

Cr P>
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA.
[May 9, 1901.
WEBSTER & CO.
Importer General $ Commission merchants,
Mary Street, Brisbane, QUEENSLAND,
Are Sole Agents for the following:
MERCHANDISE
Aisen’s Cement
Champion & Co.’s Vinegar
J. & J. Colman, Starch, Mustard and Blue
Anglo-Swias Condensed Milk Co. “ Milkmaid”
DEPARTMENT.
Day & Martin’s Blacking
Manilla Cigars, Londres, Highlife and Windsors
John Gillon & Co.’s Sauce, Bovril, Carbos Salt
WINE AND SPIRIT DEPARTMENT.
Jeffrey’s Ale, case, |--hhds, hhds
Guinness’ Dagger Stout, Champagnes, by O’Brien
John Robertson & Sons’ celebrated J R D Whiskies, in
octs., J-casks and cases
Lucien Beliefs Brandies, case and J-casks
St. Hubert’s Victorian Wines
Heidsieck Dry Monopole Champagne
Invalid Port, case and cask
Bueker’s Schnapps and Geneva
AVH Geneva
Manilla Cigars
Gillon’s Lime Juice Cordial
Vino Sacro (Sacrament Wine)
Lemon Hart & Co.’s Rum, case, octs. and
Mackay Rum, J-casks and hhds
Benedictine, -J-cases, qts. and pints
Sherries and Ports, case, octs, and J-casks
Seppelf s South Australian Wines
Dos Cabanas’ Havana Cigars
HARDWARE
Suter Hartman’s “ Red Hand Brand,” Ship Paints
Alexander Ferguson and Co.’s “ Elephant Brand,” White
Lead, Oils, Paints and Colours
Harland’s Varnishes and Stains
Quick & Co., Ltd., Varnishes and Stains
Borne, Scrymser & Co.’s Lubricating Oils
Smith & Wellstood’s Stoves and Castings
Henry Wells Oil Co., Oils and Greases
DEPARTMENT.
Myer’s Pumps
Protector Knife Polish, Black Lead and Plate Powder
Siegner Dynamite Co., Explosives, Fuses, &c.
Importers of American Hardware of all kinds—Chairs
(American and Austrian), Bedsteads. Stores of all
kinds. Barb Wire, Fencing Wire, Wire Netting,
Nails, Woolpacks, Shears. Pianos, Bicycles, &c.
WEBSTER & CO. have always on hand large Stocks of General Hardware of all
kinds, Oilmen’s Stores, and all requisites for Station, and
can fill all Orders promptly.
STATIONERY
DEPARTMENT.
WEBSTER & CO.,
SOLE QUEENSLAND AGENTS FOR—
Alexr. Cowan and Sons, Ltd., Paper, Envelopes and
Account Book Makers
PAPER MERCHANTS,
WHOLESALE STATIONERS,
PRINTERS’ FURNISHERS,
PAPER BAG MAKERS.
Crossley Bros., “ Otto ” Gas and Oil Engines
“ Caligraph, ” “Yost,” “ Densmore ” and “Brook’s” Type-
writers
Stephenson, Blake & Co.’s Type and Printers’ Materials
WEBSTER & CO. carry the Largest Stock of Paper and Mercantile Stationery in
Queensland. Newspaper and Job Printing Offices furnished complete.
SHIPPING
DEPARTMENT.
Trinder, Anderson & Co.’s Line of Sailing Vessels, London
to Brisbane
S.S. Beaver, the Finest Tug Boat in the Australian
Colonies
R. W. Forbes & Son’s Line of Sailing Vessels, New York to
Brisbane
China Navigation Company’s Line of Steamers (trading
between Japan, Hongkong, Port Darwin and
Australian Colonies)
The Tyser Line, Limited
R. M. Sloman, junr., Line of Packets, Hamburg to
Brisbane
INSURANCE DEPARTMENT.
The Liverpool and London and Globe Insurance Company (Lire and Life)
The Loyal Exchange Assurance Corporation (Eire, Marine and Life)
The [Reliance Marine Insurance Company, Ltd.
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


May 9. 1901,3; AUSTRALIA. xn -
QUEENSLAND
At the Commencement of the Twentieth Century.
VAST RESOURCES OF THE COUNTRY.
Varied Churjictes of its Product! v e Industries.
REPRESENTATIVE DISPLAY AT GLASGOW EXHIBITION.
With a Specially Written Account of the Railway, Mining, and Pastoral Developments now taking
place in Northern Queensland, and which present such a Splendid Field for the Utiiisaton of
British Capital and Enterprise.
EDITED BY PHILIP MENNELL.
During a visit which I paid to Australia last year, and speaks truly, have most of them seen enough to feel con-
which was largely devoted to the investigation of the fident that when market prospects brighten both here and
mineral and other resources of North Queensland, I was in Australia, North Queensland will justify the investment
greatly struck with the attention which they were attract- of outside capital on a very large scale. Already the English
ing in the sister States —colonies as they then were. I public have taken a hand in the great enterprises connected
cannot but regard this as a with the opening up of the
very good omen. It was the ... - Ohillagoe and the Clou curry
same way with Western j districts, and it must be said
Australia in 1891. Wherever * n justice to Mr, Philp,
one went, from Adelaide to [*’ ' .. Aft] the present — or rather
Auckland, one found the M absent—Premier of Queens-
impression prevailing that land - tbat is fully pos-
the long despised Cinderella ~ , se * secl with the importance
was coming to the front. [' : / ' ■ Qy ' j of encouraging the develop-
The result was that Aus- ' W i ment of the magnificent
tralian and New Zealand f. * patrimony which Queens-
appreciation was the fore- Jm I land possesses in her north-
i vinner of a great influx of W ei 'n areas. One can under-
British capital, resulting in * " : ;V , * ' *•;£ * stand > when one has studied
an enormous expansion of ‘ * the 6ub i ect on the s P ot > the
the prosperity of the colony. / ' ' fervency with which the
I may be too sanguine, but : ' Norfch - Queensland Separa-
it seems to me that North ! I tion m ovement was at one
Queensland is much in the ; time embraced on the not
same position, from what, f;. * 1 wholly unjustified allegation
I suppose, I shall be blamed ) j of neglect on the part of
for calling the “booming” ''c£% the central Government. To
point of view, as Western \ ; *9l see such vast P ossibilities
Australia was in 1891 and **- X" ‘ • X JvJB|ki ljmg idle might well be a
the succeeding years. Of k* *-*33 _ % 1 source of irritation—almost
course, I mean minus the *— \ of despair—to those who
“ wild cats.” LORD LAMINGTON, G.G.M.G. knew all about them, and
Victoria, which has always (Governor of Queensland.) had y6t t 0 rUn their headS
been the pioneer of mining in any struggle for progress
and much other exploitation in the sister States is against the stone wall of stolid indifference in Brisbane
turning her attention to the mineral and especially Times have changed considerably since then, and now local
the copper producing possibilities of North Queensland. appreciation has followed on the heels of outside valuation.
Already the strong group whose enterprise has spelt Perhaps a good deal of the change is due to the fact that
success in many a previous venture, I refer to the Mr. Philp is member for Townsville. North Queensland
Broken Hill and Mount Lyell combination, has acquired has many advantages over Western Australia in the fact
large interests in the cupriferous areas of North Queensland, that she has a far stronger parent colony at her back,
and are working out the destinies of the Ohillagoe and and that as far as the areas now being exploited by British
other kindred enterprises on the broad scale and businesslike capital are concerned, she has not to deal with the demon
lines which they have employed with such striking success of water scarcity. All around her mines tropical and other
in previous campaigns. Of course, their example has husbandry will flourish galore, so that the exploiter of
brought many imitators on the scene. Victorian experts North Queensland’s resources will never find bimself tied
and exploiters were making their way by the score when I to one industry. In connection with the strides which
was there to the new field of operations, and if report North Queensland is now making in the appreciation


AUSTRALIA.
of the outside world, vital questions of transport and
inter - communication now arise, and it must be
admitted that with all the facilities afforded up to date
the near future will demand their imprpvement and ampli-
fication in a variety of directions. I had meant to make
this matter the main text of my remarks, but the subject is
so large, and the amount of detail which has necessarily
been given in regard to matters in which the British public
are primarily interested has so outgrown anticipation, that
I have been compelled to defer dealing with this portion
of a vast subject until a later issue. I myself am respon-
sible for much of the data which is given with respect to
the Chillagoe district, but with regard to the account of
the Cloncurry district and the other mining centres
noticed, the credit of its compilation is due to Mr. J. T.
Caldwell, the Special Commissioner of "'The British
Australasian, who made his report after a~ very length-
ened and laborious investigation of the facts on
the spot. It is very difficult in dealing with numer-
ous localities in such a vast country to give the reader
a correct idea of the geography of the scenes des-
cribed. All the relief I can give him is to ask him
when in doubt to look at the map included in the
present number. P- M.
Portraits of Some Distinguished Unglo Queenslanders.
SIR JOHN BRAMSTON, G.C.M.G.,
Member of the First Queensland Ministry.
SIR JAMES F. GARRICK, K.C.M.G.,
Formerly Agent-General for Queensland.
SIR ARTHUR HODGSON, K.C.M.G.
MRAW. K. D’ARCY.
[May 9, 1901.
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA.
8
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL May 9, 1901.
May 9, 1901.]


AUSTRALIA.
Unique Attractiveness or Queensland
INTRODUCTORY REVIEW
“ What is it that is so particularly attractive about
Queensland? ” is a question that is not infrequently asked
of Queenslanders in this country. The question is in
itself a testimony to the strong attachment which every
resident of Queensland acquires for his State, Speaking at
a banquet in London a number of years ago, the late Sir
Charles Lilley, then Chief Justice, replying to the toast of
“Queensland,” said: “Gentlemen, there is a good old-
fashioned English word that many people are too shy to
use; it is the word ‘love.’ Now, with all my heart and
soul, I love Queensland.” The words of the “ silver-tongued
Chief Justice” found a responsive echo amongst his
auditors, who were for the most part Queenslanders. In
this love for their State upon the part of its people may be
found some of the attractiveness that Queensland un-
doubtedly possesses, for the pride they take in their
magnificent territory makes Queenslanders hospitable to
the utmost limit, jealous of the State’s good name, and
anxious to point out to the stranger its wonderful natural
resources, and to enlist his aid in their development. In
fact, even in the other States of Australia to say that a
guest will receive “ a Queensland welcome ” is to assure
him of the most unbounded hospitality. Nature herself
under the self-government they were in the enjoyment of,
it is not to be wondered at that the statesmen who con-
trolled their destinies at the time of Federation were some-
what slow to commit them to a new experiment, while the
existing forms of government had achieved such excellent
and wonderful results. Of all the Australian colonies
Queensland was in a position to be the most self-reliant,
for within her own borders she had every natural resource
essential to the highest national prosperity.
LAND FOE SETTLERS.
First as to settlement on the land in Queensland; in so vast
an area —an area, by the way, into which Mr. Chamberlain
some years ago remarked that three German Empires could be
stowed away—-there are all sorts and conditions of soils
and climate. It is a perfectly safe assertion that there is
no known fruit, vegetable, or plant that cannot be grown
to perfection in the open air in some part or other
of the State. Over a great portion, the soil is
of remarkable fertility, and in the more accessible and
specially suitable localities it has been the policy of the
Government for years past to promote close settlement for
farming, dairying, and pastoral purposes. Efforts in this
BRISBANE—LOOKING TOWARDS
PARLIAMENT
HOUSE FROM OBSERVATORY.
has been so bountiful that the generous instincts of the
people have expanded in harmony with their surroundings.
Now to answer the question as to what makes Queens-
land so particularly attractive ? It is this. It is that
Queensland is pre-eminently “a white man’s country,”
and about the best country in the world to live in. In the
vast territory of the State a man may select for himself
almost any known avocation dependent upon natural
resources, and prosper in his undertaking. Into the past
history of Queensland since it was constituted a self-
governing colony on December 10, 1859, it is not neces-
sary at present to enter, though the story is full of interest
and worthy of careful study, especially by anyone who
proposes to embark his fortunes in the national life of the
State. The object of the writer is to try to give some idea
of Queensland to-day as she enters on a new page in her
history, as a State of the Commonwealth of Australia*, tha
infant nation of the twentieth century. Into the Federa-
tion Queensland was the last colony to enter, with the
exception of Western Australia, which was, however,
conceded special privileges in the compact between the
colonies, and considering the enormous natural resources
of these two colonies, and the progress they had made
direction have been attended with most gratifying success,
but there is still plenty of land awaiting occupation by new-
comers. Until the end of last year the Queensland Govern-
ment, through Sir Horace Tozer, the Agent-General in
London, were spending large sums in free and assisted
emigration to Queensland. Since the inauguration of the
Commonwealth, however, the question of emigration is one
that, under the Constitution Act, is vested in the Federal
Parliament. While the State does not now provide passages
for emigrants, it by no means follows that more emigrants
of a desirable sort are not wanted. The State is still doing
all that is possible to settle people on the land, and to
assist them on the road to prosperity. In fact, there is no
country in the world where the Government takes a more
friendly interest in the fortunes of the settler on the land
than in Queensland. From the Agent-General at 1,
Wictoria-street, Westminster, London, S.W., intending
settlers may procure, free of cost, interesting and valuable
information giving the fullest possible details as to acquir-
ing land and forming a home in Queensland. With a very
small capital to establish himself on arrival, an emigrant
to Queensland, if thrifty and prudent, soon finds himself in
easy and independent circumstances, and he may attain to
[May 9, 1901.


May 9, 1901.]
AUSTRALIA.
any position in the State to which he may aspire, a
condition of things which is not open to the British
emigrant to the United States.
HOW LANDS MAY BE ACQUIRED.
As to acquiring land in Queensland, there are several
methods of doing this by selection. There is agricultural
selection, comprising agricultural farms and homesteads;
grazing selections, comprising grazing farms and home-
steads, and also scrub selections and unconditional selec-
tions. The more accessible lands, near lines of railways,
are set apart in areas up to and not exceeding 1,280 acres.
Grazing farm selections may be taken up to a maximum
area of 20,000 acres by British or naturalised British sub-
jects over the age of sixteen years, and not acting as the
agent or servant of another person. Applications must be
accompanied by a deposit of the first year’s rent, and a fifth
of the survey fee. As the main object of the Government
is to settle people on the land, it is provided that in the
event of applications being made simultaneously for the
same area, application for an agricultural homestead would
take precedence over one for an agricultural farm, and an
application for an agricultural farm would be granted in
preference to one for unconditional selection. In the case
of grazing lands priority would be given to an application
for a grazing homestead over a grazing farm. When an
application has been accepted
by the Land Commissioner and _
approved by tbe Land Court, ip
the applicant receives a licence U
to occupy the land as soon as ' • *|| * i
he has paid the value of any
improvements on it.
For agricultural farms up to
1,280 acres, or for a farm and , J • *
homestead together occupying
the same area, the price is 10s.
and upwards per acre. The : > ■
term is 20 years, and all that ’ |l
has to be paid is an annual
rental of one-fortieth of the , -
purchase price. The land *
must be continuously occupied . '
by the applicant within five >
years from the issue of the I
licence. The selector must . fff j ' -■
enclose his land with a sub-
stantial fence, or make other S
substantial improvements of JS
equivalent value. When the !bRmH| jaPe J||r I
improvements are completed, j' <.’•*. f*' f
the selector is entitled to a • • '* i •
lease of his farm, on obtaining m M
which he can mortgage, sub-
divide, transfer, or sublet it.
After five years, an improved
selection can at any time be H
made freehold by paying the
balance of the purchase price.
Land, open to selection as
agricultural farms, is not HON. ROBERT PHILP, M.L.A.,
available for homesteads un- Premier of Queensland,
less it is so proclaimed, and
the area allowed varies according to the quality of the purchase price
land. If land for selection is proclaimed at not less than £1 approved by t
per acre, 160 acres is the maximum allowed for a homestead.
If the price as a farm would be less than £l, but not below
15s. per acre, then 320 acres is allowed for a homestead. In the ear
If the price as a farm is less than 15s. per acre, then 610 the Crown li
acres may be secured as a homestead. The price for a home- of the Treasr
stead is 2s. 6d. per acre, the annual rent being 3d. per acre, and others co
and there must be continuous residence during the term of freeholds wei
ten years. Within the first five years after the licence to desirable and
occupy is granted, the selector must fence his land and being on the
make substantial improvements, when he becomes entitled Garden of Qu
to a lease. After the first five years a selector can pay the interior, with
balance making up 2s. 6d. per acre, and obtain a deed of vicinity, the (
grant in fee simple, so soon as he has proved that his by purchase i
improvements amount in value to 10s., 55., or 2s. 6d., was increasin
according to the value of the land upon which the home- Agricultural
stead was taken up. repurchased
GRAZING FARMS.
Grazing farms may be selected up to 20,000 acres for 11,
21, or 28 years, as may be proclaimed. For the first seven
years the annual rent may range from an acre upwards.
For each subsequent seven years the .rent has to be deter-
mined by the Land Court, which cannot, however, increase
it by more than one-half of the rent in the preceding period.
The land must be fenced in within three years of the licence
to occupy. In the case of two or more contiguous farms
not exceeding 20,000 acres in the aggregate permission may
be obtained to fence the outside boundaries only. Lands
open for selection as grazing farms must also be open for
selection as grazing homesteads, and at the same rental and
for the same term of lease. An application to select as a
grazing homestead takes precedence of a simultaneous
application to select as a grazing farm. The conditions and
other provisions before-mentioned in respect of grazing
farms are applicable also to grazing homesteads, with the
following exceptions 1. During the first five years of the
term of a grazing homestead personal and continuous resi-
dence on the land is required of the selector. 2. Before the
expiration of five years from the commencement of the
term, or before the death of the original lessee, whichever
first happens, a grazing homestead is not capable of being
mortgaged, assigned, or transferred.
SCRUB LANDS.
Some of the richest agricultural lands in Queensland are
densely covered with scrub, and to induce selectors to settle
upon these lands special provision was made in the Land
Act of 1897 for “ Scrub Selections.” These may be taken
up in areas not exceeding 10,000 acres, and with a term of
thirty years. The lands for selection are classed according
to the proportion covered by
scrub, and for periods varying
■ ..i* from five to twenty years,
according to the density of the
gcru b, no rent is chargeable.
""" • During the “no rent” period
, . ■■ the selector must clear the
whole of the scrub in equal pro-
portions each year, and must
keep it clear. He must also
fence in his selection with a
good and substantial fence.
After the free term the rent
of a scrub selection ranges
from to Id. per acre. A
scrub selector can get a nego-
tiable lease as soon as his
application is approved by the
Land Court.
UNCONDITIONAL SELEC-
TION OP LAND.
Land may also be secured by
what is known as “ uncon-
ditional selection,” but the
maximum area which can be
acquired in this way by any
one person in the same district
is 1,280 acres. The price per
acre ranges from 13s. Id. per
acre upwards, and is payable
in twenty annual instalments.
The selector has no residence
or improvement conditions to
r’HILP, M.L.A., comply with, and may at any
Jueensland. time obtain a dead of grant on
paying up the balance of the
purchase price, but from the time when his application is
approved by the Court he is the holder of a negotiable lease.
REPURCHASED LANDS.
In the early days of Queensland, when alienation of
the Crown lands in large areas for the replenishment
of the Treasury was the policy pursued, pastoral tenants
and others consolidated enormous freehold estates. These
freeholds were situated for the most part in the most
desirable and fertile localities, the principal large estates
being on the Darling Downs, often spoken of as “ The
Garden of Queensland.” As towns began to fill up, in the
interior, with an agricultural population growing up in the
vicinity, the demand for re-acquiring some of these estates
by purchase and throwing them open for close settlement
was increasingly pressed upon the Government. By the
Agricultural Lands Purchase Acts of 1891 and 1896 lands
repurchased under their provisions are made available
to conditional and unconditional selection on terms of
payment and residence extending over periods of twenty
years in either case. The , estates repurchased up tp, the
present time contain some of the finest agricultural
land in the world, and the wisdom of Parliament in re-
acquiring them has amply justified a wide extension of the
system to other large estates suited for close settlement.
For selections on the repurchased lands the rent to be paid
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA.
[May 9, 1901.
for the first year is equal to £lO for every £lOO of the pur-
chasing price (no payment being required for the second
year), and an annual payment of £7 19s. for every £lOO
continued from the third to the twentieth year. This pays
off the principal sum, and interest at the rate of 5 per cent,
per annum in the term of twenty years, but the balance
may be paid before the end of the term, in which case
rebate of interest is allowed. Residence is necessary by
the selector or his registered agent. The Government is
steadily increasing the area of land for close settlement by
throwing open for selection localities most accessible for
the requirements of advancing population.
THE DARLING DOWNS..
It is on the Darling Downs, however, that settlement of
a permanent nature has progressed most rapidly. This
great expanse of wonderfully rich agricultural country,
comprising some 4,000,000 acres, was twenty years ago
almost entirely in the hands of a few pastoralists, owning
enormous flocks and herds. From 1880 to 1890 the number
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS.
As to what the farmer can produce on the Darling
Downs, the following is an extract from “ The Garden of
Queensland,” by Mr. George Essex Evans, a writer
thoroughly cmversanc with his subject from personal
experience
“ Every year larger areas are going into wheat, maize,
barley, and lucerne. Ten years ago the dairy industry on
the Downs was languishing, and not a single creamery or
factory existed. To-day something like 2,000,000 gallons
of milk is the output, representing several hundred tons of
butter and cheese. There are over a score of creameries
and butter factories in the district. About 1,000,000 lb*,
of bacon are turned out annually. Of wheat, 1,000,000
bushels were grown on the Downs in 1898. Grapes and
sub-tropical fruits abound here. It is a perfect apple
country, and is well suited to barley. . . . Five to
ten tons of potatoes, and seventy to one hundred bushels
of maize to the acre have been obtained here, and wheat
of farms started on the Darling Downs was very consider- varies from twenty to forty bushels to the acre. .
able, but from 1890 to the present date, and especially
during the last five years, the amount of agricultural
Lucerne on some of these flats can be cut regularly every
three weeks, the rate of growth being over one foot per
settlement has been marvellously rapid, so much so as to week. .. . 1,500 sheep have been kept on 150 acres
completely change the aspect of the country. The soil on for two months .. . a 250-acre barley paddock carried
the Darling Downs is of the richest, black, red, and choco- 1,400 ewes and 1,403 lambs during April and May lambing,
late, ranging in depth from
4 to 60 ft., and in some
localities to an even greater
depth, and in'no other part of
Australia does there exist so
vast and compact an area of
the best description of arable
land. It is well watered by
numerous running streams and
creeks, and water of excellent
quality can also be obtained by
sinking wells to a depth of 15
to 150 ft. The climate is
temperate and much like that
of the best part of the State of
California, admittedly the finest
climate of America. During
the six months of summer the
days are warm, but the nights
are cool and bracing. The
mean maximum temperature
is 83-8, and the mean minimum
38-9 degrees. There is no
winter as it is understood in
Great Britain, but in June,
July, and August there are
frequently ground frosts and
cold westerly winds. During
this period there are very occa-
sionally a few flakes of snow.
In November and December
there are frequently thunder-
storms, which cool the air and
freshen up vegetation; and from
January to April is the period
regarded as the wet season,
when the heaviest rainfall of the year is looked for,
LIFE ON DARLING DOWNS.
The Darling Downs is an immense plateau or tableland
at an elevation of some 1,400 to 2,000 feet above sea level,
and has a climate very much more bracing than that of
the sea coast, 100 miles distant. In fact,-Toowoomba, the
principal town on the Downs, is sometimes spoken of as
the Simla of Queensland. In all directions there are
thriving towns, which are easy of access for the farming
population. These towns are the centres of the religious,
social, educational, and political life of the community, but
in no land proclaimed for settlement does the Government
omit to see that convenient provision is made for the
education of the children who grow up upon it. In
Queensland education is free, secular, and compulsory,
and is giving excellent and satisfactory results. The social
life on the Darling Downs is one of the pleasantest in the
world. Under the close settlement policy of the past
twenty years, in which the farming population has sprung
up, settlers are for the most part within easy visiting
distance of their neighbours, and the entire absence of
poverty and the general prosperity of the community gives a
generous tone to social intercourse, which is often wanting
in new countries where the first struggle with nature is
harder than on the Darling Downs.
SIR HORACE TOZER, K.G.M.G.,
Agent-General for Queensland.
and subsequently yielded 24
bushels to the acre when
stripped after the removal of
the sheep. . . . During
one year five tons of lucerne
seed were sold by one station
at Is. to Is. 6d. per lb., and off
100 acres of prairie land 1,200
bags of seed, valued at 12s. per
bag, were taken.”
OTHER AGRICULTURAL
AND FRUIT LANDS.
While the Darling Downs is
at present the favourite agri-
cultural district of Queensland,
the wheat-growing area is by
no means confined to the
southern portion of the State.
As far north as Hughenden a
yield of 15 bushels to the acre
has been obtained from small
plots, and in the central district
there is a very large area of the
most productive wheat-lands
that could be desired, as, for
instance, on the Peak Downs,
and at Springsure, where 22
bushels to the acre were ob-
tained. Acre for acre the
wheat-lands of Queensland are
at least as good as these in
the agricultural districts of
California, or the far-famed
plains of Manitoba in Canada.
Other cereals besides wheat,
such as oats, barley, and rye can be grown with success, and
also all the root crops needed for local consumption, but it
is from her output of wheat that the State of Queensland
looks forward to being at no distant date one of the great
granaries of the world. It may here be mentioned that
after a trying time of protracted drought, excellent rains
have fallen in the agricultural districts, and the outlook is,
at the present time, in every way satisfactory.
As regards fruits, Queensland produces everything grown
in Northern Europe, and in equal perfection the tropical
fruits of the Eist and West Indies. Apples, cherries,
raspberries, strawberries, and suchlike fruits grown in the
south meet in the market the pineapple, banana, and
mango from the north, while semi-tropical fruits, such as
oranges, grapes, apricots, and peaches, can be grown
almost anywhere.
ARTESIAN WATER.
The success that has attended boring for artesian water
is only the prelude to the important part it is yet destined
to play in the development of Queensland. The copious
supply that has been, and continues to be, discovered in
the richest districts of Queensland has as yet been only
experimentally used for irrigation. On this subject the
following extract from the “ Year-Book of Queensland ” for
1890 is of particular interest: —
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA
It is difficult to exaggerate the change wrought in the conditions of industry on a sound footing. Dr. Maxwell’s report to the
western pastoral settlement by this discovery of artesian water. The Federal Parliament will be that of a man who thoroughly
supply is held down by an impervious stratum of hard shale, which , -. . . , • , j • i • . i „ „ QUA
throughout the artesian basin forms an undulating floor, so that the understands his subject, and it is certain to have a most
supply is tapped at varying depths of from 500 to 4,000 ft. The flow important bearing on the Kanaka issue. Its completion IS,
from these bores varies greatly in volume, the most abundant yielding therefore, eagerly awaited by that very large section of the
as much as 5,000 000 gallons per diem the average being about 700,000 peo ple of the State who are directly or indirectly interested
gallons. Much of the best pasture land of the west was without any FT . J
permanent surface water, the small water-courses which intersect the sugar industry.
Downs storing water for six or eight months at most, so that in times TOBACCO.
of drought terrible losses occasionally overtook the occupier of these ’ , ,
dangerous pastures. It would occasionally happen that during a Of late years tobacco has become a well-established
period of twelve or eighteen months the showers, which provided industry in Queensland. The most suitable land for the
abundance of grass, were insufficient to run the watercourses, and, as successful production of the tobacco leaf is that in the
the holes shrank and ultimately dried, the unfortunate flock-master m „ „ n r i a: t
would see his flocks perishing by thousands. The doomed animals Texas and Inglewood distriC S, W 6
would crowd in on the diminishing waterholes, converting the frontage tobacco-growers are now located) and an expert in Mel-
into a desert, till they were too weak to travel back to the abundant bourne has stated that judging from the cla c S and quality
pasturage which no longer availed them. In 1883-4 the losses from 0 f some Texas leaf which had come under his observation,
r d wealt ? y squatte f r V vcr ? ru j ne<L he considered that the district would become the future
It is pitiful to think that during this cruel season of disaster inex- T 7. . . TIT . . .„ .1
haustible but unsuspected supplies of the precious element were within Virginia ot Australia. When the uniform tann Of tne
easy reach, and that whilst stock were perishing from thirst by Commonwealth comes into force, the Queensland tobacco
hundreds of thousands, the ceaseless subterranean tide was flowing cro p w jq be a much more important industry than it has
steadily southwardwithin afewhundredyarcls of this scene of desola- b possible for id to be hitherto. The Government has
tion, to empty itselr in tne ocean bed somewhere in the Great * t -i mi -n , , ,
Australian Bight. Now country which previously was viewed with appointed a Tobacco Expert WDOSB duty it is to give
apprehension is watered by streams which no drought can affect. growers the benefit of his advice and any other assistance
The carrying capacity of the country has been greatly increased, and J n his power. The crop marketed for the year ending
th aa S T° e v° f + r iet ? ab ? lish f d / or ,T r - 1, • . 1899 yielded about 765,000 lbs. of tobacco, and found ready
Alter a good flow is struck the water has to be led in the required , , , n , ’. ... i. j t oln 1 ok
direction, unless the object is to run some dry or doubtful creek, in £ale at about 6d. per lb., which amounted to Lty,l2o, or
which case a natural channel is ready for the stream. In most cases, about £24 per acre. Under the present system of cultiva-
however, a channel hasto be provided, tion — which is an expensive
the shape of an acute angle or Y, | • .]
is dragged by a powerful bullock ||| jdAc-" ■ cost to the farmer of a pound
team in the required direction. This, I of tobacco ready for sale is
bv throwing up the earth on each | about 3d., SO that even at that
side of the broad furrow, forms a . 3 j p r j CO j,be profits considerably
which stock can drink. The pressure a I exceed the profits per acre
of the bore water is very great, and jf -'WM m leaped by the grain farmer,
it usually issues from the ground at j
As yet this artesian water has been :y a ‘ I|B Like tobacco, the growing
used almost exclusively for providing r. x ,- ‘ . t - : of coffee in Queensland is likely
have been few, yet the soil of the ■■ /■.'-h'vfv/d 1° become an important in-
Western Downs is the richest .-.Q dustry, and, as the BRITISH
these districts might become the , AA .■" "■ AUSTRALASIAN Stated in a recent
granary of the world. Of all cereals ’ issue. -
wheat is that requiring least mois- v ■ ■ Young men thinking of migrating
ture. The arid climate of the west 7"I to Australia to seek their fortunes in
would suit it to perfection if a sufli- the Commonwealth would do well at
dent supply of moisture could bo i present to turn their attention to
depended on at certain stages of its U||j coffee-growing in Northern Queens-
growth. In the future bore water
land. There are now about 200
will bo applied to this purpose. A V. J ~ coffee-growers in the State, and land,
Already at Barcaldii c, in Central -- # A * in every way suitable,may be secured
Queensland, irrigation experiments x at alnost nominal prices. When the
have given most encouraging results. , • WsgeilS jM JT uniform tariff comes into existence,
ni.n in A. ■ '/V.td and all themaikcts of Australia are
bUCiAxt. K ■ 1 % jgßji ■' 1 j *' ""''"j open to the Queensland planter, the
The yield of sugar for 1809 .* j||F li? business should be increasingly pro-
was valued by the lion. Robert ► • U > *• *' 1 fit able. Jt is one of the pleasantest
Philp, Premier and Treasurer F* ' ’ * .--wSh • ';l ■; ■/'■y t of °P cn ‘ air occupations, but requires
c A , t , pi nni wsm&aSaKwfK&i •' i- '•a moderate capital to carry on with
of Queensland, at £1,2J4,031. until the plants come into bearing.
The number of acres from ■HHHHBk; -. . ; .i-k'.v. iMuch useful information respecting
which cane was crushed was 1 1 1 coffee planting in Queensland is to
79,435, fromwhich 123,289 tons MT? p Q be found in a report by the “Govern-
p p , MB. G. S. DIGKEN, C.M.G., merit Instructor in Coffee Culture,
Ur fh ' Secretary Queensland Government Agency. which may be obtained at the Agent-
bugar-cane is grown all along the General’s offices in London.
East coast of the State from the New South Wales border . _
northwards. The town of Mackay is the centre of the sugar PASIORAL.
trade, and for that reason is often spoken of as Sugaropolis. The last official returns gave the number of live stock in
There is no better land for growing sugar in any part of Queensland as fifteen millions of sheep and five millions of
the world than in Queensland, but unfortunately at present cattle. Owing to excellent rains all over the State the
the fate of the sugar industry is largely immlved in a pastoral outlook at the present time is one of great pro-
political question, i.e., the retention of Kanaka labour. mise. It may be admitted, that the past year was one of
Under the Commonwealth Constitution Act this question disaster for the pastoral industry over the greater portion
falls to be dealt with by the Federal Parliament, which of the State, and that the losses in stock had been very
has a pronounced feeling in favour of the exclusion severe, but the losses have been for the most part on the
of black labour, under any shape or form, from the large squatting runs in the west and south-west. Squatters
confines of the Commonwealth. The Federal Govern- who rent large areas as pastoral tenants of the Crown have
ment has, however, declared that it does not intend to the experience of past history in Australia to guide them,
introduce legislation that might injuriously affect any exist- and in making their calculations have to take into account
ing industry without due inquiry and consideration. In the certainty of recurring seasons of drought. Anyone
connection with the question of labour for the sugar planta- who has lived in the State knows its recuperative powers
tions, the Federal Government have called upon Dr. after a season of drought, “ when the rain Argosy cometh,”
Maxwell to make an exhaustive report. Dr. Maxwell is as Mr. Brunton Stephens, the Queensland poet, ex-
perhaps the leading sugar expert in the world. He was presses it. A few good seasons very soon obliterate
stationed at Honolulu by the United States Government the evil effects of even the most disastrous one. To
to report on the sugar question in Hawaii, when that the new-comer a season of drought is always the worst on
kingdom was annexed by America. Subsequently his record, but to the older class of pastoralists the experience
services were secured by the Queensland Government, as isno novelty. As regards good and bad seasons, and the corre-
sugar expert for the State, to assist by his special know- spondingups and downsof aQueenslandsquatter’slife,people
ledge in introducing the highest forms of cane culture, and in this country wishing to obtain a thoroughly adequate idea
advising the Government in their efforts to put the sugar of them may turn with advantage to Mr. Oscar de Satgd’s
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9. 1901.
May 9, 1901.]


AUSTRALIA
[May 9, 1901.
“ Pages from the Journal of a Queensland Squatter,” a
review of which recently appeared in the columns of The
British Australasian, and who contributes an interesting
article on the resources of the Cloncurry district to the
present number of our “Australia” Supplement. Mr.de
Sata6 has been through many droughts, and also through
seasons when the whole of the interior of Queensland was a
grazier’s Paradise, like one vast green wheat-field. Taking
the good and the bad together Mr. Satge, in his recently-
published book, has, out of the fulness of his experience,
no hesitation in recommending pastoral life in Queensland
as a good career for young men of the right stamp to take up.
For the year 1899 the number of live stock exported and
passed through the various meat works was 987,677 sheep
and 594,839 cattle, and during 1900 most of the principal
meat works were in constant operation, and in fact unable
to keep pace with orders. Horses had increased in value,
as the export trade was stimulated by the demand for
remounts for India and South Africa. It appears not
improbable that horse-breeding for the Imperial Army may
before long be established in Queensland on a systematic
and profitable basis, and Sir Horace Tozer, the Agent-
General, is in communication with the War Qffioe
authorities on the subject.
MINING.
In his last Financial Statement made on August 30, 1900,
the Treasurer and Premier, the Hon. Robert Philp, stated: —
The mining industry continues to
advance steadily, and at no period
of the history of the colony has greater
interest been manifested in its mineral
resources.
Gold. —Last year’s gold yield was
the largest yet recorded, aggregating
nearly 1,000,000 ozs.—exceeding that
of the preceding year by 27,000 ozs.—
and the yield of the current year bids
fair to eclipse that of its predecessor.
On all our principal fields the mines
continue to give a large and regular
output, and both at Charters Towers
and at Gympie the exploration of the
deeper ground has been in the highest
degree encouraging. Whilst Charters
Towers last year produced 50,000 ozs.
in excess of the preceding year, Gympie
shows a falling off of 16,000 ozs.; but
the past year on the latter field has
been one of remarkable mining activity,
and already during the current year
the fruits of this activity and energy
are apparent in a larger yield and
increased dividends.
Mount Morgan again affords an %* ISfLS E.
object lesson of the results that can _
be obtained by the application of |||
scientific methods to the extraction jwT;
and reduction of large bodies of
comparatively low grade ore. Last w
year the mine produced 172,389 ozs. of |||
gold, of a value of £703,449, the aver- p|
age yield per ton being a little less ij
than 15 dwts.
The remarkable yields of some of
the mines at Croydon, one of which
alone has during the past twelve
months produced gold of a value of GENERAL SIR HENRY
£97,000, has attracted considerable Tata fnwnn
. .i . f. u ", . jjaue uuvorxiu
attention to that field, and strenuous
efforts are being made to test the ground at a greater depth than has
hitherto been attempted.
At Ravenswood also a feeling of confidence is apparent, which would
appear to be justified by the favourable developments in several of the
mines there.
Even in what have been termed our “ neglected fields ” some interest
has been awakened, and the Hodgkinson, Coen, and Palmer have all
received attention from speculators and investors ; whilst the discovery
of the Hamilton—which within the short period of its existence has
been credited with the production of 10,000 ozs. of gold—shows that
there is still scope for the prospector in the little-known watersheds of
the Peninsula.
The success of dredging operations in the neighbouring colonies has
caused many miles of our rivers and creeks to be appropriated with the
view of testing them by this the latest method of gold-winning.
Experts from the neighbouring colonies who have visited some of the
proposed scenes of operations have expressed themselves favourably
respecting the prospects of success, and before the close of the current
year, at least three, if not more, dredges will actually be at work.
Silver.— Of minerals other than gold the actual production has
been small, and gives little idea of the latent wealth of the colony.
Thus the total yield of silver— l4s,ooo ozs., valued at £ls,ooo— came
from two small mines, one in the Stanthorpe, and the other in the
Ravenswood district. But the galena lodes of the Burketown Mineral
Field are shown by the recently-published report by Mr. Cameron, of
the Geological Survey Staff, to be well worthy of the trial which they
will no doubt receive when reasonable means of carriage to the coast
are provided.
Tin.—l,3oo tons of tin, valued at £77,000, represents the year’s pro-
duction of that metal; but a great expansion of this industry may
certainly be looked for. The tin-bearing area of Queensland is larger
than that of any other of the Australian colonies, new ground is con-
stantly being opened up, and many of the old mines have passed into
the hands of those who are willing and able to work them in the only
manner in which they can be worked profitably.
Copper.— Copper latterly, more than any other mineral—not even
excepting gold—has attracted attention to the mining possibilities of
the colony. That we possess many valuable copper mines is beyond
question; and, should surprise be expressed that the production at
present is so small, it may be well to remember that the opening of a
copper mine is a laborious and costly undertaking. But now at any
time we may hear that the furnaces at Mount Garnet have commenced
smelting, and it is confidently hoped that by January 1 next six
furnaces will have been erected at Chillagoe, capable of treating
between 3,000 and 4,000 tons of ore a week. At the Einasleigh Copper
Mine the manager, who is raising 100 tons of ore a week, hopes to begin
smelting operations before the end of the present year; and at the Mount
Chalmers and other mines in the Rockhampton district the furnaces
now being erected will soon be at work. Such development work as is
being done in the mines at Cloncurry confirms the belief in the rich-
ness of that district; and this also true of the large ore bodies at
Glassford Creek, in the Gladstone district, but nothing can be hoped
for from either of these fields until railway communication with the
coast has been established.
Coal. —Last year’s production of coal was 494,000 tons, being an
increase of 86,000 tons over that of the preceding year. Hitherto the
consumption of our coal has been purely local; indeed, our mines have
been unable to supply our requirements, the reason being the remote-
ness of our coal beds from water carriage. The increased demand for
coal all over the world has no doubt been the cause of attention
being again directed to the great stores of this article that the colony
possesses, and it seems probable that an effort will be made not only
to supply all our own wants, but to look for markets outside our
boundaries.
Mr. Dunstan, an officer of the Geological Survey staff, estimates
that within the area of the Blair Athol Coalfield—about five square
miles—there are 7,000,000 tons of the
—.■ ■ | — —s —finest quality of Clermont coal, and
' v •" . W'. about 56,000,000 tons of a slightly
mm inferior quality in a lower scam
y;;| not yet mined, irrespective of other
i : scams that may exist at greater
|||i| depths.
• A remarkable discovery of anthra-
cite coal was lately reported to have
been made on the Dawson River.
The seam is 11 ft. thick, and the
coal is very heavy and compact.
As the coal country extends westerly
from the Dawson for many miles,
the quantity of anthracite is
enormous. No other coal of the
same character has been found in
Australia, so that the deposit will
be a very material factor in metal-
lurgical operations within the colonies,
and may become of international im-
portance.
As to Callide Creek, situated about
50 miles in a south-westerly direction
from Gladstone, so long ago as 1892
Mr. Rands, then Assistant Govern-
ment Geologist, reported that over
the area already proved there was
sufficient coal to last for 150 years
with an output equal to that of the
JSIP nUUjjjlt whole colony for that year—viz.,
fe. 338,334 tons. If the owners can get
permission from Parliament to build
JHKJhh a railway to deep water, I under-
BreßßskllSlii. v stand that an influential English
syndicate is prepared to supply
them with the necessary funds to
construct the railway and develop
the mines.
SIR HENRY NORMAN, G.C.8., G. 0.5.1., Wolfram.— Of the rarer mineral
Late Governor of Queensland. the colony appears to have a fair
share. Wolfram especially is abun-
spth than has dant and of high quality, and last year the mines of the Hodgkin-
son field yielded 259 tons, valued at £lO,OOO.
which would Opal.— Although gems and precious stones of various kinds are
several of the known to exist in the colony, the search is practically confined
to opal, which appears to be widely distributed over the western
some interest portion of the colony. It is difficult to obtain accurate informa-
dmer have all tion, but it is estimated that last year the value of the stone sold was
the discovery £9,000.
existence has A review of the year’s operations, necessarily brief and cursory as
I—shows that this is, abundantly shows that mining in Queensland is fast assuming
watersheds of the proportions of a great industry, with infinite possibilities of
expansion; and it requires no great prescience to foretell that ere
? colonies has Jong this colony will rank first amongst the mineral producing colonies
ated with the of Australia.
The attractiveness of our mineral exhibits at the Greater Britain
Exhibition last year proved so great to all classes, and especially to
investors, that the Government has determined to arrange for a similar
display at the Glasgow Exhibition to be held next year. That this
form of advertising the value of our immense mineral resources is cal-
culated to piove beneficial to the colony is evidenced by the increasing
interest manifested in our mineral fields by investors since the Earl’s
Court Exhibition. As a result, we have now before us several applica-
tions from wealthy people who are prepared to invest their capital,
not only in developing our mines, but also in constructing cheap
and sure means of conveying the product to the sea-coast.
Without the latter the mines cannot be worked at a profit, and
must lie undeveloped for years. I shall not dwell upon this matter
further than to ask honourable Members to try and picture to them-
selves what a hive of busy industry the whole of our Gulf country
would be if it were intersected by a network of railways—what employ-
ment the mines would give to thousands of people, and what enormous;
benefit would result to the colony as a whole!
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA.
DISPLAY OF QUEENSLAND
The State of Queensland occupies the north-eastern por-
tion of the Australian Continent. It has a total length of
1,400 miles, and is 1,000 miles broad, embracing an area
of 427 million acres, or 5| times that of Great Britain. Its
present population is estimated at slightly over half a
million, but it is expected that the census will show a
large increase. When it was proclaimed a separate colony
* n its population numbered only 25,000. The
rapid increase of population in a territory naturally rich
in agricultural, mining, and pastoral possibilities, aided in
its development by liberal land and mining laws, has had
the effect of forcing its growth in all that pertains to
prosperity and social advancement, until it claims rank as
third in importance among the six sister States now form-
ing the Commonwealth of Australia. At the end of the
century it had become intersected by 3,000 miles of rail-
way, 10,000 miles of telegraph, and had increased the
value of its exports and imports from £1,260,500 to over
£18,500,000. Two millions
had been spent in the lighting,
buoying, and improvement of
harbours and rivers, and a
like amount on public build-
The State provides a splen- : ; jilT
did system of free education,
and the average attendance
in its public schools bad risen
from 306 to 75,250. Upwards
of 16,000,000 acres of land j ■
had been selected and pur- ,
chased from the Government, - W - ’
principally by agriculturists
and small graziers, leaving a .
balance of 400,000,000 acres U •
unalienated or unsold land : ri
still available for future set- ! iwk 4
tlement. The revenue and ‘ I
expenditure for last year
amounted to over £9,000,000,
whilst the amount to the *
credit of 84,790 depositors in
the Government Savings Bank
stood at £3,624,740.
The climate is healthy and Jf
enjoyable. A recent compari- „ ■' *
son of death rates in Aus-
tralian cities with leading ’ * - v MBHaSSS
cities of this country gave the , \\
following figures:—Brisbane
(Queensland), 1039 per thou- ■ I
sand; Sydney. 12-74; Mel- - "
bourne, 15-39 ; London, 18-3 ; MR G. RANI
Liverpool, 19'7 ; Glasgow, Managing Representative Queensland
22-0; and Edinburgh, 21-0.
Brisbane, the capital of the State, has a population of To
over 100,000, and is intersected by a perfect system of thi
electric tramways. Wool, gold, frozen and preserved flu
meats, sugar, coal, tin, and copper are among its prin- po
cipal exports, whilst last year 500 tons of butter, valued at foi
£50,000, appeared in the list. In 1861 only 4,400 acres thi
of land were under crop, against 400,000 in 1900. an
Live stock numbered 15 millions of sheep and 5 Tb
millions of cattle, and the number of stock exported and Qu
passed through meat works were 970,000 sheep and 594,800 otl
cattle. An inexhaustible supply of water had been tapped de:
by 600 artesian bores, some of which yielded over 3 million Or
gallons in the 24 hours, and create running streams and op
lakes. fea
The absence of any display of agricultural productions is sh
much to be regretted, no State in the Commonwealth being an
more favoured by soil and climate for this purpose. Suf- ab
ficient has already been done in this direction to demon- in
strate the fact that there is hardly anything known to man qu
which cannot be grown and brought to perfection within
the limits of the State, from wheat and malting barley on cei
Darling Downs in the south, to sugar and coffee on the sic
coastal lands in the north, whilst the familiar apple, pear, gh
and blackberry of this country grow to perfection at Stan- spi
thorpe ; the pine-apple, banana, and orange, and a host of on
tropical fruits flourish near the capital and further fiv
north; yet, for the want of more cultivators, food pro- by
ducts to the value of £750,000 were imported only last rei
year. th
GLASGOW EXHIBITION.
THE COURT.
The Government of the State of Queensland in the new
Commonwealth of Australia is represented by a Court
situated immediately to the left of the Gray-street entrance,
and occupying some 5,000 feet of space, the main portion
of this forming as nearly as possible a square block,
having avenues on all sides. It is one of the largest, and
forms perhaps the most striking and attractive feature in
the eastern portion of the Industrial Hall. Square massive
gold columns, with at intervals rounded pillars, support a
series of arches which encircle the entire Court. These
arches are carried at an elevation which gives this part of
the decoration a most commanding appearance from all
aspects, within or without. Rows of coloured shields, on
which are emblazoned the names of every mineral field in
the colony, and strings of bunting of all nationalities and
colours, are stretched from girder to girder high in the
roof. The square gold columns at each corner are relieved by
plaster casts of the State’s
1 coat of arms, and through-
out the Court the predominant
colours of white and gold are
harmoniously blended with
most pleasing effect. With the
exception of wool (fine clothing
and combing, in two large
cases), some canned meats and
turtle preparations, samples of
fe sugar, and some specimens
■ , of timber, the entire Court is
devoted to a representation
: V ■ of the mineral resources of the
State. Gold, being the prin-
cipal mineral production, is
represented by an imposing
obelisk in the centre of the
Court. This is 6 ft. wide at
the base, and, gradually
!; • tapering, reaches a height of
~ 24 ft., its capacity measuring
864 cubic ft., and represents
' if-'• 14| million ozs. of gold, valued
at 48-J- millions sterling, thus
indicating at a glance the
quantity of the precious metal
in bulk (over 550 tons) obtained
in Queensland from the time
of its first discovery in 1858
up to the returns of last year.
In line with the obelisk at
the east end of the Court is
one of the most striking and
RANDALL, novel exhibits to be found in
asland Court, Glasgow Exhibition, the whole Exhibition—a veri-
table Fountain of Quicksilver.
To obtain a continuous flow of this lively mineral, no less
than 3 tons, or 6,700 lbs. of mercury are required. The
fluid is carried up by an elevator driven by a 2-| horse-
power motor. Part of the machinery, as well as the
fountain itself, is enclosed in air-tight glass casing, for
the double purpose of preventing the escape of quicksilver
and to enable the public to obtain a view of the working.
The object of the fountain is to make known the fact that
Queensland is a producer of mercury in addition to its
other well-known mineral productions. The fountain was
designed by Mr. Chas. Bright, F.R.S.E., A.M. Inst. C.E.
On the centre line with the obelisk and fountain, at the
opposite end of the Court, another striking and conspicuous
feature is a beautifully designed trophy, composed of pearl
shells most artistically arranged. These valuable shells,
and their sometimes more valuable contents, are found in
abundance in North Queensland waters, more particularly
in the region of Torres Straits, and are exported in large
quantities to London.
Turning from these three leading attractions or governing
centres of the Court, you find yourself surrounded on all
sides by a puzzling but symmetrically planned array of
glass cases containing rich gold quartz and other gold
specimens, piles and pyramids of copper, tin, and other
ores, and interesting models of works and machinery. The
five large cases of white enamel and gold, each surmounted
by a crown, contain a rich and most valuable collection of
; reef and alluvial gold of an estimated value of £12,000,
samples being exhibited by the Queensland Government
PRODUCTS AT
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901,
May 9, 1901.]


AUSTRALIA.
[May 9, J9Ol.
Department of Mines. In one of these cases is to be seen a
most beautiful exhibit of gold in quartz and calcite (probably
the finest for actual beauty of appearance of any collection
in the world), and estimated to contain 133 ozs., and valued
at .-6477. These specimens are from No. 1 South Great
Eastern mine, Gympie. Another collection of specimens of
greater money value, is from the Columbia Smichfield,
Gympie, and estimated to contain 900 ozs. of gold. A bar
of pure gold from the world-famous Mount Morgan mine
near Eockbampton, is exhibited by the Hon John Ferguson.
While paying regular monthly dividends, this mine gives
1,600 men employment. From this same tn'ne was pro-
duced last year 173,389 ozs. of gold, valued at £703,449.
Another bar of pure gold with its casket is from the Croydon
goldfields, and is intended for presentation to Major-General
Baden-Powell by the Croydon miners. Charters Towers,
a single Queensland goldfield, for the same year (1900) pro-
duced 50,000 ozs. of gold in excess of the preceding
year. Eight other cases, ranged on either side of the
Court, contain a large and interesting collection of specimens
of tin ore and stream tin from various fields, lead and
silver ores, copper ores of various grades, and a fine exhibit
of copper ore showing native silver, also antimony, bismuth,
and cinnabar ores. The containing the two last-men-
tioned exhibits also contains chemical preparations of
bismuth and quicksilver specially manufactured by Messrs.
Tyrer and Co., of Stratford, London, who are the exhibitors.
In some of these cases may also be seen models or cakes of
retorted gold, representing 16,690 ozs. of the metal, and of
a value of £57,027.
At right angles to the obelisk representing the gold out-
put are four specially designed upright octagonal stands,
the tops of each having domes of a colour to represent the
minerals displayed in them. Two exhibit tin in various
forms, pincipally ingots, and in fantastic shapes as given to
the metal in process of smelting. Tbe corresponding two
represent copper, principally in the form of ore and native
copper, some of which is exhibited by the Einasleigh
Copper Company, of whose property the present issue con-
tains a specially-written description. Six smaller octa-
gonal stands, having ornamental gilded tops, contain a
variety of other ores, embracing silver, copper, lead, chrome,
cinnabar, tin, bismuth, manganese, cobalt, and magnet te.
These ores are average samples yielded by the various
mines they come from, and are from widely different parts
of Queensland.
A separate and beautiful exhibit of opals is made by the
Government, another by Sir Geo. Faudel Phillips and Co.,
London. Mining for opals has of late years been corning
to the fore, the stones being known as the “Noble ” and
“ Precious Opal.” These stones to the value of £109,000
have already been exported, and Queensland now forms the
chief source of supply to the London market. The growing
popularity of the opal, whether due to fashion or increased
admiration of the beauties of this gem, points to a greatly
increased demand, and higher values in the future. Other
precious stones are the blue and green sapphire, topazes,
garnets, &c. The yield of gold last year was over one million
ounces ; the production of coal amounted to 494,000 tons.
These two valuable commodities, as also tin and
copper, are obtained already at places hundreds of miles
apart, and are known to exist in enormous quantities from
the State’s southern boundary to places in the extreme north
over a thousand miles of territory. With the construction
of Government and private railways now being undertaken
to many hitherto inaccessible mineral deposits, and with the
establishment of new smelting works, greatly accelerated
mining development is expected in the near future in
all branches of the industry. Interesting models of
chlorination works for the extraction of gold as used
at Mount Morgan, the Brilliant Block Mill for the
treatment of gold ores at Charters Towers Cyanide
Works, and of a Prospectors Camp, showing workings
on alluvial goldfields, are also exhibited.
Various firms of mining machinery manufacturers send
representative exhibits, amongst them a working model of a
10-head battery. Placed near the Pearl Trophy is a model
of one of the high-powered hydraulic dredgers recently built
to the order of the Queensland Government by Messrs.
Armstrong, of Newcastle-on-Tyne. These dredgers are built
from designs of the inventor, Mr. Linden Bates, and are
expected to prove a great advantage in dredging and
deepening rivers, a work of great importance to Queensland.
The model under notice, “The Samson,” obtained the
highest award at the Paris Exhibition, is of 5,000 horse-
power, and of a capacity to discharge 5,000 cubic yards of
spoil per hour. This model will undoubtedly prove of
interest to Glasgow people, with their experience of the
Clyde.
A reading kiosk is supplied with illustrated and other
Queensland newspapers, including copies of the British
Australasian and our Special Australia Supplements.
Photographs of mines, mining country, and machinery,
descriptive of bush, township, and city life are placed at
every coign of vantage, whilst an abundant supply of printed
matter, comprising a complete catalogue of exhibits, official
reports, diagrams, maps, plans of workings, and other valu-
able charts and daffi issued by the Mines and other Govern-
ment Departments, are available to the public.
The collection of the greater portion of the minerals
exhibited was made by the Queensland Mines Department,
the desire of the Government being to give the public some
idea of the varied mineral wealth of the country, and prove
to investors and others interested that a vast and com-
paratively untouched field awaits but the advent of more
capital and enterprise, to prove it second to no country in
the world in the abundance and richness of its resources.
Queensland’s very worthy contribution to the International
Exhibition has been carried out under the immediate
direction of the Agent-General in London, Sir Horace
Tozer, K.C.M.G., who has the advantage of a thorough
local knowledge of his State, in which he has held high
Government positions, the work of arranging the minerals
and ores being in the hands of Mr. G. W. Cornish,
assistant manager, Mr. George Eandall, from Queensland,
being in charge as the managing representative.
SOME RECOLLECTIONS OF SUGAR PIONEERING.
By EDMUND
STANSFELD
RAWSON.
I was actually asked the other day by a friend “ who only
England knew,” if sugar was grown in Queensland ! and another
friend, who did know something of the beyond, dropping in at the
moment, the talk centred on the early days and the pioneers of
the sugar industry in that colony.
Here in the stuffy, smoke begrimed office of a City financier,
my heart and memory went back to those days of emerald fields
among the plains of yellow and dried-up grass, to the angular
patches sharply cut out in the scrub-covered hills, to the swishing
of the morning breeze over the cane-tops, crackling the leaves
with a sound as of wavelets breaking on a shingly beach, and I
instinctively blew my nose and coughed, momentarily gasping for
a breath of that lost ozone, pining for a ray of that almost for-
gotten sun of so many years ago !
Who started it ? Well, Captain Hope, I believe, was the first
man who, in the early sixties, soon after Queensland was, experi-
mented with sugar at Cleveland in Moreton Bay ; then George
Raff took it up at Caboolture, and, by the way, made some
excellent rum, which was long a power in the land. But the real
value of sugar was never fully demonstrated until about 1866,
when the Mackay district suddenly sprang into notoriety, and the
first mill in the tropical portion of Queensland was erected by
John Ewen Davidson and Thomas Fitzgerald in 1857, and appro-
priately named “Alexandra,” after the Princess of Wales.
There w T as a gay time at the opening of that mill.
There w r ere not many of us in the district then, but we all went
and cheered ourselves hoarse as the rollers slowly revolved and the
first sticks of cane .went through and came out in shapeless fibre
on the other side.
Sugar cane had, of course, been well tried before that expen-
sive machinery was ordered. John Spiller, of the “ Pioneer ”
Estate, with much experience in West Indian and Java planta-
tions, had already made a little sugar with primitive wooden
rollers worked by horses, and it was not long before he also had
steam and iron to replace them, but the actual start came with
the first-puff of smoke from the Alexandra chimney stack.
That puff went round the world, not like the supposed influenza-
spreading ashes of Krakatoa, but with a life-opening influence
which speedily made itself felt.
- Capital, energy, and experience began to pour in, the former
represented by many Public school and University men, and the
latter by the tried hands of Mauritius and Java and the islands of
the West. Lofty chimneys went up, and made new landmarks for
the little vessels creeping up the coast. Steam whistles shrieked,
and the smell of dundur made the squatter swear as he
hustled his frightened fat stock over the black oozey gutters
which drained the mill refuse across the road.
There are many names fresh in one’s memory of those bustling
times. Ned Long and George Marten, of Branscombe, Hewitt
and Romilly, of Pleystowe, the Robinsons, of Lome, Amhurst and
Pocklington, of Foulden, afterwards owned by Sir John Lawes,
William Hyne, of Meadowlands, Hugh McCready, associated with
Pleystowe, and afterwards on his own at Palmyra, Hume Black ,
of the Cedars, Mcßryde and Finlayson, Carrol ani wary, Fitz -


May 9, 1901.]
AUSTRALIA.
simmons at Nebia, Lloyd and Walker, of Dumbleton, and many
more who were associated with those pioneering days. And let
me not forget Ted Kennedy, the pioneer of sport, the discoverer in
our waters, by the aid of a self-made salmon-fly, of the “ Palmer,”
the gigantic perch which has been found in most of the north-
east coast rivers, a big scaled fish with a ruby eye, and a marked
preference for “ spins ” over other kinds of lurements to destruc-
tion. Ted Kennedy and John Spiller were together at this first
kill, and christened the ruby-eyed one the “ Palmer,” because he
was caught in a pool beneath a clump of palm trees, and by that
name a great many of his race, from one to twenty-five pounds
weight, have since made sport and food for the white man, who is
for ever searching for novelties.
Then there was Parson Tanner, whose celebrated “ Ecclesiasti-
cal Tariff” appeared in the columns of Punch. The Church being
entirely dependent on voluntary contributions, and the population
being small and scattered, the Parson was compelled to announce
to his Easter meeting that he would conduct one service a week
for so much, two services for so much more, extra sermons and
services at extra prices, and the rest of his time he would devote
to his farm and garden, or all of his time if he got no other support.
He was quite right, and his appeal had the desired effect.
He and Ted Kennedy lived on adjoining farms and made many
valuable experiments in the introduction of fruit and flowers.
To the Parson we owed that particular mango which still bears
his name. What ? You never tasted a mango ? Man, man ! you
haven’t yet lived. No, you can’t get them here. Go to the
countries where they grow, go and pick half a dozen, full and
ripe and ready to fall, with the fresh bloom on their skins and
blobs of dew sparkling on them at early dawn, and wallow with
them in your morning tub.
But this is Mackay gossip only.
During this time the rich alluvial flats on the Mary River, in
the south, had been planted with sugar-cane, and Tooth and
Cran had erected their Yengarie works. Bundaberg, on the
Burnett, had sprung into existence, and Parson Tanner had
migrated there and called it the Filia pulcJirior of Mackay. Here
were the Youngs at Fairymead, and the Grans also had started
with Millaquin, a factory on the central milling system, where
the planters crushed their own cane and sold the juice, which
was pumped through miles of piping to the Millaquin mill, and
there made into sugar. The name Millaquin, by the way, is
derived from the aboriginal pronunciation of milking, the works
having been erected on the site of an old milking yard.
Simultaneously with these southern developments the northern
explorers were, not idle. The Herbert River was known almost
as soon as Mackay, and the Neames and Mackenzies and others
were quickly developing it. The great Burdekin Delta, too,
opened up an enormous area for sugar, and small settlements
were established on the Johnstone, and at Cairns and Mourilyan.
And the Government sat tight, and chuckled over its ever-
increasing land sales.
How much invested in sugar ? Well, I can hardly say now, but
it’s probably well on to ten millions sterling.
Recollections? Oh, yes; I have any number of them, and so
would you have if you had lived there for a third of a century I
mineral Developments In Port!) Queensland.
THE CHILLAGOE, IRVINEBANK, HERBERTON, MOUNT GARNET,
and EINASLEIGH MINING DISTRICTS.
[By the Special Commissioners of the “ British Australasian.”]
THE PIONEERS AND THE EARLY DAYS.
It was in 1888 that prospectors first came in from the then
unknown district now called Chillagoe, and announced the dis-
covery of important deposits of silver and lead ore. In that year,
it may be remembered, the Broken Hill silver mines reached
their zenith in the markets of Australia, and everyone in mining
circles was on the look out for silver mines, and could hardly be
persuaded to touch any others. The silver fever had even to
some extent affected the quiet tin-producing centre of Irvinebank,
where Mr. John Moffat had taken up his abode a few years pre-
viously, and it was to this gentleman, the “ father of his district,”
that the discoverers betook themselves for support. Having
satisfied himself of the existence of payable silver, Mr. Moffat
started prospecting work on some of the claims that had been
taken up. As work proceeded it was speedily found that,
besides silver and lead, copper was abundant. The price of the
last-mentioned metal having about this time reached a high
figure, owing to the operations of the French combine, attention
was directed to it also. Latterday visitors and experts may find
much to criticise in the workings of the first Chillagoe Company,
overlooking, or not understanding, the difficulties that had to
be surmounted twelve years ago. It is, however, safe to say
that had the Chillagoe mines been taken over by a big Anglo-
Australian company in 1888-9 they would be Unheard of to-day,
for the subsequent depreciation in the values of the three
principal metals of the district would assuredly have led to
disaster. And everyone knows the difficulties in the way of
reviving an enterprise after it has proved a failure at the start.
But being controlled by Mr. Moffat, the mines were worked on
economical and commonsense lines —quite apart from market
influences—and in this w r ay, though they may not have been
developed on quite the most modern and approved principles,
they were nevertheless kept going and made productive. The
adjacent country, too, was not neglected. Along the courses of
the numerous lodes which outcrop on every side, may be seen
pits and trenches beside which is stacked ore containing from
7to 15 per cent, of copper. These heaps represent what was left
after the richer portions had been conveyed to the smelters, this
comparatively poor ore being, of course, unprofitable to treat
under the conditions then prevailing.
To say that Mr. Moffat is entitled to all the honour that Queens-
land can offer him is only to do him bare justice, for had it not
been for his energy and perseverance all that portion of the colony
which lies between Chillagoe and Irvinebank would be practic-
ally uninhabited to-day. In a measure, Mr. Moffat has two
exemplars in Australia, both of them in the colony of
Victoria, viz., Mr. George Lansell, of Bendigo, and the
Hon. J, A. Wallace, but these gentlemen have had to deal
with easier problems than have arisen in the development of
Northern Queensland. Rich as the lodes have proved, none but
a man resolutely determined to develop the resources of the part
of the country in which he lived would have done what Mr.
Moffat has successfully accomplished. Those unacquainted with
the country can form little idea of the difficulties that the pioneer has
had to contend with. The natives were numerous and treacher-
ous, and as Mr. Moffat refused to countenance the rough and ready
methods of dealing with them which prevailed in the old days, they
proved a constant source of trouble. Shooting and other violent
measures to instil respect for the white man being interdicted,
the miners had to exercise the greatest caution in their move-
ments, and keep a sharp look out for their live stock, though,
despite all precautions, many of the latter were speared. All the
stores and all the machinery for the mines had to be carted from
Mareeba, upwards of a hundred miles through what was practi-
cally trackless bush, in some seasons devoid of grass and water.
The ore from the mines, too, had to be drawn to the smelters by
bullock teams. Then the tick plague visited the district, and
killed the cattle, so that mules had to be imported, and the ore
packed on their backs. Work was, nevertheless, steadily per-
severed in, and the time came when the field began to attract
public attention.
In 1889 Mr. Aloysius Kelly, brother of the Broken Hill and
Mount Lyell magnate, Mr. Bowes Kelly, paid a visit to the dis-
trict, and was so impressed with what he saw that he endeavoured
to obtain support for a big scheme to take over the whole of
the mines. He was, however, in advance of the times. Copper
mining, he was told, was almost unknown, and, what was worse, ■
unpopular in Melbourne, then as now the great speculative centre
of Australia, and the property was considered too far away
from the port, so his idea had reluctantly to be abandoned.
But, in spite of all obstacles, the work prospered, and in 1890
Dr. R. L. Jack, the Government Geologist, was deputed by the
Minister of Mines to report on the district for the information
of the public. The results of his examination were embodied
in an elaborate publication, concluding with the following
paragraph:—-
“ Considering that the Chillagoe and Koorboora fields have only
been known since the middle of 1888, and the work done has been
purely exploratory—for although Messrs. John Moffat and Com-
pany and Messrs. Delany and party have expended an amount
roughly estimated at £20,000 (on a great number of mines
scattered over at least 100 square miles of country), there has,
necessarily, in the absence of machinery and smelting works, been
almost no return —-the foregoing notes will show that the district
bids fair in the near future to rival or excel the richest of our
mineral fields. Some of the deposits of silver and copper ore are
on a gigantic scale. In the case of the silver ores, really ores of
lead containing a proportion of silver, their value can only be
estimated by assaying from day to day as the ore is raised, or
computed by the actual output of smelting works. In the present
undeveloped state of the mines, all that can be said is that the
chances are all in favour of the mines from which ore can be
raised in large quantities.”
The time came when a smelter was erected at a place since
called Calcifer —one of the few instances of appropriate naming
that can be cited in North Queensland, though a matter-of-fact,
postmaster rather spoilt the significance of the designation by
altering the spelling. The original form was “Oalcufer,” derived
from the Latin names for the principal products of the district:
calcium (lime), cuprum (copper), and ferrum (iron). The nomen-
clature of the mines furnishes, indeed, plenty of material for quite-
an amusing study. “ Chillagoe,” for instance, was adopted by the;
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA.
[May 9, 1901.
original surveyor from a cattle station in the neighbourhood as a
distinctive name for the district. The surveyor, now a highly
respected southern police magistrate, was an ardent anthropologist,
and, thinking he had thus rescued a native name from oblivion, took
occasion to inform the squatter of the fact before leaving. He was,
therefore, horrified to learn that its real origin was the chorus of a
stockman’s song winding up with the words, “Whoa ! Ho ! Chilla-
go.” “ For Heaven’s sake don’t say anything about it,” said the
surveyor, “ let it go for a native name,” and to this day it has
been accepted as such by the unsuspecting public. When the
mines were in full swing it was necessary that the individual
leases should be distinguished by special names. Two were
accordingly named after Sir Thomas Mcllwraith and Sir Samuel
Griffith, the two most prominent politicians of the time, while
several others of lesser note were similarly distinguished.
Recourse was later had to opera, and thus came into being the
“ Girofla,” “Dorothy,” “ Penzance,” “ Ruddigore,” and others,
whose origin has been the source of much discussion. The “ Ti-
Tree ” group took its name from the prevalence of that plant in
its vicinity. The “Boomerang” was suggested by the peculiar
curvature of its outcrop, while the “Lady Jane ” mine was so
called because the lode was found to be suddenly cut off by a
fault, and someone remarked that this was similar to the fate of
the historical Lady Jane Grey. Happily the mine soon received a
new lease of life, as the ore body was recovered, and there is every
prospect of its long continuance.
Messrs. Moffat continued not only to develop the mines at
Calcifer, where the smelter was at work, but to open out claims
sixteen and twenty miles away, at Mungana and Redcap respec-
tively. It was not long, indeed, before a second smelter was put up
at Mungana, and prospecting was meanwhile carried on all over the
country. It may be of interest to summarise some of the results
obtained by Messrs. Moffat from their two furnaces. At Calcifer
upwards of 4,500 tons of lead and copper ore were treated for an
average return of 20'61 per cent, of copper, 26'6 per cent, of
lead, and 40 ozs. of silver to the ton. Only two samples gave
less than 20 peV cent, of lead (viz., and B'B3 respectively), and
only four fell below 10 per cent, of copper (6, 6, 7£, and 9 per
cent.), the balance ranging from 11 to 25 per cent. The Mungana
returns are very incomplete, and it is therefore very difficult to
give a reliable summary of them, the lead and copper values in
particular being frequently unrecorded in the case of the richer
silver ores. The returns available show an average yield of 27
per cent, from more than 2,000 tons of lead ore, together with
about 14 ozs. of silver to the ton. The average of copper from
about 2,050 tons of ore was IL2 per cent., the silver contents
amounting to over 10 ozs. to the ton. In several cases where no
yield of lead or copper is specified, the return of silver ranges
from 12j to 40 ozs. per ton, and one parcel of 36 tons gave 46 per
cent, of lead, 20 per cent, of copper, and 143 ozs. of silver to the
ton. The slag heaps indicate a considerable loss in treatment,
unavoidable under the primitive conditions that prevailed, and
with the inferior quality of the fuel available for smelting purposes.
Even these results, however, go far to vindicate Dr. Jack’s
optimistic forecast of 1890, and the present position of the
Chillagoe Railway and Mines, Limited, and other adjoining com-
panies is an eloquent testimony to the acuteness and prescience
of that eminent geologist. His early estimate of the great future
in store for the Chillagoe mines will, it seems highly probable,
be ranked amongst the greatest successes of his professional
career.
THE ROUTE TO CHILLAGOE.
THE POET OF CAIRNS.
When it was first proposed tc construct a railway from the port
of Cairns into the interior of North Queensland, the terminus in
view was the prosperous tinfield of which Herberton is the centre.
The enormous richness of its mines fully justified the building of
a .railroad, but its sponsors were evidently unprepared to encounter
such extraordinarily rough country as had eventually to be
traversed, or the more accessible Port Douglas would, no doubt,
have been adopted as the starting point of the line. By the time
Mareeba—47 miles away by railway, but only 26 as the
crow flies—was reached, a million and a quarter sterling
had been expended on its construction, and as the yield
from the rich tin deposits had by this time (August, 1893)
materially decreased, the extension to Herberton was suspended.
The line was never, therefore, of the utility originally expected,
but, in view of the discoveries at Chillagoe, its construction has,
nevertheless, proved of immense service, and will result in the
conversion of Cairns into a centre of the greatest activity.
As soon as Cairns is reached one begins to hear of the Chillagoe
Company. Rumours, more or less vague, are prevalent all along
the coast, but the company’s operations create no direct interest
till one gets to the port, where they boast a valuable acquisition
in the shape of a long lease of ample wharf accommoda-
tion which has been secured for a nominal payment. This
must rise in value with the progress of the port, which is
already assuming an appearance of greatly increased activity—so
much so, indeed, that a Harbour Trust or its Queensland equivalent
has been demanded by the residents. The possession of their own
wharf enables the company to be independent of all the restric-
tions and annoyances so often associated with public wharves, or
those owned by outsiders, besides which it is likely to prove a
Valuable source of revenue in the future.
The port of Cairns lies about 1,000 miles to the north-west of
Brisbane, the harbour being the finest in Queensland, and one of
the safest and most commodious to be found in any part of the
world. Vessels of any tonnage can discharge alongside the
wharves, and facilities can readily be provided for an enormous
sea traffic at a very small cost. Cairns is the natural outlet of
the Mulgrave, Etheridge, Hodgkinson, Russell Eiver, Towalla and
Mareeba goldfields, the Tinaroo and Herberton tinfields, and the
silver, lead, and copper mines of Muldiva, Mount Garnet, and
Montalbion. The town is the centre of the banana trade of North
Queensland, and is surrounded by the finest sugar land in the
colony. There are also several rice mills close by on the Barron
Eiver, while coffee, tobacco, and pineapples are among the other
products of the vicinity.
The situation of Cairns is not particularly attractive, built as it
is on the verge of a mangrove swamp, but the town cannot fail to
interest the visitor if only for the curious jumble of races by
which it is inhabited. The racial problem may accordingly be
studied under' the most advantageous circumstances. In the
Southern provinces it is commonly reported that the white man
SURPRISE CREEK BRIDGE, CAIRNS RAILWAY.
takes off his hat to the heathen Chinee in the Cairns district, and
though this jibe at the Northerner cannot be substantiated, there
is no doubt but that the almond-eyed alien has made this part of
Australia largely his own. Between Cairns and Kuranda, the
chief stopping-place on the railway line between the port and
Mareeba, there is a lavish profusion of wild bananas, pawpaws,
and other tropical fruit-bearers, which only require regular
cultivation in more congenial surroundings to turn them to
profitable account. The Chinaman has applied himself to the
task, and his success is evident from his independent bearing in
the streets of Cairns. All the same, the white man is not so sub-
servient, but that he compels John Chinaman to travel by train in
a special compartment reserved for himself and “ Jimmy Tanna,”
the Kanaka. With all the objections against him, the Chinaman
finds for himself a useful sphere in this semi-tropical region, and
fills it successfully. No white man, apparently, will compete
with him in fruit production, and John accordingly enjoys a
monopoly of which he makes the most. His crop never fails
him in the equable climate of this fertile country, and his market
in the south is so extensive that all his produce can be disposed
of without any present hope of overtaking the demand. Why the
white man neglects this most healthy and profitable employment is
a mystery. He calls it “ nigger’s work,” and works for 7s. to 9s.
a day as a navvy, timber cutter, or miner, -when he might easily
dislodge the servile inferior race, and make the Asiatic, if he is to
have any place there at all, do all the labour of the country. The
Japs, with their vicious panderings and pushful characteristics,
are also a feature amongst the multiferous nationalities of Cairns.
THE GOVERNMENT RAILWAY FROM CAIRNS TO
MAREEBA.
In travelling by rail from Cairns to Mareeba one passes through
some of the finest scenery that is to be found in Australia, or, for
that matter, in any other part of the world. The level country
which surrounds the port is soon left behind, and a sharp ascent
leads into a region of rocky gorges and precipitous slopes. The
railway is one of the greatest engineering feats that has ever been
attempted in the Australian colonies, and as I rounded the
mountain sides on narrow cuttings at enormous heights, or was
carried through the tunnels which succeed one another with startling
rapidity, I was irresistibly reminded of the line which skirts the
northern coast of Italy near Genoa. The route follows the
course of the Barron River as closely as possible, and in the
intervals between the tunnels all the traveller’s attention is
rivetted by the magnificent panorama which unfolds itself before
his eyes. Far below him, the waters of the rainy season
have carved out rocky channels amidst the dense scrub; here
flowing in tortuous courses among the boulders, there falling in
silver streaks over a precipice of granite. Ranges of hills limit the
view in every direction, while all around may be seen the luxuriant
vegetation of a tropical climate, cedars crowning the slopes, and
flowering plants imparting colour to the undergrowth of the
valleys. It is not long before the sound of rushing waters pro-
claims the Adcinity of the celebrated Barron Falls. Although at
the time of my visit there was comparatively little water passing
over owing to the effects of an exceptionally dry “ dry season,”
the falls, with their sheer drop of 700 ft., formed a truly magnifi-
cent spectacle. Even the practical-minded Australian is not
behindhand in his appreciation of its beauties. A station has
been erected at this point on the line, and there is ample pro-
vision of tables and seats for the benefit of picnic parties, it being
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND EW EALAND MATT., May 9, 1901 .


AUSTRALIA.
customary to go up to the Falls by the morning train, and then to
get out and inspect them from various points of view until it is
time to proceed on to Mareeba by the afternoon train. The
photograph conveys a better impression of the magnificence of the
Falls than any word picture can conjure up in the mind. While
admiring their grandeur, however, it is impossible to refrain from
a regret that a potential source of so much electrical power should
THE BAEEON FALLS.
From th 6 Cairns to Mareeba Eailway.
be allowed to run to waste. None of their incomparable beauty
would be impaired by the utilisation of their limitless energy.
Hut for the moment a section of the public has successfully
opposed the scheme for putting them to a useful purpose, when
they might be made a benefit as well as a beauty.
A couple of miles further on is Kuranda, the sanatorium of the
district and, in fact, the general health resort of North Queensland,
where I made an enjoyable stay. After leaving Kuranda, the
scenery is unimpressive, compared with that previously passed
through, and, by the time Mareeba is reached, the prevailing
monotonous country of North-East Queensland has been fairly
entered upon, and the comforts of the seaboard have become a
mere memory.
MAREEBA.
Mareeba is a mining township, situated on the edge of some
good timber land, wi h some very fair agricultural and pastoral
country in the vicinity. At the time of my visit it was the centre
of considerable business activity, owing to the presence in the
neighbourhood of the large numbers of men engaged in the con-
struction of the Chillagoe Railway. It was consequently with no
little difficulty, and after a considerable recourse to diplomacy,
that I w T as able to obtain accommodation as one of 60 guests at
one of the hotels. The number may not appear imposing, but
when it is remembered that this was merely an ordinary bush inn,
accustomed to regard a score of visitors as a strain on its re-
sources, the magnitude of such a rush may be conceived. And
the guests ! They were a motley mixture of all classes, from the
mining magnate of the London market, to the railway navvy and
plantation Kanaka, with a sprinkling of French, German and
Italian wanderers, the latter being for the most part charcoal
burners. Nearly all were in the possession of money and good
spirits a surplus of the latter in liquid form towards midnight—
and the utmost good humour prevailed, though sleep was not easy
to obtain.
As the terminus of the Cairns Railway, Mareeba had the
importance which usually attaches to an Australian town in such
a position, but it has few other claims to attention, and with the
extension of the railway to Chillagoe it seems probable that it
will dwindle down to the usual hotel or two, store, and black-
smith’s shop, unless mineral discoveries are made in the imme-
diate neighbourhood. The belt of timber country on the
Herberton road has, however, produced several hundred thousand
pounds worth of cedar, and so plentiful is it that the hotels and
many of the miners’ huts have been built and lined with it
throughout. With the railway, and the opening up of the country
which must result from the operations of the Chillagoe Company,
this tract should prove an important source of wealth to the
colony, and may be the means of preventing Mareeba, which has
already engineered a large timber export, from falling into oblivion.
THE CHILLAGOE LINE.
In the case of some Australian railways the object aimed at
seems to have been the achievement of reputations by the
engineers, who appear to have run up against all kinds of obstacles
in order to show how well they could surmount them. This has
certainly resulted in some remarkable exhibitions of engineering
skill, but the triumph of the Chillagoe railway lies in the avoidance
of obstacles, and the result has been the construction of a road
that has no superior in Queensland for substantial work and easy
running. The railway connects with the Cairns-Mareeba system
on the colony’s standard gauge of 3 ft. 6 in., and for the first 25 miles
traverses fairly easy country, though the grades are occasionally
pretty stiff. The highest point of this section is seven miles from
Mareeba, where the elevation is 1,720 ft. Between the 25 and 40
mile marks culverts and cuttings become more frequent, but the
engineer in charge has skilfully avoided the construction of works
on the scale that is to be observed on some of the lines in New
South Wales and Victoria. From the highest point of the line,
where it crosses the Featherbed Range at an elevation of
2,050 ft., it descends to Chillagoe, 1,050 ft. above sea level,
the total length to the terminus at Mungana being 103
miles. The first 60 miles run over grazing land, after which
the limestone of the mineral belt is entered upon. In the con-
struction of the railway 2,288 sleepers have been used to the mile,
as against only 1,700 or 1,800 in Victoria and New South Wales.
These sleepers are not squared in the usual manner, but are
simply large logs divided in two, and laid with the rounded side
uppermost. The reason for this innovation is that in the hot
weather, when rain is frequent, rapid deterioration would set in
under the combined influence of the heat and damp, were not the
water thus prevented from finding a lodgment. It is such
matters as this, small enough individually, but highly important
in the aggregate, that indicate the care with which this under-
taking has been carried out, and from a shareholder’s point of
view, it is, of course, highly satisfactory.
Rails of a minimum weight of 41 lbs. were stipulated for in the
contract with the Government, but, as a matter of fact, 60 lb.
rails prevail throughout, as against 40 lb. on the Perth to
Kalgoorlie line in Western Australia. The maximum grade was
to be 1 in 40, but 1 in 50 to 60 is the prevailing
average. I was able to proceed by the railway as far as
the “ 49-mile,” where Emu Creek is encountered. Emu
Creek is a wide watercourse which, in the wet season,
conveys nearly the whole of the water which is subsequently
carried by the Barron river into the sea, and here the
company has erected a steel bridge at a high level above it.
The bridge used originally conveyed the heavy traffic across the
river at Brisbane, but was displaced by an abnormal flood, and,
like the Clifton suspension bridge in England, was bought up at
the price of old iron. It is the largest piece of work that the
company have had to erect, all the other bridges being across
minor streams and gullies, and it is probably the finest work
of its kind in North Queensland, with the exception of the Burdekin
river railway bridge between Townsville and Charters Towers. From
this point, locally termed “ Wade’s” though officially known
as Lappa Lappa, the country becomes more rugged, and a high
mountain chain, ironically named the “ Featherbed,” has to be
crossed. Cuttings become fairly numerous, and there are several
embankments; but the route chosen is level compared with that
taken by the coaches, whose terrors are much enhanced by the
rapid pace at which the drivers are prone to insist on driving
down the slopes.
The company’s railway was opened to the 55-mile peg on
October 1 last, and traffic is now in full swing over the whole
length. It has been stated in some quarters that the rains will
have a disastrous effect on the line, and that the first floods will
inevitably carry away the bulk of the bridges and a large portion
of the track. As a matter of fact, care has been taken to cross all
waterways as near their sources as possible. The rock cuttings,
too, are principally through granite, felsite, slate, and other
compact rocks, and the ballasting and draining of the track have
been carried out in a manner that should ensure immunity from
accident. From “ Wade’s ” the journey had to be made to
Chillagoe by road, and arrangements were accordingly entered
into for a buggy and pair, guaranteed to do the intervening
45 miles before dark, say six o’clock. Scores of teams of 10 to 18
horses each were passed on the road, all destined for Chillagoe
with mining material, stores, beer, and all the necessities of a new
and rising mining camp in Australia. The dust created was
awful, enough to make even a Westralian green with envy, and,
above all, it was a “dry stage” (i.e., no drinks), for a detour
made in an endeavour to avoid some of the dust resulted in
the only bush inn being passed unobserved. The only alleviation
of an otherwise monotonous journey was to watch the fantastic
shapes assumed by the “ tors ” and boulders of the granite hills.
In some places they look like flocks of sheep scattered over the
slopes; at others, like huge cairns erected in memory of some
departed hero. Sometimes, too, they resembled nothing so much
as a cluster of marbles left by the giants of the fairy age. Despite
these distractions, however, at the end of twenty-two miles both
men and horses had had enough, and the former were glad to
take advantage of a hospitable invitation to stay at a railway
camp, especially as it was now nearly six.
Approaching Calcifer, the former headquarters of the Chillagoe
Company’s operations, a change comes over the appearance of
the country, and, in place of granite, limestone ranges come
into prominence. At first sight the glaring sunlight gives their
summits the appearance of being coated with snow. In the softer
glow of the setting sun, however, they assume gorgeous tints as
it sinks to rest behind the hilltops. The splendour of the effect
produced is beyond description, and is probably unrivalled, except
in the regions of perpetual snow. To ascend one of the ranges
at this period of the evening is a revelation in scenery. The
country between the hills is covered with forest growth, and
presents a lakelike appearance, brought into relief by the ever*
green foliage of the ironbark, bloodwood, and other trees,
so much so that a stranger might readily take it for
the waters of an inland sea. Or, at another moment, in
the limited period between daylight and darkness, the
level surface might well be mistaken for a grassy plain,
stretching away to the next range of hills. Such a scene calls to
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901,
May 9, 1901.]


AUSTRALIA.
and capabilities, and as the future of the" company largely resolves
itself into a question of the successful solution of the smelting
problem, they are to be congratulated upon having secured
Mr. Weinberg for the crucial post mentioned. Mr. Weinberg
was for a number of years in America, where he acted
as smelting manager to the Anaconda Company. On going
to Australia, he became general manager of the Queensland
Smelting Company and, more recently, of the Smelting Com-
pany of Australia, whose works are at Dapto. The Chillagoe
Company is controlled from Melbourne by a board, which
includes Mr. C. W. Chapman as chairman, Mr. Win, Knox,
Mr. John Moffat, Mr. Harvey Patterson, and Mr. J. S. Reid.
The secretary, Mr. C. L. Hewitt, is a very able official, and
the head offices are at 39, Queen-street. The trustees for the
debenture holders are Sir Henry Norman and Mr. Chas. A.
Hanson, and there is a London board of three —Mr. R. B. Ronald,
Hon. S. A. Stephen, and Mr. W. Douglas Reid. The offices in
London are at Finsbury House, Blomfield-street, E.C. The
nominal capital of the company is £1,000,000 in 1,000,000 £1
shares, of which 700,000 have been issued and fully-paid. In
March, 1899, £400,000 6 per cent, first mortgage debentures
were offered for public subscription in London, and were
negotiated on somewhat onerous terms, especially considering
the premium to which they promptly went. Following on the
lines of the Mount Lyell Company, debenture holders have an
option to exchange their bonds for shares at any time before
April 1,1902, at the price of 30s. per share. A further debenture
issue of £50,000, making £450,000 out of the £500,000 6 per cent,
first mortgage debentures, took place in June, 1900. The interest
on the whole of the debentures is payable in London or Melbourne
on April 1 and October 1 in each year, and they are redeemable at
par on April 1, 1919, or from 1909 to 1919 at £llO on six months’
notice being given by the company. We are not aware to what,
if any, extent the conversion option has been exercised.
In the meantime we hear from a variety of sources that the
development of the company’s concession is proceeding satisfac-
torily. As regards the mines, Mr. Stewart’s estimates continue to
lean to the side of caution, indeed, they are not estimates at all,
but valuations of ore actually at grass. . Writing on February 15,
our Melbourne correspondent says:
Mr. A. S. Frew, the engineer in charge, of the railway, writes in
quite a different tone of his portion of the undertaking, and the public
is convinced that, whatever happens to the mines, the railway is an
asset that will ensure the company a successful career. Already the
traffic is producing a profit, and the trains have scarcely commenced
to run yet. Next month, when the rainy season will be over, there is
going to be a rush of visitors to Chillagoe, and one result will certainly
be the opening up of a number of mines at Hodgkinson, Herberton,
Watsonville, Irvinebank, Coolgarra, and other adjacent districts, not to
mention the output of ore by co-operative parties of miners, the whole
of which, together with the supplies required for these districts, will
come over the company’s railway. In a few months there will be a
large traffic in Mount Garnet copper, now being produced in the form
of matte, at that company’s smelters. The Einasleigh Mine will also
shortly be producing, the Coolgarra tin mines, Stannary Hill tin
mines, Vulcan mines, and Irvinebank smelters—all these will send
huge consignments of ore and metal.
The last half-yearly meeting of the company was held on
Melbourne on February 20. Mr. J. S. Reid presided, and in
moving the adoption of the statements of accounts and reports
for the period ending November 30 said: —
The railway was rapidly approaching completion. All earthworks,
drains, and culverts were actually finished, and the last bridge would
shortly be completed. Whilst the terminus of the railway, in com-
pliance with the Act, would be at Mungana, the western centre of the
traffic had been fixed at Chillagoe, 92 miles from Mareeba. This was
the site chosen for the company’s reduction works, for the reason that
it was •' a good centre for the mines, with a never-failing supply of
water. It had been chosen by the Government as the best position for
the principal town of the district. The railway station and the sidings at
Chillagoe had been completed, and they were now delivering passengers
and goods at this terminus. No doubt the prognostications of the
directors with regard to large traffic would be fully realised, ar.d that
the railway would prove to be a profitable and enduring branch of
their business. Good progress continued to be made in the erection
of the reduction works. A branch railway connection had been com-
pleted to the smelter dump, where machinery was being erected. The
engineer in charge of the construction stated in a supplementary
report just to hand that the smelter-stack was half built, the orebin
foundations were completed, and the main shed and other parts of the
work were well in hand. Orders for the more important portions of
the machinery required for the works, such as engines, boilers, and
blowers, had been placed in England and America some time ago, and
the greater part of this machinery had already been delivered or was
afloat. Contracts for the rest of the ironwork, which had been let in
Australia, were either completed or well in hand. Mr. Smith, manager
of the mine, had prepared a supplementary report, indicating the
advance in the developments to date, which could not be regarded
minerals they now contain. These deposits, or “ bonanzas,” a shortly be completed. Whilst the terminus ol the railway in com-
n „„„ r,. , -j , F j \ ’ n nliance with the Act, would be at Mungana, the western centre of the
they are sometimes termed, are not regarded as possessing the |j raffic had been fixed at chillagoe, 92 miles from Mareeba. This was
permanence at a depth that characterises true lodes, though it tbe gite c h o sen for the company’s reduction works, for the reason that
may be remarked that the formations at the Rio Tmto and jj. was a good centre for the mines, with a never-failing supply ol
Tharsis mines, in Spain, and at Mount Morgan, Broken Hill, water. It had been chosen by the Government as the best position for
Mount Lyell, and other famous mines are of similiar character. the principal town of the district. The railway station and the sidings at
True lodes are, however, by no means wanting, and comprise Chillagoe had been completed, and they were now delivering passengers
several of the most important ore-bodies on the field. and goods at this terminus. No doubt the prognostications of the
In addition to the leases primarily taken up by Mr. Moffat and directors with regard to large traffic would be fully realised, and that
acquired by the original Proprietary Company, the Chillagoe the railway would prove to be a profitable and enduring branch of
Railway and Mines, Limited, hold a number of other properties. their business. Good progress continued to be made in the erection
When it was first decided to embark on the undertaking the com- of reduction works. A branch railway connection had been com-
pany obtained a concession of 2,000 acres of mineral land under pleted to the smelter dump, where machinery was being erected. The
‘ free fro m labour and oth» tS'hS SJSjttß
he a T ,al °', fl P” , T ° ‘heir foundations were completed, and the main shed and other parts of the
other property it was afterwards mund advisable to add another work were well in hand. Orders for the more important portions of
2,000 acres, which were accordingly leased under the ordinary machinery required for the works, such as engines, boilers, and
mining regulations, so that the company now possess an area blowers, had been placed in England and America some time ago, and
several square miles in extent split up into a number of separate the greater part of this machinery had already been delivered or was
sections. After obtaining the necessary concessions for their afloat. Contracts for the rest of the ironwork, which had been let in
railway and mining schemes, the directorate of the company Australia, were either completed or well in hand. Mr. Smith, manager
arranged with Mr. Alexander Stewart, general manager of the of the mine, had prepared a supplementary report, indicating the
great Broken Hill Proprietary Mine, to make an exhaustive advance in the developments to date, which could not be regarded
report upon their property. His opinion of its value was so high as otherwise than satisfactory.
that it was deemed advisable to permanently secure the advantage The company’s concession was legalised by an Act of the
of his experienced supervision. He was accordingly offered the Queensland Parliament entitled the “ Mareeba to Chillagoe Rail-
position of general manager at Chillagoe, which he accepted, while way Act of 1897,” and as the date for the completion of the railway
Mr. George Smith, formerly general manager of the Australian was specified as December 18, 1901, it will be seen that the
Broken Hill Consols mine, was associated with him as mining statutory requirements have been antedated by nearly twelve
manager. Mr. A. S. Frew, C.E., was appointed engineer in months. As already stated, the mineral concessions granted by
charge of the railway, and under the able direction of these gentle- the Act consist of a total acreage of about 2,000 acres, held on
men the company’s enterprise is rapidly being brought into the lease for fifty years from January 1, 1898, at £1 per acre. A point
reproductive stage. * that cannot be too strongly insisted on is that, as regards this
Since the above was written a rearrangement of the managerial statutory leasehold, it is absolutely free from the incidence of the
responsibilities has been arrived at. Mr. F. Back, general ordinary labour and other conditions to which mining leases in the
manager of the Tasmanian State Railways, has resigned his position colony are usually subject, and which are apt at times to prove
to take the post of managing director of the Chillagoe Railway highly onerous. •
and Mines undertaking. Another very important appointment is In addition to contemplated branches to Mount Garnet, Mount
that of Mr. E. A. Weinberg to the position of Chief Metallurgist. Cardwell, Einasleigh, and other mining centres, it will not be the
Mr, Weinberg is a man of the highest attainments, character, most improbable thing in the world if ultimately the Chillagoe
In addition to contemplated branches to Mount Garnet, Mount
irdwell, Einasleigh, and other mining centres, it will not be the
ost improbable thing in the world if ultimately the Chillagoe
[May 9, 1901.
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9,190 U


May 9, 1901 ]
AUSTRALIA
xvii.
Line makes a connection with the Government line at George-
town, which is in process of being surveyed as an extension of
the existing Normanton to Croydon line. The Etheridge Gold-
fields only want the fillip of railway communication with the
coast to lead to their exploitation with new vigour, and, as the
local people prophesy, with the most profitable results. In that
case it can hardly be doubted but that a large amount of traffic
would come over the Chillagoe and Mareeba Railways to Cairns.
In fact, the Georgetown 'mails are already despatched to the
Eastern Coast along this route.
Of course, with the large holdings of the Chillagoe Rail-
way and Mines, one great source of anticipated profit to
the shareholders must consist in the flotation of the various
groups into subsidiary companies as the former become
developed and defined. Ultimately the parent company
may be expected to take the shape of a great railway
and smelting corporation with large interests in the subsidiary
companies floated under her aegis, and who will look to her for all
facilities of transport and treatment. The first of these sub-
sidiaries was, to use the company’s favourite phraseology, “ segre-
_ MR. E. A. WEINBERG,
Chief Metallurgist, Chillagoe Railway and Mines, Limited.
gated ” on March last, and comprises the Mungana group, of
which we give a detailed account in the text. Advertisement and
publicity are not a strong point with the company, and all that
the British investing public heard of the new flotation was gathered
from the following rather vague notice to debenture-holders pub-
lished in the two leading financial dailies. It emanated from the
office in Finsbury House, and was signed by the London secretary,
and was to the following effect: —
The directors have indicated to shareholders from time to time that,
in view of the number and magnitude of the mining areas held by
this company, the policy to be pursued would be to select suitably
connected groups of mines for the purpose of forming separate mining
companies.
Developments at some of the groups are sufficiently advanced to
warrant the initiation of this policy, under which concentration of
operations and more vigorous progress will be secured.
It is intended that the groups of mines, when segregated into
mining companies, shall be bound by agreement to send their ores to
the parent company’s smelters for treatment, and to use the
railway.
The directors, therefore, after consultation with the general manager
(Mr. Alexander Stewart), have decided to form the Mungana Group
into the first of the separate mining companies.
The main line of railway, which will be continued to connect with
the group, is approaching completion, the construction of the smelting
plant is pushed forward rapidly, and the general manager has been
able to make all the necessary investigations and estimates of the
values of the mines with which it is thus proposed to deal.
A copy of the prospectus containing full details of the scheme,
together with the general manager’s report upon the mines included
in the Mungana Group, may be obtained at this office. You will
observe that the issue is offered for subscription exclusively to
registered shareholders in this company in proportion of one share in
the Mungana Company for every 2J shares held in the parent
company.
Holders of debentures, by lodging their bonds for conversion into
shares in the Chillagoa Railway and Mines, Limited, will secure the
right of applying for shares in the Mungana Company on the same
footing as existing shareholders. Forms for the conversion of deben-
tures into shares and for application for shares in the Mungana Com-
pany are annexed to the prospectus. The debentures must be lodged
for conversion, and application for shares made on before the 18th hast.,
the date fixed for the closing of the list.
Of course, the directors of the Chillagoe Railway and Mines
know their own business best, but in the interests of North
Queensland it is to be regretted that the public has not heard
more through the usual channels respecting the properties which
the company controls and the method and amount of their
segregation and capitalisation. We had to wait for the bald
particulars till the arrival of a letter from our special mining
correspondent in Melbourne, dated February 26, and published in
our issue of April 4. He merely gives the wording of a circular
dated February 25 and issued to the Melbourne shareholders of
the Chillagoe Railway and Mines Company:—
An agreement, ensuring successful flotation, has been completed
in London for the formation of the Mungana mines into an indepen-
dent mining company, called the Mungana (Chillagoe) Mining Company,
Limited, which will take over the Griffith, Dorothy, Lady Jane, and
Girofla mines. The prospectus will shortly be issued containing Mr.
Stewart’s plans and reports, and the terms and conditions of the new
company. The nominal value placed upon the mines acquired by the
new company is £125,000 in 500,000 shares of ss. The issue is limited
to 400,000 shares, and the terms of payment are 2s. per share on appli-
cation, and 3s. on May 31 next. Forty thousand pounds net will be
placed to the credit of the new company as a working capital, and the
parent company takes £60,000 cash, and the remaining 100,000 paid-up
shares in payment for the properties, and to cover the cost of railway
connection, outlay on the mines, and flotation expenses. The agree-
ment provides that the registered shareholders in Chillagoe must be
given prior right of pro rata application for the new shares, and any
shares not applied for under this condition will be otherwise allotted.
Calcifer was the first centre of the company’s operations, but
it was soon found that a more central situation was essential. A
convenient site was therefore chosen near the railway at Station
Creek, where the smelting works ’are being erected. Here
has been laid out the Government township of Chillagoe, and
as the creek is a permanent watercourse, the residents will be
much better off in the matter of water supply than they would
have been at Calcifer.
For convenience sake the properties are divided up into groups
of several mines each, the latter being so numbered that to
indicate any individual mine it is only necessary to quote its
number and the name of the group in which it is included.
The following is a list of the various groups in the order of
their distance from Mareeba, and in this order they will be
described: —
Calcifer Ti-Tree Otho Zillmanton Redcap
Harper Fortunafa Ruddigore Mungana
It is not my purpose to give details of all the mines included in
the various groups, but merely to give examples here and there.
The notes too, that I made at the date of my inspection, may
in certain cases be of little value at the present time, since
further work may have materially altered the aspect of affairs
which then prevailed. They should, however, be sufficient to give
a good general idea of the prospective value of the mines, especi-
ally if it be kept in mind that there are many other properties
owned by the company which are likely to yield as good results as
will be obtained from those described. It is unnecessary for me
to go deeply into the subject of ore deposits; what is intended
is to give an unvarnished account of the prospects of the various
mines. With this view, the use of technical language will also
be avoided as far as possible, so that the casual reader should
experience little difficulty in obtaining a clear view of the situation.
THE CALCIFER GROUP.
The mines of this group are situated at the Eastern extremity
of the company’s property, and are the first to be traversed by
the new line of railway. The ore bodies of the group occur
at the junction of the limestone with the granite, and may there-
fore be described as contact lodes. On lease 40, the outcrop,
which is 40 ft. in width, takes a direction nearly north and soutli,
traversing a hill of no great height for a distance of 600 yards. A
shaft has been sunk in the crown of the hill to a depth of 60 ft.,
and from the bottom a level has been put in on the lode for a
distance of 90 ft., the ore being of good quality. A return of over
10 per cent, of copper was obtained from a quantity of this ore by
Mr. Moffat. On lease 41 the outcrop of the lode is traceable for
nearly half a mile over a considerable eminence. Its strike (or
direction) is north-west and south-east, with a dip or underlie
(inclination to the horizon) of 40 deg. to the east. A shaft has
been sunk to a depth of 150 ft., which cut the lode when 50 ft.
down. The veinstone or matrix of the ore is garnet rock, and the
oxidised ores near the surface run as high as 30 per cent., while
the copper pyrites, or yellow ore, of the lower levels, gives about
10 per cent, of copper.
An enormous outcrop, literally covering the summits of two
hills, between 200 and 300 ft. in height, traverses leases 48, 50,
and 51 for three-quarters of a mile. Its strike is nearly east and
west, and its average width must be fully 400 ft. The magnitude
of this formation evidently proved attractive to the original pro-
spectors and proprietors, for many trenches and holes have been
sunk at various points. Beside these there are invariably to be
seen heaps of ore which were apparently not considered rich enough
to justify removal, as the copper contents do not average more
than 10 per cent. A shaft was sunk by the former management
at what appears to be the junction of the main body with another
having a north-westerly direction. A cross-cut was driven for a
considerable distance, but, owing to men being required at another
part of the field, work was suspended just when every indication
pointed to the immediate proximity of the lode. The second lode,
like the principal one, has been tested only by “ pot holes,” as
prospectors’ work is termed: but even these have revealed the
presence of good ore, and it is a wonder that a shaft has not been
sunk on the outcrop as a temporary measure in order to test its
value at a depth. The ground rises abruptly, and there is every
facility for working these immense deposits on the open-cut
system, i.e., by simple quarrying.
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


xviii.
AUSTRALIA
[May 9, 1901.
On the Boomerang leases, which comprise No. 43 and eight
others immediately adjoining, the workings, mostly open cuts,
indicate that a large quantity of ore has been extracted, a fact for
which the close proximity of the old smelting plant is no doubt
responsible. 1,100 tons smelted by Messrs. Moffat gave the
splendid return of over 15 per cent, of copper. Several thousand
tons of ore have been raised, and for half a mile the formation has
been traced by trenches and pits. The veinstone is garnet rock,
and the ore is principally green carbonate of copper (malachite),
with a little sulphide, into which the former will no doubt graduate
lower down. The limited prospecting done by the present company
proves that the ore body is 30 ft. wide near the old workings, and
averages some 12 per cent, of copper. When the mine is
systematically developed it should prove a very valuable property.
THE HARPER GROUP.
In the Harper group the formation is on a huge scale, and may
be followed for a distance of two miles, while it is no exaggeration
to state that the outcrop is 1,000 ft. across. Some portions con-
tain silver lead ores, and in others there are large copper deposits,
while garnet rock, which is the common associate of the rich ores
found on many of the other leases, also occurs here. Most of the
ore smelted by Messrs. Moffat yielded 27 per cent, of copper, and
there are now 2,000 tons of rich carbonates lying at the surface
ready for treatment. This is, undoubtedly, one of the big things
of the Chillagoe Company, for, judging by what is now visible,
systematic exploration will reveal an unlimited supply of ore,
which can be readily mined by means of open cuts, and contains
payable silver.
THE TI-TREE GROUP.
The Ti-tree group includes the prospecting protection area held
by the old company, and adjoins the Otho and Fortunata groups,
as well as the Eureka lease of the Chillagoe-Bedford Company.
Here the lode has been proved for about half-a-mile. The outcrop
is one of the most imposing on the company’s property, standing
fully 40 ft. above the surrounding surface, and measuring 50 to 60
ft. across. A cutting has been put to a depth of 30 ft. into the
outcrop, which should give an average of 10 per cent, of
copper. A shaft has also been sunk to a depth of 60 ft. in
the level ground between the large outcrop and a hill to the
south-east into which the lode runs, and this has proved
the existence of payable ore. Hundreds of tons are lying
at the surface, some of it very rich in copper, and in
other excavations sto 7 per cent, ore has been found. Garnet
rock forms the matrix, and below water level the ore will probably
be suitable for concentration. In the meantime, taking the
measurements of the body as at present exposed, the property
would be a very suitable one for development by a subsidiary
company.
THE FORTUNATA GROUP.
South-west of the previous group are the Fortunata leases.
The Euro shaft has been sunk 110 ft. on a garnet lode carrying
lead, copper, and up to 75 ozs. silver to the ton. The lode has
been traced for nearly half a mile by pits, and is similar in appear-
ance to the Tbtree, though not so large. The lead and copper
contents of the ore work out at 20 per cent, and 3 per cent,
respectively, and there are a few hundred tons lying at the sur-
face showing galena (sulphide of lead) and copper pyrites. On
lease 61 the Fortunata shaft is down 40 ft. on the Euro lode, but
very little work has been done. The veinstone here contains
blende (zinc sulphide) and galena with some copper pyrites
and a little silver. This part of the property is not so promising
as some of the other groups.
The Hensey Section (67) is of more than ordinary interest to
those concerned in its development, owing to the fact that the
ore body is wholly within the limestone zone. No. 1 shaft has
been sunk on the lode to a depth of 100 ft., and crosscuts were
put in each way, levels being driven where the limestone comes
in contact with the lode for 200 ft. from the north-east crosscut
and 530 ft. from the south-west crosscut. The ore is very solid
and clean, the average value being about 6 per cent, copper and
18 per cent, lead, with 9 ozs. silver and a few grains of gold per
ton. No. 2 shaft is down 210 ft. and a crosscut is being made to
a point where there is a probability of a large ore deposit being
found in the limestone, derived from the outcrop of the lode which
has been worn away in former ages and re-deposited in its present
position. The occurrence here of chloritic schists, if such they be,
is a matter of considerable interest, but the true nature of the rock
in wh ch No. 2 shaft is sunk is a moot point, and its decomposed
state renders the question a difficult one to settle. The matter is of
considerable geological interest, but it hardly concerns our present
purpose, so we need not stop to discuss it at length. The workings
are surrounded by limestone ridges, and the outcrop of the lode is
much obscured by alluvial soil. It can, however, be traced right
up to the shaft of the Euro lease, and at intervals prospectors’
“potholes” show the existence of m ire or less payable ore over
the whole distance, about half a mle. Indications point to the
occurrence of a large depesit of carbonates some little distance
from the main workings, bat quite accessible from them.
THE OTHO GROUP.
The Otho group has had less work done on it than any of the others,
and its prospects cannot therefore be determined with any accuracy,
but as far as can be judged they are of an encouraging nature.
The main lode trends almost East and West, and has been traced
on the surface to a point two miles away, where it has been worked
with favourable results by the Chillagoe Blocks Company. Hitherto
it has chiefly yielded silver lead ore, mainly from the western
end. The eastern extension of the lode runs into the Ti-tree
group, and the usual number of holes are to be seen along the
outcrop, though hardly any work of a permanent character has
been done up to the present. About half a mile to the south is
a parallel lode known as the Atherton, and here a shaft has been
sunk to a depth of 160 ft. A crosscut at the 50 ft. level has
shown the lode to be 10 ft. thick, and several hundred tons of
ore have been raised containing silver, lead, and copper, the last
ranging from 10 to 25 per cent. Another lode, running through
Leases 33 and 34, connects the Atherton with the Otho, but
though the surface indications are most promising, no work has
yet been done upon it. On Lease 32, however, there is a big pit
from which a quantity of ore was taken and smelted by the
previous management. A stack of it remains on the surface,
while underfoot a similar class of ore may be seen, but, as it is
situated in a flat between two hills, it is not in such a favourable
position for working as the more prominent formations of the
hill side. Its occurrence is, however, of very considerable
importance, as its presence is not indicated by any outcrop at the
surface, thus indicating the possibility of finding important ore
bodies even where no traces of them are to be seen. The value of
the ore ranges from 11 to 13 per cent, copper, with about 27 ozs.
silver to the ton. Taken as a whole, the prospects of the group
are exceedingly promising, and it should give a splendid return on
the expenditure incurred in its development. It is worthy of
note that chloride of silver has been recognised as occurring in the
main lode by Mr. George Smith.
THE RUDDIGORE GROUP.
About two miles from the Otho lies the property known as the
Ruddigore, and the most casual observer cannot fail to be
struck by its magnitude as a low-grade copper proposition.
The formation is a great “ stock-werk ”: a dyke of quartz-
porphyry, intersected in all directions by veins of copper
pyrites, and though its limits have not yet been determined,
it has been proved to be at least 450 ft. wide, while it
has been followed for a distance of half a mile, having been
pierced by shafts 100, 110, and 63 ft. in depth. It will be mined
by open cuts, and for a description of it I cannot do better than
quote from Mr. Stewart’s admirable report on the property.
“ The principal workings,” says Mr. Stewart, “ are confined to
Lease No. 25, which covers almost entirely an immense flat hill
of porphyry, in granite country. On the north-west end of this
hill a large cutting has been formed, which has exposed a very
peculiar deposit of copper minerals. It would appear that the
hill has undergone a very extensive system of faulting, which has
resulted in a network of fissures, and through these solutions
have passed and deposited various minerals, but principally copper
ores. These veins may be said to range from a mere streak to
nearly a foot in width, and contain ores of great purity and of
corresponding value. The principal copper mineral present is
crystallised copper pyrites, partially altered to covelline, black
sulphide of copper, and though no bulk of ore apparently exists in
any one place, the veins are so close together and so numerous that
very large quantities could easily be extracted. In following down-
wards over the face and sides of the open cut, it appears evident
that the quantity increases with depth ; and portions of the floor of
the cutting, which were broken up by blasting during the inspection,
confirmed this opinion, and showed that not only was there an
increased quantity, but also a somewhat improved quality, at the
lowest point yet touched. Judging from these indications, it may
reasonably be expected that this improvement will continue.
Whether this be the. case or not, there can be no doubt that this
mine, which probably ranks as the largest of a series of very large
properties, possesses very wonderful possibilities.”
As in the case of the other properties, a lot of surface prospect-
ing has been carried on along the outcrop, revealing ore all through.
The principal workings are at the foot of the hill, where a striking
outcrop formerly existed, but has long since been removed and
smelted. Records of the smeltings show that nearly 1,000 tons
of first class ore yielded about 20 per cent, of copper, and there
are now stacked some 8,000 tons of “ seconds ” worth 5 per cent.,
besides a quantity carrying 25 per cent. In the cut from which
this was extracted good ore is visible on both sides. A tunnel has
been driven 220 ft. along the course of the body, 160 ft. of
which is highly payable ; the remainder, low grade ore containing
from 3 to 4 per cent., will also leave a good margin of profit,
considering the large scale on which the company’s operations
will be conducted.
The assay value of the veinstuff, taking mineral and matrix
together, ranges from 4 per cent, to 10 per cent, of copper,
together with 4 to 20 ozs. of silver to the ton, and an amount of
gold varying from a mere trace to an ounce per ton. No definite
plan has apparently been formulated for the treatment of this
huge deposit, but it will probably be subjected to a process of
concentration, and brought up to average, say, 20 per cent, per ton
of copper before being smelted. There is a possibility, however,
that in consequence of the silicious character of the matrix it m ay
be conveyed direct to the smelters, as is done at Mount Lyell in
Tasmania. In this case 2 per cent, of copper would probably
cover all expenses. In any event, assuming the whole mass to
average only 5 per cent., and taking no account of the silver and
gold contents, a profit of about 30s. per ton may be confidently
looked for, and the enormous quantity of ore available will thus
be seen to fully warrant the statement that the Ruddigore
group in itself justifies the existence of the company.
THE ZILLMANTON GROUP.
An examination of this group discloses fewer signs of prospect-
ing than usual, though the outcrop on Lease 23 is very con-
spicuous, and is from 10 to 20 ft. in width. A shaft was sunk by
Messrs. Moffat to a depth of about 50 ft., but further sinking was
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA.
prevented by a heavy influx of water. Some good carbonate ore
was, however, met with, which averaged about 10 per cent, of
c opper, and is said to contain a little silver. The present com-
pany’s shaft is down 100 ft., and the developments are of
considerable importance, a lode 17 ft. wide having been struck,
showing the black oxide and sulphide of copper.
THE MUNGANA GROUP.
These mines which, as already stated, have recently been
segregated into a separate company, under the title of the Mungana
(Chillagoe) Mining Company, Limited, are situated to the west of
the township of the same name, where there are still two hotels, a
couple of stores, a “wallop shop,” and other smaller trading
institutions. Here Messrs. Moffat erected their second smelter,
and the mines have on this account been opened up in a rather
more systematic manner than elsewhere. Both copper and lead
ores have been worked on this group, and plenty of fluxes are near
at hand.
On the Girofla Mine (Lease 4) the main shaft is down 100 ft.,
whence a cross-cut was driven through the lode. It first passed
through a seam of solid galena 4 ft. thick, worth 50 per cent, of
per cent, lead and 4 per cent, copper, besides silver, for which no
figures are available. It produced all the lead required for smelt-
ing purposes, nearly the whole of which came from this level
and from the surface workings. Some beautiful specimens of
crystallised malachite have been obtained from this mine.
The Lady Jane Shaft on Lease 3 was commenced by the old
company on a patch of ore which cut out at a shallow depth.
When the present company took over the mines the shaft was
continued to a depth of 60 ft., ore being encountered at 40 ft. A
drive was put in east on ore assaying 15 per cent, copper, which
continued for 17 ft., when the lode suddenly pitched under foot.
A cross-cut was also put in south from the shaft, the first 20 ft.
being in ore; then there was an intrusion of barren country for
14 ft., after which a body of rich grey sulphide was cut. 90 ft.
from the shaft there is a big body of melaconite, the black oxide
of copper, which passes into lead ore 12 ft. wide, of which
apparently it forms the cap. The grey sulphide lode has been
driven on for 30 ft., after which it pitches underfoot. The lode
has a strike N.N.W., and is apparently a connecting link between
the Girofla and Dorothy formations.
About 400 yards north-west of the main shaft it was decided to
Views of the Mungana (Chillagoe) Mining Company’s Properties.
GIROFLA MINE PROM NORTH, SHOWING MAIN
OUTCROP OF ORE.
MUNGANA TOWNSHIP, SHOWING LIMESTONE OUTCROP.
THE GIROFLA SHAFT
THE MAGAZINE FACE
lead, then through 25 ft. of ore carrying copper, lead, and 25 ozs.
of silver to the ton, after which came another seam of galena
containing 50 per cent, of lead and 15 ozs. of silver per ton. From
the cross-cut a drive was in 50 ft. to the north-east, 12 ft. being
in solid galena, 13 ft.—dividing the sulphide and oxidised zones—
in stone carrying a little lead and silver, and the remaining 25 ft.
in cerussite (carbonate of lead) containing 25 per cent, lead and
some silver. The cerussite is stained with manganese oxide, and
in hand specimens is almost indistinguishable from certain of the
ores which occur at Broken Hill. From the north-east cross-cut
a body of ore 75 ft. long has been proved, the first 20 ft. being low
grade, and the remainder a high grade carbonate. A cross-cut
penetrated it for 30 ft., the ore being rich in lead and silver, and
continuing in the face. A drive is being carried south-west to
prove another ore body, the outcrop of which has produced large
quantities of high grade copper and lead ores in the past, but
which is all virgin ground below. The outcrop over the main
workings is also very massive, and has been fairly honeycombed
in the search for rich patches of ore, and the position of the mine
would render it very easy to remove the deposit to a depth of at
least 150 ft. by means of an open cut 300 ft. long and 100 ft.
across.
The mine was formerly worked at the 40 ft. level, where the ore
body is exposed for a width of 103 feet, and gave a return of 20
sink to ascertain whether the lode was continuous or not. There
was absolutely no outcrop or other indication of copper lodes
except a small plant called the “copper plant.” It appears to
thrive wherever copper ores abound, and is invariably found on
the outcrops. Old prospectors regard it as an “indication,” but,
of course, it does not bear much weight in the calculations of a
trained miner. However, as there was nothing better, the
manager at Mungana accepted this visible sign, and, starting his
shaft, cut a rich copper vein only a few feet below the surface
which promises to develop into an important body of ore.
The Lady Jane ore from the 40 ft. level assays 25 per cent, of
copper in the bulk, while picked samples give a return of 40 per cent.
The Dorothy Shaft (Lease 1) has been sunk to a depth of
180 ft. Down to 130 ft. is in carbonate ore, worth from 7to 20
per cent, copper, with a little gold and silver; below this, to a
depth of 145 ft., it passes through a siliceous rock, with thickly
disseminated patches of bornite (purple copper), copper pyrites,
apd occasional bunches of grey ore, the latter showing native
silver freely. The whole body gives a return of about 5 per cent,
of copper. At the 75 ft. level the lode has been proved by cross-
cuts for a width of 40 ft, and there is no sign of the walls at
either end. An enormous outcrop marks the spur from which
ore was formerly taken out, but no systematic work has yet
been done upon it; the whole body, including the big outcrop,
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901,
May 9, 1901.]


AUSTRALIA.
[May 9, 1901.
will, however, be mined in future by open cuts to a depth of at
least 150 ft. Some 3,000 tons of ore, varying in value from 7to
10 per cent, are lying at the surface.
The Magazine Face is one of the best of Messrs, Moffat’s
workings. It is an open cut 25 ft. in depth and 40 ft. across,
which has yielded large quantities of ore in the past, the smeltings
having given an average return of well over 20 per cent. The ore
body, which has an east and west bearing, has been proved for a
width of 50 ft. and a length of 100 ft., and a prominent outcrop at
a distance of some 10 chains is connected with the workings by
another smaller outcrop. It is, therefore, possible that the ore
body extends the whole distance, the more so since ore has been
taken out from holes all the way along. The prospectors, how-
ever, were then seeking for silver, not copper, and the ore in view
was sufficient for the former proprietary without exploratory work
being undertaken. From the “ Face ” a shaft has been sunk 45
ft. in ore all the way, and at the bottom a cross-cut was driven for
40 ft. in 7 per cent, ore containing some silver and gold. In order
to further prove this body two cross-cuts have been driven north
at equal distances, the first cutting 20 ft. of the 7 per cent, ore
when 12 ft. in, while the second intersected it after being put in
33 ft., proving 30 ft. of 25 per cent. ore. A tunnel has been driven
for a distance of 200 ft. from the face, cutting a bornite lode 17 ft.
wide when in 180 ft., and a drive has been put in along the hanging
wall, or upper boundary of the lode, for 40 ft. in bornite ore. A
winze has been sunk to 25 ft., and the ore increases in value with
depth, averaging 12 per cent, at the bottom, an increase of five
units over the level above. To the east, about halfway between the
carbonate and sulphide lodes, a shaft is being sunk with the
object of exploring them below 200 ft. There are some 2,500
tons of 15 per cent, ore, and 500 tons worth 25 per cent., lying
at the surface, which were extracted by the former owners,
besides a large heap of sulphides thrown aside as worthless, but
which must contain fully 7 per cent, of copper. Prospecting
works are now in progress which reveal an increased tonnage of
ore weekly.
The Nordville shaft, 80 ft. deep, is sunk on the sulphide lode,
and from the bottom an underlay winze has been put down
through 25 ft. of ore, worth 7 per cent., while a crosscut has
proved similar ore carrying, in addition, up to an ounce of gold to
the ton.
A good deal of work has been done on the Griffith lease
(No. 24), and judging from the heaps at the surface, the value of
the ore must have been very high. The formation is a very large
one, and one vein is said to have yielded 88 per cent, of copper.
Operations were apparently not carried on below the 110 ft. level.
The Chillagoe company was crosscutting at the 200 ft. level, but
had not gone far enough to cut the lode at the time of my inspec-
tion. A great deal of surface work has been done on the outcrops,
and the various heaps of ore stacked around them amount to the
very respectable total of 3,000 tons, containing from 5 per cent,
to 20 per cent, of copper. At the old smelting plant, which is
about half a mile from this mine, there still remains a consider-
able quantity of ore in bags, no doubt that portion which was
considered unprofitable to treat under the old management, a
silent testimony to the boon that will be conferred on the district
by an improved system of transport.
THE REDCAP GROUP.
A number of mines are embraced in the Redcap group, which
is one of the company’s largest holdings. Here there is a change
in the country, granite being replaced by elvan or felsite, the
lodes occurring where this rock comes in contact with the lime-
stone. Besides the ordinary amount of surface work, a good deal
of exploration has been done below ground on this group, three of
the mines being equipped with winding and pumping plant. The
Nelly shaft is down 90 ft., and a crosscut from near the bottom
has proved a lode 40 ft. wide, assaying 12 per cent, of copper in
the bulk, together with some gold and silver. The outcrop, which
stands out prominently at the surface, is of large size, and may
be traced into the tenzance mine adjoining. Native metallic
copper and very pure red oxide are found in considerable quanti-
ties in this mine, and generally speaking its prospects are
extremely good.
The extensive workings on the Penzance mine (Lease 6) show
that large quantities of ore have been extracted. They resemble
a huge rabbit warren, and it is evident that the mine has been
noted for rich patches, which have been worked to the exclusion
of the poorer ores, of which quantities remain in the old stopes
and levels.
To the east is the Mcllwraith shaft, 150 ft. in depth, over which
a winding plant has been erected. A crosscut has intersected a
body of sulphides 40 ft. wide, yielding 7$ per cent, of copper, and
this has a satisfactory bearing on the question of the prospects of
the mines at a depth, for it is strong underfoot, while in the upper
levels it is of insignificant dimensions. Several hundred tons of
ore are at the surface, and to the North the lode is marked by
many pits, each of which has yielded its quotum of payable ore.
The Queenslander section to the North-west has been extensively
prospected, but the outcrop is of such magnitude that even this has
never been thoroughly exploited, although attention was'chiefly
directed to the rich deposits at the surface. As showing what an
unknown quantity they remain, it may be mentioned that on the
occasion of our inspection, Mr. George Smith, who was present,
was induced by certain indications to knock off a few samples
from the outcrop, which ultimately led to the discovery of a body
of malachite and cuprite (the red oxide). Only a trained
mineralogist would have detected any difference between this
particular spot and the surrounding mass, and important results
maybe expected from a systematic survey of the property.
The outcrop covers nearly the whole of the hill, and a number
of shafts have been sunk, all proving the presence of silver-bearing
copper minerals. One, said to have reached a depth of 200 ft.,
has a large quantity of pyrites lying at the surface, and the vegeta-
tion for a considerable distance down the slope has been destroyed
by the permeation of the soil with the copper solution resulting
from the decomposition of the sulphide. The dump is said to con-
sist of 6 per cent, ore with about 6 ozs. of silver per ton. On lease
15 the lode has been proved by a tunnel for a width of 50 ft., and the
general average of copper from all the workings is 6per cent., with an
appreciable amount of silver and gold. On the north-west
boundary, at No. 1 shaft, over which there is good winding and
pumping gear, sinking has proceeded to a depth of 180 ft. A
crosscut west at 160 ft. has proved the width of the lode for 50 ft.,
the ore containing 5 per cent, of copper and a little gold and silver.
No. 2 shaft at the south-east boundary is down 150 ft., and the
crosscuts are in ore worth 7 per cent. No. 3 shaft is 100 ft. deep,
and from the bottom crosscutting had just been started at the
time of my visit. This shaft is midway between the other two,
and the lode has thus been practically proved to extend right
through the block, showing good ore wherever tested. The north-
west boundary runs along the base of Mount Redcap, a con-
spicuous iron-capped hill marking the termination of the massive
Queenslander lode. Here the outcrop is chiefly composed of
manganese oxides containing carbonate of lead, greatly resembling
the formation at Broken Hill. Beds of conglomerate also occur,
and there is evidence that the hill marks the site of an ancient
volcano, most of which has been removed by the action of the
weather.
THE OUTSIDE SHOWS.
In a mineral district so large and so rich as Chillagoe many
other companies find plenty of scope for the investment of capital,
the principal being known as the Chillagoe Blocks, Limited. This
company holds a number of leases adjoining those of the big con-
cern, notably at Ruddigore, on the western extension of the Otho
formation, where the lode has been proved, and near Calcifer. Two
promising claims are held at Redcap—the Nelly South, and
another west of the Belgravia lease, a very promising mine.
More capital is, however, required for the proper development of
the company’s property. A wealthy English company was at
one time prepared to find money for this purpose, but the out-
break of the South African war put a stop to the negotiations.
About 25 miles north-west of Mungana the Linedale West
Chillagoe Company possess a large number of leases. The lodes
are small, but the ores are rich in copper, and the silver and gold
contents are unusually high. The company should thus be able
to supply the Chillagoe smelters with high-grade ore to blend with
the poorer kinds, and this will probably be the chief aim of their
operations rather than the extraction of the metals on their
behalf.
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS.
As to the capabilites of the Chillagoe district, no one who has
taken the trouble to make an examination of the mines can fail to
form a favourable opinion. The deposits of ore are numerous,
rich, and frequently on a gigantic scale. That they have not been
proved down to great depths is due simply to the fact that the
workings are at present comparatively shallow, and that the latter
have not been put down further is owing to the fact that deep
sinking is both unnecessary and expensive, seeing that many
years’ work has been provided for the smelters by present
developments. As it is, the company have proved the
existence of large and valuable bodies of sulphides below the
water level, and for further exploration pumping machinery of an
expensive character would be indispensable. To fully equip the
mines before the railway is completed would result in an enor-
mous and useless expenditure on freight, more, probably, than the
plant would cost. Pumps will, of course, have eventually to be
provided, and, in the rainy season there may be some trouble
with the water. During the other nine months of the year, how-
ever, but little draining will be required. The 4-inch pump at
the Girofla Mine has, up to the present, proved fully equal to the
task of keeping the workings dry.
But little expense will have to be incurred in timbering the
mines. Most of the deposits can be worked on the cheap and
efficient open cut system, and where underground work is neces-
sary the country rock is of a most solid and unyielding character.
In any case, the country is covered with forest, so that plenty of
timber is available for mining purposes, and a sawmill is, in fact,
already hard at work. The fluxes required in smelting are also to
be had on the spot, and a never-failing supply of water passes
round the foot of the hill on which the smelters are now in course
of erection. Both brickearth and fireclay are plentiful in the
vicinity, and extensive brickworks are already in operation, while
a foundry will also shortly be in full swing.
THE CAYEB.
No account of the Chillagoe district could possibly be considered
complete without some reference to its magnificent caves, which
are probably unrivalled in any part of the world for the number
and beauty of their stalactites, and of the erystalisations that
incrust their walls. The Royal Arch Cave is situated about four
miles from Chillagoe, and for this we set out under the direction
of a so-called “ guide,” who seemed to have a very hazy idea of its
precise location. Indeed, we afterwards heard that at least one
party of visitors who enlisted his services had wandered about
the whole afternoon without ever reaching the caves at all 1 We
had better luck than this, however, and succeeded in discovering,
without great difficulty, the hill in which the entrance of the
cavern is situatedl It is a bare limestone rock, which rises
abruptly from the plain to a height of some 150 ft., and bears a
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA.
striking resemblance to an iceberg, terminating as it does in a
series of pinnacles standing out like exaggerated needles against
the sky. After descending for some way along a rough and
slippery passage, we found within two large chambers, the roofs
of which rise almost to the summit of the hill with stalactites of
all forms and sizes depending from them to the ground. Some
are dazzling in their whiteness, while others again are stained
blue and green with manganese or copper. All of them sparkle
like gems, and they are indeed a revelation to those who have
only seen the caves of Somerset or Derbyshire in England.
The Mungana caves are even finer than those near Chillagoe, the
stalactites and incrustations being more massive, and the
chambers and passages more numerous. What is called the
“ Piano ” is a glorious creation, though it should rather be
called the “Organ,” owing to the resemblance ot the regular
growth of its magnificent stalactites to that instrument, A fine
stalagmitic growth is the “ Cradle,” which is a very fair representa-
THE THEATRE IN EOYAL ARCH GAVE, STATION CREEK,
CHILLAGOE.
tion of a sleeping child lying amidst its snowy draperies. It is, I
cannot help thinking, somewhat of a reflection on the Department
of-Mines that no provision has been made for the protection of
■these beautiful caves from the vandals by whom they are con-
stantly being disfigured and destroyed. Future exploration may
reveal others as fine as those already known, but the damage
done can never be made good. In this connection the name of
Mr, J. Jeffcoat, the popular manager of the Mungana group, de-
serves honourable mention for the admirable way in which he has
promoted the exploration of the caverns, and has endeavoured to
prevent their destruction by inconsiderate iconoclasts.
FROM CHILLAGOE TO HEEBERTON.
On leaving Chillagoe, we followed the railway back to Wade’s,
whence we had decided to proceed on to Herberton by way of
Irvinebank. As I have already stated, the route traverses a tract
of mineral land where some very promising shows are now being
opened up. The only permanent centre is at Koorboora, or
Kaboora (the name is pronounced in the latter fashion) where
mines and machinery have for years been kept going by Mr,
Moffat, principally in the interests of labour. Some extremely
rich patches of tin ore were worked near by in the early .days of
the field, and during the first ten years of its existence the mines
appear to have paid handsomely, 1,000 tons of ore crushed giving
a return of 18 per cent, of “ black tin.” When the surface deposits
gave out and it became necessary to mine on a more extensive
scale, the lack of cheap transport caused the locality to be gradu-
ally abandoned, but the advent of the railway has again rendered
the outlook a hopeful one, and Messrs. Moffat’s battery is now
being duplicated. Of late attention has also been directed to
silver-lead mining, and a promising property is now . being
developed with very encouraging results by the Queensland
Smelting Company, who are showing commendable enterprise in
this region.
The traveller in Queensland can scarcely complain of want of
variety either in country over which he passes, or in the convey-
ances by whose agency he is more or less rapidly carried from
place to place. Possibly the buckboard is the most popular (?)
means of transit, and for the benefit of the uninitiated I may
explain that this consists essentially of a wooden platform
mounted on four wheels and provided with one or two seats, the
latter beipg supported on springs. It was on such a vehicle that
we proposed to set out for Irvinebank, and though it cannot be
denied that nothing could be better calculated to withstand the
wear and tear of a journey along the rough country roads, he
would be an ungrateful man who would complain of the slowest
train after a few days’ experience of a buckboard.
The “ coach ” was timed to leave Wade’s at 4.30 a.m., and with
commendable punctuality it was ready about half-past six. Just
as the passengers were preparing to mount, the driver announced
that as his horses were a bit “fresh,” and there was a difficult
watercourse to cross a short distance further on, it would perhaps
be better if we walked along and made a start from the opposite
side. Everyone accordingly crossed the bed of the creek on foot,
and all was ready for the real journey to commence when shouts
from afar apprised us of something having been left behind. It
then transpired that a couple of passengers and the mails had
been overlooked. There were already five persons and a lot of
luggage on board besides the driver, and when the latter made an
appeal to us to “ oblige a lady,” it was evident we were in a
tight place, especially as the lady brought her husband with her.
To crowd the driver, seven passengers, the mail bags, and a
number of swags and portmanteaux into a vehicle built to carry
six proved a somewhat difficult task. Not only, however, was
this feat successfully accomplished, but another traveller was
actually picked up en route. Two of us sat in front with our legs
hanging over the dashboard, the married couple shared the front
seat with the driver, another passenger sat on the mail bags
between the two seats, while three miners brought up the rear.
The team attached to the conveyance were as sorry a quartette
as can well be imagined, and though no such thoughts were openly
expressed, it was pretty obvious that they would be in a sad plight
before ten miles were got over. At the first dry creek we
encountered the horses were pulled up and the driver’s cry of
“Now then, boys, lend a hand!” clearly-showed what was
expected of us. The passengers now became divisible into three
classes —one section who insisted on riding all the way, another
who got out to walk across creeks and up steep hills, and a third
who not only walked but pushed behind when required, which was
pretty often. If there was one thing on that journey more enter-
taining than anything else it was assuredly the cheerful alacrity
with which the last class adapted themselves to the position.
When we had gone ten miles or so our forebodings began to
take a concrete form, for the horses showed unmistakable signs
of exhaustion, though they stuck manfully to their work. The
driver constantly urged them on with the words “ Sten’ up to it,
lads,” and as his throat became dry this gradually got down to
something like “ Eenup,” a name which was ultimately conferred
upon him by his passengers, and one which is likely to stick to
him as long as he remains in the district.
Coachdrivers all the world over are held in more or less awe by
the average traveller, and North Queensland is no exception to the
rule. It therefore required no little courage on the part
of anyone to contradict this worthy, who had a habit of
prefacing his observations with the remark, “In a case
like that, as you say,” when no remark whatever had been
addressed to him. This mode of address, however, become so
monotonous that one of them at last broke out with, “ Hang it,
man, I never said anything about a case like that.” So astounded
was “ Eenup ” at the audacity of such an interruption that, in
an attempt to touch up one of the leaders, he succeeded in
removing most of the feathers from the hat of the lady passenger,
and with the others rallying him on his indifferent skill as a whip,
he became less anxious to air his views.
All this time the team looked as if every hill would be their
last, and the passengers began to express open doubts as to
whether they could manage the five miles that remained before
the next stopping place was reached. This roused “Eenup’’from
his lethargy, and he brightened up as he began to dilate on the
splendid animals that were to be put in at Montalbion to com-
plete the journey. Here was something at least to furnish food
for discussion, and served to beguile the tedium of the journey
until Montalbion was reached.
From Wade’s to Irvinebank the country retains its mineralised
character and groups of mines are constantly passed. About
fifteen miles from the former is the Sorata mine, belonging to the
Chillagoe Blocks Company, where a large copper-bearing forma-
tion is being worked. Shafts and open cuts have disclosed ore of
varying values, a parcel of 17J tons sent to the smelters yielding
25J per cant, of copper and over 12 ozs. of silver to the ton. One
shaft is down 70 ft., but the deepest workings are at the 40 ft.
level, where the lode is 20 ft. across. The formation traverses a
porphyry belt, as in the case of the Ruddigore mine at Chillagoe,
and might approximate that property in value if amalgamated
with the adjoining leases. One of these is held by an individual
who has made a large income for several years by merely working
the rich patches, while the other, known as the Mount Balinda, is
owned by a Herberton syndicate.
A few miles further on are the Montalbion mines, once held in
high esteem, to which the richness of their ores fully entitled
them. The depreciation in the values of silver and lead, for
which they were principally worked, led, however, to many of the
claims being abandoned, though had the district been served by a
railway it would, no doubt, be flourishing to-day. On the Albion
mine, once owned by an English company, a smelting plant was
erected and a considerable sum of money spent, all to no purpose.
Bad management —a frequent cause of failure—led to excessive
expenditure, and the company got into difficulties, and was forced
to go into liquidation with liabilities amounting to £7,000. A
metallurgist made an offer to treat the slag left by the company’s
operations in consideration of receiving 25 per cent, of the
returns, and the amount that he recovered is said to have been
sufficient to pay off the company’s debts. A portion of the pro-
perty is now held by th.e Chillagoe Blocks Company, which is
doing some exploration with encouraging results. In the adjoin-
ing claim the ore pays to send to England for treatment at a cost
of £9 10s. per ton, a fact which is sufficient demonstration of the
richness of the lodes.
Those of the passengers who had conjured up visions of a well-
groomed team pawing the ground in their anxiety to carry us to
Irvinebank, were doomed to bitter disappointment. There was
certainly nothing in the hollow-flanked, sad-eyed quartette to
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901
May 9, 1901.]


xxii.
AUSTRALIA.
[May 9, 1901.
indicate any marked superiority over their predecessors, and the mud
with which they were covered did not tend to render their appear-
ance the more prepossessing. Fortunately the road to Irvinebank
is downhill for the greater part of the way, and that town was
duly reached without mishap. How the poor beasts negotiated
the hilly road to Herberton must, however, remain a mystery, but
that they did is certain, for when we got there a few days later,
we saw them preparing for the return journey.
IRVINEBANK.
Irvinebank, which is about six miles from Montalbion, is one
of the most flourishing inland towns in Queensland, and no better
indication of this fact could be needed than the crowded state of
the three hotels- —pretty large ones for a country town. The
district has long been noted for its tin mines, though at present
the Yulcan is the only large producer. Here Mr. John Moffat has
made his home since he left the New England tinfields nearly
twenty years ago, and it is to the energy and ability of this
shrewd and enterprising Scotsman that the town chiefly owes its
present prosperity. At one time or another he has owned nearly
every important mine in North Queensland, and many is the
property that has been brought into the paying stage under his
careful and capable management. For a mining magnate of his
standing he lives very simply, and his residence has few preten-
sions either as to size or style. The lower part serves chiefly for
offices, while the upper part is devoted to living rooms, and from
here he supervises the working of the various mines in which he
is interested.
Mr. Moffat is the principal owner of the only tin-dressing and
smelting plant in the district, and this serves the mines for as
great a radius as it pays to cart the ores, a distance which has
lately been much extended, owing to the high market price of the
metal. The machinery is of the most approved pattern, and includes
a 20-head stamp battery, with Luhrig and Frue vanners and all
the most modern appliances for the concentration of tin ores and
their reduction to the metallic state. Several ingenious con-
trivances calculated to materially reduce working expenses have
been introduced by Mr. Moffat, who has considerable engineering
skill, and the whole of the works are under his immediate
supervision. Although some years ago the low price of tin
reduced the profits almost to vanishing point, the works have
never been closed down. Encouragement was thus offered to a
few of the mines to keep open until better times set in, but there
were not many owners who cared to continue work under the un-
favourable conditions that prevailed. Thus nearly all the rich mines
round Watsonville, about seven miles off, and those of the Coolgarra
field, as well as most of the famous Herberton mines, were left
deserted. The Vulcan mine at Irvinebank was one of the few
which kept at work, and though its prospects have varied like
those of other mines, the shareholders have for some years past
been in receipt of substantial dividends. The main shaft has
been sunk to 800 ft., and I am glad to note that since my visit
good ore has been proved at a depth of 750 ft., the deepest, it is
believed, that payable tin has been found in Australia. In
all £20,000 has been spent on the plant, &c., while £50,000 has
been distributed in dividends, A reserve fund is also being
gradually built up—a practice entirely foreign to the usual
methods of Australian companies, but which would save many a
one from premature liquidation. The concern is entirely owned
and managed in Irvinebank, and many a shareholder has to thank
it as the means by which he has been raised from the position of
a working miner.
The Tornado Mine adjoins the Yulcan on the north, and is now
engaged in shaft-sinking. For working in the most economical
manner it should undoubtedly be amalgamated with its neighbour,
but local jealousy seems for the present to preclude the pos-
sibility of coming to any arrangement. The Yulcan lode has been
proved at the 200 ft. level, and even under present conditions the
success of the company seems practically assured.
The country round Irvinebank is rugged and mountainous—the
town itself stands 2,300 ft. above sea level —and the roads wind
round the steep sides of the hills, so that a journey is measured
rather by time than by distance. From the summits extensive
views may often be obtained, some of which are very fine, but
there is a remarkable absence of the precipices and impassable
ravines that characterise such regions as the west coast of
Tasmania. Compared to that country the difficulties it presents
to the prospector are of the slightest. There is hardly any under-
growth or fallen timber, and it is generally possible to walk, or
even ride, without the necessity of making long detours to avoid
obstacles.
WATSONVILLE.
From Irvinebank we proceeded to Watsonville, a once noted,
but now nearly abandoned, tin district. It lies in a valley
some 2,560 ft. above sea level, and the surrounding ranges
rise to a height of about 4,000 ft. An inspection was made
of the two chief producers of the locality—the “ Caledonia,”
owned by an Adelaide company, and the “ North Australian,”
belonging to Messrs. Moffat. The former, which covers an area
of 37 acres, was worked for nearly 20 years by two men, who are
said to have cleared something like £BO,OOO by their own labour.
No systematic mining was ever attempted, all they did was to
follow and extract the richest bunches of ore. The workings are
accordingly of a curious character —large chambers connected by
narrow drives, showing how the richer portion of the ore-body
made and pinched out as work proceeded. The manual labour must
have been enormous, and with the long and circuitous route that
the ore had to be hauled up it seems wonderful that any margin
of profit remained until the quality of the ore is considered. But
when it is remembered that it averaged from 10 to 40 per cent, of
tin, it will not be a matter for surprise that it paid so well to
work even under these primitive conditions. Systematic develop-
ment would have entailed a heavy expenditure on machinery, and
this the former owners were not prepared to face, well as they
were doing out of the mine. The present proprietary are develop-
ing the mine on very different lines with a view to the greatest
economy in working, and they have every reason to be satisfied
with the result of their explorations.
About a mile east of the township are the “ North Australian ”
Mines, owned by Messrs. Moffat and Stevens, and covering an
area of 135 acres. The group indues a number of formerly well-
known claims, such as the Ironclad, Baal Gammon, Easter
Monday, Good Friday, and others, which, like the Caledonia,
have a good record behind them, having returned some £64,000
in profits to the co-operative parties who formerly worked them.
The principal lode has a N.VV. and S.E. bearing and a S.W.
dip, and is enclosed by sandstone, shale, porphyry, granite, and
el van. It varies in width from 15 ft. to 100 ft., and, as might be
expected from the variations in the country rock, the ores are of
a complex character, yielding gold, silver, copper, and tin.
Timber is abundant, and the Walsh River, two miles distant,
might be made to supply motive power for all the plant neces-
sary to work the mine on a big scale. . The Herberton road
passes close to the mines, and, about a mile hence, attams its
greatest elevation, 3,650 ft. above the level of the sea. Prospect-
ing operations are being carried on throughout the intervening
country, but there are no mines of any note until Herberton is
reached.
HERBERTON.
The town is situated on the Herbert River, named in honour
of Sir Robert Herbert, the first Premier of Queensland. To
Mr. John Newell, now a prominent Member of the Queens-
land Parliament, is due the credit of having been the first to
recognise the value of the Herberton tin deposits, and, with
his fellow prospectors, commenced the active exploration
which has resulted in opening up the rich mineral land round
Irvinebank, Coolgarra, Watsonville, the Tate River, and, finally,
Chillagoe. During the first few years, until the rich surface
deposits were exhausted, the production of tin ore was very large,
and the profits were in many cases enormous. In 1896 the
Assistant Government Geologist reported as follows :
“ I consider the Herberton district as rich as the finest parts of
Western America and I look confidently forward to a great
development in Queensland mining. . . I can, and do, con-
fidently state, after nearly 30 years of professional work in Europe,
Asia, Africa, and America, that I never saw anything more pro-
mising than this Northern area of Queensland, which has fallen
into decadence only because nothing that was not phenominally
rich was deemed worthy of development.
“ When we consider that not a single mine is down 600 ft. (as
a matter of fact, only one mine is over 300 ft.), and that over
£1,600,000 worth of' metal has been sold from the mines since
1883, it is amazing to see that so much of this area remains in
a state of stagnation. I must speak strongly, for I feel strongly,
and I am sure that this district is destined to become one of the
most profitable in the Southern Hemisphere.”
The policy, or folly, of immediately distributing all mining
profits, without any regard to the future of the mines, has been
carried out in its entirety, with the result that the houses of the
once flourishing town of Herberton are to-day largely tenanted by
goats ! The principal reason of its present continued existence
appears to be the fact that it is the meeting place and stopping
stage of several lines of coaches. Most of the mines have been
closed down for years, the several batteries are silently rusting
away and a general air of depression pervades the atmosphere.
In 1899 an attempt was made to raise capital in London for the
development of an extensive group of the mines, but, owing to the
war, the scheme did not come to anything. It is certainly a pity
that such was the case, for the properties would undoubtedly yield
a handsome return on almost any capitalisation that might be
fixed upon.
Some newcomers have put in an appearance of late, opening up
some of the abandoned mines and prospecting for new ones, and
their work may lead to the district being given a new lease of life.
They hail from every part of Australia, and at present constitute
all the life and hospitality of the town. Thus there is Mr.
Norman Hay, from New England and Tasmania, representing the
Tropical Tin Syndicate; Mr. John Elburn, only better known in
Melbourne than he was at Kalgoorlie and previously at Broken
Hill; Mr. O. T. Lempriere, of Melbourne, who had not long before
left Broken Hill for Cloncurry; and Mr. J. Phillips, who was last
seen in the wilds of East Gippsland. These are the men who are
now assisting in the revival of North Queensland mining, and
upon whom the hopes of renewed activity at Herberton largely
depend.
COOLGARRA.
Leaving Herberton, a deviation was made from the Mount
Garnet road in order to take in the Coolgarra tinfield. Years ago
it was a centre of the greatest activity, batteries sprang up in
every direction and money circulated as freely as water. Then
came the fall in the price of tin, and with it the practical abandon-
ment of the field, only a single inn remaining for the accommoda-
tion of a few persevering prospectors. Now things are beginning
to look up again, and with all the principal claims amalgamated
under the auspices of a Brisbane company it is to be hoped that
a solid success will arise from the ashes of so many failures.
Large bodies of ore are a characteristic feature of the property,
which has been aptly named the “ Bischoff of the North,” and
under good management it should certainly emulate the success
of the famous Tasmanian mine, for the tin is there right enough.
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA
xxm.
The large lodes will, no doubt, prove the company’s chief stand-
by, but there are many smaller veins rich in tin, that will doubt-
less yield considerable profits when opened up in a systematic
manner.
An up-to-date crushing and dressing plant is to be erected on a
slope above the creek, across which two substantial dams have
been built, enough water for all requirements being thus con-
served. The battery will be one of 20 head of stamps, though to
treat the large bodies of low grade ore on the most economical
scale, quite 100 stampers would be required. The mines are
about 15 miles from the nearest point on the proposed Chillagoe-
Mount Garnet Railway, and will be connected therewith in due
course. A good road connects them with Irvinebank, where the
concentrates will, in the meantime, be sent for smelting.
THE ROAD TO MOUNT GARNET.
Our next stopping place was at the junction of the Wild and
Dry rivers, where some miles have been taken up for dredging
purposes. This form of mining for gold and tin has hitherto
been almost confined to New Zealand, but a number of Queens-
land properties are now being prepared for the London market,
and there seems no reason why this should not be as successful
as in the former colony.
During the afternoon several old prospectors camps were
passed, but, with two exceptions, they had been deserted on
account of the extraordinary drought then prevailing. Those who
had continued work were evidently doing well, but men on an
alluvial lead are not much disposed to dilate on the value of their
claims for fear of attracting unwelcome strangers to the ground.
The country round is generally mineralised, but only the abnorm-
ally rich deposits receive any attention. There were several
parties working wolfram, but the recent fall in the price of this
mineral had abated their energy, and the claims were being
gradually abandoned. From Herberton to Mount Garnet there
are scores of wolfram lodes, and bismuth is also of common
occurrence, but the limited demand for these minerals and their
constant fluctuations in price are very discouraging to the pro-
spector. A rise in the price of either mineral will, perhaps,
induce him to start work on a lode, and then, when he comes to
dispose of his product, he frequently finds it quite unsaleable.
Such being the case, it is scarcely matter for surprise that
wolfram and bismuth command so little attention.
THE MOUNT GARNET MINES.
The Mount Garnet Freehold Copper and Silver Mine is owned
by a Melbourne company in a very strong financial position, and
it may fairly be regarded as among the most important of Queens-
land mining enterprises. The property covers an area of 176
acres, of which 60—the most valuable portion—are freehold, and
it was formerly owned by Mr. Moffat and others, who worked it
for silver until the price of that metal left no further margin for
profit. The mine was then closed down, but, being a freehold,
there were none of the usual labour conditions to be fulfilled,
and it thus remained in their possession until after the formation
of the Chillagoe Company, when it was taken in hand by some of
the most influential men interested in that concern, and the
present company was registered in Melbourne in February, 1899.
The nominal capital is £200,000, in 200,000 shares of £1 each, of
which 96,000 were issued to the vendors as fully paid-up ; 54,000
were sold to provide working capital, and the remaining 50,000
are held in reserve for issue if necessary. The directors are
Messrs. C. W. Chapman (chairman), E. Neale Wigg, Harvey
Patterson, and J. T. Lempriere. Mr. John Moffat is managing
director, and the secretary is Mr. Thos. Rollason.
The formation is an elongated, lenticular body, which
comes to the surface at the crest of one of a line of hills
branching from the main range. Copper had long been
known to exist in the lodes, but its presence was merely re-
garded as an obstacle to the successful extraction of the silver
contents. In the future, however, its production will be the
chief concern of the management. Development work has been
admirably carried out during the two years that the company has
been in existence, and at the time of my visit there were upwards
of 200,000 tons of ore ready to take out as soon as the smelters
are completed, a quantity that must have been largely added to
by this time.
The works, which are on an extensive scale, are now in course
of erection under the direction of Mr. John McCloskey, who
came from America some years ago to superintend the con-
struction of the Mount Lyell smelter. In England, it may be
remarked, an idea seems to prevail that the manufacture of
machinery is unko wn in Nothing could be more erroneous.
Australian-made mining machinery is strongly in evidence
in all the colonies, and nowhere more so than in North Queens-
land, where Messrs. Walker Bros., of Maryborough, seem to enjoy
a monopoly of that branch of engineering. At Mount Garnet the
firm is responsible for two 14 by 6 marine-type boilers, a 14 by 16
horizontal engine, a 9-drill duplex air compressor plant, and all
the other requisites for the efficient working of a big mine. Two
water-jacket blast furnaces have already been put up, and pro-
vision has been made for the erection of more when required.
The present plant, which will reduce a charge of 200 tons in four
hours, is housed in a substantial building 175 ft. in length, all the
heavy timber usedin its construction having been obtained locally.
It is intended to construct a line to the south to meet a branch
of the Chillagoe Railway. The Chillagoe Company not being em-
powered to undertake the construction of branches more than 10
miles in length, the remaining 26 miles required to reach their
mine will have to be undertaken by the Mount Garnet Company.
The work would have been started some time ago, but for the
difficulty in obtaining legislative powers. Since my return the
Bill has been passed, and work will no doubt be commenced
without delay.
FROM CARDWELL TO EINASLEIGH.
At Mount Cardwell, 12 miles east of Garnet, the journey
was resumed in one of Cobb and Co.’s coaches, and our
progress consequently became faster and more comfortable.
For half a century “ Cobb ” has been a household word through-
out Australia. The founder was an American who started a
service of coaches between Melbourne and the Victorian
goldfields on the lines followed in his own country. That
is to say, they were punctual in departure and arrival, they
travelled at a speed previously unheard of, and they had some
pretensions to comfort. Many of the old pioneers look back with
professed regret to those early days when it took from sunrise to
sunset to reach Ballarat or Bendigo, and wish “Cobb” was still
in evidence. Queensland’s Cobb is not, however, the Cobb of the
old days. The present concern is a limited company, represented
by agents whose sole aim in life seems to be the demanding of
extortionate charges for very small services rendered. But, after
all, the destination is usually reached up to time, and it is a great
relief to sit behind animals that have some go in them after being
obliged to watch the laboured efforts of a half-starved team urged
on by the heavy whip of an “ Eenup.” It is little wonder that
such fields as the Hodgkinson, Herberton, and Cloncurry remain
in a backward condition when the absence of all civilised means
of transport is remembered. One can only marvel at what they
have accomplished under the disadvantages to which they have
been condemned.
From Mount Cardwell westward, the country is less rugged than
that previously traversed, the route lying along the main water-
shed of the district. When, therefore, a railway is sanctioned by
Parliament its construction should present few difficulties, as all
the creeks are crossed close to their sources. Tin occurs in
various places; indeed, it would be hard to find a spot in the
granite country of North Queensland where it does not exist in
more or less profusion. A notable locality is a camp known as
Fossilbrook, which was a big producer of stream tin a few years
ago. The present high price of the metal and the prospect of
railway communication in the near future have attracted pro-
spectors to the spot, and tin ore is again being produced in soma
quantity.
Quartz Hill, the stopping place for the night, was reached about
six o’clock, the journey of 85 miles having been accomplished in
something under fifteen hours (we started at 3.30 a.m,), which is
considered a smart performance. The country being practically
uninhabited, there are no hotels along the route, and the traveller
has to eat what is put before him at these places, and cheerfully
pay his half-crown for the privilege. The fare is not usually of a
first-rate order, and the sleeping accommodation also leaves
something to be desired. A cowhide stretched across a frame is
a fair substitute for the ground, but there is an absence of give
about it that becomes rather monotonous towards morning,
particularly as bedding is usually conspicuous by its absence.
Although it was winter the temperature rarely fell below 90 degs.
during the daytime, but the nights were invariably cool and
pleasant. Towards morning, however, it becomes quite chilly—
compared to the warmth of the day—and this adds to the discomfort
caused by the never ceasing jangle of the horse-bells, for, in the
absence of feed, the animals hung about near the place all night.
We left Quartz Hill next day by a buggy bound for the Einas-
leigh mine, and though the country is rarely traversed and there
was then no road, we negotiated the 35 miles without further
incident than the mild excitement afforded by the driver being
thrown out. The size and quality of the timber appreciably
improved as we went along, and the numerous lagoons formed a
pleasing feature of the landscape after the dried up look of the
country over which we had just been travelling. To avoid mis-
conception, I may as well say that the north of Queensland is not
a waterless region in any sense of the word, as might perhaps be
inferred from some of my remarks. The rainfall is every bit as
certain as that of England, and usually of much greater volume,
but it all comes down during the summer, and the rivers conse-
quently look rather dried up in the winter, apart from occasional
permanent waterholes. This often causes the casual observer
to carry away a very wrong i mpression of the character of the
country, but as a matter of fact the apparent lack of water arises
from one of those provisions of nature which counteract the
adverse influence of a hot climate. The supply lies beneath the
surface, not above it, and can be tapped by digging a few feet
into the sandy bed of a creek, and it is well that such is the case,
for if it were exposed to the fierce rays of the tropical sun it would
very soon be completely dried up. The sand, too, acts as a natural
filter and keeps the water clear and sweet, so that one hears little
of the typhoid scourge so prevalent in less favoured regions.
THE EINASLEIGH MINES.
It is upwards of thirty years since the then Government
Geologist of Queensland, Mr. Richard Daintree, discovered a
rich and extensive deposit of copper ore at the junction
of two large rivers now known as the Einasleigh and the
Copperfield. His original report on the discovery is still extant
in the proceedings of the Royal Society of Sydney for 1867, and
it is evident that he held a very high opinion of the value of the
find; so much so, indeed, that he put himself into communication
with a Melbourne friend—he had previously been on the staff of
the Victorian Geological Survey—and induced him to purchase
the freehold of 120 acres, as was then possible under the Mining
and Land Acts. Some prospecting was done under Mr. Daintree’s
supervision, and the formation of an English company was pro-
jected for the purpose of taking over the mine. Whereas, how-
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.
May 9, 1901.]


(May 9, 1901.
xxiv.
ever, gold mining largely resolves itself into a simple question of
crushing the stone and depositing the proceeds in the nearest
bank, the working of a copper mine is a much more complicated
proposition. The services of the chemist have to be called into
requisition to decide on a suitable method of treatment, and the
easy transport of the product to the market becomes a considera-
tion of the first importance. As it was, the engineer sent out to
report upon the property reached Queensland during the wet
season, and, owing to the swollen state of the rivers, failed altogether
to get as far as the mine. Then, again, the cost of freight was
enormous, and the natives were at that time proving very trouble-
some. The consequence was that the margin of profit was scarcely
deemed large enough to justify the expenditure of capital on the
development of the mine, and the scheme fell through. The pro-
perty was accordingly abandoned, and was speedily forgotten by
the outside public. Locally, however, the place never ceased to
be referred to as the “ Copparfleld,” and when the rise of Chil-
lagoe brought copper mining to the fore, stories of the great size
and richness of the deposit were not long in coming to the ears of
ing capital. The directors are Messrs. E. Russell Roberts (chairman),
Mr. Blyth, J. H. Smith, and J. Sidney Smith. Mr. W. H. Woodland
is the managing director in Australia, and has taken up his resi-
dence in Brisbane in order to be as near as possible to the scene
of operations. He constantly visits the property, and super-
vises all its concerns with a businesslike devotion that few
English-owned properties in any part of Australia can claim
to equal, and certainly not to excel, in the case of
their representatives. The head office of the company is at
110-111, Hamilton-house, Bishopsgate-street Without, London,
E.C., and Mr. Thomas Mullettisthe secretary. In twelve months’
time it is hoped that the company will not only be smelting large
quantities of ore, but be paying substantial dividends. If local
opinion has any weight then the Einasleigh must be regarded as
one of the most promising copper propositions in North Queens*
land. In a quite unofficial way Mr. Alexander Stewart, of the
Chillagoe Railway and Mines, Limited, admittedly the most eminent
expert in Australia, has expressed a good opinion of the prospects of
the Einasleigh Company. As stated above, the freehold covers an
Views of the Einasleigh Freehold Copper Mines.
MINING PLANT AND POPPET HEAD,
THE OPEN CUT.
NATURAL RESERVOIR IN RIVER BELOW MINE
PASSAGE CUT BY RIVER THROUGH BASALT.
Mr. John Moffat. After some time an individual was found who
was able to pilot an expert to the spot, and the report sent in by
the latter was of so favourable a nature that men were immediately
despatched to prospect the lode. Their work resulted in the
exposure of a very rich body of ore, and application was accord-
ingly made for a lease. It was then found that some part of the area
had been taken up as a freehold, and the discovery of the original
shaft led to the freeholder making good his title to the property,
which was eventually secured by Mr. W. H. Woodhead. Mr.
Reginald Murray, the well-known Victorian geologist, who was
commissioned to examine the mine, fully endorsed the previous
high estimates that had been formed of its value, and Dr. Jack
also gave a glowing account of its capabilities in a report to the
Government of Queensland. It is most satisfactory to be able to
record that the opinions of these eminent geologists have been
fully borne out by the work undertaken since the present company
took over the mine.
The Einasleigh Freehold Copper Mines, Limited, was
registered in London in April, 1899, with a nominal capital of
£200,000, divided into 200,000 shares of £1 each, of which 180,000
were issued as fully paid up, the remaining 20,000 being held
in reserve. The purchase consideration was £140,000 in cash and
shares, leaving out of the issued amount £40,000 for work-
area of 120 acres, following the course of the lode for a distance of
40 chains (half a mile), and is situated west of the confluence of the
two rivers, which combine to form one of the most important
watercourses in the colony. The country rocks appear to be
schists and quartzite, which are overlain by a sheet of basalt
about 40 ft. in thickness. The outcrop, revealed by the denuda-
tion of the basalt, formerly stood some twenty feet above the
general level of the ground, but its situation is now marked by
an open cut, from which large quantities of rich ore are being
extracted. At the time of inspection the excavation was 50 ft. in
length, 30 ft. across, and 20 ft. deep, and a cross-cut west had
proved the lode for a width of 100 ft. Upwards of 1,000 tons of
25 per cent, ore had been raised from these workings, all that
assayed less than 10 per cent, of copper being put on one side as
second class. The ore near the surface is chiefly oxide, silicate,
and carbonate of copper, while below water level black sulphides
make their appearance mingled with the oxides. Much of the
ore averages 40 per cent, of copper, with about 4 dwts. of gold
and a few ounces of silver to the ton, and a feature of the
deposit is the quantity of metallic copper disseminated through
the veinstuff. On being broken, this presents a beautiful
appearance, but it is impossible to retain a specimen in
its original condition owing to the rapidity with which it
AUSTRALIA
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA
tarnishes on exposure to the atmosphere. Although the native
metal is not expected to occur much below the level of the present
workings, formed, as it has been, by the action of the basalt on
the mixture of oxides and sulphides exposed to its influence when
it swept over the country as a molten mass, it serves to consider-
ably enrich the upper portions of the ore body. The quantity of
ore proved by the shallow workings at the time of his visit was
estimated by Mr. Murray at 50,000 tons, and as the deposit has
since been followed further to the North, a considerable addition
must now be made to these figures.
Up to the present the workings have been largely confined to
the surface, but the configuration of the ground precludes the
possibility of quarrying being extensively resorted to in the future.
The main shaft is now being sunk on the high ground to the west
of the open cut, and had at the date of my visit reached a depth of
nearly 200 ft. At 120 ft. a crosscut had been started, and it was esti-
mated that the lode was some 150 ft. distant at this point. A
second crosscut was being commenced 50 ft. lower down, and when
this is connected with the other by a winze, a large amount of ore
will be available, especially if the lode should be found to increase
in width as it goes down, an eventuality which is by no means
inprobable. Thirty tons of oxides which were taken out and
smelted at the Cockle Creek Works in New South Wales gave a
return of 22 per cent, of copper, with 12 dwts. gold and 3 ozs.
silver to the ton, while a trial shipment of sulphides yielded 14
per cent, of copper, 5 dwts. of gold, and 6 ozs. of silver, a very
high return from this class of ore.
The winding and pumping plant is in first class order, and
capable of working the mine to a depth of 1,500 ft. The smelter
is already on the mine, and has a capacity of 50 tons daily. The
furnace is on the water-jacket system, and the cold air blast is
furnished by a combined engine and Roots’ blower of American
manufacture, the first of its kind that has been installed in
Queensland. As the mine is situated on perfectly level ground
the ore will be raised to the feed-floor of the smelters by hydraulic
power—another innovation—and the cost is expected to prove at
least as small as that of any alternative method, being estimated
at Ijd. per ton. Electricity will be employed for lighting pur-
poses, the current being generated by a patent Belliss-Parker
engine and dynamo, which will provide a hundred lights of 16
candle power. The mild and equable climate renders a large out-
lay on building operations totally unnecessary, and, while the
plant has been housed in a substantial manner, no needless expen-
diture has been incurred in this direction. Large as it is, the
Einasleigh River does not flow throughout the whole year,
but this fact need give rise to no fears on the score of
water supply, as all requirements are amply provided for by
the numerous deep pools which are permanent during the
driest seasons. Briefly, the mine may be looked upon as a certain
dividend-payer; the lode is one of the largest in the colony>
and rich enough to allow of the price of copper depreciating by
fully 50 per cent, without giving the shareholders any cause for
anxiety.
The outcrop of the Einasleigh formation can be traced across to
the eastern side of the river, where the North Einasleigh Company
hold an area of 120 acres under mineral lease. The lode extends
into their ground for a distance of 200 yards, and assays of ore
from the outcrop on the bank have yielded an average of 6 per
cent, of copper. Though hardly any work has yet been done on
the lode, little doubt can be entertained as to its continuity;
indeed, it seems to give every promise of developing at a
depth into a large and compact sulphide ore body. The
country rock is a soft schist, and the property is well
situated for working, as the ground rises abruptly from the
river, and gives every facility for mining by means of open cuts
and tunnels.
About a mile and a-half from Einasleigh, the Einasleigh
Exploration Syndicate are working what is apparently a continua-
tion of the main lode. The country is a good deal disturbed at
the surface, the schists being much shattered, and very easy to
work. The outcrop is on the side of a hill, of which it forms a
very prominent feature, and a shaft has been sunk to a depth of
70 ft., which passed through a small body of ore. A tunnel has
also been driven under the outcrop, which cut a tabular body of
ore at 103 ft. After being driven on for 24 ft. this suddenly
pitched south, the country rock here showing an almost vertical
dip. A chamber was being excavated at this point to
allow of a winze being sunk to determine the position of
the lode, after which a main shaft will be put down on it. About
50 tons of ore have been taken out since the lode was struck,
various assays returning the value at 10J, 23, and 44 per cent.
One sample treated in the blacksmith’s forge yielded over 50 per
cent, of the metal. It may also be mentioned that a party of
miners who worked the lease some years ago sent five tons to the
smelters which gave a return of 23 per cent., but the expenses of
carriage were so great that the property was soon abandoned. A
fine sheet of water skirts the base of the hill, and there will, there-
fore, be no difficulty about water supply when the time comes for
the erection of works.
The South Einasleigh Mine adjoins the Freehold Company’s
ground, and from a position point of view its prospects are
eminently favourable. Little work has been done on the property,
which is covered with basalt, but the chances are all in favour of
the continuation of the lode through the lease. Indeed, this is
rendered almost a certainty by the fact that about two miles
further south, on the strike of the lode, there is a large ironstone
outcrop. This was taken up by the Einasleigh Company in order
to provide fluxes, but when sinking was started copper, ore was
brought to light mixed with the iron, a highly important develop-
ment, not only for that company but for the South Einasleigh.
Every hope may, therefore, be entertained that the lode will be
encountered at a depth of say 50 ft. in the latter company’s
ground.
Mines are, as a general rule, so situated as to offer small attrac-
tion beyond their mineral wealth. This is, however, far from being
the case with Einasleigh, which is situated in the midst of a splendid
tract of country. The basaltic rocks give rise to a fertile soil, capable
of producing anything suited to the climate. The Government have
reserved 4,000 acres as a town site, and in August, though the
season, in common with the rest of the north, had been a bad one,
the spot was covered with a growth of grass that made it resemble
a cornfield. Water of the best quality is always abundant, and
timber has merely to be carted from the surrounding forest. In
summer the climate is hot, but the nights are cool, and it rests
with the residents to provide against undue discomfort by living
in suitable buildings, and in a rational manner. At present the
dwellings are necessarily of a somewhat primitive character,
being mainly constructed of old iron brought in from decadent
Georgetown, forty miles distant, while many people still favour
tents or hessian “ humpies.”
It is intended to commence smelting at the Einasleigh Mines
about the middle of June. It will be necessary, however,
to find some better means of transport than is at present
afforded by teams, before starting the production of copper on a
large scale. A move has already been made in this direction by
the introduction of a couple of traction engines each able to haul
a load of 32 tons, but even this may be looked upon as a tern
porary measure, and sooner or later the construction of a railway
to join the Chillagoe line seems inevitable. To watch the slow
and laboured movements of the horse teams constitutes an object
lesson on the unsuitability of such means of conveyance as they
afford. Its costliness will be evident from a consideration of the
work which is accomplished. The average rate of progress may
be reckoned at about ten or twelve miles a day, and each 'team
is capable of carrying a load of six tons. The distance to be
covered being .ninety-six miles, it will be seen that eight days
would be occupied in performing the journey, without making
any allowance for possible delays. The product of the smelters
is likely to be about twelve tons of copper daily, and to carry that
quantity regularly to the market would involve the constant
employment of thirty or more teams going and returning. It
follows that something like 500 horses would be kept on the move,
the expense being correspondingly great.
The construction of a railway presents few engineering difficul-
ties, and it is to be hoped that it will not be delayed by
parliamentary opposition. The route traverses the divide
between the basins of the principal rivers, and the bridges will
thus be practically confined to low-level crossings over insignificant
creeks. The country is no more than gently undulating for the
greater portion of the distance, and few deep cuttings will, there-
fore, be necessary, while timber and ballast are plentiful all along
the route. Such a line would open up a large extent of mineral
land now lying neglected for want of more efficient means of
communication, and could hardly fail to yield a handsome return
on the cost of construction, apart from its beneficial influence on
the working of the Freehold Mines.
Before leaving the subject I must not omit a good story I heard
during my stay. It appears that one of the carters employed in
the transport of materials to Einasleigh was only possessed of
12 horses, a number totally insufficient to negotiate one of the
hills with a full load. To avoid reducing his burden, and thus
the amount earned on each journey, he hit on an ingenious idea,
which will certainly not earn him the gratitude of his fellow
teamsters, whatever its good results from his own point of view.
Reaching the hill, he got up as far as he could, and then quietly
camped, awaiting further developments. It was not long before
another team came up the road, and, as the track is far toonan-ow'
to permit of two vehicles passing one another, the newcomer was
compelled to assist the first arrival up the hill before being able to
proceed on his way. By repeating this performance the ingenious
driver is able to get on very well without the necessity of in-
creasing the number of his horses.
Supplement to the BBITISH AUSTBALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.
May 9, 1901.]


Croydon Consols
., 47,000
from 13,900
Golden Gate Nos. 5 and 6....
.. 3,977
„ 14,452
Golden Gate No. 7
.. 20,063
„ 6,272
Rogers’ Golden Gate
.. 38,120
„ 28,319
xx vi.
AUSTRALIA.
[May 9, 1901.
FROM EINASLEIQH TO NORMANTON.
SOME ACCOUNT OF THE INTERVENING GOLDFIELDS.
THE ETHERIDGE,
A lucky chance having brought in a buckboard from George-
town, advantage was taken of the opportunity to visit the
Etheridge Goldfield, 60 miles by the mule track that had to be
traversed, with all the detours caused by having to avoid rivers.
If a railway is ever constructed in this direction, the maximum
length of line required would be about 30 miles. The team was a
better one than usual, but constant travel and poor feed had so
exhausted the horses that the pace was by no means great, and
by the time we got half-way it was deemed advisable to camp,
Georgetown not being reached till the following evening. Some
forests of very good timber was passed through, mostly boree and
ironbark, though the ridges were stony and bare. Indications of
minerals were also plentiful, but no prospecting appeared to have
been carried on.
A few miles out of Georgetown evidence of a more prosperous
era than the present began to be discernable in the heaps of
mullock marking the sites of shafts. A 10-stamp battery, engines,
grinding pans, sheds, &c., all in a state of decay, testified to the
former activity, but despondency seems to have settled over the
town. Yet there was a time when the Etheridge loomed large in
the public eye, and a number of English companies were at work
on the field. Wild and reckless expenditure, however, marked
the policy of the managements, as opposed to careful develop-
ment, and the mines soon subsided into oblivion. Perhaps the
most famous were the Durham and the Cumberland mines,
ten or twelve miles from the town, and old Georgetown iden-
tities love to tell of the magnificent yields once obtained from
them. The Cumberland alone is said to have produced 75,000 ozs.
of gold from 37,000 tons of stone in three years, while the previous
owners, according to the admittedly incomplete official returns,
obtained 40,261 ozs. from 16,000 odd tons during the eight pre-
ceding years. It was really a misfortune for the field that the
returns were so high; had they been smaller greater care and
economy might have been exercised in the management, and it
is quite possible—indeed, highly probable—that they would to-day
be paying regular dividends instead of having long ago been shut
down.
The road to Croydon is intensely monotonous, red dust cover-
ing almost everything, and hanging about the coach like a mist.
Here and there granite and schist protrude above the surface, but
there is a great sameness about the country until the Gilbert
River is reached. This enormous waterway, almost dry at the
time of the year >vhen I visited it, is surrounded by a belt of rich
agricultural land, probably deposited by its flood waters in the
course of bygone ages. At the crossing there is a large boat
Which serves to remind one of the season when its waters cover
the land for miles on either side to a depth of from three to
fifteen feet, though it was somewhat difficult to conjure up such a
scene with hardly enough visible to water a horse. The end of
the first day’s stage was a picturesque spot on an apparently
permanent stream known as the Little River. The accommoda-
tion was not, however, on a par with the scenery, and the driver
had no difficulty in arousing his passengers at four o’clock to
continue their journey to Croydon, the intervening 35 miles being
got over by 1 p.m.
THE CROYDON GOLD MINES.
It is about 15 years since attention was first directed to the
auriferous resources of Croydon, and their extent may be judged
from the fact that since 1886 the recorded output has reached the
large total of 800,000 ounces of gold. The surface deposits were
very rich, and caused a big rush from all parts of Australia, but
great hardships were experienced owing to the difficulty of storing
the water when rain fell, and the absence of means of communi-
cation with the more settled districts. Normanton, the port on
the gulf of Carpentaria, is 100 miles distant, and the intervening
country being practically a desert, there was great difficulty in
obtaining supplies during the dry season. It happened, however,
that a railway was in course of construction from Normanton to
CloncUrry, and a successful agitation was got up to divert the
line to the new Eldorado. This railway was built under the
supervision of Mr. A. S. Frew, the present engineer-in-charge of
the Chillagoe line, and from the time that it was completed the
field, now provided with machinery, came to the front as a gold
producer. Apart from some assistance from London and from
Charters Towers, the field has nevertheless had to rely almost
entirely on local enterprise for development. The mining industry
is now in a very flourishing condition, and what good results
have been obtained is instanced by the record of a co-operative
party which has worked a portion of the South Golden Gate Mine
since September 14, 1898.
The party had only a two years’ lease of the mine, and started
with the modest capital of £4O, while by the terms of their agreement
the number of men they were allowed to employ was limited to
eight, inclusive of engineers and surface hands.
Stimulated, however, by high wages, based on the amount of
ore produced, the miners worked with such energy that they had
succeeded in raising 9,673 tons of stone up to the time of inspec-
tion. From this quantity gold to the value of £96,927 had been
extracted —just over £lO per ton—the dividends amounting to
£72,458, while the final crushing was expected to add some
£lO,OOO to the total; altogether, not a bad return for two years’
work.
Up to the present the Golden Gate has been the main line of
reef, and some idea of its productiveness may be gathered from
the appended crushing returns of some of the leading mines apart
from the one just referred to :
Ozs. Tons.
The Golden Gate lode has been profitably worked for a length
of two miles, and there seems to be no reason, save lack of enterprise,
why it should not be opened up for a greater distance. The mines
are referred to here as “Outcrop,” “Block,” and “Extended
Block” claims, these terms being equivalent to the “Reef,”
“ Deep,” and “ Deep Deep ” of the Rand, and the lodes lie com-
paratively flat, having a dip of about 1 in An “ outcrop ”
claim is consequently soon worked out, so that it is essential for a
company to acquire “ block ” claims in order to follow the reef
down to a reasonable depth. For miles in every direction there
are scores of shallow shafts which were sunk on the outcrops in
the early days and abandoned when water was encountered, or
when the reef passed out of the claim, the owners going to some
other part of the field to renew operations on the surface.
The Rogers’ Golden Gate may be taken as a typical mine, and
it is certainly among the most valuable on the field, combining
as it does both an outcrop and a block claim. The stone is very
little mineralised, and quartz crystals are not uncommon. The
shaft on the outcrop has been sunk on the underlay of the lode,
and levels have been driven north, while a third will shortly be
put in 100 ft. below the second, to pick up the rich shoot of ore
worked above, from which regular returns are being - obtained.
On the block lease, nearly in the centre of the property, a main
shaft has been started to pick up the lode at about 450 ft. At
427 ft. indications pointed to its immediate proximity, but the
heavy inflow of water caused operations to be suspended for the
time being, but sinking will shortly be resumed under subsidy
from the Queensland Government.
■» The lowest point at which payable gold has yet been proved
to exist on the field is on the True Blue Reef, where a rich
leader was recently cut at a depth of 430 ft. in the Jubilee
Mine. This and the Croydon Goldfields Company’s lease are
the principal producers on the line, and their combined yield
totals up to 43,244 ozs. from 17,556 tons of stone. The former
is now being worked from the Goldfields shaft, and the rich
vein seems to accompany a large body of stone not previously
met with in the mine, but further exploration had to be dis-
continued owing to the influx of water. That this should be the
greatest depth attained at Croydon shows the backward state of
its development, but the discovery should act as a stimulus to
mine-owners all over the field, and it is to be hoped that a short
time hence will see the introduction of adequate pumping plant
and the vigorous opening up of the mines at the lower levels.
An important move in this direction has lately been made by a
local syndicate, which, with the assistance of the Department of
Mines, is putting down bores to search for the continuation at a
depth of the Iguana Reef. This lode, which once gave big returns,
was cut off by an intrusion of granite, but Mr. W. H. Rands, the
Government Geologist, is of the opinion that it will make again
beyond the granite, hence the inauguration of this new method of
prospecting. The bore may not find gold, but if it locates the
reef that will be sufficient encouragement to sink a shaft to ex-
plore it at a depth.
The inevitable English company has a mine at Waratah, a
few miles off. On the surface some £lO,OOO worth of machinery
is lying about, a great part of which has never been used,
including a quantity of 12 in. piping, which was intended to
convey water to a 30-stamp battery. The company has also
acquired the Federation mine from a man who got £30,000 out of
it in a couple of years, but the only work done was to start a new
shaft within a few yards of the old one. It is a large low-grade
property, with occasional rich patches, but though thousands of
pounds have been wasted on surface equipment, no real work has
been done. It was only when the capital was exhausted that the
advice of a practical man from Charters Towers was obtained,
and although he reported that £1,500 expended on mining would
put the company on a sound footing, the mine will probably be
abandoned.
The field offers every encouragement for the legitimate expen-
diture of capital, but it is essential that operations should be con-
ducted under the guidance of experienced and honest men, and
that the mines shall not be burdened with excessive capitalisation
or heavy management expenses incurred in London.
RECENT PROGRESS AT CROYDON.
We append some recent notes received from an up-to-date
source:—
A rather heavy cloud would appear to have been hanging over
the companies having their interests on this field of late, but it
would seem now as if brighter days are ahead. A great deal of
development and prospecting work has evidently been done,
which would partly account for the lack of returns, and the
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA
xxvii.
results in most cases are highly satisfactory. Considerable
excitement has lately been caused locally through the strik-
ing of rich reefs in three different mines on the Golden
Gate, two to the south end and one to the north, the
latter adjoining the Croydon Consols, of which mention is made
hereafter. Great interest is also being taken in the Diamond
Drill, which is being put down to prospect for the Iguana reef,
which was cut off by an intrusive bar of granite. This work is
being financed by a local syndicate aided by the Government, to
the extent of pound for pound. By latest advices the depth
reached was 721 ft., the country having just changed from a hard
coarse granite to plumbago formation with quartz leaders. Should
this bore open up a payable reef, which seems only reasonable to
expect, judging by the country now being passed through, all
mining in the northern portion of Queensland wall be given a
tremendous impetus.
THE JUBILEE CONSOLS,
which lately acquired a portion of the Croydon Goldfields True
Blue Lease, on tribute, promises to do well in the near future.
After several months spent in opening up and putting the mine
into good working order, stoping and crushing have started, a
trial of 30 tons giving a return of 76 ozs. The result of a further
crushing of bigger tonnage is being awaited with interest. The
good prospects of this portion of the mine naturally affect the
Croydon Goldfields, as, besides receiving a royalty on the gold
won by the Jubilee Consols, she is having her property well pros-
pected at no expense to herself, and at the same time retains the
right to work the greater portion of it. The Croydon Goldfields
No. 3 Mine (North Croydon Consols) is about to be restarted, and
the reef, which has been opened up for a distance of over 200 ft.,
is to be driven on and crosscuts put into hanging and foot walls
to thoroughly test the country.
CROYDON CONSOLS.
The Croydon Consols has done nothing underground for some
months, but her large pumps have been kept working at the
expense of and to keep the neighbouring mines dry. The No. 7
North Golden Gate, which adjoins the Croydon Consols Lease on
the southern side, has lately struck another rich reef some 50 ft.
below the old one, in speaking of which the Mining News gives it
as 4 ft. to 6 ft. in width, and prospecting for an average of 3 ozs.,
some selected portions of it, however, going up to 10 ozs. Over
300 tons of this was already at grass when writing. As the strike
is within 250 ft. of the Croydon Consols No. 2 Shaft, it has been
decided to sink there for it, and we understand a start was made
on the Ist inst.
QUEENSLAND MINING AND LA REINE d’OE.
The shareholders of the latter company should soon have cause
to congratulate themselves on being given the opportunity of
becoming associated with the former. The Queensland Mining
has now been working for some months at the Caledonian Mine,
but has only lately got it into condition for raising stone in any
quantities. The first crushing of 140 tons gave a return of
109 ozs., and regular returns may now be expected. The
company’s 15-head battery is kept constantly crushing public
stone when not on her own, and is a good source of revenue.
The many and varied channels through which income is derived
makes this company especially an attractive one to anyone who
would combine the chances of making big profits from a mining
venture with the almost certainty of lesser ones from other
sources.
ROGERS’ GOLDEN GATE.
Owing to a breakdown to the company’s machinery at the
principal hauling shaft, which necessitated the purchase of a new
plant, a great deal of time has been lost, and the company has
naturally fallen into the background together with its shares.
There now seems to be a revival imminent, which is doubtless
warranted, judging from the good crushing lately reported—
namely, 441 ozs. from 252 tons, and with regular returns from
now on, the company should take a very prominent position.
mineral and Pastoral Resources of Rortb-West
Queensland.
THE PROJECTED GREAT DEVELOPMENT RAILWAY FROM
NORMANTON to CLONCURRY.
(By of the Special Commissioner of the
“British
Australasian and New Zealand Mail’*).
NORMANTON.
Here may be seen many a man of varied experience ; those I met
including a former amateur athletic champion of England, now a
Queensland Government official, a Dublin M.D., an ex-army
officer, and many scions of old English families. They constitute
as agreeable a Bohemian society as may be found anywhere out
of London, and many a pleasant evening may be spent in their
company.
For the past quarter of a century Normanton has been looked
upon as a place sure to come to the front, because it has been
regarded as the probable terminus of the long-talked of trans-
continental railway, but as a matter of fact, there is no certainty
of such being the case. Indeed, the probabilities seem all in favour
of the actual terminus being on the deep water at the mouth of
the Norman River, 50 miles distant by the river and half that
distance by land. As it is, the “ oldest inhabitant ” looks back
with regret to the days when Normanton boasted a permanent
population of 2,000 souls and a floating one of 1,500. Then
everyone had money and knew how to spend it. Now, the
residents only number some 600 to 700, and but for the large
meat works being in full swing once more, there would be little
activity.
The establishment referred to was erected years ago by a far-
sighted Scot, whose cattle runs form a province in themselves.
Tire works are on the banks of the Norman River, and are
capable of dealing with 100 head of cattle daily. They are com-
plete in every respect, and produce large quantities of canned
goods—the “tinned dog” of the West—as well as extract of beef
and tallow. Nothing is allowed to go to waste. The large bones
are cut up into sizes, and sent to Japan for conversion into knife
handles and similar articles, while the smaller bones are sold for
use in the manufacture of studs, buttons, &c. The sinews are
dried, and find a ready sale to confectioners, while horns, hides,
hair, and hoofs are regularly forwarded to England.
With this as its only industry things were very dull at Nor-
manton, and were it not for the genial and hospitable residents,
there would be little to induce the stranger to linger. Many a
good fellow who pushed out into the Gulf country a score of years
ago elected to make a stand at the port, believing that the build-
ing of the Trans-Continental Railway would create a town of
considerable importance, and bring about a proportionate
improvement of their own prospects. Some of them still remain.
Pastoralists, professional men, financiers of a past day, all are to
be met with in such a place as Normanton, and they render the
visitor’s stay as pleasant and agreeable as possible with the
thermometer up to 110 in the shade day after day. But if it is
warm during the day, the nights, at least, are cool, and it is an
entertaining sight at dusk to see the long line of residents
sitting in the roadway on easy chairs, with their feet on
the kerb. It is thus that they get the full benefit of
the evening breeze, sipping their squashes and other drinks—
mostly other—discussing the while the prospects of the Cloncurry
Railway Bill, and anathematising those who are subverting the
interests of the district by opposing it.
One of the chief sights of the town is an artesian bore, from
which a large volume of nearly boiling water constantly
flows. This is, however, so highly charged with salts as to be
useless for domestic purposes, and the town water supply is
drawn from tanks attached to each house or from the well in the
main street. To the latter the blacks repair for what they require,
and it is a common sight to see a “ gin ” carrying a tin billyful in
either hand, with a piccaninny perched on her shoulder or securely
slung on her back by means of a strip of paper-tree bark. The
men are rather above the average in stature, some being quite six
feet in height, and it is a pity that in the early days they were
not put to some useful work, instead of being treated as noxious
animals, only fit to be exterminated. Treacherous they doubtless
were, but if they had been justly and firmly handled, and not
permitted any undue intercourse with the whites, their fate
might have been different. Some, indeed, of the pioneer
pastoralists were able to gather around them a lot of willing
workers, and on the Carpentaria Downs station, Mr. F. E.
Cobbold, who went out there over a quarter of a century ago,
still has in his employment “ boys ” who were caught in the bush,
as the custom then was when labourers were required.
NORMANTON TO CLONCURRY.
Leaving Normanton, a passage was booked for Cloncurry by
the inevitable buckboard. The road follows as nearly as possible
the course of the proposed Cloncurry railway. The terminal
station is to be at Port Norman, on the shores of the Gulf,
which only requires certain improvements for its conversion into
a fine harbour. Here will be the principal settlement of the
future, and the centre of the freezing and meat-preserving indus-
tries of the district. The country in the immediate neighbourhood
is poor, but from Normanton onward there is an abundance of
rich land, eminently adapted for raising and fattening stock. Indeed,
the whole way to Cloncurry the country is uniformly good, with
magnificent rolling downs stretching away on both sides, the
horizon being interrupted only by patches of box forest, and by
the heavier timber marking the water courses. The stations
usually cover hundreds of square miles, and were largely taken
up by individuals whose financial resources were not strong
enough to tide over the years of weary waiting for the construc-
tion of a railway to give them access to the markets. Thus it
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.
May 9,1901. J


Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.
xxviii.
AUSTRALIA
[May 9, 1901.
comes about that many have passed into the hands of banks and
other financial institutions.
Donors Hills station, situated about a hundred miles south of
Normanton, is owned by Victorians, and managed by one of the
partners, Mr. Feehan. It is remarkable for the fact that it
pastures 40,000 sheep besides several thousand head of cattle,
this being the farthest north that sheep have been successfully
reared in Queensland, if not on the whole continent. In the dry
season they occupy the river country ; that is, the portion of the
holding subject to floods during the rains. In the wet season
they are moved up to the higher ground, the station area includ-
ing a long line of hills covered with spinifex, a coarse bushy kind
of grass. In the earlier records of land settlement in Australia
spinifex country was always spoken of with contempt as worthless
and a thing to be avoided ; but the experience of later years has
caused it, like the salt bush of New South Wales, to be regarded
as an excellent standby, especially during periods of drought.
Stock will not eat it while there is anything better to be had—in
which respect they are not peculiar—-but when all other grasses fail
they take to it and thrive. Like most other things if not properly
attended to, sheep would be a failure in this tropical country, but
with judicious management they are doing well on Donors Hills, and
from a public company to construct the line and maintain it for a
period of fifty years, on terms that commit the country to no
expenditure, and under which no financial or other obligations
are incurred. The company is already possessed of certain mining
areas in the Cloncurry district, and it is for the efficient
development of the mines that a railway is chiefly necessary. The
course of the proposed line is practically level, and the ascent of
Donors Hills and low level bridges across the Flinders and Clon-
curry rivers are the only engineering features of the route. It
should be an economical road to construct and maintain, the more
so as ballast is plentiful at convenient intervals. It will traverse
the heart of the pastoral lands whose natural outlet is the Gulf,
and will in this way impart new life into the pastoral industry by
promoting closer settlement, and it will do much to revive the
mining industry, not only by reducing expenses, but by giving
prospectors the opportunity of testing the outside districts.
About 200 miles south of Normanton it is proposed to run a
branch for sixty miles through mineral and pastoral country as
far as Mount Oxide, beyond the Leichardt river. About forty
miles nearer Cloncurry a second branch is projected to Argylla,
twenty-five miles through a tract of the same character. The
railway is practically certain to develop into a highly profitable
VIEWS OF CLONCURRY.
CLONCURRY TOWNSHIP SHOWING THE POST
AND TELEGRAPH OFFICE.
CLONCURRY RIVER. CATTLE AT TWO MILE
CROSSING.
ON THE CLONCURRY RIVER.
there were no signs of disease among the thousands that grazed along
the track. On the contrary, they were well and closely woolled, active,
and in good condition, and there seems to be no reason why they
should not prove profitable even farther north, provided they had
high lands to retire to during the wet season. There is said to be
a deficiency of saline matter in the natural grasses north of
Donors Hills, but other parts of Australia have had that difficulty
to cope with, and have overcome it successfully. With the build-
ing of the railway it would appear that the country, instead of
being held in huge areas, could be more profitably worked in hold-
ings of, say, 30,000 acres. They might not yield fortunes, but
they would at least provide comfortable incomes. Such a state of
affairs would be much more desirable than the present conditions,
under which one or two whites and half-a-dozen blacks work
hundreds of square miles, of which they constitute the sole popu-
lation. Had the railway from Normanton been an accomplished
fact, the saving in live stock this year alone would have been
sufficient to justify its existence. As it was, several thousands of
sheep from the drought-stricken districts were landed safely in
good grass country, though many died from weakness on the road.
The Government were reluctant to construct this urgently-
required railway themselves, because it would lead to so many
demands for lines from other portions of the colony that could not
all be satisfied. The Ministry, therefore, received a proposal
ROCKY HOLES IN RIVER THREE MILES NORTH
OP CLONCURRY.
undertaking, if only as an outlet for the livestock of the district
for when meatworks are established at Port Normanton a large
traffic will be ensured. The port, as may be seen from a glance at
the map, is the most favourably situated in the colony for shipping
frozen meat and livestock to India and the surrounding countries.
It is very close to the route already followed by the British India
Line, whose ships would find ample accommodation.
From Donors Hills to Normanton, and westward towards the
Lawn Hills, the country is not much affected by droughts, and
there is generally abundance of fat stock at all periods of the
year. With such examples in the colony itself as Mount Morgan,
not to mention places like Kalgoorlie, Broken Hill, &c., in other
parts of Australia, to show the benefits resulting from successful
mining operations, the official neglect of Cloncurry becomes the more
incomprehensible. No one doubts the future of the field; all
admit that a railway should have been built twenty years ago, and
that its commercial success is assured, and yet the work has been
so long delayed.
CLONCURRY.
The township of Cloncurry is situated some 250 miles south of
Normanton and 520 miles North West of Townsville, nearly in the
centre of a belt of mineral land extending some 75 miles to the
north of it, and about the same distance to the south. This
stretch of country includes two small goldfields, but it is principally


AUSTRALIA
xxix.
important as a copperfield, the copper deposits of Cloncurry
and Hampden ranking among the richest in the world.
A considerable amount of money has already been expended in the
district, but this has chiefly been in small sums on isolated
properties by co-operative parties and small syndicates, and the
results of their labour have in most cases been of little account.
A Scottish company, however, who formerly owned the Great
Australian mine, spent a good deal of money on development
work and proved the existence of large and rich bodies of ore.
Precisely what tonnage of copper was produced is unknown, but a
couple of water jacket furnaces with a capacity of something like
fifty tons still remain as an evidence of the company’s operations.
The nroperty is one of a number of freeholds, comprising alto-
gether nearly three thousand acres, acquired under the old mining
act. Although this act has long ago been repealed, the titles
granted during its operation still hold good and are consequently
much more valuable than ordinary mining leases owing to the
absence of labour conditions and other restrictions on the holder.
The mine was the pioneer of the district and was discovered by
Mr. Ernest Henry upwards of thirty years ago in the course of a
search for good pastoral land. Mr. Henry endeavoured at the time
to form an English company to work it, but the scheme was never
carried out and he had to wait nearly fifteen years before it was
taken over by the company referred to above.
Mr. Henry was attracted to the spot by the glittering appearance
of the outcrop, which he found to consist of malachite, cuprite,
chessylite, and other oxidised ores of copper, altogether forming a
valuable and unique collection of minerals. The outcrop has
been described as a hill of copper ore, and such it is. It rises to a
height of about 50 feet, and shows numerous holes and trenches
from which rich ore has been extracted. The individual veins have
been followed to some extent in the past, but all the intervening
country rock contains a percentage of the metal, and when the
railway becomes an accomplished fact, the most profitable way to
work it in the long run will, no doubt, be to remove the hill
bodily, and put it all through the smelters. The main body is
about 100 ft. in width, and has been prospected for fully 500 yards
along its course, while there are evidences of other lodes which
either effect a junction with the main body or run parallel to it
at close quarters.
Excessive management expenses proved the ruin of the first
company. Managers, superintendents, and other highly-paid
officials seem to have been employed to the number of about a
dozen, and there was the additional cost of the head office in
Glasgow. With good and economical management the mine
would have been able to pay its way and leave something over
for the shareholders, even under the adverse conditions it had to
face, but it could not bear the burden of such extravagant
expenditure in salaries. The presence of rich ore in payable
quantities was nevertheless proved beyond doubt, and there is
still at the surface a large amount of ore which must contain
quite 20 per cent, of copper, besides some gold and silver.
The North lode, situated about a mile and a-half from the
is where Mr. Henry first definitely proved the existence of
copper beyond doubt, for here he found considerable quantities of
the native,metal exposed at the surface. The formation traverses
a series of small rises in a N.W. by S.E. direction, the veinstone
being a yellow quartzite. At the northern end a shallow pit
shows that a fair amount of ore was extracted, this being
principally grey sulphide, containing some 40 per cent, of copper,
which was carted to Norman ton, and thence shipped to Newcastle
(N.S.W.), or to Swansea, for treatment. The lode has been
sunk on at various other points along its course, and the debris
at the surface proves the ore to have been of exceptional richness.
The work was done with the view of extracting the most valuable
portions with the least possible expenditure of time and money,
and there was no pretence of real development, but at the same
time sufficient proof was afforded of the likelihood of the lode
being permanent at a depth.
A striking feature of the neighbourhood is a hill called Mount
Leviathan, or the Black Mountain, which rises to a height of
200 ft., and is composed entirely of rich iron ore. From the
summit several quartz reefs and other lodes may be descried, and
it is possible that the mountain may prove to be the cap of a big
deposit of copper minerals, particularly as the outcrop of a copper
lode has been traced to its very base. Near the Mount is the Western
lode on the wests bank of the Cloncurry river. Several outcrops
containing rich veins of cuprite and grey ore have been proved by
trenches, but there has been no real development work done, the
deepest hole not being more than a few feet.
Two miles west of Mount Leviathan are the Serpent Hill lodes,
covering an area of 800 acres, but although there are indications
of big deposits of copper, they have not yet been proved to be
payable. On one of the blocks limestone crops out with a north-
easterly strike, and along its course there is an outcrop of gossan
and yellow quartzite in which trenches have been sunk. Small
veins of red oxide (cuprite) occur at intervals, and the whole
body, which is 20 ft. across, is stained with green and blue
carbonates. At another point a couple of miles to the north-
west, a large “ blow ” has been cut by a trench, but beyond dis-
closing a little carbonate and oxide ore nothing definite has been
proved, though the prospects offer every inducement for further
work on the. formation.
The ridge on which the Great Australian mine is situated
terminates a few hundred yards beyond it in a small hill of iron
ore which is also connected with Mount Leviathan. This is com-
prised in a lease known as the “ Wanderer,” where the copper
lode can be traced for a considerable distance along the connecting
ridge. Veins of rich ore worth as much as 50 per cent, of copper
have been worked at intervals, while two trenches have proved
the continuity of the lode along its south-westerly strike. The
northernnaost h» <*.ut three veins, and has also proved what is
a pparently a parallel lode 50 ft. to the west. In a trench a
hundred feet south a solid body of grey ore 4j ft. wide has been
cut, and there are also smaller veins. The property seems likely
to prove a very valuable one, and certainly offers inducements for
the expenditure of considerable capital in opening it up.
SOME OUTSIDE SHOWS.
Fifteen miles east of Cloncurry is an extensive group of mines
known as the Homeward Bound. Some years ago the outcrop of
the main lode stood 20 ft. above the surface, and literally formed
a solid body of red and grey ore associated with malachite and
blue carbonate. Five hundred tons were carted away to the port
without dressing or any other treatment, and the shipment gave
a return at the smelters of 40 per cent, of copper. Gold was not
in those days accounted for in the treatment of copper ores, but
from the fact that later parcels have yielded oz. to the ton, and
that coarse gold is occasionally to be seen in the ore now at the
surface, it may safely be assumed that it will add largely to the
value of the deposit. Indeed, the occurrence of the precious
metal is characteristic of the Cloncurry lodes, and they probably
contain more gold than any other copper deposits in the world.
For some time past the mine, which gives its name to the group,
has been worked single-handed by one of the owners, Mr. George
Seymour, who is now upwards of seventy years of age, and whose
physique many a man of forty-five might envy. Day after day
for four years the veteran has gone down his shaft, and un-
remittingly pursued his monotonous occupation, only engaging
assistance when the drives became choked with debris. The lode
has a width of 40 ft. at the surface, but diminishes to 20 ft. of
solid ore at a depth of 36 ft,, though veins frequently spread out
to the east. Some splendid carbonate ore was to be seen in the
workings at this level, but in the absence of timbering it was
rather unsafe to linger with the roof showing signs of falling
in, as portions of it had previously done. A shaft sunk
from the bottom of the quarry where the outcrop formerly
stood is 40 ft. deep, and the north drive shows a rich body
of ore, chiefly malachite, containing 20 per cent, of copper. The
main shaft is down 70 ft., but progress is slow, as may be imagined
when there is only one man employed. A crosscut is being driven
to intersect the lode, which has a bearing N.E. by S.W.
but it probably would have been better policy to have
waited till 100 ft. was reached, when pyrites might have been
expected. A shipment of 24 tons was lately forwarded to the
smelters, and gave a return of 17 per cent., and there are now
several tons of equal value awaiting transport.
Some 300 yards north of these workings is the Douglas Claim,
formerly worked for gold. The shaft is sunk on solid ore, and a
trial parcel of 50 tons treated last year yielded nearly 30 per cent,
of copper. Free gold is visible in the ore, which is a mixture of
malachite, red oxide, grey ore and blue carbonate, with splashes of
copper pyrites and occasionally silicate of copper. The outcrop
is traceable for some distance, but no other work has been done
upon it. Two hundred yards south a massive calcspar and quartz
formation has been prospected, evidently for gold, though the
lode contains copper. It is 20 ft. wide and has been traced for
two miles. In the future it will no doubt prove useful to assist in
fluxing the other ores.
On the Flying Dutchman Claim a shaft has been sunk on 3 ft.
of grey ore to a depth of 40 ft. The lode has an east and west
strike, and joins the Homeward Bound formation north of the
latter’s shaft. Fifteen tons from the shaft were sent to the smelters
by Mr. Henry, and gave a return of 40 per cent, copper. The
country rock is soft slate, and as far as can be seen the lode is as
strong at the bottom of the shaft as at the surface.
Before they passed to the present owners the foregoing claims
were all worked for gold, and yields up to 3 ozs. to the ton have
been reported. At a depth, however, the gold became intimately
associated with copper, and being thus rendered difficult of recovery,
particularly with the primitive appliances at command, the leases
were soon abandoned. All the country is distinctly auriferous,
and quartz reefs abound, some of the gullies leading from them
having yielded large quantities of alluvial gold. The precious
metal is frequently to be seen in the ore heaps, and some rich
specimens were readily secured showing that the copper lodes
have no doubt assisted to enrich the gullies.
There are a number of other leases near by which will no doubt
come to the front in the future, and of these I was especially
impressed with the Copper Quarry, about a mile and a half west
of the Homeward Bound, which covers a total area of 100 acres.
Holes sunk on the course of the lode show red oxide, together
with a little unaltered copper pyrites and grey ore. The workings
are situated at the north end of a slight eminence, and the out-
crop of the lode, which is of great width, can readily be traced for
several hundred yards, copper ore showing wherever the surface
rocks are broken. At the time of my visit the men were cutting
a trench to prove the width of the ore, and had done so for about
a chain. A trial parcel of eight tons extracted from this point
smelted 30 per cent, of copper, and the ore at the bottom of the
excavation is, to use the words of one of the men, “ as solid as an
anvil.” A portion of the ground covered by the lease was worked
some years ago for gold, and a battery was erected on the creek
near by. No records are available, but it is stated that yields up
to 4 ozs. per ton were obtained from the ore at the surface ; but
as depth was attained, the quartz reef in which the gold occurred
merged into copper ore, and thus rendered extraction too costly to
pay, besides which the value fell off, though the ore still assays
J oz. to the ton.
The matrix of the ore is a silicious ironstone and garnet rock
enclosed in slate country, and it will doubtless be worked by open
cast, to a depth of, say, 100 ft., its large size rendering that the
most economical manner of dealing with it on a scale commen-
surate with its importance,
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.
May 9, 1901.]


Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9,1901.
AUSTRALIA.
[May 9, 1901.
About half a mile to the south of the foregoing are some old
workings, from which 1 to 4 ozs. of gold per ton are said to have
been obtained, the claim being known as “ The Musical Union,”
from the fact that the four owners were musically inclined.
The gullies crossing the trend of the lodes to the east have been
turned over for alluvial gold, and good results are said to have
been obtained in places, but there are no large deposits of gravel
or well-defined leads such as might lead one to consider them
likely to prove of value in the future.
There are numerous other claims in the vicinity, such as the
Imperial and the Monakoff, which seem likely to turn out well,
but space precludes my going into details concerning their
prospects. I must, however, mention the mines of the Devon-
court group, situated about 50 miles from Cloncurry, which will
be served by a branch of the proposed railway. They cover an
aggregate area of about 300 acres, and include a number of
leases, of which the Duchess and the Ivanhoe are the most
important. The Duchess lode runs along the crest of a ridge of
hills, and the outcrop, which is 40 ft. wide, presents a very striking
appearance owing to its brilliant green colour. The ore is mostly
composed of malachite, the green carbonate of copper, and the
assay value varies from 40 to 50 per cent, of the metal. The lode
has been traced for something like half a mile, though it has been
covered over by alluvium in places. The country rock is slate,
and the lode does not appear to have been subjected to any dis-
turbances since its formation.
The Ivanhoe lode resembles the one just mentioned, especially
at the north end of the lease, and is 30 ft. wide, with an average
value of 20 per cent. At the south end the outcrop rises 50 ft.
above the surface, the capping being principally haematite, with
which is associated a sort of yellow jasper, which is considered a
good, indication of copper. The Pilgrim and Pluto leases, be-
longing to the same group, seem also to be promising shows, but
so little work has been done on them that it would be unwise to
hazard a more definite opinion. Among the other properties of
the surrounding country is the Palm Tree group, about 35 miles
to the west, and the Dugald River group, 45 miles north-west of
Cloncurry, which will in the future supply a good deal of traffic
to the railway, with which they will no doubt be connected by
branches if their developments warrant it.
Mount Oxide, at Gunpowder Creek, a tributary of the Leichardt
River, is one of the “ big things ”of the district. The outcrop of
No. 1 lode is massive and striking, consisting of immense boulders
of green carbonate ores traversing a spur which rises gradually to
a height of 150 ft. above the valley formed by the creek below.
In one place all the softer portions of the lode Lave been eroded,
leaving only blocks of heavy solid ore. The width varies from
24 to 50 ft., and from its position the ore body will be economically
mined either by means of a tunnel or a series of benches along
its course. The ore has an average assay value of 30 per cent.,
and is composed of silicious iron, malachite, and blue carbonate.
No. 2 lode has a strike approximately north-east by south-west,
and measures 90 ft. across, showing copper more or less all
through. In the bed of the creek, which bisects the lodes, veins
of solid ore are visible.
There is a large cave in an iron-stone deposit on this property
through which traces of copper occur. Thousands of tons of
friable red oxide of iron (98 per cent.) are stored in this cavern,
and it supplied the aboriginals with their war-paint and decora-
tions in the days when they were numerous, and indulged in
tribal fights and convivial meetings.
THE ARGYLLA MINE.
The main lode in this mine was described less than twenty years
a g° by a well-known Scottish mining engineer sent out in the
interests of the Cloncurry Company as being “ indisputably the
largest and most valuable deposit of high-class copper ore yet
discovered in Queensland.” Although this statement cannot at
this date be endorsed, in view of the important developments at
Chillagoe and other places opened up of late years, the fact
remains that the Argylla is one of the most promising mining
properties in the colony, and it has only remained undeveloped in
consequence of the want of means of communication with the
coast. It was opened up by Mr. Ernest Henry, to whom it was
revealed by the chief of a tribe of aboriginals, and is situated 50
odd miles north-west from Cloncurry, a passable dray road
leading up the valley of the Dugald River.
The lode occurs in a belt of chloritic schist, and the immediate
surroundings are desolate in the extreme, with not a vestige of
useful vegetation on the barren hills. It has a bearing N.N. West,
along the summit of a ridge fully 80 ft. in height, where the out-
crop can be seen for half a mile, and it is composed almost
entirely of quartz and yellow jasper. Boulders of copper-stained
ore, mostly green, and very conspicuous at a distance, occur along
the course of the lode, while there are numerous small caverns
contiguous to it in which there are traces of copper.
The main lode—there are several smaller ones—practically
outcrops throughout the whole length of the property, and for 500
yards it is especially strong and well defined, running between two
smooth walls fully 150 ft. across, veins of rich ores such as mala-
chite, copper glance, and red oxide occurring within these limits,
the balance being made up of “ seconds.” Blocks of ore weighing
several hundredweights may be detached from the lode, but the
absence of any means of getting it away profitably prevents any
use being made of it, notwithstanding that it will yield from 40 to
50 per cent, of copper, and several pennyweights of gold per ton.
Prospecting shafts and trenches have been put down on the lode
at several points, and in nearly every instance high-class ores have
been disclosed, mainly red oxides below the surface.
The Yamamilla Mine is another promising property, seventy
miles north-west from Cloncurry, and the surrounding country is
moderately rough for Queensland. The course of the lode is
nearly north and south, and it traverses a steep range of hills,
rising to 350 ft. at its highest elevation, along which it may
be followed for a mile. There is a break in the range at the north
end of the lease, and on the southern side of the gully the
outcrop of the lode rises above its surroundings to a height of
50 ft. Blocks of ore, weighing several hundredweights, are lying
about, quite valueless in their present position. In the gully
referred to the ore body is exposed at the lowest point, and is
there 15 ft. wide, being composed of quartz and green carbonates,
containing a very high percentage of copper. It is a matter for
regret that so valuable a property has not long since been
turned to profitable account.
THE HAMPDEN DISTRICT.
If actual development work were to be given precedence, then
the Hampden Mines should be the first mentioned, but inasmuch
as for the present this field is regarded as an outlier of Cloncurry
it has to take suburban rank for the moment. It is situated just
over 50 miles to the south-east of the town, and though the inter-
vening country is all more or less mineralised prospecting opera-
tions are confined to the areas close to water. At “ Top Camp,”
the scene of an alluvial rush some years ago, there are a score of
men making a living, merely passing the time till the drought
breaks, and they can get into the “ back country ” again to renew
the search for copper lodes. At this camp is a distinct “alluvial
lead,” long since worked out, which was traced for some two
miles, but with here and there a blank which seems never to have
been located. Some of those working now are in hopes of
“ picking her up again,” and for their sake the wish may be
expressed that they may not be disappointed. Their task is hard,
and luck has not been much with them, and if they struck a Gol-
conda no one could envy their good fortune, for their failures are
borne without undue complaint. At intervals along the trask
individuals are working their shows, some of which are pretty fair
and others not without hope, but I cannot enter into a detailed
description of their prospects.
The Hampden Mine is the centre of operations in the district
nearly every other property being under exemption from the
labour covenants, in consequence of the drought-stricken con-
dition of the country, and when it is stated that all the goods,
including horse-feed and utensils, cost 6d. per lb. for carriage
alone, the wonder is that any progress is shown at all.
The mine comprises 240 acres, in three leases of 80 acres each,
through which an outcrop of silicious ironstone marks the course
of the lode, which has an approximate strike north and south,
and apparently an easterly dip. It is bounded by slates, and has
been proved for a width of 200 ft., but indications on the western
side tend to show that the ore will extend another 100 ft. in that
direction. About a chain from the northern boundary a diorite
intrusion cuts off the lode, which, however, is said to make again a
mile or so further on in this direction. Of late operations have
been mainly centred on two open cuttings and one shaft, although
at various times eleven shafts have been sunk, and a number of
trenches cut in several places for the full width of the body.
No. 1 open cut is right across the proved ore body for 200 ft.,
and runs to a depth of 18 ft., and No. 2 is being continued
along its course to a depth of 17 ft., and from 20 to
30 ft. wide. Rich ore is visible along the sides, and is
going strong under foot. The ore seems to occur in large
bands, with a dip to the east, and evidently it is making into a
more solid body than obtains on the surface. It chiefly consists
of copper glance, malachite, and red oxide. In places veins of
solid glance are met with, the richness and extent of which
materially adds to the value of the whole body, and this is
apparent in the deeper portions of the open cuts.
No. 1 shaft has been sunk to 115 ft., and at 100 ft. crosscuts
east and west had just been commenced, the former being in
12 ft., and having passed through two veins of sulphide ore, worth
from 10 to 27 per cent, of copper. Ore was showing in the face,
and, judging by the easterly dip of the veins, it should make into
a solid body about 100 ft. deeper. This shaft was sunk to prove
a theory held by the manager, that though the outcrop was not
visible at any given point, yet it did not follow that there
was no continuity of the ore body, and after sinking 50 ft.
ore was struck, which at 73 ft. took the form of copper glance,
and improved in value to 74 per cent. The water is kept down
by baling with a windlass, and nearly all the shafts along the
outcrop have been drained, six of them being below the permanent
water level, and in rich ore, while the other half-dozen have it in
places. They have been sunk from the most northerly point at
which the lode occurs right to the southern boundary, 39 chains
distant, proving rich ore all the way. The work that is being
done is merely to comply with the labour covenants, as in the
absence of any feed for horses, and the difficulty of obtaining
other supplies, it is impossible to operate on a large scale.
When the drought breaks up teams can get through, and the
first-class ores will then be sent to market, probably to
Townsville by way of McKinlay. The ore is being classified into
“ firsts,” 40 per cent. ; “ seconds,” 13 per cent.; and “ thirds,” 65
per cent, of copper. Free gold is visible in the oxidised ores, but
in estimating values it is not taken into account, though it should
prove a welcome addition to the mine returns when put through
the smelters. About £45,000 worth of ore is lying at the surface,
and if it could be realised upon now the proceeds from the “ firsts ”
alone would not only pay the whole of the working expenses of
the company, but leave a profit of £4,000 for a year’s work —-that
is to say, the total profit would in such circumstances amount to
about £14,000 from mere prospecting operations.
The lode traverses two low hills, and, owing to its immense
width and length, it will be easily mined by open cuts to a con-
siderable depth. At the south end it passes into a lease held by
the McKinlay Ranges Syndicate, on whose ground a shaft and a


EW EALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALA lAN A
May 9, 1901.]
AUSTRALIA,
xxxi.
few trenches put into the formation have disclosed the existence
of copper, and there is no reason why this block should not Open
up well. It would, therefore, .make a valuable addition to the
Hampden Company’s property.
MR. P, STANLEY LOW, 8.G.E..
General Manager Hampden Mines.
Considering the richness of the ore body and its vast dimen-
sions, no hesitation is felt in stating that there is a million pounds’
worth of ore practically proved, and it is certain that the mine
will ultimately be one of the great copper producers of Australia.
The work of the manager, Mr. F. Stanley Low, 8.C.E., has been
performed under the difficulties caused by the worst season, or
rather series of seasons, known in the history of Queensland, and
reflects the greatest credit on his management. Mr. Low was
formerly assistant engineer-in-oharge at the famous Mount Lyell
Mine in Tasmania, and has had two years’ practical experience at
Broken Hill, so that he is eminently qualified to deal with the big
scheme of open cast workings that will be necessary in order to
get the best results from the property.
The discoverer of the Hampden Mine was Mr. P. Gibson, an
old squatter in the Gulf country, who sold the property to Messrs.
John and Norman Godkin, who were sent out by Messrs. Wm.
and J. H. Orr to prospect the Cloncurry district on their behalf.
For some time Mr. John Godkin acted as manager, and the develop-
ments proved so satisfactory that Messrs. Wm. Knox and H. H.
MR. WILLIAM ORR,
Chairman Hampden Copper Mines.
Schlapp, of Broken Hill fame, joined in the deal. The company
—known as the Hampden Copper Mines (No Liability)—was
registered in Victoria in May, 1899, and the head office is at 31,
Queen - street, in that city. The authorised and issued
capital is £lOO,OOO, in 1,000 shares of £lOO each, which were
saleable in Melbourne last year at £240, and were, I
believe, during a temporary boom quoted as high as £l,lOO.
If the Cloncurry railway project is successfully effectuated, the
British public will, we dare predict, hear more of the Hampden
Copper Mines, and should they realise the expectation of those
who have examined them and estimated their vast ore reserves,
the greater portion of the credit will be due to Mr. William Orr.
That gentleman stuck to the mines when once he had satisfied
himself of their value through good and ill report—even his
partners being at one time inclined to throw cold water on the
venture. The present directors are Mr. Wm. Orr (chairman),
Wtd. Knox, H. H. Schlapp, and T. H. Orr.
CLONCURRY: GBNURAL CONCLUSIONS.
The properties mentioned ifi the foregoing are merely some of
many scattered over a very large tract of country. Nearly all of
them give promise of developing into payable mines, aUd sortie
will be very rich. But tile great feature of the district will be the
opening for patties of working miners. There are innumerable
lodes, rich, But too small to pay the average company with its
costly management* that will yield a competency to men who will
do a portion Of the work themselves, and have to pay for nothirlg
but extra labour. When the railway and its branches are con-
structed from the several districts to the smelters, they will be
able to mine the ore and sell to the smelters without having to
erect costly machinery. The arrangement will be an advantageoiis
one both for the smelting company and the miners. The
railway, too, will be fully employed in conveying supplies to,
and ores from, the mines, and there will also be a splendid
freight in cattle. It is proposed to erect the smelters
on the Leichhardt River, where there is a permanent water supply,
even in this year of unprecedented drought, and abundance of
timber for building and fuel, together with all the fluxes required.
In many countries it is considered more profitable to take the ore
to the coast than to smelt it locally, but an exception must be
made in the case of Cloncurry, for at the port there are no fluxes,
and it will consequently be more economical to take the necessary
coke and coal to the works. These will be conveyed in trucks that
will return loaded with cattle and sheep for the meat works that
will be in operation at Port Norman, so that there will be no loss
in running empty freight waggons. In ordinary seasons the
country, 100 miles on either side of Cloncurry, carries fat stock
for nine months of the year, and all the surplus will be sent
through to the works by rail.
In addition to the copper mines, there are two goldfields in the
Cloncurry district, and although the yield therefrom does not
figure largely in the colony’s output, yet there is plenty of
evidence that with good management the numerous quartz reefs
could be worked to advantage. It is, however, many years since
serious attention was paid to them. The Gilded Rose mine,
about fifteen miles out, was once a payable concern, and there is
a winding and pumping plant and a 10-stamper battery to remind
one of that time. The former, however, is not powerful enough
to cope with the water, and the owners are not strong enough to
erect a new plant. The Bower Bird mine also possesses a similar
plant, and is in the same position, and there are other promising
properties.
The “ Top Camp ” diggings are on the Cloncurry River, thirty
miles south-east of the town, and it would probably pay a dredg-
ing company to work the river near by. There are also lead
lodes on the Leichhardt, valueless at present, but which should
open up well in the future.
When Lord Lamington, the Governor of Queensland, went over
a portion of the field he was astonished at the evidence of the
enormous latent resources that he saw on every side. He had
heard a great deal about it before leaving Brisbane, and con-
sequently expected to see a promising field for the investment of
capital, but he was by no means prepared for the revelation of
wealth that was displayed wherever he went.
THE DISCOVERER OF THE MINES.
As is frequently the case in Australia, the discovery of copper
at Cloncurry was the result of chance rather than of research. Mr.
Ernest Henry, an Imperial officer, who had seen service in the
MR. ERNEST HENRY.
Crimea, being attracted to the then young colony, entered into
pastoral pursuits, and was subsequently the pioneer of the
Hughenden district, one of the finest stretches of wool-growing
country in Australia. Some years later he pushed out still further


xxxii.
AUSTRALIA
[May 9, 1901.
west, seeking new stations, and it was during one of these
expeditions that he came across the “Black Mountain,” a hill of
almost pure i ron ore. Knowing nothing of minerals, yet
believing he had made a great discovery, he packed 4 tons of it to
the coast—upwards of 400 miles—for transmission to Sydney,
and took with him a sample of 2 cwts. to the Peak Downs Copper
Mine, then commencing operations. This involved a journey of
no less than 500 miles on horseback, and when he arrived there
he had the mortification of learning that his ore was
valueless. However, with a faith born of inspiration and
plenty of enterprise and determination, he decided to return
to Cloncurry, but first spent a few weeks at Peak Downs
to gain a knowledge of the various copper minerals. Shortly
after his return to Cloncurry he discovered the “ Great
Australian” Mine, and after that, as far as copper was con-
cerned, the way was easy. But, as a preliminary, the con-
fidence of the natives had to be secured, and as these included
the warlike Kalkadunes, a stalwart and dominant tribe, it required
the exercise of considerable tact and diplomacy to effect a footing
in the country. Yet not only did Mr. Henry gain their goodwill
as a tolerated resident in their territory, but the members of the
tribes entered into the spirit of his enterprise, and pointed out to
him several of the properties which he still holds, notably the
Argylla and Yamamilla Mines. Before these happy relations
were established between this indefatigable pioneer and the native
lords of the soil, the former had however been badly speared and
nearly killed by them.
In 1863, having with great foresight secured the freehold of a
large area in different parts of the district, Mr. Henry went to
England to raise capital for their development, but although
successful in coming to some arrangement, he left London
before the business had been finally completed, and soon
after his return to Queensland learned that the scheme had
fallen through. It was 16 years later that the Scottish Company
was formed. In 1831 Mr. Henry accompanied the late General
Feilding in his famous journey through Queensland, when he
was exploring the routes for the proposed Trans-continental
Railway, and subsequently assisted in the survey which has
since been adopted. His experiences for the past 33 years
form a record of pluck and enterprise, patience, and determina-
tion to carry through to a successful issue the scheme to which
the best portion of his life has been devoted.
The Normanton=Cloncurry Railway and Copper Mines,
Limited.
SOME PARTICULARS OF THE COMPANY
CAPITALISATION
The registration of the Normanton-Cloncurry Railway and
Copper Mines, Limited, marks what ought to be the last stage of
a praiseworthy endeavour, extending over some twenty years, to
open up that much-neglected but, nevertheless, wonderfully rich
part of the Empire, viz., North-West Queensland. A short
resume of these efforts and of the people connected with them
wdll not be out of place here.
In the early eighties, Major-General Feilding, representing an
influential London syndicate, reported on the country between
ITS COMPOSITION AND
But the conditions attached to the granting of so many millions
of acres of land did not appeal to the Queensland Parliament of
the day, though strongly supported by the then Premier, the
late Sir Thos. Mcllwraith, and the measure was defeated. A few
years later (1886) a select committee was formed to report on
the desirability of the Government building the Normanton-Clon-
curry line themselves.
The Committee’s report was as follows:
ROUTE OF PROPOSED NORMANTON-CLONCURRY RAILWAY, WITH MAP OP ADJACENT MINERAL AND
PASTORAL COUNTRY.
Point Parker on the Gulf and Longreach in the south, taking in
Cloncurry and Winton, with a view to constructing a trans-conti-
nental railway on the land grant system.
Associated with the scheme were Mr. Hugh Matheson, Mr.
Henry Kimber, M.P., the Earl of Denbigh, and a host of other
influential people and powerful institutions.
“ I.—That the policy of the railway is approved by them.
“ II. —The mineral resources of the Cloncurry district are exten-
sive, and their development is calculated to give remunerative
returns if certain and speedy railway communication, with
navigable water, is assured, and as Normanton appears to be the
best port on southern portion of the Gulf of Carpentaria, the rail-
Supplement to he BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA
xxxiii.
way thence to Cloncurry must result in an increased prosperity to
the country.
“ lII.—It has been shown that the proposed first section will
be of very moderate cost.
(Signed) “Thomas Macdonald-Paterson,
“ Chairman.”
In 1884 Dr. Robert L. Jack, Government Geologist, had written :
■—“ The reports, when published, will show that the Cloncurry,
Leichhardt, and Dugald Yalleys abound in copper and other
minerals, which are destined to make this district a crowded
manufacturing country. At present it lies almost a waste owing
to the want of a railway to connect it with the coast.”
As the result of the committee’s recommendations Parliament
voted half-a-million pounds towards the construction of the rail-
way. £75,000 of this was spent when the rush to the Croydon
goldfield came along, and the Normanton people insisted upon the
line being diverted to that centre. This was done, and much to
the disgust of many capitalists who, on the strength of the vote
for the Cloncurry Railway, had taken up and stocked large tracts
of the magnificent sheep and cattle country to the south and west
of Cloncurry, the railway was abandoned.
In 1888 the question was again brought under the notice of the
Government by a strong deputation of pastoralists and others,
but nothing was done till 1892, when a Land Grant Act was
passed, which held out inducements to private enterprise
to construct railways in exchange for blocks of land along the
route. No one, however, volunteered to take advantage of this
privilege until 1897, when, on the suggestion of Mr. Henry J.
Withers, the British Colonial Railways Corporation, Limited,
was formed in London with a view to obtaining the
necessary legislative powers. This company, composed
largely of business men interested in the welfare of the
colony, was associated with the owners of some rich copper
freeholds, which were valueless until a railway was built,
and who had promised their financial support to the scheme.
Among others connected with the concern were Mr. Sheriff
Lawrence, chairman of those eminently successful companies
the Linotype Company and Machinery Trust; Mr. Jeremiah
Lyon, J.P., senior partner of Messrs. Jeremiah Lyon and Co.,
East Indian and colonial merchants, of London, Manchester, and
Birmingham; Mr. D. C. Mackinnon, of Lloyds; Mr. Alexander
Freeland, director of World Insurance Company ; Mr. W. Weddel,
of W. Weddel and Co., so intimately associated with colonial
produce ; Mr. R. J. Turner, of Weddel, Turner, and Co., the well-
known colonial shipping agents.
The company was duly registered in Queensland, and its applica-
tion was favourably received by a large section of the House, but a
change had come over the constitution of Parliament since 1892.
The Labour Party was more in evidence, and their vote was dead
against anything in the nature of private enterprise, especially
when coupled with a grant of land. Sir Hugh Nelson, the then
Premier, was approached by a deputation when in London, and
accorded his approval of the scheme. His retirement in favour
of Mr. Byrnes, however, caused delay, and Sir Hugh Nelson’s suc-
cessor was not so favourably disposed towards the object of the
company.
The lamented death of Mr. Byrnes further impeded the progress
of the Bill, which, however, was strongly espoused by his successor,
the late Sir J. R. Dickson, who, nevertheless, made it plain that
the land grant, even on leasehold, would have to be dropped.
This was agreed to by the company, and a Bill was drawn up
and approved of on the lines of the Mareeba-Chillagoe Railway
Bill, which had become law in Sir Hugh Nelson’s time. The
General Election of ’99 and the subsequent fall of the Dickson
Government put a stop to further progress. The Hon. Robert
Philp now took up the reins of office, Sir J. R. Dickson acting as
chief secretary. Under Mr. Philp’s regime this Bill was at last
introduced, and passed the second reading, when an unfortunate
misunderstanding caused it to be postponed till next session. It
was considered that the time had now arrived for the construct-
ing company to be formed. The result has been the registration
of the Normanton-Cloncurry Railway and Copper Mines, Limited,
with a nominal capital to start with of £50,000, afterwards to be
increased to some million and three-quarters.
The first subscribers are as follows:
John Neilson Cuthbertson, Knight, chemical broker, 29, Bath-
street, Glasgow.
Archibald Coats, thread manufacturer, Woodside, Paisley.
P. Coats, thread manufacturer, 5, Garthland-place, Paisley.
P. Harrower, East India merchant, 134, Bath-street, Glasgow.
R. L. Alston, gentleman, 22, Forsyth-street, Greenock.
W. D. Gillies, iron merchant, 17, Royal Exchange-square,
Glasgow.
John Coubrough, gentleman, Blanefield, Stirlingshire.
James Hope, metallurgical manager, Dean House, Lenzie, as
factory and commission for Hon. John Ferguson.
W. R. Galbraith, civil engineer, 20, Yictoria-street, Westminster.
Edwyn Sandys Dawes, K.C.M.G., 23, Great Winchcster-street,
London, E.C.
Robert G. W. Herbert, G.C.8., 3, Whitehall-court, London, S.W.
William Dunn, Bart., M.P., Broad-street-avenue, London, E.C.
Harold Brown, solicitor, 2, Bond-court, Walbrook, London, E.C.
The first directors are :
Sir Robert G. W. Herbert, G.C.8.,
Sir John Neilson Cuthbertson,
Mr. Peter Harrower,
while the legal interests of the company are in the hands of the
well-known firms of Messrs. Linklater and Co. and W. A. Crump
and Son.
It is seldom that one sees such a strong list of names in con-
nection with any one concern. More powerful have never been
associated with any Australian undertaking.
The railway has also the approval of the leading Australasian
banks—the Mortgage, Finance, and Pastoral companies, a large
number of whose interests will be greatly improved by the con-
struction of such a line. Including as it does the acquisition of
an unusually large number of valuable freehold and leasehold
copper selections, and opening up as it will such a vast extent of
rich pastoral country, the future of the company seems assured,
while in view of the incalculable benefits to Queensland it is
sincerely to be hoped that no further obstacles will be placed by
the legislation of that State in the way of the scheme being carried
out.
The company has a splendid exhibit of copper ore from its
properties at Cloncurry at the Glasgow Exhibition. The assay of
the ore varies from 14 per cent, of copper per ton to 78 per cent.
The average of 15 samples is 44-81 per cent, of copper, with both
gold and silver. The company has 2,933 acres freehold and
1,045 acres leasehold containing over 60 lodes, varying in width
from 2 ft. to 50 ft. For some years the ores must give a very high
percentage of copper if those exhibited can be taken as a sample
of what is exposed on the surface.
It is understood that no shares will be issued to the public at
present.
THE PASTORAL AND MINING PROSPECTS OF CLONCURRY.
BY OSCAR
The recent registration as a London company of the Norraan-
ton Cloncurry Railway and Copper Mines Company opens
that rich and long neglected part of the great colony of Queens-
land to approaching development by perhaps the most powerful
company that was ever put together to construct railways by
private enterprise in Australia—and this initiation will no doubt
rouse the slumbering faculties of the great stretch of mineral and
pastoral country that centres at Cloncurry and awaits that long-
cherished scheme.
As the readers of this article may know, Cloncurry, to which, as
a mining centre, the Rev. Julian Tenison-Wood and other geo-
logical experts drew attention forty years ago, lies some 250 miles
south of the gulf port of Normanton, at the very head of the Cion-
curry River, which joins the Flinders River near Donors Hills,
shedding its waters in the Gulf close to Normanton, near the spot
where Burke and Wills in February, 1861, first espied the goal of
their famous trans-continental trip.
Nature has destined Cloncurry to be the eventual capital of
north-west Queensland, for its position is unique ; as a mineral
centre it commands to the south and south-west an endless
variety of copper lodes of excessive richness, to which Mr. Ernest
Henry, the original discoverer of the great Australian copper
mine at Cloncurrv, nearly a quarter of a century ago, pays the
following tribute: —
“ These hills form the MacKinlay and Cloncurry ranges, and
gold, silver, lead, antimony, and manganese are to be found in
different portions of the ranges. The most valuable, if not the
most inherently precious, of the metals is copper, the wonderful
deposits of which spread over the enormous area of 200 miles.
SATGE.
Most of the copper lodes contain more or less gold, whilst many
of them are not only extremely rich in high-class ores, but are of
a very great width, ranging from a few feet up to 30, 40, and even
50 ft. The virgin copper, as if it was smelted, shows freely
through the ore.”
Dr. R. L. Jack, the late Queensland Government geologist,
reports of the “ Argylla ” Mine, one of the new company’s
properties:—-“I venture to assert that any attempt at a descrip-
tion of this wonderful property must needs fail to give a full
estimate of its richness and extent. The outcrop rises to a height
of nearly 50 ft., and carries with it an immense lode of high per-
centage ores throughout its entire length.” Besides the large
number of claims owned by the Railway Company, there is a
separate undertaking known as the Great Hampden Copper
Mine, lying south of the Cloncurry about 50 miles, the richness
and extent of which is almost fabulous. As a goldfield the
Government proclaimed no less than 1,200 square miles as its
virtual area in 1891; it has disappointed many and enriched but
few, but there is no saying what a railway may not do in develop-
ing its qualities —diggers have chiefly failed for want of water and
rations, and the railway mxy help them to both, for the gold is
there—both alluvial and in reef. The company having powers to
extend branch lines to favoured spots will no doubt find plenty of
such extensions necessary.”
As regards the pastoral advantages to be enhanced by the Nor-
manton to Cloncurry Railway, which traverses a country without
engineering difficulties, the line may be said to go through a
thickly-grassed stretch of excellent cattle country, well adapted,
as, indeed, all the Gulf country is, to the rearing and fattening of
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.
May 9, 1901.]


xxxiv.
AUSTRALIA
[May 9, 1901.
cattle, though I do not think that any of the pasture-land abso-
lutely along the line is either good sheep country or fitted for
agriculture, though to the east and south-east of the last hundred
miles of the line the head of the Flinders, an extensive tract of the
finest sheep country, affords the promise of a certain portion of
its traffic being sent to the Cloncurry; that portion, in fact,
which is too distant from Winton or Richmond Downs (if the
Northern Railway is extended to the latter), and, therefore,
obtains an advantage by using the Cloncurry line instead of the
Townsville line.
To the south and south-west and west of the Cloncurry there is
no lack of first-class sheep country of the Saltbush Riverina type,
but it has a small and uncertain rainfall, though that is not too
little to make squatting there, with a lengthened tenure and at light
MR. OSCAR DE SATGE.
rents, an unprofitable pursuit. This lengthened tenure at a reduced
rental the Government have just afforded to the lessees of the
extreme Western country, including the areas I have alluded to,
and with this, and the boon of certain and cheap carriage afforded
them by the projected railway, there should be more than a
revival of sheep farming in those parts. Squatting in the Far
West has had a great shake in the past few droughty years, but
good seasons will mend the aspect.
No country has greater fattening properties ; bullocks from the
Georgina have travelled over 1,000 miles to Adelaide in old days
and topped the market; and it is difficult to think that a country
possessing good wool growing and superlative fattening qualities is
not to be made more use of now that all the stores, machinery,
plant, &c., required for settlement will be cheaply and rapidly con-
veyed by rail for, at any rate, the worst half or two-thirds of the
road between port and their stations, to say nothing of the quicker
disposal of the settlers’ wool, attained by rapid rail carriage to the
Gulf.
As to carriage of meat from the pastoral districts of the Clon-
curry, which should, in one shape or another, form a traffic second
only in importance to that of the copper, and, in time to come,
wool, I think that if the freights are made easy the “ live stock ”
traffic to the freezing works at Normanton, when these are in
order, will be the safest and largest. There must corne a “ power
of fat sheep and cattle fit for market from that western country in
fair seasons, and I venture to say that no finer beef or mutton will
leave Queensland than that produced on the Georgina River and its
tributaries, and the Burke, Wills, and Hamilton country, so far, never
overstocked, and rich in every variety of saltbush and herbage.
There may be found use for boiling down and extract works at
Cloncurry the same as at Long Reach, Hughenden, and Charleville,
but that is a matter of time; the main thing is to provide the
Eastern markets as well as the Cape with the prirnest stock direct
from inland pastures of the highest fattening quality. In these
coming squatting “turnovers ” it must not be, however, forgotten
that the copper freight will have to be served first.
The Railway Company that is about to take in hand the fortunes
of the Cloncurry district, with its copper, iron and gold, its wool,
tallow, and meat, will have just now, and for some time to come,
plenty of labour at its disposal, and the sooner it starts to work
the sooner will the Government find labour for the many
hands thrown out of employment in the great pastoral districts of
Queensland by the late drought, which has swept off about
half the stock in the central and western districts, and
necessitated an equivalent reduction in the establishments
hitherto kept up by the now depleted stations. The construction
'of the Normanton and Cloncurry railway comes as a Dms ex
maoliina to relieve the situation, and the sooner the Cloncurry
Railway Bill passes the sooner these hands will be employed, and
that in no niggard shape, judging by the men of mark)and enter -
srise5 rise that stand at the head of the newly-registered company,
jo end of carriers thrown out of work in the old districts will
turn to the new, and I can figure them the moment the Bill is
passed pushing out to get their slice of the new capital to be
poured into the North-West of Queensland chiefly from “ good old
Scotland.”
Finally, it is impossible to forecast what the future attractions
of the Cloncurry may not become to the speculative dweller in
China or Japan, or to the Indian on leave, who, at little cost of
time or trouble, can spend a winter month or two on the Western
plains of Queensland. It will mean a calm trip through lovely
summer seas, a camp at a first-class hotel at Normanton (which
has yet to be built), and a day’s journey by rail through pastoral
lands to the mineral plateau of the Cloncurry, where the dry,
bracing air of a Queensland winter will revive the most debilitated
constitution.
The promise by the Government that they will use a most
powerful modern dredge to remove the bar at the mouth of the
Norman River will do away with the hete noir of all Queensland
tidal rivers; old colonists well remember Brisbane and Rock-
hampton before these were made fine ports by the dredges of
old days, and the smaller difficulties of the Norman are not likely
to daunt the able department that watches over that important
branch of the public service in Brisbane with the use of the up-to-
date plant they propose employing at the Norman River.
The coast districts of Queensland all through enjoy a far
greater rainfall than the inland pastures, and in regard
to the certain use the Cloncurry line will eventually be put
to in extreme cases of drought, it may be here stated that the
Gulf country has a much greater and more certain rainfall than
the vast pastoral districts that will be tapped by the projected
railway, and send their produce to the Cloncurry terminus. The
Cloncurry Railway will become, in that respect, an insurance
against the worst effects of drought. The Gulf country is never
heavily stocked, and its chief pasture, a coarser kind of Mitchell
grass, will always keep sheep at a pinch, better than the grass
seedy coastal pastures of the Eastern seaboard.
It is difficult to estimate the probable future of Normanton
when the Cloncurry traffic is fairly set going, and is added to the
gold sent from the Croydon goldfields by the line which took the
place of that to the Cloncurry; but it must become a big port, as
with a well dredged waterway, Normanton will receive, besides the
many and varied exports of the Cloncurry district, a good deal of
direct trade with China and Japan and Batavia and New Guinea, to
which it lies within easy reach. Direct shipment to the Cape and
Great Britain, even if it should commence in a small way at first, is
pretty sure to repeat the encouraging story of other Queensland
ports that began with a less varied export fist than that which
Normantonmay fairly lay claim to when the Cloncurry Railway is
a fait accompli. The site of the present township is excellent; a
fine gravelly ironstone ridge with plenty of good water.
The pastoral areas to be developed by the railway from Nor-
manton to Cloncurry, and which, so to speak, come within its
influence, may be summed up as follows :—-
To the north-east and east from Cloncurry, the fine sheep
country that is watered by the heads of the Flinders and Saxby
Rivers, and which has, roughly speaking, an area of 10 to 15,000
square miles, a good deal of which is stocked by cattle, but
would, in process of time, be turned into sheep runs; this country
lies in the Gulf watershed. To the south-east and south of the
Cloncurry there lies on the watersheds of the Diamantina,
Hamilton, Burke, and Wills, some 20,000 square miles of country,
equal in quality to anything in Queensland. This is also chiefly
stocked with cattle and awaits carriage to be turned into sheep runs.
Turning to the south-west and west from Cloncurry lies the vast
tract of fine country bounded by the Northern Territory of South
Australia from the 20th to the 25th parallel of latitude, and
embracing an area of at least 30,000 square miles. This
country is full of saltbush and fattening herbage, and is all prime
sheep country. This makes in all an area of nearly 60,000
square miles of first-class sheep country awaiting the advent of
carriage to port for its full development. In all this vast tract
there is but little scrub, mountain, or waste country. It is
chiefly black soil plains covered in normal seasons with
the richest pasture, and well fitted for the growth of fine
wool, and above all for the fattening of stock on a wide
scale. Difficulties of carriage and labour which this pro-
jected railway will overcome, together with low prices for
cattle and wool, have told- heavily against the development of
these areas, much of which has been thrown up by their lessees.
But now that cattle are rising fast, and have nearly doubled their
value, and that the Government has come to the rescue with a
Land Bill giving the areas described above lengthened tenure
at lower rents, there seems to be a good time looming
ahead. Carriage to port has long been the bugbear of
outside properties, and until the railway to Port Norman
becomes assured, settlers in the far west will become chary
of extending their sheep operations ; but there is now certain to be
a steady development of high-class cattle properties, for it would
be impossible to get finer beef than that produced on the western
watersheds I have included in my list. Sheep development will
follow, as it has done in other parts of Queensland, when the
carriage question is solved. For the horse-breeder for Indian re-
mounts, the country I have named offers a special opening, the
condition and mettle of the horses bred in Western Queensland
being especially notable. I have known both thoroughbred and
draught stock attain their greatest power on country not far from
the Northern Territory, the limestone formation of the soil being
specially suited for creating bone and muscle in horse stock.
It is difficult to form a correct estimate of the sheep and cattle
now carried on the country above described, as coming under the
influence of the projected railway, but a moderately accurate
estimation of the stock that the country can carry in a fair season
is to be arrived at by allowing an easy calculation of fifteen acres
for every head of cattle and four acres for every sheep.
The minimum of 50,000 square miles gives 32,000,000 of acres,
which allotted to 1,000,000 of cattle and 4,000,000 of sheep would
lightly stock the area named.
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


May 9, 1901.] AUSTRALIA. xxxv.
The output of 1,000,000 cattle yearly, calculating it at 10
per cent., would give 100,000 head of fat cattle, and 4,000,000
of sheep should yield, at 6 lbs. each, 24 million lbs. of
wool yearly. The calculation of the increase in the breeding stock
of cattle and sheep can for the present be left alone, but should
be another asset. Except in droughts, that so often trouble the
Queensland squatter, the above calculation is well within
the mark of that fine western country, which is, . perhaps,
owing to its saline nature, the healthiest in the world for live
stock.
FROM CLONCURRY TO GYMPIE.
A NOTABLE CHARTERS TOWERS MINE.
RICH DEVELOPMENTS AT DONNYBROOK.
KANGAROO HILLS MINERAL FIELDS.
THE QUEENSLAND SMELTING COMPANY—COPPER MINING AT GYMPIE.
On his way back from Cloncurry to Brisbane, via Hinton and
Townsville, at the close of last year, our Special Commissioner
made a careful survey of the great gold-mining centre of Charters
Towers. Copious notes resulted from his observations, and this
was also the case at Eavenswood and Donnybrook. On reach-
ing Townsville he made that thriving entrepot the starting-
point for an examination of the Kangaroo Hills Mineral Field.
The Queensland Smelting Works and Gympie were also inspected
on the return journey to Brisbane. At the moment we are
unable to find space for his observations on Charters Towers, and
are thus compelled to hold them over for future publication.
Tn the meantime our readers will welcome with pleasure
the remarks which we append on “A Notable Charters Towers
Mine,” made by that indomitable pioneer of the Queensland
gold mining industry, Mr. Thomas Mills. We give a precis of
our commissioner’s report on Eavenswood and Gympie, as well as
an account of that most promising undertaking, the Donnybrook
Blocks, from another pen. A brief note of tin mining operations
in the Kangaroo Hills district concludes the number, which has
necessarily involved a good deal of dry detail. In a future issue
it will be possible to treat the igreat producing industries of
Queensland from a broader standpoint, and in a more interesting
manner.
Che Dap Dawn Block and Wpmlham mine.
Of all the mines in the Charters Towers district none has been
developed so steadily, or with more satisfactory results, than the
Day Dawn Block and Wyndham, with which the name of Mr.
Thomas Mills has been associated practically from the date
of its discovery in 1871. When the property was abandoned
by the two old miners who originally worked it he took it up,
together with adjoining claims, and after successfully working the
group turned the whole into a local limited liability company in
1882, subsequently bringing it to London and placing it on the
English market with a capital of £460,000 in £1 shares. It may
readily be understood therefore, as the chairman, Mr. George
Hopkins, C.E., informed the shareholders at the last annual meet-
ing, that the property is an old love of Mr. Mills’s, and one from
which he does not like to be away from for very long. A member of
the London directorate, and by
far and away the largest share-
The crushing mill is about eleven miles away from the mine
Here is a photograph showing the quartz being carried down to
the mill. The No. 2 shaft is now down on the Day Dawn reef
nearly 3,000 ft., which is something over half a mile.”
“ Of course you use cyanide ? ”
“ Yes. The cyanide plant had been erected since my previous
visit, and was in excellent working order. On my return to
England last year I recommended my co-directors to put up small
filter presses. These have already been sent out, and are now
being erected. They are expected to be in working order in about
two months’ time. We are going to treat the slimes by them-
selves. At present we treat the slimes with the tailings. Since I
left the colony the mine has been opened up at the nineteenth
and twentieth levels, and to-d is looking exceedingly promising.
c J In this new country we have
— -, three distinct workable reefs, all
holder in the company, he re-
turned to England last year after
paying another visit to the mine,
and being desirous of giving the
readers of the British Austra-
lasian the most up -to - date
information regarding this—the
premier mine in the Charters
Towers district —I had a chat
with him the other day at the
London offices of the company.
A practical miner, who knows '
his Queensland well, Mr. Mills
is regarded as an authority on
gold mining in the colony, and
certainly none is in a better
position to speak of the develop-
ments that are taking place in
the Charters Towers district.
“ I came home,” he said, “at :
the beginning of last year, after
an absence of about fourteen |
clil tlUfcitJllUe Ui ctuuuu IUUI UCCiI A]
months, the majority of the time
having been spent at the Towers,
as we call it. During my stay
I made a considerable number
of inspections of the Day Dawn
Block and AVyndham, both below
and on the surface, and I can
tell you that the workings are all
in first-class order, and every-
thing is going on well. The
mine was much more extensively
opened up than on the occasion
of my previous visit. The drives
from No. 8 to No. 18 had all been
considerably developed. These
main drives, which are about 100
ft. apart, are in extent from
50 ft. to over 1,000 ft. We have two main shafts, one to work the
eastern portion of the mine the other the western portion,”
“The area of the property has lately been increased, has it
not ? ”
“ Yes ; since my previous visit our manager had increased the
area of the property considerably. He has added about twenty-
five acres, so that the area of country now being worked is
about 100 acres.”
“ And what number of stamps have you at work? ”
“ Sixty, the crushing returns being about 3,000 tons a month.
“ On the occasion of your visit to Queensland did you have
an opportunity of discussing the question of gold mining with the
Government ? ’ ’
“Yes. I got the Railway Department to reduce the rate of
carriage from our mines to the mill, and also carried out several
other matters of importance. The Government are doing all they
can to push the mining interest ahead. I suggested that they
should grant larger areas of land for deep sinking. The area is
50 acres now, but when a man sinks to 3,000 or 4,000 feet he
should be allowed to take up extra ground—say, up to 200 acres.”'
payable.”
“ Then there is no chance of
the mine being worked out ? ”
“ I don’t think either your head
or mine will ache when that takes
place. We have in Mr. Eollston
an excellent manager, who is
working the mine in a most sys-
tematic manner. From the date
of the incorporation of the present
company up to the end of last
year, 329,915 tons have been
crushed, yielding 380,191 ozs. of
gold, of the value of £1,206,737,
and, including the dividend paid
in March last of 6d. per share,
£549,152 has been returned to the
shareholders in dividends, which
you will note is considerably
more than the paid-up capital of
the company.”
‘ ‘ Then ho w is it the shares may be
purchased to-dayat less than par?”
“ Simply because the mine is
worked for the shareholders and
not for the market. For some
considerable time past we have
paid quarterly dividends of 6d.
per share, or 2s. a year, so that
those who can buy the shares
for 13s. have a remarkably good
investment.”
“You, I believe, hold still the
largest interest ? ”
“ Yes, and I hope I always
shall. I appreciate the value of
the mine, and am quite content
to hold for the future, and indeed
all time.”
MR. THOMAS MILLS.
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


February 20, 1903—
73 tons crushed
.. 292
Slimes, &c .V.
36
.... 328
May 4—
103 tons crushed
.. 407
.... • •
Slimes, &c
66
.... 473
June 20—
104 tons crushed
.. 482
Slimes, &c
70
.... 552
September 21—
220 tons crushed
.. 1,519
....
Slimes, &c
.. 242
.... 1,761
December 22—
263 tons crushed
.. 2,066
• • • • . .
Slimes, &o
55
.... 2,121
xxxvi. AUSTRALIA. [May 9, 1901.
“ And what did the Government say ?” if you were to drive on the lodes and spend the same amount of
“ They are inclined to fall in with the proposition, but nothing money, you would prospect 1,000 times as much land.”
has been done up to the present. There will be no need to inter- “You are not going to pay another visit to Queensland just
fere with the
mining laws.
Such grants
should be special
grants made by
Parliament, and
each case should
be treated on its
own merits.”
“What is the
attitude of the
labour party in
the colony to-
wards such a
proposal ? ”
“As a body
they are against
it. The Premier
introduced a Bill
for my people to
take up land, but
nothing came of
it. There was a
good deal of op-
position, but I
am satisfied that
that is the policy
for the Govern-
ment to pursue.
There has been
far too much
money sunk in
sinking shafts
through dead
yet, I suppose ?”
“ No ; not yet
awhile. Mr. Ross
Robinson, one
of our directors,
is now en route
to Australia, and
he will pay a
visit to the Day
Dawn on his
arrival in
Queensland. My
next tour will
be practically
through Great
Britain. The fact
is, my eldest son
—who, by the
way, is a native
of the Towers —
is now just out
of his time, after
studying engi-
neering—- practi-
cal and theo-
retical respec-
tively- -at Fraser
and Chahner’s
works and King’s
College, and I
propose to take
him on a tour
of inspection of
some of the
TRAIN LOADED WITH QUARTZ FOR THE MILL.
country. A shaft down even of 4,000 ft. only prospects a piece I mines in Cornwall, Wales, and Scotland, preparatory to his going
of country 8 ft. by 16 ft., and instead of sinking shaft after shaft, 1 out to Australia.”
By FORDYCE WHEELER (late
“ The Donnybrook,” as it is affectionately and colloquially
termed by the miners of North Queensland, very happily filled the
bill, and maintained the northern colony’s reputation for sensa-
tional richness during the closing year of the century. It is
satisfactory to note that since the beginning of the year the
Donnybrook Blocks, the premier property of the field, has amply
fulfilled last year’s promises of rich and successful development.
Barely eighteen months ago Donnybrook wasn’t even a “ neglected
field ” —only a collection of some dozen tumbled in pot holes—yet
in November last, when I visited it, the success of the Donnybrook
Blocks had laid the foundations of a flourishing mining township.
Building allotments in the main street were riotously gambled in,
and since then a Bill has been put through Parliament and a State
railway is underway from the old, and now highly prosperous
goldfield’s town of Ravenswood.
DONNYBROOK BLOCKS PROPERTIES.
The Donnybrook mines are situated about six miles in a
southerly direction from Ravenswood, and from the recent rich
developments must undoubtedly have a most important future.
The history of the Donnybrook mines is one of the romances of
mining—riches on the surface, and golden opportunities underfoot
cruelly abandoned through ignorance, and want of proper
appliances. One claim, which recently turned out a startlingly rich
crushing, and which is paying its holders nearly £2OO sterling per
month per man, was taken up by a Brisbane syndicate. The
manager understood his business, started sinking an excellent
shaft ; but owing to circumstances which need not be detailed,
funds were stopped, and the show abandoned when not 100 ft. of
sinking would have put the syndicate on to one of the finest and
richest reefs in North Queensland.
But let me turn over the leaves of an old mill returns-book,
with the ink nearly faded out with old age and the warm, balmy
air of North Queensland. Here I find in 1871-2 the Donnybrook
reef, worked under the most primitive conditions, turned out the
highly respectable output of 1871 tons for a gold yield of 6,340 ozs. !
At that time there were no concentrating or grinding appliances,
and they had screens with eighty holes to the inch instead of 225
holes, as at present, which were not what might be considered the
highest form of gold-saving science. That stone if crushed to-day
would have yielded 6 ozs.; in fact, the same reef to-day at 190 ft.
vertical is going 8 ozs.
In the early seventies surface shows at the Donnybrook did
very well. From old records of the mill there, I find that between
December 23, 1871, and July, 1874 (it must be remembered in
those days mines only worked intermittently), 8,303 tons were
crushed for 18,090 ozs, several small crushings giving a return of
8 ozs. What would those crushings have not been with modern
mining appliances? Compare the yields from the Donnybrook
reef above quoted of 1,871 tons for 6,340 ozs with the last crush-
ing of the Donnybrook blocks, of 263 tons for 2,066 ozs. of gold,
in addition the resultant slimes, and sands, and concentrates,
which in the old days would have gone down the creek, 55 ozs. of
gold, bringing up the average to over 8 ozs. of gold per ton.
The Donnybrook Blocks form the premier mine on the Donny-
brook line of reef, inasmuch as the value of their stone is 2 ozs.
better than anything else on the line, and the company has the
argest holding, 50 acres. The history of the present company—
Che Donnj)brook Blocks.
Mining Editor “Brisbane Courier’’).
the Donnybrook Blocks Mining Syndicate, Limited, with 12,500
fully paid-up £1 shares, now selling on the London market at
£9—dates back to June, 1899, when the surface was first
broken by the company to sink for the Donnybrook reef, by
the sinking of the present shaft on lease 344 of 12 acres,
and which formed part of their area. In November, 1899, the
reef was intersected at only 190 ft. vertical, and the shaft con-
tinued down to a depth of 258 ft. The reef was then opened out
at 190 ft., with two drives, and a crushing taken out of 73 tons,
which yielded 293 ozs., exclusive of a resultant 36 ozs. from the
concentrates, slimes, and sand. Five crushings have been taken
out since the bottoming, which, it is satisfactory to note, have
each improved on the previous one. The following are the returns,
which include all slimes and concentrates :
Ozs. Ozs.
It would be hard to find in the annals of gold-reefing in
Australia a small syndicate company in only 12,500 shares of
£l, which has had such a magnificent success in a
twelvemonth from so small, yet so rich, a reef. And the crushing
now going through is looking equally as well as the last. The
major portion of the last crushing was taken from a depth of
224 ft., the greatest depth worked, thus showing that the stone is
improving as the reef goes down. With such really fine returns
it is needless to say the company is in a flourishing condition,
more especially as the sound policy is being pursued of piling up
reserves for future development work, while at the same time it
occupies a bright position on the dividend list. Not only has the
company erected a stamp battery and cyanide plant, an up-to- s
date winding and pumping plant, but even after payment for
these it declared in January last an interim dividend of Bs. per
share, which is to be followed by another in a few weeks I Since
commencing operations, in June, 1899, to November 20, 1900, the
company has sunk 258 ft. of a three-compartment shaft, securely
timbered, and cut down No, 2 Shaft 107 ft., driven 460 ft. of
levels and 78 ft. of cross-cuts, and put up 270 ft. of rises. Since
bottoming in November, 1899, as already stated, the com-
pany has crushed and treated in five lots 763 tons for the
fine result of 5,235 ozs., and by the time this is in print
it is estimated that there will be 400 tons on the dump,
worth at least £9,000. The various leases stretch over a most
extensive line of the reef, both on the line and angle of dip, which
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW /EAT.AND MATT,, May , 1901.


AUSTRALIA
xxxvii.
should ensure for the company a long and extended period of
prosperity. The reef dips at an angle of 27 degs.
At present there are three shafts, including the recently com-
menced underlie from the outcrop of the lode in the western
•corner of Lease 338. This shaft, since it was down 51 ft. to the
present depth of about 130 ft., has been sinking all the way on
stone of a payable nature, but which, following out previous
experiences of the field, will undoubtedly get highly payable as
•depth is attained. It is also intended to sink a shaft at the junc-
tion of Leases 346 and 338, which it is expected will bottom at
about 500 ft. This will necessitate even more increased battery
power, and the 10-head battery will then be going day and night.
According to the mine manager’s (A. L. Wilson’s) report, the
company will in all probability pay dividends amounting to 200
per cent, in the current year. From its fine holding of 50 acres, there
is no reason why it should not continue to do so for a very con-
siderable period-—certainly the life of the mine cannot at present
be determined. In December last, before the present underlie
shaft had been commenced, it was estimated by the manager that
there was ore then in sight alone to the value of £30,000. The
secretary of the company is Mr. Arthur Lift, and the offices of
the company are at Dashwood House, New Broad-street, London,
E.C.
Kangaroo Rills mineral field.
This is one of the little-known mineral areas of the colony,
although it is included in the Great Eastern belt, which comprises
the Herberton, Irvinebank, Coolgarra, and other tin districts, and
Chillagoe, Mount Garnet, and adjacent copper fields.
It is approached by two routes, one from Townsville, ninety-
five miles south, and the other from Ingham, or rather, Lucinda
Point, the port for this town, seventy miles east. For the present
the latter is the easiest route, as a tram has been constructed to
within about thirty miles of the principal mines, at the foot of Sea
View Range, a somewhat steep coastal mountain range. From
the top of the hills the route presents no difficulties to speak of,
and a good road leads to the principal groups of mines known as
the Waverley Tin Mines, and the Running River Mines, both
owned by Melbourne companies, and the Kangaroo Hills Free-
hold, a local proprietary. Scores of leases have been acquired on the
strength of operations by these companies, which maybe regarded
as holding the best in the district, as far as is known at present.
WAVERLEY TIN MINES.
The Waverley Company possess about 400 acres, the bulk of
which is in one irregularly shaped block, situated on a huge water-
course called Oakey Creek, which, until this unprecedentedly dry
year, has always been a running stream, but which, except for
pools at intervals along its course, was dry at the time of my visit .
A large and strong timber and stonework dam has been made
across the creek, and, after the next rainfall, there will never be a
shortage of water, as its capacity will be upwards of 70 million
gallons.
Lodes occur throughout the whole of the leases, and quite 30
have been located by trenches and holes, and there are many out-
crops that have not been touched. They vary in width from 2to
10, and even 20 ft., and in value from 5 to 50 per cent, of black
oxide (cassiterite), containing an average of 73 per cent, of tin.
The outcrops are traceable for long distances, and in no place have
they proved barren of ore ; but the amount of work done is so
small in comparison with the importance of the mines, that it is
impossible to say whether the lodes are continuous or made up of
separate shoots of ore.
The principal workings are on the Guy Mannering lease, on
which a tunnel has been driven for nearly 300 ft. into the side of
a hill, intersecting several lodes. At 116 ft. in from the entrance
a main level has been driven east and west for nearly 230 ft. on a
lode averaging 3 ft. wide. The western level is in payable ore the
whole distance, 116 ft., and it continues so in the face, while on
the surface, some 60 ft. above, there is very rich ore, which
has proved to continue down in a winze to connect the
workings. The eastern level has been driven for over
110 ft. on the lode, which continues strong, and carries
profitable, though poorer, ore than is seen in the western drive ;
but as the surface workings have yielded first-class tin ore there
is little doubt but that large quantities will come from this part of
the workings when stoping is commenced.
There are numbers of other lodes besides those referred
to. They occur on every portion of the company’s large
holding, but to thoroughly prospect the whole of them would
require a considerable outlay, and operations have thus been con-
fined to those nearest the battery. This consists of 10 stampers,
and the ore from what are at present the main workings will keep
it fully employed, as its capacity is limited. It would be useless
having too much work done ahead, desirable as it undoubtedly is
for developments to be well in advance of requirements. What is
necessary for the success of so large and valuable a property is
systematic and extensive permanent mining work and a plant to
correspond.
At the time of writing work has been practically suspended,
owing to the drought. The route from Townsville to Waverley, or
Kallanda, as the new township is named, is closed to teams, owing
to want of water and feed, and consequently horse feed is unobtain-
able on the mines, even assuming that there were no other
obstacles to working. The battery was worked at intervals
covering a period of eight days, and, taking the ore as it came
from the levels, a return of 6 per cent, was obtained, giving
a profit of £l,OOO on the operation. A good deal of ore which was
no more than payable was first put through, as is customary in
starting new machinery, so that the result was highly satisfactory.
In addition to the ten stampers, provision is made for another ten
heads. The ore is put through a stonebreaker, Cornish rolls, Jig’s
buddies, and, finally, over Wilfley tables and Frue Yanners, the
plant including everything necessary in a modern tin-dressing
mining establishment, and is covered by one of the most sub-
stantial buildings in the North.
It is said that by constructing a dam 3 miles further up Oakey
Creek than the one just built, ample power could be obtained for
working a very large plant; but as this would entail some con-
siderable outlay, it will scarcely be carried into effect. What is
more feasible is an electric scheme on the running river some
7 miles distant, and if the two companies concerned in these
mines could combine to carry it out, it should lead to a great saving
in working costs.
The Waverley is owned by a Melbourne syndicate, of which Mr.
J. C. Syme is chairman, and the head office is at 17, Queen-street*
Queensland Smelting Company.
One of the important adjuncts to the mining industry of way to an era of prosperity which the then recently-appointed
Queensland are the works installed by this powerful company at manager was quick to perceive and take advantage of, and he
Aldershot, some six miles from Maryborough, on the G-reat entered into arrangements with small mine owners to assist them
Northern Railway.
The company was formed in England several years ago, its
advent being received with great satisfaction by those interested
in North Queensland mining, who saw in it the solution of their
difficulties in dealing with the pyntic and other complex ores
common to the mineral fields of the colony.
There was every indication that the undertaking would prove
a good financial success, in addition to forwarding the development
of some of the neglected fields, and a modern smelting plant, on
which no expense has been spared, was erected in due course.
This consists of two smelters of 100 tons nominal capacity, one
for copper and one for silver-lead ores; a 30-ton smelter for deal-
ing with copper matte, together with necessary ore crushers, con-
centrators, amalgamating machinery, cyanide plant, and refineries,
the latter being used mainly for the production of the company’s
well-known “ Q.S.Co.” brand of pig-lead, for which in Australia
alone there is an unlimited demand.
Agencies were established in the principal mining centres of the
colony, as well as in the adjoining colonies and Tasmania, for the
purchase of ores to blend with the refractory ores of the north.
The Zeehan silver-lead mines were at this period producing large
quantities of ore, and, being rich in lead, the company operated
there so largely as not only to secure nearly a monopoly, but to
obtain a large revenue as well, the reason of it being the adapt-
ability of the ores for blending with those received from local
sources.
But, somehow the local business for which the company was
mainly formed declined, causing a restriction of operations, and
it appeared as though Queensland had given up the production of
complex ores. As a matter of fact, mining, other than on the
principal goldfields, did experience a check after the financial
crisis of 1893, and the concurrent low prices for industrial metals
and silver.
The enterprise of the Chillagoe Company in opening up an
enormous mineral territory with its railway, however, pointed the
financially in opening up their properties on terms that compelled
them to forward all ores to his company’s works. This, as may
be imagined, has proved a positive boon to prospectors in the
north, for not only are they saved all the expense and anxiety
of forming companies to acquire their mines, but they
reap the advantages of full possession instead of having
only the small share interest accorded to men in
their position. In the Chillagoe, Lappa Lappa (“ Wade’s ”),
Montalbion, Kooboora, and other districts there are hundreds of
silver-lead, copper, and other ore bodies that will pay co-opera-
tive companies to develop, yet are not large enough for highly-
capitalised companies, with their heavy managerial and unpro-
ductive expenses, to undertake. The construction of the Chillagoe
Railway has entirely altered the prospects of these districts, and
in a few years they must become important mining centres,
furnishing large quantities of ore to the Queensland Smelting
Company’s works.
In addition to subsidising trustworthy and capable co-operative
conpanies, the Queensland Smelting Company has acquired silver -
le id mines on its own behalf, and possesses one of the best in the
Lappa Lappa district. The ore is a clean galena, producing 65 to
70 ozs. of silver, and 70 per cent, of lead from the first quality
ore, while the seconds return 50 ozs. of silver and 50 per cent, of
lead.
At Montalbion is another property producing carbonate of lead
and galena ores of richness equal to that at Lappa Lappa, and a
few miles distant, at Eureka Creek, still near the Chillagoe Rail-
way, is a mine locally held in high esteem, called the “ Santa
Claus,” producing lead ores through which runs a band of zinc
and lead sulphides, immensely rich in silver, characteristic of the
best of the Broken Hill “ sulphides.”
These three mines are worked by the company with highly profit-
able results, although they are only in course of development, and
but for the convenience of the Chillagoe Railway could not have
been worked to advantage.
Supplement to the RITISH AUSTRALAS AN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.
May 9, J 901.]


XXXVIII.
AUSTRALIA.
Besides mining and assisting others to produce silver-lead, and
other ores, the company purchases as much ore from other sources
as can be obtained, audits operations extend all along the Queens-
land coast, and as far inland as the railways command to the
Northern Territory, through New South Wales, Tasmania, the
rugged Gippsland districts of Victoria, and actually to the centre
of the continent 500 miles north of Adelaide, where a lead mine is
being worked. Years ago this mine was prospected by an
Adelaide company, but the subsequent fall in price of silver and
lead caused its abandonment. But the enterprise of the
Queensland Smelting Company sent their manager to the
district, and having approved of the mine instructed him
to sink a shaft on a gossan formation some distance from
the old workings. In three weeks a body of payable ore was
struck, the lode apparently being a true fissure, occurring
at the contact of the limestone and slate country, and although
the work was started less than a year ago (since when ever £19,000
sterling has been won), the mine is producing monthly 200 tons of
clean galena worth 6 ozs, of silver, and 80 per cent, of lead per ton,
not, perhaps, a great return, if worked by a large proprietary com-
pany, but a highly satisfactory result of the expenditure of £2,030
by an institution having other interests of a similar nature.
This ore is actually sent from the centre of South Australia
to Central Queensland for treatment, that is, half way across
and nearly half way around the continent, surely a monument
to the energy and enterprise of the directors. Other South
Australian ores find their* way to Aldershot for treatmert,
as well as from Broken Hill. Many English investors
have reason to remember the Pinnacles Silver Mine at
Broken Hill, the immense property which was to rival the Broken
Hill Proprietary, from which the late Fitzgerald Moore and
Colonel North believed they were going to obtain millions sterling
during the wild days of the Broken Hill boom. Possibly, as was
said, the value was in sight, but how to reduce the huge ore bodies
to bullion was another question that neither lived to solve, not-
withstanding all the knowledge, ability, and tireless energy of Mr.
Moore. After many vicissitudes, the mine passed into the hands
of a Sydney company, and with the fortune that has attended so
many mining companies managed in that city, difficulties occurred,
with the result that the Smelting Company have taken over the pro-
perty and actually manage it for the proprietors. Absolute posses-
sion could have been secured under the powers held by the Queens-,
land Smelting Company, but the action taken was merely for the
protection of both parties, and an arrangement has been made by
which all the ores are forwarded to the smelting works for treat-
ment, and the profits will be returned to the proprietary company,
who have at the present time no responsibility or voice in the
management of the mine.
Already, under a commercial system of management, the mine
is paying its way for the first time in its history, and, under this
control, promises to fulfil the optimistic anticipations formed of it
many years ago.
All the rich auriferous concentrates from the New Ravens*
wood, Donnybrook, and other mines on the resuscitated and
rising Ravenswood goldfield are purchased on assay or
treated for the proprietors, by the company, together with large
quantities of crude ore, and all the “ prills,” that is, the clean ore
free from gangue, that occasionally occurs on this field. The whole
of the refractory residues, i.e., cyanide and chlorination slags,
from the Mount Morgan mine -are sent for treatment, besides
almost ■ all the refractory ores from Charters Towers, Gympie,
Rockhampton, Gladstone, Couktown, and, in fact, wherever this
class of ore is found, and that covers practically every mining
district of the colony'of Queensland. Zinc blende, mispickel,
galena, auriferous, antimonial, and copper pyrites, and other
copper ores are successfully dealt with ; in fact, the works may
be termed the “dumping ground” for all the refractory ores of
Australia, and it speaks well for the keen business intelligence
and energetic enterprise of the directorate, which can successfully
cope with such a complex “ sulphide problem ” as is presented at
Aldershot.
Besides producing the special brand of lead, previously referred
to, shipments of dore bullion of a value from £lO,OOO to £15,000
are made periodically. Copper is produced in the form of matte
containing from 50 to 60 per cent, of metal. Cyanide works are
installed capable of treating large quantities of tailings and
crushed ore, and as the varied classes of ore necessitate more
elaborate treatment than is required at mines were only one class
has to be dealt with, the works include calciners and several
forms of subsidiary smelters before the various metals are
separated one from the other.
A colliery only a few miles distant supplies a first-class coke
and coal at a reasonable cost, and the works are placed in the
middle of one of the best forests of Queensland, containing
timber for all purposes.
A never-failing stream supplies all the water required, and even
in this unprecedentedly dry season there is ample. Lime and iron-
stone - quarries are close at hand, and furnish all the fluxes that
are necessary, the requisite silica being contained in the ores.
The great foundry works of AValkers, Limited, is only six miles
away, so that any repairs or additions to the plant may be easily
and cheaply effected, and in other respects, principally its centra,!
position, proximity to an important port, and connection with the
main railway system, the works are advantageously placed.
The head office of the company is at the office of the managing
director, Mr. A. Rift, Dashwood House, New Broad-street.
Gpmpie Gold and Copper.
It may, perhaps, be doubted if there’has been a single gold-
mining district in the world which has not had some element of
romance before the public could be induced to regard it with favour
as an investing centre. No one gainsays that Gympie is an
exception to this statement —in fact, viewed relatively with other
gold-mining fields, its romantic side outstrips, in some respects,
the sister auriferous tracts where the British flag flies. The dis-
covery of gold on the Gympie field was regarded as happening at
"a very opportune time ; inasmuch as it took place in 1867—the
year following that in which the “bread and blood” riots of
Brisbane occurred—when so many men w T ere, for various reasons,
thrown out of work. On the discovery being made by Mr. James
Nash, it was reported at Maryborough, 60 miles off, when a rush
at once set in. Of course, there were sensational finds. In con-
firmation of this, it may be mentioned that shortly after the
opening of the field, George Curtis found his great nugget, said to
weigh 975 ozs. of pure gold, valued at £3,675.
Crushings are reported in 1870 of 998 ozs. having been obtained
from 10 tons, 3,670 ozs.. from 3 cwt., and 4,120 ozs. from a few
bucketsful of stone. About two years later, 739 tons from the 7*
■and 8 Monkland Mine produced 5,972 ozs., or over 8 ozs. to the
ton, and this was obtained in seventeen weeks’ work.
From 1878 to 1899 the North Phoenix crushed 245,231 tons of
quartz, producing 234,436 ozs., valued at £835,565. Up to
October, 1894, £402,750 had been paid in dividends.
The total yield from the Gympie Field to the end of 1899 was
about million ozs. ; the value of the- gold produced nearly 8g
millions sterling.
When so much attention is shown to popular fields, such as
West Africa, Klondyke, and elsewhere, it is quite possible that
British investors may overlook the colony of Queensland, and it
is significant that investors i-esident in Glasgow and vicinity are
about the only people who have taken a tangible interest in the
.district. Glasgow is said to be the most businesslike and cautious
city in the world, and it is another exemplification that the “ canny
Scot” still knows where a good thing can be found. It is more
-particularly in the eastern portion of the field in which their
operations have been carried out. In that locality the two mine's
which are pre-eminent in the sense of productive capacity are
No. 2 South Great Eastern and the Scottish Gympie. In 1899
the former property had the credit of being the biggest dividend-
paying concern on the field. The. Scottish Gympie has likewise a
magnificent record, in justification of which statement it is only
.necessary to say that it has a most complete winding plant, and
that the quartz from the mine keeps 100 head of stamps in con-
stant operation.
There are, of course, other promising properties on the field.
Notably amongst the latter is the property quite recently taken
over by the Gympie Copper Mines, Limited, wdaose head-quarters
are at 34 and 36, Gresham-street, London, E.C. Probably one of
the most unhappy and exasperating conditions applicable to
colonial mining is the fact that the local management is very
frequently of the weakest and most ineffective character. In
this respect, however, the London directorate of the company just
named regard themselves as singularly happy in the selection of
local managers. The particulars of the mine were originally
brought to London by Mr. W, E. Thomas, the' present manager,
whose probity and business integrity are well known at Gympie,
where he resides. Allied with him on the local directors’ staff
are Mr. Thomas Baty, the well-known manager of the famous No. 1
North Phoenix Gold Mine, Gympie, and Mr.A. G. Ramsey, J.P., who
is likewise intimately associated with mining concerns in the
colony. It is bare justice to state that these gentlemen are
satisfied with the developments which have already been made
on the company’s property, which comprises 200 acres about 40
miles- south-west of Gympie. They are indeed exceedingly well
pleased with the result of the operations. As far back as 1894
and 1895 some shallow shafts were put down on the property by
a few local residents in the locality, and the bulk samples put
through at Maryborough, under the supervision of Mr. Weinberg,
resulted in proving the exceptional value of the ground. One
parcel of about 4| tons brought a total value for gold, silver, and
copper of over £4B; another of ICR tons brought £BO 2s. 6d., and
a third of 10 tons brought over £2B.
Underground operations were not actively prosecuted until the
spring of 1900, when the London company was formed. At a
depth of 225 ft. in the sinking of No. 1 shaft, the lode was proved
to be 15 ft. wide, of which 5 ft. had an average assay value of
£l4 to £l6 per ton, whilst the other 10 ft. was low grade, the
wdiole 15 ft. averaging £6 per ton. This shaft has been sunk to
a depth of nearly 300 ft., and operations are now being directed
towards proving the lode at that depth. Crushing plant has been
obtained, and will shortly be at work, and the local managers look
upon the prospects as excellent.
Other shafts have been sunk on the company’s ground and in
each case gold-bearing ground of great promise has been dis-
covered.
At the present time all hands have been put on to raise mineral.
Prior to the London directorate entertaining the acquisition of
the property bulk samples were treated at Swansea, result in
one case being a value of £l6 12s. sd. per ton of ore, and in another
case £ll Is. lid.
When it is borne in mind that, collaterally with the ascertained
results already mentioned, the local directors entertain the highest
opinion of the future prospects of the undertaking, coupled Avith
the fact that certain auxiliary elements, essential to the success of
gold mine ventures, are all present, such as a plentiful supply of
water and an inexhaustible supply of timber, no doubt need be
entertained in relation to the ultimate success of the mining
operations. _ •
The nominal capital of the company is £150,000, of which
£30.000 is available for working capital.
[May 9, 1901.
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.


AUSTRALIA.
XXXIX.
Elmslie Limited.
LONDON AND
Established 1887.
DIRECTORS.
C. T. ELMSLIE, J.P,, Assoc. Inst. Min. and Met. P. G. SPENCE.
(Chairman and Manaqinq Director .)
MAJOR WM. CHRISTIE. ALEX. B - ELMSLIE, F.G.S.A.
CAPT. JAS. A. ELMSLIE. A. G. ELMSLIE, J.P.
Messis. A. B. ELMSLIE and A. G. ELMSLIE manage in Australia. The latter is at present in London,
relieving the Chairman, who is on a visit to Australia.
BANKERS.
COMMERCIAL BANK OF SCOTLAND, LTD., LONDON
ROYAL BANK OF QUEENSLAND, LTD., AUSTRALIA.
BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES, AUSTRALIA.
AUDITORS.
JACKSON, PIXLEY, BROWNING, HUSEY & CO., 58, Coleman Street, London, E.C.
HEAD OFFICE.
BLOMFIELD HOUSE, LONDON WALL, LONDON, E.C.
CENTRAL OFFICES IN AUSTRALIA.
NORWICH CHAMBERS, HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY. Also Agency at the Croydon Goldfield and other
principal Centres in Australia.
Telegraphic Addresses] u| b o f“tote”A s “f n °”y.
London Telephone, No. 1797, London Wall.
CODES.
Moreing and Neals.
A.B.C. 4th Edition.
Moreings, 3rd Edition.
Broomhalls.
AUTHORISED CAPITAL
£120,000
Issued and Fully Paid
£101,529.
MINING AND INDUSTRIAL INVESTMENT AND GENERAL AGENTS, GENERAL
MINE AND COMPANY MANAGERS.
Mining and Commercial Investment Reports, containing full particulars of sound
dividend-paying securities of the Australian Colonies, are issued regularly from the London
Office.
.Reports containing similar information adapted to local requirements are forwarded from the
Sydney Office, post free, upon application. Prices net inclusive of all Commissions.
Having their own Mining Engineers constantly inspecting mines on the various Goldfields
Messrs. Elmslie make a speciality of Australian Mining Business, including the management of
the interests of non-resident Mining Investors.
The Company undertakes the management of Mining Companies. This includes the active
supervision of operations at the mine and all office and secretarial work, the different companies
being attended to by the Company’s mining men and accountants respectively.
MANAGERS IN AUSTRALIA FOR SEVERAL MINING COMPANIES and Agents for same in London.
The Company also makes a speciality of the opening of London Offices and Registers for
sound Australian Companies.
CORRESPONDENCE INVITED.
All inquiries are promptly attended to and answered by return of post.
Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.
May 9, 1901.]


Supplement to the BRITISH AUSTRALASIAN AND NEW ZEALAND MAIL, May 9, 1901.
AUSTRALIA.
[May 9, 1901.
I QUEENSLAND I
1 Royal Mail Line. I
HI
British India Steam Cities. I
♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦l g |
India, Ceylon, Burmah, ij|
Australia, Persian Gulf, g|
East Africa, Straits Settlements, g|
Java, Mauritius, &c., &c. H|
CIRCULAR TOURS AND RETURN TICKETS ON FAVOURABLE i
ech
Ijljjpgj (D(~f~V~)G)
“"E TONS
pg “ Dilwara 5,441
Ip “Dunera” -5,413
|| “Avoca” -5,324
Ip “Jelunga” - 5,196
Up “Jumna” -5,182
|p ’
TERMS. 5
TONS.
“Matiana” - 5,264 |3|
“Manora” - 4,697 E
“ lombassa” 4,662
“ Goorkha” - 4,407 p|]|j|
“Rewa” - 3,922 §|j|
gji n>
j~~~ii [i>
6U^_Pg)
S.S. ‘GOLCONDA,” 5,874 TONS.
POR PARES AND ALL PARTICULARS, APPLY TO
I GRAY, DAWES & CO., I
3 7 gll
§ British India House, 23, QL Winchester Street, E.C., |||
s i^it
1 And Craven House, Northumberland Avenue, London. Mf
£ P=Hit
g Sjit
