

Australia's
HOME of HEALTH
Over 600 Feet
above
sea Level


Australia’s Home of Health
THE SYDNEY SANITARIUM is located among the pic-
turesque hills of the North Shore-Hornsby railway line, and
stands over 600 feet above the level of the sea. It is about
twelve miles from Milson’s Point, and is one of many similar institu-
lions scattered throughout the world. The Sanitarium has been
established for about fifteen years, during which time it has been
patronized by hundreds of people from every part of Australia and
New Zealand, who have highly appreciated the help derived from the
various treatments prescribed, including Hydrotherapy, Massage, and
Electricity.
Among the cases successfully treated at this institution are disorders of the
nervous system, —such as nervous prostration, neurasthenia, etc. All the life at the Sanitarium
is adapted to the building up and reconstruction of the nervous system.
Rheumatism in its various forms yields readily to the treatment and diet; even in the most stubborn
cases a considerable degree of improvement will be secured. This can also be said of rheumathoid arthritis.
Associated with the department for diseases peculiar to women is a competent woman physician,
who devotes much of her time to this class of patients. With the consultation of a good medical staff, and
every advantage for rest, with local as well as general treatment, together with the facilities for minor and
major surgery, great encouragement can be offered to those suffering from these maladies.


Persons suffering from disturbances of the blood, with functional and organic heart diseases. (
and with diseases of the abdominal and pelvic viscera, which can only be relieved by methods which
equalize the circulation, find relief or permanent help by the various improved methods of treatment
provided at the Sanitarium.
Diseases of the eye and ear, affections of the air passages, —bronchitis, asthma,
and the milder forms of respiratory troubles, are successfully treated.
Special advantages are offered to cases requiring surgical treatment. The
purity of the atmosphere and the quietude of the sur-
roundings, and the great advantage of being able to
improve the general condition by treatments, diet, etc.,
be'ore operations, make it a particularly favourable
place for surgical work and convalescence. The value
of these in influencing the successful outcome of opera-
tions and in hastening convalescence can hardly be
overestimated. These facts have been abundantly
demonstrated in the excellent results obtained.
Those desiring a complete rest and change will
undoubtedly find this charming Health Resort, with
its pure air, sunshine, beautiful flowers and trees,
orchard and vineyard, best adapted for their health
and happiness. Although in close proximity to the
city, it is away from all the noise and excitement
which is so wearisome and exhausting to those who
are run down in health.
2
ALIGHTING FOR THE SANITARIUM


Upon entering the main ves-
tibule leading to the office, the visitor
is impressed with the air of quiet dignity and
homelike atmosphere which is characteristic of
the entire institution.
Every mail brings to the correspondence
department of the Sanitarium many enquiries
from intending patients, also letters of apprecia-
tion from those who have found health and
happiness in the institution.


On the Lawn
Dining Hall
A stranger
entering
the dining®
room and
observing
the happy faces surrounding
the tastefully arranged tables
will hardly realize that he is in
a Sanitarium.


A COMFORTHBLE LOUNGE.
Here patients find rest from the wearisome toils of business and professional life.
DRAWING ROOM.
MUSIC ROOM.


THE GUESTS’ BEDROOMS
are of comfortable size, well ventilated, neatly
furnished and conveniently arranged, each opening
into a long, wide corridor. They are lighted
by electricity, also provided with electric bells
connected with the main vestibule.
THE DRAWING-ROOM
is entered through the main hall. Here patients
delight to gather in the evenings for a social chat
and to listen to musical items rendered by visitors
and friends. Lectures are delivered here by the
physicians, and general questions on health topics
answered in an interesting way. The social life
of the Sanitarium is quite unconventional. Fashionable display is conspicuously absent.
THE LOUNGE ROOM
leading from the front balcony affords ample facilities for rest and retirement.


THERAPEUTIC APPLIANCES
Hydrotherapy is one of the principal agents used for treating the many forms of disease, and
comprises the scientific application of water, hot and cold, by means of tub
and sitz baths, leg and foot baths, salt glows, fomentations, packs, local ip
and general, a fine system of sprays and douches, and many
other tested and tried hydropathic treatments. Combined
with these are the electric light and hot air baths, and the
various forms of electricity such as X-ray, static, sinusoidal,
galvanic, and faradic currents. Massage and manual Swedish
movements are used with gratifying results.
THE MATERNITY WARD
is maintained under the care of a skilled physician. Such ar-
rangements are made as to permit the patient to enjoy the
advantages of the Sanitarium without unpleasant publicity.
The special care and after treatment, dieting, and regular
regimen, is found to be greatly conducive to rapid recuperation
and the prevention of the unpleasant sequelae which sometimes
follow confinement under less favorable conditions.


The
Medical
Matron's
Study
Applying Electricity
Ladies Baths


Contagious Diseases are not
admitted.
Resident Doctors Office
•—All treatments
are given in a
thorough and system-
atic manner by trained
manipulators.
One of the Men's
Hydropathic Treatment Rooms


The bill of fare is
one of the characteristic
features of the Sanita-
rium. The real pur-
pose of every effort of
the institution is the
return to Nature as far
as possible. The old
regime of fried foods,
rich pastries, and highly
spiced and seasoned
dishes is abandoned,
and a new order of
toothsome, dainty, and
easily - digested dishes
substituted. Special
attention is given to the
preparation of whole-
some and palatable sub-
stitutes for flesh foods
which are not served.
Patients are guided by


The Schedule of charges is very moderate
the staff physicians in their choice
and combination of foods, as
well as in the quantity taken. J
The cooking classes jj%
form an interesting fea- . z]
ture of our work.
Here guests may TBa
receive free instruc-
tion in the art of
cookery, as prac-
tised at the
Sanitarium. f
1 he milk
used is pro-
duced on our I Itt ,Mia
own farm from a \S«L„ ‘
carefully selected,
well - cared for, vHHBEHH
and tested herd.
OUR.
MILK
SUPPLY
11


“DIET CURES MAIR THAN DOCTORS”
Fruits In season are abundantly supplied at all three meals. The value of fruit has long been
recognized as an aid to digestion and a help in eliminating poisons from the body. A *jj
liberal supply of choice fruit, such as peaches, cherries, blackberries, pears, and
apricots, are bottled each season on the premises and served on the tables between
the seasons. The estate covers over seventy acres, and the Sanitarium
building stands on the highest point overlooking the orchard.
In the
Orchard.
Orange Grove on the Estate


The
Walks
are
most
picturesque
Delightful
scenery
surrounds
the
Sanitarium.


Contagious Diseases
are not
Admitted
TENNIS
on the
FRONT
LAWN
Nothing is more important for
a medical institution than a salu-
brious location. Pure air, pure
water, sunshine and a bracing
climate are among the most essen-
tial features of a first class location
for a sanitarium. The extensive
grounds cover over seventy acres,
and the walks in and around the
institution are attractive and ro-
mantic. The spacious balcony affords a
beautiful panoramic view of the sur-
rounding country, and patients who are
unable to join in the various games and
exercises find pleasure in reclining in the
fresh air overlooking the lawn and
pleasure grounds.


Realizing the importance of ex-
ercise, the Sanitarium has fitted up a
gymnasium for the use of its guests.
Exercises prescribed by the physician
and carefully regulated according to
the strength and condition of the
patient, are carried on under the
watchful eye of an experienced phys-
ical director.
This is also true of the daily
exercises in deep breathing; which,
EXERCISE
PHYSICAL CULTURE CLASS
SYDNEY SANITARIUM
WANROONCA.
like all our treatments, are so taught that the
patient can continue wisely after his return
home, what he here learns of right living.
The lawn tennis court, croquet grounds,
lawn golf, and other games afford pleasant and
healthful amusement and recreation to those
able to take part in them.


) THE SYDNEY SANITARIUM is located on the North
Shore-Hornsby railway line. It is easily reached by an hourly
train service connecting with the Circular Quay ferries.
Passengers should book to Warrawee, which is the
nearest railway station. From 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. a cab
plies to and fro between the Sanitarium and Warrawee.
Visitors are always welcome.
Telephones: —Wahroonga 134 and 137
16


Avondale Press
COORAN BONG, NSW.
