

AUSTRALIAN DIVISIONAL SYSTEMS.
By R. H. Mathews, l.s.
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, June 1, 1898 .]
In the following pages it is proposed to give a brief account of
all the intermarrying divisions of the aborigines throughout
Australia, with which we are acquainted up to the present time.
As no similar work has hitherto been attempted, it is hoped that
an article of this character will be found of some value to others
who may embark in the same line of investigation. The group
and totemic divisions are strongly manifested in all the principal
ceremonies of the Australian aborigines ; hence it is of the utmost
importance that any one studying the customs of these people
should have a knowledge of their divisional systems.
Before proceeding to enumerate the different systems found
throughout the continent, it will perhaps be interesting to give a
short outline of the structure of aboriginal communities in general.
An Australian tribe has certain territorial limits, and is known
by a general name, which is in most cases derived from the
language spoken by its members, as is the names of the Wiradjuri,
Kamilaroi, Koombanggary, etc. The area of a tribe’s domain
varies with the character of the district they inhabit, as well as
with the numerical strength of the people. In the well-watered
coastal districts of New South Wales, where fish and game are
abundant, their hunting grounds would be comparatively small;
whilst in the open plains of the interior, where game is not so
plentiful and water is often scarce, the tract of country required
to support a tribe would necessarily be more extensive.
Every tribe is made up of several sub-tribes, all speaking the
same language, each of which occupies its own hunting grounds,
which are defined by hills, water-courses, patches of scrub, or
other remarkable natural features. Each of these sub-tribes has


a headman or chief, and these headmen collectively are the rulers
of the whole tribe. The customary laws are administered by
these headmen, who, in the exercise of their authority, are
supported by all the initiated men of their respective divisions.
When a number of these tribes are bound together by having the
same divisional (or class) systems—speaking dialects of the same
tongue, participating in identical or similar initiation ceremonies,
and among whom intermarriage is more or less frequent—they
form communities. Aggregates of these communities may be
called nations.
The members of a tribe, and of course, also of its component
sub-tribes, are divided into two exogamous intermarrying groups,
bearing distinctive appellations, and having a more or less varied
selection of totems attached to each. In some tribes these two
groups are the only divisions observable—the individuals of one
group intermarrying with those of the other—of which the Mattiri
and Karraru groups at Port Lincoln, South Australia, may be
taken as an example.
In other tribes the two groups are subdivided into smaller
segments. For example, the Yuipera tribe at Mackay is composed
of two primary groups, called Wootaroo and Youngaroo; the
former is again divided into two sections, called Woongo and
Coobaroo, and the latter into two, called Bunbia and Gurgila.
In other communities, of which some tribes in the Northern
Territory may be taken as an example, the two primary groups
are segregated into four sections each. Group A. is subdivided
into Ohoolum, Jamerum, Chenum and Yacomary. Group B. is
similarly divided into Chingalum, Bungarin, Chooralum and
Palyarin.
There are other tribes, especially in some parts of West Aus-
tralia, whose divisions appear to be of an abnormal type, but I
shall be glad to receive further particulars before coming to any
definite conclusions respecting them.
Besides the segregation of the community into the groups and
sections to which I have referred, there is another partition of


the latter into lesser divisions, bearing the names of animals, or
other natural objects, which from their analogy to the well known
North American tribal divisions, have been called totems. It is
evident therefore that an aboriginal native inherits a group and
a sectional name, followed by that of his totem. For example, a
man of the Kamilaroi tribe may belong to the group Kupathin,
section Ippai, and totem Emu. In addition to these ancestral
titles, each blackfellow has his own personal name, as Fleet-
foot.
The individuals belonging to any group, section, or totem, do
not collect into certain localities by themselves, separate from the
rest, but are dispersed indiscriminately throughout the whole
tribal territory—members of each section and totem being found
in all the local divisions. It is possible for all the totems in the
community to be represented in the same locality. This dispersion
of the totems is due to the intermarriage of the individuals of
which the groups and sections forming the social community are
composed.
As the intermarriages of the groups, sections and totems will be
fully explained later on, it is only necessary to say here that, in
nearly all Australian tribes descent is reckoned through the
mother only—the father being generally disregarded in determin-
ing the division to which the children belong. There are also
strict totemic regulations of universal prevalence which prevent
persons of the same totem from either marrying or having sexual
intercourse with each other.
In dealing with this subject it will be preferable to take the
divisions existing in each of the colonies separately, stating shortly
who was the first to observe them, and then to give particulars
of their structure and geographic range, from information collected
by myself.
South Australian Divisions.
The Rev 0. W. Schurmann was the first to place on record the
rules of marriage and descent in force among the aborigines of


South Australia. In a pamphlet which he published in 1840, 1
describing the customs of the Parnkalla and other native tribes
inhabiting the Port Lincoln district, on the west of Spencer’s
Gulf, he says : “ They are divided into two distinct classes, the
Mattiri and Karraru people. . . If a husband be Mattiri, his
wife must be Karraru, and vice versd , the children taking invari-
ably the appellation of that class to which their mother belongs.”
That is, if a Karraru man married a Mattiri woman, the sons and
daughters would be Mattiri, the same as their mother. In a
similar manner the children of a Karraru woman would be
Karraru. Mr. C. Wilhelmi, in 1860 2 confirmed the divisional
names and rules of descent given by Mr. Schiirmann.
These rules of marriage and descent will be more apparent if
arranged in tabular form, thus :
Husband Wife Offspring
Mattiri Karraru Karraru
Karraru Mattiri Mattiri
In 1874 the Government of South Australia issued circulars
asking for certain particulars respecting the customs of the abori-
gines, and such circulars were sent to all persons likely to be
acquainted with the subject throughout the colony. In response
to these notices, a large amount of valuable information was
obtained, and was published by the Government Printerj Adelaide,
in 1879, under the title of “Folklore, Manners, Customs, and
Languages of the South Australian Aborigines.” This book was
edited by the Rev. George Taplin, who had taken an active interest
in the movement from its inception. In the following pages refer-
ences will frequently be made to the work mentioned.
Mr. James Bryant mentions two divisions as obtaining amongst
the tribes about the Gawler Ranges, who adjoined the Port Lincoln
people on the north. He spells the names' of the divisions as
1 Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln, S.A. (R. Thomas & Co., Adelaide).
This work is republished in “Native Tribes of South Australia,” (1879),
pp. 207 - 252.
2 Trans. Roy. Soe., Victoria, (1860) Vol. v., p. 178.


Muthury and Cariero, and states that they intermarried with
each other. 1
Still farther inland, round the head of Spencer’s Gulf, and down
the eastern side of it as far as Crystal Brook, as well as in the
Flinders Ranges, which extend from there to the east of Lake
Torrens, Mr. Noble reports the existence of the same two divisions
which he calls Muttay and Arriee. 2 Both Mr. Bryant and Mr.
Noble call these divisions “clans,” —which is by the way quite as
suitable a term as “classes,” although neither of these names are
very appropriate.
Mr. Samuel Gason, in describing the customs of the Dieyerie
tribes at Lake Eyre, states that they were organised into inter-
marrying divisions, bearing the names of animals. 3 In 1882, Mr.
A. W. Uowitt, from information supplied by the Rev. H. Vogel-
sang, a missionary among the tribes referred to, reported that
their divisions were Mattiri and Karraru, being the same names
as those stated by the Rev. C. W. Schiirmann at Port Lincoln.
Dr. E. C. Stirling in 1896, 4 and Professor W. B. Spencer in 1897/
mentioned these divisions in the same district.
It will be seen that I have traced the two divisions, Mattiri
and Karraru, through a wide extent of territory, reaching from
Port Lincoln, via Port Augusta and Farina, to somewhere about
Oodnadatta, a distance of over seven hundred miles. From the
latter place northerly to the neighbourhood of the James Ranges
the tribes are divided into four sections ; and thence to the Gulf
of Carpentaria they are divided into eight sections, the particulars
of whose organisation I shall now endeavour to explain.
In 1875, Mr. Christopher Giles/' who was a station master at
Charlotte Waters telegraph station, reported that the tribes in
that neighbourhood, who spoke the Arrinda language, were divided
1 Folklore, Manners, &c. of S. A. Aborigines, p. 103. 2 Ibid., p. 64.
3 The Dieyerie Tribe of Australian Aborigines, (1874), p. 13.
4 Horn Exped. Central Australia, Part ir., p. 46.
5 The Engwurra Ceremony—Proc. Roy. Soc. Vic., N.S., x., 18.
6 Folklore, Manners, &c. of S. A. Aborigines, pp. 82-91.


into four classes, called Parroola, Panungka, Booltara and Koo-
murra. He gave the rules of intermarriage established in relation
to these four divisions, with the names to which the offspring
belonged, which may be briefly summarised as follows :
Husband Wife Offspring
Paroola Panungka Koomurra
Panungka Parroola Booltara
Booltara Koomurra Panungka
Koomurra Booltara Parroola
In 1878, Mr. J. D. Woods 1 confirmed the observations of Mr.
0. Giles in regard to the divisions of the tribes from the Peake to
Charlotte Waters and Alice Springs, his spelling of the four names
being as follows : Parula, Pooninga, Pultara and Coomara. He
says the children of either sex always take their mother’s family
name. Mr. E. M. Curr mentions the same names in 1886. 2 In
the same year they were referred to by Mr. F. E. H. W. Krichauff, 3
and in 1887 Mr. D. Lindsay also mentions having observed them. 4
Mr. W. H. Wiltshire reported these four classes at Alice Springs
in 1891, 5 and again in 1895. 6
The Rev. Louis Schulze, a missionary at Hermannsburgh, on
the Finke River, discovered that each of the four classes which
had been reported by previous writers, had a fellow or comple-
mentary class, if I may so term it, attached to it, thus making
four pairs of classes, or eight divisions in all. The nam?es of the
additional classes he found to be Pungata, Mbutjana, Knurraia
and Ngala. 7 Mr. Schulze also observed that a man had the
privilege of choosing his wife from either of two prescribed divis-
ions. A Bultara man, for example, could marry either a Koomara
or Mbutjana woman. 8
1 Trans. Philos. Soc., S. Australia, n., 85-86.
2 Australian Race, i., 417.
3 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., S. A. Branch, n., 33.
4 Ibid., ii., 3rd Session, p. 4.
5 The Aborigines of Central Australia, (Adelaide, 1891) p. 13.
6 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xxiv., 183.
7 In 1897, Professor Spencer and Mr. Gillen confirmed the existence of
the four additional divisions. —Proc. Roy. Soc., Victoria, x., N.S., 19.
8 Trans. Roy. Soc. S. Australia, xiv., 223 - 227.


I was much interested in the paper communicated by Mr.
Schulze, and during 1895 I was enabled to make independent
enquiries through Mr. Jackson, a friend who went out to the mica
and ruby fields in the Hart’s ranges, and the gold mines about
Arltunga, or Paddy’s Waterhole, as it is commonly called. From
information then obtained, I was enabled to tabulate the divisions
as under, showing two intermarrying groups, A and B :
is under, snowing wo interim
Husband Wife
'Bultara Koomara
Pungata Mbutjana
a. ,
§ 1
Parulla Panungka
\Ngala Knurraia
'Koomara Bultara
W Mbutjana Pungata
o
Panungka Parulla
Ngala
Children
Panungka or Knurraia
Knurraia or Panungka
Koomara or Mbutjana
Mbutjana or Koomara
Parulla or Ngala
Ngala or Parulla
Bultara or Pungata
Pungata or Bultara
My correspondent confirms Mr. Schulze’s statement regarding
the intermarriage of the men of a pair of complementary sections
with the women of another pair. Thus, Bultara can marry a
woman from either the Koomara or Mbutjana sections, and
Pungata can marry into either of the same sections that Bultara
can. If Bultara marry a Koomara woman, the children will be
Panungka, but if he select an Mbutjana wife, the children will be
Knurraia. It appears, therefore, that the children of each of
these men may be either Panungka or Knurraia, which is regulated
by the section to which the mother belongs. Marriage and descent
in the other pairs of sections will follow the same rules, mutatis
mutandis , as examplified in the table.
It will be seen by the above table that my arrangement of the
divisional names differs from that of Mr. Schulze. He also states
that the children have paternal descent, but Mr. Jackson represents
that they belong to their mother’s group, as shown in the table,


and this is supported by Mr. Woods’ statement already quoted.
As there is a difference of opinion in regard to the line of descent
among the Alice Springs tribes, I intend making further enquiries
and will also endeavour to obtain comprehensive particulars
respecting the totems. For the present, therefore, a list of totems
already collected will be omitted.
My correspondent afterwards made his way northwards, and
before leaving the Hart’s Banges I gave him such particulars of
the divisions of the Warramonga tribes as I could obtain from
Mr. A. M. Giles’ statements published by Mr. A. W. Howitt, 1
and asked him, if he had the opportunity, to make certain further
enquiries which I indicated. He met some of these blacks and
gathered particulars from which I am able to tabulate eight
divisions in the following order, illustrating the rules of marriage
and descent:
Husband Wife Sons Daughters
. /Kabatjee Nakamarra Ungary Namatjillee
I Opalla Namatjillee Ampatjona Tampatjona
o j Apungata Tampatjona Aponunga Naponunga
O 1 Tungulli Naponunga Akamarra Nakamarra
. /Akamarra Kabatjeen Opalla Narulla
I Ungary Narulla Apungata Napungata
o Ampatjona Napungata Tungulli Nungulli
Nungulli Kabatjee Kabatjeen
The foregoing table shows that the community is segregated
into two groups, A and B, one of which intermarries with the
other; and each of these is again subdivided into four sections,
the names of which are given. The sons of the women of group A
marry the daughters of the women of group B, and vice versa ,
therefore the women of one group are the mothers of the men of
the other.
Each group has perpetual succession through the women—the
daughters belonging to the same group as their mothers, but to a
1 Journ. Antbrop. Inst., xm., 44.


different section of it. The women of group A pass successively
through each of the four sections in as many generations. For
example, taking the women of group A in the table, we find that
Nakamarra is the mother of Namatjillee ; Namatjillee of Tam-
patjona ; Tampatjona of Naponunga; and Naponunga is the
mother of Nakamarra, the same sectional name with which we
started, and this order of succession is repeated ad infinitum.
The men of any given section likewise reappear in the fifth
generation, but in a different manner to their sisters. We have
seen in the last paragraph that the women of a group never pass
out of it, but perpetually alternate from one section to another.
The men, however, fluctuate from one group to the other in each
generation. For example, Kabatjee, of group Ain the table has
a son Ungary who belongs to group B; Ungary has a son
Apungata of group A ; Apungata has a son Aponunga of group B;
and Aponunga has a son Kabatjee, which brings us back to the
starting point in group A. In four generations the men pass
through two sections of each group.
The son of the brother marries the daughter of the sister, and
conversely, the son of the sister marries the daughter of the brother.
This can easily be shown by preparing a short pedigree of any
given individual. Let us take a man of the Opalla section as an
example :
Opalla
marries
Namatjillee
Ampatjona
Ampatjona marries Napungata
Son
Tungulli
Daughter
Nungulli
Daughter
Tampajona
Apungata marries Tampatjona
Son Daughter
Apanunga Naponunga
By this table it is seen that
Opalla marries Namatjillee, the
offspring being Ampatjona and Tampatjona. Ampatjona marries
Napungata, and has a son and daughter Tungulli and Nungulli.
Ampatjona’s sister Tampatjona marries Apungata and has a son


and a daughter Aponunga and Naponunga. Tungulli the son of
Ampatjona marries Naponunga, the daughter of Tampatjona his
father’s sister. Apanunga the son of Tampatjona marries Nun-
gulli, the daughter of Ampatjona his mother’s brother. The
relationship of brother and sister here referred to must of course
be understood as tribal only, and not of the full blood.
Mr. S. N. Innes, having read my paper on the Kamilaroi class
system, 1 took a lively interest in the subject and commenced study-
ing it. He wrote me that he was acquainted with a number of
tribes having very .interesting divisions, and stated his willingness
to assist me if I gave him the points on which to make enquiries.
This I immediately did, and made such suggestions as I thought
might be of value. After a lot of correspondence, and much
thrashing out, I am now enabled to prepare the following table,
showing the divisions of the tribes occuping a considerable tract
of country in the Northern Territory, stretching from near the
Gulf of Carpentaria westerly across the overland telegraph line;
and there is reason to believe that a similar organisation extends
onwards into West Australia.
Husband
'Choolum Ningulum
Jamerum Palyarinya
Cheenum Nooralum
Yacomary Bungarinya
cl
S
O
Li
o
Sons Daughters
Palyarin Palyarinya
Chooralum Nooralum
Bungarin Bungarinya
Chingulum Niagulum
'Chingulum Noolum
Bungareen Yacomarin
Chooralum Neenum
Palyarin Neomarum
Yacomary Yacomarin
Cheenum Neenum
Jamerum Neomarum
Choolum Noolum
Oh
a
o
u
O
The community is divided into two intermarrying groups, A
and B, the men of one group marrying the women of the other, or
the sons of group A marrying the sisters of the men of their own
generation in group B, and vice versa , subject to certain rules which
1 The Kamilaroi Class System of Australian Aborigines —Proc. Roy.
Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), x -» 18-34.


are apparent in the table. The women never change out of the
group to which they belong, but pass successively through each
of the four sections of which it is composed. Taking the women
of group A as an example, it is shown that Ningulum is the
mother of Palyarinya, Palyarinya of Nooralum, Nooralum of
Bungarinya, and Bungarinya of Ningulum, and this series is con-
tinually repeated, each section name reappearing in the fifth
generation. Succession is counted through the females—the
women of one group producing the men of the other.
New South Wales Divisions.
The Wiradjuri and Kamilaroi communities are divided into the
four undermentioned sections, the names of the women in each
section being different from those of the men. For example, in
some families all the sons are Murri, and all the daughters Matha-
in others they are Kubbi and Kubbitha; in others Ippai and
Ippatha; and again in others they are Kumbo and Butha. These
names were first reported by the Rev. Wm. Ridley in 1853 as
occurring among the Kamilaroi tribes on the Namoi and other
rivers. 1 Since then I have reported the same divisional names
among the Darkinung 2 tribe of the Wollombi district, and among
the Moorawarrie of the Culgoa and adjacent rivers. I have also
observed four divisions with the same nomenclature among the
Wail wan, Uollaroi, Wallaroi, Pickumbul, and Ukumbul tribes.
The intermarriage of the sections, and names of the offspring
can be more clearly understood by means of a table :
Husband Wife Offspring
Murri Kumbo Ippai
Kubbi Ippai Kumbo
Kumbo Murri Kubbi
Ippai . Kubbi Murri
From particulars supplied by Mr. Chas. G. N. Lockhart, the
Rev. L. Fison, in 1872, states that among the Darling River tribe
1 Studies in Ancient History, Second Series (1896), by J. F. McLennan,
p. 289; also, Kamilaroi etc., (1866), p. 38.
2 Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, xxxi., 170, 171.


at Wentworth, a Kilpara man must always marry a Mookwara
woman, and a Mookwara man a Kilpara woman. 1 Speaking of
the same people in 1875, the Rev. R. W. Holden 2 reports the
same divisional names and rules of marriage as those given by
Mr. Fison, but neither of these gentlemen mentioned the divisional
names of the offspring. In 1878, Mr. R. B. Smyth, in referring
to these divisions says, on the authority of Mr. J. Bulmer, that
the children take their caste from their mother. 3 For example,
if the mother be Mookwara the children will be Mookwara ; if the
mother be Kilpara, the children will also belong to that division.
This appears to be the first report showing the line of descent in
the tribe referred to.
In May 1883, Mr. F. Bonney, who resided fifteen years near the
Darling, mentions the divisions Muckwarra and Kilparra as
obtaining on the Darling River above and below Wilcannia. He
also mentions their prevalence among the natives of the Barrier
Ranges, which includes Silverton and adjacent stations. 4
In 1884-85 I was surveying in the Silverton and Broken Hill
district, and made a tour from there to Tibooburra, and thence to
the Darling via the Paroo river. Among the tribes throughout
that immense tract of country I found the two divisions, Muck-
warra and Keelparra, with groups of totems attached to each.
In 1885, Mr. A. L. P. Cameron, who lived some years, between
the Darling and the Lachlan Rivers reported that these two
divisional names extended up the Darling from Wentworth at
least as far as Menindie. He was also the first to observe that
Mukwarra was equivalent to the pair of sections Murri and Kubbi
of the Kamilaroi, and that Kilparra was the equivalent of the
Ippai and Kumbo sections. 5
In 1883, Mr. E. Palmer described the divisions of what he
called the Kombinegherry tribe on the Bellinger River, 6 consist-
1 Trans. Roy. Soc Victoria, x., 161.
2 Folklore, Manners, &c. of S. A. Aborigines, p. 17.
3 Aborigines of Victoria, i., 86.
4 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xiii., 129. 5 ibid., xiv., 351. 6 Ibid., xin., 304.


ing of the four sections Kurbo, Wombo, Marro, and Wirro. Since
then I discovered the same divisions, with some modifications of
sound and spelling, among the tribes of the Clarence, Kempsey,
Manning, Hastings and Hunter Rivers, with their numerous
affluents. I also found similar divisions in the New England
tribes, but two of the female sectional names were entirely different.
I have elsewhere given the sectional names and list of totems, of
all the tribes referred to in this paragraph with their rules of
marriage and descent. 1 I was moreover the first to establish the
equivalence of the sections to those of the Kamilaroi and Wirad-
juri communities, 2
Queensland Divisions.
The Rev. Wm. Ridley gave the names of the four divisions of
the Kogai tribe, on the Balonne, Maranoa and Coogoon Rivers,
with the laws of marriage and descent as follows :— 3
Husband. Wife
Sons Daughters
Wungo Unburrigun
Obur Urgillagun
Urgilla Urgillagun
Unburri Unburrigun
Obur Oburrugun
Urgillagun
Unburri Woongogun
Oburrugun
Urgilla Oburrugun Wungo Wungogun
Mr. Ridley was also the first to draw attention to the equivalence
of the sectional names in different tribes. For example, he showed
that Wungo of the Maranoa tribe was equivalent to Murri of the
Kamilaroi; Obur to Kubbi, Urgilla to Ippai, and Unburri to
Kumbo. 4 It may be as well to explain that when a certain section
in one tribe holds the same place in the system as a section in
another tribe, such sections are said to correspond to each other,
or in other words, to be equivalent, as in the above example. 5
When Mr. R. JB. Smyth was compiling his work on the
aborigines, published in 1878, one of his correspondents, Mr.
George Bridgman, Superintendent of Aboriginal Stations, near
Mackay, who had seen Mr. Ridley’s classification, reported that
1 Journ. Roy. Soc., N. S. Wales, xxxi., 168-171. 2 Ibid., xxxi., 169,170.
3 Kamilaroi and other Australian Languages, (1866) p. 38. 4 Ibid., p. 38.
5 Proc. Roy. Gfeog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), x., 31.


the Yuipera and adjoining tribes at Mackay were divided into
two primary classes, each of which was subdivided into two others.
This will be better understood in tabular form :— 1
Primary Division Husband
Wootaroo <[
( Coobaroo
( Bunbia 2
Youngaroo j Gurgila
Wife Offspring
Bunbia Gurgila
Gurgila Bunbia
Woongo Coobaroo
Coobaroo Woongo
The above four names, although differing somewhat in spelling
from those reported by Mr. Ridley, are manifestly the same.
Mr. Bridgman was the first to observe that the tribe, although
divided into four sections, actually consisted of two groups,
Wootaroo and Ycungaroo ; and that the children belong to their
mother’s primary division, but to the other section of it. He
further states :—“An intelligent native now at Mackay, who has
been living with the Kamilaroi people, says the Kamilaroi system
is the same as that here.” This was subsequently found to be
correct by Mr. Cyrus E. Doyle, one of Mr. A. W. Howitt’s cor-
respondents, who reported the primary divisions of the Kamilaroi
as being Dilbi and Kupathin. 3 He had no doubt been informed
of the two groups of the Mackay tribe, published five years before.
The Rev. L. Fison, in 1880, and Mr. E. M. Curr in 1886, also
refer to Mr. Bridgman’s researches.
In 1883 a paper by Mr. Edward Palmer 4 was read before the
Anthropological Institute, London, containing the results of his
personal researches, in which he dealt, inter alia, with the divis-
ions of the tribes on the Flinders, Oloncurry, Mitchell, Kennedy
and other rivers in Northern Queensland. He showed that the
natives about Hughenden and the heads of the Flinders and Clon-
curry Rivers, and extending easterly from Tower Hill Creek
1 Aborigines of Victoria, (1878), i., 90, 91.
2 This word is written Bembia in Smyth’s book, but it is evidently a
misreading of the MS., for we find that Mr. Bridgman spells the word
Bunbia in an article he contributed to Mr. Curr’s work on the “Australian
Race,” Vol. hi., p. 45.
3 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., (1883) xm., 335. 4 Ibid., xm., 302.


towards the Belyando River, were divided into four sections called
Woonco, Coobaroo, Bunbury and Kurgielah, 1 which is practically
the same nomenclature as the tribes at Mackay and Maranoa
River. The intermarriages of the sections, and the names of the
offspring, were also identical.
In 1886 Mr. E. M. Curr published the names of the same four
divisions as obtaining among the Kowanburra, Wokkelburra, and
other tribes on the Belyando and Suttor Rivers, Elgin Downs,
Bowen Downs, and the sources of the Alice. The particulars
were supplied to Mr. Curr by Mr. James Muirhead, a resident of
that district. This gentleman appears to have been the first to
draw attention to the native custom of each section being restricted
to certain kinds of food. He stated that the Bunbury section is
confined to opossum, kangaroo, dog, honey of small bee. Woongo
is allotted emu, bandicoot, black duck, black snake, brown snake.
Obur has carpet snakes, honey of stinging bee, etc. Kurgilla has
porcupine, plain turkey, etc. He also observed that Woongo and
Obur formed a primary division called Wootheroo, whilst the
other two sections were Mallera. 2 The primary division Mallera
is the equivalent of Youngaroo of the Mackay tribes.
Some of Mr. Curr’s correspondents reported the same four
sections among the tribes of the Nogoa and other head waters of
the Mackenzie River 3 ; and at Logan Downs, Peak Downs, etc,
where the primary divisions were called Youngaroo and Wootheroo, 4
being identical with those at Mackay. Other correspondents of
the same author discovered that the four divisions referred to also
obtain at the Cape River. 5 At Halifax Bay—at Hinchinbrook
Island, and on the mainland adjacent—identical sectional names
were reported to Mr. Curr, 6 and published by him in his valuable
work.
1 Each of these names has a feminine equivalent: Wooncoan, Coo-
barooan, Bunburyan, and Kurgielan.
2 The Australian Race, (1886) in., 26,27. 3 Ibid., hi., 91. * Ibid., in., 65.
5 Ibid., ii., 468. Mr. Curr mentions the names Utheroo (Ootaroo), and
Multhuroo (Mallera), as occurring on the Cape River.
6 Ibid., ii., 418, 425 and 427.


The Rev. Wm. Ridley, in his “Journal of a Missionary Tour
among the Aborigines in 1855,” 1 stated that the family names at
Moreton Bay were Bandur, Bundar, Barang and Derwain, with
the corresponding female names Banduran, Bundaran, Barangan,
and Derwaingan. He reported that the Warwick and Canning
Downs blacks had the same family names as at Moreton Bay, and
also that these names prevailed from the latter place to Wide Bay. 2
In 1865 Mr. G. S. Lang said : “The Moreton Bay blacks are
divided into four classes, and all the children take after the class
of their mother.” 3 The Rev. E. Fuller, a missionary for some
years at Fraser’s Island, north of Wide Bay, says: “The children
are supposed to belong to the mother’s tribe.” 4
In 1883 Mr. E. Palmer stated that he found the divisions
mentioned by Mr. Ridley extending northerly from Wide Bay to
near Rockhampton, except that Balcoin was used instead of
Bandur. 5 He also reported them as existing among the tribes in
the Bunya Bunya Mountains. The last statement is confirmed
by the Rev. J. Mathew, one of Mr. Curr’s correspondents. Mr.
Mathew says: “The names of the children depended directly on
the mother’s name.” 6
Mr. Palmer, from information supplied to him by Mr. Jocelyn
Brooke, Sub-Inspector of Police, gives a diagram showing the four
names in a rectangular position, and states that “the child always
takes its name from that opposite to its father’s name.” 7 This does
not necessarily lead to the inference that descent is through the
father, though it may bear this construction.
In 1888 Mr. A. W. Howitt, from particulars furnished to him
by Mr. Palmer’s informant Mr. Brooke, arrived at the conclusion
that “descent was in the male line.” 8 In 1894, partly from Mr.
1 This article was also published in Dr. Lang’s “Queensland,” (1861),
p 436
2 Kamilaroi and other Australian Languages, (1875), p. 163.
8 Aborigines of Australia, p. 10.
* Queenslander, Sept. 7, 1872.
5 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xm.. 304, 305
6 Australian Race, hi., 162, 163.
7 Journ. Anthrop. last., xin., 305. 8 Ibid., xvm., 49, 50.
F —June 1, 1898.


Palmer’s statement above referred to, and partly owing to Mr.
Howitt’s conclusions, I assumed that these tribes had paternal
descent. 1 On making further enquiries of some natives of Jon-
daryan run, who belong to this organisation, the following arrange-
ment of the divisions was arrived at—the spelling being in accord
with the pronounciation of my native informants.
Husband Wife
Djerwine Bandjooran
Bunda Barrangan
Bandjoor Djerwinegan
Barrang Bundaran
Sons. Daughters
Barrang Barrangan
Bandjoor Bandjooran
Bunda Bundaran
Djerwine Djerwinegan
When travelling among the tribes on the head waters of the
Clarence, Richmond, Dumaresq and Condamine rivers, I found
the rules of marriage and descent somewhat different to those
obtaining farther north, particulars of which are given in the
following table :
Husband Wife Offspring
Terrawine Barrang Banjoor
Bunda Banjoor Barrang
Barrang Terrawine Bunda
Banjoor Bunda Terrawine
Terra wine and Bunda are the equivalents of Ippai-Kumbo, and
Barrang-Banjoor of Murri-Kubbi.
In the article published by Mr. Palmer in 1883 he gave the
sectional divisions of the Mycoolon and Myappe tribes on the
Saxby and Cloncurry Rivers, with the laws of marriage and
descent which he tabulated as follows :— 2
Husband Wife
Offspring
Bathingo and Munjingo
Marringo Goothamungo
Yowingo Munjingo
Bathingo Carburungo
Jiramalingo Ngaran-nghungo
Jimmalingo and Goothamungo
Marringo and Ngaran-nghungo
Yowingo and Carburungo
1 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q), x., 29.
2 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xm., 302.


This table clearly shows that there is matriarchal descent, and
Mr. Palmer reports that such is the case. Mr. A. W. Howitt,
however, arranges Mr. Palmer’s sectional names in a different
order to that shown above, and endeavors to show that descent is
through the father. He says “under the influence of agnatic
descent, the girl is of the same class name as her mother’s mother.” 1
This is not correct, because in the Kamilaroi tribes, where descent
is uterine, the daughter always takes the sectional name of her
mother’s mother. 2
Mr. Palmer also reported the discovery of four other sectional
names among the Koogobathy tribes on the Mitchell River and
surrounding country. These divisions he arranged as follows,
with the rules of marriage and descent : 3
Husband Wife Offspring
Jury Barry Mungilly
Mungilly Ararey Jury
Ararey Mungilly Barry
Barry Jury Ararey
He stated that Jury was equivalent to Marringo, Mungilly to
Yowingo, Ararey to Bathingo, and Barry to Jimmalingo. When
I first read Mr. Palmer’s paper—having confidence in his general
accuracy in other cases—l assumed that descent among the
#
Koogobathy was in the male line ; and in a paper I wrote in 1894,
it was stated that there were some tribes in the Gulf country who
had agnatic descent. 4 Shortly afterwards I made enquiries through
correspondents, who reported that the children belonged to the
mother’s group, the same as in the Mycoolon tribe. In a paper
read before the Royal Society of Queensland in September 1897,
I corrected th,e statement I had made in 1894.®
A blackfellow at Charters Towers, who had travelled with
drovers to the Palmer river informed me that the descent of the
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xm., 346. 3 Ibid., xm., 304.
2 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust. (Q.), x., 24. 4 I bid., x., 32.
5 “Aboriginal Customs in North Queensland.” —Proc. Roy. Soc. Queens-
land, xxii.


children is uterine, as exemplified in the following table. He
spoke from memory of what the Palmer natives had told him,
and I have not yet had an opportunity of checking his statement.
Husband Wife Offspring
Jury Barry Ararey
Mungilly Ararey Barry
Ararey Mungilly Jury
Barry Jury Mungilly
In 1897 Dr. Roth found that the same divisions which had
been reported by previous writers on the Maranoa, at Mackay,
and the other places referred to also obtained on the Hamilton,
Georgina and neighbouring streams. Dr. Roth also confirmed the
sectional names discovered by Mr. Palmer among the Mycoolon
and Myappe tribes; and further, he ascertained the equivalence
of the sections to those of the tribes about Hughenden and Boulia.
For example he states that Bathingo corresponds to Coobaroo,
Jimmalingo 1 to Woongo, Yowingo to Kurgielah, and Marringo to
Bunbury. He also reports that the Mycoolon divisional names
are found with some modifications, in the Kalkadoon and neigh-
bouring tribes. 2
West Australian Divisions.
Capt. Grey, now the octogenarian Sir George, when exploring
in West Australia in 1837-39, observed that the natives were
divided into certain great families; and that each family adopted
some animal or vegetable as their kobong or totem. A man could
not marry a woman of his own family name, and the children
always took the family name of their mother. Sir George gives
the names of these divisions as Ballaroke, Tdondarup, Ngotak,
Nagarnook, Nogonyuk, Mongalung and Narrangar. From his
table of genealogies I collect the following partial statement
regarding the intermarriage of the sections :
1 In 1883 Mr. E. Palmer stated that Jimmalingo belonged to Wootharoo
among the Leichhardt River tribes, which agrees with Mr. Roth’s obser-
vations. —Journ. Anthrop. Inst., xiii., 303.
2 Ethnological Studies among the Australian Aborigines, (1897), p. 57.


Ballaroke marries Ngotak, and the children are Ngotak
Ballaroke „ Noganyuk, „ ~ Noganyuk
Tdondarup „ Ballaroke, „ „ Ballaroke
Ngotak „ Ballaroke, Nagarnook and Noganyuk
Noganyuk „ Ngotak and Tdondarup. 1
In an official report on the “Habits and Customs of the
Aboriginal Inhabitants of West Australia,” printed at Perth in
1871, p. 21, Bishop Salvado gives the names of six classes prevalent
in the tribes at the Catholic Mission Station at New Norcia, in
the Victoria district, eighty-two miles northerly from Perth. The
names of the classes which each one of the others may marry, and
also the classes into which they may not marry, are stated, but
unfortunately the classes to which the children belong are not
given. The information supplied by Salvado may be tabulated
thus:—
Class Could Marry Could not Marry
rn. j Palarop, Jiragiock Tirarop, Mondor
irarop N-ocognok Tondorop
Tirarop, Mondorop
Tondorop
XT , ( Palarop, Tondorop
-ocogno -j 'j'j raro p j Mondorop
N-ocognok
Jiragiock
p , ( Tondorop, Mondorop Palarop
a arO P | N-ocognok, Tirarop Jiragiok
Tondorop ( palarop, N-ocognok
r ( .Jiragiok, Mondorop
Tondorop
Tirarop
-»«- j ( Jiragiock, Tondorop
Mondorop j N . oc ° ognok; Palarop F
Mondorop
Tirarop
T . • i ( Tirarop, Mondorop Palarop, N-ocognok
J lragiok Tondorop Jiragiok
The information supplied by Sir George Grey, and by Bishop
Salvado, is very meagre and unsatisfactory. I trust that if this
article of mine should be read by any gentlemen residing in either
of the districts referred to, that they will endeavour to gather
l Two Exped. N.W. and W. Australia, (1841) Vol. n., pp. 225, and 228.


further details regarding the divisional names and totems, with
the rules of marriage and descent established in relation to them.
When Sir John Forrest visited Nichol Bay on the north-west
coast, in 1878, he found that the aborigines were divided into four
families, with rules of marriage and descent which he tabulated
in the following manner :
Husband Wife Children
Paljarie Kimera Banigher
Boorunggnoo Banigher Kimera
Kimera Paljarie Boorunggnoo
Banigher Boorunggnoo Paljarie
The grand-child in the male line is of the same family as his
grand-father; and in the female line, of the same family as her
grand-mother. 1
In 1880, the Rev. L. Fison published these class names, which
he had obtained from a correspondent, as Paliali, Paronga, Kimera
and Banaka. 2 A correspondent furnished Mr. E. M. Curr with
the same divisions in 1886, which he reported as Palyeery, Boor-
ungo, Kymurra, and Panaka. 3 The resemblance of these names
to those of the divisions at Alice Springs, 1000 miles to the east-
ward, is remarkable.
Equivalence of Divisions.
It is highly important to show how the groups and sections of
a tribe in one district correspond to those of other tribes in different
parts of the country. From some natives whom Mr. Jackson met
about Oodnadatta, Macumba and Charlotte Waters, he ascertained
that the group Mattiri of the Arrabunna tribe was equivalent to
the pair of sections, Bultara and Parulla of the Arrinda tribe;
and the group Karraru to the sections Panungka and, Koomara.
I subsequently checked this statement by referring to Mr. Kempe
of Peake Station, who gave me the same answer.
1 Journ. Anthrop. Inst., ix., 356, 357. Austr. Assoc. Adv. Sci., n.,
653, 654.
2 Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 36.
3 The Australian Race, i., 298.


The equivalence of the Alice Springs and Warramonga tribes
is as follows : —Bultara corresponds to Kabatjee ; Pungata to
Apungata ; Parulla to Tungulli; Ngala to Opalla ; Koomara to
Akamarra ; Mbutjana to Ampatjona ; Panungka to Aponunga ;
Knurraia to Ungary. It is evident therefore that the group
Mattiri is equivalent to the four sections of group A of the Alice
Springs and Warramonga tribes respectively; and that Karraru
corresponds to group B of each of these communities.
In June, 1887, Mr. David Lindsay stated that the Warramunga
tribe occupied the country lying between Tennant’s Creek and
Powell’s Creek, N.T., and for a considerable distance on each side
of the Overland Telegraph line. He was also the first to report
that they had an unusually large number of divisions regulating
the intersexual relations. 1
1 Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., S.A. Branch, Yol. n., 3rd Session, p. 10.
