

AUSTRALIA
CONFEDERATED.
A LECTURE
delivered in the Town flail, Adelaide,
BY THE
REV. J. JEFFERIS, LLB.
WITH SPEECHES ON THE OCCASION
BY HIS EXCELLENCY
SIR W. F. D. JERVOIS. GC.M.G, C B„
Governor of South Australia ;
77i> 97/
The Hon. W. MORGAN, Premier of South Australia ;
The Hon, W. GIBLIN, Premier of Tasmania ;
Sir HENRY AYERS, K. 0.8.
IMimi *
GEORGE ROBERTSON, 361 GEORGE STREET,
\
And Melbourne, Adelaide, and Brisbane








AUSTRALIA
CONFEDERATED
A LECTURE
gelivered in the gown gall, Adelaide,
BY THE
REV. J. JEFFERIS, LL.B
WITH SPEECHES ON THE OCCASION
BY HIS EXCELLENCY
SIR W. F. D. JERVOIS, G.C.M.G., C.B.
Governor of South Australia;
The Hon. W. MORGAN, Premier of South Australia;
The Hon. W. GIBLIN, Premier of Tasmania;
Sm HENRY AYERS, K.G.B.
Ighiwij;
GEORGE ROBERTSON, 361 GEORGE STREET,
And. Melbourne, Adelaide, and Brisbane.


jSydney :
POINTED BY jJOHN AND pO.,
’3 DOE pTI^EET,


2-7 S*r77
-^t-PREFTKiK; 11^
HE question of Confederation is coming to the front,
i The Statesmen of Victoria, New South Wales, and
1 South Australia, have met and deliberated, and
adjourned, not without something achieved, and yet
more predicted. At the Conference recently held in Mel-
bourne, not a few of the matters referred to in the
following Lecture have been discussed with courtesy and can-
dour, and with fair promise of mutual agreement.
I have no overweening conception of the value of any of my
own bantlings of the brain, but I honestly think the Lecture is
worth reading. For many years I have addicted myself to
literature bearing on the Constitution of the Empire—thereby
following up certain legal studies during my University career-
What I have said touching the union of the Australian Colonies
may be said far better, I doubt not, by many of my Australian
fellow-citizens who have given themselves to practical politics;
but if they will not come forward to show the feasibility of what
by nearly all of us is so eagerly desired, and what by many of us
is deemed so vastly important, they will at least forgive the
attempt of a “ layman ” to expound the advantages and methods
of Confederation.
It was my intention to have delivered the Lecture in Sydney
and Melbourne, as well as in Adelaide, but the “ incessant talk ”
inseparable from my vocation has produced such great weakness
of the chest that my doctor has imposed upon me twelve months
of silence. I hope to use my enforced leisure in studying some
of the weightier problems of life as they are presented in the
social and political institutions of Europe and America.
The Retreat, Newtown, Sydney,
December 18 ih, 1880.


* V /


AUSTRALIA CONFEDERATED
(By the Rev. JAMES JEFFEBIS, EB B.)
AM to discuss with you, the possible Confed-
eration of the Australian Colonies. My theme
is one of singular interest and importance; but I
confess that I enter upon it with some degree of
trepidation. Politics in our day have become almost
completely secularized. The Church and the State
have parted company. In England, the presence of Bishops in
the House of Lords is regarded as an anachronism, tolerated
only as we tolerate things that are venerable for age. In the
Colonies, the severance is complete. Victoria especially has
solemnly decreed that “ Clergymen of any religious denomination
and persons convicted of felony, are excluded both from the
Legislative Council and the Assembly.” What has a Minister
of Religion to do with politics ? “Ne sutor ultra crepidamV
Let the parson stick to his pulpit ! But I for one refuse to be
shunted off the main line of our social life. I decline the
questionable dignity of holy orders. In becoming a Minister of
Religion I have not sacrificed one privilege, nor would I evade
one duty of our common citizenship. And so I claim my right
this evening, as at all other fitting times, to utter my opinions
about the body politic. You must take my views for what they
are worth, only do not begin by treating them with prejudice or
contempt, because I am neither a lawyer nor a legislator.
The political union of the Colonies is not a subject that
ought to be discussed only within the walls of Parliament. Nay,
I will go yet further and say that it ought not to be taken into
serious consideration there, until it has been well discussed
outside. Legislation that deals with the organic life of society,
ought in every case to be preceded by an expression of the wish
or a declaration of the will, of the people generally. The
British Constitution was not created by Act of Parliament. It
was forged in the heart and fashioned by the brain of the
British people. I hold that nothing will exercise greater


influence for good on the fortunes of Australia than a genuine
interest taken by the citizens generally in the work of Govern-
ment. It was a source of profound pleasure to me, and an
augury of good I thought for the future of South Australia,
when I heard twelve months ago, that the society of young men
of which I was president for seventeen years, had formed classes
for the mutual study of political economy. This is as it should
be. It is only by the cultivation of public spirit, by a
willingness to bear social responsibilities, by a lawful ambition
for social honours, that liberty and a well ordered government
can be secured. De Tocqueville, in his great work on the
Democracy of America, has a noble passage bearing on this,
which I will venture to commend to the attention of the young
men of my audience : —“ The native of New England is attached
to his township, because it is independent and free ; his
co-operation in its affairs insures his attachment to its interest;
the well-being it affords him secures his affection; and its
welfare is the aim of his ambition, and of his future exertions j
he takes a part in every occurrence of the place; he practises
the art of Government in the small sphere within his reach; he
accustoms himself to those forms which alone can secure the
steady progress of liberty; he imbibes their spirit; he acquires a
taste for order; comprehends the union of the balance of powers
and collects clear practical notions on the nature of his duties and
the extent of his rights.” Now that is the kind of spirit we
want to evoke and cherish. I shall count myself happy if I can
do aught to further it to-night.
My subject is great enough and even romantic enough to
rouse your utmost enthusiasm. I shall discuss with you the
possibility or the feasibility of uniting into one great nation the
various colonies that have been founded on the shores of
Australia. The history of these Colonies may well justify us in
entertaining the grandest hopes of our future. It is but about
90 years ago that the first European vessel arrived in Botany Bay
for the purpose of settlement, and already we have a population
of more than two millions and a quarter. Compare this with the
early progress of England. The national history of the English
race commenced in 449 with the landing of Hengist. The Saxons
were followed by Danes and Normans. And yet 750 years after,
in the reign of John, it was computed that the population of
England was only two millions. It took seven centuries to effect.


in the British Isles, what Australia has accomplished in less than
one.
In my remarks to-night I shall take no account of Western
Australia, nor of New Zealand. The one is still in effect a penal
settlement, and the other is separated from the mainland by a wide
belt of storm-tost seas. The remaining five colonies are within
easy reach of one another. In a few years there will be railway
communication between the metropolitan cities of all of them,
save of Tasmania, and even Hobart Town will be as near to
Melbourne, so far as time of transit is concerned, as Melbourne
will be to Sydney. Sir Henry Parkes, indeed, has expressed the
opinion in a recent number of the Melbourne Review , that Queens-
land and Tasmania should be left out in the cold, and that the
Australian nation should be made up of the three greatest
Colonies. He gives no reason why Tasmania should be excluded,
but says that the soil and climate of Queensland “clearly mark her
out for a colonizing career, dissimilar to that of her elder sisters,
while her noble extent of territory affords more than ample scope
for the growth of a mighty nation.” But I fail myself to see
why either should be omitted. Queensland has marvellous
resources, and her productions are not all of a tropical or semi-
tropical character. If she grows sugar she can also grow wheat.
On the vast upland downs which stretch eastward and northward
from Brisbane, they say they have one of the finest climates in
the world. I have met people from Brisbane who could scarcely
endure Sydney in February, and who shrugged their shoulders
at the very mention of the summers of Adelaide. Besides, if
South Australia is invited to join her two wealthier sisters, it
surely must be on the condition that she carries with her the
magnificent, but much abused and slowly developing Northern
Territory. Possibly, indeed, in the coming years, the whole vast
extent of inter-tropical Australia may form a second group of
Confederated Colonies, with Palmerston for their leading capital
and great commercial centre. But whatever may be done in the
future, I take it that any immediate scheme for a Nation or a
Dominion of Australia must embrace Queensland, New South
Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Tasmania.
And now glance with me for a moment at these. From the
line of the tropics a little to the south of Rockhampton, we have
a coast line of some 2500 miles, omitting Tasmania, extending
southward and westward to the Great Australian Bight. At


intervals all along this coast there are ports of trade as noble and
commodious as the best ports of the Old World —those of Brisbane,
Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide being the chief. Settlement
has taken place as yet chiefly on the fertile plains near the sea,
or on the broad uplands that flank a noble range of mountains,
running more or less parallel with the coast, from the Darling
Downs of Queensland to the Crawler ranges beyond Port Augusta.
But we are beginning to understand that the interior of Australia
differs greatly from the conceptions formed of it by the early
pioneers, and the savants of the Royal Geographical Society.
Recent discoveries have shown that over a great part of the
central districts there is good soil, and a fair amount of water.
The successes of late, in well-sinking, are beyond all precedent;
and what shall we say of the bunch of wheat brought this last
season from the neighbourhood of Cooper's Creek, where Burke
and Wills, only nineteen years ago, met their untimely fate ?
Everything points to the settlement of untold millions on the
lands stretching far beyond the dividing range. The farmer is
following hard upon the squatter, and the miner is a companion
of both. We are not, as a race, very susceptible to the influence
of mere ideas, but it would be possible for imagination to kindle
into poetry when dealing with the marvellous resources of
Australia. There is no poetry, indeed, like the poetry of facts,
and it would be easy enough so to arrange and present these, as
to inspire every true-hearted son of Britain with a just and
generous pride. The records of Australian progress read like a
chapter of romance to that large section of our countrymen who
judge of the greatness of a people by the extent of its revenue
and the magnitude of its commerce. Neither the Imperial
Parliament, nor the great guild of merchant princes, can look
without something of wonder at a group of Colonies deficient only
in population, which has an aggregate trade of nearly one hundred
millions sterling per annum, an aggregate revenue of thirteen
millions, and resources in land and minerals that may well be
spoken of as boundless. We have inexhaustible mines of coal
and iron, and copper and tin. We have well nigh every one of
the metals and minerals needed for the manufactures and uses
and appliances of civilized life. We have immense deposits of
gold and silver, diamonds and other of the rarer gems have been
discovered, and pearls and pearl-shell are found in abundance on
our northern coasts. We are plentifully supplied with stone,


granite, marble, freestone, and slate. If our indigenous timber
is somewhat deficient in variety, we have sound and serviceable
wood for buildings and furniture, for piles, and bridges, and
jetties. Our soil is exceptionally good, if not exceptionally rich.
Our wheat is of better quality than that of Kent or California.
Our wine, recently judged by representatives from every wine-
producing country in the world, is declared able to compete
successfully with that of France, or Spain, or Hungary. No
country in the world can beat us for fruits or vegetables. The
grapes of Eschcol were not richer than those of South Australia,
and the oranges of Portugal or the Western Islands could not
surpass those of Sydney. Spanish olives may be larger than ours,
but the olive oil from the Adelaide plains is fully equal to that of
Lucca and Leghorn. And what shall I say of our sheep and
cattle, of our wool and leather, of our mutton and beef ? New
South Wales alone has 30,000,000 sheep, and 3,000,000 head of
cattle. For a century or two to come our production of wool and
meat will be limited only by the capacity of the markets of the
globe to absorb them. Practically, our pastures are inexhaustible.
As yet, but little attention has been paid to our fisheries ; but our
seas teem with fish of excellent quality, and oysters, equal to the
British natives, are cheap enough in many towns for common food.
And let who will decry the climate of Australia, it stands
favorable comparison, at least outside the tropics, with that of
any part of the world ! Canada is our great rival among the
Colonies of the Empire. Its very name is suggestive of coolness;
and it ought to be, for in winter the moisture of your breath
hangs in icicles from moustache and beard. But in Montreal,
they tell me, and doubtless it is the same in other Canadian
towns, butter in the summer is sold by the pint. We too have
cold and heat, each of them as much as can be pleasantly borne,
but we may well thank Heaven that our thermometer has not so
wide a range as this. If we have occasional spells of excessive
heat they are not much worse than those of London in August,
and hardly as bad as those of New York in July. During the
greater part of the year it is a joy to exist. The heavens are
blue, and the clouds are white, and the air is clear aud dry.
Nor have we yet found that the English type of the Anglo-
Saxon race has degenerated with us. Doubtless there is some
change. It might have been expected. There may be a little
less breadth in the physique of our men, and a little less colour


in the cheeks of our women, but there is no lessening of the
strength of the one, or the beauty of the other. Probably the
typical British Australian will be somewhat taller and somewhat
thinner than his fellows in England; but more of brawn does not
mean more of muscle. The lithe, wiry form, showing the bony
framework well covered without an ounce of superfluous flesh, is
that which wins the palm, both for strength and activity.
Trickett has beaten the best scullers of the Empire, and Spofforth
found not his match among the aristocratic bowlers at Lord's.
And let us not forget (remembering the difference in population)
that the chances were fifteen to one against Australia furnishing
such victorious athletes. As to mental power, our greatest
enemies cannot say that we have shown signs, as yet, of waning
intelligence. Not long ago the London Times remarked (possibly
after tasting one of our Australian vintages) that if the
Englishman of the present day desired to know what England
would be fifty years hence, he had better study what Australia
is now ! No doubt we are a little too democratic for Lord
Salisbury, or Mr. Lowe, but we are not now regarded by
Englishmen generally as experimenting in legislation. Imitation
is the sincerest form of flattery, and we may be proud of the
adoption by the British Parliament of certain reforms borrowed
from the Colonial Statute Books. Vote by ballot, household
suffrage, the transfer of land by registration, these, as Sir George
Bowen once said, “ are as much an importation from Australia as
wool and gold." And now think of this Australian people with
these advantages of blood, and gifts of fortune, increasing and
multiplying like the Jews in the land of Goshen. A good many
of the seniors present could testify, from a pleasant but an
anxious experience, that Australia is a wonderful country for
“weans." How well I remember a father and mother in my
congregation at North Adelaide, in the old days—he lusty
as an oak, she stately as a palm tree, the happy parents of
nineteen children. Sir Hercules Robinson, some time ago, in a
speech delivered at Albury, showed the probabilities of our future
in the way of population. Arguing from the rate of increase in
New South Wales, which for some years had been four per cent,
per annum, he said that at the end of the present century we
shall number five millions, and by the middle of the next century
(which some of our boys and girls will live to reach) the
population of Australia will be no less than thirty-one millions.


which was that of Great Britain ten years ago. What a vision is
that of noble cities and busy towns, and quiet hamlets, of world-
wide commerce, and extending manufacture, of fleets and armies,
of legislators and public teachers, of science and philosophy, of
architecture and painting and poetry, and of Churches, let us
hope still differing in creeds and methods of worship, but holding
fast to those things which are most surely believed among us.
I have felt it needful to the object I have in view, to give
you a picture of what Australia is, and what we trust it will be.
But I have spoken as if we were all united in one great people.
You know it is not thus. Within the limits I have drawn, we
are five separate provinces, five separate political states, and we
are beginning to develop five distinct types of national life. We
are joined, it is true, by a mutual bond to the mother country,
but we have among ourselves no national nor legislative union.
There are custom house officers guarding the Murray, lest
smugglers from Adelaide or Sydney should surreptitiously
cross. Victoria, in the way of protection, levies large
duty on South Australian wheat, and New South Wales, under
cover of free trade, imposes an unconscionable tax on South
Australian wine. In spite of conferences there are serious
quarrels over tariffs, and postal and telegraphic matters.
Railways are being constructed of different gauges, and for the
purpose of securing as much trade as possible for the rival
capitals, with no thought of their common advantage. Immi-
gration has hitherto been fostered and paid for chiefly by the
smaller colonies to the benefit of the larger. Our land laws
present to the eye of a stranger a medley of empirical systems.
Instead of a uniform method of dealing with the public estate or
methods upon uniform principles easily to be comprehended and
smoothly to be worked, we have laws so different, and so
frequently changed, that the shrewd speculator and the astute
lawyer have benefitted more largely than the simple hard
working yeoman. Colossal fortunes are being built up in all the
colonies by those who know how to take advantage both of the
excellencies and defects of our land laws, while the poor man is
vexed and hindered, and in one colony at least settlement is
scandalously delayed. It is time, too, to undertake the definite
exploration and general survey of the interior; but it is too great
a work to be attempted save by the Colonies acting together.
Then there is the Chinese question, one of the greatest and


gravest now before the public mind. Men of an alien race
belonging to the most numerous and prolific people that have ever
lived on the earth have become enamoured of the land. They
have multiplied until they have filled up to overflow the great
east of Asia, between India and Japan, and now they are
swarming southwards into the Pacific. We are bound in the
interests of humanity, in the interests of Englishmen, aye ! in
the interests of the Chinese themselves, who will hereafter be
incorporated with our Empire, to limit and regulate their coming.
An unrestricted immigration of Chinese, with their illimitable
out-populating power, would change the character of Australian
life from European to Asiatic. But how can we deal with this
most important question before the different colonies are united ?
The policy to be pursued is not provincial but continental. The
same may be said of our national defences, the state of which
calls for serious and urgent thought. Now that the Australian
Colonies are beginning to loom largely upon the eyes of the
world, because of the vast wealth they are creating, they will be
regarded as a tempting prize by unscrupulous statesmen in the
event of any great European war in which England is involved.
It is not without reference to Melbourne, and Sydney, and
Adelaide, that the French have constructed a great naval arsenal
in New Caledonia, and the Germans have secured a harbour in
the Navigator Group, and the Russians are forming vast depots
and gathering great fleets at Saghalien, and at the Mouth of the
Amoor. That which has happened before in human history may
happen again. Our great empire—God long preserve it in its
integrity —may have to contend against fearful odds in some
war involving East and West. All her ironclads may be needed
in the Hooghly and the Thames, for the safety of her very life.
It is absolutely necessary for the security of our coasts that naval
and land forces should be called into existence, and that our
leading ports should be well fortified against a sudden attack of
an enemy. But all this cannot be done while five separate
governments are tinkering at five separate modes of defence. No
doubt His Excellency Sir William Jervois and Colonel Scratchley
have given us the soundest possible advice, but we shall never
fully act upon it until we are one.
It would be easy, if time permitted, to cite many other
arguments in proof of the grievous disadvantage of continued
disunion. But let these suffice. It is becoming increasingly


clear to all intelligent patriots that the time is nearing for some
sort of union among the Colonies, so that at least we may
combine in works that are absolutely essential to our national
life.
This thought about union, which I believe will swiftly
advance to an imperative demand, is not one that has lately come
up. It has sprung from our necessities. It has grown with our
growth. It has been pleaded for in the British Parliament, has
been discussed in the Colonial Office, and debated in all the
Colonial Legislatures. Some of the greatest statesmen of the
empire, and all the leading statesmen of Australia, have spoken
in favour of it. You cannot converse with an intelligent citizen,
whose patriotism rises above the low level of provincial life, who
does not express a wish for it. Even where little hope is
entertained because of difficulties supposed to be insuperable, the
desire is still the same. For thirty years at least, the idea of a
union of the colonies had been befere the mind of politicians in
England and Australia. Somewhere about 1850, Earl Grey
propounded a scheme for federal legislation, and a committee of
the Privy Council advised that a body should be called into
existence “competent to act for all the colonies in matters of
common concern.” This scheme, however, had more relation to
the binding of the Colonies to the Empire than to the welding
them together into one. It endeavoured in a round-about sort of
way to settle the vexed question of the representation of the
Colonies in the British Parliament. The proposal was that a
committee should be formed expressly to consider colonial affairs,
and that the agents of the Australian Governments should be
members of it. Of course this scheme failed. It could not but
fail. The most imperialistic Tory is by this time convinced that
any attempt to govern the colonies, or even to direct the
legislation of the colonies by a London Bureau, is as impracticable
as it is foolish. We are quite competent to do all the governing
ourselves here upon the spot, in harmony of course with the
British Constitution. Something more tangible was aimed at
a little later. The year 1855 is the most important of our
political history. Constitutions were then granted to the
separate colonies. It was natural that New South Wales, as the
parent of the rest, should be concerned in a motherly sort of way
about the future of her offspring and their relation to herself.
A select committee of the Legislative Council, which had been


appointed to prepare a constitution, considered also the
advisability of federal union. This committee not only
pronounced in favour of it but declared that a General Assembly
ought to be called into being, which should be empowered to
legislate for all the Australian colonies in matters of common
national concern, such as tariffs, railways and postal com-
munication, the lighting of the coast, the management of
criminals, and a court of appeal. In the year 1870, the question
of union was yet more seriously considered. A Eoyal Commission
sat at Melbourne for the express purpose of examining into its
advisability and feasibility. The report issued is worthy of
thoughtful study. The subject inspired the Commission with
eloquence, and the eloquence is not mere varnish to-day as dust
facts, or common-place arguments. The question is lucidly
stated and the logic is unanswerable. The conclusion arrived at
is that federal union is desirable. A number of definite
propositions were made with a view of showing how federation
might be accomplished. In addition to this serious effort to
grapple with the difficulties of the subject by the united wisdom
of the colonies, various attempts have been made by several of
the Parliaments. Committees have been appointed and
conferences have been held. Almost all the great questions
needing to be dealt with authoritatively, by a central supreme
power, have been discussed at friendly meetings of politicians,
and some matters, notably that of telegraphic communication
with Europe, have been amicably settled on a lasting basis.
Nor has the Press been behindhand in the endeavour to affect
the public mind in favour of confederation. The leading papers
in all the colonies have explained and urged it. Some, indeed,
appear to be more despondent about the difficulties than
enthusiastic about the advantages of union. Yet I know not of
one that has not spoken of it as desirable, if only it could
be accomplished. To Sir Henry Parkes, the veteran Premier of
New South Wales, belongs the merit of bringing the question
forward in a thoughtful article in the Melbourne Review of
October last, an article replied to by the Honorable J. Douglas,
of Queensland, in the January number of the same review. To
the utterances of the Press we may add certain deliverances of
our Colonial Governors. Hardly one who has occupied the vice-
regal position during the past fifteen years has not dealt with
the subject in post-prandial or other speeches. Sir Hercules


Robinson alone, so far as I remember, set himself deliberately to
expound the advantages and methods of federation. The speech
he delivered at Albury, a few years ago, produced a visible effect
in the stirring of colonial thought. He discussed the union of
the colonies, not as a philosophical politician, but as a practical
statesman. His wise and weighty words will yet bear fruitage in
action.
I will now, with your permission, set forth as clearly and
exhaustively as the limits of a public lecture will allow me, the
chief views that are held upon the union of the Colonies. As
prospectively joined they are spoken of as & Nation, or a Dominion,
or as The United States of Australia. The different terms do
not, however, indicate three distinct theories. United Canada
calls itself a Dominion, though the somewhat high-sounding
word almost ignores its relation of dependence to the Mother
Country. The union between the different provinces of British
North America, and that which is about to be formed between the
different colonies of the Cape, might as well be characterized by
the word “ Nation,” or “ United States,” as by the word
“ Dominion.” But (C Dominion ”is a good term, audit is getting
to have a defined meaning of its own. I do not know that we
can improve upon it. It indicates, so far as I understand it, a
genuine nationality formed by the union of the previously
separate Colonies, which are still linked by certain ties of filial
subordination to the Mother land. The Hon. J. Douglas, indeed,
asserts that if there is to be an Australian Nation, our present
relations to the British Empire must be changed, and he seems
to imply that that change must bring with it complete indepen-
dence. I know not how he could form such an opinion with the
case of Canada before him. In order to become, in a true real
sense, an Australian Nation, I see no necessity whatever for
casting off our allegiance to Britain. The Earl of Beaconsfield,
in his election manifesto of March last, sneered at the liberal
party as “ having attempted and failed to enfeeble our colonies
by a policy of decomposition.” The sneer was as false and
worthless as the “no popery ” cry which he raised in the vain
endeavour to avert the disestablishment of the Irish Church.
The Marquis of Hartington, in his counter manifesto, declared
that he “ knew of no party who are attempting to enfeeble the
colonies by a policy of decomposition.” And he continued in


words as full of meaning as of truth, to enunciate the past and
future policy of the Liberals, “ If the Colonies grow more loyal to
the throne, and more attached to the connection with the Mother
country, and more willing to undertake the common responsibility
and burdens which must be borne by all members of the Empire,
than at any former time, it is due to the fact that under the
guidance of Liberal statesmen they have received the institution
of complete self-government, and learnt to recognise, that entire
dependency on Imperial assistance is not compatible with their
dignity or freedom.” There may, indeed, come a time when in
the full adolescence of our national life, equal in population and
equal in wealth to some of the leading countries of Europe, we
may aspire to the manly toga, and take our place among the
principalities and powers of the world, but we must be welded
into a compact and united people long before that event will be
justified, save by the gravest exigencies of the empire. And I, for
my part, deprecate the introduction of this question now lam
proud of being an Australian colonist; I shall be prouder yet to
be a citizen of the Dominion of Australia. But my pride takes a
loftier sweep when I think of myself as belonging to that great
empire which is the stable centre of liberty, the fountain of
constitutional freedom, the champion of the oppressed, the teacher
of all high arts and noble duties, the leader of the peoples, the
mother of nations. “If I forget thee, 0 England, may my
right hand forget its cunning, and my tongue cleave to the roof
of my mouth.”
Setting aside then, not without pardonable scorn, the idea of
separation from the Mother land, we must look at the two chief
forms of national life to which we may aspire. They are spoken
of under the terms Legislative union and Federal union. These
terms need definition, but in political philosophy the only
definition possible is that derived from current usage. By
Legislative Union then, we mean that for all the colonies that are
joined together, there shall be one and only one Parliament, and
that in this Parliament shall be vested supreme authority over all
national affairs tvhatsoever. By Federal Union we mean that
each federal colony shall still have its oivn Parliament to decide
on matters that belong specially to itself, while a central
authority shall be created, a supreme Parliament to decide on
all matters that are of common and universal concern. The


union of the “ United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland ” is
a Legislative Union. If it were Federal, there would be a
Parliament at Dublin, a Parliament at Edinburgh, a Parliament
at Westminster, with a Supreme Parliament—perhaps at Berwick-
upon-Tweed.
Now, which of these modes of national life shall we adopt.
Federal or Legislative? The question is one of no small
difficulty. It came up at the founding of the Canadian Dominion.
It has come up in the attempt to found the Cape Dominion.
Indeed it is impossible for a constitutional union to be formed of
colonies which have already enjoyed a separate existence, and
a separate government, without having it debated with some
intensity. And because so much hinges upon this, and because
such contradictory views are entertained respecting it, I shall
to-night, with your leave, consider it somewhat closely. It will
not be needful, I think, save for the affirmation of general
principles, to go beyond our own national experience. A student
of history will indeed seek for guidance in the constitution of the
amphictyonic councils of Greece, and the colonial system
of Phoenicia, and in the governments of Switzerland, and
Holland, and Germany. But enough direction for all prac-
tical purposes may be gathered from the records of our
own colonial empire. Two events in the history of British
Colonies stand out with remarkable prominence, the one full
of temporary disaster to the British name, the other full
of omens for its future glory, but both of them helping
forward the unparalleled advance of the Anglo-Saxon race. In
the history of the British Colonies now joined in the United
States, and in the history of the British Provinces of North
America, we have all the materials we require for a clear under-
standing of the important problem of Australian Confederation.
What then is the union which we should seek to effect ? Shall we
continue the existing Parliaments at Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne,
Adelaide, and Hobart Town, though with lessened powers, and
call into existence a supreme Parliament to meet, say at Albury :
or shall there be one Parliament only, representing in its Legis-
lative and executive the whole of the Colonies ? For myself, I
decide in favour of Federal union as against Legislative union.
I believe that by committing local matters to local control, and
general matters to general control, we shall be much more likely
to secure the peace and permanence of a united Australia. I


believe that a government having a similar basis to that of the
United States and the Dominion of Canada to be the best kind
of government for us. There is no need of slavishly copying
either. They have existed long enough for us to know something
of their weakness, and to be able to profit by their mistakes.
Political wisdom cannot be formulated into a certain number of
axioms. New light is always breaking forth from the experience
and exigencies of human life. In this preference for Federal
union I place myself wholly at issue with Sir Henry Parkes. He
advocates Legislative union, and even dreams of the possibility of
achieving it within a year, at least so far as the three greater colo-
nies are concerned. Sir Henry is undoubtedly a great and successful
politician. Hardly another can be named in Australia of equal
experience. But his article cn “An Australian nation” will not,
I think, add to his fame as a statesman. He accuses the Federals of
propounding views marked by “ intangibility and want of logic.”
The Federals might in their turn accuse him of propounding views
so visionary, with such strange forgetfulness of the means by which
they could be attained, and such contemptuous disregard of the
multitude of difficulties to be surmounted, that it is hardly
possible to believe his article to have been written by a veteran
of political science. As for Federalism, he asserts that, during
the 23 years of our Parliamentary Gfovernment, e< no two twigs
have yet been put together towards the bundle of sticks,” “no
single venture has been made in the trial of federal strength.”
As for Legislative union he believes that “ the time is come when
without the creation of any complicated scheme ... an
Australian nation might start into existence with all the
attributes of national greatness . . . within a year.” No
doubt, if he were the Jove of politics, such a Minerva, full armed,
might spring from his brain into the full maturity of life. But
we have to look in these days for slower and much more painful
travail in the birth of nations. Who is to believe, with the
simplest knowledge of human nature, that Victoria or New South
Wales would be content to lay down at the bidding of theorists
the power which each of them honorably won, and which each of
them upon the whole has nobly used ? If Sir Henry Parkes had
indicated the method by which such an act of self-abnegation
might be gained, he would have relieved his proposals of the
utter improbability now attaching to them. Would he call a
conference? But he has no faith in conferences. Would Mr.


Service and Mr. Morgan accept a scheme propounded jointly by
himself and Sir John Robertson, and does he think it would be
endorsed without a murmur on North Terrace, and the Carlton
Hill ? So fierce at this moment is the jealousy between Mel-
bourne and Sydney, that any scheme whatsoever emanating from
the one would be sure to be rejected by the other. “Within a
year,” indeed ! Let us be thankful if the union we long for —
any union that is real, is completed within the decade. This
proposal for Legislative union by the creation of a single Parlia-
ment is accompanied by a remarkable statement which reveals
the shifts to which its advocates are driven. “ The change,”
says Sir Henry, “ would of necessity call into existence a
more competent order of municipalities, armed with larger
powers for dealing with local improvements, from whose super-
vision in the execution of works both expedition and economy
might reasonably be looked for.” It seems then that not
only are our existing Parliaments to be swept away, but
our Municipal Institutions are to be changed as by an en-
chanter's wand. No longer is insolent incapacity to fume
and storm in our civic chambers. Town councils of a more
competent order, with authority over the adjacent country, are
to be called into existence. Gravely seated, like the Burghers of
New Amsterdam, they are to deal with local improvements
expeditiously and economically. The cities of the future are to
be built like the cities of the New Atlantis, well paved and
drained, clean - swept and electric lighted, with additional
three-penny rates to worry and vex the burgher-soul. Alas ! it
is but a dream —“ He that hath, to him shall be given.” That
is the divine law. Our Municipal Governments have not yet
proved themselves worthy of being endowed with larger powers.
I am not sanguine enough to imagine that I can set forth with
convincing argument, the advantages to be gained from Federal
union, but I take them to be chiefly these. Under a Federal
Government we should avoid the dangers to freedom inseparably
associated with the exercise of undivided power by a central
authority. One of the most reliable teachings of history is this,
that small States are more favorable to the development and
preservation of liberty than large ones. Under a Federal Go-
vernment we should not be so likely to be inflamed with the
passions of war. Your centralizing Imperialists are those who
take chief delight in “ gunpowder and glory.” Under a Federal


Government allowance would be made in legislation for diversi-
ties prevailing in different districts. This would be impossible
in a Legislative Union. Local wants are only properly attended
to by local legislators. To this it might be added that what is
wanted above all things for the successful working of Republican
government is a public spirit animating and rousing to exertion
the whole body of citizens. This can be attained only as the
Government is locally connected with the people of each State.
The average citizen of Adelaide would take very little interest in
public measures discussed in Albury for a united Australia.
But he will take a good deal of interest in measures discussed on
North Terrace for the benefit of his own colony. No amount of
telegraphic messages, or of increase in railway communication,
will overcome this grievous disadvantage to which a single
legislative authority is always liable. Nor can it be justly said
that in Confederation there is no real sovereign strength. On
the contrary, for all the purposes of a genuine national life the
patriotic zeal of each State would create a common fund of
patriotism for the entire people.
I shall venture, then, in spite of the great authority I have
quoted for the opposite view, to defend the scheme of federal
union as the best and only practicable scheme. And now I will
endeavour to set forth, as clearly and concisely as I can, the
general features of a Federal Government such as I humbly think
will avail for the peaceful and righteous administration of the
great and united people of Australia, during the long centuries
of their future. The sketch lam about to give is not the dream
of a visionary, busied about some utopia like that of Plato or Sir
Thomas More. I look to the history of my native land, and to
the history of the nations already founded by our race, as fur-
nishing all that is needed for wise prevision and judicious choice.
And I am further of opinion that we should be chary of novelties
and experiments, according to the famous saying of Lord Bacon,
“ For hoping well to deliver myself from mistaking by the order
and perspicuous expressing of that I do propound, I am other-
wise zealous and affectionate to recede as little from antiquity,
either in terms or opinions, as may stand with truth and the
proficience of knowledge.” For everything I propose there is a
precedent more or less tried and successful in the constitution of
the United States, or of Canada, or in the fundamental principles
of English jurisprudence.


To begin then with the apex of the social pyramid. The
federal colonies will need—a Governor, a Governor-General. How
shall he be appointed ? We shall not in this, I hope, follow the
example of the American Constitution. In America the Presi-
dent is chosen by a popular vote for a term of four years. And
so, once in four years, there is instability in the Legislature and
confusion in the Executive, and some degree of danger to the
commonwealth. Let the Governor-General of Australia be
appointed by the Sovereign, and thus be the representative of
British Majesty. I hold with Gladstone that, a the name of the
Queen is still the symbol, and her office the fountain of all
lawful powers.” Who will cavil at this close union between us
and the British throne ? The relation already existing does not
hinder the development of our self-reliance. The colonial
Governors of England are not like the Yiceroys of Spain. They
are but the constitutional heads of a constitutional government.
But the conditions are altered when we come to the next stage in
our graduated scale of authority. Since we are to retain
Parliaments for the several colonies, we shall need, as now, a
personal head in each, exerting a direct and personal influence
over the whole work of local government —watching, following,
canvassing the policy of each successive ministry. Shall these
(let us call them as in Canada, Lieutenant-Governors ), be
appointed by the Crown, or by the Governor-General in
or by the Ministry of each Provincial Parliament, or, as in
America, shall they be elected by universal suffrage ? There are
special advantages as well as disadvantages attendant upon
either mode, but I believe it will be found most expedient that
the Lieutenant-Governors should be appointed without election by
the Governor-General in Council.
And now consider with me the functions and duties and
limitations of the General Legislature and administration, —the
Parliament par excellence of all Australia. If we compare the
constitution of Canada with that of the United States, we shall
see a marked difference in the relation of the central to the
provincial powers. The American theory was that the sovereignty
lay in each particular state, and that only such powers should be
conceded to the central Government as were absolutely necessary
for general purposes. The authority of the House of Representa-
tives was therefore rigidly defined, and all attributes of Govern-
ment not distinctly specified were declared to belong to the


Senates of the States. As De Tocqueville tersely expresses it
“ The Government of the States remained the rule, and that of
the Confederation became the exception.” In Canada a very
different plan was followed. The theory was that the sovereignty
of the entire realm was vested in the Central Legislature, and that
the powers of the several provinces were essentially local and
particular. This theory leads to some important results. It
diminishes the probability of conflict between the central and
provincial legislatures, such a conflict as may some day bring
about a disruption of the United States. The Canadian precedent
I regard as the safest, and as more in harmony with the British
Constitution. I shall be guided by it, therefore, in the brief
sketch that I will endeavour to give of the privileges and powers
of the Australian Federal Parliament on the one hand, and of
those of the Provincial Parliaments on the other. There are
several vexed questions relating to the qualifications for member-
ship in the Upper and Lower Houses respectively, on which I
will not enter, but I will hazard the opinion that both in the
General and Provincial Parliaments, the Upper House should be
elective and not nominated, and that all election, so far as possible,
ought to be according to the principle of representation by
population. Universal suffrage inevitably leads to this.
What, then, are the powers to be vested in the General
Australian Parliament, the Parliament that is to represent all the
colonies jointly ? We shall all agree that the duty and
responsibility of the defence of our dominion against foreign foes
must be given to it. We are yet a long way off from the
Millenium, and must make provision for our safety. The General
Parliament must, in concert with Great Britain, provide our
naval and military forces, and such fortifications and arsenals as
may be needed for the protection of our coasts. It must
determine all questions touching the direction, the opening, and
maintenance of the main trunk lines of Bailway between the
several colonies. The Telegraphic and Postal System must also
be under its control. It must settle all questions of trade and
commerce, of navigation, of the lighting of the coast, of cunency
and coinage, of weights and measures. The chief Parliament
alone must have power to impose customs and excise duties, and
all other general taxes whatsoever. It will be needful also to assign
to it all legislation affecting Banks and Savings Banks, bills and
promissory notes, bankruptcy and insolvency, copyrights and


patents of invention, marriage and divorce, immigration and
naturalization. It must take upon itself also, both in the
legislative and executive, the important range of national duties
connected with the criminal law, the appointment of judges, and
a High Court of Appeal. In fine, I would endow the General
Parliament with power and responsibility over all matters coming
within the sphere of Government, that were not expressly handed
over to the local Parliaments.
Now at first sight it might seem, and especially to one not
familiar with the far-reaching responsibilities devolving on a
civilized government, that if the Central Parliament has all this
to do, there cannot be much left for the Parliaments of the
several colonies or states. But indeed there are many and
most important matters still left uncared for. To the Local
Parliaments would be assigned, first of all, the administration of
the Land. Important as it is, that the Land systems of Australia
should be uniform in their leading features, it is yet more
necessary that the differences in soil, and climate, and production,
and the habitudes and callings of the people should be fairly
considered. The difficulties that have arisen in all the colonies
between the pastoral tenants of Crown Lands, and the farmer or
settler, will be best met by ample discussion and cautious legis-
lation in each. It would be better, e.g., for New South Wales
to suffer for awhile from the injurious system of free selection
before survey rather than be compelled to adopt the more
rational system that prevails in South Australia. To the
Local Parliaments I would also assign everything that has
to do with Education —primary and higher, universities, colleges,
technical schools, grammar schools, common schools. If there
would be differences created by this mode, no serious neglect
need be anticipated in any province. Emulation would be
better than uniformity. They would also have the construction
and control of all public works, the maintenance and oversight of
hospitals, asylums, reformatories, prisons —everything in short
that has to do with pauperism and crime in the way of prevention
and repression. The Local Parliaments would exercise such
authority as is in harmony with the common law of the empire,
and in accordance with the constitution expressly provided for
Australia, over all municipalities and all sectional governments
that might be called into existence outside the boundaries of
municipalities, e.g., the Divisional Boards, which, in 1879, were


created in Queensland. With a similar restriction the Local
Legislatures would deal with all questions of taxation for local
purposes, and with the important classes of subjects relating to
the ownership and the duties of property, to rights of citizenship,
and to the administration of justice. This list of responsibilities
and obligations might easily be enlarged, but I think I have
cited the most important. It will serve to show that the
Provincial Parliaments will not be mere vestries or municpal
councils. Without interfering with the supreme and sovereign
authority of the Central Parliament, they will be endowed with
real powers of legislation and genuine executive authority.
Now, it is not to be expected for a moment that the Consti-
tutional changes I have thus foreshadowed can be accomplished
without overcoming considerable difficulties. It will be best to
have them, and grapple with them. Only from conflict comes
victory. But it is nonsense to speak of them as insuperable. Let
the people generally be aroused to the belief that confederation is
necessary to their true welfare, and the momentum generated will
bear down every obstacle. The chief difficulty at present con-
fronting the more thoughtful among the people, and their
legislators, is undoubtedly the protection policy of Victoria. It
has been asserted with much persistence, during the past five
years, that the prosperity of that colony depends on the creation
and nurturing of her manufactures by heavy protective duties.
South Australia and New South Wales, and Queensland, think
differently. They have made their ports free, save for such
customs duties as are needed for revenue. The question is
certainly a crucial one. Complete federation would be impossible
between States firmly holding such antagonistic views of fiscal
policy. As for myself, I am a thorough free-trader. I believe
that what we want for the next half century, at least, is to devote
all our strength to developing the great, the marvellous resources
of our magnificent country. We shall be much more profitably
occupied in growing wheat, and barley, and maize, and sugar, and
tobacco, and cotton, in producing beef and mutton, and tallow and
wool, and mohair and alpaca, and leather, in raising coal and
shale, and iron and copper, and gold and silver, and the rest of
the metals, than we should be in forcing manufactures before the
natural time for them has come. But far more than I believe in
free trade, do I believe in the right of a people to determine for
themselves the principle on which they will shape their destiny.


If confederation were in danger of being indefinitely delayed
because of rigid differences of opinion about Protection, I would
plead for a compromise. Something surely might be agreed
upon, say in the direction of intercolonial reciprocity, or of a
customs’ union, until Victoria came to the better mind. There
would, of course, be many adjustments to be made, and it would
be needful to deal with these in a spirit of generosity. Perhaps,
though I submit this with great diffidence (and I beg you to
observe that it forms no integral part of my scheme of confedera-
tion), we may agree to re-consider the boundaries of the
several colonies. Ido not mean that all the lands of Australia
should come into “ hotchpot” with a view to an equitable division
(though I must confess that the Northern Territory is something
like an estate given in Frankmarriage to one of the daughters of
Britain), but with a view to some partial re-adjustment, where
the original division was manifestly unfair. No one can look at
a map of Australia without seeing that the territory belonging to
Victoria is altogether too small, and not equal, I venture to say,
to her deserts. She ought, in my judgment, to have an open
pathway of her own to the northern coast.
Now, whatever view you like to take of these candidly
expressed opinions of mine about the union of the colonies, you
will at least confess that the subject is one that ought to be taken
up, and taken up at once by the people of Australia. It is worth
agitating about. A few public meetings in our leading cities,
some thoughtful and earnest articles in our leading newspapers,
and a public opinion would speedily be created, before which all
difficulties of initiation would be swept away. In a matter of
this sort the first real step would settle it, if only that step were
the result of a wide spread feeling previously created. Possibly
we might need to call for the intervention of the Home Govern-
ment at an early stage. The Royal Commission that sat at
Melbourne, in 1870, said “ We are distinctly of opinion that the
best means of accomplishing a union is to remove by an Imperial
Act all legal impediments to it without delay, and leave the
colonies to determine by negotiation among themselves, how far
and how soon they will avail themselves of the power thus
conferred upon them.” But to me it seems that the less the Home
Government has to do with it the better, until we ourselves have
determined on its expediency. The Earl of Kimberley will not
be very likely to fall into the error of Lord Carnarvon, and send


Mr. Froude, or any other philosophic historian, to instruct us in
the duty and art of Government. The initiation of the union
must not be effected by the colonial office, or the completion of it
will be indefinitely delayed. Probably the best mode of procedure
would be that adopted by Canada, Let the Parliament of each
colony choose from among its ablest politicians, two or three dele-
gates to a general conference. Let the conference, thus constituted,
be empowered to appeal to the Home Government for an Enabling
Act, in the event of fair unanimity of opinion in favour of
confederation. We may be sure that an Enabling Bill would
readily pass both Houses, The House of Lords would not
venture to do what they did thirty years ago, when they threw
out a clause in the Australian Government Act “ which empowered
the Crown to summon a general assembly of the colonies desirous
of legislating on matters of common interest.” The day has
gone by for interferences of this sort by the nobles of Great
Britain. In spite of the reactionary wave of imperialism, which
of late has been sweeping over the mind of the nation, the power
of the elected representatives of the people has become more
firmly settled, year by year. If we desire Confederation, the
House of Commons, and especially the present House with the
noble Gladstone for its leader, will lend us every facility, and
probably not the oldest wearer of a coronet will record his
dissent.
I am not sanguine enough to think that a work of this
magnitude could be completed in a year, or in two years, but I
think that in seven years we ought to be able to lay the topmost
stone of the edifice of Confederation with abundant rejoicing.
It was in 1787 that the first colonists landed upon the shores of
Australia. What could be better than that our first centenary in
1887 should witness the union of all those flourishing republics
that have risen to the dignity of national life ? Who has
enthusiasm to commence the necessary agitation, and who will
have mind of clearness and heart of faith to carry it on ? What
statesmen from among those who, by long and honourable service,
have deserved well of their country, will combine for the
first great act of this great political drama ? The names of
Washington, Madison, and Hamilton will stimulate the chivalry
of America for a thousand years to come. What names in the
long centuries of our glorious future will be counted worthy of
highest honour as the names of those who founded the Dominion
of Australia ?


REPORT OF MEETING
AT THE TOWN HALL, ADELAIDE,
On JUNE 17, ISBO.
From the Adelaide Register , June 18th.
AUSTRALIA CONFEDERATED.
A lecture on this subject was given at the Town Hall, Adelaide, on
the 17th of June, by the Rev. James Jefferis, L.L.8., Congregational
Minister, of Sydney, in the presence of His Excellency the Governor of
South Australia, who was accompanied by Mr. J. Jervois, R.E., Aide-
de-camp. On the platform were also the Chief Justice, Sir Henry
Ayers, the Hon. W. Morgan (Chief Secretary), the Hon, T. King
(Minister of Education), the Hon. W. R. Giblin (Premier of Tas-
mania), His Worship the Mayor of Adelaide (Mr. E. T. Smith, M.P.),
several members of both Houses of the Legislature, and a number of
ministers of various denominations.
His Excellency, in introducing the lecturer, said : —“ I am sure
that we could not be met to consider a more important subject than
that which will be laid before ns this evening, nor do I think from all
I have heard, and from the little that I know of Mr. Jefferis myself,
that any one could be chosen more competent to enlighten you upon
that important subject. You probably know Mr. Jefferis better than I
do ; at the same time I am bound to remark that he is not altogether
unknown to me, although personally 1 have not had the pleasure of
meeting him until the occasion of his visit to Adelaide at the present
time. When I was in Sydney, before I ever was in South Australia, I
was asked by a gentleman —a friend of mine—to go and hear a most
able preacher at the Congregational Church, Sydney, and 1 went. I
heard there one of the most satisfactory and able lectures that it was
ever my good fortune to listen to ; it was on the use and abuse of
wealth. I came away highly gratified and much enlightened, and I
am satisfied that those who heard the lecture to which I listened were
equally gratified and enlightened too. lam sure that if Mr. Jefferis
deals with the subject of the federation of the Colonies with the same
ability as he did with the use and abuse of wealth, he will do a great
work, and take one great step towards bringing about the consumma-
tion of that federation which we would all desire to see effected.”


The Hon. W. Morgan (Chief Secretary) proposed a vote of thanks
to the lecturer. He said he had very much pleasure in doing so,
because no one could fail to profit by the very weighty words Mr.
Jefieris had used in illustrating his subject. (Applause.) Not so
very long ago, in that grand old country to which Mr. Jefieris had so
eloquently alluded, it used to be a fashion among the clergy to step
down from their high position as spiritual teachers to build castles and
cathedrals, which still remained standing, as monuments of their
skill; while others went so far as to become great financial Ministers,
some administered the law, and others donned the casque and became
leaders of their own retainers. He did not say that Mr. Jefieris went
so far as this, but he had done something in that direction, for he had
stepped down from his high position as a teacher of great spiritual
truths to teach his audience something affecting the political welfare of
the country. Unlike some of the old priests, Mr. Jefieris, he believed,
did not go in for apostolic succession. (Laughter.) He might be
compared to some of those ancient men who taught the men of their
day a great deal of wisdom. He (Mr. Morgan) believed in this great
question of the confederation of these colonies, and had always believed
in it. He regarded confederation as the great future of the Australian
Colonies. (Applause.) But he was afraid it would only be brought
about when some great disaster overtook us. He believed that the
people of Australia would not be wise enough to become united while
they could do so in times of peace ; it would be only accomplished by
some great calamity happening to the mother country, and through
the mother country affecting the colonies. He believed that the great
obstacle in the way of confederation was the Custom House. As long
as we had Custom House officers stopping us at every colony at which
we called, he did not think there would be any chance of confederation.
He had never felt so much ashamed, as an Englishman, as when he saw
people stopped at Adelaide, Sydney, and Melbourne and asked if their
boxes had been examined to see if they contained any dutiable goods.
(Applause.) He said it was most discreditable that such a state of things
should be permitted to exist. The people of these colonies all spoke the
same language, we were all subjects of the same Queen, all were brothers
and sisters of each other in a national sense, and yet we could not
go from one colony to another without having our luggage overhauled,
and being made to pay duty on certain classes of goods. Before any con-
federation could be brought about it would be necessary to abolish Customs
duties and the the Custom House officers altogether. With regard to what
had already been done in this direction, as practically a part of the carrying
out of the question, he had great pleasure in alluding to the action of
the comparatively small colony of Tasmania, whose Premier he was
glad to see present on this occasion on the platform. (Applause.)


The colony of Tasmania was the first to bring forward some practical
scheme to have a Customs Union of the colonies effected. Some time ago
a schedule of goods was drawn up as a beginning, showing what classes
of goods might be admitted into the colony free of duty. He took the
trouble, some years ago, when he did not have so much to do as at
present, to make a balance-sheet with respect to the matter, and he
found that, although there would be at first a loss to the revenue of
the different colonies, still if that schedule had been adopted —the
schedule embraced nearly all the goods sent from one colony to
another —the whole balance divided between the colonies would be
absurdly small. It was humiliating that we should be put to so much
inconvenience for so small an amount of money. What made him
despair of anything being done in a year, or even two years, was the
fact that since that schedule was submitted and the communications
relative to it passed between the colonies, in the endeavour to effect
which settlement his hon. friend Sir Hemy Ayers and himself had both
helped, already some five or six years had elapsed, and nothing had
been done up to the present time. Judging from the past there was
little hope for future efforts, except some great calamity overtook us
and compelled the colonies to federate for their united protection. He
said, with all respect to the other colonies, that South Australia had
done more than any other colony in the dmection desired by the
advocates of confederation. She had provided telegraphic communica-
tion overland to Port Darwin, and thereby was enabled to hold daily
communication with all parts of the world. This great undertaking
had been carried out solely by South Australia ; it cost her £30,000 a-
year; and although none of the other colonies assisted in the work in
any manner, they nevertheless participated in the benefit. This was
what South Australia had already contributed to the confederation of
the colonies. (Applause.) If the older and larger colonies of Victoria
and New South Wales, which were much more able to put forth
similar efforts for the general good, were to make proportionate
efforts, then something tangible would be effected in the way of
confederation. He should recommend Mr. Jefferis, when be advocated
his scheme of confederation in the other colonies, to leave out that
part of his lecture about altering the boundaries. He thought if he
went to Queensland and New South Wales and told the people they
should give up a large portion of their property to Victoria, he would
not hear much more of federation from them ! (Laughter.) It would be
likely to prove fatal to his scheme. He was sure every one present was
very much obliged to Mr. Jefferis for the very able and eloquent
lecture he had delivered that evening. (Applause.) It was not only
a very eloquent lecture, but it was practical as well, for it contained a
great many practical points. Although he did not agi’ee with Mr.


Jefferis in every point, still there was enough foundation in the
lecture upon which to base a serious cousideration of this great
question. (Applause.) Apart from its practical bearing the lecture
was a masterly piece of elocution and eloquence, and well worth their
while to come there to listen to. (Applause.) He trusted we would
all live to see the day when we need not call ourselves South
Australians, but Australians, over all this great continent (Loud
applause.)
The Hon. W. R. Girlin, Premier of Tasmania, was then called
upon to second the motion, and was received with prolonged applause.
He said he was sure they would appreciate the motive which had
induced such well-known citizens as His Worship the Mayor, or Sir
Henry Ayres, or his friend the Chief Justice, to leave to him the
pleasant task of seconding the vote of thanks so ably proposed by his
hon. friend the Chief Secretary. They would appreciate the motive,
and feel that it was not from any desire on their part to shrink from
paying testimony to the merits of the lecturer, but because here, in
South Australia, every visitor who came to these shores was met with
such generosity, with such hospitality—(applause)—and such kindlk
ness, that for himself he said he should go away burdened with
obligations —(applause) —which, so long as his life lasted, he would
never forget, and which it would be his privilege to seek in some
measure to repay when any South Australian visited his colony.
(Loud applause). He regarded it as a great honour and privilege to
second this vote of tlianks for the earnest and eloquent lecture
they had just listened to. He was a little younger than his
hon. friend the Chief Secretary, and perhaps he was a little
more enthusiastic perhaps a little more credulous ; but he
ventured to say, without pledging himself to every part of Mr.
Jefferis’ scheme, that the words the lecturer had spoken that night
were words that Australia would not willingly let die. They would be
read by thousands of persons throughout the length and breadth of the
land through the medium of the public Press, and wherever the lecture
might be hereafter delivered it would produce a lasting impression.
Although there might be a difference of opinion upon minor points
there would be none upon the one great question that the colonies
must be federated in one great union, sooner or later, and he prayed
God it would be soon. (Loud applause.) He believed it would be the
outcome of the work upon which Mr. Jefferis had entered that night.
He honoured him for not confining his attention exclusively to ques-
tions of theology, he honoured him for descending from the pulpit to
enter the arena and give them the benefit of his voice and judgment in
so great a cause. (Applause.) For himself, he said, although belong-


ing to politically the most insignificant colony of the Australian group,
—the smallest, the weakest, and the poorest colony —he had to thank
Mr. Jefferis for bringing into a focus his (Mr. Giblin’s) somewhat hazy
thoughts regarding the future Australian Dominion. The will of the
Australian people should be brought to bear upon this question, and
then those jealousies which now divided the colonies would have to
melt away, and one common interest unite the whole group together.
He agreed also with Mr. Jefferis that in this matter of confederation it
must begin in the colonies themselves, and not be forced upon them by
the old country. He trusted that he and his friend the Chief Secre-
tary would have a hand in bringing about so desirable a result.
(Applause.) He regarded the question of intercolonial defences as
eminently important in any confederation scheme ; and in his opinion
the fact that South Australia had already, in a very tangible manner, con-
tributed to the general good of the colonies by constructing the overland
telegraph to Port Darwin, furnished a very good reason why she should
be foremost in pressing the scheme on. (Applause.) There was one
part of Mr. Jefferis’s lecture to which he took most violent exception,
namely, the suggestion to have the central seat of government
at Albury or Mount Gambier. He knew a town nestling under the
shadow of a grand and romantic hill—(laughter) —which was laved by
the clear waters of a beautiful river, on whose fair bosom the navies of
the world might safely anchor ; and this town had a Government
house which he was sure might well become the official residence of his
friend, His Excellency the Governor of South Australia, if it should
please Her Majesty to appoint him Governor-General of the future
Australian Dominion. (Laughter and applause.) And as he had been
told there were days in the summer in South Australia when the air
was not so exquisitely balmy and mild as at present, it would be an
advantage to fix the central seat of government at Hobart Town, where
in the summer months the climate was deliciously cool, for then the
work of the Parliament of the Australian Dominion would go on with
admirable smoothness, and the South Australian representatives would
at the close of the session return to Adelaide invigorated in mind and
body, and give the most pleasing accounts of the happy time they had
passed in the quiet village of Hobart Town, (Laughter.) He had
great pleasure in seconding the vote of thanks. (Loud applause.)
The motion was carried by acclamation.
Mr. Jefferis, in acknowledging the compliment, mentioned that
the subject of confederation had occupied his attention for some years
past, and his lecture was the result of patient observation and study.
He adjured all good citizens of Adelaide to set to work and endeavour
to give some practical effect to the matter. South Australia had been


foremost in the colonies in many works of great and national utility,
and if she were successful in commencing the agitation which would
by-and-by end in the confederation of the colonies it would be hei
crown of glory ? (Applause.)
Sir Henry Avers proposed a vote of thanks to His Excellency for
presiding at the meeting, and in doing so passed a high compliment on
him, referring pointedly to his readiness at all times to assist at public
gatherings. Speaking of the lecture, he said it was not only an able
lecture but it was practical. Mr. Jefferis had, more than any one who
had addressed himself to the subject of confederation, dealt with the
matter in a practical way. He had also shown the absurdity of the
proposal of his friend, Sir Henry Parkes, as to a legislative confedera-
tion for the colonies. That, in his opinion, was simply impossible.
The motion was carried by acclamation.
His Excellency, in responding, said he had listened to the lecture
with the greatest pleasure. Whether it was considered in its historical
aspect, or from the careful analysis it gave on the subject of confedera-
tion, or from the practical manner in which Mr. Jefferis proposed to
carry out the idea, he was sure they must all regard it as an immense
contribution to the cause of the future great kingdom of Australia.
(Applause.) He observed that Mr. Jefferis was going to deliver
another lecture shortly on the subject u Australia Christianized. He
only hoped he would deal with it as ably as he had dealt with the
subject of the Confederation of the Australian Colonies. (Loud ap-
plause.)


CONFEDERATION OF AUSTRALIA.
From the Adelaide Observer of June 26, 1880.
The lecture which the Rev. James Jefferis, of Sydney, delivered on
Thursday week, dealt in a very eloquent yet withal practical way with
a subject of vast importance—we refer to the confederation of the
Australian Colonies. It is a question which demands the earnest and
early consideration of all Australian statesmen. Time is passing, and
each succeeding year finds the provinces, instead of being drawn
closer together in any bond of union, more separated from each other,
and emphasizing with increasing force their individual peculiarities.
Reprisals, as well as differences in regard to fiscal legislation, the
sudden discontinuance of friendly treaties, and jealousies, both of a
local and national character, are widening instead of lessening the
breach ; and it seems as if Mr. Morgan’s words were true—that
nothing but some terrible calamity will lead the colonies to seek
anything like the foundation of a great Southern Empire. And yet it
could be shown that from purely selfish, apart from any higher
motives, it would be to their advantage and prosperity if they lived in
closer union and connection one with another.
Mr. Jefferis laid down in clear and undisguised terms what he
conceived to be the basis of a federal union between the colonies. And
although we are not in accord with him as to some of the details, yet
in the main we are at one with him. We do not think, with the Hon.
J. Douglas, of Queensland, that a United Australia necessarily implies
separation from the mother-country and the springing into existence of
a separate and independent nation ; nor are we disposed to accept Sir
Henry Parkes’ view that the best plan of carrying out the scheme of
federation is to have a legislative union among the three colonies of
New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia, whose individual
Parliaments should be merged into one great Parliament, which should
have supreme authority over all national affairs. This would not be a
complete Australian Dominion. Mr. Jefferis is more liberal, and would
include Queensland and Tasmania, but not Western Australia or New
Zealand ; but for ourselves we do not see why the whole of the conti-
nent, as well as New Zealand, should not be embraced in any federa-
tion proposals. We believe with the lecturer that the plan most likely


to meet with popular acceptance in the colonies themselves is that
which will leave to local Parliaments the conduct of local affairs, and
to a supreme Parliament the control of all matters of universal
concern. Of course there will arise differences of opinion as to many
of the points on which Mr. Jefferis laid much stress, though his good
judgment would no doubt lead him to modify them if they stood in the
way of the adoption of his main proposal. The first great point is to
get the colonies agreed as to the desirability of being federated in one
grand Dominion. This decided, all minor details and differences may
be susceptible of adjustment. Many persons may hold views antagon-
istic to an alteration of the boundaries of the colonies ; others may not
agree with the lecturer in his proposal respecting the distribution of
legislative powers among the local and national Parliaments; and
others again may think Wentworth or Port Augusta a more suitable
site for the federal capital than either of those proposed by Mr. Jefferis
and the Hon. Mr. Giblin ; but after all the great principle of federation
itself does not rest upon any of these points. It is superior to them,
and in the study and consideration of the question this should be
borne in mind, lest that which is of paramount importance should be
lost in that which is non-essential.
On the whole, we agree with the view that the question should-
not at the outset be hampered by authoritative suggestions and pro-
posals from the Imperial authorities, or from the Colonial Parliaments.
It should first spring from the wish and will of the people. Public
opinion must be educated up to a sense of the profound importance and
necessity of the matter, and when this is done, then will be the time
for the Legislatures of the various colonies to take action. This course
of procedure will, we are sure, serve the great cause far more than any
outside attempt to thrust it upon the people. For this reason the
desirability of the proposal, news of which reached us by telegram a
few days ago, that the British Commissioners who are to attend the
Melbourne Exhibition will come armed with power to summon a
Conference of the Governors and Premiers of the colonies to consider
and discuss the subject of confederation, is open to question. If the
object of the Imperial Commission were simply to initiate the con-
sideration of the momentous undertaking, there could be no possible
objection to it, but anything like compulsion would not be tolerated for
one moment. If the question is to be begun and continued with any
prospect of success, it must be called for by the people themselves, who
have become sufficiently attached to the democratic rule of self-
government to resent anything like an interference with their free
action. We have statesmen able enough to grapple with the subject ;
and the rev. gentleman’s own contribution is evidence that it is
receiving earnest attention at the hands of others than those who


specially have fco deal with politics. There is, therefore, no reason why
feeling on the matter should not be quickened, and ere long something
definite be done. We believe Mr. Jefferis purposes redelivering his
lecture in Melbourne and in Sydney, and possibly he may succeed in
arousing public interest in the question in those cities. Should this be
so, some practical good may result from his masterly deliverance, and
within the next decade we may be on the high-road to the full and
complete establishment of a confederation of the Australias. So far as
feouth Australia is concerned, we are sure there will never be any
opposition to the great principle itself, albeit when the details are
published some differences of opinion may arise. A careful study of
the question in all its bearings—a consideration of the interdependence
of the colonies in times of warfare, and of the intimate social and tradal
relations which might be sustained between them were hostile tariffs
abolished, and petty jealousies annihilated, will convince any candid
mind that federation is a work that should engage the earnest and
vigorous labours of those who take any part in the public affairs of the
provinces.
(From the Sydney Morning Herald of July 5, 1880).
The theme of the lecture by the Rev. James Jefferis, which we
published last week, is no doubt a tempting one. It is no new thing
to sound the praises of unity. The conception of solidarity has entered
into every conception of ideal life and society. The wise saying of
Seneca is that “ The gods divided man into men that he might be
more helpful to himself.” A series of independent units must always
be weaker than a common system. During recent years especially,
unity has been a watchword iu Europe and throughout the world.
The unification of Italy and Germany in particular has been the
occasion of new aspirations, victories, and hopes. In its way, a united
Australia is as noble an idea as a united Germany. A number of
settlements, welded together by a common language and by common
interests, have everything to lose by sectional estrangements, and
everything to gain by common co-operation.
So far, at least, everybody must agree with Mr. Jefferis in his con-
tribution to the question of the confederation of Australia. It will also
be generally admitted that when Australia is confederated, it will be on
some such principle as Mr, Jefferis lays down. If the colonies are to
change their form of government at all, there are but two ways of
doing it, the first is by consolidation and the second by confederation.
Consolidation would mean the abolition of all the colonial Govern-
ments but one, and the going back to the days when the


colonies were ruled from a common centre. Advantageous as
such a change as this might be in certain respects, there is not
the slightest probability of its being made. As population extends in
the distant parts of these colonies, the cry is for still further separation,
not consolidation. The scheme under which local affairs would be
managed by a local Legislature, and general affairs by a central Legis-
lature, would be the only possible improvement on the existing state of
things. This scheme, which in its general outline is found in the
Constitution of the United States, has been embodied in the Dominion
of Canada. The leading provisions of such a method of unification
were clearly laid down during the discussion on the confederation of
South Africa, which took place about five years ago. Appended to the
Enabling Act, which was prepared with a view to that event, was a
list of the subjects that should be dealt with both by the Provincial and
General Parliaments. As might be supposed, this list differs in a good
many respects from the one supplied by Mr. Jefferis, and, so far as the
modus operandi of confederation goes, it leaves little to be desired.
This, indeed, is a phase of the confederation question which it is hardly
necessary to discuss under existing circumstances.
There is, however, an important phase of the question which Mr.
Jefferis leaves out of the calculation. He discusses the relation of the
colonies to each other, but not their relation to the mother country.
But to no small extent it is the future of the relation of these colonies
to the United Kingdom that makes the future of their relation to each
other of so much importance. The doctrine which Mr. Froude was
authorized by the Beaconsfield Government to lay before the politicians
of South Africa, was that the colonies were to work in the direction of
their political independence of the mother country. Any such theory
of the future must modify all our notions of confederation. Supposing
as we may do, that a separation from England is not to be contem-
plated in the immediate future, many, if not most, of the great questions
which concern the colonies as a whole are in some of their bearings
Imperial questions. The Chinese question, for example, that of mail
services, and, above all, that of colonial defence, if ever disposed of,
must be dealt with by the common action of the mother country and
the colonies. The business of colonial defence has already become an
important part of practical politics. The military supremacy of Asia
must be determined sooner or later, and when it is determined there will
have to be some understanding as to the part which is to be played
in the colonies, and that which is to be taken at home. The proba-
bility that these colonies may be attacked by Russians, Germans, or
Chinese, may seem a distant one. But the danger that the colonies
may be set upon by a hostile power of some sort is not one to be
ignored, and, if not, the union of the colonies to this extent at least


is not a matter to be dismissed. Whether united action for such
purposes as those of defence must necessarily mean organic unity, is
another matter. It will probably be held that there are two opinions
upon that point. But, whether for the purposes of united action, or
for those of actual confederation, the Imperial question must of neces-
sity enter into the Colonial question. We do not agree with Mr. Jefferis
when he says that the less the mother country has to do with the business
of confederation the better. We conceive that the matter is one with
which the mother country has a great deal to do. Indeed, if the
work of confederation is attempted at all, unless some great political
cataclyism occurs, the probability is that the mother country will have
to take the initiative. This is what was done in South Africa. The
objection raised in that part of the world was not to Lord Carnarvon’s
urging the holding of a Conference, but to his undertaking the task of
naming the members of the Conference, and to the sending out of Mr.
Froude to show the colonists how the negotiations should be conducted.
As to the purely Colonial part of the question, the circumstances
of Australia are different from those of Canada and South Africa.
We have no hostile races in our midst and no great nation on our
borders. Even at the Cape, as we have been recently informed, the
difficulties in the way of confederation have been found to be over-
mastering, and for the present, at least, the project has been given
up. There is no ground for supposing that at the present
juncture a movement in the direction of confederation would be
more successful here than it has proved in South Africa. The
two difficulties in the way of such a movement would grow out
of the pressure of our provincial concerns, and the differencies
in our tariffs. The latter of these difficulties would probably
be found to be insuperable. In any scheme of confederation
there would have to be intercolonial free trade to start with. Following
this there would of necessity be a common system of trading with the
outside world. What system could be agreed upon ? Victoria would
want her protective system, New South Wales would demand free
trade. For the purposes of confederation Mr. Jefferis suggests a com-
promise. With this suggestion we cannot agree. Even confederation
may be purchased at too great a price, and we should hesitate to take it
as a substitute for free trade. Even if the tariff difficulty were removed,
a number of other difficulties would present themselves. There are
many evils to be endured in our present state of division, but many
of them are incident to it, not consequent upon it. They are evils
that would exist with confederation as well as without it. Mr. Jefferis,
in referring to our various land systems, in the first part of his lecture,
seems to convey the idea that a uniform system would be preferable to
the medley of empirical systems at present in force. But in the scheme


he advocates he proposes to leave the question of public lands with the
Provincial Parliaments, not with the central one. This is no doubt
what would have to be done, and the method of dealing with public
lands would be adopted in connection with many other subjects which
now divide the colonies. Thus, confederation would attack more
anomalies than it would remove. That confederation must come
hereafter may be admitted, but nothing would be gained by forcing it.
Political systems are things of growth rather than of manufacture.
There are two methods by which the colonies may be brought nearer
together, the one is by political confederation, and the other is by
united action. If we cannot adopt the one, we may adopt the other.
THE CONFEDERATION OP THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
(From The Colonies and India [London] of October 9, 1880.)
The lecture on “Australian Confederation,” given by the Rer. J.
Jefferis at Adelaide last June, and already referred to in our columns,
has evoked such favourable comment and caused so much discussion
throughout the Colonies, that we give at length the principal portions
of it, in the hope that it may excite thoughtful discussion at Home.
Printed by John Woods <£■ Co., Bridge Street, Sydney.




