

\k * v r -.s pjza
le St. James's Magazine Advertiser. ix.
Price Is. Monthly.
ST. JAMES’S MAGAZINE.
No. 230, FOE FEBRUARY, 1881.
CONTENTS:
1. KATHARINE JOHNSTON. By Mbs. Fokbes-Bobebtson. Chapters VI., VII., VIII. ... 81
2. PROFESSOR BLACKIE’S FAUST ... 98
3. HENRIK IBSEN. By T. Aboher, M.A 104
p —4. AUSTRALIAN CULTURE. By A. H. Keane 11l
z' 6, GUILTY AND NOT GUILTY. A Novel from the Gorman. By Maeie Sophie Schwartz.
Chapter XIX., XX 12G
6. HOW PLANTS MOVE 137
7. THE LOGARITHMIC SLIDE , 144
8. LIGHTNING PROTECTORS FOR ELECTRIC TELEGRAPHS. IV 150
9. NOTICES OF BOOKS 157
Communications to the Editor should he addressed to the care of Messrs. Grattan,
Marshall & Co., Paternoster Row, E.C,
Every M.S. should hear the name and address of the sender and he accompanied
hy the necessary Postage Stamps for its return in case of non-acceptance.
Every endeavour will he made to send lack non-accepted Articles, hut the
Editor cannot guarantee their safe return.
ROYAL LETTERS PATENT-
THE ONLY RULE WITHOUT AN EXBEPTION
IS THE
SELF-CENTRE RULE,
Appleton’s Patent.
INSTANTANEOUS IN OPERATION.
NO MENTAL CALCULATION ,
The exact centre, and equal or unequal distances from the
centre, of a piece of work can be found with the greatest
readiness and accuracy. It is invaluable for all classes of
workmen, and not higher in price than an -ordinary well-
made rule.
Wholesale and Retail in various Sizes and Prices of
WILLIAM PICKERING,
31, ARUNDEL STREET, STRAND, LONDON.
A SPECIMEN SENT FOR 18 STAMPS.


The St. James's Magazine Advertiser.
S. DAVIS & CO.,
MANUFACTURE EVERY DESCRIPTION,
2/6 WEEKLY.
ILLUSTRATED PRICE LIST, containing full information. Post Free,
DAVIS’S PERIOD BICYCLE. COMPLETE 55/-,
2/6 WEEKLY.
OR 2/6 WEEKLY.
MACHINES EXCHANGED—fuII value allowed.
REPAIRS at either Establishment, by Skilled Mechanic
DAVIS’S BAKERS PATENT BOX WASHER, from 20/-
COMPLETE! from 20/- MANGLE, from £3 ; 10 : 0.
2/0 WEEKLY. 2/6 WEEKLY.
2/6 WEEKLY.
S. DAVIS & CO.
LONDON BRANCHES
& 67, Cheapside, EIC. nr. Bennett’s Clock; 144, The Grove, Stratford, corner of Great
10, Hackney road, near Shoreditch Church 5 Eastern street;
Period House, Borough, near St. George’s 18, Commercial road, near Leman street 5
Church 1 126, Tottenham tCourt road, near Euston
Bicycle Academy, 13, Blackman-st., Boro-S.E Road.
CHIEF OFFICE & WHOLESALE DEPOT—IS, Blackman-st., Borough, S.E,, London.
'THE “E. U.” JEWELLERY MAY JUSTLY BE
TERMED HIGH ART.’-Pnncm.
L’fIRTISTIQUE LOCKET,
In ‘E.U.’ Hall-marked Silver, with Invisible Joint
AND TO OPEN FOR TWO PORTRAITS.
In Raised, Engraved, and Pierced Work (designs unlimited),
over a highly-polished Background.
Embattled and Shotted Border.
*A fine production, bearing comparison with the choicest
work of mediaeval ages.’ —Civil Service Gazette.
Price, size of Sketch, 295.; size larger, 335.; best Morocco
Case, is. 6d. extra. Free by registered post on receipt of
P. 0.0. (Piccadilly-circus) in favour of
EDWIN TJMFBEVILLE, Art Jeweller,
119, JERMYN STREET, LONDON, S.W.


AUSTRALIAN CULTURE.
T has long been the fashion even amongst scientific
writers to treat the aborigines of Australia with the
greatest contempt, and they are still popularly re-
garded as but little removed from the brute
creation. Almost every mental and physical
quality has been denied them, and they have been
represented as occupying the lowest possible position in
the social scale, without government, religion or tribal organiza-
tion of any sort. This unfavourable picture has been partly
formed through the habit of drawing hasty conclusions from in-
sufficient data, and judging of the whole race from the few
degraded specimens hanging on the outskirts of European
civilization, and loafing about the shanties and farmsteads of the
backwoods. A wider knowledge of the subject, however, has
made it abundantly evident that there are many grades of culture
amongst the native tribes, and that while some are undoubtedly
as low almost as the Fuegians themselves, others have attained
a respectable status, enjoying definite institutions, possessing
efficient arms and implements, building at all events temporary
dwellings, entertaining some idea of an after state and often
endowed with mental qualities of no mean order. Before they
were tainted by contact with European vice, many of the border
tribes shewed themselves capable even of chivalrous conduct
and gave many proofs of kindly feeling, tenderness, loyalty,
great endurance of hardship and physical suffering, and
a surprising capacity for adopting the ideas and manners of
the white man.
Efforts have been made by ethnologists to distinguish two
native races, one of lighter colour, physically, and mentally
superior and on the whole degraded from a higher state since
their arrival in Australia, the other of a far more debased type,
darker in complexion, of smaller statue, without traditions of a
better past, a race not fallen from a higher position, but pain-
fully struggling upwards from a still deeper primitive condition.


But whatever truth there may be in this view, most of the
differences observed in the various tribes may very well be ac-
counted for by the different surroundings, the more or less
favourable outward circumstances of soil and climate, the
greater or less facilities for obtaining food and raiment enjoyed
by a race thinly scattered over such a vast area as that of the
Australian Continent. Thus the river and fish eating tribes of
New South Wales and Yictoria are generally described as having
been more numerous, powerful, intelligent and robust than
those of the arid plains in the centre and West. “ I have seen
many six foot men among’them,” says Albert Le Souef, well
built and stout in proportion. The tribes who inhabit country
with no rivers, and but little water, are miserable creatures,
repulsive in appearance, stunted in growth, without vigour,
having more primative encampments, fewer appliances, and
ruder weapons, and altogether inferior to the fish tribes.”
Attention to this point is indeed of the greatest importance, and
will help to account for many of the discrepancies and violent con-
trasts presented by the subjoined series of pictures, intended to
illustrate the manners and customs, religious ideas, moral
thoughts, tribal organization, in a word, the Culture of
Australian Aborigines.
I.— Belief in Gods, Demons, Ghosts.
On the arrival of the white man, the Western tribes about
Perth and the Swan River, seem to have had absolutely no
religion of any sort, no trace of idolatry, no notion of a god or gods.
Yet their belief in the existence of many local demons was very
strong. Thus an evil being called the Nyowalong was sup-
posed to roam about during the night, collecting the gum of the
boranthus, which he placed in bags suspended round his body.
He is described as taking the form of an old man, moving along
in a half squatting attitude with a ivanna or yamstick in his
hand, and uttering a short shrill shriek at every step. When
asked why they did not spear him, they laughed at the idea,
remarking that ‘‘one might as well try to spear a grasstree, he is so
surrounded with gum-bags.” They eat the gum of the acacias,
hakeas and other trees, but not of this particular species, for
were they to do so they fancy Nyoiualong would certainly do
them some great harm, the fact being that this gum is not


edible. There is another demon named Winninry, who resides
during the winter on a hill in the Darling Range, south of the
Helena River, but in summer on the north side of the river,
“ because he cannot cross it when flooded.” These fanciful
beings are all material, subject to the same physical conditions
as ordinary mortals. But the Highlanders of this region have
a chief demon called Wangal, who seems to be a sort of spirit
dwelling in the large brown snake, which is consequently care-
fully avoided and never killed, although other equally venemous
serpents are freely eaten. Mr. W. H. Knight of Swan River,
tells us how he was on one occasion travelling on horse-back
near the River Dale, with a native guide, when he suddenly
came upon a large brown snake coiled up and fast asleep. On
alighting to kill it “ my sable friend was much alarmed, and
tried to pull me back, declaring that if I killed the snake,
Wangal would quibble Oingee, or spear me by stealth when I
was asleep, and he urged me to have one of the soldiers of my
escort to sleep in my tent for protection.”
There is another Wangal, who is a water demon endowed
with supernatural powers. To him are referred most of the
ailments that cannot be otherwise accounted for. But a being
of a much higher order is Nurunderi , the great and wonderful
god of the Narringeri people inhabiting the regions of the
Lower Murray. This Nurunderi is a good instance of hero
worship, and ultimate deification, for he was evidently a real
person, who performed great deeds in his time. Hence he is
described as originally coming down the Darling with his
followers. On his arrival at the Lower River Murray he sent
back two messengers to report his arrival to the up country
people. The expedition seems to have then crossed over to
Lake Albert, where they found the land in possession of hostile
tribes. Marvellous accounts are told of the contests that
ensued. Nurunderi is said to have thrown flat stones into the
present Lake Alexandrina, which became the fish called
tinuwarri, or bream. He made an excursion up to the Coorong,
where he had a great fight with, and slew a chief, who had kid-
napped his children. When he reached the coast at Encounter
Bay, his wives forsook him, but he called upon the sea to over,
flow, and they were all swallowed up in the waves. In the end
he went to Wyirrewarri, or heaven, where he now dwells.
YOL. xii. X


Another being more nearly approaching the idea of a
creator is Bunjil, to whom the Wawurongs of the Yarra River
attribute the beginning of all things except woman. He has a
wife Boiboi, whose face he has never seen, a son Bin-beal and
a brother Pal-ly-yan, by whose help he made most things. He
goes about with a large knife or sword, and after making the
earth he went all over it, cutting and slashing it into rivers and
creeks, mountains and valleys. Others give him two sons,
whom he often sends to destroy wicked people, bad men and
women who kill and eat the blacks. In the north of Victoria, the
creation is attributed to the Nooralie, a misty being who lived a
very long time ago, and who sometimes assumed the form of a
crow and an eagle. Between crow and eagle there was a
standing feud, but they came to terms at last. They agreed
that the Murray tribes should be divided into two classes, the
Eaglehawks and the Crows. Thus out of their enmities and
reconciliations arose the two great divisions of these people, and
all the intricate laws regulating their marriages and mutual
intercourse.
In general, birds and beasts may be said to be the gods of the
natives. The eagle, the crow, the mopoke and the crane play
a large part in all their legends. The native cat also is now
the moon, and the emu, kangaroo, opossum and other animals
distinguished on earth have been set in the firmament, and
now shine as bright stars. Formerly the Swan River people
also supposed that the souls of the departed passed into the
cormorants frequenting the Mewstone rock facing the mouth of
the river. But since the arrival of the whites this belief has
been modified, and the whites, or Jenga, that is ghosts, were
then supposed to be re-imbodiments of their forefathers
returning in big ships to the land of their birth. Mr. Knight
tells us that he himself was taken for Bogare, a native of the
Middle Swan tribe, who had been slain by another man some
time before his arrival. He also mentions the case of a
European “ who had a scar on his leg similar to one which had
been on the leg of a deceased native man. This gentleman
was the first to settle in a new district, at Chittering near
Bindoon, where the natives had then seen very little of white
people. On perceiving the scar, they immediately asserted
that he was their deceased friend, and the widow claimed him


as her husband.” Europeans were in this way constantly and
inconveniently claimed as near relations by the blacks, who
seem quite positive of their identity, treating them at times with
great affection and oppressive attentions. The belief, however,
began to die out since children were born to the white people,
and the Mewstone cormorants are once more reinstated in the
place of honour.
ll. —lmmortality, Superstitions,
From some of the foregoing statements it is obvious that
many of the natives believe in an after state, although this has
been strenuously denied by many intelligent observers. They
possess terms for the soul as something quite distinct from
the body, and when the latter is buried they often believe in
the reappearance of the former. The escaped convict, Buckley,
was supposed by the Maruras of the Darling to be animated by
the spirit of a departed chief, and on that account his life was
spared. The belief was occasioned by the fact that the spear
of the chief was in Buckley’s hand when found, his height also
and other points tallying with those of the departed chief.
Buckley lived 32 years amongst these wild tribes, and related
the circumstance on his return to the settlements.
The Narrinyeri people have an idea that the dead go to some
place in the far west, where their God, or hero, Nurunderi
resides. To get to this place they have to pass under the sea,
and on their way they behold underneath them a great fire
burning very fiercely. The wicked are in great danger of
falling into this pit, but the good are quite safe. Some say
that this, like many other legends, is not genuine, and that the
native folk lore has been greatly coloured or corrupted since
the propagation of the Biblical myths amongst them. A more
genuine belief is that of the Ninibaldi tribe of Mount Freeling,
and the Poondinna district. Their idea-is that when a black
fellow dies, a kinchirra— black fellow, carries him off to the
west, where he will be placed in a sort of elysium, with nothing
to do but play about and kill wild beast or kangaroos every day.
But if he has been a very wicked fellow in life, then the
kinchirra drowns him on the way. But who the kinchirra is
nobody seems to know, and his possession seems to be a special
privilege of the Ninibalda people.


All things considered, we may safely conclude, with Mr. J.
M. Davis, that all the tribes, without exception, believe in some
sort of future state, however crude and material; “ for go where
you will—east or west, north or south—you will still find them
strong in the belief that though they will die they will rise
again in the flesh, stronger, aye, and wiser again than ever.
They are, on the other hand, excessively superstitious, and
betray the greatest alarm in the presence of all unusual
natural phenomena. The first appearance of the great comet
of 1842 produced tremendous excitement and consternation
amongst all the tribes. “A large number,” writes Le Souef
“ were encamped close to the station where I resided, and I
remember the intense alarm it created-different spokesmen
gesticulated and speechified far into the night. But as the
comet still remained, and all their endeavours to explain the
unusual appearance were fruitless, they broke up their camp in
the middle of the night—the only time I ever remember it
being done—and crossed the river, where they remained huddled
up together till morning. Their opinion was that the comet
had been caused and sent by the Ovens blacks to do them some
direful harm. They left the station and did not return until
the comet disappeared.”
Some of their superstitions are extremely curious. Mr. W.
Locke, who lived some time amongst the Kotoapna people,
relates how he was once returning with a native from Moira,
and on expressing his fear that it would be dark before reaching
home, “blackie immediately alighted from his horse, and,
without saying a word, proceeded to cut a small sod of
which he placed in a fork of a tree, exactly facing the setting
sun, remarking, ‘ Plenty quambee (stop) sun now. No pull
away.’ As it happened we got home before it was dark, when
Sambo exultingly exclaimed, ‘ No gammon ground ’ (meaning
the sod of earth). Of the same tribe he mentions a terrible
custom attending the death of a baby. The mother carries it
on her back till her husband procures the kidney-fat of some
strange blackfellow. The kidney-fat is wrapped in some rags,
and worn as a charm round the neck. To extract the fat the
victim is first stunned by a waddy, a small incision is then made
jn his side, and a portion of the fat carefully removed from the


kidneys. He is then left to his fate, and will often linger in
great agony for six or eight days after its operation.”
lII.— SOECEEY.
The most baneful form assumed by superstition is undoubtedly
the prevalent belief in withcraft, as universal on the Australian
as on the African continent. No native ever dies a natural
death, the event being always referred to the incantations of
some sorcerer in a neighbouring tribe. From this arise
feuds, bloodshed and a thousand other evils, which almost
more than any other cause have retarded the natural develop-
ment and intellectual progress of the inhabitants. For the
first duty is to find out the magician, and avenge the murder.
For this purpose they resort to the most ridiculous practices.
They will scrape up the earth around the yictim to find the
track of some worm or insect, or watch the movements of a
passing lizard, or study the cracks formed in drying by the
moist clay covering the grave. These omens are interpreted
by the tribal medicine man, whose prerogative it always is to
point out the road to be taken in search of the evil doer. Then
the warriors set out, and often kill the first that crosses their
path in expiation of the fancied crime. This stirs up feelings
of revenge in the fresh victim’s friends, and so the evil spreads
until every clan is in a chronic state of warfare with all its
neighbours, and all hopes are lost of effecting that union of
the isolated communities which is the first step towards estab-
lishing a state.
The various forms assumed by this cruel demon are almost
endless. Amongst the Narrinyeris there are three distinct
kinds, the millin, the ngathungi and neilyeri. In the practice
of millin there is used a plongge, or large headed club, whose
mere touch is injurious or even fatal. With it they will knock
down an enemy, tap his chest, or strike his shoulders and
knees, after which he is supposed to be placed in the power of
a demon called Nalkaru, from whose machinations there is no
escape. If he is not speared in battle he is bitten by a
venomous snake, or swept away by tbe stream, or stricken by
disease. Let the plongge but touch the chest of a sleeper and
the lungs are at once affected, and any soreness discovered in
those organs after the invariable post-mortem is triumphantly


attributed to its efficacy. Ngathungi is different, its virtue
lying in tlie bones or remains of animals that have been eaten.
Let but a man get hold of a particular bone from a beast or
bird devoured by his enemy and then it is worse for that enemy
than for the enemy who in civilised society writes a book. The
bone is carefully mixed with fat, red ochre and human hair,
and the mass fixed in a round lump to the end of a skewer
made of the leg bone of a kangaroo. This is the ngathungi ,
which is then placed by the fire, and as it melts so the life of
the unconscious victim wastes away. The only way to break
the charm is to buy the ngathungi from its holder, and throw it
into the water. Lastly, neilyevi is practised with a sharply
pointed bone or bit of iron, which is poisoned by being stuck
into a dead body. Any wound inflicted with this object in-
variably causes loss of limb or life. So afraid of it are the
natives that they dread even its being pointed at them, at-
tributing to it a deadly virtue even at a distance. Amongst
the Goolwas, a branch of the Narrinyeris, the victim dreams of
his enemy, and reveals it to those present, who swear to avenge
his death.
The formerly powerful Dieyerie nation of Lakes Hope and
Eyre have a mookovellie duckana, a death spell, endowed with
extraordinary virtues, consisting of the small bone of the human
leg, and possessed by the tribe in common. When it is re-
solved to slay some great chief of a hostile tribe at a distance
of fifty or a hundred miles, for that is quite immaterial,
several of the elders are told off to despoil the dead by extracting
the small leg-bones from so many skeletons of their own de-
parted kindred. Of these from three to eight are selected and
wrapped in fat and emu feathers. The notables of the tribe
then take and point them towards the place where the intended
victim is supposed to reside, cursing him the while, and naming
the death he is doomed to die. Should he, however, survive
this spell it is because they either pointed in the wrong direc-
tion or because some powerful medicine man of the hostile
tribe destroyed the virtue of mookovellie duckana.
IV. —The Doctor—Medical Treatment.
The belief in socery leads naturally to the evolution of the
medicine man, who both practices witchcraft on the enemy and


averts its baneful effects from his own people. Hence he be-
comes credited with the most marvellous powers, and the
Bulya-gadak, or magician of the Western Australians, is con-
sulted, like those of ancient Egypt, in all cases lying beyond
the sphere of common knowledge, and consequently needing
the intervention of supernatural powers. In case of sickness
he is of course, the only physician called in, and he professes to
cure all ailments by enchantment, or by ejecting the Bulya, or
evil-spirit, the supposed cause of all complaints. He performs
somewhat after this fashion. Squeezing the affected part with
both hands and then drawing them down, he coaxes the Bulya
to the extremities and thus gradually exorcises him. He
shakes and blows upon his hands at each dislodgement of the
evil one, who is supposed to escape without being seen by the
eyes of the profane, but who at times appears as a piece of
stone, kept as a great curiosity in proof of the wizard’s power.
The Koonhie, or doctor of the Dieyeries is some member of
the tribe, who in his childhood has seen Kootchie, or the
devil, thus acquiring the healing virtue. The Kootchie may be
a man or a woman, and is known to have been favoured with
the vision by being visited by unpleasant dreams, or the
nightmare. When called in here is how he operates on the
patient. He first rubs the parts affected, until he pretends to
get hold of something. He then sucks vigorously for a minute
or two, after which he retires to a spot some distance from the
camp, soon returning with a small bit of wood concealed in his
hand. After some more rubbing and the application of a red-
hot coal, the piece of wood is suddenly produced, as if extricated
from the patient’s body, of course to the great admiration of
the spectators who fancy the evil has thus been eradicated.
Mr. Samuel Gason, an eye-witness of these mummeries, tells us
that the impostor will not confess to his*trickery, and indeed,
from constant practice, at last deludes himself into a belief of
his skilful surgery, in which all the natives have implicit faith.
“ The force of imagination is so strong in some cases, that I
have seen a native quite ill, and actually cry for the Kootchie,
after his humbugging appearing quite recovered.” Similar
instances of the power of the imagination are now commonly
witnessed, at least in the case of nervous disorders, in the south


of France and the West of Ireland, so like is human nature all
the world over.
Amongst some tribes the remedies are often much worse than
the complaint. The method of treatment practised by the
doctors of the Kukutha tribe, Port Lincoln and Fowler’s Bay,
is described by Mr. Provis as most barbarous. “On his arrival
the doctor goes to the patient with an air of importance and
assumed wisdom, and after looking at him a few moments
without speaking, he goes away to some distance and gathers
some small branches from a bush, which he brings back with
him. By the time he returns, the patient has generally moved
a short distance from the invariable fire, and the doctor begins
to rub and beat the sick person, first with the boughs, and then
with the naked hands, then pinches him, turns him over and
repeats the same process, all the time muttering some
unintelligible incantations; and having previously ascertained
the locality of the pain (min-ga), he pinches the part most
unmercifully, and then takes it in his mouth and sucks it
vigourously for sometime, then runs quickly away to a distance
to spit out the accumulated saliva from his mouth, which he
makes them believe is the min-ga. This mummery is kept up
for nearly an hour, the old women of the party keeping up a
low monotonous wail the while, and the patient is then left to
die or recover according to circumstances. If he recovers of
course it is attributed to the skill of the doctor in overcoming
the min-da-bi (evil spirit, which they believe inflicts all
manner of sickness on them); if the patient dies, the min-da-bi
was too strong for the doctor.”
t. Others are still mote skilful in the art of inflicting pain,
while others again have risen to a really intelligent method of
treatment, applying efficacious poultices to cuts and wounds,
practising phlebotomy with sharp flint or shell surgical instru-
ments, and adopting the “ cold water cure” with marked success
in cases of chronic rheumatism. But even here, when all other
remedies fail, recourse is still had to all manner of spells and
incantations, in the hope of exorcising the evil one, the ulti-
mate source of all their troubles, social and political.
y.—Government—Clanship—Administration of Justice.
The term “chief” has occasionally occurred in the foregoing


remarks; but chieftainship in the strict sense has no existence.
There are no true “ rulers of men ” in any of the Australian
tribes, and the idea of “ nation ” has not been evolved. There
are doubtless here and there a few distinguished men, distin-
guished often quite as much by their reckless depravity as by more
ennobling qualities, who secure a certain purely personal and
passing recognition, a momentary ascendency maintained by
terror, liable to be lost at any moment by failure or disaster.
But there is nothing at all comparable to the established and
hereditary authority of the North American or Polynesian
chiefs and kinglets. Still there is a certain tribal organisation,
and each clan is bound together by the common interests and
the instinct of self-preservation. This feeling overrides even
that of the family, whence it must have arisen, so that certain
public duties become paramount to the individual rights. Com-
bination for offensive and defensive purposes and unity in the
presence of any common danger are in fact the first conditions
of existence, without which the tribe itself could not be held
together. Hence certain usages and customs acquire the
sanction of tradition, and the spirit of clanship, in which all
are practically equal and all act in concert, becomes thoroughly
established. So much is this the case that each clan has not
only its own name, totems and symbols, but every member of it
regards all the others as blood relations. They do not as a rule
intermarry, but seek alliances in another branch of the same
tribe. Within the clan there is no such thing as personal pro-
perty, all weapons, implements, and even the products of the
chase belonging to all collectively. Every individual looks on
all such things as public property, to be used for the common
welfare and defence. His arms, his nets, his canoes he holds
for the common good, and he feels that his possession of such
things is subject to the superior claims* of the clan. Hence all
are equally interested in their neighbour’s property, for he
regards it as part of the common tribal wealth. The late Mr.
G. Taplin describes the solemnity with which a fisherman will
call his friends to a consultation over the repairs of a canoe or
a fishing net; with similar gravity will he also get them to
deliberate over his family affairs—the marriage of his son, or
the betrothal of his daughter. He is surprised that you should
expect him to act on his own unaided judgment; to him this


would be dishonestly ignoring the rights of others. Every one
of the clan feels interested in that which is used by his neigh,
hour, because he has a share in it. Only let sufficient occasion
arise, and he has a right to use it himself.
But while all are held to be equal by birth, all must equally
yield obedience to prescribed laws and usages. Hence, though
devoid of any abstract ideas of morality, they must be regarded
as non-moral rather than immoral, and amongst themselves
they are habitually honest, and even truthful, never stealing
or lying with a sense of guilt, and always conforming to a
recognised standard in these things. Mr. Philip Chauncy, J.P.,
of Ballaarat, declares that during his many years of acquaint,
ance with the Victoria natives he never remembered ever
hearing any of them utter a falsehood with a definite idea of
gaining anything by it. If questioned on any subject he would
form his reply rather with the view of pleasing the enquirer
than of its being true, but this was attributable to his polite-
ness, like that of the Asiatics, and not to any desire to deceive.
Amongst the Narrinyeri there is a rudely organised tendi,
or council of elders, which controls all tribal affairs, and
administers justice in accordance with traditional or common
law. Offences against the tribal usages are regularly tried by
a court, presided over by the rupilli, or chief, who sits on a
judgment seat called tendi lewvrmi, and summons witnesses in
due form. Both sides get a fair hearing, and sentences are
passed in proportion to the nature of the offence. A favourite
mode of punishment are a number of blows on the head with a
waddy, which would brain most white men, but which the black
skull resists with impunity. Banishment and death by
spearing are also recognised in the penal code, and an execu.
tioner is sometimes appointed to fall suddenly on a criminal
and put him to death unawares.
In the Dieyerie tribe the law of murder is strictly formu-
lated by oral tradition. “If two or more men fight, and one
of the number should be accidentally killed, he who caused
his death must also suffer it. But should the offender have an
elder brother, then he must die in his place, or should he have
no elder brother, then his father must be his substitute. But
in case he has no male relative to suffer for him then he him-
self must die. He is not allowed to defend himself, nor in-


deed is he aware of when the sentence will be executed. On
some night appointed an armed party surround and dispatch
him. Two sticks, each about six inches long, one representing
the killed and the other the executed, are then buried, and the
subject is not again referred to.” In the same tribe a thief is
challenged to fight by the person he has robbed, and slanderers
are dealt with in the same way. Children are not punished
for theft, but the father or mother has to fight the person from
whom the property was stolen. Armed bands called pinya
are sometimes organised to carry out sentences of death on
distant offenders. After smearing themselves with white clay
to distinguish each other in case of resistance, they march to-
wards the camp about midnight, and when within a hundred
yards or so divide into two parties, and thus form a complete
cordon to prevent escape. The “ dogs now begin to bark, the
women to whimper, not daring to cry aloud for fear of the
pinya, who set up a very melancholy grunting noise. Then
one or two penetrate to the accused, inviting him to come out
under their protection, which he does not believe, yet obeys,
being powerless to resist. The pinya then despatch him with
spears and the two-headed club, striking always above the
hips, as they believe were they to break the legs they could not
walk home again. The execution consummated, the weapons
are washed, and all the gore and flesh adhering to them mixed
with some water and carried round to the younger members of
the pinya, who believe that by swallowing the mixture they
will be inspired with fresh courage and strength. The fat of
the victim is also cut off and wrapped round the weapons of
the old men, which are then covered with feathers.
Banishment is a very severe sentence, for the offender there-
by becomes an outlaw from all the clans, and takes refuge in
some remote part of the country. He- is seldom able to bear
the isolation long, after a few months returning, and voluntarily
submitting to whatever punishment may then be awarded him.
Mr. Chauncy mentions the case of a young man named Yimgher,
who thus surrendered himself. “He stood in front of a large
tree, without clothes or weapons, other than a single spear and
miro, or throwing board. Before him, at of about
fifteen or twenty yards, sat some thirty or forty men and women
in a semicircle facing him, many of them talking loud and


rapidly, while in the open space nearer to him a little man
with a spear seemed to be making frantic efforts to work him-
self up into a passion. But Yungher cared not for him, all his
attention was directed to two men behind the lookers on, who,
with their spears quivering, were pacing rapidly to and fro,
every now and then making feint to throw the spear, but
seldom uttering a word. They seemed to be incited by an old
hag, who, perfectly naked, but grasping a wanna or yam stick
in both hands, was running backwards and forwards before her
hut, violently gesticulating and pouring forth a volume of in-
vective, or rather keeping up a monotonous harangue. The
rapidity of her speech and her physical exertion were quite
surprising. Yungher all this time was standing up against the
tree, slapping his head first on one shoulder and then on the
other. I noticed that he did this more rapidly as he expected
an attack. In about half-an-hour the little man’s passion
seemed to have spent itself, and the two fighting-men threw
their spears simultaneously, and continued to do so from time to
time, Yungher dodging them with great coolness and dexterity
for nearly an hour, until at length a spear pierced him in the
leg:, and the affair was over. He was then received as a friend
o "
among them, and they had a dance in the evening.”
Amongst some tribes the law of blood for blood is universal,
and revenge then becomes a sacred duty, so much so, that if a
man refuses to take life in satisfaction for his brother’s he is ever
after regarded as a coward. Hence the avenger is generally
actuated not so much by personal feeling as by a sense of duty
and the desire of mantaining his good name amongst his fellows.
He will often kill the first of the tribe he meets, regardless of
the consideration whether or not his victim had any part in the
murder. Justice is supposed to be satisfied by the mere
shedding of blood, just as amongst so many nations of antiquity
the innocent blood of animals was supposed to appease the
wrath of the deity. This sentiment also helps to account for
the mysterious and otherwise inexplicable murder of many
whites during the first settlement of the country. As all white
men are supposed to know and approve of each other’s deeds,
the avenger felt himself bound to kill the first European in his
power in retribution for the murder of his kinsman by any of
the settlers, “ For every black man you white fellows shoot, I


will kill a white man. I will take life for life.” Such was the
very language used to Mr. G. F. Moore by Yagan t a member of
the Upper Swan River tribe in 1843.
But once satisfaction is done, or the wrong has ceased to exist,
the blacks seldom harbour any further feelings of vindictive-
ness towards the offender, An instance in point, attended by a
very remarkable circumstance, is related of Marohunda also a
Swan River native. A young Irishman, one of the early
settlers in those parts, gradually acquiring a taste for savage life,
went off to the bush and resided for some two years with the
neighbouring tribe. He so thoroughly adopted their tastes that
on one occasion he ran off with the young wife of Marabunda,
taking her eastwards beyond the Darling Range. Marabunda
tracked them for several days and at last overtook them in a
great guangan or sandy plain. Creeping up with the dawn of
day, when the people are supposed to be heaviest with sleep, he
was about to hurl the fatal spear when “ Betty,” aroused by
the noise, gave warning to her comrade in guilt. He had
barely time to grasp the gun at his side, pulling the trigger at
the very moment Marabunda let fly his spear, The two
missiles are stated to have met in mid-air, the bullet shivering
the spear to atoms, whereupon Marabunda withdrew, satisfied
that the offender was Oevga , or the devil himself. They after-
wards continued to meet for some time on equal terms, the Irish,
man cocking his gun, the black raising his spear with a grim
smile as they passed, until at last a reconciliatien was effected.
The Irishman, who afterwards became a Police Inspector,
always maintained the strict accuracy of this story apparently
so characteristic alike of Keltic fancy and native bonhomie.
A. H. Keane.
(To he continued).


GUILTY AND NOT GUILTY.
MARIE SOPHIE SCHWARTZ.
CHAPTER XIX.
E must now transport ourselves to Kronobro, which
had been left desolate and deserted since the
General’s death three years before. Constantine
had been away on a voyage at the time of his
father’s death, and now, after an absence of six years,
Hi, the young heir had suddenly come to the estates of his
forefathers, accompanied by two Russian noblemen who were
passionate sportsmen.
The principal building at Kronobro consisted of a square
house, with two large wings. General Canitz had had the
rooms furnished with princely magnificence, and they exhibited
all the lavish luxury which is characteristic of the taste of the
wealthy Russian. The mansion, with its marble pillars and
balconies, was little less than a palace.
The largest saloon in the centre of the first floor, with
windows down to the ground and glass doors opening out on the
balcony, traversed the entire building, and might be taken—so
far as its fitting-up was concerned—for a sample of the rest.
The hangings were of grey silk damask, interwoven with
flowers of red and silver, while the mirrors between the
windows were set in silver frames inlaid with the most splendid
crystals and stones, and the silver furniture was covered with
damask to match the hangings. One large and four smaller
chandeliers of silver and red glass hung down from the ceiling,
and in each corner of the room stood a group of marble figures
holding silver candelabra. The curtains were looped up with
rich laces and tassels of red, green, and silver.
On one of the numerous little sofas to be found in this
apartment the young owner of Kronobro was lying on the even,
iug of Skuldfrid’s encounter with the Unknown, The glass


doors into the verandah were open, and floating through them
came the sweet scent of flowers.
Lothard Constantine Canitz was now about two-and-twenty,
and was of extremely prepossessing appearance. His broad
high forehead was so clear and open, it seemed as though it
could never be overshadowed by a cloud; and in his large,
dark, deep-set eyes there was an expression at once gentle,
intelligent, bold and spirited. The shape of the face was a
perfect oval, the nose delicately formed, the mouth small and
disclosing dazzling white teeth, and the whole countenance
was set in a frame of dark hair and whisker.
Just now Constantine seemed to be troubled with restlessness,
for he looked at his watch from time to time; and, when this
failed to amuse him, he seized a silver bell which stood near
him on a little marble table, and rang it violently. A servant
in green and red livery at once made his appearance.
“Has the Doctor come back,” inquired Constantine in
Russian.
“ No, not yet,” was the answer given in the same lan-
guage.
“ As soon as he comes tell him I am waiting for him.”
The same question and answer had been repeated now seven
times since the doctor had left Kronobro ; and when the servant
had quitted the room, with a low reverence, Constantine began
to walk up and down in evident impatience of mind. At last
he stopped at one of the glass-doors, and stood looking out upon
the country. Far away lay the sea, with the sun resting his
glowing cheek against its cool breast; but whatever the nature
of the young man’s reflections might have been he was soon
disturbed by someone’s coming into the room. He turned
round at once and Doctor Wagner came up to him.
“ Well, doctor, how is she? ” said Constantine, in French.
“ I have set the foot, but she will have to rest it entirely for
two or three weeks, and must not move,” answered the doctor
with a polite smile.
“ I promised you anything you liked to ask, if only you
would cure it quickly.”
“ Monsieur le Baron, my art can only assist nature; we
doctors are not gods I”
“So I sec, plainly enough, and really I don’t know what is


the use of your art since nature does the chief part of the
work ! ”
Constantine threw himself on a little sofa which he had
pushed up to the open doors.
“It is useful so far that it can set a dislocated ankle, put a
broken arm in splints, heal any wounds one may happen to
have received, and ”
“ Ah! you have a good memory I see. Do you know,
doctor, you are a very peculiar mixture of cunning and daring,
of humble toadyism and bold candour ? Like all your country-
men, you are a wonderful combination of the knave and the
honest man.”
A menacing expression passed over the doctor’s smiling
features, but so quickly that it left no trace behind.
“ What you say of me and my countrymen may, I venture to
assert, be said of all mankind. There is always a germ in
some corner of every heart which may develop into a knave,
and it depends entirely upon the circumstances into which we
are thrown whether the knave or the honest man carries the
day.”
“ Or whether they go hand in hand as in your case.”
“ Yery true; but I must leave you,” returned the doctor, with
a low bow.
Constantine stretched out his hand, saying with a smile,
“ Oh, don’t think you are going to escape so easily. Gurtzskow
and Brunsknowitz are out hunting, and as I am alone I want
you to keep me company this evening. I have several things to
talk over with you, and it is a long time since wo had any
private conversation, so you are my guest for the rest of the
day.”
“ With the greatest pleasure,” answered the doctor, politely,
putting down his hat, and pushing up a seat, be was just going
to sit down when Constantine said, “Bo so kind as to ring. It
is quite impossible to talk without pipes and wine.”
The doctor took up the bell, casting a dark look at the young
man, who seemed to treat him with a careless sort of air of
superiority.
A few moments later the two were smoking their pipes and
sipping from their glasses some especially choice juice of the
grape.


was to keep on with you i should onley decive you as my
wagges are not very igh as i ham onley a learner at preasant
and praps i shall have severael placeses in diffrant parts of thay
country before I shall settel down and that would make howers
a long cortship and thay in genarial ends in no good so i hope
that you won’t think i ham doing this with aney ill will tords
you but as i ham thinking it is for thay best as long cortships
are often decivers and i ham shaure i should not like to decive
no one after corresponding for two or three years so dear magy
i hope that you wont be put out of temper when you reads this
for there is a old saying and a true one that is a stich in time
saves nine so praps it may be so with us God onley knows what
will acure so now i must conclude wishing you good by for a
time as God onley knows whether we shall meet again on earth
but i hope we shall meet in heaven so good by with my kindest
love and well wisheses from Youre well wisher,
C. Slatek.”
“Well I never did,” said Mrs. Tibbs in an indignant tone,
after reading the letter. “ I never did read any thing like it,
the ignorant, impudent puppy! I’m sure Maggie you’ll never
break your heart about such as him. I hope you’ll never speak
to him again ; and if he leaves the place, it will be a good rid-
dance to bad rubbish, as they say.”
“ Maggie quite understands, Mrs. Tibbs,” said Deborah coolly,
“ that he’s not worth thinking about, and, like a sensible girl,
will soon forget such a fellow.”
Maggie did not speak. Her heart was full. Her face felt
cold, and her eyes hot. She had not yet got over her indigna-
tion, though the contempt his letter inspired was quickly doing
its work in eradicating her love for him. Her idol was thrown
from its pedestal. Can an honest, good woman love a man,
when she knows he is unworthy? Maggie’s soul said “no.”
Presently Miss Waller came in, and Mrs, Tibbs departed with
her budget of news to the neighbours. She soon let them all
know that Maggie was not “ caring a bit,” and “ felt herself
well quit of such a lover.” The contents of the letter were told
to every one, and all united in sympathy for Maggie, while they
despised Charley, who after a few days took his departure, to
try his fortunes with a farmer in a neighbouring county.
(To he continued.)
VOL. xl, n


lilMil
vnvHisnv jo Aiivaan
IVNOIIVN
ii in ilium in
3 1508 01779504 3
PEOEESSOE BLACKIE’S EAIIST.*
0 dogma is more stringently insisted on by the
worthies and lawgivers of the Christian Church
than that which teaches that works are worthe-
less without grace; and this canon is, perhaps, still
more aptly applicable to literature and especially
to that widely cultivated form of it which deals with
metrical translation. In these days of wide-spread dilet-
tantism, when the knowledge of foreign literature and language,
ancient and modern, is no longer confined to a small class, the
literary aspirant, who feels himself inapt or ungifted to pursue
the thorny ways of original composition, is led naturally
enough into the safe and well-worn path of translation, in the
modest hope that acquaintance with the language of his
chosen original and a conscientious study of approved models
of versification may qualify him to accomplish satisfactorily
the task of presenting some famous or favourite foreign poem
in an English dress. The result too often attests the un-
suspected difficulties of the task: the record of failures in this
line alone would fill a goodly volume. Yet so great are the
fascinations of this secondary form of authorship, that no
warning, no experience seems to deter the greatly-daring folk
who year by year, week by week, rush into the yawning breach,
well nigh choked with the corpses of their precursors, themselves
in their turn destined to swell the heap of the forgotten
dead. “ Deep calleth unto deep.” Metrical versions sue.
ceed each other without interruption, each worse than
its fellow; and each failure seems but to exercise a
sort of magnetic influence in attracting fresh victims to
the charnel-house. Translations of Heine, Goethe, Dante,
iEschylus, Horace, choke the publishers’ shelves and fill the
advertisement columns of the literary journals—many of them
* Faust : A tragedy, by Goethe, translated into English verse, by John
Stuart Blachie. London : Macmillan and Co,
