

>*<? ,
■
:
■■’'mHmßv. a ';,\ . \v \ffili
ilia
:f : irifJMmi ! m
i
: Awi' :
EsMm hwtimL .. j»A


FREDERICK WARNE & Co.,
PUBLISHERS.
WAENE’S COMPANION LIBRARY.
Under this general title will be issued, at intervals, a
NEW SERIES OF CHOICE NOVELS,
Well printed on good Paper, in a clear Type, with Wrapper.
Price ONE SHILLING each [unless specif cd).
THE SUTHER- 3. CHRISTINE.
LANDS. 4. FRANK WA3
4. FRANK WARRING-
RUTLEDGE. TON.
THE RIGHT HON. B. DISRAELI, M.P,
6.
7-
8.
YOUNG DUKE.
TANCRED.
11. SYBIL.
12. ALROY.
13. ixion.
VENETIA.,
CONTARINI. FLEMW .14. HENRIETTA TEM-
ING. , t-RLE.
CONINGSBY. 15. VIVIAN GREY.
MY AUNT PRUE’S RAILWAY JOURNEY. By
Mrs. Gascoigne.
LORD LYNN’S WIFE. By Author of "Lady Flavia.”
SYLVESTER SOUND, the Somnambulist. 21.
ZOE’S BRAND. By the Author of “ Recommended
to Mercy.” 2s.
OLIVE BLAKE’S GOOD WORK. By J. C.
Jeaffreson. 2S.
FOOTPRINTS ON THE ROAD. By C. Kent. zj.
TOM CRACKENTHORPE’S HUNTING AD-
VENTURES.
PARIS AND LONDON: Humorous Sketches.
By Albert Smith.
LOVE MATCH. By Author of “ Valentine Vox.” 2t.
ON GUARD. By Annie Thomas, zs.
WALTER GORING. By Annie Thomas, zs.
The NIGHT FOSSICKERS, &c. (Australian Tales.)
Bedford Street , Covent Garden.


Frederick Warne & Co., Publishers.
WAKNE’S USEFUL BOOKS.
FOR TOWN, THE COUNTRY, OR THE SEA-SIDE.
In foolscap 8-tw, cloth or fancy hoards, fully Illustrated , price ONE
SHILLING each, unless me hen specif ed.
COMMON SHELLS OF THE SEA-SHORE.
By the Rev. J. G. Wood. With 300 Woodcuts.
SEA-WEEDS. By Mrs. Lane Clarke. With Ten
pages Plates, printed in Tinted Litho.
FLOWERS AND THE FLOWER GARDEN.
By Elizabeth Watts.
WATTS’S VEGETABLES: How to Grow Them.
FONBLANQUE’S HOW WE ARE GOVERNED.
FRIENDLY TRUTHS FOR WORKING HOMES.
KINDLY HINTS ON COTTAGE LIFE.
FISH, AND HOW TO COOK IT. By E. Watts.
OUR COMMON FRUITS: a Description of all
Cultivated or Consumed in Great Britain. By Mrs. Bayle
Bernard. With Coloured Plates, Price 2:.
COMPANION LETTER WRITER. A Complete
Guide to Correspondence, with Commercial Forms, &c.
THE MODERN GYMNAST. By Charles Spencer.
120 Illustrations.
EVERY-DAY COOKERY. By the Author of “ The
Wife’s Own Cookery.”
HAY TIME TO HOPPING. By the Author of
<c Our Farm of Four Acres.”
POULTRY: their Breeding, Rearing, Feeding, and
Exhibiting. By Elizabeth Watts.
ANGLING. A Practical Guide to Bottom Fishing,
Trolling, Spinning, Fly Fishing, and Sea Fishing. By J. T.
Burgess,
THE ORCHARD AND FRUIT GARDEN. By
Elizabeth Watts.
Bedford Street, Co-vent Garden.


Frederick IVarne & Co., Publishers.
WABNE’S ILLUSTRATED BIJOU BOOKS.
In 4 Smo, gilt , and gilt edges, with Coloured lllustrative
Diagrams , &c., price SIXPENCE each, Postage id.
i. VENTRILOQUISM MADE EAST; or , How to
Become a Ventriloquist , By F. Hardy.
2. FUN AND FLIRTATION FORFEITS for
Evening Parties.
3. ETIQUETTE FOR LADIES. By a Committee of
Ladies.
4. ETIQUETTE FOR GENTLEMEN. By a Com-
mittee of Gentlemen.
5. THE BALL-ROOM COMPANION. By an
Amateur.
6. ETIQUETTE OF THE TOILET. For Ladies and
Gentlemen.
7. THE LANGUAGE OF FLOWERS. Compiled by
L. V.
8. LONDON IN MINIATURE. With a New Map.
9. ARCHERY. By H. J. B. Hancock.
10. BILLIARDS, The AB C of. By F. Hardy.
11, SWIMMING, The AB C of By the Rev. J. G.
12. ELEMENTARY GYMNASTICS. By E. L. Burgess.
13. CRICKET. By F. Wood.
14. CROQUET By the Rev. J. G. Wood.
15. ETIQUETTE OF COURTSHIP AND MATRI-
MONY.
16. CHESS, 'The AB C of. By F. Hardy.
17. THE MODEL LETTER WRITER. By Arthur
Etheridge.
18. CRIB BAGS AND DOMINOES. By F. Hardy.
19. DINNER-TABLE ETIQUETTE, and CARTING.
20. MAGIC, The AB C of. By F. Hardy.
21. DRAUGHTS and BACKGAMMON. By F. Hardy.
22. WHIST FOR BEGINNERS. By J. R. W.
WARNE’S BIJOU BOOKS are handy for the waistcoat pocket, neat
n style, and compiled by competent Authors.
Bedford Street , Covent Garden.


THE NIGHT FOSSICKERS,
AND OTHER
Australian: Cafes of |lcrif atib Jbkutiirc.
JAMES SKIPP BORLASE.
LONDON:
FREDERICK AY ARNT E AND CO.,
BEDFORD STREET, COYENT GARDEN.


HIS EXCELLENCY SIR CHARLES DARLING,
LATE GOVERNOR OF THE COLONY OF VICTORIA,
®j}is 00l ovl'i
IS BY SPECIAL PERMISSION RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,
HIS OBLIGED AND OBEDIENT SERVANT,
JAMES SKIPP BOELASE.


PREFACE.
n the following pages are narrated scenes of real life and
dventure, describing which the Author has as frequently
5 possible given pictures of Colonial life, which may be
died on as truthful and not too highly coloured. Thus the
abits and manners of the aborigines, the pictures of outpost
ad station life, the description of a bush fire, the jottings of
olonial scenery, natural history, entomology, &c., are correct
ad unvarnished, and may recall to the mind of the returned
donist scenes and things which were once familiar to him;
hilst at the same time they will enable those whose feet
ive never trodden Australian soil to picture to themselves
io aspect and peculiar characteristics of that great southern
nd, with the habits of its peoples.


CONTENTS.
The Shepherd's Hut, 1
The Missing Fin gees, 16
The Madman’s Tale, 31
PUKSUING AND PURSUED, ..... 44
A Sticking-up-and Shooting-down-Adventure, . 59
Buried Alive, 76
Night Possickers, 94
The Salted Claims, 114
Tale of a Skull, 134
A Leap for Life, 15 5
The Lubra’s Revenge, ..... 170
The Ace of Spades, . . . . . .181
Three Golden Hairs, ..... 186
King Eum Tum’s Ghost, ..... 205
Mystery and Murder, 226
Homeward Bound via Panama, .... 240


THE SHEPHERD’S HUT.
It was a bitter night in June ; and although there was
neither snow nor ice—for such phenomena rarely distinguish
an Australian winter, —yet the damp, raw wind blew from
the Southern Ocean with a hollow roar and a penetrating
power that no great-coat could defy. In the old country I had
often crossed St. James’s Park at midnight in only a light
dress coat, when the summit of the York Column and the
roof of the Horse Guards’ clock-tower glittered white in their
snowy shroud, and the ornamental water slept beneath solid
ice, yet never had I felt such a chilliness at the very bones
as on this, to me, eventful evening in the year 1851, when,
issuing from the long, irregularly-built wooden structure,
dignified by the name of “ Cafe de I’Europe,” into Bourke
Street, I made my way through the uneven, rut-wrinkled
streets of Melbourne, towards the little inn called “ The
Golden Nugget,” where I expected to find my horse and
trap.
What magical changes do ten years sometimes produce !
Can this princely city that I now behold, with its broad and
well-paved gaslit streets, that would not disgrace the West
End of London, and actually put to shame those of our great
manufacturing capitals of Manchester, Liverpool, and Bir-
mingham ; this city, with its glittering shops, its noble
public buildings, elegant churches and charitable institutions,
—its theatres, concert halls, museums, libraries, giant ware-
houses and docks, its business and its riches; this city, that
cries second to few of its century-aged rivals in the old world;
can it indeed be the same as the comfortless, dreary spot of
almost Siberian wretchedness that I knew fifteen years


since ] Even now I can, methinks, see it in its past attire—
rows of wooden huts, with their tin or shingle roofs, inter-
spersed with tents, mud hovels, drinking booths, and here
and there a row of stone houses lifting their heads above
their humbler brethren ; streets that might be better termed
rivers of mud, with stumps of trees yet uncleared away in
their midst; carts drawn by oxen or horses, struggling through
the mire, and often hopelessly stuck in some deep rut ;
drivers swearing and cracking whips ; diggers- and adven-
turers often drunk and disorderly, reeling or trudging through
the mud slough—for fragments of paving only existed here
and there ; emigrants sick and disheartened, sitting in despair
on their sea-chests in the roadway, homeless and houseless,
and unable to pay the guinea a bed and half-guinea a meal
charged in the inns and grog-shops; while from within those
inns, whose doors stood invitingly open for such as had a full
purse, came the sounds of laughter and revelry, mingled with
the scraping of fiddles, the clattering of glasses and cans, and
occasionally the brutal oath or the fierce sounds of strife.
But I am rambling from my subject, and, what is worse,
narrating an oft-told tale. Most of my readers, if they did not
see, have yet been made familiar, in the pages of the colonial
or home press, with the aspect of Melbourne at the first break-
ing out of the gold fever. It is during this stormy period
that the incidents of my tale are laid, and that 1 first set foot
on the shores of this great continent.
I did not come, however, as a seeker of the yellow metal—
I had no ambition to become a digger. In fact, reason taught
me then that which experience has since convinced me of—that
he who, by hard toil, finds the gold, makes not so great a profit
as he who, keeping to his trade or profession, wins by his
brains, the wealth second-hand.
I was a detective police officer, and quitted the service at
homo for reasons which my conscience approved, and owing
in great measure -to an adventure which 1 have no space to
relate here, but which would supply incidents for a more
thrilling narrative than the present, in which form I may
some day be tempted to make it public.
Bound by honour not again to exercise my calling in the
old country, I had no scruple in doing so in the new; and


when I arrived at Melbourne in April, 1851, I found there
was a good opening for me. The police arrangements were
very ineffective —murders, stabhings, and other outrages were
of frequent occurrence in the city ; and throughout the coun-
try round prowling ruffians—escaped convicts from Sydney
or Van Diemen’s Land—were ever ready to waylay and murder
the -wandering digger for the sake of the gold they expected
to find on his person.
One of the greatest scoundrels of the latter class had, by
the number of murders he had committed, earned the cogno-
men of “ Dick the Devil;” his outrages had extended to within
a quarter of a mile of the town; he was wont to boast that
he killed a man per week and robbed one each day, and so
anxious was every one for his capture that one thousand pounds
was offered for his body alive or dead.
This was the very worthy I was about to seek when I
quitted the “ Cafe de I’Europe ” and turned my steps down
Bourke Street on the evening in question.
I had come to the knowledge, how and by what means is
irrelevant, that he would be at a hut a mile or so off the high-
way to Bundura at eleven o’clock that night. This hut was
inhabited by a shepherd belonging to a neighbouring run,
who was evidently through fear or inclination an accomplice
of the ruffian. I did not, however, fear the odds against me,
the reward offered was more than commensurate with the
danger incurred. Had I taken a comrade that reward must
have been shared, which I did not care for; the more par-
ticularly as the honour of the affair would have to be divided
also.
A revolver and a bowie knife were my best friends, and
the only thing that caused me annoyance was, that a recent
kick from a horse prevented my crossing a saddle or walking
very far; it would also prevent my running away if such a
course were needed, but the necessity of the latter step I did
not consider very probable.
Thus prevented from either walking or riding, I had as a
dernier resort hired a light gig; for I knew the road to within
a mile of the spot to be a pretty good one, and I could then
hobble my horse and creep the rest of my way on foot.
I had arranged that this gig should be brought to me at


“The Golden Nugget” inn in Elizabeth Street, close to the
post-office, and thither I now made my way, carefully picking
my path so as to avoid the dangerous ruts and holes half full
of water—a task which the few flickering oil lamps scarcely
assisted me to perform. At last, however, I arrived at the
spot named; the gig was awaiting me; I consulted my watch,
it was nine o’clock, and as I had eight miles to drive andperhaps
one to walk, it was time to he en route. So, after tossing off
a nobbier of rum punch to keep the cold out, and examining
the caps on my revolver, I clambered into my somewhat dila-
pidated vehicle, gathered up the reins, and whipped the raw-
boned old mare into a trot.
The gleam of light from a few open pothouse doors enabled
me to escape driving over the crowds of half-dressed children,
mingled with dogs and goats, that seemed to divide the centre
of the street between them; and in a few minutes the last
straggling outskirts of the city were passed, and I was rattling
along the road that leads to the now pretty little village of
Elemington.
It should have been a light night, for the moon was nearly
at its full, hut the heavy masses of cloud only allowed her
radiance to appear occasionally, and at other times the dark-
ness was so intense that I could scarcely see my horse’s head.
This, however, I did not much heed; I knew that my raw-
honed old mare knew every inch of the road; I had received
information that I could not very well mistake as to the dis-
covery of the shepherd’s hut, and the peculiar business upon
which I was engaged rendered darkness more welcome than
light to me. I had proceeded in this way some three miles
or so, with slackened reins, trusting to the instinct of the
horse to find the way, when a shrill voice hailed me with
“ Arrah, yer honour, will ye he giving a puir lone woman a
lift as far as the “ Bell ” at Bundura, and it’s many thanks
she’ll offer ye for the throuhle ? ”
Involuntarily I drew in my sorry nag at this sudden greet-
ing, and as I did so the moonlight suddenly glinted out from a
rift in the leaden clouds, and I beheld standing close to the
roadside a gaunt and decrepit looking hag of some seventy
years of age; her clothes a mere bundle of rags, and filthy-
looking in the extreme; whilst from beneath a large mob-cap,


■which once doubtless had been white, but now retained little
evidence of the fact, a look or two of straggling grey hair
waved in the wind. In short, the appearance of this strange
old woman resembled so closely one of the weird sisterhood
in “ Macbeth,” that a more unattractive companion for a
lonely night’s drive could hardly be imagined.
“ What are you doing here at this time of night, my friend? ”
I asked.
“ Och, faith, yer honour, ye may well ask the question.
Shure and it’s the market I’ve been attinding at all day, and
then I bided to take a dish of tay wid a neighbour, and the
night o’ertook us talking o’ old times.”
“Why did you not stop at your friend’s all night then? it
would have been wiser than tramping this lonely road at such
an hour.”
“ Ah! I should anger the old man, yer worship, who’s a-
waiting up for me at home; it’s a pretty bit of a bating I
shall catch as it is,” she answered, in a shrill voice.
Not wishing to be delayed longer, and half believing her
tale, I bid the old woman jump up, which she did with an
alacrity not to be expected from her years, and the journey
was resumed. For a mile or so my companion was silent,
while I was too much absorbed in my own reflections to open
a conversation. When, however, the tw 7 0 or three wooden
houses that then composed the village of Flemington were
passed, and the lights that had flashed from the windows of
the little inn known as the “ halfway house ” had grown like
tiny stars in our rear, my strange companion again found her
tongue, and gabbled away with such garrulity that I began to
grow doubtful whether she was insane, or rather the worse
for “ a drop of the crather.” She continued thus for some
distance, and I had begun to wish her at a region at least as
remote as Jericho, when the moon again shone forth with a
sudden radiance that for a moment quite dazzled my sight,
and revealed the long straight road for miles in front, with
the dark woods on either side, as clearly as if ’twere noonday.
The ghastly white bark and sombre foliage of the gum trees
and other eucalypti glittered in the light, but not a single
thing of life was visible around.
It was at this moment that, glancing down to see that a


small bag containing handcuffs and a few other little imple-
ments of my craft had not fallen out of the gig, I perceived
a strange object sticking out of the pocket of my companion.
Could it be ? I looked again. Yes, it was—the steel-mounted
butt of a pistol—a genuine Colt’s revolver! I knew it in an
instant by the shape, and could scarcely refrain from giving
a whistle of surprise, but I did control the impulse. I glanced
at the face of the bearer, and now in the clear moonlight I
could perceive that the deep wrinkles in the cheeks were
skilfully put on with burnt cork, and that the straggling looks
of grey hair were the fascinations of a wig.
I was clearly in a trap, my own fire-arms were buttoned
over in my breast pocket; were I to drop either rein or whip,
the suspicion of the bushranger, for I doubted not the pro-
fession of my companion, would be roused, and ere I could
draw my own weapon I should have a bullet through my
head. Although the gabbling conversation, in the cracked
tones of an old woman, was still kept up, I saw that a careful
survey was being taken of the neighbourhood, and I knew
that one hand grasped the skirt pocket and the barrels of the
pistol beneath the tattered plaid shawl.
“ What strength can’t accomplish, skill must,” is an old
axiom of my profession; so, turning round, I exclaimed, “ I
fear my horse has got a stone in his shoe; mother, you won’t
be afraid to hold the reins a minute whilst I jump down and
see, will you?”
The careless and yet encouraging tones in which I spoke
took my companion off his guard, I drew up and handed him
the whip and reins; then rising as if to get out of the gig, I
suddenly snatched the revolver from his pocket, and levelled
it at his head, exclaiming, “You’re my prisoner; move hand
or foot, and I’ll blow your brains out.”
“ Faith, Mr. Paaler, it’s yourself has got the best of it, but
ye can’t be for arresting me, ye’ve no ividence I meant to do
wrang.”
“ I’U be responsible for my acts, my lad. Yow listen to
me, obey me word for word, and no dodges; my finger’s on
the trigger, remember.”
“All right, yer honour,” answered the villain, perfectly
cowed.


“ On the seat you see a bag, drop the reins, the horse won’t
bolt, put the whip in its holder. Good. ISTow, then, the bag
is unlocked, what do you see in it ? ”
“ Bracelets, yer honour, and bad cess to them.”
“ Key in the look ? ”
“ Yes, yer honour.”
“ Then put them on.”
The man hesitated. “ Put them on, or I fire.”
This time the fellow obeyed.
“ Now place your hands in such a position that I can look
the handculfs with my left hand.”
This he also did. Placing the muzzle of the revolver against
bis forehead, and never taking my eye off his, for he looked
mischievous, I locked his bracelets with my left hand, and
put the key in my waistcoat pocket; then taking a piece of
strong cord from the bag, I laid the pistol on the seat, and
strongly bound his arms and legs.
“ Kow, my dear old lady,” I said, as I finished, “ next time
you frequent Paddy’s market, don’t got benighted on your
way home. I’ll save you this time from a bating by the old
man, but I may not be able to do so always.”
“ Curse you for a meddling fool! ” was the answer, “the game
may be in my hands next time; if so, my hearty, look out.”
I made no reply to this, and was about to gather up the
reins, for the adventure had delayed mo, I should be behind
my time at the shepherd’s hut, when, frightened at a sheep
which suddenly showed itself in the brushwood, the horse
swerved round, and, before I could check him, had quitted
the road, and was galloping at a rattling pace across country.
It was a fortunate thing that the trees were not very thick at
this spot, or the gig must have been dashed against one, and
the results therefrom anything but agreeable. As it happened,
the sward was nearly as level as a bowling-green, and the bark
of the scattered gum trees so white, that the frightened animal
naturally avoided them; and thus the only ill consequence
resulting from the runaway was, that by the time I had got
the horse again in hand, we were far away from the high road,
with the probability of not finding it again.
This improbability was soon rendered an impossibility by
the moon becoming again obscured. The heavens grew one


leaden shroud, each moment the darkness became more
intense.
It was now necessary to abandon the gig, for it was unsafe
longer to stick to that conveyance. I unbound my prisoner’s
arms, and made him unharness the mare, whilst I covered
him with my pistol, an operation -which his chain handcuffs
rendered troublesome but not difficult. I then rebound his
arms and unfastened his legs, and mounting the horse in spite
of my bad leg, turned his head I knew not whither, making
my captive march about a length before me, having first given
him the comforting assurance that if he stopped or looked
back I would put a bullet through his head.
After travelling for some tw r o hours in this manner, I could
not define whether in a circle or a straight line, to my great
joy I perceived a light a little way ahead, and as we drew
nearer, discovered that it shone from the window of a long
rambling wooden house. The deep growl of dogs greeted our
approach, and when, in obedience to my command, the bush-
ranger knocked heavily at the closed door, a voice within
saluted us in an angry tone with “Pass on, whoever ye are,
ye get no rest here to-night. They pay high who make this
a resting-place. Begone!”
I felt annoyed at this uncourteous reception, and was about
to ride up to the door to hold a parley through the key-hole,
when my companion, giving it a kick, exclaimed, in a voice
quite free from the brogue, “ Come, my good people, you
won’t have the heart to refuse the shelter of a roof and a crust
of bread to two poor travellers lost in the bush.”
He had hardly spoken when the door opened, and a rough
voice answered, “ Well, I don’t mind if I do, if that’s the
time of day; I thought you was only loafers, perhaps.”
When, however, his eyes rested on the feminine apparel
and handcuffed wrists of the bushranger, ho started in dismay;
so to reassure him, I rode up and said, “ I am an officer of
police, this is my prisoner, we have lost our w T ay in the dark-
ness, and so can’t reach Melbourne to-night; but I don’t w'aut
to impose on your hospitality; if you will give us food and
shelter, I will pay you well for both.”
As I ceased speaking the man gave us a scrutinizing glance,
and then said, “ Pairly spoken, Mr. Policeman, I’m an honest


man myself, and I Lid you welcome; drive that ragamuffin
indoors while I take your horse round to the stables.”
I was not sorry to dismount, as my leg was becoming
troublesome. I resigned the animal to the master of the house,
for he looked an honest fellow, and the nag was not wortli
stealing; besides, I could not keep an eye on it and my cap-
tive, whom I now followed into the house.
The first object that caught my eye on entering the kit-
chen was an American clock its hands pointed to eleven. It
was the hour appointed for my nabbing “ Dick the Devil ”
at the shepherd’s hut, and a sigh escaped me as I thought of
the thousand pounds reward, and the way it had slipped
through my fingers, Eegrets were, however, useless; the hut
might be miles away, and even the direction in which it lay
I could not as much as guess at. “ I’ve a bird in the hand,
at least,” I thought, “ I’ll keep an eye on the old woman.”
My cogitations were put an end to by the return of our
host, accompanied by two young men of about twenty-five
years of age respectively, whom he introduced as his sons.
They were both strongly built young fellows, but would nei-
ther of them attain the almost herculean proportions of their
father, w r ho looked a perfect Samson in the ruddy firelight,
which now enabled me to view his countenance and note the
aspect of the apartment. The man had my first attention.
He was attired in the ordinary costume of a shepherd or
small farmer; he might have been forty-five years of age, for
his short black hair was turning slightly grey, certainly he
was not more; he was upwards of six feet in height, broad-
chested and stoutly built in proportion; in fact, his well-set
muscular figure showed great strength; his face was pleasing
and open, save when in perfect repose, then only a kind of
half-sneer, half-scowl rested on it, and seemed as though
caused by some malformation of nature rather than the result
of habit.
The room was plainly furnished, as is usual in the bush.
A roughly hewn table, a chair, half a dozen three-legged stools,
and the American clock before referred to, formed the greater
portion of it. The fire consisted of a few logs of wood kindled
on the hearth, while two iron bars laid across it, resting on a
brick at each end, supported the tea-kettle and a saucepan or


two, from whence issued a savoury aroma strongly suggestive
to an empty stomach. The walls around were decked with
an atrocious print of “The Babes in the Wood,” a rifle, fowling-
piece, double-barrelled gun, and a brace of old flint pistols.
As you may imagine, the weapons attracted my attention, the
more so as they were all, save the pistols, capped and on half
cock. Still, in such a lonely situation, so far away from
another habitation, and the country around swarming with
bushrangers, escaped convicts, and rascals of every description,
there were but very slight grounds for suspicion in all this.
“ Come, lads, let’s have some tea. I’ve fed and watered
your nag, sir, and now we must attend on you, but you aren’t
going to let that thief of the world sit at table with us, I’ve
a cellar below will suit him bettor,” said the farmer, con-
temptuously, as he glanced towards my strangely attired pri-
soner, who returned the favour with a fierce scowl. I readily
availed myself of this offer, and found the cellar a secure
place; that it was both dark and damp was not my fault. I
unbound the prisoner, still, however, keeping the bracelets
on, and pushed him in. Our host threw him some straw,
and giving him some bread and beef, we left him to his own
reflections.
We now turned our undivided attention to the supper,
which, though perhaps wanting in quality, was ample as to
quantity. A boiled leg of mutton was fished out of one
saucepan, a huge mess of potatoes from another, the damper
was taken from the hearth, and an immense jug of ale with
a black bottle of whiskey put on the table.
Rendered hungry by my long drive, I did justice to the
substantial viands before me, and over a glass of grog listened
to the worthy shepherd’s account of the death of his wife from
typhus fever, of the marriage of his only daughter with a
rural policeman; of the murrain in the cattle and the rot in
his sheep; of the last great bush fire, and other like matters,
until at last, getting drowsy, I proposed to go to bed.
It was time I did so, the fire had long since gone out, the
clock pointed to two in the morning, and as I rose to depart,
the remains of the candle sunk in its iron socket, and left us
in darkness. “ Here is a pretty go,” said the shepherd, after a
fruitless rummage in every nook and corner of the room.


« We have not another scrap of candle, were it to light us to
nick up nuggets; you must go to bed in the dark.”
«Heed not that, my man,” said I, “ the moon shines
brightly, lead the way.”
“ Will you not leave your great-coat and arms here 1” sug-
gested the host.
& « Ho, my friend, my pistols and I never part company,” I
answered, with a laugh, and wishing the young men good
night, followed their father to my room.
This was, however, no easy matter. I had to grope my
way after him along a dark passage, at the end of which he
ushered me into an apartment where there was no other light
than that given by the moon, which shone through a small
window glazed with little panes of coarse glass. Here he
bade me good night, and, with apologies for the poor accom-
modation, left me.
The apartment was small. In one corner stood a bed of
that shape commonly called in the colonies a stretcher; this,
with a coarse basinstand, a broken chair, and a ship look-
ing-glass, made up the furniture. Like an old traveller, I
turned to secure the door; without bolt or lock, it had only
a small thumb latch.
Dismounting the wash ware, I piled the stand, together
with the chair, against the door, in such a manner that no
one could enter without making a noise sufficient to wake me.
To make all sure, I felt in my pocket to see that the key of
the cellar, wherein I had confined my prisoner, was there. It
was all right. I then examined the charges in mine and the
bushranger’s revolvers, and placing both under my pillow,
without undressing, threw myself on the bed, and weary and
worn out by my night’s adventures, prepared to sleep.
For a time a species of nervous wakefulness possessed me;
the moaning of the passing wind, the flapping of a loose
board on the roof above, the fitful shadows of a gigantic gum
tree thrown by the moonlight on the damp and discoloured
walls, and above all, the deep bay of dogs in the yard beneath
my window, baffled my every endeavour to slumber; and
when at length I was about to drop off, a whispering of
human voices in the next room again put me on the qui vive.
I could not help fancying that I was the subject of their con-


versation, and I could swear that I heard the voice of the
prisoner joining in the discussion. Creeping from my bed I
put my ear to the wall, and, thanks to the loose jointing of
the boards, could hear what was spoken.
The villains, of whom the bushranger seemed the leader,
were coolly discussing a method for my murder; I was to be
shot in my bed. The moment I discovered these amiable
intentions I rose up and reflected. I had my revolvers,
there were twelve lives in the barrels, if neither of them
missed a life; but might not these assassins have revolvers
also 1 at all events, they were four to one.
My mind was made up—l would run. Then rose the
thought—how 1
The rascals were traversing the passage, my feeble barricade
would not stay them a minute. I gave a glance around the
room. I espied a rope in one corner, a long rope. It sug-
gested an idea, I secured one end of it to a strong iron ring
that happened providentially to bo in the wall, then I noise-
lessly opened the casement, and dropped the other end out
through the window, following it myself, but not with the
intention of descending it at once.
My foot found a rest on one of the projecting logs of
which the house was built, my left hand grasped the window-
sill, above which half my head and the six barrels of my re-
volver were alone visible. I had yet to bid my hospitable
entertainers farewell.
I had not long to wait. The moonlight presently showed
me the handle of the door turn, the door itself open about an
inch; I waited no longer, bang, bang, bang, went three barrels
of my revolver, and exclaiming, “ Good-bye, my friends, pray
don’t forget me,” I began to descend the rope.
A shriek of pain and hoarse curses from above told me that
I had not thrown away my powder. I congratulated myself
on an escape, when turning to look below, I saw the red fiery
eyes of an immense dog glaring up at me, his deep muzzle,
broad chest, and greyish white coat of wiry hair showed him
to be a bloodhound, and with a thrill of horror I saw that I
must drop right at his feet.
I levelled my pistol at him, and tried to steady myself on
the rope to take aim; my first shot missed him, the second


gave him only a slight wound that rendered him far more
dangerous, when I felt the rope give way, and I fell some five
or six feet almost into his very jaws.
The fierce hrute was about to spring on me, at the same
moment a clattering volley rang out from above, and half a
dozen bullets hissed by my head and buried themselves with
a dull thud in the earth. Though little intended for the pur-
pose, that volley saved my life; every ball missed me, but one
passed through the head of the bloodhound, who was now
lying dead across my body. It was a providential escape,
but I was not yet out of the wood, and there was no time to
lose. I could hear muttered curses of disappointment and
the ramming of new charges home, as those above saw me move.
Throwing off the dead brute, whose weight nearly stifled me,
I fired the last barrel of my revolver at the window, and with
satisfaction saw the big shepherd clap his hand to his face,
which in an instant became covered with blood, then spring-
ing to my feet, I ran for my life, I knew not whither !
Immediately, however, I was checked by a high fence. At
any other time I should have found this an obstacle difficult
to surmount, but now a love of life gave me strength and
expertness; even my sore leg was unfelt, and in a minute I
was at the summit. The sharp crack of a rifle rang out on
the still night air, my wide-awake flew from my head, and I
felt a scrape like that of a blunt razor across my scalp, but
did not stay to ponder on that. Springing down on the off
side, I again took to my heels, loading my revolver as I went
and ramming a bullet homo in each barrel.
In about five minutes’ time I stopped to regain my breath,
and, from behind a gum tree, looked back at the log house.
It lay a little more than a quarter of a mile distant, clearly
visible in the bright light of the moon, which now shone
down from an unclouded heaven. The night was so still that
even the spring of the grasshopper could be heard, and I lis-
tened with breathless anxiety for the sounds of pursuit.
Presently the deep fierce bay of dogs smote on my ear,
mingled with shoutings. I saw three figures and two power-
ful hounds emerge from the shadow of the fence; they were
urging the dogs on the trail.
Again I commenced my flight, but had not run many yards


when I caught my foot in a hole, and was brought to with a
sprained ankle.
I ground my teeth in despair, and glanced around; the dogs
were only a hundred yards or so in my rear, running neck
and neck, their great tongues lolling out of their mouths, thus
displaying their formidable fangs, their eyes flashing fire, too
eager for my blood even to give tongue.
I looked wistfully around, a ray of hope dawned upon my
soul; a yard from me stood a tall gum tree more bushy and
thick with foliage than its neighbours. With great difficulty
I clambered up its trunk, got amongst its densest fronds, and
with my two revolvers before me prepared to sell my life as
dearly as possible. I knew they must come within my range
to see me, they could not use their rifle now, save at hap-
hazard, while from the dogs I was quite safe. Those brutes
were now howling with baffled rage at the foot of the tree.
I did not notice them, my powder was for their masters.
Presently they drew near, not advancing boldly, for they
knew I was armed, but dodging from tree to tree. I recog-
nised the shepherd with his head tied up in a blood-stained
bandage; the bushranger (now attired in male apparel), and
one of the sons. The other, I supposed, I had shot, which
was in fact the case.
At last the villains opened fire, but, thanks to the shelter-
ing foliage of the tree, the balls flow by me harmlessly.
I returned the compliment whenever a head was shown
from behind a trunk, but for some time with equal ill
success.
At length a bullet from the bushranger passed through my
leg, and half mad with rage and pain I resolved to repay the
shot with interest.
I had not to wait long for a chance; he incautiously exposed
his side whilst reloading, and I marked him with his own re-
volver and fired. I saw him clap his loft hand to his side,
and blood spout out from between his fingers. He then
quitted his tree, and fearlessly walked up to the very trunk
of the one in which I was concealed. His eyes met mine, I
fired two shots at him and missed, the next instant his barrel
covered me.
“ Curse you,” he muttered, “ that shot of yours has won you


a thousand pounds. lam 4 Dick the Devil,’ hut you shan’t
live to touch the money.”
His finger was on the trigger, hut ere he could pull it his
brain reeled, death’s hand was upon him, he fell at my feet
a corpse.
At the same moment a rattling volley rang around me, I
saw the shepherd and his son running for their lives, pursued
hy two of the Melbourne mounted police.
The fellows were captured, tried, condemned, and hanged.
I pocketed the thousand pounds, less two hundred, with which
I rewarded my brave preservers. Thus ended my first adven-
ture with the bushrangers of Victoria.


THE MISSING FINGERS.
“ Old Jimmy Brooke and his troopers so tall
Would have empty stomachs if ’twarn’t for the wall.”
Such was a common chorus of the street hoys of Melbourne
in the year of grace 1852, and it became as highly popular as
did the kind inquiry, “ How’s your poor feet ? ” in the good
city of London some ten years later.
How old Jimmy Brooke was myself, the troopers so tall
were my subordinates, of whom twelve months after my
arrival in the colony I had a goodly company of twenty, all
stout, strongly built fellows of some six feet in height, well
mounted, and each armed with a brace of revolvers and a
cavalry sabre : but my readers will be naturally curious to
know what the empty stomachs and the wall are about.
Well, then, the meaning was this. In those days it was the
custom to affix all notices offering rewards for the capture of
criminals and escaped prisoners on the outer walls of the city
gaol; and there we members of the detective force used
daily, and often two or three times a day, to resort, to peruse
the little square bills, and see if there was anything new.
Our regular pay was small, —in fact, despicably so; but then
we could generally feather our nests well with blood-money,
and such chances arose almost daily.
We used facetiously to term those placards “ The Police
Gazette,” and when beneath the royal arms and the Y.E.
£lOO or upwards figured in thick black type as the reward
for a capture, no little excitement pervaded our barracks, and
bets were made, and odds given and taken, as to who would
be the winner.


On such occasions I seldom troubled myself to give in-
structions to my subordinates, individual interest always
sharpened their faculties, and each would secretly plot a
plan for capture, and carry it out on his own hook, jealous
of having to go shares with a comrade. You may imagine
that over such a pack of man-hounds I had to keep a
pretty tight hand, but I soon found one kind of punishment
in all oases sufficient, and that was to restrict the offender
for a time from tracking the high rewards, and to force him
to look after those offenders for whom only ten or even
twenty pounds wore offered. This plan answered a double
purpose, for, save as a punishment, my fellows would never
have looked after this latter class at all; and had a five or
ten pound prize fallen into their hands, they would most
probably have let him go, hoping that temptation would
before long drive him to commit a worse crime, and elicit a
higher value on his head. “ Why be content with an egg,
when it will become a fowl?” was their motto.
This feeling I had a great difficulty in overcoming, but at
length I did so by decreeing that every trooper who did not
produce a small offender once a week should be restricted
from following any higher game for the succeeding month.
This had the desired effect. And now for my narrative.
It was a bright summer’s morning in the September of
1852 that I strolled down Eussell Street, and took a glance
at the prison walls for any new placards that might have
been posted since the preceding evening. My attention was
almost immediately attracted by one that ran as follows :
“ Y. E.
ONE HUNDRED POUNDS REWARD.
Whereas a prisoner named Eolf Schweig escaped last night
from the city gaol, and killed a turnkey who endeavoured to
stay him : the above reward is offered for his recapture,
alive or dead. Description : height, live feet eleven inches ;
face pale ; hair sandy and curly; nose aquiline, a pimple on
left side of same ; ears small, and bored for earrings ; teeth
irregular; body stout, broad-chested, and muscular; hands
small, and middle linger of left hand cut off at second joint;
age forty-live; speaks with a slightly foreign accent.”


The. description was clear enough. “ There’s no mistaking
the fellow if I once clap eyes on him,” I thought to my-
self. Then arose the natural query, “Where was he gone
to?”
While I walked up and down, buried in deep thought, I
saw two or three of my fellows come down from the direc-
tion of Latrobe Street, and after hastily looking over the
new placards, walk away rapidly towards the barracks. At
half a glance I knew the conclusion they had arrived at,
which was that the fugitive had taken to the bush. In half
an hour they would be in the saddle and in pursuit.
This was certainly the most probable course that an
escaped prisoner would adopt, and yet something seemed to
whisper to me that they were on the wrong scent.
Before I decided upon a course, I determined to gain fuller
information regarding the man and the manner of his escape,
and with such intention I gained admittance within the
walls, and asked to see the governor and the chaplain.
I did not, however, elicit much information from them.
The prisoner had made his escape the evening before by
stabbing the turnkey who brought him his supper, robbing
him of his keys, and by their means gaining the yard, where
he succeeded in scaling the wall, and, escaping two shots
fired after him, was observed to run up Latrobe Street in the
direction of the new Carlton Gardens.
Two or three incidents struck me as peculiar in this
matter. Firstly, the turnkey was not only killed, but his
body was covered with stabs in every part, and the throat
was cut as well. Private vengeance has been at work here,
thought I, and the prisoner delayed his escape to have a full
surfeit. The poor man had been slain with his own pocket-
knife, which I took possession of, as it might be useful to
me. I learnt that he was a German, and could speak very
little English. Prisoner and he had always appeared on very
good terms. The second thing I noticed was that the
prisoner must have had assistance in his escape, for a broken
rope hung from the outside of the wall, and there were
scratches from boots ascending the wall, which would not
have been caused by a man slipping down a rope. I in-
quired as to the manners and habits of the prisoner, and the


crime for which he had been confined. I learnt, to my sur-
prise, that his habits were reserved, quiet, and gentlemanly;
his temperament even, but slightly inclined to melancholy;
that he was a Protestant, and a great favourite of the chap-
lain, as he seemed very devout in his religious duties; and
that he had been convicted of stabbing a German waiter in
an hotel at Geelong, apparently without any provocation
whatever. As the wound had been a slight one, though
within an inch of the heart, the charge had been only “ for
wounding with intent,” arid the sentence three years’ im-
prisonment, which term, with the exception of three months,
had elapsed at the time of his escape.
The only other point told me worthy of note was that the
prisoner always seemed strangely affected by the singing of
the Evening Hymn in chapel, and 'would generally either
tremble, shed tears, or exhibit some other signs of strong
mental excitement during its performance.
There was very little to guide me in all this; in fact, it
more confused my pre-arranged thoughts than otherwise, and
on my way back to the barracks I kept asking myself the
questions, “What made the fellow so terribly mutilate the
turnkey ? What made him take such fearful measures to
escape, when in three months more he would have been
released at the expiration of his sentence 1 How is it in
both cases his victims were Germans 1 And why has the
Evening Hymn such a strange effect on a man who appears
lost to every other gentle emotion ? ”
In vain I strove to fathom the matter; the only conclu-
sion that I could arrive at was either that the man was
insane, or that there was some great mystery in the affair,
which the amputated finger on the left hand might perchance
afford a clue to. On my arrival at the barracks I learnt that
five of the force were already in pursuit of the runaway.
They had gone to seek him in the bush.
I took another view of the case, and without being able to
assign any reasons for my suspicions, I felt sure that the
fngitive would either lie in concealment somewhere in the
city until the furore occasioned by his escape was over, or
else secrete himself on board some vessel in the harbour,
with the hope of escaping from the colony.


I lost no time in commencing the search. In half an hour
I had a dozen private agents —men in whom I could trust —
trying to hit off the scent through the city, whilst I and
two or three more started for Sandridge, to search the
shipping at the piers and in the bay.
While my men were scattered about on board the different
vessels, I wandered down one of the flights of water-steps to
question the boatmen, and as I was systematically pumping a
weather-beaten old tar, I beheld a strange object lying amid
the dark green sea-moss that coated the sides of the lower
steps. I took it up, and a thrill of horror ran through my
frame as I discovered it to be a human finger covered with
clotted gore. I could see at half a glance it was the fore-
finger of a man’s left hand, and it had been out off with a
knife ! I tried to track the drops of blood up the steps, but
there were none save on the one where the finger had lain.
I questioned every boatman ; they had neither of them had
a passenger, nor seen a man answering the description of the
runaway. I could tell by their answers that they spoke the
truth.
To make a long story short, I spent the whole day at
Sandridge and on the bay. Every ship I boarded and
closely searched. I sent trusty agents in the swiftest boats I
could find to do the same with every vessel at Geelong and
inside the Heads. I made inquiries, and found that no
vessel had left the harbour since the hour of the prisoner’s
escape the preceding night; but when I returned to Mel-
bourne in the evening, tired and weary with the day’s labour,
I had no more clue as to the whereabouts of the fugitive
than when I set out in the morning.
My spies, who had been hunting about the city, came in,
one by one, to give their reports. They were equally
unsuccessful.
The police who had taken to the bush did not return.
Were they, after all, right in their conclusions ?
Days and weeks passed away, however, after this ; and in
spite of our utmost endeavours, which were further stimu-
lated by a doubling of the reward, not the slightest clue
could be discovered of the murderer. Had he been in the
colony, we must have had him, for our vigilance never slept.


He was evidently gone far away, but how and where, none
could tell.
I often gave a discontented glance at the finger picked up
at Sandridgo Pier, which was now preserved in spirits of
wine, and I felt sure belonged to the fellow I wanted; and
yet there were very slight reasons for such a suspicion : it
was a finger that anybody might have owned—merely the
forefinger of a man’s left hand. Still three things were
evident from its inspection, namely, that its owner had not
lately done any manual work ; that he had either not had the
opportunity,or else had neglected to cut his nails; and thirdly,
from two small abrasions of the skin, and a bit of mortar
between the nails, that he had been clambering a wall or
something of the sort.
I recollected also that the police report stated the middle
finger of prisoner’s left hand was missing, and I made up
my mind, when I did fall in with my worthy friend, I
should find his fore one gone also; though how he lost it,
and by what fatality, I never expected to discover.
******
Wo must now pass over a period of several months, and
change the scene to Sydney.
I had been sent to that city on some official business
relative to forged notes on one of the banks there, which
necessitated my being absent from Melbourne for a lengthened
time. During my stay I became acquainted with a gentle-
manly Frenchman, who was living at the same hotel, and
whose name was Jacques Loval.
He was a good-looking, frank fellow, to whom one would
naturally take a liking. He was very nearly six feet in
height, somewhat delicate-looking, with aquiline features,
jet-black curly hair, and well-pointed moustache; true, his
teeth were not of the most regular species, and a pimple on
the nose detracted from the appearance of what would other-
wise have been a very handsome face ; his figure was stout
and muscular, but his left arm he carried in a sling, having,
according to his own account, broken it in falling over some
rocks at Manly Beach, about three weeks prior to my arrival.
We soon became fast friends, or rather, I should say,
companions, for my duties gave me ample leisure; and the


Frenchman being an artist, with very little business, I found
him ever ready for a walk, boating excursions, or billiards.
It was a fortnight after my arrival in Sydney, that Loval
and I took a boat, with the intention of sailing as far as the
Heads.
The weather was superb in early autumn, the month being
March, and as we glided swiftly down the harbour, I fancied
that never had I beheld so glorious and fairy-like a scene as
that which surrounded us.
On our right, the spires and domes of Sydney and
Wooloomooloo, the dark green foliage of the trees in the
Botanical Gardens, which seemed to throw out in clear relief
the tapering spars, yards, and taut rigging of the stately
guard-ship that lay close inshore, her long snake-like
pennant slowly curling and twisting in the breeze, and the
spirit-stirring strains of her magnificent band (for it was the
officers’ mess-hour) borne melodiously to our ears over the
glassy bosom of the water, in which her colossal form was
reflected as in a mirror. Close on her right frowned the
guns of Macquarie Fort, a quarter of a mile to the rear of
which, embosomed in trees, rose the walls and square tower
of Government House, above which floated the royal stan-
dard of England.
On our left a different scene presented itself. The undu-
lating wooded banks of North Shore, where the dark tea-
tree shrub and dwarf eucalypti covered the shelving cliffs
even to the water’s edge, and handsome verandahed villas,
standing amid their flower-gardens and bright green lawns,
glittered in the sunlight like pearls set in ‘inerald, while before
and around them frowned the green-black foliage of the
towering gum, the most mournful and funereal of trees.
In less time than I have taken to describe them all these
scenes were left behind ; Pinohgut Island and the Sow and
Pigs (what names for such scenes of fairy-land !) were quickly
passed —for the wind had begun to freshen, —and in less
than two hours from leaving Circular Quay, the bold pre-
cipitous bluffs known as the Heads rose to our view, and
beyond them the blue crested waves of the ocean—the
boundless Pacific.
We took in sail, and for some minutes we gazed silently


upon the beauty of the scene, for there is nothing so con-
ducive to a drowsy kind of reverie as the mere act of gazing
upon the sea, and listening to its low monotonous murmur.
At length a certain feeling in the stomach suggestive of
dinner made me break the silence with, “ Well, Loval, if
you’ve had enough of this, let’s put her about; we shall be
nearly two hours running up the harbour, and ’tis already
four o’clock.
The Frenchman started. I had evidently aroused him
from deep and painful thought, for his cheeks were pale as
death, and his eyes full of teats, but he aided me to put up
the sail; and we were soon tacking across the harbour’s
mouth, so as to have fair wind up channel.
Sydney harbour is full of angles and windings, so much so
that at six different periods between the Heads and the
town you seem to be enclosed in a small land-locked bay,
only finding an exit therefrom when your boat appears to
touch the opposite shore.
It was in rounding one of these points that Loval uttered
a cry of alarm, and on looking round I saw a small steam-
tug bearing right down upon us, and only about fifty yards
distant. She was coming on under full steam, and we were
directly crossing her course.
“ Port helm ! ” I shouted to my companion ; but he was
so panic-stricken that he was perfectly helpless. I flew to
the tiller, though too late to escape the collision. The last
thing I remember was the captain of the tug shout, “ Back
her ! ” A terrific crash followed, and then a sensation of
being pitched head over heels into space. A moment after
I was struggling in the water, swallowing large mouthfuls,
buffeting with the waves that buzzed in at my ears, and
having the clear consciousness that I was going to the
bottom, for I had no idea of swimming, and the shore was a
good hundred yards distant.
Just as my eyes and nose were submerged, I heard a voice
shout, “ Lay your hand on my shoulder, but don’t grapple
me—there’s a boat coming ! ”
I had sense enough loft to follow this advice; and, instead
of clutching my preserver, as many a drowning man would
have done, I laid my right hand on his shoulder, and thus,


while he trod water, I was enabled to raise my mouth and
chin above the stream, and in this position, to my unspeak-
able joy, I saw a small boat, propelled by a couple of sturdy
oarsmen, rapidly nearing us.
“ Keep up your pecker, my hearties ! ” shouted one of
them, as he shipped his oar ; and in another minute we wore
both dragged into the boat, and her head turned for Sydney.
Pretty drowned rats we looked, as we stepped out of the
Nancy Jane on to the Circular Quay, and hastened to the
nearest inn to warm ourselves with a nobbier; from thence
driving to our hotel in a cab, and losing no time in changing
our dripping garments for dry clothing.
Having completed my toilet, I knocked at Loval’s door to
see if he was ready. A moment later he joined me on the
landing.
“Well, old fellow,” I said, “you saved my life, and I
trust the day may come when I shall ho able to show my
gratitude in some other manner than by mere words.”
Little did I fancy that an opportunity would soon occur.
Little did I know the man who stood beside me.
“ Where shall we dine to-day, McDonald 1 ” asked Loval,
as we reached the hall. McDonald was my nom de guerre.
“ Well,” I replied, after a minute’s reflection, “ let it he
the St. George’s Restaurant, in George Street. I feel inclined
to he extravagant to-day. A bottle of champagne will take
the horrid taste of salt water out of my mouth.”
“ And yet you swallowed it as though you seemed to like it,
man cher,” laughed Loval; “ nevertheless, champagne lot it he.”
We emerged into George Street as we conversed, and
sauntered lazily on, gazing at the fashionable crowd and the
glittering shops—for George Street is the Regent Street of
Sydney—until we reached the corner of King Street, where
we met George Rodway, the then Chief of Police at Sydney.
I knew him well. He nodded to mo in passing, and stared
very hard at my companion.
After he had passed us about a dozen paces ho stopped
and called to me. I begged Loval to excuse me a minute,
and walked up to him.
“ You are a clever fellow, Brooke,” he exclaimed, laugh-
ingly, hut in a low tone.


“ How so 2 ” I asked, not understanding him.
“ How so 2 Come, that is good. Don’t you fancy I’m up
to your little game 2” he answered, with a knowing wink.
“ I’ll be shot, Rodway, if I know to what game you
allude. The bank matter is settled very satisfactorily ; I have
no further business here, and to-morrow I return to Mel-
bourne.”
“ Oh, indeed ! ” said Rodway, in a tone of relief, though a
curious smile rested on his lips ; then, in a careless tone, he
asked, “ Who is your companion 2 ”
“A Frenchman named Loval,” I replied. “We have
been out boating, and were capsized; he saved me from
drowning.”
“ Oh, indeed ! then I’ll not keep you longer from joining
him, Mr. Brooke. I trust you will never be called upon to
return his kindness by saving him from hanging ! ”
And without waiting for a reply, Eodway turned away,
and quickly disappeared round the corner of Pitt Street,
leaving me extremely puzzled, and totally at a loss to
account for his concluding words.
“ How is it that you know him 1 He’s the head detective
here, is he not 2” asked Loval, suspiciously, as I joined him.
“ Yes,” I said, carelessly, for I did not want my acqu unt-
ance to know that I was in the same profession ; “ I had to
consult him the other day about a watch that was stolen.
Reputation speaks of him as being a very clever fellow.”
By this time we had arrived at St. George’s Restaurant
(why will these antipodean eating-houses choose foreign
designations in lieu of the good old English mine of
eating-house 2), and entering the dining-room, took our
seats at one of the side tables that, through the open
window, commanded a view of the street, which—the heat
of the day being over, and the evening fine—was more
thronged than usual, with a fashionable, well-dressed crowd.
Several handsome equipages were dashing along, or drawn
up before the doors of one or other of the gorgeous marts of
feminine apparel, awaiting their occupants, who, perhaps,
were at that moment more engrossed over the merits and
demerits of a new bonnet than were their husbands, in the
dull gloom of the Legislative Assembly, over some colonial


bill embracing mighty and important provisions for the
reduction of thistles, or the abolition of “ brickfiolders.”
Though I have called the crowd a fashionable one, it was
not exclusively so. A sprinkling of French sailors and naval
officers gave it somewhat the air of the Hue St. Antoine of
Marseilles, while a still larger number of British Jack Tars,
artillerymen, and marines, would recall to down-west English-
men an idea of Union Street, Plymouth. ISTor were there
other elements of variety wanting: the cabbies, newspaper
boys, fruit-sellers, and others, had the true brogue of the
Emerald Isle; and the untanned leather complexions, twisted
pig-tails, and remarkable costumes of a few passing Celestials,
were calculated to present to an old Chinese merchant
reminiscences of health-impairing, liver-destroying Hong
Kong.
And well does the aspect of the street itself accord with
the nationality of its promenaders; for as Hew Orleans
presents the appearance of a French city, a German city, an
American city, and an Indian town, all met together in
orderly and decorous fraternization, so does Sydney resemble
an English street, a French street, a Chinese street, and a
Colonial street, with a dash of German, Irish, and native
peculiarity in each; the houses whereof have become uni-
versally mutinous, and, consequently, been drafted into each
other’s ranks.
In support of my assertion, I recollect, seven years ago, in
this very George Street, nine houses in succession, as follows :
—Humber one, a bank (architecture pure Italian); secondly,
a French cafe; next, a German divan; then a Chinese
merchant’s, followed by a colonial wooden shanty; then an
English draper’s ; then a pension Suisse; next, a Turkish
bath; and lastly, an American rifle gallery and bowling
saloon.
I have no longer time for descriptions, and will at once
return to my personal adventures. Loval and I did ample
justice to the cuisine of the restaurant; and after satisfying
the inner man, took our chairs through the window on to
the balcony, so that whilst we discussed our wine and cigars,
we could better enjoy the sweet western breeze, and observe
the passers by in the street below.


We had not "been here ten minutes, when Loyal, who
was sitting listlessly, with his legs over the arm of his chair,
suddenly started to his feet so impetuously that table,
decanter, and glasses were upset, and exclaiming, “ Cursed
fate ; ’tis he! ” dashed in through the window, across the
room, and out at the door, before I could recover from my
surprise at the sudden excitability of my usually sedate and
unimpassioned acquaintance.
When I did so, I determined to follow him, for I felt
that strange presentiment of coming evil which seems some-
times to be a very instinct of our nature.
Hastily putting on my hat, I paid the bill, and reached
the street in time to see Loval turn the corner of Market
Street towards the racecourse. I followed him, not with
the intention of overtaking, but for the purpose of watching
his movements.
I could see even now that a great change had come over
him within the last few minutes. Instead of his usual quiet
but haughty walk, his steps were long and uneven, and his
right arm (his left was still in a sling) was swinging back-
wards and forwards, while his head kept jerking to and fro
like that of a man suffering from severe nervous affection.
I could not distinguish the object of Loval’s pursuit, the
street being still crowded. On following him round the
next corner into Elizabeth Street, I distinguished, about
fifteen yards ahead of him, a tall, muscular fellow, whose
Crimean shirt, white moleskin trousers, with dandy silken
sash, answering the purpose of belt, and felt hat, marked him
as a digger.
He seemed quite unconscious of being followed. He never
once looked round; but with his hands in his pocket, and
a short black pipe in his mouth, walked rapidly on towards
Bathurst Street. All at once he stopped, as if irresolutely,
then turned off at right angles, and entered the racecourse,
which, by-the-bye, now enjoys the more dignified appellation
of Hyde Park.
Loval increased his pace, entered the same gate, and fol-
lowed still more closely, but keeping an even distance from
the digger.
By this time it was getting dark, for in Hew South Wales,


as far north as Sydney, twilight is very short, so that as I
kept some yards behind Loyal, I had little fear that he would
recognize me, even if he looked back.
My curiosity was aroused to its highest pitch. Was the
Frenchman, with his broken arm, going to attempt to give
the burly digger a thrashing 1 I saw that hatred, and not
friendship, instigated my friend’s movements, and naturally
enough imagined that it was caused by some old grievance,
perhaps being cheated at cards, a foul stroke at billiards, a
rivalry in love, or something of the sort.
I had not much time for conjecture. Loval, walking on
the grass as softly as a cat, was gradually nearing his adver-
sary; his right hand was thrust within the breast of his coat.
Had I not had a high opinion of the Frenchman’s honour, I
should have imagined that he was handling a weapon ; but
I knew him too well to have that suspicion, for how could I
fancy that the man who had risked his life to save my own
was a cowardly assassin 1 So I still kept at a discreet distance
in the rear.
The digger at this moment had gained the turnstile leading
into the main avenue, and pushing it open, passed through.
Then Loval sprang forward; one bound, and he was at the
low hedge by the side of the stile. I saw him bend down ;
I noticed the glimmer of steel in his hand. I shouted to
him, but he did not hear me ; my voice was drowned in the
sharp crack of a pistol, and the piercing shriek that fol-
lowed.
“He has killed him !” I muttered to myself. I made no
effort to secure the murderer. I stood rooted to the spot.
I knew it was my duty to capture Loval, though I felt I
could not hand over to justice the man to whom I owed
my life.
I had just resolved to retrace my steps towards the town,
when I heard a cry and the sound of a scuffle, and, to my
surprise, saw the Frenchman struggling in the grasp of three
men, whose shining glazed shakos showed them to belong to
the police force. In spite of his opponents, he was fighting
like a madman; he had drawn his broken arm from its
sling, and was using it with as much effect as his right ; in
fact, so desperate w'as his defence, that one of the policemen


was obliged to draw his staff and deliver him a head blow,
that stretched him senseless on the grass.
At this juncture of affairs 1 joined the party, and to my
astonishment recognized Eodway, the chief detective.
Upon seeing me he burst into a loud laugh. “ Ah,
Brooke !” he said ; “ your name ought to be Gull. I don’t
admire your choice of acquaintance ; there are almost suffi-
cient grounds for me to arrest you as an abettor in this
affair; but as you’ve let such a piece of good fortune slip
out of your hands into mine, I won’t exceed my strict duty.”
“Itis a most remarkable case,” I replied. “ Loval is the
last man I should have suspected of such a crime ; but what
you mean by the piece of good luck I’ve let slip, I can’t
imagine.”
“ Oh, can’t you 1 perhaps a glance at this poor wounded
arm and its continuations will solve the riddle ! ” and un-
twisting the bandage from Loval’s left hand, at a glance I
saw that two of the fingers were missing.
“ Eolf Schweig !” I exclaimed, aghast at the discovery.
“ Yes, Eolf Schweig,” exclaimed Eodway, with a laugh.
“ Who would have imagined that hair dye, false moustache
(the latter does cover the cut on the upper lip, though), and
other trifles, would have deceived the keen eye of a Victorian
chief detective ? My dear fellow, I’ve known the man’s
identity for a week; but thinking that you were marking
him down as your exclusive prey, professional etiquette pre-
vented my interfering, until to-day from your lips I learnt
that you were ignorant as to who the fellow was. Then I
resolved to act at once. You were traced to the Eestaurant,
and afterwards followed hither; and now James Eodway
will thank the Victorian Government for two hundred
pounds reward.”
“ And the fellow he fired at—is he dead ?”
“ Not a bit of it; the ball passed through his shoulder.
Can’t you hear him groaning 1 His wound has been bound
up, and they will carry him to the hospital; he will be about
again in a fortnight.”
***#»*
My story I must draw to a close. Loval—to designate
him by his proper name, Eolf Schweig, was borne to the


police station, and soon recovered consciousness. He was
taken before the magistrates, and remanded to Melbourne, so
that the more serious charge, the murder of the gaoler, might
be gone into first. Of this, as a matter of course, ho was
found guilty (the facts being indisputable), and sentenced to
death. From circumstances elicited at the trial, the fact of
his sanity was so doubtful that his sentence was commuted
into incarceration for life in the Yarra Lunatic Asylum,
where he lived throe months, and died a confirmed and dan-
gerous lunatic.
I visited him frequently there; he seemed as sane as most
men. On one of these occasions he told me his history, and
his reasons for committing the crimes he had perpetrated and
attempted ; and as the narrative was both strange and yet
interesting, I will endeavour to narrate it to you. One fact
he would never thoroughly disclose—how he managed to
evade us so cleverly after escaping from the Melbourne Gaol,
and to get scot-free into the sister colony.


THE MADMAN’S TALE.
Little did I dream that I should ever disclose the incidents
of my eventful life to the oars of mortal man, hut now that
my last night has come*—now that I hear the hammering of
the carpenters on the terrible gibbet, and see its reflection cast
by the moonlight on the walls of my prison cell, I feel that
it will be a relief to ease my heart in some measure of the
load of crime that lies heavy on it—to confess my sins to
one human ear before the dark grave hides them and their
perpetrator in its embrace for ever.
To begin, then. lam neither German nor French, for I
was born in Drury Lane, London, in the year 18—.
My parents were dealers in old clothes, rags, bones—in
fact, anything that came to hand. They were Germans ; and
doubtless it was from hearing them talk of the Fatherland
so frequently in terms of pride and regret, that caused me in
future years to be anxious to be considered a German.
My parents had only two children, myself and my sister,
who was three years my senior. We were neither much
looked after nor cared for, being allowed to spend our time
as we pleased, and pick up whatever companions and play-
fellows we chose. You may easily imagine that our position
was a perilous one, with no good example before us ; for our
parents were frequently had up for receiving goods knowing
them to have boon stolen, obtaining money under false
pretences, and other similar charges, whilst the juvenile
* Schweig’s sole delusion was “that he was in prison, and to be
executed on the following morning at seven o’clock.”


community of the immediate neighbourhood of Drury Lane
and its blind courts and alleys was not very select.
I soon learnt to he a pickpocket, and by the time I was
twelve years old was one of the most accomplished prigs in
London.
My sister’s fortunes were better. A kind clergyman,
struck by her childish beauty when she was about twelve
years of age, and finding her totally ignorant of every kind
of religious and secular instruction, got her into his Sunday
school, and at the end of three years his wife took her into
his service as under housemaid. To this kind sister I was
many a time indebted for being saved from want. When
father and mother were in prison she would often send me
all her scanty earnings, so that I might have bread to eat,
and be saved from the temptation to steal. She even begged
the worthy clergyman to take me into his employ as a stable
hoy, which he said he could not do, as he always kept his
vacant situations for those who had been most regular in
their attendance at his school.
Even the love of this good sister, however, and the money
she so kindly sent me, were not enough to turn me from my
evil courses. Her affection was not valued then, and the
money went in tobacco, beer, and pitch and toss during the
day, whilst my evenings were spent around the doors of the
theatres, picking pockets whenever a chance offered.
On one of these occasions I was detected in the act. A
tobacconist in Bow Street saw me insert my hand in a
gentleman’s pocket who was looking into his shop window.
He rushed out in time to seize my hand just as I had ab-
stracted a valuable silver snuff-box. In vain I kicked and
struggled. He handed me over to a passing policeman, who
took mo to the station-house. Hext morning I was taken,
for the first time, into a police court. The evidence of the
owner of the snuff-box and of the tobacconist did for me,
and I had six months in the gaol.
There I was mixed up with criminals of the deepest vil-
lany, for one of whom, a noted burglar, I contracted a great
liking. I looked up to him as a kind of hero, and the con-
sequence was that he patronized me in a lofty sort of way;
and as his sentence of two years expired on the same day as


mine, lie offered to give mo a start in the world if I would
stick to him. This I was proud to do ; we loft gaol together
and took a miserable room in Paradise Eow, leading out of
Little Gray’s Inn Lane.
Two days later ho told me that he and some pals* had
arranged to crack a cribf at Hornsey, and that as I was
small they would put me through an abstracted pane of glass
in the library window, that I might open the front door for
them. For this I was promised a flimsy, % and I readily
agreed to do it.
The evening arrived, but I had a little job of my own on
hand first, for I had resolved to burn the tobacconist’s shop
in Bow Street, the owner whereof had informed against me.
Although at that time only about twelve years of age, I was
a veritable little demon. London street boys have all the
vices and cunning of men at a very early ago, and I was
certainly in advance of most of my companions. About
seven o'clock in the evening I went to the tobacconist’s, and
it being in the month of November, and the night thick and
dark, I was able to make my observations unporceived.
I noticed the shelf whereon the pipes and pipe-lights
were laid, and then bought at a neighbouring shop one of
those fire-lighters composed of little pieces of wood covered
with tar and combustible matter, and returning to my
victim’s establishment, watched my opportunity, lit my in-
strument of vengeance under my cloak, and running into the
shop, pushed it behind the row of match-boxes on the shelf,
and then ran for my very life all the way home to Little
Gray’s Inn Lane, to meet my big pal the housebreaker.
I need not inflict upon you any account of my further
adventures that night; suffice it to say, that after being put
through the window, I was caught before I could open tiie
door to let in my mates. They escaped, but I was again
sent to the station-house, and committed to take my trial on
the two charges of burglary and arson, for the tobacconist
—whose shop, as well as the two adjoining ones, were com-
pletely destroyed by fire—traced the crime home to me, and
swore that he saw me running out of his shop ; and a polioe-
* Mates. f Break into a house. J Bank note.


man on duty in the street deposed that he saw me go in
stealthily and put something on the shelf, but that before he
could take me in charge I had rushed out and run down the
street like a mad thing. Even the shopkeeper from whom I
had bought the fire-lighter was in court, and identified me
as the purchaser. I was tried, found guilty on both charges,
and condemned to penal servitude for ten years for the
burning out of the tobacconist, and seven for housebreaking
at Hornsey, making a cumulative sentence of seventeen
years, which were to be spent in that dreaded colony of New
South Wales.
After lying in prison for about three months, I, with fifty
others, was conveyed to the London Docks in prison vans,
and placed on board the Vulture, which, on the following
day, in company with a store-ship named the Mystery, sailed
for Australia.
After a seven months’ voyage, during which we suffered
the very torments of hell, being chained in the hold to each
other in rows, sometimes for a week at a time, while the
least murmur would bring the lash. Often, too, the hatch-
way was battened down during the rough weather for days,
and strong men fainted for want of air, or rendered darkness
more hideous by the wildest and most horrible ravings and
imprecations ; some even died, and in more than one instance
their dead bodies, still chained to their living companions,
were left festering amongst us until nearly putrid, before
their irons were knocked off, and their poor remains com-
mitted to the deep.
At length scurvy broke out, and then the visits of our
persecutors became more frequent. Every night they came
down to our noisome den to clear away the corpses, and seldom
did they return empty-handed, for there was no surgeon on
board, and we were left to die or live, as luck or Providence
willed it.
At one time our rate of death was on an average of two a
day; and during the night we could hear the dull splash!
splash ! as the poor fellows’ bodies were thrown into the sea,
without coffin or burial service.
It was a horrible time. Often we prayed for shipwreck,
for dea.h would have been a welcome termination to oul


sufferings. At last, however, “ Land ho !” was the welcome
shout from the look-out, and twenty-four hours after we
dropped anchor in the magnificent harbour of Sydney.
The next day wo were landed and marched to the gaol,
guarded by a company of light infantry with loaded muskets
and fixed bayonets. Strange as it may appear, I never re-
member feeling so happy in my life as on that day, even
though I was being ignominiously conducted to a prison.
The air was so pure and beautiful, the sun shone so brightly,
and all nature was so calm and peaceful, that after the fear-
ful horrors of the past few months it seemed a veritable
garden of Eden.
At this time it was the custom, instead of keeping the
convicts close prisoners, to assign them to the officers of the
garrison, but soon after my arrival the supply exceeded the
demand, and for six months I continued an inmate of the Par-
ramatta gaol, being employed during the day, with a hundred
other convicts, in road-making, stone-breaking, &c.
During all this time I had received no tidings of my
parents, whom I left in prison on a charge of purchasing a
valuable watch for three pounds, well knowing it to have
been stolen.
One morning when lying in my cell, thinking of my
parents, and fancying how strange it would be if a parental
government were to send them out to meet me in Australia, I
heard steps in the corridor, the grind of the huge key in my
prison coll, and when it opened—oh, heavens ! I fancied I
was mad, for my eyes rested on the face of my sister !
It was indeed her ; the same quiet smile, the same sofl
melancholy light in the large hazel eyes, and her own soft,
pleasing voice. After a moment’s steady look I knew I had
not been dreaming, and in the next we were clasped in each
other’s arms in a silent embrace. When the turnkey had
retired, bolting the door behind him, I learnt that this angel
of mercy had left her situation in England, and encountered
all the dangers and discomforts of the long voyage (for those
were not the days of ocean steamships and swift Black Ball
Liners) for my sake—to soften my heart and hardships.
She had even broken off an engagement with a young man
who loved her fondly, and whose love she returned, and to


whom she was shortly to have been married, because her
affection and sense of duty told her she might do good to a
sinful and ungrateful brother at the other end of the world, —
and that brother a convict, a thing of scorn, whom many
sisters would have disowned and shrunk from.
When my good sister had told me all this, for the first time
since my childhood tears trickled down my face, and my
heart told me that I was not an alien from all mankind.
We were not allowed to be together for more than a quar-
ter of an hour, but during that short interval I learnt that
my parents were still in prison, where they were likely to
remain for a couple of years more. I found also she had
brought a most excellent character from the clergyman’s
family in which she had lived so long, and this I knew would
get her a good place and high wages in Sydney. She told me
that her plan was, if possible, to obtain a situation, get into
favour with her employer, and induce him to get me assigned;
when after a time, she fondly hoped, if I conducted myself
well, a ticket-of-leave might be obtained, and I should be
almost as well off as a free labourer. Ah, Mr. Brooke, I see
by the shadow of the gallows on the wall, that I must con-
dense the incidents of my tale, or I shall be unable to con-
clude it in this world. Well, then, Annie was successful; within
a week of her arrival she obtained a situation as dairymaid in
an officer’s family who resided in the bush, but only six miles
from Sydney; and in about a month after, a generally useful
lad being wanted, she begged her master to take me. The
consequence was that I became an assigned servant to Lieu-
tenant Pasco of the Marines, and entered upon my duties
forthwith.
A career of happiness now opened before me. The example
of my sister engendered in my breast a wish to imitate her
good qualities. My duties being over early, I could spend
my evenings with her, when she would talk over the sins of
my past life, and teach me to read, write, and sing, in all of
which I was an apt pupil. My sister’s favourite tune was
the “ Evening Hymn,” and we used to sing it together every
night before I started across the home paddock, towards the
hut which I shared with the shepherd. I stayed with Lieu-
tenant Pasco three years, and in that short time rose from the


equivocal situation of generally useful boy to the post of
bailiff or agent. You may consider this an extraordinary
thing for a convict so quickly to accomplish, but it is never-
theless true that I did it. Within that three years I had also
educated myself to a great extent. I had picked up some
German from a stockman on the station, who had belonged
to a German band in London, and been transported for stab-
bing a comrade whilst in a state of half-drunken passion. I
had acquired a knowledge of French, too, from a hut-keeper,
who had been sent out for forgery, a thorough Parisian; this
fellow had lived some years in London, and gained a hand-
some income by forging foreign passports for runaway debtors
and others who were in a hurry to put the Channel between
them and Britain; and I had, amongst other things, taught
myself book-keeping, and believed I had formed myself fit
for any kind of business.
Annie, my sister, had not been idle all this time. She,
too, had struggled hard to improve herself, and had succeeded
sufficiently to rise from the position of dairymaid to be a sort
of nursery-governess and wardrobe-keeper. Lieutenant Pasco
and his young and lovely wife were very kind to us, and the
former had promised speedily to obtain for me a ticket of-
leave, when the terrible calamity happened which took from
me one whom I loved more than my own life, and dedicated
me her avenger.
I was then seventeen years of age, Annie just twenty, and
a very lovely young woman. Her eyes were blue as the Aus-
tralian sky, and her hair of that pale brown that gleams with
golden lustre in every shade of light; her eyebrows well arched,
the lashes long and silken, the little rows of teeth were white
as strings of pearls, and the delicate purity of her skin was
remarkable in such a climate as Sydney. In figure she was
graceful, of the medium height, and neither thin nor approach-
ing to fatness.
Annie was liked by every one, and, consequently, all were
glad that she had so risen in favour with her mistress as to be
promoted to the situation of trust I have named. When I say
every one, I must, however, except the German stock-keeper.
Ho had learnt to love Annie in his wild and impulsive way,
and had sworn that she should be his. He saw in this rise in


her position another serious obstacle to be overcome. The
difference was broad enough between the free dairymaid and
the convict cattle-driver, but now the gulf was amazingly
widened, and he began to feel less sure of his success. Annie
had never received the German’s advances with any degree
of favour, though her natural kindness of heart and delicacy
of feeling prevented her treating him rudely, and sending him
speedily about his business, as she should have done. And
perhaps this conduct, with a fellow who could not understand
“ Ko ” to mean no, unless accompanied by abuse and passion,
encouraged him to hope on. At last matters came to a crisis ;
the fellow wrote her a very long letter, containing a rambling
confession of his devotion and passion, the offer of his hand
and heart, and finishing with vague threats of putting an end
to himself if she refused him. This letter was put into my
hands by my sister, who begged me to return it to the writer,
and tell him that he must never speak or write to her again.
I obeyed her behest, and undoubtedly spoke to the fellow
a deal sharper than she wished me to do, and the consequence
was that angry words arose, and he called me a “lag,” where-
upon I knocked him down and left the hut.
From that moment there was no good blood between us,
at least on Itzig Schroter’s side, and I was told that he had
sworn that if Annie wmdd not be his wife, she should not,
at all events, wed anybody else.
For about three months things went on in their usual rou-
tine, till one afternoon in June my sister obtained leave to
ride into Sydney, as she wished to deposit some of her salary
in the new savings bank. I had arranged to accompany her,
but at the last moment something turned up that required
my immediate attention at the home station, and I was forced
to stay behind.
Annie was not the girl to fear a lonely ride; Sydney was,
as I have before said, only six miles from the station; and
she was a first-rate horsewoman, so, as she intended taking a
cup of tea with a friend in town ere her return, I promised
to ride and meet her in the evening, and then hurried away.
K ight came, and I mounted one of the horses and hastened
to fulfil my promise. I had not been able to get over my
work so quickly as I had anticipated, and was somewhat


after my time, but I rode fast to make up for it, and clearing
the open space in front of the home station, speedily struck
into the narrow hush track, which I had to traverse before I
gained the broad road to Sydney. The night had grown very
dark, considering that the moon was at its full, but the heavy
masses of clouds so covered the heavens that its radiance was
seldom visible; indeed, it was only just possible to see a
couple of yards beyond my horse’s head.
As I rode on, my mind dwelt on many things. Unpleasant
recollections of the past mingled with pleasing thoughts of
the present, and still brighter hopes of the future, for I had
that day been told by my master that my tioket-of-leave had
been signed, and would be in my possession the next day;
while hopes were held out to me, at the same time, of a part
remission of my sentence.
Once or twice my reverie was broken in upon by a distant
sound resembling a scream, but I set it down as the chuckle
of the laughing jackass, or the cry of the cuckoo. At length
the sharp report of a pistol smote on my ear, and putting
spurs to my horse, I galloped in the direction of the sound.
The beating of my heart told me that some dread discovery
was near at hand; and suddenly my horse stopped and trem-
bled violently. .Finding it impossible to urge him on, I dis-
mounted and endeavoured to discover the cause of his terror;
when the moon suddenly glinted out from behind the cloud,
and oh ! horror of horrors ! —I beheld the dead body of my
poor sister lying at my feet. Her face was distorted and
covered with bruises, her eyes glared wildly upwards at the
cloud-covered sky, and a dark stream of blood welled slowly
forth from a pistol wound in the throat. She was quite dead.
I knelt by her side; a sudden and brilliant light from the
full moon for a moment fell on her poor upturned eyes.
Heavens ! in their widely expanded pupils I saw reflected the
features of the German dock-keeper, Itdg Schrofer.*
From that moment I lost all consciousness, until one
bright summer’s morning, three days after my sister’s murder,
I awoke from a dreamy state of delirium, and all the inci-
dents of that horrid night came vividly back to my mind;
* The reader must remember that this is a madman’s tale.


then everything became once more confused; again wild
ideas hovered through my brain, and wild shapes flitted be-
fore my eyes. I was mad; and the succeeding' six months
were spent in the Lunatic Asylum. At last I was discharged as
cured, and walked a comparatively free and sane man through
the streets of Sydney; the surgeon of the asylum having
given me, on the eve of my departure, my ticket-of-leave.
I soon learned that two men had been tried for the murder
of my poor sister, and condemned to death, but had con-
trived to effect their escape the night before the day fixed
for their execution, and that no traces had been gathered of
them, but the general opinion was that they had wandered
into the bush, and perished miserably there. Kh suspicions
had rested on Itzig Schroter, who, I learned, wvas still in the
service of Lieutenant Pasco.
With a mind deadened to every feeling of mercy, and a
heart filled with no single desire on earth save to avenge my
sister’s death, I remained in town till evening, and then set
out for the station. I knew that Schroter generally occu-
pied a little hut to himself, which stood about a mile from
the homestead. I had bought powder and shot at a gun-
maker’s in town, and stolen a pistol from the window while
the shopkeeper’s back was turned, and with grim satisfaction
I loaded my weapon as I strode along the solitary bush-
track.
An hour later, and I stood at the door of the stock-
keeper’s hut; it was on the latch, so I noiselessly opened it
and entered.
By the moonlight that streamed in through the open door
I saw the bulky form of the German lying at full length on
his straw-covered stretcher. I cooked my pistol, and shook
him by the shoulder. He immediately awoke, and as he did
so his eyes rested on me, and on the glittering barrel of the
pistol.
“ Itzig Schroter, I have come to avenge my sister’s murder,”
I said, sternly.
The wretched man half leaped from his bed, and with his
eyes raised to mine, begged piteously for his life.
Then a thought struck me, and I said, “ Tell me the names
of your companions in villany, and where I may find them.”


“ If I do will you spare my life ?”
“ I do not promise, but attempt to deceive me, and you
have no hope. Remember, I know much already.”
Thus exhorted, Schroter confessed all. He told me that
he was aided in his diabolical crime by two other fellow-
convicts, also Germans, named Grasser and Hippus; that
they bad been tried in Sydney and found guilty, and that
suspicion had never rested on him. He further informed me
that both had escaped from the colony, but how or by
what means, no one knew. I next made him give me a
close description of the two ruffians, so that I might know
them if ever I came across them; and after he had done
this, to make more sure of mercy, he told me that Hippus was
the murderer, and that he was only induced to join in the
affair on being assured that robbery was the sole object of
his mates.
“ Liar and villain! ’ I cried; “ I saw your countenance
reflected in the eyes of my murdered sister; your mates
only aided you in the vile plot that you yourself concocted,
and thus do I avenge her.”
I levelled my pistol as I spoke, and fired.
A sharp cry was followed by a hollow moan, and as the
smoke cleared away I saw that Schroter had fallen across the
stretcher. He was dead; a dark stream of blood flowed
from a gap in his throat; I had shot him exactly in the
same spot as he had shot my sister.
Whether from a return of my insanity, caused by the
strong excitement under which I was labouring, I know not,
but no sooner did I arrive at the conclusion that Schroter
was dead, than I felt that I must commemorate my first act
of retribution by severing the first finger of my left hand.
I did so with a knife I found in the hut, bandaged up the
stump, and fled into the bush.
Mr. Brooke, I have but a short time to finish my tale. I
asked Mr. Brown, the Protestant chaplain, to come to me at
seven o’clock; it only wants ten minutes to that hour.
You will remember there still lived two others on whom I
had sworn to wreak my vengeance, but as yet, in spite of
my utmost efforts, I had obtained no clue to their where-
abouts. Years passed away. I had been a wanderer in


every land, —everywhere watching and waiting for them
who came not. At last the gold fever broke out in this
colony, and after an absence of many years I again set foot
in Australia, not with the intention of digging for the
yellow dross, for I had accumulated enough to supply my
few wants whilst life remained. No; like the sleuth-hound,
I scented blood. Instinct told me I should find JHippus
and Grasser here, and it did not deceive me.
At an hotel in Geelong I encountered the former. His
costume as a waiter, and the alterations which the hand of
time had made in his features, did not cheat my memory. I
stabbed him; but my dagger, striking a copper coin in his
waistcoat pocket, glanced off, and instead of piercing his
heart merely inflicted a flesh wound. I was arrested, tried,
condemned, and incarcerated, as you are aware, in the Mel-
bourne Central Gaol.
There I had been about two years and a half when I dis-
covered that a new turnkey had been appointed to our wing
of the prison, and to my intense joy I recognized in him the
German convict Grasser. You know how I served him, and
how I escaped. He was my second victim. I fled I know
not whither. At midnight I found myself sitting on the
cold watery steps of Sandridge Pier. The silence and
solemnity of the scene almost tempted me to commit suicide,
but the memory that a third assassin lived, and that my
vengeance was not yet complete, diverted the thought. Then
a wild tumult in the brain banished all reasoning faculties,
and I knew that my old madness was once more overpowering
my senses ; under its impulse I drew from my pocket the clasp-
knife of the murdered man, which I had pocketed after
committing the crime, and coolly and resolutely severed the
second finger of my left hand, bandaging up my hand as care-
fully and skilfully as though I had been an army surgeon.
What I did after this, and how I escaped from the colony,
I know not; and I believe all was done whilst in a state of
lunacy. I have a dim memory of riding for days and
nights over stony deserts and boundless tracts of sand, —of
a wild longing for water, and at length of sinking exhausted
beside a flowing river; and my impression is that my senses
did not return for some time after a party of overlanders


found me, and the city of Sydney was within view. They
told me that they found me lying helpless beside a creek on
the parched open plain, and that my burning thirst had weak-
ened my brain and made me delirious : I fancied I knew the
contrary; and in another hour we were at our journey’s end.
This was about five months before I met you. During
those months I won much at cards, and also earned money
by painting, having become a fair artist during a somewhat
lengthened stay in Germany, whither I had journeyed some
years previously, fancying that both Hippus and Grasser
might have returned to their native country.
Well, I have little more to add. The man who passed the
window of the St. George’s Restaurant, and whom I followed
and fired at, was Hippus. I recognised him in an instant,
although the jaunty digger costume had supplanted the dress
of the waiter; and sorry am I that my wrist had lost its
steadiness, or my poor sister should have been fully avenged.
Still lam content; for though he has escaped me as well as
the punishment awarded him by the law, he carries his
crime in his heart, and one day fate will provide him a meet
doom.
Mr. Brooke, you have heard my tale; the gallows is
ready; it is past seven. I hear the chaplain’s step on the
stairs ; you must go.
And rising, the lunatic motioned me from the room.
Poor Sohweig ! within a fortnight after his relating his tale
he died, amid the most terrible ravings. He expired exactly
at the hour of seven in the morning, the time which hi
phantasy had ever, day by day and hour by hour, depicted
as the time fixed for his execution on the morrow.
His history made a great and lasting impression on me;
it was the strangest I had met with during my professional
career.


PURSUING AND PURSUED.
By the opening of the year 1853, things had settled down
pretty considerably in the good city of Melbourne, and, in-
deed, throughout the colony. A revolver stuck one side
your belt, and a howie knife the other, was not the afternoon
promenade costume for Collins Street then, more than it is
now. Handsome shops had already sprung up here and there,
pavement was a thing not unknown in the principal streets,
public gardens had begun to be laid out, church towers and
spires were more plentiful, hoard and lodging could be had
for money at all seasons, though two-roomed houses did bring
their four and six pounds a week rent, on a general average;
many handsome suburban terraces, too, had arisen, as by
magic ; Collingwood and Fitzroy were no longer towns under
canvas, but had gradually risen to be represented by neat
weather-board, ugly corrugated iron, and even here and there,
brick and stone tenements; railways, too, were in progress,
and a handsome stone bridge had been thrown across the
Yarra, at the foot of Swanston Street. Over this bridge,
and, consequently, on the south side of the river, stood our
barracks —a fact sufficiently attested to the beholder by the
blue uniform, white facings, and shouldered carbine of the
sentry, ever on duty before the large white gate leading into
the barrack square.
Inside the outer gates, and, as well as I recollect, on the
right-hand side thereof, were the sergeant-major’s quarters,
together with those of the lieutenant in charge, while oppo-
site them stood the residence and office of the inspector. Of
the square itself the extreme right was the officers’ and com-
missioners’ stables, and opposite were the stables for the


troop horses, in the rear whereof were pitched the tents for
the troopers, while close hy stood a long unsightly buildino-
which was divided into a mess-room and dormitory for the
cadets. These said cadets rejoiced in a silver-lace hand
around their caps, instead of the white cloth one that dis-
tinguished the troopers."
There are many people who think barrack life a sadly idle
and indolent one. They may he right, but if so, ours was a
great exception to the general rule, for at six o’clock every
morning we were roused by sound of trumpet, and had to
dress at once, take out our chargers, and ride them more
than a mile to water. On our return we had to clean them
down and give them a feed, by which time another trumpet
flourish announced the morning meal, which consisted of
good plain roast or boiled meat, bread, and tea without milk
At ten the cry was “ boot and saddle,” and we had to fall
in on parade with our horses. Inspection over, which gene-
rally lasted half an hour, the order was given to mount,
and we rode into the Government paddock—a large piece of
open ground at the end of which flowed the Yarra-Yarra,
forming its northern boundary, where we had a full two
hours’ drill; then we returned to barracks, cleaned down our
chargers, furbished up our accoutrements, and went to dinner,
which, as to the kind of prog, was breakfast over again,
with the variation of hot meat for cold, and vegetables in lieu
of bread. After this we had to parade for a second two
hours’ drill, this time on foot, which brought us up to within
a few minutes of four o’clock, when we had to take the
horses to water, clean down and feed them. Our day’s labour
was then concluded, save for such of us as were told off for
guard, which was strictly kept, particularly over the stables,
as at this time there were many bushrangers and other des-
peradoes in the colony, who were quite bold enough to make
an attack on our quarters, and carry off our horses from under
our very noses, had the least carelessness on our part given
them the necessary encouragement. I was despatched about
this time in all haste, with eight other troopers, to a distant
station, which was a kind of connecting link between still
more distant points, hut where we should be a protection to
the squatters, who, in these remote spots, were not only ex-


posed to the open ferocity of bushrangers, hut also to the
treacherous assaults of the aboriginal natives. The termina-
tion of our journey was a spot situate near the base of Mount
Koronth, Marahool.
It was a lovely autumn morning in the month of Feb-
ruary when we set out on our journey along the Gardiner’s
Creek Eoad, and passing through Prahran, then the tiniest
of villages, gained the open hush beyond, and headed for
Gardiner’s Creek. Crossing this, and leaving the Yarra-
Yarra river (which, by the by, in the aboriginal language
signifies “flowing, flowing”) on our left, we passed over a
patch of rising, sandy land, which formed a belt between the
river and a tract of sandy heath and shrub-covered ground
beyond ; in traversing which I noted several native cran-
berry bushes, together with many species of dwarf acacia and
wattles. Arrived at the end of this sandy tract, we struck
out in an easterly direction, crossed some ch!ar running
streams of water—all tributaries to the Yarra, whose banks
were thickly covered with sombre trees, and dotted with
innumerable wild flowers.
At last the sun set behind the distant mountain tops, and
we prepared to camp for the night. We were about midway
between Gardiner’s and Babee Jim creeks, where the country
was extremely rich, undulating, sparely timbered, but thickly
grassed, and about four miles from the southern bank of the
river.
We accordingly hobbled our horses, lit a fire, made tea in
our billies, baked some damper in the embers, and sat down
to our supper with light hearts and keen appetites.
It will be as well here to introduce my readers to some of
our company.
Next me, on my right, sat Bill Mathews—a stoutly made,
muscular fellow of about twenty-eight; his hair was brown
and lank, his face of a dull mercurial colour, perfectly beard-
less, with large grey eyes, one having a slight squint Al-
though not possessing the appearance, he was nevertheless a
gentleman, his father, being a clergyman and schoolmaster in
England. Poor Mathews had gone astray through a faulty
home training ; his father ambitious for a reputation for strict
impartiality in his school, made a point of treating his own


son even more harshly, and punishing his boyish delinquen-
cies more severely, than those of his other pupils. From'
this, his son, who was motherless, began to entertain the idea
that his father disliked him, and seizing an opportunity, he
had run away to sea, worked his way to Victoria as a cabin
boy, and was now a trooper in the police.
The next man to him was George Smith, the son of a
large coal and iron mine proprietor in the midland counties
of England, who was worth his £30,000 a year, the owner of
a palace, of thirty indoor servants, with twenty saddle and
carriage horses in his stable. This young man had been
brought up in the greatest luxury and comfort, but at twenty
years of age he had fallen in love with a beautiful but pen-
niless girl, and to prevent a mesalliance, his father had
banished him to the other end of the world, not even seeing
him ere he departed, nor making him any pecuniary allow-
ance, lest on coming of age he should have the wherewithal
to return to England and marry the girl in spite of him.
The young man in question was slightly formed, and about
live feet ten in height, dark, and good-looking, with curly
brown hair, a well-pointed moustache and imperial, and dark
flashing eyes ; he was rather affected, and had an air of lassi-
tude in all his movements, which was partly assumed and
partly natural.
The third individual was a young Irish farmer, whose
father, owing to an increase in rent and pressure of creditors,
had been turned out of his homestead, and died in the union.
The son had come out as a free emigrant along with his
only sister. She was now a shop assistant in Melbourne,
and he was earning half a guinea a day and his prog in the
force.
Next him reclined a handsome but somewhat blase man,
of gentlemanly bearing, who was once a captain in a light in-
fantry regiment, but who had been cashiered from the army
for gambling, and striking a superior officer.
Then came a fellow who had been a whipper-in in Eng-
land, and a stock-driver in New South Wales; he was the
most brilliant rider I ever saw.
The sixth man was the most refined and highly educated
of us all. Tall and slight, but muscular and well made, he


had heen a fellow of Baliol College, Oxford; and later still, a
rising author in London. Time and women had, however,
brought his funds so low, that he had to come to the last
refuge of the destitute—Victoria.
Beside him, again, was a man with red whiskers and
moustache, who was the son of a leading physician in the
West of England, who, with a good practice hut large family,
had only the means wherewith to give them all a good edu-
cation, a Bible, and a blessing. This son had ever heen wild
and wayward; at twenty he had, in a drunken bout, accepted
the Queen’s shilling, and entered the army as a private,
whence his relatives had to buy him out. Then he persuaded
his father to pay his passage to Australia; where, after spend-
ing all his loose cash in debauchery and licentiousness at
Sydney, he had worked his passage to Melbourne, and there
been taken into the force, after successively failing in the
aristocratic employments of selling oranges in the theatre,
crying fish in the streets, and breaking in horses at the
bazaar.
The last man of our little company was about forty years
of age, tall and dark, with hair slightly changing to grey; he
was an old hand from Van Diemen’s Land, whither he had
been transported for killing his man in a duel. He had served
seven years of his time, and was remitted the remainder, owing
to most exemplary good conduct, and a friendly warning he
once gave the Government of a contemplated revolt amongst
the convicts. It was owing to the high character given him
by the gaol governor and the chaplain that he obtained ad-
mission into our ranks. He was now our leader.
Having thus described our little circle, it is time for me to
resume my narrative. After partaking heartily of our meal,
we sat around the fire smoking our short black pipes and
spinning yarns, until the moon rose; when, wrapping our-
selves in our blankets, and placing our saddles as pillows, we
consigned ourselves to sleep.
I soon sunk into a profound slumber, perhaps lulled thereto
by the lonely cry of the mopoke or native cuckoo, which only
utters its low plaintive note at night; or by the soft murmur
of the warm east wind amid the tall branches of the gum and
pencil cedar trees, that were thinly scattered around our camp.


I might have slept some two or three hours, when I was
suddenly roused from my slumbers by a rough hand shaking
my arm, and another laid across my mouth.
“ Hush! listen! what do you make out that to be?” whis-
pered a voice in my ear which I recognised as belonging to
Harry O’Neil, the duellist.
I raised my head from the saddle; but it was so dark that
I could see nothing; the fire had burned down to a heap of
red cinders, and only shed a dim light for a radius of about a
yard; beyond all was dense blackness.
I listened, but the rustle of the wind was alone audible to
my ears.
“What alarms you, O’Neil?” I asked, in a low voice; “I
hear nothing.”
“ But I do; there again, surely you heard that ? ”
“Of course I did, ’tis the cry of the mopoke; you surely
ain’t frightened at a cuckoo?” I responded, scarcely able to
refrain from laughing aloud, for the cry was so familiar that I
could not imagine any one mistaking it.
“ Not at a cuckoo, my friend. Don’t you know the real from
the sham, the dove from the hawk ? That is no mopoke, ’tis
the signal of the black fellows.”
“The deuce it is !” I ejaculated, feeling for my revolver;
“do you think they will attack us?”
“Not they; but they will steal our horses, that is what
they are up to now.”
“You mean, if you let them,” I said.
“We shall find it a difficult matter to prevent them,
mate,” was the retort.
“ These savages can see by night as well as by day, when
I can’t distinguish your head from your heels, although you
are touching me. However, let’s wake our comrades.”
This was done in a minute, for they lay so close together
with their feet turned towards the fire, that, like spokes in a
wheel, you had only to describe a circle, and you would not
miss one.
As silently as possible they were all aroused from their
slumbers, and a council of war was hastily held.
“ Throw some logs on the fire, let us see what we’re about,”
said one; but all our wood was already burnt.


“ Listen, mates, that we may learn in which direction our
horses are,” whispered another.
We did listen, hut could not hear anything hut the wind,
and once more the cry of the false mopoke.
“ Let’s fire our revolvers; ’twill show the fellows how many
we are, and frighten them away,” said Bill Mathews.
“ It will tell them exactly how many horses there are to
steal, and not frighten them a hit, for the very act will show
that we don’t know where they are,” said Smith.
“ I have it! ” I exclaimed, as an idea struck me. “ Does
any mate’s horse know his whistle 1"
Not one had taught his charger that branch of elementary
education.
“Then mine does,” I continued; “and I will show you a
way to save our horses yet.”
As I spoke, I gave a long shrill whistle, and within a
couple of minutes after, the sound of hoof-strokes was audible,
and presently my handsome black charger galloped up to the
camp, as well as his hobbles would allow him.
“Well, you’ve got yours, Frank, but how the deuce shall
we get ours?”
“ Easily enough,” said Smith; “ Frank’s horse came eas-
terly, we have but to go in the same direction; for as horses
always keep together at night, we shall necessarily find
them.”
“ I have a better dodge than that, my boys,” said I, as I
carefully saddled my nag, and secured every strap and chain
so that they should not jingle; “ I’m going alone after the
horses; my animal, if left to his own guidance, will naturally
rejoin his fellows, who are, without doubt, under the same
instinct, making their way towards us. If they are not sur-
rounded by the black fellows, I will bring tbem, never fear,
for they will all follow me when I wheel round. If, how-
ever, their return is cut off, a pistol shot or cooey will tell you
where I am, and we shall have to obtain them by force.”
“ All right, old fellow, go ahead;” and with this parting
greeting I mounted and rode forth into the darkness.
In spite of the readiness of my proposition, I now felt de-
cidedly uncomfortable, as, with the reins lying on my horse’s
neck, so that he should follow his own course, every moment


took me further into the lone hush, and more distant from
the dull red spot that marked the smouldering camp-fire. It
was so dark that I could not see my charger’s head before me,
hut I knew full well that the keener eye of a black fellow
could discover and distinguish objects several yards distant
from him on such a night, so that I should be perfectly at
the mercy of their spears and boomerangs; while they would
he as safe from my pistols as if they were in the clouds.
These thoughts had scarcely occurred to me, when my horse
gave a shrill neigh—a sure token of man or beast in close
proximity; the next moment a shiver told me of the proxi-
mity of the blacks.
A touch of the spur reassured my steed, and bending for-
ward, I rode on with my head nearly under his neck, in
which position, my uniform being dark and my horse black,
I trusted to escape observation.
Above the low murmur of the wind, I thought I could dis-
tinguish the muttered yabber yabber of the savages; and I
was ignorant then, as, indeed, were most of us, of the general
cowardice and harmlessness of these half-naked sons of the
soil; and of the fact that larger bands of them than a round
dozen or so, were rarely to be met with.
Still on I rode. I conjectured that I must already have
left the camp a good half-mile in the rear, when the faint
rattle of chains, and the neigh of a horse, which was cheer-
fully answered by the animal I rode, told me that we were
close upon the missing animals. By the sound of their hoof-
strokes I could tell that they were advancing towards me,
and drawing in my steed, I waited until I conjectured they
were close by, and then, wheeling him round campwards,
knowing they would follow, commenced the return route.
We had not gone far, however (I still preserving my
almost horizontal position in the saddle), when the quick
jerking jabber of the blacks (this time distinct enough)
again fell on my ear. I could distinguish the patter of
human naked feet around me —how many I could not guess;
and as for the use of my eyes, I could not even see my
pistol-holsters. By the cries of the blacks, I conjectured
that they had surrounded the horses in a circle, and were in
the act of seizing upon them. It was plain they had not


discovered me yet, and what course to take in the emergency
I had not the slightest conception.
Suddenly I felt a hand laid upon the neck of my horse,
and then there was a sharp cry of surprise as it came in
contact with the bridle. That cry was repeated in a still
shriller tone; when sliding my hand along the rein, I laid
hold of the fellow’s wrist, and hy sheer strength of arm,
lifted him from the ground, and threw him across my horse
in front of me; then firing a barrel of my revolver into the
darkness, shouting, as I did so, “ Cut it, you rascals; here
are twenty of us ; run, or we’ll shoot every one of you.”
My words had talismanic effect. I could hear the black
fellows scampering away in every direction. One only of
their number ventured to give me a parting salutation, which
came in the shape of a stout wooden spear that whizzed hy
within an inch of my nose, with anything hut a pleasing
effect.
It did not confuse me so much as to make me let go my
captive. In spite of all his struggles, I held him tightly;
and when, a quarter of an hour later, I was seated hy our
non-replenished camp-fire, with our good horses (not one
missing) close hy us, and the black fellow in our midst, loud
and boisterous was our merriment, and many were the
queries of what we should do with our unexpected sable guest.
One or two proposed to hang him then and there, hut it
ended hy his being kicked out of the camp.
We now composed ourselves again to sleep, hut our
slumbers were short ; in a couple of hours or so morn broke,
and there was a repetition of the hilly and the damper, after
which the cry was “ Boot and saddle,” and we resumed our
march.
It was a glorious morning, and all nature looked calm and
beautiful Our route lay over a gently undulating country,
well grassed and watered, dotted thinly, and in park-like
clumps, with the graceful pencil cedar, mingled with dog-
wood and native walnut trees ; while the strongly scented
wattle blossoms filled the air with fragrance, and the low
rich notes of the thrush, the sweet warble of the magpie,
and the boisterous cadence of the laughing jackass, reverbe-
rated through the still air.


Our destination was close at the foot of Mount Koronth,
Marabool, which is a hill rather than a mountain, standing
apart from the main range.
We halted for refreshment about mid-day, on the margin
of the Babee Jim Creek, whose banks were then nearly
carpeted with wild flowers of rich hues, but, with one or two
rare exceptions, affording no perfume. Above them, here
and there, cropped up picturesque rooks of bluestone.
Amongst these flowers I noticed the tints of the clematis
and ranunculus, with the creamy petals of the dwarf banksia,
or native honeysuckle.
Whilst camping here we enjoyed the luxury of a bath in
the clear sparkling water of the creek ; and seeing some fine
fish in the shallows, we got our swords and had the luck to
spear some; we boiled them in our billies, and a very savoury
meal they made us.
We took our siesta in the shadow of the trees, for the day
was very hot, and had a couple of hours’ rest. The mos-
quitoes were too active to let us sleep. We again saddled
our horses and resumed our march.
We reached our destination after five hours’ quick travel-
ling. It was at the base of the mountain near a small
brook; the banks were thickly covered with the tree fern.
At the rear of the station was a perfect forest of these fem
trees.
Glad were we that night when we had stabled and littered
our horses, and sat down to supper.
It is time now to explain to my readers the object of our
journey to this remote spot. I have already mentioned the
general purpose of an out-station. This particular one had
hitherto been occupied only by a mounted trooper and a foot
constable ; but they could not be everywhere at once ; and
the recent depredations of a band of bushrangers on the
neighbouring stations, whose owners were living in daily-
danger of their lives, together with a stray murder occasion-
ally by the blacks, made a stronger force at that spot a
matter of urgent necessity.
We were in high spirits at the chance of active service,
and yet for a whole fortnight after our arrival we never suc-
ceeded in effecting a single capture. This was disheartening


enough; hut what exasperated us was the fact that the hush-
rangers avoided our presence, succeeded in levying black mail
with as great success as before our arrival, stations were still
attacked, and people bailed up, one squatter being stopped
and robbed within a few hundred yards of us.
“ Well, boys, this will never do !” said O’Neil, the duellist,
in a tone of despair. “ I’ll tell you what—we must come
the bushrangers ourselves, as far as togs go; I mean, we must
nab the villains by cunning, if we can’t capture them openly,
and I’m going to set the example this very night.”
O’Neil was as good as his word; but the only result was —
that he got shot at by a stock-driver of a neighbouring run,
who took him to he what he personated, and popped one
hall through the nap of his hat, and another through his
horse’s ear; so O’Neil returned more chagrined and ill-tem-
pered than he had set out.
In spite of this untoward opening of the game, the idea
became popular amongst us, and after that evening, in ones
and twos, many of us used to come the bush toilet; and
hilly-cook or cabbage-tree hats, blue or red serge shirts, mole-
skin pants, and heavy riding-boots, with blankets rolled up
and strapped in front of our saddles, so as to conceal the
holster flaps ; our revolvers stuck in our belts, and our faces
as innocent of shaving as though Mappin’s shilling razor
were a thing unknown. We soon looked more veritable
knights of the road than perhaps many bond fide bushrangers
would have done.
We were unsuccessful, with the exception of Captain
Cunningham, as we called him in commemoration of his
former position. He had been, by his own account, singu-
larly fortunate, having beaten off three ruffians who attacked
him ; and on another occasion shot one in the bush, who,
not being mortally wounded, managed to get away, conceal
himself, and could not be found.
These narratives of the captain excited us unlucky hands
until we were nearly wild; and one night we got up a
handicap of a fiver round, to be taken up by him who made
the first capture, and brought his prisoner to the station.
It was the third evening after this that I was donning my
bush attire, and in rummaging over my valise I discovered


an immense false beard—or rather, heard, moustache and
whiskers combined (one of those kinds that fasten over the
ears with wire); the hair was red, and I recollected having
bought it in Melbourne to attend a masquerade.
The idea came into my head that it would he good fun to
wear it; so I clapped it on, completed my toilet, and made
my way to the stables. Pretty lun my appearance caused
amongst such of my mates as were at the station, but I was
anxious to get away, for something whispered in my ear that
an adventure awaited me; so, learning that the captain and
Bill Mathews had ridden out, and the direction they had
taken, I determined to strike into a contrary track, and
giving my horse the spur, was soon out of sight of the
station, and skirting the fern-tree wood that stood in its
rear.
It was a lovely night. The moon was full, and the whole
sky was studded with its myriad stars, seeming like a mil-
lion diamonds sparkling from a shroud; amongst them, with
brighter lustre than the rest, shone the five fixed stars that
form the constellation of the “Southern Cross.” The smallest
star of the group I chose to guide my course by, and for a
while rode on in silence, for the stillness of the night was
conducive to thought.
At length my attention was attracted by a tiny spark of
lire a little way in the bush on the left of me; it was just
such as would he produced by a pipe, and I soon came to the
conclusion that if it was a pipe there must be a smoker at
the other end of it.
I at once took a pistol from my belt, cocked it, examined
the caps, and rode towards the smoker.
It might he a mate ; if so, we should know each other by
the colour of the ribbon in our hats. But it might be a
bushranger ; then there was a fair field and no favour.
Such were my reflections as I neared the fellow, walking
my horse, but having the reins well in hand, in case I
should come upon a covey of them.
In the soft grass my charger’s feet made little sound, so
that I was close upon my worthy before he noted my ap-
proach. He was lying down with the rein of his horse
passed over the arm winch supported his head. His face I


could not see. He was a tall, strongly made fellow; two
revolvers and a bowie-knife ornamented his belt.
“ Wake up, friend ! Who are you ? What brings you
here?” I shouted, when I was within a few yards of him.
The man started up, and as his astonished gaze fell on me
the moon revealed his countenance. I recognised the fea-
tures of Captain Cunningham. Such an absurd expression
of terror I never before saw depicted on any face ; his teeth
chattered, and his eyes seemed to start out of their sockets.
“ There’s the brave shooter of bushrangers,” thought I; so
I refrained from disclosing myself as I had at first intended,
and determined to frighten him still more, as a punishment for
his bombast and cowardice.
“ Answer me quickly, fellow, or I’ll send a ball through
your head.” Still no answer came. The captain appeared
petrified with fear.
“ Come nearer and show your face. I’ve a notion you’re
one of them cursed traps at the station; if you are, I’ll
shoot you first and roast you afterwards, as sure as my
name’s Hed Rowley, for I’ve sworn to kill every mother’s
son of ’em.”
This threat, and the mention of the name of the most
noted and savage bushranger of the day, completed the
captain’s confusion. He sprang to his feet, uttered a cry
like that of a hunted wolf, and galloped away for dear life.
Bursting with suppressed laughter, I discharged a barrel of
my revolver to increase his alarm, and started off in hot
pursuit.
To give the captain his due, he rode well. We were both
equally mounted. We were clear of the scrub in a minute,
and for several miles right ahead lay a gentle undulating
country, over which the hunt would become a race.
I had no wish to catch the runaway at once ; I felt much
the same as a cat does with a mouse, —a vindictive pleasure
in prolonging his sufferings to the greatest extent, so I kept
every now and then popping off my pistols after him, taking
care to aim pretty wide of the mark, and yet near enough
for him to hear the hiss of the balls as they passed him.
In doing this I nearly put my foot into it. The captain
had enough presence of mind to guess that I had only two


revolvers ; he must have counted my shots, for when I fired
my last shot he drew in his horse, turned in the saddle, and
fired six shots at me in rapid succession.
Luckily, the trembling of his hand caused the halls to fly
wide of me. Seeing me clap my hand to my holster, as
though for another pistol, he again wheeled round and re-
sumed his flight.
I saw at once that the fugitive was leading for Alla-
Mannin Station, the property of Mr. West, doubtless with
the intention of seeking refuge at the homestead, and I
determined to get up with him before he gained that haven.
On, on we dashed. My black steed was covered with
snowy foam-hells, but I had not touched him with the spur.
In the clear moonlight I could see, by the heaving flanks
and irregular stride of the captain’s horse, that the pace was
terribly telling upon him.
At this juncture Cunningham perceived directly before
him a wide ditch, —one of those deep gullies that are cut
through the soft sandy plain during the wet season by the
turbulent streams running down from the ranges, which are
often nine or ten feet in depth, and even more in width.
The next moment the animal leaped short and fell into the
gully-
Cunningham was deposited roughly on his back in the
water; the animal shook him off, and scrambled up the
opposite bank, while its master staggered to his feet and
confronted me.
“Make a movement to escape, and you die,” I cried,
covering him with my pistol.
■ An old proverb says in effect, that when at hay, and
escape impossible, even cowards are brave. Captain Cun-
ningham was an exception to the rule. Although he had a
loaded weapon he did not dare to draw it, but threw himself
upon his knees in the middle of the stream, and with tears
begged piteously for Ms life.
“ It’s granted on one condition,” I said, sternly. “ Listen
to me. I know you ; you are a trap in disguise; your name
is Albert Cunningham. My mates have sworn that not a
trap shall live who meddles with our doings. We are six of
us, there are nine of you; the price of your life is that you


lead your companions into an ambush that I shall plan,
when we can shoot them down at our ease.”
“Agreed,” exclaimed Cunningham, eagerly; “hut the job
is cheap at the price.”
“ What more do you require ?” I asked.
“ Five pounds a head for the men, and half the valuables
they have on their persons, with admission amongst your
company afterwards.”
“And what should we do with a coward?” I asked, con-
temptuously. “ I cannot trust you; I recant my offer; you
must die.”
“No !—no ! —mercy ! for God’s sake, mercy !”
“ Such mercy as you would show to your mates. A man
who would betray his own companions might prove false to
me. When I count thrice I fire. Once—”
I took aim; and then the awful shriek of agony, the
curses, the prayers that rose from that gully were indeed
terrific ! How long I should have kept him in that state of
terror I know not, for my heart was steeled against him, but
the neigh of a horse caused me to look round, and to my
surprise I saw Mathews, Smith, and O’Neil almost at my
elbow.
“ Don’t apologize,” said the latter, turning to me; “we
have heard it all. You were so engrossed with your joke
that you did not hear our gallop over the grass. Fortunately
for you, I saw you in your false whiskers before you left the
station, or we should have shot you down as a regular bush-
ranger; and the ribhon-badge not on your cap either.”
Then riding to the edge of the gully, and revealing himself
to the astounded captain, he continued, in a tone of haughty
irony, “ Mr. Cunningham, you have been taught a lesson.
We cannot have cowards, leave alone traitors, in our force.
I must request that you do not put in an appearance at the
station again. Come, gentlemen,” and we turned our horses’
heads homewards.
Captain Cunningham we never saw nor heard of more, but
his horse was safe in the stable before our arrival


A STTCKING-UP-AND-SHOO TING-DO WN
ADVENTURE.
It was about a week after Shrove Tuesday, in the year 1853,
—I really forget in what month, but its near proximity to the
day named is imprinted on my memory, from the miserable
failure we troopers of the Y. P. made in our attempt to con-
coct a dish of pancakes for dinner out of the very limited
means of flour, sugar, lime-juice, and wild ducks’ eggs, with
the lid of a billy for a frying-pan.
Never shall I forget our captain, O’Neil’s, look of dismay
as he dished one of the whitey-brown leather-looking concerns
with his ramrod, and attempted to masticate a portion. Suf-
fice it to say, that the taste resembled sodden leather fried in
lemon juice, with a remote flavour of stewed tripe; none of
us could eat it, and Mathews’ large kangaroo-hound alone
benefited by the efforts of our chef-de-cuisine.
To return to my tale.
It was evening, and the weather very chilly., I was alone
in the log hut which formed our out-station at the base of
Mount Koronth; all my confreres were on duty, hunting for
those it seemed they would never find, the rascally bush-
rangers. I had built a jolly good fire, and while I enjoyed
its genial warmth and cheering blaze, I amused myself by
polishing up my accoutrements, and cleaning my revolvers,
alternately smoking and whistling for mere want of thought.
Suddenly, above the murmur of the wind amid the fern
branches, and the lone cry of the wild fowl from the neigh-
bouring swamp, I thought I could distinguish the gallop of a
horse in the distance. My suspicions soon changed into cer-


tainty; it was the dull thud of a horse’s hoof-strokes on the
grass, and there was no douht whatever hut that the rider
was urging it at a terrible pace towards the station.
I knew it could he none of our men, they would never ride
their horses to stable in that blown and heated manner; so,
buttoning up my uniform, and seizing my shako, I was about
going to the door to see what I could make of it, but before
I could open it, the rider, whoever he might be, had gained
the station, and was hammering away with a riding whip
against the door right lustily, while at the same time a terrified
voice cried, “ Open ! open ! for heaven’s sake, open ! ”
I was not long in obeying that urgent behest, and great was
my surprise at beholding a young girl standing on the thres-
hold ; her head was uncovered, and her long golden hair streamed
over her shoulders and fell in rich tresses even helow her waist.
In one hand she grasped tightly her little silver-headed
riding whip; in the other she held the reins of a large bay
stock-horse, whose foam-flecked sides and quivering nostrils
told plainly of the speed at which he had been rideu. I was
too scared for a minute, at the sight of this unexpected and
beautiful apparition, to find words wherewith to address her,
but I slipped the rein of her horse through the ring of the
door-post, and motioned to her to go in and warm herself by
the fire, whither in another instant I followed her.
If my ideas, regarding the beauty of my young lady visitor,
were in any way confused upon my first beholding her be-
neath the pale moonlight, they became fully settled when,
upon re-entering the house, the light of the huge fire, and the
flickering flame of the lamp, fully revealed the almost hea-
venly beauty of her countenance and the graceful outline of
her statuesque form. I now recognised her as the only
daughter and heiress of Mr. George Martin, the owner of
Cambromatta Station, and the richest squatter for a circle of
fifty miles around.
I had seen Gertrude Martin once before; she had been
pointed out to me at a kangaroo hunt by O’Neil of ours, and
I had gazed with surprise and almost awe at this lovely Sou-
thern amazon as, by her father’s side, she leapt her blood-
horse over every obstacle with a firm seat in the saddle, and
as light a hand on the reins as a very Nimrod.


Miss Martin must have been about eighteen years of age,
but she was tall, and her figure perfectly moulded; the sweep-
ing outline of limb, the ivory throat, sloping shoulders, swell-
ing bust and taper waist, were worthy of a very Venus de’
Medici; while her dazzling complexion, snowy brow, bright
laughing blue eyes fringed with the longest of golden lashes,
her arched brows; and above all, the arch dimpled little chin,
and the richness of her glossy hair that flowed like a cloud of
golden glory around her, composed a host of charms which,
had they been transferrable to canvas, instead of blooming un-
seen amidst the wilds of Australia, would have immortalized
their possessor.
Her features at present, however, bore an expression of
excitement and impatience; she was very pale; there were
scratches on her face and hands; she wore no riding-habit,
but a rich evening silk dress, which was torn and splashed
with mud; still, whatever was the occasion of this disordered
attire and wild night ride, there was no sign of terror in her
countenance, but on the contrary, her eyes, usually so soft
and dove-like, now flashed with anger and indignation; and
her voice, generally so musical and soft, was firm and haughty
as she said, “ I dare say my appearance astonishes you, sir;
but my father’s station, Cambromatta, is stuck up by bush-
rangers. They are threatening my parents, and maltreating
the servants with impunity; at the risk of my life, I escaped
through my bed-room window, made my way to the stables,
saddled a horse, and have ridden at a gallop all the way here.
Can you aid us ? for not only property, but what is far more
precious, life is in danger.”
“ How many fellows are there, madam ?” I asked.
“ Six,” was the reply.
“And how many men have you at the station?”
“ Oh ! only half a dozen, but they’ve all run away; and
my father is tied down in his chair; whilst my brother, un-
happily, is down in Melbourne.”
“ Then I will away instantly,” I replied. “ You stay here,
Miss Martin, it’s rather a rough place for a lady, but there’s
a good fire, and before I start I’ll take your nag round to the
stable.”
“You are not going alone?” she asked in astonishment,


seeing me examining my weapons and preparing for depar-
ture.
“ I’m sorry to say I must; my mates are all out patroling,
and may not return for hours; but don’t fear, I’ye no doubt
but that I can tackle these fellows, —at all events, I’ll try.”
“ I will return with you, I can guide you by the shortest
way,” said the young lady, rising.
“ No, no, Miss Martin, that will never do,” I rejoined,
“You have already ridden nine miles, the return journey
would completely knock you up. You must rest here until
things are again quiet at the station, and they can send for
you; besides, there is danger in your returning now—danger
that there is no need for you. incurring.”
“ It is not a daughter's duty to shrink from sharing a dan-
ger in which her parents are involved; nor will I allow you,
a stranger, to incur that peril for me and mine which I have
not the spirit to meet also.”
“ But, Miss Martin, I’m a rough trooper, aud those things
are in my ordinary line of business. Your parents, too, are
safe from the peculiar dangers that—pardon my plain speak-
ing—would surround one so young and so beautiful as your-
self, were you to fall into the power of these savages, who, by
this time, are doubtless half mad with liquor.”
The fair girl remained silent for a minute, with her eyes
fixed on the floor, then raising them, she said, firmly, “ In
spite of all you say, I feel that I ought to return, and so I
will; therefore, further arguments are wasted. Are you
ready!”
“ Quite,” I said. For during this colloquy I had not been
idle, but had loaded my revolver, buckled on my sword, and
written on a piece of paper the following words, “Nine p.m.;
just leaving for Cambromatta station, which is stuck up by
six bushrangers. lam alone, so lose no time in sending suc-
cour, which may be most welcome.
(Signed) “ James Brooke.”
This I affixed to the table with a pin, and fetching a good
horseman’s cloak, once more turned to my visitor and said,
“ If you will return, Miss Martin, this will protect you from
the cold night air; I’m going to saddle my horse, and in five
minutes we shall be on the road.”


I was even better than my word, for ere three minutes had
elapsed, my black charger was at the door of the hut, the
pistols transferred to the holsters, and after assisting the
young lady to mount, I leapt into the saddle, and we started
at a quick pace for Cambromatta.
I calculated upon our reaching the home-station about ten
—for my companion’s horse was somewhat distressed by its
long gallop, and would not keep pace with my fresh steed.
I was not in heart sorry for this, for I could not regard the
present adventure in any other light than as a most desperate
one, and the longer we were on the road the greater was the
chance that some of my mates would come to the rescue
before it was too late.
Por the first five miles of our journey neither spoke a word,
and no sound was heard save the low, plaintive note of the
mopoke or Australian cuckoo, answered by the still more
mournful cry of the wildfowl from the low, swampy ground
on our right ; while from the clear blue sky above, unflecked
by a single cloud, the pale full moon shed a radiance as clear
and far softer than that of day over the mellow Australian
landscape and on the face of the lovely girl who rode by my
side.
At last the white chimneys of the station were visible some
two miles ahead; the sight of them aroused me from the
half-dreamy reverie to which I had given way, and recalled
me to the matter-of-fact world of which I was still a
member.
“ Miss Martin, how are these bushrangers disposed ? Are
they all within the house do you think 1” I asked.
“ No, four are inside and two are keeping guard—one
under the verandah in front, and the other in the courtyard,
at the back.”
“ And you think these are all 1”
“ I do, and what is more, I know exactly where they are
placed ; the man in the courtyard I had some difficulty in
avoiding, and just as I was fairly off, he discovered and fired
his pistol after me; one ball tore the sleeve of my dress, but
the others went very wide of the mark.”
“ Eeally, Miss Martin, you are a perfect heroine,” I could
not help exclaiming ; “ but, upon my word, I wish you were


fifty miles away now. Why will you insist upon thrusting
yourself into danger?”
“ For the reasons I have given yon before,” she said,
smiling; “ hut, see, lam not so defenceless as you fancy ; I
pillaged this from your armoury whilst you were saddling
your horse, and can now take care of myself.” And she
drew’from under her cloak one of our regulation revolvers,
duly capped and loaded.
“ I hope you won’t shoot yourself instead of a bushranger ;
hut as you are determined to he a veritable trooper, you must
obey my orders as your senior officer, —will you ? ”
“ Yes, as long as you don’t tell me to run away.”
“ You faithfully promise ?”
“ I do.”
“ Well, then, I must tell you that prudence and discretion
are the better part of valour, and as my army is small, I must
not allow my men to expose themselves to useless danger.
Watch my every look and motion, and don’t fire before I
give the word.”
“Very well, captain,” was the roguish rejoinder.
“Well, then, that’s arranged. Now, where are we 1”
“Yonder’s the station, amid that clump of trees, just a
quarter of a mile distant.”
“ Then we must ride more under the shadow of the ferns;
keep directly behind me, and walk your horse as- noiselessly
as possible.”
How I did at that moment long for a cloud to pass the
moon, but there was not the slightest trace of one in the
whole dome of heaven. I glanced back over the wide plain
we had traversed, but not a single horseman was visible ; our
chances of succour were few indeed, so I nerved myself to
meet the danger as best I could. And now the chimneys
and roofs of the home-station were close by—l could hear
the neigh of horses, and dreaded lest one of ours should
answer them, but luckily they did not. Thanks to the shel-
tering shadows of the tree fern, which grew nearly up to the
house, our approach could not be detected, and the long lank
grass over which we rode prevented the horses’ hoof-strokes
from being audible. At length I saw the end of the fern-grove,
and that it extended to within ten yards of the post and rail


fence at the back of the station ; but I saw another sight that
caused me more uneasiness, which was the bulky form of an
armed man pacing up and down just at the extremity of the
grove ; his cabbage-tree hat slouched over his eyes, his long,
shaggy black beard flowing far down over his scarlet shirt,
and his broad belt adorned with a bowie knife and a re-
volver.
I saw at a glance that this fellow could not be avoided, we
could not gain the station without his perceiving us; while,
on the other hand, an open attack could not be contem-
plated, as the report of a pistol would bring the whole band
on us.
My companion was too far in the rear to see him, and not
wishing that she should, I rode back a few yards and met her.
“We must leave our horses here and proceed on foot,” I said in
a whisper ; and dismounting, I aided her to alight, and then
fastened both our steeds to the stem of a fern tree.
“ Now, then,” I continued, “ you must stay here for about
five minutes, whilst I reconnoitre ahead and see that the coast
is clear. I shall not be long.”
She looked at me suspiciously, but nodded assent.
“ Don’t move an inch until my return,” I said ; and walk-
ing away from her until I got a little distance in front, I
crept on the ground, snake-like, amid the grass, towards
the unconscious bushranger, with my drawn sword in my
hand.
It was a deed I shrank from, it looked so very like murder ;
but I knew the act I meditated was necessity and justifiable,
which reflection consoled me. This snake-like motion was
a very slow and unpleasant mode of progression, but it was
a successful one. Once only I made a noise, which was
caused by my spur coming in contact with a stone. The
sentry heard it and glanced suspiciously in my direction,
but perceiving nothing, muttered in a rough tone, “ Only a
’possum, as I live; I’m getting as skeered as a cat since I
shot the trap on the Balbal Plains; a drop of brandy will
banish these fears.”
.As he spoke he drew a spirit-flask from his pocket, and
turning his back to me, raised it to his lips. I was now only
five or six yards from him, and availing myself of this favour-


able circumstance, sprang to my feet, and before be could
finish his draught of brandy my sword hissed through the
air, and so true was the stroke that the man’s head was
severed from his body, and rolled for more than a yard along
the ground, while the trunk, with spirit-flask still clutched
in its hand, fell prone to the earth.
I moved these ghastly objects out of sight, and then
returned to Miss Martin, whom I found somewhat terrified
at my long absence.
I did not tell her what had occurred, but with a few whis-
pered words of assurance told her to follow me, for that there
was no sentry at the back now.
We walked boldly on until we gained the post-and-rail
fence which enclosed the yard at the back ; here I again re-
connoitred, and finding the yard empty, and no lights in the
windows of the house, we went on, but creeping very
cautiously and keeping under the shadow of the fence, for
discovery now would be fatal.
When we gained the door we listened breathlessly, and
heard bursts of laughter and loud voices from within :
“ Your health, old gentleman, and yours too, Mother
Martin, and many thanks for your hearty welcome. I trust
you may always have such honest and jovial boys as us to
eat your cold meat and drink your wine.”
This speech was followed by uproarious applause, and then
another shouted, “ Let’s unbind the governor and make him
dance a hornpipe on the table.”
“Agreed ! good ! capital!” and for a moment the jingle
of glasses and the mingled volley of shouts of laughter and
imprecations were tremendous.
Amid this din we entered the house, and my companion—■
now my guide—led me through two or three rooms, until we
reached one which was only divided from that occupied by the
revellers by a thin partition, in which was a little square of
glass, and through this we could plainly see -what was passing
in the adjoining apartment.
A stranger sight than that I witnessed I never before
beheld, nor happily such a one since. The room in which
the bushrangers feasted was furnished with carpets, lounges,
ottomans, and rich lace curtains, and the many articles of


vertu scattered around presented a strange and ludicrous
contrast to the odd assemblage it contained. The table
was spread with every variety of food and liquor, while
empty and broken bottles and glasses strewed the floor. On
the velvet-seated chairs and elegantly carved couches sat or
reclined, in every attitude of ease and disregard for appear-
ance, rough and ferocious-looking men, with tangled, un-
combed hair and beards, and mahogany-tinted complexions,
dressed in the rough bush costume, consisting either of
cabbage-tree hats, coloured shirts, cord pants, with long boots
reaching above the knee ; or broad felt hats, red or blue
jumpers, and moleskin continuations : most of them had
their brawny throats bare, and wore silk scarfs around their
waists, with revolvers and knives.
The leader of them sat at the head of the table on the
edge of an ottoman, with his muddy boots over the back of
an arm-chair, and the sleeves of his scarlet jumper rolled up
to his elbows. I recognised at once that prince of bush-
rangers, Bob the Thunderer, a fellow possessed of as much
strength and brute courage as a tiger, but, if possible, with
less mercy. <
At that time he was as much known and feared as Morgan
has more recently been. Yet Morgan did show mercy in one
or two instances; but I never heard of Bob the Thunderer
being guilty of such an act, — at least, I mean to those who
might prove dangerous in any way hereafter to him.
Many a trooper had Bob sent to the shades; in fact, it was
his common boast that he should never feel content until he
had shot one for every barrel of his revolver. I knew that
he had already killed five, and I could not help conjecturing
whether I was destined to make up the complement.
But to return. These worthies were smoking most
zealously, the short black pipes being rarely removed from
their mouths, unless to spit about the carpet or to drain another
deep draught of wine. One had a quart basin before him;
another a huge Venetian glass goblet; the third preferred a
decanter by itself; whilst the fourth seemed bent upon trying
every vessel capable of holding a liquid that came within
his reach.
These fellows were not the sole occupants of the room.


The station-owner and his wife were there, and seated at the
same table, for bushrangers are fastidious in their notions;
they had strapped their host and hostess down in separate
chairs, and placed them in that position to preside at the
festive board.
Mr. Martin looked anything but pleased at the speedy
disappearance of the treasures of his cellar; his stiff grey
hair almost stood erect like the “ quills upon the fretful
porcupine,” and his jolly round face was purple red with
bottled-up passion. The old lady looked angry and nervous,
but tried to smile and take things easy, as she fancied that
course to be the best policy under the circumstances. The
two maidservants were the most terrified of the group;
they were seated on chairs placed back to back; a thick rope
encircled their waists, and another their wrists, their arms
being passed backwards between the top and middle bars,
and thus brought together. In this manner they were united
almost as thoroughly as the Siamese twins. It was evident
they were suffering from extreme terror; they were trembling
violently, though neither dared speak.
It did not take us one quarter as long to notice every
incident of this scene as it has taken me to describe. We
had only a glance around ere the speaker who had proposed
a hornpipe drew his knife, severed Mr. Martin’s bonds, and
another having cleared a space in the centre of the table, the
old gentleman was hoisted up, passed safely over the bottles
and glasses, and told to begin his dance.
I could tell by the hard breathing of my companion that
she felt deeply this indignity offered to her father, but I had
no wish to open an attack before such a step was compulsory,
as every minute’s delay gave a greater chance of my comrades
arriving to share the danger. This I intimated to Miss
Martin, who nodded approval.
Events soon hastened a denouement. The worthy squatter,
who had at first been too angry to comply and too alar ned
to refuse to dance, at length became more heated to har iess,
and getting too near the edge of the table, it capsized, a .d in
company with wines, spirits, prog, and crockery, Mr. Martin
found the floor.
What a crash that was! what a ruddy lake poured over


the carpet! what cries from the women and curses from the
men ! The voice of Boh the Thunderer soon quelled all the
other noises : “ Stash that row, yer fools ! Hold yer tongues,
yer she-cats, or I’ll give you somethink to holler for.—And
you, ye tarnation old ass, I’ll have a drop of yer blood for
every leak of spirit yer’ve spilt.—Oat with jmur knives, my
hoys, and prick his tough hide for him ; he’s clean spoilt
our feast! ” And as he spoke, Boh, with one kick, launched
the old man nearly half across the room.
Almost simultaneously with this act, and just as I was
about to take the initiative, my companion brushed by me,
pulled her revolver from under her cloak, and without
pausing a moment to take aim, fired through the little
window.
I saw Bob the Thunderer put his hand on his left shoulder,
and howl like a wounded bear. I thought he was not dan-
gerously wounded. His mates sprang to their feet and drew
their weapons, so I fired hastily at one, and seeing they were
about to send a volley haphazard against the partition, I
dragged my companion to the ground.
I was right in my conjecture. They fired their revolvers ;
the bullets tore through the lath and plaster wall, and
whistled above our heads.
“ Stay here, I command you ; do not move hand or foot,”
I said sternly to the beautiful girl at my side, for I was
resolved that she should not get under fire if I could help
it; and perceiving the handle of the door, I determined on a
ruse, and walked boldly into the adjoining department, ex-
claiming in an authoritative voice, “ Give up your weapons,
or you are all dead men. I have ordered my troopers to fire
upon you if resistance is shown.”
It was worth a good deal to watch the bushrangers’ coun-
tenances at that moment; my fearless bearing had the desired
effect. They never doubted the truth of my assertion, but
they evinced no disposition to lay down their weapons.
“ Where the devil are your men, young cook of the walk 1 ”
asked one.
“ Within a few yards of you; their pistols cover you
whilst I speak.” I knew that bravado alone must carry my
point now.


“ And if we do yield,” returned another, “ will you insure
us our lives 2”
“Fools! will yer believe the lying trap?” cried Bob the
Thunderer, with a frightful oath. “ ’Tis the bullet or the
halter, and I choose the first, so here goes.” He raised his
revolver as he spoke, but ere he could draw the trigger there
came another shot through the little window, and throwing
up his arms, Bob the Thunderer gave a piercing shriek, and
fell on the floor a corpse ! The bullet had penetrated his
brain.
“ There, my lads,” I cried, taking advantage of this demon-
stration ; “ you see the only one whose crimes left him no
hope of mercy has met his fate. How are the rest of you
going to surrender, or must I give my troopers the signal to
fire 2”
“ Shoot them, policeman, shoot them. The rogues de-
serve burning. Look at my wine, and the way they’ve
treated me,” exclaimed the old squatter from a corner.
“ No, no; don’t make our house such a scene of blood-
shed. Take them away,” said his wife, who, pale and
trembling, was still bound in her chair.
The servants only increased their screams.
“ Mr. Martin, my orders will not allow me to have them
shot if they surrender.—Madam, they have had their desserts
already, though no doubt the next of which they partake
will have less wine and sweetmeats to flavour it.—Now,
gentlemen, deliver up your weapons.”
“ Well, hang it, I suppose we can’t do any other, Mr.
Peeler. I don’t want to be shot down, so here’s my barker,”
cried a muscular fellow, handing me his revolver with re-
luctance.
No doubt his example would have been followed by the
others, but just as I extended my hand to receive this tribute
of submission, a loud voice exclaimed, —
“ What to are you about in here, surrendering to a
single bobby and a gal 2 Out on you ! ” and the door being
burst open by a kick, a bearded rascal appeared in view,
holding in one hand a Colt’s, and with the other dragging in-
Gertrude Martin by the hair of her head.
The game I saw was up in a moment. I tried to draw my


pistol, but ere I could do this I was felled to the earth by a
blow from one of the bushrangers, and in a twinkling bound
hand and foot. Gertrude was lying at a little distance from
me, in the same helpless condition.
What next we should encounter I knew not, though I
pretty well guessed that my doom would be death, while a
fate more terrible might hang over the brave and lovely girl
whose love for her parents had strengthened her to encounter
such perils as she had done that night. I could hear her
sobs : those sounds were not wrung from her by the cords
that cut her delicate arms and ankles, —her heart bled for the
sufferings of those whom she loved more than her own life.
' Much as I longed, I was unable to help or sympathize
with her. Lying on my back helpless as an infant, I was con-
strained to listen to the narrative of the bushranger whose
entrance at so inopportune a moment had spoilt my plot, and
brought us to such a miserable strait.
This ruffian had been on guard under the verandah in
front of the station. Having no tobacco in his pouch, he
had run round to beg some from his mate, who was posted
as sentinel in the rear. Unable to find him, he had hallooed
and cooeyed, but this being of no avail, he had in the clear
moonlight tracked his footprints, and discovered his dead
body in the bushes. This alarmed him; he saw it was the
work of a trooper, as none else would carry swords. The
whinny of one of our horses attracted his attention, and
aided him to solve the mystery. He quickly found them,
saw that they were only two, then noticed our footprints,
and plainly perceived that one was a woman’s. He had
then tracked them back to the station, entered by the back
door, which he left open, and made his appearance just in
time to undeceive his mates and turn the fortunes of the day
completely against us.
Long and boisterous was the laughter of the rangers as
Eed Tommy (as he was called) narrated his yarn. Imme-
diately he ceased, dark and lowering brows were bent upon
us, and Red Tommy shouted, “ What shall we do with them?
Blood for blood, I say. Let’s hang ’em both.”
“Hang the trap by all means if you like, but the gal’s
mine. I’ll make her Mrs. Peter Dargan,” cried another.


“ Dash it, no ; that’s not fair. She’s no more yours nor
ours, Peter. We’ll cast lots for her, —she is worthy of one of
us. A brave girl like that deserves to be a bushranger’s
wife. The bobby I vote burying alive.”
“Burying or hanging is too good for the likes of him,”
grumbled a third. “ I’ve a better plan than either of you,
lads. Let’s hang him by the heels to yon lamp-crook, and
take flying shots at him from the other end of the room.
Whoever, in two rounds, sends a ball through his head
nearest the right eye shall have the gal. What do you say,
mates ?”
“ Good, good. Bravo for Big Mike ! ” they cried.
The resolution was carried nem. con. With a thrill of
horror that I can hardly describe I glanced up at the lofty
ceiling. There, sure enough, was the hook, which was evi-
dently hung for the purpose one day of sustaining a cande-
labrum. Little did the man who placed it there imagine
what a burden it was this night destined to bear! I tried
to think that the bushrangers were jesting, but another look
at their ferocious countenances told me how vain was my
hope. I turned towards my companion, who was pale as
marble, and her eyes filled with tears. I • was going to
whisper a few words of encouragement, when the harsh
voice of one of the rangeps turned the current of my
thoughts.
“ A rope! a rope! Where the d are we to get a
rope?”
“Dash it, I know. I saw one in the kitchen long and
strong enough to hang every trap in the colony.”
“ Hurrah ! Bring it here, mate. Let’s get this thing over,
and fix who’s to have the gal, then we’ll hunt up some more
drink.”
“Ah! ah! We’ll drink to the trap’s long journey, and
that he may hire us good quarters in the next' world by the
time we join him,” said Bed Tommy.
“Trap, how do you feel yerself?— Miss Martin, how do
yer do at all at all?” asked Big Mike, squirting some tobacco
juice on my face.
“ Wretch ! hold your tongue. If I was free of these cords
T would thrash the whole lot of ye,” I cried j and managing


to give Master Mike a kick on the shins, made him howl
lustily.
He looked fiercely at me, and handled his revolver as
though to put an end to me there and then. In a voice
hoarse as a raven’s he shouted to his mates, who by this time
had found the rope and brought it into the room, “ Eeeve a
noose there; this fellow’s neck is itching for his collar.
Here, Tommy, a chair on the table; now another on the top
of that; see, now you can reach the hook. That’s right, my
hearty, make it safe. —And, Mike, have you finished his
hempen collar 1 Confound it, I forgot; he’s to be hung by
his heels. Look alive, mates ! ”
They did look alive. In another minute my feet were
secured to the rope, and the signal given to haul me up.
“ Pull with a will, my hearties ! ” screamed Mike, dancing
and capering round the room in wild glee, amid the threats
and entreaties of the station owner, and the supplications of
Gertrude and her mother. I was hauled up into mid-air ; the
next moment I was swinging like a pendulum, equidistant
between floor and ceiling.
“That’s right, my boys; let him swing; ’twill require a
better shot to win the gal. Are your pistols loaded ? Boys,
I m first shot. Carroty Tom, stop by him to set him swinging
fresh just as we are ready to fire.—And you, my fine fellow,
say your prayers if you know any, for by jabers you’re no
better than a dead ’possum.”
How shall I describe the agonized feelings of that mo-
ment 1 Pray I could not; the horror of my position made
me forget everything. I felt a rough hand give me a push ;
I felt myself swinging to and fro; then I heard a wild
scream, followed by the report of a pistol, and a tingling as
though a piece of red-hot wire were held against my ear.
Hext 1 heard Big Mike’s rough voice ejaculate, “A miss, by
George ! Harry, it’s your turn now, and may had luck wait
on you.”
Again the sharp click of a pistol-lock, another hearty
shove from the hand of Eed Tommy, once more the sharp
report of a revolver, hut this time, to my surprise, followed
by a howl like that of a wounded wolf.
A strange hope fluttered within my breast. I tried to


turn my head round, but could not. Bang ! bang ! —more
shots—another howl—a wild cheer—the crashing of glass
and wood, and Big Mike’s hoarse voice shouting, “ The traps,
by G —! • Make yourselves scarce, mates. The hack door
for your lives.”
A moment later I was cut down by O’Neil, who laugh-
ingly exclaimed, “ By Jove, James, ’tis clear you were never
horn to be drowned. ’Tis lucky they preferred your heels to
your neck, or you’d have been a gone coon by this time,
anyhow.”
“ O’Neil, I owe my life to your prompt assistance ; but
give me a pistol quickly ; I owe that villain, Big Mike, a shot,
and I would not that any one else should kill him.”
Without waiting a reply, I took the weapon from O’Neil’s
belt, and was making for the back of the house, when two
troopers entered the room, guarding a couple of the bush-
rangers, who were bound hand and leg.
“Where are the rest V’ I eagerly demanded.
“ The big fellow they call Mike has slipped it, but
Mathews and Smith are after him, and as their horses are
better than his, they will come up with him, no doubt.
A man with red hair is shot dead in the courtyard, and
there’s another with a ball through his head lying in yon
comer, just breathing his last.”
I glanced round and saw the fellow ; I knew it was Dar-
gan, whose account on earth a bullet from O’Neil’s revolver
had settled, j ust as he was about to take his shot at me. By
his side knelt Gertmde, holding to his lips a glass of water.
At that sight of heavenly forgiveness and Christian charity
my heart thawed; the savage longing for Big Mike’s blood
abated. I felt content to leave his pursuit to Smith and
Mathews, and returned to congratulate Mr. and Mrs. Martin
on the turn affairs had taken.
The old gentleman shook my hand warmly, and the
worthy matron told me that I should ever be a welcome
visitor at Cambromatta.
Meanwhile the others had removed the dead men from
the house, and deposited them in an outhouse for the
station hands to bury.
We very soon afterwards took our leave.


Miss Martin was the last to whom I said farewell and
the parting was as though we had been very old friends.
Lest my readers may indulge themselves with the idea that
something more came of it, and that a future tale will nar-
rate the elopement of the young lady with a penniless
trooper, I will at once inform them that in three months
after the adventure just narrated, Gertrude Martin was mar-
ried to a wealthy and middle-aged squatter, whose runs
joined those of her father at Cambromatta.
Big Mike escaped with whole bones, much to my sorrow.
The two captured rangers were sentenced to penal servitude
for life.


BURIED ALIVE.
AN ADVENTUBE AT FOREST CREEK.
One of the most general sources of dissatisfaction and mur-
muring on the Victorian gold-helds, in the year 1852, was the
method hy which the Government collected the gold revenue.
Following the example of the Legislative wiseacres at Sydney,
immediately upon the first discoveries of the precious metal
at Ballarat, regulations were issued requiring all miners to
procure a monthly licence to dig for gold, and to pay thirty
shillings for the same. This regulation was all very well in
theory; the question was, how to render it available to practise.
It was plainly no easy matter to enforce this tax among a
migratory population, living in tents, scattered throughout a
wild and wide tract of country.
The mode adopted was to send out armed hands of police,
who, swooping down suddenly on gully or flat, spread them-
selves over it and levied “ black-mail,” vi et armis, by demand-
ing of every one his licence. These posses of police were
always supported by a few mounted troopers, to cut off such
worthies as might put faith in the alternative of putting in
leg bail, and showing a clean pair of heels; for all who could
not produce their licence were captured, and marched off, fre-
quently many miles, to the nearest magistrate, -where, after
more or less detention, they were either fined five pounds or
sentenced to a month’s imprisonment. It will readily be
conceived that such a system led to great discontent and
irritation, and I must say that such feelings were but natural;
and the general dissatisfaction was increased by the manner
of collecting the licence fee, for instead of the collector’s


calling upon the tax-payer, the tax-payer had to hunt up the
collector. The digger was compelled to walk from his own
gully to the commissioner’s camp, which was frequently
several miles distant; after which he had often to wait hour
after hour .under a broiling sun, while a crowd of others,
who had arrived before him, were paying their thirty shillings
or weighing out their ounce of gold.
I believe that greater facilities were subsequently offered
for the payment of this fee, though it must have been after I
quitted the force; anyhow, the mode of enforcing it continued
the same for a long period, and I have hundreds of times heard
the diggers complaining loudly and unceasingly of such a harsh
and un-English measure. “ First you tax our labour,” said they,
“ and then you collect your tax at the point of the bayonet.”
The hatred to the system was universal, disputes were of
daily occurrence, and collisions between the police and the
diggers often took place, whereof spilt blood and cracked
pates were frequently the result.
At some of the gold-fields a curious plan was hit upon for
evading these inquisitorial visits. Directly a party of police
was perceived in the distance, the diggers raised a cry of
“Joe! Joe!” The cry was taken up, and presently the
whole length of the gully rang with the shout, “ Joe ! Joe !
Joe !” and of course, with more speed than dignity, the un-
licensed portion of the community made tracks for the bush.
Sometimes, however, the police were too quick for this
manoeuvre, or else a view of a stronger body than usual of
mounted troopers shook their reliance in their own pedal ex-
tremities ; and in this case, as a dernier ressort, those diggers
who had lost or never obtained a licence would descend their
shafts and holes, and if any of the force happened to pass
by and peer down into the depths profound, he would be
greeted with the polite invitation to “ walk down and make
himself at home;” a kindness, however, which he took care
not to avail himself of, for the tone of the invite too much
resembled that “ of the spider to the fly;” and had he done
so, the chances were a thousand to one that he would have
regretted his precipitancy, had he indeed escaped to regret
it at all.
But to commence my tale. I have indulged my readers


with this long preamble in order that they may the better
understand the state of affairs at the Forest Creek Gold-
field, at the period when, in company with two other
troopers, named Matthews and Crawday, I was ordered to
leave Mount Koronoth Station, and attach myself to one bor-
dering on those gold-fields. Matters were just about reaching
a crisis, a general riot was anticipated daily, and we were all
in the highest possible spirits at the prospects of scrimmage
and adventure that presented themselves.
As we rode along, the laugh and jest were freely bandied
round, and our very horses seemed to share our gaiety and
light-heartedness. It was magnificent weather, the glorious sun
shone down from an unclouded sky of steel-grey hue, which,
in Australia, takes the place of the azure blue of Southern
Europe. As we increased the distance between ourselves
and the little out-station we had that morning quitted, the
dense scrub gave way to the open bush, and for many hours
we rode through a tract of country perhaps unsurpassed in
loveliness by any portion of the inhabited globe. The stately
gum trees (eucalypti) with their white trunks, the shea oak
with its gracefully drooping foliage, the golden perfumed
blossoms of the mimosa, with the richly wooded mountain
range in the background, united to form a picture too magni-
ficent to describe. The ground was fairly carpeted with wild
flowers, the sarsaparilla blossoms creeping everywhere. Along
our track sparkled the murmuring waters of a pretty stream-
let, reflecting as in a mirror the gorgeous tints which the last
rays of the setting sun at length flung over the surrounding
scene; while the air rang with the cawing of the myriad
parrots and cockatoos, of every hue and colour, who made the
lone bush resound with their discordant notes, while their
restless movements and gay plumage gave life and piquancy
to the scene. Occasionally, too, the lonely plaintive cry of
the curlew would ring out on the perfumed air, answered by
the jocund “ Ha ! ha ! ha !” of the laughing jackass; while
now and then, with a suppressed hiss and a rustle of the dry
grass and parting bushes, a snake would wriggle out of the
way of our horses’ hoofs, and then, with vibrating head and
dull glistening eyes, glare at us as we passed. In the distance,
too, as night advanced, the long melancholy wolf-like howl


of the dingoe or native dog, and the sharp cry of the wild
cat and ’possum awakened the echoes of hill and gully.
At a distance of about forty-five miles from our destination
we came to a halt, and pitched our camp for the night. Our
beds were made of the mimosa, which possesses a perfume like
the hawthorn. The softest looking branches were selected,
cut down, and flung upon the ground, which, with our saddles
for pillows, formed beds that to our weary limbs appeared
soft and luxurious as one of feathers would do to the blase
man about town.
Early the following morning we resumed our march, and
by noon reached our destination.
We found a dozen or so of the force already quartered at
the station, and at once obtained an interview with the super-
intendent, who received us most courteously, and pointed out
the nature of the duties that we should have to perform. We
had arrived just at the opportune moment to enjoy the anti-
cipated fun, for the very next day we were, in company with
a party of foot constables who were quartered not far from us,
to effect a regular raid on Forest Creek, and “stick up” all
unlicensed diggers.
Not a single theme was started that night that did not
hear reference to the events of the morrow, and amid the
furbishing up of accoutrements, the grinding of sabres, the
cleaning of firearms, &0., many were the odds given and
taken as to whether the diggers would show fight—whether
there would he a regular scrimmage, or only black looks and
muttered curses as formerly.
The next morning was a magnificent one, and by nine
o’clock we were mounted and en route to the field of antici-
pated battle, which was barely three miles distant. On our
way we were joined by the company of foot police, twenty-
five in number, and we immediately divided into two parties,
in order to approach the gold-field from different directions.
A quarter of an hour later we were close to the scene of opera-
tions, and a stirring one it presented. The hundreds of tents
and shanties scattered over the valleys, the little stream wind-
ing through its midst, and the groups of busy diggers scattered
around, was a pleasant sight to one who for so many months
had been rusticating at a lone out-station; and more particu-


larly to one who, like myself, had never seen the diggings
before.
We had not much time, however, for a quiet enjoyment of
the picture, for no sooner were our snow-white shakos perceived
in the distance, than pick, spade, and cradle were abandoned,
and the roar of voices—to which the confusion of Babel must
have been a comparative silence, for every one seemed talking
at once —arose from the flat below.
This excitement increased, if such a thing were possible,
when the crowd saw our other party advancing from an oppo-
site direction. Cries of “ Joey ! Joey! Joey!” echoed from
all sides, followed by curses, shouts, and ribaldry. Stump
orators sprang on inverted beer-barrels, and with waving
arms and stentorian lungs harangued their mates. To in-
crease the confusion dogs howled, women screamed, and
babies squalled in unison.
All this time we advanced upon the crowd slowly but
steadily, for we were not allowed to outstrip the foot con-
stables, and as we drew nearer I could hear one herculean
fellow, who surmounted a barrel of colossal dimensions,
shouting, “Yes, mates, that’s what I say—l’m for fighting, I
am. Send the darned traps back with a tight good lacing.
Ah ! do better than that—dowse ’em in the creek ; pitch ’em
into the holes and cover them up ; kick ’em, cuff ’em, warm
the ears of ’em ! never say die. Never cry funky, my hear-
ties ! ” And at each pause the speaker would wipe the per-
spiration from his face with the sleeve of his shirt, while he
waved his other arm in the air like the sail of a windmill.
“ True, true—listen to Jemmy Small!” cried some ; “ Hur-
rah for Jim the smith !” hallooed others ; but one wiry old
fellow, edging himself out of the crowd, exclaimed, with a
chuckle, “ Ay, Jim’s the mon to talk sinse, but for all that,
thim as has got a licence will be great fowls to put their fet
in a scrape for them as hasn’t.”
Many seemed to be of this worthy’s way of thinking, for
as we drew nearer some twenty or more detached themselves
from the mob and walked quietly away.
“Halt!” cried the superintendent, when we had got to
w; hin about a dozen paces of the crowd; and riding fearlessly
forward, he said, in his hearty, good-tempered way, “ Now,


then, my boys, we’ve come to have a glance at your licences,
so you may as well fork them out with a good will. You
know we are only doing an unpleasant duty that we can’t
shirk, so you won’t blame us ; and I don’t think any of you
will be so foolish as to oppose the Government.”
There arose a few cheers in answer to this, but just as
many hisses on the opposition side; and Jim, the smith, to
restore his somewhat waning popularity, shouted, “ All right,
captain, here’s my licence ; ” and pulling a rotten egg from his
pocket, he shied it with so correct an aim that it smashed to
atoms upon the superintendent’s nasal extremity, which for
the moment seemed as though it had just emerged from a pot
of honey.
This was too much for the superintendent; the hot Celtic
blood was up in a minute, and drawing his sword and giving
his horse the spur, he dashed at his assailant on the barrel,
the crowd making way for his powerful charger with a won-
derful degree of politeness.
The stump orator howled with terror, and tried to escape.
In vain were his efforts, —before he could leap from the
barrel amongst the crowd, the flat of the “ captain’s ” sword
descended with such force upon the bent back of Jim the
smith, that the head of the barrel gave way under him, and
with a yell of mingled pain and fear he disappeared from
view.
This incident was sufficient to restore the good temper of
the multitude, or at all events of the licensed portion.
“Serve him right!” “Well done, Joey!” were the cries
which now arose; and the riffraffs amongst the crowd who
did not possess miner’s rights, seeing they would not be sup-
ported by the more respectable portion of the community,
prepared to make themselves scarce, and a general rush to
the holes ensued.
“ After them, boys; if they once get to their holes, you
won’t unearth them in a hurry,” shouted the superintendent;
and putting spurs to our horses, away we went helter-skelter
in pursuit.
The reader may fancy we had pretty easy work to overtake
these fellows, but this was anything but the case. There
were so many mounds of earth, so many deep and dangerous


shafts in every direction, some almost concealed from view
by brushwood or dwarf scrub, that our pursuit was one of
the most difficult operations imaginable. The fellows would
take advantage of this, and double around these holes in a
most annoying manner, leaping forth and back over them,
while they chuckled at the idea of one of us going in headlong
—a mishap which might have been anything but pleasant,
as some of these holes were from a hundred to a hundred
and fifty feet deep, though the majority of them varied pro-
bably from ten to forty feet in depth.
An accident of this kind actually did happen; for as I
was following a long-legged fellow, whose puffing and blowing
showed me that his wind was failing him, I saw another
rascal coming down a slope of the hill-side as hard as he could
tear, and Matthews on his bony roan charger peppering after
him at a gallop, whirling his sword around his head, and
laughing at the excitement of the chase to such a degree that
the tears rolled down his cheeks. The pursued was a Chinese,
and the ludicrous expression of terror written upon his coun-
tenance, his long pigtail, wdiich waved at his stern like
the broad pennant of an admiral’s three-decker, and the
shuffling, extraordinary run which his clumsy shoes rendered
compulsory, made me join in Matthews’ merriment. My
mirth, however, was of short duration, for as the Chinaman
reached the bottom of the slope, he made a momentary pause,
bent down, and then gave a clear spring over what I took to
be a bush. On thundered Matthews in his rear; he, too,
reached the furze bush, when his horse stopped suddenly in
the midst of its gallop, by throwing himself back on his
haunches, and sticking his fore-feet in the ground, while the
rider went flying over his head. I should not have been
frightened at this, had not a sharp cry escaped from Matthews’
lips, followed by the hollow splash of water; so I spurred to
the spot, and there a picture worthy of the pencil of Leech
or Doyle met my view.
From the centre of a deserted hole, full of muddy water
to the brim, emerged the boots and ankles of the unlucky
trooper, at which only visible portion of his master the raw-
boned charger—still in the same attitude, which closely
resembled that of an eager terrier watching a rat hole —was


intently gazing; and at about five yards distance on tlie other
side of the hole crouched the Chinaman, sitting on his heels,
his mouth expanded into a wide grin, while waving his
licence above his head, he hallooed, in disjointed sentences,
“You no savvy; you no wise man, Masser Joey, to run down
man what got licence. John got licence. John all right;
but him hah bit joke wid Joey. How you like water ?
Hou you feel himself? Ho catch Johnny, Masser Joe ; him
heartful —too sharp ! ” and then the fat Celestial would roll
himself from side to side in the excess of his mirth.
Enjoy this scene as I certainly did, I saw that there was
no time to lose. Matthews had evidently been pitched into
a shallow hole of some five feet in depth, but his head was
stuck in the mud at the bottom, and unless quickly extri-
cated, he would be suffocated. So, taking off my belt, I suc-
ceeded in throwing it around my mate’s feet, and with some
difficulty dragged him to the bank.
What a spectacle he presented! daubed with a half-mask
of sticky yellow clay as far as the nostrils, his shako gone,
the sleeves and collar of his jacket forming separate little
channels for the draining off of the water, and his smart
uniform soiled and saturated. lam sure that directly I saw
he was alive, striving to force open his solitary eye (he had
but one), which the clay plastering rendered a difficult feat
to accomplish, and to cough up the quantum of muddy water
he had involuntarily swallowed through incautiously entering
his bath with his mouth open, I thought I should have
expired with suppressed laughter.
In less than five minutes my mate was himself again, or
at least strong enough to remount his horse and ride to the
rear. When I mounted my own steed, the fellow I had
been pursuing prior to Matthews’ mishap was, to use a
sporting expression, “ nowhere.” Without doubt, he had
got to his hole, and knew too well that no efforts would be
made to dislodge him.
I took a hasty glance over the field of action. My imme-
diate neighbourhood was well-nigh deserted. In my rear,
the ground over which we had advanced, the miners were,
many of them, setting to work again; the rest, in company
with the women and children, were gazing towards the


opposite side of the flat, where the other party of police had
not succeeded in making so pacific a progress as we had done.
I could see that a pretty shindy was being kicked up there.
Stones and sticks were flying through the air, while the
shouts and imprecations of the combatants were clearly
audible.
About halfway between where I stood and this swaying,
struggling mob, were visible the superintendent and his little
body of horse and foot, hurrying on to the relief of their
comrades, while a little way in their rear walked six prisoners
in irons, guarded by two troopers. These were all the
unlicensed diggers that had yet been captured, for upwards
of a hundred had baffled pursuit, and were at this moment
at the bottom of their holes, no doubt laughing over their
escape. As I could not do any more where I was, I now
made the best of my way after my mates, whom I soon suc-
ceeded in overtaking.
I explained to the superintendent the particulars of
Matthews’ mishap, and then fell into rank, and the advance
continued. We could see that our comrades were in diffi-
culties. The staves of the foot constables were playing pretty
freely on the heads of the mob, and the flats of the "troopers’
sabres and the shoulders of their horses were doing still
more; but the little party was nearly surrounded, and half
a dozen of them had already been knocked down and trodden
under foot before the mob noticed our approach.
I guess, though we were only twenty strong (twelve on foot
and eight mounted), they did not like the look of us.
“ Come, lads, you’ve had fun enough; for your own sakes
you’ll now disperse quietly,” shouted the superintendent, in
a voice of thunder to the crowd, more than half of whom had
turned to face us, and had already opened fire with a volley
of stones and sticks.
“ If you don’t stop that, you rascals, we’ll make you,” cried
the superintendent, soon rapidly losing his temper. “I’ll
give you one minute for all honest men to disperse.”
Derisive laughs and jeers, shouts of “ Come on ! come on
if ye dare,” was the retort of the mob; while one long slim
Yankee fellow cried, “ Use yer knives, mates, if they do; I
calculate they want bloodletting, anyhow.”


“ Troopers, draw sabres, prepare to charge! Constables,
follow as best you can; and don’t be afraid of hitting too
hard. Now then. Forward.” And the old superintendent’s
cheeks flushed, and eyes flashed, as he uttered the words of
command, for he thought of his lasi charge—when, as Captain
of the 17th Lancers, he had led his little band of troops
against the overwhelming forces of the Eajah of Bouradar, in
the old Sikh war, and forced them to fly in confusion from
the field. The present skirmish was as child’s play to him,
but lam afraid that some of us regarded it differently. I
know that as far as I was concerned, I would just as soon
have been a hundred miles away, and perhaps sooner.
However, at it we went, and in a compact little wedge
divided the mob in our course, as the sharp prow of a yacht
would divide a heaving sea. With the flats of our swords
we knocked the diggers down. The foot constables rushed
into the gap w'e had made in the enemies’ ranks before it
could tdose again, and with their staves seconded us right well.
Suffice it to say that we fought our way right through the
crowd, and joined our mates, in junction with whom we again
charged through the mob with the same success, and by that
time the rioters had had enough, and scampered away in
every direction, leaving some forty or fifty of their number
on the ground, too badly hurt to follow their example; while
four of our troopers and five constables were in a similar pre-
dicament.
Not a life was sacrificed on either side.
I had come off almost untouched from the struggle, though
once my life had been in some peril. The tall Yankee who
had so warmly recommended the knife had not hesitated to
put his suggestions into practice. I had just knocked down
one fellow, and stooped to avoid a stone, when a long bowie
knife gleamed before my eyes, and the next moment would
doubtless have been my last, had I not seized the arm of the
rascal that wielded it, and so arrested the stroke, while I re-
turned the compliment by a heavy blow in the mouth, with
the butt end of my revolver, that sent half a dozen teeth
down his throat, and effectually cooled his courage.
As soon as the skirmish was over our wounded men were
collected together, with as many of the captured rioters as


were capable of moving, and the latter having been hand-
cuffed, we returned to the station.
We had scarcely done dinner when Matthews (who was
now all right again), Crawday, and myself were summoned
before the superintendent, who wished to know if we would
volunteer to return to the gold-field in the character of dig-
gers, and stay there for a week or so, for the purpose of dis-
covering a few of the unlicensed workers, their names, and
the locality of the claims, &c.
We readily accepted the service; and that same night, in
most artistic make-up, and from a different direction from that
of the station, we again reached Forest Creek. We had a
tent with us, which wo fixed, made a fire, boiled our billy,
had tea, and then separately lounged through the camp, and
visited various grog shanties to pick up information.
Throughout that evening neither of us was recognised,
which gave us confidence, and for more than a week we
played our game with more than tolerable success. One
night—it was a Saturday night, I remember, for I had been
buying some groceries at M‘Kenzie’s store—l dropped into
“The Golden Age ” shanty, with the double object of imbib-
ing a nobbier and increasing my stock of information. A
good many people were there, and amongst them some of the
greatest roughs on the Flat, and I found it an easy matter to
join in the conversation, and at length to turn it upon the
topic of the recent police raid. It was an hour at which
most of the diggers were half-seas-over, and consequently
communicative. Many of those who had eluded us on that
occasion were not slow to brag of it, and thus I obtained
more valuable information on that one night than I had done
for the whole preceding week.
It was verging on eleven o’clock when I quitted the shanty,
and steered my course in tbs direction of our tent. It was a
stormy night, and there was no moon, so that I had to walk
warily on account of the holes so thickly covering the ground.
I had, however, accomplished about half the distance in
safety, when I was roughly gripped from behind, and thus
brought to a halt. The next moment three or four burly
fellows surrounded me, and one of them striking a match
held it close to my face.


“ By George ! the very man, mates; the cat-faced snivelling
spy himself; ” and with a curse the speaker let drop the match
and trod it under his hoot.
During the momentary glimmer of the lucifer I had re-
cognised him as one of the unlicensed diggers, whom we had
captured and marched to the station the preceding week. I
had ridden hy his side the whole way, and doubtless the
fellow had escaped from custody, returned to his hole,
recognised me in some shanty, and waylaid me for no good
purpose.
“ What shall we do with the rascally trap V’ cried another.
“ Wall, I calculate we’ll lynch him,” echoed a voice whose
nasal twang I thought I remembered.
“ No, no, take him down my hole; it’s a duifer, and I leave
it to-morrow; we can cover him in, and there he’ll rest quiet
enough until the crack of doom,” suggested the first speaker.
“ Good! good ! a new way of salting a claim,” laughed
another ruffian, and the motion was carried without a dis-
senting voice.
The manner of my death decided on, no time was lost in
putting it into execution. I was gagged, and borne along a
quarter of a mile or so at a run ; for although we were in the
least frequented and most lonely part of the Flat, an honest
digger might perchance have seen us, and then their amiable
intentions would most probably have been foiled. No such
luck, however, awaited me, and we were soon at the mouth of
my selected sepulchre.
It was a pit of about fifty feet in depth, or at least so I
conjectured, from the time they took to lower me, and the
number of revolutions made by the windlass, which I
counted. At length I rested on the damp clay at the bot-
tom of the shaft, the rope was drawn up, and then my per-
secutors descended in turn, and I was hurried along a drive
for some distance, when we came to a halt, and a candle was
produced and lighted. My eyes were then unbandaged, and
the gag taken from my mouth.
I could now see my enemies. They were four in all. Be-
sides the fellow who had escaped from the station, I recog-
nised the Yankee who had tried to stab me in the skirmish,
and —could I believe my eyes I—in.1 —in. one of the other ruffians I


recognized a fellow who had been in the force, and discharged
for cowardice and theft; the latter crime he had at the time
tried to slip on to my shoulders, and I had consequently
cherished no kindly feeling towards him.
The recognition was mutual on both sides, and Finch
growled with a sneer, “ The last time we parted you didn’t
fancy we should meet again so soon, mate.”
“Dog! thief! sneaking coward!” I retorted. “Would
that I had the power to give you what you deserve !” Then,
as an idea struck me, I turned to the other rascals, saying,
“ This fellow is a trap as well as myself; he was turned out
of the force for cowardice, and for a theft that he tried to
slip off on me; just as a favour allow me to put it out of
his power to gloat over my fate.”
This request seemed to tickle the palate of the sallow
Yankee. “ What say ye, mates 1 He’s fairly drawed the
coon to my notion. Why shouldn’t we have a little more
lark over the matter ? A pistol-shot wouldn’t be heard down
here. Knock down and draw out, I say, and let’s see who’s
the cock that crows craven the first.”
“ I don’t want to fight him, mates; in fact, I won’t fight
him,” said Finch, turning as pale as death.
This refusal, however, on his part, caused the others to
declare that he should. “ You were the cove what betrayed
the trap, and by G —, now we’ve discovered that you were a
trap yourself, he shall have his revenge,” said one.
“ Stand up, sirree, and take your pick of ways to settle it.
You’ve got your choice of weapons; knives or pistols, just
decide.”
“ Mr. Badgery, I shan’t fight him. I decline his chal-
lenge,” whined the coward, in a supplicating tone.
“ But ye shall fight him, ye pitiful, eternal sneak, —ye
slinking, psalm-singing varmint of a British-whelped bone-
setter ; and as ye won’t choose yer weapon, I will for ye.
There’s my revolver, with a single charge in it, —enough for
you, I reckon. Who’ll lend the other trap a barker 1 Mind
there’s only one barrel charged, or he may try to shoot us all
and escape.”
To me there was something very strange and gloomy in all
these preparations. Whether I shot Finch, or he shot me,


my fate was equally sealed—l should never see the light of
day more. I knew the hole we were in had been worked
out, and that the dark tragedy about to he performed would
he for ever hid by the pits being filled up and abandoned.
My feelings may be imagined as I stood in this long, narrow
drive, surrounded by reckless diggers, jeering and uttering
unfeeling comments upon what was passing.
Finch stood twelve paces distant in his red flannel jumper
and moleskin pants, holding the long revolver the Yankee
had handed him down by his side. A like weapon was now
given to me, five charges having been first drawn.
The Yankee said he would give the signal by clapping his
hands, bidding me at the same time, with a knowing wink,
“ to shoot my best, and not think about giving trouble, as it
would be just as convenient to fill the earth in upon two of
us as one.”
We were now allowed five minutes to prepare, and during
that time I noticed the drive where Finch stood was broader
than where I had been posted, and that the shadow was
greater where he was. This gave him a great advantage
over me, but I did not fancy it was worth troubling about.
As long as I hit him, I did not care whether he hit me or
not ; in fact, I would have preferred his shooting me through
the head at once, to the lingering misery of being buried
alive in such a spot, and suffering a lingering death from
starvation or the want of pure air.
“ Are you ready now 1 ” growled the Yankee at length.
Finch groaned a response ; the sound came hollowly out of
the gloom.
The umpire turned to me and repeated the question.
“ Quite ready,” I replied ; “ give the signal when you
like.”
It was a moment of terrible excitement. It was strange
yet awful to hear the measured “ One —two —” of the
Yankee echoing out of the darkness. When he called
“ three ” we were to fire.
I felt no fear, but a wild throbbing of delirium was in my
brain, —a sensation as though I was an atom in the universe,
swept, onwards by an unknown but irresistible power through
space, while hundreds of fiery stars flashed before my eyes,


and strange inhuman cries sounded in my ears. My sight
grew filmy. I strove to pierce the gathering darkness, but I
could see nothing distinctly.
“Three !” said the umpire, and clapped his hands.
“ Crack ! crack ! ” went the pistols simultaneously, the
lurid flashes illuminating the living tomb with a glow of
crimson; hut only for a moment I saw Finch’s pale, ghost-
like countenance, his eyes glaring out of his head, a thin
stream of blood trickling down from a hole in the right
temple, then I heard him fall with a dull “ thud ” on the
damp, cold earth; hut the darkness of eternal night was
around, for the concussion of air caused hy the explosion of
our pistols had extinguished the candle.
“ Darn it, is it over 1 Speak, somebody ! ” hallooed the
Yankee.
There was no reply.
“Answer me, some one; and whoever has a match jist
strike a light,” said the umpire again.
“Dang it, I’ve heen searching every pocket for a match
and can’t find one,” said somebody.
“ I’ve not a match,” growled a third voice.
“By George, mates, we must make our way out then in
the dark.”
“ That we must,” retorted the Yankee. “ I oalkerlate
both they traps is dead as ’possums, for I don’t hear a
squeak, so let’s get above ground, and begin to fill in the
hole. It must be nigh morning already.”
Oh, what moments of agony were those to me! A burn-
ing, throbbing pain in my right side told me that I was
wounded, and upon placing my hand on the spot I felt that
my jumper was saturated with moisture, —blood, no doubt.
I fancied that I had not many minutes to live, yet the in-
tense horror I felt at the bare idea of being left there —
there, in that horrible grave, to die alone and untended, —
there, close to the body of the man I had just shot —I cannot
describe. I was about to halloo to the retiring diggers,—•
to beg, to entreat them to spare me, when my intention was
arrested by a low rumbling sound, such as I had never heard
before. A moment later the earth trembled around me —the
air seemed to vibrate—the rumbling noise increased —a loud


snap! snap ! rang through the mine, and in accents of hor-
ror and' alarm I heard the Yankee shout, “To the shaft! to
the shaft for your lives ! The props are giving way! The
workings are falling in !”
It was, indeed, true ; the vibration of the double discharge
had effected more than the putting out of a candle—it had
loosened the ground above. The wooden props placed here
and there along the drive had proved unequal to support
the additional weight required of them; and before the
Yankee and his mates could reach the mouth of the shaft,
tons upon tons of earth, with a crash like thunder, rushed
down upon them, burying them for ever beneath its weight.
I could hear their cries and shrieks ring awfully through
the mine, but in a second almost they were stilled for ever
in the silence of death.
Thus did the punishment of the would-be murderers over-
take them. They perished by the very death to which they
had doomed me.
For some time I remained on the spot where I had fallen
through weakness and the loss of blood, expecting every
moment to share a similar fate; but at last I became con-
vinced that the danger of being crushed to death was over,
and with it came a new longing for life. I took off my
cravat and belt, and with them contrived to bind up my
wounds and stanch the flow of blood. I then lay down a
little to collect my strength, and called aloud the name of
Finch, fancying he might still be living. My voice rang
hollowly through the gloom, but no reply came—not even a
groan. It was a childish prejudice, but even the idea of
being alone with the dead added fresh horror to my position,
and I arose, determined to make at least an effort to escape.
I was very weak, and the air was growing close and oppres-
sive, but I managed to stagger forward until my further pro-
gress in that direction was arrested by a wall of clayey earth.
I shuddered as I touched it. Was it, or was it not, the wall
of my tomb 1
I resolved to make a tour of inspection, and ascertain if
there was any exit from this dreadful spot. The only way
to discover this was to follow the damp wall all around,
keeping my hand against it as I went, so as not to miss any


narrow brandling passage that might lead me to liberty. I
at once proceeded to put the idea into execution, but I had
hardly got nine paces on my way when I stumbled over
something. I put my hand down to discover what it was,
and withdrew it hastily, for it had rested on the icy coun-
tenance of my late antagonist, and touched even a hole in
the forehead through which the bullet had tom its way.
Notwithstanding my feelings of horror, I bent down and
endeavoured to move the body, but in doing so discovered
that up to the shoulders it was buried beneath the fallen
earth, and thus fixed firmly to the spot where it lay. This
showed me how nearly I had escaped destruction, and also
that the fallen debris had effectually blocked up the exit by
the way we had entered.
As I could do the dead man no good, I now resumed my
march of discovery, counting my paces as I went, and never
taking my hand from the damp side of my vault. I had
counted forty-five paces in this way, when I again stumbled
over something, and discovered that, as before, it was the body
of poor Finch.
This was the most terrible discovery of all, for it convinced
me that I was really surrounded by those frightful walls of
clay—that every channel of escape was out off. I threw
myself on the cold, wet ground, and wept and prayed by
turns.
At length I fancied that the air was growing oppressively
close, and presently it became so bad that I could scarcely
breathe.
This forced me to renewed exertion. I again made a
circuit of the loathsome vault, rapping the walls at every
step with the stock of the revolver which I had used in the
duel, and which the Yankee and his gang had forgotten to
dispossess me of.
At length I fancied that a rap I gave produced a hollow
sound. A faint hope sprang up within my breast ; I rapped
again and again.
I was not deceived; more and more hollowly resounded
the blows. Hope became a conviction, and I now dug away
with a short knife that I found in my pocket.
I had laboured thus for about half an hour without


result. My strength was fast leaving me; my wound had
begun to bleed afresh from the exertion, when, just as I was
about to give up in despair, I found no resistance to my
knife, for both knife and arm slipped into an aperture,
through which rays of daylight streamed, together with a
current of pure air.
What a feeling of intoxicating joy now took possession of
me ! my strength returned as if by magic; all feeling of
faintness passed away. I had soon made the hole big enough
to pass my body through; having accomplished which, I
found myself at the bottom of an adjoining shaft, of some
thirty feet in depth, the top of which was accessible by
means of ladders.
Up these ladders (incredible as it may seem) I managed to
climb; and when I saw the glorious sun rising above the
distant mountain range—that sun which I never expected to
see more, —and beheld the lovely face of nature, the tent-
dotted plain, the groups of busy labourers already proceeding
to their work, then my strength gave way, and with a wild
cry of delight I fell insensible to the ground. Whilst still
in an unconscious state, some friendly diggers carried me to
our tent, where Matthews and Crawday were in great alarm
at my prolonged absence. A doctor was speedily summoned,
who examined my wound, which he found trifling; the ball
had first grazed a rib, and the bleeding had been profuse, but
that was all. In less than a week I was able to knock about
again, and nearly as strong as ever.


THE NIGHT FOSSICKERS OF MOON-
LIGHT FLAT.
Perhaps life and property were never less secure on the
Victorian gold-fields than about the end of the year 1852.
It would not have been so had it not at that period been the
custom to fix the district head-quarters of the police force in
peaceable and orderly neighbourhoods, too far distant from
those populous but remote gullies which were the nightly
scenes of deeds of robbery and violence. Every evening men
were knocked down and brutally treated, or “ stuck up ” and
robbed. Every night horses were stolen, tents broken into,
and “ holes ” plundered of gold by the “ night fossickers ”
miscreants who watched for the richest holes during the day,
marked them, and plundered them at night. At length
these desperadoes had become so numerous and shameless,
and their outrages so frequent, at a place called Moonlight
Elat (near Forest Creek), that the miners rose en masse
against them. A public meeting was convened, blue-shirted
diggers made stirring appeals to their auditory, a deputation
was appointed to proceed immediately to Melbourne to re-
monstrate with the Government, and to implore it to adopt
energetic measures for extirpating the “ hordes of ruffians ”
that infested their neighbourhood, and the persons of many of
whom were well known there.
It was during the height of this excitement that I received
orders to quit Forest Creek, where I had been for some time
stationed, and proceed to Moonlight Flat, where, in the
character of a digger, I was to make as,many discoveries and
arrests as I could.


A foot constable named Coulson accompanied me on the
expedition. I bore our tent on my shoulders, my mate
carried the rest of the traps, and we both started in good
spirits for the scene of our future labours, which we reached
by sundown.
We pitched our tent in as central a situation as possible,
and the consequence was that for the first night or two not a
wink of sleep did either of us get. We had encamped in a
regular pandemonium. There was murder here, suicide there,
revolvers cracking, blunderbusses booming, rifles going off,
balls whistling; one fellow groaning with a broken leg,
another shouting because he couldn’t find the way to his
hole, and a third equally vociferous because he had tumbled
into one. This man swearing, another praying, a party of
returning bacchanals chanting various ditties to different
time and tune, or rather minus both. Here was one man
grumbling because he had brought his wife with him, another
ditto because he had left his wife behind, or sold her for an
ounce of gold or a bottle of rum. Donnybrook fair was a
peaceful scene compared to an evening at Moonlight Plat, for
here all bad human passions seemed to be seething, making
earth a hell
Upon the second evening after my arrival, as I was leisurely
strolling through the camp, my hands in my pockets, my short
cutty pipe between my teeth —to all appearance as true a
devotee of pick, shovel, and cradle as any of the heteroge-
neous mass around me—in passing a tent that stood a little
apart from the general run of such like domiciles, I fancied I
heard a groan.
I listened for a minute or two for a repetition of the sound,
which was presently again audible; there could be no mistake
about it now, it was a genuine groan, and no mistake; so
feeling that the stock of my revolver was handy—under my
jumper—l dashed into the tent, where the first object I
beheld was a man hanging to the ridge-pole,* his feet some
ten inches from the ground, and apparently dead.
To pull my knife from my pocket and cut him down was
the work of a moment; this done, I removed the ligature from
* The centre pole of the tent.


his throat, and upon examining it, found it to he a black
silk handkerchief, with fringed ends. I then used every
endeavour to restore the suicide, as I regarded him, to con-
sciousness. After a time I was successful, and in an hour or
so he was sufficiently recovered to converse and express a
desire for something to drink.
I fished up a bottle from a corner, and took down a mug
from the side pole. The bottle contained whiskey, and we
were soon hobnobbing over the genial liquor.
“ How on earth did you come to hang yourself, mate 1 ”
I asked at length.
“ Hang myself! ” he retorted, staring me in the face ; “ I
never hung myself, I was strung up by the three rascals who
stole my gold.”
“Eh % what is that you say 1 ” I asked, with a start,
for this explanation aroused a professional interest at once
within my breast. “Itis a case of attempted murder, then,
instead of suicide 1 The night fossickers have been paying
you a visit, friend 1 ”
“ They have indeed, mate, and I should have been a dead
man in another minute or two if you had not arrived at the
very nick of time, and cut me down. I owe my life to you.”
“ Never mind that, but tell me how all this happened,” I
said.
“Well, then,” commenced the digger, “it fell out in this
way. I was just working a new claim, and as the hole looked
promising like, I got up this morning earlier than usual and
lost no time in setting to work. I was not long at it before
I hit upon a ‘ pocket,’* full of the precious metal. It lay
in a dark corner of the hole, but my fossicking-knife soon
brought its glittering beauties to light. Whilst I was com-
placently contemplating my treasure I heard some one say,
‘ You’ve good luck, mate; that’s a tidy bit of gold there.’ I
looked up and saw a tall, lanky digger standing at the brink
of the hole, and regarding my discovery with greedy eyes.
‘ Tolerably well,’ I rejoined curtly, at the same time shifting
my revolver to show the fellow that I was prepared to defend
it too, if necessary. He made no reply, but with a grunt
* A little hole.


and a surly nod, walked away. Well, my luck had not
quitted me yet. Nugget after nugget did that dirty hole
give up; by knock-off time* I had taken out five pounds’
weight of gold. To-morrow being the Sabbath, thirty-six
hours of suspense had to elapse before I could discover
whether this was but a mere passing stroke of luck or the
herald of continued good fortune. To-night, for the first
time in my life, I was really in dread of an attack, though
I kept my success a secret, not even telling my most intimate
friends. I did not intend to do so, you may be sure, for on
Monday morning my first business would have been to send
my gold down to the escort office for security. Tor the time,
however, I was forced to content myself with *planting ’f it,
which I did just inside the tent, and just below where you
now stand ; if you move you will see where the ground has
been disturbed. After I had done this not a footstep passed
the tent without my imagining myself robbed of my con-
cealed treasures ; and it being Saturday night—the noisiest
and most riotous one in the week—my panics were of course
neither few nor far between. At last my phantom fears
assumed the air of realities —footsteps approached close to the
tent, and then stopped. I went out and looked around, but
in the darkness I could not perceive any one, so I came inside
again, and as I entered my gaze fell upon a little round hole
cut in the canvas on the opposite side. I knew it must have
been recently done, but the hole itself did not terrify me, it
was the solitary eye that gazed through it and was fixed on
mine. lam no coward, but I felt an icy chill run through
my veins. I plucked my revolver from my belt, but the eye
never moved. I pointed it at the hole in the tent, and was
about to pull the trigger/when my arm was knocked up from
behind and the bullet passed harmlessly through the top of
the tent. I found myself in the grasp of two powerful ruffians
with blackened faces, who bound me hand and foot, and
threatened to blow my brains out if I made the least noise.
A third robber, a tall, gaunt man, now entered ; his face too
was blackened ; he pointed to the spot where my gold was
buried, and merely uttered the monosyllable, ‘ Dig !’ One
* Hour of leaving work.
f Concealing.


of the men seized my shovel and set to work with a will;
in another minute my treasure was discovered, and speedily
divided. Then the tall, gaunt man again pointed, tins time
at me, and said the single word, ‘ Hang ! ’ Immediately one
of his mates uncoiled a rope from his waist and reeved a
noose in it, hut the cord was not long enough ; so the tall
man growing impatient, tore off his neckerchief and tossed it
to my executioner, who soon secured it around my throat, and
then attached it to his rope. I now began to call for help,
but a knock on the head stunned me, and I remembered no
more till I awoke and found you pouring brandy down my
throat, and trying to bring me round.”
“ And the tall man, who seemed to be leader of these rascals,
was the cove who spoke to you at your hole in the morning ?”
I remarked.
“ Was he? how do you know?” asked the digger, with a
look of surprise.
“ I don’t know, I only conjecture it was he. We members
of the police force are apt to draw our own conclusions pretty
readily,” I responded.
“ Do you belong to the force?” asked the digger, with a
look of pleased surprise.
“I do; and lam here on secret service,” I said, “so you
must not betray me; but I am desirous to aid you to win
back your gold, and to bring these night fossickersto justice.
They have been a curse to honest diggers too long; their
depredations must be put a stop to. Try now to recollect
whether this tall, gaunt man who broke into your tent and so
politely hanged you at all resembled the man who came up
to your hole in the morning, just as you discovered your
pocket of gold ? ”
“Why, he wasn’t unlike,” said my new acquaintance,
scratching his head. “ You see I couldn’t make out his face
owing to its being blackened; but the figure was much the
same, and so was the voice, I reckon.”
“ Could you swear to the ringleader of to-night, if you
were confronted with him?”
“ Darned if I think I could; but I’d swear to the fellow
who came up to the hole in the morning amongst a thou-
sand.”


“ Had he got on a tie like this 1 ” I asked, producing from
my pocket the one that had so nearly terminated his exist
ence.
“ No, he had not,” was the confident reply; “he wore a
blue and white speckledy one.”
“ Describe the appearance of the man who spoke to you in
the morning, and I will take it down in my pocket-book,” I
said.
The digger complied.
“ Tall, thin, feet large and rather splay, shoulders round,
complexion sallow, full heard and whiskers of a reddish hue,
hair long and dark brown, eyes large, dark, and very fierce.
Dress —blue serge jumper, brown hilly-cock hat, blue and
white speckledy tie; shepherd’s plaid trousers, large pattern.”
I muttered as I dotted down the separate items, “ That
will do, mate; hut can’t you recollect anything of the dress
or appearance of either of the fellows who stuck you up
and hung you this evening?”
“Ho ! I can’t for certain; I was struck all of a heap like
with surprise; hut I feel sure that the tall one was the fellow
who came to my claim in the morning, his eyes had the same
scowl, hut as for his togs and those of his mates I didn’t
notice what they were like.”
Setting my new friend down in my own mind as an arrant
paltroon, and seeing that nothing more was to be got out of
him, I began to more narrowly inspect the neckerchief, which
had performed the duties of a halter. As I said before, it was
of black silk with lace ends, but I now noticed that it was
moreover made stock fashion, and was intended to fasten
behind the neck with two buttons, the ends being brought
forward in a double fold, and tied in a bow in front. There
was nothing very unusual in all this, but what attracted my
attention was the buttons, on each of which appeared the
words, “ Channbns —Plymouth.”
“He tried to hang you with this, mate, did he 1 What
will you say if I hang him by it ? ”
The digger gazed at me in bewilderment.
“ Keep a still tongue in your head, say nothing of having
met with me, nor even mention the fact of your having been
robbed until Monday. Perhaps by that time I may have


nabbed one or more of these •worthies. If you do not see or
hear anything of me before, I will meet you at ‘ The Promised
Land,’ old Mack’s shanty, at knock-off hour on that day.
Now good-bye, for I must set to work at once,” and slapping
him on the shoulder, I left the tent.
It was just ten o’clock when I quitted the digger, but it
was half-past when I reached my own quarters, for though
the distance was only half a mile, I walked very slowly, for
I was trying to unravel the mystery that had just presented
itself. I kept muttering the words “ Channens —Plymouth,”
“ Channens—Plymouth,” for somehow I fancied that those
two words, innocent as they sounded, would alone bring the
criminals to justice. “ The probability is, that this Channens
is an outfitter or a tailor at Plymouth,” I thought, “ and that
the wearer of that neckerchief bought it there; and if so,
most likely he purchased other articles of clothing at the same
establishment which bear similarly stamped buttons.” The
more I pondered upon this probability, the more likely it
seemed, and I concluded that I must somehow obtain an
inspection of the wardrobe of the tall man of monosyllables,
come what might of it.
Fortunately Coulson was in the tent when I reached it,
and I told him forthwith every incident of the digger’s nar-
rative, read him the description of the supposed ringleader in
the matter; and then we held a brief consultation, which
resulted in a decision to look in at every shanty on the Flat
that night, and see if we could not hit off the scent some-
where.
We accordingly lit our pipes, and sauntered out in different
directions, in quest of those who were wanted.
It was now about eleven o’clock, and the township was
crowded. Some were out to purchase provisions for the
ensuing week, others to impart and receive news, but the
greater number to squander their gettings in the grog shanties,
whose glaring lamps of camphine or naptha threw a ruddy
light over the strange forms that passed and repassed beneath
them.
I’ve no time to enter into long descriptions. I was intent
on business, and perhaps did not notice the picturesqueness
of the scene, as an artist or a poet might have done. I had


eyes alone for the prey I was tracking, the notorious night
fossickers.
I dropt into shanty after shanty, however, without success,
for nowhere did I see any one answering the description
noted in my pocket-hook. I was returning home vexed and
dispirited, when it struck me that I would re-enter one of
the grog-shops I had previously visited, and whose door I
was then passing. The thought no sooner entered my head
than I acted upon it. The shanty was even more crowded
than when I had last visited it, and I recognised several new
faces. Amongst others, my eyes rested upon a tall, lanky
fellow, who was leaning over the bar imbibing a very stiff
glass of brandy and water. He immediately fixed my atten-
tion ; not that he much resembled the description I had
received of the man I was in search of, for his hair, instead
of being long and dark, was very short, and of a light red
hue, whilst as for whiskers and beard he was quite destitute
of either. His complexion, too, instead of being sallow, was
florid and freckled, and his dress did not at all accord with
that of the man who had visited the digger at his hole in the
morning.
In spite of all these discrepancies in look, my suspicions
were aroused, for in all other respects his appearance was
exact j so, edging up to him, I said, “ Well, mate, you and I
have met before somewhere.”
“ May be so ; but I don’t recollect you,” was the surly
rejoinder ; and he cast a searching glance at me as he
spoke.
“ Perhaps not; for if my memory don’t deceive me, ’twas
before either of us set eyes on this land of gold.”
“ Oh, was it 1” he replied more cheerfully. “ Then where
do you hail from, mate 1 ”
“ Why I’m a down-country man, I am; Plymouth’s my
native town.”
The man started. I thought that I could distinguish tears
glittering in his large fierce eyes, but whatever emotion he
experienced he soon overcame it, and once more turning
towards me, said, “ You haven’t much the accent of a Devon-
shire man.”
“ That’s because I was brought up and lived some years in


London; but I’m a Plymothian, nevertheless. It’s a pretty
place, isn’t it 1”
“ Ah, it is, indeed,” rejoined the tall man, with a sigh.
“ What part of the Three Towns* did you live in, friend ]”
I asked innocently.
“ Why bless your heart, I lived in—in—in —oh, no, I
never lived in Plymouth in my life. I passed through it
once ; that’s how I came to know the place.”
I noticed his hesitation, and thought to myself, “ Oh, oh,
old fellow, you do come from Plymouth. You were about
to confess it, and name the very street you resided in, when
suddenly something came into your head that made you
desirous of concealing the fact, as though its knowledge by a
stranger might be dangerous to you.” I did not let my
thoughts appear upon my countenance, however, but rejoined
with an air of disappointment, “ Oh, is that all 1 I hoped
I had fallen in with a fellow-countryman ; and yet I could
almost swear that I had seen you there; ay, and in the shop
of my uncle Charmens, too.”
“ I was never at Channens the tailor’s in my life; I
never heard the name before,” ejaculated the fellow, with a
terrified start.
That answer confirmed my suspicions at once. If he had
never been at Channens’ shop, or heard his name, how could
he know he was a tailor 1 And if he had been there, and
did not know him, why should he be afraid to own it 1
“ He remembers the buttons on the neckerchief,” I thought,
and as events proved, I thought rightly.
“ I beg your pardon, sir,” I said in tones of apology,
“ but I did not mean to offend you. Will you have a
nobbier with me 1 ”
The fellow consented, but he imbibed the liquor in silence,
and only gave a parting nod when I paid the score, and
wished him good night. He felt that his tongue had
betrayed him once, and he did not care to trust it to wag
again in my presence.
My reflections, as I walked home, were very satisfactory.
* Plymouth, Stonehouse, and Devonport join each other, and are
termed The Three Towns.


I felt persuaded that I was on the right track, and though I
was not yet possessed of sufficient proofs whereon to arrest
the man, I fancied that they would soon he forthcoming.
Whilst talking to the rascal at the shanty, I had contrived,
unperceived by him, to cut a button from his trousers, and I
had it now in my waistcoat pocket. It was a brace button ;
and as he wore a belt, he might not discover his loss for some
time. When I reached our tent I eagerly lit a candle, drew
this button from my pocket, and looked at it. Yes, as I
anticipated, there the words “ Channens —Plymouth ” encir-
cling the rim.
This was moral evidence sufficient to satisfy any one, but
to make sure of a conviction the connecting links still
required strengthening. Besides, I wished to discover the
purloined nuggets for the sake of the poor digger who had
lost them, and to do this I must not be too precipitate.
The idea struck me that the next night being Sunday, and
the diggers not at work, that these night fossickers would
very probably make an excursion to the hole that had turned
out such a pretty nest egg, and try to plunder from it still
more of the precious metal. I imparted my suspicions to
Coulson, who coincided with my views on the subject; and
we resolved to lie in ambush close to the hole, and endeavour
to nab them in the very act.
Having arranged the whole plan of the campaign over a
pipe of Barrett’s twist, we turned in for the night, or rather
morning, for it was nearly one o’clock, and had a good
sleep.
The next day was a day of rest, for the quietness of the
diggers on a Sunday is striking. There seems a general
agreement to cease from the usual occupations; consequently,
it is extremely rare to find anybody engaged in actual mining
on that day. But it will be easily understood that, situated
as miners are, they have few resources to fall back on for
employment of mind or body during that period of rest.
Many thousands are brought together, separated at once from
the comforts and restraining influences of a home and family,
and pursuing a vocation of a speculative and irregular
character. It was my first Sunday at the Gold Fields, so I
noticed the way that the Sabbath was kept with interest. I


observed some games in progress, and little groups of people
looking on. Many were chopping wood, or performing little
duties about their tents. The pipe seemed a great comfort.
Most of the diggers were well dressed, and many women
and children were walking about or sitting at the entrances
of tents. Bills were posted on the gum trees along the road,
intimating that the minister of some particular sect would
preach that day, and giving the hour and place. There was,
however, no place of worship on the Flat, and it is not sur-
prising that the camp preachers complained of a thin attend-
ance and an uncertain flock, when the skittle-alley and the
shanty offered such strong counter attractions.
A month or two later than the period of which I write,
there was a canvas church erected at Moonlight Flat. Later
still an Episcopalian wooden structure, the model whereof
was evidently taken from Noah’s Ark, sprang up on the
township; and then, as though out of a spirit of opposition,
a stone building, calling itself a Primitive Wesleyan chapel,
reared its square walls exactly opposite.
As for myself, I am sorry to say I passed the day as idly
and irreverently as the rest, for I did nothing but read and
smoke until nightfall, when Coulson and I made a jolly good
tea of damper and beefsteak; and it being by this time quite
dark, we armed ourselves, and set out for our ambuscade.
It was a fine night, hut there was no moon. Still the stars
shed quite sufficient light for our purpose, and in fact a less
degree of obscurity would have been objectionable. We took
up our quarters close to the hole we came to watch, being hid
from view by the trunk of a gum tree that had recently been
cut down, and now lay prostrate on its parent earth within
a few yards of the hole.
It was just nine o’clock as we got into ambush, and we lay
flat on the ground behind the log for at least a couple of
hours, before our attention was attracted by the slightest
sound of approaching footsteps. Every few minutes one of
us would peer over the barrier in the direction of the town-
ship, for the claim we were watching was one of the most
remote on the diggings, and there was only a stray tent or
two within a good quarter of a mile of it.
We were still in our ordinary diggers’ clothes, hut we had


our trusty revolvers with us, and did not fear encountering
any three men on the Flat.
“ By George, Brooke, here they come,” whispered Coulson
at length, giving me a nudge, and dipping his head out of
sight.
I took a momentary peep, and there, sure enough, just a
hundred paces distant, and coming directly towards the spot
where we lay, were three men.
Luckily they were approaching from an opposite direction.
As they drew nearer I could see that one was very tall and
lanky, and the others stouter and more compactly built.
“Oh ! oh ! my friend of the shanty and his mates,” I thought
to myself, and sure enough I was right, for coming straight
up to the hole the tall one jumped in without hesitation,
(it was barely nine feet deep), and began fossicking for his
life.
“Are you sure this is the right ’un, Eed?” asked one of
his companions from above.
“ Eight one, of course lam; I know it by that felled gum
tree close by,” was the irritable rejoinder.
This reply seemed satisfactory, for the questioner, without
more ado, leaped into the hole and whipping out his knife
set to work with a will, while the third rascal kept watch
at the top.
The dark lantern they had lit shed no light above the sur-
face of the shaft, so that although we could hear every move-
ment below and distinguish every word uttered, yet the form
of the sentinel, though not more than half a dozen paces
from us, was barely discernible.
Coulson was anxious to rush out and capture the fellows
there and then, but upon my whispering to him that such a
course might prevent us from ever discovering where they
had concealed the treasure stolen from the digger’s tent; and,
indeed, prevent us from bringing the attempted murder home
to them as speedily as if we spied their movements a little
longer, he altered his views and agreed with me that it was
wiser to watch and wait.
“There’s a nugget, by the powers, as big as a pigeon’s
egg,” ejaculated one of the fossickers in accents of delight.
“Ay, ay, that’s a good haul, anyhow,” grunted his mate.


“What have you found, Bill?” interrogated the first
speaker, who by his voice I knew to he the worthy whom. 1
had so effectually pumped at the shanty.
“ Find ! why not much: two or three hits the size of shirt
buttons, that’s all,” was the dissatisfied reply.
There was silence now for a few minutes, hut at length one
of the fellows grunted, “ I’m hlowed if I can find anything
worth taking. It’s hard work and little pay, that’s what it
is.”
“ I don’t think so, Bill, I don’t dislike the work,” said the
other.
“No, perhaps not, with your pigeon’s eggs; hut I’m not
in luck, and I tell you what, I don’t see the fun at all of
working in these damp dismal holes at the dead of night, and
breaking one’s hack with the stooping, when there’s lots of
tents on the Flat with the nuggets ready cut and dried for
us.”
“Yes, that’s all very well, hut tent work’s a dangerous
game to play too often. There is sometimes as much lead as
gold to he got. You don’t always come across a rank coward
such as the one we strung up the other night.”
“ May he not, hut there’s generally a safe and sure way of
doing these things if a fellow only hides his time. Why, I’ve
made away or helped to make away with nine men since I
entered the profession, and stuck up and robbed about twenty
more, and I’ve never had a hall through me yet.”
“Nor been nabbed?”
“No, nor been nabbed; hut then I was never such a fool
as to hang my man with my best Sunday neck-tie, particularly
when it bore my tailor’s mark upon it.”
“Cuss you, Bill, hold your jaw about that neckercher.
’Twas a stupid piece of business I own, and I must go and
cut the fellow down to-night, and get possession of it again.
I don’t suppose any one has discovered the body yet, the
tent’s in such a lonely place.”
“No fear of that, the fellow might hang there for a month
of Sundays, and nobody would miss him. Moonlight Flat
ain’t the spot for neighbourly kindness and attention, I
reckon.”
“Nevertheless I’ll cut him down to-night; that booby at


the shanty with his Plymouth talk and his Uncle Channens
made me feel uncomfortable like.”
“Oh ! hang him, he’s a fool, he is. A new chum and no
mistake. I heard him jabbering away to you a good ’un, and
wondered how you could abide him so patiently. There’s
nothing to be feared from him.”
“ May be your right; at all events I’ve out every button off
my togs that answers to the name of Channens, so that if
the infernal neck-tie should attract attention they can’t bring
the matter home to me. I haven’t been three times imprisoned
and twice transported for nothing, mate.”
“ And it strikes me that you won’t be scragged for nothing
in the end. The mare with three legs* will never have
a more worthy rider than Spider-legged Bed the Night
Possicker.”
“Dang it, Bill, hold your jaw and turn the lantern this
way. I see the gleam of gold.”
During the whole of the preceding conversation the fellows
had not for a moment ceased from their labours, but from
their silence on the subject we concluded that they had not
had any finds. Now, however, we could hear them grunting
unqualified praises over the gleaming nuggets that their
fossicking knives had, without doubt, exposed to view, and
this excitement was shared by the sentinel above, for, relaxing
his vigilance, he lay down on his stomach and peered into
the hole to catch a glimpse of the glittering treasure. To
judge from his smothered ejaculations of “Oh my!” “By
George ! ” “ What beauties ! ” “ What sparklers ! ” his admira-
tion was unbounded, and so long did it continue that his
mates at length warned him angrily to return to his duty.
At length they resumed their labours, which they continued
for another hour, and then we observed them hand up a bag
to their companion on the surface, and clamber out of the
hole. When, after gazing cautiously around as though timid
of observation, they began to retrace their steps towards the
township.
Letting them get some distance the start of us, we emerged
from our ambuscade, and guided by the sound of their foot-
* Gallows.


steps more than hr seeing them, for heavy clouds had now
obscured the starlight and it was very dark, we managed with
great trouble and difficulty to keep on their trail. Instead of
making straight for the township, they skirted it, crossing
the most dangerous line of country for unfenced shafts and
deserted holes on the Flat. It was now with no little risk
that we kept on their track, for every moment we were in
danger of our lives; still, we managed it somehow.
We had proceeded in this manner about a mile or so, when
we heard a sharp cry from before us, and the unmistakable
sound of a heavy body falling down a deep pit, rebounding
from side to side in its descent, and at last plunging with a
hollow splash into water at the bottom.
We paused at once in our advance, for we knew that it
must he one of the night fossickers, whom, in the thick
darkness, had walked right into a hole.
The echo of footsteps in front ceased suddenly.
“By George, he must have fallen into the old Tolvadden
shaft, the deepest on the Flat. He’s as dead as a door nail
by this time, poor fellow,” remarked a voice, which I recog-
nised as Bill’s.
“ Yes, ’tis the Tolvadden shaft; and he must be dead, for
it’s nearly a hundred and fifty feet deep,” rejoined the other
of the two survivors, whom I knew to be Mr. Channens’
customer.
“ Tom ! Tom ! speak man if you are alive,” shouted Bill
down the hole.
“Fool! would you risk alarming the neighbourhood?”
hissed his comrade in his ear, pulling him away from the
shaft. “He has not got the bag of gold with him. Come
along with you.”
“ hied, I believe you pushed him in, by G— Ido ! ”
“ Dolt! idiot! Why should I push him in ? The man
never harmed me. I tell you he fell in by accident, and as he
is quite sure to be dead, come away. We can do no good to
him by staying here, and we risk our own safety.”
“ Well, if I thought he was dead I wouldn’t mind, but I
don’t like the idea of deserting a mate. Honour amongst
thieves, you know. ’
“He must be dead, I tell you. He Can’t he other than


dead. It would be more than a miracle if he had a spark of
life in him,” said Spider-legged Ned, impatiently, as he
forcibly dragged his companion away.
“ Come along, Coulson,” I whispered. “ That Ned's an
out-and-out scoundrel; but the poor fellow must be killed, and
our business this night is with the living more than the dead.”
The ground now became clearer, but still required wary
walking. The two fossickers strode on in silence, for stray
tents were now scattered around the neighbourhood. At
length, after about three quarters of a mile more had been
traversed, they came to a momentary halt, and then made
their way to a tent that stood about fifty yards in the rear of
two others. This they entered, and we immediately posted
ourselves on the outside, where, through a rent in the canvas,
we could observe all that passed within.
A light was soon struck, a tallow dip lighted and stuck in
an old bottle, which, for want of a table whereon to stand it,
was placed on the ground. My friend of the shanty then
fished a bottle of rum out of an obscure corner of the tent,
together with a broken wine-glass and a horn cup. Reserving
the latter for himself on account of its holding the largest
measure, Spider-legged Ned filled both to the brim, and
handing the wine-glass to his friend, said, “ A drop of this
will keep up your pecker, man; you look as crestfallen as if
you were going to be married t”
“Do I?” said Bill, drily. “Then you look as crestfallen
as if you were going to be hanged.”
“ Don’t fear, mate. The rope that’s to hang me has not been
woven; I shall cheat the gallows yet,” answered the other with
a laugh. “ But to work, Bill. We are losing precious time.
Let’s bury the gold, and then go and cut down the digger.”
“ All right, Ned —to work ! ”
Spider-legged Ned took a long dram out of the bottle on
the excuse that there was no time to stand upon ceremony,
and his companion was not slow in following his example.
Then Ned laid hands on his shovel, and began to dig a hole
wherein to deposit the stolen treasure.
“ Why not bury it in the same pit that we dug for the
nuggets that we shook from the tent last night, just under
that box, mate ?” asked Bill, as he lit his pipe.


“ Because there’s safety in scattering it,” was the reply.
“ Don’t you know that there are as great rascals as ourselves
on the Flat 1 Well, suppose some scamp was to discover us
one day burying gold; he might contrive to outwit us in
some way, sharp as we are, and then if all our earnings was
hid in one hole he’d just get the lot; but if we bury what
we get every time in a fresh place, he would only discover one
nest egg, and the other would be safe. Then these traps,
too ”
“Dang the traps. Don’t start that subject, because I
don’t like it. Thank heaven there are none of them idle,
prying, mischief-making fellows on this Flat; if there was,
I should soon make myself scarce. Just get on with your
work, Ned; it’s two o’clock in the morning.”
Ned readily complied, and dug away for very life. When
he had reached a depth of about a couple of feet, the bag of
nuggets was dropped in, the hole filled up, the earth trodden
down, and an old sack thrown carelessly over the spot until
the ground should resume its usual aspect.
The rum bottle was now again had recourse to, and pretty
nearly polished off, and then the two worthies prepared to
set out for the tent of the digger whom they had plundered
and thought they had murdered the night before, with the
intention of cutting him down, in order to recover the neck-
tie whose buttons Spider-legged Ned feared might possibly
prove troublesome to him.
“ I daresay you think me a fool, Bill,” he said, as though
to apologize for a feeling which his mate might consider
childish and fidgetty, “ but when you have studied the world
and literature as I have done, particularly the ‘ Police
Gazette’ and ‘Newgate Calendar,’ you will be aware that
trifles often lead to great discoveries.”
“Perhaps so; perhaps so, Ned. These nice calculations
ain’t much in my line, but there was always a spark of the
lawyer in you, so if you must do the thing why come and
do it.”
“All right, man; but can’t you lend me a spare hand-
kercher, it’s a bitter cold morning, and I’ve got a sore throat;
anything will do that keeps the wind out and the warmth
in,” said Spider-legged Ned, coughing.


“No ; I can’t. I don’t wear such nick-nacks, and I don’t
keep them to lend to my friends. lor heaven’s sake don’t
he so old womanish, hut come along,” replied Bill, testily.
“Follow me, Coulson, quickly; the moment has come,” I
whispered to my comrade ; and creeping round to the tent
door, I entered, and taking the identical scarf from my
pocket, held it towards Master Med, exclaiming, “My
countryman from Plymouth is very welcome to wear a scarf
of my Uncle Channens if his throat is sore, and he will
accept of the loan.”
Spider-legged Med recognised both me and the neckerchief
in a minute. I saw his cheek pale and his lip quiver, hut he
recovered his pluck almost instantly, and stammered, “ Who
the fury are you and your Uncle Channens ? What brings
you here 1 And whose old cravat is that in your hand ?”
“ I will answer your questions backwards, sir,” I answered,
sternly. “ The cravat is your own, and it is the one with
which you hung a digger named John Ivy. Channens is the
name of the outfitter in Plymouth where you bought that
cravat. My name is James Brooke. I am a detective
officer. And lastly, my business here is to arrest you on the
charges of robbery with violence, and as being an escaped
convict from Western Australia.”
“ Take that for your trouble, trap,” cried a voice close by
me, and I saw Med’s mate covering me with his revolver, but
before he could pull the trigger Coulson rushed in, and with
one blow sent him head over heels to the other end of the
tent, where, springing upon him before he could recover him-
self, he wrenched away his weapon, and clapped the darbies
on him in a trice.
Meanwhile, however, I was having a desperate tussle with
Spider-legged Med, who made an effort to rush past me and
escape, but I caught him a blow on his chin that sent him
reeling. I didn’t like to fire my revolver, as Government
discountenanced the use of firearms if a capture could pos-
sibly be effected without; and a week previously one of the
mounted troopers had been discharged from the service and
imprisoned for being too ready with his pistols.
Med came to the scratch again in a minute. He dared not
draw his own weapon, for it was covered by his jumper, and


he knew that before he could handle it I could shoot him
down, so he suddenly lowered his head and made a butt at
me, as a hull would do, a style of fighting much in vogue
amongst the niggers of the West Indies. He calculated,
doubtless, that I should jump on one side, and that thus he
could dart by me and out of the tent. But he calculated
without his host, for I tripped him up as he passed, and then
stunned him with a blow on the head from the stock of my
pistol, after which I handcuffed him.
For fear of a riot amongst the rowdies, we at once marched
the prisoners out of the camp, which, by the time the first
streaks of daylight showed themselves in the east, was four
miles in our rear. By eleven o’clock we reached an out-
station of the mounted police : the two fossickers were
thrown into different cells, and the next morning brought
before two justices of the peace, who, upon our united evi-
dence, and that of John Ivy the plundered digger, who
swore that Spider-legged Hed was the man who had held the
conversation with him at his hole the preceding Saturday
morning, and closely answered the appearance and possessed
a similar voice to the man who had prompted the others to
hang him the same evening, they were both committed to
stand their trial at the ensuing criminal sessions at Mel-
bourne.
John Ivy recovered the gold stolen from his tent, as well
as that subsequently plundered from his claim, for we had
heard the fellows confess where the former had been se-
creted, and beheld the latter buried. The rascal, too, who
had fallen down the shaft, was not killed by the fall, hut
was hauled out of the pit the following day by some miners
who happened to he passing the Tolvadden claim, and heard
his cries for help. Spider-legged Ned had pushed him in,
doubtless, to save sharing the plundered gold with him;
and Tom Jude, for such was the man’s name, was so enraged
against his treacherous mate, that he turned Queen’s evi-
dence, and disclosed every iniquity that this trio of ruffians
had committed on the diggings.
Without his assistance our links of evidence were so
complete that we should have been sure of a conviction on
at least three charges. But Tom Jude’s testimony disclosed


even more serious crimes. Three murders against Spider-
legged Ned, or, as he was called in the indictment, Edward
Barton, alias Edward Brunton, alias Thomas Dunn, alias
Michael Dimealy, and two murders and sundry other crimes
against his comrade Bill, or William Hagarty, the result of
which was that they were condemned to death, and were
duly executed at the Central Gaol, Melbourne, about three
weeks or a month later.


THE SALTED CLAIMS.
One day during my stay at a gold-field called the Galunga
Diggings, I was walking leisurely down a gully, when I
heard a lusty hurrahing at a neighbouring hole, and per-
ceived a digger with whom I was acquainted by sight run-
ning towards me. A moment later he stood breathless at
my side, and invited me to go and see a nugget nearly as big
as his finger. No nuggets had yet been found close on that
spot, but only small gold, so the discovery seemed to me
rather surprising. I hastened on, however, but before I
could gain the spot I heard a man say, “ Well, I have sold
the nugget and my hole for five pounds fifteen.”
“ Where is the nugget 1” I asked.
“ Oh ! ” said he, “ the man who bought it has gone off with
it.”
Now I found out that there really was a nugget, but I also
conjectured that it had first been put in by this fellow, an
old Bendigo digger, in order to sell his hole. The nugget
was probably worth half the purchase money, and the hood-
winked buyer of the hole might dig on with ardour hut would
soon come down to the rock, and scarcely a particle of gold
reward his pains.
This trick for getting rid of a worthless hole is called
salting a claim..
In order to enable my readers, or such of them as have not
worked at the diggings, better to understand this tale, I will
relate some of the circumstances under which gold is gene-
rally found.
At the surface-diggings the gold is discovered lying on the


very top to the depth of from six to fourteen inches, and some-
times still deeper. These diggings have always been on the face
or side of a hill, and generally such a hill faces east or south-
east. It is found in all sorts of earth, excepting the black
alluvial soil, in or amongst gravelly earth, and small quartz,
or iivhard, marly clay. The average yield of this sort of
diggings is about an ounce of gold to a cart-load of earth, and
three men with a cradle can dig up and wash six or seven
loads a day. It was at this kind of diggings that a party of
three, whom I knew, obtained in eleven days 37 oz. 2 dwts.
each. But some of the surface-diggings yield much more.
In some particular spots parties of three or four have obtained
300, 400, and 500, even in one instance 800 ounces in two or
three days ; but taking them all together they yield about an
ounce to a load of earth. In sinking, the deepest of the holes
might be eighteen or twenty feet, certainly not deeper ; and
the shallowest two, three, and four feet, so that the average
would be about eight or ten feet. As they keep sinking they
try a dishful of the earth occasionally until they find that it will
pay for washing. They frequently find a few particles from
within a couple of feet from the top, but they in general have
to go within a foot of the rock before they find it to pay them;
it is then found sometimes in a hard, marly substance. The
rocks are mostly blue or grey slate, and in general covered
with a few inches of tough clay, in which gold is seldom or
ever found. But on the top of the clay a bed of small gravel
is found in which gold most abounds, the nuggets and larger
pieces being often discovered in this gravel.
How the nugget which the fraudulent digger had pretended
to discover in order to get rid of his hole, he stated he had
found in this lower stratum of clay ; a very improbable thing
in itself, but it was still more improbable that, having made
such a discovery, he would be willing to sell his hole without
making further search, for so small a sum as five pounds
fifteen, or rather two pounds seventeen, after deducting the
value of the nugget.
“ I must keep my eye upon that fellow,” I thought to
myself; but as the affair would only amount to a misde-
meanour, even if he was convicted on the charge, and the


result be merely a few months’ imprisonment at the most, I
didn’t trouble myself much about it; thinking that Mr.
James Donnithorne would be sure to put his foot deeper into
the mire before long, and consequently be a fatter prize for
capturing.
It was about a fortnight after the transfer of the salted
claim that I came across Donnithorne’s victim. He was a
young man of scarcely twenty-five years of age. He must
once have been handsome, but now his face had grown very
haggard and thin, his cheekbones become unduly prominent,
and his face of nearly the colour of old parchment. It was
on the evening of the day upon which he had deserted his
hole, upon proving it to be a duffer,* and I don’t think I ever
saw a fellow look so cut up in my life. I soon managed to
make his acquaintance, and then discovered that he was quite
a new chum, and that this was the first claim he had ever
worked ; in fact he bad only been in the colony about three
months, and on the diggings as many weeks.
I asked him to come to Poole’s shanty and do a chop and
a nobbier with me, an invitation he readily accepted, and as
it was early in the day we got a room all to ourselves, where,
chops and etceteras disposed of, my new acquaintance became
communicative, and I had no great difficulty in getting him
to narrate his history, which ran, as nearly as I remember, as
follows :
“My name is John Tucker. I was bom at Marazion, a
small town or rather village in the extreme west of England,
situated on the shores of Mount’s Bay, My father was a
fisherman, an honest man and an upright, but from early
boyhood I aspired to a higher position than that to which he
had attained. My education in the village school did not
content me. My natural talent, my steadiness of character,
and my earnest desire to rise in the world, interested the
clergyman of the parish in my favour. He offered to aid
my views by giving me lessons in Euclid, mathematics and
natural science. I eagerly accepted his offer, and I have
every reason to believe that I did justice to the efforts of my
* 'Worthless one.


kind teacher, for I learnt quickly, and what is more I re-
membered what I learnt. I determined to make for myself
a name, and as I had a passionate longing to he a sailor, I
bound myself an apprentice on board a merchantman.
“ During the first year or two of my apprenticeship I spent
every leisure moment in study, and in order to buy the neces-
sary books I became a teetotaller, and in their purchase spent
the money which else had been squandered in the public-
house. At the age of twenty-one I was second mate, at
twenty-three I passed my examination as first mate, and now
at no long period of time ahead I saw a mastership in per-
spective. At this period of my life I fell in love with a very
beautiful girl some eight years my junior. My love was
more madness than anything else, as first love generally is.
However, the young lady favoured my advances with en-
couragement, and within a month we were engaged, the
marriage being appointed to come otf directly I obtained the
rank of master, which I hoped to do in some twelve or
thirteen months time. A few weeks after my engagement
I went to sea again, but only for a short voyage, and
when I returned my lady love seemed as glad as ever to see
me, and exhibited every demonstration of constancy and
devotion. Well, I couldn’t stay at home long, much as I
desired to do so. I was suddenly recalled to my ship, which
was lying at Liverpool, and a week later we were on the wide
sea again, bound for the Greek ports with a cargo of miscel-
laneous merchandise, or, as the Yankees would term it,
‘notions.’ We made a prosperous run, discharged cargo at
Corfu and at some of the neighbouring islands, and reloaded
with wines, preserved fruits, oil, &c., with which we ran home
in about six weeks. Again Liverpool was our port, and no
sooner had we been warped alongside the wharf than I
obtained a week’s leave, and went down by rail to Plymouth,
whither Eva Field, m j fiancee, had been taken by her mother
for the benefit of her health, it being feared that she was
consumptive. I had not received a letter from her for a long
time, although she knew well the ports at which our vessel
would touch, and had promised to send a letter to each
one consecutively to await my arrival. Only one of these


promised epistles liad come to hand, and that was a very
short note, and anything hut a comforting one. I knew that
she was very variable in temperament, passionate, suspicious,
and jealous, so I did not think very deeply of all this, con-
cluding that half an hour’s conversation would set all right
again; and as in a fortnight’s time I meant to go in for my
examination for master, I trusted that she would marry me
off hand, spend the honeymoon in Liverpool, and take the
first voyage with me in the vessel I should he appointed to.
All these fine hopes were destined to he crushed, and that
speedily. I had great difficulty in finding Eva’s where-
abouts, hut at last —more by chance than otherwise —dis-
covered that, with her mother and sisters, she occupied
apartments in Union Street; in fact it was through seeing
one of her sisters looking out of a first-floor window as I
passed along that I did find it out at all. I was asked to
walk in, and met with a kind reception, hut Eva I —l looked
for her in vain.
“‘Where is Eva?’ I asked; and the answer I received
made my brain whirl and my heart nearly burst with grief
and passion. The mother told me ‘ that Eva had grown very
intimate with a young surgeon who lived a little way down
the street: that she visited him daily, in defiance of her
commands to the contrary, and that she feared he had not
only alienated her affection from her parents, but won her
love from me.’
“ I happened to know this young fellow. I had been
acquainted with him for a long time, and was aware that he
bore the reputation of being tolerably steady, and of fair
moral character. I knew also that he had known Eva for
some years, and had always been on speaking terms with her,
so I did not fancy that matters were so far gone as Mrs. Field
had represented them to be. I said I would walk down Union
Street to his house, and let her see that I had returned, and
this I accordingly did at once. It was only a five minutes’
stroll, so I was presently knocking at his door. Eva must
have seen me pass, for she answered the door herself. ..She
was very pale, and greeted me very coldly; called me
‘ Tucker,’ and told me to wait in the doorway while she


went in and put on her hat and shawl. She was about five
minutes doing this, and I heard a tittering inside which I
have no doubt was at my expense. At last she came out,
and said ‘ that Mr. Smith had told her to ask me in, hut
that she had made an excuse for me because I had my rough
sailors’ clothes on.’ I made no reply, and we walked home
together; but no sooner had we got into her mother’s sitting-
room than she commenced upbraiding me in the most hitter
manner for things whereof I was perfectly guiltless, and
demanded a return of all the letters she had written me, and
that I would consider our engagement at an end.
“My passion was now aroused, for I had loved the girl
truly and devotedly, and this treatment pierced me to the
heart. I threw the letters she had written me —and which
until now I had kept in a pocket next my heart —into the
fire, and watched the flames consume them with a feeling of
savage glee. Then I turned towards her, pointed to the
quivering ashes, and without a word, quitted the house. I
was too proud to call next day and try to make my peace,
which I believe I should have succeeded in doing, but by the
first train in the morning went down to Marazion on a visit
to my father and mother.
“ Three days later I saw in The Cornish Telegraph an
announcement of the marriage of Eva Field to John Smith,
and then I regretted my precipitation, and that 1 had not
made some overtures towards a reconciliation ere it was too
late. I learnt about a week later, from a relative of the
bride’s, that she had only married to spite me, and for the
reason that she believed I had been leading a gay life in
Liverpool. I was more riled than ever with her upon
hearing this, and fancying from what I heard, that though
married she loved me still, and more to avenge myself than
for any other reason, returned to Liverpool, and, like an idiot
that I was, got married in less than a week to a girl whom I
had never known before.
“ Well, after this all my chance of passing for master was
gone. My capabilities for study vanished. I took to hard
drinking, and in my next voyage, owing to being drunk
on watch, I got the ship on the rocks, where she became a


total wreck, though, happily, no lives were lost. Of course,
all hopes of promotion were up after that. I took a hatred
to the sea ; and haying received a letter from my brother
some time previously, narrating how well he was doing in
Australia, I resolved to come out with my wife and child.
“ After a three months’ voyage, we dropt anchor in Port
Phillip Bay, landed the next morning, and went to the
address mentioned in my brother’s letter. Imagine my sur-
prise upon learning that this brother, whom we at home
thought was doing so well, had become bankrupt (he was a
saddler by trade), and gone nobody knew whither. Neither
I nor my wife knew another soul in the colony, and we had
only twenty pounds in our pockets. Out of that money we
bought a tent, pick, shovel, and other camp requisites, and
set out for the diggings. When we arrived here I had but
six pounds in my pocket, and while looking about me the
day after, I was fool enough to credit that d d cheat
Donnithorne, and give him five pounds fifteen for a hole
not worth a straw.”
* * * * * *
I saw that the poor fellow was actually desponding; he
had but sixpence in the world, his wife was prostrated with
Colonial fever, and, in short, he was in as unpleasant a
quandary as ever fell to the lot of a new arrival on a gold
field. I was really sorry for him, but what could Ido ? I
could only give him plenty of sympathy, which I did, and
also promised to use every endeavour to bring to justice the
scamp who had sold him the salted claim. Urging him by
all means to avoid meeting the fellow and taking the law
into his own hands, which, from his violent denunciations
and threats I feared he intended to do. After a second and
third nobbier, however, my new acquaintance cooled down,
and soon after took his leave.
Now when I had been first shown the nugget with which
the fraudulent digger had salted his claim, I felt convinced
that he had never found it in the hole from which he pre-
tended to have dug it. This hole lay where a watercourse
had once been, and I was sufficiently a miner to know that
gold found in the watercourses, or in those places where


watercourses formerly existed, is always more or less smooth
and water-worn. This nugget, however, was a rough, nuhhly
one, such an one in fact as would he found in a hole on the
side of a hill, in what is known as a surface digging, where
gold is invariably of the roughest kind, as having been least
exposed to friction, never having been in a watercourse.
I believe this fact alone would have been sufficient where-
on to convict the fellow, but my plan was always to make
things doubly sure, and I determined to wait a while, and, if
possible, catch my man in some piece of rascality that I
could bring more directly home to him. I conjectured that
he would soon mark out another claim, and that if after a
week or two’s digging he found nothing in it, he would salt
it as he had done the last, and try to get rid of it in the
same manner.
I soon contrived to introduce myself to the fellow, for
etiquette at the diggings is somewhat lax, and before long
ingratiated myself into his confidence.
He was a stout, broad-chested fellow of about forty; none
of your brutal-looking roughs, but bearing the cringing ser-
vility of a petty tradesman, united with the foppish impu-
dence of a town swell. His face was smooth shaven, a rare
thing at the diggings ; and this, aided by a pair of silver-
rimmed spectacles, gave him somewhat the appearance of a
dissenting minister; but there was a snakey glitter in his
small, twinkling, steel-grey eyes, that betokened cunning and
deceit as plainly as though the words were written on his
narrow, contracted forehead. He was generally dressed in a
seedy suit of black, plentifully clay bedaubed, and said his
name was Donnithorne, though his general cognomen amongst
the diggers was “Sexton,” often qualified by an adjective
more forcible than elegant to ears polite. In nature he
seemed decidedly genial, had a word for everybody, and was
ready to take a drink with any one, though I must confess
that I never saw him stand anything in return. It was this
amiable little weakness of his that enabled me so easily to
gain his friendship ; and as whenever I met him I offered to
shout, I had numerous opportunities of studying his cha-
racter, and of pumping him with advantage.


It was about a month after the imbibing of our first
friendly nobbier that I one day met Jimmy Donnithorne in
the street of the township. A pretty spectacle he presented.
His left leg was bandaged up, his right arm was in a sling,
and his face looked at least a yard longer than usual, which
is saying a good deal. He walked with a crutch, and his
old blackened tin billy hung from his belt.
“Why, Jimmy, what the deuce is up?” I exclaimed, upon
meeting him in this plight.
“ Oh, Mr. Brooke, a sad accident. ‘Man proposes, but God
disposes,’ you know. Here am I with a crushed foot and a
broken arm, just as I had a stroke of luck too. Oh dear !
oh dear! ”
I strove to the best of my power to soothe the sufferer,
and assisted him into a neighbouring shanty, where I got
him into a private room at the back, ordered brandies hot
for two, and pressed him to narrate his adventures.
“Ah, Mr. Brooke, it’s an unlucky man I am. Here I’m
laid up for a good six mouths, and the most splendid hole I
ever worked lost to me. Alas ! what shall I do?” And he
groaned aloud in his distress.
“How did you meet with such an accident?” I asked.
“ The earth fell in, man. I suppose the ground was
loosened by the rains, and I had neglected to prop up the
sides of the hole. ’Twas a wonder that I was not killed on
the spot, or else buried alive beneath the refuse, it was indeed.
As it happened, I was just able to limp out of the shaft
and crawl to the doctor, who, as you know, lives close by, and
he says that I shall be unfit for work for at least six months.”
“ ’Pon my honour, Jimmy, I’m very sorry,” I remarked,
assuming an expression of commiseration.
“ Sorry! I’m mad, my friend. But it’s the loss of the
precious gold that grieves me, even more than does the bodily
pains. Such a find ! Oh, what an unlucky dog lam ! ”
“ I don’t exactly understand you, Jimmy,” said I.
The wounded digger cast upon me a glance of pity, doubt-
less at my stupidity, and screwing round his head over his
left shoulder, winked his left eye, and muttered, “ Look in
my billy, mate; that’ll answer you.”


I raised the lid as desired, and saw at the bottom of the
billy eight or nine nuggets of gold.
“ Take ’em up and look at ’em,” said Jimmy.
I readily did so. They were nuggets, sure enough. The
largest was about the size of a walnut, the smallest some-
what bigger than a broad bean.
“ Mate, you’re in luck,” I observed, replacing the bits of
gold at the bottom of the billy.
“Luck do you call it?” he growled. “Why, I had just
discovered a pocketful of golden nuggets, some as big as
little pears, but I’d only just picked up these haphazard from
the lot when the earth fell in and buried it all again, nearly
killing me into the bargain.”
“ What a pity you are so badly hurt, Donnithorne. You
must look out for a mate now, and divide all finds with
him,” I said.
“Mate? Not I! lam so badly hurt that I must man-
age to get to town and have more skilful medical attendance
than that of the drunken stupid doctor here. I must try
and sell my hole, that’s what I must do. A mate might roh
me whilst I was away.”
“And what would you take for the hole ?”
“ A hundred and fifty pounds down on the nail, and not a
penny less. There is more than that amount of gold in the
pocket from which I got this. It would not take a week to
shovel out the landslip.”
I began to smell a rat. I had suspicions that Master
Jimmy was acting a part with me, but I replied innocently,
“Well, Donnithorne, perhaps that would be your best plan.
I would buy your claim myself had I but the blunt to do so;
as it is, however, I will, if you will lend me one of the smallest
of your nuggets, try and get you a purchaser, you giving me
five per cent, on the purchase money if I introduce a deal.”
“ Done, mate,” responded the digger, grasping my hand.
“You see I’m unable to move about much, and so might
miss a chance of a good bargain. Take one of the nuggets,
big or little, and then just help me into the bar, for I might
do a stroke of business with a stray customer of Mother
Reece’s.”


I did as lie requested, selected the second largest nugget
amongst Ms selection, transferred it to my pocket, helped
him on to his feet, or rather his foot and crutch, amidst
many groans and contortions of countenance, as though the
movement caused him acute anguish, and then assisted him
into the bar, where I propped him up against the counter,
ordered a drink of brandy hot, which I placed before him,
and then bade him good day and quitted the shanty. As I
sauntered down the street I could hear Ms shrill cracked
voice re-spinning his yarn to two sturdy diggers who had
dropped into the “Eose and Crown” for their morning
nobbier.
Before returning to my tent I entered another shanty in
order to get a snack of lunch. As I walked into the bar the
mail coach from Melbourne rattled up, and hastily securing
a copy of The Argm, I threw myself into a chair, and was
soon quickly devouring its contents. The English mail had
just arrived, so that the paper was full of home news, and in
a few minutes I was so thoroughly engrossed in the still
damp broadsheet, as completely to have forgotten the exis-
tence of Jimmy Donnithorne and his nuggets to boot.
Suddenly, however, both were recalled to my mind as my
eye rested on the following paragraph:—
“Birmingham Fraud on our Victorian Gold Fields.—
We are in receipt of advice that spurious nuggets and gold
dust are being extensively manufactured in Birmingham, for
Australian consignees, either to he sold to gold buyers, or else
for the purpose of ‘peppering ’ or ‘ salting ’ claims for fra-
dulent sale on the diggings. Some of this spurious metal
arrived by the ‘ Marco Poloon Thursday last; and a box
full was captured by the police. The strongest acids have been
applied, hut the metal was so well and strongly gilded as to
resist the teds ordinarily applied. We were present at Mr.
John Cohen’s gold sale yesterday, and saw some of this ficti-
tious compound of the form of shot, in which shape the gold
is found icith a slight pellicle hanging to it; but it was agreed
upon by all present that the imitation was most ingeniously
contrived, and when acids were applied by Mr. Hall, a jeweller
and purchaser for the banlcs, the metal was not to be acted


upon. The extent to which this nefarious trade is being car-
ried on between Birmingham and the Colonies, and with what
degree of success, is unknown, and will remain so until our
next advices from England are received. The loss to some
will, no doubt, be a very serious matter. This is not a very
creditable affair for the workshop of the ivorld to be connected
with, hut several other frauds are at present being perpetrated
in connection with the gold deposits and gold dealing; one of
a much more serious character is the following, viz.;—The
adulteration of gold with twenty per cent, of copper, or as
it was stated in evidence at the Police Court in Bendigo on
Wednesday last, with Muntz metal.”
I had no sooner concluded the perusal of this paragraph,
than I felt a firm conviction that worthy Jimmy Donnithorne’s
nuggets were no other than spurious Birmingham compound,
that his having found them in his hole was all a hoax, and
that his smashed foot and broken arm was a trick got up to
enable him to sell a worthless claim at a high price. lat
once started for my tent, where I subjected the little nugget
in my possession to nitric acid, and then to aquafortis, but
to my chagrin it defied both tests. I was, however, un-
changed in my impression by this, and I determined that
very day to start for Melbourne, and submit it to the most
skilful chemists in the city; when, if its worthlessness was
discoverable, I would obtain a warrant and return and arrest
Mr. Donnithorne at once.
First of all, I resolved to call on the doctor to whose sur-
gery Donnithorne said he had crawled after his accident. I
did so, and found the surgeon at home. Upon asking him
whether upon a certain night a man with a smashed foot and
a broken arm had called upon him, he told me point blank
that he had not attended a patient for either kind of accident
for more than a month, and that on the night in question the
only person who had sought his medical assistance was a
woman to have a tooth extracted. I therefore hade him good-
day, begging him not to tell any one of my visit, and once more
bent my steps homewards, if my little shabby tent on the bleak
hillside could he called home.
On my road I had to pass down the street of the township,


and when I had nearly reached the further end, I met a man
walking wildly along, his hat crushed over his eyes, his step
irregular, his face pale and haggard as that of a dying man.
By the bright moonlight I recognised John Tucker, the
digger who had purchased Donnithorne’s duifer claim for
£5 las., the day after his arrival on the Flat.
“Why, Tucker, what’s the matter?” I asked, laying a
hand on his arm as he was about to pass me.
The man started, and his face flushed for a moment, then
he said, “ Oh ! it is you, Mr. Brooke.”
“Yes, it is I; hut you —why, bless my heart, I scarcely
knew you.”
“Ah ! no wonder—no wonder,” he murmured abstractedly.
“What, still out of luck? You look regularly down in
the mouth,” I said.
“ Out of work? Yes, and far worse than that: my wife
died last night, died of starvation, and I am now looking for
her murderer.”
“I am sorry to hear that, very sorry. But, starvation:
how did that happen ? Surely you could have got work
somewhere.”
“ I tried—l tried, Mr. Brooke. I kept working at that
cursed hole of Donnithorne’s till I got to my last sixpence.
Then I tried to get employment from some one else, hut I
tramped over the diggings day after day without success, no-
body would give me a job. I would have left the field, for
I could have got plenty of work, at high wages, anywhere in
the country; but, by this time, my wife was stricken down
with Colonial fever, and could not he moved. I dared not
leave her alone in such a place, so still kept looking, hoping,
praying for work on the Flat. Well, I never got it, my wife
sank day by day, the doctor who attended her gratuitously
said that she was dying from want of proper nourishment;
last night, at eleven o’clock, she breathed her last. And
now, as I said before, I am looking for her murderer.”
“ Whom you consider to he Donnithorne ? ” I observed.
He nodded assent.
“And what do you mean to do by him?”
“ Shoot him down as I would a dog. Don’t I owe all my


misery to him 1 Didn’t lie cheat me of my money 1 But
for him my wife would not have died, I should not now
perhaps he a heggar. Ho, no, I’ve sworn to shoot him, and
I will.”
“ Nonsense, Tucker; hy that course you will peril your
own life. It is not worth while to he sent to the gallows for
the mere pleasure of killing such a fellow as Donnithorne.
Let the law claim him. If you will promise to forego your
revenge for three days, I will promise that by that time he
shall he in a prison.”
“Ho, no; I cannot forego my revenge; his punishment
must he awarded by my hand,” muttered the digger between
his teeth.
“ If such is your resolve, I must arrest you,” making a step
towards him.
Tucker started, “ You arrest me. Who are you, then 1 ”
“ James Brooke, of the detective force.”
“ Are you in earnest V’ he asked.
“ I am,” I rejoined, sternly.
“ Then I promise,” he said, with a sigh.
“ To prove you are not prevaricating, just lend me that
revolver for a few days,” I said; for I had caught sight of the
stock of a “ Colts ” sticking out of his pocket.
He essayed to make some excuse, but I was firm, and he
gave the weapon up.
“ How, old fellow, cheer up ; one day you will thank
heaven that I was the means of frustrating your plans this
morning,” and without another word I left him and soon
gained my tent.
Early the following morning I w’as up and preparing for
my departure. I walked away from the Flat on foot, and
then struck into the high road and slackened my pace. In
a quarter of an hour or so Cobh’s mail coach overtook me. I
managed to get a seat on the box, and after a pleasant drive
of some nine hours we reached Melbourne.
It was too late to transact any business that day, so I went
to the theatre and enjoyed myself. Early next forenoon I
set to business. I first called on Mr. Hall, the jeweller, and
purchaser of gold for the hanks, whose name occurred in


the paragraph in The Argus that had struck my attention a
couple of days previously. He tested my nugget, and after
taking no small amount of trouble, to my great delight, found
it to be a spurious one.
I took down his depositions to that effect, and then hurried
to a police magistrate, from whom I procured a warrant to
arrest James Donnithorne, on the charge of “ obtaining
money under false pretencesand armed with this authority,
I secured a seat in the evening coach, and in a few hours was
being whirled back to the Galunga Flat.
After a journey which occupied the whole night, we
arrived at our, or rather my, destination, for the coach only
dropt me in passing.
The sun was just rising over the distant mountain peaks
when I reached home. It was five o’clock. I lit my fire,
filled my billy with water, and manufactured some damper.
Then while it was baking I lit my pipe, and seating myself
on a log outside, puffed away in happy contentment, and
admired the beauty of the landscape.
Suddenly I observed a man walking rapidly along the flat
in an easterly direction. It was rather an early hour for a
digger to be astir, but that fact alone did not fix my atten-
tion, for though he was too far distant for me to distinguish
his features, I knew by his long, irregular stride and gaunt
figure, that it was John Tucker.
Another fact that I immediately became aware of was that
he was crossing the flat in the direction of Donnithorne’s
tent. This discovery, however, did not cause me any uneasi-
ness. Strange to say, I trusted the fellow’s promise, and
concluded that even if he did break it, that as I had his
revolver, and knew he could not afford to buy another, the
assault would be a mere matter of fisticuffs, from which
much mischief was not likely to result, so I patiently waited
until my breakfast was ready, made a hearty meal, and then
set out for the purpose of arresting my man.
It was about a mile to his tent from my own, and as it was
even now only six o’clock, I depended upon capturing him
before he was out of bed, for it would be inconsistent with
his reputed broken and crushed limbs to be up with the lark.


I therefore sauntered leisurely along, enjoying the beauty of
the morning and the deliciously cool southern breeze, until
■within a couple of hundred yards of my destination, when I
heard the noise of two men in angry altercation. The sounds
came, without a doubt, from the interior of Donnithome’s
tent. Furious oaths and bitter names, then the dull sound
of blows, and presently the whole structure shook as though
some one had been violently hurled against the ridge pole.
I now hastened my steps, feeling as I ran on whether my
revolver and handcuffs were handy to be got at; but before I
could gain the tent, two figures reeled out of it. They were
both of them looked in each other’s grasp, and I recognised
at a glance that the combatants were John Tucker and James
Donnithorne. The face of the former resembled that of a
demon, so disfigured was it by rage and hatred; the latter,
no longer a cripple, was, with his disengaged arm (the broken
one, by-the-bye), raining a shower of blows on his adversary’s
head and shoulders, which seemed to be no more regarded
than if each of them was a descending feather.
“ Stop, mate,” I shouted, “ that man is my prisoner! ”
Neither of them heard my words, but continued to writhe,
twist, and struggle in their close embrace like two interlaced
boa-constrictors. I made no attempt to separate them, but
waited until the struggle was over, which I concluded would
be as soon as one of the parties was thrown. At length
Jimmy Donnithorne seemed to be getting the better of his
more fragile antagonist, whose breathing was becoming short
and gasping, and whose muscles were beginning to fail him.
A sneer curled Donnithorne’s lip as he noticed these indica-
tions of failing strength ; he ceased to grapple his assailant,
but with an adroit jerk freed his arms for a moment, and
then, like lightning, caught him with both his brawny hands
by the throat, which he grasped with such iron pressure that
Tucker’s face began to grow purple, while his eyes seemed to
be starting from their sockets. I now thought it time to in-
terfere, and sprang towards Donnithorne to drag him from
his half-strangled foe, but ere I could effect this, Tucker
had drawn a knife and stabbed Donnithorne twice in the
back.


The latter immediately relaxed his grasp, and muttering,
“ Oh, my God, I am done for !” fell heavily to the ground.
“ What have you done ? You have killed him,” I said,
as I raised the wounded man’s head.
The digger did not seem to hear my words, his gaze was
riveted with an expression of fiendish hate on the counte-
nance of the dying man. He folded his arms on his chest
and said, calmly, “ My poor wife is avenged.”
I now hastened to examine Donnithorne’s wounds. A
moment’s inspection told me that he had only a few minutes
to live. The knife had been plunged into his body up to its
haft at each stab ; the blood was flowing in torrents, and had
already formed a pool around him.
“ I will summon aid to carry you to the doctor’s,” I said.
“ Ho, no, let me die here, I can hut live for a few minutes,”
he said, faintly.
I saw that to insist upon moving him would he needless
cruelty, hut I bandaged up his wounds in order to keep body
and soul together as long as possible, and then asked him if
there was anything he would like done after his death.
He seemed to consider for a moment or two, and then
looking me in the face, he for the first time recognised me.
A puzzled expression crossed his countenance as he said, “ I
thought that some one called out just now that I was a
prisoner. Was it so?”
“ Yes, I said so as I came up. lam a police officer. The
nugget you gave me the other day I took to Melbourne to he
tested ; it was found to he spurious, so I obtained a warrant,
which I have now in my pocket, for your arrest. But you
will presently he before a more mighty, and, I trust, a more
merciful tribunal than a police court.”
The dying man shuddered, then his glance fell on John
Tucker, who still stood in the same attitude, with his stem,
remorseless gaze fixed on his victim.
“ Who are you and why sought you this meeting ?” asked
the dying man, who had evidently forgotten the digger’s
countenance.
“ Who am 7, rascal ? why, I am the man you cheated out
of his every penny in return for a worthless claim; who owes


his own ruin and his wife’s death to you. If you would know
the name of the man who has wreaked a righteous judgment
on you, it is John Tucker.”
“ Who 1 who ?” cried the dying man, raising himself upon
his elhow and gazing wildly at his assassin’s face. “ Say that
name again, it cannot he possible !”
“What can’t he possible?” muttered the other. “If you
mean my name, why, it is possible, for I am John Tucker !”
“My God! then you are my brother ,” ejaculated the other.
“ My name is Tom Tucker, and my native town is Marazion in
Cornwall;” and as he uttered the last word he fell hack on
the blood-sodden turf a corpse.
A terrible change overspread the countenance of the mur-
derer; the expression of hatred and gratified vengeance that
had been imprinted on every feature passed away, and with
a look of unutterable agony and despair he flung himself on
his knees before the corpse, and with trembling fingers un-
fastened a long hair guard that encircled the dead man’s
throat. To the end of this chain was attached a large gold-
plated locket. The wretched man opened it, and exclaiming,
“It’s my mother’s portrait; his words are true then, and I
am a second Cain,” he fell hack insensible.
By this time we had a small crowd around us. Two or three
sturdy diggers, by my directions, carried the corpse to the
doctor’s, for the purpose of a post-mortem examination;
though, of course, such a proceeding would he a mere matter
of form.
I now turned my attention to the unconscious assassin,
who in about ten minutes began to show signs of returning
reason. When he had fully regained his senses I clapped
the handcuffs on him, and took him to my own tent. He
was very quiet and docile, his spirit seemed to he completely
crushed. When we got to the tent he asked for a drink of
water, and after he had drunk it he said impressively, “ I
should have thanked Heaven if I had taken your advice the
other day, Mr Brooke.”
I made no reply. What consolation could I give under
such circumstances 1
The finding on the inquest was, of course, one of “ wilful


murder,” and that same evening I started with my prisoner
for Melbourne.
He was not very communicative on the journey, he seemed
to he sunk in a sort of lethargy of agonized despair; but yet
I gathered from him the following facts, —namely, that his
brother had quitted England at twenty years of age, and when
John was only ten years old, therefore the non-recognition
on each side was very natural. When Donnithorne, or rather,
the elder Tucker, sold his duffer claim for £5 155., he never
troubled to inquire the purchaser’s name, and so was uncon-
scious that he w T as cheating his own kith and kin, until he
learnt it from the lips of the fratricide. As for John, he
did not even know whether or not his brother had quitted
the Colony.
The fratricide was tried at the following criminal sittings
at Melbourne; but the bill for murder being thrown out by
the grand jury, he was merely arraigned for “ manslaughter,”
of which he was found guilty, with a strong recommendation
to mercy, on account of the excitement he was labouring
under at the time, and the painful circumstances that occa-
sioned it. He was condemned to twelve years’ penal servitude;
which sentence, by-the-bye, terminated nearly twelve months
ago, and my readers may perhaps be glad to learn that on his
release from captivity he returned to England a truly peni-
tent man, and that he is now the sole stay and comfort of
his aged father and mother.
About a month after the fatal conflict of the two brothers,
I had the good fortune to make a regular raid amongst the
sellers of dummy claims and spurious gold on the Galunga
Flat. I was the instrument of bringing some nine or ten of
them to justice; but not before many innocent persons had
been victimized, and much injury inflicted on those who could
hardly afford to be chiselled of perhaps their last sovereign
or two. Poverty is a sad thing everywhere, but in no spot
is it so hard and difficult to bear and struggle with as on a
gold-field, where the necessaries of life are so exorbitantly
dear, and selfishness the prevailing characteristic of the
population. Perhaps, also, there is no place on earth where
poverty is so frequently to be met with, even absolute want.


To most people at a distance there appears some romance
in gold-digging; they are excited with the idea that they may
kick up a stone and find twenty pounds of gold under it, and
cannot imagine how people can refrain from seizing a pick
and breaking every piece of quartz they pass, to see if there
is another monster nugget in it; but this is all a delusion.
Gold-digging is a real downright matter-of-fact trade; in so
many hours of common labourer’s work, so much gold; in so
many buckets of earth, so many ounces; and when once a
man is amongst the diggers, he feels no more inclination to
take a pick in his hand for the chance of what he may turn
up, than he would to enter upon the labour of English
navvies, whose allowance is three cubic yards per day. The
labour is always great, and sometimes exceedingly so, and a
great many fail altogether, and either go to the wall or become
fossiokers, cheats, loafers, and adventurers. As to salting
claims, I have little doubt in my own mind that many of the
Munchausen holes, out of which the £5,000 and £7,000 were
so readily shovelled up at Mount Alexander in a few days,
were got up in such a way and for similar purposes. Many
knowing people, at the time, did not hesitate to assert that
the wonderful finds that the Governor, in perfect good faith
on Ms part, reported to the Home Government, in the early
days of the gold fever, were prepared by interested parties.


A TALE OF A SKULL.
On every digger’s licence at Galnnga there was notified the
strict prohibition against sinking holes upon any road, or of
cutting up the roads through the diggings in any manner. This
regulation was not only necessary for the preservation of the
roads, hut even more so for the security of human life. Yet
it was almost totally disregarded, and wherever gold was to
he got, the diggers cut up the roads, without the slightest
regard either to the convenience of the public or its safety.
The roads through the diggings were, in fact, regularly under-
mined, cut up, and obstructed; and the unfortunate dray-
men, and all who had to travel over them, sought in
bewilderment to find a passage across the heaps and hollows.
In innumerable places in all the diggings there were pits
along the sides of the roads—even in the roads —of various
depths, of from ten to one hundred feet, gaping, without the
slightest protection, for any traveller in the dark to plunge
into. The reader may be astonished at this disregard of
human life, but the fact is, that amid the chaos of adven-
turers of all countries, rushing madly from every corner of
the globe to render themselves wealthy, life, as may be sup-
posed, was held wonderfully cheap. Who was likely to care
for any one but himself 1 The number of unrecorded dead who
were discovered and cast in hastily dug graves, too frequently
without any one knowing anything about them, was truly
frightful. While I was encamped at these diggings, instances
occurred of people entering a tent, and finding a solitary
man in the last moments of life, without a friend near, or
any means of help. Probably he had lain for days, or even


weeks, amid the vast multitude, unahle to raise hand or foot,
or cry for aid to those who, eager in their quest of gold,
were ever passing or repassing a few steps from him. Others,
again, were found in such a situation with every sign of
abject want around them, and not the slightest clue whereby
to discover who they were or whence they came. Out of
hundreds of thousands of diggers, English and foreign, how
many might have had friends who would have given their
own lives to learn news of the absent ones ! But any news
of them they will now never obtain, for they lie either in
those nameless graves, or in the deep road-side shafts now
long since deserted, and their sides fallen in, burying their
victims under many tons of clay and earth. Yes, many a
poor fellow, without doubt, has met a horrible fate thus;
many a fleshless skeleton lies at the bottom of those terrible
man-traps whose fate must ever remain a mystery.
I was one day chatting with two or three diggers at Old
Brown’s store, on the Galunga diggings, when a man whom
I knew very well came in to buy a pound of candles. There
was something so strange about his appearance that I could
not help staring at him in mute surprise. I had not seen
him for two or three days, and when I last beheld him he
was as burly, red-faced, jovial a looking fellow as any on the
flat. Now he was thin, haggard, and lantern-jawed, with
a face as pale as a corpse, and even his hair and whiskers,
which had been of a glossy black, were thickly sprinkled with
grey.
“ How d’ye do, Mitchell 3” said the man, nodding to me as
he entered.
(Mitchell was then my nom de guerre, for as yet it was
known but to very few that I was in the force.)
“Pretty well, thank ye, mate. How’s yourself! You
look down in the mouth. Have you hit upon a good claim,
or seen a ghost 3—which 3 ”
“ I’ve hit upon a claim and seen a ghost, or something
worse. Come along with me directly, and I will tell you of
something curious,” answered the man ; and without another
word he proceeded to make his purchases.
While he is doing so let me try and picture to the reader


the general appearance of a store at the diggings in the year
1853. The one we were in was a fair sample of its class.
It was a large tent, oblong in shape, and in it everything
required hy a digger or a digger’s wife or family could he
obtained, —that is to say, if the wherewithal to purchase
was at hand, —from barley-sugar to sardines and potted
salmon, from pickled onions to Bass’s pale ale, from ankle
jack-boots to a sou’-wester, from a pair of stays to a cradle,
and every requisite for mining, from a pick to a needle. But
the confusion, the noise, the medley! What a scene for a
Regent Street shopwalker ! Here hang a couple of red her-
rings dripping into a bag of sugar, and a heap of tallow
candles lying amid a box of raisins. There a bundle of gay-
coloured ribbons crushed beneath two unwashed tumblers
and a half-finished bottle of stout. Cheese and salt fish,
bread and blacking, pork, yellow soap, and currants, saddles
and frocks, green veils and blue serge shirts, wideawakes and
shovels, baby linen and camphine lamps, all heaped indis-
criminately together, added to which there are frequently
children squalling, men swearing, storekeeper sulking, and
last, though by no means least, women’s tongues going nine-
teen to the dozen.
The digger bought a few articles, crammed some into his
pockets, stuck others under his arm, and beckoned to me to
follow him. So nodding to the other loiterers, I joined him
on the outside.
“ Come with me,” said he. “ I’ve got a sick wife, so 1..
must go straight home, but the track is not much out of*
your road, and we can talk as we go on.”
“ All right, mate,” I replied. “ But you look ill yourself.
What the deuce has come over you?”
“ That’s just what I’m about to tell you, and as it’s a long
yarn I’ll begin at once. I’ve not told it to a soul yet, and
thought I wouldn’t till I’d asked your opinion on the mat-
ter. It’s a secret that had better, perhaps, be kept close.”
“ Well, Bob, begin, for I’m all impatience to hear it.”
“ May be, then, you’ve missed me for a few days ?”
I confessed that I had done so.
“ It’s oncommon lucky for me that I wasn’t missed alto-


gether. I tumbled down a fifteen fathom shaft last Saturday
night whilst coming home rather groggy from Heilson’s
shanty, and didn’t get haule.d up until yesterday.”
“By Jove ! yesterday was Tuesday,—three days. Why, you
must have been nearly starved, man.”
“So I was, but the miracle is that I was not killed. My
life was saved by falling on the body of a putrid horse, so
that I came down soft like, but by George the smell was
frightful! How I did halloo all the Sunday ! hut ’twas no
use ; not a soul heard me, and on the Monday I was equally
unsuccessful. On Tuesday I was too weak to cry out much,
but just as ’twas getting dark I heard two men walking just
by the mouth of the shaft, so I gathered all my strength for
a desperate cooee,* and thank God I was heard. They got
a rope and somehow hauled me up, more dead than alive, I
can tell you, and carried me home to my tent, where I found
my wife stricken down by Colonial fever, brought on no
douht hy her anxiety regarding me. By Jove! when my
own children looked at me they did not know me ! ”
“ I scarcely wonder at that, Boh; I hardly knew you my-
self,” I rejoined, seeing that he paused for me to make some
observation.
“Didn’t you, now ? Well, do you fancy that what I’ve
already told you is all that befell me in that cursed hole!”
“ I don’t know, but from your manner I imagine you’ve
something more to tell,” I rejoined.
“And so I have, mate. Listen. There’s heen a foul
murder committed, and the evidences of it are now at the
bottom of that pit.”
“ The pit you fell into ?”
“Yes.”
My professional interest was at once aroused, and I
demanded eagerly, “How do you know this?”
“ Why, while I was groping about down there in the dark,
my hand came against something hard and round like a ball,
but full of holes it seemed to be. I tried hard to discover
what it was, and at last, by feel more than sight, made it out
♦ A peculiar halloo, that can he heard for a great distance.


to be a skull—a human skull. I could feel the holes where
the eyes had been, the nostrils, the mouth; my fingers even
fumbled against a tooth or two, all loose and rattling. Warn’t
that a pleasant discovery 1 ”
“ Well, ’twas rather dismal, mate; but all this does not
show that any murder has been committed. The man might
have fallen in by accident, as you did, then died of starva-
tion, as you might have done, and then the rats and other
vermin perhaps picked the flesh from his face, and left his
skull to frighten you.”
“ You won’t think so when I have finished my yam, for
just over the left eye there was another hole. Ah, I see you
start now ! This hole was a slit of about an inch long, and
may be the eighth part of an inch wide ; in fact, just such a
slit as a Congress knife would make in a fellow’s skull, and I
guess that was what done it.”
“ Where was the fellow’s body ? You only mention the
skull, Bob.”
“ Where his body was I can’t guess—not in that hole, I’ll
take my Davy.”
“ Did you search?”
“ Yes, I did, thoroughly, but not even a bone was there,
only the skull.”
“ That is a pity,” I muttered to myself; “ additional
evidence would be valuable.”
“What do you think of this, then?” said Bob, after a
pause, and plunging his hand into his trousers pocket, he
pulled out a bowie knife, and handed it to me with a grim
smile.
I clutched the knife eagerly; it afforded one of the links
of evidence that I wanted. Stopping suddenly in my walk,
I closely examined it. It was a kind of weapon known in
America as a Congress knife : the hilt was of German silver,
the blade might have been some six inches in length; it was
very rusty, but half a glance showed me that the rust was of
two kinds. Hear the hilt the light iron-mould hue was
that of damp, but from the point to about three inches up
the blade the dark brown, almost black stains, were plainly
the rust of blood. On one side the blade I could distinguish


an eagle, with the motto, “ Never draw me without reason ,
nor sheath me without honour,” stamped in the steel.
“ This is a most valuable find, Boh,” I said, slapping my
companion on the hack; “ hut I suppose that the skull is
still in the shaft ? ”
“It is; I didn’t care to bring it up with me. Don’t you
think we ought to inform the police before we do anything
further?” observed the digger.
“ Bob, I’ll tell you a secret; we’ve been acquaintances
now for some time, and I think I can depend upon you. I
am one of the force, and I’m here on special duty, so you see
there’s no need to inform any one else.”
“ The deuce you are! ” exclaimed Bob, starting, and then
looking at me keenly to see whether I was in jest. He
seemed satisfied with his inspection, however, and said drily,
“ Well, you might have told a fellow of this before ; you’ve
been rather close with a friend, I think.”
“ Never mind that, old boy; I dare say I should have
told you before long, even if it had not been for this affair.
But to return to business. We must manage to get that
skull above ground, and that speedily, too. Will you aid me ? ”
“ Oh yes, I don’t mind.”
“ What do you say to to-night, then, for a try ? ”
“ I’m willing ; but what about a rope ?”
“ I’ll get both rope and candle,” I rejoined. “ Eemember,
there’s money to be earned, as well as justice to be meted
out. At what time will you join me, and where ?”
“ I will call for you at your tent at about eleven o’clock;
the hole is no great way from your hang-out. We shall
have finished the job before midnight, I reckon.”
We had now arrived close up to Boh’s tent, and caution-
ing him not to tell a soul what had happened, not even his
own wife, I took my leave of him and walked away.
Many a brown study I fell into that day, and many a pipe
of Barrett’s twist did I smoke to clear my faculties and aid
me in the solving of the skull enigma. In vain, however,
did I trouble my brain; the affair as yet seemed inexplicable,
but I still smoked and thought on, until night brought eleven
o’clock and my friend Bob.


“ I am pretty punctual, you see,” said he.
“ Yes, I can’t blame -you on that score, mate; and here
are rope and candles. We will have a dram of rum, and
then be off.”
I produced a bottle and a couple of tin cups as I spoke,
and we took our drinks in silence. We then set out on our
adventure.
We had only a mile to walk before we got to the scene of
operations, so that in about twenty minutes after leaving my
tent, we stood alongside the deserted shaft; and while Boh
was adjusting his rope around the barrel of the windlass,
and making other preparations for a descent, I took a narrow
inspection of the locality, which the bright starlight enabled
me to do.
Although not far removed from the centre of the gold-
field, this hole was, nevertheless, at least three hundred yards
distant from any other, while at about forty-five or fifty
yards from it stood a tent, which was also about three
hundred yards distant from any other tent. The tent in
question was pitched in the rear of the heaps of earth thrown
up in digging the shaft, so that, standing as we were at the
mouth of the shaft, we could only just see the top of it.
These simple facts struck me as peculiar. “ Without doubt,”
I thought, “ that tent is occupied by the man who dug this
shaft, for a digger would naturally fix his tent as close to the
locality where he was working as possible, but this hole has
evidently been for some time abandoned. How is it, then,
that he has not marked out a fresh claim, and commenced
digging somewhere else, and, as a natural consequence,
removed himself and tent to his new scene of operations?”
I was unable to answer these mental queries, but I could
not help fancying that the mystery of the skull was hidden
within that neighbouring tent.
By this time Bob Mason was ready for a descent ; he had
secured and wound the rope over the barrel, and tied a coil of
the other end around his middle, so I stood by the windlass
and began to lower him.
By George, how that old rusty windlass did creak; but as
it did not commence doing so until Bob was halfway down,


it was as well to lower Mm the other half as to draw him up
again. I was, however, terribly afraid that the inmate of the
tent would be alarmed by the noise, and if he had been, and
there was any crime- to conceal, he might pop me off with his
revolver and then throw me into the hole; leaving my mate a
second chance of starving to death by cutting the rope, or
else shoot him down at his leisure, as coolly as he would fire
at a rat in a trap.
The deuce of it was, I had not a weapon of any kind with
me.
As luck would have it, however, the fellow was either
away in the townsMp, or else slept as man never slept before,
for Bob got to the bottom of the hole all right, and the creaky
old windlass ceased its uproar. I looked down into the
obscure depth below me, and saw the digger strike a match,
light a candle, and look around him narrowly on every side.
At length I saw the light fall on the identical skull he was
in search of. He perceived it at the same instant, picked it
up from the damp humid earth, and held it aloft in his hand
with an air of triumph. I nodded to signify approval, and
he then placed it inside his jumper, and gave me a signal to
draw Mm up.
“ Are both your hands at liberty, Bob?” I asked in a low
tone, for a whisper is almost audible from the top to the
bottom of a shaft.
“ Yes, quite.”
“ Then I shall just secure the rope to the upright, and you
must ascend hand over hand.”
I did not explain my reason for so doing, but doubtlessly
he guessed it. Quickly shifting the rope from the barrel to
one of the uprights of the framework, and making it secure,
I let him clamber to the surface as best he could. A few
minutes later he stood by my side. We then drew up the
rope, coiled it, and without interchanging a word, retraced
our steps to my tent, which we soon reached. I looked at
my watch, and as Mason had predicted, we had finished our
work before midnight, for it was just ten minutes to twelve.
We now had out the rum bottle again, and lighting our
pipes, prepared to enjoy ourselves.


“ Whose tent is that, Boh, close to the shaft I” I asked.
“ Oh, I know ; a fellow called Adams hangs out there.”
“ Don’t you fancy it’s a strange thing that he never heard
your shouts during those three days and nights that you were
in the hole 1 ” I remarked, drily.
“So it was, very odd; living so closc_hy as he did, too; hut
I believe he is deaf. I know that he used,to complain of
being so when he was a mate of mine at Gardiner’s Creek,
some two years ago.”
“ Does he know of your adventure in that shaft, or any-
thing of what you saw there 2”
“Oh no; I have not seen him since. You are the only
man I have told of the skull business, and the only one
I shall tell.”
“ That’s right, Bob; a still tongue makes a wise head, you
know. In less than a month, ay, perhaps in less than a
week, all the flat may know of it. It seems to me this fel-
low Adams is a queer one. What’s he doing now 2 I don’t
see any sign of another hole about his tent, and that old
shaft has long since been deserted. Has he given up
digging 1”
“ Hot he, he’s got a claim and has sunk a hole quite at
the other end of the flat; he works in it every day, too,
and has lately turned up some tidy nuggets there. Why,
bless your heart, his claim is only half a stonethrow from
mine,” said Mason.
“ Then why on earth don’t he pitch his tent close to his
new hole, instead of leaving it by the deserted one 1 He has
a two-mile walk every day to and from work.”
“ I don’t know; he’s a rum cove altogether, a mighty
savage chap too. He was in California some time, and his
revolver and knife are as ready as his tongue,—a little more so,
in fact; for Jack Adams prefers biting to barking any day,
I can tell you.”
I now changed the conversation to other subjects, and
shortly after Bob Mason got up to go home, leaving the skull
behind him.
After he had gone, I immediately set to work to examine
my treasure by the aid of a tallow dip stuck in a ginger-beer


bottle. The skull was just like any other skull, for the flesh
had been all stripped off it long ago by rats and other vermin,
but there was the hole over the left eye socket, just as
Mason had described. I saw that it was knife-work at once,
and going to my box I rummaged up the rusty old bowie
knife that Mason had given me the day before, and thrust it
into the incision. It fitted it exactly; a fool could not have
doubted but that that knife and that head had been pre-
viously acquainted.
All this was very satisfactory, so far as it went, but the
next and most difficult thing of all was to find the murderer,
and to bring the crime home to him. I had already, as before
observed, strong suspicions against Mr. Jack Adams; and I
passed another sleepless night in laying schemes whereby to
bring him within my toils, for it was broad daylight before
I had concocted a sufficiently practicable plot to stand any
chance of success.
I first of all set about forming Adams’s acquaintance, which
I managed to do the following day at the “ Olive Leaf ”
shanty at knock-off hour, and before a week had expired
Sundry drinks had, in a way, cemented it, and a sort of
friendship arose between us.
One Sunday afternoon I strolled carelessly past the deserted
hole and Adams’s tent, calmly smoking my pipe and with my
hands in my pockets, wearing the air of a man who is lazily
taking his constitutional, and wanders as his nose or fancy leads
him. All at once I heard a gruff voice halloo out, “ Hoy !
hoy, Mitchell! ” I glanced round and pretended to look sur-
prised, as my eyes fell on the burly form of Jack Adams lying
on the ground outside his tent, his hands under his head and
a short black pipe between his teeth.
“ Halloo, is that you, Adams ? So you hang out here, do
you! Why, man alive, I thought you were fixed up by
O’Heil’s shanty, on the other side of the flat,” I said, with an
air of surprise, as I turned back and sat, or rather squatted
down by his side.
“Oh no, I ain’t, nor never was; what made you think
that 1 ”
“Why, I could have sworn that as I passed along the


ridge there the other morning I saw you at work close
hy.”
“Yes, I dare say you did; I’ve a hole there.”
“There?” I exclaimed, in accents of assumed surprise.
“Why on earth don’t you pitch your tent there, then?”
I saw that the suddenness of the question had taken him
aback ; hut after a draw from his pipe he said, “ Oh, I don’t
like the neighbourhood there, I prefer this place.”
The reason was a poor one, for the part of the diggings
where he was now located, and which he pretended to prefer,
was marshy, unhealthy, very gloomy; and I knew that the
water, which was very good on the other side, was here im-
pregnated with’mineral substances, and most offensive to the
taste.
“Ah, you may like it best, for you’ve more elbow-room
here, I grant; hut ain’t you afraid of having your hole plun-
dered at night, and you so far away from it?”
“Oh no, not I. They know me, they do, and I guess that
most of them do vally their skins too much to try it on with
Jack Adams,” said the fellow, with an oath too horrible to
record.
I had not won much ground on that tack, so, after a few
minutes’ silent puffing at my pipe, I said carelessly, nodding
towards the neighbouring shaft, “Did you ever work that
claim, mate?”
“ Yes, rather ; Bill Taylor and I was mates there a twelve-
month agone, and a tidy hit we made out of it too.”
“ Bill Taylor ! heavens ! I knew Bill Taylor well in Eng-
land. Where is he now ? By Jove, I’m so glad I began
to talk about that hole. How delighted I shall he to
see the old fellow! ” I exclaimed, in excited tones. It is
needless to confess that I never heard the name before in
my life.
I saw that I had caught Adams for a second time on the
ground-hop. I perceived that his mahogany-tinted counte-
nance actually grew pale, and his voice had lost its loud
blustering tones, as he said, “ I’m afraid you never will clap
eyes on that coon, for the day after we had our best find he
said he would have a holiday, so he took his gun and went


into the hush to shoot parrots. I never saw him afterwards ;
I dare say he lost his way and died of hunger.”
It was not likely that I swallowed this cock-and-bull story,
but of course I pretended to, and expressed abundance of
sorrow and pity for the fate of poor Bill Taylor ; though at
the same time feeling pretty sure that I had his skull at
home in my tent, and that his body was lying, not in the
bush, but snugly buried under the turf in a spot not very
remote from where I now sat ; in fact, I shrewdly con-
jectured that his grave was dug inside Jack Adams’ very
tent.
I had done enough pumping for one day, for I did not
want to awaken any suspicions in the breast of my new
friend, so we chatted for some time on various subjects, and
then I rose and took my leave.
I suffered three days to pass before I came across Adams
again. This time I watched him into a shanty, and walking
in about five minutes later, recognised him as though acci-
dentally, and asked him to have a wet. Master Jack readily
assented, and I soon contrived to get him into a sufficient
state of jollity to illustrate the proverb, “ When the wine’s
in the wit’s out.” I then enticed him away, telling him that
he had had enough, got him outside, and volunteered to walk
part of the way home with him.
Adams was not drunk —had he been so it would not have
suited my views, —but he had taken just enough to dissipate
his usual caution, and I felt sure that he would not be on his
guard when replying to my questions.
For some minutes I walked by his side in silence ; then I
said, carelessly, “ How long ago is it since you worked the old
shaft by your tent, Jack?”
“ Hot since Bill Taylor’s death, mate; or at least, I mean
to say, ’twas about a week after he lost himself that I gave it
n P-”
I noticed the clumsy correction, but took no heed of it.
“ Why did you abandon it, mate 1 Didn’t it pay for
working?”
“Not a bit of it, we was clean down on the rock; there
ain’t a bit of gold left in the hole.”


This statement did not exactly correspond with his boasting
on tire previous Sunday afternoon of the “ tidy lot of gold ”
himself and mate had got out of the hole a day or two before
the final disappearance of the latter; so I said, “I am sure,
mate, jmu overlooked something, for that old shaft holds a
secret that no one on the flat knows about,” I said, in
slow, impressive tones, looking him full in the face as I
spoke.
By George ! the expression of Adams’s face at that moment
was a treat to witness. He turned as pale as death, his eyes
seemed to be starting out of his head, his legs shook under
him, as he exclaimed, “ A secret! what do you mean 1
There’s no secret there. Hang it, man, what secret should I
have 1 ”
“ You have ! Come, I like that. I never supposed that
you had it, Adams, or you’d be working there again with a
win.”
“ Then what on earth do you mean 1 Don’t talk riddles,
man, for I’m clumsy at guessing them,” said he, half angrily,
and yet considerably reassured.
“ Well, then, Jack, I mean this, that I’ve examined the
dip of the land and other things, and I’ve come to the con-
clusion that that hole is not half worked out yet. I meant
to double on you and jump* it, but as you look upon it as
your own like, I couldn’t bring myself to do such a shabby
trick, particularly as we’ve become friends, so I propose that
we work it as mates. You will find it a profitable spec, I
feel sure.”
I spoke with such an air of candour that Adams never
doubted my sincerity for a moment, but then, by every argu-
ment in his power, he sought to persuade me out of my
assumed belief. It was quite amusing to listen to him.
Doubtless he would not have gone down into that hole
again for the world; and for any one else to do so would
have been still worse, for the discovery of the skull could
not but cause ugly queries to arise, which might somehow
implicate him in the matter. His protestations and vocifera-
* Take possession of it.


tions more than ever confirmed my previous convictions; and
when I parted from him I lost no time in obtaining an inter-
view with the proper authorities, explaining matters to them,
and procuring a warrant to arrest Jack Adams “ for the
murder of one William Taylor.”
I was away from the flat a whole day effecting this, and
when I got back to my tent I was too tired to do anything
but turn in and get a sleep.
The following day, however, at knock-off hour, I came
across my man, and assuming a blithe tone, I told him that
I had had a lucky find, and to commemorate the occasion
had got sundry bottles of grog and ale, a cheese, and other
good cheer, from the “ Magnolia,” and invited him to come
into my tent and help to keep it up.
Adams readily assented—he was not the one to decline an
offer to shout from any one—and we went into the tent
together.
On the way I adroitly picked his pocket of his heavy clasp-
knife, and transferred it to my own.
The reader will naturally imagine that I did this in order
to prevent his drawing it and doing me a mischief when I
arrested him, but such an idea as this never crossed my mind.
I had another object in view, which was to bring the crime
still closer home to him.
Well, we entered the tent, and I put bottles, bread,
cheese, meat, and other things on the inverted cask that
served me for a table, and bade Master Jack sit down and
partake.
Drawing my clasp-knife from my pocket (table-knives and
forks were not often amongst the household furniture of a
digger), I began helping myself, and hid my companion do
the same, and not to stand upon ceremony.
Adams growled assent, and dived his hand into his pocket
for his knife. No, it was not in that one; and he tried the
others with equal ill-success. “ Dang it, I’ve left my tater-
scraper at home, I reckon,” he said at length.
“ What, lost your knife ?” I asked.
“ Why, it looks like it, mate,” he responded.
“ Oh, never mind, I can lend you one, Jack,” said I; and


as I spoke I drew from out my breeches pocket the rusty
Congress knife that had been found in the old shaft, and
handed it to him.
Ho sooner did his gaze rest upon that accusing steel than
his face grew white as a sheet, his eyes seemed glaring out of
his head with horror, his teeth clattered like a shaken dice-
box. He staggered to his feet, though his legs nearly refused
to support him, and stammered out, “ That knife—where did
you get that knife from % ”
“ Where you threw it, rascal. I arrest you, John Adams,
for the murder of your mate, William Taylor.”
“ Arrest me 1 Who are you, then 1 ” he asked, in a con-
fused tone.
“ I am detective Brooke, of the Melbourne force,” I an-
swered, as I drew the handcuffs from my pocket, and sprang
upon him.
I fancied that the fellow was too frightened to offer any
resistance, but I was mistaken. His panic had been but
momentary, and he now displayed a strong objection to the
irons. A tremendous blow, delivered straight from the
shoulder, and which I only guarded just in time, showed me
that I had met more than my match. He was greatly my
superior in weight and strength, and I was well aware that
unless aid arrived I should fight the losing game.
I had provided for this contingency, for all this time Bob
Mason, armed with a heavy sprig of shillelah, had been
waiting outside the tent, ready to put in an appearance
directly such a step was expedient. Seeing that we had
come to actual fisticuffs, and that Jacky Adams was getting
the better of me, he rushed in, and with a blow of his cudgel
brought the murderer to the ground.
“ How, then, on with the bracelets. Quick ! the villain’s
stunned ! ” he said.
I was about to do so, when I discovered that through some
carelessness the key had fallen out. “ Keep your eye on
him while I find the key,” I whispered, and began to hunt
about on the ground for it, fancying it had dropped in the
struggle.
Mason stood over the prostrate Adams with his stick


raised, but believing him to be insensible, his eyes wandered
around to aid me in discovering the lost key. Adams, who
had only been shamming that he was stunned, saw all this
through his half-closed eyes, and suddenly grasping Bob
Mason by the leg, threw him over on his back in a twinkling;
and springing to his feet just as I made a rush at him, sent
me staggering against the ridge pole with a back-handed
blow on the chest, and then seizing the stick out of Mason’s
relaxed grasp, he sprang over him and darted out of the
tent.
All this was done like a flash of lightning; the next
instant Mason was on his feet, and we were gazing into each
other’s faces like two asses as we were.
“ After him, mate ! ” I shouted, pulling two revolvers from
my box, and deeply regretting that I had not had one by me
when I handed Adams the rusty knife. I gave one of them
to Bob, stuck the other in my own belt, and we dashed out
of the tent in pursuit.
Adams was already at least a hundred yards in advance;
his hat was gone, his long uncombed hair streamed in the
wind; he was running for his life, and heading for the ex-
treme right of the flat in the direction of his own tent. I
immediately concluded that once there he would seize his
pistols, stand at bay, and show fight.
This part of the flat was thinly peopled of an evening, so
that our race was not impeded by any one. The few who
did perceive us only stared, probably thinking that we were
running for a bet.
The reader may perhaps wonder that we did not hail any-
one to stop him, but there were so many roughs on the flat,
that had we done so we might have won an enemy the
more instead of a friend; and then we neither of us cared
for the story to get abroad of how an unarmed man had
thrashed and escaped from two armed ones, for my hand-
cuffs ' ought to have been as efficient a weapon at close
quarters as Bob’s stick. So on and on we went, gradually
lessening the distance between pursuers and pursued, until
at last, as I had conjectured, we ran him to earth in his
own tent.


“ Stop, Masoh, lie has weapons there; let us lie down
behind this ridge,” I said to my companion, for Adams might
have shot both of us down with ease through any holes in
the canvas of his tent—and every old tent has such holes
—whilst he would he perfectly concealed.
Mason read my thoughts in a moment, and we both lay
down behind the steep mound of earth which had been
thrown up in digging the shaft. The tent was now about
forty yards from us, within easy range of our revolvers, and
as we lay there with our fingers on the triggers of our wea-
pons, Adams came boldly out to the door of his tent, and
fired at Mason’s head, which for a moment was raised above
our earthwork.
The aim was a good one, for the bullet passed clean
through Bob’s hat, grazing his scalp rather sharply in its
passage.
Mason ground his teeth with rage as he returned the shot,
but his bullet sped about a yard wide of the mark; and in
return Adams fired his second barrel, the ball this time rip-
ping up the sleeve of my coat.
Crack went my own revolver in reply, and Adams’s pistol
arm fell helpless by his side; the leaden messenger had
sped right through his shoulder, smashing the bone in its
passage.
He was plucky to the backbone, however, and though suf-
fering excruciating torture, he picked up the pistol that had
dropped from his nerveless grasp, with his left hand, and
blazed away at us again.
It was plain, however, that he had never practised left-
hand firing, his bullets flew very wide of the mark, and
another shot that passed right through his leg did for him.
He again dropped his pistol and threw up his left arm as a
signal that he yielded.
Bob Mason and I at once quitted our cover, and rushed
upon him, the irons were on his wrists in a trice, and he was
completely in our power. Pain and defeat had not con-
quered his bravado, and he spared neither taunts nor
curses.
“ Tut, you blockheads, what can an old rusty knife do ?


There’s many a one like it on the flat,” he growled at
last.
“ When the chemist comes to test the rust on it perhaps
he will tell a different tale,” I said.
“ And what if he does find it’s blood 1 who can swear that
I haven’t killed a pig or a sheep with it ?”
“The microscope will show whether it is the rust of an
animal’s blood or the rust of a man’s blood,” I said,
solemnly.
“ Ye jest—such a thing’s impossible,” exclaimed Adams,
with a stare of stupefied amazement. The expression of low
cunning soon returned to his countenance, and he said with
a laugh,—
“Ah ! ah ! ah ! and if he does, where is the body ? By
Jove, where is the body 1 that will slew you. The body
—where is the body, you thundering idiots 1 ”
“ Under your feet, just where you now lie, Jack Adams,”
I said, sternly.
“ Man or devil, ’tis false,” shouted the digger; but his face
had turned white as that of a corpse again, and he was
trembling in every limb.
“ Bob, take that pick, my man, and let’s dig. And I seized
a spade as I spoke, and rolling Adams out of the way, we
commenced digging just at the spot where the ruffian had
thrown himself when we ironed him.
We worked with a will, and in less than ten minutes we
had got down a yard. Jack Adams by this time looked like
a dead man himself; his braggadooia and bravado had
totally disappeared; he shivered and trembled to such an
extent as almost to shake the tent.
Suddenly my spade struck against something hollow, at
the same instant the point of Bob’s pick caught in some
obstacle. He dragged it upwards with all his force, and lo !
a headless skeleton was exposed to view. Bob’s pick had
caught in one of the ribs.
At sight of that terrible relic of the departed, Jack Adams
uttered a wild cry, and fainted.
The reader may wonder how I became so thoroughly con-
vinced that the body of the murdered man was buried in


that spot. "Well, I had several reasons for such a conviction.
Firstly, Adams’s persistency in keeping his tent pitched so
close to the old shaft, which, had there not been a peremptory
reason for remaining near, he would naturally have been glad
to quit the proximity of. Secondly, a faint musty smell that
I had remarked during my previous visits to Adams. And
thirdly, because I noticed that when, faint from his wounds,
he had sunk to the ground, instead of falling where he had
stood, he struggled for at least three yards in order to fall on
a particular spot. Adams naturally feared to remove his
tent lest the ground it had stood on might be dug up, a most
probable thing on a gold-field, and the secret it held be
revealed to the world.
Adams was perfectly passive after this discovery, and
allowed us to take him off to prison in a spring-cart without
the slightest show of resistance. The police magistrate,
before whom he was first taken, remanded him to the Cri-
minal Sessions at Melbourne; the day of trial came on, and
of course I made sure of a conviction. I was, however,
doomed to disappointment, for John Adams was actually
acquitted, the jury, after half an hour’s consideration, bring-
ing in the verdict “Not guilty" Afterwards he was tried
on the second charge, and sentenced to five years’ penal
servitude for “shooting with intent” at myself and Bob
Mason when we attempted to capture him.
Never in my life was I so inclined to sneer at the inability
of the criminal law to punish crime as in the present in-
stance. True, the body of the murdered man was not
identified, nor could it be proved point-blank that
Adams was his murderer. Yet am I convinced that every
one in court, one or two obstinate jurymen excepted, felt
certain of the fellow’s guilt, and were astounded at his
acquittal.
As to the operation of the law at the diggings, and its
competency to grapple with the crimes of an uncivilized
mob, the facts narrated in the above tale will enable the
reader to judge; there is no need of discussing the sub-
ject logically. When I visited the Californian gold-fields
some years previously, life and property were more secure


there than they were during the years 1852 and 1853 at the
Victorian diggings. Without law save the law of honour,
without restraint except that imposed by fear of summary
punishment, which was sure to follow the only crimes cog-
nizable under the new code, those of dealing and murder,
we were comparatively safe. If the “ way of the trans-
gressor was hard,” it was also speedily terminated. It was
the reign of the rifle and the halter. And yet this was a
people who had been accustomed to the laws of civilized
countries, and who loved order. The principles of a repub-
lican government were only adapting themselves to a new
and untried emergency. The crime was committed, and
proved in the presence of a competent and impartial jury,
who were also required to award the punishment. The sen-
tence was pronounced by the alcaid. A grave was dug, the
sharp crack of the rifle was heard, the body was buried, and
every man proceeded silently to his own work. There was
no lawyer’s finesse, no twistings and turnings of special
pleading, no absurd precedents or legal quibbles, affording
the accused a hundred loopholes to escape by, when morally
not one in a thousand could doubt his guilt; and yet, during
the thirteen months that I remained in the State, I never
once heard of a case in which the verdict given under the
first system was an unrighteous one, or the punishment
inflicted undeserved. But even here a change eventually
came. Laws were at last enacted on Californian gold-fields,
and the result was that crimes of every kind were soon very
prevalent, and the officers of justice were met with the taunts,
“ Catch me if you can,” “ Punish me if you dare.” Seldom
was the criminal captured, and when arrested more seldom
was he brought to punishment. There was but one opinion
amongst the miners, namely, that the system without law, hut
with summary justice, was in the state of society which then
existed in California incomparably better and more beneficial
to the majority than the system with such law, hut without
justice.
Different diseases require different remedies; different
peoples require different forms of government; and laws that
are adapted to a great commercial enlightened nation like


England, or to a fully developed colony like Victoria at the
present day, will fail to suit the emergencies for which they
are required amid the tumult of a gold-field, which is a world
within itself, and often one which is infested with a great
number of the vilest scoundrels in existence.


A LEAP FOR LIFE.
In the August of 1854 I quitted the mounted police force of
Victoria, and entered that of New South Wales. Ido not
know why I took this step ; perhaps it was that yearning after
“ fresh fields and pastures new ” which seems to he an instinct
of human nature. Anyhow, one bright spring morning I
found myself on board the steamship Illawarra, clearing the
calm blue waters of Hobson’s Bay (the largest harbour in the
known world), with Queen’s Cliff and Point Nepean some
three miles ahead, and beyond them the snow-crested waves
of Bass’s Straits.
I shall not inflict upon my readers a narrative of my voyage,
which if barren in incident was full enough of discomfort and
misery. I was a second cabin passenger, and the sea was so
rough during the entire voyage, that after tumbling into my
bunk when off Cape Patterson, I never emerged from it until,
forty-five hours later, we entered Port Jackson bay, and con-
sequently were in calm water.
By Jove, how my bones ached when I did get up ! for my
berth had been destitute of bed and bedding, and lying for
two days and nights on hard boards, added to the misery of
rolling from your left side to your right, and vice versa, at every
lurch of the ship, is almost sufficient to turn one into a jelly.
The eating and drinking, too —ugh ! How terrible an ordeal
it is for a seasick man to witness people possessed of ravenous
appetites ! Three times a day were the dirty scratched tin
plates and cups placed on the oilclothed, tobacco-strewn,
beer-ring marked tables; and two immense tin dishes, one
holding a pile of stringy, half-raw beefsteaks, the other an


oniony and oleaginous mess of Irish, stew, placed in the
centre of the board ; stale loaves of bread being the only
adjuncts to this invariable bill of fare. When these horrible
meals were disposed of, the refuse was cleared away, greasy,
fly-spotted packs of cards were produced, and after a five-
minutes’ “ ohop-ohop-chop ” at “ Barrett’s twist,” or “ nig-
ger’s toe,” pipes were lighted, a cloud of impenetrable smoke
obscured the scene, and the only noises that were audible were
the “ thump, thump, thump ” of the screw, the “ swish ” of
the waves against the scuttle window at the side of my head,
the bleating of the sheep from above, where a hundred and
fifty of them were huddled in a mass on the fore deck, ren-
dering it next to impossible for a steerage passenger to escape
from below during the entire voyage, mingled occasionally
with the shrill hissing of the steam, words of command
bellowed through a speaking-trumpet, and the clatter of the
tin and crockery in the steward’s pantry ; while nearer still,
cries of “Four by cards !” “ Clubs is trumps !” “ Game and
game!” “High, low, and Jack!” “I scores three!” and
similar exclamations, mingled with eternal spitting on all
sides, and sometimes loud calls for bottled ale and stout
(which, by the bye were sold at the rate of half-a-crown a
bottle), with the consequent popping of corks ; and last,
but by no means least, the continuous groaning of women
and screeching of children from the women’s cabin, con-
stituted, when combined, as neat a little Babel or Pande-
monium as it is possible to conceive.
Never was a poor wretch more glad to get out of jail, mad-
house, or purgatory than was I to escape from that detestable
cabin. Directly the rolling of the ship ceased I scrambled
up on deck, and struggling through the poor penned-up sheep,
many of whom had died on the passage and been flung over-
board, I ascended the forecastle, and from thence surveyed
the beauty of the surrounding scene.
We had just passed the Heads, which reared their awful
heights in our rear like two precipitous walls of iron, sur-
mounted by massive crags that stood aloft like watch-towers
guarding the entrance to the most lovely harbour in the
world (the Bay of Naples or that of Yaletta not excepted),


while eight hundred feet below lay piles of rock, variously
tinted with bright red, grey, and brown lichens, and set in
wreaths of vivid green boobyalla bushes that lie within the
dash of the ceaseless spray.
We rapidly ascended the harbour ; presently the crescent-
shaped range formed by the two headlands disappeared astern,
and on each side of us rose the steep rocky shore, where rough
rocks showed themselves from between the trunks of the
gigantic gum trees, while thick bush and scrub commenced
from the very edge of the narrow strip of sandy beach, and
continued up to the brow of the heights above.
Three more points of the winding shore rounded, and
the scene grew more peaceful and homely. White, green-
verandahed villas glittered here and there amid the foliage.
Graceful, slender young tea trees* growing up between the
massive, mossy old rocks, drooped some of their long sprays
of snowy blossoms over the water ; while groups of acacias—
their bluish blooming foliage laden with fringed golden
clusters, hawthom-like in fragrance—grew just beyond,
waving their scented fronds where the eddying currents of
tributary creeks gurgled on to dissolve into their parent
stream. The still water through which we steamed was
blue as the heavens above, save where the shadow of the
dense smoke that rolled from the mouth of our funnel threw
a leaden hue across its broad bosom. Around us flocks of
sea-birds, with silvery plumage and scarlet legs and feet,
added to the joyousness of the scene—either skimming along
high above even our fore topmast, or poised for an instant
like silver stars, until, one after another, dozens of them would
pounce down upon the shoals of fish below.
Point after point, forming a series of apparently land-locked
lakes, was rounded. Gradually the villas that dotted the
shore became more numerous. Garden Island was passed,
so was the round tower on Pinchgut Island. The tall Oyster
Bay pines (Frenela australis) in the Botanical Gardens
rose to our view, towering high above the topmasts of the
large frigate that lay at anchor in Wooloomooloo Bay, almost
* Septospemmm.


under their shadow. Then we steamed past Government
House and Circular Quay, rounded Cockatoo Island, where
the convict station is situated, and a few minutes later wore
alongside Phcenix Wharf, at the base of Sussex Street, and
once more, I must confess also to my great satisfaction, the
hum and hustle of city life sounded in my ears.
It was about six o’clock in the evening when I landed.
I immediately hastened to report myself at head-quarters,
where the letters of introduction and commendation from the
officers of the Victorian force, of which I was the bearer,
had due weight. I was politely requested to attend the fol-
lowing morning at ten o’clock, in order to be sworn in. This
I accordingly did; the ceremony was duly performed, and I
retired to the barracks to don my new uniform and hold
myself ready for orders.
I was destined not to have a long stay in Sydney, for
the very morning following my admission into the force I
was ordered for out-station duty, and received instructions to
start at once, in company with another trooper younger than
myself, for a place called Dunewatha, which lay at some
distance on the other side of the Blue Mountains, and was a
good three days’ journey from the metropolis.
It was nine a.m. when we received our orders, and by
eleven we wore in the saddle and descending Elizabeth Street
at a trot. We turned round Hyde Park Corner into Parra-
matta Street, and in another quarter of an hour the straggling
suburbs of the city were left in our rear.
It was a most unpleasant day. A regular briokfielder *
was blowing, and even before we had cleared the town our
white shako covers and snowy buckskin breeches were pow-
dered thickly with reddish dust, which the furious- north-
west wind, hot as the breath of a furnace, blew against our
faces with such force as to cause intolerable pain; while the
fine gritty sand would penetrate eyes, ears, and nostrils with
a persistency anything but agreeable. The thermometer,
when we left Sydney, marked 115 degrees in the sun; and
as that luminary rose higher and higher in the pale, steel-
* Hot wind.


grey, cloudless sky, the intensity of its rays became more
and more unbearable. I tried to picture the verdant pastures,
shady woods, and rippling streams of England, but that
rendered the sufferings I endured still more unpalatable.
It was too hot to talk, and my mate was as glum and dis-
contented as myself; and so we slowly trotted along the
solitary bush road silently and spectre-like, our poor horses
black with sweat, their heads drooped, and their tails as limp
as a shirt-collar without starch. Around us the straw-coloured
vegetation was unvaried by the slightest tint of green, and
the tall white trunks of the gum trees, with their scanty
vertical foliage, mingled with sombre peppermint and stringy
bark, formed about as dreary a scene as it is possible to
imagine.
As to the road we were travelling, they talk of corduroy
roads in America, but I should like to show a Yankee a mile
or two of the one we that day travelled over. Imagine a
stony plain, the surface entirely covered with large swampy
holes, filled with water, slush, and glutinous mud; then
throw into these hollows a number of angular blocks of
stone, half concealed by the muddy waters, and let mud
and water turn into dust (twelve hours will in ISTew South
Wales effect the metamorphosis), and you will have a
faint conception of our road. At length the scrub on either
side grew less thickly, and we gladly quitted the rugged
path for the open country. We had not ridden on for more
than a couple of miles, however, congratulating ourselves
that we had bidden farewell to dust, if -not to heat, when a
far greater annoyance than either befell us. This arose from
the pertinacious attentions of the sand-flies, which are a
kind of midge—small filmy things, like the midges at home,
but much more lively, bloodthirsty, and venomous. They
were as numerous as the grains of sand in the sterile Iron
Bark ranges. They covered the whole ground for miles, and
as we advanced would rise up, get on our horses’ legs and
chests, puncturing them in such a manner that their legs
were completely covered in a few minutes 'with blood. The
poor animals of course became quite frantic, not being able to
brush them off. It was often no trivial matter to keep one’s


seat, owing to their rearing and kicking from the pain. My
mate told me in another month the birds would have eaten
the midges up ; it was only in spring they were so numerous.
The effect -of the bite on man is much worse than on
horses. Wherever they bite, the part swells excessively, and
becomes a great livid boil as large as a walnut. He had
been bitten on the wrist the preceding spring, when riding
on the banks of the Murray. The next day his hand was
swelled enormously; it settled into one of those boils which
are very sluggish and difficult to cure. It was not well, in
fact, for a month, and would not heal till treated with caustic.
Another, only a month ago, had bitten his other hand ; the
venomous puncture had gone exactly through the same
process. As a proof of his words, he showed me a scar on
each hand, which no doubt would never wear away.
About mid-day we reached a creek, where we watered and
bathed our horses, to their great relief, and on whose banks
we encamped to eat luncheon. It was a lovely spot; on
account of the moisture the grass was green, and adorned
with myriad-tinted flowers, while forty miles in our front
rose the purple peaks of the Blue Mountains. Close to
where we sat grew some grass trees, but only dwarf ones,
splendidly in flower. The flower is on a rod of two or three
feet high, which rises perpendicularly from the centre of the
tree, and surrounds some half a yard of it in the manner of
the flower of the club rush, but white, and the florets
resemble those of the water tussilago.
During our meal we were terribly persecuted by “jumping
ants.” They were about half an inch long, and jumped sur-
prisingly. They were great flycatchers, and so far proved
themselves our benefactors, but we soon found that it was only
one pest giving place to another. These little black flies were,
even in this comparatively cool and shady spot, the most
impertinent, persevering vermin possible. The moment we
produced our meat from our saddle-bags, they covered it.
They also managed to settle on our hands and faces,
where they raised up blood blisters, and then sucked at them
till they burst. The moment the spots were raw, they thrust
as many of their heads in as they could, and so continually


irritated and enlarged the orifice. What was a mere scratch
became a sore under their incessant operations; and unless
such sore was speedily defended by handkerchiefs or gloves,
it would soon become a wound. Plaster was, not enough,
for they would suck and envenom the wound through it.
Insects are the pest of Australia. The gnats are terrible ;
then there are bull-dog ants, that fight for hours after they are
cut in half, and when they bite will not relax their hold though
beheaded. Another persecutor is the fierce mosquito; and
amongst Australian peculiarities of insect life are the centi-
pede, the scorpion, and tarantula spider, the latter being
called by the aboriginals triantawallagong. The bite of
either of these three last species of insect is extremely dan-
gerous, often proving fatal unless promptly treated by cutting
out the flesh around the bite and cauterizing the wound with
fire.
After we had discussed our beef and damper, enjoyed a
delicious drink from the creek, and had half an hour’s draw
at our pipes, we remounted and resumed our journey, making
another twelve miles before sunset, when we encamped for
the night, unsaddled our horses, hobbled them, lit the fire,
boiled some tea in our billy, and sat down to enjoy our
evening meal. Then we again had recourse to our pipes,
and at length rolling ourselves in our blankets, and with
the saddles for pillows, soon sunk into slumber both sound
and deep.
The second day’s journey was but a repetition of the first.
There is great monotony in bush travelling. The heat, the
thirst, the mosquitoes and other insects were the same ; the
only difference in the scenery was that every hour the tower-
ing mountain range we had to cross seemed looming larger
and mightier before us ; their summits, glittering in the sun-
light three thousand feet and more above the level plains we
were traversing, presented only a little deeper azure tint than
did the cloudless firmament above. Well did they deserve
their name of Blue Mountains.
On the afternoon of the second day after leaving Sydney
we were at their base ; and upon the earnest assurance of my
mate that he had crossed them at this point before, and knew


every inch of the way, I consented to attempt the ascent at
once, fully expecting, as it was only three o’clock and the
evenings getting long, we should encamp hy sunset on the
western side.
We were soon riding along a steep, narrow gully, with
almost precipitous sides, rising in lofty ridges that were
covered with loose rocks and scraggy gum trees, charred and
disfigured hy frequent bush fires. It was a dreary scene,
though here and there relieved hy groups of pines and other
eucalypti, with the jointed horsetail foliage of the shea oak,
and the gaudy blossoms of the blue wattle, while the tower-
ing peaks of Mount Gwallior rose gloomy and cloud-wreathed
above all.
“ Are you sure you will find the pass, Bootes 1 ” I asked;
“ because unless you are, it would he wiser to ride a matter
of twenty miles round and follow the regular waggon
track.”
“Oh, I’m all right. I know it, never fear,” retorted the
young trooper, with a laugh ; “ why, ’tis not two years since
I travelled it, man, and on my road to this very same Dune-
watha too. It saves a round of very nearly nineteen miles
by crossing the mountain here.”
“ And is it a pretty fair road for horses all the way % ” I
asked.
“ Why, as to that, I shouldn’t care to ride an unbroken
colt or a hroken-kneed old coach horse over some parts of
the track, hut with such nags as ours there is no hazard. In
fact, there is only one dangerous place, and that does not
continue for more than half a mile or so.”
“ And what is the nature of the danger, mate ? I am
unused to mountain scaling, and like to calculate my risks
beforehand.”
“ The place is called ‘ The Devil’s Eidge.’ It is a passage
along the side of one eminence which a cataract divides from
another. It is seldom broad enough for two horses to pass
each other, and often not room enough for one. It is hare
of all rail or fence ; in fact, it is impossible to fix any.”
“ And how deep is the precious precipice which this nar-
row pathway overlooks i ” I asked, nervously.


“ Deep 1 Oh, perhaps a thousand feet ; hut owing to the
narrowness of the gorge, the bottom is invisible.”
“ And into this gulf the slightest trip of a horse would
precipitate its rider—a worn shoe, a loose pebble, a nervous
twitch of the rein, would he certain death ? ”
“ Decidedly so ; and I can tell you of a very curious ad-
venture on this very same Devil’s Eidge.”
“ The devil you can ! Well, then, lire away, for you can
scarcely make me more nervous than I feel already.”
Eootes laughed. “It happened in this way,” he said.
“ Two horsemen met in the narrow pass. Such a thing
douhtfess never occurred before, and perhaps never may
again, the road is so rarely traversed; hut this once it did so
happen. Neither of the parties had space to hack his steed,
and so make room for the other to go by. They tossed up
which should sacrifice his horse. It fell to the lot of the
man ascending the ridge. He dismounted, pushed his horse
over the precipice into the gulf below, and then, snake-like,
crept between the legs of the descending horse and continued
his journey on foot.”
By the time my mate had concluded his story, which I
have narrated in as fevf words as possible, we had ascended
some three hundred feet of the mountain’s height, and beheld
a prospect of sea and land to the extent of a hundred and
twenty miles. Almost beneath was a roaring cataract;
to look down upon and listen to its hoarse brawl was enough
to appal more daring natures than my own. Still up and
up we went, the pathway having a zigzag tendency that
made the ascent anything but laborious. As we attained a
higher and yet a higher altitude, the change from heat to
cold became very apparent, and by the time we had left the
level plains some nine hundred feet below us, it was easy to
imagine one’s self transported from a tropical summer to a
bracing northern winter.
Australian mountains differ very much in appearance from
those of Europe, and this difference mainly consists in their
being wooded to such an altitude. In the Northern Hemi-
sphere it is rare to find a mountain bearing trees for more
than a few hundred feet of its height, whereas the hardy and


sombre eucalypti of Australia and Tasmania frequently
flourish to the very apex of mountains three thousand feet in
altitude. This, in my opinion, although it sometimes gives a
peculiar beauty of its own, in most cases detracts from the
majesty and awe-inspiring grandeur that would otherwise
distinguish the mountain ranges of Australia, while to the
eye it decreases the effect of their height by at least one-
third.
Eootes and I spoke little during the ascent; he looked
meditative and I felt nervous, for an indescribable feeling
had taken possession of me, to the effect that something
terrible would happen to one or both of us before we
descended to the level plain again. The very elements
seemed impressed with my ill-omened forebodings, for the
sky which had been so blue and sunny when we commenced
the ascent, was now flecked with heavy reefy clouds that
appeared to be hurrying to a common centre; great drops of
rain began to fall, and presently the dull rumble of a distant
thunder-peal fell upon our ears.
“ I fear we are in for a ducking, mate,” said Eootes, turning
in his saddle ; “ the rain comes down here in buckets full
when it once begins. Thank God our upward course is at an
end, for we are at last opposite the pass. We now skirt the
mountain, passing between it and its less lofty neighbour on
our right. In five minutes we shall be descending the
Devil’s Eidge.”
“ And suppose our horses are startled at a thunder-clap, or
shy at a lightning flash in such a spot I ” I asked.
“ Why, then ’twill he a long good night to Marmion,” he
answered, laughing; “ but don’t be afraid, friend, I think
the storm will hold off for another half-hour, and if not, our
horses are old stagers, and won’t be frightened in a hurry.”
As he spoke the sky momentarily brightened, and some-
what reassured, I replied, “ Well, go ahead, old fellow. You
appear to know the way, and where you lead you won’t find
me far behind.”
We had now done with ascents, and had to round the
mountain at about half the distance to its summit, in order
to descend on the opposite side. Our peril was now about to


commence. Eootes was right, in five minutes we were on the
Devil’s Eidge, amidst all the horrors of perhaps the most
dangerous and terrible mountain pass in the world.
We rode, of necessity, Indian file, Eootes at forty paces in
advance. The pathway was a yard wide, certainly never more,
and often somewhat less. On our left rose the precipitous
mountain side, a sheer cliff, to a height of at least a thousand
feet. On our right yawned a dire chasm, apparently bottom-
less, to a depth, as I afterwards learned, of nine hundred and
fifty feet; while from the bottom arose the roar of water, as
though seething and boiling from a subterranean Niagara. I
do not hesitate to affirm that at any part of the pass, had I
raised my arms in the shape of the letter T, the middle linger
of my left hand would have touched the black cliff; and a
pebble dropped perpendicularly from between the forefinger
and thumb of my right, would have fallen into the whirling
torrent below.
Luckily the path was good, being of rough rock, without a
loose stone to be seen.
Terrible and dangerous as the pass was, it seemed to instil
no alarm into the breast of my companion, who in the most
narrow parts would turn in his saddle to see how I was
getting on. His jet-black steed stepped out as gaily and as
steadily as though on a broad coach road. Suddenly, how-
ever, just when he was traversing one of the narrowest ledges
of the rock, a burst of thunder crashed through the narrow
defile, and a flame of forked lightning shot and danced
before his horse’s eyes. The animal reared, beat the air for a
moment with his fore-hoofs, and then plunged headlong into
space, precipitating himself and rider into the abyss below.
In an instant —in the twinkling of an eye —horse and
horseman had vanished for ever from my sight; and with my
steed reined in until his haunches pressed the dark mountain
side, whilst his fore-feet were planted in the rocky path within
a couple of inches of the precipice, I gazed in agony at the
fathomless grave that had so remorselessly swallowed up my
unfortunate companion.
How can I describe my feelings when I beheld this awful
spectacle, this hapless fate of one who, a moment before, in


all the pride and strength of manhood, was riding so gaily
along only a few yards before me 1 The blood that, but a
minute before, had been coursing healthfully through my
veins, seemed to freeze and suspend its functions, while my
brain appeared to reel about with lightness. It was a mercy
that I did not lose my seat in the saddle and fall headlong
after poor Jim Eootes. For at least an hour I must have
remained stationary at this spot, gazing with horror-stricken
yet almost imbecile stare down that dark abyss, until my
heart and head seemed on fire, and I was almost a maniac;
but, thank God, my reason at length returned, and I awoke
to all the dangers of my own position.
I found the rain pouring down in torrents ; the lightning
was one continuous blaze of light; while the heavy thunder-
peals, re-echoing again and again amid the mountain peaks
and stormy ravines, sounded like the roar of heavy artillery.
My horse was black with sweat and quivering with fear, as
with dilated nostrils and glaring eyes he, too, gazed into the
depths below him, as though terror was prompting him to
essay the leap.
I saw that his fore-legs, from being kept so long in one
position, were trembling, and the muscles strained. His
sure-footedness was no longer to be depended upon, so, after
a moment’s consideration, I reined him round with his head
down the pass, and freeing my feet from the stirrups, let the
bridle fall loosely on his neck, and then slipped to the
ground over his tail.
Even at this moment I tremble to think to what a terrible
fate a kick or even the slightest movement on his part would
have consigned me whilst I executed this manceuvre ; as it
happened, it was accomplished in safety, and I prepared to
descend the ridge on foot, driving my charger before me. It
was very slow progress. Sometimes the poor animal was so
frightened that neither threats nor coaxings had any effect
upon him, and he would stand trembling and whining most
piteously for some minutes without moving a step. The
rain, too, had made the rocky path slippery, and every dozen
paces or so he would slip out and nearly topple over the
precipice. Nevertheless, after another half-hour’s torture,


such as I never experienced before, and trust I never shall
again, I could see the end of the Devil’s Eidge about a
quarter of a mile before us, and the sloping mountain side
beyond.
Hope now reanimated my bosom, and I do believe the
poor borse felt it too, for he never loitered in his advance
until we were within a few yards from the end of the Eidge.
Then he stopped short, and no effort of mine would induce
him to move forward. Hot knowing the cause of this seem-
ing obstinacy, I looked over his back at the road in front,
and, to my horror and despair, perceived that a flash of
lightning had cleft the solid rock, and caused some couple of
yards in length of the pathway to slip into the gulf.
To scale the mountain side was next to impossible. My
horse could not do it ; and to manage a clear six-foot leap
without a run and in my present nervous state, was a matter
of no great certainty. I must, however, do this, or retrace
my way along the Devil’s Eidge over the path already tra-
versed. This I could by no means make up my mind to do.
Anything seemed preferable to re-crossing that terrible pass.
I made up my mind to sacrifice my horse, and then essay
the leap for life I
I could scarcely summon the heart to consign my noble
charger to so terrible a doom, but his death was a necessity,
and I steeled my heart for the sacrifice. I pushed him over,
and with one wild shriek (for horses can shriek when in ex-
treme terror, and the sound, though indescribable, if once
heard can never he forgotten) he disappeared from sight,
though his heavy rebound from rook to rock in his descent,
and ultimate dull splash into deep water at the bottom, rose
plainly to my ear.
I now divested myself of my sword, belt, and coat, and
threw them across the chasm ; then I braced myself for the
leap, keeping my eye steadily fixed upon the firm ground on
the other side, and refraining from glancing below, lest I
should turn giddy. At length I sprang —gained the opposite
bank, but my foot slipped—l lost my balance and fell back-
wards, luckily clutching the spreading branches of a shrub
in my descent, and thus saving myself from instant death.


Was I saved ? or was it a few minutes’ respite only 1
The shrub to which I clung grew from out a cleft in the
rock. It was about a yard below the surface. Beneath me
yawned the terrible chasm that divided the two mountains.
Did the branch give way or my strength fail I knew that T
should drop like a plummet into the torrent that roared
beneath me. Then arose the thought, “ Could I scale the
cliff, and so reach the pathway above?” Alas ! one glance
at the dark slippery rock, without a single excrescence to
aid foot or hand, forbade the thought. Death seemed inevit-
able.
Suddenly I perceived a shelving cliff upon which it might
be possible to obtain a foothold. The question was, how to
reach it; it was a desperate resource even for one so fearfully
situated as myself. I glanced at the base of the shrub that
bore me; it appeared to be firmly rooted, and not likely to
give way. The branch which I grasped was long, sinewy,
and tough. The idea struck me that I might, by swaying
my body to and fro, give it and the branch the momentum
of a pendulum, increasing it gradually so as at last to be able
to swing myself on to the shelving cliff.
This notion had scarcely occurred to my mind when a new
horror appalled me. Close to the roots of the shrub two small
glittering eyes met mine, their metallic lustre seemed to
fascinate me. Then I saw a forked tongue, and a flat, wedge-
shaped head, which presently began to undulate from side to
side as it approached me. The next instant I was aware of
the dreadful fact that it was a diamond snake, one of the
most venomous of its species; it had marked me as its
victim.
My failing strength would not allow me to raise a hand
to guard my face ; the reptile was about to spring. At that
moment a voice seemed to whisper in my ear, “ The shelving
rock—leap, and you are saved.” As the voice prompted so
I acted: by a vigorous jerk I gave the branch a sudden
impetus ; two swings, and I sprang boldly from it, alighting
on the jutting crag in safety.
I now clambered up the rough side of the shelving rock,
an angle of which presently hid the Devil’s Eidge and its


dread ravine from view. Then my steps tottered, my eyes
grew dim, myriads of fiery stars seemed to sparkle around
me, and I fell to the ground in a swoon.
I must have lain thus for hours—yes, the whole night.
When I recovered consciousness the sun was just rising over
the mountain tops. It was a glorious morning. A thousand
feet beneath spread a vast level country, with white stations
dotted here and there, few and far between. I felt very
weak, hut was able to crawl down the mountain side, and
about an hour later reached its base. Here, happily —for I
was almost dying of thirst and hunger—l came across a
shepherd’s hut. I stayed there the day and night. The
next morning at dawn I set out for Dunewatha, and reached
the out-station of mounted police, to which I was bound,
about an hour before sundown.


THE LUBEA’S EEVENGE; OE, THE
FIEE AT GAEEYONG.
One day during the five weary months that I was quartered
at Dunewatha, as I was sitting upon a rude bench in front of
our wooden station, having a draw at my pipe while survey-
ing discontentedly the dust-dimmed, sun-scorched landscape
around, and feeling disgusted with myself, the service, and
everything else sublunary, my attention was attracted by the
sudden appearance of a little black boy, half naked, riding a
great brown stock horse at full gallop towards the station.
In a few minutes more he was alongside of me, and with no
little difficulty induced his animal to stop.
“ Hallo, Snowball! what do you want!” I said.
I can’t very well imitate the broken English of the Aus-
tralian natives, much as I have been amongst them, so I won’t
attempt it here. Suffice it to say, that with many interjections
and gesticulations he informed me that Mrs. Captain Leslie,
of the Garryong Station, had told him to ride as hard as he
could to our outpost, and bring back with him a trooper or
constable as quickly as possible. More than this he did not
know, so the nature of the service required could not even be
guessed at.
The proverb says that “ where ignorance is bliss ’tis folly
to be wise,” so consoling myself that it might be so in the
present instance, I told one or two of my mates where I was
going, and then saddling my bay charger and furbishing my-
self up to the nines, on account of there being a lady in the
case, I informed the black imp on the stock horse that I was


at his service, and away we trotted on our twenty-five miles’
ride through the bush.
Arrived at our destination, I was at once ushered into the
presence of the lady of the house, whom I found to be a
buxom., good-looking woman, of about forty years of age,
wearing a stout cotton gown, and with her sleeves tucked up
to her elbows, and her white fat arms dusted with flour,
whilst strips of dough adhered to her fingers. This deshabille
was accounted for by a half-manufactured pumpkin pie which
stood on the deal table.
“ I believe I address Mrs. Leslie?” I said, with a bow, on
entering the room.
“ Yes, I am Mrs. Leslie; sit down, sir,” she rejoined, point-
ing to a. seat.
I then asked her the nature of the service required of me,
and she told me the following tale: —
“ For the past three months the station had been much
frequented with the blacks. At first only one or two had
made their appearance, but the regularity with which damper
and scraps of meat had been given to them had no doubt
caused others to repair to so desirable a locality. The first
recipients of Mrs. Leslie’s bounty had been a tall lanky abori-
ginal and his lubra (wife), with a couple of piccaninnies; but
by and by, brothers, sisters, aunts, uncles, fathers, mothers,
cousins, and still more remote relatives, had swelled the list
of recipients to such ah extent, that often ten or twelve men,
women, and children would at the same time be clamouring
at the doors and windows of the home station for damper,
mutton, baccy, and rum. This, of course, became an intoler-
able nuisance, and at length supplies were stopped altogether;
and day after day the mortified blacks had to go away empty-
handed. Seeing that no one helped them, these rascals
thought that they would help themselves. Sheep and lambs
began to be missed pretty frequently, one or two dogs were
speared; everything left out of doors at night was sure to be
stolen before morning, and, in short, Mrs. Leslie’s sable friends
soon became terrible bores. At length matters reached a
crisis. A new overseer had been appointed on the station, a
man not over-scrupulous as to trifles. He had come from the


Southern States of America, and had there learnt to regard
a black man in the light of a chattel. One day he had hung
some shirts outside his hut to dry, and, as at nightfall they
were still damp, he did not take them in, thinking, that as
his dog was loose, the blacks would be afraid to come near.
He was mistaken. An aboriginal did come, speared his dog,
and stole his shirts. The dying howl of the dog awoke its
master, who sprang to the window and saw the thief making
off with his shirts. He seized his revolver, rushed after him,
and shot him dead, leaving him to lie where he fell. The next
day his body was discovered by his countrymen, whose worst
passions were now aroused. To them stealing was no crime;
perhaps, in their uncivilized code of morals, a positive virtue.
The widow of the unfortunate black fellow went to the home
station, and poured her complaints into the ear of Mrs. Leslie,
whose husband was at the time in Sydney on business con-
nected with the wool sales, and not expected home for three
or four days. She asked for justice; for the death of the over-
seer. Mrs. Leslie’s promise that he should be discharged and
sent away did not satisfy her; it was his blood, his life, that
she required. This she begged and entreated, but of course
Mrs. Leslie would not grant her request. Then the lubra,
seeing that she had only a nervous woman to deal with, be-
gan to threaten. She knew that Mr. Leslie would not return
for some days, that there were only three or four men around
the station, so she swore that Captain Leslie should never set
eyes on his home more, that he should be waylaid and mur-
dered on his return from Sydney; that Garryong should be
burnt to the ground; and lastly, what was a more terrible
threat than all to the fond mother, that her only child, a
sweet little girl of about five years of age, should be stolen
from her and brought up as a savage. Mrs. Leslie was too
much alarmed by these threats to take any steps to prevent
the woman’s leaving the house, but an hour after her departure
had despatched a messenger to the police out-station, the
result of which, as the reader is aware, was my present visit.
At the conclusion of her narrative Mrs. Leslie asked my
opinion on the matter.
I confess I was rather puzzled to answer her; I was not


much, acquainted with, the characteristics and habits of the
aboriginal population, though I knew them to he cruel and
revengeful, hut at the same time rank cowards. I therefore
advised Mrs. Leslie to keep the child as much as possible in
the house for the next few days; and recommended that to
guard against any act of incendiarism on the part of the blacks,
two of the station hands should he on the alert all night, and
keep walking around the homestead. I promised to use
every endeavour to capture the luhra, and get her punished
for her threats. All the consolation, however, that I could
offer did not seem to pacify Mrs. Leslie; she was in a terribly
nervous state, and begged me to stay at the station for a day
or two as a guard. At last I promised to do so, and writing
a letter to my mates at the outpost, stating the reason of my
non-return, and desiring them to look out for the black
woman, and if they could find her to lose no time in locking
her up, I prepared to make myself at home amid the comforts
that now surrounded me.
That night the mother and her little girl slept in a room
next the one allotted to me. Both rooms were on the ground-
floor ; the station being, like most of its class, only one story
high. The windows, which were French ones, were nearly
level with the ground outside, and overlooked the large,
smoothly mown lawn, which sloped down to a small creek
whose waters sparkled at its base. Mrs. Leslie, according to
my advice, carefully bolted her windows on the inside, while
I left mine wide open, and went to sleep with my loaded
revolver under my pillow.
We must both have slept very soundly, for it was broad
daylight on the following morning when I was awoke by a
wild cry of despair from the adjoining room. I immediately
sprang out of bed, dressed, and then knocked at Mrs. Leslie’s
door. She opened it at once. I noticed that she was clad
in a richly embroidered silk dressing-gown. Her face was
pale as death.
“ Mr. Brooke, my little girl is gone ! ” she exclaimed, and
then fainted.
I summoned her maid, and then examined the fastenings
of the window. I saw that the thief had entered the apart-


merit by skilfully taking out two panes of glass, one at the
top, the other at the bottom of the window, and then inserting
a hand through the aperture and withdrawing the bolts.
On the lawn and on the paths I noticed the impress of a
foot, which from its smallness I knew to be a woman’s.
Thus I became aware that the lubra had fulfilled one of her
three threats.
I did not allow myself any time to partake of breakfast
that morning. I hastily swallowed a cup of coffee and then
mounted my horse. The lubra’s footprints led down to the
creek. Here of course the trail failed; and upon crossing
over, I could not recover it on the opposite bank. I scoured
the country all day, but not a black was to be seen anywhere,
and at nightfall, with a lame horse and a sorrowful heart, I
returned to Garryong, where I found Mrs. Leslie in a wild
delirium, occasioned by the loss of her child and her increasing
fears for her husband’s safety.
Painful incidents were not, however, to come singly.
While I was sitting down to a beefsteak and a cup of tea,
a servant rushed in with the intelligence that the bush
was on fire, and that a stiff breeze from the west was blowing
the conflagration towards the home station.
I at once rushed out into the verandah, and there a grand
spectacle met my gaze.
It was night. About a mile from the station rose a hill
called Cat’s Back, doubtless because its shape was like that
of a cat’s back when erected in a passion. This hill was
some hundred and fifty feet in height, and covered with trees.
It now presented an imposing sight. An Australian Vesuvius
or Etna it fairly seemed, rising with fiery grandeur amid the
darkness of the surrounding forest, which looked more sombre
than usual on account of the ruddy blaze that enveloped tree
and shrub from near the base to the very summit of the
mount. The fire spread with such rapidity as soon to cover
the whole face of the hill as seen from the station with one
sheet of flame, so that it looked like a vast orb of solid fire,
rising over a w T orld of darkness.
Presently the scene changed : the scattering flames of fire,
swept by the wind away into the thick undergrowth, served


to kindle new mischief, and to enlarge the scope of devasta-
tion. The sight now was one of the grandest description.
I could hear the roar of the flames as they careened through
the compact wood, and every now and then the ear was
stunned by the falling of burning timber in every direction.
Occasionally, as one of the old giants of the forest succumbed
to the fury of the fire and fell crashing amongst the crackling
underwood, the flames would leap up a hundred feet into
the air, and throw up a myriad fiery stars to twice that
altitude.
The fire moved on at the rate of at least a mile and a half
an hour towards the devoted station, which was now in terri-
ble danger, as the long yellow grass, dry as tinder, grew up
to the very out-buildings, which, with the roof of the home-
stead itself, were of wood.
Had there been no wind, or had it blown in any other
direction than towards the station, danger might have been
averted by ourselves setting fire to the grass for a radius of a
quarter of a mile around, thus preventing the onward rush
of the bush fire by depriving it of further material on which
to feed. As matters stood, however, this ruse could be of no
service, and so, as a last resource, the station hands began to
pack waggons with the furniture and other valuables pre-
paratory to retreating before the destroyer.
The lire had now spread into a vast conflagration, occupy-
ing at least two miles in breadth, and exhibiting a moving
mass of flame surmounted by dense clouds of smoke, awful
in grandeur and extent. Already sparks began to fall around
us ; the air was so hot that it blistered our hands and faces,
while we were half suffocated with the smoke which curled
over our heads in sulphureous wreaths.
The horses were at last in the waggons, having been blind-
folded before being brought out of their stalls, so that the
unnatural light should not frighten them; for the lurid
flames had dispelled the darkness so effectually that the
smallest print would have been readable.
Mrs. Leslie was now led out by her maid. Her delirium
had passed away, but she was very pale. As she was about
to mount one of the waggons she recognised me, and said


sadly, “The second threat of the black woman is accom-
plished; perhaps by this time the third also, for I had a
letter from my husband this morning saying that he might
be home to-night.”
By this time the roar of the flames behind the station was
like the sound of a cataract. The swift-winged beetle and
flocks of wild birds flew over our heads; fleet, bounding
kangaroos and long-legged emus passed by on the other
side of the cockatoo fence that encircled the home pad-
dock, frightened by the flames in their rear; then, with
discordant howls, a pack of dingoes, or native dogs, swept
by at full speed. The fire was now within a quarter of
a mile from the house, and the waggons began to move
away.
I had mounted my charger, having first blindfolded him,
but drew rein for a moment to take a last glance at the
scene. It was an awful sight; a sea of fire, roaring in its
fury, with its heaving, leaping waves, and unearthly hisses,
approaching each moment nearer and nearer. I turned my
back on the destroyer, and was about to ride after the
waggons, when, to my intense surprise, I was greeted by a
strong gust of wind directly in my face—a spiteful, uncertain
blast, blowing crabwise, but yet for a minute it caused me a
greater, a more exquisite pleasure than the softest, balmiest
English summer breeze could have done. Another steady
blow from the same direction completed my satisfaction, for
I knew that the wind had suddenly changed, veered, in fact,
directly around, and was now blowing half a gale from the
east.
What a refreshing change this cool, invigorating wind was
from the hot dry furnace blast that had surrounded me a
moment before ! but it was not this that overjoyed me. It
was the fact that the station might yet be saved, for if the
breeze kept up from its present direction the fire could
advance no further.
A lusty cheer from the distance at this moment told me that
Mrs. Leslie and the station hands had made a similar dis-
covery. I rode into the paddock, and saw the waggons re-
turning to the station. Presently the blue sky was visible


overhead, the stars sparkled out—the whole voice of nature
seemed to echo, “ Thus far shalt thou come and no further.”
When Mrs. Leslie descended from the waggon, the expres-
sion of her countenance was far more hopeful than when she
had entered it. Perhaps she thought, that as an Almighty
power had interposed and saved her property, so it would
interpose also to save her child. I own that I had such a
presentiment when, dismounting hy her side, I said respect-
fully, “ If you can let me have a fresh horse from your stables,
I will again set out and seek your little girl.”
She turned towards me and said, with a faint smile, “ I
fear I am taxing your kindness greatly. You have under-
gone much fatigue since the morning, and must require
rest.”
“ Pardon me, madam, I will rest when my work is accom-
plished. lam quite up to another hush ride, and, in short,
I have my reasons for setting out at once.”
“ Indeed! have you any hopes, then 3” eagerly inquired
the mother.
“ I have, Mrs. Leslie, hut I would rather not explain them
now,” I answered, and to avoid further questioning, I bowed
and moved off towards the stables.
Pive minutes later, mounted on a strong stock horse, I was
riding at full speed from the station.
How the idea that had occurred to me was this. The
luhra, either alone or with other blacks, had no doubt set fire
to the hush just on the ridge-of Cat’s Back Hill, trusting
that the strong wind would speedily urge the flames forward
until they destroyed the station. Most probably, then, the
incendiary or incendiaries would remain in concealment some-
where behind this hill until they either discovered that their
plan had been successful, or until the change of wind blew
the fire hack in their faces and caused them to retreat before
it. My plan was therefore to round the conflagration and
get in its rear, where very likely I might find the luhra and
the stolen child. One thing I felt sure of, which was, that
if I did not make the capture now, the probability was that
I might never be able to do so, as doubtless, after so flagrant
an act of hostility the blacks would make themselves scarce,


and, with the little girl, proceed perhaps some hundreds of
miles into the far interior, whither it would he folly and
madness to pursue them.
I pushed my horse on as speedily as possible, riding along
the whole front of the conflagration, and as near to it as the
heat would allow.
It was now three o’clock in the morning; the fire had
already raged for eight hours, and I found the front to he
about six miles long. At last, however,. I succeeded in
rounding it, and half an hour later I gained its rear, or rather
what had been its rear; for it was now, as a matter of course,
its front, the wind having changed completely round. Cat’s
Back Hill now seemed in about the centre of the conflagra-
tion, and I had to make a wide detour to steer clear of the
advancing flames.
I had ridden in this manner about a couple of miles
further, and had given up almost all hopes of coming across
the lubra, when I noticed a movement amid the scrub on my
left. At first I fancied it might be caused by a snake or some
wild animal, hut when I looked again I perceived the face of
a black fellow peer for a moment above the hushes and then
duck under cover. The next moment a spear glanced by me,
so close that it grazed my shoulder.
“ Hang it! ” thought I, “ these rascals are in ambush, and
I shall never attain my object unless I hit upon some clever
scheme to outwit them.” While these thoughts occupied my
attention a waddy whizzed through the air and came crack
right against my stout leather shako with such a hearty good
will that it made my head ring again. Thank Heaven, how-
ever, it did not stagger me or confuse my senses for an instant.
On the contrary, it enabled me to put the plot I had been
hatching in my brain into execution. The very moment the
waddy hit me, therefore, I fell from my horse, and lay as if
dead. I knew that the stock horse was too old a hand to
leave the spot, and as for the savages, as long as he stood by
me and my revolver held a single charge, I did not care a pin
for them.
My reason for this ruse I will explain. I was sufficiently
acquainted with the habits of the blacks to know, that directly


they saw me fall from my horse and lie still, they would all
rush out of ambush and surround me, thinking I was dead. If
the revengeful luhra was amongst the party, the child would
doubtless he in her arms or by her side, so that by springing
suddenly up I might he able to wrest it from her, and then
make the whole party scamper away by showing them my
firearms ; for a white man with a six-chamhered Colt or
Adams, may, in open ground, drive a score or so of these
black fellows before him like a flock of sheep,—the abo-
rigines of Australia, or at least those south of Queens-
land, being about the rankest cowards on the face of the
globe.
I had hardly been on the ground a minute when I saw a
dusky form creep out of the scrub, then came another, and
another, until I counted a dozen. I was sadly afraid I had
taken all my trouble for nothing, when, to my joy, a thir-
teenth form sprang from out the cover, and my heart heat
quickly, for I saw that it was a woman, and that a white
child was clutched in her arms.
I now held my breath, and half closed my eyes.
Cautiously they came nearer, and at last surrounded me,
dancing, screaming, and indulging in such an exuberant
“ yabher ! yahher ! ” that it nearly deafened me. The woman
at first held aloof, hut presently she came right up to me, and
endeavoured to tear a button from my coat ; doubtless the
glittering silver had attracted her.
Here was the very opportunity I had longed for; with
one hound I sprang to my feet, I dragged the child out of
her arms, and, drawing my revolver, cried, “ Away, you
rascals, or I’ll shoot every mother’s son of you ! ”
By Jove ! there was not a single one of them man enough
to hurl a spear or throw a boomerang or waddy. They turned
tail and ran for the scrub, and with equal speed I sprang
into the saddle, placed the child before me, and set spurs to
my horse. The savages, brave enough now that they were
hid behind the scrub again, hurled a shower of missiles at
me. One spear tore up the sleeve of my coat, another
grazed my ear, while a waddy hit the horse on the flank. In
another minute, however, we were clear of danger, and an


hour later I reached Garryong station, and restored the little
girl to her mother.
A happier meeting than that it has never been my lot to
witness ; and as if to complete Mrs. Leslie’s joy, just as she
had kissed her rescued darling for about the hundredth
time, the sound of a horse’s hoofs were audible without, fol-
lowed by heavy footsteps in the passage, and the next
moment the dining-room door was thrown open, and a rough,
manly voice exclaimed, “ Why, what the deuce brings you all
up at this hour in the morning?” The owner of the voice,
ere the sentence was concluded, entered the apartment. He
was a fine, burly, red-headed country gentleman, and with a
cry of joy Mrs. Leslie placed the child on the sofa, and
threw herself into his arms.
It was Mr. Leslie, returned safe from Sydney, and thus
neither of the lubra's three threats were accomplished suc-
cessfully. As for the woman herself, I never saw or heard
of her more, for in spite of all our efforts to catch her, lest
she might plan and execute further mischief, she eluded us,
and with her party fled, without doubt, into the interior, to
escape a dreaded retribution.
After a hearty breakfast, and a very handsome present
received from Mr. Leslie, I quitted Garryong, on my return
to our out-station. By this time the fire had somewhat
abated, but though in one or two places it seemed to be
quite extinguished, a fallen tree would occasionally light up
the charred, blackened scrub again, and send a thousand
sparkling stars of fire towards the now sunlit sky. All
danger from the conflagration,'however, was past, though it
continued to smoulder for another couple of days, when a
summer thunder-shower extinguished it altogether.


THE ACE OF SPADES.
A SCENE IN A SYDNEY GAMBLING SALOON IN 1855.
When I was quartered in Sydney in tire year 1855, that city
did not wear the quiet, dull, English market-town appear-
ance that it does at present. The gold fever was not yet
decidedly on the wane, aud bright-shirted diggers from
Ophir, Bathurst, and other inland gold fields were still the
lions of George and Pitt Streets, and the principal person-
ages which the caterers of public amusement sought to
please.
They were rough fellows most of them, hut the majority
were honest, while not a few possessed gentle blood and a
university education. There were, however, as a matter of
course, many roughs amongst so large a number, and some
villains of the deepest dye. Fellows of this latter class
were always to be met with amid the purlieus of Sussex or
Cumberland Streets, or at night in the many low play-houses
and gambling-saloons that were so prevalent in the neigh-
bourhood of York Street or Brickfield HilL
I had often listened to descriptions of the interior of one
or other of these temples devoted to the deity—cards ; and
one night, being off duty, I determined to set out in search
of adventures, and penetrate the mysteries of one or two of
the most notorious of these places ere my return.
After attending the Victoria Theatre, therefore, where I
witnessed a very lengthy melodrama of the “ Jonathan
Wilde ” and “ Newgate Calendar ” stamp, I discussed some


prime oysters (for Sydney rock oysters are equal in flavour to
London natives), together with a pint of stout, and it being
hy this time about eleven o’clock, I marched off to a gaming-
house which I knew to he situated on the Brickfield Hill
side of Pitt Street.
When I entered the room the clouds of tobacco smoke
were so dense, that for a few minutes I could not perceive
anything clearly, hut in a little while I became used to it,
and then a strange scene presented itself.
It was a very large room, but low, and, to my idea, exces-
sively dirty. At one end was a bar, with its usual back-
ground of bottle-laden shelves. A very stout, brown-wigged,
red-nosed woman, of dubious age, was presiding over this
department; and, to judge from her vacant smiles, and the
frequent mistakes she made in drawing the wrong liquors,
she must have been already considerably more than fuddled.
Scattered throughout the rest of the room were deal
tables of every size and form, around which sat as motley
groups as it is possible to conceive—swell diggers, distin-
guished by their loud-patterned shirts and Chinese silk
scarfs, mingled with stockdrivers, navvies, sailors, loafers,
and every other variety of the genus “ scamp.”
All kinds of games were in progress, but cards seemed to
be the favourite pastime; and I had hardly been in the
room ten, minutes when I became absorbed in a game of
whist waged fiercely between a couple of diggers on the one
side and a brace of—as I had no doubt—out-and-out sharpers
on the other.
They were “ game and game ” when I first approached
their table, and hi the third one of the rub the diggers had
crept up a single point at a deal to “ three by cards,” when,
in the fifth deal, their opponents marked “ four by honours,”
but purposely lost the trick, thus making the game “ four
all.” I could see that the honours were obtained by trickery,
and that the single point by cards which would have secured
them the rubber was lost intentionally, for the reason, I had
no doubt, of encouraging betting. Anyhow it had that
effect, for the diggers were half-screwed, and were willing to
give and take any odds that the Tub was theirs. The result


was, that although they were playing at a guinea a point, in
addition to ten guineas on the rubber, they were let into
some twenty-five pounds each in bets.
It went against my grain to stand by and see the poor
fellows so chiselled, and I whispered a warning to the elder
and more sober of the two, but the reply I got was a leer of
drunken cunning, and a threatening scowl from one of the
sharpers who overheard me. In spite of this, I determined
to foil the rogues if possible. It was now the turn of the
younger of the gamesters to deal, and as he took up the cards
for that purpose, I saw the deuce of clubs at the bottom of
the pack, but in the middle of the deal, with a quick move-
ment of the hand, he slipped this bottom instead of the top
card to the player on his left, and when the trump came to
be turned up it proved to be the ace of spades.
I looked over his partner’s shoulder as he sorted his cards,
and saw that he held the king, knave, and five small trumps,
and at the same moment a tall, gaunt fellow, who throughout
the rubber had been overlooking the two diggers’ cards,
knocked the ash from his cigar with two applications of his
little finger, spitting at the same time on the floor to Ms left.
I knew that the expectoration in this direction meant spades,
and that the number of times he touched -his cigar signified
the number of trumps in the hand of the digger, while the
peculiar flourish of his little finger at the close intimated
that one of them was an honour.
The game was of course played out; the rogues, as a
necessary consequence, won ; and the diggers, half-sobered
by their losses, were about to hand over the stakes.
“Stop, mates,” I said. “You have been cheated. In-
stead of parting with your gold, just help me to give these
fellows into custody.”
“ Liar ! ” screamed one of the blacklegs. “ Prove your
words, or by G — I’ll knife you.”
“ I can easily do that,” I replied. “ Hand over your pack,
and I will prove that you have been playing with brief*
* Brief packs have the court cards a trifle longer, the minor cards a
trifle broader than the others. In cutting them the sharper can always
secure a court card in trumps, andi vice versd.


cards; and as for your tall friend, he has been performing
the old piping * trick, and revealing the cards held by your
dupes throughout the rubber. Give me the ace of spades,
the last trump turned up, and I will show you the comer
Joend-\ on it.”
The uproar that arose when I made this disclosure defies
description. I had thought that there were as many honest
men in the room as blackguards, hut I was mistaken. The
few who were there slipped away, and in a minute or two
the two diggers, who had succeeded in pocketing their
stakes, and myself, were fighting for our very lives to escape
from the house into the street.
“ The ace of spades is it that ye want, ye ’tarnal skunk 1 ”
growled one of the sharpers, a gigantic fellow with the
strength of an ox ; and as he spoke, he pressed the card
against my chest with his left hand, while with his right he
drove a long-bladed knife into my body, right through the
card, thus nailing it to me.
The whole thing was done so suddenly that I had no time
to avoid the stroke, but after I received it, I sprang at my
assassin, and floored him with one blow, falling over him
insensible the moment I had done so.
When consciousness returned I found myself in the
hospital; my wound was being dressed. The ace of spades,
still transfixed by the knife, lay on the floor close by. Two
inches or so of its blade was stained with blood.
My wound proved very troublesome. I was in the hos-
pital six weeks, and it was a much longer time before I was
quite restored to health.
With regard to the other actors in the scene at the gaming
house, the two diggers escaped with a few bruises, and,
what is more, succeeded in carrying away their cash with
them. Before I left Sydney they presented me with a
handsome watch as a souvenir of their gratitude for the
pecuniary losses from which I had saved them. Two of the
, * So called because a pipe is generally used, and tbe disposing of
the fingers on the pipe whilst smoking discovers the principal cards in
the hand of the person he overlooks.
t Four cards turned down finely at one corner, —a signal to cut by.


rascally cardsliarpers escaped, but the tall fellow who had
stabbed me was arrested three days later, and in return for
his bit of knife work got three years’ penal servitude. Since
the expiration of that sentence he has turned bushranger,
been captured, and is now a convict for life.


THEEE GOLDEN HATES.
It was towards the close of 1855 that I joined the detective
force of Adelaide, South Australia. One bright November
morning I stepped on hoard the steamer Wollongong at
Sandridge, and after a rapid passage reached the third
rising city of “ the Empire of the Southern Seas.”
I confess that I was at first delighted with Adelaide, for
I found it a town, or rather city, presenting a contrast —and
a very marked one —to both Melbourne and Sydney. The
streets were bordered with Norfolk pines, giving it an
American air, while the remarkably clean-looking houses
with their verandahs, gardens, and bright green jalousies,
and the attractive outward appearance presented by the
shops, many of which displayed as choice an assortment of
wares as Eegent or New Bond Street establishments could
do, rendered it almost possible to imagine oneself trans-
planted to an European city, the more so as Adelaide was
the chief German resort in Australia, and the language of
the “fatherland” was as frequently heard in its streets as
the dialect of the Celt or Saxon.
Adelaide presents many features worthy of remark. It is
divided into two distinct portions, north and south, the
former comprising an area of 300 acres, the latter 700. The
streets are systematically laid out, being twenty-two in
number, and intersecting each other at right angles. They
are from 60 to 130 feet wide. Squares, a rare thing in
Australian towns, are met with here and there, and a large
area of park land that environs the city is reserved for a
boulevard for the recreation of the inhabitants.
The population of Adelaide when I first arrived there


was about 20,000; it has since then much increased. An
assessment of one shilling per pound on the rental amounted,
X recollect, to £5,500, which will afford some idea of the
value of house property at that time. South Adelaide, the
commercial quarter, bore a thriving aspect, its business being
chiefly concentrated about Eundle, Bindley, and King Wil-
liam Streets, though many others almost equalled them
in bustle. These streets resemble those of an English
country town. Drapers, grocers, and others, revelled in
spacious well-stocked premises. Members of the Jewish per-
suasion ruled over cheap clothing depots on a very extensive
scale ; and some very imposing stone edifices, yclept “ stores,”
especially attracted my attention. These latter belonged to
merchants, and were used for the reception of English goods,
which were thence sold wholesale to retail dealers, squatters,
and country residents.
Most shopkeepers I found dealt in the general way, sup-
plying that multifarious description of articles which, under
the comprehensive term of “notions,” are to be had at
Yankee stores ; but these things are altered now in America,
I hear. Adelaide tradesmen, I found, fully appreciated the
advantage of puffing, for I discovered that pretended failures
and sellings off were common ruses to draw attraction, whilst
tempting announcements through the medium of tickets,
informing the public of the sacrifices they were prepared to
make, met your eye in every street.
Amusements, too, were numerous, —a capital theatre, two
or three public rooms, concert halls, dancing saloons, &c.,
being sprinkled here and there. In fact, the city of Ade-
laide affords a striking proof of the notable saying that “the
Anglo-Saxon reproduces his country wherever he plants his
country’s flag,” for although South Australia had been then
colonized only about twenty years, the traveller who visited
this capital in 1855 might, in perambulating its business
streets, imagine himself in Exeter, Gloucester, or Worcester,
whilst its more retired quarters would, to a German, seem
as if a lump of his “ fatherland ” had suddenly dropped
before him from the moon.
But I must cease description, and at once commence the


narration of a most remarkable case in which I was destined
to form one of the chief actors shortly after my arrival in
Adelaide.
Early one morning, as I was sitting in my office reading
the Melbourne papers, a young man, with tears in his eyes,
came to give information that a girl, named Lucy Eloyd, re-
siding at No. 36, Brownlow Street, and by profession a circus
rider, had been discovered lying dead in her bedroom on the
second floor, and that there was a suspicion of foul play in
the matter. I at once intimated to my informant that I
would accompany him to Brownlow Street and personally
investigate the matter, and a quarter of an hour later we
stood in the room where the dead girl still lay in her long,
last sleep.
She was lying on her back ; her head was on the hearth-
rug ; her feet nearly touched the foot of the bedstead. The
only article of clothing she had on was her nightdress. Her
face was pale, but from its expression I could tell that her
last moments had been free from pain.
Upon examination of the body, I could not discover any
clue as to how she had come by her death. There was no
wound, no blood, no marks of violence, with the exception of
a trifling swelling on the left temple. It also seemed to me
as if some hairs had been lost from the left eyebrow. As for
the swelling, it was of so trivial a nature that I never for a
moment imagined it sufficient to cause death, and I continued
my investigations, —smelling her nostrils and half parted lips
to see whether I could detect the fumes of ether or chloro-
form, examining the muscles of the throat and the eyes for
any significations of suffocation, and the colour of the tongue
and rigidity of the fingers for symptoms of a death by poison.
I could make nothing of it, and felt satisfied that the dis-
covery of the cause of death rested with the medical profession
at the inquest. I was convinced, however, that the poor girl
was murdered, but more, I own, from a kind of mysterious
impression to that effect than from any definite course of
reasoning.
A glance around the room assured me that the murder, if
murder it was, could not have been committed for the sake


of plunder, as a valuable gold watch, a purse containing
money, and some rings, lay on the toilet-table.
I now carefully searched the apartment for any traces left
by an intruder, but could find none, with the exception of a
small piece of plaster, which lay on the floor just under the
window. The room being papered this could not have come
from the walls, nor could it have fallen from the ceiling, for
that was painted pink, whereas the plaster was whitewashed.
X consequently concluded that it came from the outside wall,
and opened the window to make further investigations.
Further and more important clues now presented them-
selves. Fortunately the window-frame on the outside had
been newly painted, and on the ledge was the impress of a
thumb and three fingers. From their position I could tell
that they had been so placed for the purpose of lifting the
sash. I discovered also that a minute portion of the stone
window sill was chipped off, as though by an iron-rimmed
boot heel; and what was still more important, about a yard
or so below this window sill a fragment of plaster had been
knocked from the whitewashed wall, which from its shape
could have been none other than the piece that I had picked
up in the bedroom. How the assassin had mounted to the
window was also apparent, for a leaden spout ran from the
garden below up to the roof, passing the window at a distance
of about a couple of feet, and this spout also bore scratches
from nail-shod boots. Upon descending the stairs, and going
out into the garden, I found that there were footmarks leading
from its western corner, outside which ran a narrow right-of-
way called “ A’Beckett Lane,” right up to the base of the spout
before-mentioned and back again. These footprints were very
large, and the boots that made them would seem to have
belonged to a harcl-working countryman or navvy, from the
clinker-shod sides and the number of great hob-nails in the
soles of them. I say would seem to have belonged, because
I did not for a moment believe that they did belong to either
a countryman or navvy; and the fact that these footprints
were impressed deeply into the ground, and that their wearer
had crossed flower beds, and such places as were most likely
to retain their impression, convinced me that the murderer


had cunningly worn these large hoots for the purpose of
throwing the authorities off the scent in any investigations
they might make.
Having concluded my search, I placed a constable in charge
of the room where the dead girl lay, with orders that no one
should he allowed to enter until the arrival of the coroner,
whom I sent for at once; and then adjourning to the sitting-
room down stairs, I begged the young man who had first
brought me the intelligence of the murder, and who was the
only son of the lodging-house keeper, to tell me as much as
he could of the antecedents of the deceased.
From him I learned that the circus in which Lucy Floyd
(or to quote the play-hills “ Madlle. Duroc”) performed had
been in Adelaide about a month, and during the whole of
that time she had lodged at his mother’s house, occupying the
same bedroom on the second floor, and taking her meals with
the family. She was a very quiet, well-behaved girl, regular
in her habits, and always at home a few minutes after the
performance was over of an evening. The young man then
told me that he had been engaged to her about a week, and
that preparations had already been made for their approach-
ing marriage.
“ Was your engagement to her generally known ?” I asked.
“ Only to one or two individuals,” was the reply.
“ Had you any rival in the young lady’s affections 2” I next
inquired.
“ Yes, one; Mr. McDonald the clown had been very atten-
tive to her, and asked her to marry him the very day after
she had accepted me. Lucy told me that he was sadly put
out about it, and had said that ‘ she should not marry me
at all.”’
“ And did this Mr. McDonald know the position of her
bedroom?”
“ He did.”
“ Then I must have an interview with him,” I remarked,
and quitted the room.
* * * * #
The inquest was held on the following morning; the
medical evidence went to prove that deceased had met her


death “ from concussion of the brain, caused hy a blow on
the left temple with a blunt instrument,” and after half an
hour’s consideration the jury returned a verdict as follows: —
“We, the jury, find that Lucy Floyd, alias Louise Duroc,
died at South Adelaide, on Thursday the 15th December, 1855,
of concussion of the brain —the said concussion having been
caused from a blow from a blunt instrument, in an attempt
to commit grievous bodily harm; and we further find a
verdict of wilful murder against some person or persons
unknown.”
Directly I learned the finding of the jury, accompanied by
two constables, I proceeded to the lodgings of McDonald the
clown, which I had had watched closely for the preceding
twenty-four hours, and a few minutes later I stood in his
presence.
McDonald had just finished breakfast, and was now lean-
ing hack in an arm chair hy the open window, reading the
Advertiser. He dropped the paper on the floor as we entered
the room, and regarded us nervously.
Without saying a word, I walked to the window, closed the
sash and drew down the blind; then turning to him abruptly,
I demanded, “ What is your name 1 ”
“ Joseph McDonald,” he answered.
“ Otherwise ‘ the great little Borello,’ clown in the Cirque
de I’Emperatrice 1 ”
“ The same.”
“ Then I arrest you for the murder of Lucy Floyd, alias
Louise Duroc,” I said, sternly.
The most close observer would not have noticed the slightest
alteration in his countenance as I made the charge, for he had
only taken a minute or so to recover his self-possession. He
was about to reply, when I cautioned him that “ what he was
going to say might possibly criminate him, and that, in that
case, such statements would he used against him,” whereupon
he merely remarked, “ that we must he precious fools to take
him for a murderer,” and relapsed into dignified silence.
I had him searched, hut nothing suspicious was found on
his person. I then clapped the irons on him, and we began
to thoroughly overhaul the apartments. ,


After an hour’s search, during which time we turned every-
thing topsy-turvy, and effectually ransacked the most remote
corners, we gave up the investigation, rather chagrined, for,
with the exception of a heavy, old, flint-locked pistol, we
found nothing calculated to strengthen the suspicion against
our prisoner.
The pistol in question had evidently not been loaded for a
long while; but its brass inlaid stock was well adapted to
give a heavy and fatal blow, even if wielded by a weak arm,
and for that reason I put it into my pocket.
We were now about to leave the house with our prisoner,
when the idea struck me that I would rake out the embers
of the fire, and search amongst the ashes. I proceeded to do
so, and was rewarded by finding several scraps of half-con-
sumed leather, and more than eight dozen nearly red-hot
nails, such as are used in the manufacture of rough country-
men’s blucher boots.
I carefully collected these fragments of leather and the
nails, cooled the latter by pouring cold water over them,
screwed them up in a piece of paper, and then instructing
one of the constables to call a cab, we bundled McDonald
into it, and drove him to the police-station.
During the drive, and whilst we were putting him into
his cell, he did not utter a word. His bearing was firm and
composed, and he certainly wore the air of an injured man ;
yet I felt certain that he was the criminal.
The next day he was brought before the magistrates, but
the testimony against him was so slight that he was dis-
charged, and the justices would not even grant a remand
that I might have time to strengthen the chain of evidence.
They, in fact, paid McDonald the compliment of telling him
that “he would leave the court without a shadow of sus-
picion upon his name.”
“ Mr. Brooke, I wish you good morning,” he said, turning
towards me with a sarcastic smile, as he quitted the court.
“ Good morning, Mr. McDonald; we shall meet again
before long,” I said, spitefully, in reply. The next moment
he was gone.
That night I visited the circus. McDonald was there in


his clown’s dress as “ the great little Borello,” and received
a perfect ovation from the audience, not a soul of whom
thought him guilty of the murder. Had I been recognised,
no doubt I should have come in for a due share of hisses,
hut being in disguise I escaped notice. The circus was
crowded, and during the performance the proprietor an-
nounced that on the following evening “ great little Borello”
would take his benefit, whereupon the thunders of applause
were renewed, and McDonald had thrice to appear from
behind the scenes and bow his acknowledgments.
Well, the next day came; and in spite of the discharge,
ovation, and benefit, the clown had disappeared, leaving his
stage wardrobe, personal baggage, and a month’s arrears of
salary behind him. He had left secretly, and without
informing a soul of the object of his journey, or whither he
was going. The proprietor of the circus was in consterna-
tion, and everybody seemed to think that he had either been
murdered or had committed suicide.
I alone dissented from these views, for I jumped to the
conclusion that, stricken with a sudden panic, perhaps also
with remorse, he had fled either to another colony or into
the far interior.
That he had not quitted South Australia I speedily ascer-
tained ; for upon making inquiries at the port, I found that
the only ship that had left the harbour for the preceding four-
and-twenty hours w r as the Kiama, bound for Melbourne, and
that no one at all answering McDonald’s description had
taken a passage in her.
I did not care to prosecute my search further at present,
for if I could have discovered his whereabouts, the magis-
trates would not have issued a w r arrant for his re-arrest; so I
determined to set about strengthening the evidence before I
again assumed the offensive.
The only things I had at present to go upon were the
scraps of half-consumed leather, and the nails that I had
fished out of the fire. I knew that the leather belonged to
a thick labourer’s pair of boots, and the nails were the hob
and clinker nails pertaining to such boots. I had dug one
of the footprints out of the garden pathway, where it had


been embedded in tbe stiff clay, which had taken its im-
pression as clearly as wax could do the wards of a lock, and
I now set to work to fit in my nails into this clay model.
To make my readers more clearly understand this I must
explain to them that clinker nails are such as surround the
edges of the sole and heel of a boot of this class. Their
heads are nearly square, and almost as large as the smallest
size of dice. Hob nails, on the contrary, are round-headed,
and are generally arranged in some fantastic design on the
flat of the sole, such as a diamond or a star. Thus it is
evident that the clinker nails would mark the outline and
size of the boot, and that if I could make half the clinker
and hob nails that I had got from McDonald’s grate fit into
the corresponding holes in the clay footprint dug from the
garden pathway, it would go far to prove that the boots to
which they belonged were those worn by the man who had
crossed the garden, scaled the spout, entered the window,
and murdered the young girl at the lodging-house in Brownlow
Street.
I was an hour at this little job, but it was crowned with
complete success. The indents in my clay model were every
one filled up, and it had taken exactly half my nails (forty-
eight) to effect this. To me the boot mystery was solved.
I now turned my attention to the pistol, and surveyed it
carefully, though with very slight hopes of discovering any-
thing condemnatory in that. A blow from a blunt instru-
ment is difficult to trace to the instrument causing it. In the
instance of a knife or dagger stab, you may discover a weapon
of the kind that fits the wound. In a case of death from a
bullet you may find a rifle or pistol carrying a similar sized ball.
In both oases such a discovery would be valuable evidence;
but in the present instance the deceased might have been
killed by a blow from any blunt instrument—a hammer, a
fire-iron, or a ruler; so I could not convince myself that
McDonald’s pistol would throw any light upon the subject.
I was just about to return the cumbrous old weapon to the
drawer from whence I had taken it, when I observed three
or four short hairs sticking to the rough ribbed stock. They
were all about the fourth of an inch in length, of a pale


golden colour, and might possibly have once belonged to a
human eyebrow.
I picked them off carefully, wrapped them in a piece of
silk paper, and sallied out to obtain the loan of a very power-
ful microscope.
Now it happened that for the past two years I had given
considerable attention to comparative anatomy, particularly
to the structure of the hair as it appears under the micro-
scope. To the naked eye, indeed, all hair presents a pretty
similar appearance, except as it is long or short, dark or fair,
straight or curly, coarse or fine. Placed under a microscope,
however, other peculiarities are noticeable. The white man’s
hair is seen to be round, whereas the black man’s is ovah
The mouse’s fur is apparently jointed, the hat’s jagged, &c.
Every species of animal has hair of a peculiar kind ; hut in
the human race the character of the hair varies according to
the part of the body upon which it grows. You can distin-
guish a hair plucked from the eyebrow from a hair of the
moustache, an eyelash from a hair of the beard or whisker.
In the present instance, although I could not get the
loan of a sufficiently strong microscope, I obtained from an
optician permission to use one that stood in his shop, and
submitting my three hairs to its powerful lens, I soon dis-
covered that they were from the human eyebrow, and had
been bruised.
Making a note to this effect, I refolded the hairs in the
paper which had previously contained them, returned them
to my pocket, and thanking the optician for his courtesy,
quitted the shop.
In my opinion the guilt of McDonald was now clear
beyond a doubt. The case stood thus: —the deceased had
been killed by a blow with some blunt instrument on the
eyebrow. The murder had not been committed for the sake
of robbery, as the purse, watch, and rings had been left on
the table untouched. It must therefore have been done for
the sake of revenge; and McDonald, as a rejected suitor,
was the most likely man to seek that vengeance. Then the
hair and eyebrows of the murdered girl were of a beautiful
golden brown, and the hairs I had picked from the stock of


McDonald’s pistol were of a precisely similar colour, and I
had proved them to he eyebrow hairs and bruised. The
clinker and hob-nails, too, evidently belonged to the boots of
the man who had crossed the lodging-house garden and
broken into the girl’s room ; and here were these same nails
and burnt shoe-leather found in the fireplace of McDonald’s
sitting-room. The mere fact of his trying to burn these old
shoes was calculated to arouse grave suspicions, as it was the
very last way of getting rid of them that a man possessing
the sense of smell would adopt.
I went to a justice forthwith, acquainted him with the
additional evidence that I had obtained, and pressed him to
grant me another warrant for the clown’s arrest.
He at length complied, and I then made him promise to
keep his having done so a secret for a while, or that else I
might find it a very difficult matter to discover McDonald’s
whereabouts and bring him to j ustice.
Ho sooner had I fortified myself with this warrant than I
began to make an attempt at recapture; but a couple of
days’ investigation convinced me that if I would lay hands
on “ the great little Borello ” again, I must hit upon some
scheme to entice him back to Adelaide, instead of myself
going to seek him in the country. I accordingly penned a
paragraph for the Adelaide daily paper, which ran, as nearly
as I can recollect, as follows ;
“ The Mysterious Murder in Bbownlow Street.—
After a week’s untiring efforts on the part of the police,
there exists a hope that the assassin of poor Madlle. Louise
Duroc will yet be discovered and brought to justice. The
detective force are in possession of information which seems
clearly to inculpate one Charles Henley, formerly a banking
clerk in Adelaide, who sailed for England in the barque
Cornubia the day after the murder. A riding whip with
a heavy silver handle, bearing the crest and initials of Mr.
Henley, has been discovered in an interstice of the chimney
of the bedchamber occupied by deceased, and a witness has
come forward who states that he saw him talking with her
outside the circus the night that the murder was perpetrated.


Upon these as well as other grounds of suspicion, the
authorities feel convinced that Mr. Henley is the murderer •
and Mr. Brooke, chief of the detective staff, starts by the
mail steamer to-morrow for England, where doubtless he
will arrive some weeks before the Cornubia, as that vessel
is reported to be a slow sailer. Thus Henley will be arrested
before he can have a chance of landing, and he will be
brought back to Adelaide to stand his trial in the first ship
that quits England for this port after his arrest.”
Two days after the insertion of the above paragraph I drew
up an advertisement to the following effect: —
“ WANTED, the address of Mr. Joseph McDonald,
late of Mary Street, Hampstead Eoad, London, who left
England about eight years since, and who is believed to be
now travelling with a circus in the Australian colonies. If
his address is forwarded to, or if he will call at, the office of
Mr. James Eobinson, solicitor, 19, Hindley Street, Adelaide,
who is acting under power of attorney for the late Mr.
Fergus McDonald, of Maidstone, Kent, he will hear of some-
thing greatly to his advantage.”
This advertisement I ordered to be inserted in the same
paper for a week, and sent copies of it for publication in the
Melbourne and Sydney papers.
I had every hope that this stratagem would succeed in
bringing Master McDonald back to Adelaide, for the former
paragraph would show him that all suspicion as to the
murder was directed into another channel, and that no one
would for a moment doubt his innocence ; while the latter
advertisement would appeal strongly to his cupidity, and, in
fact, present a bait which, to one less proof against tempta-
tion than the good St. Anthony would be next to impossible
to refrain from biting at.
As for the chance of his not seeing these notices, I did not
regard that, for I knew by experience that most criminals read
attentively every newspaper they can lay hold of, in which it is
at all likely that any paragraph may concern themselves; for
they are anxious to know as early and as exactly as possible


what is said and known about themselves or their crime, so
that they may act accordingly. I was therefore quite as
certain that, if living, McDonald would read the paragraph
and advertisement, as I was that I had written them, and
events proved that my conviction was correct.
Of course, before framing the above advertisement I took
care to learn some of McDonald’s antecedents ; and the Mr.
Fergus McDonald whose name I borrowed for the occasion
was an uncle of the clown, a very wealthy old bachelor, who,
at the time I made so free with his name, was very probably
enjoying as perfect health as myself.
Some of these facts I gathered from the proprietor of the
circus, others I obtained from more secret hut not less au-
thentic sources. The solicitor named was a personal friend
of my own, who had volunteered to aid me in the intrigue.
Of course the paragraph concerning Henley was entirely a
fabrication.
Nine days after the first insertion of the advertisement I
received information that McDonald had returned to Ade-
laide. I knew that it was past Mr. Eohinson’s office hours, so
I doubted not hut that if he called at that gentleman’s cham-
bers, finding them closed, he would make a point of going
there again the first thing the next morning. I therefore
merely ordered two of my aides to watch him closely, hut by
no mean's to let him catch them at it, and then waiting until
it was quite dark, I took a car and drove to Mr. Eohinson’s
private residence, where we arranged that he should he at
his chambers half an hour earlier than usual on the following
morning, and hide me in a large cupboard, from whence I
could spring out and capture my man at a moment’s notice.
Well, the next day came, and this little plot was carried
into execution. Just as the clock struck ten, a step in the
outer office was audible, and we heard a man asking the
clerk if Mr. Eohinson was in ? lat once rushed to my
cupboard, for I recognised McDonald’s voice, and the next
moment that worthy was duly ushered into the private office.
The solicitor bowed, requested him to he seated, and then
getting up, looked the door and put the key in his pocket,
observing as he did so, “ My dear Mr. McDonald, the husi-


ness relating to your deceased uncle’s affairs may require a
long interview, so I take this precaution against being dis-
turbed by importunate clients,” with which words he re-
sumed his chair.
From my place of concealment I could, through a crack in
the cupboard door, see all that passed in the office. Mr.
Eobinson had reseated himself with a bland smile, and
McDonald fidgeted himself about in his chair, anxiously
awaiting an explanation from the lawyer., A few moments’
pause ensued, which I took advantage of to note the appear-
ance of the ci-devant clown. He was stylishly dressed,
sported a silver-headed cane, a heavy Colonial gold Albert
chain, and wore two or three costly rings on his fingers. He
looked well up in condition, too; his face was ruddy with
health, his hair, whiskers, and moustache carefully oiled and
curled; and though decidedly a little man (he could not have
stood more than five feet three in his boots), he never looked
so Kg in his life.
“ You see I have taken the very earliest opportunity of
calling upon you, Mr. Eobinson,” he said.
“Yes, Mr. McDonald, I wish one-half of my clients came
on so happy an errand; you are a most fortunate young man.
It isn’t every one that has rich relatives at their finger ends,”
replied the attorney, turning over and over his papers as
though searching for a document.
“ Did my uncle make his will long before his death, sir 1 ”
asked the clown.
“My dear sir, he made no will, he died intestate; accord-
ingly you are possessed of the whole of his property as his
heir-at-law.”
“ And his moneys?”
“ Yes, and his moneys; everything, in fact, that he died
possessed of.”
“ The devil I am ! ” exclaimed “ the great little Borello,”
springing from his chair and beginning to dance about the
room, while he kept shouting, “What did he die worth?”
“What did he die worth?”
“ Forty thousand pounds in the three per cent. Consols,
twenty thousand ditto in East India stock, nine thousand in


railway debentures, ten thousand pounds on policy of insur-
ance in ‘The London Equitable,’ freehold estates at Maid-
Stone, Kent, and Blaokheath, valued at two thousand a year
rental, cash in London and Westminster Bank at time of
decease eight hundred and fifty-six pounds seven shillings
and ”
“Stop—stop—stop! impossible! nonsense!” exclaimed
the clown, suddenly recovering himself after a double somer-
sault, and with onen mouth and wondering eyes regarding
the attorney. “ Why, man, my uncle, rich as he was, could
never have saved a quarter of that money. There must be a
mistake somewhere.”
“ There is a mistake somewhere, Mr. McDonald,” I calmly
observed, as I emerged from the closet.
“ The deuce! Mr. Brooke here in Adelaide ? Why, I
thought you were half way to England by this time, in pur-
suit of the murderer Henley,” exclaimed McDonald, endea-
vouring to assume an off-hand tone.
“ You see it’s a mistake all round, mate, for the fact is
that I’ve stayed in South Australia on purpose to capture the
murderer McDonald,” I replied, coolly.
“ But my uncle—his property—the advertisement in the
Register, —what the fury does it all mean?”
“ A neat little trick to induce you to put your head into
the lion’s mouth, that’s all: you’re my prisoner.”
“Your prisoner! Eudge ! You arrested me once before,
and could prove nothing ; why make a fool of yourself
again?” exclaimed the clown, dodging me around the table.
“ Since then additional evidence has been obtained, which
warrants a fresh arrest; therefore surrender yourself quietly,
or I shall resort to force,” I said.
“ Take that, and be hanged to you; two can play at that
game,” was the reply; and quickly drawing a small pistol
from his pocket, he fired it point-blank at my face.
Providentially the cap missed fire; had it not, I should
never have lived to relate this tale. Before he could recap
his weapon, I was down upon him. A fierce struggle ensued;
for though McDonald was a little man, he was very muscular,
and as slippery as an eel. Robinson made no effort to assist


me, either from nervousness or a love of fair play, I don’t
know which, so I give him the credit of the doubt.
For some minutes we struggled furiously, upsetting chairs,
stools, desks, and ink-bottles. At last I succeeded in trip-
ping the clown up, and throwing him heavily on his back.
Before he could rise, I planted my knee on his chest, and
put the handcuffs on him. I then suffered him to scramble
to his feet, and found him quiet enough. A cab was soon
summoned by one of the clerks, and pushing my prisoner
into it, we drove to the police-station.
The next morning McDonald was taken before a magis-
trate, who, upon the evidence of the footprints and the
bruised hair, committed him for trial at the approaching
sittings of the criminal court.
The day previous to the one fixed for his trial, he tried to
escape from his cell by a violent and sudden assault upon
the turnkey who brought him his supper, but the effort was
not crowned with success.
When the day of trial arrived, and the case of “ The Queen
v. McDonald ” was called on, the supreme criminal court
was crammed to suffocation. The calmest face amid that
multitude was the prisoner’s. The trial lasted six hours. I
had a great difficulty in making the jury believe that the
three golden hairs found on the stock of the pistol could be
ascertained to be “ bruised hairs from a human eyebrow,” but
the evidence of an eminent naturalist, happening fully to
substantiate mine on the subject, and upon the assurance of
the judge that such a discovery was perfectly within the
reach of natural science, removed their doubts. The evi-
dence of the clinker and hob nails was, however, much more
satisfactory and intelligible to them. After being locked up
for three hours, they returned into court, and, amid a breath-
less silence, the dread verdict of “ Guilty ” was delivered
through their foreman.
The judge now asked the prisoner whether “he had
arty reason to urge that the sentence of the court should
not be passed upon him,” but McDonald merely shook his
head.
His honour then assumed the black cap, and delivered his


judgment, which the prisoner listened to with an appearance
of the most perfect apathy. Not a muscle of his face qui-
vered ; nothing about him indicated that the sentence being
pronounced was the span of his life. It seemed as if his
crime and his condemnation did not concern him in the least
degree. As he was removed from court his only words were,
“ What is to be will be. We are all in the hands of fate.”
At a later date, when informed that a petition he had for-
warded to the Government had been rejected, he preserved
the same stoicism and indifference.
At five o’clock on the evening preceding his execution the
gaol chaplain visited McDonald in his cell, reminded him
that he had but a few hours to live, and usged him to confes-
sion and repentance. The prisoner, who was fast asleep when
the chaplain entered, awoke with a cry, and sprang to his
feet. He listened attentively to the worthy pastor’s exhorta-
tions, and at length suddenly exclaimed, “ Yes, I will con-
fess. I did murder Louise Duroo, and I deserve this fate.
I now feel the horror of my crime ! ”
He then made a full revelation, stating that “Mademoiselle
Duroc had joined the circus at San Francisco, that he had from
the first loved her deeply, and that until the arrival of the circus
in Adelaide— : a period of eleven months—she had accepted
his addresses. Here, however, she had accused him of being
a roue and a hard drinker, and insisted on breaking off the
engagement. A day later she consented to marry a young
man, the son of her lodging-house keeper, whom she had not
known for more than a week. She had informed McDonald
in a letter of her intention to marry this young man, but he,
fancying that she was not in earnest, begged and prayed of
her to revoke her determination. She repelled his overtures
with scorn and sarcasm, and he threatened her that if she
■would not marry him she should never wed any one else.
When he quitted her that night he determined to be avenged,
and watching her bedroom window until the light was ex-
tinguished, he proceeded to the circus, procured a large pair
of ‘ property ’ boots, and then returning to the lodging-house,
he crossed the garden from the right of way,* mounted to the
ill-fated girl’s -window by means of the waterpipe, and enter-


ing the room dragged her out of bed—with one hand on her
mouth to prevent her from crying for help,—and then felled
her to the floor with a blow from the stock of his pistol. To
his surprise he found that the first blow had killed her; a
fact which he attested by feeling her pulse and heart, both of
which had ceased to beat. Satisfied by the extent of his
revenge, he now quickly made good his escape from the
house and returned to his lodgings, where he sought forget-
fulness of the terrible crime he had committed in drink. He
was soon afterwards arrested, taken before the magistrates,
and discharged. After quitting the circus, which he did
under the impulse of a sudden panic, McDonald had gone
into the interior, —so far that he would have been tolerably
safe from pursuit, had he not, unfortunately for himself, been
unable to abstain from visiting the shanties to glance at the
papers. On an unlucky day he noticed the paragraph I had
concocted concerning ‘ Henley, and my trip to England to
arrest him ; ’ and a few days later he came across the adver-
tisement for his discovery. Cajoled and thrown olf his guard
by these, as I had anticipated that he would be, he dis-
carded his fears and set out at once for Adelaide, which city,
after a week’s journey through the bush, and sundry adven-
tures on the way, he safely reached. So anxious was he to
learn what ‘ the something greatly to his advantage ’ was, that
he called at the lawyer’s within an hour of his arrival in
town. He was too late, the office was closed. The first
thing the following morning he called again—to find, poor
fellow, that ‘ the something to his advantage ’ was a prison
cell, the dock, and the gibbet.”
After his confession to the chaplain, McDonald appeared
to be happier in mind. He slept very soundly the last night
of his life, and an hour previously to his execution he made
a hearty breakfast on bacon and eggs, which he had scarcely
concluded before the officials entered his cell to conduct him
to the place of doom. It was about ten o’clock when
McDonald mounted to the platform ; his face w r as still calm,
but very pale. A dense crowd was collected to witness his
execution, but he seemed to take no notice of it. He shook
hands with the chaplain, and thanked him warmly for his


■unremitting kindness and attention. He then felt the rope,
and said “that it was very rough.”
Before the executioner adjusted the noose, he turned to the
crowd and exclaimed in a loud, clear, and firm voice, “ I am
willing to die, for I richly deserve this terrible doom and
public shame, which I hope may partly atone fcr my sin. I
have only one caution to give you all : Beware of ungovernable
passion, and a desire for a retaliation of wrong; those feelings
brought me here!” Then he added, solemnly, “May God
have mercy on my soul!”
His arms were now pinioned, the noose adjusted, the white
cap drawn over his face. A second later the drop fell—a jerk,
a gurgle, and all was over, —Joseph McDonald had ceased to
live, and human justice was at length satisfied.


KING RUM TUM’S GHOST.
In one of the quietest streets of the singularly quiet city of
Adelaide there stood, in the year 1855, a three-storied desolate
house, that had not possessed an occupant for more than five
years. Had I come across such a house in London, or any
English town, I should have set it down as being a very old
house, a soot-hegrimed, leaky-roofed centenarian at the very
least; but in Adelaide, where at that time the very oldest
stone structure could not have been more than twenty years
in existence, I could only regard it as a prematurely aged
house, a house whose days were numbered, whose span of
life was rapidly drawing to a close. Had this house been a
man, I should have concluded him to he a monomaniac, a
hypochondriac, or something of that sort; as a house, of course,
I could do nothing of the sort. I have before said that it
was three stories high, and it happened to stand between two
heavy, squally-looking buildings, possessing only one story
each; consequently, a beholder might easily acquire the im-
pression that its altitude had been caused by the presence of
its sluggy neighbours against its sides. To conclude my
description, it had four lanky chimneys, which had apparently
eschewed smoking for years; and eight windows in the front;
namely, two on the ground-floor, and an allowance of three
to each of the floors above. These windows had most of their
panes broken, but were all fortified on the inside with closed
rickety shutters, which, if they excluded light and air, cer-
tainly frustrated the curiosity of any passer by to obtain a
view of the interior.
I might go on describing the peculiarities of this strange
building until I had filled pages of my manuscript, could I


but afford the space. If any of my readers are familiar with
Eed Lion Square, Holhorn; or Cumberland Square, Clerken-
well, they have only to imagine a house transferred from one
of those localities, and plumped down suddenly into the
middle of a new colonial city, and they can picture to them-
selves Ho. 19, South Charlotte Street to the very life.
During the first twelve months that I was stationed at
Adelaide I used to wonder why this house was never let;
and as often as I happened to pass it, which was pretty fre-
quently, I used to glance up at the windows, fancying I
might see in one of them a little square card with “ This
House to Let” figuring upon it in bold black type; or else
great yellow posters glaring from its dark walls, notifying that
it was to be sold by auction. .Neither of these phenomena
occurred, month after month passed away, and still the
gloomy tenement remained uninhabited; and this was the
more strange because, at that time, house property was at a
premium in Adelaide.
On the evening of the twenty-fourth of June (I recollect
the date because it had been a very cold, windy day, and
nearly every one I met had made the remark that it was
Midsummer day in England) I and a couple of friends sat
beside a bright gum-wood fire, in my private office at the
detective station; and as I felt inclined for a carouse, busi-
ness being rather dead, and not anticipating an interruption,
we manufactured a jorum of punch, filled our pipes, and pre-
pared to spend a right merry evening. Yarns were the order
of the night, and after two or three choice ones had been
spun, I remarked that I fancied there was an old house in
Charlotte Street which, could it but speak, would be able to
relate as absorbing reminiscences as any that had yet been
given.
“ Ah, you mean the haunted house, Ho. 19,” observed
little Wifiles, my aide.
I confessed that I did mean Ho. 19, though I was un-
aware that it bore the reputation of being haunted.
“Ah! ah! ah!” laughed John Abell, the doctor of our
force. “ That don’t portray your sharpness, Mr. Brooke.
You’ve been here now a whole year, and by this time you


should know everything, from the most secret thoughts of a
minister of finance to what Mother Meddles opposite puts
in her pork pies. A pretty detective you, indeed ! ”
“ Laugh away, doctor, but spin the yarn also, for I’m as
ignorant of aught that concerns the house in Charlotte Street
as the man in the moon can he,” I said.
“ What! never heard of King Eum Turn?”
“Kever a word.”
“Well, then, fill up your glasses, hoys,” exclaimed the
doctor, “ and as you all doubtless know the story with the
exception of this ignorant Melhournite, I will make the nar-
rative as short and to the point as possible.”
So saying, Jack Abell took a sip at his punch, relit his
pipe, crossed his legs, and between his whiffs related the
following narrative, which he facetiously called—
Ye Histobib or ye King of Burbanaguck.
Twenty years ago the population of this important colony,
instead of being computable as at present by tens of thousands,
scarcely numbered a hundred souls. Adelaide itself could
boast of but nine houses, instead of fourteen hundred as at
present, and the space now occupied by our paved and
macadamized streets was open bush or dense scrub, the
hunting-ground of the black fellow. The aboriginals were
then very numerous, and were not the drunken degraded
beings they have since become. They were divided into
different tribes, each tribe having a king of its own. The
natives who occupied the country for a radius of many miles
around where we now sit were ruled over by a gigantic black
fellow, called by them King Eaum-tume-tume, meaning in
their language “Warrior strong strong;” but the colonists,
unable to pronounce the name, abbreviated it into Eum Turn
Turn, or Eum Turn, and as King Eum Turn, the strong
warrior, was generally known amongst the whites.
While the colonists were weak in numbers and the blacks
very numerous, the former took care to keep on good terms
with their sable brethren, and overlooked the numerous acts
of petty thieving which daily took place. At length, how-


ever, as they grew more numerous, and learnt that the native
was a poor, timid, easily seared creature, they assumed the
high hand, and without training or teaching, the black was
expected to understand and conform to the white man’s code
of morals. For a sheep or two stolen from a run, or an axe
or piece of cloth from a store, the aboriginal, to whom pur-
loining was no crime, would if caught he whipped like a dog,
or imprisoned and half starved. If the theft was of greater
magnitude a general raid would he made on the black inhabit-
ants with dogs and guns, and if resistance was offered blood
would sometimes he shed like water. Seldom was any
retaliation offered by the natives, though sometimes a shep-
herd would be found murdered in his hut; or a traveller’s
skeleton, picked clean by the native dogs, he discovered far
away in the silent hush, transfixed to the earth hy the black
man’s assagai or javelin.
In the year 1840, however, the tribe of which King Hum
Turn was the head was suspected of levying very frequent
and rather heavy black-mail on the extensive sheep runs of
Burranaguck, a station some miles to the south of us. The
station hands were accordingly collected, the dogs unleashed,
and a fresh raid made upon the unhappy aboriginals, who
vainly pleaded ignorance of the fate of the missing sheep.
Although none of them were actually slain, they w'ere beaten
and ridden under foot, until at length King Bum Turn was
so angered at seeing his favourite wife (the old boy had seven
of them) lashed with a heavy stockwhip, each cut of which
brought blood, that he hurled his boomerang at the fellow
who was inflicting the punishment, and killed him on the
spot.
It happened to he the owner of Burranaguck who was
killed, and King Eum Turn was immediately captured, taken
to Adelaide, and arraigned before the Justices of the Peace
as his murderer. The result was that he was committed for
trial, and as the prison was not yet built, the Justices expe-
rienced some difficulty in finding a place wherein to confine
him.
Kow it happened that a certain Miles Humphrey had just
erected a large house in the then rapidly rising town, but on


the very day that it was completed, for some unaccountable
reason, he committed suicide ; and as he was a lone man,
had made no will, and had left no clue whereby any of his
relatives or friends could be discovered, Government appro-
priated his property; and as his new house was the strongest
and most secure in the town, they imprisoned King Rum
Turn in the top story thereof, defended the windows with
stout iron bars, and fortified the doors with heavy bolts and
chains.
Here the unhappy captive pined until his trial, a month
later, when he was found guilty of murder, and sentenced to
be hanged on the third day after the passing of the sentence.
He was taken back to his prison, where with inhuman bar-
barity he was forbidden a last interview with any of his
wives or children. At length the morning fixed for the
execution arrived, the gallows had been duly erected, and a
large crowd collected to witness the spectacle. The execu-
tioner and other officials repaired to the King’s place of cap-
tivity to escort him to the scaffold, but when they ascended
to the third floor, and entered the room where he was
imprisoned, a terrible sight met their gaze. King Rum Turn
was sitting bolt upright upon his haunches in the furthest
corner of the room; his head was thrown back, and covered
with an old cotton handkerchief. He made no reply wdien
spoken to, and so the executioner advanced and snatched the
handkerchief from his face. A glance showed that he was
dead. His face was terribly swollen, and of a dull leaden
hue; his eyes seemed to be starting from their sockets; his
mouth was half open, and smeared with blood. Upon
examination it was discovered that ho had committed suicide
by swallowing his own tongue, which he must have effected
by rolling it up in a ball, and then by mere strength of will
and sinew forcing it backwards down his windpipe.
Thus did King Rum Turn cheat the gallows. Of course,
the body was promptly buried, but from that day the fate
of the house where he had died was sealed. It is now
fifteen years since that tragic event occurred, hut it has
never had a tenant since, and for four or five years the
present owner, who bought it from the Government for a


mere song, has not thought it worth while to announce it to
he let.
*•**»*
As the doctor concluded his tale, he refilled his glass from
the punch-howl, and emptied it at a draught.
“ Whatever objection you may have to ghosts, you evidently
have none to spirits, Abell,” I observed, with a laugh.
“ Your story is a good one; but do the townsfolk really
believe this house to be haunted?”
“ I believe you, my boy. Half Adelaide is ready to swear
to it ; the very children will not play within a good stone’s
throw of it after dusk, and not one grown person in a
hundred would set foot in it after nightfall, were they paid
their own weight in gold for such a deed of daring.”
“ And all this because a poor devil of a black fellow
swallowed his 'tongue in it at least twenty years ago,” I
observed, with a burst of laughter that I could not refrain
from.
“ There I beg your pardon; not because a poor devil of a
black fellow, as you irreverently term his Majesty King Eum
Turn, swallowed his tongue in the house; but because he
persists in returning to this sublunary sphere every night, to
revisit the scene of that notable exploit. They say that, in
company with the first proprietor of the house, who, as I
told you before, committed suicide on the very day that the
structure was completed, he walks about the empty chambers
every night, ’mid the clattering of chains and all the noises
of Eblis, and when day begins to dawn with most unearthly
wails they return to the grave.”
- “ Ton my word, I can’t look grave whilst you narrate
such superstitious nonsense, doctor; besides, I don’t believe
in ghosts.”
“ Kor do I,” said the surgeon; “ but yet I feel sure that
there is some mystery connected with the old place that may
be attributable to natural causes, but which will be difficult
to solve.” Then glancing at his watch, he observed, “It is
time for me to be off; I see it’s five minutes to eleven
o’clock,” and shaking hands all round, he hastily took his
departure. The rest of the party broke up a few minutes


later, and before the clock struck midnight I myself was in
bed and sound asleep.
The following day ushered in a more busy season for us.
A desperate murder was perpetrated. A week later a heavy
fraud on the Bank of South Australia was practised; then
came two or three embezzlement cases, and for some time
my hands were so full of work that my thoughts never once
reverted to the haunted house, or to the doctor’s story con-
cerning it. The above matters were scarcely disposed of
when a new mystery arose which baffled all my cunning for
weeks. This was no less than the immense quantity of
illicit and overproof whiskey that was in use throughout the
city and neighbourhood. The Customs were in a state of
fury and bewilderment about it, and kept urging me to use
every endeavour to solve the enigma and bring the distillers
to justice as speedily as possible. I certainly made every
effort to do so, but I must own that I was never so thoroughly
at fault in my life. I had an idea for some time that the
confounded stuff was manufactured in the country some-
where, but if so the spot was past finding. Every suspicious
locality in Adelaide, and for a radius of twenty-five miles
around it, was searched again and again, but all without
avail, and at last I gave up the matter in despair, though I
took care not to say so.
One evening, Mike Daley, one of my aides, with a face as
pale as death, rushed into my private office, where I was
smoking a pipe, and exclaimed wildly, “ I’ve seen them, I’ve
seen them; it is all true about that house in Charlotte
Street!”
“ What’s all true, Daley?” I asked.
“ Why, every word that the doctor told us the other night.
I’ve seen King Bum Turn and the fellow who built the house,
and then killed himself.”
“ You’ve been having a nobbier too many, Daley. What
the deuce do you mean?”
“ Mean ! why, that a quarter of an hour or so ago I saw
King Bum Turn and Miles Humphrey in a room of that very
house, sitting on three-legged stools, and drinking raw spirit
against each other, as though they were doing it for a wager.”


“ Sit down, man, and tell your yarn at length,” I said,
becoming interested in the matter.
“Well,” began Daley, “you see, I was just on my way
home to the station when, in passing down Charlotte Street,
I cast my eyes up at the haunted house and began to fancy
that I should like to inspect it a little-closer; after, therefore,
I had almost stared it out of countenance from the street, I
slipped down a little right-of-way to the left of it, and got in
its rear by clambering over an old tottering wall into a weed-
grown garden. If possible, the house looks more desolate and
weird from the back than from the front, and the windows
are blinded in a similar manner—in some places by closed
shutters, in others by boards nailed across. While I was
looking up at these windows I fancied that I saw a glint of
light through a crack in one of the shutters ; the longer I
looked at it the more certain I felt that it was really a light,
and no freak of the imagination. lam a pretty good climber,
and, aided by the rough outer stonework, I clambered up to
the window which was on the second floor, and through the
narrow fissure could see into the room.”
“ Well, and what did you see ?”
“ Why, what I told you—King Eum Turn and Miles
Humphrey hob-nobbing together as comfortable as could
be.”
“ Did you notice their look or dress 1”
“ I did; Miles Humphrey was attired in a suit of rusty
black, and wore a cabbage-tree hat drawn over his eyes ; his
face was quite as white as that whitewashed wall. The king
wore a ragged pair of plaid trousers, had an old blanket
Wrapped around him, and had no shoes to his feet.”
“Was his face black?”
“ His face, hands, and feet were black as soot, but his hair
and eyebrows were white. He was the most hideous old
fellow that I ever saw.”
“ But hang it, man, how do you know that these forms were
ghosts ! Perhaps they were living men, and met together in
that old house to plan something unlawful.”
“ Hot a bit of it. Didn’t Miles Humphrey hang himself?”
asked Daley, crossly.


“ I believe he did, hut what of that?” I rejoined.
“ Why, this ; his ghost had a livid ring around his long,
scraggy throat where the rope had encircled it; and as for
the black fellow, a narrow red rihhon encircled his neck, to
which was suspended a brass plate in the shape of a half-
moon. As it lay on his chest and glittered in the candle-
light, I read the words ‘ Eum Tum Tdm, King op Buera-
naguck ; ’ they were engraved upon it.”
“By Jove, it’s very strange, Daley, I own, hut did you
hear them talk ? ” I asked.
“ Not a word, they took their drinks in silence. I watched
them until my blood ran cold, and I trembled so that I feared
I should fall into the garden below; to prevent which I
descended as quickly as I could and returned here as fast as
my legs would carry me.”
“ And you still adhere to the opinion that the two men you
saw were inhabitants of the spirit world?”
“ Faith, I’m sure that they’re none other,” was the confident
reply.
“ Let me see, it is now just a quarter to twelve o’clock.
I never yet heard of a ghost retiring to his underground
dwelling before the midnight hour, so just rouse up Wiffles
and Black, and tell them to dress like lightning, for I’m de-
termined to make an effort to solve the mystery of that house
at once. You must accompany us.”
Daley looked rather astonished at my sudden energy, but
an impatient wave of the hand caused him to vanish with
alacrity to arouse his mates. In less than five minutes we
were all on our way to Charlotte Street.
It was a bright moonlight night, and never had I before
fancied the haunted house to look so mysterious and ghost-
like. Towering high above the surrounding edifices, it threw
a dark and ominous shadow across the street. Not a glimpse
of light was visible at either of the front windows, and
placing Black and Wiffles to guard the street door, I told
Daley to lead me to the spot from whence he had first
observed the light in the second-floor window. This was
soon accomplished, but it was no longer visible. I scrambled
up to the very window through which Daley had witnessed


the two spectres, hut it was all dark within, and the only
noise audible was the pattering of the rats as they gambolled
and chased each other through the empty rooms. I tried to
throw up the window-sash, but the rusty slip bolt defied my
efforts. I then cautiously thrust my arm through broken
pane after broken pane, hoping to be able to open the closed
shutters, but found them to be nailed as well as barred, and
so effectually that it would have taken some ten minutes to
effect an entry, and even then it could not have been done
without a great deal of noise. I therefore descended to the
garden, but unwilling to give up the adventure without a
further effort, I again ascended and tried three other windows
in succession, but with equal ill- success, until I gave the thing
up—for that night, at all events —in despair ; and returning
to Daley, we joined our mates in Charlotte Street, who stated
that they had been watching the house closely ever since we
had quitted them, but had noticed nothing suspicious, and
were quite certain that no one had left it by the front door
or windows since they had been on guard.
As nothing more could be effected until the next day, we
returned to the station. *
The following morning I disguised myself, discovered the
residence of the proprietor of the haunted house, and called
upon him.
He was a tall, lanky man, with a sullen look, but oily
manners. He kept an inn called the “ Dublin Arms,” but
he was a Yankee for all that, and had never been in the
Emerald Isle in his life.
“ Good morning, Mr. Snakes,” I exclaimed, as he entered
the private parlour whither I had been ushered upon stating
that my business was private.
“ Good morning, sir; good morning. I believe you wished
to speak with me,” he said, favouring me with a searching
glance as he spoke.
My get-up as a well-to-do squatter was, however, too com-
plete to be penetrated, and assuming an off-hand air I came
to the point at once with “ I understand that you are the
landlord of Ho. 19, Charlotte Street, and that you want to
let it?”


“ I—l am the proprietor of the house you name, hut as to
letting it, I really don’t know what to say; I’ve no particular
desire to do so,” he answered, with rather a confused air.
“Ah !ah ! You say that in order to run me up in the
rent, Master Snakes; but I’m a rich man, and don’t care to
haggle for such a trifle as a few pounds a month. I’ve taken
a fancy to the house, and you must let me have it. Of course
you would rather let it than have it empty on your hands ? ”
“ Oh, without doubt it’s unpleasant to have an empty
tenement bringing in no rent, hut the fact is, sir, that the
place is so damp and out of repair, that it would cost nearly
a thousand pounds to make it habitable.”
“ Well, let me have it on a twenty-one years’ lease, and
I’ll expend a thousand pounds to put it to rights.”
I noticed an angry glitter in the tall Yankee’s eyes, hut
his voice was more oily and persuasive than ever as he said,
“I’m an honest man, sir, though not a very rich one. I
can’t make up my mind to cheat you, though you’re sorely
tempting me to do it. The fact is, before you had been in
that house a week you would he ten times more anxious to
get out than you are now to enter it. Although it is my
house, and consequently much against my interests to say so,
yet my conscience obliges me to tell you that it is damp,
draughty, badly built, and terribly out of repair. It is, more-
over, known to he a haunted house, and you would not get
a servant, male or female, to stay in it one night, were you
to offer them all your wealth to do so.”
“A haunted house? By Jove! that makes me more
anxious than ever to become its occupier. I always longed
to live in a haunted house.”
“ But the servants, sir ? ”
“ Oh, hang the servants ! I’ll bring some down from my
station at Coonahurra who will fear neither ghost nor devil.”
“Ah, sir, you won’t hear reason,” groaned the landlord.
“Hot I, hut perhaps you will. I offer a rent of a hundred
and fifty pounds a year for a term of twenty-one years, and
will expend a thousand pounds in repairs prior to entry, as
well as pay all rates and taxes,” I said.
“ Ah, I could not let it on those terms.”


“ Make it two hundred a year then, and come and show
me over the rooms at once,” I persisted.
Snakes bit his lip until the blood spurted, and then
looked scared lest I had perceived it. He stammered, hesi-
tated, and at last blurted out, “ I’ve lost the key of the
door; and besides, am too busy to leave the hotel to-day.
Call again, if you’re passing, towards the end of the week,
sir.”
I saw that a prolonging of the controversy would only
awaken Master Snakes’ suspicions, without effecting any cor-
responding good. I therefore pretended to be satisfied with
his excuse, and promising to call again as he requested, took
my leave.
I was highly satisfied at the result of my pumping. I knew
that six months previously Snakes had offered to let this
house at thirty pounds a year , rather than keep it on his
hands. Now he did not care to take seven times that amount;
the conclusion naturally possessed me that he found the old
house more profitable empty than let, and as a natural con-
sequence next arose the mental query, “ In what manner could
he make it more profitable 2” The bolted and nailed windows
seepred to answer that it was not by means altogether honest
and above-board; and then, like a flash of lightning, it
crossed my mind that perchance the landlord of “ The Dublin
Arms ” was a whiskey distiller, and that in this old house
might he manufactured the large quantities of illicit spirit
that had deluged Adelaide and its neighbourhood for the past
three months, and defied the police as well as the excise to
discover its makers.
When I got to the station I imparted my suspicions to my
mates, for I determined at any risk to solve the mystery of
the haunted house, and the identity of Miles Humphrey and
King Eum Turn that very night.
I sent two of the force —in mufti, of course —to watch the
house, with orders to arrest any one who might pass in or
out. Directly it was dark, I doubled the number ot watchers,
telling them to be wary and watch every approach, and not
he content with merely keeping an eye on the doors; for I
fancied, that if my suspicions were correct, the persons who


visited the lone house would obtain ingress hy any means hut
the legitimate ones. If anything mysterious happened pre-
vious to eleven o’clock, one of them was to return at once
and report to me. At that hour I resolved to repair thither
and effect an entry hy hook or hy crook.
Hour flew hy after hour; at last half-past ten came, and I was
about to equip myself for the adventure, when in ran Wiflles.
“ Well, what’s up, mate*” said I.
“ Why, they’ve iust entered the house, sir.”
“Who have V’
“ Why, God knows; Daley sw'ears they’re ghosts, hut I
guess they are men. You know, sir, we were on guard at
the hack, and I was lying down in the garden under the
shadow of the tall weeds, keeping a sharp look-out on the
house, when I heard a rustle close hy, and a black man with
a white woolly head skidderedhy me as if old Nick w r as after
him. I never saw a fellow go at such a pace in my life, and
before I could make up my mind whether to pursue him or
not I saw him and another fellow, I can’t guess where he
sprang from, apparently glide up the side of the house to the
third story, and then dart in through a window.”
“ Did Daley see all this too ?”
“He didn’t see the black follow pass me, because he was
away too far to the left, hut he saw' the two figures glide up
the wall and pop in through the window.”
“ And he swears they’re ghosts, does he 1 ” I laughed.
“ He does indeed.”
“ Then, if I don’t mistake, he shall have the honour of
locking up two ghosts in the police cells to-morrow. Come,
let us be off. You shall accompany me into this haunted
house, for Daley’s too superstitious and timid. Have you
your revolver with youl”
“ Yes, I’m all right.”
“Wait a minute, then, and I’ll he with you,” I said; and
going into my bedroom I took my revolver out of its case,
examined the caps, and placed it in my pocket, for I did not
know how many desperadoes there might he in the house,
and there is no saying more true than “ discretion is the better
part of valour.”


It was just eleven o’clock when we left the station, and
five minutes’ brisk walking brought us in view of the haunted
house. Turning down the little right-of-way we came full
tilt against Daley, who, dressed as a mechanic, stood leaning
against a lamp-post smoking his pipe.
“ Mind you fellows keep your eyes open, and draw closer
around the house. Wifiles and I are going in; but the rascals
may possibly slip through our fingers, as they know the run
of the rooms and we don’t. See, therefore, that they do not
pass you.”
“The ghosts, you mean, Mr. Brooke.”
“ The fiddle-stick ! ghosts be hanged! the house is no more
haunted than you are, man, unless it be by burglars, forgers,
whiskey distillers, or rogues of that class.' Now go and give
my instructions to our mates; I want you all close under the
walls, one in front, two at the back, and be particularly
careful lest any one drops from the windows by a rope.”
Leaving Daley, Wifiles and I now got over the broken-
down wall into the garden, which we crossed noiselessly and
stealthily, and presently stood under the high frowning walls
of the house.
“ Now, Wifiles, look out sharp for a rope, for they must
have ascended by means of one, and I think we can follow
their example,” I whispered.
The idea that the two figures that he had seen enter the
house by one of the top story windows had attained that
altitude by means of a rope had never entered Wifiles’ head.
He now saw the probability of the thing at once; and in
another minute all doubts as to their mode of ingress were
set aside by my running my head against the identical rope
itself, which depended from the middle window of the third
story, and reached down to just the level of my nose.
“ Who’ll go first?” asked Wifiles.
“ I will; and don’t you begin to ascend until I’m safely
landed, for then if any one sees me before I reach the
the window and tries to cut the rope, you may perhaps be
able to shoot them down,” I said.
I now commenced my ascent, and being a fair climber, I
did not experience much difficulty in mounting hand over


hand. In a few minutes I had gained the window and
clambered through it into the room. Wiffles was not slow
to follow my example, and just as the clock of a neighbouring
church chimed a quarter past eleven we both of us stood
within the haunted house.
It was very dark, the moonlight did not penetrate into the
room, so that we could not see an inch before us. We
listened, but no sound was audible, save the skiddering of a
stray rat or two across the floor, and the monotonous “ tick-
tick-tick ” of the Mimi beetle (the Australian “ death-
watch”).
“ Off with your shoes silently and quickly,” I whispered to
Wiffles, setting the example as I spoke.
We now groped noiselessly over the room in search of a
door; at last we found bne, but it was looked, and defied all
our efforts to open it. We next went right round the room,
feeling the wall all the way, but found no other mode of
egress. Clearly there was only one door, and that we could
not force open without alarming the whole house.
“ It seems to me that we are sold after all,” muttered
Wiffles.
“Not a bit of it, my boy,” I responded; “ let ns cross and
recross the floor, but cautiously, or we may fall through a
trap.”
We accordingly shuffled along noiselessly to and fro, never
raising our feet from the floor, until at last I felt that half my
left foot rested on empty space, and stooping down, I found
a large opening in the floor.
“ By George, Wiffles, it’s lucky I thought of this, or we
should assuredly have broken our necks in falling through
this precious trap. The question now is, how to reach the
room below.”
“ There’s a rope fastened to an iron ring, and with its end
hanging through the hole,” answered my mate.
“ Then get along with you, ’tis your turn to go first now.”
Jack Wiffles required no second bidding; active as a
monkey, he slipped down the rope, and in a moment had
gained the floor below. More leisurely I followed his example,
and presently felt boards under my feet again.


“ Hush ! did you hear that 'I ” asked Wiffles.
“Yes, hut ’twas only a rat,” I replied.
“ Not a hit of it. I swear it was a human voice,” retorted
Wiffles, in the same low tone.
We listened, and in a moment a loud metallic crash rang
through the house, awaking a dozen reverberations amid the
empty rooms. Then followed the clanking of a chain and a
yell of demoniac laughter.
“ This is strange. Perhaps there is more truth in the
common report that the house is haunted than we have
credited,” said my aide, in nervous tones.
“ I confess that matters look rather dismal; hut now that
we have dared so much, we will not cry craven at a mere
noise. Ghosts or thieves, I must find out their reasons for
taking up a lodging here,” I answered.
We now made for the wall again, and glided along it as
we had done in the room above in search of another door,
which we presently found, and to our satisfaction it was
unlocked.
Taking a bottle of oil from my pocket, I plentifully lubri-
cated the hinges lest they should creak, and then we opened
the door, passed through, and found ourselves in a passage,
for on raising my arms until with my body they formed the
shape of the letter T, I could touch the walls on either side.
It was still as dark as the grave around us, hut at the end
of the passage we were traversing we could see a narrow line
of light, apparently gleaming through a crack in a door.
We soon found that this was the case, and upon looking
through this fissure a strange scene met or gaze. The room
into which we peered was devoid of furniture, with the
exception of a couple of three-legged stools and two stretcher
beds, on each of which lay a couple or so of not over-clean
blankets. It was a very large room, but the carved ceiling
was discoloured with damp and spiders’ webs; the once rich
paper was hanging in strips and tatters from the walls, and
the floor was black with dirt, and thickly strewn with broken
pipes and glasses. All these matters only received a mere
glance, for our attention was riveted by the occupants of the
two stools, who sat one on each side of the soot-begrimed


fireplace. At a glance we recognised them to 'be Miles
Humphrey, the suicide, and the King of Burranaguck, look-
ing just as Daley had described them the night before, and
drinking raw spirits like the very deuce.
At the feet of one lay a heavy chain; against the stool of
the other leant a metal gong. There was the livid mark of
the rope around the throat of the white man, and on the
breast of his companion lay the half-moon shaped brass
plate, with its inscription in large black letters, “ Eum Tum
Tum, King op Burranaguck.” There could be no mistake
about all this, and I confess that for a minute or two a kind
of superstitious terror seized hold of me, and I began to
think that we had really to do with inhabitants of the spirit
world. As for Willies, plucky as he generally was, his teeth
now began to chatter with fear, and he whispered, “ This is
awful! ”
“ Hush, man ! depend upon it, there’s some earthly devilry
in all this,” I answered. “ I can’t fancy that veritable ghosts
swig off raw spirits at such a rate as these do. Listen, the
black fellow is going to speak.”
“ Sure he can’t with his tongue stuck down his windpipe,”
said WifHes.
King Eum Tum, however, quickly proved to Mr. WifHes
that he was mistaken as far as the tongue went, for turning
to his companion, he said, suddenly, “Well, Snakes, you
never told me how you put off the fellow as inquired after
this here house.”
“ Oh, the fool! I scarcely know how I managed it, for he
was the most persisting varmint that I ever clapped eyes on,”
said the other, with an oath. “By Jingo, he wouldn’t take
‘ no ’ for an answer.”
“ And has he given up all thoughts of the house!” asked
the king, anxiously.
“Oh no, not he; but I put him off until the end of the
week.”
“ And if he still presses you, what then 1”
“ Why, if he won’t take civil advice, I must tell him pat
and plain that he shan’t have it; say that I've already let it,
or that I’m going to knock it down. Darn him, he can’t


make a man let his own property against his will,” said the
Yankee.
“ Ah! ah! ah! the house pays better as it is, don’t it,
daddy Snakes 1 ” laughed the black fellow.
“ I believe you, my boy. I think our profits are at present
to the tune of a hundred pounds a month each, so I should
be a precious fool to let the place at only that rate per
annumand the Yankee laughed until the tears ran down
his cheeks.
“ How lucky we were to get such a crib! we are safer
from observation here than if we were in the centre of the
Stony Desert. Not a human being in Adelaide, even those
d d traps included, would enter these walls, they
paid their weight in gold to do so. Come, Master Snakes, or
Master Humphrey, whichever ye are called, I propose a toast.”
“ Hang your toasts ! What is it 1 ” growled the landlord
of the “ Dublin Arms.”
“ Why, the haunted house, you duffer! the haunted
house! ” he repeated in a louder key, as he staggered to his
feet, and raised a brimming glass of whiskey to his lips.
“ The haunted house,” echoed Snakes, following his ex-
ample with tipsy gravity.
“ The haunted house ! ” I exclaimed, in a sepulchral tone
from the passage.
“The haunted house!” shrieked WifHes, taking his cue
from me.
King Rum Turn, or rather his personator, had raised his
glass to his lips, but he let it fall from his relaxed grasp
when the third voice smote upon his ear ; and at my mate’s
eldritch yell, Snakes tossed his glass and its contents into
the ample fireplace, and turned yellowish brown and white
by turns.
“ Did you hear that 1 ” asked the black fellow, in quivering
tones.
“ I did. What on earth could it have been ] ” faltered the
landlord.
“ The devil,” suggested the black.
“ King Rum Turn, whose name you’ve taken,” howled
Wiffles through the keyhole.


“ And Miles Humphrey, who owns this house,” I echoed,
in a voice that seemed to come from at least ten million
good leagues under ground.
By George! a peep at the two terrified impostors at that
moment was worth a mine of rubies. For a minute or two
they stood staring at each other like a couple of idiots; then
they simultaneously fell on their knees and tried to mutter
their prayers. To put an end to the ridiculous scene, I
placed the muzzle of my revolver against the lock of the
door, and blew it open. We then rushed in and threw our-
selves upon the horror-stricken distillers, reckoning that after
the fright they had just received no resistance would he
offered. In this, however, we were mistaken; for the moment
the rascals saw that we were veritable men, and not the
spirits of those whom they had personified, their courage
returned, and drawing their knives, they stood on the
defensive.
“ Hone of your knife-work, Master Snakes,” I cried,
covering him with my revolver. “You see I was deter-
mined to inspect the inside of this house before I took
it on a twenty-one years’ lease, at two hundred a year.”
“ Ten thousand fiends ! Are you squatter Thompson that
called on me this morning about the house 1” demanded the
astonished landlord of the “ Dublin Arms.”
“ Squatter Thompson, or detective Brooke, at your service.
I answer to either name,” I replied.
“ By Jabers, the traps !” cried the black fellow, in accents
of despair.
“ Come, my friends, just drop those pig-stickers ; we want
to take your measurement for a pair of wristbands,” said
Willies.
For a minute or so the fellows looked defiant, but our
revolvers overawed them, and they sullenly threw down their
arms and allowed themselves to be handcuffed. We then,
aided by their candle, began to search the premises. There
was a second door in the room where we had surprised them,
which led into an adjoining apartment, and upon entering
this inner room the mystery of the haunted house was solved
at a glance.


It was an immense apartment—far larger than the one which
we had just quitted, it was probably two or three rooms
knocked into one. In it stood a large still in perfect working
order ; the boiler stood over the glowing embers, and the
head and worm were attached, the latter carrying its convolu-
tions down through a large hogshead of water, and discharging
the whiskey through a pipe near the bottom into a vessel
placed there to receive it. Nearly touching this vessel stood
a pannikin, and close to the pannikin lay a pile of empty
bags ; for what purpose we could not imagine, but three-
fourths of the floor of the room was covered by numbers of
kegs and barrels, the greater proportion of which were filled
with the mountain dew. All these were clearly revealed by
the rays proceeding from a dirty oil lamp which hung by a
chain from the ceiling.
Wiffles and I did not neglect to patronize the warm spirit
that trickled slowly into the already nearly overflowing pan-
nikin ; and I must admit that if the ghosts of the haunted
house were not genuine, the spirits were, and excellent ones
to boot.
Well, after we had had a good drink we returned to the
other room and rejoined the crest-fallen proprietors of the
still, whom we ordered to lead the way to the street door.
This they sullenly did, and we found that it was not only
bolted, locked, and barred, but actually screwed on the inside.
It took us nearly half an hour to get out these screws, draw
back all the rusty bolts, and force it open. By the time we
had done so a distant church clock struck the first hour of
the morning.
We walked off our captives to the police station, and when
there, the first thing that “ King Rum Turn the Second ”
asked for was soap and water ; by the aid of which he
speedily transmogrified himself into a white man, and a
genuine son of Erin into the bargain. The next morning
our brace of worthies were marched before the Court of
Petty Sessions, where, after a long trial, the still was sen-
tenced to be confiscated, and each of the distillers to a fine
of £l5O, or in default three months’ imprisonment with hard
labour. The host of the “ Dublin Arms ” counted down the


cash with the air and dignity of a prince; hut his mate,
shrewdly observing “ that a hundred and fifty pounds was a
dear price for three months’ liberty, and that with their
worships’ leave he would accept the temporary hoard and
lodging kindly placed at his disposal by the Government,”
made a serio-comic bow, and was conducted from the court
by two constables.
Thus were King Eum Turn’s and Miles Humphrey’s ghosts
laid : the two rascals who had turned the superstitious fears
of the townspeople to so profitable an account were in turn
taken in and done for ; and upon the landlord of the “ Dublin
Arms” becoming insolvent a few months later, the old house
in Charlotte Street—now a haunted house no longer—passed
into other hands, and is at present, I believe, tenanted by
either a homceopathic or hydropathic doctor, I forget which.


MYSTERY AND MURDER
While in Tasmania I met with, an adventure of so singular
a character, that it has been the subject of much thought
during my leisure hours in the intervening space of time, the
more so as the mysterious portion of it remains unexplained
to this day.
On an evening during one of the winter months I was
seated in my quarters in Hobart Town, engaged in making
memoranda of my day’s occupation, when a gentleman who
had requested to see me was shown into the apartment.
Although he had not the slightest knowledge of me, I recog-
nised him at once. It was Mr. Longmore, a merchant of
Hobart Town, who had the character of being a steady,
worthy, and withal wealthy man. He was a widower, the
father of an only daughter, and resided on the outskirts of
the town, in a handsome residence situated very near to that
part of the Derwent which bears the name of Sullivan’s Cove;
in fact, its waters rippled at the bottom of Mr. Longmore’s
own grounds.
“ I have the pleasure of speaking to Mr. Brooke, the
detective officer, I believe,” said he, after having at my invi-
tation seated himself.
“ Yes,” I replied, “ and you may spare yourself the
trouble of introducing yourself, Mr. Longmore. I have
the honour of knowing you well by sight, as well as by
reputation.”
“ Well, I suppose I need not be surprised at your recog-
nising me,” replied he, with a staid smile, “ although I do
not recollect having ever met you before; but it is quite in
your way to be observant.”


“ It is, sir; and now in what manner can my present ser
vices avail you 1 ”
I could not help noticing that the gentleman looked uneasj
and hesitant, and not at all easy in his conversation, as 1
should have expected to hnd a man of the world as Mr.
Longmore.
“ I scarcely know what to say to you, Mr. Brooke,” shift-
ing uneasily upon his chair. “ I came with the purpose of
disclosing to you something so extraordinary and singular as
to he scarcely credible, and now I am doubly inclined to fear
that its very singularity may occasion doubts in your mind
as to my judgment or want of common sense.”
“ You need not he at all afraid, Mr. Longmore,” I responded,
encouragingly, “ that I shall draw any false inference from
any communication that you may do me the honour of making
to me in confidence. Your well-known character as a gen-
tleman of clear judgment and sound common sense is a
sufficient guarantee that any information you may give me,
or communication you may make, will he well worthy of
attention.”
“ Thank you! ” replied he, “ hut in this matter I am
positively afraid that my ordinary judgment is at fault; hut
if you can afford me time I will relate the circumstances, and
allow you to form your own opinion upon the matter.” Of
course I signified my readiness—nay, anxiety to listen, and
Mr. Longmore commenced thus:—
“ My house is, as I dare say you know, at this side of the
suburbs, and quite near to the river. I reside in it with my
only daughter and three servants, one male and two females.
The house has no upper story; the front windows are French,
all open into the grounds; the hack part of the establishment,
stables, yard, &c., being separated from the front gardens by
a high stone wall. Into the back yard the kitchen and
ordinary apartments open, so that unless through the house
itself no communication can be held by any of the servants
with the pleasure-grounds; unless, indeed, they were to go
down and approach by the river. I tell you all this so that
you may be in the same position as I have found myself, as
to the possibility of finding a natural solution of the singular


difficulty which I am about to relate to you. The door of
communication between the front and hack portions of my
house I am particularly careful to secure every night myself,
my early residence in the colony having made me very
cautious in guarding against surprise of any kind, and my
daughter’s safety is of greater moment than my own, so that
I am even more careful in these matters than I might have
been.
“ This night week I had retired at my usual hour, or per-
haps a little later. Everything was quiet, my daughter as
well as the servants had gone to their rooms some time before.
It was a wild, dark night, but as I burn a lamp in my
room it is of course lighted, although dimly. For some time
I had been asleep, what awoke me I cannot tell; the first
thing on which my eyes rested was a form —a figure, or the
semblance of one : it was standing at the foot of my bed,
and was that of a female ! I was not alarmed, for the idea
that it was my daughter immediately suggested itself, so I
raised myself upon my elbow for the purpose of asking if
anything was the matter. As soon as I did so I instantly
perceived that the face was strange to me.
“ The figure was slight, attired in a white robe; the fea-
tures had a horrible expression of terror, and their death-like
pallor was increased by the contrast presented by the longest
and heaviest black hair I ever saw, which hung over her
left breast and reached down to her knees. Her dress was of
silken material, for I heard it rustling; and all over the front,
and also upon the loose sleeves, it was clotted with blood.”
Here the narrator stopped, apparently quite overcome with
the recollection of the scene that ho had been describing, and I
must confess that I could hardly repress a smile at such emo-
tion being felt by a person of Mr. Longmore’s sense and expe-
rience, about such a piece of absurdity ; and I dare say he read
the expression of my feelings in my face, for he remarked, —
“ I can scarcely feel surprised that you should be inclined
to treat the matter as a joke, Mr. Brooke ; it is a very singular
story to relate, and I do not expect you to give it credence
without proving its truth yourself.”
“Oh, I hope, sir,” I hastened to observe, “you do not


suppose for a moment that I doubt your veracity, only to my
professional mind the apparition looks very like a hoax
which some one is playing off upon you ; but if you will
narrate the facts we can talk of these things afterwards.”
“ I have very little to add. The appearance which I have
described has visited me every night—in spite of barred doors
and windows, —each time waving its hand impatiently, as if
beckoning me to follow.”
“And you never followed?”
“ .No ! I must confess that I felt too horrified to attempt
moving whilst the figure stood so immediately before me. I
felt frozen to the bed, as it were ; indeed, I assure you it is a
fearful sight! ”
“ Will you permit me to inquire, Mr. Longmore, are you
at all superstitious?”
“In the sense you mean lam not superstitious. If I met
with anything so peculiar in appearance as to be quite beyond
the ordinary run of natural events, before setting it down to
be supernatural or apparitional I should certainly do my
utmost to find a natural cause or causes for it, as I have done
in this instance ; failing in that, I am ready to acknowledge
there are ‘ more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt
of in our philosophy.’ Still, had I been as really super-
stitious as you appear to think me, I should not have been
here to ask your more practised assistance in trying to
unravel this mystery.”
“ Well,” I replied, laughingly, “ I am inclined to feel
certain that we shall easily prove this visitation not to be
one from a spiritual kingdom; for in truth, Mr. Longmore,
I do not believe in ghosts ! ”
“ Because you have never seen one.”
I did not reply to this observation, as I perceived that his
nerves had been much affected, and not without wonder ;
the appearance of such a figure in one’s bedroom night after
night, in spite of looks and bolts, was enough to shake any
man’s judgment; nevertheless, I had not the slightest doubt
that the professional cunning upon which I prided myself
would expose the trick of some conspiracy, formed, I was
sure, for no good purpose.


“ Have you mentioned this to any one, Mr. Longmore?”
“No, I have not; I was afraid of alarming my daughter.
I do sincerely hope that you will he able to get to the bottom
of it. The knowledge of such an unaccountable visitation,
such a horrible appearance, being night after night in the
immediate neighbourhood of my unsuspecting child is
almost overwhelming me. Now what steps will you take?”
I considered for a moment before I answered, and then
mentioned my intention of spending that night in Mr. Long-
more’s bedroom.
“ Could you get in without any one suspecting that you
had a visitor ? ” I inquired ; “ and could you manage to let
me occupy your room in secrecy also?”
“ Oh, easily enough. Only name the hour you will he at
the side entrance into the garden, and I will admit you
myself. It is usual after dusk for me to smoke my cigar
near the river.”
Having made suitable arrangements Mr. Longmore left
me.
I sat down and considered the matter on all sides. What
was the object in thus acting the ghost in the bedroom of
a man of Mr. Longmore’s well-known strength of mind?
From what I knew of that gentleman’s character I was
much surprised at the weakness he had shown, the earthly,
and I had no doubt criminal nature of which only wanted a
little keen-sighted perseverance to he proved.
As to ghosts, and entrances effected without any existing
means of ingress—hah ! it was all fudge. My intention, in the
first place, was to see, if possible, this singular apparition; and
while doing nothing more than simply affecting to he the ordi-
nary occupier of Mr. Longmore’s bed, for the first night to
make good use of my eyes, and he guided in any further attempts
at unravelment by my observations. Well, at the appointed
time I was conducted by Mr. Longmore into his bedroom, the
servants, as well as Miss Longmore, having retired. I was
at liberty to examine the room at leisure. The apartment
was a good size, perhaps sixteen feet by twenty-two, and had
two large French windows that opened on a verandah which
ran along the front of the house. These windows consisted


each of a single sheet of plate glass in handsome mahogany
framework, and faced directly the Derwent, called, as I have
before mentioned, at that spot, Sullivan’s Cove. With its
head against the wall, opposite to the windows, stood a large
elegant bedstead, with a canopy at the head, from which
depended rich damask curtains, that only formed a shelter to
the head of the bedstead, leaving the foot entirely unpro-
tected. On the right hand of the bed was the door opening
into a dressing-room, which communicated with the other
portion of the establishment. By the wall at the left was
the toilet-table; upon it stood a deeply shaded night lamp.
There was also a chimney in the room, but as the grate was
one of the stove description I did not trouble myself about
it. The windows and doors I left entirely to Mr. Long-
more’s inspection, taking his word that they were fastened as
usual.
When this was all right we seated ourselves beside a table,
where my entertainer had taken care to have refreshment,
and after partaking of a glass of wine I lit my cigar, begging
my host to excuse my invariable practice before retiring. It
had not escaped my keen observation that the gentleman on
whose behalf I had volunteered to encounter a ghost had
shown indubitable signs of a mind ill at ease ever since he
had ushered me into his house. Taking advantage of the
wreaths of smoke that soon curled up between my lips, I
watched him as he sat opposite to me more closely than I
should otherwise have had an opportunity of doing.
He was gazing down at the floor, occasionally sipping his
wine in an abstracted manner, with a thoughtful and troubled
expression upon his face, but looking up once, and en-
countering my eyes steadfastly, and I suspect searchingly,
fixed upon his countenance, he became red and pale by turns,
and at length addressed me hurriedly.
“ I am afraid, Mr. Brooke, that I have done wrong in this
business, as I have given you trouble, I think. I believe I
should have told you everything.”
“ Certainly, Mr. Longmore,” was my reply. “If you seek
my professional services I think I have a right to learn
everything you know in connection with it.’’


“It is true ; it is quite true. And yet I think you will
make allowance for my disinclination to speak of this cir-
cumstance. There are some things of the past so painful
that I may he excused if I feel a disinclination to allude to
them.”
“ Well, sir, if you regret having mentioned the subject to
me, forget that you have done so, and nobody shall be the
wiser.”
“ Ho, no; you quite mistake me. lam anxious to tell
you at once of what I should have informed you before, and
it is simply that this—this apparition bears the semblance of
one with whom I was too well acquainted.”
“May I ask of whom?”
“ My wife ! ”
“Your wife!” I exclaimed, and then checked myself at
once as the cause of Mr. Longmore’s awkardness and evident
trouble of mind flashed before me. I now remembered
having heard a great deal of gossip about this said wife.
She had eloped years before from this very house in a most
disgraceful manner, and with a most unprincipled, low
rascal. I respected my host’s feelings of course, and felt
grieved that anything should have occurred with which I
had any connection to bring the memory of the transaction
again before him.
“And you think the figure resembles that person?” I
inquired.
“ It is herself! ” was the determined reply.
“Well, I must say I think it very likely it is. What more
probable than that she should be acquainted with some outlet
from this room which you do not know ?”
Mr. Longmore shook his head.
“ It is not she alive,” he said.
“Do you then really and positively believe that this
visitation is a supernatural one ? ” I asked, in much surprise.
“ I do ! I am willing that every means of discovery shall
be tried; but when you have seen it, I think you will
acknowledge that I must believe it is supernatural.”
This was very positive and very singular to me. That any
man in these days of enlightenment, and possessed of his full


allowance of brains, should insist upon the existence of a ghost
—if lam not making a “ hull ”in so saying—was a matter
beyond my comprehension; and as I turned into Mr. Long-
more’s stately bed, after he had taken up his quarters on a
couch in the dressing-room, I am afraid I allowed myself to
consider for a moment how long in all probability it was
likely to be ere this far-seeing merchant should become the
inmate of an asylum, where the beds would not be half so
soft or the rooms so luxurious as the one which I occupied
as the temporary tenant of this “ haunted house.” My clothes
I had not removed, and my revolver lay handy; indeed,
since the last communication of my host, I made up my mind
to bring the matter to an end that night. This ghost, be it as
active as it liked, would have to use all its supernatural power
to enable it to escape from my clutches; for I had no doubt
that I should succeed in “ grabbing ” the late Mrs. Longmore
before she had time to invoke the powers of darkness, or find
her usual mode of egress. An officer of ten years’ experience
in the detective force was not born yesterday ! And so I lay
thinking over things quietly, hour after hour striking upon
the ornamental clock that stood upon the mantelpiece, until
it was half-past one.
It was a cloudy night, a chill wind blew up from the cove,
which made a sighing and sad whispering among the trees
that shaded the house; the lately risen moon—now streaming
in through the verandah, and casting shadows of vine leaves
and creepers upon the carpet —shadows that waved and shook,
as the agitated air waved and shook the foliage outside —was
occasionally obscured, and left the room almost in complete
darkness, as I had screwed down the lamp as low as possible.
I had made up my mind by this time that the conspirator or
conspirators had found out my presence in the apartment,
and had thought it safer not to attempt any of their pranks
upon me. At this moment the moon became cloudy, the
room was nearly, but not quite in darkness; when suddenly,
and without any apparent reason —I had seen nothing, I had
heard nothing—l felt myself getting cold, cold as the dead;
and then, and not until then, I heard a rustling as it were of
silk; involuntarily my eyes settled upon the space at the foot


of the bed, a distinct shadow was there, hut only a shadow,
out of which my eyes could form no distinct figure or sem-
blance ; in a second or two it grew white —whiter; at length
against the dark background the white-dressed woman stood
out visibly and clearly; the long hair hanging unfastened
over her left breast, with blood spattered on the white silk
of her robe ! But her face—oh, how horrible ! I could not
help feeling it impossible for a living face to look so by any
contrivance whatever. I was horror-stricken— l could not
breathe. I felt as if all my faculties were frozen; my eyes
were fixed on that ghostly figure, which now lifted an arm
and waved, as if to follow. The face of this woman, as Mr.
Longmore had said, was full of combined agony and terror.
Although this continued only a few seconds, I was for the
time paralyzed. I made an effort, however. “Am I going to
allow myself to he made a laughingstock V’ Perhaps the
touch of the pistol, which I felt at this moment against my
fingers, helped to recall me to myself; at any rate, I bounded
out of bed, rushed toward the figure, resolved to grapple
with it to the death. It was gone ! not a moment did I lose.
I pushed hack the holt of the window, near which the figure
had disappeared, opened it, and rushed on the verandah.
There stood the phantom on the lawn, rendered now visible
by the moonlight; it was still beckoning to me to come !
Worked up to frenzy, I took a steady aim at the vision with
my revolver; I fired, and then rushed toward it again. There
it was, hut a little farther off—still beckoning, and so I fol-
lowed and followed, without appearing to gain on it in the
slightest degree. The report of the pistol had aroused Mr.
Longmore, who now joined me.
The figure in white moved in the direction of the river,
which, as I have before said, was in front of the house; the
grounds belonging to Mr. Longmore extended down to it.
The shrubbery went round a grassy hollow not far from the
water, in a spot so low that it was occasionally a receptacle
for the surplus rain-water that lodged in it, and formed a
pond. At the time I write it was quite dry, and I only
became aware afterwards from Mr. Longmore that such had
frequently been the case. On reaching the centre of this


grassy hollow the figure stopped until we came within a dis-
tance of about twenty yards, and then, wildly tossing its
clasped hands above its head, appeared to fall prone upon the
earth. Not only was there nothing on the ground when
we reached it, but there was nothing to see nor hear on the
shore, or in the shrubbery; not a vestige of anything did the
most rigid search discover; and as the moon had again become
invisible, Mr. Longmore and I went hack to the “ haunted
room.” He was as pale as a corpse, and I freely confess I
was not sorry to be helped to a glass of wine.
“ What do you think of it 1 ” he whisperingly inquired.
“ Let us speak of it by daylight, sir,” I replied, flinging
myself upon a sofa; and, in truth, I was positively ashamed to
say what I did think of it. As soon as it was light I com-
menced a thorough examination of the room. I could make
nothing of it.
I could not account for the entrance of the bullet-proof
visitant of the night. I then walked to the foot of the lawn,
and sat down close to the spot where the figure had vanished ;
being an inveterate smoker, I took a cigar to clear my intellect
and soothe my agitation.
As I smoked I observed at the bottom of this little hollow,
the ground, which elsewhere was covered with green, fresh-
looking grass, strown for a small space with a layer composed
of what appeared to be a mixture of dead leaves, chips, and
rushes, mixed with some kind of soil; in short, just such a
sediment as might have been left as the deposit of a dried-up
pool. On a closer examination I fancied I could detect signs
of a late disturbance of the soil in that particular place. What
could have suggested to me the idea of making a search in
the ground there I am totally unable to explain ; it was one
of those singularly instinctive thoughts for which there is no
accounting ; certain it is, however, that I at once decided,
before 1 took another step in the matter, to get the assistance
of one of the force to examine this hollow before any person
would be likely to he on the river or about to make observa-
tions on our movements.
Eeturning to the house, I found Mr. Longmore just dress-
ing, looking miserably pale and wretched. I felt sorry for


the man, but as my silence I had no doubt would be more
grateful to him than any sympathy, I merely informed him
of my intention, and taking the key of the side gate, went
toward the police camp.
Going along Macquarie Street, I fortunately met the very
man I should have chosen as an assistant where I wished for
a closed mouth. I despatched him for tools, and when he
joined me we proceeded on our return to Mr. Longmore’s.
“ What do you expect to find?” inquired that gentleman,
who stood beside us when we commenced shovelling the
loose soil from the place.
I could only shake my head, and iii a few moments my
companion’s spade scraped against some wooden substance ;
at the empty, hollow sound Mr. Longmore’s face grew death-
like.
“ Perhaps you had better go up to the house, sir,” I said.
“ jSTo,” he replied, with an effort; “goon ! ”
Quickly, then, we uncovered a deal case with a loosely
fastened, ill-fitting lid ; it was about four feet long by three
wide, and perhaps two feet deep ; it looked like a soft goods’
case, which I dare say it had been.
Well, we lifted it from the hole, Mr. Longmore still stand-
ing silent and inactive beside us ; and I am certain that I
was more surprised than either of my companions at the
result of our labours, as I was the one who really knew how
entirely without reasonable cause I had set to work with
spade and shovel in that unlikely place. As soon as the box
was set upon the ground I prised off the rough lid with my
spade, and it fell over to the side, exposing a lining of zinc,
which was bent down without any attempt at evenness, and
entirely concealed what remained below it. We unfolded it
bit by bit, gradually exposing an object of horror so terrible
that I wish I had never seen it!
Many a night since—when some midnight duty has found
me on a lonely patrol—have I fancied, in the darkness, the
figure in that deal box. It was a dead woman ! and the fac-
simile of the phantom that visited me in the darkness of the
night before ! The figure lay upon its right side, the knees
slightly drawn up so as to enable it to fit in the case; and it


•was dressed in the identical rich white silk, every fold of
which seemed familiar to me.
The long, heavy "black hair was loose, and gathered at one
side lay scattered over the left shoulder ; and upon the skirt
of the blood-stained dress, and under the hair, where it lay
clogged and clotted, remained still the handle of a Spanish
knife—the blade had passed through the unfortunate woman’s
heart! Although the body lay upon its side, as the space
was confined, the head was turned so that the face looked
upward, with the glaring wide open eyes fixed in a look so
full of fear and horror that I can never forget it, and with
one glance at the well-known face, Mr. Longmore sank to the
ground in a swoon. He had recognised his wife !
It passed over in the usual way—an inquest resulting in
an open verdict, and a large offered reward posted on the
walls, and printed in the Gazette. Mr. Longmore had long
left Hobart Town, glad to escape anywhere from a place so
fraught with horrible memories.
One night I was seated in the same room where, twelve
months before, Mr. Longmore had sought and found me
about this business of mysterious termination, when a tall
young man of seventeen inquired for me, and gained admit-
tance. He looked like a sailor, in his hand he held a paper,
which he opened and handed to me ; it was one of the posters
to which I have alluded, commencing under the offered
reward with the usual “ Whereas,” &c. The paper was torn
and partly destroyed, hut not sufficiently to hinder one from
perusing the principal parts of it.
“ I suppose yon remember that, sir 1 ” said the young man.
When I replied in the affirmative, he entered into the following
narrative, which I shall give as nearly as possible in his own
words.
“ I only came to this port last night, and to-day I went into
a shop to buy some toggery, the woman wrapped some of the
things in that paper ; when I came to look it over, I thought
I could give some information about it, and when I told a
policeman he referred me to you.”
“ Well, then, my man,” I replied, “ sit down and tell me
what you can.”


“ Nearly twelve months ago I belonged to a brig called the
Water Snake, owned and commanded by a man of the name
of Walter Cuvier.”
I rather started at this, as Walter Cuvier was the name of
the man with whom the murdered Mrs. Longmore had
eloped.
“ I was cabin hoy in the Water Snake, and had been in
that brig a couple of years.”
“ Can you tell me what Captain Cuvier did with his
vessel? In what trade was he 1”
“You know, sir, that was none of my business. He
traded on his own account, and I think principally in con-
traband goods. Well, as I said before, I was cabin hoy in
the Water Snake, and all the time I was in her the captain
had his wife with him, at least a woman who passed for his
wife, and I do believe that the body found in this hill was
the woman we used to call Mrs. Cuvier.”
“What makes you think so ?”
“ I think lam sure of it, and I’ll tell you why, sir. The
captain and the missis did not live very comfortable at times,
and when he was drunk he was a real brute; and the missis
herself I am certain took a drop too much, so they had
terrible shindies. Well, we came from Calcutta here, and,
tired of being kicked and cuffed, I determined to bolt the very
first chance, and give Cuvier leg-bail for it. We cast anchor
in the cove last May, and that very night, as I was in the
pantry washing up the glasses, I heard such a row between
the captain and the missis in their state-room, she insisting
on ‘ going back ’ somewhere, crying her eyes out all the
time, and he swearing he’d kill her first, until at last he told
her to ‘go back and be .’ Shortly after the captain
ordered the boat to be lowered. He took me into the cabin
to help him with a box like the one described in this; and
as I went back to get something he had forgotten, I saw
Mrs. Cuvier getting ready to go ashore. She w’as dressed
very handsome, and it looked like a white silk gown she had
got on. She gave me a glass of wine, and shook hands with
me, saying she was going to leave the ship and go to her
friends. I thought nothing of it, having, as I said before,


heard the talk between her and the captain. Well, I and
one of the sailors rowed them ashore, and landed them on
the beach near some trees. It was a squally, dark night. So
Mrs. Cuvier shook hands with the other man, and hid him
good-bye. The captain told us to shove off again, and wait
for him up at a tavern he pointed out along shore, as he had
a few words to say to the missis before he went; and then
he gave us the price of a drink or two, so we went off,
leaving him and herself sitting on the box that he said had
the woman’s clothes in. That was the very last time I saw
them, for as soon as my mate had a glass or two I took the
chance and made tracks, and stowed myself aboard the ship
Chester, that sailed for Calcutta the next morning ; and that’s
all I know about it.”
“And you never saw or heard of Cuvier or his vessel since ?”
“ Ho, sir ; and if I had I’d have given both her and him
a wide berth.”
And I have never heard of him since. Perhaps he still
lives to drag a miserable consciousness of his crime through a
wretched existence. Many a time have I pictured to myself
the unfortunate and guilty woman returning to the neigh-
bourhood of her husband and child whom she had disgraced,
and no doubt still loved and yearned to see! How often,
during the abuse and ill usage of him for whom she had
sacrificed everything, had her breaking heart prayed for
the peace and rest of the home she had left! And then,
resolved to brave all—to throw herself at the feet of her
injured husband—to beg the intercession of her child—did
the demon murder her upon the threshold of her hopes ?
within sight of the very window-lights of the home she
longed to enter once more ? And who can tell who and
what was the midnight visitor to Mr. Longmore’s bedroom ?
Was it the bodily presence of some one acquainted with the
murder, and who wished the affair to be known without
being recognised? To solve the mystery in that manner
seemed impossible, considering all the opposing circum-
stances. And thus it has remained unravelled to this day—
a mystery into which I carried the closest investigation
without being wiser by the inquiry.


HOMEWARD BOUND, VIA PANAMA.
It was a splendid summer’s morning in the December of
1856 when I went on board the American steamship Golden
Age, which was lying alongside Circular Quay, Sydney, just
getting up her steam for her long voyage across the Pacific to
Panama.
This was her second trip, her former one, accomplished in
the previous year, having been the first passage performed by
a steamship between those two ports ; and as in about tw*.
months from the present time (26th of March, 1866) a fine
line of mail packets will be established from Sydney to
England by way of New Zealand and the Isthmus of
Panama, which, on account of the shortness of the passage
and the moderate fares (I use the term moderate as
with those charged by the Peninsular and Oriental Com-
pany at the present time) will doubtless induce thousands of
persons to choose this way of journeying to or returning,
from the southern colonies of Great Britain, a few notes i
my voyage may not prove uninteresting or out of place.
To begin, then, we were one hundred and forty-four pas-
sengers of all classes, on board a natty new steamship of about
1300 tons register, which at three o’clock in the afternoon
tripped anchor and moved majestically down the beautiful
harbour of Port Jackson towards the sea. We had soon left
the Heads astern, and, aided by a stiff breeze from the S. W.,
were off for Tahiti with a kind of rocking-horse motion, that
cleared the decks in no time, and sent at least three-fourtns
of the passengers to their berths, from whence the majority
of them did not show their noses for some days. I, with the


doctor and about eight others, had the dinner-table to our-
selves during this period, or rather we shared it with the
captain and the first mate, and thus I was one of the few
who saw Lord Howe’s Islands, which we steamed close by
only two days after leaving port.
Their aspect, though not grand, was nevertheless pleasing,
set as they were, like emeralds, in a sea of azure hue; and as
the sun sunk behind the high peak of the centre isle, the
bare mountain sides seemed to reflect salmon colour and
violet tints. The captain told us that one of these isles con-
tained a settlement of about forty-five inhabitants.
Three days after losing sight of Lord Howe’s group we
passed within a similar distance of Norfolk Isle. It looked
like a very picture of fairy land, owing partly to the richness
of its vegetation, for trees and flowering shrubs seemed to
grow down to the very water’s edge, and from over the
blue expanse of sea we could hear the delicious song of
forest birds. This lovely isle was then the abode of felons,
bht they no longer defile its shores, for at present it forms
thhabode of the descendants of the mutineers of the Bounty,
the narrative of which our readers are doubtlessly acquainted
We now saw no more land for a week, and during that
‘Hod we only sighted one vessel, which proved to be a
wfialer called the Porpoise, from Hobart Town, ten months
orft. We passed close by her, and exchanged some bags of
pb¥atoes, of which they were in want, for some dry fish.
J Two days after parting company with the whaler we sailed
close along the shores of Eoro Tonga, and saw crowds of
half clad natives on the beach. It was a pretty sight to
look upon, —the calm blue ocean laving the snow white
sands, in the rear of which flourished the richest of tropical
vegetation, forming a background to and throwing out in
clear relief the whitewashed, shingle-roofed, green-verandahed
mission house and pretty square-towered church, surrounded
by cocoanut, pineapple, and bread-fruit trees, amid which
we“ce perched, in charming irregularity and confusion, the
huts of the hardy islanders.
The great charm of the Panama route is that you see nearly


as much land as sea. Thus, within a fortnight of leaving
Sydney, we had thrice sailed close hy lovely islands, besides
sighting others in the dim distance; and now another two
days brought us into the calm waters of Papiti Bay, the port
of Tahiti.
In entering this bay we just grated our keel on a coral reef,
but luckily sustained no damage. A month previously a
French merchantman had gone to pieces on the same reef, in
a furious gale, and every soul on board had perished. Half-
an-hour later we dropt anchor, having accomplished 4,100
miles in fifteen days, a slow run, the average passage being
thirteen and a half days.
At Tahiti, or Otaheite, we stayed a week, to coal and water.
Why we did this I could never imagine, for both might have
been effected in three working days, but as it afforded fine
opportunities for excursions into the interior I did not object
to the delay, in fact I rather rejoiced at it. Certainly Tahiti
is one of the most charming islands in the world, and I cannot
wonder at the fascination it exercised over the officers and
crew of the Bounty. There is an air of unreality about it
that is very charming. The town itself is pretty, but non-
descript, presenting a picture of mingled French, English,
and barbaric life that is both romantic and amusing. The
military bakehouse is about the largest, though at the same
time, the ugliest structure in the place; and the fluttering
union jack, the stars and stripes, the tricolour, and the
gawdy Tahitian banner, denote respectively the residence of
the French governor, the houses of the English and American
consuls, and the palace of Queen Pomare. Then there are
the military barracks, the magazine, and various other Euro-
pean buildings of every conceivable shape and size, mingled
with hundreds of picturesque native huts, while around and
about grow the branching bread fruit, the bushy guavas, and
scores of other tropical trees and shrubs whose names are
legion; and high above all, over-topping hut and palace, wave
the graceful heads of the magnificent cocoa nut trees, as
though to shield the dwellings of man from the rays of the
burning sun; and in the background, rearing their evergreen
summits nine thousand feet up into the deep blue cloudless


sky, stretch, a range of mountains of surpassing majesty of
form and grouping.
There is hut one good street in Tahiti, hut that one runs
alongside the heach, and affords a most lively and cheerful
promenade. Soldiers in glittering uniforms, military hands,
lounging civilians, the lady portion of whom are attired in
the latest modes of Paris fashion ; fruit-sellers carrying
curiously shaped baskets,, overflowing with luscious pine
apples, bananas, pomegranates, and passion fruit; native
ladies attired in loosely flowing drapery a la Watteau, com-
posed of gaily-coloured, large-patterned, cotton stuffs, walk-
ing or chatting in groups, or lying at full length on sofas
outside their houses, gazing half sleepily at the still waters of
the bay, which ripple in on the crescent-shaped beach within
a stone’s throw of this delightful promenade.
In this bay lay a small French squadron, consisting of a
frigate, a corvette, two twelve-gun brigs, and a small war
steamer. There was a merchantman or two lying closer in
shore, and our own ship, which, with the exception of the
French frigate, was at that time the largest vessel in Tahitian
waters. Amid these ships the canoes of the natives, although
generally laden with fruit nearly to the water’s edge, would
dart in and out like fireflies, while their occupants would
screech and halloo at the top of their voices, as if mere
strength of lung would nuke their guttural gibberish under-
stood.
At Tahiti there is a market too, where fish, flesh, and fowl
may be obtained at low prices, and fruit and vegetables at a
mere song. There is also a nice carriage road for some miles
out of town, running between cocoa-nut, bread-fruit, orange
and apple trees. The oranges are as big as melons, but the
apples scarcely larger than apricots. They are both, however,
of delicious flavour, and together with other fruits may be
had for the picking. As for the natives, the women are
beautifully formed and not bad looking, but the men are
miserable objects, as the black man always is when half
civilized.
During our sojourn in the island I was lucky enough to
see the Queen. I had read much of her beauty and her


superb figure, but I had forgotten that the work wherein I
had perused this flattering description was some twenty-five
years old. The consequence was, that I was disappointed,
for Queen Pomare was very fat, very plain, and apparently
about forty-five years of age. She was attired in a long
loose gown of bright red silk, and her head was uncovered.
I might describe many more strange things that I saw in
Tahiti had I but the space to do so, but I must resume my
voyage.
It was a lovely morning upon which The Golden Age
steamed out of Papiti Bay, and most of us were rather sor-
rowful at saying farewell to land, for we did not expect to
see aught but the blue Pacific until we approached the Wew
"World of Columbus. We were, however, pleasureably dis-
appointed, for in less than twenty-four hours after the blue
mountain peaks of Otaheite had disappeared below the far
horizon, we sighted the Pomatu Islands.
There are upwards of a hundred of them, but we only saw
nine. They are coral islands, and have no mountains or
even cliffs. They seem to be on a level nearly with the sea,
but possess a rich vegetation, immense cocoa-nut and other
trees, and a numerous Christian population, converts to the
zealous efforts of Catholic missionaries from Otaheite.
A week after passing these islands the cry of “ Land, ho ! ”
from the look-out at the masthead proclaimed that we were
approaching Panama, and that the first half of our voyage
was nearly over. The day before we sighted the American
coast we had a funeral on board, a female third class pas-
senger having died from dysentery. The body was committed
to the deep amid the impressive burial service of the Catholic
church.
We dropped anchor at Panama on the 20th January; and
were immediately surrounded by dozens of boats, the owners
of which intimated in broken English, delivered in stentorian
tones, that they would take us ashore at a charge of two
pounds each. A modest demand, considering that the dis-
tance was not more than a quarter of a mile. As, however,
the captain would not allow the ship’s boats to be lowered,
we were obliged to submit to this imposition.


It happened to he only the first of many. Before we could
uch the beach, a crowd of hallooing, gesticulating, half-clad
seals rushed down to the water’s edge, and kept the boats
ick, insisting that it was their privilege to carry us ashore
i their backs, in return for a dollar a head; and directly I
It myself on my feet, my possum rug was seized by one
How, my hat-box by another, my walking-stick by a third,
id myself by half a dozen, each pulling in a different direc-
on in the hope of dragging me to the particular hotel or
jarding-house of which he happened to be touter. Every
le of us was served in the same way, with the exception of
ie third class passengers, who, I suppose, did not seem
orth such obtrusive attention. We only stayed at Panama
>out twenty-four hours, but during that time I think I saw
'erything that was worth seeing there. It is a tolerably
rge town, but it is very old, and not too clean. Half its
iblic buildings are falling to decay; twelve out of its twenty-
ree churches are gone past repairing, and half the others
em hurrying the same w r ay. The barracks certainly did not
intain more than a dozen soldiers, and the battery, which
r erlooked the harbour, held upwards of forty splendid brass
ms, but most of them were unmounted, rusty, or otherwise
ifit to be used.
In Panama, as in other tropical towns, vultures seemed to
s the chief scavengers and inspectors of nuisances, and I
tubt not that but for them fever and cholera would destroy
thirty per cent, larger number of the inhabitants than they
> at present; for every kind of filth is thrown into the
reets, and you may see these zealous and never-tiring birds
dozens, ay, scores at a time, clearing it away, and so tame
e they (for no Panamese would hurt a vulture, and that
e clever birds know well enough) that they will scarcely
dgn to get out of your way.
Panama has numerous a music-hall, and a theatre.
l the latter structure the people of Panama crowded to
itness the acting of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Kean, in the
ar 1865, and accorded those talented artistes an enthusiastic
ilcome, though I fancy that nine-tenths of them could not
,ve understood a word of the English language,


While at Panama I twice attended divine service at the
cathedral, which is dedicated, I think, to San Antonio, hut
I would not he certain. There is nothing very remarkable in
the structure within or without, and owing to having heen
despoiled and pillaged during recent civil hroils, its relics
and gifts are few, and the poverty of the clergy very great.
Take it all in all, Panama is not a spot one would care to
abide in long; true, its women are lovely and graceful, hut
fall into the sere and yellow leaf when about twenty-five
years of age. The men I cannot say so much for, and they
are too ready with the knife to he very pleasant fellows to
deal with. The town is dull, too, and not at all healthy.
Yellow Jack sometimes levies heavy contributions on the
inhabitants, and cholera pays occasional calls, in spite of the
scavenger vultures. I was not sorry, therefore, after a
tolerably good breakfast, to find myself at the railway station,
where the train was just about to start for Aspinwall, which
was our port of departure on the Atlantic side of the
Isthmus.
We were a trainful; all in good health and high spirits.
The journey from Panama to Aspinwall, from the Pacific
Ocean to the Atlantic, is accomplished in four hours, the
distance being fifty-nine miles. From the conical summits
of the mountains, which run through the centre of the
Isthmus, from north to south, the two oceans can be dis-
tinctly seen, or, at least, I was informed so, and I have no
doubt truly, as the Isthmus is never more than sixty, and in
one place only thirty-five miles across. I never enjoyed a
railway jaunt so much in my life as the one from Panama to
Aspinwall, the tropical forests through which we passed
being so magnificent that I cannot describe them. Flowers of
every tint and form that imagination can picture, trees of
every height and hue of green, many cumbered with heavy
wax-like parasitical plants to their very summits, and amid
these, dark myriads of gaudily plumaged birds and painted
butterflies. This beauty, however, is deadly; the heavily
perfumed air is a baneful poison, and no less than six
thousand navvies died from the Isthmus fever while con-
structing the railway we were traversing.


Arrived at Aspinwall, we found the mail steamer Shannon
getting up her steam, and half an hour after we got on hoard
she set sail.
A week later we called at St. Thomas, one of the West
India Islands, hut we only stopped there a day and night,
and during that time I did not quit the ship. It was the
13th January when we quitted St. Thomas for Southampton,
which we hoped to reach within a fortnight, as we had no
other ports to touch at on the way.
The weather continued fine and the sea calm ; hut as it
was now all sea, and nothing hut the sea, we began to grow
dull, and in the evenings the cahin passengers would form
themselves into little coteries and cliques, and lounge or lie
about the decks, telling anecdotes and spinning yams.
The increasing coldness of the evenings soon put a stop to
the lounge on deck, with the consequent story-telling and
flirting, and in a few days after leaving St. Thomas these
modes of killing time gave place to the social rubber, crib-
bage, chess, and backgammon, while the young lady part of
the community displayed a sudden enthusiasm in the prose-
cution of embroidery, crochet, and Berlin wool work; these
in turn gave way to packing up, hunting for lost books, &c.,
and chatting about approaching separation; for the look-out
one bright frosty morning, gave the welcome shout, “ Land
on the larboard bow!” and the captain, in reply to our
anxious queries, informed us that it was the Lizard Head,
and he trusted by sun-down we should be at anchor in
Plymouth Sound.
He was right, for we passed inside the Breakwater at four
o’clock in the afternoon, and dropped anchor off Drake’s
Island, having steamed 14,000 miles in sixty days; or, de-
ducting the time we were detained in places we called at,
fifty-two sailing days.
Together with many 'more, I determined to land at
Plymouth in preference to sailing up Channel, by which
means we reached town nearly two days earlier than those
who went on to Southampton.
How charming the din and bustle of dear old London
seemed after my long absence in a colony; I truly rejoiced to


tread my native land again, and a thick London fog gave me
more pleasure than anything I had felt for the preceding four
years. The sea voyage had restored me to perfect health, and
having a taste for the detective branch of the police service,
I determined to invest the money I had saved whilst in the
colonies, and to start a private inquiry office in the City.
THE END.
J. AITS W. KIDEE, PEINIBES, LONDON.


Frederick JVarne 13 Co., Publishers.
WAENE’S NOTABLE HOVELS, Sixpence Each.
In crown Zvo } picture cover.
THE SCOTTISH CHIEFS.
JANE PORTER.
Illustrated Edition of “ Sylvester Sound."
In large crown Bvo, 55. cloth; postage,
SYLVESTER SOUND, the Somnambulist,
HENRY COCKTON.
Author of “Valentine Vox," “The Love Match.”
With Portrait , and 18 Steel Illustrations.
NEW SONG BOOKS.
In foolscap 16mo, price is. 6d., cloth extra ,
With a complete Index, Frontispiece, Sc c. 600 Songs.
THE NEW NAVAL & MILITARY
Edited by J. E. CARPENTER.
Also, price ONE SHILLING each, boards .
THE NEW NAVAL. 300 Choice Songs.
THE NEW MILITARY. 300 Choice Songs.
Also, price SIXPENCE each, sewed.
With upwards of 150 of the best Songs.
THE SOLDIER’S.
THE NAVAL.
THE SAILOR’S.
THE UNITED SERVICE.
Especial care has been taken to have them free from everything that
would mar their usefulness in the family circle.
Bedford Street, Covent Garden.


■Frederick Warne & Co,, Publishers,
NEW PUBLICATION FOR THE PEOPLE.
Jn foolscap Bw, doth limp , 256 pp., price One Shilling each,
IN TEN VOLUMES, EACH COMPLETE IN ITSELF, SOLD SEPARATELY,
PENNY READINGS,
IN PROSE AND VERSE.
For the use of Members of Literary and Scientific Institutions , Recreation
Societies , Mutual Improvement Associations , Mechanics’ Institutes , Young
Men’s Societies) Working Men's Clubs , &c. t &c. y and for the General
Reader .
Compiled and Edited by J. E. CARPENTER,
Twelve Years Public Reader, Lecturer, and Entertainer at the
Principal literary institutions in Great Britain.
A STANDARD WOES OF GOOD BEADING.
In f ca P• drtb boards) price ONE SHILLING eachy 256 pages,
in two volumes (Each sold separately),
SUNDAY READINGS, IN PROSE & VERSE.
Edited and Arranged by J. E. CARPENTER.
Devoted in the main to Sacred Literature, but blended with Moral and
Instructive Pieces of a Secular Character, all by Eminent Authors.
In Five Volumes , crown Zvo, cloth extra, each 550 pages,
price 20s.
POPULAR READINGS, IN PROSE & VERSE.
J. E. CARPENTER.
Elegantly printed, Paged throughout. Each Volume Indexed. With
complete Index of the Series in Volume 5.
steel portrait or the editor in vol. 1.
Either Volume (complete in itself) sold separately .
Bedford Street, Covent Garden.


Frederick Warne £s f Co., Publishers.
BOOKS FOR BRITISH SPORTSMEN.
THE SPORTSMAN'S VADE MECUM.
“ Unquestionably the best book on British Rural Sports now to be obtained.”—Stam-
ford Mercury.
In large crown Bvo, cloth, goo pp., price 15X.
STONEHENGE’S BRITISH RURAL SPORTS.
For FISHING, see BRITISH RURAL SPORTS.
For HUNTING, see BRITISH RURAL SPORTS.
For RACING, see BRITISH RURAL SPORTS.
For BOATING, see BRITISH RURAL SPORTS.
For COURSING, see BRITISH RURAL SPORTS.
For CRICKET, see BRITISH RURAL SPORTS.
For SHOOTING, see BRITISH RURAL SPORTS.
For CROQUET, see BRITISH RURAL SPORTS.
For SWIMMING, see BRITISH, RURAL SPORTS.
For RIDING, see BRITJS’IT'RUR^ErSP.ORTS.
For DRIVING, see BFSM^'lferalS^^SSJiTS.
For everything SPORTS.
Now ready, the SevemhJfedition, enlarged, nmWdrotistnew Illustrations.
In large Arowji'gyo, p4fe®ji 6 d„ pp.,
SPORT PiCCj t C HE S
AT HOME AHB^HBMAD.
By the Author of “ Ten Years in Sweden,” and “ Bush
Wanderings in Australia."
General Contents.
THE BEST 14-HANDER IN ENG- SWEDEN.
LAND. DUCK SHOOTING IN WERMLAND,
THE KEEPER’S TREE. SWEDEN.
THE RABBIT BATTUE. MY FIRST STEEPLE-CHASER.
MY LAST DAY IN THE FEN. THE TROTTER,
THE LEATHER PLATER. THE FISHING DAY.
THE POACHER. GUN ACCIDENTS.
THE MANLY SCIENCE. THE WRECK.
THE AUSTRALIAN BUSH. DID YOU EVER DRIVE A JIBBER
A BEAR-HUNT IN NORDLAND. DOWN TO A FIGHT?
&C., &C.
ALSO BY “ THE OLD BUSHMAN,"
Fcap. Bvo, price 3s. 6d., cloth , new style. Third Edition,
BUSH WANDERINGS IN AUSTRALIA,
WITH SIXTEEN PAGES OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
Bedford Street , Covent Garden. \


WARNE’S COMPANION LIBBAB
Unde? this general title will be issued at intervals a
HEW SERIES OP CHEAP VOLUME
Well primed on good paper, in a clear type, Picture Cover
Price ONE SHILLING! each (unless specified).
THE SUTHERLANDS.
RUTLEDGE.
CHRISTINE; or, St. Philip's.
PRANK WARRINGTON.
LOUIE ATTERBURY ; or, St. Mar,
THE RIGHT HON. B. DISRAELI, M.P.
6.
7.
8.
YOUNG DUKE
TANCRED.
111. SYBIL.
12. ALEOY
13. IXION.
VENETIA.
CONTARINI FLEMING. 14. HENRIETTA TEM
CONINGSBY. 115. VIVIAN GREY.
115. VIVIAN GREY.
MY AUNT PBUE'S RAILWAY JOURNEY.
Mrs. Gascoigne.
LORD LYNN’S WIFE. By the Author of “Lady Pb
SYLVESTER SOUND, the Somnambulist. 2s.
ZOE’S BRAND. By the Author ofßecommended to Merc;
OLIVE BLAKE’S GOOD WORK. By J. C. Jeaffkesc
FOOTPRINTS ON THE ROAD. By Charles Ken
TOM CBACKENTHOBPS’S ADVENTURES.
PARIS AND LONDON: Humorous Sketches
Albert Sj-ith.
LONDON: FREDERICK WARNE AND 00
BEDFORD STBEET, COVENT GAEDEN.
