







596
AUSTRALIAN GROUP RELATIONS.
BY
A. W. HOWITT, F. L. S., F. G. S.
FROM THE SMITHSONIAN REPORT FOR 1883.
WASHINGTON:
GOVERNMENT FEINTING OFFICE.
1835.


PAPERS RELATING TO ANTHROPOLOGY.
AUSTRALIAN GROUP RELATIONS.*
BY A. W. HOWITT, F. L. S., F. G. S.
I—INTRODUCTION.
There is probably no student of the development of civilized society
who will be prepared to maintain that the social unit, during the long
period over which history extends into the obscurity of the past, has
been, as it is now, the individual. On the contrary, it will I think be
readily admitted that the farther we go back the clearer it becomes
that it was the group, and not the individual, which formed the basis of
human society.
It seems strange that, although this principle of group relationship
as the basis of social organization has been readily admitted as to peoples
of the past, it should have been violently denied as existing among
savages of the present day. The reason of.this may be that the civil-
ized man and the savage contemplate their social relations from two
entirely different standpoints, though it might not be as difficult for
the former to think after the manner of the latter as it is for the latter
to fit himself mentally into the surroundings of the former. Train-
ing from childhood, with, perhaps, all hereditary tendency of thought,
renders this next to impossible to the savage; but the civilized man has
this advantage, that with largely developed mental powers he is able,
where opportunity offers, and he cares to avail himself of it, to place
himself on the standpoint of the uncivilized, and thus with more or less
success to see the surroundings as the savage sees them, and to think
of them with his thoughts.
This difficulty in projecting themselves, as it were, into the mind of
the savage, has proved a stumbling block in the path of many anthro-
pologists, who have studied the habits and beliefs of the lower races by
means of the too often hasty and superficial statements of travellers,
without having themselves any practical knowledge as to the modes of
thought of the tribes in question ; and thus they have not been in a
* Read before'the Anthropological Society of Washington.


position to question the accuracy of the statements made as to fact, or
to draw the true inferences which the facts justified.*
One of the strongest illustrations of the difficult,}' to which I have re-
ferred is shown by the determined refusal on the part of some English
anthropologists to accept the classiflcatory system of relationship. The
late lamented Dr. Morgan, who had practical acquaintance with the
North American tribes, came to see that their peculiar system of rela-
tionship terms was founded on the idea of a group where civilized people
have that of a single individual. He was thus led to institute inquiries
which proved that this idea is common over the whole world in savage
life, and he drew the general inference which might be drawn from the
facts by persons accustomed to the mode of thought among the lower
races. This, however, is so different from that of civilized man that
most of the English anthropologists refused to accept his inferences and
it is only now, whbn accumulated evidence continues to support his
views, that the truth of the main generalizations which he made is be-
ginning to be recognized.
In Australia observations may be made similar to those made by Dr.
Morgan in America, but with this difference, that in the former country
the native tribes are in a much lower ethnical stage, and are therefore
so much nearer to the conditions under which the group system of re-
’ The danger to which such inaccurate statements of custom lead when received as
established facts justifying generalization is strikingly shown by the well-known
and often quoted passage as to Australian marriage in Collins’s English Colony in New
South Wales, p. 362 :
“ These unfortunate victims (the wives) of lust and cruelty * * * are, it is be-
lieved, always selected from the women of a different tribe from that of the males (for
they ought not to be dignified with the title of men), and with whom they are at en-
mity. * * * The poor wretch is stolen upon in the absence of her protectors.
Being first stupefied with blows, inflicted with clubs or wooden swords, on the head
back, and shoulders, every one of which is followed by a stream of blood, she is then
dragged away through the woods by one arm, with a perseverance and violence that
it might be supposed would displace it from its sockets.” In this manner the woman
is said to be dragged to the man’s camp, where “ a scene ensues too shocking to re-
late.”
Isolated cases of brutal violence such as this doubtless occur as acts of war, but no
such practice is known to me as a custom in any Australian tribe. On the contrary,
Mr. C. Naseby, of Maitland, New South Wales, who lived for fifty years in the Ka-
milaroi country, states as follows :
“When a young man has passed a certain number of Boras (initiations) he has a
right to choose a wife from among the unmarried and otherwise unappropriated women
of the tribe who are of the class permitted to him by the native laws. He claims tho
girl in the presence of her parents by saying “ I will come and take you by and by,”
and they cannot refuse her to him unless he be specially disqualified—as for instance
if “ his hands are stained with the blood of any of her kin.” And even in that case he
may carry her off by force if he can in spite of their refusal. For this purpose he
generally comes by stealth and alone. But if he be a very bold warrior, he some-
times goes openly to the girls’ camp and carries her off, defying the bravest of her
friends to meet him in singla.combat if they dare to stay him.”
This places the practice stated by Collins in a very different light.


lationship may be assumed to have arisen. In Australia, moreover,
aboriginal society has had a continental development, free from disturb-
ing influences from without. It affords therefore an unrivaled field for
inquiry; and here, if anywhere in the wide world, it should be now pos-
sible to trace out some of the causes which have been at the root of the
classiflcntory system of relationship.
Iu this memoir I propose to draw attention to the connection which
I find to exist between certain group relations of the Australian abo-
rigines. In the term “group relations” 1 include not only those which
are indicated by the terms of relationship, but also those shown by the
groups formed in the aboriginal communities by the action of those
social laws which have divided them into what, for the sake of con-
venience, have been termed “ class divisions.” For the purposes of this
memoir I shall rely for my evidence mainly upon the custom of certain
tribes of Central Australia, whose condition is socially * the lowest of
any with which I have acquaintance.
II.—THE TRIBAL STRUCTURE.
An Australian tribe may be defined as a larger or smaller aggregate
of people, who occupy a certain tract of hunting and food ground in
common, who speak the same language with dialectical differences, t
who acknowledge a common relatedness to one another, and who deny
this relatedness to all other surrounding tribes. This tribal aggregate
may be so small as to cover a tract of country less than fifty square
miles, with under a hundred individuals, or it may extend over hun-
dreds of miles of country and number thousands of souls.
Such a tribe, as a whole, occupies a certain tract of hunting and
food grounds, but it is invariably divided into well defined local groups,
each having its own portion of the common country. These are again
divided into smaller groups, until the smallest unit consists of a few
people of the same blood, under the direction and guidance of the
oldest or most able of the elder meu.f Thus a tribe is composed of a
* “Socially”—l use this term in a certain special sense—referring only to what I
call the socially social organization. When I say that an Australian tribe is socially
more advanced than others I do not mean that they have a better knowledge of the
arts of life, but that their social organization is of a comparatively advanced type.
And I take it that the lino of advance is from group marriage to individual marriage,
and from uterine descent to agnation.
I may note here that “ individual marriage ” does not necessarily imply monogamy.
It is consistent with that form of polygamy under which a man may have more wives
than one, he having an exclusive right to th em, as against all the rest of his tribesmen.
t There are certain exceptions where, for instance, the husbands and wives are
found to speak ditferent languages, that is, diiferent languages of the Australian
stock, but this arises through the connnbinm between two tribes.
t In most tribes, if not in all, the old men constitute what may be called the Groat
Council of the tribe. For instance, in the Dieri, this council is composed of the
heads of totems and of men of mark, such as warriors, counselors, orators, &c.
The council has, among other functions, jurisdiction over breaches of tribal morality
and offenses against the tribe. In short, it is the governing power.


number of local groups, and these are perpetuated in the same tracts
hy the sons, who hunt over the hunting grounds of their fathers. This
has been termed by Mr. Fison and myself the “Local Organization.”*
But it is not the only organization of the tribe, for there is also what
we have termed the “Social Organization,” in-which the tribe, as a
community, is divided into two parts, which are quite distinct from the
local groups just described, t Each of these two social divisions is, in
many tribes, divided into two subgroups, and in all, except the most
abnormal cases, there is a group of subdivisions to each class, or sub-
class, to which the convenient and well understood name of Totems
may be applied.:): These groups, subgroups, and totem groups have
each a name, which is borne by every individual belonging to them.
All the members of such a group are held to be parents and children,
or brothers and sisters, as the relative ages of the individuals may
determine. Thus tve may distinguish between “own” and “tribal”
parents, children, and brethren.
I use the term “ primary classes ” for the two principal social divis-
ions ; but it is certain that, in many cases, their designations are “ ani-
mal names,” and therefore the term “ major totems” might be applicable
to them. The tribe, therefore, is organized in two ways. On the one
hand, it is divided geographically , either into what may be termed hordes
with uterine descent, or into clans with agnatic descent; and, on the
other hand, it is divided socially into classes with their subdivisions as
above described. The two organizations are coexistent, and they are
coextensive in their entirety, but the divisions of the one do not corre-
spond with those of the other. For, while all the people who belong to
any given local group are found in one locality alone, those who belong
to any given social group are to be found distributed among many, if not
among all, of the local groups. In order that we may clearly perceive the
bearing of the facts as to marriage, descent, and relationship, which I
shall place on record in this paper, it is very necessary to bear in mind
this distinction between the local and the social organization of a tribe.§
* In order to avoid going over this ground, which would take up too much spacOj
I may ho permitted to refer to a memoir on this subject entitled, “ From Mother-right
to Father-right.” Journal Anthropological Institute, August, 1882. .
t Exceptions to this rule may he found in rare cases, where in certain advanced
tribes the two organizations have come to be coincident; for instance, the Woi wornng
tribe of the Yarra River, in which the two totems of the community live in a num-
ber of local groups apart from each other. All the people in one locality are Eagle-
hawk, and in another they are Crow. It may be noted here once for all that the
present tenge is used in some cases where the past would be more appropriate, the
tribes being all but extinct.
t Of course the word “totem” is, strictly speaking, the badge of a certain group.
For the sake of convenience I use it also to denote the group which is distinguished
by the badge.
$ This is a concise statement of what has been detailed more at length by Mr. Fison
and myself in a paper entitled “The Deme and the Horde,” communicated by us to
the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain.


III.—THE CLASS ORGANIZATION.
In some communities there are only the two primary class-divisions,
each with its group of totems. In others there are the two primary
classes, each divided into a pair of sub-classes, and each of these pairs
has a group of totems. In some cases this totem group is common to
both of the two sub-classes to which it belongs; in other cases each sub-
class has its own peculiar totems. In some exceptional cases the
primary classes are wanting. In others the usual totem sub-groups are
absent, but the primary classes, or their sub-classes, are themselves
totems. Other exceptions are where the totems alone, or the classes
alone, have survived. All these abnormal instances I have found to be
connected with changes in the line of descent. The primitive and com-
plete forms have uterine descent; and it is in cases where descent is
counted through the male line that I find the most abnormal forms to
occur. There are also intermediate cases. The changes in the class
system, their variations, and their decay are therefore connected with
the principle of agnation. To this subject I shall again refer. The
decay in the class system of a tribe is, in fact, a symptom of profound
changes in its social organization; and these changes, so far as I know,
are invariably connected with the more pronounced influence of the
local groups. The local organization becomes stronger as the social
organization grows weaker.
The entire subject of the class organization, and the development of
the class divisions and totems, is too large to be entered upon here; and
for some further particulars concerning them I must refer to a brief
memoir of mine, entitled Notes on the Australian Class Systems, which
may be found in the Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great
Britain, for May, 1883. In order, however, to bring the class organiza-
tion clearly into view, I subjoin that Of the Dieii tribe of Central
Australia, which will serve as the type of the less developed systems,
and also as an illustration of the remarks I am about to make in this
paper on the connection existing between the class groups and those
indicated by the terms of relationship now in use.
Much of the evidence I am about to use will be taken from the cus-
toms of the Dieri and other kindred tribes, which, collectively, form
a great allied group or “ nation.” * The letters and numerals, which
are prefixed to the class divisions and totems in the following table,
will serve for convenient reference.
'lndependently of my own acquaintance with the Dieri and the allied tribes more
than twenty years ago in their wild state, I am indebted to Mr. S. Gason for very
full particulars as to the Dieri, in whose country he resided for six years as an officer
of the South Australian mounted police, and of whose community he became an
initiated member. As to the Kundndaburi tribe, to which I refer, I have unfortu-
nately much less information. For what I have, lam indebted to Mr. J. W. O’Donnell,
formerly of Mount Ilowitt station, in that country.


Table I. —Dieri class system.
Primary divisions.
Totems.
A. MattSri
1. Karaura j= eaglehawk.
2. \Varugati== emu.
3. Kint&la = native dog and thirteen other totems.
1. Tchukdru = kangaroo.
2. KaudIka==crow.
3. Tidnam&ra=frog and sixteen other totems.
Every member of the community is either Matter! or Kararu, Each
individual also bears one of the totemic names of the primary division
to which he or she belongs.
This class system represents that of the Dieri, the Kuuandaburi, and
other kindred tribes, between whom there exists connubium. It also
represents the systems which are found under various dialectic differ-
ences of nomenclature among tribes spread over a very large area in
Central Australia. The members of one tribe know well which of their
own divisions are the equivalents of those in neighboring tribes, even
when the totemic names are not the same.
Before explaining the laws of these classes it will be well to say a few
words about the Dieri and the kindred tribes making up the “nation”
of which it is the most important member.
As shown upon the annexed sketch-map, the Barcoo River, in its nu-
merous sources, the Alice, the Thomson, and many other streams, rises
on the western fall of the Queensland Great Dividing Range, and thence
has a general south ' esterly course into the depressed region of Central
Australia. Soon after passing from Queensland into the colony of South
Australia it begins to form a large delta, or a series of deltas, and its
numerous branches water, and pften partly submerge, a tract of country
at least 20,000 square miles in extent. The various streams of this delta
terminate in lakes, of which Lake Eyre is the largest. This delta coun-
try of the Barcoo—or, as it is called locally, Cooper’s Creek—is one of
the hottest and driest districts in all Australia—a country of sand-hills,
of mud-plains subject to floods, of stony tracts, and of salt lakes. It is
subject to great vicissitudes of climate, being in its extreme conditions
a perfect garden of verdure after seasons of flood, while during long
continued droughts it is little better than “ a howling wilderness.” This
delta country on the eastern side of Lake Eyre is inhabited by the Dieri
tribe. To the north, east, and south, and to the west also beyond the
great lake—are other tribes allied to the Dieri by language, by custom,
and by class system, all more or less intermarrying. Of these the Ku-
nandubnri tribe is one of the farthest outlying to the eastward within
the Queensland boundary on the main Barcoo River above the point at
which the delta commences.. Of all these tribes, as I have already said,
the Dieri is the central and most important. Hot only do its members


consider themselves as being “the fathers of all the tribes,”* but these
on their part regard the Dieri with mingled feelings of respect and fear.
The Dieri tribe may represent all the others. It is divided geograph-
ically into three sections, each of which takes the name of its principal
locality, and these sections are again locally divided. Its social organiza-
tion is based upon the division of the community into two classes, each
with its group of totems.f Each totem is under the direction of a head-
man, who is the oldest of the name. Each man is what I may term the
“ totemic brother” of every other man and woman of his totem on the
same level with him in his generation. An illustration will show how
this works. When, for instance, a stranger arrives at a Dieri encamp-
ment from some neighboring tribe, the first question put to him is,
* Quoted from information supplied to me by Mr. S. Gason.
t The Diori -word for totem is Mtirdu. This word has two meanings, one signifying
u taste,” the other “totem”; that is to say, ono of those names of animals,'birds,
reptiles, fish, insects, or plants, which, according to the Dieri legend, the Great Spirit
Muramura ordered the ancestors to assume when he instituted their class divisions.


“ What is your totem V’* This being ascertained, his totemic brethren
take charge of him, protect him, and treat him with hospitality, even to
the extent of providing him with a temporary wife of that totem with
which his own intermarries.
These totems are strictly exogamous under the severe penalty of
death. Thus, a man being A I (that is, Matteri and Eaglehawk; see
Table I), may marry, according to the Dieri rule, a B woman of any of
the B totemic divisions, and so on with A 2, A 3, &c., and vice versa ,
always provided that the parties do not stand to one another withiu
certain close degrees to be hereinafter specified. Even casual amours
between persons who are forbidden to each other, either by this near-
ness of actual kinship or by identity of class and totem, are regarded
with the utmost abhorrence and are punished by death. Yet this rule
differs somewhat in different tribes, for, among the Kunandaburi, the
prohibition is relaxed upon a woman’s marriage, when the jus primee
noctis includes all the men present at the camp without regard to class or
kin.f Among the Dieri the rule is never relaxed on any occasion, and
this tribe is, as I shalJ show, in some respects slightly in advance of
the Kunandaburi, while both stand at the commencement of the long
progressive series formed by all the Australian tribes concerning which
I have hitherto collected data. At the other end of this series stand
tribes such astheKurnai, of Gippsland, whose class system has become
almost extinguished, and whose local divisions have become agnatic
clans.
IV.—THE RELATIONSHIP TEEMS. —MARITAL GROUPS.
The terms denoting relationship which are used by the Australian
tribes belong to the classificatory system of Dr. Morgan. After collect-
ing and studying a great number from all parts of Australia, I have
found that there are several types under which the relationship terms
of different tribes may be arranged; and that they show a progressive
change from a system of extreme simplicity to one, which, although still
classificatory, has developed far more individual distinctions than our
own descriptive system.
Looked at as a whole, these types show a progressive development,
which is certainly connected with a progressive social change, indicated
in most cases by the change in the line of descent. What I now pro-
pose is, not to enter upon a general discussion of the Australian rela-
tionship terms, but to point out the connection between them and the
‘This question, “Minna rnurdu?” can he put hy means of gesture language, to
which in the same way a suitable reply can be made. Thus it is possible to learn, at
a safe distance, whether a stranger is friend or enemy, even more certainly than by
using the well understood sign for “ peace.”
t This extreme and exceptional extension of the jus primes noctis is given on the sole
authority of Mr. J. W. O’Donnell, who resided for some years in the Kunandaburi
country. I have not been able to obtain any further information on the matter.


Table II.
English.
Knnandaburi.
Dieri.
Plrahru.
N5a.
Koa.
Koa.
Piranru.
Koa.
Koa.
Koa.
6. Individual wllo
Kuhaia
class systems which I have described in the preceding pages. It will
suffice for my purpose to show that the terms of relationship arise nat-
urally out of the relations of the class divisions to each other, and that
these relations are those of group to group.
I find that the relationship terms of the Australian tribes fall into cer-
tain natural groups, of which I select three of the principal for illustra-
tion. These are the marital , the parental and filial , and the fraternal ;
and I take those of the Kunaudaburi and the Dieri tribes for illustration.
(M) means male speaking; (F), female speaking.
The first terms in these lists challenge attention. In ak these tribes
there are two kinds of connections, which we may term marriage. One
where two individuals are allotted to each other permanently, often in
extreme youth, by their parents. The other where a man and a woman
are allotted to each other as “accessory spouses,” each of whom may
stand in the same relation to other individuals of the opposite sex.
The exact nature of this second kind of marriage I shall now consider;
and I take the Dieri instance for illustration. The relation is called
Pirauru,* and the various Piraurus are allotted to each other by the
great council of the tribe in secret session, after which their names are
formally announced to the assembled people on the evening of the cere-
mony of circumcision, during which there is for a time a general license
permitted between all those who have been thus allotted to each other.
The following precis of Mr. Gason’s valuable information shows the
precise nature of this Pirauru relation:
1. Bach Dieri man, or woman, is the Pirauru of some other Dieri
woman, or man.
2. The relation of Pirauru may exist between men and women of dif-
ferent local groups, or of different tribes.
3. The relation of Pirauru may not exist between a person and those
who stand to him or her in any one of the following relations: Bather,
father’s brother, father’s sister, mother, mother’s sister, mother’s brother,
* The only derivation I can give for this word is from Pira=moon —also used for the
round wooden howls made by the Dieri —and tiru=circular. The great councils of
the tribe are always held at full moon, and Pirauru may possibly be taken as having
relation to the time when these couples are allotted to one another. I however offer
this explanation with some diffidence.


brother’s child, sister’s child, brother, sister, or any of those whom
we ourselves call “ cousins,” either on the father’s or on the mother’s
side.
4. Nor may it exist between persons of the same totem, for these are
regarded as brother and sister, or (the Dieri having uterine descent)
mother and son, as the case may be.
■5. A Dieri man, having passed through the Mfndrai (peace) ceremony,
may have a Pirauru allotted to him.*
G. The Piraurus being allotted to one another at each great council
previous to the ceremony of circumcision, a man, or a woman, being
already Pirauru, may thus acquire a new Pirauru relation in addition
to those previously acquired. Hence in time any individual may come
to have several Pirauru.
7. Seniority in the man regulates the temporary right to any given
Pirauru. Thus, supposing an older man and a younger to be in camp
together, and that the latter had with him a Pirauru, the former, being
alone, the older man could lawfully claim the woman, if she were Pir-
auru to him also.
As the Piraurus cannot be of the same class name we have here a
number of men belonging to one class married collectively to a number
of women of the other class. Thus a number of A men (see Table I)
are the Piraurus of a number of B women and vice versa ; and this is
clearly a form of group marriage, which, when the two classes meet at
the tribal ceremonies, becomes what may be called regulated communal
intercom se between the sexes. At other times, when the community
is scattered over the tribal country, a man may be found having with
him at one time one or more Pirauru, and at another time other women
who stand in this relation to him; or a woman may be found living
with several men who are Pirauru to her. To those unacquainted with
the custom this presents the aspect of lawless license, or of polygamy,
or of polyandry, but it is in fact group marriage.t
The terras Dilpa malif and Pirauru signify the same relation, the one
among the Kunandaburi and the other among the Dieri. They are the
terms of relation between two groups, and these two groups in the
widest sense are the class divisions A and B (Table I). Here, then, in a
* Before being fully admitted into membership in the community a youth must pass
through the following ceremonies: 1. Chirinchiri—knocking out two front teeth. 2.
Kurawali wonkana—circumcision of boys. 3. Wilyaru—anointing with the blood of
an old man. 4. Mindari—the peace ceremony, when the entire community assem-
bles.
There is also an additional rite to which only certain individuals, selected by the
old men, are subjected. This is Kulpi, the slitting of the urethra.
tThe Pirauru custom clearly accounts for the so-called polyandry of the Nairs.
(See Mr. J. P. McLennan’s Studies in Ancient History,p. 148.)
t The term Dilpa mali I cannot explain. lam told that the word kodimali means
“nothing,” in the sense of negation of something of which Nubaia is the expression.


modified form, and in actual existence, is what I Lave elsewhere called
the Divided Commune.*
Besides this form of group marriage there is also individual marriage
in the tribes. This is the Noa relation, the features of which can be
thus summarized.
1. The relation of Noa can only exist between a man and a woman.of
different class names and totems, who, moreover, are not within certain
prohibited degrees of relationship to each other.
2. A woman becomes the Noa of a man most frequently by being be-
trothed to him when she is a mere infant, he being perhaps a young
man. In certain cases she is given by direction of the great council as
a reward for some meritorious act on his part.
3. A man may be Noa to two or more women, but a woman cannot be
Noa to more than one man.
4. But a woman who is hToa to one man may also be Pirauru to
several other men.
5. The right of the Noa overrides that of the Pirauru. Thus a man
cannot claim a woman who is Pirauru to him when her ISToa is present
in the camp, excepting by his consent. It is not often, however, that the
male ISToa refuses to accommodate the Pirauru temporarily, for he is
liable to have a refusal retorted upon himself. But he will more freely
lend his Pirauru than his Noa. Such cases, however, are the frequent
causes of jealousies and fights.
6. When a man is sent on a mission to another tribe he never takes
his Noa with him. It is understood that, on such occasions the female
companions of these “ ambassadors ” are to be perfectly complaisant to
all the men of the visited tribe w T ho do not stand to them within the
prohibited degrees; and it is held that for this purpose a man’s Pirauru
is better fitted than his Noa. Yet this Pirauru is of course the Noa of
some man who remains at home.
7. The relationship of No a may exist between individuals of any of the
allied tribes, always provided that there is no obstacle of class or other
prohibition. Such arrangements between individuals of different tribes
are often, perhaps most frequently, brought about by the great council,
as tribal alliances, and are the subject of much diplomatic negotiation.
The ISToa of the Dieri is the same as the Nubaia of the Kuuandaburi.
But the marital group of the latter has a most archaic simplicity, show-
ing a group relationship even more extended in theory than that which
* Seo Kamilaroi and Kurnai, passim. I may take this opportunity of saying that I
doubt whether, even under an “Undivided Commune” there could have been anything
more than a limited promiscuity, ixcepting when the whole community occasionally
reunited. The general conditions of savage life on the Australian continent would not
permit an entire undivided commune to remain united for any length of time in the
same locality. The Dieri practice may show us, in a modified form, what might take
place. The common Pirauru right exists, but it cannot be fully exercised excepting
when the whole tribe assembles. Then, anti then only, does the Pirauru group of A
men (or the Pirauru group of B men), with its female Pirauru, temporarily resemble
what one might suppose an undivided commune to be.


the Pirauru of the Dieri gives in actual practice. This, however, is in
accord with the general customs of the Kunandaburi, who are the least
advanced of all the tribes known to me. While, the Dieri, the
sexual intercourse of persons who, according to their notions, are too
nearly related is forbidden under all circumstances by a death penalty;
wjth the Kunandaburi, there is, according to Mr. O’Donnell, no such
restriction on the occasion of the marriage of a betrothed girl. This
gentleman also says that, though it is considered improper that there
should be intercourse between women and their husbands’ own brothers,
or between men and their wives’ actual sisters, such intercourse con-
stantly takes place with little more than a mere pretense of concealment.*
The Dieri would regard this as abominable—at least, if the Koa were
present in the camp—and yet the third, fourth, seventh, and eighth re-
lationship terms (Table II) show that, in all probability, it was once
their practice, as it still is, in at least one of the tribes composing the
group to which they belong.
lu tribes such as those with which I have been dealing, the terms of
relationship fit in more or less completely with the actual group relations
of the class divisions and their members. The inference to be drawn
theoretically from an inspection of the terms is that a group of tribal
brothers have their wives in common, and that a group of tribal sisters
have theirhusbands in common. When this is compared with the actual
custom now prevalent among the tribes inhabiting the Barcoo delta,
it is found, as I have already stated, that the contemporary generation t
of each class division is composed of “brothers and sisters”; that the
men of one class, who are thus “ brothers ” to one another, marry the
women of the other class, who are thus “sisters” to one another; that
at all times there is between the intermarrying groups a modified com-
munal right, which becomes general among those who have been allotted
to each other as Pirauru; and that the marital rights, which are in-
herited in common under the laws of the social organization, are con-
trolled and restricted by the local organization through the great coun-
cil of the tribe.
It now remains to be seen how far these conclusions are borne out by
an examination of tribes in other parts of the Australian continent.
Of all the tribes which I have hitherto met with the least advanced
socially (that is, as to their social organization) are those of Central
*Mr. Fison tells me that this was the case in some, at least, of the Fijian tribes.
And, after this memoir was completed, information reached me from Mr. S. Gason
that “the Jaw allows intercourse” between these parties, hut only in the absence of
the Noa.
tThe word “generation” is of uncertain meaning, and its use may be misleading.
Ido not use it as implying a line of ascendants and descendants. Nor do I use it in
the common acceptation as “the present generation,” which includes all those now
living, as distinguished from those who are gone, and from those who are yet to come.
Perhaps the best among several unsatisfactory definitions which suggest themselves
is that I mean by it “ all those on the same level in a generation.” Thus, all the
young people who are marriageable would be on the same level in the generation to
which theyhelong.


Australia; the most advanced are those which are found along the
southeastern coast-line. These can be taken as the two extremes of a
series in which all the tribes I have examined can be arranged accord-
ing to their social status. I am not prepared to show all the causes
which have advanced the coast tribes far beyond those in the center of
the continent, but this much may be ventured upon, that the social
advance appears to be connected with a more favored climate, and the
greater abundance and regularity of food-supply consequent thereupon.
The tribes which I have already described have a marked social organi-
zation with uterine descent. In the tribes with which I am about to
deal the social organization has been profoundly modified, and in some
cases even extinguished all but the faintest traces; while, in an equal
degree, the local organization has gained strength, and taken to itself
all the powers which the social organization formerly possessed. For
comparison, I take the Kurnai and the Coast Murring tribes, which
stand near the end of the series, at whose other extremity are the Died
and Kunandaburi.
The Kurnia tribe inhabit Gippslaud and the Coast Murring the coun-
try extending from the confines of Gippslaud along the southeastern
coast towards Sydney. For the purposes of this memoir the Shoalhaven
Eiver may be taken as their approximate limit in that direction. The
two tribes touch at Mallagoota Inlet, where their extreme local sections
intermarry.*
The Kurnai tribe is divided into live large clans,f which again are
divided into local subdivisions, until the smallest group consists of only
a few members. Of class divisions the Kurnai have none, and the only
remaining traces of totems are two birds, the name of one of which is
borne by all the males and that of the other by all the females of the
tribe. Traces of the two great class divisions of the stock from which
the Kurnai are probably derived—the classes Eaglehawk (Buujil) and
Crow (VVaa, or Ngarugal)—are found in the application of Buujil to all
the old men of the tribe, and in the extreme reverence felt for the
crow. The Kurnai believe that it can talk their language, and that it
is in the habit of warning them of approaching danger. In this tribe
the class organization, so far as it affects marriage, is extinct. The
local organization, however, has stepped into the place thus left vacant.
It has assumed authority over marriage, and it regards all those who
were born in the same locality as necessarily so near in blood as to be
forbidden to each other in marriage. A man therefore is compelled by
this rule to seek a wife in some more distant part of the tribal territory,
and from certain local groups, to the exclusion of others. Moreover,
in this tribe the remarkable custom of marriage by elopement has be-
come developed to such an extent that only under exceptional circum-
stances can a man obtain a wife in any other manner.
* For further details as to the remarkable organization and customs of this tribe,
see “Kamilaroi and kurnai,” Robertson, Melbourne.
tl use the word “clan” advisedly here, because this tribe has agnatic descent. The
term “horde” I use for local divisions of tribes having uterine descent.


In this tribe marriage is individual, as in the Noa practice of the
Dieri; but men are never known to lend their wives to others,* nor
does anything like the Pirauru custom obtain. Nevertheless, there are
certain occasions when a practice arises similar to that of the Dieri, but
under the restrictions placed on the union of the sexes by locality and
not by class. In the case of marriage by elopement, the woman be-
comes for oue day, under the jus primcc noctis, t the common property
of the bridegroom’s “comrades.” The faithless wife also becomes the
common property of the men who pursue her, until she is taken from
them by her husband or her brothers. On occasions such as the ap-
pearance of the Aurora Australis, the supposed irnpeudiug danger to
the tribe is believed to be averted by a temporary exchange of wives
by order of the old men.
The coast Murring consists of several tribes, or rather, large clans,
which have local names, but to which collectively the name of Murring
(=men) is applied. These clans are again divided and subdivided down
to the smallest groups of a few individuals, each under the direction of
its oldest man. The large groups are governed by old men, who com-
bine the attributes of age and of powerful “magic,” and the oldest and
most powerful wizard is the master (Biamban) of them all.J
In the Murring tribes the class system is not completely extinct.
There are not the two primary classes, but there are numerous totems.
These descend, not from mother to child, as in tribes having uterine
descent, but from father to child, and in some localities they are borne
in duplicate. They are scarcely regarded as names, but still they have
a power over marriage, for no man may marry a woman of his own
budjan (totem). The principal control over marriage is, however, in
the local organization; for the rule is very strict that no man may
marry in his own locality. He must obtain a wife from certain fixed
localities at a distance from his own. In these tribes wives are ob-
tained by the exchange of sisters—own or tribal—under the arrange-
ment of the respective fathers. The only occurrence of any of the
primitive forms of license with which I am acquainted, is when a
visitor from a distance is provided with a temporary wife by the hosts.
Also, in cases of elopement, when the woman is captured, she becomes
for a time' the common property of her pursuers. With these excep-
tions, marriage seems to be strictly individual.
I now give, in a,tabulated form, the terms applicable to the marital
group as used by the two tribes under consideration, for comparison
with the Dieri and Kunandaburi terms given in Table 11.
* This applies, of course, to purely native custom as it prevailed before the incom-
ing of the white men. The mere immorality resulting from the contact of the two
races is not taken into account.
t“Comrades” (Brogan.) See a paper on the Kurnai Jeraeil, communicated by me
to the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain.
(This “master” must not be taken as the equivalent of the “hereditary chief,”
found in more advanced tribes, such as the Fijians, &c.


Table III."
English.
Kurnai.
Marring.
TanamsL
Xdjandtiri.
Najanduri.
Tanama.
Kajanduri.
Najanduri.
(>. Wifo
Table IV.
English. Kunandahuri,
Bieri
apiri waka.*
apiri, or apini.t
apiri waka.
apiri waka.
andri waka.
andri wandrini.
andri waka.
andri waka.
atamura waka.
atamura, or atamnrini.
atamura waka.
atamura waka.
atani waka.
atani.
atani waka.
adada.
9. Son of Piranru (M)
(F) means female speaking; (M) male speaking.
* The Kurnai terms are one of the two dialects spoken by that tribe. It is called Mftkthang.
Muk =tnie, superior, eminent; Thang= speech. Mukthangthereforeisthelanguageparexcellence.
The Murring terms are in the language called Tharawal, which is spoken by the coast Murring tribes
adjoining the Kurnai. It is unintelligible to the Kurnai, as tbeir speech also is to the Murring ; and
yet the border clans of the one tribe intermarry with those of the other. Her© we find an easy ex-
planation of the fact that among savages husband and wife sometimes speak different languages.
An examination of these terms shows, in those of the Krnai, an ar-
chaic simplicity which 1 can only account for on the supposition that
they owe their preservation to the extreme isolation of the tribe, arising
from the geographical features of their country, which render it extremely
difficult of access. No distinction is drawn between the husband, his
brother, and the wife’s sister’s husband. These terms do not fit the ex-
isting relations as marked by individual marriage, the exclusive right
of the husband to his wife, the absence of the Piaruru practice, and the
male lino of descent. But they more clearly accord with the relations
which arise on exceptional occasions such as those I have mentioned.
The custom on these occasions is analagous to that of the Pirauru, and
to this practice the relationship terms of the Kurnai apply, and indicate
a possibility of its former prevalence as a custom.
In the Murring terms a distinction appears between the second and
the third and fourth, as well as between the sixth and the seventh and
eighth, indicative of individual marriage.
V. —THE PARENTAL AND FILIAL GROUPS.
I now return to the Died and Kunandaburi tribes for illustrations of
these groups, which I take together as follows:
(M) means male speaking; (F) female speaking.
* Waka = little.
t Apini, according to Mr. Gason, means “my father ” as “ signifying a relation without doubt.” It
is evidently an abbreviation of apiri = father, and ani =I. A little difference exists between Mr*
Gason’s method of spelling the native words and my own. I have followed as nearly as possible the pro-
nunciation which I remember to have heard from the natives themselves when I waJi in their country.


I regret that the Kunandaburi list is so meager, but unfortunately my
source of information ran dry before my inquiries could be completed.
There are, however, enough taken together with the previously given
marital relations, to suggest a similarity to those of the Dieri. The
third term, if further inquiry shows it to be correct, is a deviation.
The custom of Pirauru must necessarily produce doubt as to the pa-
ternity of children. A Dieri woman rarely admits that any particular
man is the father of her child.* I have shown that it is the group of A
men who cohabit with the group of B women (Table I) and vice versa,
and that the whole group of women to which the mother of any given
child belongs are also regarded as its mothers. But a distinction is
drawn between the mother’s Pirauru and herNoa. With the latter she
habitually cohabits. She was specially given to him by her father, or
by order of the great council. Hence he claims the right to dispose of
her daughter in marriage, and her children call him Apiri=father, or
Apini=father-to me, while they call her Pirauru Apiri waka, that is to
say, “ little father.” Here we can see the commencement of individual
marriage, and of the more precise notions of descent which follow it.
The man’s Piraurus are called the mothers of all the children of his
Noa; that is, of all the children of the woman with whom he habitually
cohabits. But they are the andri waka, that is to say, the “little
mother” of those children, white each child’s own mother is its andri=
mother, or andrini=my mother.
Hence a man is the “ own ” father of all the children of his Noa, but
the “ little father ”of the children of his Piraurus. It follows that if
every woman is Noa, every child must have some Apini, i, e., some “ par-
ticular father,” and patria potestas can begin.
Given the cohabitation of a group of A men with a group of B women,
as I have shown it to exist, the men being “ own ”.or “ tribal brothers,”
it follows naturally that each one is the father in common of all the children.
This we see expressed in the classiflcatory terms tabulated by me (Table
IV). The “father’s sister’s husband” is not included in this group of
fathers. He is kaka, not apiri. The reason of this will appear from the
following diagram.!
The diagram shows why the father, father’s brother, and mother’s
• Informant, Mr. S. Gason.
t Explanation of diagram.—A and B are the two intermarrying groups. (M) A and
(M) A' are brothers, (F) Ais their sister. (F) B and (F) B' are the wives of (M) A
and (M) A'. (M) B it the husband of (F) A. B is thfe child of (M) A and (F) B.
(M) = malo; (F) = female.


Table Y.
English.
Knrnai.
Marring.
hanga
nadjnng
kaaang .
4. Mother
5. Mother’s sister
minung
miming
7. Son (M)
lit
9. Wife’s sister’s son
wurun
sister’s husband are all “ apiri,” for they are of the same group, (M) A,
which is Pirauru to group (M) B. The mother’s brother and the father’s
sister’s husband—who are the same group individual—are both Kaka,
and form part of another martial group, (M) B.
I have said that in spite of the Pirauru system, and the consequent
uncertainty as to actual paternity, there is, nevertheless, a tendency to
attribute the paternity to the man who habitually cohabits with the
mother of the child; that is to say, who is to her in the relation of Noa,
which, indeed, is inchoate individual marriage. He is the “ father ”of
the child, while the mother’s accessory husband is only the “ little father.”
Morever, he claims the right to dispose of the daughter of his Hoa in
marriage, though she may be do facto the child of any one of her mother’s
Pin unis.
This rests upon a belief which is not peculiar to the Dieri. 1 have
found it in every Australian tribe, without exception, with which I have
acquaintance. This belief is that the child is derived from the male
parent only, and that the mother is no more than its nurse. As a black
fellow once put it to me, “The man gives the child to a woman to take
care of for him, and he can do whatever he likes with his own child.”
This is so wonderfully like Apollo’s well-known dictum in the Eumeni-
des as to be positively startling when heard from the lips of an Austral-
ian black; but the foregoing is not the only instance within my knowl-
edge in which the belief has been expressed by the aborigines. The
subject well merits full discussion, but, as it involves the important ques-
tion of the change of descent from the female line to that through males,
I defer its further consideration to the penultimate section of this
memoir.
1 now offer for comparison with the parental and filial terms of re-
lationship among the Dieri and Kuuandaburi, those of tribes who are
socially more advanced.
(M) means male speaking; (F) means female speaking.
I have found the study of the development of the terms of relation-
ship used by the Australian aborigines to be one of extreme difficulty.
When arranged in groups, as I have arranged them, the terms of one


group do not logically follow out those of the antecedent group, as do
the terms used by savage and barbaric tribes in other parts of the
world collected and arranged by Dr. Morgan in his magnificent work
on systems of consanguinity and affinity. For instance, it is rare to
find that the terms of the filial group follow logically those of the pa-
rental group. As a general rule, the latter has departed farthest from
simplicity. The Murring list is a case in point. (See table.) Nor have
I found that the actual social status of any Australian tribe in the
present day can be inferred from an examination of the terms of rela
tionship alone. In all cases it is evident that the actual status of the
tribe is in advance of the status theoretically deducible from the terms
of relationship. This is significant and points to social development.
The most extreme case within my knowledge is that of the Kuruai;
and I have selected it partly for this reason, and partly because I am
better acquainted with the customs of this tribe than with those of any
other. It is a good example of the preservation of an archaic type
under changed conditions. (
In the Kurnai terms we have precisely the analogues of the Dieri;
but, as I have already pointed out, the Kurnai have no Pirauru prac-
tice, and indeed would look upon such a custom with horror. Never-
theless, as I have said, they did on occasions permit a license which to
my mind strongly points to its former existence with them as a custom.
Moreover, the terms given for the parental group point to such a form
of group marriage, and .those for the filial group strengthen this infer-
ence.
The Murring, in their tribal organization, their individual marriage
with a strong obligation of fidelity on the part of the wife, and their
agnatic descent, much resemble the Kurnai; in fact, both these tribes
may be said to stand nearly upon the same social level, but the for-
mer has relationship terms considerably more differentiated than those
of the latter. Yet in these the filial group still retains the extreme
simplicity found in the relations of tribes who have group marriage
still actually existing, the only difference being that the Murring terms
for “father’s brother” and “mother’s sister’s husband” are differen-
tiated from that for “ father,” as also are the terms for “ mother’s sister”
and “ father’s brother’s wife” from that for “ mother.”
In both the Kurnai and the Murring tribes, however, there is a dis-
tinction made between the terms of the parental group which is worth
noting as indicating severally two processes of differentiation. While
the Murring have separate terms to distinguish the father, the father’s
brother, and the mother’s sister’s husband, who, under the Pirauru prac-
tice of the Dieri, may all be married in the group to the same woman,
the Kurnai make no distinction between these terms excepting by add-
ing the word “brebba” to the term implying paternity. The “own
father” is Mungan, while the father’s brother and the mother’s sister’s


husband are Brebba mungan; that is to say, ‘‘the other father.” This
distinction, however, is rarely used in ordinary parlance, though it
conies out when particular inquiry is made as to the relationship.
VI. —THE FRATERNAL RELATIONS.
The class divisions, viewed in their Pirauru relation, produce two
marital groups, and, as a necessary consequence, they also produce pa-
rental and filial groups. The Pirauru relation also creates, as a matter
of course, a group relation between the children of the Piraurus. It
ought to be found, and it is found, that the children of the Pirauru
group recognize one another as brothers and sisters. Moreover, all the
children of any given Noa are brothers and sisters of the Pirauru group
to which that No a belongs. But when, in any particular part of that
group, a man habitually cohabits with his No a and with a Pirauru, and
the children of the two women are brought up together, Mr. Gason tells
me that there is a recognition in this family of a superiority in the chil-
dren of the former over those of the latter. This fact is of the very
greatest importance, for it brings us to the dawning of birthright.
The fraternal group, as shown in the class divisions, embraces all
those on the same level in a generation who are of the same class name,
but more especially all those who are of the same totem, which is
nearer to the individual than is the class. The “totems-men ” succor
one another as a matter of course in all tribes in which, as in the Dieri,
the social organization is vigorous. Where, however, it has been super-
seded by the social organization, as among the Kurnai, it is the mem-
bers of the local group who aid each other, and this bond is strength-
ened by the far-reaching relationships in this tribe, such, for instance,
as that of “brother” In all these cases the individual recognizes and
carries out the obligation laid upon him by the group of which he is a
member.
As it seems to me, the division of the community into two primary
classes and lesser divisions has evidently been brought about with in-
tention* to prevent those connections between brother and sister, and
other near relations, which are looked upon by the blacks with the ut-
most abhorrence. The prohibition extends beyond the children of the
same parents, and prevents the union of those who are of the same
class name or totem. The group relations which, as I have shown,
spring naturally out of the class divisions and their laws, also forbid
the marriage of all who are within the fraternal relations. But in the
less advanced tribes I have met with an instance where the prohibition
is not a perpetual injunction never, under any circumstances, to be
broken. In the Kunandaburi tribe the prohibition is relaxed on the
' This is opposed to the commonly-received notion that the lower savages are men-
tally incapable of perceiving and dealing with such questions. But the fact is be-
yond dispute that they do perceive them, and discuss them freely among themselves,
the women taking an active part in the discussion.


occasion of a girl’s marriage, when, according to Mr. O’Donnell, her
favors may be shared “by all the males present in the camp without re-
gard to relationship.” In the Dieri tribe, however, the prohibition, as
regards intercourse between those who are within the fraternal rela-
tions, is never relaxed. No greater offense can be offered to a Dieri
man or woman than to call him or her “Buyulu pfirchaua,” which means,
according to Mr. Gason, “ nearest relatives,” or, in its understood sense,
“incestuous intercourse between near relatives.” Among such are all
those who stand in the fraternal group relation to one another.* That
this group relation is a real one to the Dieri is proved by the fact that
such an offense is punished by the great council of the tribe with death.
In the more advanced tribes, where the social organization has given
way and is more or less approaching extinction, if not utterly extinct,
the fraternal group survives as long as a single totem remains in ex-
istence, as in the coast Murriug. And, where the totems are gone,
it becomes transferred in a modified form to the local group, whose
members are then thought to be so “ near to each other ” in blood as to
be forbidden in marriage. It is well to remember that this local group
has, in all cases, even where uterine descent is strongest, been perpetu-
ated in the same place from father to sou by occupation, I may almost
say by inheritance, of the hunting grounds.
The relationship terms of different Australian tribes, which I have
collected and tabulated, show three types of the fraternal group.
First. All the descendants of several brothers or of several sisters are
still brothers auds'sters mutually ; and this relationship descends in an
ever-expanding fraternal group. Such an instance is that of the Kurnai
tribe.
Second. The descendants of several brothers are differentiated from
the descendants of several sisters; so that two fraternal groups come
into existence, each of which is still fraternal within its own limits, but
is not so towards the other group. Nevertheless, the prohibition as to
marriage between the members of the two groups still obtains. The
new relation thus arising, finds expression in a reciprocal term such as
the “ Kami ”of the Dieri (Table Yl).. Taken in the widest sense, the
contemporary generation “ on the same level ” in the intermarrying di-
visions A and B (Table I) may be said to be “ potential spouses” to one
another; but the marital privilege is restricted by what we may call an
“inner regulation” when two “Kami,” male and female, are the chil-
dren of own brother and-sister respectively.
Third. The fraternal relations tend to become restricted to the chil-
dren of one pair. There is also a tendency to a multiplication of distinct-
*This prohibition includes not only “brother” and “ sister,” but also the “cousins”
who are indicated by the term “ kami.” (See Table VI.) Although the kami belong,
respectively, to the two intermarrying class divisions, the nearness of blood stops the
marital right. We have here a prohibition counted through the male line in a tribe
which has uterine descent.


Table VI. —Fraternal relations.
English.
Kumai.
Bieri.
Gournditch Mara.
1. Elder brother
2. Youu ger brother -
Tundung
Bramung -
Negi
Ngattata
Wurti.
Kokong.
Kaki.
Kokoyar.
Wawurt.
Wangya.
Wurti or Kokong.
Kaki or Kokoyar.
Benangar.
-Kamutch.
Benang.
Kamutch.
4. Younger sister
5. Father’s brother’s son
6. Father’s brother’s daughter....
7. Mother’s sister’s son
8. Mother’s sister’s daughter
9. Father’s sister’s son
10. Father’s sister’s daughter ...
11. Mother’s brother’s son
12. Mother’s brother’s daughter ...
Lunduft
Tundung or Bramung.
Bau-ung or Lunduk ....
Tundung or Bramung..
Bau-ung or Lunduk —
Tundung or Bramung..
Bau-ung or Lunduk
Tundung or Bramung..
Bau-ung or Lunduk
Ngattata
Negi or Ngattata ...
Kauku or'Ngattata.
Negi or Ngatiata...
Kauku or Ngattata.
Kami
Kami
Kami
Kami
ive terms, thus more or less differentiating from each other, the Kami
numbered 9,10, 11,12, in Table YI. Such an instance is that of the
Gournditch Mara tribe of Western Victoria.* It is instructive to note
that the old fraternal terms still linger, attached to the children on the
maternal side in accord with the uterine line of descent. The change
has taken place on that side which leans towards agnation.
Although I have not found it possible to determine with any degree
of certainty the social status of any tribe from an inspection of its re-
lationship terms, yet on the whole I may venture to say that in gen-
eral the type of system, according to which the terms are arranged, is
correlated in some degree with the social position of the tribe using
them.
These discrepancies between ancient custom on the one hand, as the-
oretically inferred from the terms of relationship, and present usage on
the other, as ascertained Iby careful observation, render it most difficult
to bring the facts briefly into order, and so to marshal the evidence as
to show clearly to others that which an acquaintance with a large col-
lection of relationship terms from many tribes enables me to perceive.
To bring this out with the necessary clearness would require a detailed
statement of all the evidence in my possession, and, this of course, is
impossible within the limits of this paper. The subjoined table, how-
ever, will serve in some degree to illustrate the preceding remarks.
The speaker may be either male or female.
VII. —RESTRICTIONS UPON MARRIAGE.
In the far-reaching fraternal relations explained in the previous sec-
tion there is an equally extended prohibition of marriage. The rela-
tionship, which is recognized between the persons constituting this
large group of contemporaries, not only prevents there being any inter-
marriage between them, but even a casual amour is regarded with ab-
horrence j and, as I have already noted, it may be punished capitally
under the moral law of the aborigines. But this restriction is not con-
* See Kamilaroi and Kumai, p. 2*4. Since the publication of that work lam in-
debted to the most obliging inquiries of Mrs. Stable for further information concern-
ing the Gournditch Mara. I now learn that it has a class system almost identical
with that of the Wotjohalluk noted in this memoir.


Table VII.
Primary class
divisions.
Totem divisions.
Subtotems.
A, Krokitch
1. Hot wind*
2. White ciestleas cockatoo ..
3. Bclouging-to-the-sun
1 Each totem has subordinate to it a number of ob-
> jects, animal or vegetable, e. g kangaroo, red
5 gum-tree, &c.
5. Black cockatoo
G Pelican
Do.
fined to the fraternal groups, for it necessarily also affects the parental
and filial groups with which they are connected. These restrictions
arise out of the relationships resulting from the action of the laws which
regulate the class divisions of the community. Other equally stringent
restrictions are connected with the local divisions of the people. I shall
now briefly note what they are, and show how all these restrictions
affect the choice of a wife, not only within the tribe, but even beyond it
in neighboring tribes with which there is connubium.
1. Prohibition arising out of the class and totem restrictions. —The pro-
hibition as to class divides the whole community into two halves, coin-
ciding with those divisions, which, for convenience of reference, I have
called A and B* (Table I). By this arrangement a man is restricted
in his choice of a wife to one-half of the community. The women of this
half are his potential wives, and he obtains either one or more of them
according to certaiu circumstances which limit his inherited right. In
some tribes the totemic regulations still further restrict his choice to
one totem out of as many as perhaps a dozen which compose the class.
As an illustration of the simpler case, I take the Wotjoballuk tribe of
Northwestern Victoria.!
The social organization of this tribe is somewhat peculiar, and may
be thus tabulated.
* I liavo orai ttod tho original words as useless for my purpose.
Descent in this class system is uterine. A and B are the two great
primary divisions, which, under different names, extend across the Aus-
tralian continent.;}: The peculiarity in this Wotjoballuk system is that
the primary classes divide into six subclasses which are totems, and
that each totem class has associated with it a larger or smaller group
of what I have called subtoteras, but which might be appropriately
termed pseudo-totems. They appear to me to be totems in a state of
development. Hot wind has at .least five of them White cockatoo has
seventeen, and so on for the others. That these subtotems are now in
process of gaining a sort of independence may be shown by the follow-
* In many tribes, as I have already noted, A and B again divide into four subclasses,
e. g., the well-known Kamilaroi Ipai-Kumba (A) and Murri-Kubi (B).- But since this
arrangement, though it extends over a vast area, is not found among the tribes spe-
cially dealt with in this paper, I do not take it into consideration here,
t Wotjo=men, balluk=people.
11 have now identified with each other the primary classes in their various forms
from Mount Garabier to near the Gulf of Carpentaria; that is to say, practically
across the whole north and south extent of Eastern Australia.


iug instance; a man who is Krokitch-Wartwut (Hot wind) claimed to
own all the five subtotems of Hot wind (three snakes and two birds),
.yet of these there was one which he specially claimed as “ belonging”
to him, namely, Moiwuk (carpet-snake). Thus his totem Hot wind seems
to have been in process of subdivision into minor totems, and this man’s
division might have become Hot wind carpet-snake had not civilization
rudely stopped the process by almost extinguishing the tribe.
Marriage in this tribe might take place between a totem of one class
and any totem of the other class. Tims a man of A 1 might marry a
woman of 84,0r8 5, or 86, and so with the other totems. The sub-
totems have no influence on marriage. In this tribe, therefore, the class
law prohibits a man from marrying one-half of the women in the com-
munity.*
2. Prohibition arising out of blood relationship. —By the action of the
primary divisions a man is restricted in his choice of a wife to one half
of the women. Of these again a certain number are ineligible by reason
of their standing in some of the forbidden degrees of relationship to him.
In the Wotjoballuk tribe with uteiine descent, all the women standing
to an aspirant in the relation of “father’s sister” are forbidden to him,
as also are all the daughters of these women. Nor would he be per-
mitted to take the daughter of his mother’s own brother, although, being
of the class intermarrying with his own, she belongs to the group of
women, who, according to the general class law, arc his “potential
wives.” Farther than this, by the class law itself, all the daughters of
his father’s brothers, as well as those of his mother’s sister’s, are held to
be too near iu blood to admit of a lawful union with them. It must be
remembered that iu this tribe marriages were settled by the elders, the
girls being betrothed often iu early childhood, so that those who made
the marriages were not liable to be swayed by passion, but could calmly
consider how far any proposed alliance was or was not admissible. It
must also be remembered that the relatives which I have spoken of as
individuals are iu fact groups, and that individuals counted iu these
groups came into them through others—in other words, that they are
a very far away” group relations. The prohibition as to some of these
might be disregarded where all else was desirable; but otherwise they
would certainly bo insisted upon, and probably by the old women of the
tribe more strenuously than by any one else.
3. Prohibition arising out of localityA further prohibition arises out
of locality. Local proximity by birth is quite an insuperable obstacle
to marriage- iu many tribes, in which a man is absolutely forbidden to
* The four classes into which A and B divide in the Kamilaroi and many other
tribes restrict matrimonial choice to one-fourth of the women. And, after the com-
pletion of this memoir, I received from Mr. Allan M. Giles, of Tennant’s Creek, North-
ern Territory, an extremely interesting and valuable communication on the Wara-
mnnga tribe, which is divided into eight classes, demonstrably subdivisions of the
four classes above mentioned. The Waramunga classes limit the choice of a wife to
one-eighth of the women.


marry a woman of the same subhorde or sub-clan. However eligible
she may be in other respects, the fact that both parties belong to the
same locality is held by certain tribes, the Kurnai for example, to make
them “too near each other,” that is, too near in blood. Even in some
of the tribes which have uterine descent and a vigorous class system I
find this to be the case; and bearing in mind what the Pirauru prac-,
tice really is, one can easily understand how all the people of any given
horde may come to consider themselves, and with good reason, too
nearly related to admit of marriage without mixing the same “blood” or
“ flesh.”
In tribes where the classes and totems have been weakened, or almost
extinguished the local organization in hordes, or in clans, has assumed
an overwhelming preponderance, and the local restraints upon marriage
are strictly enforced. The Kurnai tribe is a good instance. In it, as I
have already said, the totems have become practically extinct; and the
local groups have become so strictly exogamous that sexual intercourse
between members of the same division of a clan is looked upon with the
utmost abhorrence. In olden times—that is, before Gippsland was
settled by the whites—these local groups must have been bound to-
gether in a most extraordinary network of relationships. For, as I have
already pointed out, the Kurnai terms of relationship exhibit a most
primitive type, and the parental and filial groups are of very wide ex-
tent and may be traced into surprising ramifications.* Moreover the
filial relations were inherited, carrying with them fraternal relations in
ever widening lines. Again, the children of brothers and the children
of sisters’ own or tribal, were brothers and sisters to each other as far
as descents could be counted. It is not surprising that in such a tribe
the difficulties in the way of any young man finding a girl among those
locally eligible, who did not stand in some forbidden degree of relation-
ship, should have been next to insurmountable.
Restrictions such as those I have now briefly noted are found in all
Australian tribes, but in some more than in others. When one reflects
upon the wide prohibition of class and totem of relationships, and of
locality, and adds to these disabilities all the further restriction of blood
feuds, one cannot feel surprise that the question of marriage between
any given couple should be the subject of deej) and careful considera-
tion by the elders of the community, and that it should often prove an
insoluble problem to those who seek to bring it about.f No wonder
that under such conditions the young people of Australian tribes, being
still further hindered by the practice of betrothal of infant girls, so often
* I have often noticed that the whole Kurnai community appeared to be related.
Every one seemed to be the father, mother, son, daughter, brother, or sister of every
one else, but when special inquiry was made, the ‘‘tribal” relationship was distin-
guished from the “own” by more precise statement, as the “other (brebba) father,”
“ other mother,” &c.
t The “ nation,” consisting of the Aldolinga and at least three other tribes of Cen-
tral Australia, affords a good instance of the extensive marriage prohibitions arising


take their own course, and cut the gordian knot of restriction by elope-
ment. In Gippsland, where these restrictions were of exceptional ex-
tent, so as to form a net in whose meshes every individual Euruai was
almost certainly entangled, the solution of the difficulties raised by the
nearly absolute impossibility of obtaining the consent of parents was
found in the practice of elopement, which was the most prevalent form
of marriage.
VIII.—THE CHANGE IN THE LINE OF DESCENT.
In a late memoir* dealing with tbe change of descent in Australian
tribes, the practice of infant betrothal was assigned as probably the
chief cause of the change. But I have come to see at the root of be-
trothal the belief which I have noted in a previous section of this mem-
oir, “that the child is derived from the male parent only, and that the
mother is no more than its nurse.” This belief has been active in other
directions. It has aided the local organization, whoso perpetuation from
father to son is its direct expression, to over-ride the social organization;
and, together with betrothal, which produces the sense of separate own-
ership, it has tended to bring about ultimately individual marriage,
with a change of descent from the “group of female Pirauru ” to the
individual male “ Hoa.”
This belief in the renewal of a man in his son is not, nor has it been,
confined to the Australian aborigines. It is probably as old as the time
when men first began to speculate upon the phenomena within and with-
out themselves. Dr. Hearn, in his valuable work, the Aryan House-
hold,! shows that the “ worship of the house-father” is founded on the
very belief which I find among the Australian savages. It is found
distinctly enunciated in passages of the classical writers, and it forms
the central idea on which iEschylus has caused the third part of his
majestic Orestean trilogy to turn. Often as the case of Orestes has been
quoted, it seems to me that, as examined by the side-lights of Australian
custom, there may be even yet some views of it whose significance has
not been clearly seen. I may be excused for briefly considering it here,
because it seems to me to raise some curious questions as to the exist-
ence of uterine descent among the Hellenic ancestors.
out of the combined influence of class divisions and of locality. These tribes are
divided socially into four classes, which cover at least sixty-four local groups. Ac-
cording to my present information (which is not yet complete) the matrimonial
restriction arising out of the four classes is as usual, but in addition a man’s choice
is in every case confined to a few of the local groups. (Informant, Rev. H. Kempe.)
I have endeavored to show in the Dieri the prohibitions arising out of class and
close relationship, and in the Kurnai those arising out of close relationship and local-
ity. In the Aldolinga all these restricting forces combine, and result in the narrow-
ing down of the matrimonial choice to an incredibly small fraction of the whole
number of women.
* “From Mother-right to Father-right,” by A.W. Howitt and LorimerFison. Jour-
nal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland. August 1882.
t The Aryan Household. W. E. Hearn, LL. D. G. Robertson, Melbourne, 1878.


In the Orestean trilogy, of -which the Eumeuides forms the final and
most striking part, ASschylus had apparently several objects in view.
He glorified the institutions of the Athenian people by assigning a
divine origin to their great council, the Areiopagos, doubtless as op-
posed to the “modernizing institutions;” he showed the perfect action
of an ancestral curse, together with divine vengeance upon a doomed
race, the impious house of Pelops, and those who had become engrafted
upon it; and I venture to think that in the Euimenides he also gave a
dramatic version of the change effected in past ages in the line of des-
cent. The whole gravamen of the charge against Orestes is that he has
shed the blood of his mother “ being kindred.” In reply for the defense
Apollo delivers a dictum, which, he takes care to state, is derived
directly from Zeus himself, and this dictum is confirmed by Athene,
-.he embodiment of Divine wisdom. The words placed in the mouth of
Apollo are those I desire to note. In the course of the prosecution of
Orestes, the Erinyes declare their ancient jurisdiction to be over those
who have shed the blood of kindred, and they claim the right to “ hale
below”* the accused, he having “ poured out upon the ground the kin-
dred blood of his mother.” t In reply to this, Apollo, as counsel for
the defense, raises a nice point, on which, as the mouth-piece of Zeus,
he declares the law. He denies the authorship of the child to the
woman, declaring that she receives the germ merely “ as a bailee,” so
to speak. The sire, he says, is the author, for whom she preserves and
nourishes the young plant, as lor one to whom she is united by ties,
which, though sacred, are expressly denied to be those of kinship.|
v V .)
Here we have precisely the sentiment already quoted by me from my
aboriginal informant, that “ the man gives the child to a woman to take
care of for him”; and this I recognize as being at the root of changes
which have occurred in the social organization of the Australian tribes.
iEschylus shows the uterine line of descent as being the foundation on
which rested the jurisdiction of the Erinyes, “assigned to them at their
birth,” § and therefore of venerable antiquity. By the equally divided
vote of the judges he shows men’s minds halting half-way between the
old views and the new, and he assigns the cause and the reason justi-
fying the momentous change which was effected under a direct divine
mandate through the mouth of the prophetic Apollo. It seems to me
that these conclusions may be drawn from the language used by the
dramatis persona, and moreover that ASschylus may possibly have had
such conclusions in his mind when composing the Orestean trilogy.
It has been a feature of the past history of mankind that great and
momentous changes have been made under an alleged divine direction.
Of old the lawgiver was the priest, and the priest declared himself to
* Eumenides, 257, Camb. Texts.
Üb„ 623.
t Eum., 627 /t.r.X.
slb., 320, 329.


be the divine mouthpiece. In the course of time the office of lawgiver
became separated from that of the priesthood, but at the time pictured
by Aeschylus the two offices were still united. lu savage tribes, such
as those of Australia, it cannot be said that there are either priesthood
or lawgivers, in the modern sense of the words; but it is possible to
see what I may call the germ of these offices, prepared under favoring
conditions to develop into active existence.
As I have said, there is no priesthood in the Australian tribes; but
in their wizards I can recognize those who, if I may use the expression,
already stand at the threshhold of the temple, prepared to advance and
take their place at the altar when the edifice shall be completed.
These men profess to be in communication with the ancestral spirits
and with the great Supreme Being, the founder of their race, whose
sacred ceremonies of iuitiatiou they conduct and of whose laws—the
ancestral customs—they are the depositaries. Were Ito find an explan-
ation given by an Australian tribe to account for the change in descent
in their class system, 1 doubt not I should find it attributed to a com-
mand from their Great Spirit, through the mouth of the tribal wizard.
This, indeed, is almost implied by the statements which I have heard
made by old men at initiation ceremonies, that all the institutions of
the tribe were in the first instance established by him whom they
speak of and reverence as the All-father of the tribe.*
It seems to me that the important bearing of this primitive belief is
only now beginning to be appreciated. When its influence upon the
development of early society, and upon the beliefs of the early world,
is fully recognized, it will be found that its effects have not been con-
fined to the development of the ancestral worship of our Aryan fore-
fathers.
IX.—CONCLUSION.
The subject which I have dealt with in, I fear, but an imperfect
manner, is one of the most difficult of those which are met with in
studying savage society in Australia. In the Australian terms of re-
* I find that the great Supreme Being, who, as the Australians believe, lives in a
land beyond the vaulted sky, is known under many different names in the various
tribes, perhaps under as many names as there are tribes. These names, being con-
nected with the initiation ceremonies, are often too sacred to be uttered by the tribes-
men save during the celebration of those “mysteries” from which the uninitiated
are excluded. For instance, the Woiworung tribe of the Yarra River district called
the “Great Spirit” Buujil; the Wiradjeri tribe of the Lower Murrumbidgee call him
Baiame, and the Marring of the mountains and of the coast call him Ddramuliin.
But these names are not for common utterance. They are generally reserved for the
secret ceremonies of initiation, and all these tribes usually and in preference speak
of the Great Being by words meaning in their several languages “our father.” The
Kurnai of Gippsland know him only by this name (Mungau ngaura) and utter it,
when compelled to do so, with reverential awe. I have seen Australian blacks, when
referring to their Supreme Being, do so by gesture, thus avoiding the utterance of
his name.


lationship there are many anomalies which cannot be explained with-
out a competent knowledge of the dialects in which they occur, and of
the customs of the tribes using them. Such a knowledge is not to be
looked for in any one investigator. The present memoir must, there-
fore, be looked upon as no more than an attempt to ‘‘ prospect” the rich
field which has so long awaited examination. How far I may have suc-
ceeded in the attempt I will not venture to surmise, but will leave it for
the consideration of anthropologists.
I think, however, I may venture to say that I have shown good
grounds for accepting the following conclusions:
1. The class divisions and totems are groups held together by common
descent.
2. The class divisions and the totems form in the aggregate two ex-
ogamous intermarrying divisions of the community.
3. The marriage relation between these twoexogamous divisions was
probably at one period the common co-habitation, as occasion, food, sup-
ply, and other conditions allowed, of a group of males belonging to one
division with a group of females belonging to the other division; and that
even now this communal marriage exists in a somewhat limited form.
4. The marital relations, being those of group to group, the terms of
relationship which arose and were used, necessarily expressed this rela-
tion of group to group, as well as of the individual to the group, and of
the individual to the individual.
5. The filial relations of one generation to the preceding generation
are those of group to group, and are clearly brought into view by the
Pirauru practice, under which the children are necessarily the children
of a male group, and not of an individual.
C. The conditions of 3 and 5 necessarily require those terms which I
have tabulated as the u fraternal.”
The evidence, which I have endeavored to state with clearness, is, I
I feel, very incomplete, and therefore wanting in that entire unity
which I should have liked to give it. But, looking at the facts which
have been I venture to submit that the systems in use
among the Australian tribes indicate relationships which have been, and
are, fully as real to them as ours are to us; that the terms have arisen
under social conditions whose survival we may now distinctly recog-
nize as still existing in the least advanced tribes, and that they have
been developed and modified under the influence of changing social
conditions, just as language, laws, religions, and even society itself
have been developed and modified.
The Australian evidence, as far as it has been systematically collected
and examined, supports in the main the views enunciated by the late
Dr. Lewis H. Morgan. He was subjected to violent attacks by certain
critics, who held views to which his own, if accepted, were fatal. This
confirmation of his conclusions will be gratifying to all who, like myself,
admire his single-hearted search after truth, and who feel a sincere re-
spect for his memory.
