

AUSTRALIAN LITERATURE.
A LECTURE
DELIVERED AT THE
WINDSOR SCHOOL OF ARTS,
ON THE EVENING OF WEDNESDAY,
THE 20TH OF JULY, 1864
(JAMES ASCOUGH, ESQ., V.P., IN THE CHAIR,)
BY
WILLIAM WALKER, ESQ., M.L.A.,
President of the Institution.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
Sydney:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY READING AND WELL BANK,
356, GEORGE STREET.
1864.




AUSTRALIAN LITERATURE.
A LECTURE
DELIVERED AT THE
WINDSOR SCHOOL OF ARTS,
ON THE EVENING OF WEDNESDAY,
%
The 20th of July, 1864,
(JAMES ASCOUGH, ESQ., V.P., IN THE CHAIR,)
BY
WILLIAM WALKER, ESQ., M.L.A.,
President of the Institution.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
356, GEORGE STREET,
1864.




AUSTRALIAN LITERATURE.
A LECTURE, &c.
In undertaking to deliver a Lecture on Australian Literature, I
have to premise that I intend only to take within the range of my
observations that portion of colonial publications which is peculiar to
New South Wales. I have selected the term “ Australian ” not only
as being more euphonius than “Hew South Whies, but because it is
in a large degree appropriate, inasmuch as our Colony has not inaptly
been termed “ The Mother of the Australias,” and was for many years
in fact the only Australia recognized or generally known.
The subject I have taken in hand is of a varied, extensive, and
interesting character; but the scanty materials at my command, and a
vivid sense of my own inadequacy, compel me at once to the confession
that I fear I will do but imperfect justice to it. I have no doubt how-
ever, that to many, the matters to which I shall refer will be curious
and interesting, if not instructive; whilst as to others I may perhaps
succeed by my remarks in exciting their sympathies for a subject
which has not hitherto received much public consideration.
The Colony is now some seventy-six years old—one generation has
departed and another is passing away,, and yet no great Australian
author has arisen to give lustre to the Literature of his country, or to
entitle his own name to a high niche in the temple of fame. Ihe
celebrated Wit, Essayist, and Poet, Charles Lamb, the genial author
of the Essavs of Elia, once wrote a characteristic letter to his triend,
Barron Field, Esq., then a judge at Sydney, in which he ventured to
make some sarcastic allusions to the probable state of literary matters
in this Colony. Lamb, who was a thorough “ Cockney, and had seldom
or never been beyond a few miles out of London in his life and when
he did go, soon sighed for the Metropolitan streets again—could no ,
it seems, imagine where or what sort of a place Hew South W a es cou c
be, and thought, as his letter clearly expresses it, that if there should be
any authors in that distant, benighted, and despised land, they must o
necessity be plagiarists. Field’s answer to this insinuation does no
appear, although he himself became one of the literati of the Colony ; but
to me it is evident that Lamb’s imputation was more humorous than
just. Australia certainly has a Literature, though it is a circumscribed
one, and her authors are not plagiarists, though few in number. Ours


would be a pitiable country indeed if it had not a Literature of its own;
and if its people were not imbued with some taste and desire for learn-
ing and knowledge. A classic author has sagely remarked
Yita hominis sine literis, mors est.
(The life of man without literature is death,) and no doubt the
sentiment is morally true. Men of mind, as you must be aware, would
experience a moral defunction were they altogether deprived of the
luxury —or rather the necessary —of books. It is well known that if
even a newspaper be delayed in its delivery beyond the accustomed
time, a mental want is felt, as disagreeable in its way as the actual
cravings of hunger —a want which has to be satisfied ere the longing
individual recovers his wonted serenity and composure. The possession
of a literature cherished by a community, is one of the surest signs
of the existence amongst it of a state of high civilization. It forms a
grand distinguishing mark between a people elevated by refinement,
and another sunk in the depths and degradation of barbarism. Lord
Bacon, the English Solon, says that “ learning softens the barbarity
and fierceness of men’s minds, prevents all levity, temerity, and
insolence, by suggesting doubts and difficulties, and inviting the mind
to balance the reason on both sides, and reject the first offer of things,
or to accept of nothing but what is first examined and tried. It
prevents vain admiration, which is the root of all weakness; things
being admired either because they are new, or because they are great.
Learning also conquers or mitigates the fear of death and adverse
fortune, which is one of the greatest impediments to virtue and morality.
Again, the pleasure and delight of knowledge and learning surpass all
others ; in all other pleasures there is a satiety. But of knowledge
there is no satiety, for here gratification and appetite are perpetually
interchanging, and consequently this is good in itself, simply without
fallacy or accident. We see how much more durable the monuments
of genius and learning are than those of the hand. The verses of
Homer have continued above five and twenty hundred years without
loss, in which time numberless palaces, temples, castles, and cities have
been demolished and are fallen to ruin.” Bacon divides human learn-
ing and literature (including theology) into three grand divisions or
classes, “ derived fiom the three different faculties of the soul, the seat
of learning —history being relative to the memory, poetry to the
imagination, and philosophy to the reason.” I need scarcely remark
that my lecture will touch only upon the two first of these classes,
history and poetry, the colony not having yet produced any native
philosophers —at any rate such as have become known by their writings.
Nor is it my intention to advert to publications upon theology or the
exact sciences.
In pursuing the course I have marked out for myself, I shall divide
my subject into a consideration and review of the literature, whether of
history or poetry, which is comprised in the journals, magazines, and
volumes, which have, from time to time, appeared in, or been published


in connection with, the colony. I will commence then with the news-
papers. Although New South Wales is considerably behind m other
literary matters, the progress which she has made in this departmen o
literature since the first dawn of colonial letters in 1803 is remarkable.
“ Sixty Years ago” was the alias, or second name, which Sir Walter
Scott gave to his first novel, “ Waverly; ” but whilst he referred to the
times of Prince Charlie and Flora MacDonald, “ Sixty Years ago with
us was the era when the first newspaper was published m New South
Wales. Would it be called a newspaper at the present day r 1 doubt
it. I suspect such a production would be distinguished by the name ot
some less pretentious article. I possess one ot the early numbers;
they are extremely rare, and not to be had for love or money, ihe
only complete sets that I know of to be found in the Colony are those
at the Colonial Secretary’s office, the Australian Library, and the Parlia-
mentary Library. Mr. Justice Wise has been endeavouring at great
pains and expense to gather in, as literary and historic curiosities, what-
ever strav numbers may be floating about in the colony ■ or ■elsewhere.
Having asked me if I could assist him. m his object, I replied that 1 had
only the one number, and my antiquarian predilections made me selinh
enough not to part with it. From the histories of the period we learn
that although a small printing press was brought to the Colony by
Governor Phillip, (the first Governor), it was never turned to use
during his administration. It was used for the first time unc ei
Governor Hunter, in November, 1795, for printing public notices and
government orders. One George Howe, a Creole, born 1769, from the
island of St. Kitts, (or Christopher) in the West Indies, was the first
Government printer. It was not, however, till the government ot
Captain King, that a newspaper was tried. This was the Sydney
Gazette, or New South Wales Advertiser. The printer was George Howe,
already named. The first number appeared March, 1803. It was the
only paper for many years, and was the sole recognized medium or
government proclamations and notices —in fact it was a thoroug
government paper. Some of these old Gazettes contain accounts of
matters which are amusing enough at the present day. From the
number which I produce, dated Sunday, February 15th 1807, it will
be seen what kind of thing it is. It is only a small half-folio sheet ot
inferior paper, containing altogether six columns, and is printed irr o
worn-out type. It contains three general orders by command of the
Governor, the first being against the erection of stills; the second
against bartering grain for spirits, and sentencing prisoners to .the lash
and free persons to imprisonment with hard labour for an infringe-
ment of the law ; and the third enjoining the destruction of all
curs and useless dogs. The local intelligence is very bare. It seemed
that the magistrates in those days regulated the price, of bread, as the
following announcement would shew: “The average price of wheat being,
as last week, the assize of bread was ordered by the Bench of
Magistrates to stand as before, viz. 13d. the loaf for wheaten, and lOd.
for household bread.” Dear as the loaf is just now, it is not quite so
bad as that. The Gazette gradually increased in size, and is a most


valuable record of the public events during the period of its existence.
George Howe died 11th May, 1821, and was succeeded by his son,
Robert Howe, who carried the paper on. In the year 1882 it ceased
to be the Government medium. In that year the present Government
Gazette was first published. The old Gazette lived for thirty-seven years
altogether, down to the year 1840. I have one of the last numbers,
June 13th of that year, shewing how it increased in size fourfold. At
one time it was published daily. Up to the year 1824, when the
liberty of the press was granted, it was unopposed as a colonial news-
paper. During the government of Darling in 1824 and 1826, two
independent papers were started. The Australian was brought out
14th October, 1824, under the auspices of Mr. Wentworth and Dr.
Wardell, both barristers, the latter being the first responsible editor.
The Monitor was established by Edward Smith Hall, May 19th, 1826.
These papers were conducted for a number of years with much spirit
and ability ; but the editors embroiling themselves in libels upon the
Government, for which they suffered fine and imprisonment, their papers
ultimately succumbed to adversity, and are now amongst the things
that were. The late George Robert Nichols attempted a few years back
to revive the Australian, but did not succeed. In 1835 Dr. Lang
established a paper called The Colonist, of which I have one number,
dated March 24th, 1838. It was generally in opposition to the other
papers, and was conducted with much talent and acted as the censor
morurn” of the time. However, like its contemporaries, it also fell
after a few years existence, but not without having effected considerable
good in reforming the morals of the community. Amongst the
numerous other papers, however, that have appeared at various times
in the colony, The Sydney Atlas, which flourished for four years, viz.,
in 1845-6-7-8, was decidedly the most talented and influential. I
possess the four volumes of which that paper consists. They are not
now to be purchased, and I have been offered a large sum.of money for
my set. This paper was started under most favorable circumstances,
and it took amazingly with the public at first. Amongst its early
editors or contributors, were Robert Lowe, lately an imperial minister;
William Forster, the present Colonial Secretary; the late Richard
Windeyer, barrister ; and James Martin, the present Attorney General
and Premier. It was opposed to the administration of Sir George
Gipps, generally favored the squatting interest, and contained some
powerful pliillipics, in prose and verse, against the government of the
day. As a literary production it has never been equalled by any
publication of the kind that has appeared in the colony. The Weekly
Register was also published at this time, and though less pretentious
than the Atlas, was a clever little paper. Its politics were opposed to
the Atlas, and it favored Sir George Gipps’ policy. Its editor, Mr.
Duncan, on the paper ceasing to be published, was appointed Collector
of Customs at Brisbane, an office conferred upon him, it has been said,
by the Governor, as a return for the support the paper gave him. A
good general weekly paper of the style of the old Atlas is much wanted
at the present day ; and it is a matter of surprise that none such exists.


The typography of the Atlas was of a most superior description, and
merited for the paper a better fate than befel it.
Having now dealt with such of the departed papers as I think of
sufficient note to mention, I shall next refer to the living Literature in
that department. Chief amongst Colonial Newspapers of the present
day stands undoubtedly the Sydney Morning Herald. It is unquestion-
ably first in point of age, resources, and in the ability with which it is
conducted. But when you look at the early numbers, you will be amazed
at the progress it has made in every respect. Started as a weekly
paper by Messrs. Stephens and Stokes, the first number appeared
April 18th, 1831. I have the first volume. Look at its diminutive size !
The small folio was slightly enlarged in 1832, again in 1833, and in the
following year the page became double the original, in fact its present
size. In 1&36 it was published twice a week, in 1837 three times.
In 1841 Messrs. Kemp and Fairfax bought the property and made it a
daily paper. In 1853 Mr. Fairfax bought out Mr. Kemp, and at once
enlarged the paper from four to eight pages. The present circulation
of the Herald is immense, some thousands per day ; and the monthly
Summary for England is usually twice as many. The Sydney Mail —
which may be called the weekly Herald—in four years has reached a
circulation of 11,000. The Herald possesses the fullest, earliest, and
most authentic information on all subjects from nearly every part of the
Colony, and in fact I might say the world. Its leading articles generally
exhibit much pungency and are models of English composition. Its
reporting staff is of the best procurable character, and the paper itself
has not improperly been termed the “ Times of Australia.” In politics
it is moderate or liberal conservative, but it is more as a commercial paper
than as a political organ that its power and usefulness are felt and
appreciated. Its younger daily competitor, the Empire, was originally
started in 1850, as a weekly paper, by Mr. Henry Parkes, the well known
politician; after the first four issues, it was changed into a daily paper
half its present size. It is a more violently political paper than the
Herald , and represents colonial democratic principles. The leaders are
often written with great ability, full of cutting unsparing satire, and
powerful invective. Occasionally the Empire, from too great readiness
to accredit reports and to furnish startling news to the public, has been
blamed for making inaccurate announcements, a course which has repeat-
edly involved it in trouble and expense ; but on the whole it is a most
useful publication, and has frequently ferreted out abuses, and been
the means of drawing attention to grievances which but for the light of
its pages would probably have never been thought of. Mr. Parkes, encum-
bered with debt in consequence of his great undertaking in 1858, failed,
and the publication of the paper was suspended for about twelve months ;
but in May, 1859, it was re-established under the management of the
present enterprising proprietors, Messrs. Hanson and Bennett. The
circulation is considerable, but only about one half that of the Herald.
The typography is susceptible of improvement; an alteration which, not-
withstanding the heavy weekly outlay of the conductors, amounting, 1
understand, to between £3OO and £4OO weekly, will no doubt be carried


into effect some day. It is unnecessary that I should give any extracts
from these papers as specimens of their style. They are so fre-
quently before the public—such household words-that to do so would
be an act of supererogation. Suffice it to say that the Colony has
some reason to be proud of its daily press —whether as literary produc-
tions or as useful publications. In my opinion, the contemporary
newspapers of the neighbouring colonies are not to be compared to
ours in any respect. I shall not dilate upon the weekly or bi-
weekly journals which are now published, as time would not permit,
and they are so well known : but I cannot refrain from making reference
with great pleasure to the two illustrated papers which have recently
been started. A Sydney Punch has made its appearance, which does
no dishonour to its great prototype, whether as regards its artistic or
its literary characteristics ; and the Illustrated Sydney News’ which it is
intended to issue monthly, has made a good beginning and is a highly
creditable production. I trust both of these papers will be well support-
ed. They are calculated to be of great benefit and use to the Colony,
and will bring it into notice in a manner that no other means that could
be devised would accomplish. Attempts have been made before to
establish illustrated papers in Sydney, but they were such spiritless
productions that they were very short lived.
The next branch of my subject relates to Magazines. Several
endeavours to establish Magazines in Sydney have been made, but I
regret to say they have all failed. One of the earliest efforts of the
kind was that of The New South Wcdes Magazine, conducted by the
Rev. Ralph Mansfield, in the year 1833. Magazines had been
attempted before then, but this, though the best which had been tried
up to that time, gave way after twelve months’ experience: Another
New South Wales Magazine was published in 1843, which only saw out
eleven numbers. Together with merely literary and political articles
these magazines gave summaries of the month’s news. Some of the
essays exhibit considerable talent. The Sydney University Magazine
was started in 1855. It seemed to come out under favorable auspices,
and was intended to supply a want urgently felt by the community.
The design was copied from the Dublin University Magazine —one of
the ablest and oldest of the kind in the mother country. In pro-
moting it the members of the University, professors and students,
naturally took a part as contributors to its pages ; yet, notwithstanding
the powerful talent at its back, it departed like its predecessors after
oidy three monthly issues. Perhaps the day will yet come when a
University Magazine will be permanently established amongst us. But
I have next to speak of the best and most successful instance of a
colonial Magazine which has ever appeared. I refer to The Month,
which was commenced by Mr. Prank Fowler in July, 1857. It had a
longer career and was characterised by more spirit and ability than
any that had preceded it. It contained numerous articles of originality
and interest—of a grave and gay, poetical and prosaic character —with
some smart reviews and neat biographical notices. Mr. Fowler had
some clever contributors to its pages, amongst whom were Mr. Richard


Rowe, (Peter Possum), Mr. Sheridan Moore, Henry Halloran, and
J. L. Michael, and he seemed to he getting on well with his work when
circumstances compelled him to leave the colony. The Magazine was
then carried on under the editorship of Mr. Moore, but after seeing out
eighteen numbers it came suddenly to an end. Bound together, these
make a most interesting volume, well worthy of being placed on the
shelves of a library. No successful effort has been made to establish a
Literary Magazine in the colony since this, and at the present moment
we are without one. This is some reproach to us as a community,
particularly as I believe a very good magazine has succeeded m a sister
colony I hope, however, the period is not far distant when the colony
will support periodical literature of this description. It affords a grate-
ful outlet for latent talent, it being a well-known fact that many or the
finest productions of genius in other countries have first been brought
out through the medium of a magazine. In an article in the Month on
the support of letters in Australia, the writer laments the fact that
little encouragement is given to men of genius in this Colony. s
pertaining to the subject under notice, and as a specimen of the style
of writing in this periodical, I will quote the following passage, which
bears marks of Mr. Fowler’s pen. After premising that, m any country,
old or new, the man of education has the same claim upon the State as
the skilled or unskilled laborer, the writer proceeds
This much being conceded—and the basis upon which we start is surely narrow
and modest enough—we unhesitatingly affirm that men of education m Australia
have not up to this period in our history had fair play. \\ e have no desire to
prate the nobility of talent—although it is a common thing enough to prate of the
nobility of labour,—but we believe we only utter a fact long apparent to all who
have the faculties for any thing besides the groping together of dollars, when we say
that the man of letters, the artist, the scholar, the profession in fact of any of the
higher branches of art, is in this community most shamefully driven to the wall.
Our custom in this matter is as antipodean to that of the old woild as our geogra-
phical position. Let the reader imagine, if he can, a man of undoubted genius
unaided by wealth or other adventitious advantages appointed to an exalted position
in this country. Who can conceive of a person of high intellect nominated on that
ground to the Upper House ? Nay, would Mr. Thackeray himself stand any
chance on the platform against the author of the Murmuis r
The Sydneij Magazine of Science and Art was carried on by Mr.
Wauofi for two years, 1847-9, but was discontinued, I am sorry to say,
for want of sufficient support. It contained the transactions and papers
of the Philosophical and scientific societies about Sydney.
The Beads of the People was an agreeable miscellany or weekly
illustrated magazine, published in 1847 and 1848, by that enterprising
man in his day, William Baker, of almanac notoriety. Baker was a
lithographer, and in his publication he found a field for the practice o
his art; whilst the letter-press contained many well written and enter-
taining compositions, both in poetry and prose. r l he work contains some
good likenesses of the men of the time, and even at the present day it
may be perused with delight. In the absence of Punch it supplied a
fund of amusement; and its weekly arrival was hailed with pleasure by
its readers.


I ought not to leave this portion of my subject without a passing
allusion to the Book Almanacs, some of which are rare and valuable
for historical reference at the present day. The first of the kind is said
to have been published in 1817, by George Howe, the Government
printer, with very modest pretensions. Year by year it improved till
it resulted in 1830 and 1831 in a substantial and creditable volume,
containing as well a directory .of the Colony. From this time the pub-
lication of Almanacs seems to have gone back till about 1849, when
the “ Australian Almanac ” was commenced by Mr. Ford, at first as a
small shilling publication but gradually extending itself till it had
reached its present form. This almanac was very much improved
under the auspices of Mr. James Waugh, who was its publisher after
Mr. Ford for several years. Some of the volumes, particularly those
commencing from 1857, contain interesting essays and articles on
colonial subjects well worthy of preservation, and which I believe were
specially prescribed by Mr. Waugh and obtained by him at consider-
able trouble and expense.
As I have referred to the Book Almanacs I cannot omit noticing,
with pleasure, “ Wellbank’s Nautical Almanac.” It is the same size
as Waugh’s ; contains 160 pages of most excellent matter, ably and
industriously compiled, and well printed, for the use of sea faring
persons in these colonies. It is now in its fourth year of publication,
and I am happy to find that the work has the entire confidence of the
Nautical men of Australasia, and that its circulation, already large, is
increasing.
Numerous pamphlets have appeared at various times from the
Colonial press on miscellaneous subjects, but chiefly on political
and religious questions. As few of them possess any literary merit, I
do not consider it worth while to refer particularly to any of them.
Some Colonial translators have appeared. A Mr. Marcus Collison was
the author of a neat translation of a curious little Greek work, called
“ Psellus’ Dialogue on the operation of Demons,” with comments,
which appeared from the Atlas press in 1843.
I now arrive at the Book literature of the Colony, and in briefly
reviewing it, I have to state that I shall notice not only the works
of native authoi’s but of those who have made Australia their adopted
country. I shall also deem it within the scope of my lecture to refer to
some of those works, whether of native authors or otherwise, which
have a purely Australian character. All works published in the Colony,
whoever the author may be, I shall, in addition, include within my
category. To confine my observations to native authors only, would, I
conceive, be anything but satisfactory.
The first book said to have been published in the Colony, was
“ Busby on Vineyards,” which appeared in 1825. But it is not my
purpose now to notice this work ; but to introduce to you the historical
literature of the Colony. In doing so, I fear I must in all sincerity
repeat the oft asserted phrase, “ The History of the Colony has yet to
be written.” It is too true we have no purely historical work on the
Colony, simply, perhaps, because we have no history to engage upon.


The books which are called histories, might, more correctly be termed
chronicles. None of them rise to the dignity of historical writing.
Bat, as has been said “ we are now making history,” and the time will
no doubt arrive when a native Gibbon, or a Hume will arise, worthy to
be ranked with those great masters of historical composition. Mean-
time let us be content, if not gratified with what we have in that way ;
so far as it goes it is valuable.
After Governor Phillips’ “Voyage to Botany Bay, with an account
of the Colonies of Port Jackson and Norfolk Island,” the third edition
of which was published in 1790, the earliest noticeable work of a
historical character on New South Wales, was that of David Collins,
who was a lieutenant of the Royal Marines, under Captain Phillip, and
afterwards Judge Advocate of the Colony. It consisted of two volumes
quarto, issued in succession, and contained an account of the Colony
down to 1801. It reads more like a book of memoirs or travels in the
style of a journal, than anything else. However, it has been the
groundwork of all the subsequent histories, and is venerated on that
account. It is now exceedingly rare. It contains much information
about the aborigines of the period in which it was written, and is
embellished with several handsome engravings. It was reviewed by
Sydney Smith of The Edinburgh, and that able writer says of it, “ Mr.
Collins’ book is written with great plainness and candour: he appears
to be a man always meaning well; of good plain common sense ; and
composed of those well wearing materials which adapt a person for
situations, where genius and refinement would only prove a source of
misery and of error.” There were works on New South lAales pnor
to Collins’, such as “White’s Journal,” (1790) and “Tench’s Transac-
tions of New South Wales, from 1788 to 1791.” Barron Field, who was
appointed Judge of the Supreme Court in 1817, and whom I have
already spoken of as the correspondent of Charles Lamb, became the
author (savs Flanagan) of one of those works on Australia, in 1820,
which evincing very little industry, and not much erudition, are at the
present day all but valueless. It contained chiefly some papers read
before the then Philosophical Society of New South Wales, with some
wretched poetical effusions called “ Botany Bay Flowers” at the end.
Peter Cunninghame’s “Two years in New South Wales ” appeared in
1828. O’Hara also wrote a work in the Colony, about this time, as did
the celebrated Barrington, who was chief constable at Parramatta.
These are now almost forgotten, and of little interest at the present day.
The latter was chiefly remarkable for containing a clever poetical address,
spoken at the opening of the first Sydney Theatre, and lately rescued
from oblivion by my friend, Mr. Waugh, who re-published it in a
little brochure, called “ The Stranger’s Guide to Sydney.”
To the honor of the Colony be it said, the first really valuable and
permanent work, comprising history and statistics upon the Colony,
was that by a native author—William Charles Wentworth.. The third
edition, in two volumes, was published in 1824. It is generally
designated “ Wentworth’s History of New South Wales ; ” but although
it contains a certain amount of historical information down to the


period of publication, it is in fact nothing move than its title page
indicates—“ a statistical account of British settlements in Australia,
including the Colonies of New South Wales, with an enumeration of
the advantages they offer, and directions and advice to emigrants.”
A great deal of it is taken up with descriptive and topographical details
of the physical features and characteristics of the Colony, as presented
at the time he wrote, and taken from the surveys and observations of
the early surveyors, Mr. Oxley and others. It was written shortly after
the departure of Governor Macquarie from the Colony, in 1823, and
the political portions of it contain an elaborate defence of’that
gentleman’s government in answer to the adverse statement of Mr.
Commissioner Bigge, who was sent out by the home Government to
report upon the state of the Colony. Mr Bigge made his report in
1819, and it contained most offensive allusions concerning, and serious
charges against, the Governor. Mr. Wentworth apologises for and
defends Macquarie with much warmth and ability, and some of his
blows at the colonial aristocracy of those days who opposed the rather
liberal social measures of the Governor, are dealt out in a most trenchant
manner. Dr. Lang, in his history, is at issue with Mr. "Wentworth in
the matter. Both accounts are worthy of perusal by the curious. Of
Mr. Bigge and his report, Mr. Wentworth thus delivers himself:
“ From the moment of his disastrous landing in the Colony, the tendency of
his sentiments and feelings was sufficiently obvious. Though preserving a friendly
deportment towards the government himself, he treated all those who were the
objects of the Glovernor’s. confidence and support with a repulsive and supercilious
reserve, whilst the most influential of the faction, who had been the systematic
opponents of the Governor’s measures, instantly became, by a sort of political
instinct, his bosom friends, were consulted by him upon all occasions, had access
to him at all hours, and were, in short, almost the only persons from whom he thou°'ht
fit to receive any of the evidence on which his report has been founded. Such befog
the source of his information, it was obvious a priori what spirit that document would
breathe; and, in I act, this phoenix of a Commissioner, to do him justice, has far
outstripped the anticipations even of the most sanguine of the party to whose guid-
ance he had resigned himself; for instead of healing those wounds, and allaying
those animosities which have so long distracted this unhappy community, he has
sown, with a prodigal hand, the seeds of new and still more inveterate dissensions.
Instead of confining his report to public objects and public interests, he has polluted
almost every page of it with private scandal and vituperation, as if these had been
the exclusive ends of his appointment. This nauseous trash, the insertion of which
could conduce to no one object of public utility, and could only indeed have been
meant to inflict a gratuitous wound on individual feeling, he has not scrupled to
promulgate to the world on the faith of mere ex-parte evidence, collected with
mischievous industry from the very dregs and refuse of the people—from the rogues
and vagabonds of Sydney—on evidence too, not even taken under the sanction of an
path, because, forsooth, his high mightiness could not brook the indignity of receiv-
ing a commission of the peace from his Majesty’s representative.”—Vol. i. p. 388.
He then winds up his powerful pliillipic as follows:
These infant communities are yet like a piece of unmoulded wax, open to any
impression that may be stamped upon them. They are a prolific evil yet unsown,
and capable alike of producing the rankest weeds or the most luxuriant harvests!
Benefits sown there will yield gratitude; Justice, content; injuries, hatred; oppression,
resistance in the first instance, defeat and separation in the end. Past history


nt w a that tyranny flourishes but for a season; that injustice triumphs but for a
j v " lie e y en t s of the present hour are not less of this great and
c - . • Wiihin the circle of their own Empire as without it, the most
are everyi. to be Jrdajjd
ihe West Indies Greece, and South America are all living proofs of this truth
indEmone itself from one extremity to the other, is a pregnant volcano threatening
to voiniths hidden vengeance on its trembling oppressors or those who have built
their greatness on the thraldom and miseries of their fellow men. . . • •
SSerfor the colonies then take heed how he acts; for on his conduct m the
organization of that new constitution for these coionieswhidi has been promised, d
wlriph their increased growth and necessities demand will depend whether in n
~ • , . pct'ihlishments will remain the attached and dutiful child of a considerate
the tendency of Colonies to outstrip even legitimate restraints! How then can it
he expected 7 that they will long wear the fetters of injustice and oppression ? vol. i.
page 418.
These extracts afford a fair specimen of Mr. Wentworth’s style as
a writer, and of his declamatory power. He was then a young man
and full of enthusiasm. I question much, whether m his riper years,
he would have given expression to such inflammatory sentiments ie
strictures were to some extent merited; hut the Edinburgh Review,
in an article from the pen of Sydney Smith supported Mr. Bigge.
The publication at this juncture however of Mr. Wentworth s work must
have bad considerable effect in modifying public opinion concerning
Macquarie, whilst Mr. Bigge himself no doubt quailed under its fieice
Time will not permit me to dwell longer upon Mr. Wentworth’s
work : and I can only make a passing allusion to a publication upon
the colony, by Mr. James Macarthur, another native, which appeared in
1887. It relates almost solely to political and social matters, the public
interest in which has long since passed away, and which it would be
inexpedient now to revive, even by a simple reference. As a literary
work it is carefully composed, and its contents will be found useful by
tlie The Rev. S Dr^Lang’s “ Historical and Statistical ” account of Hew
South Wales, is perhaps better known than any of its kind in tie
colony. It is most frequently quoted, and certainly, the first volume has
more the aspect of history than any work of that character on the co ony
which has yet appeared. As a literary performance it is decidedly supe-
rior to all the other histories of the colony which have been published ;
yet I regret having to remark that it contains blemishes which detract
greatly from its merits. The author has disfigured his work with acri-
monious personal attacks upon those who differ rom im, w e ei
politics or religion; and I fear he has overdrawn a picture when it was
necessary, as he thought, “to point a moral 01 a orn a a e.. ever
theless, the work is a most valuable one, and contains many interesting
details not to be found in any other. It has reached a third edition, neatly
printed and published in 1852. The first and second editions appeared
in the years 1834 and 1837; but as is remarked m the preface to the third
edition, “the wonderful development of the colony during the last fifteen


years, and the manifold and important changes that have taken place in
its general condition and prospects, only a small portion comparatively
of the original work has been embodied in the present edition.” It was
written at sea whilst on a voyage to England, as were several of the
Doctor’s works. The first volume is entirely historical —from the earli-
est period down to the administration of Sir Charles Eitzroy. The
second volume dilates upon statistical and descriptive matters with large
references to Educational and Religious topics. Passing over the many
exciting narratives of a political and polemical character which the work
contains, I will only quote the following interesting account of the great
flood of August, 1806, which has been painfully referred to by way of
comparison to the grievous visitation of the same kind which our district
has recently experienced.
There had been a flood in the Hawkesbury and Nepean Rivers in the year
1801; hut as the number of settlers on the alluvial land, on their hanks, was then
comparatively small, it had done hut little damage, and had affected the Colony
generally, hut very slightly. But as the number of settlers in that fertile district
had greatly increased during the five following years, and as a large majority of
these settlers had, notwithstanding the warning already given them, continued to
erect their houses, and to form their farm-yards within reach of the inundations of
the river, which in 1806 rose from eight to ten feet higher than in the former flood,
the alarm, and the loss sustained, were proportionally great. In places where there
was high ground easily accessible, in the rear of the settlers’ houses, they had to
retreat as the waters rose; and one of the Scotch settlers at Portland Head
informed me many years ago, that, during the night of Saturday, the 22nd March,
1806, the waters rose so rapidly, that he had to remove his family three times,
successively, to higher, and still higher ground, before morning, although his wife
had been confined only the preceding day. In many places, however, the high
grounds were inacessible, from the intervening waters; and in these cases, the
settlers and their families were to be seen clinging for hours together, to the roofs
or ridges of their houses, in the expectation of being at length swept away by the
impetuous current, till they were rescued from their perilous situation by means of
boats, which a few benevolent persons plied for the purpose, often at the risk of
their own lives. The loss of life was indeed considerable, although by no means so
great as might have been expected; but the loss of property, and especially of grain
and stock, was extensive and exceedingly calamitous. Two hundred stacks of wheat
were in one day swept into the river, and carried into the sea. Many of these were
covered with pigs, dogs, and poultry, that had taken refuge upon them from the
rising of the waters; and as they occasionally approached the banks, as they were
swept along by the rapid current, the poultry generally took flight and reached the
land. The settler whom I have already mentioned, and whose farm was situated on
a beautiful bend of the river, with high ground in the rear, has told me that he has
seen no fewer than thirty stacks floating down the river at one time. Several
remarkable escapes are related as having taken place during the flood. For
example, a settler of the name of Leeson, who with his mother, wife, and two
children, together with two convict servants, had taken refuge on the top of a barley-
mow in his farm-yard, was swept away with all his household on the mow, and
carried to a distance of nearly seven miles, where they were all taken off during the
night by another settler in a boat, although, with great difficulty. Walter Scott, a
shoemaker, and two women, the wives of small settlers in the neighbourhood, had
all taken refuge in the farm of another settler, named Chalker. But Chalker’s
house being within reach of the inundation, he had, at length, to take to his boat,
together with the three persons I have mentioned, and a child of his own, of five
years of age. By some fatal accident, however, the boat was upset, and these three
persons were ail drowned ; but Chalker, who could swim, seizing his child, struck
out for the nearest dry ground, which was nearly a mile distant. Instead of giving
way to fear, as would have been natural in such circumstances, the child endeavoured


to embarrass his parent as little as possible, and even cheered him occasionally by
telling him they were nearly out of danger, till they both reached the land. The
boy Chalker, who appears to have been what his early associates would have
called “ game ” from the first, lived to be a noted Australian pugilist, and was long
the Champion of the Colony.
I am told on reliable authority that the Doctor is in error in assert-
ing that the boy alluded to as having been saved by Chalker was
Chalker’s own son. The fact is, as I have been credibly informed,
that the youth in question was William Bradley —now a very wealthy
and influential gentleman, and who once represented Argyle in the
old Legislative Council. Flanagan does not bear out the Doctor in
the statement: he merely says that Chalker saved a boy, without giving
his name. The account given of the height of this flood alone seems
incredible. The late very high flood of June last only rose something
less than fifty feet. A flood, eighty feet high, would have swept over
the town of Windsor. Dr. Lang says in another part of his work that the
flood of 1809 rose 6 or 8 feet higher than that of 1806, and Wentworth
in his history actually states that one flood rose 93 feet; this is more
incredible still. I suspect these were mere guesses, and, as all guesses
very often are, very wide of the truth. The account, however, of the
flood of 1806, apart from its height, is exceedingly well told ; for
although the destruction of property from the infancy of the district
may not have been so great, it was more terrible in another sense than
the recent inundation, inasmuch as some valuable lives were lost on
that occasion, whereas we were so far fortunate lately that not a single
individual perished, though many were in imminent peril. Dr. Lang
has written several other works besides his history; in fact he is the
most voluminous author we have in Australia. Besides a volume of
sacred poetry, he wrote “ Religion and Education in America,” “ A View
of the Origin and Migration of the Polynesian Nations,” “ Transporta-
tion and Colonization,” “ New Zealand,” “ Phillipsland,” “ Cooksland,”
and “ Freedom and Independence for the Golden Lands of Australia.”
He has also published several Pamphlets.
I now come to the latest historical work on the Colony—that by
Roderick Flanagan. This history might more properly be called
“ Annals of New South Wales.” The author complains in his Preface,
not without cause, that of only two works called “ Histories of the
Colony,” which have appeared since Collins’ account —alluding I
suppose to Wentworth’s and Lang’s —one of them is scanty in its
chronological details and glaringly partial, while the other is character-
ised in a still larger degree by at least one of the defects of the former,
that of crudity in its narrations. Mr. Flanagan certainly cannot be
condemned—if it be a fault—for the scantiness of his details. In fact
I think he has erred in going too far in that direction, and many of his
pages contain nothing but newspaper paragraphs of domestic intelli-
gence scarcely worthy of being reproduced in serious history. But he
says the design of his work is to furnish “ a connected narrative ” of
the affairs of New South Wales from the period when the country first
came under the notice of Europeans down to the present time. I gladly


admit that in this respect his history is the most complete and valuable
work that has appeared. It contains simple chronicles of events, and is
not incumbered with those statistical particulars and philosophical
disquisitions which form so large a proportion of the works of
Wentworth and of Lang. The author has exhibited much industry,
and it must ever be a matter of sincere regret that he was cut
off in the hey-day of life before the sheets of his first volume had
passed through the press —an event which occasioned many typographi-
cal errors in the second volume, from the want of his personal super-
vision. Mr. Flanagan, like Dr. Lang, prominently betrays his denomin-
ational peculiarities in the course of his writings. This is a serious
defect in a historian. The beauty of history is its impartiality —for
which reason Gibbon will always hold a high place in the estimation of
men of learning and discrimination. Mr. Flanagan, I believe, was a
young man of worth and amiability, and had Providence seen fit to
have spared him, he might have proved of great use in promoting the
literature of his adopted country. Like many others of the literati of
Australia, he was employed on the reporting staff of one of the daily
papers —an occupation which brought him into personal contact with
many of the leading men of the Colony, and befitted him the better for
reducing into his second volume, from actual observation, much of the
interesting matter which it contains. The first volume is, in my
opinion, the most interesting : inasmuch as it treats of matters of which
most of us have no personal knowledge. The following is respecting
Governor Phillip and the discovery of the Hawkesbury :
Early in June, 1789, the Governor set out on an excursion to Broken Bay, with
the view to ascertaining whether or not it was practicahle to reach the mountains
from the head of that harbour. The result of this visit was the discovery of the
Hawkesbury—an event of the greatest importance to the future career of the
Colony. Not having sufficient provisions to allow of his tracing the stream to its
source, Phillip returned, after an absence of ten days, with the intention of revisit-
ing the river.
This design he immediately set about carrying into effect, and on the 29th set
off a second time with a considerable party, and with provisions for twenty-one
days.
On the 14th July he returned, having traced the river to the place where
"Windsor now stands. The indications of extensive freshes in the stream which here
presented themselves, deterred the explorers from proceeding farther or remaining
for a longer period. The traces of inundations rising from twenty to forty feet
above the ordinary level were evident in various places. The windings of the
stream were found exceedingly picturesque, and the soil on the hanks very fertile.
The river, which was the first of any note met with in the colony, was named the
Hawkesbury, after the nobleman who was at that time at the head of the Council of
Trade and Plantations. The discovery of this beautiful and noble stream is not the
least of the honors to which the first Governor of the Colony is entitled. V. i. p. 46.
In December, 1792, Phillip began to make preparations for his
departure from England. The following eloquent panegyric is passed
upon him by the historian :
Phillip was the iEneas of New South Wales—the conductor of the fleet that
bore its founders over tempestuous seas, through severe climes, and even amid those
dangers usually incident to war; for this was a period when wars were frequent


among the European nations. He was the chief contriver of those arrangements "by
which it was firmly established, and its absolute ruler for a period of five years.
The leader of what must he regarded as the forlorn hope of Australian colonization,
he never shrunk from the dangers and difficulties which presented themselves from
the first outlet of the enterprise, and increased at every step taken in advance.
Every present danger was met face to face ; every future difficulty foreseen, and
as far as possible provided against
The discovery of the Hawkeshury and the exploration of that important river,
as far as those fertile localities, the occupation of which afterwards exercised so
important an influence on the progress of the Colony, are events, which of them-
selves must ever make the name of Phillip honorable in connection with the history
of New South Wales. The first Governor of the Country, by appointment, the
discovery of the Hawkeshury entitles him to a place in the list of those enterprising
men, who, by their explorations and travels, have perpetuated their, own names,
added large territories to the possessions of the Colony and of the Empire, promoted
human knowledge, and enriched the various fields of science.
Of the first Governor of New South Wales it may he said, that however
meritorious some of his successors may have been, the reader of Australian history
will always transfer to the brow of Phillip a branch from the laurels of the
best. V. i.p. —.
Flanagan’s second volume contains a succinct narrative of the
principal occurences of the colony which took place under the adminis-
trations of the later Governors —Gipps, Fitzroy, and Denison ; and brings
down the history to the recent period of 1860. A large portion of it is
occupied with accounts of the conflicts and successful agitations which
were carried on in the colony against the renewal of transportation
and of the political struggle for those free institutions which we now
enjoy. Mr. Wentworth’s name appears prominently in these contests,
evidencing him as the foremost colonial politician and statesman of
the day. The events referred to are within the memory of most
persons. Almost the last thing mentioned by Flanagan, is an account
of the disastrous floods which took place in 1860, which many will
remember. The work altogether is a valuable addition to the historic
lore of colony. Another edition would improve it very much, if it
were only for the sake of correcting the numerous errors of the press in
the second volume.
Judge Therry, after leaving the colony, published in 1863 his “ Thirty
years Reminiscences of New South Wales and Victoria.” It is a light
sketchy and amusing book—full of anecdotes —but is written with little
care, and has been justly censured for its numerous blunders. I think
the worthy Judge might have done something better had he taken the
necessary pains.
I have now done with the works generally designated historical.
There are some others of a quasi-historical, but more strictly of a
scientific and geographical character, to which I can only refer by name.
The only two necessary to mention particularly, that I am aware of —apart
from the productions of the Surveyors and Explorers, Oxley, Mitchell,
Leichhardt, and others—are “ Cunningham’s Botanical Researches ”
and Dr. Bennett’s Natural history of the Colony. I have not had an
opportunity of perusing these books, and others of a similar character ;
but from Reviews of them which I have seen, I have no doubt they are


valuable contributions to the literature of the colony. Mr. Busby
already referred to, wrote some treatises upon the Culture of the Vine
and upon Horticulture, which were most useful publications of their kind.
Time will not permit to refer to all the works of that character which
have issued from the Colonial press.
It is my intention to conclude with a notice of the Australian Poets
and Poetry. Previous however to doing so, I will touch upon the light
literature of the colony. First, if not foremost in this field, stands
amongst native geniuses at least, the present Premier, James Martin.
Whilst but a youth of eighteen, he wrote a series of sketches after the
manner of Washington Irving’s, which, considering his then early age and
disadvantages, are not the least creditable of the productions of his pen.
A carping critic in the Month has characterised them as “ sad twaddle
but I hesitate not to say that some portions of them compare favorably
with the emanations of the great American sketcher himself. Parts of
them are jejune and stilted enough—the natural effects of juvenescence
—but Mr. Martin is so far -entitled to respect, that no Australian author
in the same line has yet surpassed him. This may not be saying much,
but it is something to his credit. The little volume published in 1838,
contains articles on the Sublime in Nature, The Thunder storm,
Botany Bay, the Colosseum at Rome, Cenius, the Pseudo Poets, War,
Bondi, Sunrise, Sunset, and others. Would time permit I should like
to give a portion of the article on War, which is written with much
originality and power. But I can do no more than subjoin portion of
the piece on Bondi, which is short and descriptive: —
If, of all the places I have seen, there is one spot more proper for meditation
than another—one spot more eminently calculated to inspire the mind with lofty
sentiments, and to call forth the latent energies of genius, Bondi Bay is certainly
that favored situation. Here might the poet, rushing from the haunts of man, the
marts of commerce, and the din and bustle of a busy world, seat himself on some
w T ave-worn stone, which has been washed for centuries by the ocean, draw inspira-
tion from the scene before him, and leave to posterity the lofty sentiments which his
excited imagination would create. Here might he stay the live-long day without
being tired with the monotony of surrounding objects—idea upon idea, would crowd
upon his fancy, and the longer he beheld, the longer would he desire to remain.
Byron, in his glorious ode (as Jeffries designates it) on the aspiration of Greece after
Liberty, makes the Grecian bard exclaim ;
Place me on Sunium’s marbled steep,
Where nothing, save the waves and I,
May hear our mutual murmurs weep ;
There swan-like, let me sing and die;
A land of slaves shall ne’er be mine—
Hash down yon cup of Samian wine!
Sunium or Helicon or Parnassus may doubtless possess many claims to captivate
a poetic mind, but Bondi I feel convinced could, for natural scenery, dispute the
palm with any of them. It is such a spot as this, that one might imagine Cowper
to be situated when he wrote the exquisite lines supposed to be spoken by Alexander
Selkirk in the desert Island of Juan Fernandez. Apart from mankind, exquisitely
sensible of the impressions which the scene around might produce upon him, his
eyes resting upon the silent solitudes of nature, and his idea of loneliness augmented
by the expanse of Ocean before him, and the murmuring of its billows as they


rolled in successively and dashed in spray among the rocks, or covered the extended
beach with one unbroken line of silvery foam; the poet might form a vivid idea of
the situation of the man whose lament he endeavoured to relate. It may he under
circumstances similar to these that the splendid piece which Selkirk is made to
speak, was produced; and it is very probably to the inspiration caused by a scene
like Bondi, that we are indebted for this classic effusion of poetic genius.”
Mr. W. Woolls, of Parramatta, published in 1838 a small volume of
Miscellanies in prose and verse. The first portion consists of a number
of Essays on various subjects, amongst which are the Press, Intemperance,
the Southern Constellations, the Philosophy of the Human Mind, and
Education in New South Wales. The little book exhibits scholarship
and taste, and short though the contents be, they are exceedingly inter-
esting. The following concluding paragraph from the Essay upon
Politics, will convey an idea of Mr. Woolls’ style as a writer: —
“ Happy was the venerable warrior who preferred the labours of the field to the
glittering pomp of the Dictatorship—happy was the Philosopher who could look
with indifference on the luxury of Kings—happy was the Emperor who, in order
that he might attain peace and serenity of mind, laid aside the imperial purple.
The paths of honor are slippery and uncertain, they lead a man to a dreadful
pre-eminence, therefore he, who in sweet retirement leads a peaceful and quiet life
is rather to be envied than the mightiest of earth’s potentates. And we may be
assured that whatever our rank and station in society be, little happiness will
follow from a constant discussion of political matters. Such enquiries two frequently
induce the most painful disputes, and incapacitate the mind for more important
subjects. The man who has sold himself to a party, views every thing with a
jaundiced eye, and he can see nothing that is good, excellent, or virtuous in those
who differ with him in sentiment. Let us then direct our minds to wisdom ; let us
pursue those subjects which are calculated to enlarge the mind; let us tread in those
paths which are likely to secure happiness for us while we remain on earth, and to
lead us to the acquisition of the greatest of all blessings, health of body and
tranquility of mind.”
Mr. Richard Rowe, under the pseudonyme of “ Peter Possum,”
although he is no longer amongst us, before he left, bequeathed to
the Colony his clever “ Port Folio.” It contains effusions in poetry and
prose —the latter predominating. Most of the articles appeared pre-
viously in “ The Month ” magazine ; but they come to us in a better
shape, in a collected form. Peter was induced to publish, as he
tells us in his preface, not from a desire for authorship, but from an
atrophy in his purse. Had he been a richer man, Australia might have
been deprived of one of its most rich and racy books. The first and
longest piece is a fictional autobiography called “ Arthur Owen,” very
well written. “ A Trip up the Hunter,” and numerous other amusing
sketches follow. Some of them exhibit much wit and learning. Peter
without doubt was a scholar of no mean order. Windsor can boast of
having once been his “ local habitation,” though I cannot say that it
ever gave him a “ name.” He still contributes to the literature of the
Colony in the shape of monthly letters or articles from the Northern
British Capital, published in the Sydney Morning Herald. I have only
time to give the following short extract from a sketch of his, as a speci-
men of his prose writing :


AN ECLIPSE OF THE SUN.
“If you’re waking, call me early, call me early, Bridget dear,” was my poetical
appeal last night to my Hibernian handmaiden ; and Bridget, for a wonder chancing
to wake before seven, I was called in time to see
The sunlight sheathed and gently charmed,
Of all its sparkling rays disarmed,
And as in slumber laid.
Calling to mind how often I had been “in slumber laid ” at the unsheathing of
his light, 1 hardly liked to look the sun in the face before his obscuration. It seemed
so ridiculous in me, so rude to him, to he getting up at that unreasonable hour not
to see him. An eclipse of the sun is a rare phenomenon, hut so to most of us is his
rising. lam almost ashamed to say that in the whole course of my life I have only
once witnessed his levee—l was sleeping on the deck of the little “ Vivid,” darting
through the calm summer waters, from Calais to Dover, swift and graceful as a
mackerel, when I was aroused hy the grutf old steersman with a “ Look at .that, Sir !
It’s a sight, I’m thinking, you dont often see.” The eastern sky was mottled with
a mantling red, recalling the sweet old world myth of the rose-sprinkling hours.
The bridegroom was about to come forth from his chamber. A segment of the
golden disc was just above the waves, and as it ascended into kingly stateliness,
“ unhasting, unresting ” majesty, its dazzling glory, shooting horizontally along the
sea, turned the water into blushing wine—as though in sacramental memory of the
“ beginning of miracles ” wrought by the transmuter’s sacred antitype, the Sun of
Righteousness—itself an emblem of the enriching change. His mission was to work
in the whole life of man. The blush vanished, but myriad spangles glittered on the
gently heaving waves, and the wheeling sea birds wing, and here and there a streak
of cloud —left white and lonely as a lingering snow wreath, on the deep blue sky-
exchanged their spotless purity of hue for burnished brilliance. The cliffs on both
sides of the channel waking, as it seemed drew back their veil’s lavender mist, and
smiled'a sisterly “good morrow” to each other across the mirror that reflected
their fair forms. And over all the sun glowed grandly beautiful, graciously
sublime, as though it were the visible all seeing eye of God. Like a Persian, I
could have fallen down and worshipped. And yet a sight like this we might see
every morning if we chose &c., &c., &c.
Of the little brochure of Possum’s friend, Frank Fowler, called
“ Southern Lights and Shadows,” I shall say nothing—the sooner it
descends into oblivion, with Baron Munchausen, the better. But I
ought not to omit mentioning that Dr. Woolley, of the University, has
collected a number of his talented lectures into a neat little volume,
which is a most pleasing addition to Colonial Literature.
Australia has not yet produced any novelists of note, if we except
Miss Atkinson, who, to the credit of her country and her sex, has
published two works of fiction of a highly moral caste. The first, called
“ Gertrude,” is a tale of the Colony, and exhibits life in the bush.
Whilst it was being published, Peter Possum, no unworthy critic, des-
cribed it, speaking to the Authoress as “your pretty, womanly,
anxiously looked for, little work.” The narrative of every day occur-
rences is instructive and fascinating: and a reviewer in the Sydney
Herald described it as “ a book of instruction inculcating moral and
religious principles.” The work is neatly printed and embellished by
well executed w T ood engravings—illustrative of colonial customs and
scenery. It was published in numbers, and it is difficult now to obtain
a bound copy of the whole.


Miss Atkinson called her second story “Cowanda; or, The Veteran’s
Grant.” It is not so large or pretentions as its predecessor, yet it is very
nicely written. The incidents are few, hut such as they are they are
very graphically described. The following passage, taken at random, is
from the seventeenth chapter, page 103. It refers to Rachel, one of the
principal female characters :
Half-past five: at least I shall see Sydney under a new aspect, she mused,
securing her mantle, and stepping with noiseless feet down the passage and unlocking
the door. The sun was just rising ; the golden hall of St. James’ Church glistened
in the first rays, and then the roofs of the higher buildings caught the amber tint,
and so it travelled from gable to gable, and shot in at the upper windows to waken
the sleepers; but the streets were still in shade, cool, fresh, and quiet. A group
of labourers passed her now and then, with flat baskets, from which protruded saws
and squares, or a paint-pot, or trowels in hand ; then near the tardy rising walls, of
the Cathedral, an old woman with a temporary table raised on benches, circulating
large cups of coffee and thick slices of bread and butter among her customers—the
workmen, and a few late boys, masons, labourers, or bus-boys, perhaps. Not much
was said ; they ate and drank quietly, and then filed away, and collected in groups,
sitting along the curb-stones, and waiting for six o’clock.
The truthfulness of this scene may be ascertained at any time by
an early walk in Sydney on a summer morning. I do not know how
the works of the talented authoress took with the public they merited
success. I only trust that Miss A. will he encouraged to still greater
efforts in that department of literature in which she has shown herself
well qualified to shine. It will be known to many that the fair author
is a resident of the Kurrajong, and that from her mountain home at
Eernhurst, she has contributed many sketches to the columns of the
daily journals —chiefly on the subject of botany, a science to which she
is an ardent devotee, and in which she has an able guide and friend in
Mr. Woolls, of Parramatta.
There was an Australian fiction once published, I believe, called
“ Martin Beck it attained but little recognition, and has not come
under my notice. It is not, I conceive, a matter ot much moment that
I cannot now enter into its subject.
The Drama, which I shall next allude to, is a _ species of poetry.
Dr. Johnson in effect defines it as a poem or fictitious composition in
dialogue in which the action is not related but represented. In this
peculiar field some of the noblest efforts of genius have been employed,
and in its form of composition England’s great master mind and great-
est poet, Shakespeare, immortalised himself and shed renown upon the
literature of his country. There is but little to notice in this line in
Australia, but such as it is I will briefly refer to.
There may have been plays written prior to the one I am about to
notiee, but the earliest that has come under my observation was a
tragedy in five acts, from the Atlas press, 1843, named “ Tarquin the
Proud, or the Downfall of Tyranny.” The author was Mr. S. P. Hill.
It is a production of some merit, but it does not seem to have attained
much popularity, and lam not aware that it was ever acted. I have
only time and space for one short passage. Tarquin, enraged with
Turnus, thus exclaims :


Tarquin. —My soul is bursting from my frame,
Ye gods! there was a time when I was free
From all pollution, crimes, and murd’rous stains ;
But now they weigh me to the dust. There’s nought
Can blacken fame but I have done. My life
Is one dark spot upon this glorious world’s
Creation ; and all for nothing, less, less
Than nothing. To be a king—to wear a crown,
And all reward is ours. Ambitious fools !
We always love the thing we want; but when
We’ve gained the long’d for prize, our love dispels,
And, like a vapour, disappears : disgust
Succeeds, which is our only true reward.
But still lam a King; and who shall dare
To beard me to my face P Ah ! was I King
When Turnus belch’d his filthy words on me,
And I did not revenge ? And Brutus too! *
But hold! I’ll be myself. Two murders more
Will free me from these dogs. What ho ! there boy.
Enter a Page.
This extract, whilst giving an idea of the author’s style, will also
serve to indicate the sanguinary character of the plot.
In 1853 Mr. Charles Harpur published, with some other poems, a
Play in 5 acts, which he entitled “The Bushrangers.” The scenes are
laid in Windsor, Richmond, and various parts of the interior forest.
Eighteen male characters, including the magistrates, the police, and
four bushrangers, and five females sustain the action. It is an elaborate
production, and evinces much industry on the part of the author, but I
cannot award it high merit. It is partly plain prose, and partly blank
verse. Several songs are interspersed of a bacchanalian and amorous
character. There are some passages of considerable dramatic power
and beauty; but Mr. Harpur’s fame will rest more upon his regular
poems than this species of composition. The play has never been
represented, and Ido not think it was written for the stage. Portions
of the dialogue are forced and improbable. There is a very interesting
passage, full of tenderness and poetic sentiment, which forms a conver-
sation between Stalwart, the chief of the gang, and his sweetheart
Mary ; p. 7 :
Stalwart. —So we depart; and here comes Mary
To take another leave. Poor girl, she loves me;
And as I deeply feel the charm of being
Beloved by one, else innocent, despite
My desperate fortunes, I must grieve as deeply,
To know what sorrow and shame I and her parents,
Her all-abandoned parents ! are entailing
Upon the creature that thus loves me ! Yes ;
Although a wild, ungovernable heart
Hath driven me neck-deep in crimethough misery,
And burning wrongs have stung me to commit
Deeds terrible but to name ! yet I, at times,
Am quick to pity.
Enter Mary.
Why so sad, my girl P


Mary. —What Stalwart! can you ask me such a question ?
Do you not now depart—going, as it were,
In quest of an untimely grave, or bonds,
Or worse than these, of crime P I would not vex you !
They say you are a wild and fearful man,
But I will not believe them ; —be not angry !
I ask not what you are : to me you seem
Only unhappy, like myself; and very—
Yes, very gentle—at least to me; and this
Aye makes me weep to think on when you are gone.
Stalwart. —This kindness kills me ! &c., &c., &c.
The play ends with the shooting of Stalwart by the police. “He
falls and dies, the bushrangers crowd round the body, grounding their
arms in token of surrender; while the police rush forward to secure
them ; —the whole forming a large picture as the curtain slowly descends
to triumphant music.” I only wish that the police of the present day
would be as successful in bringing to such a termination the career of
some of the desperadoes that now unhappily infest the interior of the
country.
Mr. George F. Pickering, of Bell’s Life in Sydney , wrote a drama a
few years back, which was represented on the Sydney boards. Mr.
Pickering is a poet of ability, and the pages of his paper are frequently
adorned by lines understood to be from his facile pen. It has not been
my good fortune to get hold of a copy of his play, but I remember it
was spoken very highly of by the reviewers of the day. I believe it was
the first colonial play ever placed upon the stage.
The most successful drama however which has been produced in the
Colony is that called “ Raymond Lord of Milan,” from the pen of Mr.
Edward Reeve, a gentleman at present on the literary staff of the
Sydney Morning Herald. It is a historical tragedy in blank verse,
written in 1847, and published in Sydney, in 1851. “ The action of
the piece is laid at Milan, in the 13th Century, about the year 1263,
when Ramondo Dello Torre (third prince of the house of Torriani)
was the reigning chief of the Milanese state. The play is understood
to comprise a number of historical facts, as they actually occurred at
that strange eventful period, when Italy was convulsed with the terrible
wars of the Guelfs and Ghibellines, the result of which was the
temporary restoration of the various Italian states to liberty and
independence. With the plot of the tragedy are blended several of
the striking but less generally known events, which threw a gloom over
the last days of Raymond the Lord of Milan, who was, like Rienzi, slain
ere his mission was accomplished.” The play was expressly written, we
are told, for the late W. Nesbitt, though never performed by him. It
was played however for three successive nights in the month of
September last at the Victoria Theatre, and a fourth time to a very full
house on the Bth of October, 1863; Mr. Warner very ably taking the
principal character. It was pronounced by the theatrical critics an
unqualified success ; and as a literary production, it has been reviewed
in several of the Sydney journals in terms of the highest praise. I
have only space for one short extract: —


Sal.— I gay
I left my country free, a virgin state,
In which no coward tongue had dared defend
The accursed cause of tyranny, she made her laws,
And all with reverential joy obeyed.
Aye, she ruled well, because she ruled herself;
In her senate there was wisdom and vigour;
And among the people liberty, order, and content,
And thou—thou that dost well remember this—art calm
And smilest at the change.
Da Rom. — What if I do ?
Sal. —Why then the love thou feigneds’t for Milan
Was worthless, changing, and contemptible
As the love of fickle woman.
Da Rom. — What art going ?
Sal. — Aye to search for one that loves his country,
And when I’ve looked on him to die.
Probably there are some other plays which have escaped my
observation, but I doubt much whether there be any of such a character
as to make it a matter of regret that I have overlooked them. Mr.
Reeve, the talented author of the last play was once prominently
connected with a little magazine called the “ Australian Era,” which I
am sorry to say had but a short lived existence: and he is well known
to have contributed largely and ably in various ways to the current
literature of the Colony.
In introducing a cursory review of the Poets and Poetry of
Australia at the end of my lecture, I fear I am to some extent dealing
unkindly with the subject; but it is impossible within the limits of my
command I can do more than touch upon the subject in a very brief
manner. To do it full justice would require a lecture of itself. Never-
theless, I trust —I will not fail altogether in giving some idea of what
has already been done for the fair fame of Australia in the most
beautiful and enduring of all arts —the art of poetry—by her native
sons and adopted children.
It has been said that to give a concise and satisfactory definition of
poetry has hitherto baffled the most learned critics and even the poets
themselves. Byron says, it is “ but a passion ” —others, “ beautiful
prose.” It may with more accuracy be termed “metricalcomposition,”
yet metrical composition without passion or sentiment is but poor
poetry. Verse is not always poetry. There are verse uniters innume-
rable who have not a spark of the poet’s fire within them. And I
need scarcely say (with James Martin in one of his sketches) that
Australia has not been free of those pseudo poets —individuals who
ha\ e no proper conception of the real nature of poetry, and who only
make themselves ridiculous by their attempts at versification. Poetry,
to be good, must be pleasing to the senses. It ought to be smooth and
grateful to the ear. This latter quality is one of the tests of true
poetry. There may be fine sentiments expressed in measured lines and
verses, but if they be inharmonious in numbers and harsh in language,
ley can only be considered as mere prosings of fancy. True poetry is


inseparable from music; and the ancients did well to regard the
goddess Polymnia as presiding over botli rhetoric and singing. We
have some versifiers, thinking themselves poets, whose effusions are
totally destitute of metre, and have scarcely a shade of rhythm. It is
a pity they do not direct their literary mean derings in another channel.
I am glad however to think that Australia does possess some true poets ;
although none of shining greatness has yet appeared in her literary
horizon. The fugitive poets of Australia are numerous, and it will
not be in my power to refer to them all. The most noticeable however
shall receive attention.
First in the list is Australia’s most gifted son, William Charles
Wentworth, who was a poet before he became a politician. “Australia
has formed a fruitful subject for the poetic muse, but scarcely one has
rendered it more justice than Mr. Wentworth. Whilst a student at
Cambridge, in 1824, he was one of twenty-five competitors for the prize
poem on Australasia, and was allotted the second place after Mr. Praed,
the successful candidate. The following passage, having reference to
Cook and his companion, Banks, exhibits much feeling: —
Illustrious Cook! Columbus of our shore,
To whom, was left this unknown world’t ’explore
Its untraced hounds on faithful chart to mark,
And leave a light where all before was dark :
And thou the foremost in fair learning’s ranks,
Patron of every art, departed Banks,
Who wealth disdaining and inglorious ease
The rocks and quicksands braved of unknown seas.
Immortal pair ! when in yon spacious bay
Ye moor’d awhile its wonders to survey,
How little thought ye, that the name from you
Its grateful shrubs, and beauteous wild flowers drew,
Would serve in after times, with lasting brand,
To stamp the soil and designate the land ;
And to ungenial climes reluctant scare
Full many a hive that else had settled there ! &c., &c., &c.
The poem concludes with the following animated and highly
patriotic apostrophe, which is often quoted :
And oh, Britannia, should’st thou cease to ride
Despotic Empress o’er old ocean’s tide ;
Should thy tam’d lion, spent his former might,
No longer roar, the terror of the fight;
Should e’er arrive that dark disastrous hour
When bow’d by Luxury, thou yield’st to power
When thou no longer freest of the free
To some proud Victor bend’st the vanquish’d knee,
May all thy glories in another sphere
Relume, and shine more brightly still than here ;
May this thy last born Infant then arise
To glad thy heart, and greet thy Pakent eyes.
And Australasia rise with flags unfurl’d
A new Britannia in another world!


Mr. S. P. Hill was one of the finest Poets that have appeared in
Australia. He filled the office of Secretary to the Sydney School of Arts
some years ago, he published some pieces that reflect the highest credit
on his memory. His most prominent productions were the “ Ode to the
departing year,” the “ Loss of the Cataraqui,” “ Australia,” and the
“ Monody on the death of Sir George Gipps.” The last was full of
pathos and feeling. It begins thus :
There was a voice of wailing, and it came from lands afar,
Proclaiming mournfully and sad the falling of a star.
A light shone in the firmament—though pale, it glittered bright
Then sickened in eclipse beneath the sombre shroud of nighti
Tis past—’ tis past! and all that now remains,
The silent grave with mouldy grasp retains.
His Sun is set! or scarce it had attained
The bright meridian of its day—it waned. &c., &c., &c.
Mr. Hill, like the subject of his beautiful poem, is now alas no more
I recollect once spending an evening with him in Windsor, which he
visited with a mutual friend, Mr. (now the Rev.) R. K. Ewing, another
poet, and shall never forget the genial vivacity and wit of his conver-
sation. He left Hew South Wales shortly afterwards, and settled in
Tasmania: and I read with much sorrow that he died in Hobartown a
few months ago. A collection of his poems would be very acceptable.
Mr. E. K. Sylvester, another sweet poet, has passed away, after
contributing numerous pieces full of tenderness and merit. One was
“ t;^e Battle of the Sutledge ; ” another “ Leichhardt’s Return ” This
latter was followed by a beautiful poem by a Mr. Lynd, also alas no
“ ore > H sad to sa y> on an opposite theme, “ Leichhardt’s Grave.”
this dirge has been highly praised as a composition “ whose touching
measure has drawn from many an eye a tear.” The following is the
first stanza : °
Ye who prepare with pilgrim feet
hour long and doubtful path to wend,
If —whitening on the waste—ye meet
The relics of my murder’d friend ;
His hones with rev’rence ye shall hear
To where some mountain streamlet flows ;
There by its mossy hanks prepare
The pillow of his long repose. &c., &c., &c.
Mr. John Rae has contributed to the poetical literature of the
colony in his “Mayor’s Fancy Ball,” “lines on the death of Miss
Nathan,” and several other pieces. Mr. Woolls, of Parramatta, has
published several meritorious effusions—the most remarkable of which
is his Ode written to commemorate the establishment of a University
in Sydney, which commences thus
Amidst the vapours of the mental gloom
Which hung o’er Sydney, murky as the tomb,
I heard a voice above the ocean’s roar.
“ Let th ere be light upon Australia’s shore.” &c., &c., &c.


Mr Sheridan Moore, the friend of Kendall, has published some
lyrics of merit which are deserving of a more lengthened notice than i
can afford to give them. Mr. Moore is one of the chief literary men of
AU The a iate unfortunate and lamented Mr. A. J. Evelyn also wrote
some beautiful lyrics, which appeared in the papers of the day, lbdh.
He termed them “ Snatches of Song ” and Lyrics of the Sea. A
full collection of his poems I have, not met with ; those I have seen
prove him to have been strongly imbued with true poetic feting.
“ The Lonely Rock ”is a clever lovely little poem—the first and last
verses are these :
In the hlue and middle sea
’Neath a heaven bright,
One tall rock imperially
Lifts its lonely height;
Gnomen of the water-dial,
Perch of wandering bird,
Standing there in dumb denial
Of the thunder’s word.
* * * *
Waves are moving all around,
Sun and stars above;
But the rock is steadfast found,
Still and strong as love.
Crowded ships go down to hell
In the tempest shock ;
Quiet, calm, immoveable
Stands the lonely rock.
Mr Geoffrey Eagar, the present Colonial Treasurer, is said to have
courted the Muses when a young man. I have read pieces ™ on
the “ Myall Tree,” “ Parting with Friends, and In memory ot
E B Kennedy.” They are of a melancholy moralizing caste, as most
of the Austral poem's are. Mr. Eagar is a
standing, and has been a frequent contributor to the leading columns
of the Sidney papers. His literary ability-whatever may be said of
h s stateLanship-is undoubted. His colleague and school companion
Mr William Forster, the present Colonial Secretary is also an eminent
Colonial litterateur and poet. His forte however in the latter respect
lies in a different direction to that of his old friend; and he has appl ed
his talents more to the satirical than the sentimental. Some ot the
most pungent pieces, both in prose and verse, which appeared m the
old Atlas newspaper were from the pen of Mr. Forster,; and e
known dramatic sketch, “ The Devil and the Governor, is understood
to have been written by him. He has composed numerous Sonnets-
the best of which are on the Crimean War. They originally appeared
in the old Empire. The following is a specimen
Sebastopol! that on the sable sea
Sitt’st with the blood of many nations bathed,
Now that war’s warning tempest leaves thee free,
How proudly frowning from thy craggy steep,
With haggard looks thou dost survey the deep,
Sublime, though shattered—terrible though scathed !


Oh! more enduring monument than brass,
Or marble shape, stern city ! thou shalt pass
From memory never—privileged to hear
The horrid brand and character of war,
Imprinted on thy forehead, as a scar
Adorns a warrior. Oh! for ever wear
Thy glory so. When noble foes are crowned
By our own hands, we make ourselves renowned.
I am not sure that I have given the best of these sonnets, which
are six in number. But Mr. Forster may be safely ranked as one of
Australia’s most gifted citizens. He, like Mr. Eagar, also supplied
articles to the leading columns of the elder Empire and other public
journals.
In alluding to the poets of Australia, I ought not to omit some
mention of two of her most talented sons —Mr. D. H. Deniehy and
Mr. W. B. Dailey, both men of genius. I know that they are orators
of high character, and I believe they have contributed largely to the
journalism of the Colony, both in poetry and prose, but from the fact of
all, or nearly all, their productions being anonymous, I am unable to
put my hand upon any of their effusions worth referring to. In the
Empire, whilst under Mr. Parkes, and in the Southern Gross weekly
newspaper, Mr. Deniehy gave vent to his great powers of criticism and
satire ; and Mr. Dailey in the articles he is said to have contributed to
some of the periodicals of the day has proved himself a wit and
humourist of extraordinary power. Mr. Deniehy has delivered lectures
upon the poets of Australia, and Mr. Dailey has also distinguished
himself as a public lecturer. I trust that some day or other permanent
works will appear from their polished pens to adorn the literature of
their Country.
Amongst the fugitive poets of Australia the greatest must undoubt-
edly be said to have bee»- Henry Halloran. He has never published a
book ‘‘for his enemy ”; but the newspaper press of the day for many years
past has been embellished by his poetic productions. He was born at
Cape Town. His early days were spent in England, but Australia is his
land by adoption. He has written a great deal, and, as he assures me,
he had hoped at times to influence public feeling in a rightful cause,
but not for fame, which he cares little for ;if he has only —as lam sure
he has the love and affection of those who are most precious to his
soul. One of his latest and best effusions is a poem in celebration of
the Anniversary of the Birthday of our most Gracious Sovereign Victoria,
24th May, 1864. It is written in peculiar measure ; and, like all Mr.
Halloran’s poetry, is occasionally rhapsodical, but posesses the true
passion. It is as follows :
Oh! pleasant month of May !
What jocund memories float
Round that loved land remote,
Where in my earlier day
I saw thy white foot on the dewy lawn;
And felt young summer breathing in the sky,
But more upon my heart and lip and eye
Felt the glad influence of a higher dawn.


Sweet month, how many a pleasant thought
Of Royal England hringest thou to me;
Great land of deeds sublime by heroes wrought:
Land of the Fair! land of the Free!
Land of the loyal heart and gallant hand.
Beloved Fatherland!
Mr. J. L. Michael has written and published the most elaborate
poem which has yet appeared from a colonial author. It is named
“ John Cumberland,” certainly a very unpoetical name. The matter
however bears evidences of being charged with much poetic fervour.
Some critics have awarded Mr. Michael the highest place among the
Colonial poets. “ John Cumberland ” is an epic, written in irregular
verse. Its commencement indicates its purport: —
Listen a little and I will impart
The tale of my own life —no, hardly that;
There is hut little in my life to tell;
No hair breadth ’scapes, no risks by flood and fell.
Only a quiet story dull and flat, —
The story of my mind and heart.
The worthy poet is very modest; the story is not by any means “ dull
and flat;” there are passages of great spirit, passion, and feeling, well
worthy of perusal. Sentiments of a religious and philosophical bearing
also pervade the poem, and some portions of it are of a highly classic
character. The subject of “ Love ” enters deeply into its pages, and
to it some of the best lines are devoted. I will quote the'following :
Why was love painted child ?
Had I the semblance of the passion plann’d
I would have sketch’d the lines with firmer hand ;
With eyes unfathomable, such as smiled
Into the new horn eve’s in Eden land ;
Bending above her, radiant as the sand
Of Eldorado’s fountain grottoes : wild
With all intense imaginations ; grand
In early manhood’s majesty: defiled
By nothing: least of all by weakness: wild
(Strength in repose is always mild ) so stand
Starlike the Gods on Ida. So are pil’d
The clouds upon the mountain summits, fann’d
By breezes, wafted from the summer strand
Of pleasant waters, sleeping silver, isl’d
With spots that yet are Eden. So the hand
Stood, of the sweet star spirits, that beguil’d
The morning of the world to understand
AColian melodies. As such my pen
Should write the Love by whom men most are men.
Mr. Michael is also the author of “ Songs without Music,” —another
unhappy title, “ Sir Archibald Yelverton ” and other poems. He has
been accused of copying from Longfellow and Tennyson. He certainly
imitates their style, if he does not pirate slightly their words in some
instances. When he trusts himself, however, it is admitted he writes


gracefully and well. Mr. Michael, as his name indicates, is a child of
Judah, born in England, and is a member of the legal profession. It is
seldom that the law and poetry are found together. The Muses abhor
technicalities. It is gratifying however to find that in the person of
Mr. Michael they have not been found incompatible.
I have reserved for the last the two best known and most popular
poets—sons of the soil—Charles Harpur and Henry Kendall. Harpur
has been long before his countrymen as a poet. He has been considered
their laureate, and to some extent he is entitled to the honor. His
name ought to possess especial interest to the natives of the Hawkesbury,
for I believe he spent much of his youth, if he were not actually born
about Windsor. Some forty years ago his respected parent was teacher
of the Church of England School in this town, as many of the old
residents well remember. His poetry is of the Shelley and Coleridge
caste —dreamy and philosophical—often obscure, but betraying true
poetic fire and inspiration. He takes lofty flights on his Pegasus, and
often soars beyond Parnassus to the regions of higher thought. “ The
Creek of the Pour Graves ” has been much admired. It is written in
blank verse, As an imaginative poem, Mr. Deniehy thought there was
nothing superior to it in the whole range of poetry —exaggerated praise,
I fear, which Ido not think even the author approves. His verses to
the Moon, a favorite subject with poets, is a beautiful composition, and
possesses, for the dwellers on the Hawkesbury, a local interest in the
third stanza. I can only afford to extract the following from the small
volume which he published in 1853, page 88: —
TO THE MOON,
With silver step behold her steal
Over those envious clouds that hid
Till now her face, then stand—a seal
Of silver on heaven’s mighty lid !
So round me would I have her light
In one broad burst of beauty play ;
And who, whilst thus she rules the night
Would wish the day ?
N or feel the yearning spirit fraught
With sweetly solemn strains of visionary thought!
&c., &c., &c.
Kendall, however, promises to outstrip all his predecessors and
compeers in the poetic art. His compositions possess the smoothness
of Pope or Longfellow, with the tenderness of Kirke White. It is to be
regretted that most of his subjects as yet are of a melancholy turn.
He seems as one bowed down with grief, often looking upon the beauti-
ful world around us as if it were cased in gloom. He appears frequently
as if he felt himself passing away through murky ethereal shades to the
world of spirits—to the poet’s Aiden. I trust he will soon grow out of
this sadness and live to produce something more spirited and worthy of
his talents, which are undoubtedly of a high order. He is a true child
of nature, and some of his poems are beautifully descriptive, in 1862


Mr. Kendall published a small volume containing some forty-five of his
poems. The first is an address to
THE MESE OF AUSTRALIA.
Where the pines with the eagles are nestled in rifts,
And the torrent leaps down to the surges ;
I have followed, her clambering over the clifts,
By the chasms and moon-haunted verges. &c., &c., &c.
With the following I must conclude my notice of Kendall’s poetry,
and of the poets. It is so natural that lam sure it will be appreciated.
THE CURLEW SONG.
The viewless blast flies moaning past,
Away to the forest trees :
There giant pines and leafless vines
Bend ’ neath the wandering breeze!
From ferny streams, unearthly screams
Are heard in the mid-night blue ;
As afar they roam to the Shepherd’s home
The shrieks of the wild Curlew!
As afar they roam
To the Shepherd’s home
The shrieks of the wild curlew.
&c., &c., &c.
I wish I could repeat “ the Maid of Gerringong,” a most touching
story; but time will not permit. Let me advise all who can, to
purchase the book. Mr. Kendall is a young man Australia may well
be proud of; and I only hope his countrymen will not fail to do homage
to his genius whenever opportunity occurs.
I must now bring this long lecture to a close. I fear I have been
tedious to some extent; but if I have only succeeded in proving that
our Southern land of sun and flood has a literature of her own of a
progressive and promising character, and that we may reasonably hope
she & will yet shine as “ a bright particular star ” in the firmament of
the liberal arts, I will not have laboured in vain. With our noble
University, our Grammar School, and the many other seminaries of
learning —not forgetting the School of Arts, which are now scattered
throughout the Country; there is every probability that Australia will
yet produce sons as authors worthy to be placed by the side of the
Bacons and the Shakespears —the Byrons and the Scotts of our glorious
fatherland.
Printed by Reading and Wellbank, Bridge-street, Sydney.




ERRATA.
r. B . 24, ii„, 11 am b 0„„, „ mit „, „ , honM 6e „ wi#m „
Page 26, line 3 from the top, after the word “ ago ” the word <. ,
be inserted. g ’ * d when ” should
27, me 10 f,„„ a , top , „ , o>sly „ ihou|a ta „ li>eiy „


