

/7. * .
Np -2
'rod Ira iian
DEHYDRATED
MUTTON
X. C, C j R ,
WHAT IT IS : HOW TO PREPARE IT FOR
COOKING : AND SOME TESTED RECIPES
FOR ITS USE




Australian Dehydrated Mutton is prepared
from specially graded Carcase Mutton; Pre-
cooked; Boned and Dehydrated. It retains all
of the Food Value of the fresh meat, and is
Manufactured and Packed under the supervision
of the Meat Inspection Branch of the Department
of Commerce and Agriculture, Commonwealth of
Australia.
To Reconstitute the Product for use it is
recommended that two parts of boiling water be
added to one part of Dehydrated Mutton and left
to stand for up to one hour.
SOME TESTED RECIPES
INDIAN CURRY
24 Cups Dehydrated Mutton.
8 Cups Curry Powder.
8 Cups Powdered Chillies.
12 Cups Doll (Split Peas).
12 Cups Ghee.
12 Cups Spices.
* Cup Salt.
48 Cups Rice.
Reconstitute the Dehydrated Mutton as advised above.
Take it and the Ghee and cook first. Keep stirring,
and when cooked add water as required, together with
the other ingredients. Cook the rice separately and
place on the plate first, with the curry placed on top.
The above is suitable for 30 persons, allowing one
pound to a pound and a half per person. The Recipe
was prepared and used by Indians at India House,
Sydney, and was reported on as being very suitable to
their tastes.


COTTAGE PIE
12 Cups Dehydrated Mutton.
20 Cups Mashed Potatoes.
4 ozs. Onions.
2 Cup Tomato Sauce.
2 Cups White Sauce.
I Teaspoon of Dry Herbs.
1 oz. Fat.
Reconstitute the Dehydrated Mutton as advised above.
Chop onions finely and fry in fat, add sauce and all
other ingredients and cook for 15 minutes. Season
with salt and pepper. Spread a layer of mashed potatoes
into a baking dish and cover it with the mutton mix-
ture. Finally, cover with mashed potatoes. Sprinkle
with breadcrumbs, and a knob of fat or butter, and
brown in hot oven. Serve with tomato sauce.
The above is suitable for 25 persons.
SAVOURY MINCE
12 Cups Dehydrated Mutton.
6 Onions.
1 Cup Tomato Puree.
2 Tablespoons Worcestershire Sauce.
2 Cups White Sauce.
Seasoning to taste.
Reconstitute the Dehydrated Mutton as advised above.
Chop onions and fry in hot fat. Blend all ingredients
together and season with salt and pepper. Serve piping
hot on buttered toast.
The above is suitable for 25 persons.
MINCE PIE
Reconstitute the Dehydrated Mutton as advised above.
Line out the bottom of baking tartlet with short crust.
Fill the mixture, cover with puff pastry and cook in hot
oven. Serve with tomato sauce.


RISSOLES
10 Cups Dehydrated Mutton.
4 Onions.
1 Cup Tomato Sauce.
I Cup Fat.
li Cups Flour.
3 Cups Stock or Milk.
Season to taste.
Reconstitute the Dehydrated Mutton as advised above.
Melt fat and stir in flour, add stock and mix into a
smooth thick sauce and simmer for 5 minutes. Add
Reconstituted Mutton and the rest of the ingredients.
Cook for 10 minutes. Season with salt and pepper,
pour into baking dish and let cool.
Shape the above mixture into Rissoles, roll in flour,
dip in egg wash, roll in breadcrumbs, and fry in deep
fat to golden brown colour.
PASTIES
Reconstitute the Dehydrated Mutton as advised above.
Slightly cook, add finely-chopped fried onions, season
with pepper and salt, and cook for a few minutes
longer. Dice cooked carrots, potatoes and add chopped
parsley; mix well and use for filling pasties, made with
a good short crust.
MUTTON BROTH
2 Cup Dehydrated Mutton.
4 Cups Water.
1 Carrot.
1 Turnip.
1 Onion.
1 Stick Celery,
i Cup Pearl Barley.
Salt and Pepper.
Finely-chopped Parsley.
Reconstitute the Dehydrated Mutton as advised above.
Place in saucepan with washed barley, salt and pepper
and quart water. Bring slowly to boiling point, add
vegetables cut into small dice. Simmer gently li-2
hours. Remove any traces of fat and serve hot,
sprinkled with finely-chopped parsley.


SAUSAGE ROLLS
i lb. Rough Puff or Flaky Pastry.
1 Cup Dehydrated Mutton.
1 Tablespoon Flour.
Salt and Pepper.
Finely-chopped Parsley.
Reconstitute the Dehydrated Mutton as advised above.
Blend the flour with a little of the liquid in which the
meat has been soaked. Place the meat into saucepan
with the liquid. Add blended flour, parsley, salt and
pepper. Stir over a slow fire and cook for 10 minutes.
Turn out to cool. Roll pastry into a thin oblong strip.
Place rolls of meat on pastry, glaze and fold one side
of pastry over meat and overlap with the other side.
Glaze. Cut rolls into number and size required with a
floured knife. Glaze with a beaten egg, and place on
a try to bake in a very hot oven with decreasing heat
until cooked.
ABERDEEN SAUSAGE
2 Cups Dehydrated Mutton.
i Cup Fat Bacon.
1 Cup Fresh Breadcrumbs.
| Cup Browned Breadcrumbs.
1 Tablespoon Tomato Sauce.
1 Tablespoon Worcestershire Sauce.
1 Egg.
Salt and Pepper.
Reconstitute the Dehydrated Mutton as advised above.
Drain off excess liquid. Mince bacon and add to meat
with breadcrumbs, sauces, salt and pepper. Mix in
beaten egg, pressing into a sausage-shaped roll. Tie in
a floured cloth and plunge into boiling water. Boil
11-2 hours. Unroll on to browned breadcrumbs. Serve
cold in thin slices, garnished with sprigs of parsley.


MEAT SLICE
1 Cup Dehydrated Mutton,
i lb. Shortcrust.
1 Tablespoon Finely-chopped Onion.
1 Dessertspoon Chopped Parsley.
4 Teaspoonful Herbs (if liked).
1 Tablespoon Flour.
Salt and Pepper.
Reconstitute the Dehydrated Mutton as advised above.
Blend flour with liquid in which meat is soaking. Place
all ingredients in a saucepan and stir over slow fire for
10 minutes. Make pastry and divide into two equal
portions. Roll each into oblong shape. Place one
portion on a shallow tray and spread evenly with meat
mixture. Cover with remaining sheet of pastry. Mark
into squares and glaze with beaten egg or milk. Bake
in a hot oven with decreasing heat 15-20 minutes.
MEAT FRITTERS
1 Cup Dehydrated Meat.
1 Tablespoon Finely-chopped Cooked Onion.
1 Dessertspoon Chopped Parsley,
i Tablespoon Herbs (if liked).
1 Cup Self-Raising Flour.
1 Egg.
i Cup Milk.
Salt to taste.
Reconstitute the Dehydrated Mutton as advised above.
Sift flour and salt into a basin, making a well in the
centre. Break the egg into centre and mix into a light
batter. Add milk gradually, heating until smooth.
Add drained meat, parsley, onion, salt and pepper to
batter mixture. Fry spoonful of mixture in heated fat
until golden brown. Drain to free from fat and serve
at once garnished with sprigs of parsley.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
N ,AQf£/3o *4 fg


lip 1 ’ *) ‘ n . ; s y ;;V" •
*''Mi ? -
ii.
'. V-v;
I'iV' ■ - . ,
x y ,■ ,
