





cooper’s creek.
CHAPTER YIIL
Australian Heroes.
The Story of Exploration in Australia—Edward John Eyre—Opposes a Proposed Expedition, and starts Another—Meets
with Obstacles—Baffled—ln a Dry and Thirsty Land—Searching for Water-holes—A Crisis —Dangers and Difficulties
—Murder —Footsteps Dogged—Succour—The “ Burke and Wills Expedition ” —The Start—Disaffection—The Party
Re-organised—Cooper’s Creek—The Journey to the Gulf of Carpentaria—The Return in Hope—Abandoned—A
Terrible Situation—Death of Wills—Death of Burke—King among the Natives—The Relief Party.
HE Story of Exploration in Australia is 'brimful of incident, as the
many bulky volumes written on the subject testify. It is a
P colony, too, full of interest to Englishmen everywhere, inasmuch
p as there is hardly a family in the land but is directly or in-
111 directly concerned in Australia, and is eager to welcome every
||| fresh piece of information. Many a thrilling story has been told
||| of the wild adventures and dangerous explorations of Wentworth,
HI Lawson, Hovell, Hume, Cunningham, Sturt, Mitchell, Tyers,
)kr Strzelecki, Gray, Lander, Lefay, Leichhardt, Kennedy, Roe,
Gregory, and a host of others. In these pages we shall confine
ourselves to two instances only—the explorations of Eyre, and of Burke and Wills
56


Edward John Eyre, a native o£ Yorkshire, left England for Sydney at the age of
sixteen; he commenced sheep farming, was successful, became rich, and settled on his
own estate on the Lower Murray. He was appointed Protector of the Aborigines, and
as such was engaged in settling the numerous disputes which arose between the natives
and the colonists —a task in which he displayed great ability. But his instincts were for
exploration and adventure, and in 1840, when he was still only twenty-three years of age,
he started off on an expedition which is almost unparalleled for dramatic interest and
heroic resolution. The principal object of the proposed expedition was to ascertain whether
a route could not be opened between Adelaide and the settlements in Western Australia by
which sheep and cattle could be sent in safety, and at a less expense than by sea. Eyre
was unfavourable to the project, on the ground that it was not practicable; and urged by
means of earnest and sagacious letters in the public press that not west, but north, would
be the direction in which the colonists must look for their great pathway of intercom-
munication. His arguments showed so clearly his thorough knowledge of the subject on
which he wrote, that public opinion went with him; and having thus succeeded in diverting
it from its original bent, he felt in duty bound to show his faith in his own views by offering
to lead an expedition northward. The proposal was cordially taken up by the colonists,
although, being poor—it was only four years after the foundation of South Australia—they
were not able to subscribe much. Nevertheless, help came in from various quarters, and on
the 18th of June, Eyre started off, with five Europeans, two natives, thirteen horses, forty
sheep, and provisions for three months. The theory of Eyre was, that if he could successfully
pass Lake Torrens, about which not much was known, he would then come into fertile
regions, where there would be room for settlements, and ample means of communication
with the already established colonies. Another theory, held by many, was that there was
an immense inland sea, and that the northern half of Australia could be reached by watei
communication. Either theory held out a tempting bait to an explorer of Eyre s cneigv
and adventurous zeal, and with a light heart he set off with his little band of followeis.
But Lake Torrens was found to be nothing better than a great dismal swamp, a
huge bed of mud covered with a coating of salt, which they could not get over and
could not get round; “in every direction Lake Torrens, overlapping them like a monster
horse-shoe, checked their progress."* Eyre and his party struggled hard for months to find
a way northward, but failed, and then they endeavoured to cross the lake. Eor six miles
they made their hazardous way over the mud, which was so far free from surface water,
but the farther they went the more precarious became their position; the horses sank in
the slime up to their bellies, and the whole party was in imminent danger of sinking at
every step. It was utterly impossible to proceed northward, and Eyre therefore struck
out a westerly course, and reached the sea at Port Lincoln, from whence he proceeded
to Fowler’s Bay in the Great Bight. Scarcity of water on two occasions thwarted him
in his purpose of rounding the head of the Bight, but on the third attempt he was
successful, and penetrated fifty miles beyond it. It was done at a great cost to the
expedition, however, as four of the best horses were lost in the undertaking, and in
consequence he was left without the means of carrying provisions.
* “ Across Australia.” By Colonel Egerton Warburton.


Eyre was now compelled to send back some of his party to Adelaide in the little
cutter placed at his disposal in Fowler's Bay by the Government, and at the same time
sent for further supplies of provisions, as he had determined, upon the return of the
cutter, that he would start off, with his pack-horses and a few followers, and endeavour to
make his way round the Great Big-lit to the settlements of Western Australia. A few
months before he had pronounced this journey to be altogether impracticable; but he
remembered now how he had turned public opinion on the subject of western exploration
in favour of northern, how in that northern attempt of his, after eight months of toil,
anxiety, and privation, he had been baffled and defeated in every direction, and he felt
that to return then, without having accomplished anything, would be to render of no
avail the heavy expenses incurred in the outfit of the expedition, to raise a barrier in the
way of future exploration, and to throw away his chance of justifying the confidence
that had been reposed in him. Having failed in establishing his own theory, that
exploration could be better carried on to the north, he would now do his best to establish
the theory of those from whom he had differed, and do his best to carry to a successful
issue an expedition to the west. With a chivalrous sense of duty, and without regard to
personal or private motives, he determined to face the thousand miles of trackless desert
before him.
When the cutter returned, Eyre received urgent letters from friends, as well as from
Colonel Gawler, the Governor, begging him to give up the expedition; but his mind
was made up, and on the 25th February, 1811, he bade farewell to his friends in the
cutter, and started.
The party consisted of two Europeans, Eyre and a man named Baxter, who had
been in his employ as overseer and factotum; the two natives who had been with him
from the first, and a favourite black boy named Wylie, a native of King George’s Sound,
who had come out to him in the cutter. They took with them nine horses, one Timor
pony, six sheep, and a provision of flour, tea, and sugar calculated to last them for nine
weeks.
All went well until the 3rd March, when some natives informed Eyre it would be a
doubtful matter whether he would be able to get the sheep and horses forward to the next
place where water could be obtained. Eyre determined, therefore, to divide the party and push
ahead with the sheep, in company with the boy Wylie. Two horses were taken, one to carry
provisions, and one to be ridden turn and turn about; but the boy, being unable to bear
the fatigue of the journey, had almost the sole use of the horse, while his companion did
the walking. By the 10th March, when they had accomplished about ninety-five miles,
they were suffering so much from exhaustion and want of water that they were compelled
to halt. Resting the body, however, would not quench the thirst, and therefore they did
not halt for long, as the necessity for finding water was becoming every hour more pressing.
On again they went, Eyre occasionally dozing as he walked, and the boy sleeping in
the saddle, until 110 miles were travelled, and still there was no indication of water.
The sheep were able to walk only very slowly, and the position was becoming so precarious
that Eyre set to work to construct an enclosure of shrubs in which he might leave the
sheep. Having accomplished this, he set up a tall stick with a red handkerchief on it.


to attract the attention of the party following* up in the rear, and then, depositing a note
he had written to the overseer, instructing him to bring the stores and push on with
the horses only, Eyre and the boy started forward again. It was a journey for life, and
more rapidly than they had travelled for some days past they pressed onwards. At one
time they fell in with a beaten track, and felt sure it must lead to water. Eagerly they
followed it, and it led to water-holes, but they were dry. By midnight they had journeyed
fifteen miles, but no sign of water, and then their course, which had hitherto been through
open country, became impeded by thick scrub, through which they had to force their way
with difficulty, leading the horses after them. Utterly fatigued and burning with thirst,
they were at length compelled to rest for a little while, during which time the boy was
able to sleep soundly. But not so Eyre. He knew full well the fate awaiting the whole
party if water could not be speedily obtained; he knew that 128 miles of desert lay
between him and the last watering-place; the horses he had with him had gone for
four days without a drop of water, and he knew that those following up in the rear
must be drooping under their heavy burdens, so that upon the issue of his quest, hung
immediately the lives of the sheep and horses; and not far off was the certainty that
the lives of himself and his followers would be sacrificed too.
When the morning broke he saw in the distance sand-hills, which, in the darnness
of the preceding night, he had passed unobserved. A terrible thought darted through
his mind—what if those should be the hills to which the natives had referred, and he
had passed them ? and what, if he set off to retrace his steps, and after all found the
journey in vain ? It was certain that in the latter case his horses must perish, and then
the fate of all would be sealed. The crisis was most momentous, and it is difficult to
realise a position more painfully trying than that in which he was now placed. Life or
death hung upon the decision; but it was soon made. Straining his eyes to take in
the full position and the configuration of the hills, Eyre saw, or fancied he saw, a low
sandy shore at the foot of the hills, and this decided him. Eagerly he pressed forward
over seven weary miles of intervening country, until there followed a reaction from the
painful tension of anxiety to the thrill of hopeful anticipation, for he came upon a
well-beaten native track, and following it for a couple of miles found, to his inexpressible
joy, sunken wells and abundance of water. It was life from the dead for man and beast,
and devoutly the traveller thanked the goodness of Providence in sending this succour in
the hour of his extremity. Only pausing for an hour or two, Eyre and the boy hastened
away to find the rest of the party, bearing with them a supply of water. It was well
they hastened, for Baxter and his companions were in a pitiable condition; they had
suffered as much or more than their leader, and, but for the timely arrival of relief, would
have succumbed to the death awaiting them.
For a week the whole party stayed at the wells, the sheep, cattle, and stores having
been safely brought there; but, although thankful for present mercies, their position
was by no means one of unmingled happiness. Before them, as the crow flies, there were
600 miles of desert to be traversed, and how much more, in order to obtain a passable
route, it was impossible to say. Now was the time to consider the advisability of
abandoning the expedition and retracing his steps, but the idea never seemed to have


entered the mind of Eyre, who had determined to succeed, or perish in the attempt.
On they went again for forty miles, and then the country presenting such a forbidding
aspect, Eyre stowed the baggage, and sent hack the horses to be re-laden with fresh
supplies of water, while he remained for six weary days with the sheep, allowing himself
“And then when he reached the spot where he had left the paity apparently sleeping, he found his
faithful friend and ally, Baxter, in the agony of death ” [p. 126).
only one pint of water a day, some of which evaporated and some was accidentally spilt.
Rejoined by his men, the cavalcade again set forth, and again the country grew more
desolate; the baggage had to be reduced, and everything not essential to life thrown
away. But still they toiled on, until the pony died by the way, the horses broke down
from exhaustion, and the travellers could only crawl along languidly. It was but natural


in these circumstances that Baxter, brave and faithful man though he was, should
entertain grave doubts as to the expediency of going forward. He foresaw the speedy
death of the horses, as there was nothing but dry and sapless grass for them to eat,
and for days they had been without water, and he felt satisfied that if the horses failed
them it would be impossible to go forward or to return, and so all must perish miserably.
He gave way to no vain regrets, nor did he lose heart by indulging in any morbid or
unmanly fears, but he calmly reasoned the matter with the leader; and then, when he
found that determination to proceed was inflexible, he said no more about his own
opinion, but loyally resolved to stand by his leader to the end.
Soon the dangers and difficulties increased. Two of the horses had to be left behind;
the travellers grew foot-sore from the action of salt water; all equipments had been
abandoned, except the guns and the things necessary for existence; their last drop of
water was consumed, and all they could obtain to save them from death was that which
they were able to collect from the dew on grass and shrubs by means of a sponge and
pieces of rag. For seven days they bore up under these sufferings, and then, when they
were almost in despair, sand-hills were seen again; fresh efforts were made under the
inspiration of fresh hopes; they dug a well, and water sprang up in the desert once more
for their salvation.
But it was possible to halt at this oasis only for a short time, as food was running
short, and soon death from hunger threatened to be as imminent as death from thirst.
Baxter and one of the natives went back a distance of forty-seven miles to bring up
abandoned stores, but during the journey two of the horses failed and had to be left
behind, as well as much of the provisions they were carrying. Disaster followed disaster
as the party, re-united, proceeded on their way; dysentery followed the eating of putrid
horse-flesh; the natives deserted the expedition, but after an absence of three days came
back hungry and professedly penitent; and then came the crowning disaster, which is one
of the saddest episodes in the story of Australian exploration.
One cold night the party halted at a spot where, if, as seemed probable, any rain
should fall, they would be in a good place to catch it; and Eyre, having seen his followers
snug for the night, as he supposed, beside the break-winds of boughs that had been
constructed, went out to look after the horses, which had rambled for some distance in
search of fodder. r l hey had strayed a longer distance than he had imagined, but were
eventually found; and then, as he was just turning them back towards the direction of
the camp, he was startled to hear the report of a gun. Hurriedly he ran towards the
camp. The boy Wylie, in a state of wild excitement, met him, and cried aloud, “ Oh,
massa, massa, come here ! ” And then when he reached the spot where he had left the
party apparently sleeping, he found his faithful friend and ally, Baxter, in the agony
of death, with the blood flowing from a wound in his left breast, treacherously murdered
by the natives, who had fled, taking the guns with them and most of the provisions.
Eyre raised in his arms the body of the murdered man, received his last pathetic
look of farewell, and in a moment more, without a word, the spirit of the man, who had
served him faithfully day and night for years, had gone to its rest.
It is impossible to describe the appalling position in which Eyre was now placed.


He was alone in the desert, with armed murderers probably lying in wait for him, his
sole companion a native lad, who, for aught he knew, might yet join the assassins; 600
miles of trackless desert before him, and 40 lbs. of flour, a little tea and sugar, and
four gallons of water constituting the sole stock of provisions. “ Suffering and distress,”
says Eyre, in his graphic account of the expedition, “ had well-nigh overwhelmed me,
and life seemed hardly worth the effort necessary to prolong it. Ages can never efface
the horrors of this single night, nor would the wealth of the world ever tempt me to go
through similar ones again.”
When the morning came the painful duty of paying the last sad offices of humanity
to his faithful comrade had to be performed. But it was not possible to dig a grave in
that hard rocky ground, and therefore Eyre wrapped the body in a blanket, and left it on
the spot where the treacherous shot had slain him.
Then he and Wylie set forward, and as hurriedly as they could pressed along
their way. But ere nightfall Eyre was aware of the presence of the murderers dogging
his footsteps, and he knew that, as they were armed and carried a plentiful supply of
stolen ammunition, any moment might be his last. They came near enough to be heard
calling with loud solicitation for Wylie to leave the traveller to himself and join them as
his only hope of safety, but the boy was not to be moved by their entreaties. Eyre sought
to enter into a parley with the men, but they were too cunning and too cowardly in heart
to approach the intrepid man whose destruction they were plotting. When night closed
in, Eyre made a feint of encamping, but under cover of the darkness he stole away and
made a long night's march; then for seven days more he pressed forward, and so out-
stripped the miscreants, who were never heard of again, and probably died in the desert,
retarded by the booty they had plundered.
One day, when Eyre was looking out seaward, he saw two black objects on the water.
At first he could not make out what they were, but by degrees he discovered they were
small boats. Small boats in that quarter necessitated the idea of a ship not far off, and
sure enough in a little time he saw the masts of a vessel rising above an island to the
westward. Almost maddened with joy, Eyre mounted the strongest horse and pushed ahead,
when to his indescribable delight he came up to the bay, and there before him was a fine
barque riding at anchor, and in a short time he was on board shaking hands with the
captain. The vessel was a French whaler, the Mississippi, and the commander a genial
Englishman, who welcomed him to the rest and comfort of his vessel, and spared no
pains in ministering to the travellers' welfare. And never did succour arrive more timely,
for the weather became suddenly cold, boisterous, and wet, and in their exhausted state must
have been fatal to the travellers. For a fortnight they remained on board, and then, refreshed
and recruited with new strength and fresh supplies of food, they bade farewell to their
hospitable entertainers, and once more started off into the unknown.
Twenty-three days later two miserable-looking objects stood on the hill overlooking
the town of Albany in Western Australia—pale, haggard, and emaciated from fatigue,
anxiety, and exposure. Eyre wept as he thought of the day, more than twelve months ago,
when his expedition set forth amid rejoicings and every token of prosperity. And now he
and the boy were the only ones left to reach the goal.


But lie had conquered; his indomitable pluck had carried him through the desolate
land of thirst and starvation; and he had done it with the simple, honest determination to
prove those theories correct in which he had himself been a disbeliever.
In after-life Eyre had many other strange adventures, and in connection with the
Jamaica outbreak of 1865, and the measures he took, as Governor, to repress it, his name
became known throughout the world. Opinions differed then, as they do to this day, as
to his conduct on that occasion; but as regards his adventurous exploration to pierce the
centre of Australia, and afterwards to open up a pathway of communication between the
southern and western colonies, no one can doubt that John Edward Eyre gained for himself
the honourable title of a Hero.
In 1860 an anonymous donor offered, in the Melbourne Argus, the sum of £l,OOO to
induce the Government and others to raise a fund for an exploring expedition into the
interior of Australia, to follow up the researches of Leichardt, Sturt, Eyre, Mitchell, and
Oxley.
The necessary funds—that is to say, over £9,000 —having been promptly supplied,
the expedition was duly organised, and placed under the command of Robert OTiara
Burke, an enterprising and courageous man, who had seen something of adventurous
life, and was eager to see more. He was born in Galway in 1821, and early in life
entered as a cadet in the Woolwich Academy, from whence he removed to Belgium for
the completion of his military education. He obtained a lieutenancy in the Austrian
service (7th Beuss Regiment Hungarian Hussars), but finding the life monotonous, he
relinquished his commission in 1848 and returned to Ireland, where he was appointed to the
Irish Mounted Constabulary. But as this kind of life was not quite to his mind, and the
prospects were not sufficiently wide for his ambition, he emigrated to Australia in 1853,
and became Acting Inspector of Police in Melbourne, to which place several of the men
who had served under him in Ireland accompanied him, in the hope that tley might
still serve under one who had endeared himself to them. When the stirring news of
the outbreak of the Crimean War reached Australia, it fired the imagination (f Burke,
who was a brave and true man, covetous of honour and careless of profit. Eagei to take
part in the conflict, he returned to England for that purpose, but he arrived too 'ate. So
he went back again to Australia, and at the time of his arrival there the projct for a
further exploration into the interior of the country was under discussion. Burk entered
the lists without delay; and although there were many applicants for the hnour of
leading the expedition, it was, as we have said, conferred upon him, and hertily he
threw himself into the spirit of the undertaking, even going forthwith into pdestrian
training in order to put himself into proper condition for the work.
The exploring party, as originally constituted, was as follows : —Burke, commander;
Mr. G. J. Landells (superintendent of the camels), second in command; William John
Wills, surveyor, astronomer, and meteorologist, third in command; Dr. Herman Beekler,
botanist and medical officer; Dr. Ludwig Becker, artist, naturalist, and geologist; C. E.
Ferguson, foreman; and Thomas McDonough, William Paton, Patrick Langan, Owen Cowan,
William Brahe, Robert Fletcher, John King, Henry Creher, John Dickford, Dost IV.ahomed


(a Sepoy), and two natives, Belooch and Botan, assistants. Cooper’s Creek was selected
as the base of operations, where a large depot of provisions was to be established to fall
back upon in case of need.
EGBERT o’hara BURKE.* (Drawn by William Strutt, Pointer of the original Portrait.)
It was a gay day in Melbourne when, on the 30th of August, 1860, bells rang, guns
fired, banners waved, and lusty voices cheered, as the expedition set forth from the
Royal Park, well provided with pack-horses, stores, instruments, waggons, and an imposing
* In the background are shown the Royal Park and camel stables.
57


string- of twenty-seven camels. All went well at first; the season was good; the roads
in fair condition, and the spirits of all the party were high. But this state of affairs did
not last long. Ferguson, the foreman, grew insubordinate, and had to be discharged;
then Landells, who had charge of the camels, followed suit, and left the expedition in
high dudgeon. Dr. Beckler grew faint-hearted and went away, and then came about a
re-organisation of the party. Wills was appointed second in command, and, as the
sequel will show, was in every way worthy of the distinction; but, unhappily, a man
named Wright, an old settler, but one of whose qualifications nothing previously was
known, was selected by Burke to occupy the position of third in command, and to conduct
them to Cooper’s Creek, 400 miles farther on. To this man are mainly attributable the
whole of the disasters of the expedition, while to Wills remains an imperishable memory
for his heroic zeal as joint explorer with Burke of the terra incognita between Cooper’s
Creek and Carpentaria.
William John Wills was no ordinary man. As a child, in his home in Devonshire,
he showed proclivities for learning, and an intelligence altogether beyond his years. He
was daring without being reckless; and it is recorded by his father that nothing moved
him to anger so readily as witnessing any ill-treatment of dumb animals. He was destined
to the medical profession, and studied at St. Bartholomew’s; but his father proposing to
emigrate to Australia when he was in his nineteenth year, young Wills determined to
accompany him.
Circumstances prevented the father from carrying out his intentions, but the young
man started, endured the hardships of a steerage passage, entered upon the work of a
rshepherd at £3O per annum, and bore the vicissitudes of colonial experience; but his
■scientific tastes prevailed, he studied surveying as a means of livelihood and astronomy
as a means of recreation, and ultimately obtained a good appointment in the Magnetic
Observatory at Melbourne under Professor Neumayer, a position he held with credit to
himself, and only relinquished to join what was then called Burke’s Expedition.
The news of his intention to join that expedition was very painful to some of his
friends, and especially to his mother, who frequently urged him to re-eonsider his deter-
mination, pleading the danger of the enterprise. An insight into the character of the
man is given in a letter he wrote to her at that time. “ The actual danger is nothing, and
the positive advantages very great. Besides, my dear mother, what avails your faith if you
terrify yourself about such trifles? Were we born, think you, to be locked up in comfort-
able rooms, and never to incur the hazard of a mishap ? If things were at the worst, I
trust I could meet death with as much resignation as others, even if it came to-night. I
am often disgusted at hearing young people I know declare that they are afraid of doing
this or that because they might be killed. Were I in some of their shoes, I should be glad
to hail the chance of departing this life fairly in the execution of an honourable duty.”
After the re-organisation of the party, Burke, with Wills and a selected number, set
forward to test the safety of the road to Cooper’s Creek, which had been pronounced by
the settlers at Menindie, where he established his first depot, to be dangerous. Wright
conducted them for a hundred miles on the road, and then returned to Menindie, to
bring up the stores and other things which had been left in charge of Dr. Becker, who.


neglecting his health in the pursuit of his professional duties, died here, after finishing-
a series of drawings of scenery and animal life.* Full and explicit instructions were
given to Wright to follow without delay in the track of his leader. Had he done so
all would have been well, and not a life would have been lost. As it was, he lingered at
Menindie from the sth of November to the 26th of January, in direct opposition to his.
orders, and the result of this criminal delay was a terrible tragedy.
Burke and Wills, with six men, fifteen horses, and sixteen camels, pushed on
towards Cooper’s Creek, and reached their destination without mishap on the 11th of
November. Here a number of important explorations in the immediate neighbourhood
were made, Burke taking one direction and Wills another. But they were only half-way
across the continent, and although health was good and everything was like a long,
pleasant pic-nie, the men were panting to be off: on the other half of the journey—the
half which promised unlimited adventure, and was to solve the possibility of penetrating
through the continent from south to north. After waiting a long time for Wright to
join them, they grew impatient; the season was slipping away while they were doing
nothing, and so they set to work to arrange their plans for pushing northward, whether
Wright came up or not. They were confident he would be at Cooper's Creek before long,
and his arrival before they started was not essential to them.
On the 16th December, Burke, Wills, King, and Gray, with one horse and six
camels, started northwards, leaving at Cooper's Creek Brahe, Baton, McDonough, Dost
Mahomed, six camels, and twelve horses. Brahe was to be commander-in-chief until
Wright arrived, and the fullest and most explicit instructions were left with him to
remain at Cooper's Creek until Burke and his party returned from the Gulf of Carpentaria,
and it was anticipated that at least three or four months would elapse before that could
take place. The instructions enjoined were that on no account was this reserve party to
leave, unless from “ absolute necessity ."
We will not follow our heroes step by step through their tremendous journey. Day
after day they pushed on, with dauntless resolution, through salty swamps and over vast
and arid wilds; and Wills, with his observant nature, never passed a bird or plant, or
water-hole or sand-ridge, without “ making a note of it." His “ Field Books" were full,
too, of important astronomical observations and surveyor's notes for mapping. By the
30th January they found the ground in such a state from heavy rainfalls that it was-
impossible to get the camels over it, and it was determined, therefore, that Gray and
King should remain where they were, while Burke and Wills should push forward on foot,,
leading the horse. A fearful journey they had : again and again the horse was “ bogged"
in interminable marshes, and was extricated only by supreme exertion; rains and storms
and the roughest of roads had to be encountered; but the brave men were rewarded for
all the toil and the peril by penetrating successfully through the vast wilds of the
interior, until at last they reached the Gulf of Carpentaria. The mystery was solved;
the astounding feat which mortal man had never before succeeded in performing, of
passing through that vast continent from south to north, was accomplished; all the
important ends of the expedition were gained; and with thankful hearts they turned their
* These beautiful little drawings are now in possession of the Royal Society, Melbourne.


faces again to the south, homeward bound. They dreamt not of defeat now—the peril
was over. They had but to follow in the course they had already trodden, avoiding the
bad places whenever their experience taught them they could find a better. They had
only to re-visit the depots they had planted on the road until they regained their friends.
Gray and King, and then move on together to Cooper’s Creek, where ample supplies of
all kinds would be ready for them, and no further difficulties would stand in their way.
It was well that they could not see what lay before them; well that they could not even
WILLIAM JOHN WILLS.
surmise the bitter disappointments, the terrible mortifications, and the agonising deaths
awaiting them. They saw only success, and with light hearts set forward on their
homeward journey, regained Gray and King, and on the 13th of February cheerfully
resumed the toilsome return march, buoyed up with hope and flushed with victory. The
rains were incessant, the storms terrific in their violence, the ground so boggy as to be
almost impassable, the nights sultry and enervating, but still they pushed on. Many
adventures befell them on the way —adventures with snakes, adventures with the natives,
adventures in difficult passes and dangerous morasses. On the 6th March one of their
camels had to be left behind, completely done up in the service; a fortnight later 60 lbs.


weight o£ things from their packs had to be abandoned; then Gray fell ill of dysentery,
and on the Bth of April died. After his attack he was not able to speak a word distinctly,
and he passed away under circumstances extremely painful. The party tarried for one
day to bury their comrade, but they were all so weak it was with extreme difficulty they
were able to dig a grave sufficiently deep to bury him in. Some time after this one of
the camels and the horse "Billy" died of starvation; the bodies were cut up and the
MENINDIE,
meat “ jerked," but it was found to be without the slightest trace of fat in any
portion. All the men were as nearly as possible used up. They had had four months of the
most severe travelling and privation, and were in such an exhausted state that they found
it a most trying task to walk for even a few yards. Not a step was taken for many
days except in the most intense pain, and with a sense of utter helplessness and lassitude.
There was only one thing that kept them alive and resolute, and that was the
knowledge that in a day or two they would reach Cooper’s Creek, where they doubted
not they would meet Brahe and Wright and the rest of the party, find ample supplies
for all their wants, and be able to indulge in well-earned repose.


At last, on Sunday, the 31st April, they arrived, faint and exhausted, at the very
spot where they had established the depot and parted company with Brahe.
The place was deserted !
Eagerly hut silently the two men looked round for any trace of their party, and
when the appalling truth at last broke fully upon them Burke flung himself on the
ground, completely overwhelmed, while Wills, paralysed and bewildered, showed no sign
of anger or loss of self-command. In a few moments all three men sufficiently recovered
themselves to investigate the position, and upon a tree they found marked “1) I G, 31
April, 1861.” The pang of intense disappointment which shot through their hearts as
they read from the date on the tree that they had been deserted on that very day, the
day of their return, can hardly be conceived. Still there was a ray of hope; they might
not have proceeded far on their journey, and weak and exhausted as they were, strength
might be left to overtake them. Eagerly they broke open the cache , or hiding-place, and
found there the following letter :
“ Depot, Cooper's Creek, April 31, 1861.
“ The depot party of the Y. E. E. leaves this camp to-day to return to the Darling.
I intend to go S.E. from Camp 60 to get into our old track near Bulloo. Two of my
companions and myself are quite well; the third. Baton, has been unable to walk for
the last eighteen days, as his leg has been severely hurt when thrown by one of the
horses.
“No one has been up here from the Darling.
“ We have six camels and twelve horses in good working condition.
“ William Brahe."
The concluding words of this letter crushed out the last ray of hope. How could
those weary men overtake their companions, who were “ quite well," and were on their
way homeward, with camels and horses e< in good working condition"?
They found a small supply of flour, oatmeal, sugar, and rice, and made themselves
a supper forthwith, and discussed the future. Wills was anxious to proceed as soon as
possible in the old track homewards, but Burke, feeling satisfied that the provisions left
for them would not hold out if they continued in that direction, and that they might
more speedily find succour by trying to make for Mount Hopeless, determined upon that
course. It was a fatal determination, as they discovered when it was too late.
Lingering at Cooper's Creek for a few days to recruit, they then placed an urgent-
letter in the cache, and, depositing their everything that was not absolutely necessary to
support life, they turned their faces towards Mount Hopeless. They had not travelled
for many days before they discovered that the water-courses were dry, and in their
present state to have advanced without water would have been to have courted death.
There was no course left to them, therefore, but to return a distance of some forty
miles to a creek where water was abundant, but by that time their rations were so much
reduced as to consist of one small cake and three sticks of dried meat per diem. Then
Wills went back to deposit a further note in the cache, stating that they were living on
the creek.


While at this creek they fell in with natives, and by signs conveyed to them a
knowledge of their need. The natives showed them great hospitality and friendliness,
and made them a present of some fish. Finally, as their provisions dwindled away and
their strength grew daily less and less, they cast in their lot with the natives, spending
all their time in gathering nardoo, a plant from whose seeds the natives made a kind of
porridge.
However well it might suit the natives, it was insufficient for Europeans; and we
find in Wills's diary, which he faithfully kept posted until the end, frequent entries like
the following :
“Friday , Ith June. — . . . Found ourselves all very weak, in spite of the abundant
supply of fish that we have lately had.
“Monday , 10 th June. —Mr. Burke and King collecting nardoo; self at home, too
weak to go out.
“Saturday, 15 th June. —King out for nardoo. . . Mr. Burke and I pounding and
cleaning it; he finds himself getting very weak, and I am not a bit stronger. I have
determined to chew tobacco and eat less nardoo, in hopes that it may induce some change
in the system."
In the meantime the natives had departed, and the three men were left in their
mia-mia entirely to their own resources. King retained his strength better than the
others, and worked with surprising energy in collecting nardoo, which, after the 16th of
June, when the last piece of dried camel was eaten, constituted the sole diet. “ I cannot
understand this nardoo at all,” writes Wills in his journal; “it certainly will not agree
with me in any form. We are now reduced to it alone, and we manage to consume from
four to five pounds per day between us; it appears to be quite indigestible, and cannot
possibly be sufficiently nutritious to sustain life by itself."
In addition to the lack of food, there came the disaster of almost unprecedentedly cold
weather, and their clothing consisted simply of a few rags held slightly together, and no
extra clothing whatever to afford them protection from the bitterness of the cold night air.
It is as surprising as interesting to know how calmly these brave men, despite the
bitter disappointment and mortification, looked forward to the inevitable death awaiting
them.
“ Unless relief comes in some form or another," wrote Wills, “ I cannot possibly
last more than a fortnight."
But even then he had over-estimated his strength. On the 27th of June, feeling that
his end was drawing nigh, he wrote the following letter to his father :
“ Cooper's Creek, 27th June, 1861.
“My Dear Father, —These are probably the last lines you will ever get from me.
We are on the point of starvation, not so much from absolute want of food, but from
the want of nutriment in what we can get.
“ Our position, although more provoking, is probably not near so disagreeable as that
of poor Harry * and his companions. We have had very good luck, and made a most
* Harry, his cousin, Lieutenant Le Yiscompte, who perished with Sir John Franklin.


successful trip to Carpentaria, and back to where we had every right to consider ourselves
safe, having left a depot here, consisting of four men, twelve horses, and six camels.
They had provisions enough to have lasted them twelve months with proper economy,
and we had also every right to expect that we should have been immediately followed
MAP OF BURKE AND AVILLS’s ROUTE.
up from Menindie by another party with additional provisions and every necessary for
forming a permanent depot at Cooper’s Creek.
“ The party we left here had special instructions not to leave until our return, unless
from absolute necessity. We left the creek with nominally three months’ supply, but they
were reckoned at little over the rate of half rations. We calculated on having to eat


some of the camels. By the greatest good luck at every turn, we crossed to the gulf,
through a good deal of fine country, almost in a straight line from here. On the other
side the camels suffered considerably from wet; we had to kill and jerk one soon after
starting hack. We had now been out a little more than two months, and found it
necessary to reduce the rations considerably; and this began to tell on all hands, but I
felt it by far less than any of the others. The great scarcity and shyness of game and
our forced marches prevented our supplying the deficiency from external sources to any great
extent; but we never could have held out but for the crows and hawks and the portulac.
“ The latter is an excellent vegetable, and I believe secured our return to this place.
We got back here in four months and four days, and found the party had left the creek
the same day, and we were not in a fit state to follow them.
“ I find I must close this that it may be planted; but I will write some more,
although it has not so good a chance of reaching you as this. You have great claims
on the committee for their neglect. I leave you in sole charge of what is coming to
me. The whole of my money I desire to leave to my sisters; other matters I pass over
for the present. Adieu, my dear father. Love to Tom.* ((T w
“ W. J. Wills
“ I think to live about four or five days. My spirits are excellent.”
His brother in Melbourne.
“ King stayed for a few hours by the side of his dead chief ” (p. 139). (Brawn by William Slrutt.)


Two days after that letter was written it was felt by all three that the time for
some decisive action had arrived. King still retained comparative strength, and Burke
was still able to move about. It was a matter of life or death to all that the succour
of natives should be obtained, and in order to procure this, those who were able must go in
search of it. Having collected and pounded sufficient nardoo seed to last Wills, who was
now too weak to stir, they placed beside him water and firewood, and then the brave
men, who through all those long and weary months had never exchanged one harsh or
unkind word, but had supported each other’s strength and courage with hope and words
of cheer, grasped hands for the last time. Burke and King went forth on their melancholy
errand, and Wills remained alone —to die !
The last entry in his diary was made on that sad day of separation, and there is
reason to believe that after he had penned it he did not survive many hours. Perhaps
there is hardly anything in the whole range of biography which illustrates so appositely
the dignity of heroic calmness and fortitude than this simple writing of a man full of
affection and hope, left in utter loneliness to meet the most terrible form of death.
“ I am weaker than ever, although I have a good appetite and relish the nardoo
much, but it seems to give us no nutriment; and the birds here are so shy as not to be
got at. Even if we got a good supply of fish I doubt whether we could do much
work on them and the nardoo alone. Nothing now but the greatest good luck can save
any of us; and as for myself, I may live four or five days if the weather continues
warm. My pulse is at forty-eight and very weak, and my legs and arms are nearly skin
and bone. I can only look out, like Mr. Micawber, ‘for something to turn up.’ Starvation
on nardoo is by no means very unpleasant but for the weakness one feels and the utter
inability to move oneself, for as far as appetite is concerned it gives the greatest
satisfaction. Certainly fat and sugar would be more to one’s taste —in fact, those seem
to me to be the great stand-by for one in this extraordinary continent; not that I mean
to depreciate the farinaceous food, but the want of sugar and fat in all substances
obtainable here is so great that they become almost valueless to us as articles of food
without the addition of something else. “ /«,•<,npdf W T Wttts”
“ (Signed) W. J. Wills.”
And there, alone in the wilderness, without a living soul to cheer his last moments,
the brave young Wills, at the age of thirty years, calmly resigned his soul to God. It
is difficult to conceive a more terrible or a more heroic death. Not one word of repining
or vain regret; not a vindictive sentence, although so cruelly victimised by the treacherous
Wright and pusillanimous Brahe; not a word of useless complaint, although the false move
of his leader had brought about the tragedy. At peace with man and God he closed his eyes
in the solitude, beneath the chill Australian sky, a martyr to science, without the knowledge
that his discoveries and observations would ever be of service to his fellow-creatures, but
strengthened in his soul by the consciousness that he had faithfully performed his duty.
We must now follow the survivors in their melancholy journey. Burke felt from the
first that it was a last chance and a feeble one. When he started, the pains in his back
and legs were so violent that, although he dragged on for many weary miles, every step


was torture. On the next clay he travelled for two miles, and then throwing down his
“swag” declared he could not proceed a step farther; hut King, who saw the danger of
once giving in, persisted in urging him to continue. He did for a little while, and then
called a halt for the night. The two sat down and ate their supper together, consisting of
some nardoo and a crow that King had been fortunate enough to kill during the day; and then,
when Burke had made a few notes in a pocket-book, he handed it to King with his watch,
saying he felt convinced he had only a few hours to live. The MS. ran as follows :
“ I hope that we shall he done justice to. We have fulfilled our task, hut we have
been ahand . We have not been followed up as we expected, and the depot party
abandoned their post. R. O’Haea Bueke.
“ King has behaved nobly. I hope that he will be properly cared for. He comes
up the creek in accordance with my request. ]| OHlaea Bueke.
“ Cooper's Creek, June 28th.”
When he had written this he said to his comrade, “ I hope you will remain with
me here till I am quite dead —it is a comfort to know that some one is by; but, when
I am dying, it is my wish that you should place the pistol in my right hand, and that
you leave me unburied as I lie.”
That night he slept a troubled sleep, in the morning he was speechless, and at 8 o’clock
he expired. Bravely he had borne the bitterness of disappointment; manfully he had
watched the advance of gaunt starvation; calmly he gave back that once strong vigorous
life now wasted away, and as a hero he fell into the grand calm sleep of death.
King stayed for a few hours by the side of his dead chief,* and then gathering
together his few things, bade farewell, and started up the creek in search of the natives.
Utterly lonely was this lion-hearted man as day after day he wandered on unsuccessfully,
sleeping in deserted wurleys belonging to the natives, upon whose track he could not come,
until at last he determined to go back to Wills. With a fluttering heart of fear and hope
he drew near to the gunyah in which he had left his friend, and there he found him in the
long sleep of death. A fresh mortification and pleasure met him, for he saw that during his
absence the natives, for whom he had been in search, had been to the gunyah, and had
taken away some of Wills’s clothes. Burying his friend in the sand. King went off' in
search of the natives, and was not long in finding them. They told him by signs that
they were the tribe that had been to the gunyah, for they put their fingers on the
ground, and covering them with sand, pointed up the creek and said, “ white fellow,”
signifying that the white man was dead. When King by a similar sign intimated that
the other white man was dead also, they were moved to compassion at the loneliness of
* Mr. 'William Strutt, the artist of the drawings on pp. 137, 141, writes:—“l may state that my sketches
of the death and hurial were made from descriptions and memoranda supplied me immediately after the return
of Howitt’s party, of which Mr. Welch (a remarkably observant man) was the surveyor, and he, whilst taking-
some sketching lessons at my studio, supplied me with most of the descriptive matter I have. Brahe, also, as
he sat to me for his portrait, added to my stock of information. Thus the position of Burke, resting his
head on his left hand as he expired, and was found, the surrounding plants, trees, &c., and all the details of
the burial are correct.”


the survivor, and after giving him plenty to eat, took him to their camp, where he
remained for more than a month, receiving unvarying kindness. They often expressed
anxiety to see the place where Burke, the Great White Chief, lay dead, and one day
King gratified their wish.
It was an affecting scene that then occurred; the natives broke out into loud
weeping and lamentation as 'soon as they saw the remains; then sitting round in a group
they contemplated the dead chief for
a long while, and afterwards gathered
some hushes and spread them over
him, covering him with a pall of
verdant leafage.
While all these events were
happening in the neighbourhood of
Cooper's Creek, great anxiety was
being felt by the people in Mel-
bourne, and especially by relatives
of the explorers and members of the
Exploration Committee of the Royal
Society. After a long waste of time
and much fruitless discussion, that
body availed itself of the generous
services proffered by Mr. A. W.
Howitt, son of the well-known
William and Mary Howitt, who was
then in Melbourne, and they sent
him forth with a rescuing party to
seek and relieve the missing ex-
plorers. Very earnestly Mr. Howitt
set about his work, and used every
exertion to hurry forward on his
mission of mercy. But it was not
till the 15th September, when in
the neighbourhood of Cooper's Creek,
that he found King. He was sitting
J. A. KING.
in a hut the natives had made for him, presenting a most melancholy appearance, being
wasted to a shadow, and hardly to be distinguished as a civilised being, except by the
remnants of clothes upon him. He was so weak and ill, and his speech so curiously
affected, that Howitt found it at times difficult to understand what he said. It was
very gratifying to find, however, that he had won the confidence, and even affection, of
the natives, who hailed the arrival of the relief party with intense delight, believing,
although they knew not how, that the sight of his own countrymen would have the
power of rousing him from his lethargy.
A few days after the finding of King, Mr. Howitt collected the remains of poor


“Wrapping the remains in a Union Jack as a fitting winding-sheet for the gallant explorer, Mr. Howitt
buried him under a box-tree.” [p. 141), (Drawn by William Strutt.)
Wills, which he found in the wurley where he died, still under the sand and rushes
where King had first laid him to rest. Reverently placing the body in a grave near
to a large tree, and heaping sand and branches over his tomb so that the natives, who
understood that token, might never disturb his long repose, Mr. Howitt read that
grand story of death and resurrection in the fifteenth chapter of the First Epistle to
the Corinthians, and then cut on the tree this inscription :
Collecting from the cache where they had been buried the Field
w j WILLS Books of the deceased, and every memento he coidd find, Howitt
xlv. tds. then proceeded to search for the remains of Burke. There they lay
w.n.w. among tall plants under a clump of box-trees, and the pistol lying
A. H. _ , , , _ _ .
by his side corroded with rust. Wrapping
the remains in the FTnion Jack as a fitting
R. O’H. 8.,
winding-sheet for the gallant explorer, Mr. Howitt buried him
under a box-tree, on which he cut this inscription :
21/9/61.
A. H.
Not many days after this, Howitt assembled all the natives
together who had been kind in any way to the explorers, and
distributed among them presents of tomahawks, knives, necklaces, looking-glasses, combs.


and other articles useful and ornamental, which were received with shouts of intense
delight.
King, upon his arrival in Melbourne, received a tremendous ovation, and was crowned
with honours and rewards. And if the reader should chance to visit Australia now,
he will find in Melbourne a magnificent monument to the memory of the brave explorers
Burke and Wills, streets hearing their names, and many other pleasing memorials. But
none of these will obliterate from his memory the recollection that these noble fellows
were the victims of a series of blunders. Had Wright fulfilled his obligations, had Brahe
remained at the post of duty for twelve hours longer at Cooper’s Creek, the tragedy
would have been averted. Nor was this all. Burke, Wills, and King arrived at Cooper’s
Creek on their return journey, as we have seen, on the 31st April, and when they left
it to seek the natives, they deposited in the cache a letter telling of their whereabouts.
In the official inquiry, instituted after the return of Mr. Howitt, it transpired that on the
9th of May, while there was yet time to have saved the intrepid men, Wright and Brahe,
conscience-smitten perhaps, returned to Cooper’s Creek, but not seeing any sign of the
lost travellers, retraced their steps without looking into the cache where the letters had been
placed, telling of the whereabouts of the men, who were then in the direst need of help !
Burke and Wills will live when the splendid monument in Melbourne has fallen
to decay, for they achieved a glorious feat in passing through the continent from sea to
sea; they have written a brilliant page in the world’s history which will never he
forgotten; they died, it is true, on their way to where temporary glory and honour
awaited them, but in their deaths, no less than in their adventurous lives, they immortalised
themselves as British Heroes.
the NARDOO plant. (A, Seeds —natural size.)
