

AUSTRALASIAN CYCLONOLOGY:
THE LAW OF STORMS
THE SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN,
AND ON THE
COASTS OE AUSTRALIA, TASMANIA, NEW ZEALAND,
&c. &c.
IN TWO PARTS.
BY THOMAS DOBSON, 8.A.,
SCHOLAR OF ST JOHN’S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND HEAD-MASTER OF THE 111,011 SCHOOL
OP HOBART TOWN.
“ The wind goeth toward the South, and tumeth about unto the North; it 'whirleih about
continual!}', and the wind returneth again, according to his circuits
Eooles. i. 6.
SOLD BY J. WALCH & SON, HOB ART TOWN : JOHN WE ALB, HIGH HOLBORN, LU- ON.
1853.


—aTHTspencer
New a secondhand bookseller
PUBLISHER. FINE art DEALER
86 Bourke" St., Melbourne
(the ‘Hill of Content ) Aust.




i»ri ■
\
;
/
\
\
r
/*
\x
\
?
-
ill
m.
\
\
/XX
/
w \<
X \
\
J
\
\
r ■ -
X
-7 '
>
\
X
X
\
\
N
\
f I
iv
X— 1
1 h
~
pzX
Z j
Nd
/K
N
V
X
X,
y
[
>
X
x
Ng
s 5 Sf K *
-s
'o S' \ \
ri
X
x
X
v
( ?
) /
/ J
s \
X
XV
\
\
/
J
\ /
/ /
~j
v
x
r -
H3 Z'
\x 7
/
y
1
-
—
V
>
S hJ
&
■
f
$
•=<
t|| s' f
7 ’i
<
•
/
JX
—
N
Jl/ ►*< •
J# !p-
S M
\
X
yx
—
z
(R
(p:
N
~^W~7\
7
yX
~
N
-‘sXx
j
5
.Ilf
£11/ j
ss
>S
Si
5vX
4;
/ /
Oi i
\
/l
\
3
'I
3
vmj’
ii-f
,)j
r~~"~
1 N
1
y (
\
\
xi
H
p*-X
9k,
ss
HF
,
X/ 7
\
<X^\
y
- S'*
V
y
■fc \
\
\
S
gfejigd
*^Skl£*
•k'
ik
>#*
pTF [
ii
->y
~y x
—x~^
-VU
y
ip
9*
a
■ ;f
i
x N
( c
1
/
cr ! —
\ M
\ <£•
\
/ \
&
5*5
*
y
rjTAV
C/
yX
X
Z7
C--T-.
j- _
i
/
\
X
( \
Aj*
\
SgSgg;
,.x / .
f
/
\
MS /
,
■)#,
fJM
\
s
X
*f \
7
\
\
$f b
\ 1
%
| v^
J[ f
L
& V’^X"Xc^:
>_Vt
J
\v \ \
//
•fj
M
\
* M
\
)r
H.i
if
?
sS|§
V
**—
■ *x
yv
w
X
CO
\
IZ
\ f
\
Sfc.3g5fcs
— H
V*
\ y.
A_ \
r f "
vl
s
>
XX
—^
X
A
\
V T
J
X
<
v^X
<*,
%
#
\ \
rc
\
\
—
%
<s
$i
-
\ \
\\
.#
/
I
>
i
•
S)
-3
'
■ c*
o


July
( /ssz)
JUticjt&sfr.








AUSTRALASIAN CYCLONOLOGY:
THE LAW OF STORMS
THE SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN,
AND ON THE
COASTS OE AUSTEAHA, TASMANIA, NEW ZEALAND,
&c. &c«
IN TWO PARTS.
BY THOMAS DOBSON, 8.A.,
SCHOLAR OP ST JOHN’S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, AND HEAD-MASTER OP THE HIGH SCHOOL
OP HOBART TOWN.
« The wind goeth toward the South, and tumeth about unto the North; it whirleth about
continually, and the wind retumeth again, according to his circuits'.'
Ecoles. x. 6.
FEINTED BY. WILLIAM PEATT & SON, 67, ELIZABETH STEEET, HOBAET TOWN.
1853.




WILLIAM HOPKINS, M.A., F.R.S.,
PRESIDENT OP THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY; PRESIDENT OF THE
CAMBRIDGE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY ;
PRESIDENT OF THE BRITISH ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OP
SCIENCE; &c. &c.
AND TO
THE REV. JOHN LILLIE, D.D.,
MINISTER OF ST. ANDREW’S CHURCH, HOBART TOWN;
AND MODERATOR OF THE PRESBYTERY OF VAN DIEMEN’S LAND;
THIS LITTLE WORK IS DEDICATED,
AS A SLIGHT MARK OP THE SINCERE REGARD AND ESTEEBI
THE AUTHOR.
H33syrv/B*z.


PREFACE,
At a time when Australia has become, not merely “ the cynosure
of neighbouring eyes,” but the centre of attraction to the enterprising
of all nations, both near and remote; and when multitudes are
hazarding their lives and fortunes on the Ocean in order to reach
her shores; I have thought that I should be rendering an acceptable
and a well-timed service to Mariners, Merchants, Ship-owners, and
Emigrants ; and, indeed, to all who are interested in the rapidly-
increasing intercourse between the Australian Colonies and the rest
of the world, by publishing the results of my investigations into the
nature of the Hurricanes which prevail at certain seasons in the Seas
and Oceans circumjacent to Australia.
Hitherto little more has been known than that such hurricanes do
occur; all beyond was vague conjecture.
While my researches have afforded me the satisfaction of confirm-
ing the anticipations of the writers who have preceded me respecting
the Cyclones on the West and South Coasts of Australia, it will be
seen that they have also imposed upon me the duty of demonstrating
the incorrectness of former conjectures respecting the Storm-tracks of
the South Pacific Ocean. The science of Cyclonology has been so
recently developed, that a servile respect for Authority has not yet
arisen to clog the independent action of the student’s judgment;
and, as a pioneer in a new field of research , I may appropriately
adopt the assertion of Horace :
Quid verum atque decens euro & rogo, et omnis in hoc sum;
Condo & compono, quae mox depromere possim.
Ac ne forth roges, quo me duce, quo fare tuter;
Nullius addictus jurare in verba magistri,
Quocunque me rapit tempest as, defer or hospes. —Epist. i. Lib. 1.
Instead of encumbering my pages with repulsive-looking tables of
barometrical readings, I have preferred to exhibit the fluctuations of
Atmospheric pressure during Storms by means of curves, of which


At Circular Head, North Coast
„ 1840 ,.
1851 „
At the Hampshire Hills, by Dr. Milligan...
„ 1835 ,,
1841 „
At Launceston, by Dr, Pugh
„ 1846 ..
1848 „
the variations are much more readily apprehended. The Atmos-
pheric pressure being represented by vertical lines, the succession of
time will be taken into account by passing the eye along the curve
in a horizontal direction, and from left to right. Thus, in the
figures marked IX. and X. respectively, each of the spaces included
between the numbers 1,2, 3, &c., denotes an interval of 24 hours of
time, and would comprise three dots, in the case of three daily ob-
servations. The continuous curve is formed by drawing a line
through the series of dots with as few points of contrary flexure as
possible. In fig. YII. time is exhibited on a more enlarged scale.
These Curves have all been carefully plotted on machine-ruled
paper ; and are, I believe, quite equal in correctness to the readings
from which they have been constructed, although they may not be
relied upon to the thousandth part of an inch, as some readings affect
to be.
In the course of my researches I have had access to valuable Me-
teorological Registers kept at the following places in Van Diemen’s
Land, viz :
The Magnetic Observatory, Hobart Town... From 1840 to 1852jnclusive.
The last Register contains two daily observations ; the others con-
tain three.
Having examined these records carefully, and even constructed
the Curves corresponding to 24 years of daily observations, I have
met with no instance of a great Atmospheric perturbation which does
not fully confirm the conclusions arrived at in the second part of
this work.
To collate, compare, and interpret physical facts is the duty of the
Investigator in any branch of Natural Philosophy, and the discovery of
truth is his reward; but the facts which form the basis of the investiga-
tions of the Cyclonologist are so widely scattered, and so difficult to be
collected, that he has a peculiar claim upon the spontaneous co -opera-
tion of all who can assist him by supplying information, but more


especially upon sailors, ship -OAvners, merchants, &c., who are directly
interested in the results of his researches. I possess a mass of detached
notices of Storms, &c., which have not been brought to bear upon
the subject of my investigation, on account of their isolated and im-
perfect nature. Some of these, however, may yet become highly
significant and valuable, when I shall be enabled to link them
together by the receipt of information which may now lie buried in
old logs or other, to me, inaccessible crypts : just as the descriptions,
by Commander Wilkes, of the Feejee Islands Hurricane, and of the
New Zealand Hurricane, of 1840, served to determine the first
Storm-track ever laid down in the South Pacific Ocean, as soon as
I had discovered an account of the intervening hurricane in Captain
Moi’gan’s Journal (page 29). With a view, therefore, to the more
perfect development of the Cyclonology of the Southern Hemis-
phere, I shall feel obliged by having the opportunity of inspecting
ship’s logs of any date ; by the receipt of useful extracts from logs,
or from the Captain’s Journal (generally much fuller and more
valuable than the show-log ) ; or by the receipt of Newspapers con-
taing Notices of Storms, Waterspouts, Volcanic Eruptions, Earth-
quakes, &c. When such notices are transferred from one Newspa-
per to another, care should be had to preserve the means of fixing
the date of the event recorded. For want of this important element
I have had to reject many otherwise valuable meteorological notices.
I beg to acknoAvledge Avith thanks the kindness of those Gentle-
men AA r ho have exerted themselves to procure information to aid me
in an undertaking of Avhich the success so greatly depends on gene-
ral and spontaneous co-operation.
Especially are my acknoAAdedgments due to His Excellency Sir
W. T. Denison, F.R.S., and to Lieutenant Clarke, R.E., his Private
Secretary, for the very encouraging interest that they have taken
in my researches, and the readiness with Avhich they have, on seve-
ral occasions, enabled me to obtain valuable information in quarters
not easily accessible.
It Avill be a great satisfaction to me to find that the importance of
the results already elicited from the data supplied to me satisfies my
friends that their kind efforts have been turned to good account, and
induces a continuance of them.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
What is a Cyclone ? 1
What causes a Cyclone ? 5
PART I.
On the Hurricanes op the South Pacific Ocean.
Upoltt, Navigators’ Islands, in April 1850. —Capt. Courtenay, of the
brig “ Two Friends;” Rev. G. Stalworthy; Rev. W. Mills, &c. II
Upolu, Raratonga, and Mangaia, March, 1846, —Rev. J. Buzzacott 18
Raratonga, Jan., 1845. —Captain Morgan, of the “ John Williams” 19
Upolu and Mangaia, December, 1842.—Rev. W. Day; H.M.S.
“Favourite;” Captain Stokes 19
Tahiti, Raiatea, Huaheine, December, 1843 23
Upolu and Tutuilah, the Laughlin Islands, December, 1840 23
Raratonga.—The Rev. J. Williams, December, 1831 25
Tonga, March, 1830.—Lieutenant Wilkes 26
Erromanga, December, 1848.—“ Marian- Watson” 27
Whaler “ Factor,” June, 1847 27
Savage Island. —Barque “ Junius,” April, 1848 27
Feejee Islands, and New Zealand.—Missionary brig “ Camden,”
Captain Morgan 28
Cyclone of the “ Vincennes,” January, 1840 32
French Island.—The “Levi Starbuck,” March, 1849 34
French Island. —The “Levi Starbuck,” March, 1849.
New Caledonia.—The “ Nimrod” and “ Marian Watson” 35
New Caledonia, February, 1848.—The “ Castlereagh,” “ Eleanor,”
and “Sophia” 38
New Caledonia.—Barque “ Rifleman” 39
Anatam, Norfolk Island, and New Zealand, March, 1852. — The
“ Lady Franklin,” brig “ Maukin,” &c. 40
Norfolk Island, February, 1789. —Lieutenant King 44
Approximate Computations of the Velocity of Progression, and of
the Magnitude of the preceding Cyclones 45
General Conclusions arrived at 47
PART 11.
On the Hurricanes op Torres’ Straits, the West and South Coasts op
Australia, Bass’s Straits, and Van Diemen’s Land; the Hot Winds
of Australia, &c.
Port Essington, November, 1839. —Captain Stanley, R.N., Captain
Stokes, R.N.; Capt. Wickham, R.N.; Van Diemen’s Land 49
Timor. —Barque “ Artemise,” April, 1843; Dr. Thom 53


Brig “ Maguasha,” Febraary, 1843; Dr. Thom 54
The “ Guardian,” April 1849 5"4
The ships “ Roompot” and “Howqua;” Mr. Piddington 55
The “ Abercrombie,” January, 1812; Dr. Thom 56
Shark’s Bay, February, 1839. —Captain Grey; the “ Eudora,”
Captain Addison 56
H.E.I.C.S. “Bridgewater,” March, 1830; Colonel Reid 58
The “ Baretto Junior,” July, 1850 58
The “Mahommed Shah,” September, 1849 60
The “ Beagle,” Swan River, May, 1838 61
Swan River.—The “ Samuel Wright,” “ North America,” and
“ Endicott,” July, 1840 62
Swan River, Tornado, June, 1842 62
Swan River, Perth and Bunbury, April, 1843 63
Cape Leu win.—“ Harlequin,” barque “ Derwent,” & brig “ Emma”
August, 1850 •. 64
King George’s Sound.—The “ Candahar” and “ Dusty Miller,”
November, 1842 66
King’s Island, Bass’s Straits, August, 1843.—Barque “ Rebecca” 66
King’s Island.—The “ Cataraqui,” July, 1845 67
Bass’s Straits, April, 1850. —Barque “Jane,” brig “Emma,” “Vic-
toria Packet,” the “Ida,” the “Lady Denison,” and brigantine
“ Elizabeth” ...... 68
Adelaide, 13th Oct., 1850. —The “ Grecian,” brig “ Essington,” &c. 70
Adelaide and Twofold Bay, floods, May, 1851; “ Alcrnene” and
the “ Emma” 73
Adelaide, V. D. Land, and New Zealand, June, 1851 74
The “ Duke of Richmond,” October, 1851 75
Flinder’s Gales of South Coast of Australia 77
Cyclone of July, 1852. —“ Duke of Lancaster,” brig “ William,”
H.M.S. “ Fantdme” 78
Cyclone of August, 1852 ; floods at Adelaide, Portland Bay, Circu-
lar Head, Sydney, Goulbum; floods in Van Diemen’s Land,
“ Duke of Lancaster,” “Emma,” “ Hawkesbury Lass,” “Vic-
toria Packet,” Screw Steamer “ City of Melbourne,” wrecked on
King’s Island, H.M.S. “Fantdme,” &c 81
“ Erebus” and “ Terror,” Sir J. Ross, off S. W. Cape of V. D. Land
August, 1840; below New Zealand 90
Captain Cook, New Zealand, December', 1769 91
The ship “ Strathisla,” October, 1846 92
Cape Horn.—Captain Weddell, 1822 92
Cape Horn.—“ Berwick Castle,” Febraary, 1848, and March, 1849 93
Great fall of Mercury in South Pacific Ocean without a Cyclone... 94
Hot Winds of Australia, 6th February, 1851, “ Black Thursday,”
the “ Henry Edward,” “ Velocity,” and “ Diana;” Van Diemen’s
Land, and New Zealand. Not a Cyclone 95
The French Brig “ Anonyme,” December, 1847; Mr. Piddington 101
The Society Islands, Raiatea, 1819; Mr. Ellis 102
Cape Horn.—The “Adventure” and “ Beagle” 102


WHAT IS A CYCLONE?
the dreadful spout
Which shipmen do the hurricane call.
•—Tkoilus & Cressida.
In explaining the nature of Cyclones I have found it of consider-
able service to begin by endeavouring to convey a general idea of the
phenomenon as a whole before treating of the several details,
which, without such preparation on the part of the student, present
an aspect somewhat complicated and even incomprehensible. It is
true that our knowledge of Cyclones is not yet sufficient to enable
us to do this with anything like certainty in describing some parts
of the phenomenon; and that more than one assumption may be
found in the following familiar description; but it has the advan-
tage of presenting a connected and pretty correct view of the prin-
cipal parts of a Cyclone in the Southern Hemisphere ; and expe-
rience has convinced me that he who has fully mastered it, has
made the first and the most difficult step in the study of the Law
of Storms.
For the purpose of familiar explanation the Earth may be regarded
as a huge globe, enveloped by a coating of air of about 40 miles in
thickness, and having a definite exterior surface ; and a Cyclone as
an immense whirling eddy in the air, extending vertically from the
surface of the Atmosphere down to the Earth, and moving bodily
over the Earth’s surface. In the Southern Hemisphere, this eddy
invariably turns in the order N.E.S.W.; that is, in the same
order as the hands of a watch ; and in the Northern Hemisphere,
in the contrary order, or N.W.S.E.
Let fig. I. be a vertical section, and fig. 11. a horizontal section,
of such an Atmospheric eddy, or Cyclone. The imaginary vertical
line D is the axis about which the Cyclone revolves horizontally.
The mere act of revolving (we do not enter here into the question
what causes this revolving motion) tends to throw the air straight
out from the axis D, just as water is thrown straight out from the


handle of a twirling mop. The air near the top of the Atmosphere
is comparatively rare, growing more and more dense from the top
towards the Earth. At the top, therefore, less resistance is offered
to the air thrown outwards from the axis, and more and more
resistance at points lower down the axis ; hence the eddy will be
wider at the top than below; and the surface of the Atmosphere
will appear depressed into the form of an inverted cone.
In the space immediately below this conical surface, the air is
much rarefied and very calm. In the adjoining portions, marked
C and E, the rotatory motion is most violent, diminishing in intensity
as the distance from the axis increases. The effect of the centrifugal
force is to heap up the air in the exterior spaces, marked B and F.
In the spaces marked A and G the Atmosphere is supposed to be in
its ordinary state.
In the horizontal section (n) a comparative calm will reign in
the space bounded by the smallest circle; the smaller annulus, or
ring, will be that of the most intense rotatory action ; and the exte-
rior annulus, of much greater breadth than the interior, will exhibit
a rotatory action diminishing in intensity from the inner towards the
outer circle.
The W. N. E. S. Cyclone-points correspond to
the N. E. S. W. Compass-points respectively.
The quadrant, or quarter circle, between W. and N., is the N.E.
quadrant, that between N. and E. is the S.E. quadrant, and so on.
The outer-circle is sometimes called the margin of the Cyclone.
Fig. 111. is intended to give an idea of the effect of a Cyclone
upon the surface of the sea; both figs. 11. and 111. represent a
Cyclone in the Southern Hemisphere moving due East.
In the spaces A and B, the mercury would stand at about 30
inches, and water would rise in a pump to a height of about 32 feet;
the Atmospheric pressure would therefore be about 15 ibs. on each
square inch of surface of the sea under A and B. In the spaces
B and F, the air is made dense by accumulation, and the mercury
wfill rise somewhat above 30 inches. Passing inwards from Cor E
towards D, the air becomes more and more rare, and the mercury
falls rapidly, until, when just below D, it stands at between 27 and
28 inches. The pressure on the surface of the sea in the central
space around the axis D will therefore be less than elsewhere by
some two or three inches of mercury, or by about 3 vertical feet of


water ; so that in the central space of a Cyclone, the sea may rise
a yard above its ordinary level, by the mere diminution of the
Atmospheric pressure there. But this alone is not sufficient to
account for the “ confused cross sea, rising in pyramidal heaps,”
compared in some logs to huge sugar-loaves, and church steeples,
which is invariably experienced in the central space.
A little consideration of fig. 111. will show how this cross sea is
produced. The effect of a strong wind in a definite direction is to
raise a heavy swell moving in that direction. Thus the numbers
1,3, 5,7, denote the several swells, or systems of parallel ridges,
raised by the W., N., E., and S. winds respectively. The numbers
2,4, 6,8, those raised by the N.W., N.E., S.E., and S.W. winds
respectively. The swells raised at intermediate points of the com-
pass are omitted to avoid confusing the figure. The several systems
marked 2,3, 4,6, 7,8, which are not parallel to the track of the
Cyclone, subside soon after the Cyclone has passed; but those
marked 1 and 5, which arc coincident with the Cyclone’s track, are
continually reinforced from the Cyclone’s action, and therefore last
longer, and extend farther than the others. At the centre, and for
some distance around it, all these systems of swells become super-
imposed, and cross each other. If the dark ridge in the figure be
the depressed part, and the white ridge the elevated part of a long
wave, the white lozenge formed where two systems interfere will
represent a double elevation , and the four points around it, where the
black lines cross, will represent so many double depressions , and thus
a pyramidal mass of water four times higher than the wave of any
one system will be produced. Of the two more permanent swells,
No. 1 is the more moderate, since it precedes the Cyclone, and there-
fore passes over an undisturbed part of the Ocean; No. 5 traverses
the already greatly agitated Wake of the Cyclone, and is scarcely
less dangerous than the central space itself.
Suppose a ship to sail from A through the successive spaces B,
C. D, E. F. Gr. ; that is, right through the centre of the Cyclone,
passing along the line NS in fig. 11. Her log would record facts
somew’hat like the following.
At A, Light Northerly Airs, head sea from westward, barome-
ter 29 - 90, inclined to rise. Cloudy with mizzling rain. On entering
B, wind increasing from N, barometer rising slightly. Middle of
B, strong Gale at North , heavy head sea, dark cloudy w r eather,


barometer falling. On leaving B, and entering C, a complete
hurricane, wind north, barometer falling rapidly, torrents of rain, hail
and snow, and a tremendous sea. On entering D a sudden calm ;
sky, open and clear ; barometer 28*10; a confused cross sea, huge
seas tumbling on board on all quarters. Barometer inclined to rise.
On entering E, a furious gale from South , if anything, heavier than
before, with an awful cross sea, barometer rising very rapidly.
Through F, Gale decreasing; and for some days in the space G,
light southerly winds, and a very heavy folloiving sea. When near
the centre, lightning, and one heavy peal of thunder would probably
be experienced.
This is an easy case, Avith only one shift of Avind. In the body
of this Avork Avill be found many examples of more complicated cases ;
but whoever wishes to make himself master of the practice of Cy-
clonology cannot do better than to study carefully Mr. Piddington’s
excellent “ Conversations about Hurricanes,” and “ Sailor’s Horn-
Book of Storms.”


WHAT CAUSES A CYCLONE?
If, after a Cyclone lias been formed, we are obliged to have recourse
in some degree to surmise and conjecture, in order to give a complete
description of its peculiar features and properties, it may readily be
imagined that an attempt to develope the causes of its formation
must be premature and unsatisfactory. But ages may elapse before
the Meteorologist is in a better position for undertaking the investi-
gation. Meteorological phenomena cannot be reproduced at will
like chemical experiments ; nor are they, in general, susceptible
of mathematical expression. Under these circumstances a little
guarded speculation respecting the causes of Cyclones may be per -
mitted, and may have the effect of directing the attention of observers
to some apparently minor concomitant phenomena, which neverthe-
less are likely to furnish a key for solving this most difficult ques -
tion. The theory, of which I shall here give an outline, embraces
and explains the principal facts which characterize a Cyclone. It
occurred to me on perusing, in the Literary Journal for February
1850, Professor Faraday’s exposition of Quetelet’s observations on
the Electricity of the Atmosphere, which had been carried on con-
tinuously from August 1844 to October 1849, with Peltier’s induc-
tive Electrometer. The results are considered by Faraday to
present a type of the perfection of observing. The most important
are, that the electricity of the air is always positive; and that it
increases as the temperature diminishes, and vice versa, invariably
following both the diurnal and annual fluctuations of temperature.
In the same horizontal stratum of air, no change of electric condition
was ever perceived; but the quantity always increased as the elec-
trometer was raised vertically, the increase being proportional to
the height. The electricity of the clear blue sky was enormous, the
monthly means in degrees of force for January being, cloudy 263,
and clear 1133. These conclusions warrant us in looking upon the
upper and colder regions of the Atmosphere as an immense reservoir
of electric fluid enveloping the Earth, which is insulated by the


intermediate spherical shell formed by the lower Atmosphere, of
which the insulating power increases with its density and dryness.
Now, whenever the upper Atmospheric strata are highly charged
with electricity, and an opening is suddenly made through the
lower strata, the electric fluid will rush down the vertical column of
rarefied air, in a spiral form, and will produce a rotatory hurricane,
or Cyclone, at the surface of the Earth. Let us examine whether
nature possesses any adequate machinery for tapping the denser air,
which envelopes and insulates the Earth. The fall of an avalanche
from a sufficient height is generally succeeded instantaneously by a
hurricane. In December 1819, the village of Randa, in Switzer-
land, was destroyed by a hurrricane caused by the fall of an ava-
lanche, of which the volume was 360,000,000 cubic feet, from a
height of 9000 feet, A light was seen as it fell. (Edinburgh Phil.
Journal , 1820.,)
This is an example of perforation from without. That hurricanes
accompany Earthquakes and Volcanic Eruptions is a notion that has
prevailed since the time of Aristotle; and in the sudden displace-
ment of the vertical column of air, superincumbent upon the Crater
of a Volcano just before a violent explosion of its long pent-up gase-
ous forces, we see a mode of perforation from loithin. 'Humboldt
states that a mass of rock weighing 200 tons was projected from the
crater of Cotopaxi to a distance of 9 miles, so that the paroxysm of
a Volcano developes a force quite adequate to the effect supposed.
The hurricane season in the Northern Hemisphere extends over
the months of July, August, September, and October; and in the
Southern Hemisphere over the months of December, January, Feb-
ruary, and March. These are also the seasons of greatest heat in
the respective localities, when the processes of evaporation and vege-
tation are most active, and therefore the development of Atmospheric
electricity most rapid. The electric fluid will consequently accumu-
late in the tropics at these seasons ; and if we suppose a communi-
cation, possessing good conducting properties, effected between the
surface of the Earth and its highly charged electrical envelope, by a
sudden vertical perforation of the intermediate insulating air; it fol-
lows that a descending spiral current of positive electricity would
instantaneously occupy the cylindrical channel of highly rarefied air,
which is a comparatively good conductor. Now, the behaviour of
such a current has been well determined, both theoretically and


practically, by Ampere, Faraday, and others; and we may compare
it with that of a well-developed and carefully observed Cyclone. The
agreement is most striking and conclusive. In all good treatises on
Electricity, (Roget, L, U. K., Noad, Pouillet, &c.), an experiment
is described in which a vertical cylinder of zinc, delicately suspended
over the pole of a Magnet, is made to rotate by passing a continuous
current of positive electricity down the cylindrical surface. When
the cylinder is under the influence of the North Pole of the Magnet,
(corresponding to a Cyclone in the Southern Hemisphere, because the
South Pole of the Earth is a North Magnetic Pole since it repels
the North Pole of a Magnet and attracts its South Pole), the rota-
tion is in the direction of the hands of a watch, or N.E.S.W. When
under the influence of the Soutli Pole (the Northern Hemisphere)
the rotation is in the contrary direction. Pouillet states that the
sensibility of the apparatus can be made sufficiently great to produce
rotation by the influence of the Magnetic Action of the Earth alone.
The gyrations of a descending electrical current will therefore
perfectly account for the peculiar rotations of Cyclones on either side
of the Equator.
The distinguished philosopher Ampere in his “ Theorie des phe-
nomenes electro-dynaraiques,” has proved, by means of a profound
mathematical analysis confirmed by well-devised experiments, that
all the effects of magnetism may be produced by currents of elec-
tricity. The observed effects of Terrestrial Magnetism may
be equally Well accounted for by supposing the Earth to be a
huge Magnet, of which the North Pole is in the Southern Hemi-
sphere, and the South Pole in the Northern; or by supposing the
existence of a certain system of electrical currents. This system
may be either at the surface of the Earth, or in the Atmosphere, or
near its exterior surface. Or there may be electrical currents in all
these localities ; but it is probable that the currents near the supe-
rior limit of the Atmosphere form the ’predominating system in ter-
restrial electro-dynamical phenomena.
According to the principles of electro-magnetism, and the actual
polarity of the Earth, the requisite conditions to be fulfilled by such
a system of currents of positive electricity are; 1 st—-that they should
flow from East to West; 2nd—that they should flow from the
Equator towards the Poles. The discovery of Thermo-electricity
has shewn that the incessant changes of temperature caused by the


Sun’s daily motion must give rise to electrical currents satisfying the
first condition. This system of spirals is, in fact, the channel
through which any unusual increase of electricity is distributed over
the electric envelope of the Earth, and its ordinary condition restored.
By the nature of electrical currents, they will always cross the
Magnetic Meridian at right angles ; or, to speak more correctly, the
needle will always place itself at right angles to the predominating
system of electrical currents at any place; hence Cyclones should
progress towards the Magnetic West. For, the electrical current
Avhich forms a Cyclone is moving in a westerly direction and towards
one Pole, before it is diverted from its course by a Volcanic explo-
sion. After its descent it will retain this motion. Hence arises the
progression to the Westward of the Cyclones of the Mauritius and
West Indies. Near Java, the Magnetic variation vanishes, and
gradually increases from 0° to 20° W. from Java to the Mauritius.
Hence a Cyclone, starting from Java Head, like the Rodri-
guez Hurricane (Y fig. VIII), will move at first to the Westward,
and then gradually make to the South of West. Near the Little
Antilles, where the West Indian Cyclones commence, the variation
is nothing, and increases gradually to about 10° E. about the western
extremity of Cuba, causing the Cyclones to move at first Westward,
and then to the North of West.
Tropical Cyclones always begin near active Volcanoes, and are
sometimes accompanied by Earthquake Shocks ; but the Volcanic
paroxysm is the proximate cause both of the Earthquake and the
Cyclone.
The theory here enunciated enables us to answer the principal
questions in, what may be termed, the philosophy of Cyclonology ;
these are,
1 st—Why tropical Cyclones occur at certain seasons only ?
2nd—Why Cyclones accompany or follow Volcanic Eruptions , and
the fall of Avalanches ?
3rd—Why they rotate , and why always in one certain direction
in the Southern Hemisphere, and in the opposite direction in the
Northern ?
4th—Why tropical Cyclones progress , and why to the Westward ?
5 th —Why luminous meteors, and other electrical phenomena, abound
in a Cyclone ?
But this theory offers, as yet, no explanation of the recurving and
retrograding of Cyclones, or of the anomalous tracks of the South
Pacific Ocean. This explanation is probably to be sought for in
the different electrical conditions of the Atmosphere above an Ocean
and a Continent.


PART I.
ON THE HURRICANES OF THE SOUTH PACIFIC
OCEAN.
In attempting an investigation of the Storms of the South Pacific
Ocean by means of the scarce and rude data available for that pur-
pose, it appears natural to begin by assuming that these storms obey
laws similar to those which are now known to prevail in the South
Indian Ocean.
Bearing in mind the chief circumstances which characterize the
class of Mauritius Cyclones, and relying on analogy and the generally
uniform character of homogeneous phenomena when subject to con-
ditions apparently similar, we should conclude :
Ist.—That the hurricanes of the South Pacific Ocean are Cyclones ,
or revolving Storms.
2nd.—That the order of rotation is N.E.S.W.; or, in the direc-
tion of the hands of a watch.
3rd.—That they begin near the Equator, in the North East por-
tion of the South Pacific ; progress first to the Westward, then
towards the South West; and finally, recurving, pass off in middle
and high latitudes towards the South East. (See the dotted track
in VIII.)
These probable conclusions, deduced from analogy alone, comprise
all that the science of Cyclonology has hitherto been able to offer to
aid the Navigator of the South Pacific Ocean. Thus, Mr. Piddington,
in his Sailors’ Horn Book, (1851), page 137, directs the careful
seaman to be guided in the Pacific Oceans by “ analogies drawn
from what is known of the other parts of the world. For the South
Pacific, and for the present, I can only then recommend to him the
careful study of what is said of the South Indian Ocean, both as to
tracks and stationary storms.”


Thus, too, Captain Stokes in the voyage of the Beagle, vol. ii. p.
441, and a writer in the “ Nautical Magazine” for 1845, p. 425,
treating of the Cyclone met by H.M.S. Favourite, off Mangaia, in
1842, and apparently anxious to make it conform to the law of pro-
gression, state that it was moving towards the South West , whereas
its actual path was towards the South East.
In fact, it will be found that the Cyclones of the South Pacific
are in some respects of a peculiar nature; and the preservation of
the valuable lives and property which may be endangered by them
will evidently depend, in a great measure, on the previous determin-
ation of this peculiarity.
In a matter of so much practical importance it would not be pru-
dent to rest satisfied with inferences drawn from analogy, and
unsupported by facts; and it would be extremely hazardous to act
upon such merely probable inferences. With much labour I have
succeeded in collecting information, which, though comparatively
scanty, and imperfect, is yet amply sufficient to warrant the assump-
tion of the truth of the first and second of the preceding conclusions;
and to render imperative the rejection of the third , so far as regards
the direction of the Progressive motion. A little consideration will
show the necessity of demonstrating, or refuting, the existence of
the anomaly just indicated. The science of Cyclonology is as yet
only in its infancy, and there remains some disposition among sea-
men to disbelieve its laws. Now, if seamen should be induced to
act upon the presumed application of these laws to the South Pacific
Ocean, and be led into danger in consequence of their failure in that
region, the previous disposition to incredulity would be confirmed,
and disastrous consequences might ensue if they should be after-
wards involved in Mauritius or West Indian Cyclones, to which the
laws are undoubtedly applicable. The discrepancy in question is
likewise interesting from its tendency to lead to a more intimate
knowledge of the proximate cause of Cyclones, and of the agent by
which they are formed and sustained ; as well as to a more compre-
hensive expression of the Laws which govern their motions.
The prospect of obtaining materials sufficient to conduct the pre-
sent investigation to a successful issue was at first somewhat dis -
couraging. Until very recently the South Pacific has been com-
paratively unfrequented by vessels of a large class. The logs of the
few small traders for sandal-wood and biche-la-mer among the


islands, and of whale-ships, were difficult of access; and seldom
contained any information of use in such an inquiry. Colonial
newspapers are of a very ephemeral nature, and not distinguished
for attention to scientific subjects. The notices of hurricanes that
occur in the works of literary men and Missionaries are generally
so deficient in accuracy, and in essential facts, as to he of little
value. But we are now, fortunately, able to bring to bear on the
imperfect data derived from such unsatisfactory sources, the certain
and definite information acquired from the Cyclones of other regions,
which have been observed under more favourable circumstances; and
that Analogy which would prove a perilous guide to the Navigator,
becomes of eminent service when employed to suggest and direct the
enquiries of the Investigator.
As no particular advantage appears to belong to the arrange-
ment of Cyclones in the order of the time of their occurrence, I have
preferred to give priority to those which tend to elucidate the three
hypothetical conclusions with which I set out. I shall first con-
sider one of the most recent of the Tropical Hurricanes of the South
Pacific; which has been observed with care, and of which we
possess a full and satisfactory description. The examination of this
hurricane fully bears out the first and second of these conclusions,
but throws no light on the third. It occurred in 1850 at the
Navigators' Island, or the Samoan Group, of which Upolu is the
principal, from its possessing the best harbour Apia. Captain
Courtenay, at that time commanding the brig the Two Friends , has
given a graphic narrative of his passage through the hurricane as
it progressed to the southward, after it had left Samoa, in the fol-
lowing letter to Captain Ashmore, of Sydney, dated Upolu, 16th
April, 1850.
“We left Auckland on the 23rd March, passing through Outer
Barrier about midnight. It was my intention to have gone to the
Eastward of Pitcairn’s Island, as I thought it possible we might
encounter a hurricane, but at the same time not very probable, as it
was getting so late in the season; though I had been in one so
late as April, at the time that the Anastatia and two American ships
foundered. I was baulked in my intention of going to the East-
ward by a hard gale at S.E., so I compromised the matter by stand-
ing to the Northward. Everything had gone on w r ell until Thurs-
day, the 4th April, wind then strong at S.E. Tutuilah at noon


N. b. E. 65 miles. Strong winds at S.E. and squally ; 1 r.M. split
fore-top-mast studding sail. 2h, 30m. p.m, took in main-royal.
5 p.m. thick and squally ; in flying-jib and top-gallant sails. Not
seeing the land at sunset, took in boom, and square main- sail, and
double-reefed. Steered N. b. W, At 8 p.m. steered North. At
9 p.m. steered N.N.E., and at 9h. 30m. N.E.—considering the ship
then between Upolu and Tutuilah. At 10 p.m., just after a heavy
squall, the look-outs shouted ‘ land, and breakers on the lee-bow I’
jumped to leeward, and there they were, breaking as high as the
lower yards, not more than 300 yards off. Luffed, and the brig
came up to East. Got boom and square mainsail on her; she
reached out, and soon lost sight of them. Shortly afterwards she
broke off N.E. b. N. Wore to the Southward. Now blowing
very hard, with tremendous squalls. Fore-top sail blew away.
Barometer 29 - 80. Wind S.E.
Friday , 2 a.m. The top-mast stay-sail blew away. Barometer
29-40, Wind S.E. Brig’s head S.S.W. Barometer gradually
falling until 9 a.m., when it was 29 - 00, wind still steady at S.E.
Cut the fore-sail from the yard and saved it, wind steady at S.E.
until midnight, barometer 29-00, brig doing well under close reefed
main-top-sail.
Saturday , 1 a.m. Every appearance of a hurricane. Barome-
ter 28-90.- 2 a.m. main-top-sail blew to ribbons ; brig then gunwales
in. At this time a sea broke over the quarter, carried away the
wheel ropes, broke the main boom, took the boat from the stern,
broke the pilot’s boat’s keel and stem-post, and smashed the gig
lying on the port side of the quarter-deck. At 4 a.m. barometer
28-85. Wind then began to shift to S.S.E, and S., brig’s head to
S.W. At daylight a sea broke over the bow ; stove in the fore-
scuttle ; took away the cabouse, stove, and coppers ; leaving nothing
but one frying -pan ; washed away tarpaulin from the after hatch-
way, and a considerable quantity of water got below. With diffi-
culty got all secure again, sounded and found three feet water.
Hands to the pumps and sucked her, 9 a.m. Barometer 28-60,
wind S. b. W. Brig gunwale in. At 10 a.m, top-gallant-sails
and main-sail blew out of the gaskets; main-top-gallant-mast blew off
by the cap; the yard likewise going in the slings. Brig now fre-
quently leading-blocks in the water. Stove the lee-water casks and
got rid of the deck load. Harness casks, full, washed over the lee


rail. Noon, hurricane awful; upper part of round-house in the
water, companion and sky-light stove, much water going below, and
in through the lee dead-lights, which were completely under water.
At this time two full casks of water were washed over the main
boom and gaff, which were lashed to the main rigging about ten
feet from the deck. At 1 p.m. barometer 28-60, wheel ropes and
relieving tackles carried away again; got them secured. 2 p.m.
barometer 28-50. 3 p.m, barometer 28-45, wind S.W. Brig’s head
N.W. b. N. At 4 p.m. barometer 28*35, hurricane howling. Lee
bulwarks, part of rails and stancheons going; wind complete drift.
At 5 p.m. barometer 28-20 ; wind W.S.W.; head N.W. At 6 p.m.
barometer 28-10; awful, expecting to see the masts go; but although
prepared to cut, wished to hang on to them as long as possible. Half
of deck in the water, sea a complete drift; unable to seethe jib-boom.
At this time the remains of main boom, gaff, and boom mainsail
washed away. Cut off all, to clear the wreck of the stem. Not
able to stand against the wind without holding on. At 7 p.m. the
barometer began to rise, although there was no apparent abatement
of the wind. 8 p.m. wind W., head N.N.W. 10 p.m. wind W.N.W.,
head N., barometer 28-50. Midnight, barometer 29-00.
Sunday. Still blowing very hard, with squalls and a high sea.
Employed clearing the wreck, got some tea made in a pitch-pot.
I stood the first watch until one hour past midnight, (the Chief
Officer being laid up) and then turned in for the first time for 90
hours. We got a fore-sail bent and steered to the Eastward, then
bent two old top-sails, and found our way in here. Had we had
more than one suit of sails we could have proceeded on our passage.
We found three vessels stranded at this island, —the Favourite,
of London ; the Hercules, of New Bedford ; and the schooner Clara;
high and dry on the reef.
They had the storm here on Friday, the wind shifting suddenly
round from N.W. to S.W. with barometer 27-15 ; and I think near
the centre of the storm, the barometer with us must have been about
27-80, as my barometer ranges high.
I never saw so much change as there is in the appearance of this
island, —before, it was a complete garden, and green to the summit
of the hills ; now, it looks as if it had been swept over by fire, all
the trees ai-e stripped and dead, and cocoa-nut trees lying in all
directions. There is hardly a house standing on the island.


It will make about 15 days difference in our passage, but with
barometer at 27-80, we ought to be thankful we escaped so well,
especially as we were hove to on the breaking-off tack. The Ame-
rican ship will soon go to pieces, her stem-post and keel being out.
The Favourite might be got off, had we the means here. The
Clara is high and dry at low water, and there is not more than 4
feet rise. We have got our sails bent, and top-gallant masts on
end, and shall be on the road again on Saturday, and you may
depend she shall not want the muslin."
The Rev. G. Stallworthy, of Upolu, gives the following notice of
the storm in the Missionary Magazine for February, 1851 :
“ During the 4th April a strong S.E. wind had blown, with
rain. That, however, is not the quarter from which gales blow
here, and therefore no apprehension was felt. Between 8 and 9 a.m.
of the sth the wind shifted to about S S.W. and a furious blow
began. At the same time a heavy sea came rolling in. There was
all the time what appeared to be a driving rain, but which our taste
informed us was largely charged with salt water. Trees and houses
were falling all around. About noon the wind suddenly fell and
there was a dead calm, An occasional gentle breath of air assured
us that the wind had changed. About 2 p.m. the wind had travelled
round by East to about N.W. It again blew as heavily, and some
think more heavily, than before; and continued through the after-
noon and night w r ith much rain. A large number of houses and
trees, which had resisted the southerly blow, fell before this. Only
about one house in ten was left standing. The wind blew occasion-
ally during Saturday and Saturday night, Sunday was squally and
rainy, but the gale had spent itself; out of more than 30 chapels
only one remains.”
The Rev. W. Mills, of Apia, Upolu, says, (idem.)
11 All our former storms appeared but a gentle zephyr to this. I have
never seen a Gale like it. The whole came upon us so suddenly
that there was no time for preparation. A little before sunrise,
nothing unusual indicated a storm, light puffs came across the
island, which soon changed into squalls. In less than an hour they
became thick and strong. By mid-day the storm began, and was
truly awful. The iron Bethel Chapel stood out the hurricane, one


end is somewhat bent in. Long before the hurricane was at its
height, three ships which lay at anchor went on shore. Torrents of
salt water poured down with little intermission for 48 hours.”
The “ Samoan Reporter” is published at Upolu half-yearly by
the Missionaries. In the number for July 1850 the hurricane of
the preceding April is thus described :
“ Between November and March we have generally a gale of
wind for a few days on these islands. In January last, we had
some high winds and bad weather. On the sth of April we had
a hurricane, not only unusally late in the season, but also very
sudden and severe. It was scarcely felt on the island of Savaii,
one side of Manono escaped, but all along both sides of Upolu it
raged with fearful violence, gathering strength apparently as it
advanced in its course from the West towards the East end of
the island. It extended to Tutuilah, (S.E. of Upolu) but,was not felt
there to the. same extent as on Upolu. It began in the morning from
the South, shifted to the West about mid-day, and by 2 p.m. bread-
fruit and other trees innumerable were laid low. Upwards of 2000
native houses, chapels, and other buildings, were in ruins ; and
three vessels in Apia harbour were driven on shore among the rocks.
Parties of natives sailing along the coast were overtaken by the
Gale, and had their Canoes wrecked. Some were almost dead
before they reached the shore; others were carried out to sea
and drowned. At Tutuilah a large part of a mountain broke down
near a native village, by which four persons were killed. The storm
made sad havoc at Apia, the vessels wrecked there were the whaling
ships, the Hercules, of New Bedford ; and the Favourite, of Lon-
don ; and also the Roman Catholic Mission Schooner Clara. All on
board the vessels were saved except a Rarotongan, who leaped over-
board in the night, thinking he might reach the shore.
Captain Courtenay, of the brig Two Friends, reported to us that
he was about 60 miles to the South of Tutuilah during the gale,
that they had it strongest 24 hours later than we, and that not r one
on board expected to be saved.”
Captain Ashmore has published in the “ Nautical Magazine” for
November, 1851, the following interesting extract from the log of
Captain Cuthbert, the commander of the above-mentioned barque the
Favourite.
“ Friday , sth April, 1850, at 12h. 30m. a.m. (midnight of Thurs-
day), heavy rain, with lightning and thunder. 6 a.m. strong breeze


at South, barometer 29-25, At Bh, 30m, let go the starboard
anchor; then 50 fathoms out on the port bower, barometer 28-50,
down royal and top-gallant yards. At 9h. 30m. a.m. gale increased,
gave 10 fathoms more starboard bower cable. Barometer 28-10,
falling fast The American went on shore, the keel coming up along-
side. At 11 a.m, strong hurricane at S. W. striking the ship, wdien
she struck on the starboard side, but not heavy enough to do any
harm. At 12h. 45m. p.m. shifted suddenly to N.W. catching the
ship on the starboard side, when she instantly swung round, head in
shore. Tried to set fore-top-mast stay-sail, but it instantly blew to
ribbons-. She then fell foul of the American ship Hercules, un-
shackled the starboard cable to clear the American ship. She
forged ahead, and carried away her bow-sprit, then struck heavily
and fell over on her larboard beam-ends. Cutting away, the hurri-
cane increasing with terrific fury. At 3h. p.m. barometer 27-50.
At dark barometer still falling, and the hurricane on the increase
every hour. Made fast from the sea flying over. Barometer 27-30.”
Saturday , April.—l a.m. dreadful gusts, hurricane still on the
decrease, (?) barometer 27-30. At 2 a.m. struck by a sea, when
she bilged and filled. At 2h. 15m. the height of the
barometer 27-05. At 2h. 20m. a.m. barometer began to rise.”
The sudden shift to N.W. at 12h. 45m. agrees with the dead
calm and change to N.W. about noon, mentioned by Mr. Stall-
worthy, and shews that the central space passed over Upolu about
noon on Friday, The barometer, (fig. VII.) of the Favourite, con-
tinues to fall during the afternoon and night of Friday, instead of
rising, immediately after the change of wind, as might be antici-
pated. But as this took place while the ship was bumping on the
rocks, it is probable that the repeated shocks sustained had vitiated
the vacuum, or otherwise deranged the Barometer’s action. Mr.
Williams, the American Consul at Apia, informed Captain Ash-
mox-e that there was no barometer on the island when this hurricane
occurred.
On board the Two Friends the barometer (fig. VII.) began to rise
at 7 p.m. on Saturday, and the wind changes soon after, indicating
the passage of the central space over the ship at that time. The
central space was therefore undoubtedly moving towards the South,
Nothing more definite than this can be legitimately deduced from
the observations at Upolu, respecting the direction of progression, on


account of tlic modification and irregularity to which Cyclones are
subjected in the neighbourhood of high land. The continuous veer-
ings of the wind, and the concurrent falling and rising of the mer-
curial column, so carefully recorded by Captain Courtenay, prove
this hurricane to have been a true Cyclone. The fact of its southerly
progressive motion demonstrates that the rotation must have been in
the order N.E.S.W., for the contrary order, viz : N.W.S.E. would
require the Cyclone to move towards the North, which it certainly
did not. The diagram (IV.) shews the successive shifts of wind on
the supposition that the brig was perfectly stationary , and makes
the Cyclone appear to move to the West of South, The exact track
of the Cyclone cannot be determined, until we possess notices of its
appearance a few days sooner or later than the sth April, in other
localities.
Analogy would indicate for the Samoan class of Cyclones a mean
track to the South Westward , passing to the North of the Feejee
Islands, over New Caledonia, recurving a little to the North of
Sydney, and then passing off to the South Eastward towards New
Zealand, (dotted curve in fig. VIII.) But the facts, which my
researches have brought together, all concur in refusing to verify
the suggestions of Analogy ; and agree in indicating that Cyclones
travel from the Navigators' Islands, in 13° 50'S, and 171° 40' W. to
liar at on ga and Mangaia in 21° 57' S. and 158° 7' W., and therefore
pursue a South Easterly course for about 1000 miles.
In the “ Sydney Morning Herald” it is stated that, “ Upolu was
visited by a hurricane on the 16th March, 1846. The vessels at
anchor in the harbour (Apia) were, H.M.S. Juno, the French mis-
sionary schooner Clara, and the Tahitian trader Lucy. Both the
latter were driven high and dry on shore. The Juno with difficulty
held her ground, with four anchors a-head. Fortunately the falling
of the barometer indicated an approaching storm, and gave her time
to lower her top-masts, &c., so that she rode out the gale without
damage. On shore, houses were overturned, large trees torn up by
the roots, and the crop of bread fruit entirely destroyed. The island
had not been visited by a similar calamity for seven years. It blew
hardest from N.W. to N.N.W. The following American whalers
touched at Upolu during the remainder of March. The G anges had
lost three boats, top-masts, &c., had her decks swept, and was twice


16 March 10 a.m 29-60
17 March 1 a.m 27-70
„ 7 p.m 29-00
„ 2 a.m 28-00
„ 10 p.m 28-50
„ 4 a.m 29-00
„ 12 P.M 28-00
„ 6 a.m 29-50
on her beam-ends. The Lalla Rookh damaged her rudder and lost
one boat. The Mount Vernon lost main top mast, and one boat.
The Eliza Adams lost main-top-gallant mast, and three boats. The
Howqua lost one boat. The % Timor lost two boats. The Crescent
lost fore-top mast and two boats. The Lexington, rudder carried
away. The Newton, lost her jib-boom, and two boats.”
Since Upolu suffered chiefly from the N.W. gale, it was in the
northern portion of the annulus, and the central area lay to the south-
ward of Samoa on the 16th. It seems then to have travelled rapidly
towards the South East, since we find it passing almost directly over
Raratonga about 1 a.m., and over Mangaia about 10 a.m. of the
17th. For the following interesting facts lam indebted to the Rev.
A. Buzzacott, of Raratonga, the friend and fellow-labourer of the
Martyr Williams. For some days previous to the great hurri-
cane at Raratonga, the wind had blown 'strong from the East. On
Monday the 16th there was a furious gale from the Eastward. At
1 a.m. of the 17th there was a dead calm which lasted a few minutes,
and then the wind shifted suddenly to the South West. A vessel
from Tahiti was driven by the rising sea over the Palm Trees ; the
Captain told Mr. Buzzacott that he felt the tree tops grating against
the bottom of the vessel. At Mangaia, 40 miles South-East of Ra-
ratonga, there was no barometer, but it blew strongest there, and
the change of wind occurred at 10 a.m. of the 17th. At Rara-
tonga, the actual violence lasted from 9 p.m. of the 16th to 3 a.m. of
the 17th, the storm passing away more quickly than it came on.
On board a vessel between Raratonga and Mangaia, the barometer
was lowest at 5 a.m.
The track of the central area is thus determined by four points
over which it passed at consecutive times, viz : a point to the S.W.
of Upolu on the 16th March, a point a little N.E. of Raratonga at
1 a.m. of the 17th, a point between Raratonga and Mangaia at 5
a.m., and Mangaia at 10 a.m. of the 17th. The change from East
to South West shews that the Cyclone was gradually inclining
towards the South, and approaching the vertex of its track. (A
fig. VIII.) The fluctuations of the barometer at Raratonga on the
16th and 17th March, are thus given in the “ Samoan Reporter”—
In the course of the clay, it rose to 29-90, its usual height in fine weather, (Fig. YXI)


The inspection of the depression of the barometric curve suggests
that this was a Cyclone of great violence. Its diameter appears not
to have been above 200 miles, for the hurricane did not extend to
Aitutake, about 180 miles north of Raratonga, as I am informed by
Captain Morgan, who touched at Aitutake shortly afterwards.
The Missionary Brig, John Williams, met a hurricane here in
1845 travelling towards the South East , (B fig. VIII.) It is thus
recorded in Captain Morgan's log:
u 1845, Jan. 16, p.m. —Brisk gales and heavy rains.
Jan. 17, 10 a. m. —Barometer fell rapidly, shortened sail.
10£ a.m. —Gale increased to a hurricane, the wind
veered eight points, from North to West; and then to S. W. 11
a.m. head sea running so high that we carried away our jib-booms.
11| a.m. abated and fell calm. Cleared the wreck. Raratonga
bore W.S.W. 30 miles. 18th, wind from the Southward.”
The Cyclone of H.M.S. Favorite, in 1842, (C fig. YIIL)
The Rev. W. Day, of Hobart Town, has given me the following
extract from a Journal kept by him at Sagano, about 6 miles west
of Apia, Upolu :
“ Before daylight of 15th December 1842, the wind set in from
the North East, Some guests who were with us started at 5 o’clock,
anxious to be at home, and had a dangerous ride. Before 10 a.m,,
the natives, who are familiar from childhood with these hurricanes,
were urgent with us to leave the house. We left it about 10, and
took refuge in the village in a low hut, which they nearly buried in
bread-fruit branches, to break the fury of the wind. Trees were
falling around us in our way to the village, but we received no injury.
Towards afternoon the storm abated, and rain fell in torrents. It
became calm, and even fine, an hour or two before sun-set. During
the hurricane the wind came on in blasts, and got round from N.E.
to S.E. b. S. Great devastation was done in the grounds around
our dwelling. On surveying the fallen trees, we found that they had
been prostrated in very opposite directions. The storm raged ex-
tensively on the islands of Upolu and Savaii, throwing down many
of the largest native houses and chapels. An American whaler has
been in since the storm, the Captain states that they encountered it


when about 200 miles distant, blowing from the West, at the same-
hour that it blew hardest here.”
Here the central area lay on the North side of Upolu, and the
whaler must have been still farther to the North. The Cyclone was
moving towards the South East, since the wind veered form N.E. to
S.E. b, S. This is confirmed by the appearance of the Cyclone on
the following day, off Mangaia, where it was met by H.M.S. Fa-
vourite, which left Tahiti for Sydney on the 11th December, In
the following extract from the log of the Favourite, the want of
barometrical observations is, in some measure, supplied by the
recorded force of the wind, (12) being the maximum in the scale of
intensity, as usual:—
“ 1842, Dec. 16.— a.m., (b.c.) wind N. 4 a.m., wind N. b. E. set
royals. Noon, 20° 42' S. 204° 9' E., Mangaia S. 59° W., 145
miles, p.m. wind N.N.W. (4). 8 p.m. wind N.E., in studding
sails.
Saturday , 17th.— -a.m. wind N.E. (6). sh. 30m. a.m. saw Man-
gaia S.W.|-W. 7h. 45m. a.m. hove to. Mangaia N.N.W., one
mile off shore. 10 a.m. wind E.N.E (6). p.m. wind E.N.E. (7).
Split mainsail. 4 p.m. wind E.N.E. (12) 8 p.m. wind S. b. W. (12)
Carried away main-stay sail, battened down hatches, first gig lost, a
man drowned, jib blew to pieces, and split driver. 12p.. m. wind
W.S.W. (10).
Sunday , 18th.—Wind W. (10, 8). 3 a.m. wind W.N.W. (4)
Noon W. b. N. (5). 1 p.m. windW. (5). 5 p.m, wind W.S.W. (5).
11 p.m. wind W. (3). Out reefs.”
The first indication of the Cyclone here is at 8 p.m, of the IGth,
when the wind shifts to N.E.; the centre passes on the N.E. of the
ship, but moving in a South Easterly direction, between 4 p.m and
8 p.m. of the 17th, when the wind is of hurricane violence (12),
and shifts from E.N.E, to S. b. W.
A writer in the “ Nautical Magazine” for 1845, p. 425, over-
looking these indications, and misled by a supposed analogy between
the progressive motions of the Cyclones in the Pacific and Indian
Oceans, has made this Cyclone move towards the South West.—
Captain Stokes, who was at Sydney when the Favourite arrived
there, has fallen into the same error. The following are the data


and remarks given by Captain Stokes, at p. 441, vol ii., of tlic
Voyage of the I) eagle :
11 At noon of the 17th Dec. 1842, the Favourite was in 21° 58' S.
158° 2' W. Mangaia distant 5 miles, S.W. b. W., steering
W. b. S, \ S. in a moderate gale from E.N.E., with cloudy rainy
weather, 3 p.m, had run 27 miles, wind having increased to a
strong gale, veering to N.E., course now S.W. At the end of an-
other hour, having run 8 miles, wind increased to a storm, veering
again to Eastward. Ship brought to the wind on port tack under a
main-try-sail. For the hours 5 and 6 she headed from S. to S.JF.,
which would give for the direction of the wind about S.E. b. E.
At 6h. 30m. a man washed away with the lee quarter boat. At 8
the wind had veered to S. b. W., having blown a hurricane with
constant rain for the last hour. At 9 most of the half-ports were
washed away, the sea making a clean sweep over the decks. By
midnight the Avind had subsided to a whole gale, hut still the veer-
ing had reached the W.S<W. point , and at 3 next morning it was
blowing only a moderate breeze from W.N.W., Avith tolerably clear
Aveather. Sail was hoav made, and a S.W. b. S. course held for 28
miles, Avhen, at noon, obsexwation gaA r e 22° 1' S. 158° 44' W.
The day after the hurricane the wind Avas moderate from Westward,
and the day before, it Avas moderate from Northward. The ship’s
position at noon on the day before the hurricane was about 130
miles to the N.E. b. E. of Mangaia Island. The duration of this
storm, then, may be considered to have been from 4 p.m. to mid-
night, in which eight hours the wind had veered gradually from E.
round by S. to W.S.W, The veering being much more rapid
between 8 and 9 p.m., when the Storm Avas at its height, the ship
must at that time have been near the focus. The tack on which
the Favourite Avas hove to, carried her into the course of the hurri-
cane, or rather placed her in a position to be overtaken by it, as it
passed along to the Southward and Westward ., But as the ship
broke off to the IFestward and Northward , she fell out of its North
Western edge. Doubtless, if a W.N.W. course had been pursued
in the first instance, or at noon on the 17th, the Favourite would
have avoided the storm. It is to be regretted that the barometer
Avas broken in the commencement of the hurricane, Avhen it Avas un-
usually loav, having been falling for some time beforehand. Besides


tins, there was ample warning in the unusually gloomy lurid
appearance of the sky ; the weather also was misty, with showers of
rain, as the ship approached the course of the storm.”
The data given in the above extract are at variance with the in-
terpretation which Captain Stokes has applied to them. If the
wind veered gradually from E., round by S. to W.S.W., the pro-
gressive motion would have been S. b. E., and not to the South
Westward. But it will be observed that the veering is continuous
from N.E., round by East, South, and West, to W.N.W.; and it
will be instructive to seek an explanation of this fact. On a chart
(fig. V.) mark the point A in 21° 58' S., and 158° 2' W., draw
A B = 27 miles, in the direction W. b. S. \ S., and BC = 8 miles,
in aS. W. direction. Mark another point E, in 22° V S., and
158° 44' W., and draw ED— 28 miles, to the N.E. Then A is
the position of the Favourite at noon of the 17th, C her position
when hove to, and D her position when she again made sail. In
running from the N.E. to A the wind is Northerly, at B it is N.E.,
veering to Eastward at C, with a falling barometer. The ship is
in the S.E. quadrant of a Cyclone. If the Cyclone is moving to-
wards the S.W., she is on the left side , and therefore should heave
to on the port tack ; but if it is moving towards the S.E., she is on
the right side, and the port tack is the hreaking-off tack The wind
along B C being N.E,, the centre lies at some point C i, to the N.W.
With the Cyclone moving to the South Westward, and hove to on
the port tack at C, the ship would soon have been clear, both of the
advancing Cyclone, and of the mountainous sea left in its wake;
but the wind at D being W.N.W., the centre now lies at some point
C 2, to the S.S.W. of D, the progressive motion is therefore to the
South Eastward. By the united action of the wind, and the radial
swell, she drifts round the advancing centre to D, breaking off gra-
dually, as shewn in the diagram, as the wind veers from N.E. round
by East, South and West, to W.N.W. ; the beaming sea in the
wake of the Cyclone making a clean sweep over her decks. The
dotted line C D represents the course of the drifted vessel when the
centre is supposed stationary at Ci. ABCD Eis the actual track
of the ship, and C i, C 2, C 3 the track of the Cyclone’s centre.
It will be seen that the Favourite would not have avoided the storm
by pursuing a W.N.W. course from A, as suggested by Captain


Stokes. When at A the best course was to wait, or to stand back,
until the Cyclone had passed.—When at C, if she had stood on to
the S,W. she would have passed in front of the Cyclone uninjured.
The misfortunes of the Favourite arose from two errors, which were
perhaps unavoidable in 1842, she hove to when she ought to have
made all sail to the S.W.; and she hove to on the wrong tack.
The course (W.N.W. from A) suggested by Captain Stokes would
certainly have made the matter worse, for the Northerly Winds
would have taken her right into the central space.
A storm-track has now been shown to exist between Samoa,
Raratonga, and Mangaia. The Rev. Mr. Darling, a Missionary at
Tahiti, informs me that hurricanes are unknown there, hut some-
times occur to the Westward of the Island. I have only met with
one such instance, and the notice is very defective. It occurs in the
work called “ Rovings in the Pacific, by a Merchant, long resident
in Tahiti.” The notice is written at Maupiti, an island about 30
or 40 miles west of Borabora and Raiatea:—
“ 1843, 19 Dec. thick and hazy, a complete gale, hove to. During
the night the wind suddenly and absolutely ceased. 8 p.m. a very
tempest raging. The gale increased fearfully, with lightning at
night. Houses, trees, &c., were blown down. Not a house entire,
nor bread-fruit tree standing. The beach strewed with wreck, and
all the small craft of the natives destroyed. A boat with natives
blown dead before the wind to Raiatea. The hurricane passed over
Raiatea, but did little damage at Huaheine.”
The Samoan and Raratongan storm-track appears to pass to the
Southward of Tahiti. Capt. Morgan left Tahiti on the 7th Dec. 1840,
in the Camden, and arrived at Tutuilah on the 23rd Jan. 1841,
without meeting with the following Cyclone, which must have
passed to the Southward of him, as it advanced towards Raratonga :
“ 1840, Dec. 16. A violent hurricane blew down many trees, and
damaged the fruit at Apia, (Upolu.) The S.E. wind increased
until the 16th when there were heavy squalls from N.E, At 2
a.m. wind very heavy from S.E. with rain, some houses down.
a.m, gusts heavy from S.S.E. Barometer, though an injured
one, fell to 24 inches, its ordinary standing being 28 inches.
Thermometer 88°. 6 a.m. wind again rose rapidly, blowing down
houses, trees, &c., blasts very severe at intervals of 10 minutes,
8 a.m. a sudden shift of ivind to after which it moderated.


Noon, clear, wind still S.W. The houses were generally blown
down after the change of wind. A similar gale occurred about 9
years before, and changing in a similar manner.” (D fig. VIII).
( Wilkes, voL 5, p. 19.)
The changes N.E. to S.E. and then to S.W. indicate progression
to the South East, and accordingly we find the Cyclone at Tutuilah
on the following day.
u 1840, 17th Dec.—A hurricane such as the islands had not ex-
perienced for eight years. On Thursday the 17th, from forenoon to
midnight, it blew a fearful gale, shifting from the usual course (S.E.)
of the Trades to about N.W., and again to S.W. Pago-Pago was
sheltered by the hills, but Leone, 15 miles off, and many other vil-
lages, were completely laid desolate.” (Missionary Life in Samoa ,
P-179).
“ 1840, Dec.—A very violent hurricane laid waste the island of
Vavoo.” (Sir E. Home, in Naut. May. 1850. p. 37.)
The storm-track here passes to the North East of Samoa, and to
the South West of Tutuilah, passing between the islands.
The following notice renders it highly probable that this Cyclone
came from the immediate neighbourhood of New Guinea, and Torres’
Straits, the Laughlin Group being in 9° S. and 154° E. :
u During the whole of the Ist Dec. 1840, the whaling barque
Mary, of Sydney, was buffetted about in an unmanageable state in
a typhoon. On the 2nd she struck on a reef of rocks at the S. E.
extremity of the Laughlin Islands. The sea swept overboard six of
the crew, the rest reached the land, but only one escaped the natives,
and reached Sydney in the Woodlark, whaler.”
The distance between the Loughlin Islands and Samoa is about
2100 miles, which, for 15 days, would give an average daily velo-
city of 140 miles.
We have thus an indication of a continuous storm-track of the
tropical hurricanes of the South Pacific extending from New Guinea
to the Navigators’ Islands, or Samoa, in an Easterly direction ; and
thence to Earatonga and Mangaia in a South Easterly direction ;
over about 50° of longitude, or 3000 miles. This forms an exact
counterpart to the track, from Java to the Mauritius, of the Cyclones
of the South Indian Ocean. In fact, the region around Torres’
Straits is the common starting place of both classes of Cyclones.


By way of illustration, we may regard tliis locality as tlie northern
extremity of the minor axis of an elliptical track, of which the
islands of Rodriguez and Mauritius form the western extremity of
the axis major, and the islands of Raratonga and Mangaia, the
eastern extremity. Beginning near Torres’ Straits, the Cyclones
of the Indian Ocean traverse the Western half of the Ellipse, and
those of the Pacific Ocean the Eastern half. This may he regarded
as the maximum, or exterior, ellipse of its class; for, it will he
shewn that within this ellipse, there is a series of smaller ellipses,
along which the centres of Cyclones in both oceans travel; the
minor axis of all these imaginary ellipses being nearly coincident
in direction with the mean meridian of Australia.
The hurricane alluded to above as having taken place 9 years
before, was that experienced by the Rev. J. Williams on the 21st
Dec. 1831, at Raratonga, which likewise devastated the Navigator’s
Islands, though Mr. Williams has unfortunately omitted to mention
the date of its occurrence at the latter place. Since it veered in the
same manner as that in Dec. 1840, which was moving to the East-
ward, it may be fairly inferred that it passed from Samoa to
Raratonga, The following is the substance of Mr. Williams’
description:—
“ Dec. 21st, 1831, Raratonga, Saturday morning.—A heavy sea
rolling into the harbour of Avama; the atmosphere threatening,
and ocean agitated. Fastened the vessel by a chain-cable to the
main post of the large school-house, which was upon a bank 10 feet
high, and 40 or 50 yards from the sea. Sunday, a day of gloom
and distress. The wind blew most furiously, and rain fell in tor-
rents. Towards evening, the storm increased. 9 p.m. the sea a most
alarming height, over the bank to the school-house. A resistless
gust burst in the East end of the chapel. Monday morning, rain,
lightning and thunder. The whole island trembled to its very centre
as the infuriated billows burst upon its shores. The crisis had
arrived, for the wind shifted suddenly a few points to the West
(from North ?) the sea retired, and the storm was hushed. Bank,
school-house, and vessel, had all been washed away. The vessel
carried over a swamp, and lodged amongst a grove of chestnut trees.
No spot escaped, for the gale veered gradually round the island.


This dreadful hurricane extended to the Navigators’ Islands, and
was most destructive. At Savaii it was accompanied by a violent
shock of an Earthquake.” ( Williams' Missionary Enterprise.)
As the wind blew first from the Eastward and then veered a few
points to West, the Cyclone was moving to the Southward.
I shall record here, with a view to future use, some isolated and
imperfect notices of Cyclones, apparently belonging to this class ;
11 A desperate hurricane occurred at Tonga in the latter end of
March, 1830. A Spanish brig drove ashore'near the reef, with loss
of cai’go and nine lives. The Lloyd Whaler rode out the gale. The
Wolf, English Whaler, was forced to cut from two large whales,
with loss of boats, &c.”
The information collected at Tonga respecting its hurricanes, by
Lieutenant Wilkes, merits insertion here. He says, in vol. 3. p. 32,
“ Hurricanes are frequent in this group, and occur in February and
March, but have also taken place in November and December. The
Missionaries say that the storms begin at N.W., thence veer to the
Eastward, and end in South East. (This would make the Cyclone
progress towards the Equator , which I regard as an impossibility ,
T. D.) Houses are levelled, trees torn up by the roots, vessels
driven on shore, canoes lost or driven hundreds of miles away to
other islands. In these storms the wind is frequently observed to
change from one point to its opposite, (marking the passage of the
centre , T. D.) and in the same group of islands trees have fallen
during the same gale, some to the South and others to the North.
(Cyclone moving to the Eastward, T. D.) They are local in their
effects, and fall chiefly upon Hapaii and Vavao; (to the North of
Tonga.) If the fury of the storm be felt at Vavao, Tonga generally
escapes, and vice versa ; but Hapaii is more or less the sufferer in
both cases, situated as it is between the two places. A very severe
hurricane was felt at Lefooka, Hapaii, in 1834. They vary in
duration from 18 to 36 hours ; after a destructive one a famine
generally ensues : it destroys all their crops, and numbers of the
natives die. The most severe are called “ Afa hija fagi,” the hur-
ricane that throws down the banana trees. Earthquakes are fre-
quently felt here.”
The following is from the “ Samoan Reporter,” March 1849
«1848, Dec. 26.—The islands were visited by a severe gale
which lasted during the two succeeding days, and was severely felt


both at the Society and llervey groups. The sea was far beyond
what the oldest natives remember to have seen. Large islands
have been raised on the reef on the northern side of Upolu, several
feet above high water mark, and composed of dead coral.
Contrary to the general direction of the winds during gales which
visit this group, it blew from the East, going round to the North,
and N.W.”
In the “ Sydney Morning Herald” it is stated that the schooner
Marian Watson was at Erromanga on the 28th December, 1848,
with 17 tons of sandal-wood, bound thence to the Sandwich Islands.
She had encountered a heavy gale from E.S.E. a few days previous ,
accompanied with thunder and lightning, which split the whole of
her sails ; and from the effects of the electric fluid, the Captain was
blind for four days.
The Marian Watson was probably to the North of Erromanga
during the gale : she appears to have been in the Southern Margin
of the Cyclone as it passed on towards Samoa, which suffered from
the passage of the North East Margin. (E fig. YHI.)
In the “ Seaman’s Friend,” published at Oahu, I find the following
accounts of Cyclones, probably connected with the Samoan class :
“ 1847, June 16.—The American Whaler Factor, from New
Zealand towards Talcuanha, met with a typhoon, and put into
Tahiti in distress.”
“ 1848, April 12. —The barque Junius, off Savage Island, 18° S.
and 169° W. for several days had strong gales from S.E, and E.
and was compelled to lie to, 12th April, 2 a.m. wind increased, in
topsails. 3 p.m. a sea struck and stove the larboard boat. 6 p.m.
fore-top-mast stay-sail torn in pieces. Blowing a perfect hurricane,
with a heavy sea, lee-rail under water. April 13, 7 a.m., cut away
fore and main top-gallant backstays, a sea carried away the boat.
9 p.m. top-masts and jib-booms gone; vessel nearly a complete wreck.
14th, wind and sea increasing. Barometer fell fast. At 5 p.m. the
hurricane at its height. Barometer 27*70. Daybreak, if possible,
the wind blew harder, the clouds looked blacker, and the rain fell
faster, than on the previous evening. Through the day, a slight
x’ise of the Barometer, about o*3o. 15th, At daylight, wind and
sea somewhat abated. At sun- set, weather quite moderate, sea


falling fast, made Savage I. 10 miles distant. The hurricane
commenced with wind at E. or E.N.E., and veered round to the
Northward and Westward, dying away to W.N.W., or West.”
In this case, if the vessel could be supposed to have remained
nearly stationary diming several days of such weather, the order of
veering would lead to the conclusion that the Cyclone was moving
due South ; but to infer the direction of progression from the shifts
of wind alone, without regard to the various positions of the ship,
would generally lead to fallacious results. (F fig. YIII.)
I shall now consider the Cyclone-tracks which fall within that
of the Samoa and Raratonga class, or those which traverse the
western regions of the South Pacific. This class is of considerable
importance on account of the proximity of its locus to the Australian
Colonies.
In the Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition, by
Lieutenant Wilkes, we find that, at the Feejee Group, from No-
vember to April the winds prevail from the E.N.E. to the S.E.
quarter, at times blowing a fresh trade wind. From November to
April, northerly winds are often experienced, and in February and
March, heavy gales arc frequent. They usually begin at the N. E.,
pass round to the N. and NAY., from which quarters they blow with
most violence ; then, hauling to the Westward, they moderate.
A very heavy gale was experienced from the 22nd to the 25th
of February, 1840. The only data I could get, to be at all de-
pended upon, -were from Captain Engleston, whose ship was lying
under Toba Peak, on the north shore of Yitileva. The gale began
from the N.E. with heavy rain, on the morning of the 22nd. During
the night and morning of the 23rd, it was more to the N., increasing
with heavy gusts. They let go a third anchor, and sent down the
top-masts and lower yards. On the 24th the gale was the same,
with much rain, the wind hauling to the westward at mid-night of
the 25th. It became N.W. in the morning, and began to moderate,
the wind hauling gradually to the Southward, when it cleared off.
This gale was not felt at Tonga, although they had strong winds
there at the time.


Tlie veering of the wind from N.E., by N, and W. to about S.W.
makes tbe Cyclone move towards the South East, the centre pass-
ing on the South of Vitileva. A strong northerly wind at Tonga
would shew the proximity of the eastern margin.
Captain Morgan has favoured me with a perusal of his Journal,
and of the log of the Missionary Brig Camden, at that time on a
voyage from Sydney to Tutuilah. The following extracts deter-
mine another point in the track of the Feejee Cyclone :
“27 Feb. 1840, lat. 31° 45' S., long. 171° 52' E. Wind shifted
suddenly from N. to S.W., and then to S.E. 28th Friday. In-
creasing breeze from Eastward. Barometer falling gradually.
Midnight, under double-reefed topsail and foresail, 31° S. 174° 7' E.
29th Saturday, wind increased from S.E., till 10 a.m., when it
blew a perfect gale—yea, a hurricane. Barometer 28'40. Took
in all sail and lay on our side; kept the pumps sucking. The
water came up the skin into the cabins between decks. The sea
stoved the whale boat triced up in the rigging, and we were
forced to cut her away. At noon, it began to abate a little, and at
2 p.m. the gale had subsided. Sent down top-gallant yards, with
fore-top-gallant mast. At 7 p.m. wore round, the wind at S.W.;
set main-top-sail and fore-sail, steering N.E. Ist March, a light
S.E. wind.”
Captain Morgan adds, “ I have known it to blow as hard, but
never harder ; —we could not look to windward for a second at a
time.”
Mr. G . A. Lundie, a passenger by the Camden, in a work entitled
“ Missionary Life in Samoa, 1849, thus refers to this Cyclone : “ A
few days since Ave met a fearful and long-continued hurricane.,
Friday (28th) was a day of rough and restless calm; the barome-
ter fell gradually. In the evening a fresh breeze set in, increasing
gradually till 4a m. (29th). Lay to under a small sail to keep the
vessel from rolling. 8 a.m. without a stitch of canvas, at the
mercy of the fierce wind and infuriated waves. The lee bulwarks
and nearly half the deck under the boiling waters. The day time
darkness rendered more dismal by the burning of a solitary lamp.
Boat, bulwarks, &c., carried aAvay. At llh. 45m. a.m. the mer-
cury began to rise. At 1 p.m. the rain had ceased, but the wind
had not perceptibly abated. The sun shone out at 4 p.m., the wind
subsided, and continued to abate till Sunday morning.”


The centre of this Cyclone lay considerably to the East of the
Camden, since the wind veers from S.E. to S.W., and was also mov-
ing to the Southward ; consequently from the Feejee Islands, and
towards New Zealand.
At page 381, vol. 2, of Wilkes’ Narrative it is stated that on the
29th Feb. 1840, there was a violent gale at the Bay of Islands,
New Zealand, said by the Missionaries to have been the severest
they had experienced, with perhaps the exception of one which took
place shortly after their arrival. Many vessels suffered great damage.
The Thom, of Sag Harbour, which sailed a few days before, bound
home, was obliged to put back in consequence of the damage
received, and was condemned as unseaworthy ‘ as was also the
Tuscan, an English whaler. The barque Nimrod arrived, having
lost her topmast. Several Coasters were missing, supposed to have
been lost. Most of the vessels lying off Kororarika dragged their
anchors. The Harriet was driven ashore at Tipoona ; she parted
her cables during the night, and next morning was found a complete
wreck; the crew barely escaped with their lives. On land, fences
were carried away, houses and grounds deluged, and the extensive
embankment of the Missionary establishment at Pahia nearly
demolished. The tide rose six feet during the night of Saturday
beyond its usual mark. This gale was experienced at the Thames,
on board H.M.S. Herald, 140 miles to the South, also by the Fly-
ing Fish, off Cook’s Straits, on the East, and by the barque
Achilles to the North. Mr. Hale was a passenger in the Achilles,
and took barometrical observations and notes, from which it appears
that the change took place at the two Northern and two Southern
positions in opposite directions, proving that the gale was a rotatory
one, and that its centre must have passed between the Bay of
Islands and the River Thames. The greatest force of the gale was
between 1 a.m. and 3 a.m. of the Ist March, At the Bay of Islands,
a calm was observed by Mr. Dana and others, which lasted fifteen
minutes, after which the wind rapidly hauled round to the West-
ward, and blew with increased violence. On board the Herald, the
barometer fell to 28-75, and as the gale was experienced first to the
Northward and Eastward (of New Zealand), it is certain that it
came from that quarter, and passed over New Zealand in a S.W.
direction. The width of its track was about 500 miles.


On the 29tli February the Flying Fish was in 40° S. and 178°
30' E. At noon the wind hauled to S.E., and by midnight blew
a most violent gale, hauling to the Eastward until about 8 p.m.
(Ist March), when its violence moderated.
About this time the Vincennes was in 50° S. and 135° E., and
escaped the Cyclone, which probably passed to the Southward of her.
The “ Colonial Times,” Hobart Town newspaper, for April 1840,
attributes the following disasters to this Cyclone, at New Zealand :
The Harriet lost. The Navarino, from Kaipara, a total wreck.
The schooner Falcon lost in the Bay of Plenty, on the night of the
29th February. The Fair Barbadian lost. The Diana on shore.
The schooner Ulitea lost, with all hands. The schooner Trent
wrecked at Tegedoo. The schooner Phoenix foundered at sea, and
all hands lost. During the hurricane a heavy flood inundated the
site of the proposed capital of the New Zealand Colonization
Company.
At page 64 of “ Rovings in the Pacific,” we learn that the
Author met with a most violent gale from the Northward, on the
29th February, when off the Three Kings, at the Northern extre-
mity of New Zealand. The vessel was thrown on her beam ends.
Next day the wind moderated, and gradually veered round to the
S.E. The vessel had drifted to the Southward of the Bay of
Islands, —hundreds of red bream were floating about, killed by
the gale.
A note to page 61, of Piddington’s valuable “Horn Book”
supplies some additional information respecting this Cyclone; thus ;
It is said to have passed between the Bay of Islands and the River
Thames, which lie about S.S.E. \E. and W.N.W. W. of each
other; hence the track may have been either to the Northward or
Southward of S.W. Its track to the South Westward, or perhaps
S.S.W. after crossing the Island, lam enabled perhaps to corroborate
from a log in my possession of the Adelaide, which vessel, between
the Ist and 2nd of March, about 3£° due West of Cape Egmont,
experienced a smart gale, commencing at about E. b. S., or E.S.E.,
and veering to S. b. E., reducing her to close reefs, with a heavy
cross sea. This, roughly calculated, gives 340 miles for 36 hours,
or about 10 miles per hour. Commodore V likes suggests that this
New Zealand Cyclone may possibly have been the same as that
which occurred at the Feejee Group, which is very probable.


The identity suggested by Commodore Wilkes has now been satis-
factorily demonstrated by the account of the hurricane of the
Camden. It is important to observe that at Yitileva the Cyclone
was moving to the South East, due South when passing to the East
of the Camden, and to the South West at New Zealand. The dis-
tance from Yitileva to New Zealand is about 1200 miles. The
vertex of the Cyclone’s track lay considerably to the Eastward of
both islands; so that the distance described from one island to the
other was probably not less than 1500 miles. (Gr fig. VIII.) By
continuing the track below New Zealand it will be found to pass
through the place where the American Expedition met with a severe
hurricane in the preceding month, and which, in all probability,
had travelled over nearly the same route ; As this is the only
instance of a well-observed Cyclone in a high latitude, and as it
appears to determine another point in the Feejee and New Zealand
track, a short account of it may not be out of place here.—
(fig. YI.)
The United States Squadron ; consisting of the Vincennes, a first
class sloop of 780 tons ; the two brigs Peacock & Porpoise; and
the schooner Flying Fish, left Sydney for the Antarctic Ocean, on
the 26th December, 1839. A few days before the hurricane all the
vessels were near the latitude 66° S. and long. 150° E., or about
1300 miles to the Southward of Van Diemen’s Land.
The Peacock was standing to the Northward for Sydney, to repair
damages received among the ice ; the others were making to the
Southward and Westward, along the icy barrier, and the supposed
Antarctic Continent. A full report is given by Lieutenant Wilkes,
of the proceedings of each ship during the storm, in the 2nd volume
of his interesting narrative. Pie does not appear to have been aware
of its rotatory character, but thinks it remarkable that, while the
Peacock had a strong gale from the N.W., the Vincennes, 450 miles
to the S.W. of her, should have met with another gale from the S.E.
Apparently not recognising the obvious truth that these subordinate
gales were consistent parts of the same great whirlwind storm.
The proceedings on board the Vincennes are recorded thus :
“ 1840, Jan. 27.—142° 40' E., 66° 54' S. Porpoise in sight.
Midnight, wind shifted to South East,
28th.—11 a.m. land in view, weather thickens, breeze freshens.


Noon, hove to, so thick that everything was hidden. Barometer
began to fall. 5 p.m. a gale coming on, in three reefs of topsails.
8 p.m. blew very hard, a violent snow-storm, barometer still falling.
Midnight, the gale was awful,- —all hands called on deck.
29th.—1 a.m. gale terrific; sea so heavy that sail was further
reduced. 4 a.m. hove to, all hands still on deck. 7 a.m. appear-
ances of weather moderating. The wind veered to the Southward.
The whole strength of the gale was from S. E. By noon, the gale
was over, and it cleared off towards four o’clock. 60° 30' S. 140° E.
Wind now hauled to the S. W., and we again made sail to the
South, to pass over the very route we had just traversed.
30th.—Morning, a brisk breeze from Eastward, sea quite smooth.
A brisk gale ensued, ran at 9 or 10 miles an hour, one reef in top-
sails, stood directly for the most Southerly part of Piner’s Bay.
Noon, 66° 45 / S. 140° 2' 30" E. Wind increased to a gale.
1 p.m. reduced to storm topsails, top-gallant-yards on deck. Baro-
meter had again declined rapidly. Wind S.E. All the canvas we
could shew to this gale at one time were a close-reefed mainsail and
fore-storm-staysail. It blew tremendously; the sea was a short dis-
agreeable one, but nothing compared to that which accompanied the
first gale.
31st.—Gale unabated. Noon, gale continued, lowest reading of
barometer 28-59. 6 p.’m. After lasting 36 hours, the gale mode-
rated a little.”
The circumstances under which the Porpoise had the storm are:—
“ January 27.—65° 41' S. 142° 3P E. Making for 105° E.
28th.—Noon, strong winds from Eastward. Close-reefed topsails
3 p.m. hove to. 65° 16' S. 8 p.m. blowing very heavy with snow.
Have seldom experienced a heavier blow ; towards the end the
squalls were severe and frequent.
29th, — 3 a.m. a heavy sea, thick snow, barometer 28-20, lowest
reading. 8 a.m. gale abated. 64° 46' S. 137° 16' E.
30th. — 4 a.m. Stood to S.W., wind increased, shortened sail.
During the day a heavy gale of wind, and a very heavy sea
running. Noon, hove to under storm-staysails. Wind South
Easterly.
31st.—7 a.m. Gale moderated. Made sail to the Westward.”


In the log of the Flying Fish we have: —
“ 29th Jan. —Thick snow, wind N.E. 9 p.m, a heavy gale,
lay to.
30th.—Morning, gale abated. 65° 15 / S. 150° 16' E.
31st. —Thick snow, heavy sea, wind North.”
The Vincennes found the Peacock at Sydney on 12th March.
On 29th Jan., the Peacock was in 61° 30' S. 154° 9 / E., and had
a strong gale from the N.W., which increased until midnight, and
then moderated.
The barometrical fluctuations on board the Vincennes are given
for intervals of an hour, with a few exceptions, from January 28 to
Feb. 2. I have expressed these in a curve (fig. VII.), which forms a
graphic and instructive record of the various phases of the Cyclone.
The Vincennes sails first into the central space, the gale moderates,
and the weather clears off; then, the wind hauls from S.E. to S.W.,
and the barometer has been falling. She now returns to the South,
and has a brisk gale from E. The barometer rising. This Cyclone
appears to have been moving very slowly, and to the westward.
On the 17th March, 1849, the Levi Starbuck, Captain Nye, met
with a severe hurricane off French Island in 32° S. and 179° W.,
which lies in the track of the Feejee and New Zealand Cyclones.
It came on first from N.E., and then veered round to S.W. The
intermediate shifts are not given; and the change from N.E. to S.W.
implies progression to the S.E., as if the Cyclone belonged to the
New Caledonian class. But I find from the log of the Prince
Regent, whaler, that there was no heavy weather on the South
Coast of New Caledonia just before the 17th March. If the Levi
Starbuck was hove to, the Easterly gale may have drifted her to
the Westward of the centre, when she would have the winds from
the South and South West, as the Cyclone moved to the Southward.
(H fig. VIII.)
Several other vessels were in company, and some damaged
severelv. One was capsized, and all hands lost.
A third definite storm-track appears to extend from New Cale-
donia, and the small islands to the East of it, by Norfolk Island, to


New Zealand. The Cyclones here also all seem to come from the
N.W. of New Caledonia, i.e., from the Neighbourhood of New
Guinea, and Torres’ Straits.
On the 23rd January 1849, the barque Nimrod, Capt. Espinasse,
sailed from Sydney for China, and returned to port on the 7th
March, under jury-masts. The following particulars were furnished
to the “ Sydney M. Herald” for publication :
“Feb. 10.—17° 38'S. IGl° 26' E. Wind N.E., heavy head
sea, standing N.W. Oh. 30m. p.m. increasing breeze, double-
reefed the topsails, lb. 30m. p.m. furled mainsail, stowed jib and
mizen. 4 p.m. fresh gale, with increasing wind and sea. Wore
ship to E.S.E.; furled fore-topsail, down royal yards, top-gallant
studding-sails and booms, and unrove all the studding-sail gear.
The sun set fiery, and heavy dense clouds extended from E.S.E. to
N.E. Still there was no very threatening appearance. 8 p.m.
blowing fresh, in close-reef of main-topsail. 9 p.m. gale increasing,
furled foresail. Midnight, hard gale, with a rugged sea.
Feb. 11.—Steady gale, wind E. 9 a.m. wore ship to N.N.E.,
stowed fore-topmast staysail. Noon, more moderate, no observa-
tion. 2 p.m. heavy squalls following one another, with torrents of
rain, sea breaking more, and gale increasing fast. Housed top-
gallant mast and mizen topmast with great difficulty. Wind E.S.E.
Hard gale, with no intermission between the squalls.
Feb. 12,—Daylight, blowing a very hard gale; the flying jib-
boom carried away in the iron. 10 a.m. tremendous puffs from S.E.,
moderating a little after a very severe squall. At 3 p.m. wind S.
4 p.m, wind S.S.W., increasing again with hard squalls. 5 p.m,
moderating, refurled all the sails for the night, and secured them
with the studding-sail gear. 8 p.m. wind W.S.W., sky open , stars
shining , quite moderate ; kept the ship away to the North Eastward
to endeavour to run out of the approaching and expected hurricane,
agreeable to the Law of Storms! Bh, 30m, p.m. increasing with heavy
squalls, rounded the ship to again, with her head to the S.S.E.
under the main trysail. 10 p.m. sudden shift to N.W. , and the gale
now became a hurricane. 11 p.m. the lacing and tack-lashing of the
main trysail carried away, all hands in the ship unable to brail it
up ; it blew to ribbons. All the Lascars sent into the cabin to bo
ready in case of being wanted.


February 13.—Daylight, wind N.W. to W., hurricane terrific,
lying in the trough of the sea. 6 a.m. cut away the rigging of the
fore-top mast; but the mast, &c,, did not go over the side for a con-
siderable time. The ship now felt much relieved. Noon, the hurri-
cane blowing gradually stronger ; nearly dark, scud very low, im-
possible to look to windward ; the rain, from the force of the wind,
cut like needles. 2 p. m. hurricane increasing, very dark, ship
labouring fearfully in a tremendous sea. As much as one could do
at times to hold on, men at the pumps lashed. 3 p.m. the ship
being on her beam-ends, the glass still falling, and the hurricane
increasing, determined as a last resource to cut away the mainmast,
with the greatest difficulty got the fore braces cut from the main-stay
and weather rigging. 4 p.m. cut away the mainmast, from the force
of the wind, it went overboard without touching anything, and did
the ship no injury. The rigging crushed both the whale-boats and
one of the skids. The ship righted, and felt much relieved. 5 p.m.
a heavy sea struck the ship, and washed the long boat out of the
chocks, &c. The jaw'-lashing of the gaff carried away ; could not
get the gaff down, lashed it into the mizen rigging, and secured the
mizen-mast. The jib-boom being sprung, and part of the jib still
blowing about, cut away the weather-gear to let the boom carry away.
The hurricane continued increasing, if anything, in strength till 7-|
p.m,, after which it lulled a little at times between the squalls. Be-
fore the mainmast was cutaway, the main-topsail, mainsail, and jib,
had blown aw r ay from between the gaskets. The mizen blew away
during the night, and, at day-light next morning, only a small part
of the foresail remained.
February 14.—Daylight, wind S.S.W., blowing a strong gale.
Got the men with great difficulty to go on the fore-yard to cut away
the r’emains of the foresail, as the fore-lift blocks had been carried
away when the fore-topmast was cut; sent the fore-topmast stud-
ding booms on deck, got tackles on the fore-yard, and secured the
fore-truss. Found the mast much cut, bent the gaff topsail for a
storm mizen. Noon, moderate, bent the second foresail and second
driver. Bent the fore-topmast staysail on the fore-stay. Ship
rolling very heavily. No observation. Bore up for Sydney.
February 16.—1 n 18° 33' S., 161° 12 / E
I have constructed, from the numerous barometric readings given


by Captain Espinasse, a curve, (fig. VII.), which shews that the
centre passed the Nimrod about 4 p.m. of the 13th, and as the Storm
began at N.E. and ended at S. S.W. it was progressing towards the
South East. This inference is confirmed by the statement of Cap-
tain Rule of the wreck of the brig Scamander, and the loss of seven-
teen lives.
“ February 15.—3 a.m. a heavy gale commenced from Eastward,
which by 11 a.m. had increased to a hurricane and veered to South-
ward. Noon, ship hove to in 23° 38 / S. and 167° 40' E., the Isle of
Pines bearing N.N.W. about 58 miles. 10 p.m. the vessel struck
on the South reef of New Caledonia ; a sea, as high as the main-
top, broke over the ship, and swept aw'ay all hands except two.”
The Marian Watson, at the Isle of Pines, had the hurricane at
the same time, and veering in the same manner, that is, from E. to
S., shewing that it continued to travel towards the South East,
(I fig. VIII.)
The track of the Cyclone being thus determined, it will be instruc-
tive to endeavour to ascertain the cause of the Nimrod’s disaster,
and the proper course to be taken in the same locality, under like
circumstances, in future. At first, steering to the N.W., and there-
fore meeting the centime, the mercury falls; she then stands to the
E.S.E. for 12 hours, and the mercury rises; she is sailing before,,
and faster than, the Cyclone. Having reached the Southern part
of the Cyclone with the wind at E., she stands to N.N.E., and on;
this course sails round the western half of the advancing Cyclone,,
the wdnds veering from E. to E.S.E., S.E.; S.; and W.S.W. ; she
is then near the northern edge of the calm central space, the sky is
open, stars shining, and weather quite moderate. She is now kept
away to the N.E., and sails into the N.E. quadrant. Of course, she
has a sudden shift to N.W., and the gale becomes a hurricane. On,
her beam-ends, in the trough of the sea, the Northern Margin of the
Cyclone passes over her, veering from N.W.; by W.; to S.S.W..
When the gale came on at N.E. veering to E. the vessel should have
been kept to the South of West, hy which both the Cyclone and the
confus ed sea in its wake would have been avoided. By standing to
the N.E. the vessel actually ran into the Cyclone, which was re-
ceding from her, and instead of pursuing her voyage, as she might
have done before this unfortunate manoeuvre, she returns to port
a crippled wreck.


On the 2nd February, 1848, the barque Isabella Anna left Syd-
ney on a sandal-wood voyage, and was condemned soon afterwards
at New Caledonia, From her log it appears that the bad weather
began on leaving Howe’s Island :
“ 6th to 11th Feb. strong gales. 12th. hove to for three days.
On the 14th wind terrific ; sea running very high. On 15th, gale
over. 16th, again blew terrifically.”
At Anatam, the brig Alfred and schooner Rosetta were driven
ashore by this hurricane.
The brig Sarah and schooner Castlereagh were wrecked in Lefoo
Bay, Loyalty Islands, 21° S., 167° E.
The log of the Castlereagh shews that the Southern part of the
Cyclone passed over her:—
“ 10th February, fresh from S.E. 11th, noon, wind increasing.
12th, strong gale from S.E. ; heavy sea rising. 4 p.m. heavy gale
from E.S.E., and a heavy sea. Midnight, heavy gusts of wind with
much rain. 13th, 4 a.m. saw the Sarah drive broadside on the
beach, the sea breaking completely over her. 4h. 30m, a.m. struck
aft, and unshipped the rudder. Daylight, blowing a complete hur-
ricane ; cut away the lower masts. At 10 a.m. went broadside on
the beach.”
The Eleanor encountered the same hurricane on the west coast of
New Caledonia, 25 miles W.N.W. of Port St. Vincent, with two
anchors put, and drove on shore. The brig Spy on the East coast
rode out the gale, but lost two whale boats. The cutter Georgiana
and three of the crew were lost. The natives at New Caledonia and
Lefoo state that such a terrific hurricane had not occurred for the last
18 years : during the height of it, the Eleanor’s barometer fell to
28 - 40. (Sydney Morning Herald.)
The late Captain Tanner informed me that at that time he com-
manded the brig Sophia, and was between Erromanga and Tanna,
on Feb. 10, barometer was 28’30, having fallen from 28 # 80 between
3 and 4 p.m., wind N.W. right off the land, 80 miles from Erro-
manga. At 6 p.m. vessel on beam-ends and drifted 30 miles to the
S.E. The gale continued at N.W. till 4 a.m., when it shifted to
S.E., and blew harder than before, and with a heavier sea, for two
days, during which the vessel drifted 50 miles to the N. TV, , On


the fourth day, the wind fell light, hut the sea kept up for a week.
On the 17th made En*omanga and Tanna.
The Sophia was at first in the N.E. quadrant of the Cyclone.
While she was drifting to the S.E. the centre, moving Eastward,
passed over her, and she then was in the S.W. quadrant, and was
exposed to the “heavier sea” of the Cyclone’s wake, and the S.E.
wind and swell, before which she drifted back 50 miles. The centre
having passed between Tanna and Erromanga, the Southern margin
would fall on New Caledonia, and the winds there be E. and E.S.E.
as they were experienced by the Castlereagh, &c. (K fig. YI1I.)
Mr. Piddington, at page 61 of his “ Sailor’s Horn Book” (1851)
gives an isolated notice of a Cyclone, the consideration of which will
be instructive. His remarks are :—•
“ The sea to the westward of New Caledonia (perhaps the whole
extent of it to the barrier reefs) is certainly subject to Cyclones ;
and they, moreover, appear at times to pursue curved tracks, so
this may, not improbably, like the corresponding latitudes of the
Indian Ocean between Mauritius and the South end of Madagascar,
be one of the usual curving tracks for the Cyclones of the Southern
Pacific. From a log of the barque Rifleman, sent me by Captain
Hammack, it appears that in running up to pass between the western
coast of New Caledonia and the Bampton Shoals, she encountered
on the 2nd March, (the hurricane season also at the Mauritius) a
Cyclone in 21° 22' S. and 157° 10' E. The wind veered with her
from E. b. N. by S.E. and S.W. to W. and N.N.W. in 3-| days,
while she was hove to; her barometer falling from 29*40 to 28*80.
Being then obliged to bear up from about 19° 30' S. to the South
East , she again fell in with the northern quadrant of the Cyclone,
which left her only in 24° S. and 164° E, From apparently some
error in copying, I am unable to say with perfect certainty that
this was a curved track , as there is a remote possibility that there
may have been two Cyclones, but I am inclined strongly to take it
as an instance of a recurving track in the Southern Pacific.”
(L fig. VIII.)
This is certainly a seductive case for the application of analogical
reasoning, although the explanation offered is not without its diffi-
culties ; but the instances, already investigated, of the Favourite,


the Sophia, and Nimrod, suggest an explanation much more satis ■
factory than either that of a double Cyclone, or that of a recurving
track. In fact the shifts of wind while hove to, and the track
while drifting, are in kind, precisely alike in the cases of the
Favourite and the Rifleman. The Rifleman’s Cyclone, like that of
the Favourite, was undoubtedly moving to the S.E., like the Nim-
rod’s and others in the same locality, for its western and northern
parts passed over the Rifleman, which then stood to the S.E., and
again fell in with the northern quadrant. In the diagram of the
Favourite’s Cyclone (Y), suppose the Rifleman to have drifted from
Cto D, and the Cyclone to move from C2to C 3. In pursuing a
South Easterly course from D, she would again overtake the nor-
thern margin of the retreating Cyclone. To adapt the diagram to
the case of the Rifleman, the letter D should be brought down the
circle nearly to where it is cut by the line A B, but this does not
affect the correctness of the explanation.
In the following recent instance the Cyclone appears to have been
for some time nearly stationary among the Islands on the east coast
of New Caledonia. As it passes down to the eastward of Norfolk
Island, we observe the allied phenomena of Electric Nimbus, thun-
der, and the shock of an Earthquake on the East Coast of New South
Wales ; succeeded by the Southerly swell left in its wake, and
Southerly Gales (M fig. VIII.) The first notice of its appearance
is contained in a letter by the Captain of the Deborah, which I have
slightly abridged from the columns of the “ Sydney M. Herald”—
“ Anatam, sth March, 1852.
“ Gentlemen, —I send you an account of the loss of the schooner
Deborah. On Monday, Feb. 16, I was attacked at New Caledonia,
the natives making an attempt to take the vessel. I had upwards
of 60 of them on deck, but fortunately got them all away. On the
17th left New Caledonia to come on to Sydney. On the 18th and
19th had a heavy gale, with a fearful sea ; ship making a good deal
of water. Bore up, intending to take the passage at the North end
of New Caledonia, when the wind, from blowing a strong gale at
S.E., chopped round and blew from the Westward. I then stood
across for Anatam, and came to an anchor on the 21st. The next
morning it blew a strong gale from the N.W. with a heavy sea.


Noon, let go the best bower, veered to 60 fathoms starboard
cable, and 30 fathoms port ditto. Sent down fore-top gallant yard
and mast, and housed the mainmast. Barometer 29’04. Next
day (23rd) moderated a good deal. Missed stays, let go both
anchors, and took in all sail. Anchors came home like scrapers.
Struck aft, unshipped the rudder, and broke the stern-post; the sea
making a clean breach over her, smashing the launch and third
boat. Compelled to leave her, a complete wreck. Saved 28 out of
the 45 tons of sandal-wood on board. We were warmly aided by
the Rev. John Geddie, resident Missionary.
P. J. White.”
This Cyclone was moving slowly, beginning on the 18th, and not
passing over until the 23rd. The Deborah, while standing to the
North, sailed out of the S.W. quadrant into the N.W. one. She
then stood across to the Eastward to Anatam, and fell into the North
East quadrant. The barometrical observation 29-04 appears to
have been taken during the N.W. gale, when the mercury would be
rising rapidly.
The Government Barque Lady Franklin had a Cyclone on the
sth and 6th of March, 1852, when to the S.E. of Norfolk Island.
The following particulars have been furnished to me by Captain
Willett:—•
“ 1852, March s.—Norfolk Island bearing N.W. distant 70 miles.
Midnight, till 6 a.m. very strong E.S.E. wind. Under close-reefed
topsail and foresail. 6 a.m. in foresail and fore-topsail. Hove to,
wind at East, veered to about S.E, Continued blowing a very
heavy gale. Top-gallant yards on deck, and all snug. Barometer
29-57. 6 p.m. began to moderate, gradually veering to E.N.E.,
and then dying away to a calm at 2 a.m. of Saturday, the 6th.
Barometer still low. 6 a.m. still calm, 7 a.m, breeze from the
Westward, gradually freshened, and blew a heavy gale from W.N.W.,
but not so heavy as from East. The barometer commenced rising
as soon as the wind changed. 8 p.m. moderate. Norfolk Island
N.W., distant 90 miles. The barometer rose to 30*35, and stood
there for seven days. Wind S. and S.E.”
The changes of wind indicate progression to the W. of S. A
New Zealand paper states that the American brig General Worth,


was overtaken by the gale when about 100 miles to the Eastward of
Norfolk Island, and sustained damage in her sails and spars while
it continued.
The barometric curve (fig. VII.), constructed from the four daily
readings at Sydney, distinctly recognizes the passage of this Cyclone,
though Sydney must have been at the extreme western margin,
since the calm central area passed over the Lady Franklin when
about 800 miles East of Sydney.
The meteorological remarks at Sydney indicate the Southward
progress of the Cyclone, and notice the consequent remarkably heavy
swell from E. b. S. These remarks have also a certain significance
respecting the agency of electricity in Cyclones :
“ Friday, sth March.—Very light W. airs. p.m. increasing to
strong breezes from N.E. During the afternoon, electric nimbus
kept rising in the W. and S.W., and passing over to the E. and
N.E. with thunder. About 9 p.m. a dark range of clouds swept
over to Northward, with a Southerly squall, and it continued to
blow heavily from South through the night.
Saturday, 6th.—Coarse southerly wind and flying showers in
forenoon. Between 2 and 3 p.m. storms of rain with thunder from
S.W., and atmosphere quite cold and chill. Subsequently fresh
S.W. wind, passing nimbus, cold and raw. After 10 p.m. a cloud-
less sky.
Sunday, 7th.—Light westerly airs till 9 a.m. N.B.—A remark-
ably heavy swell setting in all this day and night from the E. b. S.,
which has caused a great surf to break against the cliffs.”
The u S. M. Herald” states that the Keera steamer left Sydney
on the 6th March, at 8-5 a.m. against a strong southerly wind, and
arrived at Woollongong at 4’45 p.m., although the sea was running
so heavy that several craft, including the Shamrock steamer, lay
snug in Watson’s Bay until Sunday morning. The same paper
states that, on the sth March, while the Star, whaling barque, was
running for the middle ground, she encountered a heavy gale from
South East. Rounded the ship to on the starboard tack, the wind
suddenly veered to the South , with a heavy, sea running; which
stove the lee quarter-boat, carrying away the davits, and starting
the covering board, after stancheons, &c.; and being compelled to
cut away the boat, Captain Eury put in to Sydney to repair.


The change from S.E, to S., with a heavy sea, confirms the
Southerly progress of the Cyclone.
The brig Maukin was lost in Sandy Bay, near the North Cape
of New Zealand, during the heavy gales of Saturday, the 6th March.
Captain Eames describes the disaster in the “ New Zealander" of
24th March :
“On Friday, sth March, the Maukin was 16 miles N.E. b. E.,
by compass, from Knuckle point, a stiff breeze blowing from the S.E.
The vessel hove to under a close-reefed main topsail, and heading
about N.E. b. E., thus making aN.orN. b. W. drift, A heavy
sea running. Wind gradually increased towards night, got the
quarter boats up to the davit-heads. About 10 p.m. wind shifted to
East.
Saturday, 6th.—-At 2 a.m. wind hauled two points more to the
Northward, i.e., E.N.E. Between 4 and 5 a.m. it blew very hard,
so as almost to lay us on our beam-ends, and the lee quarter-boat
was swept away. About a.m. saw the land on our lee beam,
not more than a mile distant. Saw the North Cape on our weather
bow. Determined to run into a little bay. As we went through
the surf, one sea came aboard of us, smashing the starboard boat
all to pieces, and deluging the decks. All hands, but two at the
wheel, were in the rigging ; or many of them would, doubtless,
have been swept overboard. The vessel then struck, and a succes-
sion of seas poured over us. One man was swept away and lost."
The Katherine Stewart Forbes, a barque from London, was off
the North Cape, on Friday the sth March and lost one man off the
foreyard during the heavy gale of that day.
In the “ New Zealander” of the 10th March, it is stated that, —
“On Friday night, and during the whole of Saturday, the neigh-
bourhood of Auckland was visited by a gale of unusual severity, the
wind blowing for the most part E.N.E., and mounting to a furious
storm at intervals. Much damage was done to fences, young trees,
See. ; but it was in the harbours that the most injurious effects were
experienced. Two cutters and a schooner were completely wrecked,
and considerable damage done among the small craft. We have
had no intelligence from the East Coast, but we can scarcely venture
to hope that the tempest passed over without producing injurious
results in some places.


From the same paper we learn that during the gale, on Saturday,
(6th), about mid-day, H.M. Surveying Schooner Pandora, then at
anchor off Omokoite, in the Kaipara, parted both her anchors, and
was driven on shore. Much fear for her safety was entertained
until Sunday at noon, when the wind changed at high water, and
she was got off, having sustained no material damage.
In the “ Sydney Morning Herald” of 10th March, a Correspon-
dent at Goulhurn announces the occurrence there of an Earthquake
Shock on Sunday.—“ This morning, the 7th instant, a great num-
ber of the townspeople of Goulhurn were awakened about 5 o’clock
(rather before) by a shock of an Earthquake, which was preceded
by a rumbling noise like distant thunder ; so violently was every-
thing near the wall shaken that it appeared as if robbers were pil-
laging the houses; the crockeryware on the wash-stands rung
against each other.”
The log of the Packet Brig Emma, then on her passage from
Hobart Town to Sydney, shews the influence of the Cyclone on the
winds off the East coast of Yan Diemen’s Land :
“ Friday, sth March, 2 a.m. —Storm Bay. At 10 a. m. a heavy
breeze from westward, veering to S.W., stowed top-gallant sails,
and double-reefed topsails. Noon, hard breeze and rain.
Saturday, 6th.—p.m. gale from S.W. and rain. Cape Pillar N.E.
4 miles.
Sunday, 7th.—Hard gale from S. and thick weather. Midnight,
moderating. 10 a.m. Cape Howe, S.W. b. S. 20 miles.
Monday, Bth. —Hard South gales , squalls, and heavy rain.
In the Journal of Lieutenant King, published in the 14th chapter
of “ Hunter’s New South Wales,” is a good description of a hurri-
cane which seems to have passed over Norfolk Island in a South
Easterly direction, (N fig. VIII.)
“ The interval of fine weather was succeeded by a hurricane that
was dreadful beyond description. In the morning of the 25th Feb-
ruary, (1789) we had light winds from N.E. and very dismal, dark,
cloudy weather; with constant torrents of heavy rain. Towards noon,
the wind blew a gale, and kept increasing in violence. At midnight, it
shifted to E.S.E., and blew with great fury, attended with constant


deluges of rain. At 4 a.m. of the 26th, several of the largest pines
were blown up by the roots. From 4 until noon, the wind increased
to a very severe hurricane, with the heaviest rain I ever saw, or
heard of. Pines and oak trees of the largest size were bloivn down
every instant; the roots were torn up, with rocks that surrounded
them, frequently leaving pits at least 10 feet deep. Some of the
very large trees, which measured 180 feet in length and 4 feet in
diameter, were thrown, by the violence of the tempest, to a consider-
able distance from the place where they grew; and others, whose
roots were too deep in the earth to be torn up, bent their tops nearly
to the ground. The gale now raged with the most violent fury,
which defies all description ; whole forests seemed, as it were, swept
away by the roots. By one o’clock in the afternoon, there were as
many trees blown down round the settlement as would have em-
ployed fifty men for a fortnight to cut down. The swamp and the
adjoining vale were overflowed, and had every appearance of a large
navigable river. The surf ran mountains high; in the road the sea
ran very high, often eclipsing Nepean Isle. Strong log-houses were
blown downy The violence of the wind blew up cabbages, turnips,
&c,, by the roots ; and what remained in the gardens were turned as
black as if they had been burnt. At 3 p.m. the wind veered round
to South, and moderated; and at sunset the weather was very plea-
sant. During the remainder of the month, we had very pleasant
weather, the wind at South West, but a heavy surf kept still
running.”
The South West quadrant of the Cyclone passed over Norfolk
Island, the central space being a little to the Eastward of the Island,
as was the case also in March, 1852.
It may be useful to endeavour to form an idea of the rate of pro-
gression and of the magnitude of the preceding Cyclones, in such
cases as afford data for computation.
In 1842, the central area travelled from Upolu to Mangaia, about
900 miles, in 54 hours, i.e., from noon of the 15th to 6 p.m. of the
17th, which gives 17 miles for the mean hourly rate. In 1846, the
central area passed from Raratonga to Mangaia, 40 miles, in 9
hours ; the velocity was therefore 5 miles an hour. The rate at
Mangaia being 5, and between Upolu and Mangaia 17 miles, the
rate at Upolu would be 29 miles. These decreasing rates harmonize


with the observed gradual diminution of velocity as a Cyclone
approaches the vertex of its track.
The distance between the Nimrod and the Isle of Pines, about
600 miles, was traversed in about 43 hours, i.e., from 4 p.m. of the
13th to 11 a.m. of the 15th, which gives about 14 miles an hour for
its mean velocity of transit.
From the Feejee Islands to New Zealand is about 1100 miles,
which was passed over in 100 hours, viz,, from midnight of the 25th
February to 2 a.m. of the Ist March. The mean hourly velocity
was therefore 11 miles.
The investigation of the magnitude of a Cyclone must, in general,
be liable to much uncertainty. Indeed, their exterior limits scarcely
admit of being distinctly defined; and their influence on the air
seems to extend considerably farther in front than in the rear of the
central space. Moreover, in the cases now under consideration, the
average rates of progression just deduced can only be regarded as
very rough approximations, derived from vague data.
The Favourite’s Cyclone, in 1842, appears to have been 8 or 9
hours in passing over Upolu; which, at 29 miles an hour, gives
about 250 miles for the chord extending from the Cyclone-points
N.E. to S.E., and therefore subtending a right angle at the centre.
Whence the diameter is found to be about 350 miles.
The velocity at Mangaia being 5 miles, the diameter there would
come out somewhat larger, as it ought, since Cyclones generally
expand as they progress.
At Raratonga, in 1846, the actual violence lasted 6 hours, and
the chord extending from the Cyclone-points E. to S.W. was there-
fore 30 miles. The annulus of most intense action consequently
had a diameter of about 50 miles ; but, as the wind had blown
strong from the Eastward for a day or two before, the diameter of
the whole Cyclone was probably not less than 200 miles.
The time of transit of the Camden’s Cyclone, in 1840, was about
50 hours, from E, to S.W., at about 11 miles an hour; making a
diameter of about 600 miles, which does not differ materially, con-
sidering the approximate nature of the data, from that assigned to
it by Lieutenant Wilkes.


On re-considering the whole of the information which has now
been brought together, it will, I think, appear evident that the
Tropical Hurricanes of the South Pacific are Cyclones , or revolving
storms; and that the order of rotation is N.E.S.W.; or, in the direc-
tion of the hands of a watch. So far the results obtained fully con-
firm the indications of Analogy. But the conclusion respecting the
direction of the progressive motion of these Cyclones does not con-
firm the statement of Mr. Piddington, “ Horn Book,” (p. 59,) that
“they appear to come from the Eastward among the Islands,” and
is, indeed, altogether opposed to the conjectures based on Analogy.
For, instead of satisfying the conditions announced in the third of
the hypothetical conclusions with which this Investigation set out,
they appear to rise in the North West region of the South Pacific,
somewhere in the neighbourhood of Torres’ Straits; they then travel
to the Eastward; and between 10° and 20° S. are found, almost in-
variably, to be moving towards the South East. Between 20° and
30° they probably recurve, as they are generally moving to the
Southward between these parallels: and in higher latitudes are
found passing to the Westward of the South.
The general Storm track of the South Pacific Ocean appears to
follow the curvature of the East coast of Australia; as the Storm
track of the South Indian Ocean does that of the West coast of Aus-
tralia. The West Indian Storm track also seems to be greatly in-
fluenced by the form of the coast around which it sweeps.


END OF PAET I


PART 11.
ON THE HURRICANES OP TORRES’ STRAITS, THE WEST AND SOUTH
COASTS OP AUSTRALIA, BASS’S STRAITS, AND VAN DIEMEN’S LAND:
THE HOT WINDS OP AUSTRALIA, &c.
The hurricane that destroyed the Settlement of Port Essington
(H° 30' S. 132° E.) in Nov. 1839, may be regarded as a type of a
West Australian and South Australian Storm in its initial phaze.
(0, fig. VIII.) It is thus described by the late Captain Stanley,
K.N., in the u Nautical Magazine,” 1841 :
“ Monday, 25th Nov.—A strong breeze set in from S.E., with
drizzling rain, but the barometer remained at 29 ’9O, its usual point.
Between 7 and 8 a.m. the wind drew round to the Southward, and
the barometer began to fall rapidly. At 10 a.m. it blew furiously
from S,, barometer 29-10. Many trees were now blown down.
At midnight, the wind drew round to Eastward, and blew a
perfect hurricane, before which nearly every thing gave way;
the trees came down in every part of the Settlement, the marines'
houses were all blown down; the church, only finished a week,
shared the same fate: barometer 28-52, About 2 a.m. the wind
shifted suddenly to the Northward, from which point, for about
half an hour, its fury was tremendous; the Government House,
built on stone piers, was blown away from them to a distance
of nine feet. The sea rose feet, by measurement afterwards,
above the usual high-water-mark. H.M.S. Pelorus, having parted
her cables, was driven on shore, and thrown over on her beam-
ends, on the N.E. point of the Settlement, where, heeling over
82°, her starboard side was buried nine feet in the mud, leaving the
keel three feet clear of the ground, (Afterwards dug out and got
afloat.) At daylight, the barometer rose slowly to 29-90, the gale
moderated, and the sea went down so fast, that between 7 and 8 a.m.
we were able to send a boat to the assistance of the Pelorus; after


8 A.M. the wind blew strong from the Northward for two days, with
heavy rain. The extent of the hurricane must have been very
limited. At Coepang, a strong gale from the S.W. w*as experi-
enced, and also between Java and Timor, on the 26th, but the wind
did not change. Even 18 miles North, atYashon Head, the change
of wind must have been greater, though equal in force. There the
first trees fell with the wind from W.S.W., a few fell when the wind
was East, and most when the wind was N.W.”
During November, 1839, the Beagle was lying in Victoria River
(14° 40' S. 129° 21' E.), about 270 miles S.S.W. of Port Essing-
ton. The following observations are from vol. ii. of the work of
Captain Stokes :
“ 1839, Nov. 3.—A thunder storm, followed by a tremendous fall
of rain. This storm began at S.E., and drew round by E. to N.W.
The torrents of rain lasted two hours, and cooled the air so rapidly
as, in that time, to reduce the thermometer from 92° to 82°.
Nov. 7,—Night, several meteors in N. and N.W. falling per-
pendicularly.
Nov. 8. —7 p.m., a violent squall, sky threatening in S.E., wind
veei'ed from S.E. to N. It lasted an hour, accompanied by harsh
screams of affrighted birds, moaning wind, awful rolling thunder,
and fearfully brilliant lightning, with drenching showers of rain.
About 8 p.m. we noticed a singular meteor in the E.S.E. darting per-
pendicularly upwards. It lasted 10 seconds. Before midnight we
saw a great many, passing chiefly from S.E. to N.W.
Nov. 9.— p.m., a squall like that of last night.
Nov. 13.—Midnight, a sharp squall from S.E.
Nov. 19.—Barometer at ship had ranged from 30*08 to 29*97.
Meteors were numerous between the 7th and 11th November.
Nov. 25.—A very extraordinary change in the winds. Instead
of the usual N.W. breeze after 10 a.m. there was a moderate one
from E.S.E ., which drew round gradually by E. to N. At sunset,
gloomy; barometer as usual. At midnight wind changed suddenly
from light N.N.W. to a fresh breeze from S.E., with rain. Morn-
ing, veered to E.S.E., with squalls from E.N.E. and heavy rain.
Dense masses of cloud covered the sky. Thermometer down to
75°. Barometer, 30*06, and at 2 p.m. of the 26th barometer 29*98.
Night, squally.


Nov. 27.—Barometer lower all day than it had been at all. At
2 p.m. barometer 29*91.
The fact of the time when the weather was worst haying been
the same at Port Essington and in Victoria River, and of the French
Discovery Ships meeting it in Torres' Straits first, shews the wes-
terly course of the storm.
Its Northern edge did not reach Coepang, but a strong S.W. gale
on the 26th shewed that it was passing. We were informed at
Timor that hurricanes were never felt there, but occur once in four
or five years to the Southward of it. A vessel lost her topmasts in
the Port Essington Hurricane near Sandal-wood Island.”
Fiery meteors, and hurricanes, are the usual concomitants of Vol-
canic eruptions ; and it is probable that some Volcanic paroxysm
gave rise to this Cyclone. Its westerly motion through the Straits
is shewn by the veering of the wind both at Port Essington and
at Victoria River. That the S.W. gale at Coepang was not fol-
lowed on the 26th by gales from W. and N.W., shews that the
Cyclone was not then moving due West, but that its track was
inclining to the Southward of West.
The fact stated by Captain Stanley respecting the changes of wind
at Point Vashon, proves that the centre lay only a few miles to the
North of Port Essington; and the Southern Margin extended to
Victoria River : hence the diameter was not less than 500 miles.
The exact position of the French ships, and the time when the
Cyclone passed them, would enable us to calculate the rate of pro-
gress. The following additional details are from an account given
in the “ Perth Gazette,” Swan River :
“ The Settlement of Port Essington swept away by a Hurricane.—
On Sunday, the 24th November, 1839, there was no indication of
a change of weather. About 7 p.m. a squall from the Southward
worked gradually towards the Settlement, and extended itself in a
very heavy thunder-storm, with the most vivid forked lightning,
rain, and wind, for about 3 hours. The sky became clear, but more
than usual sheet lightning was seen during the night. On Monday
the sky was heavy and lowering, with a fresh breeze and spitting
rain. At 8 a.m. the wind moderated, but the sky was lowering,
and threatening rain. At noon the wind increased, and it was dan-
gerous to venture in a boat to the shipping. 5 p.m., a strong gale.


8 p.m., a heavy gale, barometer still falling . At 10 p.m. the hurri-
cane commenced. Trees were torn up, and falling in every direc-
tion. Large branches were carried by the force of the wind
some hundred yards. The very stones were flying, Every house
in the Settlement, except the Officers’ Mess-house, Store, and
Hospital, was blown down. Government House was thrown from
the piles on which it was built upwards of 10 feet. The harbour
was one sheet of foam. H.M.S. Britomart was seen to drift before
dark, and H.M.S. Pelorus was riding heavily at her anchors. From
10 to daylight the hurricane raged with unabated fury. At mid-
night the wind changed from South to East , and in a few minutes
afterwards from East to North, blowing with redoubled effort. At
daylight the Pelorus was ashore on her broadside at Minto Head,
having lost eight men. Many of the men were up to their necks in
water, and others holding on by the weather rigging, the sea break-
ing violently over them. The church was blown down, and all the
houses, boat-sheds, armourer's shop, &c, destroyed. All the boats
in the Colony, about 20, were complete wrecks. The Pier, with
great quantities of provisions, tanks, casks, &c., were all washed
away. The banana, plantain, and all other trees, and plants, were
destroyed. The tide rose 10 feet higher than usual, and the wells
were salt for three months afterwards. The Britomart drove with
the gale, with three anchors a-head, during nearly the whole time
of the hurricane, though the bottom is a soft tenacious clay. Since
the hurricane not a bird of any kind has been seen, —many were
found dead after it. Port Essington is now a perfect wilderness.
What has been done during the last 18 months by 100 men is
entirely destroyed.”
The centre of this Cyclone was a few miles to the North of Port
Essington, and was moving to the Westward. The following notices
'probably indicate its track to the Eastward, after recurving in the
South Indian Ocean;—“On the 13th December, 1839, the Beagle
had a strong breeze from Northward, while at anchor in Gage’s
Roads on the West coast of Australia, and had to let go an extra
anchor”.—Captain Wickham, R.N.
On the 24th December the centre of a Cyclone passed the meri-
dian of Circular Head, Van Diemen’s Land, the barometer falling
more than an inch between the 21st and 23rd,


At the Hampshire Hills, Van Diemen’s Land, on the 23rd De-
cember, 1839, there was thunder and lightning and a fall of # 4l inch
of rain. On the 24th constant heavy rain, 2-30 inches in the day,
with much thunder and lightning ; the wind changing from N. E. to
S.W., (fig. X. A., 1 & 2.)
At the same time that this Cyclone was passing over the French
Expedition in Torres’ Straits, and the British ships at Port Essington
and Victoria River, another Cyclone, probably from the same source,
was passing to the Eastward over the American Expedition in the
South Pacific Ocean. On the 24th November the Expedition was
in 22° 27' S., and 172° 10' E., and experienced a remarkably severe
storm of thunder and lightning with much electric fluid ; and a vio-
lent gale beginning from N.W. and shifting to S.W. On the two
following days head-winds (S.W.) and a heavy cross-sea, (P fig. VIII.)
In Mr. Thom’s work on Storms are imperfect notices of two hur-
ricanes, the first at Timor on the 21st April, 1843, and the second
below Java on the 24th April, which were probably due to the pas-
sage to the Westward of one and the same Cyclone, issuing from
Torres’ Straits. The “Morning Herald” states that “on the night
of the 21st April, 1843, there was a terrible hurricane at Timor
(10° S. 124° E.), which was especially destructive in the island of
Rottee, where vast numbers of trees and many houses were blown
down. Seventy-five persons lost their lives. In Timor some trees
were thrown down, but the damage was not so considerable.”
(Q fig. VIII.)
The island of Rottee lies at the S.W. extremity of Timor ; hence
the preceding facts show that the centre lay to the South of Timor.
The second appearance of this Cyclone is recorded in the log of the
Swedish barque Artemise :
“ 1843, April 24.—Strong wind N.E, barometer 30'44. Thick,
dark, gloomy weather. 9 a.m. wind S.W. b. W. Hove to. Noon,
under bare poles. 10° S. and 106° E. Thick, dark atmosphere,
barometer 29*78.
April 25. —2 p.m., wind shifted from N.E. to S.W. in a small
squall. About midnight, a hard squall; wind then shifted to N.E.
and E.N.E. Ship lying on her beam -ends, a.m., ditto wind and
weather. Barometer 27*30 at midnight, and 27*40 at 9 a.m.


April 26.—Blowing very hard, a regular hurricane, with thick,
dark atmosphere. Ship’s head to W. driving S.W. At 4 a.m.
wind shifted to S. At 5 a.m. all three topmasts went, with the
head of the mainmast. Fore-yard went overboard. Barometer 27*80.
April 27. —1 p.m,, wind again shifted round by Southward to
Eastward ; blowing hard, with a heavy high sea. Ship labouring
hard. Barometer 29*20. a.m., the wind a little more moderate, and
continued decreasing. Barometer 30*4. Clearing the wreck.”
The barometric curve (fig, X., B 1) shows that the central space
passed the meridian 106° E. about midnight of the 25th, and it
passed that of 124° E. about midnight of the 21st; it had therefore
traversed 18° in 4 days, and was moving to the westward at about
270 miles a day.
The following also occurs in Mr. Thom’s work :
“Thebrig Maguasha, from Swan River to Sandal-wood Island, was
in 18° 30' S. and 116° E. on the 27th Feb. 1843 steering N. E. At
noon, strong S.S.E. breezes. 9 p.m. increasing breezes, in second
reef of topsails. Midnight, wind S. strong and squally, with heavy
rain. Furled mainsail and foresail.
28.—6 a.m., wind S. increasing to a perfect hurricane, fore and
main-topsail gave way, furled the remains, and scudded under bare
poles. 8 a.m., wind S.W., still blowing, with continued heavy rain.
10 a.m., a heavy sea struck the vessel, and she broached to. 1 p.m.,
wind W.N.W., a heavy gale, and continued rain.
March 1. —6 a.m., moderate breezes, and clear. 8 a.m., light
breezes, with a confused sea. Noon, moderate and fine. 16° 9' S.”
The Cyclone here begins at S.S.E., and veers to S.S.W. and
W.N.W., but as the brig sails about 130 miles to the N.E., the pro-
gressive motion was not so much to the South of West as the shifts
of wind would imply, (R fig, VIII., and fig. X. B 2.)
The following Cyclone, of which the account appeared in a local
Newspaper, seems to belong to the Port Essington Class:—
“ On the 15th April, 1849, the Guardian, from Manilla to Sydney,
was in 18° S. and 105° E. At 1 a.m., increasing E. gales and sea,
hove to. 10 p. m., lay to under bare poles. Midnight, gale in-
creased to a hurricane.


April 16.—Daylight, hurricane still raging with great fury, foresail
&c., blown from the yards, 7 a.m., a heavy sea struck the vessel,
broached to, on beam-ends, cut away mainmast and the ship righted.
About noon, the hurricane began to abate, but still blew a violent
gale. Pumps kept going. The hurricane lasted 12 hours without
intermission, during which the wind veered from East (the point at
which it commenced) to South, and W. b. S. The barometer fell
from 29'60 to 28’89. The gale continued unto the 20th, with rain,
and a terrific sea running from Southward.”
The veering here would imply that the Cyclone was moving to the
East of South, but the Guardian must have drifted considerably,
first to the Westward and then to the Northward; so that the Cyclone
had in all probability issued from Ton’es’ Straits, and was moving
towards the S.W. The following notice, dated 17th May, from
Singapore, confirms this suggestion :
“ Two days after passing the Leuwin the Candahar rolled top-gal-
lant masts over the side from a very heavy westerly sea. At same
time, 10° to the Northward, it was blowing a tremendous hurricane,
by which several vessels were dismasted, and others damaged.”
A storm in which the wind veered from N.W. to S.W. passed
Circular Head on the 25th and 26th of April.
The great depression in the barometric curve (fig. X., B 3),
shows that this was a Cyclone of considerable violence, moving to
the Eastward ; but I have not met with any intermediate observation
which could enable me to decide that the latter was identical with the
Cyclone of the Guardian.
Mr. Piddington gives an imperfect notice of a Cyclone which
appears to have come from Torres’ Straits in December, 1847, and
to have been moving to the S. of W., when it was avoided by the
Dutch ship Roompot, although others suffered by it for want of
proper management.
The very remarkable Cyclone in January, 1848, by which the
American ship Howqua was dismasted in 15° S. and 115° E. was un-
doubtedly of the Port Essington class. This ship met with a Cyclone
of terrific violence in which her barometer fell 2 - 25 inches, and she
was near foundering. She first ran up with a South Westerly gale
till she had a shift to South, which broached her to, and she shortly
fell into the calm centre, with the wind at S.E. and East. She
then had it North Easterly and North.


Mi\ Piddington says u we can only account for these shifts and
lulls by a track travelling up from the South, and then curving
away to the North West." (S fig. "V III.)
Now, there does not exist, and in my opinion there never can be ,
a well-authenticated instance of a Cyclone travelling towards the
Equator , and therefore the track assigned is a priori a highly im-
probable one. It is, moreover, unnecessary. The Howqua, sailing
to the South Eastward while the Cyclone was moving to the S. of
West, would pass through the S. W. quadrant, where the winds from
S.W. would become S., then S.E., and E. with a calm. The S.E.
quadrant then passed over the dismasted ship, the winds being N.E.
and North.
Mr. Thom states that on January 6th, 1812, the Ahercromby, a
1200 ton ship, was dismasted, and very nearly foundered in a gale
in 14° S. and 115° E. The wind began at N. and veered to E. and
S.E., then suddenly chopped round to N.W. This is too vague to
be of much use; but if the change from S.E. to N.W. occurred
after the vessel was dismasted, it shows that the Cyclone was mov-
ing towards the S.W. (T. fig. VIII.)
In February, 1839, a violent Cyclone passed over the exploring
party of Captain Grey at Shark’s Bay, in North Western Aus-
tralia; moving from the Continent in a South Westerly direction
into the South Indian Ocean. (U fig. VIII.)
The following abridged account contains the principal features of
the phenomenon :
11 Bernier Island, Shark’s Bay, 25° S. 113° E., 1839, Feb. 26.
Throughout the day blew nearly a gale from S.E. Same through-
out the 27th. During the evening and night heavy squalls, with
rain, and much thunder and lightning. Feb. 28, sailed to Dorre
Island, wind had fallen perceptibly, only alarming sign was the pecu-
liar look of the sky. About 11 pm. blowing a terrific gale of wind
from S.E. with occasional vivid flashes of lightning. The gale be-
came a perfect hurricane. The storm now appeared to lull a little,
and in a few minutes (about sh. 30m. a.m. of Ist March) it sud-
denly dropped. The wind, which had hitherto been from S.E.,
shifted instantaneously to N.W. We all quailed, or fell before
for it came with sudden and indescribable violence. There was not


a tree on the island; hut the bushes were stripped from the ground,
and I found it impossible to keep my legs. At 2 p.m., the storm
lulled considerably. The sea rose 53 yards above high water-mark.
During the height of the storm, about 7 a.m. of the Ist, I caught a
Cormorant on the beach, the bird not even attempting to fly, being,
in appearance, completely appalled at the violence of the wind.”—
( Grey's Journals of Expedition to N. W. Australia , chap, xiv.)
Several whalers in the neighbourhood of Shark’s Bay suffered
considerable loss of masts, sails, &c., by this Cyclone; which was
moving to the South West. After recurving, and passing to the
South East, it crosses the meridian of Yan Diemen’s Land on the
30th March, the wind at Circular Head being Easterly, and very
boisterous for some days before, with lightning, and then changing
to S.W. The barometric curves for Circular Head and the Hamp-
shire Hills, shew that the Cyclone had not lost much of its violence,
and the shift from Eastward to S.W. indicates an Easterly progres-
sion, (fig. X. A. 3 & 4.)
An extract from the log of the Eudora, Captain Addison, will
shew the weather that prevailed from the 14th to the 30th March,
along the South Coast of Australia :
“ 1839, March 14-—4l° 21' S. 100° E., fresh gales from W.N.W.
thick weather, and a heavy sea.
15.—Wind light from the S.W.
16.—Fresh breeze, N. b. E. to N.N.W.
17.—Strong from N.
18.—Strong breeze, cloudy, with rain. Wind round from, N.W.
to S.W.
19.—Strong breeze from W. and S.W.
20.—Fresh breeze, S.W., with hard squalls.
21.—Hard squalls, S.W. to N.W.
22.—Strong West gales, hard squalls, rain, and a very heavy sea.
23. —Ditto ditto. p.m., moderate, S.W.
24. —Moderate, p.m., round from S.W. to N. strong ,
25.—Strong, N. b. W.
26.—Light S.E. Mewstone, V. D. Land, N. 80° IT 104 miles.
27.—Light airs from S.E.
28.-—Light S.E. and calm.
29.—Strong from E.S.E.
30.—Squally, with rain, W. and W.S.W. Arrived at Hobart
Town.” H


The barometrical fluctuations on board the Eudora, coupled with
the changes of wind in the above, show that, in sailing to the East-
ward, she sometimes overtook, and sometimes was overtaken by, the
Cyclone. On the 21 st and again on the 24th she sailed past the centre.
The examples already produced are sufficient to demonstrate
that a class of Cyclones exists (which, for distinction’s sake, I
have styled the Port Essington class) which issue from Torres’
Straits, and progress to the South of West. That they recurve to
the Southward, and then move to the South East, can scarcely
admit of doubt.
Colonel Reid has furnished a good instance of the Southerly motion
of a Cyclone when passing the vertex of its track in the case of the
H.E.I.C.S. Bridgewater, which encountered a severe hurricane in
March, 1830, about 20° 55' S. and 90° E. (Vfig. VIII.)
Sailing to the Westward, the Bridgewater met the storm with the
wind blowing at North East, and when it abated the wind was at
North West; but the intermediate points are not stated in the log.
The log states that a heavy sw T ell from the Northward preceded the
storm. On the 2nd March the barometer w r as 29-75, On the 4th,
the wind being Easterly, the ship hove to on the larboard tack under
the trysail, until that blew to pieces ; after which she hove to under
bare poles, heaving her guns overboard. The barometer fell until
it was at 28-80, with the wind increasing in violence, so that the ship
was in much danger of foundering. After the gale, the Bridgewater
was left with only her foremast, and the stump of her mizen-mast.
Here the motion is due South, The ship sailing to the Westward
first encountered the Northerly swell, which precedes the East side
of the Cyclone. The wind N.E. she is hove to, and the wind would
veer by N. to N.W., while the Cyclone passed over her. She would
then have a confused cross-sea, ending with a heavy swell from
South, forming the wake of the Cyclone.
In the year 1850, the Baretto Junior, female convict ship,
arrived at Hobart Town, having suffered considerable injury from a
most severe hurricane in 46° 30 / S. and 82° 40' E. The following
particulars are from the ship’s log:
“ July 10th, 8 a.m. —Light winds, inclining to calm. 9h.
30m., wind light and variable, trimming sails as requisite. 11 A.M.,
light variable airs, almost a calm, and snow falling fast. Baro-
meter 29-50 j thermometer 40°. Noon, moderate breezes front


Eastward , tacked ship to N.E., snowing heavily. Ih. 30m. p.m.,
barometer 29-40, wind increasing, shortened sail to a double-
reefed topsail, stowed jib, &c. 3h. 30m. p.m., barometer down
to 29-20: at this time there was not more wind than all sail
could have been carried with ; but from the rapid falling of the
barometer, with a Southerly wind, it was considered advisable to
stow the fore-topsail and mainsail, and reef the foresail. At sh.
30m. light airs, almost calm , but the barometer still falling rapidly;
took in all sail but the main-topsail, trysail, and fore-topmast stay-
sail, and secured mizen boom and gaff upon the deck. 7 p.m,, strong
winds, coming in squalls ; sent hands aloft to stow the reefed fore-
sail, but before it was made properly fast, the gale burst upon them
with tremendous fury, and the hands were called off the yard, lest
it should be carried away, and take the men with it. At 7h. 30m.,
blowing a tremendous gale, barometer falling very fast. Finding
that the ship’s masts must inevitably go, if exposed to the whole
fury of the blasts, kept ship away before the wind to the E.N.E.,
the wind having veered to S.S.JJ T . 9 p.m , blowing a complete
hurricane, kept the ship right before the wind as nearly as possible,
and at the same time tried to square the main yard. Finding that
the main-trysail prevented the ship from steering, attempted to take
it in, but it was blown entirely away. 10 p.m., blowing a very
heavy hurricane, the night so exceedingly dark that it was impos-
sible to distinguish anything two yards away. Snow and hail fall-
ing heavily, and freezing hard. At this time the situation of the
ship was one of great danger, in consequence of the difficulty of
steering; the sea was very confused and high, owing to the rapid
veering of the wind, at times tumbling over the taffrail in upon the
poop. The binnacle lamps were continually blown out by the wind
forcing itself into the binnacles, and even when alight for a few
moments, the compass was with great difficulty distinguished, from
the glasses being covered with snow; the ship at the same time
rolling so heavily that the compass-cards were tossed off the pins.
Had the vessel broached to, nothing could have saved the lower
masts, and the consequence of their going would most likely have
been the loss of the ship, as it would have been impossible to have
cut the wrecks away, the darkness being so intense. At midnight,
the hurrican'e was at its height, barometer 28-042, and the wind and
sea such as the oldest sailors had not experienced before. At this


time, it is supposed that the head of the main-topmast cap, cross-
trees, &c., were blown away, carrying the main-top-gallant mast and
yards with them, which, for the remainder of the night, were swing-
ing about, hanging by the rigging. The fore-top-gallant mast was
luckily off deck. At 1 a.m, the barometer began to rise, but the
hurricane continued with unabated fury, the sea bursting in the
cabin dead-lights, bulwarks, &c., curling and waving up over the
quarters, as the ship yawed in her course, threatening every minute
to broach to, there not being anything to steer by but the whistling
of the tempest, as it rushed past. Towards daylight the wind
somewhat abated, and the snow ceased falling. At daylight, still
blowing very hard, with a fine long run of sea , which was very wel-
come, after the high confused one of the night. Noon, blowing a
common gale from the Westward, which continued for two or
three days.”
The barometer in this case fell an inch and a-half in 14 hours.
The shifts of wind from E. to S., S.W., and W., give a progressive
motion to the Southward, the centre lying to the East of the ship ;
but as the vessel sailed to the N.E., the Cyclone was undoubtedly
moving to the South Eastward, after having passed the vertex of
its track. (Fig. YIII. Y.)
The following extract from the journal of the Surgeon Superin-
tendent on board the barque Mahomed Shah, with emigrants from
London to Port Phillip, is a striking example of the dangers that
beset the track from the Cape of Good Hope to Australia :
“ 1849, Sept. 3. —40° 28' S. 63° 45' E. Therm. 56°, barom.
28‘82. A dreadful disaster occurred this afternoon. All hands
were aloft. They had been close-reefing the fore-topsail, some of
them were reefing the foresail, and the remainder on their way down
to assist on the fore-yard, (in all, twenty-five men aloft), when sud-
denly a tremendous squall, or whirlwind, struck the ship nearly
dead aft, carrying away the three masts, and precipitating the whole
of the 25 men into the sea ! 17 were rescued, but the remaining 8
perished. Of those saved, 11 were disabled, 2 severely. The mass
of cordage and spars fell to starboard. The foremast went about 15
feet above the deck, the mainmast by the eyes of the rigging, and
the mizen-topmast by the cap. Saved nothing of consequence but


the main-yard ; obliged to cut away everything else for the safety of
the vessel. The whole afternoon was occupied in clearing away the
wreck. The ship hove to under the mizen, the only sail left, while
she strained and rolled fearfully. The night closed in gloomily,
witbq heavy squalls and rain.”
In September, 1849, the Barham and Bucephalus experienced the
Northern quadrant of a Cyclone in this neighbourhood; but Mr.
Piddington has not given the particulars.
After having passed the vertex, and recurved towards the South
East, this class of Cyclones may be expected to bear down upon
Swan River, the South Coast of Australia, and Yan Diemen’s Land,
the storm beginning with a Northerly wind and a falling barometer,
and ending with a Southerly wind and a rising barometer.
The rapidly-increasing communication between Europe and the
Australian Colonies fully justifies, and may even be said to call for,
a minute and extended investigation of the nature of the hurricanes
and gales which prevail over the region just alluded to.
In 1838, H.M.S. Beagle, Captain Wickham, was at Swan River,
and experienced a Storm which has been thus described by her
Commander :
“ May 24, 1838. —Wind strong and squally from N.E. b. N.,
sympiesometer 30*74, falling slowly until the 30th, when it was
30*16. On the evening of the 30th, a fresh breeze set in from
N.E. On the 31st it blew hard all day between N.N.E, and N.N.W.
with dark squally weather; much lightning in the S.W., with
heavy rain, that continued all night. On the Ist June, gale at its-
height ; at 8 a.m. symp. 29-93, blowing a hard gale, with heavy
squalls from N.W. Towards noon, wind veered to West, but still
blew very hard. Symp. now began to rise. In the evening, wind
W.S.W., and had moderated considerably. Next morning, symp.
had risen to 30-26, but began to fall, and wind veered to W. and
N.W., and on the 3rd blew harder than ever, with heavy rain,
thunder, and lightning, which continued until the 10th. This gale
caused a heavy sea upon the coast; the oldest residents said they
had never experienced so heavy a sea before. On the 10th the
mercury commenced to rise steadily, and the weather was fine until
■the Beagle sailed, on the 20th.”


The veering shews progression to the South East. (W, fig.
VIII.) The central space passed the meridian of V. D. Land,
about the 20th June, as shewn by the barometric curves at Circular
Head, and the Hampshire Hills. The registers at the former sta-
tion record the weather to have been stormy and tempestuous, with
lightning; the wind changing on the 20th from W. to S. W.i
At the Hampshire Hills, on the 20th, there were high W.N.W.
and S.W. winds, with thunder and snow-showers, and on the 21st at
midnight one loud peal of thunder, with frequent showers of rain and
snow. (Fig. X. A. 5 & 6.)
In 1840, on the Bth July, the Samuel Wright, the North America,
and the Endicott were wrecked in Coombana Bay, Swan River.
From an official letter to the Surveyor-General, dated 15th July,
we learn that there was a continuous heavy rain at Yasse, on the
6th. On the 7th it was mild, and in the evening it blew fresh from
N.E., increasing to a perfect hurricane from N.N.E. at midnight.
About sun-rise on the Bth it shifted to North, without moderating.
At 8 a.m. shifted to N.N.W., and blew with unmitigated fury.
About noon, it suddenly shifted to the Westward, and S.W., and
moderated so quickly that by 4 p.m. there was not more than light
airs from Southward, with frosty weather. Geographe Bay had a
tremendous sea setting in to it during the gale, which subsided in
an hour or two to perfect smoothness, the water having been above
high water-mark.
The centre of this Cyclone passes the meridian of V. D. Land
between the 10th and 11th of July. At Circular Head (4) it is
very boisterous and rainy, the wind veering from N.W. to W. on
the 11th, and then to South. The barometer falls lower at
Hobart Town (5) because the centre lay to the South of the Island.
On the eleventh a gale of wind occurs, and torrents of rain fall there ;
and the Isabella is wrecked in a Bay near the Schouten’s passage.
(Fig. X, B, 4 & 5.)
In the “ Perth Inquirer” newspaper, I have met with an inte-
resting account of a Storm at Swan River in 1842 :
“ In the night, between the 17 th and 18th of June, the Lesche-
nault district was visited by a furious storm, which made a lane
through the forest from 300 to 400 yards wide. (X fig. VIII.)
For about 200 yards in the middle of this lane, nothing is now


standing but bare trunks of trees. The storm crossed the narrow
belt of land between the sea and the Lescbenault Estuary, levelling
and stripping the trees in its course. It appears to have crossed
the Estuary in a direction from North West to South East , and to
have struck the low land on its Eastern shore, about a mile to the
South of the Town of Australind, and proceeded in the same direc-
tion through the forest, following the inequalities of the ground, and
levelling the trees in the valleys, as well as those on the hills. I
followed its course for some distance across the Collie and Preston
Rivers. The young healthy trees were generally broken off about
two or three yards from the ground, and laid from N.W. to S.E.
I was at Yasse on the night in question, which was exceedingly
stormy, with much thunder, lightning, and rain. The trees on
either side of the lane stand up like a wall, and are free from
injury.”
Yasse is about 120 miles to the South of Perth, where, however,
there occurred at the same time a very heavy storm, with hail, rain,
and lightning. The wind there on the 17th was N., and on the
18th it changed to W.S. W. and S.W., and on the 19th to W. and S.
The barometric depression on the 18th, (1) as well as the changes
of wind, shew that this was a true Cyclone, and of considerable
extent, the centre of which actually engraved its track through the
Leschenault forest.
Severe gales were experienced at Circular Head (2) and at
Hobart Town (3), from the 28th June to the 6th July. The re-
spective barometrical curves exhibit the passage of a violent and
extensive Cyclone. (Fig. X, C, 1,2, 3.)
From the 24th March to the 13th April, 1843, Mr. Thom has
shewn that the Rodriguez hurricane was passing between Java
Head and a point to the South of the Mauritius, (Y fig. VIII.)
The following Cyclone at Swan River may have been an off-shoot
from the larger one :
“On Tuesday, April 11th, 1843, Perth was visited by a most
terrific gale from the N.W., amounting indeed to a perfect hurri-
cane. We have frequently during the winter months very strong
gales from this quarter; but this gale was most unusually severe,
although lasting but for a short time, the oldest boatmen on the River


declaring that nothing like it has been experienced in their recollec-
tion. It set in about 6 p.m., and lasted until nearly 10 p.m., when
it gradually lulled. The gale was so sudden and tremendous as to
force the Success, lately from London, to drift ashore with two an-
chors down.
At Australind (120 miles south of Perth) on Tuesday evening
there was a short, but most severe storm, which threatened alarming
consequences, laying prostrate some fine trees, &c.
At Bunbury, the day had been lowering, with the wind from
the Eastward. In the afternoon a squall of wind and rain brought
the wind round to N.E. About 7 p.m. it began to blow in
gusts with great violence, and between 8 and 10 p.m. it increased to
a perfect hurricane. The fury of the gusts was irresistible. The
tide rose upwards of four feet in perpendicular height, and then in
the course of 20 minutes fell two feet. The North America,
United States’ whaler, 400 tons, drove with two anchors down, and
grounded on the bar, as did the Chance, schooner.”
The centre here lay between Perth and Bunbury, the wind being
N.W. at the former, and N.E. at the latter. At Perth, on the 12th,
the changes of wind were N.W. to W. b. N,, and on the 13th they
were from S. to S.W., indicating the Easterly motion of the Cyclone.
The Newspapers record the occurrence of the shock of an Earth-
quake at Swan River on the 4th August, 1849, together with a
severe gale, which drove the cutter Frolic over the bar, and very
high and destructive floods. At Circular Head and Hobart Town
the barometric curves indicate the passage to the Eastward of a
Cyclone, on the 11th, the winds at the former place being “severe,”
and changing from N.AV. to W.S.W. and S.W.
The schooner Plarlequin left Adelaide for Singapore on the 3rd
August, 1850. After leaving King George’s Sound, she experi-
enced a heavy gale off the Leuwin, so strong that it was impossible
to hoist sails, as they were blown to ribbons almost immediately.
The vessel drifted towards West Cape Howe, and at 3 a.m. of the
4th September, struck upon the rocks of that headland, and went to
pieces in 20 minutes. Three lives were lost.
This gale was probably from the North Westward, since West
Cape Howe is about 3° to the S.S.E. of Cape Leuwin.


From the journal of Captain Harmsworth I find that the barque
Derwent was in 48° S. 102° E. on the 28th August, 1850 :
“August 29—Dark cloudy weather, strong Northerly wind.
Noon, strong N.N.W. gales, thick, with heavy rain. 4 p.m. strong
gales, thick hazy weather, and rain. 6 p.m., cleared up, wind shifted
to W.N.W.
30.— a.m,, squally, unsettled, showers of snow. 8 A.M., moderate
N.W. wind, and cloudy. Noon, strong Northerly, and clear. 4p. m.j
came on to blow very hard suddenly from N.N.E., with heavy rain.
Hove to under close-reefed maintop-sail. 8 p.m,, shower of hail;
cleared up, wind shifted to W. b. N., in a squall. Midnight, fresh
Westerly wind, freezing hard. 48° 27' S. 109° 44' E.
31.—Strong Northerly gales.
Sept, I.— a.m., strong Northerly gale and heavy rain. 8 a.m.
Flew and rained very hard, when the wind shifted suddenly to
W.N.W., and made a very disagreeable, turbulent sea. Noon,
moderate breeze. Midnight, calm and cloudy, a westerly swell
course E. 180 miles. 48° 22' S. 118° E.
Sept, 2.— a.m., calm. 4 a.m,, light E.S.E. 8 a.m., moderate,
hazy, with snow. Noon, strong S.E. 4 p.m., calm, and heavy
rain. 6 p.m., strong N.E. 47° 50' S. 119° 40' E. N. 61° E.
74 miles.
Sept. 3.— a.m,, strong N.E., constant heavy rain. 4 a.m. quite
calm a short time, when the wind sprung up from S.W. 8 a.m.,
strong W.S.W. wind, thick weather, heavy rain, and a cross sea.
p.m,, strong W.N.W. 4 p.m., cleared up, wind light. Midnight,
fresh westerly wind. Saw the Aurora Australis.
Sept. 4,—Fresh W.S.W. gales, squalls and hail, p.m., strong
gales and squally, and a heavy sea : 47° 4' S. 126° 35' E.
Sept. 5.— a.m., strong W.S.W. 6 a.m., steady at W. * first fine
day for this last month.
6th.—ln 45° 43' S., and 135° 35' E.”
The curve of Captain Harmsworth’s barometrical observations
(4) and the above facts, shew that the centx*e passed the meridian
(120° E.) of the ship about midnight of the 2nd September. At
Circular Head (5), the gale on the 3rd was N.W., and on the 4th
W.N.W. and moderate, and on the sth W. and S.W. (Fig, X.
■C. 4 & 5).


The log of the Emma shews the effect of this Cyclone on the
East Coast of Van Diemen’s Land :
“ Sept. 4.—5 p.m., strong W.N.W. wind. Midnight, N.W.,
moderate. 2 a.m., veering to N. b. E., set port studding sails.
6h. 30m. a.m,, wind suddenly shifted to W.S.W. , took the vessel
aback, and increased to a gale. Cape Howe W.N.W. 28 miles.
Sept. s.—Heavy gale at W.S.W,, and a heavy cross sea running
a continual wash over the vessel. 7 p.m., heavy bitter squall with
hail. 4 a.m., increasing N.W., rain and lightning to S.S.W., split
topmast-staysail, and parted sheets and main top-gallant backstays.
Served the mast with a warp.
Sept. 6.— : S.W. gale, abating a little.”
In November, 1842, the Candahar, when off King George’s
Sound, had a storm which is described by Captain Ridley as form-
ing with a densely black sky to the W.N.W. in an incredibly short
space of time, and, within an hour, “ bursting upon us like a clap
of thunder, and blowing a perfect hurricane,” which lasted for about
fifteen hours, and must have dismasted the vessel if not prepared,
as she was laid with her gunwale in the water. The wind does not
appear to have veei’ed more than from W.N.W. to W.S.W. Unfor-
tunately, Mr. Piddington has not stated on what day of November
this happened, but the Cyclone evidently came from the W.N.W. ;
and, from the shift of wind, the Northern Margin passed over the
ship, on the South of which the centre was moving Eastward,
I find that at llh, 45m. p.m. of Friday, the 25th November,
1842, the Dusty Miller was totally lost off Port Fairy in a heavy
S.S.W. gale. Since leaving Launceston they had nothing but
strong Westerly winds, compelling them to put into Circular Head
twice. At noon on Friday they were 35 miles from Portland Bay,
when the wind suddenly flew from N.W. to S.S.W. in a complete
hurricane, and a heavy roll of sea got up.
The barometric curve shews that the centre passed Circular Head
about midnight on Friday, the 25th. (Fig. X., C, 6.)
The Candahar probably had this Cyclone about the 15th of
November.
In 1843, the barque Rebecca left Batavia for Sydney on the 19th
Aiigust. On 21st September, when in 39° 38’ S., and 127° E,,


she had a hurricane. It came on to blow hard about noon from
N.N.W., barometer 29’90, and increased till 8 p.m., when there
was a furious N.W. gale, with thunder and vivid lightning. The
ship scudding with close-reefed main-topsail, reefed foresail, baro ■
meter 29-30, and falling rapidly. At 10 p.m. it flew round in an
instant, hurricane-like, from N. W. to S. W. ; threw ship on beam-
ends nearly, where she lay for 14 hours, and blew the sails to atoms.
At midnight it blew terrifically, with the sea all in pyramids, baro-
meter 28-90, with furious hail-squalls. At 4 A.M. of the 22nd, it
began to cease a little, barometer 29-00, and rising. At 8 a.m.
more moderate, barometer 29*50; got her kept away from that time
till we made King’s Island. The last correct sights we had were
on the 20th at noon, long. 123° 25'. On the 25th we were, by
account, in 40° S. 142° 12' E. Steering E.N.E. Ran from noon
till 2i a.m. of 26th, 121 miles. Look-out cried “breakers a-head!”
anchored in 5 fathoms, wind still N.W. At 11 a.m,, wind West,
coming i-ound fast to the Southward, with all appearance of a gale.
Ih, 30m, p.m,, wind S.W., blowing fresh. 2h, 30m. p.m., wind
S.S.W. In heaving up the best bower, she drove, and struck hea-
vily, slipped both anchors and chains. 4 p.m., wind working round
to N.W. (where it was as black as ink), and getting very light,
although the barometer was falling fast. 5 p.m., North point of
King’s Island, E. b. S., distant mile, wind Yf.NW. 6 p.m.,
wind N.W. b. W., and increasing fast, barometer 29-40, and fall-
ing. 6|- p.m., blowing hard N.W. b. W., and increasing. Baro-
meter 29*30, falling rapidly. Put off in the boats, one boat
swamped, and all hands lost; ship drifted on shore; blowing a com-
plete gale from N.W. all night. (6).
It is evident here that two Cyclones passed over the ship, and
this is confirmed by the curve at Circular Head (7). The centre
passed over the ship at 10 p.m. of the 21st, and reached Circular
Head about 20 hours afterwards ; the distance is about 800 miles
East. The Cyclone was therefore progressing to the Eastward at
the rate of about 40 miles an hour. (Fig. X,, B, 6 and 7),
In 1845, the Cataraqui, 800 tons, an Emigrant vessel from Liver-
pool to Port Phillip, was wrecked on the west coast of King’s
Island,- of 423 persons only 9 were saved. The chief officer,


Mt. Guthrie, was one of the latter; and gave the following
particulars :
On 15th July, when 40 miles south of St. Paul’s, they had a
strong gale from N.N.W., with a heavy sea; hatches battened
down. Heavy gales from N. to S.W. , with heavy rain and dark
weather, till July 31st, lat. 39° 20' S. On Ist August, a strong
gale from N.W., increasing to a perfect hurricane. Under close-
reefed topsails and reefed foresail until Sunday, 3rd. At 7 p.m.
hove to, ship’s head N.E., estimated position 39° 17' S. 143° 22'
E. Midnight, wore ship, head S.W., gale blowing fiercely. 3 a.m.
gale moderated, bore away E. b. N., expecting to make land about
Cape Otway. 4|- a.m., struck on reef, cut away masts, about 200
were now washed off by the sea, —every sea sweeping away some of
the survivors. Noon, ship parted amidships, and about 100 more
perished. One emigrant and eight of the crew were washed through
some chasms of the reef on to the island, and saved; 414 persons
perished!
The barometric curve at Circular Head for August shews that a
series of Cyclones passed through Bass’s Straits in that month at
intervals of a few days. (Fig. X, D 1).
The following Notices, in connection with the cotemporancous
barometric curves at Circular Head, illustrate the nature of the gales
in Bass’s Straits :
“ On the Ist April, 1850, the barque Jane left Adelaide, and put
back dismasted on the 13th. At 3 a.m., on Monday, the Bth, while
lying to, a very high sea running, and a terrific gale from W.S.W.
in 124° E., about three days’ sail East of Cape Leuwin, she lost her
mainmast about six feet from the deck, her fore-top, gallant, and
mizen topmasts.”
This storm reaches the Straits on the 14th, a Northerly gale.
On the 16th the gale is W.S.W. and on the 17th S.W. (Fig. X. D 2).
The log of the Emma shews its action on the East Coast of
Australia:—
“ April 14.—Beat out to sea from Sydney. 5 p.m., dark squally
looking weather to Southward, with thunder and vivid lightning.


8 p.m., wind checked from N.W. to W., with a smart squall, and
heavy rain. Midnight, clear, with heavy squalls from W. Noon,
strong breeze from S.S.W.
April 15.—Strong from SW. 2 A.M., calm. 4 A.M., light
breeze from N.W. 9 a.m., wind checked to S.W., with a heavy
squall and rain. Noon, anchored in Twofold Bay, blowing very
hard from S.W.
April 16th, 17th, and 18th.—Heavy squalls from S.W.’ 7
This Cyclone was followed in a few days by another. The
11 Launceston Examiner” of the 4th May states that there had been
fearful weather at sea during the preceding fortnight. The Vic-
toria Packet left Melbourne on 26th April, lost top-gallant masts,
topmasts, and sails, and bore up for Kent’s Group. On the night
of the 24th April, the cutter Straggler was wrecked at the River
Forth. The schooner Ida left Melbourne on the 24th, and on the
next day shipped a sea which washed everything away, and threw
the vessel on her beam-ends; came to an anchor on the 27 th at
Kent’s Group, the wind blowing with unabated fury, drove her on
shore. The Lady Denison left Adelaide on the 17th for Hobart
Town, and was lost, with all hands.
The brigantine Elizabeth left Adelaide for Circular Head and the
River Forth on the 17th April. She was in the wake of the first
Cyclone, but experienced the whole of the second. On 24th April,
she was off the River Forth, North Coast of Van Diemen s Land,
with light breezes.
« April 25.-2 p.m., fresh breeze from N.W., with threatening
weather. 6 p.m., hard gale from W.N.W., set a double-reefed
mainsail and fore-topmast staysail. Midnight, split the staysail,
took it in, and hove to under balance-reefed mainsail, head to N.
Ship hove over almost on her beam-ends.
26.—A complete drift of wind and sea from W.S.W. 8 p.m.,
ballast fetched away, and ship in great danger. 4 a.m., Goose
Island light bearing N. b. E,, weather moderated. 9 a.m., came to
under Swan Island.
27.—8 p.m,, heavy squalls of wind and rain from W. 10 p.m.,
sent down main topmast and fore-top-gallant-yard. Midnight, gale


blowing fearfully, ship driving at times, sent down fore-top-gallant-
mast, and gave her both chains to the bare end. 8 a.m., blowing a
fair drift of wind and sea, tried to weigh the small bower, but could
not. Ship driving to the Eastward. 10 a.m., gale blowing with-
out intermission.
28.—Heavy sea running, shipped anchors and cables, and hove
to. Gale continuing from W.S.W., bore up for Sydney.’ 7
On Sunday, the 13th October, 1850, there was a heavy gale from
the Westward at Port Adelaide. At 4 a.m., next morning, the
Grecian, just arrived from London, was cast away. The remarks
of Dr. Schomburgh on this storm are of great interest:—
“ Already on the morning of the 13th, the barometer fell four
lines in the space of a few minutes shortly before the beginning of
the gale and thunder-storm, and declined about 9 p.m. to 27 inches
four lines, having stood in the morning at 28 inches line. After
9 p.m. the storm and gale increased, accompanied by a few hail-
stones, until it reached its climax at 11. Shortly before that time
we experienced a wave-like moving of the Earth , going from S.S.W.
to N.N.E., setting tables and bedsteads in motion; after the lapse of
an hour we felt a similar one, when the storm visibly abated. It
was curious that the storm, during each of the earthquakes, changed
to W., but resumed its course S.W. directly after the cessation of
them. The duration of each was three or four seconds.”
The “ Portland Guardian” gives the particulars of the loss of the
schooner Captain Cook :
“On Sunday, the 13th, at 5 p.m., Cape Otway bore N.E., and
Moonlight Head N.W., blowing hard from the Southward, with
heavy thunder and lightning, course due West.
14.—3 a.m, wind veered to S.W., with heavy squall, sea running
high, binnacle carried away. 6|- a.m., vessel struck the rocks on
west side of Cape Grant, and filled.”
The brig Essington was off Cape Howe :
“ On the 13th, at lOh. 30m, a.m., wind sprang up light from N.E.,
and gradually increased after noon. 5 p.m., weather began to
assume a threatening appearance. The sky became overcast, and
heavy masses of blue clouds began to pile themselves on the land.


14,—Fresh breeze from N.E. b. E. Noon, sky overcast, and
everything had the appearance of night. The wind veered to East,
and increased very much. 2 p.m,, took in mainsail and jib. The
sea began to make. The rain commenced, with distant thunder
and lightning. 4 p.m, blew very hard, with heavy squalls, close-
reefed topsails. Judged the vessel to be a little to N. of Twofold
Bay, and 16 miles off shore. From 4 p.m. till midnight, the thun-
der and lightning was fearful. At 9 p.m. the wind died away to a
calm for about half an hour, when the wind sprang up suddenly from
the S.E. and blew very hard, with a heavy cross-sea. It blew a
hard gale, with a very heavy sea, until 3 p.m. of the 16th, when the
gale abated, and the wind veered to the East.”
The centre, which passed the meridian of Adelaide (139° E.) at
midnight of the 13th, is at the meridian (150° E.) of Twofold Bay,
at 9 p.m. of the 14th, having travelled in an Easterly direction, 11°
in 21 hours, or about 22 miles an hour. The meteorological i*e-
marks from the 13th to the 16th at South Head, Port Jackson, are
copious and instructive :
“Sunday, 13th,—Early morn, calm and lovely; middle part,
pleasant, light N.E. breezes, p.m., northed, got strong and gusty;
latter part, cloudy and hazy.
14.—Before 9 a.m., light north airs ; then freshened a little. A
dark hazy gloom spread over during .the forenoon, attended with
some sultriness of atmosphere. About 1 p.m. stormy clouds came
over from between N.W. and N.N.E,, with lightning and thunder,
rain and squalls from the North. Storm kept gathering, and be-
tween 2-30 and 3’30 clouds bearing a most dismal murky aspect,
came rolling over from N.W. and N. Thunder and lightning
almost incessantly for several hours p.m. A heavy storm of rain,
with a little hail at 2’40, About 3 and subsequently the clouds
presented a truly dismal appearance in the S.W. and N.W. These
swept over to E. and S.E., and about 5’30 the wind got S. of W.,
moderate, and the barometer immediately rose. Clouds after this
passed off in the E. and S.E., and between 7 and 8 p.m. the sky
presented a cloudless expanse. Incessant broad lightning in the
eastern horizon after this for several hours. After 10 p.m. began
to blow hard from S.W. Continued clear forepart night; latter part,
heavily clouded again, and occasional rain; wind rising from E. of
S. coarsely ; mercury rising.


15.—6-7 a.m., weather exceedingly coarse, with violent squalls
of wind, rain, thunder and lightning. Continued strong gales south-
erly until 9'30, when rapidly declined, and for a quarter of an hour
there was a dead calm. Yane at S.E. b. E., then it jumped round
to S.W., and black clouds bore up from S.W. b. S , sullenly, with
thunder and lightning. Rain fell in very heavy showers, and almost
continuous lightnings and thunderings all through the day ; wind
extremely coarse and squally from S.E. and b. S., and W. of S.
After 3 p.m. wind more moderate fora short while, but towards sun-
set rose again in strong gales and squalls, chiefly from E. of S., with
incessant rain; thunder and lightning still nearer and more awful
than previously. After 7 p.m. the gale became quite furious from
S.E. b. S,; rain constant, as well as the lightning and thunder, the
latter breaking in louder claps. The lightning was of the most ex-
tensive general description I have seen here, pervading the whole
expanse of the heavens, originating apparently throughout the upper
regions of the clouds, scarcely any streams of the electric fluid being
observable below the cloudal range, although at times, the clouds
seemed, as it were, to sweep the earth. After 10 p.m. little change
in wind, thunder-storms had passed over, and rain more moderate
till midnight; then another most fearful storm of thunder and light-
ning, of the same continuous description, and rain, passed over from
S.W- b. S..
16.—Strong coarse Southwesterly wind and rain. Night, a
strong wind from S. b. W.
17th to 21st. —Southerly winds.”
On the 13th at Adelaide the gale was W. and S.W., with the
Essington on 14th off Cape Howe, it was first N.E., then East, with
a calm, and afterwards S.E., and at Sydney, it was Northerly on
the 14th, and Southerly on the following days. The central track
was to the North of Bass’s Straits ; this is confirmed by the compara-
tively small barometrical depressions at Circular Head (3) and
Hobart Town. The valuable observations of Dr. Schomburgh, at
Adelaide, and of that able meteorologist, Mr. Peacock, at South
Head, give great interest to this Cyclone. (Fig- X. D, 3.)
The Australian winter of 1851 was a period of unusual atmos-
pheric perturbation. Early in May the Swan River papers state


that u llio Beacon on Challenger Rock has suffered by the late
stormy weather.” A small coaster, the Bee, and some boats were
wrecked. The barometers at Circular Head and Hobart Town shew
that a powerful Cyclone passed over the meridiail of Van Diemen’s
Land about the 7th May, (fig. X. D, 4 & 5). In the Straits, the
gales began at E., and veered to N.W.; to West on the Tth, and were
S.W. during the next few days. The effects of the great disturb-
ance of the hygrometrical state of the atmosphere were unusual and
disastrous. At Adelaide a regular waterspout was seen to form on
the hills between Kooringa and the Sod Hut. The bridges were all
washed away by the flood, and Gum Creek, between Kooringa and
Clare, was impassable. On Monday afternoon, (12th May) an
alarming and destructive flood appeared almost instantaneously at
Kooringa. The houses were flooded; 1500 persons houseless, and
much property destroyed. The Mine (Burra Burra) had only the
tail of the spout about an hour before it came out to the township.
From the “ Sydney Morning Herald” we learn that the district
of Twofold Bay, 240 miles south of Sydney, and 160 north of the
entrance to Bass’s Straits, had been visited by one of the most
destructive storms on record in this country :
11 Up to Saturday, the 9th May, there was but little to foretell the
forthcoming storm : but on that day it began to blow a stiff gale
from the S.W.; it moderated a little on Sunday, and was nearly
gone on Monday, the 11th. (This was the passage of the western
half of the Cyclone which had just come through the Straits.) On
Tuesday morning it commenced raining, in the evenirig the gale
from the S.E. set in; it increased in violence during the night,-
and on Wednesday morning became a hurricane of wind and rain.
Immediately that the wind lulled a little , the rain descended more
like the waterspouts of the West Indies than the moderate rains of
our fair clime. The gale continued with unabated fury during Wed-
nesday, Thursday, and Friday, and the Township of Panbula, from
■which this is written, became a lake. The whole of the Warragabra
Stations (25 miles distant) were swept away, and several lives
sacrificed.”
During the remainder of the month of May, and beginning of
June, there was a succession of gales and boisterous unsettled wea-
ther. Among the consequent disasters at sea, the most striking
K


was that of the total wreck of the French National Corvette"
I’Alcmene, 32 guns, commanded by M. le Comte d’Harcourt, during
a heavy gale on the 4th June, midway between Kaipara and Hoki-
anga Heads,, on the West Coast of New Zealand.
The Emma, from Sydney to Hobart Town, was laid on her beam-
ends by a S.W. gale on 22nd May, the water lying in a complete
body from the top-gallant-sail to the combings of the hatchways;
and again, on the 26th May.
In the month of June occurred a most violent Cyclone, passing
along the whole South Coast of Australia, from Cape Leuwin to
Tan Diemen’s Land and New Zealand.
The Swan River papers of the 13th June report that the Beacon
on the Challenger Rock has stood the test of the late gales most
admirably, and there is now no fear of its living through the worst
of weather.
At Port Adelaide there was a storm and an alarming flood on the 5
evening of Tuesday, the 17th June. Tuesday night was a very
stormy one, having been preceded by a sudden fall of the barometer ;
the wind had been blowing fresh from the West all day, and at night
very much increased, at times rising up to a hurricane ; the embankment
gave way, and the whole of the western part of the town was sud-
denly inundated. The temporary wooden church was blown com-
pletely off the piles, and rendered useless. The gale continued
unabated through the whole of Wednesday.
The Cyclone is at Portland on. the Wednesday and Thursday. A
correspondent of the “Melbourne Daily News” says: “ It has never
fallen to our lot to witness in Portland two such days as Wednesday
and Thursday were for tempestuous weather. Rain and hail
descended at times in torrents ; on Wednesday especially, it thun-
dered and lightened during the whole day and night. The wind
was from the North and N.W. on Thursday afternoon, and blew at
times little short of a hurricane. A number of trees were blown
down. Thermometer all day on Wednesday was 43°, and only 44°
on Thursday.
The barometric curves for Circular Head (7) and Hobart Town
(8), shew a depression extending from the 12th to the 23rd June,


<of which the minimum occurs on the 18th and 19th, when there
was an unusual fall of snow in Van Diemen's Land. (Fig. X., G
7 and 8). At Circular Head, on the 18th, there was a severe N.W.
gale, with heavy squalls, thunder, and rain; at 3 p.m. barometer
28-70, gale abating. On the 19th, a west wind, and then a severe
W.N.W. gale, with thunder. On the 20th wind W.S.W., and from
the 21st to the 24th, it is S.W.
The central track of this Cyclone lay a little to the South of Van
Diemen’s Land. The following notice indicates its appearance at
New Zealand :
“ A very heavy gale of wind occurred at Port Lyttleton on the
night of the 27th June. The Sir Harry Smith, riding with three
anchors down, was nearly blown ashore. The Duke of Bronte and
the Steadfast dragged their anchors. The Raven lost her bulwarks
and two boats, the Eudora was much damaged, and the Jane Dixon
lost her larboard bulwarks and bowsprit. The last three were on
their way to Port Lyttleton. Three schooners were blown ashore,
a cutter dashed to pieces, and the brig Torrington reduced to a mere
wreck. The gale lasted 36 hours.”
I possess accounts of numerous casualties among the coasting craft,
&c., during the passage of this Cyclone, but they possess little
meteorological value.
In October, 1851, a severe Cyclone was experienced by the barque
Duke of Richmond, from London to Sydney, in 41° 35' S., and 115°
41' E, (Z, fig. VIII.) It is well-described by Captain Barclay :
n The wind, which had for the two previous days blown from the
N.N.W., with dark lowering weather, at noon of the 13th shifted to
the N.E. Bar, 29-97. A dense fog then encompassed us, and con-
tinued until 8 p.m., when the moon, peering through a sky of a pale
yellow tinge, partially dispersed it. Bar. 29-79, wind still N.E.,
blowing in gusts at intervals of from 15 to 30 minutes, with small
rain. Midnight, wind increasing, gusts more frequent and severe.
Bar. 29*50. Close-reefed topsails and handed the courses. 2 a.m.,
bar. 29-48, heavy rain, wind N.N.E, At 3 a.m. the sky had a very
remarkable appearance, daylight appeared to have fully broke, all


the western quarter of the heavens being of a lurid red, while every
other paid, from the zenith round, was covered with a murky impe-
netrable haze, which the ocean appeared to reflect, for, instead of its
usual colour, it appeared of a dirty green. At 4 a.m., bar. 29 - 33,
made all snug in anticipation of a gale. At 8 a m., wind still
N.N.E., bar. 29°32, blowing strong. At 10 a.m., bar. 29-30, clouds
lifting to the N.W., and weather looking fine, but the barometer
said no ! and fell at noon to 29*29. At 2 p.m. the hurricane burst
upon us with tremendous violence from the North, forcing the ship’s
lee gunwale under water ; fortunately we had only the close-reefed
main-topsail set on the port tack. The sea, which had two hours
before been comparatively smooth, now rose in pyramidal heaps
from every point of the compass, while the roar of the wind could
only be compared to the noise of the highly condensed steam escap-
ing through the tube, 4 p.m,, bar. 29-30, lee side entirely under
Water, all hands at the pumps; sea, if possible, higher and more con-
fused. At 6 p.m., bar. 29-30, blowing with fearful violence, expect-
ing every moment to see the masts go. But at 7 p.m. the barome-
ter began to rise, and at 8 stood at 29-34, wind then N. b. W.,
blowing a heavy gale, an awful sea running, threatening to engulph
our poor ship, 10 p.m., wind N.W. b. N., bar. 29-39, a tremen-
dous sea rolling up, broke over the port quarter, stove the quarter-
boat, hencoops, &c., and nearly filled the cuddy with water. Mid-
night, bar. 29-49, still blowing strong, set our trysail to steady the
ship over an awfully high, but now more regular sea. At 2 a.m.,
bar. 29-60, and from this time until 6 a.m., when the wind gradually
veered to West, it rose to 29-79, then blowing only a fresh gale.
Kept away on our course, and at 8 a.m. got the pumps to suck after
12 hours’ incessant labour. From the wind never having veered
to the South of West, I conceive the Meteor’s track to have been
about S. b. E,, or nearly in a line with the West Coast of
Australia.”
Captain Barclay’s conclusion respecting the progressive motion
of the Cyclone, deduced from the veering of the wind, would be
correct if the vessel could be considered to have been nearly station-
ary during the 13th and 14th; but in small Cyclones, the run and
drift of a vessel are very important elements in investigating the
{rack. (Fig. X, B, 8.)


The preceding records of Storms are of much value in the inves-
tigation of a question which can only he determined satisfactorily
by the cumulative evidence of concurring facts. They all agree in
indicating the Easterly progression of the G ales of the South Coast
of Australia ; and nothing is wanting to prove that those gales are
formed by passing Cyclones, but the observations of a vessel placed
to the Southward of Van Diemen’s Land. This link in the chain
pf evidence is fully supplied by the log pf H.M.S. Fantome, of
which Captain Gennys kindly favoured me with a perusal, on his
return from the Auckland Islands.
The general nature of the gales that prevail on the South Coast
of Australia, Bass’s Straits, and on the Coasts of Van Diemen’s
Land, was correctly described by Flinders forty years ago. This
description is the more valuable and trustworthy, inasmuch as
Flinders was ignorant of the modern theory of rotatory storms. It
occurs at pp. 244—5 of vol. i. of the “Voyage to Terra Australis,”
published in 1814. He says :
“ The progress of the gales is usually this : the barometer falls to
29‘50, or lower; and the wind rises from the North-westward, with
thick weather, and commonly with rain. It veers gradually to the West,
increasing in strength, and the weather begins to clear up so soon
as it has got to the Southward of that point. At South West the
gale blows hardest, and the barometer rises, and by the time the
wind gets to South, or S.S.E., it becomes moderate, the weather is
fine, and the barometer above 30 Inches. •
Sometimes the wind may return back to West, or something
Northward, with a fall in the mercury, and diminish in strength, or
die away ; but the gale is not over, although a cessation of a day or
two may take place.
In some cases, the wind flies round suddenly from North West to
South West, and the rainy thick weather then continues a longer
time.
Such is the usual course of the gales along the South Coast, and ip
Bass’s Straits ; but on the East side of the Straits, the winds par-
take of the nature of those on the East coast, where the gale often
blows hardest between South and South East, and is accompanied
>vitli thick weather, and frequently with heavy rain.”


Mr. Piddington, in the “ Sailor’s Horn Book of Storms,” has
thrown out the very probable suggestion that these gales are the
Northern portions of Cyclones, which have an Easterly progressive
motion. So long as this remains a mere suggestion, few would have
the temerity to act upon it, in cases where life and property were
involved. To justify a practical application of the suggestion, a
demonstration of its correctness is necessary. In the following
investigation of the Storms of July and August, 1852, I have been
fortunate in obtaining accurate data from the log of H.M.S. Fantome,
the journal of Captain Major, of the ship Duke of Lancaster, of
Liverpool; the log of the Packet Brig Emma, and the meteorologi-
cal observations at the Magnetic Observatory, Hobart Town. The
meteorological observations at Sydney, published in the “ Sydney
Morning Herald,” are as complete and correct as could be desired.
The barometrical observations at Melbourne, published in the
“ Argus” newspaper, are taken at midnight, and therefore only once
in twenty-four hours ; the barometrical curve for Melbourne conse-
quently has not the same pretensions to accuracy as those for
Sydney, Hobart Town, and the Fantome, which are formed from
three, or more, daily observations. (Fig. IX.)
On the 28th July, the Duke of Lancaster, from London to Hobart
Town, was in 43° 48 / S., and 121° 20' E., that is, about due West
of Van Diemen’s Land, and South of King George’s Sound:—
“From 9 p.m. of the 26th to 9 a.m. of the 27th, there was a calm.
At noon, the wind was W.N.W. p.m., an increasing breeze from
W. Midnight, strong increasing gales, W.S.W.
28. —3 a.m., strong S. W. gale and high sea. Noon, S.W. gales,
squalls, and hail, p.m,, strong increasing S.W. gale, squalls, and
a high rising sea. Midnight, hard S.W. gales and frequent squalls.
29. —6 a.m., squalls terrific; hail and thick snow showers. 10
a.m., more moderate, sea dreadfully high. Noon, 42° 4.0' S. 127°
11' E. Strong S.W. gales, frequent violent squalls, very heavy sea
from S.W.
30.—More moderate.”
The barometer fell from 30-33 to 29-42, from the 27th to the
29th, and then rose gradually. The centre of this Cyclone passes
the meridian (120° E.) of the ship early on the 28th, and the vessel


sails in the N.W. quadrant until it leaves her in 130° E. on the
30th. About the same time that the Duke of Lancaster is dropping
behind the N.W. Margin in 130° E., the central area is passing
over Van Diemen’s Land in 147° E. The following is an abstract
of a memorandum from the journal of the master of the brig William,
which left Sydney on the 14th July for Launceston :
“ On the morning of the 28th got the wind strong from the West-
ward, and crossed the Straits, under all sail, hoping to get in
before sun-down. At 5 a.m., the light-house in sight, bearing
S.W., distant 10 miles ; the weather looked very threatening to the
N. W. At 8 p.m. tacked in shore, and made another attempt to
fetch the Heads, (George Town), but finding that impossible, and
the gale having fairly set in, thought it prudent to keep what otfing
I had. At 10 p.m., wore off shore, tip to midnight carried all
possible sail, hoping to be able to hang to -windward till daylight;
but at midnight the gale had increased to such a fearful extent, that
I was obliged to bring the brig under close-reefed topsails, after the
inain-try-sail gaff had been carried away. During the whole of
Thursday, (29th), the gale raged with unabated fury ; but the baro-
meter being stationary at 28*95, I hoped I had had the weight
of the gale at sun-doivn, although the weather looked, if anything,
even worse. At 8 p.m. the barometer again falling, and at 9 p.m.
barometer 28*80. It was at this time blowing harder than I ever
remember before, and a terrific sea was running. At 10 p.m. out*
decks were filled with lightning, and immediately after a peal of
thunder burst close on our weather bow. We had then a calm for
about a minute, which I well knew would be followed by something
awful, and we were immediately struck by a squall which drove the
brig’s lee rail under. About 4 a.m. of the 30th the weather mode-
rated a little, and continued so till noon, when it again assumed a
threatening appearance, and, finding myself as far to the Eastward
as Cape Portland (148° E.), I bore up for Swan Island, and anchored
there at 2 p.m. Just when bearing up, we were struck by one of
the furious westerly squalls, and snapped the starboard bower cable.
The second anchor brought the ship up with 90 fathoms of cable. I
remained here till Tuesday, the 3rd August, when the wind came
away at S.E. ; then weighed, and ran through the Straits, and
arrived at Launceston at day-break on the 4th, twenty-one days 4
from Sydney, and through the severest gales I have ever expcvi-'
enced on the Coast.”


Tlie deck filled with lightning, the single peal of thunder, the
calm, the minimum-barometric depression, and furious westerly
squalls, are so many well-known marks of the passage of the Nor-
thern Margin of the central portion of the Cyclone. The extreme
cold which is characteristic of the central space, extended over the
whole of Van Diemen’s Land. During the whole of the 30th, and
the forenoon of the 31st, there were continuous heavy snow squalls.
Eight years had passed since the last snow storm in Hobart Town,
The hills in the neighbourhood wei’e covered with snow; and at
Oatlands, Jericho, &c., the snow was two or three feet deep. The
thermometer at the Observatory -was 37° at 6 a.m., 37° at 2 p.m.,
arid 36° at 10 p.m,, of the 30th.
The newspapers furnish the following corroborative notices :
“ The Charles Carter left Hobart Town for Sydney on the 28th
July. On the 30th she fell in with heavy gales from N.N.W. to
S.W., which continued for four days.”
u At 2 a.m. of the Ist August, the brig Mary, of London, was
lost on Kent’s Group, Bass’s Straits.”
“On the 31st July the schooner Spy, of Hobart Town, w^s ;
On shore at Kent’s Group.”
“ The barque Gratitude, of London, from Sydney, the 26th July,
was compelled to return to port on the 31st, the weather being most
terrific.”
“ The schooner Gem left Launceston on the 26th July, and whilst
trying to beat into Waterloo Bay on the evening of the 30th, had
nearly the whole of her canvas blown away, and was compelled to
bear up for Twofold Bay to refit.”
G.M.S. Fantome was then lying at the Auckland Islands, in 166°
Ev,- i.e. about 18° to the East of Cape Portland. The barometer on-
board falls rapidly on the 30th, and reaches its lowest point early
on the 31st. During this interval the direction and force of the
winds are: —
July 30.—N.N.E. 4 ; N. b. E. 5 ; N.N.E. 6, 7.
July 31.— a.m., N.N.E.- 6,8, 9, 6.
shewing the passage of the South Eastern quadrant. From the
31st July to the 3rd August, the mercury is low and oscillates
within moderate limits, and the wind is variable and moderate
(L 5,2). On the 4th August the South Western quadrant


approaches, and continues its passage until the 7th,' the wind being
steady at E. and then at S.E. On the third there is a calm, and on
the following days the force of the S.E, wind is 3,4, &5.
At Sydney on the 30th, the changes of wind were N.W., W.N.W.,
WW. by S., and W.S.W., indicating the transit to the Eastward of
the extreme Northern Margin. That the trade of the centre lay
between the parallels of Yan Diemen’s Land and the Auckland
Islands is shewn by the order of veering of the wind at each of these
places. Consequently a shorter chord of. the Cyclone passed over
Melbourne and Sydney, than over Hobart Town. This accounts
for the great breadth of the barometric depression at Hobart Town,
indicating that the mercury began to fall sooner there, and was
longer in rising, than at the more northern stations. ’The Eastward
progress of the Cyclone is likewise demonstrated by the comparison
of the several barometric curves, (fig, IX.) ; for, the minimuni
depression, which occurs almost simultaneously at Melbourne and
Hobart Town, happens early on the next day at Sydney, (4° to the
Eastward) and at least two days later at the Auckland Islands, (18°
to the Eastward.) Since the Northern Margin extended to Sydney,
and the Southern to the Auckland Islands, the diameter of the
whole Cyclone was not less than 1000 miles.
Assuming the centre to have passed the Duke of Lancaster, in
120° E. early on the 28th, the meridian of Y. D. Land early on the
30th, and that of the Auckland Islands on the Ist August, it would
have traversed 45° in 5 days, or 9° a-day; that is, 9 X 42 miles in
24. hours, which gives a mean velocity of progression of about 15
miles an hour.
Now, from noon of the 28th to noon of the 29th, the Duke of
Lancaster sailed to the Eastward at about 11 miles an hour; and I
have shewn that the Cyclone overtook and passed,her : therefore the
velocity of 15 miles an hour is probably not far from the actual rate.
This Cyclone was followed in a few days by anothei', of which
the central track seems to have been considerably to the Northward
of that of the first. A correspondent of the “ Adelaide Obseiwer”
states that on Saturday, the 7th August, there was a most fearful
flood at Clare, (north of Adelaide), and no ax-rival of mails from the
Soixth, because of the floods at the intervening parts. In Clare the
L


rains commenced on the night of Thursday, the sth, and continued*
till 5 p.m., on Saturday, when it poured down in torrents for 10'
hours. All the houses were flooded, one man was drowned, and a
settler had 1700 sheep drowned in the River Bremer. (Adelaide
35° S. 138° E.)
At Portland (141° 38' E.) on Friday night (6th August) there
was one of such fearful gales from the South East, that the oldest
Inhabitant had not known the like before. The Margaret & Agnes
went on shore, and was wrecked.
At Circular Head (145° 20' E.) a most severe gale was experi-
enced' on Saturday night (7th), and continued with unabated vio-
lence up to Sunday morning. The oldest inhabitants do not recol-
lect ever witnessing such a gale and sea before, and with the high-
est tide. The schooner Toroa struck, and was driven up by the sea
to a considerable distance. The schooner Antares,’which had sailed
for Launceston, put back from contrary winds (East.) The gale
commenced with the barometer at 30-30, and the mercury fell to
29-30,
At Sydney the barometer begins to fall on the 6th, and continues
low until the 15th. The corresponding meteorological remarks
describe the passage of the N.E. half of the Cyclone ;■ —
“ Friday, 6th Aug—6 a.m. rather heavy rains.
8 A.m,,. wind in squalls from S. b, E., then light, veering to E.
Atmosphere raw and chill, and heavily charged with nimbus.
e.m., became very coarse and squally from E. and N. of E., with
driving showers.- Towards evening, grew more and more boisterous
from N. E., and continued to blow with increasing violence through-
out the night,- Strong gales and squalls, veering to almost due N.,
at times, and latter part sometimes W. of N., with driving rain occa-
sionally. Night altogether dark and dismal.
Saturday, 7th;—At day-break, gusts quite furious from N.E. b. N.
with hard rain, and increased after 7 a.m. to still more violent gales
from the same quarter. Between 1 and 2 p.m., gales from almost
due N.; after 2, veered to N-.W. b, N. with severe squalls and rain.
After 3 p.m. the tempest abated) clouds began to open and shew
patches of blue sky ; and,, after some very heavy showers, the whole
sky became most rapidly clear on all sides, and the wind fell as
rapidly to moderate breezes. Evening and night, light N.W. wind,
and clear sky.” ’


During the Bth, 9th and 10th, the winds are moderate from N.W.;
the sky clear, and the atmosphere cold and wintry .
On the 11th.—A dark dusky gloom all round; grew thicker
during the forenoon. At 1 p.m. the N.W. wind arose, blew strong
during the afternoon and night, and then shifted to about W. b. N.
A heavy swell on the sea still.
12th.—Wind rapidly rose to strong gales from W. b. N. before
10 a.m., and subsequently kept increasing in force, and blew with
extreme violence till about 4 p.m. Brisk gales all night.
13th. —Atmosphere dry and clear; no clouds. Strong westerly
gales. Noon, wind a little S. of W., and rose to heavy gales before
sun- set; after that, tacked to N. of W., and increased to most vio-
lent gales, by 8 p.m., and continued to rage till 4 a.m of the 14th.
Between 9 and 11 p.m. of the 13th, there were some most furious
gusts, and large stunted bushes and trees, which had withstood many
heavy storms, fell a sacrifice to these, and were shivered] or blown
clean away by the roots.
14th. —Before 8 a.m. gales had again set in strong from W. by N.
and blew with increasing violence all day, rising to heavy gales
before noon. Atmosphere keen, and remarkably dry and clear.
Gales continued with great violence till past midnight.
15th.—Moderately fresh breezes all day; clear fine weather, very
sharp and dry. Wind W. b. S. and W.S.W.
16th.—Cold frosty air, wind W. b. S.; S. b. W.; S.; and S.W.
Evening, light wind and clear sky.”
A correspondent of the “ S. M. Herald” writes fromGoulbum on the
16th August:—“ In the course of last week we had all the region
of a Northern winter, in a blustering cold piercing wind, with frequent
showers of rain, hail, and snow. Snow fell to a considerable depth on
Saturday evening. On Sunday we had a keen frost, which pre-
vented the white covering of the earth from disappearing ; in some
places it remained till the following day, (Monday, 9th). The rain
which fell in the early part of last week caused the Woollondilly and
Mulwarre Rivers to rise to such a degree as to prevent communica-
tion at the ordinary crossing places for several days, See.”
The Launceston papers contain long accounts of the disastrous
floods of the South Esk at Longford, on the 9th, and at Perth and


Launceston on the 10th August. The stone bridges at Entally and
Perth were destroyed, the coaches stopped, and the Royal Mail
Coach washed down the River at Ross. Meanwhile, very little
rain fell around Hobart Town.
The central area, which is accompanied by extreme cold, heavy
rains, snow and hail showers, appears to have swept over Victoria,
Bass’s Straits, and the Northern portion of Van Diemen’s Land,
and this conclusion is confirmed by numerous notices of the weather
at sea.
“On the 4th August, the Duke of Lancaster sighted the S. W.
Cape of V. D. Land, distant 15 leagues N.E., having light vari-
able airs and calms until Friday, the 6th, when, at noon, the wind
was E.N.E.
7th.—Wind moderate, N.N.E. 7 p.m,, strong increasing breeze.
9 p.m., violent squalls off the land. Midnight, barometer falling
rapidly. 7 a.m., hard gales and squalls. The Mewstone W.N.W-
-7 leagues.
Bth. —Sunday, hard gales, E.N.E., violent squalls and a heavy
sea. 11 a.m., found the main piece of the rudder sprung. Noon,
a furious gale and sea.
9th.—Furious East gale, violent squalls and rain. 4 a.m., hpve
to. Noon, somewhat abated.
10th.—Strong increasing gales, E.N.E. 10 a.m., nearly calm,
swell heavy. Noon, light Northerly airs, and clear.
11th.—Calm, a heavy swell from East.
12th.—Wind N. light, swell from E. 3 a.m., wind E.N.E< 9
a.m., wind S. and S.W, Noon, strong S.W. gales, thick, dirty,
and rainy. A furious cross-swell from East, ship pitching forecastle
under.
13th.—fi a severe S.W. gale, with furious squalls and rain.
Midnight, moderated and hauled to the W.N.W. Noon, light and
variable.
14th. —Variable—anchored in Storm Bay, below the Iron Pot
Light-house. 1 a.m,, suddenly a hard gale, furious squalls and
snow. Ship began to drift. Squalls furious, with thick snow
showers. 2h. 30m. a.m., anchored in harbour of Hobart Town.”
The barometrical curve of the observations on board the Duke of
Lancaster does not differ materially from that at Hobart Town.


The Emma left Hobart Town for Sydney on the 4th August
“ On the 6th at 5 p.m., land was seen west of Cape Howe, wind
jE. inclining to E.N.E., the sea rising. Split the main-try-sail.
Midnight, gale increasing.
Saturday 7th.—Wind steady at N.E. by E. 4 a.m. blowing
very hard, hove to. Noon, gale increased to a complete drift, with
a sea running mountains high. 4 p.m. mizzling ram. 7 p.m. rain
fell very heavy, when a sudden gust of wind nearly tore the masts
put, and immediately after it fell a “clock calm.” The main-boom,
secured with three tackles and a strong guy, tore all adrift, &c. A
light N.E. wind and a heavy sea running.
Sunday Bth.—Light N.E.
9th.—Light W. throughout. Gape Howe N.E. Heavy swell
from E.
10th.—Light, veering from W. to S. Midnight, rounded Cape
Howe.
11th.—Off the Dromedary, strong N.N.W. gale, sea running
heavy.
12th.—Veering to W. and W.N.W.
13th.—■ Off Wollogong, W.S.W. blowing a complete drift, hove
to. 2 p.m., moderating. 7 p.m., entered Sydney Heads. 8 p.m.,
blowing a drift of wind from W. Both anchors down off Shark
Island.
14th. Midnight, blowing fresh ; the second officer fell overboard
out of the boat, and was drowned.”
The ship Falcon, 1106 tons, left Melbourne pn the sth ant|
arrived at Sydney on the 18th August. On leaving she was three
days with a strong drift from East (6th, 7th, and Bth) ; and on the
9th was to the W. of Cape Otway (143° 30' E.), sea still very
heavy. Light westerly winds through the Straits, when it again
began to blow from the Eastward, veering round to N.W. On the
15th carried away her fore-top-sail and fore-sail, and split her
main-sail. The wind set westerly, and continued so until the
evening of the 17th.
The Duke of Cornwall was in the same gales as the Falcon, was
for several days under close-reefed main-top-sail, and was driven as
far as 154|° E.


The Clarence Steamer was compelled to return to Sydney by the
heavy gales on Saturday the 7th August. The gale was principally
from the E.N.E., and shifting thence to the N. W.
The Hawkesbury Lass, Captain Liddle, left Twofold Bay on the
7th August Avith an Easterly gale. Sighted the Sisters on the
evening of the 10th, when it became calm, with a very heavy sea
from E. At day-light, had drifted to leeward of the Sisters, blowing
a strong gale from N.W. At 2 p.m. wind shifted suddenly to S.W.
blowing very hard with heavy rain until 10 p,H., when the wind
shifted round to N.W. Ship drove on shore on Babel Island, where
the Captain and crew subsisted on penguins for 14 days, until taken
off by the schooner Free Trader.
The Robert Syers, from Melbourne to Sydney, when off Twofold
Bay on Friday the 6th, was hove to until Sunday evening, the Avind
veering N.N.W. to S.W. during that time.
The Miranda, of Hobart Town, was AA'recked on Rabbit Island.
The Victoria Packet left Melbourne on the sth August, with
.about 70 passengers, and 200 sheep. On Monday, the wind blew
“ great guns,” and the sails were torn to pieces. All but 25 of the
sheep were washed overboard. During the gale, a passenger
jumped overboard, and was drowned. When the vessel got outside
of the Heads early on the morning of the 6th, she had strong
Easterly winds, which continued increasing until 9 p.m. when it
bleAv a heaA r y gale from EastAvard, Avith heavy rain and A r ery thick
weather. About midnight, they rounded to, vessel’s head N.E.
and directly after that the main-topsail and fore-top stay-sail Avere
blown aAvay. The Screw Steamer, the City of Melbourne, was in
.company all day until 8 p.m, when it came on thick, and she Avas
last seen on the port tack looking up for the Tamar. The Victoria
Packet had very severe weather until day-break, lying to all night,
head N.E'. At day-break they discovered the south end of King’s
Island close under their lee. The creAv immediately wore ship, but could
not Aveather the land on that tack, running into the-breakers, and just
clearing the eastern end of the Island. After getting the vessel on
the port tack, they made sail, but it Avas all bloAvn aAvay, except the
lee luff of the foresail, which brought her out. The gale continued
until 11 a.m. on Saturday, Avhen it lulled.


The Steamer City of Melbourne was beached, about the middle
Of the East Coast of King’s Island (39° 47' S.) at p.m. of the 7th
August. By the admirable coolness and skill with which this diffi-
cult manoeuvre was successfully accomplished under most trying
circumstances, the lives of the 250 persons on board were all saved.
When the Emigrant Ship Cataraqui was wrecked on King’s Island,
in 1845, only 9 lives were saved out of 423 I The following is the
statement of Captain Saunders, of the City of Melbourne Steamer:—
« August 6th.—B a.m., left Port Phillip Heads, wind N.E. All
possible sail set. 10 a.m., fresh breezes, in foretop gallant-sail,
outer jib, and mizen. Noon, wind increasing, close-reefed the fore-
top sail, stowed the jib, and in two reefs of mainsail. 8 p.m., strong
gale from E.N.E. with a heavy sea. Midnight, blowing very hard,
with much rain. Close-reefed the mainsail, stowed the foresail, and
foretop sail.
7tb, —2 A.M., gale still increasing. 4 A.M., shipped a heavy sea.-
Carried away the weather main gangway, a great quantity of water
went down into the Engine Room, and into the Cuddy. 5 a.m.
wind East. At day-light repaired the gangway, and wore ship to
the North; took in the fore trysail, which had split. Set the main-
sail, close-reefed. Gale still increasing from East, sea running very
high. 10 a.m., wore ship to S. S.E., the gangway having broken in
again filled the deck with water, a great quantity going down below.
At lb. 30m. p.m. saw breakers on the lee bow, supposed to be Sea
Elephant Rocks. Wore ship to the North, set fore trysail, and
square foresail, to claw off the land. The gale at this time was '
awful. Obliged to call up about 60 of the passengers from below to
get the fore-tack aboard. At 4 p.m, saw breakers a-head, and the
land about two points on the lee bow. The weather was so thick
that it was impossible to see half-a-mile from the ship. Finding.
that the vessel could not clear the land on either tack, for she was
not more than half-a-mile from the breakers, and night setting in
fast upon us, I determined, after consulting with the passengers, that
the only way to save life and property, would be to run the
vessel on shore while it was day-light.
I then went up to the mast-head to look out for the best place to
beach the vessel. At 4h. 30m. p.m. the helm was put up, and the
passengers called up from below. In ten minutes the vessel struck


the ground, and carried away the rudder and false keel. At the
same time a tremendous sea broke over the poop, carrying all before
it on to the main deck. The next sea took the vessel inside of the
reef, about 50 yards from high-water mark, where she now lies,
with her head to the North, on a rocky bed covered with loose stones!”
In a published letter of one of the passengers, written on the Bth
August at King’s Island, it is stated that “ the Captain ran the
vessel ashore over a tremendous reef in the most seaman-like man-
ner. She grounded firmly upright, abbut 200 yards from the shore.
All the passengers are saved,- 250’ souls.,' but We have only three
days provisions, &c.”
The mate of the steamer arrived in a boat on the 12th at Cir-
cular Head, whence provisions &c. were sent. All the people,
including several very fortunate gold-diggers, were got off the island ;
and the steamer itself was recovered about four months after. A
testimonial was afterwards' presented to Captain Saunders by the
passengers expressive of their gratitude for, and admiration of, that
calmness and presence of mind by which he was instrumental in
preserving the lives of all on board,-
The North Eastern quadrant of the Cyclone appears to have passed
between Moreton Bay and Sydney. On the 13th August, the
Thomas Lord left Moreton Island, in company with the Zone. She
had heavy S.W. gales from the 13th up to the evening of the 19th:
The Zone had strong S.W. gales for three days after passing Smoky
Cape, and a strong set to the N.E.
The Fantbme sailed from the Auckland Islands on the Bth, and
arrived at Hobart Town on the 13th August. The direction and
force of the wind shew that she" sailed into the S.E. quadrant of the
Cyclone. These are :
On the 7th...5.E. (3); E. (I s ); N.E. (2).
Bth...N.E. (2, 5,6, 7).'
9th...N.E. (8) p E. b. N. (7); E. (7)
10th... E. (7); N.N.E. (6); N.W. (3); N. (1); W. (3) variable.
The barometric curves shew that the mercury began to fall on the
6th at Melbourne, Hobart Town, and Sydney ; but not until the Bth
at the Auckland Islands; demonstrating the Easterly progressive
motion of the Cyclone. In the diagram YIII, the figures 28, 29,


and 1, are the positions of the Duke of Lancaster on the 28th and
29th of July, and Ist of August respectively. The lower Cyclone
(a) is in the position assigned to the 30th July, when the weather
was moderating at 29, where there had been “ hard S.W. gales,
terrific squalls, hail, and thick snow showers” on the preceding day.
In the Straits, the brig William had furious westerly gales, a terrific
sea, lightning, &c., on the 29th and 30th ; and at the Auckland Is-
lands the Fantome bad the wind from N.N.E. Oh the 30th and 31st
July, and afterwards from E. and S.E.
The second, or upper, Cyclone (b), is in the position assigned to
the 6th and 7th of August, causing a South East gale at Portland,
an East gale in the Straits, and N. and N.E. gales off the coasts of
New South Wales. The Duke of Lancaster, off the S.W. Cape of
Tan Diemen’s Land, has hard E.N.E. gales, and the Fantome, on
the 7th, has the wind increasing in force from 1 to 5,6, 7, 8 on the
9th, and veering from E. to N.E, By supposing the upper Cyclone
to have moved a little towards the E.S.E., it will be easy to trace
the origin of the strong S.W. gales encountered by the Zone and Tho-
mas Lord to the North of Sydney, after the 13th August.
The reading of the barometer at Melbourne at midnight of the Bth
August is 27-38, showing a fall of two inches in the preceding 24
hours, and there is a rise of two inches during the following day.
If this is not an error of the press, 27 being printed for 29, such a
great and sudden fall and rise would indicate that the very centre
itself passed over Melbourne, which seems probable from other con-
siderations.
The supposition of the passage of two successive Cyclones, in the
tracks which have been assigned to them, will be found to explain
all the meteorological phenomena that have been here recorded. No
false theory could bear the application of such a host of independent
tests without betraying discrepancies or contradictions.
Each of the Cyclones just investigated may be regarded as the
type of a class to which Bass’s Straits are obnoxious. The first
producing the well-known gales described by Flinders 40 years ago,
which change from N.W. to S. and S.W. ; and the second those
which change from N.E. to E. and S.E.
It is gratifying to be able to confirm, by such good and conclusive
evidence, the suggestion hazarded by Mr. Piddington, one of the
M


best writers on Cyclonology, and certainly the best teacher of the prac-
tical application of the art.
Having now established a general rule for the motion of the Gales
on the South Coast of Australia, we are enabled to interpret and
explain the nature of isolated cases like the following, given by Sir
James Ross, in his account of the Exploring Expedition, carried on
in the Erebus and Terror :
“ 1840, August 12.—Noon, S.W. Cape of Van Diemen’s Land,
beai’ing N.E. b. N., distant 9or 10 leagues. The wind increased
so suddenly and violently that we could hardly take in our sails
quickly enough, and in a few minutes were reduced to close-reefed
mainsail. At 8 p.m., when blowing a perfect hurricane, the lee
maintop-sail sheet gave way, and in one instant the sail Avas rent
into numberless ribbons, and soon entirely disappeared. The only
sail then left on the ship, a neAV mainsail, Avas soon afterwards bloAvn
aAvay. No canvas could stand against such a storm. At 10 p.m.
barometer 28*16, and although it then began to rise, we could not
perceiA r e the slightest abatement of the hurricane until after mid-
night, Avhen it gradually moderated, and at the same time shifted
from North to West. It continued to bloiv a storm of ordinary vio-
lence, Avith only occasional furious squalls, throughout the 13th,
14th, and 15th, when, having been dm r en a great distance to the
Southward, Ave again stood in shore; we srav the land of Tasmania
at 3 a.m., and anchored in Storm Bay at 11 p.m.”
This Cyclone Avas moving to the S. of E. At Circular Head (7),
at the Hampshire Hills (8), and at Hobart Town (9), the wind
shifts from N. to W., and then to S.W, On referring to the baro-
metric curves for each of these places, it will be seen that the depres-
sion increases at the Southern Stations, and was greatest at the ship,
which lay farthest to the South, This fact, and the veering of the
Avind, shew that the centre lay to the South of Van Diemen’s Land.
(Fig. X., A, 7,8, 9.)
The following tAvo instances of Easterly progression in a high lati-
tude occur at pages 167 and 181, vol. i. respectively, of the same
work.
11 1840, Dec, 25.—-A strong gale, constant snoAV and rain as


usual, attended the Northerly Gale. Hove to. Noon, 62° 10' S.
170° 24' E.
26th.—Wind veered to Westward , hove to until 2 p.m. Stood to
Southward.
27th.—A strong South Westerly Gale, clear weather, and violent
squalls, with snow-showers. Early next morning the Gale moder-
ated.”
The centre of this Cyclone lay to the South of the ship ; in the
next case, the centre lies to the North of it.
“ 1841, Jan, B.—B p.m., increasing breeze from N. with thick
snow.
9th.—Northerly breeze increased to a strong gale, reducing us to
close-reefed topsails. Noon 69° 15 / S. 176° 15' E. The wind
veered round gradually to Eastward , and blew with great violence
until 2 a.m. of the 10th, when it began to abate, and by 9 a.m. had
moderated so much as to admit of our setting reefed courses. Noon,
70° 23' S. 174° 50' E, The wind soon afterwards veered to the
S. E.”
I regret that I have not been able to procure more information
respecting the Gales which prevail at New Zealand, which appears
to lie in the way both of the Cyclones of the South Pacific, and of
those of the South Indian Ocean. Meteorological observations at
this point would have an additional value on account of the occa-
sional activity of the Volcanic forces in those islands. The follow-
ing severe Cyclone experienced there by Captain Cook, seems to
have belonged to the Port Essington Class.
After leaving the Bay of Islands in order to pass round the North
Cape of New Zealand, Captain Cook appears to have fallen in with
the Northern half of a violent Cyclone moving to the Eastward, and
which had therefore probably passed along the South Coast of Aus-
tralia previously. The details are given with Cook’s usual precision,
at page 159 of the First Voyage; the Storm began at N.N.W., veer-
ing to W., with a large swell rolling from Westward. On the 28th
December, 1769, it veered to S.W., and increased from a gale to a
hurricane, with a prodigious sea. Nothing is said of the behaviour
of the barometer, but Cook’s concluding observations shew the vio-
lent nature of the Storm : he says, “it is very remarkable, that in
35° S. and in the midst of summer, I met with a gale of wind, which,


for its strength and continuance, was such as I had scarcely ever
been in before; and we were three weeks in getting 10 leagues tq
the Westward. During the gale we were happily at a considerable
distance from the land, otherwise it is highly probable that we
should never have returned to relate our adventures.”
Captain Brown, of the brig Emma, has favoured me with his
Journal of the voyage of the ship Strathisla, from Auckland, New
Zealand, to London, in 1846, which enables me to trace this class
of Cyclones far to the Eastward of New Zealand. On the 23rd Oct.
the ship was hove to, in a heavy gale from the North. On the 24th
the wind shifted from N. to N.W. ; from N.W. to W. ; and from
W. to S.W., which hove the sea up in sugar-loaves , and caused the
ship to strain and labour much. Position 52° S. and 131° W.
This exactly describes the passage to the Eastward of the Northern
portion pf a Cyclone, with the pyramidal seas caused by the inter-
ference of the superimposed ridges at the central area.
Colonel Reid has shewn that the gales in the neighbourhood of
Cape Horn are probably produced by Cyclones passing to the East-
ward, so that there seems reason to believe that Cyclones pass from
South Australia across the whole breadth of the South Pacific
Ocean. In the voyage of Captain Weddell towards the South Pole
(1822-3) occur several instances of gales shifting “from N.N.W. to
S.W., and leaving a most distressing sea.” When off James Island,
New South Shetland, in 62° 52' S. and 62° 30' W. they experienced
a severe hurricane, in October, 1823. On the 26th Oct., a.m., wind
shifted to North, and weather became foggy, and soon after fresh-
ened from N.W. to such a degree as to oblige them to take in the
foretop-sail, and it was Ayith difficulty they obtained an offing. On
the 27th, a great Westerly savcll ; at midnight a gale at West.
8 a.m. of the 28th the wind shifted suddenly into the S. W., and
increased to a complete hurricane. Sail reduced to the size of a
mere napkin, and cold intense. In consequence of the wind having-
shifted, the sea ranged on boax-d on the lee side , sweeping every-
thing before it. The gale continued with great violence from the
S.W. by S. On the morning of the 29th it moderated, and after-
wards continued at S.S.W. Lay to, many ice-islands rolling with
the noise of an earthquake.
This Cyclone was clearly moving towards the E.S.E. When we see a


.vessel ueai’a dangerous and desolate coast, surrounded by liuge icebergs,
and on the point of being involved in a furious hurricane, we cannot fail to
be forcibly reminded of the value of a Science which would enable her
.anxious commander to foresee , and therefore to preparefor , and profit
hy , a series pf successive shifts of wind, which are certain to occur during
the next few days in a fixed order. Among Captain Weddell’s
observations on the winds and weather in the neighbourhood of Cape
Horn, the following quite establishes, both the Cyclonic nature of
the prevailing Gales, and their Eastward progressive motion. At
pp. 237-8, he says, “ A North Gale comes on gradually, draws from
the N.W., and brings rain, and presently shifts into the S.W., with-
out ceasing to blow, and continues from that point 12 or 15 hours.
A vessel may anchor anywhere for shelter from a S.W. wind, with-
out fear of its shifting to the Northward; but the contrary must be
guarded against, as the wind shifts from N. TV. to S. TV., continuing
to blow with great violence.” Captain Weddell states that Bridg-
man’s Island, in 62° 4' S. and 56° 51' W. is volcanic, having seen it
emit smoke while passing it within 200 yards in 1821.
As little is known of the Cyclonology of this part of the track of
the Australasian homeward bound Traders, I shall give here an
extract from the log of the barque Berwick Castle, from Dundee to
Valparaiso, from which it appears that she was carried around and
in front of the centre of a Cyclone, to the North of the Falkland
Islands in 1848 ; the Cyclone moving to the South-Eastward.
After several days of light winds, the barque was in 42° 22' S.
and 50° 33' W. ,at noon of the 21st February, 1848.
“ 22nd Feb.—Midnight, increasing breeze, W.N.W.; rain, thunder,
and lightning. 8 4.M., double-reefed topsails, strong wind and
heavy sea. Noon, 44° 9' S., 52° 6' W.
23.—Strong gale, W.N.W., heavy showers of hail, hove to. Noon,
44° 47' S., 51° 36 / W.
24th.—Strong Gale, W.N.W., hard squalls, 6 a.m., more mode-
rate. Noon, 45° 10' S., 51° 5' W.
25th.—Variable, clear, out reefs. 6 p.m., calm. 10 p.m., increas-
ing breeze, N.E. Noon, 45° 53' S., 50° 3F W.
26th, —Fresh breeze N.E. and hazy. 10 p.m., wind E.N.E,
6 a.m., strong East wind, and rain, in studding sails, &c. 10a.m.,
E.S.E. Noon, S.E, 47° 3 5' S., 53° 45' W.


27tli.— Strong S.E. gale , and heavy rain. 6 p.m., wind S.S.E.
10 p.m., South, hove to under maintop-sail. Midnight, more mode-
rate. Noon, light S.S.W. wind, out reefs. 47° TS. 54° 33' W.
Afterwards a heavy swell from S.W.”
By marking off on a chart the successive positions of the ship, it
■will be seen to have actually described a track, nearly semicircular,
to the Eastward, while the successive shifts of wind from W.N.W.
to S.S.W. shew that it was carried through three quarters of a circle
relative to the moving centre of the Cyclone. This relative track
may he conceived by supposing in fig. Y, the Berwick Castle to start
from D, and to be carried round the right hand portion of the cir-
cumference until it reaches a point near to C i.
In nearly the same position, in March 1849, the Berwick Castle
met a Cyclone, in which the successive shifts of wind were N.E.;
E.N.E.; E. b. S., with a lowering barometer and rain ; S.E. and
S.S.E , a heavy gale and a heavy cross sea running from South;
W. b. S. with a heavy cross sea from S.W. Hove to. W.S.W.,
and SW. gales, squalls, and showers of hailstones. Eight days
afterwards sighted the Falkland Islands. The centre passes to the
Eastward, and North of the ship.
In sailing from Australia towards Cape Horn, mariners have
frequently observed a sudden and considerable barometrical depres-
sion without experiencing the usual gales of which such a fall is
considered a certain prognostication. A detailed instance of this is
given in a recent number of the Nautical Magazine, and I have met
with another well-marked instance in the excellent Journal of
Captain Harmsworth, of the barque Derwent. The following is
suggested as a probable explanation of this apparent anomaly.
Considering, for the nonce, a Cyclone to be a conical spout piercing
the Atmosphere vertically, as in fig. I, it may he easily conceived
that one of the Port Essington class may have become considerably
exhausted by the time that it has reached the meridian of New
Zealand ; and that in passing on towards Cape Horn, the huge eddy
may cease to reach down to the surface of the earth, and may there-
fore cease to create a whirlwind on the ocean ; although the barom-
eter will not fail to recognize the sudden removal of the superincum-
bent air, as the otherwise unnoticed eddy passes over the ship.
This is, in fact no more than an extension of Mr. Piddington’s


notion of tlie lifting up of a Cyclone, and is analogous to the draw-
ing up of an exhausted waterspout. In such cases as these, the sai-
lors, who have been called to make all snug, may grumble at the
Captain’s “barometer-gales,” but the faithful instrument never
gives a false alarm ; the enemy was in reality hovering above the
vessel, though his arm was not long enough to reach her.
An inquiry into the nature of the Gales of the Coasts of South
Australia, Victoria, New South Wales, and Van Diemen’s Land
would be incomplete without such a notice of the peculiar hot winds
that proceed from the interior of Australia, as may put the seaman
on his guard against their effects. These winds occur three or four
times every summer, and continue from 24 to 36 hours. They blow
from the North Westward, causing the thermometer to rise to upwards
of 100° F., and are succeeded almost instantaneously by a violent
Southerly wind, which lowers the temperature so rapidly that the
thermometer has been known to fall 25° in 20 minutes. Their arid
parching nature not only injures the fruit and crops, but leaves the
timber and herbage an easy prey to the “ bush fires” which prevail,
whether by accident or design, during the summer months.
The most fearful and destructive visitation of this kind occurred
on Thursday, the 6th February, 1851; a day ever since distinguished
in the Australian calendar as “ Black Thursday.” The loss of life
was serious, but the loss of property was immense and extensive.
The fires swept over a tract of country of upwards of 600 miles in
length. A feAV abridged extracts from the newspapers of the period
will shew the nature of this fiery tempest both on land and at sea.
The most striking features of the Cape Otway country are, the
immense size and crowdedness of the timber trees, and the density
and luxuriant growth of the fern scrub. This scrub , in ordinary
circumstances, burns slowly ; while a fire may continue for weeks in
some parts of the timber without extending far. Such a fire was,
in fact, known to have existed for a month past in the mountain
ranges, but no alarm was felt in consequence. The hot blast of
Thursday, however, playing upon the kindled nucleus, caused the
fire to spread with such fury that the dense scrub was swept away
like stubble, and the flames were carried along the tops of the trees,


leaving the massive trunks ignited whercter any decayed, hollow,
or dead branch gave the fire a nestling place.
The body of flames came down with such rapidity from the moun-
tain ranges towards the coast, that those who left their huts for a
few hours found all swept away on their return 1 .
At Portland there wa's a furious hot wind from N.N.W., and ther-
mometer in the sun 116°. After noticing the destruction of much
property on shore, we are told that, at sea, the weather was even
more fearful. Captain Reynolds reports that, oh Thursday, when
twenty miles from the Laurence Islands (in Portland Bay) the heat
was so intense, that every person on board was struck almost power-
less. A sort of whirlwind in the afternoon struck the vessel, and
carried the topsail, lowered down on the cap, clean out of the bolt-
rope ; and had he not been prepared for the shock, the vessel, he has
no doubt, would have been capsized. Flakes of fire were at the’
time, flying thick all around the vessel, from the shore in the direc-
tion of Portland.
The Portland’ Herald states that the Master of the Henry Edward
(Mr. T. Maybee) on arriving at the Laurence Island, on Thursday,
experienced a hurricane of hot winds, which parted the vessel from'
her cables, riding at 100 fathoms on each cable. The fire flew above
the vessel in large flakes, which burnt the running gear, so that the
sails fell down on deck, and the great difficulty of the Master and
crew was to prevent the sails taking fire. The lights below were
lit from 11 A.m. to 2 p.m,, and burnt as blue as possible. After this
the gale ceased, and blew from the W.S.W. a moderate breeze.
The Geelong and Melbourne papers are filled with accounts of the'
Aide-spread destruction of flocks of sheep, horses, crops, buildings, &c.
About 4 p.m., the black roaring tempest had crossed the Straits
to V. D. Land. The ship Tasman on the evening of Thursday was
fiff Cape Pillar and was covered with dust and burnt wood. The
land was invisible, and the ship driven so far to the S.E. that she
only sighted land again on Saturday.
The following notices occur of the passage of the tempest across
the Straits.
On 6th February a Captain of a vessel, about 60 miles from Port
Fairy, saw an ominous cloud on the horizon, and immediately took
m sail. He had scarcely done so, when the vessel was laid on her


beam ends, and the atmosphere became oppressively hot. Hundreds
of birds of all descriptions, driven by fire and wind across the sea,
tried to alight on the masts.”
Extract from the log of the Velocity, M‘Veigh, from Sydney -
“Thursday, Feb. 6.—Noon, light breeze from N.N.E. inclined to
be hazy. 12h. 10m. rapid scud flying from N.W., took in all
studding sails, reefed topsails and foresail. 2 p.m. wind roaring
terrifically over the ship, a great quantity of sand and leaves falling
on board, ship at this time becalmed. 3 p.m. the sky had the
appearance of livid fire, the hands on deck looked more like demons
than men. Quantities of burnt bark, leaves, and birds falling on
deck. p.m. squalls. 4|- p.m. in total darkness such as I never
experienced before, sun this evening set at 7, heat excessive. At
5 p.m. electric lights all over the ship, heavy squalls with lightning
and thunder, which continued until 9h. 45m., ship under bare poles.
The wind then came in squalls from W.S.W. At 5 p.m. barometer
29°. Wilson’s Promontory bearing about W. b. N., distant 18
miles.”
The ship Diana, 527 tons, Captain Fletcher, from Manilla to
Sydney, was then off Kent’s Group, to the Eastward of Bass’s
Straits. Captain Fletcher states :—•
“At noon, Feb. 6, we were in 39° S' S. and 147° 26' E. A clear
sky overhead, but a strong haze all round. At 1 p.m. the haze
increased in thickness from E.N.E., by N, to N.W., extending up
to the sun and preventing it from casting a shadow. At l - 80 the
breeze freshened, bringing more haze with it, which increased so fast
that at 2 p.m. the sun was invisible; and at 3 p.m. it was difficult
to read in the cuddy. Small dry dark burnt-looking leaves were
borne along by the breeze ; and a considerable quantity of dragon-
flies. At 3 p.m. the breeze was light, the haze increasing in thick-
ness in the W.S.W., and assuming a peculiar dark-looking colour.
At 3T5 the haze began to disperse a little in the S.W., the breeze
shifting to N.W., increasing, and bringing hot puffs of wind with it.
Sail was at once reduced so as to prepare the ship for the worst.
At 3‘30 the haze thickened all round, increasing so fast that at 4 p.m.
it was as dark as it ever is at night. The sun, however, made one
more attempt to exert its power by tinging the haze red for about
a quarter of an hour soon after 3*30 p.Mc At 4*15, the whole
heavens were darker than ever remembered by any one on board.


It was literally impossible to see even a mast whilst standing within
half a yard of it, much less any of the upper spars; the boom,
painted white, could not even be seen, the darkness was complete*
The breeze from 3'14 to 4 was variable between N.W. and W.,
bringing with it a fine black dust very similar to powdered char-
coal, in addition to hot wind, the hottest of which came from W. in
gusts ; in the face of which the thermometer rose to 98°, and no
doubt would have risen much higher, had the gusts lasted long enough
to affect the mercury fully before the colder portion of the breeze
blew upon it again. At 4’15 the breeze settled down at N.N.W.
increasing fast, so that at 4*30 it blew a fresh gale , continuing so
until 5’45, when it began to lull and at 6’30 had fallen to a moderate
breeze. During this period, viz : from about 4*30 to 5, we had an
exhibition of the phosphoric lights, illuminating the points of the
three top-gallant yards, the gaff, and fore-topmast studding sail
boom ends, and the royal yard lifts, both to leeward as well as
windward, these latter being quite covered with it.
This gale brought with it a great quantity of the fine dust, pre-
venting any one from looking to windward.
From 7h. 30m. p.m. it blew hard again in squalls, the air becom-
ing cooler during that time. At Bh. 30m., the breeze since 8 hav-
ing been light and variable from N.W. to S.W., a most severe gust
came from the W., lasting about a minute, when it settled down into
a strong breeze from that quarter, bringing more hot wind; this
breeze, however, only lasted till Bh. 45m,, when another severe
gust came from the South , settling down into a strong breeze from
S.W., phosphoric lights again appearing on the royal-yard points,
though not to the same extent as previously. The S.W. breeze
continued steady until 2 a.m. of the 7th, when it veered to the
Westward, and the darkness then for the first time began to show
symptoms of decreasing, so that at 2h. 30m. a.m. the masts and
yards could just be distinguished ; at 3 the horizon pretty plainly;
and at daylight the sky merely presented a very hazy aspect; the
sun, however, was not at all visible until 6 a.m,, when it appeared
as a x*ed ball, and at 7h. 30m. a.m. again cast a shadow/'
Captain Fletcher has given 36 readings of the barometer from
noon of the sth to noon of the 7th ; I have projected these in a curve
in fig. VII, The mercury falls from 29-66 at noon of the sth to
its minimum 29-31 between 2 and 3 p.m. of the 6th, and rises to


29-645 at noon of the 7th. The shower of burnt leaves, &c.,
reached New Zealand (Otago) on the morning of the 7th February.
In V. D. Land on the night of the 6th a violent hurricane accom-
panied the hot wind. At Hamilton, the crashing and uprooting of
forest trees was sublime, fences, palings, &c., were whirled in mid-
air. The heat was intense. The whole of the u new country" ad-
jacent to the Repulse and Gordon Rivers was in flames.
At New Norfolk property worth £lOOO was destroyed. A veran-
dah was blown some yards into the air, and alighted on the house.
Two seamen of the Alcmene, French Corvette, were drowned at
Hobart Town, by the capsizing of a boat. The hurricane at Hobart
Town was accompanied by vivid flashes of lightning, but no thun-
der nor rain.
In a hot wind the thermometer will be a much more sensitive index
than the barometer. Though the hot wind was the proximate cause
of the Atmospheric disturbance on the 6th February, yet the result-
ing phenomena both on land and at sea were undoubtedly greatly
influenced by the immense area in a state of intense conflagration.
The barometrical and thermometrical fluctuations were therefore the
results of the combined action of the “ bush fires" and the hot wind.
The effect on the barometer of a hot wind alone I have shown by a
curve of 18 readings during 15 hours, at Sydney, on the 23rd and
24th March, 1849. (Fig. YII.)
These comparatively inconsiderable barometric depressions tend to
shew that the Atmospheric distux-bance pi*oduced by a hot wind is
not a Cyclone.




ADDENDA.
In the Addenda to the second edition of the “ Sailor’s Horn Book
for the Law of Storms” is the following notice of a Cyclone met
with in 1847 to the Eastward of Torres’ Straits, and which Mr.
Piddington supposes to have been moving toward the SouthWest:—
“ The French brig Anonyme experienced on the 30th December,
1847, a severe Cyclone, commencing in 14° 23' S,, and in long., by
account, 159° 41' E.; in which, after scudding a short time with the
wind at about S.E., or from S.S.E. to E.S.E., she was hove to , and
had the calm centre passing over her. It is noted in the extract
from her log (nothing more being sent) that at this time it was calm,
with a heavy sea, and u the clouds were driving from the South
East and North West, with equal velocity.” It is not said, which
would have completed the description, if they were on opposite sides
of the horizon, or above each other, but in half an hour the breeze
sprang up at North West, freshening to a hurricane from that quar-
ter, in which the brig scudded till she could scud no longei*, till she
finally hove to, and the Cyclone left her. This decided shift at the
centre from about South East to North West would indicate a track
coming down from the North East in that quarter.” A correct
inference, if the vessel had heen nearly stationary.
The position of the Anonyme during the Cyclone in 1847 was to
the North Westward of the place where the Nimrod and the Rifle-
man encountered their respective storms (pages 35 and 39), which
have been shown to have moved towards the South East. On
referring to fig. V. it is easy to conceive how the Anonyme might
drift across the central space out of the South West quadrant into
the North East one, while the Cyclone was really advancing towards
the South East. This case is similar to that of the Two Friends
in April, 1850 (fig. IV.) which vessel, doubtless, drifted round the
central space. By neglecting this drift both Cyclones would appear


ADDENDA.
v
to move towards the S.W., whereas all those of the Samoan and
New Caledonian class, that present sufficient data for determining
their track, have been shown to move towards the South East. The
several instances given in this work of an erroneous track having
been deduced in consequence of neglecting to allow for the circular
drift of a vessel when hove to in a Cyclone show the importance of
this element of the investigation.
By referring to fig. 111. it will be seen that vessels in an Atmos-
pheric Cyclone are at the same time involved in an immense marine
whirlpool, (nantes in gurgite vasto), around which both the wind
and cui’rent combine to drive them.
At page 23 I have recorded the occurrence of a hurricane in 1843
at Raiatea, one of the Society Islands. I have since found in chap,
xiii. of vol. 2 of “ Ellis’s Polynesian Researches,” a description of
another hurricane in this locality, which was met by Mr. Ellis, when
on a voyage from Huaheine to Raiatea in 1819. During the tem-
pest “ the sea rose, not in long heavy billows, but in short, cross,
broken wai'es, and there were seen four large waterspouts, if not
more, so that we seemed almost surrounded with them.” Mr. Ellis
adds that waterspouts are “ often seen among the Society Islands.”
Dr. Thom and Mr. Redfield have shewn that Cyclones in the
South Indian Ocean, and in the West Indian Seas, may contain
several waterspouts within their circumference. We have here an
analogous phenomenon in the South Pacific Ocean.
Respecting the Cyclones in the neighbourhood of Cape Horn, I
have gleaned the following information from the Observations of
Captain King, Captain Stokes, and Captain Fitzroy, during the
voyages of the Adventure and Beagle ;
“ When in the Straits of Magalhaens, on the 14th June, 1828, the
barometer fell to 29 - 27, and the wind blew a hard gale from N.E.;
but in the afternoon it veered round to S.W., and the mercury rose
rapidly. A gale from S.W. followed.”—Vol. i., p. 149.


Off Cape Corso, in April, 1828, Captain Stokes says, “the gale
continued with unabated violence during the 6th, 7th, and Bth, from
the N., N.W., and S.W,, with a confused mountainous sea.”—p. 161.
“ The gales we have experienced generally commenced at North,
thence drew round to the Westward, from which point to the S.W.
they blew with the greatest fury, and hauling to the Southward,
usually abated to the Eastward of South.”—p. 162.
In April, 1830, while the Beagle was in Christmas Sound, there
occurred a “ barometer-gale,” (see page 94.) The mercury fell to
28"94, and the oil in the sympiesometer to 28*52, “ lower than I
had yet seen them in this country. Struck topmasts, and prepared
for the worst. sth and 6th.—Two more fine days, with a very low
glass, shook my faith in the certainty of the barometer and sympie-
someter. During those days, the wind had been light from the
N.N.W., and twice before I had known these instruments to be simi-
larly affected during exactly similar wind and weather; once at
Port Desire, on the coast of Patagonia, and once at Port Gallant,
while I was in the Otway Water. 10th.—Still fine steady weather,
notwithstanding the unusually low fall of the barometer. 12th. —
The glasses had at last been rising. Wind strong, with much rain,
shifted from the Northern quarter in to the Southern.”—Captain
Fitzroy, pp. 426-9.
On the 12th and 13th January, 1833, when in 56° 20' S., and
69° 10' W., the Beagle met with a tremendous storm, which was
severely felt on all parts of the South American Coast, south of 48°,
as Captain Fitzroy afterwards ascertained from sealing vessels; and
at the Falkland Islands, a French whaler, called Le Magellan, was
driven from her anchors and totally wrecked in that land-locked and
excellent port, Berkeley Sound.
Throughout the 12th, the wind was N.W., and from 7 to 8 in
force, barometer fell from 29*42 to 29*04. At 6 a.m, of the 13th,
wind W.S.W. (H), barometer 28*91 ; at 6 p.m. wind is S.W. (8),
barometer 29*28.
At 1 p.m. of the 13th three huge rollers struck the Beagle, and
turned her over so far that all the lee bulwark, from the cat-head to
the stern-davit, was two or three feet under water.
The Transport, an American sealing schooner, and two others, were
wrecked during this storm, on the S.W. Coast of Tierra del Fuego.
It will be seen that the progressive motion in each of the above
instances is towards the South East.


ERRATA.
Page 15, line 29, for “ Rarotougan” read Earatongan; page 20, line 5, for “form N.E.”
read from N.E.; page 24, line 28. for “Loughlin” read Laughlin; page 60, line 21, for
“%• VIII. V.” read fig. VIII. V / ; page 74, line 7, for “ top-gallant-sail” read top-gallant-rail.
William pratt and son,
PRINTERS,
Elizabeth-street, hobart town, Tasmania.




