

AUSTRALIA'S GLORIOUS DAY APRIL 25th 1915
SIR IAN HAMILTON'S
DESPATCH
Official Story of the Landing
and attack by our Combined
Forces at the Dardanelles.
ALSO CONTAINS AUSTRALIA’S ROLL OF
HONOR, KILLED AND WOUNDED IN THE
FIRST 18 CASUALTY LISTS.
TURNER & SONS, Publishers, SYDNEY & MELBOURNE,




Message from His Most Gracious Majesty the Ring
“/ heartily congratulate you upon the splendid conduct
and bravery displayed by the Australian troops in the oper-
ations at the Dardanelles , who have indeed proved them-
selves worthy sons of the Empire
(Signed) GEORGE R.I.
May Ist , 1915.


Y'HIS Map will give readers
a clear .grasp of the diffi-
culties with which our troops
had to contend. The first Bri-
tish troops under Lieut-Colonel
Casson landed on the 25th April
at Eski-Hissarlik, on the east
of Morto Bay, marked S. V. W.
X. and Y. Australians landed
at Gaba Tepe in the Aegean
Sea, the whole country here
being very mountainous and
difficult and protected, by high
cliffs. The French landed at
Kum Kale, but were afterwards
re-embarked, landing on the fol-
lowing day at V. beach.


Australia’s Glorious Day
APRIL 25th, 1915
General Sir Ian Hamilton's Despatch
The Official Story of the Landing and Attack by Our
= Combined Forces at the Dardanelles
ILLUSTRATED
Also Australia s Roll of Honor: the first 18 Casualty Lists
The net proceeds from sales of this Book will be Donated to the Fund for Relief of our Wounded Soldiers
TURNER & SONS, PUBLISHERS, SYDNEY & MELBOURNE
(Copyright. All Rights Reserved 1915)


INTRODUCTION
Every citizen in the British Empire will read with intense
pride the graphic account of our soldiers’ heroism given in the
following pages. History contains no finer record of dauntless
bravery than is here described, while the knowledge of the mag-
nificent part taken in this great spectacular drama by our own
gallant troops wdll thrill every heart in our own land. To a cer-
tain extent the narrative places the operations in an entirely new
light. That there had been perilous times we knew, as also that
our combined forces had suffered terrible losses. Mr. Ashmead
Bartlett, the British press representative, had cabled out a most
graphic story of the landing, and this had been supplemented by
further accounts from other sources. But in none of these was it
made quite clear how dangerously difficult the landing had been,
and how victory had only been won by the most conspicuous gal-
lantry, and a heroism which would not be denied. The entire
coast was in possession of the enemy; fortifications were every-
where, and bristling with all the impediments which science and
artifice could devise; long distance guns fired perfect hurricanes
of shot and shell at our devoted troops, while every little hill
sheltered the death-dealing sniper. There was no friendly mist
or cover of any kind whatsoever for our men. The day was
gloriously fine, with a hot sun pouring down its heated rays and
throwing a brilliant light over the tragic scene. Every ship stood
out in strong perspective, the movements on board being plainly
discernible at long distances, with each boat load as it left its
friendly shelter an easy mark for gun and rifle. Yet, despite all
these advantages, the enemy suffered defeat. Well may General
Sir lan Hamilton search as far back in history to the reign of
Xerxes before finding a parallel instance. That victory was even-
tually won can be attributed to two causes, magnificent leading
and dauntless bravery which knew no fear. Whether there had
been prior blundering (as the London “Times” asserts) may for
the present be passed by as an academic rather than a fruitful
topic. Victory has crowned our Flag with laurels, and the first
duty of all is" to acclaim the victors. With almost every man a
proved hero, it is impossible to particularise over the various units
which made up the force. All did their duty with a rare yet
peculiarly British tenacity of purpose. Sir lan Hamilton records
how leader after leader went forward, only to fall beneath the
deadly fire of shot and shell; yet still the attack never faltered,
but was determinedly pifshed home. Such brilliant heroism won
over every obstacle, until our troops were at length able to obtain
their well-earned rest upon the stricken field, with the enemy
sullenly retiring behind the lines wdiich had been gallantly de-
fended and no less gallantly w T on.
Two points of special significance are made abundantly clear
by this glorious victory. The first will prove to friend and foe
alike the added strength to the Empire’s power and might derived
from the adhesion of the great over-sea forces. Australia and
New' Zealand, Canada, Africa, and India, all have contributed with
ungrudging patriotism to the Imperial might Henceforth there
will be a Greater Britain to reckon with, a Power which in its
aggregate derived from all parts of the world will prove once
more the sovereignty of the race upon sea and land. And the
second point will prove the reality of Imperial unity, bringing
into the region of practical politics a truly Imperial representa-
tion in the Home Parliament of all the great self-governing
Colonies in Britain’s far-flung possessions. When this terrible
War is over, the Empire will enter upon its heritage, and in this
we of the distant lands will have earned our share. It has been
consummated in victory and sealed in blood. The bonds which
now unite us must be drawn yet closer under a wide scheme of
Imperial representation. The time is approaching for a yet
greater Empire to arise, in which conferences shall give place to
Councils, with direct voting representation to every portion of
the Imperial Empire.
C. E. SUTTON TURNER.


AUSTRALIA'S GLORIOUS DAY
APRIL 25th. 1915
General Sir Ian Hamilton’s Despatch: Official
Story of the Landing and Attack by Our Combined
Forces at the Dardanelles
From the General Commanding the Mediterranean
Expeditionary Force.
To the Secretary of State for War, War Office, London
S.W.
General Headquarters,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force,
20th May, 1915.
My Lord, —
I have the honour to submit my report on the opera-
tions in the Gallipoli Peninsula up to and including the
sth May.
In accordance with your Lordship’s instructions, I
left London on 13th March with my General Staff by
special train to Marseilles, and thence in H.M.S. Phaeton
to the scene of the naval operations in the Eastern Medi-
terranean, reaching Tenedos on the 17th March shortly
after noon.
Immediately on arrival I conferred with Vice-Admiral
de Robeck, Commanding the Eastern Mediterranean
Fleet; General d’Amade, Commanding the French Corps
Expcditionnaire; and Contre Amiral Guepratte, in com-
mand of the French Squadron. At this conference past


difficulties wore explained to mo, and the intention to
make a fresh attack on the morrow was announced. Tne
amphibious battle between warships and land fortresses
took place next day, the 18th of March. I witnessed
these stupendous events, and thereupon cabled your
Lordship my reluctant deduction that the co-operation of
the whole of the force under my command would be re-
quired to enable the Fleet effectively to force the Dar-
danelles.
By that time I had already carried out a preliminary
reconnaissance of the north-western shore of the Gallipoli
Peninsula, from its isthmus, where it is spanned by the
Bulair fortified lines, to Cape Helles, at its extremist
point. From Bulair this singular feature runs in a south-
westerly direction for 52 miles, attaining near its centre
a breadth of 12 miles. The northern coast 'of the
northern half of the promontory slopes downwards
steeply to the Gulf of Xeros, in a chain of hills, which
extend as far as Cape Sulva. The precipitous fall of
these hills precludes landing, except at a few narrow
gullies, far too restricted for any serious military move-
ments. The southern half of the peninsula is shaped like
a badly-worn boot. The ankle lies between Gaba Tepe
and Kalkmaz Dagh; beneath the heel lie the cluster of
forts at Kilid Bahr; whilst the toe is that promontory
five miles-in width, stretching from Tekke Bvmm to Sedd-
el-Bahr.
THREE NATURAL FORTRESSES.
The three dominating features in this southern section
seemed to me to be:—
(1) Saribair Mountain, running up in a succession
of almost perpendicular escarpments to 970 feet.
The whole mountain seemed to be a network of
ravines and covered with thick jungle.
(2) Kilid Bahr plateau, which rises, a natural forti-
fication artificially fortified, to a height of 700
feet to cover the forts of the Narrows from an
attack from the Aegean.
(3) Achi Babi, a hill 600 feet in height, dominating
at long field gun range what I have described
as being the toe of the peninsula.
A peculiarity to be noted as regards this last southern
sector is that from Achi Babi to Cape Helles the ground
is hollowed out like a spoon, presenting only its outer
edges to direct fire from the sea. The inside of the spoon
appears to be open and undulating, but actually it is full
of spurs, nullahs, and confused under-features.
Generally speaking, the coast is precipitous, and good
landing-places are few. Just south of Tekke Burnu is a


small sandy bay (\V), and half a mile north of<rTtr is
another small break in the cliffs (X). Two miles farther
up the coast the mouth of a stream indents these same
cliffs (Y 2), and yet another mile and a half up a scrub-
covered gully looked as if active infantry might be able
to scramble up it on to heights not altogether dissimilar
to those of Abraham, by Quebec (Y). Inside Sedd-el-
Bahr is a sandy beach (V), about 300 yards across,
facing a semi-circle of steeply-rising ground, as the flat
bottom of a half-saucer faces the rim, a rim flanked on
one side by an old castle, on the other by a modern fort.
By Eski Hissarlik, on the east of Morto Bay (S), was
another small beach, which was, however, dominated by
the big guns from Asia. Turning northwards again,
there are two good landing-places on either side of Gaba
Tepe. Farther to the north of that promontory the beach
was supposed to be dangerous and difficult. In most of
these landing-places the trenches and lines of wire en-
tanglements were plainly visible from on board ship.
What seemed to be gun emplacements and infantry re-
doubts could also be made out through a telescope, but
of the full extent of these defences and of the forces
available to man them there was no possibility of judging
except by practical test.
Altogether the result of this and subsequent recon-
naissances was to convince me that nothing but a
thorough and systematic scheme for flinging the whole
of the troops under my command very rapidly ashore
could bo expected to meet with success; whereas, on the
other band, a tentative or piecemeal programme was
bound to lead to disaster. The landing of an army upon
the theatre of operations I have described—a theatre
strongly garrisoned throughout, and prepared for any
such attempt—involved difficulties for which no prece-
dent Avas forthcoming in military history except possibly
in the sinister legends of Xerxes. The beaches were
either so well defended by works and guns or else so
restricted by nature that it did not seem possible, even
by tAv r o or three simultaneous landings, to pass the troops
ashore quickly enough to enable them to maintain them-
selves against the rapid concentration and counter-
attack which the enemy was bound in such case to at-
tempt. It became necessary, therefore, not only to land
simultaneously at as many points as possible, but to
threaten to land at other points as well. The first of
these necessities involved another unavoidable if awk-
Avard contingency, the separation by considerable in-
tervals of the force.


The weather was also hound to play a vital part in my
landing. Had it been British weather there Avould have
been no alternative but instantly to give up the adven-
ture. To land two or three thousand men, and then to
have to break off and leave them exposed for a week to
the attacks of 34 ? 000 regular troops, with a hundred guns
at their back, was not an eventuality to be lightly en-
visaged. Whatever happened the weather must always
remain an incalculable factor, but at least by delay till
the end of April we had a fair chance of several days of
consecutive calm.
REDISTRIBUTION OF TROOPS.
Before doing anything else I had to redistribute the
troops on the transports to suit the order of their dis-
embarcation. The bulk of the forces at my disposal had,
perforce, been embarked without its having been possible
to pay due attention to the operation upon which I now
proposed that they should be launched.
Owing to lack of facilities at Mudros redistribution
in that harbour was out of the question. With your Lord-
ship’s approval, therefore, I ordered all the transports,
except those of the Australian Infantry Brigade and the
details encamped at Lemnos Island, to the Egyptian ports.
On the 24th March I myself, together with the General
Staff, proceeded to Alexandria, where I remained until
7th April, working out the allocation of troops to trans-
ports in minutest detail as a prelude to the forthcoming
disembarcation. General d’Amade did likewise.
On the Ist April the remainder of the General Head-
quarters, which had not been mobilized when I left Eng-
land, arrived at Alexandria.
By the 7th April ray preparations were sufficiently
advanced to enable me to return with my General Staff
to Lemnos, so as to put the finishing touches to my plan
in close co-ordination with the Vice-Admiral Commanding
the Eastern Mediterranean Fleet.
The covering force of the 29th Division left Mudros
Harbour on the evening of 23rd April for the five beaches,
S, V, W, X, and Y. Of these, V, W, and X were to be
main landings, the landings at S and Y being made mainly
to protect the flanks, to disseminate the forces of the
enemy, and to interrupt the arrival of his reinforcements.
The landings at S and Y were to take place at dawn,
whilst it was planned that the first troops for V, W, and
X beaches should reach the shore simultaneously at 5.30
a.m. after half an hour’s bombardment from the Fleet.
The transports conveying the covering force arrived
off Tenedos on the morning of the 24th, and during the
afternoon the troops were transferred to the warships and
fleet-sweepers in which they were to approach the shore.


A 155 M M. Gun being towed ashore on a lighter at Sedd-UI Bahr. Illustrated War News.


About midnight these ships, each towing a number of
cutters and other small boats, silently slipped their cables
and, escorted by the 3rd Squadron of the Fleet, steamed
slowly towards their final rendezvous at Cape Helle.--.
The rendezvous was reached just before dawn on the 25th.
The morning was absolutely still; there was no sign of life
on the shore; a thin veil of mist hung motionless over the
promontory; the surface of the sea was as smooth as
glass. The four battleships and four cruisers which
formed the 3rd Squadron at once took up the positions
that had been allotted to them, and at 5 a.m., it being
then light enough to fire, a violent bombardment of the
enemy’s defences was begun. Meanwhile the troops were
being rapidly transferred to the small boats in which they
Avere to be towed ashore. Not a move on the part of the
enemy; except for shells thrown from the Asiatic side
of the Straits the guns of the Fleet remained unanswered.
THE FIRST LANDING.
The detachment detailed for S beach (Fski Hissarlik
Point) consisted of the 2nd South Wales Borderers (less
one company) under Lieut.-Colonel Casson. Their land-
ing Avas delayed by the current, but by 7.30 a.m. it had
been successfully effected at the cost of some 50 casual-
ties, and Lieut.-Colonel Casson Avas able to establish his
small force on the high ground near De Totts Battery.
Here ho maintained himself until the general advance on
the 2711 i brought him into touch with the main body.
The landing on Y beach was entrusted to the King’s
Own Scottish Borderers and the Plymouth (Marine) Bat-
talion, Royal Naval Division, specially attached to the
29th Division for this task, the whole under the command
of Lievd.-Colonel Koe. The beach at this point consisted
merely of a narrow strip of sand at the foot of a crumb-
ling scrub-covered cliff some 200 feet high immediately
to the west of Krithia.
A number of small gullies running down the face of
the cliff facilitated the climb to the summit, and so im-
practicable had these precipices appeared to the Turks
that no steps had been taken to defend them. Very dif-
ferent would it have been had we, as was at one time
intended, taken Y 2 for this landing. There a large force
of infantry, entrenched up to their necks, and supported
by machine and Hotchkiss guns, were awaiting an at-
tempt which could hardly have made good its footing.
But at Y both battalions were able in the first instance to
establish themselves on the heights, reserves of food,
water, and ammunition were hauled up to the top of the
cliff, and, in accordance with the plan of operations, an
endeavour was immediately made to gain touch with the
troops landing at X beach. Unfortunately, the enemy’s


strong detachment from Y 2 interposed, our troops land-
ing at X were fully occupied in attacking the Turks im-
mediately to their front, and the attempt to join hands
was not persevered with.
Later in the day a large force of Turks were seen to
be advancing upon the cliffs above Y beach from the
direction of Krithia, and Colonel Koe was obliged to en-
trench. From this time onward his small force was sub-
jected to strong and repeated attacks, supported by field
artillery, and owing to the configuration of the ground,
which here drops inland from the edge of the cliff, the
guns of the supporting ships could render him little as-
sistance. Throughout the afternoon and all through the
night the Turks made assault after assault upon the Brit-
ish line. They threw bombs into the trenches, and, fav-
oured by darkness, actually led a pony with a machine
gun on its back over the defences and were proceeding
to come into action in the middle of our position when
they were bayoneted.
The British repeatedly counter-charged with the bayo-
net, and always drove off the enemy for the moment, but
the Turks were in a vast superiority and fresh troops
took the place of those who temporarily fell back. Colonel
Koe (since died of wounds) had become a casualty early
in the day, and the number of officers and men killed and
wounded during the incessant fighting was very heavy.
By 7 a.m. on the 26th only about half of the King’s Own
Scottish Borderers remained to man the entrenchment
made for four times their number'. These brave fellows
were absolutely worn out with continuous fighting; it
was doubtful if reinforcements could reach them in time,
and orders were issued for them to be re-embarked.
Thanks to H.M.S. Goliath, Dublin, Amethyst, and Sap-
phire, thanks also to the devotion of a small rearguard
of the King’s Own Scottish Borderers, which kept off the
enemy from lining the cliff, the re-embarcation of the
whole of the troops, together with the wounded, stores,
and ammunition, was safely accomplished, and both bat-
talions were brought round the southern end of the pen-
insula. Deplorable as the heavy losses had been, and un-
fortunate as was the tactical failure to make good so
much ground at the outset, yet, taking the operation as
it stood, there can be no doubt it has contributed greatly
to the success of the main attack, seeing that the plucky
stand made at Y beach had detained heavy columns of
the enemy from arriving at the southern end of the pen-
insula during what it will be seen was a very touch-and-
go struggle.
WORK OF IMPLACABLE’S GUNS.
The landing-place known as X beach consists of a
strip of sand some 200 yards long by 8 yards wide at the


foot of a low cliff. The troops to be landed here were
the Ist Royal Fusiliers, who were to be towed ashore
from H.M.S. Implacable in tAvo parties, half a battalion
at a time, together with a beach working party found by
the Anson Battalion, Royal Naval Division. About 6 a.m.
H.M.S. Implacable, with a boldness much admired by the
Army, stood quite close in to the beach, firing very rapidly
with every gun she could bring to bear. Thus seconded,
the Royal Fusiliers made good their landing with but
little loss. The battalion then advanced to attack the
Turkish trenches on the Hill 114, situated between Y and
W beaches, but were heavily counter-attacked and forced
to give ground. Tavo more battalions of the 87th Brigade
soon followed them, and by evening the troops had es-
tablished themselves in an entrenched position extending
from half a mile round the landing-place and so far south
as Hill 114. Here they Avere in touch Avith the Lanca-
shire Fusiliers, Avho had landed on W beach. Brigadier-
General Marshall, commanding the 87th Brigade, had been
Avounded during the day’s fighting, but continued in com-
mand of the brigade,
A TORNADO OF FIRE.
The landing on V beach Avas planned to take place on
the folloAving lines:—
As soon as the enemy’s defences had been heavily
bombarded by the Fleet, three companies of the Dublin
Fusiliers were to be towed ashore. They were to be
closely followed by the collier River Clyde (Commander
Unwin, R.N.), carrying between decks the balance of the
Dublin Fusiliers, the Munster Fusiliers, half a battalion
of the Hampshire Regiment, the West Riding Field Com-
pany, and other details.
The River Clyde had been specially prepared for the
rapid disembarcation of her complement, and large open-
ings for the exit of the troops had been cut in her sides,
giving on to a wide gang-plank by which the ,men could
pass rapidly into lighters which she had in tow. As soon
as the first tows had reached land the River Clyde was
to be run straight ashore. Her lighters were to be
placed in position to form a gangway between the ship
and the beach, and by this means it was hoped that 2,000
men could be thrown ashore with the utmost rapidity.
Further, to assist in covering the landing, a battery of
machine guns, protected by sandbags, had been mounted
in her bows.
The remainder of the covering force detailed for this
beach was then to follow in tows from the attendant
battleships.
V beach is situated immediately to the west of Sedd-
el-Bahr. Between the bluff on which stands Sedd-el-


After the Landing at the Southern end of the Gallipoli Peninsular. Allied troops at the wrecked Lighthouse
on Cape Helles. —Illustrated London News.


Bahr village and that which is crowned by No. 1 Fort
the ground forms a very regular amphitheatre of three
or four hundred yards radius. The slopes down to the
beach arc slightly concave, so that the whole area con-
tained with the limits of this natural amphitheatre,
whose grassy terraces rise gently to a height of a hundred
feet above the shore, can be swept by the fire of a de-
fender. The beach itself is a sandy strip some 10 yards
wide and 350 yards long, backed along almost the whole
of its extent by a low sandy escarpment about 4 feet
high, where the ground falls nearly sheer down to the
beach. The slight shelter afforded by this escarpment
played no small paid in the operations of the succeeding
thirty-two hours.
THE OBSTACLES ON SHORE.
At the south-eastern extremity of the beach between
the shore and the village, stands the old fort of Sedd-
el-Bahr, a battered ruin with wide breaches in its walls
and mounds of fallen masonry within and around it. On
the ridge to the north, overlooking the amphitheatre,
stands a ruined barrack. Both of these buildings, as
well as No. 1 Fort, had been long bombarded by the
Fleet, and the guns of the forts had been put out of
action; but their crumbled walls and the ruined out-
skirts of the village afforded cover for riflemen, while
from the terraced slopes already described the defenders
were able to command the open beach, as a stage is over-
looked from the balconies of a theatre. On the very
margin of the beach a strong barbed-wire entanglement,
made of heavier metal and longer barbs than I have ever
seen elsewhere, ran right across from the old fort of
Sedd-cl-Bahr to the foot of the north-western headland.
Two-thirds of the way up the ridge a second and even
stronger entanglement crossed the amphitheatre, pass-
ing in front of the old barrack and ending in the out-
skirts of the village. A third transverse entanglement,
joining these two, ran up the hill near the eastern end
of the beach, and almost at right angles to it. Above the
upper entanglement the ground was scored with the
enemy’s trenches, in one of which four pom-poms were
emplaced; in others were dummy pom-poms to draw fire,
while the debris of the shattered buildings on either flank
afforded cover and concealment for a number of machine
guns, which brought a cross-fire to bear on the ground
already swept'tiy rifle fire from the ridge.
As often happens in war, the actual course of events
did not quite correspond -with the intentions of the Com-
mander. The River Clyde came into position off Sedd-
el-Bahr in advance of the tows, and, just as the latter
reached the shore, Commander Unwin beached his ship


also. Whilst the boats and the collier Were approaching
the landing place the Turks made no sign. Up to the
very last moment it appeared as if the landing was to be
unopposed. But the moment the first boat touched bot-
tom the storm broke. A tornado of fire swept over the
beach, the incoming boats, and the collier. The Dublin
Fusiliers and the naval boats’ crews suffered exceedingly
heavy losses while still in the boats. Those who suc-
ceeded in landing and ill crossing the strip of sand man-
aged to gain some cover when they reached the low es-
carpment on the further side. None of the boats, how-
ever, were able to get off again, and they and their crews
were destroyed upon the beach.
Now came the moment for the River Clyde to pour
forth her living freight; but grievous delay was caused
here by the difficulty of placing the lighters in position
between the ship and the shore. A strong current hin-
dered the work and the enemy’s fire was so intense that
almost every man engaged upon it was immediately shot.
Owing, however, to the splendid gallantry of the naval
working party, the lighters were eventually placed in
position, and then the disembarcation began.
A company of the Munster Fusiliers led the way; but,
short as was the distance, feAv of the men ever reached
the farther side of the beach through the hail of bullets
which poured down upon them from both flanks and the
front. As the second company followed, the extempor-
ized pier of lighters gave way in the current. The end
nearest to the shore drifted into deep water, and many
men who had escaped being shot were drowned by the
weight of their, equipment in trying to swim from the
lighter to the beach. Undaunted workers were still
forthcoming, the lighters were again brought into posi-
tion, and the third company of the Munster Fusiliers
rushed ashore, suffering heaviest this time from shrap-
nel as well as from rifle, pom-pom, and machine-gun fire.
WAITING FOR NIGHT.
For a space the attempt to land was discontinued.
When it was resumed the lighters again drifted into
deep water, with Brigadier-General Napier, Captain
Costeker, his Brigade Major, and a number of men of
the Hampshire Regiment on board. There was nothing
for them all but to lie down on the lighters, and it was
here that General Napier and Captain Costeker were
killed. At this time, between 10 and 11 a.m., about
1,000 men had left the collier, and of these nearly half
had been killed or wounded before they could reach the
little cover afforded by the steep, sandy bank at the top
of the beach. Further attempts to disembark were now
given up. Had the troops all been in open boats but few


of them would have lived to tell the tale. But, most
fortunately, the collier was so constructed as to afford
fairly efficient protection to the men who were still on
board, and, so long as they made no attempt to land,
they suffered comparatively little loss.
Throughout the remainder of the day there was prac-
tically no change in the position of affairs. The situa-
tion was probably saved by the machine-guns on the
River Clyde, which did valuable service in keeping down
the enemy’s lire and in preventing any attempt on their
part to launch a counter-attack. One half-company of
the Dublin Fusiliers, which had been landed at a camber
just east of Sedd-el-Bahr village, was unable to work its
v ay across to V beach, and by mid-day had only twenty-
five men left. It was proposed to divert to Y beach that
part of the main body which had been intended to land
on V beach; but this would have involved considerable
delay owing to the distance, and the main body was di-
verted to W beach, where the Lancashire Fusiliers had
already effected a landing.
Late in the afternoon part of the Worcestershire Re-
giment and the Lancashire Fusiliers worked across the
high ground from W beach, and seemed likely to relieve
the situation by taking the defenders of V beach in flank.
The pressure on their own front, however, and the nu-
merous barbed-wire entanglements which intervened,
checked this advance, and at nightfall the Turkish garri-
son still held their ground. Just before dark some small
parties of our men made their way along the shore to the
outer walls of the Old Fort, and when night had fallen
the remainder of the infantry from the collier were
landed. A good force was now available for attack, but
our troops were at such a cruel disadvantage as to posi-
tion, and the lire of the enemy was still so accurate in the
bright moonlight, that all attempts to clear the fort and
the outskirts of the village during the night failed one
after the other. The wounded who were able to do so
without support returned to the collier under cover of
darkness; but otherwise the situation at daybreak on the
26th was the same as it had been on the previous day,
except that the troops first landed were becoming very
exhausted.
Twenty-four hours after the disembarcation began
there were ashore on V beach the survivors of the Dublin
and Munster Fusiliers and of two companies of the Hamp-
shire Regiment. The Brigadier and his Brigade-Major
bad been killed; Lieutenant-Colonel Carrington Smith,
commanding the Hampshire Regiment, had been killed
and the adjutant had been wounded. The Adjutant of
the Munster Fusiliers was wounded, and the great


majority of the senior officers were either wounded or
killed. The remnant of the landing-party still crouched
on the beach beneath the shelter of the sandy escarpment
which had saved so many lives. AVith them were two
officers of my General Staff—Lieutenant-Colonel Doughty-
Wylie and Lieutenant-Colonel AVilliams. These two of-
ficers, who had landed from the River Clyde, had been
striving, with conspicuous contempt for danger, to keep
all their comrades in good heart during this day and
night of ceaseless imminent peril.
HOW COLONEL DOUGHTY-WYLIE DIED.
Now that it was daylight once more, Lieutenant-
Colonels Doughty-Wylie and Williams set to work to
organize an attack on the hill above the beach. Any
soldier who has endeavoured to pull scattered units to-
gether after they have been dominated for many con-
secutive hours by close and continuous fire will be able
to take the measure of their difficulties. Fortunately
General Hunter-AVeston had arranged with Rear-Admiral
Wemyss about this same time for a heavy bombardment
to be opened by the ships upon the Old Fort, Sedd-el-Bahr
Village, the Old Castle north of the village, and on the
ground leading up from the beach. Under cover of this
bombardment, and led by Lieutenant-Colonel Doughty-
AVylie, and Captain AValford, Brigade Major R.A., the
troops gained a footing in the village by 10 a.m. They
encountered a most stubborn opposition and suffered
heavy losses from the fire of well concealed riflemen and
machine guns. Undeterred by the resistance, and sup-
ported by the naval gunfire, they pushed forward, and
soon after midday they penetrated to the northern edge
of the village, whence they were in a position to attack
the Old Castle and Hill 141. During this advance Captain
AValford Avas killed. Lieutenant-Colonel Doughty-AVylie
had most gallantly led the attack all the way up from
the beach through the Avest side of the village, under a
galling fire. And iaoav, Avhen, owing so largely to his oavu
inspiring example and intrepid courage, the position had
almost been gained, he Avas killed Avhile leading the last
assault. But the attack Avas pushed forward Avithout
Avavering, and, fighting their Avay across the open Avith
great dash, the troops gained the summit and occupied
the Old Castle and Hill before 2 p.m.
THE STORMING OF BEACH W.
AA 7 beach consists of a strip of deep, poAvdery sand
some 850 yards long and from 15 to 40 yards Avide, sit-
uated immediately south of Tekke Burnu, Avhere a small
gully running down to the sea opens out a break in the
cliffs. On either flank of the beach the ground rises pre-
cipitously, but, in the centre, a number of sand dunes


Heroic Australians repulsing overwhelming masses of Turks, assisted by shell-fire from the Fleet
at the Dardanelles. —Illustrated War News.


afford a more gradual access lo the ridge overlooking
the sea. Much time and ingenuity had been employed by
the Turks in turning this landing place into a death trap.
Close to the water’s edge a broad wire entanglement
extended the whole length of the shore and a supple-
mentary barbed network lay concealed under the surface
of the sea in the shallows. Land mines and sea mines
had been laid. The high ground overlooking the beach
was strongly fortified with trenches to which the gully
afforded a natural covered approach. A number of
machine guns also were cunningly tucked away into holes
in the cliff so as to be immune from a naval' bombard-
ment whilst they were converging their fire on the wire
entanglements. The crest of the hill overlooking the
beach was in its turn commanded by higli ground to the
north-west and south-east, and especially by two strong
infantry redoubts near point 138. Both these redoubts
were protected by wire entanglements about 20 feet
broad, and could be approached only by a bare glacis-like
slope leading up from the high ground above W beach
or from the Cape Helles lighthouse. In addition, another
separate entanglement ran down from these two redoubts
to the edge of the cliff near the lighthouse, making inter-
communication between V and W beaches impossible un-
til these redoubts had been captured.
So strong, in fact, were the defences of W beach that
the Turks may well have considered them impregnable,
and it is my firm conviction that no finer feat of arms has
ever been achieved by the British soldier—or any other
soldier—than the storming of these trenches from open
boats on the morning of 25th April.
The landing at W had been entrusted to the Ist Bat
talion Lancashire Fusiliers (Major Bishop), and it was to
the complete lack of the senses of danger or of fear of
this daring battalion that we owed our astonishing suc-
cess. As in the case of the landing at X, the disembarca-
tion had been delayed for half an hour, but at 6 a.m. the
whole battalion approached the shore together, towed by
eight picket boats in line abreast, each picket boat pull-
ing four ship’s cutters. As soon as shallow water was
reached, the tows were cast off and the boats were at
once rowed to the shore. Three companies headed for the
beach and a company on the left of the line made for a
small ledge of rock immediately under the cliff at Tekke
Burnu. Brigadier-General Hare, commanding the 88th
Brigade, accompanied this latter party, which escaped
the cross fire brought to bear upon the beach, and was
also in a better position than the rest of the battalion to
turn the wire entanglements.


LANCASHIRE HEROISM.
While the troops Avere approaching the shore no shot
had been tired from the enemy’s trenches, but as soon
as the first boat touched the ground a hurricane of lead
SAvept over the battalion. Gallantly led by their officers,
the Fusiliers literally hurled themselves ashore, and,
fired at from right, left, and centre, commenced hacking
their AA r ay through the Avire. A long line of men Avas at
once niOAvn doAvn as by a scythe, but the remainder Avere
not to be denied. Covered by the fire of the warships,
Avhich had hoav closed right in to the shore, and helped
by the flanking fire of the company on the extreme left,
they broke through the entanglements and collected under
the cliffs on either side of the beach. Here the companies
Avere rapidly reformed, and set forth to storm the ene-
my’s entrenchments Avherever they could find them.
In making these attacks the bulk of the battalion
moved up tOAvards Hill 114 Avhilst a small party Avorked
doAvn tOAvards the trenches on the Cape Helles side of
the landing-place.
Several land mines Avere exploded by the Turks during
the advance, but the determination of the troops Avas in
no Avay affected. By 10 a.m. three lines of hostile
trenches Avere in our hands, and our hold on the beach
Avas assured.
About 9.30 a.m. more infantry had begun to disembark,
and tAro hours later a junction Avas effected on Hill 114
Avith the troops Avho had landed on X beach.
On the right, OAving to the strength of the redoubt on
Hill 138, little progress could be made. The small party
of Lancashire Fusiliers Avhich had advanced in this direc-
tion succeeded in reaching the edge of the Avire entangle-
ments, but Avere not strong enough to do more, and it Avas
here that Major Frankland, Brigade Major of the 86th
Infantry Brigade, Avho had gone forAvard to make a per-
sonal reconnaissance, Avas unfortunately killed. Briga-
dier-General Hare had been Avounded earlier in the day,
and Colonel Woolly-Dod, General Staff 29th Division, Avas
noAv sent ashore to take command at W beach and or-
ganize a further advance.
At 2 p.ra., after the ground near Hill 138 had been
subjected to a heaA\y bombardment, the Worcester Regi-
ment advanced to the assault. Several men of this bat-
talion rushed forAvard Avith great spirit to cut passages
through the entanglement ; some Avere killed, others per-
seA r ered, and by 4 p.m. the hill and redoubt Avere captured.
An attempt Avas hoav made to join hands Avith the
troops on V beach, Avho could make no headAvay at all
against the dominating defences of the enemy. To help
them out the 86th Brigade pushed fonvard in an easterly


A portion of the 3rd Australian Brigade established a hold on a narrow ridge of land facing an
enormously strong Turkish position. Though fearfully exposed, our men refused to budge, and
ultimately the Turks retired. —Illustrated War News.


direction along the cliff. There is a limit, however, to
the storming of barbed-wire entanglements. More of
these barred the way. Again the heroic wire-cutters
came out. Through glasses they could be seen quietly
snipping away under a hellish fire as if they were prun-
ing a vineyard. Again some of them fell. The fire pour-
ing out of No. 1 fort grew hotter and hotter, until the
troops, now thoroughly exhausted by a slcepness night
and by the long day’s fighting under a hot sun, had to
rest on their laurels for a while.
When night fell, the British position in front of W
beach extended from just east of Cape Helles lighthouse,
through Hill 138, to Hill 114. Practically every man had
to be thrown into the trenches to hold this line, and the
only available reserves on their part of our front were
the 2nd London Field Company R.E., and a platoon of
the Anson Battalion, which had been landed as a beach
working party.
IRRESISTIBLE OVERSEA TROOPS.
The Australian and New Zealand Aipny Corps sailed
out of Mudros Bay on the afternoon of April 24th, es-
corted by the 2nd Squadron of the Fleet, under Rear-
Admiral Thursby. The rendezvous was reached just after
half-past one in the morning of the 25th, and there the
1,500 men who had been placed on board H.M. ships be-
fore leaving Mudros were transferred to their boats. This
operation was carried out with remarkable expedition,
and in absolute, silence. Simultaneously the remaining
2,500 men of the covering force were transferred from
their transports to six destroyers. At 2.30 a.m. H.M.
ships, together with the tows and the destroyers, pro-
ceeded to within some four miles of the coast, H.M.S.
Queen (flying Rear-Admiral Thursby’s flag) directing on
a point about a mile north of Kaba Tepe. At 3.30 a.m.
orders to go ahead and land were given to the tows and
at 4.10 a.m. the destroyers were ordered to follow.
All these arrangements Avofked without a hitch, and
were carried out in complete orderliness and silence. No
breath of wind ruffled the surface of the sea, and every
condition was favourable save for the moon, which, sink-
ing behind the ships, may have silhoutted them against
its orb, betraying them thus to watchers on the shore.
A rugged and difficult part of the coast had been
selected for the landing, so difficult and rugged that I
considered the Turks were not at all likely to anticipate
such a descent. Indeed, owing to the tows having failed
to maintain their exact direction the actual point of dis-
embarcation was rather more than a mile north of that T
had selected, and was more closely overhung by steeper
cliffs. Although this accident increased the initial dif


riculty of driving the enemy off the heights inland, it has
since proved itself to have been a blessing in disguise,
inasmuch as the actual base of the force of occupation
has been much better defiladed from shell fire.
“STRAIGHT AT THE FOE.”
The beach on which the landing was actually effected
is a very narrow strip of sand, about 1,100 yards in length,
bounded on the north and the south by two small pro-
montories. At its southern extremity a deep ravine, with
exceedingly steep, scrub-clad sides, runs inland in a north-
easterly direction. Near the northern end of the beach
a small but steep gully runs up into the hills at right
angles to the shore. Between the ravine and the gully
the whole of the beach is backed by the seaward face of
the spur which forms the north-western side of the ravine.
From the top of the spur the ground falls almost sheer
except near the southern limit of the beach, where gentler
slopes give access to the mouth of the ravine behind.
Further inland lie in a tangled knot the under-features
of Saribair, separated by deep ravines, which take a most
confusing diversity of direction. Sharp spurs, covered
with dense scrub, and falling away in many places in
precipitous sandy cliffs, radiate from the principal mass
of the mountain, from which they run north-west, west,
south-west, and south to the coast.
The boats approached the land in the silence and the
darkness, and they were close to the shore before the
enemy stirred. Then about one battalion of Turks was
seen running along the beach to intercept the lines of
boats. At this so critical a moment the conduct of all
ranks was most praiseworthy. Not a word was spoken—
every one remained perfectly orderly and quiet awaiting
the enemy’s fire, Avhich sure enough opened, causing many
casualties. The moment the boats touched land the Aus-
tralians’ turn had come. Like lightning they leapt
ashore, and each man as he did so went straight as his
bayonet at the enemy. So vigorous was. the onslaught
that the Turks made no attempt to withstand it and fled
from ridge to ridge pursued by the Australian infantry.
FIGHTING DAY AND NIGHT.
This attack was carried out by the 3rd Australian
Brigade, under Major (temporary Colonel) Sinclair Mac-
lagan, D.S.O. The Ist and 2nd Brigades followed
promptly, and were all disembarked by 2 p.m., by which
time 12,000 men and two batteries of Indian Mountain
Artillery had been landed. The disembarcation of
further artillery was delayed owing to the fact that the
enemy’s heavy guns opened on the anchorage and forced
the transports, which had been subjected to continuous
shelling from his field guns, to stand farther out to sea.


Battle by Moonlight in Gallipoli and Turks advancing under Cross-fire and Bombs. —Illustrated War News.


The broken ground, the thick scrub, the necessity for
sending any formed detachments post haste as they landed
to the critical point of the moment, the headlong valour
of scattered groups of the men who had pressed far
further into the peninsula than had been intended—'all
these led to confusion and mixing up of units. Eventually
the mixed crowd of fighting men, some advancing from
the beach, others falling back before the oncoming
Turkish supports, solidified into a semi-circular position
with its right about a mile north of Gaba Tepe and its
left on the high ground over Fisherman’s Hut. During
this period parties of the 9th and 10th Battalions charged
and put out of action three of the enemy’s Krupp guns.
During this period also the disembarcation of the Aus-
tralian Division was being folloAved by that of the New
Zealand and Australian Division (two brigades only).
From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. the enemy, hoav reinforced to a
strength of 20,000 men, attacked the Avdiole line, making
a specially strong effort against the 3rd Brigade and the
left of the 2nd Brigade. This counter-attack, Avas, lioav-
cver, handsomely repulsed with the help of the guns of
H.M. ships. BetAveen 5 and 6.30 p.m, a third most deter-
mined counter-attack \vas made against the 3rd Brigade,
avlio held their ground with more than equivalent stub-
bornness. During the night again the Turks made eon-
stant attacks, and the Bth Battalion repelled a bayonet
charge; but in spite of all the line held firm. The troops
had had practically no rest on the night of the 24-25th;
they had been fighting hard all day over most difficult
country, and they had been subjected to heavy shrapnel
fire in the open. Their casualties had been deplorably
heavy. But, despite their losses and in spite of their
fatigue, the morning of the 26th found them still in good
heart and as full of fight as ever.
It is a consolation to know that the Turks suffered
still more seriously. Several times our machine guns got
on to them in close formation, and the whole surrounding
country is still strewn with their dead of this date.
The reorganization of units and formations was im-
possible during the 26th and 27th owing to persistent
attacks. An advance was impossible until a reorganiza-
tion could be effected, and it only remained to entrench
the position gained and to perfect the arrangements for
bringing up ammunition, water, and supplies to the
ridges—in itself a most difficult undertaking. Four bat-
talions of the Royal Naval Division were sent up to re-
inforce the Army Corps on the 28th and 29th April.
UNSUCCESSFUL EFFORTS.
On the night of May 2nd a bold effort was made to
seize a commanding knoll in front of the centre of the


line. The enemy’s enfilading machine guns Were too
scientifically posted, and 800 men were lost without ad-
vantage beyond the infliction of a corresponding loss to
the enemy. On May 4th an attempt to seize Kaba Tcpe
was also unsuccessful, the barbed-wire here being some-
thing beyond belief. But a number of minor operations
have been carried out such as the taking of a Turkish
observing statior, the strengthening of entrenchments;
the reorganization of units, and the perfecting of com-
munication witn the landing-place. Also a constant strain
has been placed upon some of the best troops of the
enemy, who, to the number of 24,000, are constantly kept
fighting and being killed and wounded freely, as the
Turkish sniper is no match for the Kangaroo shooter,
even at his own game.
Concurrently with the British landings a regiment of
the French Corps was successfully disembarked at Kum
Kale under the guns of the French Fleet, and remained
ashore till the morning of the 26th, when they were re-
embarked. 500 prisoners were captured by the French
on this day.
On the evening of the 26th the main disembarcation
of the French Corps was begun, V beach being allotted
to our Allies for this purpose, and it was arranged that
the French should hold the portion of the front between
the telegraphic wire and the sea.
The following day I ordered a general advance to a
line stretching from Hill 236 near Eski Hissarlik Point to
the mouth of the stream two miles north of Tekke Burnu.
This advance, which was commenced at midday, was com-
pleted without opposition, and the troops at once con-
solidated their new line.
By the evening of the 27th the Allied forces had es-
tablished themselves on a line some three miles long,
which stretched from the mouth of the nullah, 3,200 yards
north-east of Tekke Burnu, to Eski Hissarlik Point, the
three brigades of the 29th Division less two battalions
on the left and in the centre, with four French battalions
on the right, and beyond them again the South Wales
Borderers on the extreme right.
GENERAL ADVANCE BEGUN.
Owing to casualties this line was somewhat thinly
held. Still, it was so vital to make what headway wo
could before the enemy recovered himself and received
fresh reinforcements that it was decided to push on as
quickly as possible. Orders were therefore issued for a
general advance to commence at 8 a.m. next day.
The 29th Division were to march on Krithia, with their
left brigade leading, the French were directed to extend


their left in conformity with the British movements and
to retain their right on the coast-line south of the Kereves
Dere.
The advance commenced at 8 a.m. on the 28th, and
was carried out with commendable- vigour, despite the
fact that from the moment of landing the troops had been
unable to obtain any proper rest.
The 87th Brigade, with which had been incorporated
the Drake Battalion, Royal Naval Division, in the place
of the King’s Own Scottish Borderers and South Wales
Borderers, pushed on rapidly, and by 10 a.m. had ad-
vanced some two miles. Here the further progress of
the Border Regiment was barred by a strong work on
the left flank. They halted to concentrate and make
dispositions to attack it, and at that moment had to with-
stand a determined counter-attack by the Turks. Aided
by heavy gun fire from H.M.S. Queen Elizabeth, they
succeeded in beating off the attack, but they made no
further progress that day, and when night fell entrenched
themselves on the ground they had gained in the morn-
ing.
The Tnniskilling Fusiliers, who advanced with their
right on the Krithia ravine, reached a point about three-
quarters of a mile south-west of Krithia. This was, how-
ever, the farthest limit attained, and later on in the day
they fell back into line with other corps.
The 88th Brigade on the right of the 87th progressed
steadily until about 11.30 a.in., when the stubbornness of
the opposition, coupled with a dearth of ammunition,
brought their advance to a standstill. The 86th Brigade,
under Lieutenant Colonel Casson, which had been held
in reserve, were thereupon ordered to push forward
through the 88th Brigade in the direction of Krithia.
The movement commenced at about 1 p.m., but though
small reconnoitring parties got to within a few hundred
yards of Krithia, the main body of the brigade did not
get beyond the line held by the 88th Brigade. Mean-
while, the French had also pushed on in the face of
strong opposition along the spurs on the western bank
of the Kereves Dere, and had got to within a mile of
Krithia with their right thrown back and their left in
touch with the 88th Brigade. Here they were unable to
make further progress; gradually the strength of the
resistance made itself felt, and our Allies were forced
during the afternoon to give ground.
AMMUNITION RUNNING SHORT.
By 2 p.m. the whole of the troops with the exception
of the Drake Battalion had been absorbed into the firing
line. The men were exhausted, and the few guns landed
at the time were unable to afford them adequate artillery


Wounded Australians cheering their comrades advancing to attack


support. The small amount of transport available did
not suffice to maintain the supply of munitions, and cart-
ridges were running short despite all efforts to push them
up from the landing-places.
Hopes of getting a footing on Achi Babi had row
perforce to be abondoned —at least for this occasion. The
best that could be expected was that we should be able
to maintain what we had won, and when at 3 p.m the
Turks made a determined counter-attack with the bayo-
net against the centre and right of our line, even this
seemed exceedingly doubtful. Actually a partial retire-
ment did take place. The French were also forced back,
and at 6 p.m. orders were issued for our troops to en-
trench themselves as best they could in the positions they
then held, with their right flank thrown back so as to
maintain connexion with our Allies. In this retirement
the right flank of the 88th Brigade was temporarily un-
covered and the Worcester Regiment suffered severely.
Much inevitable mixing of units of the 86th and 88th
Brigades had occurred during the day’s. fighting, and
there was a dangerous reentrant in the line at the junction
of the 87th and 88th Brigades near the Krithia nullah
The French had lost heavily, especially in officers, and
required time to reorganize.
The 29th April was consequently spent in straighten-
ing the line, and in consolidating and strengthening the
positions gained. There was a certain amount of artil-
lery and musketry fire, but nothing serious.
Similarly, on the 30th, no advance was made, nor was
any attack delivered by the enemy. The landing of the
bulk of the artillery was completed, and a readjustment
of the line took place, the portion held by the French
being somewhat increased.
Two more battalions of the Royal Naval Division had
been disembarked, and these, together with three bat-
talions of the 88th Brigade withdrawn from the line were
formed into a reserve,
DESPERATE TURKISH ATTACKS.
This reserve was increased on the Ist May by the ad-
dition of the 29th Indian Infantry Brigade, which re-
leased the three battalions of the 88th Brigade to return
to the trenches. The Corps Expeditionnaire d’Orient had
disembarked the whole of their infantry and all but two
of their batteries by the same evening.
At 10 p.m. the Turks opened a hot shell fire upon our
position, and half an hour later, just before the rise of
the moon, they delivered a series of desperate attacks.
Their formation was in three solid lines, the men in the
front rank being deprived of ammunition to make them


rely only upon the bayonet. The officers were served
out with coloured Bengal lights to fire from their pistols,
red indicating to the Turkish guns that they were to
lengthen their range; white that our front trenches had
been stormed; green that our main position had been
carried. The Turkish attack was to crawl on hands and
knees until the time came for the final rush to be made.
An eloquent hortative was signed Von Zowenstern and
addressed to the Turkish rank and file who were called
upon, by one mighty effort, to fling us all back into the
sea.
“Attack the enemy with the bayonet and utterly
destroy him !
“We shall not retire one step; for, if we do, our re-
ligion, our country, and our nation will perish !
“Soldiers ! The world is looking at you ! Your
only hope of salvation is to bring this battle to a success-
ful issue or gloriously to give up your life in the at-
tempt !”
The first momentum of this ponderous onslaught fell
upon the right of the 86th Brigade, an unlucky spot, see-
ing all the officers thereabouts had already been killed
or wounded. So when the Turks came right on without
firing and charged into the trenches with the bayonet
they made an ugly gap in the line. This gap was in-
stantly filled by the sth Royal Scots (Territorials), who
faced to their flank and executed a brilliant bayonet
charge against the enemy, and by the Essex Regiment
detached for the purpose by the Officer Commanding 88th
Brigade. The rest of the British line held its own with
comparative ease, and it was not found necessary to em-
ploy any portion of the reserve. The storm next brok'
in fullest violence against the French left, which was
held by the Senegalese. Behind them were two British
Field Artillery Brigades and a Howitzer Battery. After
several charges and counter-charges the Senegalese began
to give ground, and a company of the Worcester Regi-
ment and some gunners were sent forward to hold the
gap. Later, a second company of the Worcester Regi-
ment was also sent up, and the position was then main-
tained for the remainder of the night, although about
2 a.m. it was found necessary to dispatch one battalion,
Royal Naval Division, to strengthen the extreme right of
the French.
ADVANCE OF OUR WHOLE LINE.
About 5 a.m. a counter-offensive was ordered and the
whole line began to advance. By 7.30 a.m, the British
left had gained some 500 yards, and the centre had
pushed the enemy back and inflicted heavy losses. The
right also had gained some ground in conjunction with


Sniping the Sniper


thc French left, but the remainder of the French line
was unable to progress. As the British centre and left
were now subjected to heavy cross fire from concealed
machine guns, it was found impossible to maintain the
ground gained, and therefore, about 11 a.m., the whole
line withdrew to its former trenches.
The net result of the operations was the repulse of the
Turks and the infliction upon them of very heavy losses.
At first we had them fairly on the run, and had it not
been for those inventions of the devil—machine guns and
barbed wire—which suit the Turkish character and tac-
tics to perfection, we should not have stopped short of
the crest of Achi Babi. As it was, all brigades reported
great numbers of dead Turks in front of their lines, and
350 prisoners were left in our hands.
On the 2nd, during the day, the enemy remained
quiet, burying his dead under a red crescent flag, a work
with which we did not interfere. Shortly after 9 p.m.,
however, they made another attack against the Avhole
Allied line, their chief effort being made against the
French front, where the ground favoured their approach.
The attack was repulsed with loss.
During the night 3rd-4th the French front was again
subjected to a heavy attack, which they were able to
repulse without assistance from my general reserve.
The day of the 4th was spent in reorganization, and a
portion of the line held by the French, who had lost
heavily during the previous night’s fighting, was taken
over by the 2nd Naval Brigade. The night passed
quietly.
During the sth the Lancashire Fusilier Brigade of the
East Lancashire Division was disembarked and placed in
reserve behind the British left.
Orders were issued for an advance to be carried out
next day, and these and the three day’s battle which
ensued will be dealt with in my next dispatch,
OUR LOSSES.
The losses, exclusive of the French, during the period
covered by this dispatch, were, 1 regret to say, very
severe, numbering:—
177 Officers and 1,990 other ranks killed.
412 Officers and 7,807 other ranks wounded.
13 Officers and 3,580 other ranks missing.
From a technical point of view it is interesting to note
that my Administrative Staff had not reached Mudros
by the time when the landings were finally arranged. All
the highly elaborate work involved by these landings was
put through by my General Staff working in collaboration
with Commodore Roger Kayes, C. 8., M.V.0., and the
Naval Transport Officers allotted for the purpose by Yice-


Admiral dc Robeck. Navy and Army carried out these
combined duties with that perfect harmony which was
indeed absolutely essential to success.
WORK OF THE NAVY.
Throughout the events I have chronicled the Royal
Navy has been father and mother to the Army. Not one
of us but realizes how much he owes to Vice-Admiral de
Robeck; to the warships, French and British; to the de-
stroyers, mine sweepers, picket boats, and to all their
dauntless crews, who took no thought of themselves, but
risked everything to give their soldier comrades a fair
run in at the enemy.
Throughout these preparations and operations Mon-
sieur le General d’Amade has given me the benefit of his
wide experiences of war, and has afforded me, always,
the most loyal and energetic support. The landing of
Kum Kale planned by me as a mere diversion to distract
the attention of the enemy was transformed by the Com-
mander of the Corps Expeditionnaire de FOrient into a
brilliant operation, which secured some substantial re-
sults. During the fighting which followed the landing of
the French Division at Sedd-el-Bahr no troops could have
acquitted themselves more creditably under very trying
circumstances, and under very heavy losses, than those
working under the orders of Monsieur le General d’-
Amade.
Lieutenant-General Sir W. R. Birdwood, K.C.S.L, C. 8.,
C.1.E., D. 5.0., was in command of the detached landing
of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps above
Kaba Tepe, as well as during the subsequent fighting.
The fact of his having been responsible for the opera-
tions—operations which were crowned with a very re-
markable success-speaks, I think, for itself.
Major-General A. G. Hunter-Weston, C. 8., D. 5.0., was
tried very highly, not only during the landings, but more
especially in the day and night attacks and counter-at-
tacks which ensued. Untiring, resourceful, and ever
more cheerful as the outlook (on occasion) grew darker,


he possesses, in my opinion, very special qualifications as a Commander of troops in the field.
Major-General W. P. Braithwaite, C. 8., is the best Chief of the General Staff it has ever been my fortune
to encounter in war. I will not pile epithets upon him. I can say no more than what I have said, and I can
certainly say no less.
I have many other names to bring to notice for the period under review, and these will form the subject of a
separate report at an early date.
1 have the honour to be
Your Lordship’s most obedient Servant,
IAN HAMILTON
General,
Commanding Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.




NEW SOUTH WALES
KILLED
Col. H. N. MacLAURIN,
Ist Infantry Brigade.
Major F. D. IRVINE,
Ist Infantry Brigade.
Major B. I. SWANNELL,
Ist Battalion.
Lieut. W. S. DUCHESNE,
Ist Battalion.
Lieut. H. E. WILLIAMS,
Ist Battalion.
Major C. G. GORDON,
2nd Battalion.
Capt. G. L. B. CONCANNON,
2nd Battalion.
Lieut. E. N. SOLLING,
2nd Battalion.
Lieut. G. E. E. KELLY,
2nd Battalion.
Lieut. A. D. DAWSON,
2nd Battalion.
Capt. C. E. LEER,
3rd Battalion.
Capt. R. BURNS,
3rd Battalion.
Second-Lt. T. H. EVANS,
3rd Battalion.
Lt.-Col. A. J. O. THOMPSON,
4th Battalion.
Lieut. M. P. SMITH,
4th Battalion.
Lieut. F. G. WILSON,
13th Battalion.
Lieut. H. T. WATKINS,,
13th Battalion.
Lieut. D. M. C. N. HE UGH,
2nd Battalion.
Capt. A. C. M'GUIRE,
Ist Battalion.
Lieut. F. G. SMITH,
2nd Battalion.
Lieut. P. S. ANDERSON,
4th Battalion.
Lt.-Col. G. F. BRAUND, V.D.,
2nd Battalion.
Capt. T. O. SMITH,
3rd Battalion.
DIED OF WOUNDS
Lieut. C. N. R. HUNTLEY,
Ist Fid. Co. of Engrs.
Capt. W. B. DOUGLAS,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. L. K. SMILES,
2nd Batt., Ist Inf. Brig.
Pte. E. A. JARMAN,
2nd Batt., Ist Inf. Brig.
Pte. F. T. WRIGHT,
2nd Batt., Ist Inf. Brig.
Pte. A. J. WILLSIS,
3rd Batt., Ist Inf. Brig.
Pte. J. DEVLIN,
2nd.Batt., 2nd Efts.
Ptc. S. P. VAGG,
3rd Batt., Ist Inf. Brig.
Pte. E. H. CHEAL,
3rd Batt., Ist Inf. Brig.
Pte. H. E. SMITH,
13th Batt. 4th Inf. Brig.
Pte. E. W. STURDY,
13th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Pte. J. GRIEVE,
13th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Pte. E. A. SHAPLEY,
13th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Pte. W. B. WAEDROP,
13th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Pte. E. C. BIRD,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. V. A. STACK.
2nd Battalion.
Ptc. J. H. SHARP,
4th Battalion.
Pte. E. E. BAILEY,
4th Battalion.
Pte. A. LANGFORD,
4th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Ptc. G. STEALER,
Ist Battalion.


Pte. F. A. DOODSON,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. H. C. H. CALDWELL,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. J. H. CUMBERLAND,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. W. E. BERRYMAN,
3rd Battalion.
Sergt. F. BOURNE,
3rd Battalion.
Sergt. G. THOMAS,
4th Battalion.
Pte. J. WHITEHURST,
13th Battalion.
Pte. W. V. KNIGHT,
Ist Battalion'.'*
Pte. G. F. TEDENHAM,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. A. BLOOMFIELD,
Ist Reinforcements.
Pte. H. H. GUMMING,
Ist Reinforcements.
Pte. W. T. C. FERRIS,
Ist Reinforcements.
Lance-Corp. T. T. BRISTOW,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. W. J. GIBSON,
2nd Batt., 3rd Rfts.
Pte. M. JOHNSTONE,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. A. At. MOZART,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. F. A. D. MARTIN,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. H. H. WHARTON,
2nd Battalion.
Driver P. KANE,
17th Co., A.S. Corps.
Pte. R. S. MACK,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. A. WEINGOTT,
4th Battalion.
Pte. O. A. CROSS,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. CLEMPSON,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. H. W. CROCKETT,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. G. LEWIS,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. P. E. SHAPLAN,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. A. D. MITCHELL,
2nd Reinforcements.
Pte. J. R. BLAKEY,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. J. P. BRODERICK,
4th Battalion
Pte. E. DONALD,
4th Fid. Ambulance.
Pte. J. SHAW,
13th Battalion.
Corp. A. J. M‘ DONALD,
Ist F, Co. Engnrs.
Sergt. W. J. HOLDAWAY,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. J. HERON,
3rd Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. W. F. LOGAN,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. M. M. MULCAHY,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. T. A. M'GUIRK,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. E. W. PATTON,
3rd Battalion,
Pte. F. REYNOLDS,
3rd Battalion.
rtp. J. SHARP,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. J. ATKINSON,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. J. J. DOWNIE,
4th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Sergt. E. R. GUTHRIE,
4th Battalion.
Pte. R. H. KAIN,
4th Batt., 3rd Rfts.
Pte. C. W. LEYON,
4th Batt., Ist Rfts
Pte. L. MULLIGAN,
4th Battalion.
Pte. R. M‘ GIBBON,
4th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Lance-Corp. T. SULLIVAN.
4th Battalion.
Corp. E. A. WOOD,
4th Battalion.
Pte. A. YATES,
4th Battalion.
■pte. H. TROON,
4th Fid. Ambulance.
DEATHS FROM OTHER CAUSES
Pte. M. M. MULCAHY,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. H. S. CONNOR, Pte. J. R. THOMAS,
13th Battalion. 13th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Pte. L. R. FOWLER,
Ist Light Horse
Pte. A. P. WOOD, 2nd Battalion.


WOUNDED
Lieut. P. S. ANDERSON,
4th Battalion.
Lieut. A. H CHAMPION,
Ist Battalion.
Major R. C. DAWSON,
Ist Battalion.
Lieut. L. J. HEMPTON,
Ist Battalion.
Lieut. R. I. KERSHAW,
Ist Battalion.
Lieut. E. M. M‘ FARLANE,
3rd Battalion.
Lieut. G. STEEN,
Ist Battalion,
Lieut. F. G. GRANGER,
13th Battalion.
Lieut. G. G. GARDINER,
13th Battalion.
Major H. E. U. BURKE,
2nd Battalion.
Lieut. R. J. STEWART,
2nd Battalion.
Lieut. H. J. FOURDRINIER,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. E. C. H. HAXBY,
Capt. J. C. WILSON,
3rd Battalion.
Lieut. R. C. COWEY,
Lieut. T. L. CADELL,
3rd Battalion.
Lieut. G S. M‘ DONALD,
3rd Battalion.
Lieut. E. G. GOLDRING,
3rd Battalion.
Lieut. W. B. CARTER,
Lieut. H. E. BUTLER,
3rd Battalion.
Lieut. C. E. M. BRODZIAK,
3rd Battalion.
Lieut. R. K. S. MAY,
Ist Battalion.
Lieut. P. S. S. WOODFORDE,
Ist Battalion.
Lieut. F. G. SMITH,
2nd Battalion.
Lieut. F. FOGDEN,
Ist Battalion.
2nd-Lt. W T . R. R. FFRENCH,
2nd Battalion.
Second-Lt. G. A. STREET,
2nd Battalion
Lieut. G. STEEN,
Ist Battalion.
Lance-Corp. C. E. W. LAURIE,
13th Battalion.
Pte. L. G. SEGUSS,
13th Battalion.
Pte. W. CLEMO,
13th Battalion.
Lance-Corp. S. L. NAIL,
Ist Battal ion.
Pte. H. B. WATSON,
Ist Batt., Ist Inf. Brig.
Pte. R. ARMSTRONG,
2nd Batt., Ist Inf. Brig.
Pte. S. W. MARWICK,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. O. LEAVE,
2nd Batt., Ist Inf. Brig.
Pte. H. R. CROSS,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. G. CLEMPSON,
4th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. A. TURNER,
4th Batt., Ist Inf. Brig.
Sapper L. G. F. BURTON,
Ist Fid. Co. of Engnrs.
Sapper M. CUMMINGS,
Ist Fid. Co. of Engnrs.
Sapper E. F. HEALY,
Ist Fid. Co. of Engnrs.
Sapper F. R. CLUETT,
Ist Fid. Co. of Engnrs.
Sapper P. F. WALSHE,
Ist Fid. Co. of Engnrs.
Pte. F. J. BAILISB,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. J. P. CONNOR,
2nd Battalion.
rte. R. COX,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. A. K DAVIES,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. W. R. DILLEY,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. T. EVANS,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. E. IT. FARDELL,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. F. A. HARRIS,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. S. J. B. RESERVE,
2nd Battalion,
Pte. G. L. MUMBY,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. A. T. M‘ INTYRE,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. W. REECE,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. W. O. SCHOFIELD,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. W. C. CROCOMBE,
Pte. H. J. CANTWELL,
2nd Reinforcements.
Pte. J. H. CROFT,
2nd Reinforcements.
Pte. F. H. DAVEY,
3rd Battalion.


Pte. J. R. ELLIOTT,
Ist Reinforcements.
Pte. G. HUGMAN,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. J. R. JOHNSTONE,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. F. J. NICHOLS,
3rd Reinforcements.
Pte. C. S. PARKER,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. J. ATKINSON,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. A. D. MITCHELL,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. N. STEELE,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. F. C. BARTLETT,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. M. M. MULCAHY,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. C. J. HACCHE,
4th Battalion.
Lance-Cpl. A. A. ANDERSON,
Ist Battalion.
Lance-Cpl. D. F. McLEOD,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. H. BARNEY,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. R. B. BARR,
Ist Battaliov,
Pte. P. T. DUNCAN,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. H. EITAPENCE,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. J. C. HAYES,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. J. HURLEY,
Ist Battalion.'
Pte. H. J. HOLMES,
Ist Battalion.
pte. a. Mclennan,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. j. McGrath,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. S. MARTIN,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. W. OYSTON,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. J. ROBERTS,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. R. ROBERTSON,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. W. H. SPARKES,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. T. W. WADDUPS,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. E. BROWN,
3rd Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. C. S. BUCKERIDGE,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. D. CURYIR,
3rd Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. V. A. DERNEE,
3rd Battalion,
Pte. G. H. FECTTT,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. G. FISHLOCH,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. W. H. KNOW,
3rd Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. S. W. MARSHALL,
3rd Battalion.
pte. r. McDonald,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. V. NOBLE,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. T. PURCELL,
3rd Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. F. A. SILVER,
3rd Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. T. VIDLER,
3rd Batt., Ist Rft&.
Pte. R. C. WRIGHT,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. E. E. GARDENER,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. B. ASHTON,
2nd Battalion.
Sergt. T. K. ABBOTT,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. G. W. CLARKE,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. J. CAMERON,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. H. L. CONSTABLE,
2nd Battalion.
Pt<wA. ,T. DOYLE,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. A. T. EL WOOD,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. A. HORNBY,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. R. L. HENRY,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. A. ISACKSON ,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. E. JONES,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. G. T. LAMPE,
2nd Batt., Ist Rfts.
Lce.-Cpl. H. A. MORELANDE,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. F. MILLER,
2nd Batt., 3rd Rfts.
Pte. S. MATTHEWS,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. J. MURRAY,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. J. M'ILROY,
2nd Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. W. G. M'SPARRON,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. E. J. OVERMAN,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. H. M. PATFIELD,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. F. RENNIE,
2nd Battalion.


Pte. S. REILLY,
2nd Battalion
Pte. P. SMITH,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. J. C. SYKES,
Corporal E. L. TURTON,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. R. J. VIDLER,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. J. E. WOODHOUSE,
2nd Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Lce.-Cpl. W. WILSON,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. O. L. WHAITES,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. A. DYMOND,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. S. LAYTON,
Pte. J. TANN,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. N. O. STAGGS,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. W. WALSH,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. R. J. AGNEW,
2nd Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. J. GLANISTER,
4th Battalion.
Pte. T. E. GOODALL,
4th Battalion.
Cpl. S. G. HENDERSON,
’ 4th Battalion.
Cpl, W. H. LYNCH,
4th Battalion.
Pte. A. A. M< DONALD,
4th Battalion.
Cpl. T. HAWORTH,
4th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. E. DAVIS,
i.3th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. T. W. MOORE,
13th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte, T. C. J. WEEDON,
13th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Capt. D. M. KING,
Ist Inf. Brigade.
Pte. A. R. ANDERSON,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. R. A. ADAIR,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. A. J. BROWN,
Ist Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. G. BARKER,
Ist Battalion
Pte. F. BOTT,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. C. BUCKLEY,
Ist Battalion.
Cpl. F. W. BUTLER,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. C. H. CAIN,
2nd Rfts., Ist Batt.
Lce.-Cpl. L. G. COLE,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. A. W. DUNNE,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. P. F. DUNNE,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. H. DILLON,
Ist Battalion.
Sgt. G. M. B. DRINKWATER,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. C. E. DUGGA,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. B. DEPINA,
Ist Battalion.
-Lce.-Cpl. W. FOWLER,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. G. GREIGERSON,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. T. GOODMAN,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. F. HAWKES,
Ist Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. C. S. HILL,
Ist Battalion.
Sergt. A. D. HIGBID,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. H. T. JONES,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. W. H. JONES,
Ist Battalion.
Sergt. J. H. M'TNTYRE,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. J. M‘ GONAGLE,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. w. D. M' COY,
Ist Battalion.
Sergt. R. I. C. MacGREGOR,
Ist Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. A. S. PHILLIPS,
Ist Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. A. PRESTON,
Ist Battalion
Sergt. B. C. SINGLETON,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. W. S. SIMMS,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. E. .1. SEXTON,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. A. C. SMILES,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. L. M. WILLIAMS,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. I. WAUGH,
2nd Rfts., Ist Batt.
Pte. H. WILLIAMS,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. 0. WOOD,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. H. EVANS,
Ist Rfts., Ist Batt.
Major M. St. J. LAMB,
3rd Battalion.
Capt. J. K. C. MAGEE,
4th Battalion.
Second-Lt. J. HOME,
4th Battalion.


Lieut. J. D. CHRISTIE,
4th Battalion.
Lieut. C. G. PASCOE,
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. T. MADDEN,
sth Battalion.
Pte. J. L. MARTIN,
sth Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. H. F. MORRISON,
sth Battalion.
Pte. F. E. MORETON,
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. P. M‘ INTYRE,
sth Battalion,
Pte. W. T. H. PREST,
sth Battalion.
Pte. W. G. PEARMAN,
sth Battalion.
Lieut. H. J. SALIER,
13th Battalion.
Pte. H. J. BEAVIS,
Ist Fid. Ambulance.
Pte. J. GREGORY,
13th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Sapper H. JOHNSON,
Ist Fid. Co. of Engnrs.
Cpl. H. FARGUSON,
Ist Fid. Co. of Engnrs.
Sergt. A. LOGAN,
Ist Fid. Co. of Engnrs.
Gunner R. WILSON,
Bth Army Ser. Corps.
Pte. F. T. TJDEN,
9th Battalion.
Sapper F. R. CLUETT,
Ist Co. Engineers.
Pte. R. A. OLDROYD,
Ist Battalio-.
Pte. E. E. GARDENER,
2nd Battalion.
Lieut. G. E. M‘ DONALD,
3rd Battalion.
Pte. J. TOWERS,
Pte. J. ATKINSON,
3rd Battalion
Pte. C. J. HACCHE,
4th Battalion.
Pte. W. J. GOODE,
4th Battalion.
Pte. L. HOSS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. T. G. BERRY,
13th Battalion.
2nd Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. H. LEET,
13th Battalion.
Pte. H. STEGGA,
12th Battalion.
Pte. W. L. ALLEN,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. E. BATE,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. R. E. BARKER,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. H. L. CHRISTENSEN,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. O. G. B. CORK,
Ist Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. C. COX,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. L, R. DONKIN,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. W. A. DIPLOCK,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. A. G. GITRNER,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. A. S. HADDON,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. A. W. HARGRAVES,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. E. H. HARTLEY,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. A. E. HARRISON,
Ist Battalion.
Tte. C. JACKSON,
Ist Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. T. KENNEDY,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. M. T. M‘ CUE,
Ist Battalion.
Lee.-Cpl. L. E. MAYES,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. G. OWEN,
Ist Battalion,
Pte. L. E. MITCHELL,
- Ist Battalion
Pte. A. MORRIS,
Ist Battalion.
Tte. J. ROSS,
Ist Battalion.
Tte. W. J. REAY,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. J. SCELTON,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. T. S. TAIT,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. J. H. WADE,
Ist Battalion.
Tte. F. H. WEST,
Ist Battalion.
Tte. A. SEARS,
Ist Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. H. Y. HOWES,
Ist Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. D. MITCHELL,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. S. R. TRAILL,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. O. H. WARREN,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. F. P. WINTER,
Ist Battalion.
Pte. H. F. ENGLAND,
Ist Battalion.
Tte. J. K. M'AULAY,
Ist Batt., 3rd Rfts.
Pte. A. HARRIS,
2nd Battalion.


Pte. D. T. MILLJKEN,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. H. W. O’CONNOR,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. J. PULLAR,
2nd Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. L. B. POURORD,
2nd Battalion.
Pte G. B. RIDER,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. C. H. WILLIAMS,
2nd Battalion
Pte. T. M. ALLEN,
2nd Batt., 2nd Efts.
Cpl. N. J. BURNS,
2nd Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. J. BULLOCK,
2nd Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. H. A. BOUFFLER,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. L. F. W. BARSBY,
2nd Battalion
Pte. A. CLARK,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. L. G. CHERRY,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. H. W. CARTER,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. J. CHALMERS,
2nd Battalion.
Qtr. M.-Sergt. B. G. DONALD,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. O. Duffy,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. A. FORRESTER,
2nd Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. A. C. G. O. FRANCK,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. H. FRITH,
2nd Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. R. W. GATES,
2nd Battalion.
Pte, S. CLOVER,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. W. K. HENDERSON, ,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. F. JOHNSON,
2nd Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pts. A. N. KING, ■>
2nd Battalion.
Pts. C. G. MURRAY,
2nd Battalion,
Sergt. F. A. MAYO,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. J. W. O’BRIEN,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. A. O’TOOLE,
2nd Batt., 3rd Efts.
Pte. E. EUSSELL,
2nd Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. R. SALMON,
2nd Battalion. t
Pte. T. THOMPSON,
2nd Batt., 2nd Efts,
Pte. W. WALSH,
2nd Battalion.
I’tc. R. H. MEKKELSON,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. J. H. CASEY,
2nd Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. C. BROWNE,
2nd Battalion.
Sergt. W. J. DANNEFAERD,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. J. C. TOLMIE,
2nd Battalion.
Gpl. W. E. MILLEE,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. C. A. PURDON,
2nd Battalion.
Pte. S. C. MITCHELL,
2nd Battalion.
VICTORIA
KILLED
Major E. F. D. FETHERS,
4th Battalion.
Major J. W. HAMILTON,
sth Battalion.
Capt. W. L. STRACHAN,
6th Battalion.
Lieut. C. F. W. LANE,
6th Battalion.
Capt. J. E. SERGEANT,
Bth Battalion.
Lieut. M. L. M'LEOD,
Bth Battalion.
Lieut. R. S. BARRETT, .
Bth Battalion.
Capt. W. R. HOGGART,
14th Battalion.
Lieut. E. H. S. CHAPMAN,
7th Battalion.
Lieut. S. R. CLOSE,
Bth Battalion.
Lieut. A. D. HENDERSON,
7th Battalion.
Capt. W. F. HODGSON,
Bth Battalion.


Lieut. C, W. WOLFENDEN,
2nd F.A. Brigade.
Pte. T. ATKINS,
Sth Battalion.
Pte. H. St. E. DALTON,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. F. V. DUNT,
sth Battalion.
Sergt. J. H. HOOKE,
6th Battalion.
Pte. W. C. M‘DONALD,
sth Battalion.
Sergt, W. F. MURPHY,
14th Battalion.
Sergt. R. ROBINSON,
6ih Battalion.
Pte. P. A. TIPPETT,
6th Battalion.
Pte. G. L. THOMPSON,
sth Battalion.
Pte. H. H. SMITH,
sth Battalion.
Pte. H. HOGAN,
sth Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. C. W. JANSSEN,
Sth Battalion.
Q.M.-Sergt. A. L. EVERETT,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. G, HUNTER,
6th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. L. G. SPROSTON,
7th Battalion.
Pte. E. MAY,
7th Battalion.
Pte. A. E. ROGERS,
7th Battalion.
Pte. Ti. HAWKINS,
7th Battalion.
Pte. A. MURDOCK,
7th Battalion,
Lce.-Cpl. F. ABBEY,
7th Battalion.
Cpl. S. J. GOULDING,
7th Battalion,
Pte. E. D. MARTIN,
Sth Battalion.
Pte. E. H. WOOD,
Sth Battalion.
Pte. A. R. OLLEY,
7th Battalion.
Pte. S. G. CHARLESWORTH.
7th Battalion
Pte. G. C. CAVANAGH,
7th Battalion.
DIED OF WOUNDS
Lieut. W. R. HODGSON,
sth Bty., 2nd Fid. Art. Brig.
Lieut. A. H. C. WALKER,
14th Battalion.
Pte. D. O’CONNOR,
6th Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. H. J. JOHNSON,
7th Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. E. DAY,
7th Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Cpl. H. SADLER,
Sth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. C. G. GREENHAM,
14th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Sergt. P. SMITH,
14th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Cpl. J. BOWEN,
14th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Lce.-Cpl. R. E. YOUNG,
14th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Pte. W. COHEN,
14th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Pte. F. C. HARRIS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. C. F. RICHARDSON,
6th Battalion.
Bugler C. J. LAKER,
6th Battalion
Pte. J. H. HORTON,
sth Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Q.M.-Sergt. C. M. PETER,
Sth Battalion.
Pte. F. BAILEY,
4th Battalion.
Pte. J. HAMILTON,
sth Battalion.
Pte. G. HEWITT,
sth Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. J. F. HE YWOOD,
sth Battalion.
Pie. J. JAMES.
4th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Staff-Sgt.-Maj. F. E. PIGGOTT
sth Battalion.
Sergt. N. ROCHFORD,
sth Battalion.
Pte. A. J. R. SMITH,
sth Battalion.
Pte. H. J. WIGG,
sth Battalion.
Pte. C. A. BIRD,
6th Battalion.
Pte. E. NIXON.
6th Battalion.
Pte. H. B. BRAIN,
6th Battalion.
Pte. H. G. JACOB,
6th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. S. H. PERROTTET,
6th Battalion.
Major R. W. WILLS,
6th Battalion.
Pte. T. E. SERGEY,
7th Battalion.


Pte. G. PORTER,
Bth Batt., 2nd Rfts.
DIED OF SICKNESS.
Pte. P. WILLIAMS,
14th Battalion
Sergt. V. C. TRECKS,
A.A. Pay Corps.
Pte. S. W. GIBSON,
Bth Batt., Ist Rfts.
DIED OF HEART SHOCK
pte. s. McDermott,
nth Battalion
Pte. J. GARTSHORE.
14th Batt., 3rd Rfts,
WOUNDED
Major J. BLEZARD,
7th Battalion.
Lieut.-Col. H. E. ELLIOTT,
7th Battalion.
Capt. R. P. FLOCKHART,
sth Battalion.
Lieut. S. 6. GILMOUR,
sth Battalion.
Second-Lt. A. R. HEIGHWAY,
7th Battalion.
Lieut. A. J. PHILLIPS,
sth Battalion.
Lieut, R. C. C. BRISK,
6th Battalion.
Lieut. C. C. RiDDELL,
6th Battalion.
Lieut. F. O. ROGERS,
7th Battalion.
Lieut. E, B. SPARGO,
6th Battalion.
Major C. E. CONNOLLY,
14th Battalion.
Major ADAMS,
14th Battalion.
Lieut. J. G. T. HAN BY,
14th Battalion.
Lieut. J. W. ROSS,
sth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Lieut. N. CLOWES,
Bth Battalion.
Lieut, Q. R. SMITH,
14th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Lieut. W. J. ROSS,
sth Battalion.
Lieut. SKERTTCHLY,
13th Battalion.
Lieut. V. H. GATLIFF,
2nd F. A. Brigade.
Lieut. H. J. F. COE,
2nd F.. A. Brigade.
Pte. C. E. BOWEN,
6th Battalion.
Pte. 0. W. WALL,
6th Battalion.
Pte. A. G. NELSON,
7th Battalion.
Pte. C. S. SHERREN,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. J. H. JEFFREYS,
sth Batt., 2nd Inf, Brig.
Pte. A. W. SMITH,
sth Batt., 2nd Inf, Brig.
Pte. C. G. OSBORNE,
sth Batt. z 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. M. O’CONNELL,
sth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. J. H. HORTON,
sth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. L. WHELAN,
14th Batt., 4th Inf, Brig.
Pte. C. F. RICHARDSON,
6th Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. E. J. MAITLAND,
7th Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. A. RULE,
7th Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. A. W. HINE,
7th Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. C. M‘ KAY,
7th Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Sapper 6. S. SHARP,
Ist Sig. Co. of Engnrs.
Pte. P. E. SHAPLAND,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. H. E. BAENSCH,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf, Brig.
Pte. J. E. DECKER,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig
Pte. W. R. GRANT,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf, Brig
Pte. J. W. HUNTER,
Ist Reinforcements,
Pte. W. D. HOGG,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Lce.-Cpl. J. JONES,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig
Pte. J. G. LETCHER,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. J. M'KINLEY,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. C. W. O’BRIEN,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. W. G. ROWE,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. C. RAITE,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig,


Pte. D. SCOTT,
2nd Fid. Ambulance.
Pte. M. L. JONES,
3rd Fid. Amb., Ist Rfts.
Capt. J. C, STEWART,
sth Battalion.
Capt. D. W. DALY,
6th Battalion.
Lieut. R. G. BENNETT,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. F. ADAMS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. V. BARRETT,
sth Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. P. BARRY,
sth Batt., Ist Rfts.
Cpl. T. W. BLISS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. W. M. BROWN,
sth Battalion.
Pte. F. W. BUTLER,
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. B. CARR,
sth Battalion.
Pte. M. CARNEY,
sth Battalion.
Pte. H. F. COLEMAN,
sth Battalion.
Pte. H. J. CRUICKSHANK,
sth Battalion.
Pte. J. F. DALLACHY,
sth Battalion.
Pte. W. DAVIDSON ,
sth Batt., Ist Rfts.
G.S.M. J. ENGLISH,
sth Battalion.
Pte. D. FINLAYSON,
sth Battalion.
Pte. J. E. FLOYD,
sth Battalion.
Pte. S. FOWLER,
sth Battalion.
Pte. H. F. FISCHER,
sth Battalion.
Pte. G. GAY,
sth Battalion.
Pte. A. GEE,
st' Battalion.
Pte. A. V. GORI jN,
jth Battalion.
Pte. J k GRAINGER,
sth Battalion.
Pte. H. GI-ORGE,
sth Battalion.
Pt©. A. W. HILL,
sth Battalion.
Lee.-Cpl. E. W. KAMI.TON,
sth Battalion.
Pte. J. M. LAYTON,
sth Battalion.
Pte. N. V. H. LIGHTBODY,
sth Battalion.
Pte. H. W. MARSHALL,
sth Battalion.
Pte. L. H. STORRY,
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. STUART,
sth Battalion.
L.-Sgt. B. MIDDLETON,
sth Battalion.
Pte. D. MORROW,
sth Battalion.
Pte. 11. H. McCALLUM,
sth Battalion.
Pte. J. OWENS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. T. S. PARKER,
sth Battalion.
Pte. C. A. PIERCE,
sth Battalion.
Pte. J. POWDERHAM,
sth Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. W. POYNTON,
sth Battalion.
Pte. W. H. RAE,
sth Battalion.
Pte. J. F. S. SEYMOUR,
sth Battalion.
Pte. H. SHARPLEY,
sth Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. A. G. SHEPHARD,
sth Batt., Ist Rfts.
Cpl. W. F. SLEMAN,
sth Battalion.
Pte. T. SPENCER,
sth Battalion.
C.Q.M.S. C. B. TAYLOR,
sth Battalion.
Pte. W. F. TAYLOR,
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. TARBITT,
sth Battalion.
Pte. M. D. TOMPKINS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. H. I. TRACEY,
sth Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. J. M. WEMYSS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. B. J. YOUNG,
sth Battalion.
Pte. E. ADAMS,
6th Battalion.
Pte. A. W. G. AVERY,
6th Batt., Ist lifts.
Pte. H. G. CRAIG,
6th Battalion.
Pte. W. CRAIG,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. H. COUGHLAN,
6th Batt., Ist lifts.
Pte. W. FULLERTON,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. GEORGE,
6th Battalion.
Pte. M. .1. GROOME,
6th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. A. S. GROVES,
6th Battalion.


Pte. W. E. GOYMER,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. J. HOARS,
6th Battalian.
Pte. A. C. HAYES,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. H. HARKNESS,
6th Battalion.
Pte. A. R. HARMES,
6th Battalion.
Pte. T. G. KLEEBERGER,
6th Battalion.
Pte. P. KLEEBERGER,
6th Battalion.
Pte. H. J. MEALMAKER,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. MACPHERSON,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. MACDONALD,
, 6th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. N. S. H. PARKES,
6th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. C. V. QUIXLEY,
6th Battalion.
Pte. A. J. REID,
6th Battalion.
Pte. G. ROWDEN,
6th Battalion.
Pte. L. H. STEELE,
6th Battalion.
Pte. D. F. SCOTT,
6th Battalion.
Pte. E. SLATER,
6th Battalion.
Pte. H. Y. GOBB,
6th Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. E. E. THAKE,
6th Battalion.
Pte. G. BALL,
7th Battalion.
Pte. R. J. BATTEN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. B. H. BIGGS,
7th Battalion.
Pte. A. BOLITHO,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. F. BUTLER,
7th Battalion.
Pte. A. W. COWAN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. D. CASE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. F. S. SCOLES,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. CORRIGAN,
7th Battalion.
Bgrl. W. J. CONNELL,
7th Battalion.
Cpl. C. D. COWAN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. W. H. DALE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. EDWARDS,
7th Battalion.
Pte. E. H. ELY,
7th Battalion.
Cpl. L. H. FAIENIE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. P. D. FIDDIAN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. E. FITZPATRICK,
7th Battalion.
Pte. A. E. FORRESTER,
7th Batt., Ist Efts.
Lce.-Sergt, G. GARNER,
7th Battalion.
Pte. A. S. GRAY,
7th Battalion.
Pte. A. W. HAMILTON,
7th Battalion.
Sergt. J. M. HAYES,
7th Battalion.
Pte. K. B. HOLLINGS,
7th Battalion.
Pte. W. KEEFE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. H. S. KING,
7th Battalion.
Pte. A. R. KNIGHT,
7th Battalion,
Cpl. W. E. LANE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. S. W. LAURENSON,
7th Battalion.
Pte. M. J. LEDWIDGE,
7th Batt., Ist Efts.
rte. J. MAKEHAM,
7th Battalion.
Pte. H. M A THEE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. F. MATTHEWS,
7th Battalion.
Pte. H. MIDDLE WISE,
7th Battalion
Pte. W. J. MONAR,
7th Battalion.
Pte. A. T. MORGAN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. L. MULKEARNS,
7th Battalion.
Pte. F. McFALL,
7th Battalion.
Sergt. E. C. McKAIGE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. D. V. C. MACKENZIE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. N. O’BRIEN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. N. OLDEN, .
7th Battalion.
Cpl. L. G. OPIE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. B. PAUL,
7th Battalion.
Pte. W. H. PETHARD,
7th Battalion.
Lee.-Cpl. W. J. POOLE,
7th Battalion.


Pte. R. PUNSHON,
7th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. A. B. SCOTT,
7th Battalion.
Pte. M. SEIBERT,
7th Battalion.
Sergt. C. M. St. STEWART,
7th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. J. R. TAYLOR,
7th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. H. W. THOMAS,
7th Battalion.
Pte. C. H. THOMPSON,
7th Battalion.
Pte. W. H. TRACEY,
7th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. A. R. TROWBRIDGE^
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. C. R. TURNBULL,
7th Battalion.
Sergt. K. L. WALKER,
7th Battalion.
Pte. W. A. WALSH,
7th Battalion.
Pte. G. J. WILLIAMS,
7th Battalion.
Cpl. J. B. CUTHBERT,
6th Battalion.
Cpl. A. G. ANDERSON,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. F. BARRY,
7th Battalion.
Pte. R. J. BONSWER,
7th Battalion.
Pte. A. BRANDER,
7th Battalion.
Pte. E. BOOTH,
7th Batt., Ist Rfts,
Pte. E. J. CLUTTERBUCK,
7th Battalion.
Pte. D. T. DWYER,
7th Battalion, Ist Rfts.
Pte. S. W. FULFORD,
7th Battalion.
Pte. W. P. FLORENCE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. F. GOSDEN,
7th Battalion.
Cpl. R. J. GRAHAM,
7th Battalion.
Pte. P. HOSKINS,
7th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. F. HOUSTON,
7th Battalion.
Pte. C. W. IVENS,
7th Battalion.
Pte. R. LEVY,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. L. LOCKHART,
7th Battalion.
Pte. L. H. M'KEOWN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. P. M'LOUGHLIN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. M. P. NICHOLSON,
7th Battalion.
Pte. F. POWELL,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. H. ROACH,
7th Battalion.
Sergt. F. S. ROCHSTEIN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. I. D. STOCKDALE,
7th Battalion.
Sergt. L. C. SYMONDS,
7th Battalion.
Sergt. E. L. TRAWIN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. M. WILSON,
7th Battalion.
Pte. A. J. WALKER,
7th Battalion.
Pte. E. A. YOUNGER,
14th Battalion.
Lieut. J. H. MIRAMS,
2nd Fid. Co. of Engnrs.
Capt. F. H. WRIGHT,
14th Battalion.
Pte. E. V. FINSTER,
2nd Fid. Ambulance.
Cpl. G. B. PALLISER,
sth Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. E. B. SUTHERLAND
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. L. SANDOW,
sth Battalion.
Pte. J. sTANNARI),
sth Battalion.
rto. G. W. STIRLING,
sth Battalion.
Cpl. H. E. ASHMORE,
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. W. BUTTERS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. A. E. BUDD,
sth Battalion.
Pte. F. W. BATES,
sth Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. R. A. CHIPPENDALE,
sth Battalion.
Pte. C. H. CAMERON,
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. M. COOKE,
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. H. DAWBORN,
4th Battalion.
Pte. A. J. FOYLE,
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. A. GILBERT,
sth Battalion.
Pte. D. JOHNSON,
sth Battalion.
Pte, H. F. LUBKE,
Ist Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. R. LONERGAN,
Ist Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. H. LOWE,
sth Battalion.


Cpl. A. F. MATHEWS,
sth Battalion.
Lieut. L. G. CAMPBELL,
6th Battalion.
Pte. S. BETTS,
6th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. E. BATES,
6th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. L. D, COLECHIN,
6th Battalion.
Pte. A. CEAW T SHAW,
6th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. G. EVANS,
6th Battalion.
Pte. A. H. EVANS,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. G. EVANS,
6th Battalion.
Pte. I. A. JENKINS,
6th Battalion.
Pte. F. J. KING,
6th Battalion.
Pte. R. KAVNAUGH,
6th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. J. LOCKHART,
6th Battalion.
Co. Q.M.-Sergt. J. NICOL,
6th Battalion.
Pte. N. A. O’FARRELL,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. W. PHILLIPS,
6th Battalion.
Pte. W. REED,
6th Battalion.
Pte. A. T. SCARBOROUGH,
(sth Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. E. A. WILLCOCKS,
(sth Battalion.
Pte. A. WOODS,
6th Battalion.
Pte. R. NUNN,
8 th Battalion.
Ptc. R. P. ORE,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. F. PARSONS,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. T. E. POTTER,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. F. T. C. POTTER,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. G. J. RICHARDS,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. E. TREW,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. C. E. CAMPBELL,
Bth Battalion.
Ptc. R. H. DAFFY,
Bth Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. H. J. DAVIDSON,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. A. A. DENMEAD,
Bth Battalion.
Bugler A. W. DUNKELD,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. R. W. HORWOOD,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. R. J. KELLY,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. J. LESTER,
Bth Battalion.
Pte, L. LEWIS,
Bth Battalion.
Cpl. W, MURRAY,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. A. E. MURPHY,
Bth Battalion.
Ptc. J. R. MALCOLM,
Bth Battalion.
Ptc. J. McLOUGHLIN,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. E. J. BAILEY,
Bth Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. E. R. WILLIAMS,
Bth Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. J. W. MITCHELL,
Bth Battalion.
Capt. H. T. C. LAYH,
7th Battalion.
Lieut. J. S. WHITELAW,
7th Battalion.
A.F.-Sgt. A. SMITH,
2nd Fid. Amb. Brig.
Pte. J. MARSTON,
14th Battalion.
Pte. J. P. TAYLOR,
14th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. A. D. WATERSON,
sth Battalion.
Cpl. A. R. VINES,
sth Battalion.
Cpl. G. E. INGLIS,
sth Battalion.
Ptc. J. M. JEFFREYS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. C. G. OSBORNE,
sth Battalion.
Pte. A. W. SMITH,
sth Battalion.
Capt. F. M. HOOKE,
sth Battalion.
Pte. N. WELLS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. C. A. TREZISE,
sth Battalion.
Pte. A. BOOT,
7th Battalion.
Pte. C. M‘KAY,
7th Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. E. S. SIMPKINS,
7th Battalion.
Pte. M. H. CRISFIELD,
7th Battalion.
Pte. E. F. MARLAND,
7th Battalion.
Pte. H. J. DAVIDSON,
7th Battalion.
Pte. H. G. SMITH,
7th Battalion.


Pte. R. COWAN,
I4th Battalion.
Pte. H. J. LYNCH,
6th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. F. Ji. M‘DONALD,
6th Battalion.
Cpl. P. J. MOLLOY,
6th Battalion.
Pte. E. 1.. PARER,
6th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. H. POWELL,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. G. 0. TEUNISSON,
6th Battalion.
Pte. L. WHITELAW,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. WHITE,
6th Battalion.
Pte. A. BRAND,
sth Battalion.
Pte. E. P. BRYAN,
sth Battalion.
Pte. L. BRAKENWAGEN,
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. C. CHAPMAN,
sth Battalion.
Sergt. M. DICKENS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. J. A. DURBAN,
sth Battalion.
Pte. C. H. ELLIS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. Ti. G. FINDLAY,
sth Battalion.
Cpl. L. R. FRANKLIN,
sth Battalion.
Pte. H. D. FLEETHAM,
sth Battalion.
Pte. L. S. GOLDSMITH,
sth Battalion.
Pte. C. W. GRAY,
sth Battalion.
Pte. W. KENNEDY,
6th Battalion.
Pt#. C. R. S. LEAR,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J, J. FITZGERALD,
, 14th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Lt.-Cpl. R. A. BROWNLESS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. D. E. DECKER,
sth Battalion.
Pte. G. GIESLER,
sth Battalion.
Pte. S. H. HAZELDEN,
sth Batt., 2nd- Rfts.
Pte. C. 8. M. PRITCHARD,
sth Battali on.
Pte. G. E. STEVENSON,
sth Battalion.
Pte. W. A. CLEMENT,
sth Battalion.
Pte. J. CARCIA,
sth Battalion.
Pte. GOURLEY,
sth Battalion.
Bugler W. HENDRICK,
sth Battalion.
‘ Pte. H. J. KERR,
sth Battalion.
Pte. R. L. LETTS,
sth Battalion.
Pte. C. E. D. M'KAY,
sth Battalion.
Pte. E. SCOTT,
sth Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. L. R. WALKER,
sth Battalion.
Sergt. P. V. D. WARR,
sth Battalion.
Sgt. T. E. CUNNINGHAME,
6th Battalion.
Sergt. A. G. DELL,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. M. GAME,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. W. M. HOOK,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. T. A. HARRIS,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. J. G. PEARSON,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. G. LINDSEY,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. L. CARTER,
Bth Battalion.
rtc. j. r. cupper,
Bth Battalion.
Bugler S. DAVIDSON,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. H. J. DUNSTAN,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. A. EWINS,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. L. J. FLEMMING,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. A. E. FORSTER,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. R. C. JOHNSON,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. W. J. KING,
Bth Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. W. J. LEWIS,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. T. G. LEEKE,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. J. LOGAN,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. F. C. MELOME,
Bth Battalion.
Sergt. F. R. POLLOCK,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. A. E. SHELDRICK,
Bth Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. H. J. TUOHILL,
Bth Battalion.
Pte. W. WHARLTON,
Bth Battalion,


Sergt. R. J. WALLIS,
Bth Battalion.
Sergt. H. CHARGE,
6th Battalion.
Pte. G. H. NAYLOR,
6th Battalion.
Pte. J. W. McJUNKIN,
6th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. E. D. WIGHTON,
6th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. A. BREAKELL,
6th Battalion.
Pte. H. F. PECKHAM,
6th Battalion.
Major E. C. OLDHAM,
10th Battalion.
Capt. K. E. GREEN,
10th Battalion.
Capt. S. R. HALL,
10th Battalion.
Capt. J. W. A. BOUCHER,
10th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl, E. JONES,
J oth Battalion
Pte. J. PARK,
6th Battalion.
Pte. L. COWELL,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. P. McKEOGH,
7th Battalion.
Pte, T. SPELLING,
7th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl, W. MENADUE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. W. PRIEST,
7th Battalion.
Pte. R. P. DUNCAN,
7th Battalion.
Lieut. R. J. M. HOOPER,
10th Battalion.
Lieut. A. J. BURNE,
10th Battalion.
Lieut. G. A. MUNRO,
12th Battalion
Sergt. J. C. McGILLIVRAY,
10th Battalion
Pte. —. BROWN;
10th Battalion.
Sergt. A. E. HEMPEL,
7th Battalion.
"Lce.-Cpl. W. P. JONES,
7th Battalion.
Pte. C. G. KINGSLEY,
7th Battalion.
Pte. J. H. POWLRY,
7th Battalion.
Pte. R. WELDEN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. L. BLAND,
7th Battalion.
Pte. P. H. BRACEY,
7th Batt., Ist Rfta.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
KILLED
Lieut. E. W. T. SMITH,
9th Battalion
Pte. T. A. WHYTE,
10th Battalion.
Pte. W. H. VICK,
10th Battalion.
DIED OF WOUNDS
Pte. W. A. WEBB,
10th Battalion.
Pte. C. K. ROBINSON,
10th Battalion,
Cpl. J. CARLILE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. V. ELIASON,
7th Battalion
Lce.-Cpl. N. D. GARDEN,
7th Battalion.
Pte. H. C. GILES,
7th Battalion.
Pte. W. HODGE,
7th Battalion.
Pte. F. A. INGLEDON,
7th Battalion.
rte. E. r. MAKTINI,
12th Battalion.
Pte. H. D. TtJTT,
10th Battalion.
Pte. E. H. JANSEN,
10th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Ptc. H. GEHLKEN,
12th Battalion,


Pt». VV. T. COPPINS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. G. A. DUNLOP,
10th Battalion.
Pte. H. T. WRIGHT,
10th Battalion.
Pte. M. H. G. LITHGOW,
10th Battalion.
Pte. H. R. COX,
10th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. R. R. PALMER,
10th. Battalion
Pte. F. 3 AMES,
10th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. G. E. TALBOT,
16th Battalion.
Pte. J. A. JAMES,
4th Fid. Amb.
DIED OF MENINGITIS. Pte. G. A. LIESCHKE, 10th Battalion.
WOUNDED
Capt. M. J. HERBERT,
10th Battalion.
Lieut. T. HOLLAND,
12th Battalion.
Lieut. W. R. JORGENSEN,
12th Battalion.
Lieut. E. W. T. SMITH,
10th Battalion.
Capt. R. B. JACOB,
10th Battalion.
Lieut. A. P. IMLAY,
16th Battalion.
Lieut. A. H. FRASER,
12th Battalion.
Lieut. F. G. CHABREL,
16th Battalion.
Sergt. H. N. UPHILL,
3rd Inf. Brig.
Pte. P. CUSACK,
* 10th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. C. C. CUSSIONS.
10th Battalion,
Pte. .1. DAVIDSON,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. J. EDWARD,
10th Battalion.
Pte. H. EDWARDS,
10th Battalion.
Pte. R. E. EY,
10th Battalion.
Pte. G. FISHER,
10th Battalion.
Pte. R. W r . FRASER,
10th Battalion.
Pte. L. G. GIBSON,
10th Battalion.
Pte. J. W. GILLETT,
10th Battalion.
Bugler T. S. GORDON,
10th Battalion.
Pte. L. A. GREEN,
10th Battalion.
Pte. B. W. HAYWARD,
10th Battalion.
Pte. W. P. HOOGARTH,
10th Battalion.
Pte. C. HORSEFIELD,
10th Battalion.
Pte. W. H. HOWARD,
10th Battalion.
Pte. M. KENNEDY,
10th Battalion.
Pte. H. S. LAST,
10th Battalion.
Pte. J. P. H. LEDDIARD,
10th Battalion.
Pte. C. R. LINES,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. LOWE,
10th Battalion.
Pte. T. E. LANGLEY,
10th Battalion.
Pte. R. MACKIE,
10th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. V. C. MONKS,
10th Battalion,
Pte, J. D. MORRISON,
2nd Reinforcements.
Pte. W. MURRAY,
Ist Reinforcements.
Pte. W. H. O'BRIEN,
2nd Reinforcements.
Pte. F. PIERCE,
10th Battalion.
Pte. F. H. PRITCHARD,
10tn cat tar on.
Pte. J. A. RAPLEY,
10th Battalion.
Pte. W. RIEKEN,
10th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. A. C. SANDLAND,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. W. SANDFORD,
10th Battalion
Pte. A. SAST,
10th Battalion.
Pte. H. H. SHAKESHAT,
2nd Reinforcements,


Pte. M. SHAW,
10th Battalion.
Pte. P. C. SLAUGHTER,
10th Battalion.
Pte. F. P. L. SMITH,
10th Battalion.
Pte. P. STRANEY,
10th Battalion.
Pte. H. G. SUDBURYSMITH,
10th Battalion.
Sergt. G. C. TAYLOR,
10th Battalion.
Pte. J. THOMSON,
10th Battalion.
Sergt. A. M. J. TUCKER,
10th Battalion.
Pte. O. WARD,
10th Battalion.
ITe. F. WAITE,
Ist Reinforcements.
Pte. B. WESTLEY,
10th Battalion.
Pte. N. A. W. MACPHERSON,
10th Battalion.
Pte. M. J. M‘ INERNEY,
10th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. G. E. TALBOT,
16th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Pte. H. W. DAVIES,
3rd Fid. Ambulance.
Pte. J. H. KENNERICK,
10th Battalion,
Sergt. J. C. MOLLEE,
12th Battalion.
Pte. T. J. COOK,
12th Battalion.
Pte. L. GILOTTI,
12th Battalion.
Pte. E. HERRON,
12th Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. L. G. JACKSON,
12th Battalion.
Pte. T. K. KNIGHT,
12th Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. E. E. MOSS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. H. E. POLLITT,
12th Battalion.
Pte. E. W. SMART,
12th Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. A. S. WATKINS,
12th Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. C. G. WIGHTMAN,
12th Battalion.
Pte. A. A. ASH,.
10th Battalion.
Pte. F. G. ABBOTT,
10th Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. H. C. BANFIELD,
10th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. A. A. BARBER,
10th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. A. H. BUTTERFIELD,
10th Battalion.
Pte. H. GOODYEAR,
10th Battalion.
Pte. F. HOLLAND,
10th Battalion.
Pte. R. H. A. HOLMES,
10th Battalion.
Pte. W. L. JENSEN,
10th Battalion.
Pte. F. L. P. A. KAERGER,
10th Battalion.
Pte. P. K. LARSEN,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. LUKANDER,
10th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. A. MARSHALL,
10th Battalion.
Pte. L. S. NEWTON,
10th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. P. E. NUTTALL,
10th Battalion.
Pte. I. H. OATES,
10th Battalion.
Pte. G. A. PAVLICH,
10th Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. G. D. ROSS,
10th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. J. F. READING,
10th Battalion.
Pte. C. RYAN,
10th Battalion.
Pte. G. V. RICHARDS,
10th Battalion,
rte. H. J. RICHARDSON,
10th Battalion.
Pte. G. E. RAMBERT,
10th Battalion.
Pte. E. SHELLEY,
10th Battalion.
Pte. S. W. SIMPSON,
. 10th Battalion.
Driver C. H. St. L. TOOVEY,
10th Battalion.
Pte. H. R. VINCENT,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. D. WOOD,
10th Battalion.
Pte. J. DICKER,
12th Battalion.
Pte. G. J. HOPKINS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. J. J. PERSSE,
12th Battalion.
Pte. B. G. SNOWDEN,
12th Battalion.
Pte. R. R. AIKMAN,
16th Battalion.
Pte. E. F. DOWNEY,
16th Battalion.
Pte. J. D. EVANS,
16th Battalion.
Pte. D. R. ELLIOTT,
16th Battalion.
Pte. G. LEE,
16th Battalion,


Pte. B. R. S. M‘ GO WAN,
16th Battalion.
Pte. T. RODGERS,
16th Battalion.
Pte. H. P. LAMBERT,
3rd Fid. Ambulance.
Pte. J. TRUMAN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. T. H. COOMBS,
10th Battalion.
Pte. E. DAWES,
10th Battalion.
Pte. H. FOSTER,
10th Batt., Ist lifts.
Pte. A. E. FOSTER,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. J. GRAY,
10th. Battalion.
Pte. A. HALSTEAD,
10th Battalion.
Pte. W', HOCHEL,
10th Battalion.
Pte. H. R. JONES,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. W. JOHNSON,
10th Battalion.
Pte. J. J. KENT,
10th Battalion.
Sergt. H, A. KINNISH,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. H. LEONARD,
10th Battalion.
Pte. T. H. LEE,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. HANNING,
10th Battalion.
Pte. G. MACLIN,
10th Battalion.
Pte. J. MATHER,
10th Battalion.
Pte. D. MELVIN,
10th Battalion.
Pte. P. MOLLOY,
10th Battaiion.
Pte. J. E. MITCHELL,
10th Battalion.
Cpl. T. E. MARTIN,
10th Battalion.
Pte. P. A. MACKAY,
10th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. R. L. MAYMAN,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. R. PERRY,
10th Battalion.
Cpl. R. PICKERING,
10th Battalion.
Pte. N. L. PAGE,
JOth Battalion.
Pte. G. D. L. PRINCE,
10th Battalion.
Sergt. J. E. PEARCE,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. ROSS,
10th Battalion.
Pte. 1. S. ROBERTSON,
10th Battalion.
Pte. J. ROKE,
10th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. E. L. RHODES,
10th Battalion.
Pte. T. H. RYAN,
10th Battalion.
Pte. H. H. STOCKLEY,
10th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. F. SLEADER,
10th Battalion.
Pte. J. H. STONE,
10th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. J. SMART,
10th Battaiion.
Pte. S. P. SPRY,
10th Battalion.
Bugler T. STEWART,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. SHAUGHNESSY,
10th Battalion.
Cpl. A. J. VALLIS,
10th Battalion.
Pte. J . WORM WELT-,
10th Battalion.
Pte. J. C. W. AFFLECK,
10th Battalion.
Pte. I. BULL,
10th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. D. H. BROOKE,
10th Battalion.
He, L. E. BARLOW,
lOtli Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. P. A. CHANNON,
10th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Cpl. G. COWAN,
10th Battalion.
Pte. W. E. BOYLE,
12th Battalion.
Pte. J. BUEKE,
12th Battalion.
Cpl. G. A. CLAYFIELD,
12th Battalion.
Cpl. C. DYER,
12th Battalion.
Pte. W. H. MOYSE,
12th Battalion.
Pte. W. PAEKEE,
12th Battalion.
Cpl. L. T. PAROISSIEN,
12th Battalion.
Pte. F. C. SELVAGE,
12th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. T. L. H. STOKELL,
12th Battalion
Lce.-Cpl. J. B. TAYLOR,
12th Battaiion.
Bugler J. EVANS,
10th Battalion
Pte. E. HARRIS,
11th Battalion
Pte. G. E. A. BAKER,
11th Battalion,


QUEENSLAND
KILLED
Major S. B. ROBERTSON,
9th Battalion.
Lieut. F, G. HAYMAN,
9th Battalion.
Lieut. R. L. CHAMBERS,
9th Battalion.
Capt. J. L. FISHER,
9th Battalion.
Lieut. R. C. HARVEY,
9th Battalion.
Capt. I. JACKSON,
9th Battalion.
Lieut. L. A. JONES,
9th Battalion.
Capt. J. A. MILNE,
9th Battalion
Pte. H. HARMAN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. E. MARTIN,
15th Battalion.
Lieut. J. P. ROBERTS,
9th Battalion.
Lieut. J. W. COSTIN,
9th Battalion.
Pte F. W. MANN, ?th Battalion.
Major J. C. ROBERTSON,
2nd in Com. 9th Battalion,
Capt. F. HORAN,
9th Battalion.
Capt. T. V. BROWN,
9th Battalion.
Lieut. C. F. ROSS,
9th Battalion.
Capt. J. F. RICHARDSON,
15th Battalion.
Lieut. T. ROBERTSON,
15th Battalion
DIED OF WOUNDS
Pte. H. S. F, BROOME,
15th Battalion.
Pte. D. C. BOURKE,
15th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
WOUNDED
lieut. W. J. RIGBY,
9th Battalion.
Capt. J. F. WALSH,
15th Battalion.
Lieut. A. J. BOASE,
9th Battalion.
Lieut. H. G. KER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. BROWN,
9th Battalion.
Lieut. G. THOMAS,
9th Battalion.
Lieut. T. C. E. SMART,
15th Battalion.
Capt. C. F. CORSER,
15th Battalion.
Pte. J. J. RYAN,
15th Battalion.
Pte. E. L. STEVENSON,
9th Battalion.
I -..nit. L. J. WA TERS,
15th Battalion,
l ie. T. TURNBULL,
9th Battalion.
Pte. F. U. BERTRAM,
15th Battalion.
C.S.M. W. J. AUSTIN,
9th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. B. BROMLEY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. J. BROWN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. G. W. COLUMBUS,
9th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Cpl. W. H. CARROLL,
9th Battalion.


Pte. B. DE TtiETEY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. J. DIXON,
9th Battalion.
Pte. F. G. FLYNN,
9th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. T. J. FLEMING,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. H. G. JONES,
9th Battalion.
i’te. R. HILLIER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. S. C. HARVEY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. F. R. HAYES,
9th Battalion.
Pte. R. C. HAYDEN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. R. KEMPSHALL,
9th Battalion.
Pte. E. J. LAMING,
9th Battalion.
Sergt. J. R. MUNRO,
9th Battalion.
Pte. R. MEREDITH,
9th Battalion.
Cpl. O. G. M'NICOL,
9th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. F. W, NEAL,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. POYNTER,
9th Battalion.
Fte. R. FITTER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. O. SIMON,
9th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. H. SPANGER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. N. T. SCRIVENER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. C. WILLIAMS,
9th Battalion.
Sergt. J. G. WILLIAMS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. M. WILDE,
9th Battalion.
Pte. E. R. WREFORD,
9th Battalion.
Pte. T. WILSON,
9th Battalion,
Pte. T. J. EVANS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. C. WEBB,
9th Battalion.
Lieut. G. F. DICKINSON,
15th Battalion.
Sergt. J. H. COLLINS,
15th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. T. DANN,
15th Battalion.
Pte. C. P. ELBRA,
15th Battalion.
Pte. J. T. KNIGHT,
15th Battalion.
Bugler H. LAMY,
15th Battalion.
Pte. R. H. MASON,
15th Battalion.
Sergt. N. R. MIGHELL,
15th Battalion
Pte. W. X. ROSE,
15th Battalion.
Sapper E. A. HICKMAN,
Ist Signalling Co.
Pte. G. F. ADDISON,
Bth Batt., 2nd Inf. Brig.
Pte. F. H. ADAMS,
9th Batt., 3rd Inf. Brig.
Sergt. A. P. H. ADAIR,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. ARTHUR,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. G. ALLEN,
9th Battalion.
Cpl. W. J. BYRNE,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. BRYCE,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. H. BOWKER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. R. BAKER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. E. W. CLARK,
9th Battalion.
Pte. P. COLES,
9th Battalion.
Pte. \V. S. CURTIS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. H. GULLEY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. L. P. CONNELL,
9th Battalion.
Sergt. W. J. DEWAR,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. J. DODD,
9th Battalion.
Cpl. J. H. TRACEY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. E. J. GANDY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. G. T. GORHAM,
9th Battalion.
Pte. S. B. GADD,
9th Battalion,
Pte. J. GRAHAM,
9th Battalion.
Pte. E. E. GODFREY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. HUGHES,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. HODGSON,
9th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. J. C. HENDERSON,
9th Battalion.
Pte. T. M. HANLY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. L. P. HILLIER,
9th Battalion.


Pte. T. H. HUMPHRIES,
9th Battalion.
Pte. T. J. HEENAN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. G. HARRIS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. J. J. HAYWARD,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. JARRETT,
9th Battalion.
Pte. R. KING,
9th Battalion.
Pte. E. KIRK,
9th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. J. E. LUCKETT,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. E. LEWIS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. D. LAKE,
* 9th Battalion.
Pte. C. LOCKHART,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. LINCOLN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. A. LATHAM,
9th Battalion.
Pte. D. LESLIE,
Ist Reinforcements.
Pte. A. M'LEOD,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. S. NATRNS,
Ist Reinforcements.
Lce.-Cpl. E. MITCHELL,
9th Battalion.
Pte. F. MORRISON,
9th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. R. M. C. M'KENZIE,
9th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. F. MATTHEWS,
9th Battalion.
Pte, C. H. MARCUBEN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. G. MUNRO,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. NEWSOME,
9th Battalion.
Pte. T. MORRIS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. M. M‘ GUINNESS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. W. NIXON,
9th Battalion.
Pte. F. NORCROSS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. A. B. NEEL,
9ith. Battalion,
Pte. E. NEWBERY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. G. A. OGDEN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. G. A. ORGILL,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. W. PREBBLE,
9th Battalion.
Opl. H. F. PATON,
9th Battalion.
Sergt. A. H. E. POLLEY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. E. J. PALMER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. G. A. C. PRESTON,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. J. PEINGER,
9th Battalion.
Sergt. C. D. PATRICK,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. C. PETERSEN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. R. C. RALSTON,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. R. REYNOLDS,
9th Battalion.
Cpl. G. H. RIGBY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. F. REDITT,
9th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. E. A. ROBINSON,
9th Battalion.
Pte. E. G. SEDGWICK,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. J. SINCLAIR,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. D. SOMERS,
9th Battalion
Pte. H. C. STARK,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. SHEEHAN,
9th Battalion.
Cpl. F. H. SMITH,
9th Battalion
Pte. A. E. STEEL,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. A. STEWART,
9th Battalion.
Pte. I. R. SPREADBOROUQH,
9th Battalion.
Sergt. R. M, VERRY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. L. VAUGHAN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. P. WARBURTON,
9th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. C. WILLIAMS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. WILSON,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. WALKER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. F. WALE,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. WHALAN,
9th Battalion
Pte. B. YELDHAM,
9th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. D. ANDERSON,
10th Battalion.
Pte. R. D. ARMOUR,
10th Battalion


i’te. W. C. ATWOOD,
10th Battalion.
Sergt. C. J. BATES,
10th Battalion.
Pte. A. J. COURT,
10th Battalion.
Pte. W. T. CROWDER,
10th Battalion.
Pte. E. S. PILCHER,
3rd Fid. Ambulance.
Sapper H. H. MARSHALL,
Ist Sig. Co. of Engnrs.
Pte. C. F. ALBURY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. T. P. ALEXANDER,
9th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. J. E. BELL,
9th Battalion.
Pte. G. BAKER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. E. W. BLACK,
9th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Cpl. A. E. BERESFORD,
9th Battalion.
Cpl. S. GUMMING,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. CLEAVER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. R. J. CLARK,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. COLLINS,
9th Battalion,
Pte. F. B. DOWNES,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. DRYSDALE,
9th Battalion.
Cpl. J. W. EDGAR,
9th Battalion.
Sergt. J. L. GRAHAM,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. H. GRIFFITHS,
9th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. R. N. GRAY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. F. C. GODDING,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. GRICE,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. W. HARRIS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. W. HARPIN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. Q. J. HUNTER,
9th Battalion.
Sergt. F. W. HOUSTON,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. HOLLAND, *
9th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. IT. E. KINGCOMBE,
9th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. E. M. KELLY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. F. KELSALL,
9th Battalion.
isergt. W. C. LINES,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. P. LYNCH,
9th Battalion.
Pte. P. K. MURPHY,
9th Battalion.
Sergt. G. MARTIN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. P. NAYLER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. O’GRADY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. W. POOLE,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. M. PORTER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. B. L. PUMFREY,
9th Battalion
Pte. J. REVIE,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. A. C. RICHARDS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. I. SPREADBOROUGH,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. A. SHREWSBURY,
9th Battalion.
Pte. R. STIRLING,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. TAMBLYN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. G. H. TAYLOR,
9th Battalion
I’te. T. USHER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. E. G. WHITE,
9th Battalion.
We. W. P. WILLIAMS,
9th Battalion
I’te. H. WELSH,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. WILLETTE,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. G. YOUNG,
9th Battalion.
Sergt. T. E. BRAITHWAITE,
7th BatL, 3rd E.A. Brig.
Cpl. A. R. BANKS,
9th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. E. J. DAVIES,
9th Battalion.
I’te. A. GILBERT,
9th Battalion,
Pte. G. W. GRAT,
9th Battalion
Pte. J. R. MORGAN,
9th Battalion
Pte. H. STEWART
9th Battalion.
Pte. F. THOMAS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. T. A. L. BACON,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. S. ABRAHAM,
9th Battalion.


Pte. A. E. ALLEN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. H. BUCHANAN,
9th Battalion.
Pte, H. R. FLINT,
9th Battalion.
Pte. A. COOMBS,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. FRASER,
9th Battalion.
Pte. M. HILL,
9th Battalion.
Pte. W. METCALFE, 9th Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. C. S. HUDSON,
9th Battalion.
Pte. L. KEEN,
9th Battalion.
Pte. C. H. KENDALL,
9th Battalion.
Pte. B. 11. HENDRICK,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. KERR,
9th Battalion.
Pte. J. H. LANGDON,
9th Battalion.
WEST AUSTRALIA
KILLED
Capt. 0. A. BARNES,
11th Battalion.
Capt. W. R. AN NEAR,
11th Battalion.
Capt. J. P. LALOR,
• 12th Battalion.
Major F. B. CARTER,
16th Battalion.
Lieut. A. H. T. MOUNTAIN,
16th Battalion.
Lieut. J. L. C. BOOTH,
12th Battalion.
R.S. Major V. A. EMMETT,
12th Battalion.
Cpl. A. TANSLEY,
16th Battalion.
Pte. C. THURGAR,
11th Battalion.
Pte. H. L. I. FINCH,
11th Battalion
Pte. W MORLEY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. T. BATT,
11th Battalion.
Pte. H. M. AMOS,
11th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. S. D. H. BURGESS,
11th Battalion.
DIED OF WOUNDS
Pte. J. E. STANDARD,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. M. MARSHALL,
12th Battalion.
Pte. H. S. PENNY,
11th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. J. PALMER,
11th Battalion.
Lieut. A. E. PARSE,
16th Battalion.
Pte. H. P. HEALEY,
16th Battalion.
Sergt. W. J. FRAMPTON,
16th Battalion.
Pte. F. S. FOSTER,
11th Battalion,
Pte. H. G. RAE,
11th Battalion
Pte. P. M. STONE,
11th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. 8. M. WOOD,
11th Battalion.
Pte. C. WATSON,
11th Battalion.
rto. J. T. WILLIAMS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. W. WOODINGS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. C. V. WARD,
11th Battalion.
Pte. G. R. HENDERSON,
11th Battalion.


Pte. J. ALTMANS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. E* BURKE,
11th Battalion.
Pte, W. BRITT,
11th Battalion.
Pte. C. L. BETTSOtf,
11th Battalion.
Pte. W. COWLEY,
11th Battalion.
Scrgt. F. W. D. COLE,
11th Battalion.
Pte. W. E. ELLINGSWORTH.
11th Battalion.
Pte. B. FRANCIS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. G. FEATHERSTONE,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. L. GARDINER,
11th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Lce.-Cpl. A. J. MARTIN,
12th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. W. H. E. HALE,
12th Battalion.
WOUNDED
Lieut. J. A. EVANS,
12th Battalion.
Lieut, D. H. MACDONALD,
11th Battalion.
Capt. J. H. PECK,
A. & S. Staff, Adjt. 11th Batt.
Capt. E. W. TULLOCH,
11th Battalion.
Lieut. R. H. WALKER,
11th Battalion.
Lieut. E. Y. BUTLER,
12th Battalion.
Lieut. N. DICKSON,
15th Battalion.
Major J. S. DENTON,
11th Battalion.
Capt. A. E. J. CROLY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. CUMMING,
11th Battalion.
Pte. G. W. MORGAN,
12th Battalion.
Lieut. E. A. WILTON,
16th Battalion.
Lieut. C. L. CURLEWIS,
16th Battalion.
Capt. D. M. M'WHAE,
3rd Fid. Ambulance.
Pte. E. ALLPIKE,
11th Battalion.
Pte. W. S. ABRAHAMS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. F. BYFIELD,
11th Battalion.
Pte. H. P. BLIGHT,
11th Battalion.
Pte. L. BROWN,
11th Battalion.
Pte. C. BRADLEY,
11th Battalion.
Op I. J. W. PITTENDRIGH,
11th Battalion.
Pte. R. A. BATCHELOR,
11th Battalion.
Pte. A. R. BOX,
11th Battalion.
Pte. C. BROWN,
11th Battalion.
Pte. A. S. CHIDLOW,
11th Battalion.
Pte. F. B. COX,
11th Battalion.
Pte. F. CURTIS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. G. A. COOPER,
11th Battalion.
Lee.-Cpl. B. DIXON,
11th Battalion.
Pte. W. D. YOUNG,
11th Batt alio a
Pte. C. A. FORSBERG,
11th Battalion.
Pte. C. A. FULLARTON,
11th Battalion.
Pte. A. A. W. GORMAN,
11th Battalion.
Lce.-Opl. J. L. HITHERSAY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. C. HILLIARD,
11th Battalion.
Pte. G. H. HUNT,
11th Battalion.
Pte. E. J. INGRAM,
11th Battalion.
Pte. G. IRVINE,
11th Battalion.
Pte. E. 0, JONES,
11th Battalion.
Pte. G. C. JORGENSEN,
11th Battalion.
Pte. W. M. S. KENNEDY,
11th Battalion,
Pte. F. N. LALLY,
11th Battuli on.
Pte. W. H. MOFFLIN,
11th Battalion.
Pte. W. H. MARTIN,
11th Battalion.


Pte. A. M. L. MILFORD,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. N. E. NICHQLL,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. E. OXLADE,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. S. PAEKEE,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. P. EEID,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. O. A. SAGGEES,
Ilth Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. J. A. SPEELSBUEY,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. J. D. TULLY,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. W. G. WESTEOP,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. J. J. WHITE,
* Ilth Battalion.
Pte. G. W. WALDY,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. D. ASHBY,
16th Battalion.
Pte. E. G. P. JOHNSON,
3rd Fid. Ambulance.
Pte. P. KILGOUE,
3rd Fid. Ambulance.
Pte. F. C. SPUEGEON,
3rd Fid. Ambulance.
Pte. J. J. BEEBNEE.
12th Battalion.
Sergt. W. H. I£ARM,
12th Battalion.
Sergt. J. E. H. SWAIN,
12th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. J. A. CAMPBELL,
12th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. J. JOHNSON,
12th Battalion.
Cpl. J. BEIGGS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. E. T. DAVIES,
12th Battalion.
Pte. H. F. HEAELE,
12th Battalion.
Pte. J. C. HUNTEE,
12th Battalion.
Pte. J. MOEEISON,
12th Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. A. W. O’NEILL,
12th Battalion.
Pte. F. EEX,
12th Battalion.
Pte. G. 0. EICKETTS,
12th Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. J. E. SMITH,
12th Battalion.
Pte. J. WALKEE,
12th Battalion.
Pte. J. W. WOOD,
12th Batt., Ist Efts.
Pte. F. J. COOMEE,
12th Battalion.
Pte. ii. V. DAWsON,
12th Battalion.
Pte. A. C. DAVEY,
12th Battalion.
Pte. J. KITSON,
12th Battalion.
Pte. F. C. WILLIAMS,
12th Battalion.
Cpl. T. EOBINSON,
12th Batt., Ist Efts
Pte. P. W. O’SHEA,
16th Battalion
Pte. E. UNDEEWOOD,
16th Battalion.
Pte. J. W. BUNNING,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. F. J. BUEEOWS,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. L. BLAKEMOEE,
Ilth Battalion.
Co.-Sgt.-Maj. G. F. CHAELES,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. E. 0. COCKBUEN,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. .1. M. CAEMICHAEL,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. A. CLAEK,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte, A. H. DAEBY,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. J. A. FAULKNEE.
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. 1. G. W. LORD,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. E. FINLASON,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. J, GOSCH,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. J. C. GAST,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. B. J. GANNAWAY,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. C. 0. HALTEEMAN,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. J. HUNTEE,
Ilth Battalion.
Sergt. W. E. HALLAHAN,
Ilth Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. J. A. NELSON,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. H. W. O’CONNELL,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. J. A. O’DONOGHUE,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. W. H. PAIN,
Ilth Batt., 2nd Efts.
Pte. I. POETEE,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. F. I. WEBSTEE,
Ilth Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. W. G. WEIGHTON,
Ilth Battalion.
Pte. C. H. WHITWELL,
Ilth Batt., Ist Efts.


Lee.-Cpl. S. M. WILLIAMS,
llth Battalion.
Lieut. W. A. BRASHAW,
16th Battalion.
Pte. J. ABER,
3rd Fid, Ambulance.
Pte. F. E. MEACHEM,
3rd Fid. Ambulance.
Lee.-Cpl. G. GALE,
16th Battalion.
Sergt. J. RENNIE,
16th Battalion.
Pte. H. A. CORDINGLEY,
16th Battalion.
Pte. F. ARNOT,
llth Battalion.
Pte. W. J. B. ASHDOW T N,
llth Battalion.
Pte. E. W. A MESS,
llth Battalion.
Pte. J. BOOTH,
llth Battalion.
Cpl. F. H. BAGGS,
llth Battalion.
Pte. F. S. C. BROWN,
llth Battalion.
Pte. H. E. CLARK,
. llth Battalion.
Q.M.-Sergt. O. M. CHILVERS,
llth Battalion.
Pte. J. DWYER,
llth Battalion,
Bugler G. K. EDWARDS,
llth Battalion.
Pte. J. F. FOX,
llth Battalion.
Pte. G. HOWDEN,
llth Battalion.
Pte. H. W. HOUSE,
llth Battalion.
Pte. J. HOYLE,
llth Battalion.
Pte. H. C. KITSON,
llth Battalion.
Pte. J. LANE,
llth Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. H. MILLER,
llth Battalion.
Pte. J. C. NEWTON,
llth Battalion.
Sergt. H. PARKINSON,
llth Battalion
Pte. .1. M. PETRIE,
llth Battalion.
Pte. W. PORTER,
llth Battalion.
Pte. E. R. RIDDAWAY,
llth Battalion.
Pte. G. E. RILEY,
llth Battalion.
Pte. J. H. ROBINS,
llth Battalion.
Pte. W. SHIELDS,
llth Battalion.
Pte. 11. SHEEHAN,
llth Battalion.
Pte. R. SCOTT,
llth Battalion.
Pte. A. F. SAVAGE,
llth Battalion.
Pte. T. SHEA,
llth Battalion.
Pte. F. J. SCOTT,
llth Battalion.
Pte. W, J. WITNISH,
llth Battalion.
Pte. C. W. WELLS,
llth Battalion.
Pte. H. CUNNINGHAM,
3rd Fid. Ambulance.
Pte. M. W. MAHNEY,
3rd Fid. Ambulance.
Pte. R. B. KNOWLES,
llth Battalion.
Pte. W. NEWICK,
16th Battalion.
Pte. P. D. SHIRIDAN,
16th Battalion.
Pte. D. ASHBY,
16th Battalion.
Pte. W. WILSON,
16th Battalion.
Pte. A. W. MAPSTONE,
llth Battalion.
C.M.B. J. .1. MAHON,
llth Battalion,
Q.M.B. J. U. McCUBBING,
11th Battalion.
Pte. S. NEWHAM,
11th Battalion.
C.M.S. R. HEMINGWAY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. B. HOLDER,
llth Battalion.
Pte. E. S. INMAN,
llth Battalion.
Pte. H. R. SCOTT,
llth Battalion.
Pte. Y. H. SOLOMON,
llth Battalion.
Pte. N. E. POLLINELLI,
llth Battalion.
Bugler A. J. BAGGS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. R. B. CAMPBELL,
12th Battalion.
Pte. W. CRAIG,
12th Battalion.
Cpl. E. W. D. LAING,
12th Battalion.
Cpl. J. R. F. MOORE,
12th Battalion.
Pte. A. S. MORTIMER,
I2rn Battalion.
Pte. P. G. O’DONOGHUE,
12th Battalion,
Pte. H. J. REILLY,
Igth Batt., Ist Rfta.


Pte. E. WATSON,
12th Battalion.
Lieut. W. H. ROCK LIFE.
11th Battalion,
Pte. H. BECKE,
11th Battalion.
Pte. W. M’N. CHAPMAN,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. H. HANCOCK,
11th Battalion.
Pte. T. HART,
11th Battalion.
Pte. F. G. HARPER,
11th Battalion.
Pte. A. KIDD,
11th Batt., Ist Rfts.
Pte. J.' R. P. KEAST,
11th Battalion.
Pte. L. C. KUHLMANN,
11th Battalion.
Pte. F. S. M’BEATH,
11th Battalion.
Pte. ,T. SALTER,
11th Battalion.
Pte. E. T. OFFER,
11th Battalion.
Pte. H. F. O ’NEILL,
11th Battalion,.
Pto. R. EARL,
11th Battalion.
Pte. G. DERRICK,
11th Battalion.
Pte. A. MKENZIE,
11th Battalion.
S.M. J. P. O’NEILL,
11th Battalion.
Pte. I. W, SCOTT,
11th Battalion.
Pte. A. SCHOFIELD,
11th Battalion.
Pte. S. R. TODD,
11th Battalion.
Pte. R. WIGZELL,
12th Batt., 2ml Rfts.
Pte. H. ALLPIKE,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. EDWARDS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. C. 1.. HARVEY, *
11th Battalion.
Pte. W. STEWART,
11th Battalion.
Pte. H. A. SHIELDS,
11th Battalion.
Sergt. H. WILLIAMS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. VENTERS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. R. E. CARGEEG,
11th Battalion.
Pte. F. E. CRABBE,
11th Battalion.
Pte. A. CHAPMAN,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. P. CONNOLLY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. DEEGAN,
11th Battalion.
Bugler G. D. FINLAY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. V., T. GRAY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. C. HEY,
11th Battalion.
Sergt. A. E. CHURCHES,
12th Battalion.
Pte. R. NEWMAN,
12th Battalion.
Pte. A. E. STYLES,
12th Battalion.
Pte. M. A. LALLY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. D. MACKAY,
11th Batt., 2nd Rfts,
Lec.-Cpl. A. G. M‘DONALD,
11th Battalion.
Pte. G. OVERTON,
11th Battalipn.
Pte. J. P. PETTIT,
11th Battalion.
Pte, E. SUGDEN,
11th Battalion.
Pte. P. W. 0. SNOWGRASS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. C. H. SMITH,
11th Battalion.
Pte. C. J. VEITCH,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. WILKINSON,
11th Battalion.
Pte. F. A. WEST,
11th Battalion.
Pte. H. F. WATTON,
11th Battalion.
Pte. T. HEDLEY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. 1.. C, GARDNER,
12th Battalion.
REPORTED MISSING”
Lieut. R. T. A. M ’DONALD,
16th Battalion.
Lieut. W. E. ELSTON,
16th Battalion.


TASMANIA
KILLED
Lt.-Col. L. F. CLARK, D. 5.0.,
12th Battalion.
Lieut, P. J. PATTERSON,
12th Battalion.
Pte. S. R. CROSS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. ANDERSON,
12th Battalion.
DIED OF WOUNDS
Pte. B. L. TAYLOR,
12th Battalion.
Pte. W. W. DAVIS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. J. WILLIAMS,
12th Battalion.
Sgt.-Major R. JERRETT,
12th Battalion.
WOUNDED
Major C. H. ELLIOTT,
12th Battalion.
Lieut. A. GREEN,
12th Battalion.
Major S. HAWLEY,
2nd in Com., 12th Battalion.
Lieut. H. A. McPHERSON,
12th Battalion.
Lieut. W. H. ROOM,
12th Battalion.
Lieut. J. A. FOSTER,
12th Battalion.
Lieut. N. D. FETHERS,
12th Battalion.
Maj. (Dr.) J. M. Y. STEWART
2nd General Hospital.
Major R. E. SNOWDEN,
15th Battalion,
Lieut. A. DOUGLAS,
15th Battalion.
Sergt. C. N. RICHARDSON,
12th Battalion.
Cpl. I. N. HOLYMAN,
12th Battalion,
6th Lee.-Cpl. R. F. LITTLER,
12th Battalion.
Pte. N. RANSON,
12th Battalion.
Pte. W. STEPHENS,*
12th Battalion.
Pte. S. ,T. SMITH,
12th Battalion.
Pte. A. F. BELLINGER,
12th Battalion.
Pte. A. F. FARNELL,
12th Battalion.
Q.M.S. D. W. MARRINER,
12th Battalion.
Pte. C. MI LI.HOUSE,
12th Battalion,
Pte. H. TURNER,
12th Battalion.
Pte. E. W. WOOD,
12th Battalion.
Pte. A. H. FISHER,
11th Battalion.
Sergt. G. H. BAKER,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. A. FITZGIBBONS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. W. A. HENNEBY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. F. J. LYNE,
11th Battalion.
Pte. W. E. BURROWS,
11th Battalion.
Pte. F, G. CLARKE,
11th Battalion.
Sergt. COOPER,
11th Battalion.
Cpl. J. J. CORBY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. R. P. HARVEY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. C. C. JUBB,
11th Battalion.
Pte. J. O. KENNEDY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. T. L. KINGSLEY,
11th Battalion.
Pte, G. S. LAYCOCK,
lltb Batt. ? Ist Rfls.


Pte. A. T. I,EMIN,
11th Battalion.
Pte. A. J. M’HUGH,
11th Battalion.
Pte. P. MHNNES,
11th Battalin.
Pte, J. T. M’isENDRICK
11th Battalion,
Pie. S. PITCHFORD,
11th BattaP in,
Pte. E. W. PRIOR,
11th Battalion,
Pte. H. R. SCOTT,
11th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Bugler C. WILLIECROFT,
11th Battalion.
Pte. L. ABREY,
11th Battalion.
Pte. .P C. ATHERTON,
12th Battalion.
Pte. C. G. E. BATCHELOR,
12th Battalion.
Pte. R. W. CARTER,
12th Battalion.
Pte. R. C. CHAWNER,
12th Battalion.
Lce:-Cpl. J. A. N. CLARK,
12th Battalion.
Pte. R; W. CLEMENTS.
12th Battalion.
Pte. O, COSSOM,
12th Battalion,
Lce.-Cpl. R. W. CRAWFORD,
12th Battalion.
Pte. J. S. CRANSWICK,
12th Battalion.
Pte. W. CUNNINGHAM,
12th Battalion.
Pte. T. H. CURTIS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. D. DENNIS,
12th Batt., 2nd Rfts;
Lce.-Cpl. S. W. DODSON,
12th Battalion.
Pte. C. E. EDMONDSON,
I2th Battalion.
Pte. C. A. F. FRA,
12th Battalion.
Pte. E. J. HAMILTON,
12th Battalion.
Pte. W. G. HILL,
12th Battalion.
Pte. W. HOLMBERG,
12th Battalion.
Pte. W. J. H. HOW, .
12th Battalion.
Pte. H. KEOGH,
12th Battalion.
Pte. O. KRUSHKA,
12th Battalion.
Pte. A. C. LUCAS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. V. L. MACHEN, ,
12th Batt., 2nd Rfts.
Pte. A. J. S. M’CULLOCH,
I2th Battalion.
Sergt. E. J. NICHOLLS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. L. L. PARRY,
12th Battalion.
Pte. A. TOWERS,
12th Battalion.
Pte. R. N. B. RICHARD,
12th Battalion.
Pte. H. H. SAYER,
12th Battalion.
Lce.-Cpl. H. E. SPOTTSWOOD
12th Battalion.
Pte. C. W. T. STREET,
12th Battalion.
Pte. W. L. STREET,
12th Battalion.
Pte. C. THOMPSON,
12th Battalion.
Pte. A. V. TURNER,
12th Battalion.
Pte. G. VAUGHAN,
12th Battalion.
Sergt. H. WEBBER,
12th Battalion.
Pte. J. DUNCAN,
11th Battalion.
Sergt. F. C. WILSON,
12th Battalion.
Pte. H. J. WTNDRED,
12th Battalion.
VARIOUS STATES.
Members of the battalions
denominated below were re-
cruited in Queensland, South
Australia, West Australia, and
Tasmania.
DIED OR WOUNDS.
Pte. E. JACKSON,
9th Batt., 3rd Inf. Brig
Pte. P. W. VENNING,
10th Batt., 3rd Inf. Brig.
Pte. B. E. MARKS,
10th Batt., 3rd Inf. Brig.
Pte. L. W. GRANT,
11th Batt., 3rd Inf. Brig.
Pte. P. W. THOMSON,
11th Batt., 3rd Inf. Brig.
Pte. T. SMITH,
12th Batt., 3rd Inf. Brig.
Pte. E. PLUMMER,
16th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Pte. G. L. NEWALL,
15th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
Pte. J. A. THOMPSON,
16th Batt., 4th Inf. Brig.
WOUNDED.
Lieut. W. B. J. PATTI SON,
9th Batt., 3rd Inf. Brig.
Pte. W. S. HANLEY,
9th 8., 3rd Inf. Brig. 2nd Bfts,
