

AUSIUBAILItASI ÏAÜ'iO LtKi Ü üaS'ÊvßM^a^Sîa
GENERAL MEETING, sth OF AUGUST, 183 5.
Pursuant to ndvertisement, this Association as* TVfr c ITVI it ..
senibled at the Rulteny Hotel, the ball room ef Mr - John Stephen considered himself called
which was crowded with members. On the motion bad waited uuon thTiil.l Bubscnbers who “ l > e ' «pon to make a few remarks upon the subject
“L 1 ; f’-, M ‘S ueen ' ■ Ks ‘ l- ’ Slr John Jamison was Association to appoint Mr R°i tlle , lnten, i°n °1 the since be considered that many of the allusions
cal ed to the chair. that numerous j 3 /' ? and made had a personal reference to himself. Ho
the chairman regretted that a severe cold would with his assurance 1 made in accordance therefore begged to preface his observations by
prevent his doing the duties imposed upon him, but Mr. Wentworth’wn* • i ® tatin S* that it was not his intention to offer himself
he tiusted that the members would make allowances claration fall from the lilTfn *l° Lear tbls de ; for the situation solely of Secretary to Mr. Bui wer.
accordingly, ihe principal business of the meeting, received no authority to make eh 1 "" Lyons "^ ho . bad ‘°wever much he should have piized the honour of
Sir john remarked, was to receive the report of the Indeed it Î / , h ! r communication, being associated with that gentleman in his efforts
provisional committee, to which he begged the alten- was an admixture of sonfe fZ* to f “ m tbat there ,0 obtain the objects for which this A ssocia'ion lias
tton ofthe gentlemen present. ture towards ™ e mTwhf g ‘ I>erS ° na na ' been s P ecial| y created. Ile felt. however, hound
ihe secretary accordingly proceeded to read the an intention ofbecomZZ“ « ‘ V °. to S!ly - î hat alt, io.igli lie had not declared himself as
report, which contained minutes of the proceedings secretary to Mr Bnlwer it date ‘°c‘be office ot a candidate for the agency from this colony to Mr.
the c “ mml ttee, and various recommendations from of the actual necessity of »I,;« c ? nfident ,H mself Bnlwer, he regretted fo have discoveied that a
that body for the future guidance and establish- appeared that none Mit a np.■ Z’’ 0 ' n ‘ m en ‘ ,0r > ‘ personal feeling alone of animosity in a particular
ment of the Association; winch were embodied in colonial matters could nmnpL S ° . conver , sant wUII quarter, had induced certain parties to commence
various resolutions subsequently submitted to the pl a j n t | lat wlli h -, J °Pf ly understand and ex- an active and direct canvass against him.
consideration of the meeting, (tor which see adver- to their narli-imentsi-v „3 te® might communicate As a Member ofthe Associa' ion, lie would ne-
Vert.sement.j of slate Kfoll.? ' . .secretary vertl, dess give his decided opinion, that the Asso-
ihe three principal topics of discussion related to means of acmiirino tbJw, ■ ignoiant, witn all his cialion could not depart from the spiiit and inten-
the nomination of the Directing Committee, the ap- an d condition of this po inhumation, of the state tion of the resolutions of the Public Meeting with
pointment of the secretary in Sydney, and the ex- 1- had never regard to this subject-far as it had been main-
pedieacy of appointing-by the Association a secretary Mr. Bnlwer be nrenareH -r ,- on - v 0 Ho "" could tamed that a departure from them in the instance
to Mr. Bnlwer. lions vvlfich „ meet ten thousand l ues ' " Well has been discussed as to the appointment of
Onr present limits will not permitour giving more l oca l character“whiVh Up ° n , matte , rs oi a t!,e »Meeting Committee might vitiate the agree-
than a brief outline ol the arguments used upon these at in the correspondence frnm^hl^A 1 be f” ‘glanced mem signed by the subscribers, it was evident that
several subjects, confining the present report ofthe the secretary of sate advanced H Assoclatlon • , If ‘he neglect to act tip to them in this particular
proceedings chiefly to that which excited the warmest statements -eo-afrimt ,i r , b most arrant mis- would equally abrogate that bond. The chief snh-
interest, namely, the expediency of nominating Mr. afford him from nê?so ■ f knn vWl’ *° "' ll t ° m f couid Je« in ‘he correspondence with Mr. Bnlwer in the
Bnlwer s secretary by the members. he look to tiorM C ITli! a dg , lnformd - le ‘.‘er which accompanied the last petition, was re-
Upon the first subject alluded to, much discussion to Cant un D inipl i *] U V ' e \ . f x P resse d Imive to the inefficiency of the Colonial Agency as
arose as to the admission of £l voters to the com- petition to the fvö 5 was . c,m |*p d Wlth our last at present constituted in the person of Mr. Bar-
mittee of direction. person shou d be eh “ lble na, d - «hieb letter was signed by Sir J. Jamison, as
Mr. Hipkiss rose to propose an amendment which Colony. I to lus assistance from this Chairman, Mr. Wentworth, as Deputy Chairman,
suggested that from the subscribers of £l should be Mr. Lawson observed n„t , and himself, as Secretary, of the Committee who
elected committee-men, in the ratio of one member of this descrintinn for numerate an agent represented the colonists ; and one of the principal
from every five subscribers. salar y of Ml"«, £ 2 000 ™." T," a“ ,S 1,1 "« •« “> effect the removals
Mi. L. Rudder, as a second amendment, moved that it had been decider! at tL* i«,* U 6 considered such an agent, who was wholly ignorant of the cir-
that certain gentlemen, £l subscribers, whose names that Mr Bulwer slmnlH ho ~n & i °f m^ elln g, cumstances of the colony and allow the colonists to
lie mentioned, should be at once admitted members of appointin'? his own «pr.rot.ir ° VV6 16 com P* lment f* ect a person qualified to represent them in Eng-
of the directing’ committee, i\i.,- i . land, Indeed the very letter which was latelv
Mr. JUaokauess approved of the principle of Mr. though he could offeree Ve-fsnn . o P lnio " s, ~ : 1,1 * ad 'lressed to the Governor by this Association, re^
Hipkiss motion, but proposed that one out of ten in«-the compliment to Mr S< B l ayoud ‘ hct 0 allow- qmring the appropriation of £2OOO a year for the
should be the limit. be aonointed w Z 7 - “ le SeCr6 ’ I!«*“«"“ to the requisite officers, in-
Mi. Carmichael moved that the roeolution should Mr. Simmons s-iid P th-it IVmrfl • 6 Assocla “ on : sisted on the necessity of a secretary in England, and
stand as proposed, leaving the question to be settled of the muor-mce of .ii i S J“ ® x Pf leno ,® »secretary in Sydney, ami more especially suggested
at the end ot 12 months, should the present directing respect to the affairs nf tZ ,' S i ln “= and wldl that a Bill should he prepared by the Association
committee deem it practicable or advisable to admit viuced that unless an am „» o ony, e was con- tor stihmi-sion to the Council, enacting most parti-
the proposed addition. ?’ ““ ** Culari .y» "* at officers should he elected by the
Mr. Wentworth objected in toto to anv alteration Mr. Lord perfectly ao-reerl ifi,* fi e S :Uve- colonists—Mr. Stephen therefore maintained that
of the resolution as proposed. He considered that as upon this point ,be last speaker the Association must strictly adhere to this professed
the subscription bond was signed with the condition appoint their own sect/l f? 1°“ f eso!ve . I,ot to l"niciple of the Institution—lie would not take up
embodied m the original motion, which declared that all colonial subjects no Id, ft h ? ve î tbe time of ‘. lle meeting by entering into the merits
£o subscribers were eligible for the directing com- to this country bv ihe " , D » U • be S ai “ ed of the question as regarded the convenience to Mr.
mittee, any departure therefrom would annul the Bulwer had i/hismunhJ . Association. Mr. Bnlwer of having such an agent appointed—inaa-
cbligatiqn. Besides which he saw nothing in the hfs *° <or ™ ,lcb as il bad been stated bv Ml . Wemwor.li,
proposition to induce him to extend the quahtioadon ; quired The "renter ,■ , • °- ve U P aB “ le " that Captain Daniel was in possession of a cominu-
when he saw the names of men who were capable vice -and fme choT 'a ° Ur ni ? ati,,n ailect from Mr. Bnlwer, requesting the
from their property of qualifying for the directing not understand our wan a n,ZnZ L ,°' sel ‘' ot 'on of a qualified agent by the Cominitlee,
committee, but who now only had snbsciibed £l, terests. Several other <n>mi Ur lar and no doubt Cajitan Daniel would, indue lime,
he was more particularly disposed to negative the sentiments ' gentlemen acquiesced in these communicate his instructions to tile Directing Com -
proposition. M , , mittee.
Mr. F. Stephen, Mr. Unwin, Mr. Moore, and tary accredited bvlthZolnM slt . uation of a seara - Sir J. Jamison observed, that there was an effi-
other gentlemen, coincided in the legal opinion of to the cause ifh/wer, 1 P ro^ e . In J uno U3 cient agent already co-opei aiiug with Mr, Bulwer ;
Mr. Wentworth, and the amendment welecoi.se- “Zcis^Steohen > P , .• Î 7 and requested the secretary to read a letter from
quently withdrawn. weaU «dTutiîe Sumenû “î ed V * the »“"aldson as evidence of the fact.
l;pon the second matter of discussion relative to p os tion of accreditino- a o-eml C Uted f a = ,un . :it tbe P ro " 1 lle le “er was read accordingly, which was to tile
the Secretaryship in the Colony, the chief argument L asZt tl.e pa.ha.Zitafv . C f° ay e ,? ect *„"' a ‘ Ml - DonaWaon declined to oppose
raised was as to the remuneration tobe allowed— which he had volant-nil y ln l .‘ e daties Air - Bulwer in any views he might have in
whether £250 per annum or £3OO, which eventually assertion that the Question iZuolZ. 1 !' *? f ~ the colonists, as he conceived hint
was fixed at the latter sum, exclusive of offices and he denied the fhet —ilm mnt! n îe alreat v settled, bes fitted tor that honour from his station as a
accommodation for the Secretary to reside upon the in«- was merely withdrawnZ P “, b IC . meet ‘ J ' Je ' llber of Parliament; but that he would co-
premises. The time appointed for election was °1 he secretary referred te J utur ® coosideration. operate with him to the utmost of his ability,
named to take place on this day month. the chairman .f„rl it 0 , tb . e mmutes signed by Mr, Wentworth remarked, that an agent of that
Mr. Wentworth hoped that the Members would “ withdrawn for LureZZkfeÎafion q “ eStlon Baa des crip*ion was not such as the colonists required
consider the merits of such candidates as might Mr F v t „ ni , 0 „ stcleration. for Mr. Bulwer s service.
öfter, and not be swayed in giving their votes by astonished at the admiss'iorTbv Mr'lvnns J' 6 ' eC, y . » was finally resolved, that ihe questions as to
any consideration of a personal nature. A good the collectors as to lis Wim/!,* Ù , e °‘ “ e expediency of sending to England an agent, and
amanuensis solely, or an ordinarily educated indivi- that this question was Ln ml I subscribers the nomination of a fit person, should he decided
dual was not such as the Association required—but under that i.mua.Z’ d ac f‘ vlll ° sub ' b J ballot, on the next general meeting, which
one who could conduct the correspondence with that such hZrone J * °V?", be ,hou B h ‘ ‘akes place on the 2nd September,
credit and advantage both to himself and the Asso- censure from the Association ° J 6 “ 8 V ° tä ° f , ibe R , lee ‘ l ”S lllen proceeded to vote the eus-
ciatlon‘ As resoected thp PvnPfliAnrxr f tomary thanks to the Chairman, and thej meeting
Many other gentlemen expressed similar opinions tary to Mr Bulwer hi\vonl J t Reding the secre- adjourned to the day above mentioned.
firrt
SÄ Ä r ;Ä fe Ä
he forthwith settled, namely, the expediency of send- instructed Mr Bulwer“ * Gould Ct \° n , lat not ““»“' tance ananged, was the Humiliation of a Cor-
mg a qualified agent to England to co-operate with clerk, taken perhaps eotm?n?i “T™ *.fi l 0 Committee, and fixing the Days of
Mr. Bulwer as secretary,-and he washed some don for advice 'to ne V cTZYuZV the Direct.,, g (lon.,..ittee, which it was
member would submit a motion upon the subject, un- mittee by divination know what m-Devs n T ,esolved d,ollld he on every Fiiidav, at 3 o’clock,
less the provisional committee had decided upon debated in the Hmi« 1 matt ® 7be p -at he Roy al Hotisl, till further notice ;of
allowing Mr. Bulwer to nominate his own secretary, ments made bv a secretary of Zip" n ih Stat6 ' " dlic,l > “ was desi|, ed that all the members would
Mr Francis Stephen replied that the report whi'oh inimfcaTto thl mS IheTolonv“ iiT * 1 ‘. ,otice ’
had been read particularly recommends to the Asso- not say who might or who miVhr pi r n , Jhe ° 0 " 11 . 1 " gentlemen have declared them-
ciatton at large to come to some conclusion upon the party for such an office hnf ,°h n 13 * b 8 ( f aa , lfied s ® lves a* candidates tor the office of Secretary to
subject, which the provisional committee had been S ,1 “ 1 but should “I candidates the Association, viz '
unwilling to dictate ‘o the members, in consequence would voZT h * r A |^ ssrB - s . lade - Morgan, Rev. H. Carmichael,
of the difference of opinion which existed upon the honest member for’rh ,t truste d eveiy Jenkins, Keith, Gisborne, and Kentish. (The two
matter. He bogged leave, however, in compliance sMeredZ t f fil ,1 H T rT l‘ a 'e ui I, lia.vn from the contest.)
with the expressed wish of the chairman to take the situation PJ ‘° dutles °“ be „ 1 b f Section takes place on Wednesday, the
opinion of the meeting upon this important question. He would, however consent fo the 2nd day of September next.
~ zr&?ssns »
7 ' taken upon its menu by ballot.
