

A.P.A. PAMPHLET, No. 1.
Australia and the
Coming Peace
A Constructive Policy
“Put up again thy sword into his place, for all they that take the sword shall
perish with the sword.”—Jesus of Nazareth.
"The more I study the world, the more I am convinced of the inability of
brute force to create anything durable.” —Napoleon Bonaparte.
WRITTEN BY
J. B. Howie
For the Australian Peace Alliance (Victorian Council)
Price Threepence
(Quantities at Special Rates)
MELBOURNE:
Fraser and Jenkinson, Printers, 343-5 Queen Street.


THE AUSTRALIAN PEACE ALLIANCE.
OBJECTS.
. 1. To bind together all the forces in Australia that are sym-
pathetic to the establishment and maintenance of Peace by means of
international arbitration and such other methods as may be favored.
2. To create a Central Council in each State of all organisations
which are in sympathy with the objects of the Alliance.
3. To co-operate whenever possible with international peace and
kindred organisations in other parts of the world.
4. To advocate the following platform:—
PLATFORM.
(a) The establishment of an effective and permanent international
arbitration court elected on a democratic basis, including women
delegates.
( b ) The setting up of adequate machinery (including enfranchise-
ment of women) for ensuring democratic control of foreign policy.
(c) The general reduction of armaments and the nationalisation
of their manufacture.
( d) The organisation of the trades unions and workers’ associations,
with a definite view of ending war.
( e ) The termination of the present war at the earliest possible
moment, and the following principles to govern the terms of peace:—
(i.) No Province or Territory in any part of the world shall be transferred
from one Government to another without the consent by plebiscite of the
population of such province.
(ii.) No treaty, arrangement or undertaking shall be entered upon
in the name of Great Britain without the sanction of Parliament. Adequate
machinery for ensuring democratic control of foreign policy shall be created.
(iii.) The foreign policy of Great Britain shall not be aimed at creating
Alliances for the purpose of maintaining the “ Balance of Power ” but shall
be directed to the establishment of a concert of Europe and the setting up of
an international council, whose deliberations and decisions shall be public.
(iv.) Great Britain shall propose as part of the peace settlement a plan
for the drastic reduction of armaments by the consent of all the belligerent
Powers, and to facilitate that policy shall attempt to secure the general
nationalisation of the manufacture of armaments and the prohibition of the
export of armaments by one country to another.
(v.) The universal abolition of conscription or compulsory military
training.
MEMBERSHIP.
A Central Council shall be formed of not more than three delegates
from each affiliated organisation and three delegates elected by indi-
vidual members in meeting assembled.
Members of the Alliance shall be (a) affiliated organisations which
contribute an annual subscription of one guinea, and ( b ) such other
persons as endorse the object and work of the Alliance and contribute
a minimum subscription of 2/- per annum.
OFFICERS.
The Central Council may elect such Officers as it deem expedient.
MEETINGS.
Meetings shall be held as decided upon by the Central Council.






Australia and the Coming Peace.
A CONSTRUCTIVE POLICY.
“ Put up again thy sword into his place; for all they that take the sword
shall perish with the sword.” (Jesus of Nazareth.))
“ The more I study the world, the more I am convinced of the inability of
brute force to create anything durable.” (Napoleon Bonaparte.)
I. AN ALTERNATIVE AND AN INVITATION.
“ War always has been and always will be.” “If you want peace,
prepare for war.” These ancient pessimisms have been accepted as the
last word of political wisdom in international affairs. Acting upon them,
the nations, in their mutual fear and suspicion, have spent thousands of
millions of pounds in vast preparations for devastation and human slaughter.
It is impossible to estimate the extent to which mankind would have
benefitted had the enormous resources thus squandered beep used in
co-operation instead of in hatred and antagonism. A world relieved from
the nightmare of the fear of aggression, and from heavy demands upon
man’s and woman’s labour for things that profit nothing; a world inhabited
by a nobler race, physically, mentally and spiritually; the conditions of
life raised because millions of the men of finest physique are no longer
doomed to barrack life, with its vices, and to destruction when greed or
fear or caprice makes a war. “Utopia,” says the cynic. Yes—gradually—
Utopia!
And the alternative? The actual operations of warfare, said Archibald
Forbes, the great war correspondent, show that it is “ essentially a soul-
blinding, heart-blurring business.” General Sherman put it more tersely:
“ War is Hell.” and a number of Australian soldiers, returned from Gallipoli,
when pressed for their experiences, gave a similar laconic reply.
We hear of glorious victories, brilliant charges, successful operations.
But listen to a nurse’s story of the aftermath:—
“ The never-ending processions of groaning men being brought
in on those horrible blood-stained stretchers, suffering unimagined
torture, the filth, the cold, the stench, the hunger, the vermin, and
the squalor of it all were almost enough to make Satan weep.”
It would be easy to pile horror on horror, to give details of hideous
mutilation, to speak of men temporarily or permanently deranged mentally;
but it is writ large there in Europe. To do justice to the fantastic devilry of
the inferno that exists to-day, not only on land and sea, but under and
above them, would require the pen of a Dante. Two and a half million l
1. Official statistics, and records of Red Cross and other relief organisations.


men—white, brown, black and yellow—dead as the result of one year of war,
if buried side by side in one long trench, it would stretch more than 940
miles! And, unseen, the mine explosion (men in the air “ spreadeagled and
revolving ”), the bayonet thrust, the bursting shell, strike at the hearts of
the heroic, uncomplaining women and the little children, who wonder what
it all means.
But there are other indirect results of vital importance, such as the
complete or partial suppression in wartime of freedom of speech and of the
liberty of the press, and the deliberate fostering of hatred and contempt
in all belligerent countries towards the “ enemy.” The effect of such things
cannot be measured, but they will assuredly leave their mark on national
life.
Hell or Utopia? That is the choice, seen as it never has been since
the first of history’s 8000 wars began. And the people must make the
choice this time. Statesmen and diplomats have led along the only way
they saw open—the way of secret understandings, of the “ Balance of
Power,” of huge armaments —and the people have followed. But a better
way must be found. It would be a crowning catastrophe, after all the
bitter cost, merely to have a renewal of the race of armaments, with the
prospect of another hideous war.
The war may end suddenly, or may drag on until a “ stalemate ” is
declared; in either event, a matter so vital as the peace settlement should
be considered in advance by all concernd. The issues involved are vast
and complex, and much wisdom, forbearance, and even apparent sacrifice,
will be necessary. Courage to apply new principles to' the affairs of
nations, trusting in the “ commonsense of most,” may be called for; but
it is surely not too much to hope that nations capable of the sympathy
and generosity shown to each other at times of earthquake, famine and
shipwreck, will be willing to show an equally generous spirit for the great
and lasting good of the whole world.
Your earnest consideration of the principles here set forth is invited,
and, if they appeal to to you as reasonable and likely to be beneficial, your
co-operation in the effort to bring about their adoption will be cordially
welcomed. It will be remembered that responsible statesmen in Great
Britain have promised that the overseas dominions shall be consulted in
connection with the terms of peace.
II. ELIMINATING THE CAUSES OF WAR.
The failure of organised Christianity, of highly-developed civilisation,
and of all political expedients, to prevent a world catastrophe is giving
men furiously to think, and war and its causation is being studied as never
before. One result is that definite proposals have been made in England,
France, Germany, and elsewhere, with the object of preserving mankind
from another such calamity. On 23rd June, 1915, a manifesto of the highest
importance was issued at Berlin by the Executive of the powerful Social
Democratic Party of Germany. The party declares itself against annexa-
tion; and in favour of compulsory international arbitration, democratic
control over treaties and agreements, limitation of armaments with a view
to general disarmament, and recognition of the inviolability of nations.
The manifesto concludes with the following passage:—
“ If the war, daily requiring new sacrifices, is not to drag on
without end, one of the participating Powers must stretch forth the
hand of peace. Germany, which has been attacked by overwhelming
Powers, which has victoriously resisted all enemies up to the present,


which has defeated a plan to starve out the people, and has proved
that it cannot be defeated, should make the first step to bring about
peace,”
“ In the name of humanity and culture, supported by the favour-
able military situation created by the bravery of our comrades in
arms, we call upon the Government to show their readiness to enter
upon peace negotiations in order to make an end to the blooey
struggle.
“We expect from our comrades in the other belligerent countries
that they will bring pressure to bear upon their governments with
the same end in view.”
Similar proposals have been adopted by the Australian Peace Alliance,
which was formed in Melbourne shortly after the outbreak of the war y
a number of Labour, Church and other organisations. State Councils have
also been formed in South Australia, Western Australia, Queensland, and
New South Wales. The Alliance aims at establishing a strong Council in
each State, and at Federal action through a Commonwealth Council. Its
objects and platform are printed on page 2 of the cover, and fuither
explained in the following pages.
III. THE PRINCIPLE OF NATIONALITY.
The termination of the present war at the earliest possible moment.
No Province or Territory in any part of the world shall be transferred
from one Government to another without the consent by plebiscite of
the population of‘such province. (From Platform of Australian Peace
Alliance.)
Much has been heard (and rightly) of the atrocities committed m
Belgium, but war itself is in its very nature an atrocity. Those who
suggest that terms of peace should be proposed by Great Britain and her
Allies are often met with the assertions that Prussian militarism must
be broken and Belgium avenged; that this can only be done by force of
arms; and that, consequently, it is folly or worse to think of peace at t
present time. Influential journals have gone so far as to express the
hope that the German people will be subjected tohorrors similar to those
perpetrated in Belgium, and a whole nation (consisting of tens of millions
Sf Tndividuals, with all sorts of ideas and all varieties of character) has
been compared to “ a mad dog or a tiger insane with the lust for blood.
It is not easy to be patient in the face of such events; but, in the
interests of the future welfare of the race, and o‘f the Belgians themselves
clear thinking is necessary. A policy of hatred and a determination to
humiliate the German nation will but consolidate it and nullify the' *
of the growing party which is working there for peace, and protesting
against *the commission of barbarities. An offer of reasonable terms of
place will have the opposite effect. It is only necessary to reverse the
positions mentally to appreciate this. Militarism is a state a
cannot be exorcised by outward force. Moreover, prior to the var, the
opposition to militarism in Germany had grown very strong, and one of
Bernhardi’s -self-confessed purposes m writing his book was to combat
this tendency. It is interesting to compare the vogue of his book in
Germany with that of “ The Human Slaughter House, by Lamzsus, a book
written by a German schoolmaster, exposing the horrors and the machine-
like brutality of modern war. Only 5000 copies of Bernhardi s woik were
2. “Financial News,” 30th September, 1914.


issued, and these were not all sold; the circulation of Lamzsus’s book,
though the authorities tried to proscribe it, ran into six figures.
Napoleon tried the policy of “ smashing Prussia,” and apparently suc-
ceeded so thoroughly that the Prussians were forced to contribute troops
towards the army with which he invaded Russia, but in a very few years
they were taking part in the campaign that ended Napoleon’s career.
Again, though the Franco-Prussian war left France prostrate, within five
years Bismarck was once more watching the Republic with uneasiness.
The prosecution of war within a territory implies the serious, if not
complete, devastation of that territory. The British people entered into
war on account of the Belgians; even if the growing revolt against
war’s horrors were not sufficient reason for a cessation of hostilities,
they should surely endeavour to save that unhappy country from the
desolation of a campaign to expel the Germans. The Bryce Commission,
in its report, comments on the absence of vindictiveness and passion shown
by the Belgian witnesses; and Belgian delegates to the recent international
gathering of women at The Hague referred to a widespread desire for
peace among their compatriots. In an interview by an American, King
Albert drew a sharp line of distinction in the matter of atrocities, stating
that, while some German regiments had behaved very badly, others had
been most considerate.
Sooner or later this mad orgy of bloodshed must be stayed. Men
and women are sick at heart by reason of the horror, the misery, the
deadly suspense, but each wears a brave face, and determines to “ see
it through,” because there seems no other way. The people of each
country are persuaded that they are fighting in defence—in a righteous
cause—and cannot understand how those of other countries can possibly
think they are right. That it is so is a tragedy within a tragedy. At
Christmas the men at the front forgot for a time that they were “ enemies,”
and, mingling together, found fellow human beings with the same sorrows,
the same desires, the same affection for mother and wife and child. The
nations would rejoice if peace were declared immediately, and if (as
many have hoped) it ended war, the anniversary of the signing of the
treaty would be proclaimed an international holiday. All the Governments
have stated that they did not make, and did not want, the war. Then
why does the struggle continue? Is it because pride compels all to
struggle on—to exhaustion if need be? The men and women of all the
nations have proved their courage, and need not fear to be called cowards
if their leaders suggest a halt. A great name awaits the statesman with
the genius to see, and the courage, to advocate, a course that shall end the
war and bring about a satisfactory and permanent solution of the difficulties
involved—the statesman who shall find a.way to give practical effect to the
goodwill and the hatred of slaughter that, despite all appearances to the
contrary, exist in the hearts of the people, and in the end must conquer.
The tendency to confuse national greatness with mere bigness has been
a fruitful source of strife and carnage. Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Persia,
Macedon, Spain, all fell. Even the Romans, with their genius for law
and for government, did not succeed, because in the last analysis theirs
was an empire of domination. The trend of modern political thought is
increasingly in the direction of government with the consent of the
governed, and of placing political power in the hands of the people. It
has been found by experience that the forcible subjection of unwilling
peoples is unsatisfactory to both parties, leading to friction, suspicion, the
waste of energy and material resources, and to war. The history of
Alsace-Lorraine, Poland, and the United States are instances, and the
present war began with a similar difficulty in the Balkans. Though the
modern tendency is towards larger political units by means of various


forms of federation, small States have contributed much towards the world's
life. Who values Babylon and Egypt and Persia before Florence and
Athens and Judea? Ideas conquer in the end, and Bethlehem, Stratford-on-
Avon and Weimar will be remembered when Corsica is forgotten. And,
if Belgium or Denmark, or even Andorra or San‘ Marino, prefers to
remain an independent State, why should it not?
Lord Halsbury, ex-Lord Chancellor of Great Britain, gave utterance
recently to some trenchant words on the subject of empire building. He
said that the Eighth Commandment was, to his mind, of universal obliga-
tion, and continued:—
"I protest against blasphemous cant! I wish to denounce any
man who thinks himself appointed by God to take possession of
somebody else’s property. It seems to me to be a very bad principle
indeed, and I cannot allow discussion to pass without raising my
voice in oposition to the notion that, because a very big crime is
committed, it is to be treated as though it were a little crime. Any
emperor who wants to take somebody else’s land is a dirty thief,
and I do not approve of the sort of delicacy which would prevent
our expressing ourselves plainly as to actions of that sort. _ They
are actions of which any man should be ashamed. The principle
of world-empire meant that by violence and force they were to
take that which belonged to another, and, in doing so, they were
to inflict suffering upon their fellow-men. He trusted that one of
these days mankind would arrive at a general concession that all
people who were established in a country of their own should remain
in possession of it, not to be disturbed unless such interference was
fully justified. It sometimes, perhaps, might be justified, but to
dispossess a nation should never be allowed as a principle of
Empire. The one principle they had to establish was, ‘ Thou shalt
not steal!’”
There are undoubtedly difficulties in the application of the idea of
letting peoples decide under what government they shall live. The object
of a plebiscite may be defeated if it is not fairly taken; but it would be
possible to obviate this by having the vote by ballot under international
control. Territories inhabited by mixed races present a special difficulty,
but the principle is, even in such cases, fairer than that of forcible subjuga-
tion without consulting the people. Questions of internal government are
involved, but if the principle be a true one it will eventually be adopted.
It should not be necessary to stress the point further in a continent whose
people have adopted Adult Suffrage and the Referendum. Justice and
friendliness between states will tend to produce co-operation and closer
political bonds by common consent.
IV. THE DEMOCRAT AND THE DIPLOMAT.
The setting up of adequate machinery (including enfranchisement of
women) for ensuring democratic control of foreign policy.
No treaty, arrangement, or undertaking, shall be entered upon in the name
of Great Britain without the sanction of Parliament. (From Platform
of Australian Peace Alliance.)
Sun worship dates back to the earliest times, and the reason is not
far to seek. Primitive man feared the darkness, with its real and imaginary
dangers, and welcomed each new day as a relief from them. In the
affairs of nations, darkness and mystery have bred suspicion and fear;
such conditions have enabled individuals and groups (numerically small,
but powerful) to forward their special interests, to the detriment of the


general welfare, often by means they would not have dared to adopt in
the full light of publicity. For instance, the unsatisfactory vagueness of
knowledge concerning official relations witl} other countries has enabled
such individuals and groups to work up war scares, with the deliberate
object of increasing the sale of munitions of war.
Let into the floor of the outer hall of the building occupied by the
Australian Parliament are the words: “In the multitude of counsellors
there is safety." Foreign affairs, with their possibilities of war, and their
tremendous reflex effect on the social advancement of the people, have
been largely conducted on the opposite principle. This was forcibly stated
by the “Times" (23rd November, 1912): —
“Who, then, makes war? The answer is to be found in the
Chancelleries of Europe, among the men who have too long played
with human lives as pawns in a game of chess, who have become
so enmeshed in formulas and the jargon of diplomacy that they
have ceased to be conscious of the poignant realities with which
they trifle. And thus war will continue to be made, until the great
masses who are the sport of professional schemers and dreamers
say the word which shall bring, not eternal peace, for that is impos-
sible, but a determination that wars shall be fought only in a just
and righteous and vital cause.”
Who are the men whose actions concern so vitally not only the people
of Great Britain, but of the over-seas dominions? What is the station i«
life of those who represent before other countries a people inclining increas-
ingly towards democratic control in home affairs? What is their training?
What the conditions of entrance to the Foreign Office? For a fuller
answer to these and other questions, the reader is referred to No. 5 of
the Union of Democratic Control’s pamphlets, “ Parliament and Foreign
Policy," by Arthur Ponsonby, M.P. Consideration of space preclude
more than a brief outline here.
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (who, by the way,
is in practice almost always drawn from the ranks of the aristocracy) is
assisted by about forty first-class clerks in the Foreign Office, and one
hundred and twenty members of the Diplomatic Service. Candidates for
the Service must have an income of at least £4OO per annum, and must
be nominated and selected before sitting for competitive examination.
The strict limits placed upon the field of selection will be obvious. Over
95 per cent, of the members of the British Diplomatic Staff, in fact, belong
to the aristocracy and landed gentry. All this tends to place and keep
them out of touch with the thoughts and feelings of the great majority
of the population, and this tendency is further increased by their exile in
foreign countries, owing to the nature of their duties and the necessity for
learning foreign languages. The successful candidate for the Foreign Office
is taught, to put it briefly, that “ all’s fair in diplomacy,” and becomes accus-
tomed to rules, codes of honor, and a diplomatic morality that no man
worthy of the name would accept in the ordinary affairs of life.
The position of the Foreign Secretary differs materially from that of
other Ministers, in that he has not to administer laws within the United
Kingdom. The effects of his actions are, therefore, not felt so quickly
by the people, and the secrecy with which the affairs, of the Foreign Office
are conducted renders him still further immune from criticism. Important
questions concerning relations with other governments are often brought
before the House at such a stage that it has practically no choice but
to endorse the action of the Foreign Office. Blue Books and questions
in the House are the two other means of information. The former deal
with past phases of diplomacy, while the latter method is far from satis-
factory. This is proved by the answers given by responsible Ministers to
questions as to whether Great Britain was in any way bound to France


in the event of war. The answers were in the negative, whereas all the
world now knows that the contrary was true, in the spirit, if not in the
strict letter. Even in less important matters a series of seemingly small
diplomatic incidents may have great results.
In 1912 negotiations between Germany and Britain took place, Lord
Haldane, then British Secretary of State for War. taking a leading part.
The German Government asked the acceptance of the following agreement:
“ Should one of the high contracting parties be engaged in war,
the other shall adopt at least a benevolent neutrality, and exert every
effort to localise the war.”
After a counter proposal by Great Britain, and a further proposal and
counter-proposal, the negotiations proved abortive. 3 There was, in fact,
no possibility of such an arrangement, for the secret agreement previously
referred to had been made with France some years before, and the two
were incompatible. It may be argued that it was a scheme on the part
of the German Government to enable it to fight and conquer possible
enemies one by one. It is impossible to say definitely in human affairs,
especially on the grand scale, what would have been the course of events
if, at a given stage, a different policy had been adopted. But it is at least
possible that a frank conference between the French, Russian, German,
Austrian and British representatives, followed by public discussion, would
have resulted in treaties preventing the present catastrophe, and leading to
gradual disarmament. Mr. Asquith said in the House on 14th February,
1912:
“There was perfect freedom of statement and frankness of
explanation over a wide area of discussion. The very fact of suck
an interchange of views, under such conditions, should in itself, we
think, dispel the suspicion, wherever it still prevails, that either
Government contemplates aggressive designs against the other. . . .
There was unmistakable evidence of a sincere and resolute desire
upon both sides to establish a better footing between us, without,
on either side, in any way sacrificing or impairing the special
relationships in which each of us stands to the other Powers. In
that spirit, and in the fresh light this interchange of views affords,
both of us are now engaged in a careful survey of practical
possibilities.”
If Mr. Asquith’s words were true of the governments, they were at least
equally true of the people, in view of the determined attempts made in
many quarters in both Germany and England to bring about an under-
standing between the two nations.
Great Britain and the United States, a century ago, made an agree-
ment not to fortify the U.S.A.-Canadian border, and the pact has been
loyally observed. Article 11., Section 11., Sub-Section 2, of the United
States- Constitution, which reads:—
“He ” (the President) “ shall have power, by and with the
consent of the Senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the
Senators present concur,”
may fairly be said to have been a considerable factor in the matter.
Englishmen and Canadians know that they must necessarily receive notice
of any other arrangement that might affect the Border Treaty.
As long ago as 19th March, 1886, the following motion, moved by
Mr. Richards in the House of Commons, was lost by only four votes:—
“That, in the opinion of this House, it is not just or expedient
to embark in war, contract engagements involving grave responsi-
3. Australian daily press, 21st July, 1915.


bility for the nation, and add territories to the Empire, without the
knowledge and consent of Parliament,”
while a Royal Commission on the Civil Service of Great Britain has
condemned the methods of filling appointments in the Foreign Office and
Diplomatic Service. It suggested, among other things, the abolition of
the property qualification, increase of salaries, and the alteration of the
constitution of the Board of Selection to make it more representative of
the whole nation.
Those who have studied the question, and made the suggestions for
the reform of the Foreign Office outlined below realise the difficulties,
but the present system has resulted in disaster, and some change must
be made. England has been called “ the Mother of Parliaments,” and it
is likely that, if she adopts the policy of treaties ratified by Parliament,
the other nations will sooner or later follow her example and that of the
United States, even if they do not at once adopt the idea.
Suggestions for the Reform of the Management of Foreign Affairs,
(a) All treaties to be considered in detail and ratified by Parliament,
(b) No alliance, obligation or understanding with other nations to be
binding unless so ratified.
(c) A Parliamentary Committee to be appointed from representatives of
all parties, to give preliminary consideration to treaties and other
important matters affecting foreign affairs. This would save the
time of the House and militate against sudden changes of policy
following changes in the personnel of the Cabinet.
(d) The Foreign Office vote to be discussed as a matter of regular pro-
cedure; ample time to be allowed for such discussion.
(e) The Foreign Secretary to issue statements concerning Foreign Affairs
at intervals, especially when Parliament is not in session, in order
that members of Parliament and the nation may become educated
on the question.
(f) The Selection Board of the Foreign Office to be made representative.
(g) The income test for candidates to be done away with, and a sufficient
salary paid.
(h) The Foreign Office and Diplomatic Service staffs to be amalgamated.
Those in foreign parts to be kept in touch with the life of the
nation by exchange of positions, etc., and vice versa.
V. IF NOT WAR, WHAT?
The establishment of an effective and permanent International Arbitration
Court, elected on a democratic basis, including women delegates.
Great Britain shall propose as part of the peace settlement a plan for the
drastic reduction of armaments by the consent of all the belligerent
Powers, and to facilitate that policy shall attempt to secure the general
nationalisation of the manufacture of armaments and the prohibition of
the export of armaments by one country to another.
The universal abolition of conscription or compulsory military training.
(From Platform of Australian Peace Alliance.)
It is obvious that, even with the most friendly international relations,
difficulties and disputes that cannot be satisfactorily settled by negotiation
will arise from time to time, and that some means of disposing of them


is necessary. The principle of international tribunals is not, however, a
new one. Hundreds of arbitration cases have been settled within the last
century, many of them between powerful nations. These have sometimes
involved matters of greater importance than others, which, less wisely
handled, have been the occasions of wars. There has been no difficulty
about the performance of the award, save in two or three cases. In one
the decision of the Court was carried out, but the principle disputed; in
another the matter remained outstanding, but did not lead to a breach of
the peace.
The two principal objections raised are that nations must to
themselves the right to go to war for matters of “ honour ” and “ vital
interest,” and that, if a powerful nation will not perform an adverse award,
there is no means of compelling it to do so, and consequently the Court
will be stultified.
" The right to make war ” is even now being sharply challenged in
many quarters. Modern discoveries and inventions, resulting in close
cortimercial intercourse and rapid means of communication, together with
the vast net-work of financial interdependence, have revolutionised the
practical affairs of mankind. Politics and diplomacy have failed to keep
pace. That, in essence, is the cause of the present war. Thoughts before
deeds, and statesmen and people have thought of international affairs in
terms that may have been applicable to the conditions of past centuries,
but do not apply to those of to-day.
Norman Angell ironically observed that, if it were necessary to fight
in defence of national honour, the smaller nations must be considered as
having no claim to such an attribute. As for vital interests, there can
surely be no more vital interest than the welfare of the people, and to
speak of a cataclysm such as that now ravaging Europe as protecting the
vital interests of the great majority of the individuals involved is farcical.
Would not Puck, looking sadly on at Europe’s madness, exclaim again:
“ Lord, what fools these mortals be ”?
The principle of the decision of disputes by impartial authority, while
admittedly imperfect, has been found to work well in the affairs of
individuals; the duel still survives in some European countries, but its use
is decreasing, and Englishmen to-day laugh at the idea that a personal
insult must be “ wiped out in blood.” We are so accustomed to the
judicial method of settling disputes that it is not easy to realise a state
of society in which individual quarrels were settled by the law of the
stronger arm; the reign of law is a growth, and there is no logical reason
why what holds good concerning a dispute between two men should not
also apply to thousands or millions. Indeed, the principle is applied to
companies consisting of large numbers of shareholders, to municipalities,
to States within a Federation, even to a certain extent to nations. When
the people come to realise (as they are realising) that they lose more in
every way by war than they can possibly Hope to gain, interest will
reinforce the higher motives of humanity and goodwill that work against
the war system. It may be necessary at the outset to back the authority
of an International Court with some form of police force, “ co-armament
replacing counter-armament;” but, in view of the force of world public
opinion, and the reflex effect on the trade of a country refusing to perform
an award, it is unlikely that it would be necessary to use it. If nations
face war’s horrors for honour’s sake, surely honour will also loyally accept
the decision of an impartial tribunal.
The fall of the Spanish Government, after the execution of Senor
Ferrer, owing to the pressure of such forces, and the desire of the
belligerents in the present war to appear in a good light in neutral
countries, are illustrations of the effect of public opinion.
It is suggested that such an International Court should be “ elected


on a democratic basis, including women delgates.” These two proposi-
tions may sound revolutionary, but steps that in time of peace have
been regarded as practically impossible politically are being taken by
governments every day. Further, it must be remmebered that this war
is likely to be the precursor of far-reaching changes in many spheres of life.
Democratic control over the appointment of delegates to such an inter-
national court might be secured by submitting the names to Parliament
for approval; it is not, however, proposed here to suggest details, but
rather to lay down broad principles.
Australia, as a nation, has recognised the fundamental right of women
as human beings to take part in government. The women in all the
belligerent countries have shared the hardships and distresses of the
war with the men; waiting is ever harder than action, and that is their lot.
But, in addition, they have in thousands of instances taken up the duties
of men, and so helped the life of the nations. They have even taken part
in the war by helping in the manufacture of munitions. .That there may
be at present few women with the knowledge and experience to sit on
such a tribunal is beside the mark; again, it is a matter of principle.
Women know the awful cost of war in a way that men can never fully
realise. Judges often suggest a friendly settlement out of court; and the
influence of women delegates would be likely to be used largely in a
similar direction. If it be retorted that this is an appeal to sentiment,
it is equally true that war would not be possible without a similar appeal,
and there is no beatitude “Blessed are the war makers!”
An argument against international courts and the implied abolition
of war which is by some considered fatal is the argument from the
unchangeability of human nature. In answer to this, the complete or
partial abolition in civilised countries of chattel slavery, witch-burning,
religious wars and persecution, and judicial torture may be cited. A
modern writer deals with the subject thus:—
“There was a Neolithic man, an enterprising wight,
Who kept his chopping implements unusually bright;
Unusually clever he, unusually brave,
And he drew delightful mammoths on the borders of his cave.
To his Neolithic neighbours, who were startled and surprised,
He said, “My friends, in course of time we shall be civilised;
'We’re going to live in cities; we’re going to fight in wars;
'We’re going to eat three times a day without the natural cause;
'We’re going to turn life upside down about a thing called gold;
'We’re going to want the earth, and take as much as we can hold!'
Said the first, ‘ It is preposterous, Utopian, absurd.’
Said the second, ' What a stupid life—too dull, upon my word.’
Said they all, ‘lt is impossible, you idiotic child;
You can’t change human nature,’ and they all lay back and smiled.
An answer to this last one it would be hard to find;
It was a clinching argument to the Neolithic mind.” 4
In order to see in its true light the policy of huge armaments that the
nations of Europe have followed since the Franco-Prussian war, it is
necessary to examine the question, not from the point of view of one
nation, but in its more general aspect. It has become increasingly obvious
in recent years that, unless some change were effected, the armament
competition could only end in a devastating war or an almost equally
devastating financial struggle, involving all the nations, beginning with
the poorest, in bankruptcy. It is equally apparent, in the light of history,
4. “The Eo-hippus ” (writer not known; said to have appeared in London “Punch”).


that any attempt to prevent a similar situation, except by general agree-
ment, is doomed to failure; for, if the outcome of the war be a ring of
heavily-armed nations, preventing others from arming, sooner or later
there will come a chance to break away and form an alliance with some
neighbour discontented with its allies. “The will to. peace ” is needed;
given that will, there should be no difficulty in adjusting practical details;
without a reasonable measure of such a spirit, the situation may quite con-
ceivably be worse than before the war.
Munitions of war constitute a temptation to try them; “a bloody war
and quick promotion ” is an old military toast, and it is not difficult to
imagine high-minded professional soldiers feeling that in peace time_ they
arc not fully earning their pay, and welcoming war as an opportunity to
do their part for the nation.
An anonymous article on “ Zeal ” appeared in the “ Australian Military
Journal “5 Q f July, 1914. The writer, while comparing “the life’s work”
of the professional with the “hobby” of the citizen soldier, said:—
“ You may perhaps quote Cromwell, Julius Caesar, and dozens of
men from the American war. Remember that it was war and their
country’s peril which brought out the ability and power of command
of men who would otherwise have remained just commonplace
citizens. On the other hand, we have Abraham Lincoln’s confession
of failure after four years of meddling. That emergency will always
bring men to light from all ranks of society will not be denied, but
there are long deserts of peace to be traversed, with but few oases of
war, and these not each and every one on the same track. It is
while in the desert that his rank and state are, to a certain extent,
a solace to the professional soldier, always reminding him that he
may one day reach an oasis where success is to be found. In the
oasis of war and a country’s peril there is ever room and to spare
for all.”
Another serious objection to the armament system is that during
critical negotiations the knowledge of the possibilities is apt to militate
against clearness of thought and coolness of action; armies and navies may
be mobilised in perfect good faith, merely as a precautionary measure;
but each step of that kind introduces more electricity into the diplomatic
atmosphere, and renders a collision more likely. Again, the military mind
is familiar with the thought of war; the tendency of familiarity has passed
into a proverb, and when, as so often happens, great soldiers are the
idols of a nation, their knowledge of military affairs is liable to be confused
with political wisdom, which they may or may not possess. That is not
to say that great soldiers always desire war, but their influence is likely
to be thrown into the scales in its favour.
It is not proposed here to refer at length to the question of conscrip-
tion, except in so far as it will affect the situation after the war; the
evils of the system, both from the personal and national points of view,
are well known, and often frankly admitted, even by those who consider
conscription necessary.
The abolition of conscription would seem to follow naturally upon
any extensive reduction of armaments. In such circumstances, the large
numbers of men hitherto drafted into the forces of the various nations
would no longer be needed; the difficulty would quite possibly He in the
other direction —that is, in providing for numbers of professional military
and naval men.
S. Edited at Headquarters, Melbourne, by the General Staff (Training Brandi);
pp. S4l-2.


The growth of anti-militarist political parties, and the almost universal
talk of ending war at the conclusion of the present struggle, bear witness
to the progress of mankind toward the peace ideal.
Conscription has automatically kept up the personnel of armies, and
prevented this tendency in the other direction from having anything like
its full effect.
The continuous expenditure of enormous sums of money brings into
existence powerful financial interests. Armament expenditure has been
no exception to the rule; on the contrary, it goes to prove it up to the
hilt, for the armament interest is not only influential, but in many of its
manifestations very undesirable.
Theoretically, it would seem that, if governments unable to produce
all the munitions of war they require give orders to private concerns,
the latter would look upon such orders from the point of view of their own
country, and refrain from supplying potential “ enemies ” with the means
of warfare. It has not proved so in practice. Armament factories have
furnished all comers with their deadly wares, and the sight of nations
using weapons made by “ enemy ” manufacturers would excite ironic
laughter were the subject one for mirth. A few instances of the inter-
nationalism of this trade may be cited.
In 1893 the Harvey Steel Co., of New Jersey, formed a company in
Great Britain; in 1894 the Harvey Continental Steel Co. was formed,
acquiring in 1896 the sole right to use Krupp armour patents, except in
Germany for the German Government. In 1901 the Harvey United Steel
Co. Ltd. took over the undertakings and assets (including steel and armour
plate patents of the British and Continental Companies), obtaining also
a controlling interest in the American and French Harvey Companies.
On 27th May, 1902, a list of the directors was filed at Somerset House; it
reads as follows; the nationality has been added in parenthesis for informa-
tion: —
Names. Armament Firms they Represent.
BETTINI, RAFFAELE Director-General, Terni Steel Works (Italjan).
CLARK, JOHN ALFRED Director, Charles Cammell & Co. Ltd. (British).
ELLIS, ’ CHARLES EDWARD .. .. Managing Director, John Brown & Co. Ltd.
(British).
FALKNER, JOHN MEADE Director, Sir W. J. Armstrong, Whitworth & Co.
Ltd. (British).
FOX, EDWIN MARSHALL Gentleman (British).
GATHMANN, AUGUSTE Director, Dillingen Steel Co. (German).
GENY, MAURICE Director, Schneider & Co. (French).
HUGHES, JOHN WILLIAM Metal Merchant (British). . ,
HUNSIKER, MILLARD Representative in England of the Carnegie Steel
Company (American).
KLUPFEL, LUDWIG Director of the firm of Fried. Krupp (German).
LEVY, LEON Director of the Chatillon Steel Co. (French).
MONTGOLFIER, JOSEPH DE .. .. Director of the St. Chamond Steel Co. (French).
RICHARDS, EDWARD WINDSOR .. Gentleman, and late President of the Iron and
Steel Institute (British).
VICKERS, ALBERT Managing Director of Vickers, Sons, & Maxim
Ltd. (British).
Prior to the war, British, French and German concerns were co-
operating in the construction of ships and guns for Russia, the agreement
being that, so far as possible, Russian labour and material were to be
employed.
Vickers Limited have a large interest in Henry Whitehead & Co.
Ltd,, of Fiume, Hungary; the Austrian submarine U 5, which sank the
French cruiser “ Leon Gambetta,” with a loss of 600 men, was built in
1909-10 at its works. 6 The subsequent distribution of profits on munitions
6. “ Naval Pocket Book,” p. 22.


made and used during the war suggests interesting, not to say revolting,
possibilities.
Sir W. J. Armstrong, Whitworth & Co. Ltd., of Newcastle-on-Tyne,
have two subsidiary companies in Italy, at Pozzuoli and Genoa. Italy
finally decided to enter the war as an ally of the Triple Entente, but she
was for years a member of the Triple Alliance, and, in the event of a war
between the two great European combinations, there was at least a
strong possibility of the factories established by this British Concern being
used against its own country.
A further instance will be of especial interest to Australians. “ The
Times ” of 3rd December, 1913, contained the following information,
received from Constantinople:—
“ A contract was signed to-day with the Armstrong-Vickers
group for the reorganisation of the Turkish naval dockyards. The
Government hands over to the Armstrong-Vickers group the arsenal
and docks on the Golden Horn, with all the existing machinery and
buildings. It likewise provides for a site for a naval base at Ismid.
The English group finds the capital for the exploitation of the works
and supplies the technical knowledge and control essential to the
success of the undertaking.”
Private information, received from an Englishman who had visited
Constantinople, shows that no actual work had been undertaken follow-
ing this agreement, preparations not being completed. It is good to know
this, but, had the war come later, munitions manufactured under the direc-
tion of these British companies would almost certainly have been used
against Australians at Gallipoli.
Processes used in connection with offensive and defensive war prepara-
tions have been supposed by the public to be secrets of the first importance,
preserved most scrupulously. This undoubtedly applies in some cases—e.g.,
the huge German howitzers—but, in view of the foregoing facts, it is evident
that, in very many instances, the “ secrecy ” is a myth. All this is
objectionable enough, but equally objectionable methods have been used
in the conduct of the armament trade. In the September, 1913, issue of
“ Arms and Explosives,” a monthly in close touch with the industry,
appeared a note under the title “ The Krupp Revelations.” Referring to
the keen desire of Government contractors to obtain “ the services of
prominent officers who have been associated ” with the work in which
the contractor is interested, it states: —
“ The retired officer who keeps in touch with his old comrades
is able to lessen some of these inconveniences, either by gaining early
information of coming events or by securing the ear of one who will
not accord like favours to a civilian. Kissing undoubtedly goes by
favour, and some of the things that happen might be characterised
as corruption. Yet the result is good by all fair tests. The organisa-
tion of facilities for supply is maintained through times of peace on
an efficient and economical basis. Manufacturers do not make huge
profits, but they are enabled to survive from year to year, so as to
be at hand in the event of national emergency.”
Armstrong-Whitworth appointed as directors Sir Geo. Murray, who
from 1903-1911 was Secretary to the Treasury, and Sir C. L. Ottley,
ex-Secretaiy of the Committee of Imperial Defence; the importance of
these positions, and the value of the knowledge possessed by the officials in
question is apparent. The same tendency to attach ex-Government officials
to the armament companies is seen in France and Germany, and probably
exists in other countries.
There is undisputable evidence in support of the contention that war
scares have been engineered by armament concerns when orders have been


slack, 7 and they have certainly contributed in some measure towards the
situation existing in Europe to-day. An uneasy shareholder, at Armstrong-
Whitworth’s meeting on 18th April, 1914, asked a question concerning?
rumours of this nature, and was informed that “ it was really against their ”
(the armament firms’) “ interests, and they did not do such things. If
the shareholders wanted to be reassured they should look upon the firm
as equipping the police of the world. The ultimate appeal for all order was
force, and a great armament firm furnished the means for the suppression
of disorder.”
In the passage from “ Arms and Explosives ” quoted reference is made
to the comparatively small profits of the industry. The Australian daily
press of Ist July, 1915, published a brief cabled report of two shareholders’
meetings. Kynoch’s Limited had declared a dividend of 20 per cent., while
Jno. Brown & Co, Ltd., whose share and debenture capital last* year was
£3,573,000, declared a dividend of 12£ per cent. Both chairmen objected
to the agitation for the limitation of the profits on armaments, the former
stating that “ a limitation of profits would result in a reduction, and not an
increase, in the output.” The declaration is interesting, in view of the
charges levelled at the workmen employed in the industry.
Let it be understood that this is aimed neither at individuals nor
companies, but at the system. A system that tempts members of Parlia-
ment and leaders in many departments of life in each country to foster
the trade in arms because of their investments is bad. The great majority
of armament shareholders have presumably believed that their companies
were “ equipping police,” while directors and others of the inner circle
have silenced any doubts with the thought that they could not help it if
a huge war did break out, and have “ lived in the present.” The Gordian
knot can be cut by nationalising the manufacture of armaments, so long
as they are considered necessary, and by prohibiting their export.
VI. THE GERM OF WORLD FEDERATION.
The foreign policy of Great Britain shall not be aimed at creating alliances
for the purpose of maintaining the “ Balance of Power,” but shall be
directed to the establishment of a concert of Europe, and the setting
up of an international council, whose deliberations and decisions shall
be public. (From Platform of Australian Peace Alliance.)
The theory of the “ Balance of Power ” is the prevention of any
nation from obtaining an undue preponderance of power in European affairs.
In practice, it has only too often meant a diplomatic or military struggle
for such preponderance between rival groups of governments.
Europe to-day resembles two parties of boys, who, each endeavouring
to weigh down the end of a plank placed across a fulcrum, have broken
the plank, involving all in the pnsuing fall.
Behind the diplomatist has been the menace of the soldier and the
battleship in ever-increasing numbers, armed with weapons of ever-increas-
ing deadliness, at ever-increasing cost. The armament race between the two
7. Referring to the 1909 “ German Navy Scare,” engineered by Mr. Mulliner, of the
Coventry Ordnance Co., Mr. Alan Burgoyne, M.P., editor of the “ Navy League Annual,"
spoke of it as “ one of the most portentous pieces of humbug ever practised on the
electorate.”


Austro-Hungary .. ..
Germany
Military.
, .. £234,668,407
448,035,543
Naval.
£46,803,394
• 185,205,164
£682,703,950
£232,008,558
France
Russia
, .. £347,348,259
, .. 495,144,622
£161,731,387
144,246,513
£842,492.881
£305,977,9008
pairs of great European Powers first involved in the war culminated in the
decade 1905-14 in the following figures of military and naval expenditure:—
Then came the smash. The catastrophe was perilously near at the
time of the Moroccan quarrel; the Balkan wars followed, and Europe
breathed again, when it seemed that that difficulty also was past. But,
unless the Foreign Offices altered their policies, the crash was bound
to come. If it had not been Morocco or the Balkans, some other “ sphere
of influence” or “concession” would have brought the great Powers into
collision—some paltry affair that could have been settled without bloodshed
for one per cent, of the cost of the war. But you cannot always bluff
without having to “ show down,” and there comes a stage in war prepara-
tions when a war to clear the international atmosphere may seem the
lesser evil.
It is not proposed here to attempt an examination into the causes of
the war, but rather to suggest means for organising Europe on a basis
of goodwill and co-operation. There are many secrets hidden in the
archives of the Foreign Offices, which will some day throw light on what
is now obscure; but there is also much that will be forever lost, because
it was left unrecorded, and left unrecorded with a purpose.
The kaleidoscopic movements of international politics are difficult to
comprehend in all their significance. Alsace-Lorraine, Constantinople,
and the capture of private property at sea have been called “ the three
nightmares of Europe.” Apart from these, other financial and territorial
considerations have influenced the actions of the Foreign Offices in recent
years, but the “ Balance of Power ” has been the dominant factor. One
hundred years ago France was the common enemy, Prussia fighting with
Britain against her, while to the Moscow campaign Napoleon’s downfall
was partly due. Fifty years after England and France were leagued
against Russia in a war later generally considered to be a mistake. To-day
Russia, France and England are at grips with the German Empire, the
political descendant of Britain’s ally of a century ago. The relationships
of England, France and Russia are especially curious. First, we see
England on the side of Russia against France; later, England and France
fight together against Russia. In February, 1887, certain English Conserva-
tive newspapers agreed that Germany might reasonably attack France by
way of Belgium; later again, at the time of the Fashoda incident, war
between England and France was by no means improbable; to-day,
England, France and Russia fight together as allies!
Again, Germany. The feeling in certain quarters in England in 1887
has been referred to. 'Jn 11th November, 1899, the “Daily Mail” published
a photo of the Kaiser, with the quotation; “A friend in need is a friend
indeed.” And in a recent speech General Botha stated that, at the time
of the Boer War, other nations were prepared to assist the Boers if
Germany helped; but the Kaiser refused to intervene. Late in 1899 the
late Joseph Chamberlain spoke of an alliance with Germany—“our natural
8. " Peace Year Book,” England. The figures are taken from official sources.


allies” —and told France she must “mend her manners or take the con-
sequences.” 9 On 28th July, 1908, in the course of a speech, Mr. Lloyd
George said:
“ Here is Germany, in the middle of Europe, with France and
Russia on either side, and with a combination of their armies greater
than hers. Suppose we had here a possible combination wTiich would
lay us open to invasion—suppose Germany and France, or Germany
and Russia, or Germany and Austria, had fleets which, in combina-
tion, would be stronger than ours—would not we be frightened?
Would we not arm? Of course we would.”
Shortly before the war (3rd June, 1914) the “Times” military cor-
respondent, in an article—“ Europe Under Arms ” —gave details in support
of his opinion that Germany had good cause to fear Russian military pre-
parations. He referred to Russia’s increase of 150,000 peace-effectives,
“ making a total peace strength of about 1,700,000, or approximately double
that of Germany. . . . There are signs that Russia has done with defen-
sive strategy. . . . The increased number of guns in the Russian Army
Corps, the growing efficiency of the army, and the improvements made or
planned in strategic railways are, again, matters which cannot be left out
of account. These things are well calculated to make the Germans anxious.”
Victoria “ the beloved ” was of German descent, while Albert “ the good ”
was a German prince. Their grandson sits on the British throne to-day.
It is all very puzzling to the “man in the street.” To suppose that
the characteristics of the people alter so fundamentally in a decade or two,
that a nation formerly friendly can become a deadly enemy is absurd.
What, then, is the explanation of these rapid changes? Surely the “ Times ”
was right; the “masses” have too long allowed men out of touch and out
of sympathy with them to “ trifle with poignant realities.” During the
South African war a drawing appeared in one of the illustrated papers;
it represented a British soldier, who before his death had placed a chess
pawn on the water bottle beside him! The grim irony of that action was
prophetic of a greater tragedy to be.
On 30th July, i 914, Sir Edward Grey wrote: —
“ If the peace of Europe can be preserved, and the present crisis
safely passed, my own endeavour will be to promote some arrange-
ment to which Germany could be a party, by which she could be
assured that no aggressive or hostile policy would be pursued against
her or her allies by France, Russia and ourselves, jointly or separately.
I have desired this and worked for it, as far as I could, through
the last Balkan crisis, and Germany, having a corresponding object,
our relations sensibly improved. The idea has hitherto been too
Utopian to form the subject of definite proposals; but, if this present
crisis, so much more acute than any that Europe has gone through
for generations, be safely passed, I am hopeful that the relief and
reaction which will follow may make possible some more definite
rapprochement between the Powers than has possible hitherto.”
It was too late then; but, with the “relief and reaction which will
follow ” the war, surely there will mingle a determination to make such
another horror forever impossible.
9. Quoted by Norman Angell in “ The Great Illusion,” p, 258.


VII. A RECENT FACTOR.
The organisation of the trades unions and workers’ associations, with a
definite view of ending war. (From Platform of Australian Peace
Alliance.)
The extensive introduction of machinery in manufacture and the
establishment of large factories in place of home industries during the
nineteenth century brought about the enormous growth of the modern
city. The consequent aggregation of large bodies of working men, together
with the spread of education, produced a new phase of the age-long
struggle for the betterment of the conditions of the non-privileged classes.
The movement has taken many forms, has been known by many names,
and has advocated many remedies for the diseases of the body politic; but
it has been in the main actuated by the great ideal of the brotherhood of
mankind —a desire for equal opportunity for the expression of life.
Broadly speaking, it has'consistently been against war and preparation
for war. The working man has learned, through bitter experience, that,
while the cost of war and war’s aftermath falls heavily on the community
as a whole, it falls heaviest upon him and his; he is nearest to the poverty
line in time of peace, and, when the pinch comes, feels it first.
The organised forces of Labour and Socialism have prevented more
than one European war, and it was the hope of millions, including very
many outside the movement itself, that they would on all occasions be
effective in the same way. Representatives from various countries got
into touch with each other when hostilities threatened in July of last year,
but the war drama developed too rapidly, and they had not time even for
a serious attempt to prevent the catastrophe.
Three principal methods of action against war have been suggested,
and, to. a greater or lesser extent, adopted, after being considered by
national and international congresses. These are the general strike to
prevent war, refusal to bear arms, and political action against war and
war preparation.
The whole question is certain to come prominently before all Labour
and Socialist, in common with other, organisations after the war, and it
is quite possible that a huge international society of men, pledged to
refuse military training or service at all costs, will arise. Such a society,
if its members were sufficiently numerous, could do much. Political action
against war preparation will be strengthened by the horrors now being
experienced and the palpable failure of such preparation to preserve peace.
The threat of a general strike in countries likely to be involved in
war may be, and has been, effective at times, but the idea does not go to
the root of the matter. Preparation for war must be prevented; for, if a
government be determined on war, it can order mobilisation as “ a pre-
caution,” and once that step has been taken men are under military control.
But, possibly, given the further development of the idea and international
organisation prepared for instant action, the situation might be materially
altered. The knowledge that such organisation existed would tend to
militate against war preparation.
The situation after the war will be analogous in some ways to that
after the Napoleonic wars. They were succeeded by a period of revolution,
followed by reaction, and another period of revolution. If the settlement
is unsatisfactory, similar results may follow, but the hope of the future
lies in the political education of the people. Democratic forces generally
are much stronger and better organised than they were a century ago,
and action is likely to be on more peaceful lines and more effective than
the efforts then made. The social conscience, too, is aroused to a greater
extent, as evidenced by the legislation of recent years, and there is a wide


spread feeling that war must be abolished. The devotees of Mars will
find arrayed against them an assemblage of opponents of many races,
creeds and political opinions, of all ages and of both sexes. But the bulk
of the populations consists of working men and women, and, because of
the preponderance of their numbers, it is supremely important that they
should determine in advance, tentatively at any rate, what attitude they
will adopt.
VIII. WHAT AUSTRALIANS CAN DO.
It may seem that little can be accomplished’ at the present time by
discussing peace proposals in a community far from the centres of the
world’s life, and constituting but a small part of the British race. No
one, however, knows when the war will end, and the political privileges
we enjoy carry with them the responsibility of considering issues of such
cardinal importance. The factors of distance and smallness of numbers
should not be allowed to weigh unduly, for the war is literally a world war,
and the peace terms will affect all.
On 21st July, 1915, Mr. A. D, Steel-Maitland stated, on behalf of the
British Government, that it was intended to take the responsible ministers
of the Colonies into the confidence of the Government with regard to
matters arising during the war and to the after settlement. When the
latter is under consideration, the Australian Government will presumably
give Parliament and the people an oportunity to pronounce upon a matter
that concerns the future welfare of the nation so vitally. No people should
be satisfied to take the risk of allowing diplomatists to negotiate a so-called
“ peace settlement ” that will actually settle very little, leaving legitimate
aspirations unsatisfied, and memories of national humiliation to be avenged.
The difficulties are very great, and the political situation seems to become
more complex daily; but that is the more reason for considering what
principles should underlie the settlement, and, so far as Australians are
concerned, bringing whatever influence they possess to bear in what
they believe to be the right direction. What will be good for Europe
will be good for us and for the whole world.
Resolutions in the following terms have been carried at public meetings
«rganised by the Australian Peace Alliance:—
“ That, in view of the likelihood of Australia being consulted
regarding the terms of settlement of the war, this meeting urges the
Commonwealth Government to take the people into its confidence as
to the measures it favours for permanently establishing the peace
of the world; and this meeting calls upon the Federal Parliament to
make representations to the Imperial Government urging it to establish
real parliamentary control over foreign policy, and to prevent its
being again shaped in secret and forced upon the people as an
accomplished fact.”
“ That this meeting of citizens protests against the destruction
of human life as a means of settling international disputes, and, in
the name of international brotherhood, urges the International Peace
Bureau to meet as early as possible, and calls upon the men and
women of all nations to demand an early cessation of hostilities, and
the submission of the claims of each nation involved in this brutalis-
ing war to arbitration.”
Present effort is necessarily mainly confined to the spread of informa-
tion and to preparing in various ways for the future. This can be done by—
(1) Discussing in political and other organisations the problems
involved, and passing resolutions.


(2) Forwarding such resolutions to the press, ministers and members
of Parliament generally.
(3) Keeping in touch with organisations that are working for the
same objects in other countries.
(4) Publishing and distributing literature.
(5) If unattached, joining societies working for the abolition of the
war system.
(6) Using influence against national hatreds, and working for the
growth of international goodwill.
A strong sense of revulsion against war’s horrors and pity for its
victims exists, strengthened in many cases by immediate personal loss.
This feeling should not be allowed to dissipate itself in vain expressions
of horror or of helplessness at the vastness of the catastrophe; neither
should the fine work being done for the alleviation of suffering be allowed
to absorb all the available effort. Prevention is always better than cure,
and we can pay the future the great debt that we owe to the past. We
are studying the causes of war to-day. We must dare to believe that some
better way can be found, and, in a spirit of sane optimism, diligently seek
for that way. If our forefathers had folded their hands in despair, and
said: “ Slavery always has been, and always will be,’ “ Witch burning always
has been, and always will be,” “ Cannibalism—religious wars—wars between
cities —judicial torture —the burning of men, women and children as
* heretics ’—always have been and always will be,” where should we be
to-day?
The blood-soaked battlefields of Europe and daring acts upon and
under the high seas have proved that courage is one of the commonest, as
well as one of the greatest, attributes of mankind Shall those who hate
war and desire its abolition be daunted by difficulties? Chattel slavery had
its international difficulties, too, in the competition of slave-produced
articles with those produced by free labour, but Europe abolished slavery.
The war system stands between the human race and its goal, and must
be swept away. This is not rhetoric, but cold fact. War is a losing proposi-
tion from whatever point of view it be examined, and mankind cannot
afford to tolerate it any longer.
War’s cost cannot be measured merely in terms of millions of pounds,
nor even in the numbers of men maimed and slaughtered. Engineers,
scientists, physicians, artists, musicians, poets—killed in their prime or
before it—their discoveries, that might have saved and benefitted untold
human lives; art, music, literature, that might have lifted untold thousands
to higher things, lost for ever, and lost for ever the unborn children of
millions of the young and strong. And what of the millions of broken
lives? What shall it profit a woman that her nation has gained glory,
territory, prestige, wealth, if the husband for whom she would have died,
or the sons she bore in bitter anguish, come not back? The cables have
told us of Austrian women driven by their sorrow to suicide; they were
“enemies,” but with what feelings did we read of their deaths?
General Sherman knew war at first hand, and “ confessed without
shame” that he was “tired and sick of war.”
“ Its glory is all moonshine. Even success, the most brilliant,
is over dead and mangled bodies, the anguish and lamentations of
distant families, appealing to me for missing sons, husbands and
fathers. It is only those who have not heard a shot, nor the shrieks
and groans of the wounded, friend or foe, who cry aloud for more
blood, more vengeance, more desolation.”
Beyond all this, war is, according to Clausewitz, who is recognised as
the greatest modern writer on the subject, “ the province of uncertainty.


Three-fourths of those things upon which action in war must be calculated
are hidden more or less in the clouds of great uncertainty.” Elsewhere
he speaks of two opposing generals as resembling men fighting in a dark
room, and groping about for each other. War, then, is opposed, not only
to justice and humanity, but even to commonsense, by reason of its waste
and its uncertainty.
“We must smash Prussian militarism.” Carlyle hoped that the Franco-
Prussian war would “ crush out militarism in France.” Apart from other
evidence, the Dreyfus affair proves that it was far from crushed. It has
been already pointed out that militarism is a spirit, and cannot be broken
by outward force; an assurance to the German people that the Allies have
no to destroy their nation, coupled with tentative proposals of
peace, might conceivably go far to weaken the backing the Prussian party
is receiving and to shorten the war. Parenthetically, it may be observed
that, short of a general massacre, it is impossible to destroy a people with
highly developed national organisation and ideals.
Such terms of peace should include the evacuation of Belgium, together
with private and national indemnification, the amount to be fixed by an
impartial tribunal. In view of the German Chancellor’s speech at an
early stage of the war, it is probable that this would be agreed to. Terri-
tories such as Alsace-Lorraine and Poland should be placed under govern-
ments of the people’s own choosing; and, generally speaking, the principle
of remedying grievances and allowing scope for the development of all
should be followed. For example, inland peoples should be allowed access
to good ports on fair terms. As for indemnifies, the shortening of the war,
and the consequent saving of expenditure would be equivalent to a more
or less heavy indemnity, according to the amount saved.
Utopian? Unpractical? According to the latest British budget figures,
if the war goes on for two years —that is, until next August, the annual
burden for interest on the National Debt, with sinking fund and pensions,
will be £180,000,000, equal to the total revenue for 1912! That is in the
richest country in the world, and it does not need detailed figures to get
a general idea of the commercial and financial situation .in other countries.
Even the United States, the South American republics, and far away China
have felt the pinch severely.
Mr, H. Y. Braddon, ex-President of the Associated Chambers of
Commerce of Australia, and an expert on financial and commercial matters,
recently gave a lecture in Melbourne on the probable commercial situation
after the war. Starting with the belief that a policy of prohibitive tariffs
against Germany and Austria was desirable, and could be effectually carried
out by the Allies after the war, he was “ driven to the conclusion that it
was not practicable.” The Allies might be willing to make great sacrifices
in finding new markets for their goods, and refuse altogether to trade
with the Teutonic nations, but even then Germany would concentrate and
focus on other markets where the boycotting nations have great interests.
“ Extremely serious things” would be the probable result. Roundabout
ways of trading would also be found, and, in his opinion, it was “ absolutely
ridiculous ” to expect such a doctrine to prove successful.
If war, then, prosecuted at such awful cost, can achieve so little, is
it worth while to let the conflagration burn itself out for want of further
fuel? Is it worth while to place a crushing burden upon production in
the immediate and more distant future? Do not the hard facts of finance
and business, as well as the higher motives of goodwill and human' kindli-
ness, point to co-operation as the keynote of the future? If this conclusion
is a true one, surely it is better to make an effort to stop the struggle.
Any desire for revenge should be subordinated to the prevention of future
war and to the development of the next great phase in the evolution of
government. It may well be that imperialism has had its day, and is to
give way before long to some form of European federation.


Tennyson wrote of the Federation of the World, but that seems far
away. Nevertheless, the future peace of the world will depend, not only
on the attitude of the great European Powers towards each other, but
towards the Asiatic peoples. The sleeping Chinese giant has awakened,
and does not relish the pinpricks of exacted “ concessions ” and “ spheres
of influence;” if Europe will not leave him in peace, he may take up the
sword in self-defence. 'The recent action of the Japanese in China intro-
duces new elements, and, whatever the exact relations betwen the two
peoples, a. demand of “ Hands off ”to Europe is likely. If the Chinese ever
lose their present pacific bias, and become thoroughly militarised, it will
be largely due to European empire builders and concessionaires. The
possibilities are too often overlooked in practical affairs and in discussions
on the international situation. And they are possibilities that intimately
concern Australia, and provide another and a very strong reason for
attempting to end the military system, with all its ramifications.
At the end of April, 1915, an International Congress of Women met at
The Hague “ to protest against war, and to suggest steps which may lead
to warfare becoming an impossibility,” as Dr. Aletta Jacobs, president of
the Dutch Committee, which called the Congress, expressed it. The
president was Jane Addams, and at the opening session there was an
attendance of fifteen hundred. Many important resolutions were carried,
and the Congress, contrary to the false reports cabled to Australia, viz.,
that it broke up in disorder, was a great success.
The Congress appointed deputations to lay its resolutions before the
rulers of the nations of Europe and before the President of the United
States. Women belonging to belligerent nations visited neutral rulers,
while Jane Addams and Dr. Jacobs were appointed to interview those of
the belligerent countries.
Miss Addams was received by Mr. Asquith, and, in company with
Dr. Jacobs and Signora Genoni, by Sir Edward Grey. The two first-named
afterwards visited Berlin, Vienna, Buda-Pesth, Berne, Rome, Paris and
Havre. In each capital they were granted interviews with the Prime
Minister and the Secretary for Foreign Affairs, and in Rome the Pope and
Cardinal Gasparri also received them.
The envoys met with an unlooked-for sympathy, one Minister express-
ing surprise that women had not taken such steps before. But, in one
instance, Miss Addams’ message was received in silence, whereupon she
remarked that it would perhaps seem foolish for two women to come on
such an errand at such a time. “Foolish!” was the sudden and impassioned
reply of the Minister. “It is the sanest thing I have had said to me for
the last ten months. Every day men come to me through that door with
demands—more men, more money, more guns, more ammunition. Now
at last two women come to me to talk of Peace.”
November, 1915.


FIVE SOULS.
First Soul.
I was a peasant of the Polish plain;
I left my plough because the message ran: —
Russia, in danger, needed every man
To save her from the Teuton; and was slain.
I gave my life for freedom —This I know:
For those who bade me fight had told me so.
Second Soul.
I was a Tyrolese, a mountaineer;
I gladly left my mountain home to fight
Against the brutal, treacherous Muscovite;
And died in Poland on a Cossack spear.
I gave my life for freedom —This I know:
For those who bade me fight had told me so.
Third Soul.
I worked in Lyons at my weaver’s loom,
When suddenly the Prussian despot hurled
His felon blow at France and at the world;
Then I went forth to Belgium and my doom.
I gave my life for freedom —This I know:
For those who bade me fight had told me so.
Fourth Soul.
I owned a vineyard by the wooded Main,
Until the Fatherland, begirt by foes
Lusting her downfall, called me, and I rose
Swift to the call—and died in fair Lorraine.
I gave my life for freedom —This I know:
For those who bade me fight had told me so.
Fifth Soul.
I worked in a great shipyard by the Clyde,
There came a sudden word of wars declared.
Of Belgium, peaceful, helpless, unprepared.
Asking our aid: I joined the ranks, and died.
I gave my life for freedom —This I know:
For those who bade me fight had told me so.
W. N. EWER.


Please fill in this form and frost to the address below.
The Australian Peace Alliance
(Victorian Council).
Hon. Secretary: S. C. WALKER,
“Currajong," Dandenong Road, East Caulfield, Melbourne.
Please enrol me as a member of the
Australian Peace Alliance, and accept a
* Subscription of £ : : towards
the propagation of its policy.
Name
• (Mr., Mrs. or Miss)
Address ._
•Minimum Subscription, 2/- per year. Amount may be sent in stamps, postal note or cheque.
DONATIONS to THE WORK will be
acceptable.




STATE COUNCILS
OF THE
Australian Peace Alliance
HAVE BEEN FORMED IN
VICTORIA (Head Office: Melbourne).
SOUTH AUSTRALIA (Head Office: Adelaide).
WEST AUSTRALIA (Head Office: Perth).
NEW SOUTH WALES (Head Office: Sydney).
QUEENSLAND (Head Office: Brisbane).
