

AUSTRALIA
EXCHANGE CONTROL


NOTES ON OPERATION OF BINDING MECHANISM AMD METHOD OF
ADVISING AND RECORDING AMENDMENTS
(1) A slight upward pressure applied with the thumb and second
finger to the ends of the Bow-Spring will enable the user to
remove the clamping bar for the purpose of inserting or re-
moving sheets.
(2) To relock the sheets place the holes in the clamping har
over the filing posts and press firmly downwards.
(3) Each memorandum in this Manual has been given an alphabetical
reference, for example, "E.C. Memorandum BA".
(4) Pages in the Manual have been noted with the date of issue.
Where a memorandum contains more than one page, each page of
that memorandum has been numbered.
(5) When amendments become necessary, completed pages will be
provided, numbered as above, and bearing the date from which
they are to become operative.
(6) On receipt of these new or replacement pages, the Record of
Amendments should be appropriately noted and the pages, filed
in their correct sequence, any superseded sheets being destroyed.
(7) The Exchange Control will inform holders of the Manual at the
time of issue of an amendment, the date of the preceding
amendment and the pages involved.
1.12.58


AUSTRALIA
EXCHANGE CONTROL
This Manual is issued hy the Reserve Bank of Australia for use
hy banks and their officers and is not an official publication
of the Commonwealth Government.
Sydney, N.S.W.
I4th January, 1960.


1 Date of
Memorandum
Date of
Memorandum 1
Amendment
Number
Amendment
Number
RECORD OF AMENDMENTS


I Date of
| Amendment
Memorandum
Number
Date of
Amendment
Memorandum
Number


CONTENTS
Subject E.C. MEMORANDUM
SECTION 1 - GENERAL
Introduction AA
Appendix I - Regulations
Appendix II - Exemptions and Gazettal Notices
Definitions AG
Rates of Exchange BA
Purchases and Sales by Banks of Currencies of
Countries outside the Sterling Area as Cover
for Authorised Transactions BD
SECTION 2 - FORWARD EXCHANGE
Application Forms, Scope of Facilities, Rates BP
Special Forward Exchange Facilities in respect of
Wool Transactions BQ
Banks 1 Authority to approve Forward Exchange
Applications BR
Extensions, Deliveries, Advices, etc. relative to
Forward Exchange Contracts BS
SECTION 3 - MONETARY CONTROL
(INCLUDING NON-RESIDENT CONTROL)
Applications for Foreign Currency CA
General Authority for Banks to approve Applications
for Foreign Currency CD
Methods of effecting Approved Payments CF
Payment for Imports into Australia including the
External Territories of the Commonwealth CJ
Current Payments CP
Life Assurance CQ
Distributions from Deceased Estates CR
Sustenance Payments CS
Charitable and Religious Payments CT
Sundry Personal Payments CV
Travelling Expenses and Enigration CX
Visiting Tourists CY
Payment in Australian Currency for Fares,
Accommodation and Incidentals for Travel Abroad DA
Importation and Exportation of Currency, Securities,
Gold and certain other Articles of Value by
Travellers DC
Australian Notes and Coin EA
Now Zealand Notoo and Coia
Despatch from Australia of Currency (including
Cheques payable in Australia) FB
Overdrafts and Revolving Credits available Overseas GA
Negotiation Overseas of Bills on Australia HA
1.8.63.


Subject E.C. MEMORANDUM
Futures Operations JA
Accounts of Non-Residents of the Sterling Area KA
Accounts of Residents of Hong Kong KD
Overseas Banks 1 Accounts in Australia LA
SECTION 4 - CONTROL OF PROCEEDS OF EXPORTS
Export Licences MA
Payment for Exports MN
Supervision by Banks - General NA
Invoicing of Exports ND
Release of Shipping Documents without Payment
in Full NG
Exports by Aircraft and Post NM
Exceptions from Normal Licensing Procedure OA
Exports from the Territory of Papua and New Guinea PA
SECTION 5 - SECURITIES CONTROL
Definitions RB
Securities - General SD
Foreign Securities SM
INDEX
1.8.63.


SECTION 1 - GENERAL


INTRODUCTION
1. Section 39 of the Banking Act 1959 provides that, where the
Governor-General is satisfied that it is expedient so to do, for
the protection of the currency or of the public credit of the
Commonwealth, or in order to conserve, in the national interest, the
foreign exchange resources of the Commonwealth, he may make
regulations, not inconsistent with the Act, making provision for and
in relation to the control of foreign exchange.
2. By instrument under Section 29 of the Banking (Transitional
Provisions) Act 1959, published in the Gazette on 14th January,l96o,
the Governor-General declared that notwithstanding the repeal of
the Banking Act 1945-1953 effected by Section 4 of the Banking Act
1959, the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations in force under the
Banking Act 1945-1953 shall continue in force as if they were made
under the Banking Act 1959.
3. The Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations continue in force
accordingly and confer certain authority in relation to Exchange
Control in Australia on the Reserve Bank of Australia.
4. The Reserve Bank of Australia has appointed certain hanks in
Australia as agents in respect of all or some of the provisions of
the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations. Agents of the Reserve
Bank of Australia are required to carry out their duties as agents
in accordance with, and shall comply with, such instructions,
directions and requirements as are issued or made by the Bank.
5. The following Memoranda include instructions, directions
and requirements issued and made by the Bank pursuant to its powers
under the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations,
6. Copies of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations and of
relevant Exemptions and Notices published in the Commonwealth
Gazette are appended.
14. 1.60


APPENDIX I
BANKING (FOREIGN EXCHANGE)
REGULATIONS
PART I. - PRELIMINARY
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Banking (Foreign Exchange)
Regulations.
2. Repealed 14th January, 1960.
3. These Regulations are divided into Parts, as follows:-
Part I, - Preliminary. (Regulations 1-4)
Part 11. - Monetary Control. (Regulations 5 - 12)
Part 111. - Control of Proceeds of Exports, (Regulations 14 - 32)
Part IV. - Securities. (Regulations 33 - 35)
Part V. - Miscellaneous. (Regulations 36 - 44)
4. In these Regulations, unless the contrary intention appears -
"agent of the Bank", in relation to any provision of these
Regulations, means a person appointed by the Bank to be an
agent of the Bank in respect of that provision;
"foreign securities" includes -
(a) any securities the principal of or interest from which is
repayable or payable in any country outside Australia or
in any money other than Australian money;
(b) any securities the funds necessary for the repayment or
payment of the principal of or interest from which are
provided from any country outside Australia;
(c) any securities which are registered outside Australia;
(d) any securities which are situated outside Australia;
(e) gold situated outside Australia;
(f) any debt or money due or accruing due to a person in
Australia by a person in a country outside the sterling area;
(g) any right to receive payment of any amount of money in any
country not being a country included in the sterling area;and
(h) any right to receive payment of any amount of money, not
being money of a country included in the sterling area,
and also includes any class of foreign securities;
"owner", in relation to any foreign security -
(a) includes a person who owns the foreign security as a
trustee or in any representative capacity; and
14. 1.60


(b) includes, in a case where -
(i) the foreign security is held on any trust; or
(ii) dividends or interest on a foreign security are
paid into any trust fund,
any person entitled -
(iii) to enforce performance of the trust;
(iv) to revoke or vary, with or without the consent of
any other person, the trust or any of the terms
thereof; or
(v) to control the disposition (including investment)
of the trust moneys,
and "owns" and "owned" have corresponding meanings;
"sterling area" means
(a) Australia, Burma, Ceylon, the Republic of Cyprus, Gambia,
Ghana, Iceland, India, the Republic of Ireland, Jamaica,
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Libya,
Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, New Zealand, The Federal Republic
of Nigeria, Pakistan, Sierra Leone, Singapore, the Republic
of South Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania, Trinidad
and Tobago, Uganda, the United Kingdom, Western Samoa and
the Republic of Zambia;
(b) a colony, overseas territory or protectorate of a country
specified in the last preceding paragraph; and
(c) a territory for the international relations of which a
country so specified is responsible,
but does not include Southern Rhodesia;
"the Bank" means the Reserve Bank of Australia,
PART 11. - MONETARY CONTROL
* 5, -(l) Subject to sub-regulation (3) of this regulation, a person
other than the Bank, shall not, except with the authority of the Bank -
(a) buy or borrow any foreign currency from;
(b) sell or lend any foreign currency to; or
(c) exchange any foreign currency with,
a person other than the Bank.
(2) Subject to the next succeeding sub—regulation, a person shall
not, except with the authority of the Bank, be a party to any trans-
action having the effect of a purchase, borrowing, sale, loan or
exchange of foreign currency unless the transaction is entered into
with the Bank,
(3) The Bank may authorize an agent of the Bank -
(a) to enter into any transaction prohibited by sub-regulation
(l) of this regulation, or into any transaction included
in a class of such transactions, and it shall be lawful
for the transaction to be entered into accordingly; and
(b) to be a party to any transaction prohibited by sub-
regulation (2) of this regulation, or to any transaction
included in a class of such transactions, and it shall be
lawful for the agent of the Bank to be a party to the
transaction accordingly.
14.2.66.
* See Appendix II - Exemptions (b) and (c),


(4) A person permitted to buy, borrow, sell, lend or exchange
foreign currency under this regulation shall not enter into any
transaction which provides for the conversion of Australian currency
into foreign currency, or vice versa, at a rate of exchange other
than a rate of exchange fixed or authorised by the Bank and in force
for the time being,
(5) Where any foreign currency is made available to any person
by the Bank or by an agent of the Bank for use for any purpose, or
subject to any conditions, that person shall not use that foreign
currency otherwise ihan for that purpose, or shall not fail to comply
with those conditions, as the case may be,
(6) Nothing in this regulation shall prevent a person from buying
foreign currency by means of a money order issued to him at any post
office, but this sub-regulation shall not affect the operation of
regulation 7 of these Regulations,
6, -(l) A person shall not, except with the authority of the Bank,
take or send out of Australia any Australian currency or foreign
currency, other than foreign currency obtained under the last pre-
ceding regulation,
(2) Nothing in this regulation shall apply to a money order
issued in Australia and payable outside Australia,
7, -(l) A person shall not take or send money out of Australia by
means of a money order issued in Australia and payable out of Australia
otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this regulation,
(2) Money shall not be so taken or sent out of Australia except -
(a) to a person permanently resident out of Australia;
(b) to the Government, or an authority or a fund established
by the Government, of any country; or
(c) to a Court,
(3) Money shall not be so taken or sent out of Australia to a
person permanently resident out of Australia
(a) except for the sole use and benefit of that person or
of another person permanently resident out of Australia; or
(b) in or towards payment for goods which, at the date on
which the application for the money order is made, are
not excepted from the application of the Customs
(import Licensing) Regulations,
(4) The amount of money so taken or sent out of Australia by any
one person to a person or persons in any one week shall not exceed in
the aggregate Twenty dollars,
(5) An application for the issue of each money order payable out
of Australia shall be made in accordance with a form approved by the
Postmaster-General,
(6) For the purposes of this regulation, "person permanently
resident out of Australia" includes -
(a) an association of persons each of whom is permanently
resident out of Australia; and
(b) a body corporate incorporated out of Australia,
but does not include any other association of persons or body corporate.
14.2.66.*
A See Appendix II - Exemption dated 3lst July, 1963,


• 8, -(l) Subject to this regulation, a person shall not, except with
the authority of the Bank -
(a) make any payment to, by the order of, or on behalf of,
any person resident out of Australia or place any sum
to the credit of any such person;
(b) omitted 14. 1.60;
(c) draw, issue, or negotiate any bill of exchange or
promissory note, enter into any contract or agreement
(not being a contract or agreement for the purchase of
goods), allot or transfer any security, or acknowledge
any debt, so that a right (whether actual or contingent) -
(i) to receive a payment, or any valuable consideration;
or
(ii) to the performance of any service,
whether in Australia or elsewhere, is created or trans-
ferred in favour of a person resident out of Australia;or
(d) make an entry in a register in Australia that recognises
or gives'effect to a transfer of any securities to a person
resident out of Australia.
(2) Nothing in paragraph (a) of the last preceding sub-regulation
shall prevent any payment by the Bank, or by an agent of the Bank, to
any person not resident out of Australia./
(3) Subject to this regulation, a person shall not except with the
authority of the Bank -
(a) make any payment to any person 'not resident out of
Australia as consideration for, or in association with -
(i) the receipt by any person of a payment, or the
acquisition by any person of any property, outside
Australia; or
(ii) the creation or transfer, in favour of any person,
of a right (whether actual or contingent) to
receive a payment or acquire property outside
Australia; or
(b) draw, issue, or negotiate any bill of exchange or
promissory note, enter into any contract or agreement (not
being a contract or agreement for the purchase of goods),
allot or transfer any security, or acknowledge any debt,
so that a right (whether actual or contingent) to receive
a payment in Australia is created or transferred in favour
of a person not resident out of Australia as consideration
for, or in association with, any matter referred to in sub-
paragraph (i) or (ii) of the last preceding paragraph.
(3A) A person shall not receive any payment prohibited by
paragraph (a) of sub-regulation (l) of this regulation or by para-
graph (a) of the last preceding sub-regulation.
14. 1.60
♦ See Appendix II - Exemption (e).


(4) For the purposes of this regulation -
(a) a body corporate incorporated out of Australia shall
he deemed to be a person resident out of Australia;
(b) the head office, or a branch, in Australia, of a body
corporate resident out of Australia shall, unless the
Bank otherwise determines, he deemed to he a person
not resident out of Australia;
(c) the making of any book-entry or other statement re-
cording a debit against the head office, or a branch,
in Australia of a body corporate in favour of the head
office, or a branch, of the body corporate out of
Australia shall he deemed to he the acknowledgment of
a debt whereby a right to receive a payment in
Australia is created in favour of a person resident
out of Australia;
(d) "security" also includes a coupon or warrant rep-
resenting dividends or interest, and a life or endow-
ment insurance policy, hut does not include hill of
exchange or promissory note; and
(e) "transfer" includes, in relation to any security,
transfer by way of loan or security,
(5) Nothing in this regulation shall prevent the doing of any
act permitted under regulation 5, 6 or 7 of these Regulations,
A 9, - (l) The sale, loan, transfer, mortgaging or charging of any
security or land by, by the order of, or on behalf of, a person
resident out of Australia to another person resident out of Australia,
or to a person acting on behalf of such a person, shall, unless it is
made with the authority of the Bank, he prohibited.
(2) A person shall not, except with the authority of the Bank,
whether as agent or attorney of any person resident out of Australia
or by the order of or on behalf of any such person, or otherwise,
enter into any transaction prohibited by the last preceding sub-
regulation.
(3) A sale, loan, transfer, mortgage or charge of any security
or land prohibited by sub-regulation (l) of this regulation or entered
into in contravention of sub-regulation (2) of this regulation shall
not thereby be invalidated unless the High Court, on the application
of the Bank, makes an order that the sale, loan, transfer, mortgage
or charge shall be invalidated, but nothing in this sub-regulation
shall affect the liability of any person to a penalty in respect of
any such contravention,
(4) The High Court shall not make any such order if the Court
is satisfied that the effect of the order (if made) would be to pre-
judice rights which have, under a subsequent dealing with the security
or land, been acquired bona fide, and without notice of the
prohibition or contravention,
(5) For the purposes of this regulation -
(a) a body corporate incorporated out of Australia shall
be deemed to be a person resident out of Australia;
(*) "security" also includes a coupon or warrant rep-
resenting dividends or interest, and a life or
endowment insurance policy, but does not include bill
14.1.60.
± See Appendix II - Exemption (g),


of exchange or promissory note; and
(c) "transfer" includes transfer by way of loan or
security.
10 # Repealed 14. 1.60.
11. -(l) Subject to any directions of the Treasurer, the Bank may,
by notice published in the Gazette, specify any country to be a
country to which this regulation applies.
(2) Any person who is liable to make any payment to a person
resident in a country to which this regulation applies shall,
instead of making payment to that last-mentioned person, make the
payment to the Bank, or to an agent of the Bank for payment to the
Bank.
(3) Where a payment is so made, the receipt of the Bank, or of
the agent of the Bank, for the amount paid shall he a good discharge,
to the extent of the amount paid, to the person making the payment.
(4) Where the liability to make the payment is a liability to
make the payment in some money other than Australian money, the
amount of the liability in Australian money, and the extent of the
discharge, shall be ascertained by converting the amount into
Australian money at a rate of exchange fixed by the Bank.
(5) The amounts paid to the Bank and to the agents of the Bank
under this regulation shall be applied in such manner as the Bank
directs.
(6) For the purposes of this regulation -
(a) a body corporate incorporated in a country to which
this regulation applies shall be deemed to be resident
in that country; and
(b) the head office or a branch in a country to which this
regulation applies of a body corporate which carries
on business in Australia shall be deemed to be a person
resident in that country, and any amount payable by
that body corporate to that head office or branch shall
he deemed to be a payment which that body corporate is
liable to make to that head office or branch.
12. -(l) In this regulation -
"blocked account" means -
(a) an account opened, whether before or after the
commencement of this regulation, as a blocked account
with the Bank or an agent of the Bank; and
(h) an existing account with the Bank or an agent of the
Bank declared, whether before or after the commencement
of this regulation, by the Bank to be a blocked account,
but does not include any such account which the Bank declares
shall cease to be a blocked account;
"the hanker", in relation to any person, means the Bank, or an
agent of the Bank, which opens a blocked account in favour
of that person, or which maintains for that person an account
declared by the Bank to be a blocked account.
14. 1,60


(2) A person shall not, except with the authority of the Bank -
(a) make any payment out of, or he a party to any trans-
action having the effect of making a payment out of, a
blocked account; or
(h) assign or charge any moneys standing to the credit of
a blocked account.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of the last preceding sub-
regulation, the banker may transfer a blocked account to the name of
the official receiver, trustee in bankruptcy, or personal represent-
ative, in Australia, of the person in whose favour the blocked
account was opened.
(4) Except as provided in the last preceding sub-regulation, or
except with the authority of the Bank, no change shall be made in
the name in which a blocked account stands, and, where any such
change is made (whether or not the authority of the Bank is necessary
therefor) then, notwithstanding the change, the blocked account shall
remain a blocked account and the provisions of this regulation shall
apply accordingly.
(5) Where the payment to any person of any sum is permitted under
regulation 8 of these Regulations subject to a condition that the
payment shall be made to a blocked account -
(a) the payment may be made either -
(i) to the banker with a direction that it shall be
credited to a blocked account of that person,
which direction may, in the case of a payment by
means of a cheque or warrant, be made by marking
the cheque or warrant with the words "Blocked
account of (naming the person in question)" or
words to the like effect; or
(ii) by a crossed cheque or warrant drawn in favour of
that person marked with the words "Payable only
to blocked account of payee" or words to the like
effect;
(b) the amount received shall be credited by the banker to
a blocked account of that person; and
(c) the crediting of that amount to that account shall, to
the extent of the amount credited, be a good discharge
to the person making the payment.
(6) Where -
(a) a payment is due from any person to any other person,but,
under regulation 8 of these Regulations, the payment
cannot lawfully be made except with the authority of the
Bank;
(b) that authority is granted subject to the condition that
the payment shall be made to the Bank, or to an agent of
the Bank, for credit to a blocked account; and
(c) the person to whom the payment is due nominates a blocked
account to the person by whom the payment is due,
the person hy whom the payment is due shall be under an obligation
to the person to whom the payment is due to make the payment
accordingly.
14. 1.60


13. Repealed 14. 1.60.
PART 111. - CONTROL OF PROCEEDS OF EXPORTS
14. This Part shall not apply in any Territory of the Commonwealth
not forming part of the Commonwealth.
15. -(l) In this Part, unless the contrary intention appears -
"export licensing officer" means the Comptroller, a Collector
or any officer authorized by the Comptroller or a Collector
to act as an export licensing officer for the purposes of
this Part;
"export value", in relation to any goods, means the value
of the goods at the time of export in the place to which
they are to he exported;
"licence" means a licence under this Part;
"licensee" means a person to whom a licence is granted;
"shipping documents" means documents relating to the
delivery and receipt for carriage of goods, and includes hill
of lading, shipping receipt, consignment note and way-bill;
"the Minister" means the Minister of State for Customs and
Excise.
"the First Schedule" means the First Schedule to these
Regulations,
(2) Expressions used in this Part shall, unless the contrary
intention appears, have the same respective meanings as in the
Customs Act 1901-1936.
16. -(l) A person shall not export any goods unless -
(a) a licence under this Part to export the goods is in
force and the terms and conditions (if any) to which
the licence is subject are complied with; or
(b) the goods are excepted from the application of this
Part.
(2) The provisions of the Customs Act 1901-1936 relating to
prohibited exports shall apply in relation to goods the exportation
of which is prohibited under this regulation as if those provisions
were contained in these Regulations but any breach or contravention
of those provisions shall be punishable as if it were a breach or
contravention of these Regulations.
17. -(l) This Part shall apply with respect to the exportation of any
goods notwithstanding that a licence or other authority for the
exportation of the goods is in force under any other law.
(2) The grant of a licence with respect to any goods, or the
exception of any goods from the application of this Part, shall not
absolve any person from the obligation to comply with any other law
relating to the exportation of goods.
14. 1.60


18. -(l) A licence may be -
(a) an ordinary licence; or
(b) a special licence.
(2) An ordinary licence shall be a licence to export, during a
period extending from the date of the grant of the licence to a
date specified therein, the particular goods in one consignment, in
the quantities, hy the method of despatch, and from the place,
specified in the licence.
(3) A special licence shall be a licence to export, during a
period extending from the date of the grant of the licence to a
date specified therein, goods of a class or kind specified in the
licence from a place and to a country so specified.
19. -(l) Any person desiring to export goods not excepted from the
application of this Part, shall make application for a licence to
export the goods.
(2) An application for an ordinary licence shall be in accordance
with Form A in the First Schedule.
(3) An application for a special licence shall be in accordance
with Form B in the First Schedule.
(4) Omitted 14. 1.60.
20. An application for a licence shall be delivered to an export
licensing officer together with such additional copies thereof as
the export licensing officer requires.
21. An applicant for a licence, or a licensee, shall supply to an
export licensing officer such information additional to that required
in accordance with the relevant form in the First Schedule as the
export licensing officer requires.
22. -(l) The Minister may grant a licence in respect of all the goods
specified in an application or in respect of portion only of those
goods or may refuse to grant a licence.
(2) The Minister may revoke any licence.
23. -(l) Subject to this Part, a licence shall be subject to the
following terms and conditions:-
(a) Any payment in respect of the goods shall be made-
(i) in such currency;
(ii) in such manner; and
(iii) within such period, before or after the date
of exportation,
as the Bank approves, and the licensee shall make such
arrangements as are necessary to ensure that the
provisions of this paragraph are complied with.
(b) Forthwith on obtaining any shipping documents in respect
of any of the goods to which the licence relates, the
licensee shall, unless the Minister or the Bank otherwise
allows, deliver the shipping documents to the Bank or to
an agent of the Bank.
(c) Shipping documents delivered in respect of any of the
goods in accordance with paragraph (b) of this sub-
regulation shall be accompanied by the original invoice
14. 1.60


in respect of the goods, or a copy thereof, together with
all hills of exchange drawn upon any person outside
Australia from whom any payment in respect of the goods
is to be received.
(d) Where the bills of exchange so delivered represent only a
portion of the amount payable in respect of the goods,
there shall be delivered with the shipping documents -
(i) an authority in writing to the Bank or to an agent
of the Bank to deliver the shipping documents to a
person specified in the authority and in accordance
with such terms and conditions as are approved by
the Bank and specified in the authority; and
(ii) a direction to each person outside Australia from
whom any payment in respect of the goods is to be
received to pay to the Bank or to an agent of the
Bank, or to some other person nominated in that
behalf by the Bank or by an agent of the Bank, all
further payments in respect of the goods, and at
the time of payment to furnish therewith a statement
of account in respect of the goods.
(e) Where shipping documents delivered in accordance with
paragraph (b) of this sub-regulation are not accompanied
by a bill of exchange in respect of the goods to which
the shipping documents relate and payment for the goods
is to be received, the licensee shall deliver with the
documents -
(i) an authority in writing to the Bank or to an agent
of the Bank to deliver the shipping documents to a
person specified in the authority and in accordance
with such terms and conditions as are approved by
the Bank and specified in the authority; and
(ii) a direction to each person outside Australia from
whom any payment in respect of the goods is to be
received to pay to the Bank or to an agent of the
Bank, or to some other person nominated in that
behalf by the Bank or by an agent of the Bank, all
payments in respect of the goods, and at the time of
payment to furnish therewith a statement of account
in respect of the goods.
(2) A licence may be subject -
(a) in addition to the terms and conditions specified in the
last preceding sub-regulation, to such further terms and
conditions (if any) as the Minister determines; or
(b) to such terms and conditions other than those so specified
as the Minister determines,
or may be free from terms and conditions.
(3) The Minister may vary or modify the terms and conditions of
any licence and may direct that a licence granted free from terms and
conditions shall be subject to such terms and conditions as he
determines.
14. 1.60


(4) A licensee shall comply with all the terms and conditions to
which the licence is subject.
24. -(l) In all shipping documents in respect of goods to which a
licence relates, provision shall he made for delivery of the goods to,
or to the order of, the Bank or an agent of the Bank, or in such other
manner as the Minister or the Bank allows.
( 2) In such cases as the Bank determines, a shipping document may
be endorsed to, and delivered to, the licensee or to a person
nominated by him.
25. Where a licence has been granted and the amount specified in the
application for the licence, or in any information supplied to an
export licensing officer under regulation 21 of these Regulations, as
the invoice value of any goods is less than the amount which, in the
opinion of the Minister, is the export value of those goods, the Bank
or an agent of the Bank may retain possession of the shipping docu-
ments until the licensee has paid to the Bank, or to an agent of the
Bank, or has made arrangements for the Bank, or for an agent of the
Bank, to receive, an amount of currency equivalent to the amount
which, in the opinion of the Minister, is the export value of the
goods.
26. A person who, for any of the purposes of this Part, has made any
arrangements in relation to currency -
(a) shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the arrange-
ments are fulfilled; and
(b) shall not, except with the consent in writing of the Bank
cancel or alter the arrangements.
27. Repealed 14. 1.60.
28. On receipt in Australia by the Bank, or by an agent of the Bank,
of advice that any foreign currency has been paid to the Bank, or to
an agent of the Bank, in respect of any goods exported in pursuance
of a licence, the Bank, or agent of the Bank, shall forthwith pay to
the licensee, or to such other person as is entitled to receive it, an
amount equal to the value of that foreign currency converted into
Australian currency at the rate of exchange fixed or authorized by the
Bank and in force for the time being.
29. -(l) No claim, action or proceeding shall be made or brought by any
person against the Bank or an agent of the Bank, or against any
officer of the Bank or of an agent of the Bank, in respect of any loss
or damage arising out of any dealing with any document delivered to
the Bank or to an agent of the Bank under this Part.
(2) The last preceding sub-regulation shall not apply in relation
to any dealing which was done otherwise than in good faith and without
negligence.
30. -(l) An export licensing officer shall have and may exercise, sub-
ject to any directions of the Minister, all the powers and functions
of the Minister under this Part, except the powers and functions of
the Minister under regulations 25 and 31 of these Regulations.
14. 1,60


(2) An appeal shall lie to the Minister from any decision or
determination of an export licensing officer under this Part,
(3) The decision of the Minister on the appeal shall he final.
(4) Nothing in this regulation shall prevent the exercise of
any power or function by the Minister,
31. -(l) The Minister may except from the application of this Part
any goods or the goods included in any class of goods.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the last preceding
sub-regulation, the exception of any goods from the application of
this Part may be limited to -
(a) any goods intended solely for use or consumption in
any place specified by the Minister; or
(h) any goods to be exported in a manner, or at or within
a time, so specified.
(3) The Minister may vary or revoke any exception made in
pursuance of this regulation.
32. -(l) Before any licence is granted, the applicant for the licence
shall, if required so to do by an export licensing officer, give
security for compliance with the requirements of this Part and with
the terms and conditions of the licence.
(2) Unless in any case some other security is accepted as
sufficient by the export licensing officer, any security required to
he given under this regulation shall he by bond in accordance with
Form C in the First Schedule, executed by the applicant and by one
or more sureties approved by the export licensing officer, and
conditioned for the compliance by the licensee and all other persons
hound thereby with the requirements of this Part and the terms and
conditions of the licence.
(3) Any bond or other security given in respect of a licence
shall, unless the export licensing officer otherwise determines, he
for a sum equal to twice the estimated value of the goods to which
the licence relates, at the time and place of export.
PART IV. - SECURITIES
33. -(l) A person shall not, without the authority of the Bank, take,
send or transfer any securities to any place outside Australia.
(2) For the purposes of this regulation, a person shall be
deemed to transfer securities to a place outside Australia if he
transfers securities from a register in Australia to a register
outside Australia.
* 34.-(l) Subject to the next succeeding sub-regulation, a person,
other than the Bank or an agent of the Bank, shall not, without the
authority of the Bank, acquire, dispose of or otherwise deal with
any foreign securities.
(2) The last preceding sub-regulation does not apply to the
acquisition of any foreign securities otherwise than for valuable
consideration.
14. 1.60
* Seje Appendix II - Exemption (j).


* 35.-(l) Subject to such exceptions (if any) as are specified in the
notice, the Bank may, by notice published in the Gazette, require
every person
(a) who on or after the publication of the notice in the
Gazette owns or has any interest in; or
(b) who has, during any period specified in the notice,
owned or had any interest in,
foreign securities of a class so specified, to furnish a return to
the Bank, or to such person as is so specified, giving such
particulars with respect to those securities as are so specified.
(2) A person required by any notice under the last preceding
sub-regulation to furnish a return shall furnish the return within
such period as is specified in the notice, or, in any particular
case, within such longer period as the Bank or the person to whom
the return is to be furnished allows.
(3) A person shall not make any false or misleading statement
in any return furnished under sub-regulation (l) of this regulation.
PART V. - MISCELLANEOUS.
36,-(l) Any person who is about to leave Australia (in this
regulation referred to as "the traveller") shall, if requested so
to do by an officer -
(a) declare whether or not he has with him any Australian
currency, foreign currency or securities; and
(b) produce any Australian currency, foreign currency or
securities which he has with him.
(2) The officer, and any person acting under his directions, may
search the traveller and examine and search any article which the
traveller has with him for the purpose of ascertaining if he has
with him any Australian currency, foreign currency or securities, and
may seize any Australian currency, foreign currency or securities
found upon the examination or search unless the officer is satisfied
that the traveller has not the Australian currency, foreign currency
or securities with him for the purpose of being taken or sent out
of Australia in contravention of these Regulations.
(3) A female shall not be searched in pursuance of the lasb preced-
ing sub-regulation except by a female.
(4) Any officer, and any person acting under his directions, may
go on board any ship or aircraft for the purpose of exercising the
powers conferred on him by this regulation, and nay also examine or
search the ship or aircraft and any goods found thereon, for the
purpose of ascertaining whether there is on board the ship or
aircraft any Australian currency, foreign currency or securities
for the purpose of being taken or sent out of Australia in contra-
vention of these Regulations.
(5) Any officer may seize any Australian currency, foreign
currency and securities found upon any such examination or search
which, in the opinion of the officer, are in the possession of any
traveller, or on board the ship or aircraft for the purpose of
being taken or sent in contravention of these Regulations.
14. 1.60
♦ See Appendix II - Notice under Regulation 35.


(6) In this regulation, "officer" means a person who is an
officer of Customs for the purposes of the Customs Act 1901-1959,
an officer of the Department of Immigration or a member of the
Police Force of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory of the
Commonwealth, and includes a person authorized by the Bank to act
as an officer for the purposes of this regulation,
37. -(l) The Minister may, by notice in writing served on any person
(including any officer employed in or in connexion with any depart-
ment of a Government or by a local authority), require that person -
(a) to furnish to the Minister, or to such other person
as the Minister directs, such information as the
Minister or that other person requires; and
(h) to attend and give evidence before the Minister, or
such other person as the Minister directs,
with respect to any act, transaction, matter or thing prohibited by
these Regulations, or to which any provision of these Regulations
applies, and may require him to produce all hooks, documents and
other papers in his custody or under his control relating thereto.
(2) The Minister may require the information or evidence to be
given on oath or affirmation and either orally or in writing and
for that purpose the Minister or person before whom the evidence is
given may administer an oath.
(3) A person shall not -
(a) refuse or fail to comply with any requirement made in
pursuance of sub-regulation (l) or (2) of this
regulation; or
(b) with intent to evade the provisions of these Regulations,
destroy, mutilate, deface, secrete or remove any book,
document or other paper.
(4) Where any person is obliged to answer questions orally under
this regulation, he shall not refuse to answer any question on the
ground that the answer might tend to incriminate him or make him
liable to any penalty but the answer given by him shall not be
admissible in evidence in any proceedings against him other than
proceedings in respect of the falsity of the answer or in respect
of the refusal or failure to answer the question.
(5) In this regulation, "the Minister" means the Treasurer or
the Minister of State for Customs and Excise.
38. -(l) Subject to any directions of the Treasurer, the Bank may,
either wholly or to the extent specified, exempt from the application
of the whole or any of the provisions of these Regulations (other
than the provisions of Part III.) -
(a) any person, all persons, or every person included in
any class of persons;
(b) any act or transaction, all acts and transactions, or
every act or transaction included in any class of acts
or transactions; or
(c) any security, all securities, or every security included
in any class of securities.
14. 1.60


(2) Subject to any directions of the Treasurer, the Bank may
revoke or vary any such exemption,
39, -(l) Subject to any directions of the Treasurer, the grant of
any authority by the Bank under any provision of these Regulations
shall be in the absolute discretion of the Bank, and the authority
may be granted either unconditionally or subject to such conditions
as the Bank thinks fit for the protection of the currency or public
credit of the Commonwealth, or in order to conserve, in the national
interest, the foreign exchange resources of the Conmonwealth.
(2) Where the authority of the Bank is granted subject to
conditions a person shall comply with all such conditions as are
applicable to him,
(3) Subject to any directions of the Treasurer, the Bank may
revoke or vary any authority granted by the Bank under any provision
of these Regulations,
40, A person shall not make -
(a) to the Treasurer or to the Minister of State for Customs
and Excise;
(b) to any Conmonwealth officer;
(c) to any officer of the Bank or of an agent of the Bank; or
(d) to any person to whom application is made for the issue
of a money order payable outside Australia,
any statement, whether oral or in writing, relating to any act,
transaction, matter or thing to which any provision of these
Regulations applies, which he knows to be untrue, or which is
misleading, in any particular, or which is made by him without his
having first made proper inquiries to ascertain the truth thereof,
41, A person shall not enter into or make any contract or arrange-
ment, whether oral or in writing, for the purpose of, or which has
the effect of, in any way, and whether directly or indirectly,
defeating, evading or avoiding, or preventing the operation of,
these Regulations in any respect,
42, A person shall not contravene, or fail to comply with, any
of the provisions of these Regulations,
Penalty -
(a) if the offence is prosecuted summarily - a fine not
exceeding Two hundred dollars or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding six months; or
(b) if the offence is prosecuted upon indictment - a fine
not exceeding Ten thousand dollars or imprisonment for
a period not exceeding five years,
(2) In addition to any other punishment, a court may, if it thinks
fit, order the forfeiture of gold, Australian currency, foreign
currency or securities in respect of which an offence against these
Regulations has been committed,
43, -(l) Where a person has been convicted of an offence against
these Regulations, the Bank may direct that person to sell, or procure
14.2.66.


the sale of, any property which that person is entitled to sell or
of which he is entitled to procure the sale, being property which,
in the opinion of the Bank, that person has acquired, whether
directly or indirectly, by reason of the act or omission constituting
the offence.
(2) The Bank may specify in the direction the manner in which,
the person to whom and the terms on which the property shall be sold.
(3) A person shall comply with every direction under this
regulation which is applicable to him.
41 44.-(l) The Bank may appoint any person to he an agent of the Bank
in respect of all or any of the provisions of these Regulations.
(2) Any person appointed to be an agent of the Bank shall carry
out his duties as agent in accordance with, and shall comply with,
such instructions, directions and requirements as are issued or made
by the Bank.
(3) The Bank may revoke the appointment of any agent of the Bank
under this regulation.
(4) Evidence of the appointment, or of the revocation of the
appointment, of an agent of the Bank under this regulation may be
given by the production of the Gazette purporting to contain a
notification of the appointment or revocation, as the case may he.
14. 1,60
• See Appendix II - Notice under Regulation 44.


Marks and Nos
of packages.
No. and des-
cription of
packages.
Description
of goods.
Quantities
Invoice value
(in Australian
currency ) £
THE SCHEDULES.
First Schedule,
Regulation 19, Form A,
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations,
APPLICATION FOR AN ORDINARY LICENCE TO EXPORT GOODS.
To the Collector of Customs at
Full name of applicant
Address
Name of owner of goods at time of exportation
Bank in Australia to which currency representing proceeds will he
paid or credited and, in the case of goods exported by ship, to
which shipping documents are to he delivered.
Name Place
Method of despatch (State if by ship, air-freight or post; if by
ship, give name)
Port or aerodrome of discharge
Ultimate destination of goods
Name and address of person to whom goods are to be exported
Give brief details of the method of payment for the goods (i,e, the
manner in which the appropriate currency will accrue in respect
thereof)
State whether goods are restricted exports under the Customs Act
The above-named applicant hereby applies for an ordinary licence
to export from the goods described below.
I hereby declare
x applicant
that I am the and that the
s duly authorized agent of the applicant
particulars shown in this application are true and correct in every
particular. Signature of applicant or agent of applicant.
Address of agent.
Date of application.
14,1,60.
k State whether f,0.b,, c,i,f,, or otherwise.
s Strike out whichever is inapplicable.


Regulation 19. Form B.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
APPLICATION FOR A SPECIAL LICENCE TO EXPORT GOODS
To the Collector of Customs at
Full name of applicant
Address
Bank in Australia to which currency representing proceeds will be
paid or credited and, in the case of goods exported by ship, to
which shipping documents are to be delivered
Name Place
The above-named applicant hereby applies for a special licence to
export from to (name countries) goods of the
following classes or kinds
I hereby declare
ii i t ~ * applicant
that I am the and that the
♦duly authorized agent of the applicant
particulars shown in this application are true and correct in
every particular.
Signature of applicant or agent of applicant.
Address of agent.
Date of application,
* Strike out whichever is inapplicable.
Regulation 32, Form C,
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
BOND
Know all men by these presents that we (full name of licensee),
of (address), (occupation), (hereinafter called the "licensee") and
(full name of first surety), of (address), (occupation), and (full
name of second surety), of (address), (occupation), are jointly and
severally held and firmly bound unto the Commonwealth of Australia
in the sum of dollars, to be paid to the Commonwealth of
Australia, for which payment to be well and truly made we bind
ourselves jointly and each of us severally and respectively, our
and each of our executors and administrators, firmly by these
presents.
Sealed with our seals and dated this day of ,19
Whereas the above-bounden licensee has made an application dated
the day of , 19 , for a licence to export goods
under the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations %
14.2.66.


Now the condition of the above-written bond or obligation is that
if the licensee and all other persons hound thereby shall punctually
and faithfully observe and comply with the terms and conditions of
the licence and with all the requirements of the Banking (Foreign
Exchange) Regulations, relating to the licence, then this bond shall
he void and of no effect, but otherwise the same shall remain in full
force and effect;
Provided always that no extension of time or other indulgence
granted to the licensee for compliance with any conditions of the
licence or with any requirements of the said Regulations, and no
neglect or forbearance to enforce such compliance, shall in any way
release any person hereby bound, his executors or administrators, from
his or their liability hereunder, and no waiver of any one or more of
the said conditions or requirements shall affect the liability of
the licensee or any other person hereby bound, his or their
respective executors or administrators, from his or their liability
hereunder.
Signed, sealed and delivered by the said)
(Licensee) in the presence of - )
Signed, sealed and delivered by the said)
(First Surety) in the presence of - )
Signed, sealed and delivered by the said)
(Second Surety) in the presence of -)
14. 1.60


APPENDIX II
EXEMPTIONS AND NOTICES
EXEMPTIONS
The Reserve Bank of Australia, in pursuance of regulation 38 of
the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations, hereby -
(a) revokes -
(i) the exemptions granted by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia under the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
on the second day of January, One thousand nine hundred
and forty-seven, and published in the Gazette on the
same day, as amended from time to time; and
(ii) the exemption granted by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia under the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
on the seventeenth day of August, One thousand nine
hundred and fifty-nine, and published in the Gazette on
the twenty-seventh day of that month;
(h) exempts from the application of sub-regulation (l) of regulation I
of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations the buying in
Australia by a person ordinarily resident in Australia from a
person ordinarily resident out of Australia, and the selling in
Australia to a per on ordinarily resident in Australia by a
person ordinarily resident out of Australia, of foreign currency
in the form of travellers’ cheques, where the foreign currency
is not converted into Australian currency at a rate of exchange
other than the relevant rate of exchange fixed or authorised by
the Bank and in force for the time being;
(c) exempts from the application of sub—regulation (2) of regulation I
of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations every transaction
that consists of the payment of money by a person ordinarily
resident out of Australia in consideration of the sale of goods
in Australia to, or the provision of services in Australia for,
that person, being a payment in foreign currency in the form of
travellers* cheques, where the foreign currency is not converted
into Australian currency at a rate of exchange other than the
relevant rate of exchange fixed or authorised by the Bank and in
force for the time being;
(d) Revoked 31st July, 1963 - see revised exemption dated
31st July, 1963 on page 3,
k (e) exempts from the application of sub-regulation (l) of
regulation 8 of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations -
(i) the making of any payment to, by the order of, or on
behalf of, a person not resident outside the sterling
area;
k See also (f) and (i)


(ii) the placing of any sum to the credit of a person not
resident outside the sterling area;
(iii) the drawing, issuing or negotiating of any bill of
exchange or promissory note, the entering into of any
contract or agreement (not being a contract or agreement
for the purchase of goods), the allotting or transferring
of any security, or the acknowledgment of any debt, so
that a right (whether actual or contingent) to receive
a payment or any valuable consideration or to the
performance of any service, whether in Australia or
elsewhere, is created or transferred in favour of a person
not resident outside the sterling area;
(iv) the making of an entry in a register in Australia that
recognizes or gives effect to a transfer of any securities
to a person not resident outside the sterling area;
(v) the making of any payment, with the authority of a bank
that is an agent of the Bank, to the credit with the Bank
or with a bank that is an agent of the Bank, of a person
resident outside the sterling area, and anything done for
the purposes of making such a payment; and
(vi) the making of any payment by a person other than the Bank
or a bank that is an agent of the Bank by the order of, or
on behalf of, a person resident outside the sterling area
for the purchase of foreign currency in accordance with
the provisions of Part II of the Banking (Foreign Exchange)
Regulations, and anything done for the purposes of making
such a payment;
(f) declares that, for the purposes of the exemptions granted by the
last preceding paragraph -
(i) a body corporate incorporated outside the sterling area
shall be deemed to be a person resident outside the sterling
area;
(ii) the head office, or a branch, in the sterling area, of a
body corporate resident outside the sterling area shall,
unless the Bank determines otherwise, be deemed to be a
person not resident outside the sterling area; and
(iii) the making of any book-entry or other statement recording
a debit against the head office, or a branch, in Australia,
of a body corporate in favour of the head office, or a
branch, of the body corporate outside the sterling area
shall be deemed to be the acknowledgment of a debt whereby
a right to receive a payment in Australia is created in
favour of a person resident outside the sterling area;
* (g) exempts from the application of regulation 9 of the Banking
(Foreign Exchange) Regulations every sale, loan, transfer, mort-
gaging or charging of any security or land by, by the order of, or
on behalf of, a person not resident outside the sterling area to
another person not resident outside the sterling area or to a
person acting on behalf of such a person;
14. 1.60
• See also (h) and (i)


(h) declares that, for the purposes of the exemption granted by
the last preceding paragraph, a body corporate incorporated
outside Australia shall not be deemed to be a person resident
outside the sterling area unless that body corporate is
incorporated outside the sterling area;
(i) declares that, for the purposes of the exemptions granted above
"sterling area" shall be deemed not to include Hong Kong; and
(j) exempts from the application of sub—regulation (l) of
regulation 34 of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations -
(i) all securities that are situated in, and in respect of
which the principal or interest is payable in the
money of, a country included in the sterling area;
(ii) all shares expressed in the money of Canada and
registered in Australia; and
(iii) all shares in the capital of National Dairy Products
Corporation (a company incorporated in the United
States of America) expressed in the money of the
United States of America and registered in Australia,
Dated at Sydney this fourteenth day of January, 1960,
The Reserve Bank of Australia, in pursuance of regulation 38
of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations, hereby -
(a) revokes the exemption granted from the application of
sub-regulation (l) of regulation 6 of the Banking
(Foreign Exchange) Regulations on the fourteenth day
of January One thousand nine hundred and sixty and
published in the Gazette on the same day;
(b) exempts from the application of sub-regulation (l) of
regulation 6 of the Banking (Foreign Exchange)
Regulations (to the extent that that sub-regulation
relates to Australian currency in the form of Australian
notes and coin) any person who departs from Australia
and takes with him Australian notes not exceeding an
amount of one hundred dollars* and Australian coin not
exceeding an amount of four dollars* provided that any
amount so taken out of Australia does not exceed one
hundred dollars* in the aggregate.
Dated at Sydney this thirty-first day of July, 1963,
14.2.66.
♦Vide Section 10 of the Currency Act 1965.


NOTICE UNDER REGULATION 35
Return of Foreign Securities
1. (l) The Reserve Bank of Australia hereby requires every person
(not being a person who arrives in Australia after the date of this
Notice) who, on or after the date of this Notice, owns, or has any
interest in, any foreign securities (other than any foreign securities
of any of the classes specified in the Schedule to this Notice) to
furnish a return to the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia at
Sydney, in the State of New South Wales -
(a) in respect of all such foreign securities of which he
is the owner, or in which he has an interest, at the
date of this Notice - within thirty days after that
date; and
(b) in respect of all such foreign securities of which he
becomes the owner, or in which he acquires an interest,
after the date of this Notice - within thirty days
after becoming the owner of the securities or acquiring
an interest therein,
or, in any particular case, within such longer period as the Governor
of the Reserve Bank of Australia allows,
(2) The Reserve Bank of Australia hereby requires every person who
arrives in Australia after the date of this Notice and, on or after
that date, owns, or has any interest in, any foreign securities (other
than foreign securities of any of the classes specified in the
Schedule to this Notice) to furnish a return to the Governor of the
Reserve Bank of Australia, at Sydney, in the State of New South Wales •
(a) in respect of all such foreign securities of which he is
the owner, or in which he has an interest, at the date
of his arrival in Australia - within thirty days after
that date; and
(h) in respect of all such foreign securities of which he
becomes the owner, or in which he acquires an interest,
after the date of his arrival in Australia - within
thirty days after the date on which he becomes the
owner of the securities or acquires an interest therein,
or, in any particular case, within such longer period as the Governor
of the Reserve Bank of Australia allows.
2. This Notice shall not apply in relation to foreign securities
in respect of which a return was, before the date of this Notice,
furnished to the Governor of the Commonwealth Bank of Australia under
the National Security (Securities) Regulations, the National Security
(Exchange Control) Regulations or the Banking (Foreign Exchange)
Regulations.
3. The Notice under regulation 35 of the Banking (Foreign
Exchange) Regulations issued by the Commonwealth Bank of Australia
on the second day of January, 1947, and published in the Gazette on
that date,as amended from time to time, is hereby revoked.
14. 1.60


THE SCHEDULE
Securities not subject to this Notice
1. All securities that are situated in, and in respect of which
the principal or interest is payable in the money of, a country
included in the sterling area.
2. All shares expressed in the money of Canada and registered
in Australia.
3. All shares in the capital of National Dairy Products
Corporation (a company incorporated in the United States of America)
expressed in the money of the United States of America and registered
in Australia,
Dated at Sydney this fourteenth day of January, 1960.
14. 1.60


APPOINTMENT OF AGENTS OF THE RESERVE BANK OF AUSTRALIA
It is hereby notified for public information that, in pursuance of
regulation 44 of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations, the
Reserve Bank of Australia has, with effect from the date of this
notice
(a) appointed the persons set out in the First Schedule
hereunder to be agents of the Bank in respect of all the
provisions of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
and the persons set out in the Second Schedule hereunder
to be agents of the Bank in respect of regulation 12 of
the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations; and
(b) revoked the appointments of agents of the Commonwealth
Bank of Australia notified in the Gazette on the second
day of January, 1947, the twenty-seventh day of September,
1951, the nineteenth day of November, 1953, the twelfth
day of April, 1956, and the ninth day of August, 1956.
THE SCHEDULES
First Schedule
Australia and New Zealand Bank Limited.
The Bank of Adelaide.
Bank of China.
Bank of New South Wales.
Bank of New Zealand.
The Commercial Bank of Australia Limited,
The Commercial Banking Company of Sydney Limited.
Commonwealth Trading Bank of Australia,
Comptoir National d'Escompte de Paris.
The English, Scottish and Australian Bank, Limited.
The National Bank of Australasia Limited.
Second Schedule
Australia and New Zealand Savings Bank Limited.
Bank of New South Wales Savings Bank Limited.
The Brisbane Permanent Building and Banking Company Limited
C.B.C. Savings Bank Limited.
Commonwealth Savings Bank of Australia,
The Hobart Savings Bank.
Launceston Bank for Savings.
Rural Bank of New South Wales.
The Rural and Industries Bank of Western Australia.
The Savings Bank of South Australia.
The State Bank of South Australia.
The State Savings Bank of Victoria.
Dated at Sydney this fourteenth day of January,l96o.
14. 1.60


APPOINTMENT OF AGENTS OF THE RESERVE BANK OF AUSTRALIA
It is hereby notified for public information that
in pursuance of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
the Reserve Bank of Australia has appointed E.S. & A,
Savings Bank Limited to be an Agent of the Bank in respect
of regulation 12 of the said Regulations.
Dated at Sydney this 29th day of September, 1961,
It is hereby notified for public information that
in pursuance of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
the Reserve Bank of Australia has appointed The National
Bank Savings Bank Limited to be an Agent of the Bank in
respect of regulation 12 of the said Regulations,
Dated at Sydney this sth day of June, 1962.
It is hereby notified for public information that
in pursuance of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
the Reserve Bank of Australia has appointed The Commercial
Savings Bank of Australia Limited to be an Agent of the
Bank in respect of regulation 12 of the said Regulations.
Dated at Sydney this sth day of June, 1962.
It is hereby notified for public information that
in pursuance of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
the Reserve Bank of Australia has appointed The Bank of
Adelaide Savings Bank Limited to be an Agent of the Bank
in respect of regulation 12 of the said Regulations.
Dated at Sydney this sth day of June, 1962,
1.8.63.


DEFINITIONS
In these Memoranda -
"agent"
"agent hank"
" bank"
"Australian currency"
"Exchange Control"
"External Account"
"foreign currency"
"Sterling Area"
means a bank or savings bank appointed as an
agent of the Reserve Bank of Australia under
the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
and includes, where applicable, a bank or
savings bank authorised by the Reserve Bank
of Australia to enter into specific classes
of transactions which are subject to the
application of those Regulations,
includes notes, coins, postal notes, money
orders, bills of exchange, promissory notes,
drafts, letters of credit and travellers*
cheques, payable or expressed in Australian
money, and also includes rights and
instruments of title to Australian money,
means the Australian Exchange Control as
administered by the Reserve Bank of
Australia in accordance with the
Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations,
is a sterling account with a bank in the
United Kingdom conducted in the name of a
person resident outside the Sterling Area
and designated by the United Kingdom Exchange
Control as an External Account,
includes notes, coins, postal notes, money
orders, bills of exchange, promissory notes,
drafts, letters of credit and travellers*
cheques, payable or expressed otherwise
than in Australian money, and also includes
rights and instruments of title to money
other than Australian money,
means -
(a) Australia, Burma, Ceylon, the Republic
of Cyprus, Gambia, Ghana, Iceland,
India, the Republic of Ireland, Jamaica,
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia,Malta,
New Zealand, The Federal Republic of
Nigeria, Pakistan, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, the Republic of South Africa,
the United Republic of Tanzania,
Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, the
United Kingdom, Western Samoa and the
Republic of Zambia;
(b) a colony, overseas territory or protect-
orate of a country specified in the last
preceding paragraph; and
(c) a territory for the international
relations of which a country so
specified is responsible,
but does not include Southern Rhodesia.
14.2.66.


Buying
Selling
t/t
Sea Mail
$2.5000
Air Mail
$2.5100
0/D
$2.4753
$2.4902
$2.5100
30
d/s
2.4609
2.4758
2.4997
60 d/s
2.4465
2.4614
2.4894
90
d/s
2.4321
2.4470
120 d/s
2.4177
2.4326
(Basis of
quotation
$A to £E1)
RATES OF EXCHANGE
Forward Exchange - See E.C. Memorandum BP
English Currency
1. All sales and purchases of English currency (except as provided
in paragraph 3 below) must be at the rates fixed by the Reserve Bank
and under the conditions determined by the Reserve Bank. On and after
15th July, 1966, and until further notice, the rates to be observed are
as foilows :-
Australia on London
Sundry After Sight Buying Rates
2. The following amounts are to be deducted from the appropriate on
demand buying rate to determine after sight rates not quoted above
3 d/s - $0.0029
7 d/s - 0.0034
10 d/s - 0.0048
15 d/s - 0.0072
45 d/s - 0.0216
Buying Rates for English Currency Bills
on Foreign Centres
3. Agent hanks are authorised to determine their own rates of
exchange, based on the T/T buying rate, Australia on London, for
purchasing English currency bills on foreign centres outside the
United Kingdom.
18.7 .66


Notes and Coin
4, The fixed rates of exchange for the purchase of sterling
notes and silver coin from the public are as follows
Notes - $2,4600
Coin - $2,3000
5, The rates at which the Reserve Bank will purchase sterling
notes and silver coin from other banks are as follows
Notes - $2,4700
Coin - $2,3500
(Basis of quotation $A to ££l)
General
Other Foreign Currencies
6, Agent banks are authorised to determine their own rates of
exchange for transactions in other foreign currencies.
Rates of Exchange to be applied to Currency Transactions which
require prior reference to the Exchange Control
7, An approved currency transaction may be arranged only at
the rate of exchange in force on the day that the transaction is
actually entered into. Whether given by the agent bank in terms
of its delegated authority or by the Exchange Control after submission
of an application, the requisite approval of the transaction must
precede the actual contractual arrangement between bank and customer
for the purchase or sale of the currency (whether spot or forward) as
the case may be.
14.2.66


PURCHASES AND SALES By BANKS OF CURRENCIES OF
COUNTRIES OUTSIDE THE STERLING AREA AS COVER FOR
AUTHORISED TRANSACTIONS
Banks may arrange to buy and sell currencies of countries
outside the Sterling Area spot and forward as cover for authorised
transactions through the following sources
(a) Authorised dealers in London;
(b) Banks and dealers in countries outside the Sterling
Area (if permitted hy local monetary authorities) -
(i) against the currency of one of the countries
concerned;
(ii) against sterling to or from an External
Account, or
(iii) against Australian currency;
(c) Another bank in Australia;
(d) (in respect of U.S. and Canadian dollars) The Reserve
Bank of Australia at Sydney,Melbourne and Adelaide,
14. 1.60
NOTE: Where any transaction has the effect of transferring
from Australia funds held here hy hanks domiciled in
countries outside the Sterling Area, prior approval
of the Exchange Control should be obtained.


SECTION 2 - FORWARD EXCHANGE


FORWARD EXCHANGE
APPLICATION FORMS
Exchange Control Form FEI - Application for Authority to sell Foreign
Currency for Forward Delivery.
Exchange Control Form FEIA - Application for Authority to sell
Foreign Currency for Forward Delivery (for exports of wool - sterling
contracts only).
Exchange Control Form FE2 - Application for Authority to buy Foreign
Currency for Forward Delivery,
Completion and Submission of Forma
1, A person requiring to sell or buy foreign currency for forward
delivery should make application to his bankers on the appropriate
form as described above. Forms should be completed in duplicate,
2, Application Forms FEI and FE2 are drafted to cover individual
transactions. However, where a contract is taken out to cover several
export or import transactions, it would be satisfactory for the
particulars sought in declaration (l) (b) of the appropriate form
to be endorsed thereon,
3, Where a bank approves an application in terms of its authority
(see E.C. Memorandum HR), a copy of the relative form should be attached
to the schedule of new contracts referred to in paragraph 12 of
E.C. Memorandum BS,
4, In all other cases both application forms should be submitted
to the Exchange Control; one copy will be returned with the
decision enfaced thereon.
SCOPE OF FACILITIES
5. Aa a general principle, forward exchange cover ia available
over tranaactiona, other than thoae of a capital nature, where a
genuine exchange riak exista and, at the time of entering into the
contract, the contracting party is firmly committed to accept or
pay a definite amount in foreign currency by a definite date,
8, Capital transactions or transactions involving speculation in
exchange are not eligible for cover.
Period of Contracts
7, Cover is not normally available beyond six months. However,
the Control will examine any specific proposal for cover in excess
of six months where
1.8.63.


(a) The period sought is justified by the time required for
production and/or delivery of the goods, or
(b) In the case of exports, the relative payment terms have
been approved by Exchange Control,
Export Transactions
General
8, Forward exchange cover will, as a general rule, be provided
for exporters who are exposed to a definite exchange risk through
having entered into a firm contract with an overseas buyer to sell
goods at a fixed price expressed in foreign currency.
Special Facilities in respect of Wool Transactions
9, See E,C, Memorandum BQ,
Special Facilities for Exporters of Sheepskins. Hides. Tops.
Noils and Waste
10, See E,C, Memorandum BQ,
Proceeds of Goods exported on Consignment
11, The Exchange Control will consider applications for cover in
respect of goods that have been exported from Australia on consignment.
The relative applications should show the export value of the goods
and the date of shipment,
12, The normal maximum period of cover under this heading is six
months from the date of shipment but applications for longer periods
may be submitted to Exchange Control for consideration with full details
of any special circumstances which may exist including, if applicable,
the date of sale of the relative goods.
Import Transactions
General
13, Forward exchange cover is available to importers who have
placed firm buying orders with overseas suppliers and are liable to
make payment in foreign currency.
Proceeds of Goods imported on Consignment
14, The Exchange Control will consider applications for cover
in respect of foreign currency amounts payable to overseas suppliers
of goods imported into Australia on consignment. Such cover is
not available until the relative goods have been sold.
1 a 3.65.


15, Applications should include dates of arrival and sale in
Australia and should he accompanied by an indication from the
submitting bank that it has been established to their satisfaction
that the goods have been sold.
Other Transactions
Non-Residents
16, Applications for forward cover by non-resident hanks should
be referred to the Exchange Control for determination. Such
applications would normally be approved where it is clear from the
information submitted that the overseas parties concerned are
exposed to a genuine exchange risk in respect of transactions in
Australian currency other than of a capital nature. Facilities
do not extend to transactions involving speculation in exchange.
Applications should include details of the relative commodities
and names of overseas parties and of the Australian suppliers or
importers involved and/or such other information necessary to
confirm that the transactions are bona fide and cover over a genuine
exchange risk is being sought.
Share Transactions
17, The Exchange Control will consider applications for cover
received from resident sharebrokers who are exposed to an exchange
risk in the normal course of their overseas business. Form FEI
or FE2 should be used as applicable and declaration (2) in the
form completed by the applicant, A description of the securities,
the method of settlement and the name of the overseas broker involved
in the transaction should be given in sufficient detail to show
that the applicant has incurred commitments in two currencies.
Invisibles
18, The Exchange Control is prepared to consider applications
for cover over invisible payments or receipts of a non-capital nature
where it is clearly established that the parties concerned are exposed
to a genuine exchange risk. Applications should include full details
of the transactions over which cover is sought and such other information
as may be necessary to confirm that the transactions are bona fide.
RATES
19, The rates fixed for forward exchange contracts in Ehglish
currency are o,lc Aust, per £EI lower for purchases and higher for
sales than the spot rates for each month forward,
20, No rates are fixed for forward dealings in foreign currencies
other than sterling.
14,2.66,


SPECIAL FORWARD EXCHANGE FACILITIES
IN RESPECT OF WOOL TRANSACTIONS
"Overnight" Cover in respect of Wool purchased at Auction
1, To meet the special needs of the trade, wool exporters may,
subject to the general requirements set out in this and other relative
Memoranda, he afforded facilities whereby wool purchased at auction
may be covered on the day following the day of purchase at the rate
of exchange ruling on the purchase date for the forward cover
required,
2, These facilities may be provided on the following basis
(a) Contracts to be completed by 2 p.m, on the day following the
day of purchase;
(b) Contracts to be in sterling only and in respect of wool
bought at the previous day’s auctions for export;
(c) In the event of an overnight alteration in the Australia/
London exchange rate, the Exchange Control to have the right
to require that before completing contracts buyers produce
documentary evidence in respect of (b) and establish that
it was their normal practice to cover their exchange risks
by forward contracts.
Applications on Form FEI for Cover where the relative
Overseas Sale has not been completed. (See E.C. Memorandum BP,
paragraphs 11 and 12 in relation to exports on consignment).
3, The Exchange Control is prepared to consider applications
for forward cover in respect of wool purchased in Australia for
direct sale overseas, prior to the relative overseas sale being
completed, subject to the following :-
(a) the amount involved being normal for the applicant;
(b) the applicant furnishing with the first application of
this nature figures to show the extent of similar business
over the last two years;
(c) the applicant naming the overseas purchaser and method
of settlement within one month of entering into the forward
contract. If applicant fails to do so, the Exchange Control
reserves the right at its discretion to cancel the contract
on such conditions as it determines.
NOTE: In respect of contracts covering wool purchased but not sold,
paragraph (b) of declaration (l) in Application Form FEI
should be deleted.
FEIA "Pool of Cover" Arrangements
4, In addition to the forward exchange arrangements referred to
in paragraph 8 of E.C. Memorandum BP and in the preceding paragraphs
of this Memorandum, the following special facilities (hereinafter
referred to as "FEIA facilities") are available for the use of wool
exporters in covering their forward exchange risks in connection
with wool purchased for export.
1.8.63.


5. The FEIA facilities are available for cover in sterling only
and in respect of wool purchased in Australia for export and coining
within the following two categories:—
(a) Shorn wool being either sheep's wool or lamb's wool whether
greasy, carbonised or scoured;
(b) Wool derived from sheepskins or lambskins.
Applications for cover in other currencies must be made on Form FEI
and are outside the scope of the FEIA facilities.
6. In respect of wool eligible for cover under the FEIA facili-
ties (see paragraph 5 above), wool exporters have the ontion of
covering their exchange risks either under normal forward exchange
arrangements (Application Form FEI) or under the FEIA facilities.
However, where they elect to use the latter they should not be per-
mitted to use other forward exchange arrangements for wool trans-
actions which are eligible for cover under FEIA facilities.
Terms and Conditions of Cover
7. Wool exporters seeking "Pool of Cover" facilities should
make application for cover on Form FEIA,
8. Cover will be provided only on the following basis unless
the Exchange Control otherwise specially approves (see paragraph
9-13 hereof):-
(a) The maximum period for which forward exchange cover shall
be provided for wool purchased for direct overseas sale,
prior to a firm overseas sale being arranged, shall be
six weeks from the date of purchase of the wool by the appli-
cant and the amount of wool so covered shall be normal in
relation to applicant's business;
(b) The maximum period for which forward exchange cover shall
be provided for wool purchased and allocated for shipment
overseas in fulfilment of a firm order or a firm contract
shall be six calendar months from the date of purchase of
the wool by the applicant,
NOTE: In the case of wool purchased prior to overseas sale -
(i) if within the six weeks period of grace from the date of
purchase wool is sold overseas, the wool concerned is then
eligible for six months overall cover from the date of
purchase;
(ii) if the wool is not sold during the six weeks period of grace
from the date of purchase, it becomes uncovered until a
buyer is found; but if the wool is sold within six months
from the date of purchase then the wool concerned becomes
covered from the date of sale until the expiration of a
period of six months from the date of purchase.
Extension of Cover over Wool for Periods outside those stipulated
in Application Form FEIA
9. Wool exporters should make application by letter through their
1.12.58


bankers when it is desired to cover wool under FEIA facilities
for periods outside those set out in (a) and (b) of paragraph 8 hereof.
10. As regards (a), the maximum period of six weeks in which to
find a buyer is applied rigidly and no extension of this period will
be granted.
11. In connection with (b), banks should appreciate that the
various contracts forming part of an exporter's "pool of cover" are
not necessarily related to particular parcels of wool. Consequently,
the approval of an extension in the delivery date of an FEIA contract
(see paragraphs 1 - 4 of E.C. Memorandum BS) does not automatically
involve approval to hold wool covered under the "pool" longer than
the stipulated period of six months from the date of purchase,
12. It follows, therefore, that if a period of six months has
elapsed from the date of purchase of a particular parcel of wool,
and the exporter concerned desires that this wool is to remain
covered as part of his "pool of cover", an application must be made
to his bankers for extension of cover in respect of this wool.
Applications of this nature should be referred to the Exchange Control
and should contain the following information:-
(a) Full particulars of the wool involved, including the type
of wool, the number of bales, date of purchase and date of
sale;
(b) Sterling value of the wool;
(c) Name of the overseas buyer;
(d) Period of cover required, and
(e) Reasons for the application.
13. It is emphasised that without specific approval wool held
longer than the stipulated periods is uncovered irrespective of
the total "pool of cover" held in the name of the exporter concerned.
SPECIAL FORWARD EXCHANGE FACILITIES FOR
EXPORTERS OF SHEEPSKINS, HIDES, TOPS, NOILS
AND WASTE
14. The Exchange Control will consider applications from ex-
porters handling goods coming within the abovementioned categories
which have been purchased in Australia for direct overseas sale
prior to the relative overseas sale being completed. Applications
will be considered subject to the same conditions as are set out
in paragraph 3 above in respect of unsold wool forming the subject
of an application for coyer on Form FEI.
1.12.58


BANKS¹ AUTHORITY TO APPROVE FORWARD EXCHANGE APPLICATIONS
Applications on Forms FEI and FE2
1, Banks may approve applications provided -
(a) contracts cover genuine export or import trade
transactions (consignments excepted) which meet
the requirements of paragraphs 5-6 of
E.C, Memorandum BP f
(b) applicants complete fully and without amendment
declaration (l) of the relative application form -
except as provided for in NOTE below,
(c) the period of cover required does not exceed six
months, and
(d) they are satisfied that delivery of the relative
foreign currency can be made in terms of the
application as submitted,
NOTE; Banks may approve applications for forward cover submitted
on Form FEI
(i) by wool exporters where information on the
method of payment is not given; however this
information must be advised to the Exchange
Control not later than 14 days after the date
of the relative application,
(ii) by exporters generally who are able to complete
declaration (l)(b) and state the expected date
of shipment even though not being in a position
to meet the provisions of declaration (l)(a),
2, Applications not coming within the scope of the foregoing
should be referred to the Exchange Control for determination. In
addition, banks should refer to the Exchange Control all applications
for forward exchange cover submitted by State or Commonwealth
Commodity Marketing Boards or Pools or Government-owned corporations.
3, All applications for forward cover received by London offices
of banks should be referred to the London office of the Reserve Bank,
Applications on Form FEIA
4, Banks are authorised to approve applications on Form FEIA
for forward exchange contracts up to six months forward from the
date of purchase of the relative wool.
1.3,65.


EXTENSIONS, DELIVERIES, ADVICES, ETC.
RELATIVE TO FORWARD EXCHANGE CONTRACTS
Extensions in Delivery Dates of Contracts
1. Banks should impress upon their customers that it is the re-
sponsibility of the customer to ensure that deliveries under forward
exchange contracts are effected within the contract period and that
any extension is at the discretion of the Exchange Control. In
cases, however, where following a written request setting out the
reasons for an extension, banks are satisfied that delivery has been
delayed as a result of factors beyond the control of the customer
concerned, one extension only of one month may he allowed. Advice
of the extension, accompanied by the customer’s written request should
he forwarded to the Exchange-Control.
2. Subsequent applications for extension and any application in
which an extension for a period longer than one month is required
should be referred to the Exchange Control. The application should
be accompanied by a written request from the customer setting out
the reasons for extension.
3. In the case of FEIA contracts, it would normally be expected
that an exporter would seek extension of the delivery dates only
where this course was necessary to keep his "pool of cover" current
and related to the total value of the wool forming the "pool", (See
also E.C. Memorandum BQ).
4. Requests for extensions of forward exchange contracts should
be submitted before the expiry dates of the contracts as there is
no scope for extension to he approved after those dates.
Deliveries under Contracts
5. Delivery under a contract should be made only by the purchase
or sale of the foreign currency at the date of delivery for the pur-
pose of consummating the transactions described in the relative Form
FEI or FE2. A purchase or sale of foreign currency made outside
the period of a given contract cannot he regarded as a delivery under
that contract.
6. In the case of FEIA contracts, woolbuyers may he permitted
to discharge the earliest dated or any forward exchange contract
against the first or any shipment of wool.
7. Woolbuyers will he allowed, when delivering under FEIA con-
tracts, a margin of either under or over the actual contract
amount. This margin may also he exercised following an alteration
in the exchange rate, either as to the total cover in relation to
the wool on hand at that time or as to the individual shipments
comprising this total cover.
1.12.58


Cancellation of Contracts
8. Banks may approve the cancellation of an undelivered balance
not exceeding 5$ of the amount of the contract without prior reference
to Exchange Control.
9. Advices of all cancellations approved by banks should be
forwarded to Exchange Control - see paragraph 12(d) hereof -
accompanied by applicant*s written explanation of the reason for
cancellation.
10. All other applications for cancellations should he submitted
to the Exchange Control for determination and should be supported as
indicated in the preceding paragraph,
11. In respect of any cancellations of contracts in sterling or
the sterling equivalent of other foreign currencies (except
U.S, and Canadian dollars) loading at current rates for the full
period of the contract will he payable to the Reserve Bank.
Advices to Exchange Control of Contracts. Extensions. Deliveries
and Cancellations
12. Schedules of forward exchange business should he despatched
to the Exchange Control daily and should reach the capital city
offices of the Reserve Bank not later than 2 p.m, on the day
following the day on which the transactions took place. The
schedules should contain particulars of -
(a) new contracts with customers approved under banks* authority;
(h) deliveries (partial and full) made under contracts with
customers (except U.S, dollar and Canadian dollar contracts -
see paragraph 17 hereof);
(c) extensions of delivery dates of contracts approved by banks;
(d) cancellations of contracts approved by banks,
13. It is recognised that exceptional and unavoidable delays may
occur in the submission of delivery schedules and, accordingly, banks
should record against transactions included in such schedules the
actual dates on which deliveries under the relative contracts took
place. In addition, deliveries recorded on bank schedules which
were made to a bank other than the contracting bank, should be
appropriately identified and the name of the bank receiving the
delivery shown against the related transaction.
9.1.61.


14. Loadings payable to the Reserve Bank (see paragraph 16)
under contracts should he paid as deliveries (whether partial or
full) and cancellations are made.
15, Where application for the approval of a new contract or
extension of the delivery date of an existing contract has been
submitted to the Exchange Control for decision, the Exchange Control
will, in the event of approval being forthcoming, record the new
contract or extended delivery date as the case may be on the basis
approved. Should any such approval not be availed of, prompt
advice should be furnished to the Exchange Control in order that
records may be adjusted and appropriate action taken.
Covering Inter-Bank Contracts
16, Advice from the Exchange Control of noting or approval of
a new contract (with the exception of contracts in Canadian or
U.S. dollars) will constitute a covering contract between the
Reserve Bank and the bank concerned for the purchase or sale,
as the case may be, of the sterling amount of the contract or the
approximate sterling equivalent if the contract is in a foreign
currency other than sterling. Loadings on contracts (contracts
in Canadian or U.S, dollars are excepted) are for the account of
the Reserve Bank and will be at the rate quoted in paragraph 19 of
E.C, Memorandum BP.
17. In respect of contracts in Canadian or U.S, dollars, the
contracting bank will retain the exchange risk and the approval or
noting of such dollar contracts by the Exchange Control will not in
itself constitute covering contracts for the sterling equivalent
thereof, (See E.C, Memorandum BD). It follows that in such cases
there will be no loading payment to the Reserve Bank and that
advice of deliveries will not be required.
Documentary Evidence
18. The Reserve Bank reserves the right at any time to request
the production of documentary evidence to substantiate statements
made in Application Forms FEI and FE2 or to establish that the
terms and conditions set out in part (l) of Form FEIA are strictly
observed. In the event of such documentary evidence not being
produced when requested, the Reserve Bank reserves the right at
its discretion to cancel the contract on such conditions as it
determines.
References to Exchange Control
19, Where in terms of these instructions reference to the Exchange
Control is necessary, such reference should be made to the capital
city office of the Reserve Bank in the State in which the transaction
is being initiated.
9.1.61.


SECTION 3 - MONETARY CONTROL
(INCLUDING NON-RESIDENT CONTROL)


APPLICATIONS FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY
Application Forma
Exchange Control Form A 1 Application for Foreign Currency other
than for Travelling Purposes,
Exchange Control Form A 3 - Application for Foreign Currency for
Travelling Purposes, For full requirements in connection with this
form see E,C, Memorandum CX,
Completion and Submission of Forms
1, A person requiring to purchase foreign currency must lodge
with his hank an application on the appropriate form, except as
stated below (paragraph 5), Where a person does not maintain a
hank account his application may be submitted to the Exchange Control
direct or to any bank, (Banks should carefully note the require-
ments of paragraphs 6 and 7 of E,C, Memorandum CD in this regard),
2, Banks should ensure that applicants state carefully and
accurately the purpose for which the foreign currency is required
and furnish fully all the information requested in connection with
the transaction concerned. Each application form should he signed
by the applicant personally or by his duly authorised agent.
3, In those cases where a bank cannot approve the sale of the
foreign currency in terms of the authorities set out in the following
Memoranda, the application should he submitted to the Exchange Control
in duplicate. The duplicate of the relative application form will
be returned to the hank concerned with the Exchange Control decision
enfaced thereon,
4, As a general rule such applications should be submitted
through a bank*s Capital office to the Exchange Control in the
respective Capital city in each State.
Transactions which do not require an Application Form
5, Application forms for foreign currency are not required
in connection with the following types of transactions unless
reference to the Exchange Control is necessary
(a) Documentary payments for goods imported or
to be imported into Australia or an External
Territory of the Commonwealth,
1.6.64,


(b) Payments (including the provision of foreign currency
for travelling expenses) not exceeding the equivalent
of SA2SO in any one case,
NOTE;
(i) "Documentary payments" referred to in (a) are all
payments associated with the surrender of shipping
documents as in the case of, for example, drawings
under documentary letters of credit or documentary
bills negotiated or collected,
(ii) In respect of (a) and (b) it will be sufficient for
a statement to be made on the appropriate voucher,
draft or telegraphic transfer requisition, currency
sales slip, etc,, indicating the purpose of the
transaction.
Availability of Approvals
6, Approved applications which are not availed of within a
reasonable time (not normally exceeding one month) should be
regarded as lapsed, unless the relative approval specifies a
longer period,
7, Where an approved transaction is not proceeded with, the
Exchange Control should be suitably advised.
Disposal of Application Forms
8, Copies of Exchange Control Forms Al and A 3 approved by
banks should be forwarded to the Exchange Control at weekly
intervals through the chief office of each bank in the Capital
cities,
9, Instructions regarding Forms NR Approved by banks are
set out in paragraphs 15 and 16 of E.C, Memorandum KA,
14.2,66


GENERAL AUTHORITY FOR BANKS TO APPROVE
APPLICATIONS FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY
1, Banks are authorised to sell foreign currency without
reference to the Exchange Control for' the classes of transactions
to the extent, and in the manner, set out in the following
Memoranda
Payment for Imports into Australia
including the External Territories
of the Commonwealth - E.C, Memorandum CJ
Current Payments - E.C, Memorandum CP
Life Assurance - E.C, Memorandum CQ
Distributions from Deceased
Estates - E.C, Memorandum CR
Sustenance Payments E.C, Memorandum CS
Charitable and Religious Payments - E,C* Memorandum CT
Sundry Personal Payments - E,C, Memorandum CV
Travelling Expenses and
Emigration - E.C, Memorandum CX
Visiting Tourists E.C, Memorandum CY
Payment in Australian Currency
for Fares, Accommodation and
Incidentals for Travel Abroad - E.C, Memorandum DA
Australian Notes and Coin - E.C, Memorandum EA
Despatch from Australia of
Currency (including cheques
payable in Australia) - E.C, Memorandum FB
Futures Operations - E.C, Memorandum JA
If an application does not fall into a category which can he
approved by a bank in terms of this general authority, it should
he referred to the Exchange Control for determination.
Currency and Manner of Payment
2, The appropriate currency and the manner in which payments
should be effected to countries outside Australia are set out
in E.C, Memorandum CF,
1.8.63.


3, All payments approved by banks mast be effected in the currency
and in the manner specified in that Memorandum in respect of transfers
to the country of permanent residence of the person to whom the payment
is due excepting where imports are concerned when, as a general
principle, payments should be made to the supplier resident in the
country or area of origin of the goods and in a manner appropriate
to that country or area. Where, however, a payment is to be made
to an overseas Sterling Area resident in respect of goods of non-
Sterling Area origin, such payment should be made in a manner appropriate
for Sterling Area payments with an indication that the Australian
Exchange Control would be agreeable to the on-transfer of funds
necessary to settle with the non-Sterling Area supplier, (Refer
also E.C, Memorandum CJ, paragraph 5), Cases which do not conform
to the foregoing requirements should be referred to the Exchange
Control for determination.
Application Forms
4, An application for foreign currency should be completed
by each applicant in accordance with the requirements laid down
in E.C. Memorandum CA,
5, All application forms approved by banks are to be disposed
of in terms of paragraph 8 of E.C. Memorandum CA.
Duplication of Transactions
6, The co-operation of banks is sought to ensure that requests
for foreign currency are not duplicated, particularly by submission
through more than one bank or branch.
7, If an applicant for foreign currency is unknown to a bank,
the latter should enquire if he has a banking account and, if so,
the applicant should, as a general rule, be referred to his own
banker. If he has no banking account, a written statement should
be made to this effect and also that an application has not been
submitted to the Exchange Control or another bank.
Residential Status
8, Where banks are satisfied from their knowledge of the case,
or from enquiries made, that a person is residing permanently
in the country to which a remittance is to be directed, they may
treat such a person as being a permanent resident of the country
concerned for the purpose of this general authority.
9, If a bank is in doubt as to residential status, a ruling
should be obtained from the Exchange Control.
1.8.63.


METHODS OF EFFECTING APPROVED PAYMENTS
Payments to Residents of the Sterling Area
1. Approved payments to residents of Sterling Area countries
other than Australia may be made in sterling or in any of the
currencies of those countries.
Payments to Residents of Countries outside the Sterling Area
2. Approved payments to countries outside the Sterling Area
should he effected in either -
(a) sterling - in which case cover should be remitted for
credit of an External Account with a bank in the United
Kingdom, or
(b) the currency of any country outside the Sterling Area.
3. Payment instructions with telegraphic and mail transfers in
sterling arranged through London should indicate the type of
sterling account to be credited or the foreign currency in which
retransfer has been approved,
4. All sterling drafts issued on London for negotiation outside
the Sterling Area should be enfaced as follows:-
"Approval of the Australian Exchange Control held for
credit to an External Account".
Sterling drafts issued on points outside the Sterling Area need not
be enfaced wi-th this clause.
5. Circular letters of credit and travellers 8 cheques issued in
sterling should be enfaced with the following clause
"Issued with the approval of the Australian Exchange
Control. This document is negotiable throughout the
world."
6. No special instructions or clauses are required in connection
with instruments expressed in currencies of countries outside the
Sterling Area.
Remittances to China via Hong Kong
7. In effecting approved payments to residents of China through
Hong Kong, banks should state for the information of the Hong Kong
beneficiary that Australian Exchange Control approval is held for
on-transfer of the funds to China.
18. 7.60


PAYMENT FOR IMPORTS INTO AUSTRALIA INCLUDING
THE EXTERNAL TERRITORIES OF THE COMMONWEALTH
Application Forms
1, Application forms (Form Al) are required -
(a) where reference to the Exchange Control is necessary
(see paragraphs 2 and 11 hereof),
(b) in respect of clean payments for imports in excess
of the equivalent of SA2SO in any one case.
In this context "clean" payments are all payments other than those
associated with the surrender of shipping documents as in the case
of, for example, drawings under documentary letters of credit,
documentary bills negotiated or collected. Application forms in
respect of "clean" payments should show
(i) the approximate date of arrival of the goods,
(ii) a brief description of the goods and their country
of origin where this information is available,
(iii) where applicable, the nature of any documents sighted
at time of payment as evidence that the goods are
in transit to or have arrived in Australia,
Submission of Applications to Exchange Control
2, Applications for foreign currency in respect of the following
classes of transactions should be referred to the Exchange Control
for determination
(a) payments (whether clean or documentary) for imports
which are unusually large in relation to the past
practice of the importer concerned,
(h) clean payments for imports where satisfactory evidence
of the movement of the relative goods (bills of lading
in the case of goods in transit or other evidence as
outlined in paragraph 9 below in the case of goods
already landed) is not produced at the time of payment
and the total of such payments in any one month for
any one importer exceeds the foreign currency equivalent
of SAIOOOO,
14.2,66


(c) payment* for good* where settlement ha* been delayed
more than six month* from the date the relative good*
were landed.
(d) other payments not covered by paragraphs 4 and 5 below,
3. In those cases where applications are submitted to Exchange
Control because the payments are unusually large in relation to
the past practice of the importer concerned, banks should show the
value of goods imported by the applicant during the preceding 12
months.
Banks* Authority
4. Subject to the requirements set out in this memorandum, banks
may sell appropriate foreign currency in payment for goods imported
into Australia and the External Territories of the Commonwealth,
Currency and Manner of Payment
5. The general principle to be observed in selling foreign
currency in payment for Imports is that payment should be made to
the supplier resident in the country or area of origin of the
goods and in a manner appropriate to that country or area. Where,
however, a payment is to be made to an overseas Sterling Area
resident in respect of goods of non-Sterling Area origin, such
payment should be made in a manner appropriate for Sterling Area
payments with an indication that the Australian Exchange Control
would he agreeable to the on-transfer of funds necessary to settle
with the non-Sterling Area supplier.
Expiry Bates of Documentary Letters of Credit
6. Except with the prior approval of the Exchange Control,
the validity of documentary letters of credit should not exceed
12 months.
Supervision by Banks
7. Banks should supervise that when they sell foreign currency
in payment for imports, the relative goods are received in due
course into Australia or an External Territory of the Commonwealth
as the case may be.
8. Sales made against customary shipping documents which include
On Board or Through Railroad bills of lading will require no further
supervision. In any case involving a clean payment, however, if
suitable evidence of the movement of the relative goods to Australia
or one of its External Territories is not available at the time the
foreign currency is sold, an undertaking should be given by the
importer to furnish such evidence in due course. Banks should
adopt a satisfactory system to relate the evidence received to the
sales of foreign currency made.
1.8.63.


9. Apart from the customary shipping documents mentioned in
paragraph 8, suitable evidence of the Importation of the goods would
include relative Customs entries. Customs stamped Invoices or
auditors* certificates. In no Instance should reliance on the
standing of the applicant with his bankers be deemed sufficient.
10, Normally if goods for which clean payments have been made
have not been imported within a period of six months from the date
of the sale of the foreign currency the matter should be taken up
with the importer and the case brought under the notice of the
Exchange Control, However, where the expected arrival date shown
in the relative application for foreign currency is more than six
months after the date of payment, banks need only Inform the
Exchange Control in cases where importation of the goods is delayed
beyond the expected date of arrival appearing in the application form.
11. In all cases where reference to the Exchange Control is
necessary the relative application form for foreign currency should
embody a statement by the bank as to the supervisory steps which
have been or will be taken in connection with the transaction.
12, Where foreign currency sold to an importer is not availed of
for the purpose Intended within a reasonable time, it should be
resold to the importer's bank. However, the importer may apply
for Exchange Control approval for such currency to be utilised for
the Importation of further goods or for another purpose.
1.8.63.


CURRENT PAYMENTS
See also E.C, Memorandum JA - Futures Operations.
Definition
1. The types of payments covered by this Memorandum are -
(a) The following forms of Income
(i) salaries, wages, bonuses and pensions;
(li) earnings of overseas residents working
temporarily in Australia;
(iii) interest, dividends, profits, rents and
annuities;
(iv) royalties, performance rights, hiring charges
and fees for technical "know-how";
(v) commissions and brokerage;
(b) Insurance and reinsurance (premiums and payment of
claims);
NOTE: See E.C, Memorandum CQ for "Life Assurance".
(c) Surplus freight and passage money collections and freight
on exports;
(d) Patents and trademarks - registration and renewal fees;
(e) Short weight and underyield claims and freight and
loyalty rebates.
Banks* Authority
2, Except as stated in Paragraph 3 hereof banks are authorised
to sell appropriate foreign currency for remittance to permanent
residents of other countries for any of the types of payments
outlined above subject to the following requirements
(a) Banks must take effective steps to ensure the genuineness
of the transactions described in the relative application
forms which should give full details and show the
manner in which the amounts concerned have been calculated.
In particular, banks should satisfy themselves that no
payment of a capital nature is involved and, in general,
applications should be supported by suitable documentary
evidence such as invoices, statements, financial
accounts, audit certificates or correspondence, as
applicable, establishing that the amount to be remitted
is due and payable to the overseas party concerned.
1.8.63.


(b) Remittance of royalties, performance rights, hiring
charges, service fees or other earnings in Australia
by persons resident outside the Sterling Area and in
Hong Kong under contracts or agreements with Australian
residents should not be approved unless the relative
contracts or agreements have been entered into with
the written approval of the Exchange Control (exceptions
are those cases where contracts or agreements were
completed prior to August 1941),
3, The following types of transactions are excluded from the
authority contained in Paragraph 2 and applications should be
referred to the Exchange Control for determination in each case -
(a) Funds which have accrued to the favouree more than twelve
months prior to the date of application for remittance,
(b) Dividends to overseas residents holding controlling
interests in Australian companies which have been declared
out of profits earned prior to the last completed financial
year of the particular Australian company,
4, Copies of application forms approved by banks and forwarded to
the Exchange Control in terms of E O C„ Memorandum CA should be noted
with details of, or be accompanied by, any supporting documentary
evidence produced.
1.8.63.


LIFE ASSURANCE
1. Banks are authorised to sell to residents of Australia the
appropriate foreign currency to cover payment to overseas insurers
of renewal premiums on life and endowment assurance policies
provided -
(a) each transaction is in accord with past practice
(i.e. same amount involved and payment has previously
been approved from Australia), and
(h) the renewal premium notice or other documentary
evidence of the amount due is produced.
2. The authority in paragraph 1 hereof does not include payment
of initial or increased premiums on life and endowment policies or
the purchase of annuities. Any applications for the payment of
such premiums or any other premiums not covered by the above authority
should he referred to Exchange Control for determination, accompanied
where a premium on an existing policy is involved, by the following
information;-
(a) when and where the policy was taken out;
(h) the residential status of the assured at that time;
(c) from what funds premiums have previously been paid.
3. Any applications for foreign currency to cover payment of
assurance claims (except where E.C. Memorandum CR - "Distributions
from Deceased Estates" - would apply), surrender proceeds, loans or
advances against policies, or transfers of reserve values of
policies, should also be referred to Exchange Control for
determination.
28. 8.59


DISTRIBUTIONS FROM DECEASED ESTATES
1. Banks are authorised to sell to residents of Australia the
appropriate foreign currency to cover remittances to beneficiaries
permanently resident outside Australia where the amount of the
remittance represents a current distribution by way of legacy,etc.
from the estate of a person who at the date of his death was
permanently residing in Australia.
2. For the purpose of this Memorandum a distribution is
regarded as "current" where the funds involved have become avail-
able to the beneficiary not more than 12 months prior to the date
of application for remittance.
3. The relative application forms should include the follow-
ing information:-
(a) Date of death;
(b) Residential status of the deceased at the date of death;
(c) Date Probate or Letters of Administration, etc., issued;
(d) Date funds became available for distribution;
(e) Residential status of the beneficiary.
20.1.59


SUSTENANCE PAYMENTS
1, Banks are authorised to sell to any person permanently
resident in Australia appropriate foreign currency up to the
equivalent of SA2OO per month for payment to persons permanently
resident overseas for sustenance and other compassionate reasons.
Banks are authorised to sell foreign currency at this rate to enable
transfers to be effected up to three months in advance,
2, Banks should take all reasonable steps to ensure that
unauthorised foreign currency transactions, including the
exportation of capital, are not effected under the guise of
sustenance remittances. In particular, banks should be satisfied
as to the identity of the applicant before selling foreign currency
under this authority,
3, All applications for sustenance remittances should be
supported by the following statement by the applicant -
(a) Term of residence of beneficiary in present country
of domicile ~,,,,,,,,,,,,, years,
(b) Amounts remitted by me through hanks in Australia
during each of the past three months for sustenance
to persons permanently resident overseas are as
follows
(Month)
. . , . ........... $
Where a written application is not required (set.
E.C, Memorandum CA paragraph 5) banks should make suitable
enquiries in order to establish as far as possible that the
beneficiary is a permanent resident of the country to which
the remittance is to be directed and that the current limit
for sustenance remittances (see paragraph l) is not exceeded
without Exchange Control approval,
4, Applications for amounts greater than covered by paragraph
1 should be referred to the Exchange Control with documentary evidence
of the favouree*s need for financial assistance. Banks should also
refer any applications where they believe that the applicant may be
remitting funds through another hank or branch and that the total
remittances would exceed the above limit.
14.2.66


CHARITABLE AMD RELIGIOUS PAYMENTS
Banks are authorised to sell to residents of Australia
appropriate foreign currency to cover bona fide collections
for and donations to charitable organisations and religious
bodies in countries overseas.
1.8.63.


SUNDRY PERSONAL PAYMENTS
1, Payments covered by this memorandum include the
following
(a) Payments for services, fees, rates, taxes,
subscriptions to societies, clubs, etc,
and other like commitments due by the
applicant;
(b) Personal gifts;
(c) Repayment of debts,
2, Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3, banks are
authorised to sell to any one remitter who is a resident of
Australia the appropriate foreign currency up to the equivalent
of $A.1,000 in any period of twelve months for payments to
persons permanently resident outside Australia,
3, Where appropriate, banks should satisfy themselves that
the amounts sought are properly due and should take all reasonable
steps to ensure that unauthorised foreign currency transactions
are not effected under the guise of, particularly, gift remittances.
14.2.66


TRAVELLING EXPENSES AND EMIGRATION
See also -
E.C. Memorandum CY - Visiting Tourists.
E.C. Memorandum DA - Payment of Fares, etc. in Australian Currency
for Travel Abroad.
E.C. Memorandum DC - Importation and Exportation of Currency,
Securities, Gold and certain other Articles
of Value by Travellers.
General
1. Where application forms are required in connection with the
sale of foreign currency for travelling expenses and emigration,
Exchange Control Form A. 3 should be used. (See E.C. Memorandum CA).
2. In those instances where reference to the Exchange Control is
necessary, the application forms should be submitted in duplicate.
3. Banks should impress on their clients who intend travelling
overseas, the desirability of lodging their applications for funds in
good time prior to their departure, although not more than approximately
one month ahead of that date. Applicants should include at the foot
of Form A. 3 in their declarations as to total foreign currency already
made available, particulars of any amount paid or to be paid in
Australian currency for accommodation and incidentals.
4. All funds made available for travelling purposes in connection
with visits or emigration from Australia must be sold only against
production of the relative passage ticket or other confirmation ,of the
applicant's impending departure.
5. Banks should bring to the notice of all intending travellers
the provisions of Regulation 5 (5) of the Banking (Foreign Exchange)
Regulations which read:-
"Where any foreign currency is made available to any person by
the Bank or by an agent of the Bank for use for any purpose,
or subject to any conditions, that person shall not use that
foreign currency otherwise than for that purpose, or shall
not fail to comply with those conditions, as the case may be."
It follows that any foreign currency provided for travel purposes may
only be used for those purposes and care should be exercised to ensure
that transfers of capital are not made under the guise of travel
expenditure. Any unused balance should be resold to a bank in
Australia upon the traveller's return to this country.


6, The attention of hanks is also drawn to the following matters
in connection with the sale of funds for travel
(a) The restriction on the export of Australian notes and
coin, except as provided for in paragraph 13 of this
Memorandum;
(b) The issue of an Exchange Control Form E in certain
circumstances to persons taking funds with them on
departure from Australia - see E.C, Memorandum DC;
(c) The enfacement of travel instruments in accordance
with the instructions contained in paragraph 12
of this Memorandum.
Banks* Authority
7, Banks are authorised to sell foreign currency to Australian
residents as follows
(a) For any type of travel except emigration -Up to the
equivalent of $A4,000 per person in any period of 12
months with availability throughout the world;
(b) For emigration —Up to the equivalent of $A4,000 per
person on departure or within 12 months thereafter,
appropriate to the emigrants intended country of
permanent residence. Within this limit funds may be
made available to meet the emigrant's genuine travelling
expenses in any other countries to be visited en route,
NOTE: Emigration applications should contain a statement by
the applicant of his intention to take up permanent residence
in the particular country. Where that country is outside
the Sterling Area, the application should also include a signed
list of the emigrant's remaining Sterling Area assets showing
where and by whom they are to be held after his departure
from Australia, ("Nil" statements should be furnished),
8, Applications not covered by the foregoing should be referred
to the Exchange Control for determination supported as indicated
in paragraphs 9 and 10,
Reference to Exchange Control
9, All applications (except emigration applications - see
paragraph 10 (e)) submitted to the Exchange Control should contain
the following information
14,2.66


(a) The purpose of the journey and the duration of the
visit overseas;
(b) The basis upon which the funds requested have been
assessed as necessary;
(c) The value of overseas accommodation and incidentals
paid for or to be paid for in Australian currency;
(d) Where the traveller is already abroad - the amount
of foreign currency made available during the preceding
12 months for the same visit, the period the traveller
has already been abroad and an outline of expenditure
already incurred.
10, In addition, the following information and documents should
be supplied according to the type of travel involved
(a) Private Travel - Applicants should state the special
circumstances in connection with their visit overseas
that give rise to the need for funds in excess of
$A4,000,
(b) Business Travel ~ Written advice as to
(i) the name and address of the firm or company
which the traveller is representing, together
with his designation and/or technical
qualifications;
(ii) the extent to which the firm or company to be
represented is bearing the costs of the visit;
(iii) if funds in excess of $A4,000 are requested
for more than one representative, the reasons
for the additional representation, and where
applicable the separate fields of enquiry to
be covered,
(c) Study Travel - Applicants should state their present
academic qualifications and the nature of the course
involved. Evidence should also be furnished of
acceptance for study at the particular overseas
institution and the costs payable to that institution,
(d) Health Travel - Applications should be supported by
(i) a medical certificate from the patient*s doctor
confirming that it is necessary for the traveller
to undertake the proposed trip and giving an
estimate of the time necessary for diagnosis,
treatment and/or convalescence;
14.2.66


(ii) any evidence available as to the costs of
treatment, hospitalisation, etc, that will
be or have already been incurred overseas,
(e) Emigration - Applications should be supported by such
evidence or information as is available which would
confirm that the emigrant genuinely intends to take
up or has already taken up permanent residence in the
new country.
In the case of applications by persons who have not
left Australia, advice should also be furnished of
the special circumstances that give rise to the need
for funds in excess of $A4,000 upon departure.
Issue of Banking Instruments in Australian Currency
11, If desired, banks may issue travel instruments in Australian
currency provided that these are suitably claused as to their
availability and form portion of the travellers authorised
foreign currency allocation.
Availability of Travel Instruments
12, Travel instruments issued in sterling or Australian currency
should bear one of the following clauses
(a) If specifically for use only in the Sterling Area -
"Issued with the approval of the Australian Exchange
Control. This document is negotiable only in the
Sterling Area,"
(b) In all other cases -
"Issued with the approval of the Australian Exchange
Control, This document is negotiable throughout
the world,"
Exportation of Australian Notes and Coin by Travellers
13, Travellers leaving Australia may take with them SAIOO in
Australian notes and coin (other than gold coin) without special
authority provided that no more than SA4 is in the form of coin.
Any requests by travellers for permission to take a greater sum
in Australian notes and coin should be referred to the Exchange
Control for decision.
14.2.66


VISITING TOURISTS
See also E.C. Memorandum DC - Import and Export of
Currency,Securities,Gold and certain other Articles
of value by Travellers.
1. For the purposes of this Memorandum the term "visiting tourist'
is to he interpreted as a person visiting Australia whose permanent
domicile is abroad and whose stay has not exceeded a period of six
months.
2. Subject to the observance of any other Exchange Control
requirements regarding the negotiation of overseas notes and coin,
banks are authorised to sell to a visiting tourist departing from
Australia;-
(a) the currency of any country outside the Sterling Area
against payment in another such currency or Australian
currency acquired here by the sale of a currency of a
country outside the Sterling Area;
(b) any Sterling Area currency against payment in any
foreign currency or Australian currency acquired here by
the sale of any foreign currency.
3. Any application not covered by the authority in paragraph 2
hereof should be referred to the Exchange Control for determination.
15 . 5 .59


PAYMENT IN AUSTRALIAN CURRENCY FOR FARES,
ACCOMMODATION AND INCIDENTALS FOR TRAVEL ABROAD
Fares and other Costs of Transport
1, Travel agents, shipping and airline companies, etc, may
accept payment in Australian currency for overseas transportation
without prior reference to the Exchange Control, as follows
(a) For Australian residents - The cost of any form
of public transport (including rental hire cars and
taxis) to, from and within overseas countries,
(b) For_ non-residents of Australia - Fares for any journey
to or from Australia by scheduled public transport
provided the journey is by a normal direct route.
Accommodation and Incidentals
2, Travel agents, shipping and airline companies, etc, may
also accept from Australian residents payment in Australian currency
for the cost of overseas accommodation and other incidentals,
without deduction from travellers* authorised foreign currency
allocations or completion of application forms for foreign currency.
References to Exchange Control
3, Specific Exchange Control approval must be obtained before
Australian currency is accepted in payment of fares, accommodation
or incidentals not covered by the foregoing general authorities.
Refunds
4, A refund on a wholly or partially unutilised ticket or
prepaid accommodation, etc,, may be made to a traveller outside
Australia provided the total amount of the refund does not exceed
the equivalent of SA2SO, Applications for refunds of greater
amounts should be referred to Exchange Control for determination.
Settlement Applications
5, Banks may sell appropriate foreign currency to enable
travel agents, shipping and airline companies, etc, to settle
commitments in respect of overseas travel facilities paid for in
Australian currency provided that relative applications contain
particulars of the items being settled either in the application
form itself or on supporting schedules. Copies of any such
schedules should accompany application forms approved by banks
and forwarded to the Exchange Control in terms of E.C, Memorandum CA,
14.2.66


IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION OF CURRENCY, SECURITIES,
GOLD AND CERTAIN OTHER ARTICLES OF VALUE BY TRAVELLERS
IMPORTATION
1 0 In order to facilitate re-exportation at a later date it is
in the interests of travellers who are not normally residents of
Australia and who arrive in Australia for temporary residence only,
to have a record made in their passports of the following items in
their possession, being their own bona fide personal effects :
(a) Australian currency and/or foreign currency (for
definitions see E.C, Memorandum AG);
!h) Securities (for definition see E.C, Memorandum RB)j
c) Gold;
d) Antiques, dressed fur skins and goods manufactured
from fur skins, industrial diamonds, jewellery, pearls,
platinum, precious and semi-precious stones, refined
silver, watches with cases of precious metal and works
of art.
The entries in the travellers* passports will he made by a Customs
officer upon request when clearance is being effected,
EXPORTATION
Australian Currency and/or Foreign Currency
2. Except as provided for in paragraph 4, every person who is
departing from Australia and is taking with him any of the following
Australian and/or foreign currency items must be in possession of a
certificate on Exchange Control Form E ;-
(i) Australian notes and coin exceeding SAIOO or
including more than SA4 in coin (see paragraph
13 of E,C, Memorandum CX) ■
(ii) Foreign currency notes valued in excess of SA2SO;
(iii) Travel instruments sold other than by an Australian
bank, Thos, Cook & Son (Australasia) Pty, Ltd, or
an Australian office of The American Express Company
Inc,
3, Australian currency in excess of SAIOO exported with approval
by, and all foreign currency notes sold to, a traveller are regarded
as forming part of the traveller's authorised foreign currency
allocation.
4, A visitor who has been in Australia not longer than six months
will not require a certificate on Form E on departure where the
currency items to he taken out of Australia are not of value greater
than or in form different from the items which were brought into
Australia and recorded in his passport on arrival in this country.
14,2.66


Procedure in issuing Form E
5, Banks should complete Form E in duplicate and insert all
particulars required in terms of instructions appearing on the form.
Blank spaces should he ruled through in order to preclude unauthorised
entries being made in the forms after their completion. Banks will
appreciate that a Form E need not be issued to a traveller who is
taking out of Australia Australian and foreign currency notes within
the limits mentioned in (i) and (ii) of paragraph 2 hereof and
travel instruments other than those referred to in (iii) of that
paragraph. Where it is necessary to issue a Form E, only currency
in excess of the limits mentioned in (i) and (ii) and travel
instruments referred to in (iii) of paragraph 2 hereof should be
included in the certificate on the form,
6, The certificate is valid for three months only from the
date of issue of the relative Form E and it is important that only
one such form should be held by a traveller when he leaves Australia,
7, The original copy of the form should be handed to the
traveller and the duplicate despatched to the Exchange Control through
the Capital city office of the issuing bank in the State concerned.
Securities
8, Approval under the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
is required to cover the exportation of securities from Australia,
9, Travellers desiring to take securities out of Australia
should apply to the Reserve Bank for such approval through their
Australian bankers.
Gold
10, Apart from the gold content, not exceeding SA2SO in value,
of a travellers personal effects (see paragraph 11 hereof), a
person may not, except with the approval in writing of the Reserve
Bank, take or send any gold out of Australia,
Other Articles of Value
11, Export licences are required by travellers departing from
Australia to cover their bona fide baggage and personal effects and
bona fide household effects where, in any individual case -
(a) the total gold content thereof exceeds a value of SA2SO, or
(b) the total value of goods listed in paragraph l(d) above,
which are included therein, exceeds $A2,000, or where any
of these items has not been the personal property of the
traveller for at least 12 months.
14.2.66


12, The export licence referred to is normally issued only upon
the recommendation of the Reserve Bank to which a request should
first be submitted on Form C,D,2 which also embodies the application
for the necessary export licence.
General
13, Where temporary residents of Australia and visiting tourists
find it necessary to obtain upon their departure from Australia
authority to export currency, securities, gold and/or the personal
effects referred to above, they may be required to produce evidence
to the Reserve Bank or to an agent of that Bank that the articles
of value in their possession were brought into Australia upon their
arrival,
14, Persons who have come from countries in the Sterling Area
and who intend to travel to non-sterling area countries may be
required to establish also that they have the permission of the
Exchange Control in the country from which they came to take with
them the items referred to in the preceding paragraph to a country
outside the Sterling Area,
15, To summarise, banks should note that before departure
from Australia a traveller may be called upon by a Customs officer
to produce the following
(a) A certificate on Exchange Control Form E if Australian
notes and- coin in excess of the general allowance of
SAIOO or including more than SA4 in coin, foreign
currency notes in excess of SA2SO in value, or travel
instruments not sold by a bank in Australia, Thos, Cook
& Son (Australasia) Pty, Ltd, or an Australian office of
The American Express Company Inc, are being taken out (see
paragraph 4for exception in the case of visitors),
(b) An authority from the Reserve Bank to export any securities
which are to be taken out,
(c) An authority from the Reserve Bank to export any gold
(other than gold contained in the items referred to in
paragraph 11),
(d) An export licence to cover personal baggage and effects
and/or household effects where necessary,
16, Banks should advise intending travellers who are their
customers of the foregoing requirements and, wherever possible,
should arrange to complete the necessary application forms for
submission to the Exchange Control,
14.2.66


AUSTRALIAN NOTES AND COIN
Exportation by Travellers
1, A traveller from Australia may take with him up to SAIOO
in Australian notes and coin (other than gold coin) without special
authority provided that no more than SA4 is in the form of coin,
2, This general allowance should not be included in the
certificate issued by banks to travellers on Form E (See E.C,
Memorandum DC),
Repatriation of Australian Notes
3, Banks are authorised to reimburse any overseas resident
for parcels of Australian notes sent to Australia for collection
(a) in foreign currency appropriate to the country or
area of the sender, or
(b) by crediting an appropriate bank account in Australia,
4, Details of all Australian notes repatriated by overseas
residents are required by Exchange Control, To this end banks
should complete pro forma application forms Al or NR respectively
for remittances to all countries or credits to bank accounts of
residents of countries outside the Sterling Area and forward
copies to Exchange Control at weekly intervals. In respect of
credits to bank accounts of Sterling Area residents, banks may
furnish details in the manner most convenient. Suitable methods
would be
(a) submission at quarterly intervals (in January,
April, July and October) of returns showing
bulk totals of such credits, or
(b) completion of pro forma application forms NR
as for residents outside the Sterling Area,
14.2.66


DESPATCH FROM AUSTRALIA OF CURRENCY
(INCLUDING CHEQUES PAYABLE IN AUSTRALIA)
1. The despatch from Australia of Australian currency, including
cheques, or of foreign currency obtained other than from the Reserve
Bank or an agent hank, is prohibited except with the authority of
the Reserve Bank, (For definitions of "Australian currency" and
"foreign currency 4 ' see E.C. Memorandum AG,)
Cheques payable in Australia
2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, hanks may authorise the
despatch abroad of cheques payable in Australia, provided -
(a) the payments are in respect of current dividends or
interest, and
(b) hanks are satisfied that the amounts involved are
properly due to persons permanently resident out of
Australia.
Relative applications should he supported by -
(a) schedules showing the name and address of the payee of
each cheque, and
(b) the amount of each cheque,
3. Banks should refer to the Exchange Control for consideration
any case where -
(a) the submission of the ahovementtoned schedules would
present particular problems to the applicant concerned,
or
(b) payments other than in respect of interest and dividends
are involved,
4. Copies of applications approved by banks and forwarded to
the Exchange Control in terms of paragraph 8 of E.C. Memorandum CA
should be accompanied by copies of the schedules mentioned above.
5. Cheques, the despatch of which is approved, should be enfaced
with an appropriate clause indicating that Exchange Control authority
has been given for despatch to the nominated country of residence
of the payee,
6. A bank receiving such a cheque for collection from a country
in the same Monetary Area as the country named on the cheque may
make the proceeds available in a manner appropriate to that country
without further enquiry from the Exchange Control angle.
1.8.63.


7, A bank receiving from abroad for collection a cheque payable
in Australia which does not bear the aboveraentioned clause or which
is received from a country in a Monetary Area different from that
applicable to the country named on the cheque, should ensure that
appropriate Exchange Control approval has been sought and obtained
before making the proceeds available,
8, In practice, the collecting bank should complete Application
Form A 1 (in duplicate) as far as possible and, if applicable,
forward both copies with the cheque to the paying bank. The latter
may approve the application if it comes within the scope of the
authority delegated to banks - see E,C. Memorandum CD, One copy
of the approved Form A 1 should be returned by the paying bank to the
collecting bank and would constitute the latter*s authority to make
the proceeds available overseas.
9, Faying banks should in all cases satisfy themselves that
the drawer of the cheque has received the requisite approval under
the Regulations to send the cheque out of Australia, Cases in which
such approval has not been granted should be referred to the
Exchange Control.
1.8.63.


OVERDRAFTS AND REVOLVING CREDITS
AVAILABLE OVERSEAS
1. Banks should not provide or facilitate the provision of
overdraft accommodation, revolving credits or similar arrangements
available overseas, or increase, extend or renew such arrangements
for residents of Australia, without first obtaining Exchange Con-
trol approval.
2. In all cases where overseas accommodation is granted to resi-
dents of Australia or to persons ordinarily resident in Australia,
or against the security or responsibility of residents of Australia,
obligations devolve upon such persons to ensure that the facilities
are used only for the approved purposes. Banks should ensure that
each of their clients affected by the foregoing is fully aware of
the position.
3. Approved remittances from Australia to the credit of accounts
of such persons are to be regarded as permanently reducing the over-
draft facilities available, unless otherwise determined by the Ex-
change Control.
1.12.58


NEGOTIATION OVERSEAS OF BILLS ON AUSTRALIA
1. Banks are authorised to make available overseas proceeds of
bills on Australia negotiated by their branches abroad where the
payments clearly fall within the scope of the general authority set
out in E.C. Memorandum CD.
2. In these cases, a pro forma application for foreign currency
(Form Al) should be completed and approved by the Australian office
of the negotiating bank on receipt of a drawing in Australia, unless
the transaction is covered by an application previously made to a
bank in Australia and approved by that bank or by the Exchange Con-
trol. Copies of such application forms should be forwarded to the
Exchange Control weekly as provided for in paragraph 8 of E.C. Memo-
randum CA.
3. In those instances where banks are unable to establish from
the information available that the transactions qualify for approval
under their general authority, reference should be made to the Ex-
change Control before proceeds are made available overseas.
1.12.58


FUTURES OPERATIONS
The Sydney Greasy Wool Futures Exchange
1. Authority has been given as required under the Banking
(Foreign Exchange) Regulations for payments to and from non-residents
of Australia by members operating on the Sydney Greasy Wool Futures
Exchange and banks may approve applications by members of the
Exchange for foreign currency to meet the payment of differences and
the return of any deposits and margins due to such non-residents,
2. Deposits, margins, commissions, charges and differences due by
non-residents must be received by members in appropriate foreign
currency or as otherwise approved by Exchange Control,
3. Applications for foreign currency submitted in terms of
paragraph 1 hereof should contain the following certificate by the
applicant:-
"We certify that the amount applied for herein is properly
due to the favouree in respect of operations on the Sydney
Greasy Wool Futures Exchange and that any deposits and
margins now being returned were originally received into
Australia in appropriate foreign currency or in accordance
with other arrangements approved by Exchange Control,"
4. Banks may also approve applications for foreign currency
submitted by members of the Exchange who are resident in Australia
to meet their commitments to overseas parties in respect of
arbitrage operations between the Sydney Greasy Wool Futures
Exchange and wool futures markets overseas. In these cases the
relative applications for foreign currency should contain the
following certificate and undertaking:-
"We certify that the amount herein is properly due to the
favouree in respect of our arbitrage operations between
the Sydney Greasy Wool Futures Exchange and
..(Name of Overseas Market). We undertake to return
to Australia any amounts as they accrue overseas to us from
these operations or to deal with such funds otherwise only
in accordance with special arrangements made with Exchange
Control."
5. All members resident in Australia are required to furnish
returns to Exchange Control at the end of each month in respect of
their operations on behalf of non-residents in the Australian
market. They should also submit separately particulars of their
arbitrage operations in each wool futures market overseas.
9.9.60.


The London Wool Terminal Market
6. Australian residents who desire to hedge on the London Wool
Terminal Market may apply to Exchange Control for a "blanket"
authority to undertake such transactions. Relative applications
for these facilities should -
(a) show the amount required for the payment of -
(i) deposits,
(ii) margins,
(,iii) commissions;
(b) contain a statement by the applicant that the amount sought
relates to a genuine hedging operation in respect of the
applicant s bona fide business operations in the wool
industry;
(c) state through whom the futures business is to be conducted
and the manner in which commitments will be settled, e.g.
by direct remittances from Australia, under guarantee to
the Market or by overdraft in London;
(d) show, in the case of a producer, the number of sheep shorn
or to be shorn;
(e) show, in all other cases, the nature of the particular risk
in respect of which the hedge is being taken out.
7. Each authority given by the Exchange Control will be subject
to the conditions that details of any sterling funds accruing to
the applicant from his operations in the Market will be advised to
the Exchange Control and, if called for, such funds will be sold to
a bank in Australia. In addition, the Exchange Control will
require returns of operations to be submitted at the end of each
month.
8. Provided the authority referred to in paragraph 6 has been
given, banks may approve applications for foreign currency on
Form A 1 for the provision of sterling to meet deposits, margins,
commissions, charges and differences due by applicants to the Market.
The application forms should contain the following certificate:-
"We certify that the amount herein is properly due to the
favouree and relates to genuine hedging operations undertaken
in the London Wool Terminal Market with the authority of
Exchange Control."
NOTE: See paragraph 4 above in relation to arbitrage operations in
overseas wool futures markets.
Operations in other Futures Markets Overseas
9. All applications for the provision of foreign currency or
other facilities in connection with operations by Australian residents
(except the arbitrage operations mentioned in paragraph 4) should be
referred to the Exchange Control for determination.
9.9.60.


ACCOUNTS OF NON-RESIDENTS OF THE STERLING AREA
Overseas Banks' Accounts in Australia - see E.C, Memorandum LA
General
1. The permission of the Reserve Bank or an agent of that Bank
must be obtained before any sum is placed to the credit of an
account in Australia of a non-resident of the Sterling Area.
2. A person resident outside the Sterling Area should, in general
he regarded as a non-resident. Where funds are received for credit
of such a non-resident in anticipation of his arrival in Australia,
the account is to be regarded as a non-resident account until the
person arrives.
3. A body corporate incorporated outside the Sterling Area is
deemed to be a person resident outside the Sterling Area. The head
office, or a branch, in the Sterling Area of a body corporate
resident outside the Sterling Area is, unless the Reserve Bank deter-
mines otherwise, deemed to he a person not resident outside the
Sterling Area.
4. Consular accounts should be treated as accounts of residents
where the operations thereon are wholly conducted by the consular
officials who are in Australia.
5. A resident of the Sterling Area on a temporary visit to a
country outside the Sterling Area should not be regarded as a non-
resident .
6. Where any doubt exists whether an account is to he treated as
a non-resident account, reference should be made to the Exchange
Control giving full particulars.
Applications for Authority to credit Bank Accounts of
Non-Res idents
7. Persons wishing to make payments to the credit of bank
accounts of non-residents of the Sterling Area should apply for the
necessary authority on Exchange Control Form NR.
8. As a general rule, applications should he dealt with on the
following basis:-
(a) Where a person in Australia desires to lodge a payment to
the account of a non-resident, he should normally make the
application to his own bank. If the application is apprcv ed,
after reference to the Exchange Control where required,
applicant’s bank should effect the lodgment on his behalf
and pass on to the receiving hank the duly approved Form NR;
9.9.60.


(b) Where a person applies direct to the bank holding the non-
resident account, it will be satisfactory for the application
to be dealt with by that bank, the approval of the Exchange
Control being obtained where required, but reference should
be made to the applicant's bank if it is considered desir-
able to do so;
(c) Where a remittance is received from abroad for credit of the
account of a non-resident, an application Form NR should be
completed, usually by the bank holding the non-resident
account, except as set out in E.C. Memorandum LA - "Overseas
Banks 1 Accounts in Australia"
Banks 1 Authority to approve Applications
9. Banks are authorised to approve applications for permission to
credit bank accounts of non-residents of the Sterling Area without
reference to the Exchange Control where the amounts to be deposited
represqnt:-
(a) sales to a bank in Australia of sterling from an External
Account in the United Kingdom;
(b) sales to a bank in Australia of any non-sterling currencies
which are freely exchangeable for sterling from an External
Account in the United Kingdom;
(c) transfers to Australia from the United Kingdom and the
advice of the remittance indicates that the United Kingdom
Exchange Control regard the moneys as eligible for credit
to an External Account in the United Kingdom;
(d) transfers from an Australian currency account with a bank
in Australia of a bank domiciled in a country outside the
Sterling Area;
(e) payments in respect of which banks would have authority to
allocate the appropriate foreign currency if a remittance
overseas had been sought,,
10. All other applications should be submitted to the Exchange
Control for decision. In such cases the application form should
be submitted in duplicate, one copy of which will be returned to
the bank concerned with the decision enfaced thereon. Where
recurring transactions are involved, an application for a "blanket"
authority may be submitted by the bank holding the relative account
to the Exchange Control for determination.
Payments from Bank Accounts of Non-Residents
11. No specific Exchange Control authority is required, for banks
to debit non-resident accounts (except "blocked" accounts - see
9.9 0 600


paragraph 12) in respect of payments to residents of the Sterling
Area authorised by their clients. If such payments should be to
Sterling Area territories outside Australia normal Exchange Control
requirements would apply to the relative remittances. Where a
payment is made from the bank account of one non-resident to the
account of another non-resident, the only authority necessary will
be the approval of the Exchange Control on Form NR covering the
credit entry involved.
"Blocked" Accounts
12. Where an account with a bank in Australia has been declared
by the Reserve Bank to be a "blocked" account in terms of
Regulation 12 of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations, banks
should not without the prior approval of the Exchange Control
permit any payment to be made out of that account while the "blocking"
restrictions remain in force.
Transfers between Accounts of the same Non-Resident
13. Except in the case of "blocked" accounts, there are no
formalities necessary in connection with the transfer of funds from
one account to another account of the same non-resident, e.g. moneys
may be transferred from current account to a fixed or interest
bearing deposit in the same name, or vice versa, without special
permission. Interest on fixed or interest bearing deposits may be
either added to the principal on renewal or credited to an account
of the same non-resident without formality.
Loans and Overdrafts
14. Without reference to the Exchange Control, no new or increased
loan or overdraft arrangement should be made for a non-resident of
the Sterling Area, nor should transactions be entered into with such
a non-resident which would have the effect of his obtaining
Australian currency otherwise than by sale to a bank in Australia of
appropriate overseas funds.
Disposal of Application Forms
15. Forms NR approved by banks in terms of (e) of paragraph 9
above, should be forwarded to the Exchange Control at weekly intervals
through the chief office of each bank in the Capital cities.
16. All other approved Forms NR should be held by banks in a
manner which will render them readily available when required by the
Exchange Control. Such forms which have been held for a period in
excess of two years may be destroyed.
9,9,60.


Non-Resident Accounts other than Bank Accounts
17, Payments to accounts of non-residents in the books of persons
or companies in Australia or payments from those accounts by order
or on behalf of non-residents may not be effected without the
authority of the Reserve Bank,
Purchases of U,S. Dollar Currency from Residents of the
Condominium of the New Hebrides
18. Banks should furnish to the Exchange Control details of any
purchases of U.S, dollar currency from residents of the Condominium
of the New Hebrides, or from other persons acting on behalf of such
residents,
9,9 .60,


ACCOUNTS OF RESIDENTS OF HONG KONG
1. Although Hong Kong is still regarded as a member of the Ster-
ling Area -
(a) payments to, by the order of or on behalf of residents of
Hong Kong, and
(h) other transactions on behalf of such residents as covered
by Regulation 8 (l) of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regu-
lations ,
require approval under that Regulation in the same manner as trans-
actions on behalf of persons resident outside the Sterling Area (see
E.C. Memorandum KA).
"Blocked” Accounts of Residents of Hong Kong
2. With the exception of the accounts of the Hong Kong banks
listed below, hanks should "block" in terms of Regulation 12 of the
Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations, all accounts in their hooks
of residents of Hong Kong. These requirements are to be observed
in relation to any new account opened by a bank in the name of a
Hong Kong resident.
3. The names of accountholders whose accounts are "blocked" from
time to time in terms of the previous paragraph should be advised
to the Exchange Control,
Applications for permission to credit Accounts of
Residents of Hong Kong
4. Banks are authorised to pass credits to any bank account in
the name of a resident of Hong Kong without reference to the Exchange
Control. The completion of Exchange Control Form NR is not necessary
in respect of such transactions.
Payments from "Blocked" Accounts of Residents of Hong Kong
5. Banks are authorised to approve the following payments from
a "blocked" account of a resident of Hong Kong without reference to
the Exchange Control:-
(a) Transfers to the credit of an account with a bank in Aust-
ralia of any of the Hong Kong hanks listed below;
(b) Payments to residents of Australia and, in respect of trans-
actions authorised by the Exchange Control or by a bank in
terms of its general authority (see E.C. Memorandum CD), pay-
ments to residents of other Sterling Area countries-
(i) under instructions given prior to 22nd June, 1950,
(ii) of a strictly personal nature, mostly of a recurring
type which have been regularly made in e.g.
expenses, including insurance premiums, of maintaining
the accountholder 1 s property in the Sterling Area;
rent and rates on property maintained in the Sterling
Area for the accountholder 1 s family; education fees;
life insurance premiums; sums due by the accountholder
to the Commissioner of Taxation; hank charges; allowancer


to dependants residing in the Sterling Area;
donations to charitable organisations; club
subscriptions and subscriptions to newspapers
and periodicals,
Hong Kong Banks referred to in paragraphs 2 and s(a) above
American Express Company Inc,
Bangkok Bank Ltd,
Bank Negara Indonesia
Bank of America
Bank of Canton, Ltd,
Bank of China
Bank of Communications
Bank of East Asia, Ltd,
Bank of India, Ltd,
Bank of Korea
Bank of Tokyo, Ltd,
Banque Beige pour l*Etranger
(Extreme-Orient) S,A,
Banque de I’lndochine
Banque Nationale pour le
Commerce et I*lndustrie
Chartered Bank
Chekiang First Bank of Commerce
(Hongkong) Ltd,
China & South Sea Bank, Ltd,
China State Bank, Ltd,
Chiyu Banking Corporation, Ltd,
Chung Khiav Bank, Ltd.
Deutsch-Asiatische Bank
First National City Bank
Hongkong and Shanghai Banking
Corporation
Hongkong & Swatow Commercial
Bank Ltd.
Hongkong Chinese Bank, Ltd.
Hong Kong Metropolitan Bank Ltd.
Indian Overseas Bank, Ltd,
Kincheng Banking Corporation
Kwong On Bank, Ltd,
Malayan Banking Ltd.
Mercantile Bank Ltd,
Nanyang Commercial Bank Ltd,
National Bank of Pakistan
National Commercial Bank Ltd,
Nationale Handelshank, N,V,
Nederlandsche Handel—
Maatschappij, N,V,
Oversea-Chinese Banking
Corporation Ltd,
Overseas Trust Bank, Ltd,
Overseas Union Bank, Ltd,
Shanghai Commercial Bank Ltd.
Sin Hua Trust, Savings &
Commercial Bank, Ltd,
Sumitomo Bank Ltd.
Sze Hai Tong Bank, Ltd.
Thos, Cook & Son (Continental and
Overseas) Ltd,
United Chinese Bank, Ltd,
United Commercial Bank Ltd,
Wing On Bank
1.8.63.


OVERSEAS BANKS¹ ACCOUNTS IN AUSTRALIA
Banks* Authority to approve Applications
1. Banks are authorised to pass credits to accounts in Australia
of overseas banks where the relative funds represent -
(a) sales to a bank in Australia of any foreign currency
which would be an approved method of payment for exports
to the country of domicile of the overseas hank concerned
(see E.C. Memorandum MN). The completion of Form NR is
not required;
(b) transfers from Australian currency accounts of hanks
domiciled in the same country or monetary area. Form NR
need not he completed but initiating banks should advise
the source of the funds to responding hanks;
(c) proceeds of collections relating to transactions for which
banks would have authority to allocate the appropriate
foreign currency if a remittance overseas had been sought.
Where payment for imports is involved,this authority is,
of course, subject to the requirements of E.C. Memorandum CJ.
Form NR is required in those cases where a Form A 1 would
have been necessary had a remittance overseas been requested
(see E.C. Memorandum CA). Copies of such application forms
should be forwarded to the Exchange Control at weekly
intervals.
2. All other applications should be submitted to the Exchange
Control on Form NR for decision. In such cases, the Form should
be submitted in duplicate and one copy will be returned to the bank
concerned with the decision enfaced thereon.
Control of Proceeds of Exports
3. In respect of exports from Australia, the approved methods
of payment include payment from an account with a bank in Australia
of a bank domiciled in the importing country (see E.C. Memorandum MN).
9.9.60.


SECTION 4
CONTROL OF PROCEEDS OF EXPORTS


EXPORT LICENCES
1, The exportation of goods from Australia is prohibited unless -
(a) a licence under Part III of the Banking (Foreign Exchange)
Regulations to export the goods is in force and the terms
and conditions (if any) to which the licence is subject are
complied with, or
(h) the goods are excepted from the application of Part III of
those Regulations.
Types of Licences
2, Two types of export licences are issued, viz. Ordinary licences
and Special licences,
3, An Ordinary licence is a licence to export, during a period
extending from the date of the grant of the licence to a date
specified therein, the particular goods in one consignment, in the
quantities, by the method of despatch, and from the place, specified
in the licence,
4, A Special licence is a licence to export, during a period
extending from the date of the grant of the licence to a date
specified therein, goods of a class or kind specified in the licence
from a place and to a country so specified.
Applications for Licences
5, Applications for export licences must be lodged by an exporter
with the Department of Customs and Excise together with such additional
copies as the licensing officer requires (normally five copies of
Ordinary and four copies of Special licences). One copy of each
licence, when issued, is forwarded by the Department of Customs and
Excise to the bank named in the application.
Form C.D.4
6, To ensure that holders of Special licences duly comply with
the terms and conditions of their licences they are required within
three days from the date of export of any goods under such licences
to lodge with the Department of Customs and Excise at the port of
shipment, two copies of Form C,D,4, One copy of this form is
forwarded by that Department direct to the bank named therein.
Where there appears to have been any delay in the receipt of these
forms, banks should report the circumstances to the Exchange Control,
Terms and Conditions of Licences
7, Export licences are issued subject to the following basic
terms and conditions unless varied or excepted by the Minister for
Customs and Excise
(a) Any payment in respect of the goods shall be made in such
currency, in such manner and within such period, before
9,9.60.


or after the date of exportation, as the Reserve Bank
approves, and the licensee shall make such arrangements
as are necessary to ensure that the provisions of this
paragraph are complied with;
(h) In all shipping documents in respect of goods to which a
licence relates, provision shall be made for delivery of
the goods to, or to the order of, the Reserve Bank or an
agent of the Bank, except where such documents have to he
drawn to the order of an overseas hank or some other party
in order to comply with the terms of a letter of credit
established in connection with the payment for the goods;
(c) Forthwith, on obtaining any shipping documents in respect
of any of the goods to which the licence relates, the
licensee shall deliver the shipping documents to the Reserve
Bank or to an agent of that Bank,
8, Although relief from one or more of the foregoing requirements
may be granted by the Department of Customs and Excise, it is usually
allowed only upon the recommendation of the Reserve Bank,
9, With regard to (a) of paragraph 7, the Reserve Bank has
approved that payment for exports shall be made in the currency
and manner specified in the schedule to E,C, Memorandum MN according
to the ultimate destination of the goods and within six months prior
to the date of exportation of the goods or within six months after
the date of exportation of the goods,
10, Relief may be granted upon reference to the Exchange Control
from the requirements of sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) of paragraph 7
in certain circumstances.
(See E.C, Memorandum MM - Exports by Aircraft and Post, and
E.C. Memorandum 0A - Exceptions from Normal Licensing Procedure),
General
11, The grant of a licence in terms of the Regulations does not
relieve any person from the obligation to comply with any other law
relating to the exportation of goods.
12, The Regulations apply notwithstanding that a licence or any
other authority for the exportation of goods is in force under the
provisions of any other law.
9,9,60.


PAYMENT FOR EXPORTS
Approved Methods of Payment
1, The Reserve Bank of Australia has approved that any payment
in respect of goods exported from Australia under a licence issued
under Part 111 of the Regulations shall he in the currency and in
the manner specified in the attached schedule as appropriate for the
country of ultimate destination of the goods.
2, The Reserve Bank of Australia has also approved that any
payment in respect of goods exported from Australia under a licence
issued under Part 111 of the Regulations shall be made -
(a) within six months prior to the date of exportation of
the goods, or
(b) within six months after the date of exportation of the
goods.
3, Banks should note that the provisions of paragraph 2(a) above
apply in cases where Australian currency arising from appropriate
overseas sources and received more than six months prior to the
date of exportation of the goods is to be applied in payment for the
export. In such cases, the approval of the Exchange Control is
required before clearing export documents except where the relative
funds have been standing to the credit of an overseas hank's account
in Australia,
Payment for Exports other than by the Approved Methods
4, In addition to the Approved Methods of Payment set out in the
attached schedule, banks may approve payments for exports to -
(a) countries outside the Sterling Area effected by methods
outlined in (A) in that schedule, provided such payments
are made by intermediary merchants resident in Sterling
Area countries other than Australia;
(b) any overseas destination effected in Australian currency
provided hanks are satisfied that their arrangements with
their overseas correspondents will ensure that relative
cover arises from an appropriate source,
5, Banks may also approve methods of payment for exports
which would result in proceeds being returned to Australia in
just over the six-month period prescribed, e.g, air mail drawings
with usances of 180 days T sight.
1.3.63.


6, Exporters wishing to arrange for any payment to be
made otherwise than- in accordance with the methods of payment
referred to in paragraphs 1 and 4 hereof, or outside the periods
for making such payments referred to in paragraphs 2 and 5,
should submit full particulars of their proposals to the Exchange
Control for determination. In the ordinary course submissions
should he arranged through exporters* own hankers.
Clean Sterling Remittances in payment for Exports
7, Where clean payments are received in sterling for
exports to countries outside the Sterling Area, hanks should
satisfy themselves in each case that the remittance represents
an appropriate method of payment.
1.3.63.


PAYMENT FOR EXPORTS
SCHEDULE OF APPROVED METHODS OF PAYMENT
Country of Ultimate Approved Methods of Payment
Destination of Goods
(A) Countries included in (i) Sterling or any other
the Sterling Area currency of the countries
(see E 0 C 0 Memorandum AG included in the Sterling
for definition) Area (except Australia); or
(ii) Australian currency from an
account with a bank in
Australia of a bank domiciled
in any of the countries
included in the Sterling Area
(except Australia),
(B) Countries outside the (i) External sterling (i.e.
Sterling Area sterling from an account with
a bank in the United Kingdom
which has been designated by
the Bank of England as an
External Account) or a
currency of any country
outside the Sterling Area which
is freely exchangeable for
external sterling; or
(ii) Australian currency from an
account with a bank in
Australia of a bank domiciled
in any country outside the
Sterling Area.
NOTE; For procedure to be adopted when payment other than as
provided above is proposed, see paragraphs 4 and 6 of this
Memorandum,
1.3.63,


SUPERVISION BY BANKS - GENERAL
1. Banka which receive copies of export licences and Forms C.D.4
from the Department of Customs and Excise are required to take
action and to exercise supervision as outlined in this and other
relative Memoranda to ensure that exporters comply with the terms
and conditions of licences issued to them. Any breach of the
Regulations must be reported to the Exchange Control. The
following matters are covered in detail in other Memoranda
Invoicing of Exports - see E.C. Memorandum ND
Release of Shipping Documents without
Payment in Full - see E.C. Memorandum NG
Exports by Aircraft and Post - see E.C. Memorandum NM
Documents, Licences and Forms C.D.4
2. Shipping documents delivered to banks in accordance with
the terms and conditions of relative export licences should be
accompanied by the invoices (original or copies) in respect of
the subject goods.
3. Banks are required to compare these documents with the
relative copies of export licences and Forms C.D.4 held by them.
Where this comparison discloses discrepancies of any consequence
in either the value of the goods or the quantity shipped, banks
should, if appropriate, arrange with the exporters concerned for
the licences or Forms C.D.4 to be amended by the Department of
Customs and Excise. Reference should be made to the Exchange
Control if banks are in any doubt as to the correct action to
be taken in particular cases.
4. Banks should review at fortnightly intervals export licences
and Forms C.D.4 received from the Department of Customs and Excise
and where it is known that the carrying vessel has departed and
documents have not been lodged with the bank, prompt reference
should be made to the exporter.
5. Should enquiries disclose that documents have been or will
be negotiated through another bank, the relative export licences
or Forms C.D.4 should be forwarded to that bank. Where it becomes
evident that shipping documents have been forwarded overseas other
than through a bank, the matter should be reported to the
Exchange Control.
Release of Shipping Documents
6. Shipping documents may not be released to exporters or
their nominees in Australia for despatch direct to consignees unless -
20.10.61.


(a) prepayment for the goods has been received in
Australia in an approved manner, or
(b) the approval of the Exchange Control has been
obtained.
Certificates of Payment
7, Except as provided for in paragraph 8, hanks should endorse
on the reverse of each of their copies of export licences or Forms
C,D,4 a certificate along the lines of one of the specimens set
out in the attached schedule, evidencing arrangements made to ensure
the receipt in Australia of appropriate payment from the overseas
purchasers of the goods.
8, Certificates of payment are not required where -
(a) the invoice value of the goods does not exceed $A2,000, or
(b) payment is received by negotiation under documentary
letter of credit.
Banks should nevertheless exercise normal supervision over the
return of appropriate foreign currency proceeds for these exports,
9, Export licences and Forms C,D,4 endorsed with certificates
of payment are to be forwarded at weekly intervals to the Reserve
Bank in the capital city concerned,
10, Where it comes to the notice of a bank appreciably before
a certificate of payment is due to be furnished that the method
of payment shown on the relative ordinary export licence or form
C,D,4 is amended to or from payment under documentary letter of
credit suitable advice should be forwarded to Exchange Control,
11, In any case where there is a change in the method of
payment after a certificate has been given by a bank, the new
method of payment should be advised to the Exchange Control,
12, Where export proceeds are not being received in one amount
(i,e, consignments, advances, joint ventures, etc,) banks should
provide certificates of payment in respect of each amount received,
preferably on pro forma copies of relative export licences or
Forms C,D,4, These certificates of payment should also be forwarded
to the Exchange Control as provided in paragraph 9 above. In these
instances the bank*s official copy of the relative export licence
or Form C,D,4 should be retained until final payment for the
shipment has been received. It should then be forwarded to the
Exchange Control endorsed with a certificate covering the final
payment and indicating that the bank has sighted documentary
evidence that full proceeds have been accounted for.
14.2.66


13. Where part payment is received by documentary letter of
credit confirmation to this effect should be included in the
certificate covering the balance of the payment as evidence that
full proceeds have been received.
20.10.61.


SPECIMEN CERTIFICATES OF PAYMENT
To facilitate the rendering of appropriate Certificates of
Payment by banks, specimen certificates are set out hereunder to
cover
1. Payment from a Sterling Area source,
2. Payment from a non-sterling source.
Where export transactions are not covered by the specimens
provided, banks should complete a suitable certificate clearly
indicating the steps taken by them to ensure that payment either
directly or indirectly will be made in an approved manner.
Where payment is to be effected on a collection basis
banks should furnish Certificates of Payment at the time the
relative documents are lodged with them.
1. PAYMENT FROM A STERLING AREA SOURCE
Payment effected for
(£E or other Sterling Area currency)
from
(Sterling Area purchaser or intermediary merchant
resident in the Sterling Area)
on ............
(Date)
Applicable where payment is effected in sterling, Australian
currency or other Sterling Area currencies for exports to
countries within the Sterling Area or in respect of
exports to non-sterling countries financed by intermediary
merchants resident in the Sterling Area.
2. PAYMENT FROM A NON-STERLING SOURCE
Payment effected for
(amount and currency)
from
(person resident in non-sterling country)
on
(Date)
Reimbursement received or to be received from
(type of account)
Applicable where payment for exports is effected in sterling,
Australian currency or any foreign currency freely
exchangeable for external sterling. The reimbursement
clause is required only where payment is in sterling or
Australian currency.
20.10.61.


INVOICING OF EXPORTS
1. "Export value" is defined in the Regulations as "the value of
goods at the time of export in the place to which they are to be
exported."
2. Banks should check invoices with a view to detecting under-
valuing of goods. Invoice values stated on licences and Forms C.D. 4
should he in accordance with the terms of the sale contracts, i.e.
f.0.h., c.i.f., etc. Where goods are exported on consignment, joint
venture, etc., estimated values should be quoted on licences or Forms
C.D. 4. Any suspicious circumstances should be reported to the Ex-
change Control.
3. Banks should see that as far as possible the net foreign
currency proceeds are, or will be, reasonably close to current market
prices of the goods in the countries of destination.
4. Special attention should be given to these requirements in
respect of export transactions -
(a) between subsidiary and parent organisations or companies
otherwise associated, and
(h) where payment for goods has already been received by the
exporter and documents are to be returned to that person
for despatch overseas.
Commission and Other Charges deducted from Invoices
5. Reasonable amounts of commission and other charges may be
deducted from the invoice value of exports provided the amounts relate
to the goods described in the documents. Other deductions from
invoice values are.not permitted except with the approval of the
Exchange Control.
6. Sufficient particulars should be included in invoices to
permit of effective checking and supervision by banks.
7. In any case where a hank experiences difficulty through failure
of an exporter to observe these requirements, the circumstances should
he reported to the Exchange Control.
1.12.58


RELEASE OF SHIPPING DOCUMENTS WITHOUT PAYMENT IN FULL
1. Where goods are exported on consignment for sale overseas or
where no bills of exchange have been drawn and shipping documents
are to be released to the consignee before payment has been
effected, the exporter should submit to his bank with his shipping
documents -
(a) an authority to the bank to deliver the documents to the
consignee against a Trust Receipt or his undertaking -
(i) to make payment in the currency required to the
bank's overseas branch or agent when the goods are
sold or payment otherwise becomes due, and
(ii) in the case of consignment shipments, to furnish
a statement of account;
(h) a direction to the consignee to make payment in due course
to the bank in terms of the requirements of (a).
2, Where bills of exchange have been drawn but these cover
only portion of the full payment to be made in respect of the
goods and the relative shipping documents are to be released to
the consignee before full payment has been effected, the foregoing
procedure should be applied in respect of that portion of the
payment not so covered,
3, Banks should refer to Exchange Control any instance where
they observe a significantly increased tendency on the part of any
of their customers to export goods on a consignment basis.
Goods exported for Processing and Sale
4. Prior reference to the Exchange Control should be made in
any transaction with a resident of a country outside the Sterling
Area where an Australian exporter would assume any responsibility
for payment of processing costs, either in cash or kind or as a
deduction from the proceeds of sale overseas of the goods after
processing.
20.10.61,


EXPORTS BY AIRCRAFT AND POST
(For exceptions from normal licensing procedure
under this heading see paragraph 1 (a) and (b)
of E.C, Memorandum OA)
1, Export licences covering goods to he exported by aircraft
or post are issued by the Department of Customs & Excise subject
to special terms and conditions which relieve exporters of those
requirements of the Regulations relating to the completion of
documents and their delivery to a bank. Banks should, therefore,
exercise particular care in reviewing relative export licences or
Forms C.D.4 to ensure that effective supervision is exercised over
the return of the appropriate foreign currency proceeds to
Australia.
2, Where the payment arrangements provide for payment to be
received other than in an approved manner, or where exportation
of any of the following goods is involved, the Department of
Customs & Excise will not issue a licence without the prior
recommendation of the Reserve Bank to which reference should be
made in the first instance
Osmiridium, osmium, iridium, antiques, dressed
fur skins and goods manufactured from fur skins,
industrial diamonds, jewellery, pearls, platinum,
precious and semi-precious stones, watches with
cases of precious metal, works of art and refined
silver having in each case or in any one consignment
a total value in excess of SA2SO,
14,2,66,


EXCEPTIONS FROM NORMAL LICENSING PROCEDURE
Goods for which Licences are not required
1, The following goods have been excepted by the Minister for
Customs & Excise from the application of Part 111 of the Regulations
(a) Goods not exceeding a value of SA2SO;
(b) Goods exported through the post other than ;-
osmiridium, osmium, iridium, antiques, dressed
fur skins and goods manufactured from fur skins,
industrial diamonds, jewellery, pearls, platinum,
precious and semi-precious stones, watches with
cases of precious metal, works of art and refined
silver, having in each case or in any one consign-
ment a total value in excess of SA2SO;
(c) Goods the property of the Commonwealth;
(d) Ships* stores for consumption on the exporting vessel
and equipment for installation thereon;
(e) Goods intended solely for use or consumption in -
American Samoa,
British Solomon Islands Protectorate,
Cook Islands,
External Territories of the Commonwealth, viz
Christmas Island (Indian Ocean),
Cocos (Keeling) Island,
Nauru,
Norfolk Island,
Territory of Papua and New Guinea,
Fiji,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony, including
Phoenix and Line Islands,
Western Samoa,
New Hebrides,
Tonga,
when the Collector is satisfied that the quantities exported
are not in excess of normal requirements;
(f) Munitions, army and air force equipment and commissariat
stores purchased by the New Zealand Government from the
Commonwealth Government for shipment to New Zealand;
(g) Passengers* bona fide baggage, personal effects and house-
hold effects, whether accompanied or unaccompanied, when
the Collector is satisfied that in any individual case
14.2.66


(i) the total gold content of any article included
therein does not exceed a value of SA2SO; or
(ii) the total value of any of the following goods
included therein does not exceed $A2,000, and
those goods have been the personal property
of the passenger for at least 12 months, viz,;-
antiques,
dressed fur skins and goods manufactured
from fur skins,
industrial diamonds,
jewellery,
pearls,
platinum,
precious and semi-precious stones,
refined silver,
watches with cases of precious metal,
works of art;
(h) Goods for the personal or official use of members of
Diplomatic Corps;
(i) Films exported by the South Pacific Commission;
(j) Goods the property of a foreign Government used
for official purposes by that Government in
Australia in connection with a project which is
the subject of an agreement between that Government
and the Australian Government.
Licences issued free from the Terms. Conditions and Requirements
of the Regulations
2. Licences free from terms and conditions may be granted by
Export Licensing Officers of the Department of Customs & Excise
without reference to the Reserve Bank in respect of exports in the
following categories
(a) Goods exported for repair and return;
(b) Goods the commercial value of which does not exceed
SASOO provided that exports in this category by any
one person are not made frequently or regularly;
(c) Goods which, having been sent to Australia f.or
repair, the cost of which (i,e, the repairs) does
not exceed SASOO, are being returned to the country c
from which they were received or to some other approved
destination;
(d) Goods purchased by any Commonwealth Government Department
as buying agent for the Government of any British Commonwealth
14.2.66


country for shipment overseas provided that evidence is
produced that payment for the goods will he made in
Australia;
(e) Goods exported in connection with Christmas gift schemes for
which no payment is to he made abroad;
(f) Goods exported as cargo by the Australian Red Cross Society,
and other approved charitable organisations when consigned
to similar organisations, British and Allied Forces, relief
authorities or charitable bodies abroad (and not to an
Individual by name),
NOTE: This list is not complete as some commodities are subject to
special arrangements,
3. Although the Export Licensing Officers of the Department of
Customs & Excise have power to issue licences free from the terms,
conditions and requirements of the Regulations, they will not do so
as a general rule, except in the cases mentioned above, without
the prior recommendation of the Reserve Bank,
4. If an exporter considers in any particular case that there
are reasons which justify the waiving of any or all of the terms,
conditions or requirements normally applied to licences, he may
submit through his bank to the Exchange Control an application
for exemption with supporting evidence such as correspondence,
cables, etc.
1.3.63.


EXPORTS FROM THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA
1. Part 111 of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations
does not apply to the external territories of the Commonwealth,
2. In the Territory of Papua and New Guinea export control
is administered under an Ordinance known as the Exports (Control
of Proceeds) Ordinance 1952-1961. This Ordinance confers upon
the Reserve Bank of Australia substantially the same powers as
those which are held by the Bank under Part 111 of the Banking
(Foreign Exchange) Regulations.
3. All trading banks operating in the Territory have been
appointed agents of the Reserve Bank of Australia in respect of
the provisions of the Ordinance and are required to comply with
all instructions and directions issued by the Bank in
pursuance of its powers under the Ordinance.
4. In general, Exchange Control policy and procedure
applying to exports from Australia, as outlined in the
accompanying Memoranda, apply also in respect of goods exported
from the Territory of Papua and New Guinea to countries other
than Australia.
5. The export licensing authority in the Territory is the
Department of Customs and Marine.
20.10.61.


SECTION 5 - SECURITIES CONTROL


DEFINITIONS
In this Section
"securities" includes -
shares, stock, bonds, debentures, debenture stock, Treasury
bills, and units or sub-units of a unit trust, and also in-
cludes deposit receipts in respect of the deposit of securities
and documents of title to securities.
"foreign securities" includes
(a) any securities the principal of or interest from which is
repayable or payable in any country outside Australia or
in any money other than Australian money,
(b) any securities the funds necessary for the repayment or
payment of the principal of or interest from which are
provided from any country outside Australia,
(c) any securities which are registered outside Australia,
(d) any securities which are situated outside Australia,
(e) gold situated outside Australia,
(f) any debt or money due or accruing due to a person in
Australia by a person in a country outside the Sterling
Area,
(g) any right to receive payment of any amount of money in any
country not being a country included in the Sterling Area, and
(h) any right to receive payment of any amount of money, not being
money of a country included in the Sterling Area,
and also includes any class of foreign securities.
"owner", in relation to any foreign security
(a) includes a person who owns the foreign security as a trustee
or in any representative capacity, and
00 includes, in a case where -
(i) the foreign security is held on any trust, or
(ii) dividends or interest on a foreign security are
paid into any trust fund,
any person entitled -
(iii) to enforce performance of the trust,
(iv) to revoke or vary, with or without the consent of
any other person, the trust or any of the terms
thereof, or
(v) to control the disposition (including investment) of
the trust moneys.
1.12.58


SECURITIES - GENERAL
Transactions with Non-Residents
1. Under the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations the allotment
or transfer of securities on a register in Australia to a person
resident outside the Sterling Area excluding Hong Kong, is prohibited
except with the authority of the Reserve Bank. The approval of the
Reserve Bank is also required for transactions in securities where a
right to receive a payment or any valuable consideration is created or
transferred in favour of a transferor resident outside the Sterling
Area excluding Hong Kong.
2. Applications for permission to carry out the above classes of
transactions should be submitted to the Exchange Control by letter.
Full particulars of the transactions should be advised, including, as
applicable, the origin of the funds to be tendered by a non-resident
in payment for securities or the manner in which moneys to be paid to
a non-resident are to be disposed of.
3. A person shall not, except with the authority of the Reserve
Bank, make an entry in a register in Australia that recognises or
gives effect to a transfer of any securities to a person resident
outside the Sterling Area excluding Hong Kong,
4. Banks should advise their customers, particularly those who
maintain share registers in Australia, of the requirements of the
Regulations relative to the foregoing matters.
Securities held by Banks for Safe Custody on behalf of Persons
resident outside the Sterling Area excluding Hong Kong
5. In any case where a bank is requested to hold securities on
behalf of a person resident outside the Sterling Area excluding
Hong Kong, or where such a non-resident interest is disclosed, the
bank should, before accepting the securities sight evidence of
Exchange Control approval to the acquisition of the securities by
the non-resident concerned.
Exportation of Securities
6. Securities may not be taken, sent or transferred to any place
outside Australia without the authority of the Reserve Bank. A
person is deemed to transfer securities to a place outside Australia
if he transfers securities from a register in Australia to a register
outside Australia. An application for authority to send or transfer
securities out of Australia should be submitted to the Exchange
Control on Form S and should contain full details of the transaction
involved.
Securities in the hands of Travellers
7. A person desiring to take securities out of Australia should be
in possession of a letter of approval from the Reserve Bank for
production to a Customs officer, if called for, at the point of
departure,
14. 1.60


FOREIGN SECURITIES
NOTE: For Exportation of Securities see E.C. Memorandum SD,
Dealings
1, Foreign securities may not be acquired for valuable considera-
tion, disposed of or otherwise dealt with without the prior approval
of the Reserve Bank (for exemptions see paragraph 4 below). In this
connection persons who mortgage or pledge securities are deemed to
deal with them. It should be noted also that these provisions apply
irrespective of whether the documents of title to the securities
concerned are held in Australia or outside Australia,
2, Applications to deal with foreign securities should be submitted
to the Exchange Control on Form S, These applications should
set out particulars of the securities involved, applicants' proposals
regarding their disposal and, where applicable, the manner in which
the foreign currency proceeds are to be dealt with.
Returns
3, Persons who own or have an interest in foreign securities are
required to furnish a Return of Foreign Securities on Form R to the
Reserve Bank within 30 days of their becoming the owners thereof
or acquiring an interest therein or, in the case of persons newly
arrived in Australia, within 30 days of the date of their arrival
in this country (for exemptions see paragraph 4 below),
N,B, The Exchange Control will consider applications by
foreign nationals residing in Australia for certain
dispensations from the requirements of the
Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations in relation
to the matters outlined in paragraphs 1 to 3 above.
Relative applications should set- out the full name,
address and nationality of the applicant, the basis
of residence in Australia and be certified by
applicants Australian bankers or Consulate,
Exemptions
4, The following classes of foreign securities are not required
to be included in Returns of Foreign Securities furnished to the
Reserve Bank
(a) All securities that are situated in, and in respect of
which the principal or interest is payable in the
money of, a country included in the Sterling Area;
(b) All shares expressed in the money of Canada and
registered in Australia;
(c) All shares in the capital of National Dairy Products
Corporation (a company incorporated in the
1.8.63.


United States of America) expressed in the
money of the United States of America and
registered in Australia,
Subject to paragraph 5 below, these securities may also be
acquired, disposed of or otherwise dealt with without prior
Exchange Control approval,
5, It is stressed that the exemptions referred to above
do not give persons the right to
(a) take or send such securities out of Australia or
transfer them from an Australian register to an
overseas register;
(b) obtain foreign currency to meet commitments to
persons resident out of Australia arising from
dealings in such securities.
Any such proposal would require the prior approval of the
Exchange Control which should be sought by submission of an
application on Form S or A 1 as the case may be.
1.8.63.


INDEX


A.
ACCOMMODATION OVERSEAS - Payment in
Australian currency by travellers DA
ACCOUNTS OF -
Consular officials KA
Non-residents of the Sterling Area KA
Overseas banks LA
Residents of Hong Kong KD
AGENT - Definition AG
AGENT BANK - Definition AG
AIRCRAFT - Exports by NM
ANNUITIES -
Payment of CP
Purchase of CQ
APPLICATION FORMS -
A 1 and A 3 CA
Disposal -
A 1 and A 3 CA
NR KA
Forward exchange BP
Import payments CJ
NR KA
S SD, SM
APPLICATIONS -
For export licences MA
For foreign currency CA
To credit bank accounts of non-residents KA
APPROVED METHODS OF PAYMENT FOR EXPORTS MN
APPROVED PAYMENTS - Methods of effecting CF
ARBITRAGE IN WOOL FUTURES MARKETS OVERSEAS JA
ARTICLES OF VALUE - Importation and exportation
by travellers DC
ASSURANCE - Life CQ
AUSTRALIAN CURRENCY -
Banking instruments issued to travellers CX
Definition AG
Despatch from Australia FB
Importation and exportation by travellers DC
In payment for exports MN
In payment of fares for travel abroad DA
In payment of hotel accommodation and other
incidental expenses of travellers DA
AUSTRALIAN NOTES EA
AUSTRALIAN NOTES AND COIN - Exportation by
travellers CX, DC EA
AUTHORITY OF BANKS TO APPROVE -
Applications for foreign currency CD
Applications for foreign currency - Import payments CJ
Applications to credit non-resident accounts KA
1.6.64.


A - B.
AUTHORITY OF BANKS TO APPROVE -
Applications to credit overseas banks* accounts LA
Forward exchange applications BR
AVAILABILITY OF -
Approvals to applications for foreign currency CA
Drafts, letters of credit and travellers* cheques CF,, CX
B.
BAGGAGE - Personal, Exportation by travellers DC
BANK ACCOUNTS OF -
Non-residents of the Sterling Area KA
Overseas banks LA
Residents of Hong Kong KD
BANK - Definition AG
BANKING (FOREIGN EXCHANGE) REGULATIONS,
EXEMPTIONS AND NOTICES AA
BANKS* AUTHORITY TO APPROVE -
Applications for foreign currency CD
Applications for foreign currency - import payments CJ
Applications to credit non-resident accounts KA
Applications to credit overseas banks* accounts LA
Forward exchange applications BR
BILLS ON AUSTRALIA - Negotiation overseas HA
BLANKET AUTHORITY TO CREDIT NON-RESIDENT ACCOUNTS KA
"BLOCKED" ACCOUNTS -
General KA
of residents of Hong Kong KD
BONUSES - Payment of CP
BORROWING -
abroad by residents of Australia (Overdrafts and
revolving credits) GA
of foreign currency GA
by non-residents KA
BROKERAGE - Payment of CP
BUSINESS TRAVEL CX
1.6*6A


c.
C.D. 4 FORM MA, NA
CERTIFICATES OF PAYMENT FOR EXPORTS NA
CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS PAYMENTS CT
CHEQUES PAYABLE IN AUSTRALIA - Despatch abroad FB
CHINA Remittances to, via Hong Kong CF
CIRCULAR LETTERS OF CREDIT - Enfacements CF, CX
CLAIMS -
under insurance policies other than life CP
under life assurance policies CQ
Short-weight and underyield CP
CLEAN REMITTANCES -
in payment for exports MN
in payment for imports CJ
COIN -
Australian - Exportation by travellers CX, DC, EA
New Zealand - Requirements regarding negotiation EM
Sterling - Buying rates of exchange BA
COLLECTION OF CHEQUES PAYABLE IN AUSTRALIA
RECEIVED FROM ABROAD FB
COMMISSIONS -
and other charges deducted from invoices - Exports ND
Payment of CP
COMMITMENTS - Personal, Payment of CV
COMPASSIONATE PAYMENTS CS
CONDOMINIUM OF THE NEW HEBRIDES - Purchase of
U.S, dollar currency from residents of KA
CONSIGNMENT EXPORTS NG
CONSIGNMENTS (IMPORTS AND EXPORTS ) - Forward
exchange facilities BP
CONSULAR ACCOUNTS KA
COVER FOR AUTHORISED TRANSACTIONS - Purchases and
sales by banks of currencies of countries outside
the Sterling Area BD
COVERING CONTRACTS - Forward exchange BS
CREDITING OF BANK ACCOUNTS OF NON-RESIDENTS KA
CREDITS Revolving, available overseas GcA
CURRINCY -
Despatch from Australia FB
Importation and exportation by travellers DC, EA
and manner of payment Imports CJ
and manner of payment - Overseas payments CD, CF
CURRENT PAYMENTS CP
1.6.64.


D.
DEALINGS IN FOREIGN SECURITIES SM
DEBTS - Repayment of CV
DECEASED ESTATES - Distributions CR
DEDUCTIONS FROM INVOICES - Exports ND
DEFINITIONS -
agent AG
agent bank AG
Australian currency AG
bank AG
Exchange Control AG
export value ND
External Account AG
foreign currency AG
foreign securities RB
non-resident KA
Ordinary export licence MA
owner - in relation to any foreign security RB
securities RB
Special export licence MA
Sterling Area AG
DELIVERIES UNDER FORWARD EXCHANGE CONTRACTS BS
DESPATCH FROM AUSTRALIA OF CURRENCY (INCLUDING
CHEQUES PAYABLE IN AUSTRALIA) FB
DISPOSAL OF -
application forms A1 and A3 CA
application forms NR KA
DISTRIBUTIONS FROM DECEASED ESTATES CR
DIVIDEND CHEQUES - Despatch from Australia FB
DIVIDENDS - Payment of CP
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE - Forward exchange BS
DOCUMENTARY LETTERS OF CREDIT -
in payment for exports MN
in payment for imports - Expiry dates CJ
Usances of drafts drawn under, in payment for
exports MN
DONATIONS TO CHARITABLE ORGANISATIONS AND RELIGIOUS
BODIES CT
DRAFTS -
on Australia - Negotiation overseas HA
Enf a c erne nt s CF
Usances under documentary letters of credit MN
DUPLICATION OF TRANSACTIONS CD
1.6.64.


E - FORM DC
EARNINGS OF OVERSEAS RESIDENTS WORKING TEMPORARILY
IN AUSTRALIA CP
EFFECTS - Personal, Exportation by travellers DC
EMIGRATION CX
ENDOWMENT POLICIES CQ
ENFACEMENT OF DRAFTS, LETTERS OF CREDIT AND
TRAVELLERS' CHEQUES IN STERLING CF, CX
ESTATES (DECEASED) - Distributions CR
EXCEPTIONS FROM NORMAL EXPORT LICENSING PROCEDURE OA
EXCHANGE CONTROL - Definition AG
EXCHANGE RATES BA
EXEMPTIONS -
Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations AA
Foreign securities SM
EXPIRY DATES OF DOCUMENTARY LETTERS OF CREDIT -
Imports CJ
EXPORTATION -
of Australian notes and coin by travellers CX, DC, EA
from Australia of currency (including cheques
payable in Australia) FB
of currency by travellers - Form E DC
of currency, securities, gold and certain other
articles of value by travellers DC
of securities SD, SM
EXPORT LICENCES -
Applications for, Types and Forms C.D.4 MA
-free from the terms, conditions and requirements
of the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations OA
Terms and conditions of issue MA
Supervision NA
EXPORTS -
Approved methods of payment for MN
by aircraft and post NM
Certificates of payment NA
Commission and other charges deducted from invoices ND
on consignment ND, NG
Freight on CP
Invoicing of ND
Payment for MN
Payment in Australian currency MN
Payment by clean remittances from overseas MN
Payment by documentary letters of credit MN
Payment from overseas banks' accounts in Australia LA, MN
Payment other than by the approved methods MN
for processing and sale NG
Release of shipping documents without payment in full NG
Supervision by banks NA
1.6.64.


EXPORTS -
from the Territory of Papua and New Guinea PA
EXPORT SHIPPING DOCUMENTS NA
EXPORT TRANSACTIONS - Forward exchange BP
EXPORT VALUE - Definition ND
EXTENSIONS IN DELIVERY DATES OF FORWARD EXCHANGE
CONTRACTS BS
EXTENSIONS OF FORWARD EXCHANGE COVER OVER WOOL FOR
PERIODS OUTSIDE THOSE STIPULATED IN APPLICATION
FORM FEIA BQ
EXTERNAL ACCOUNT - Definition AG
18.11.60.


F.
FARES -
Payment in Australian currency DA
Refunds outside Australia DA
FEES - Payment of
for technical "know-how" CP
other CV
FILMS - Hiring charges and royalties CP
FOREIGN CURRENCY -
Applications for CA
Banks* authority to sell CD
Definition AG
Despatch from Australia FB
Importation and exportation by travellers DC
Remittances CF
unused for the purpose for which it is sold -
Import payments CJ
Travelling expenses CX
FOREIGN SECURITIES - RB, SM
Dealings SM
Definition RB
Exemptions SM
Returns SM
FORMS -
Al, CA
A 3. CA
C.D.2, DC
C.D.4. MA, NA
E DC
NR KA
R SM
S SD, SM
FORWARD EXCHANGE -
Advices to Exchange Control BS
Application forms BP
Banks* authority to approve applications HI
Canadian dollar contracts BS
Consignments - Proceeds of exports and imports BP
Deliveries BS
Documentary■evidence BS
Export transactions BP
Exports and imports on consignment BP
Extensions in delivery dates of contracts BS
FEIA, "Pool of Cover" arrangements (for wool
exporters) BQ
Foreign currency contracts BS
Import transactions BP
Inter-bank covering contracts BS
Loadings payable to Reserve Bank BS
Non-residents BP
"Overnight" cover in respect of wool purchased at
auction BQ
1.6.64.


F - G - H.
FORWARD EXCHANGE -
Period of contracts BP
Rates BP
References to Exchange Control BS
Scope of facilities BP
Share transactions BP
U„S. dollar contracts BS
Wool transactions - Special facilities BQ
"FREED" EXPORT LICENCES OA
FREIGHT -
Collections CP
on exports CP
Rebates CP
FUTURES OPERATIONS JA
G,
GENERAL AUTHORITY FOR BANKS TO APPROVE
APPLICATIONS FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY CD
GIFTS -
Charitable and religious CT
Personal CV
GOLD - Importation and exportation by travellers DC
H „
HEALTH TRAVEL CX
HIDES - Special forward exchange facilities BQ
HIRING CHARGES FOR TECHNICAL "KNOW-HOW" CP
HONG KONG -
Accounts of residents of KD
Remittances to China via CF
HOTEL ACCOMMODATION AND OTHER INCIDENTAL EXPENSES
OF TRAVELLERS - Payment in Australian currency DA
1.6.64.


I - K.
IMPORTATION OF CURRENCY, SECURITIES, GOLD
AND CERTAIN OTHER ARTICLES OF VALUE BY
TRAVELLERS DC
IMPORTS -
Applications for foreign currency CJ
Banks* authority to approve applications CJ
Currency and manner of payment CJ
Expiry dates of documentary letters of credit CJ
Foreign currency unused for the purpose for which
it is sold CJ
Payment for CJ
Payment through London for non-sterling imports CJ
Submission of applications to Exchange Control CJ
Supervision by banks CJ
into the Territory of Papua and New Guinea CJ
IMPORT TRANSACTIONS - Forward exchange BP
INCOME - Payment of CP
INSURANCE -
Life CQ
Premiums and claims other than life assurance
policies CP
INTER-BANK COVERING CONTRACTS - Forward exchange BS
INTEREST - Payment of CP
INVOICING OF EXPORTS ND
K.
"KNOW-HOW" Payment of charges for CP
1.6.64.


L - M,
LEGACIES CR
LETTERS OF CREDIT -
Enfacement CP cx
(Documentary) in payment for exports MN
(Documentary) in payment for imports -
Expiry dates CJ
LICENCES -
Export MA
Export - Exceptions OA
LIFE ASSURANCE/INSURANCE CQ
LOADINGS PAYABLE TO RESERVE BANK - Forward exchange BS
LOANS TO NON-RESIDENTS KA
LONDON WOOL TERMINAL MARKET JA
LOYALTY REBATES - Payment of CP
U.
MAIL TRANSFERS IN STERLING - Instructions to
accompany CF
METHODS OF -
effecting approved payments to persons outside
Australia CD, CF
Payment for exports MN
Payment for imports CJ
1.6.64.


N,
NEGOTIATION OVERSEAS OF BILLS ON AUSTRALIA HA
NEW GUINEA AND PAPUA -
Exports from PA
Imports into pj
NEW HEBRIDES - Purchases of U.S, dollar currency from
residents of KA
NEW ZEALAND NOTES AND-COIN HSM"
NOILS - Special forward exchange facilities BQ
NON-RESIDENT ACCOUNTS -
Banks' authority to approve applications to credit KA
"Blanket" authorities to credit KA
Loans and overdrafts KA
other than bank accounts KA
Overseas banks LA
Payments from KA
Transfers between accounts of the same person KA
NON-RESIDENTS -
Earnings of while working temporarily in Australia CP
Forward exchange facilities BP
Loans and overdrafts to KA
Operations on Sydney Greasy Wool Futures Exchange JA
Payment of fares in Australian currency DA
Payments to CF
Securities held by banks for safe custody SD
Transactions in securities SD
NOTES AND COIN -
Australian -
Exportation and repatriation EA
Exportation by travellers CX, DC,, EA
New Zealand - Requirements- r-agarding negotiation
Sterling - Buying rates of exchange BA
NOTICES ISSUED UNDER THE BANKING (FOREIGN EXCHANGE)
REGULATIONS AA
1.6.64,


0.
ORDINARY EXPORT LICENCE - Definition MA
OVERDRAFTS -
to non-residents KA
and revolving credits available overseas GA
"OVERNIGHT" FORWARD EXCHANGE COVER - Wool purchased
at auction BQ
OVERSEAS BANKS* ACCOUNTS IN AUSTRALIA - LA
Banks* authority to approve applications to credit LA
Payment for exports LA, MN
OVERSEAS PAYMENTS -
Currency and manner of payment CD, CF
Currency and manner of payment - for imports CJ
OVERSEAS RESIDENTS - Earnings of while working
temporarily in Australia CP
Payment of fares in Australian currency DA
"OWNER" IN RELATION TO ANY FOREIGN SECURITY -
Definition RB
1.6.64.


p.
PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA -
Exports from PA
Imports into CJ
PASSAGE MONEY COLLECTIONS CP
PATENTS -
Registration and renewal fees, Payment of CP
Royalty payments and service fees CP
PAYMENT FOR EXPORTS - MN
Approved methods MN
in Australian currency MN
Certificates by banks NA
by clean remittances from overseas MN
by documentary letters of credit MN
other than by the approved methods MN
from overseas banks* accounts in Australia IA, MN
Supervision by banks NA
PAYMENT OF FARES IN AUSTRALIAN CURRENCY DA
PAYMENT OF FREIGHT ON EXPORTS CP
PAYMENT FOR IMPORTS - CJ
Supervision by banks CJ
PAYMENT FROM BANK ACCOUNTS OF NON-RES IDENTS KA
PAYMENTS THROUGH LONDON FOR NON-STERLING IMPORTS CJ
PAYMENTS OVERSEAS -
Currency and manner of payment CD, CF
Currency and manner of payment for imports CJ
PENSIONS CP
PERFORMANCE RIGHTS - Payment of CP
PERSONAL -
Baggage, Export by travellers DC
Commitments, Payment of CV
Effects, Export by travellers DC
Gifts CV
"POOL OF COVER" ARRANGEMENTS - Forward exchange BQ
POST - Exports by NM
PREMIUMS ON -
Insurance policies other than life CP
Life assurance policies CQ
PRIVATE TRAVEL CX
PROCESSING OVERSEAS OF GOODS EXPORTED BEFORE SALE NG
PROFITS - Payment of CP
PURCHASES AND SALES BY BANKS OF CURRENCIES OF
COUNTRIES OUTSIDE THE STERLING AREA AS COVER FOR
AUTHORISED TRANSACTIONS BD
1.6.64.


R.
RATES -
of exchange BA
Forward exchange HP
and taxes, Payment of CV
REFUNDS OF FARES OUTSIDE AUSTRALIA DA
REGISTRATION FEES - Patents and trademarks, Payment of CP
REGULATIONS, BANKING (FOREIGN EXCHANGE), AND
NOTICES AA
REINSURANCE PREMIUMS AND CLAIMS CP
RELEASE OF EXPORT SHIPPING DOCUMENTS NA
RELIGIOUS PAYMENTS CT
REMITTANCES -
to China via Hong Kong CF
in foreign currencies other than sterling CF
in sterling CF
RENEWAL FEES - Patents and trademarks, Payment of CP
RENTS - Payment of CP
REPATRIATION OF AUSTRALIAN NOTES - Provision of
foreign currency EA
REPAYMENT OF DEBTS CV
RESIDENTIAL STATUS CD
RESTRICTIVE CLAUSES ON DRAFTS, LETTERS OF CREDIT,
TELEGRAPHIC TRANSFERS CF
RETURNS -
of foreign securities SM
of repatriated Australian notes credited to
accounts of Sterling Area residents EA
of wool futures operations JA
REVOLVING CREDITS AVAILABLE OVERSEAS GA
ROYALTIES - Payment of CP
1.6.64.


s.
SALARIES - Payment of CP
SALES AND PURCHASES BY BANKS OF CURRENCIES OF
COUNTRIES OUTSIDE THE STERLING AREA AS COVER FOR
AUTHORISED TRANSACTIONS BD
SECURITIES -
Definition RB
Exportation SD
Foreign RB, SM
held by banks for safe custody on behalf of non-
residents of the Sterling Area SD
Importation and exportation by travellers DC, SD
Transactions with non-residents SD
SERVICE FEES - Payment of CP
SERVICES - Personal, Payment for CV
SHARE TRANSACTIONS - Forward exchange facilities BP
SHEEPSKINS - Special forward exchange facilities BQ
SHIPPING DOCUMENTS IN RESPECT OF EXPORTS -
General NA
Release of, without payment in full NG
SHORT WEIGHT CLAIMS CP
SPECIAL EXPORT LICENCE - Definition MA
STERLING AREA -
Definition AG
Payment to residents of CF
STERLING DRAFTS - enfacements CF
STERLING NOTES AND COIN - Buying rates of exchange BA
STUDY TRAVEL CX
SUBSCRIPTIONS TO SOCIETIES, CLUBS, ETC. - Payment of CV
SUPERVISION BY BANKS -
Exports NA
Imports CJ
SURPLUS FREIGHT COLLECTIONS - Payment of CP
SUSTENANCE PAYMENTS CS
SYDNEY GREASY WOOL FUTURES EXCHANGE JA
1.6.64.


T.
TAXES - Payment of CV
TECHNICAL "KNOW-HOW 1 ' - Payment of CP
TELEGRAPHIC TRANSFERS IN STERLING Instructions to
accompany CF
TEMPORARY RESIDENTS WORKING IN AUSTRALIA - Remittances by CP
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF ISSUE OF EXPORT LICENCES MA
TERRITORY OF PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA -
Exports from PA
Imports into CJ
TOPS - Special forward exchange facilities BQ
TOURISTS VISITING AUSTRALIA CY
TRADEMARKS -
Registration and renewal fees, Payment of CP
Royalty payments and service fees CP
TRANSFERS BETWEEN ACCOUNTS OF THE SAME NON-RESIDENT KA
TRAVELLERS* CHEQUES ENFACEMENTS CF, CX
TRAVELLERS -
Export of notes and coin CX, DC, EA
Export of securities DC, SD
Foreign currency unused for the purpose for which
it is sold CX
Importation and exportation of currency, securities,
gold and certain other articles of value DC
Issue of Form E DC
Payment of fares and accommodation in Australian
currency DA
TRAVELLING EXPENSES -
Applications CA, CX
Business travel CX
Emigration CX
Foreign currency unused for the purpose for which
it is sold CX
Health travel CX
Issue of banking instruments in Australian currency CX
Payments to travel agents, etc, in Australian currency DA
Private travel CX
Study travel CX
1.6.64.


U - V - w.
UNDERYIELD CLAIMS CP
UNUSED FOREIGN CURRENCY -
Imports CJ
Travelling expenses CX
U O S O currency purchased from residents of the
New Hebrides KA
USANCES UNDER DOCUMENTARY LETTERS OF CREDIT IN
PAYMENT FOR EXPORTS MN
V.
VALIDITY OF - Documentary letters of credit GJ
VALUABLES - Importation and exportation by travellers DC
VISITING TOURISTS - Banks 1 authority to sell foreign
currency to CY
W.
WAGES - Payment of CP
WOOL -
Futures operations JA
London Wool Terminal Market JA
Special Forward Exchange facilities BQ
Sydney Greasy Wool Futures Exchange JA
Waste, special Forward Exchange facilities BQ
1.6.64.
