

Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church.
The following ALTERATIONS of, and
ADDITIONS to, the
LAWS AND REGULATIONS
of the
AUSTRALASIAN WESLEYAN METHODIST
. . . CHURCH . . .
Were resolved upon, and enacted, by the GENERAL
CONFERENCE which commenced in Auckland,
New Zealand, on Nov. 10th, 1897, and
printed in the MINUTES of
that CONFERENCE.
They are reprinted in this Pamphlet Form, for the information vnd
convenience of the Ministers and O fficers of the Church , iy the
Secretary of the General Conference.
TRIAL OF CHURCH MEMBERS.
ALTERATION of laws and regulations.
That paragraph 39, Book of Laws, 1895, shall read —“ Either the
accuser or accused may appeal against the verdict of the Leaders
Meeting. Notice of such appeal shall be given in writing within
fourteen days of such verdict, after which the case shall be re-heard
before a Special Circuit Meeting.” (For constitution and powers of
Special Circuit Meeting see pars 165-175).
That paragraph 40 shall read —“ If the Superintendent Minister
is dissatisfied with the verdict of a Leaders’ Meeting, he has the same
right of appeal against the verdict as the member.”
That paragraph 41 shall read —“After the re-hearing before a
Special Circuit Meeting, there may be a further appeal to a District
Synod and the Annual Conference.” (See par. 178.)
That in paragraph 42, second line, the Iwords “In the special
case provided for in par. 39,” be struck out.
That paragraph 45 shall read—“lf an accused member is dis-
satisfied with the sentence, he has the right to appeal to the District
Synod, and if still dissatisfied, to the Annual Conference, whose
decision shall be final.”


That paragraph 46 shall read—Should an appeal to the District
Meeting be inconvenient or impracticable the member may appeal to
a Minor District Meeeing (see Minor District Meeting, par. 281), and
drom its decisions to the District Synod and Annual Conference.”
That paragraphs 168 and 169, Book of Laws 1895, be struck out.
That paragraph 170 shall read —“ The accuser or accused claim-
ing a re-hearing at a Special Circuit Meeting, must give notice in
writing to the Superintendent within fourteen days after the trial
by the Leaders’ Meeting.”
That paragraph 171 be amended as follows—“ A Superintendent
dissatisfied with a verdict must give notice to the accuser and accused
within fourteen days after the trial by the Leaders’ Meeting.”
That paragraph 173 shall read—“ The verdict of a Special Circuit
Meeting cannot be reversed except by a District Synod—Annual or
Special—or the Annual Conference.”
That paragraph 174 shall read —“If the member tried be found
guilty, the Superintendent is, after advising with the Chairman and
his colleagues, authorised to expel, or administer any other discipline
which he may deem sufficient.”
CONSTITUTION OF LEADERS’ MEETINGS.
That the constitution of Leaders’ Meetings be amended by the
■omission of the words “ three years” in line 7 of paragraph 143, page
28, Book of Laws.
QUESTIONS FOR LEADERS’ MEETINGS.
Question 1. —Who are present ?
Question 2. —What is the state of the several classes ? (Class
books to be produced.)
Question 3.—Are there any cases of sickness, poverty, or disorderly
conduct to be reported ?
Question 4.—Are any alterations to be made in the time, place
•or leadership of any of the class meetings ?
Question s*.—What names are added to the members’ roll ?
Question 6*.—What names are removed from the members’ roll 1
Question 7.—What is the state of the Poor’s Fund, and what
grants are made 1
Question B.—What more can be done to promote the work of
God ?
*For the meeting immediately preceding the Circuit Quarterly Meeting.


SUNDAY SCHOOLS.
That the following questions be asked (at least quarterly) at the
Leaders’ Meetings :
(a) What more can be done to promote the spiritual welfare of
our Sunday Schools f
(&) Have any communications been ireceived from the Sunday
Schools ?
JUNIOR MEMBERS.
That the term Junior Members be substituted for Catechumens,
■and that the said term be inserted wherever necessary to secure
lharmony in the Book of Laws. Provided that this shall not apply to
Foreign Mission Stations.
YOUNG PEOPLE’S SOCIETY OF CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOUR,
That the Superintendent Minister be ex officio President of the
■Christian Endeavour Societies within his Circuit.
That, subject to the approval of the Leaders’ Meeting, active
members of our Christian Endeavour Societies, if they so desire, be
regarded as members of our Church, or as members on trial ; that
their names be entered in Class-books, and that they receive
-Quarterly Tickets.
That the Monthly Consecration Meeting of the Christian
Endeavour Society be regarded as a Class Meeting.
INVITATIONS TO MINISTERS.
That page 30, Book of Laws, section 112, paragraph (e), last
■clause, be amended by the insertion of the words, “ by open voting,”
.and read as follows :—“ The invitations shall be by open voting, and
by an absolute majority of members present at the Quarterly
-Meeting.”
MAORI MEMBERS, NEW ZEALAND.
That paragraph No. 399, Book of Laws, be deleted.
CONSTITUTION OF OENERAL CONFERENCE.
That the Constitution of the General Conference be altered, so as
-to make the President and Secretary of the preceding General Con-
ference ex officio members of the next succeeding General Conference,
and so as not to involve additional representatiou of his or their
■Conference or Conferences.
REPRESENTATIVES TO GENERAL CONFERENCE.
All lay members of Annual Conferences held since the last pre-
ceding General Conference are eligible for election to the General
■Conference.


SUBSTITUTE REPRESENTATIVES TO THE GENERAL
CONFERENCE.
That in electing substitute Representatives to General Confer-
ence, the number of elective Representatives to which the Annual
Conference is entitled shall first be elected, after which a number
equal to the number of Representatives shall be elected, from whom
the number of substitutes required shall be selected in the order of
the largest number of votes received - .
ANNUAL CONFERENCES.
CONSTITUTION OF ANNUAL CONFERENCES.
That with a view of preventing the dual representation of the
Institutions of the Connexion, to the disfranchisement of Circuits,
par. 285, Book of Laws, be amended so as to read : —“ Should the
number of Laymen thus provided for be less than the number of
Ministers pertaining to any Annual Conference, the additional
Laymen required shall be provided (1) by the Lay Treasurers of the
Connexional and Conference Funds or Institutions not already
represented, as provided in paragraph 284, having a seat ex officio,
provided they are Church members of four years' standing.”
SUBSTITUTE REPRESENT ATI YES.
That with a view to completing the legislation of the last
General Conference respecting ex offieio members of the Annual
Conferences (Minutes of General Conference, 1894, p. 71), this
Conference substitutes for the resolution respecting Substitute
Representatives to Annual Conferences (G.M., 1894, p. 70) the
following :
(1) That Circuit Quarterly Meetings, Committees of Institu-
tions, and Committees of Conference or Connexional
Funds, shall be empowered to elect, by ballot, a Sub-
stitute Representative, or Representatives, to the Annual
Conference.
(2) That the right to a seat in the Conference shall be : (1)
In the case of Substitutes for elected Representatives, a
written notice that they are oppointed Substitutes for
Representatives who cannot attend Conference, from the
Superintendent of the Circuit, or from the Minister set
apart to the Institution. (2) In the case of Substitutes
for ex officio Representatives, a similar written notice
from the retiring President of the Conference. Such
written notices to be presented to the Secretary of the
Conference.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA ANNUAL CONFERENCE.
That in order to guard the interests of Ministers who have gone,
or who may go, from South Australia, and may wish to return, the


■General Conference directs the South Australia Conference to inter-
change each year one of its Ministers with one of the Ministers of the
Western Australia Conference, should the Western Australia Con-
ference request such interchange.
The General Conference directs that for the period of three years,
commencing with the year 1900, the Western Australia Conference
before receiving any candidates for the ministry shall negotiate with
the South Australia Conference with a view of obtaining, if possible,
such ministerial supplies as the Western Australia Conference may
require.
ECUMENICAL CONFERENCE, 1901.
That the election of Representatives to the next Ecumenical
Conference, which will meet in London in 1901, be remitted to the
Annual Conferences of that year. The details to be arranged by the
President and Secretary of this Conference.
SECRETARY OP ANNUAL CONPBRENCE.
That the Secretary of the Annual Conference shall be elected by
an absolute majority of the votes cast.
GENERAL RETURNS.
The Conference directs that the Returns of the Minutes of the
Annual Conferences shall show the number of Churches, Parsonages,
Schoolrooms, and Colleges. They shall also show the number of
Sunday Schools, Scholars in Sunday Schools who are members of the
Church, Bands of Hope and membership therein.
CENTRAL THEOLOGICAL INSTITUTION,
This Conference re-affirms the desirableness expressed by the last
General Conference of one Central Theological Institution.
That Queen’s College, Melbourne, be the Central Theological
Institution, and that each Annual Conference shall undertake the
financial responsibility of its own students.
That the entire management of the Institution, including the
appointment of the Tutorial Staff and the arrangement of the
•curriculum, shall be under the direction of the General Conference.
In the intervals between the General Conferences the affairs of
the Institution shall be under the supervision of the Victoria and
Tasmania Conference.
That the right of the General Conference to control the Central
Theological Institution (as per Resolution 3), shall not be held to
involve any Financial Responsibility on the part of the Conference
in relation to Queen’s College.
That the Annual Conferences, in carrying out these Resolutions,
shall ascertain and act upon the trusts of any Funds or Properties
held for purposes of Theological Instruction.
That the Conference approves of the appointment of the Rev. E.
H. Sugden, 8.A., B.Sc., as Master of Queen’s College.


AMENDMENT OF THE METHODIST UNION ACT, NEW
ZEALAND.
Certificate of the President of the General Conference.
In the matter of “ The Wesleyan Methodist Church
Property Trust Act, 1887, Further Amendment
Act, 1896.”
I, Henry Thomas Burgess, President of the Eighth General
Conference of the Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church,
held in the city of Auckland, in the Colony of New Zealand,
hereby certify that, on the sixteenth day of November, 1897,
the following resolution was passed by such General Con-
ference :
“ Whereas, by section 5 of an Act made and passed by the General
Assembly of New Zealand, intituled ‘ The Wesleyan Methodist
Church Property Trust Act, 1887, Further Amendment Act,
1896,’ it is provided that such section shall not take effect
until approved of by a Eesolution of the General Conference
of the Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church : NOW THIS
General Conference doth hereby approve of the said
section, subject to the proviso that no alteration, modification,
or repeal under sub-sections 2 or 3 of the said section, or either
of them, shall be made without the consent of the said
General Conference or other Conterence exercising supreme
jurisdiction in the Colony of New Zealand. And further
directs its President to give a Certificate to that effect.”
Dated at Auckland this nineteenth day of November, 1897.
Henry T. Burgess,
President of the General Conference of the Australasian
Wesleyan Methodist Church.
Witness to the signature of Henry Thomas Burgess,
J. A. Flesher, Solicitor, Christchurch.
AMENDMENT OP “THE WESLEYAN MODEL DEED OF NEW
ZEALAND, 1887.”
That in order to enable the New Zealand Conference of the
Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church to establish a Fund for
the insurance of properties held in trust for or on behalf of the
Connexion, this Conference consents to such alteration in and modi-
fication of the provisions of “ The Wesleyan Methodist Model Deed of
New Zealand, 1887,” being made by that Conference, pursuant to the
provisions of “ The Wesleyan Methodist Church Property Trust Act,
1887,” and the various Acts amending the same as may be by counsel
advised or deemed necessary in that behalf.
THE FOREIGN MISSIONARY SOCIETY.
That an Organising Secretary for Foreign Missions be appointed
in addition to the General Secretary for Missions.
That the Organising Secretary reside in Sydney.


That the present practice of setting apart a Minister for Foreign
Missions in Victoria be discontinued.
VACANCY IN THE FOREIGN MISSION SECRETARIAT ,
That the latter pait of par 300, Book of Laws, 1895, be deleted,
and the following be substituted in lieu thereof : —“ That in the case
of a vacancy occurring in the Missionary Secretariat during the
interval between the General Conferences, the choice of a successor
shall be made by the members of the preceding General Conference,
the President of the General Conference being charged with the
duty of collecting the votes for that purpose. The Board of
Missions shall nominate three Ministers, selecting the names from
any of the Annual Conferences, from among whom the election shall
be made.”
The foregoing shall apply to the office of Organising Secretary
as well as to that of General Secretary for Foreign Missions. Par.
342, Book of Laws, to be altered in accordance therewith.
MISSIONARY SOCIETY TREASURERS.
That Rule 10, page 113, Book of Laws, 1895, be amended to
read as follows :—“ Two General Treasurers, wdio shall hold office
for six years only, who shall be appointed by the General Con-
ference.”.
RETURNED MISSIONARIES.
That the Resolution of the General Conference, 1881, Minutes
p. 22, in re “Returned Missionaries’ Colonial Appointments.” be
amended to read as follows “Returned Missionaries shall be
apportioned amongst the Colonial Conferences in the proportion of
two each to the New' South Wales Conference and the Victoria and
Tasmania Conference, and one each to the South Australia Con-
ference, the New Zealand Conference, and the Queensland Con-
ference.”
SETTLEMENT OF RETURNED MISSIONARIES.
That in all cases the payment for the settlement of each
returned Missionary shall be £lOO.
STATUS OF CATECHISTS AND TEACHERS.
Resolved, —That the principle oi Permissive Legislation be
extended so as to enable the New South Wnles Conference to frame
regulations defining the relative status of Catechists and Local
Preachers in the Mission Districts.
QUESTION FOR QUARTERLY MEETINGS.
That the following question be added to the list of those to be
asked at the Quarterly Meetings ;—“ What arrangements are made
for holding the Annual Services and Public Meetings in connection
with the Foreign Missionary Society ?”


QUESTION FOR DISTRICT SYNODS.
That at each' District Synod the question be asked : “ Have the
amounts collected for Foreign Missions been duly remitted to the
General Treasurers ?”
FOREIGN MISSIONARY SUNDAY.
The General Conference directs each Annual Conference to
appoint one Sunday in each year as Missionary Sunday within its
bounds, and that in all the Sunday Schools and preaching places on
that day special attention be directed to the History and Claims of
Christian Missions, and the needs of the heathen world.
CHILDREN OP MISSIONARIES.
That in the cases of children born in the colonies prior to the
parents entering upon Mission work, payment be made by the
Mission Board whilst they (the parents) remain in the Mission field,
but that on their return to the colonies any further payment be
made by the Colonial Children’s Fund.”
MISSIONARY SISTERS.
That the sum of five pounds (£5) per annum be withheld from
the salary of each Missionary Sister, the same to be returned to her
on her retirement from the work ; and that such amount so with-
held be supplemented by an equal sum from the funds of the Society,
provided that such supplementary grant shall not exceed the sum
of £25.
SUPERNUMERARY MINISTERS’ AND MINISTERS
WIDOWS’ FUND.
That the Annual Report of the Board of Treasurers be bound
eaeh year in the Minutes of the Annual Conferences.
That copies of the Annual Report of the Board of Treasurers be
sent each year to Circuit Stewards as well as to Conference Repre-
sentatives.
That the action of the General Treasurers in reducing the
allowances to annuitants by 12£ per cent, from March, 1896, to
March, 1898, be confirmed.
That the Scale of Allowances for annuitants recommended by the
Rev. J. Cope, in Table “ C.” be provisionally adopted, and printed in
the Minutes of the General Conference. Payments on such scale to
commence in the June quarter, 1898. Further scales to be prepared
on a basis of 3| per cent., per cent., 3j per cent., and 3 per cent. ;
the General Treasurers to be directed to pay year by year on any one
of these scales should the earnings of the Fund require it.


That Rule 886, clause 7, Book of Laws, 1895, be amended by the
addition of the following words :—“ Should a vacancy or vacancies
occur by death or resignation during the interval between two
General Conferences, these vacancies may be regarded as retirements
and the Treasurers temporarily appointed to fill the vacancies shall
be eligible for election by the General Conference succeeding, and
their election shall be regarded as a new election.’
That all Ministers who are in arrears with their subscriptions be
required to pay the same at the rate of 20 per cent, per annum, in
addition to their ordinary subscriptions.
That the Rule, providing that no Probationer be received into
Full Connexion until his payments to the Supernumeraries’ Fund are
complete, be rigidly enforced.
That the fines on subscriptions in arrears be paid each year.
That Ministers’ subscriptions to the Fund be increased from
£6 6s. to £7 7s. per annum.
That the charge for each Minister be increased from £9 9s. to
£lO per annum, and that it be raised by a quarterly levy on Circuit
income to be paid quarterly to the Conference Treasurers,
That in case of a new Circuit, or a Circuit taking a second
Minister, the levy shall be for nine months only.
That each Institution to which a Minister is set apart be required
to pay the sum of £2 10s. per quarter to the Supernumerary Fund.
That annuities shall not be payable until the end of the eighth
year of service, instead of the fifth year as at present.
That furniture grants be reduced from £5O to £4O for Ministers
over fifteen years’ status. In the case of Ministers becoming Super-
numeraries between the eighth and fifteenth years, the grants shall
be £2O. The Regulations in re repayment of one-half on return to
full work are re-affirmed.
That the payments made on account of second marriage
premiums be increased by amending second paragraph of Eule 14,
Book of Laws, as follows :
For £l2 in last line of page 105 read £l3.
For £lB in sth line of page 106 read £l3.
For £1 4s. in 7th line of page 106 read £l,
For £4O in 13th line of page 106 read £35.
That tables be prepared to enable a Minister to purchase such
an interest in the Fund for a second wife as will place her in the
position of a first wife in regard to this Fund.


That the answer to Question YIII. of General Conference
business, “What Ministers have become Supernumeraries?” shall
be given by the Presidents of the several annual Conferences, who-
shall be required to supply any information that may be called for
in relation to any case within their respective Conferences.
That the status of any Supernumerary is decided by the
Ministerial Conference of which he is a member.
That Rule 13 of Rules and Regulations, Book of Laws, page
105, be amended by the omission of the words “ This Rule is to
apply to Ministers who have travelled more than fifteen (15) years.”
That a graduated and declining scale of allowances be made to
widows whose deceased husbands had travelled less than eight years ;
or the Board of Treasurers may, on such graduated and declining
scale, compound with the widows of such Ministers by the payment
of a lump sum in settlement of their claims upon the Fund.
That in the case of a Minister who is compelled to retire before
he has been a member of the Fund for eight years, he shall be
entitled to a return of his own personal payments, with compound
interest at current rates added.
That the statement of the financial position of the Fund be
supplied in the following form :
( a ) An extended and summarised account of receipts and
payments for the three years under review.
(&) A Revenue Account, showing premiums at interest
proper for the three years, with any variations thereof
by payment of arrears, short payments, or payments in
advance.
(c) A Balance-sheet for the same period, beginning with
capital, as at December 31st, preceding the General
Conference.
That in order to facilitate business arrangements in connection
with investments in Colonies other than Victoria, the Board of
Treasurers is authorised to give a power of attorney to such person
or persons as they may deem fit.
NEW SCALE OF ALLOWANCES.
That the following be the Scale of Allowances to Supernumerary
Ministers and Ministers’ Widows until further notice by the Board
of Treasurers :


£ &
s.s
#r 3
g §
Payments,
1 1
Payments
Super-
numeraries.
Widows.
Super-
numeraries
Widows.
35-010
20-000
36 098
20-812
66-747
69-471
72-355
75-411
78-618
82-076
85-511
89"559
93 641
97-972
102-570
107-454
112-651
118193
124095
130-416
137-199
144-500
40143
41-675
43-285
44 994
46-810
48-747
50-822
53"055
55"469
57-975
60 633
63-452
66-443
69-621
72-999
76-593
80-420
84-500
37-231
21-641
38-405
22-460
39-621
23-856
40-885
24-245
42-200
25’156
43-571
26092
45-004
27053
46-504
28-043
48-077
29-063
49-730
80-115
51-470
31-2 4
53-304
32-331
55241
33-498
57 208
34-717
59'453
35-983
61-746
37-306
64-175
38690
MINISTERS JOINING THE FUND UNDER PLAN OF
METHODIST UNIOS
That all Ministers from other Methodist Churches coming into
the Church, in accordance with the Plan of Union, be required to
become members of the Fund, and are strongly recommended to
purchase benefits in the Fund for full, two-thirds, or one-half benefits,
upon the scales to be prepared and as per Plan suggested by the
Treasurers, viz. : Ministers of eight years’ standing and under, full
benefits ; Ministers of nine to eighteen years’ standing, two-thirds
benefits ; and Ministers of nineteen years’ standing and over, one-half
benefits. An agreement explicitly stating what is purchased to be
signed by each Minister, and such agreement to be kept by the
Treasurers.
That if any Minister now connected with another Methodist
Church joins the Church in accordance with the Plan of Methodist
Union, and is unable to purchase the minimum of the benefits
recommended, such case be dealt with by the Board of Treasurers after
the Annual Conference with which such Minister is connected has
made its recommendation on his case to the Board of Treasurers.
That tables be prepared shewing what the payments of those
Ministers of other Methodist Churches, joining in terms of the Plan
of Union, who may be only able to pay lesser sums than those re-


commended in Clause 2, together with such proportion of the Circuit
payments as may be actuarially allotted to them, will purchase at the
respective ages and status at which they enter, and the Board of
Treasurers is hereby authorised to deal with such cases on these
tables.
That Ministers may purchase at any time additional benefits on
an equitable basis.
MEDICAL EXAMINATION,
That there shall be a careful and complete medical examination
of all candidates for the Ministry, which shall take place before the
acceptance of such candidate.
That there shall be a Board of Examiners in connection with each
Annual Conference, such Board to consist of not less than two (2)
legally qualified medical men, to be appointed by the Annual Confer-
ence. The Board shall submit its report, which shall be confidential,
to the Conference.
Every candidate for the Ministry shall, if possible, be examined
by each member of the Medical Board ; but the report to the Con-
ference shall be the joint report of the Board.
That in the event of a disagreement, the Board shall nominate a
referee, whose report shall be presented to the Conference.
That in the event of a candidate being excused by his Conference
from presenting himself before the Board, the Board shall indicate a
suitable examiner or examiners, whose report shall be submitted and
approved by the Board. The Board to report to the Conference.
Fees for examination shall be paid by the Annual Conferences
concerned, except reports made by the Board on primary reports of
other examiners.
METHODIST UNION,
The General Conference defines, as the general constitutional
basis upon which it is prepared to unite with any or all of the other
Methodist Churches, the plan agreed upon by the Conference of
Methodist bodies held in Melbourne, 1892, and recommended to this
Conference by the Victoria and Tasmania Conference, and which is
printed under the head of “ Proposed Constitution” in the Appendix,
pages 50 to 72, —General Conference Minntes 1897.
This Conference empowers and authorises each Annual Confer-
ence to carry into effect, within its own bounds, at the earliest period
found practicable, and on the constitutional basis thus defined, union
with any or all of the other Methodist Churches. All financial and
business questions arising out of such union to be decided by the
Annual Conference concerned.
For the purpose of enabling such union, on the plan thus defined,
being carried into effect, and in the event of such union being accom-


plished, this Conference hereby extends the permissive powers of
legislation conceded to the Annual Conferences by clause 312 of our
Book of Laws to all the clauses of the “ Proposed Constitution,” as
printed in the Appendix, and hereby authorises each Annual Confer-
ence, in the event of union with any or all of the other Methodist
Churches within its bounds being accomplished, to frame for itself
regulations in harmony with the “ Proposed Constitution” referred to
in the Appendix.
In the event of any Annual Conference actually carrying union
with any or all of the other Methodist Churches within its own
bounds into effect on the plan thus defined, all the details shall be
forwarded to the President of the General Conference, and if not
disallowed by him on legal or constitutional grounds within two
months from the time of its receipt, shall be held to be of full legal
effect.
Until Methodist Union has become general throughout Aus-
tralasia, the name of the uniting Methodist Churches shall be “ The
Australasian Wesleyan Methodist Church,” it being distinctly
agreed that when the union becomes general, the united Church
shall be denominated “ The Methodist Church of Australasia.”
This Conference empowers any Annual Conference deciding on
union on the basis defined to obtain such legal enactments as may
be necessary to give effect to such union.
Annual Conferences, in seeking to effect union with any or all
of the other Methodist Churches within their bounds, are directed to
arrange that Ministers of other Churches received into the United
Church must become members of the Supernumerary Ministers’
Widows’ Fund, under the conditions of the actuarial tables to be
prepared by the Eev. John Cope, except in such cases where it can
be shown that adequate provision has been already made.
Should any Annual Conference proceed to effect union on the
basis agreed on in this General Conference, this Conference directs
that the final vote by which union is consummated shall be carried
by a majority of not less than two-thirds of those present and voting
on the occasion.
COMMITTEES OF DETAILS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.
In order to facilitate the work and economise the time of the
General Conference, Committees of Details and Recommendations
shall be appointed, in the manner hereafter described, whose duty
shall be to prepare in advance the business to be submitted to the
Conference. Such Committees, with the subjects respectively
assigned to them, shall be as follows :
( a ) A Committee of Details and Recommendations as to the
Supernumerary Ministers’ and Ministers’ Widows’
Fund. Such Committee shall consist of not less than
twenty persons, with the Acting Treasurer of the Fund
as an ex officio member. To this Committee shall be
assigned all reports, recommendations, and matters
relating to the Fund.


(b) A Committee of Details and Recommendations as to
Foreign Missions. Such Committee shall consist of not
less than twenty members, with the General Secretary of
Missions as an ex officio member. To this Committee
shall be consigned all reports, recommendations, and
business relating to Missions.
(o') A Committee of Details and Recommendations on
Ministerial Questions. Such Committee shall consist of
not less than twenty persons, and shall have charge of all
reports, recommendations, and matters relating to
Ministerial interchanges, the course of study for Pro-
bationers, the management of Theological Institutions
and all matters relating to ministerial training and work’
(d) A Committee of Details and Recommendations on
Education and Literature. Such Committee shall consist
of not less than ten persons, and shall have charge of all
reports, recommendations, and matters relating to
Colleges, Sunday Schools, Book Depots, and Periodical
Literature.
(e) A Committee of Details and Recommendations on General
Questions. Such Committee shall consist of not less than
twenty persons, and shall have charge of all recommenda-
tions from Annual Conferences not assigned to other
Committees, and of all recommendations, reports, and
matters relating to questions of public morality.
Such Committee of Details and Recommendations shall be
appointed, and the convener of each named by the President of the
General Conference, after due consultation with the Presidents of
the Annual Conferences, not less than one month before the
assembling of the General Conference. The Pi esident of the General
Conference shall forward to the President of each Annual Conference
the list of Committees as drawn up by him, and it shall be the duty
■of the President of each Annual Conference to notify his appoint-
ment to any representative named in such list, and residing
within the bounds of the Conference of which he is President. The
Secretary of the General Conference shall forward to the Convener of
each Committee of Details and Recommendations all documents
bearing on the subjects of which such Committee is in charge
together with any other information of which he is in possession
which may be of service to it.
The task of each Committee of Details and Recommendations
shall be to collate and summarise all the details of the subjects re-
mitted to it, and to prepare recommendations on each subject for
submission to the Conference. It shall be the duty of the Convener
•of each Committee of Details and Recommendations, on the call of
the President, to submit the report and recommendation of such
Committee on the business then before the Conference, and such
report and recommendation shall be the first business under the head
of each question.


The whole of such Committees of Details and Recommendations
shall, if practicable, meet at least one clear day before the assembling
of the General Conference, and prepare the business to be submitted
to it. In any case, not less than two such committees, to be notified
by the President of the General Conference, shall so meet for this
purpose. The General Conference, on its assembling, shall, if it is
deemed necessary, revise the personnel, or add to the numbers of such
committees, and the committees as thus revised, shall be Standing
Committees of the Conference for which they are appointed, and
■shall sit as often as may be necessary, and shall act as Committees
■of Reference for such matters as the Conference may direct.
That in order to harmonise the Book of Laws with the above
all the words following sub-section 25 of par. 327, Book
<of Laws, to the end of the said par., be deleted.


