

/ '* Os'
l /3 *
■i-'i
ftJs
AUSTRALIA
AND THE
NEW HEBRIDES.
Published bg th«
AUSTRALASIAN NEW HEBRIDES COMPANY,
LIMITED.
Offices: SUSSEX STREET, SYDNEY.
WALTER AKHURST & CO., PRINTERS, SYDNEY.




AUSTRALIA
AND THE NEW HEBRIDES
T~) ECBNT EVENTS in connection with the great Australian
J- Federal movement, and the potentialities which cluster
round the future of Australian Dominion in the South Pacific
Seas, invest with a vital interest all matters pertaining to the
noble group of Islands known as the New Hebrides, which is
fast becoming a centre of commercial activity, and advancing
civilization under the vivifying touch of Australian enterprise
and energy.
Already these fertile and interesting Islands are being
gradually but surely annexed for all practical purposes to the
Australian Commonwealth, and Sydney is fast becoming the
chief entrepot for their trade and produce. The malign
influences of the French convict system, and the undoubted
menace to Australian peace and progress, which the possession
of such a vantage ground as these Islands would give for any
possible future hostile action by France is, under existing
dispositions, in a fair way of being minimised if not entirely
overcome, BUT IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT THESE
DISPOSITIONS BE CONTINUED.


Numbers of Australian planters and pioneers have founded
settlements and begun plantations in the group. Large sums
of Australian capital are invested in the various trading
stations, and agricultural clearings. Missionary activity has
received a new impulse, and the vained beneficent influences of
civilization are operating with a new vigour among the rude
and erstwhile savage Islanders, and much, if not all these
splendid results have been mainly due to the enlightened and
liberal attitude which has been taken both by New South Wales
and Victoria, in their treatment hitherto of this most important
question of Australian Foreign Policy. By means of the
subsidies granted for regular and reliable steam communication,
the most encouraging and beneficent progress has been achieved.
The subsidies have not been large, being £2,200 from New
South Wales for both oversea, inter-island, and costal service,
and £1,200 from Victoria, but these sums have been sufficient
to produce the most momentous political and commercial
results. The actual sums paid by New South Wales, are
£1,200 for the steamers of the Fiji line calling at the New
Hebrides, and £l,OOO for a smaller steamer calling at all the
islands, and connecting with the ocean steamers of the Fiji
line.
By the service as at present constituted, the results have
amply justified the enlightened and patriotic policy of which
it has been the outcome.
In face of many discouragements and the keenest
antagonism of jealous Foreign Powers, Australian influence is
steadily winning its way all along the line. But this
promising state of affairs absolutely depends on the continuance
of the steam service, which has undoubtedly been the great
factor in practically annexing this splendid group of Islands to


Australia. If the service be discontinued, the existing
industries and flourishing Australian interests must be
sacrificed. Settlement will be stopped, plantations and trading
stations will have to be abandoned. The growing trade will
suffer an abrupt and fatal check, and the supremacy of
Australia will yield to that of France, and in all probability
French convictism will take the place of peaceful Australian
progress and settlement.
It is a matter of the highest national importance that such
a disaster should be averted, and with a view to make all
interested clearly acquainted with the tremendous issues now
involved, the following hasty notes have been compiled,
showing the resources and features of the Hew Hebrides ; and
the attention of Members of Parliament and public men
generally, is earnestly invited to a careful consideration of the
whole question, from a broad liberal Australian point of view.
For we must repeat, if the subsidy is not continued, the steam
service is likely to cease, and if that ceases, Australians may say
FAREWELL TO THE NEW HEBRIDES.
Australian legislators should consider whether a small
payment continued for a few years longer, would not be the
most natural and most economical means of securing this Island
territory, which in effect belongs to Australia, and it may
cost only a few thousands now to retain, instead of tens of
thousands eventually to regain these Islands, should they
be allowed to drift under the control of any Foreign
Power.
When the debate upon the subsidy last took place in the
Legislature of Hew South Wales, it was abundantly evident
that want of reliable information prevailed in the minds not
only of the outside public, but even among the Members


themselves, as to the exact position, trade, and nationality of
these Islands, and in the light of subsequent developments, it
would seem that only a very incorrect view could have been taken
by those in our midst who have been hitherto opposed to a
continuance of the subsidy.
By a reference to the small map issued with this
pamphlet, it will be seen that the Islands lie north-easterly
from Sydney, about 1,200 miles—being about four days good
steaming. Steamers going to Fiji pass not far from the group,
the only ocean-going boat which calls, being one of the
A.U.S.JST. Coy.’s Fiji Steamers-—the “ Rockton.” This makes
a monthly call, and connects with the S.S. “ Croydon,” the
medium for the inter-island service, touching at each Island of
the whole group where trade is to be done, and returning to
Vila to meet the next monthly steamer. The only other
trading steamers are those of the French New Hebrides Co.,
which are largely supported by the French Government, and a
few years ago the French men-of-war landed some hundreds of
French soldiers, and virtually took possession of the whole
group.
It was only after the most urgent solicitations of the
Victorian Government, that the Home authorities succeeded in
inducing the French Government to withdraw these soldiers,
and allow the Islands to remain under what is known as the
dual control of England and France.
France with a view no doubt to ultimate annexation, gives
her subjects the fullest license and encouragement, and promptly
chastises any native action against her subjects. To be an
Australian and a British subject is really to all appearance, a
poor privilege, and may actually constitute a grave danger to a
man’s life and liberty. Any foreigner can have the protection


of his Government, can employ natives of one Island to work
on another, can trade in firearms and import cartridges and.
explosives and enjoy many other privileges which are altogether
denied to Australians. In sober earnest the state of things
virtually amounts to this :
Australia contributes to the support of British men-of-war,
which may be xised to harass and restrict her Island commerce
and the laws being applicable only to Australians, are in some
cases most severe. British subjects may be killed while
peacefully at work at their avocations, and their comrades
advised by high officials that it serves them right for being
there. Australians who have attempted to import a gun or a
rifle for their own protection have been warned ; and a captain
of a British man-of-war actually boarded the A.U.S.N. Gov.’s
S. S. “ Croydon,” examined her manifest, seized a case
containing fire-arms for an Australian settler, fined the captain
£5, and threatened to have him placed in irons, if the offence
were again repeated on board his ship. An employee of the
French New Hebrides Co., gave the British man-of-war the
information that an Australian settler expected these fire-arms
from Sydney, and he actually used the British man-of-war to
serve his own ends, and force Australian settlers to buy their
fire-arms, &c., from his French Co. The whole of the
Missionaries in the Islands, the Captains and Officers of the
Australian Squadron, the Admiral, the Premiers of the
Colonies, and all people of influence, and with any idea of fair-
dealing throughout the Australian Colonies, have expressed
but one opinion; viz.: that the crude and harsh laws relating
to British subjects, while applicable only to them, are
altogether oppressive, and should either be applied in a
much modified form to all nationalities alike, or entirely
cancelled.


Australians
.. 125
French
.. 76
Other Nations
.. 19
Total
.. 220
The estimated native population of the New Hebrides is
60,000 souls, and the white population 220, comprising as far
as is known :
The Islands were discovered and surveyed by British ships
at considerable expense, British and Australian money has
done the whole of the civilizing of the group, and the natives
are all most desirous that the British only should annex their
Islands.
The Australasian New Hebrides Co., Limited, comprises a
number of well-known Australian public men who are seeking
patriotically to secure for their countrymen in the Islands
FAIR PLAY. The Company requires some security for this,
and a continuance of the present steam service to convey their
produce to market. If these advantages are obtained, there
can be no reasonable doubt as to the ultimate result in two or
three years’ time. Only continuity is required, hut any
stoppage or spasmodic interference with the service, may prove
altogether fatal to Australian interests.
The Islands are altogether tropical, and the narrow and
unworthy fear of competition need hardly be considered.
Copra, coffee, ramiefibre, tea, spices, and tropical fruits will
he the principal produce, and in raising these a great exchange
market for Australian produce and merchandise is opened up.
The rich volcanic soil will grow almost every tropical product.
The natives are rapidly diminishing in numbers, and there can
be no doubt that other races will be attracted, and ultimately
develop the rich and varied resources of the Islands.


Under French occupation an extension of the Convict
system is almost certain, and Australia would annually lose
many thousands of pounds in dealing with the “ liberes ” and
escaped convicts, of whom there are already far too many in
these Colonies.
The Australian Governments assist in the maintenance of
the Squadron which is principally engaged among the islands
of the Pacific. Australia also contributes largely towards the
Government of New Guinea, although only a portion of that
Island is British, the major portion being Dutch and German.
Surely then our statesmen will not abandon their claim to this
great group of rich and beautiful Islands, situated only about
one-third the distance from Sydney to that of New Guinea.
Surely a modest £B,OOO a year could jointly be spared and
spent by the Colonies of New South Wales and Victoria, in
attracting the trade, and asserting their national rights of
possession to this fertile and important Island territory which
lies almost at our doors, whose inhabitants are desirous of
our rule, and which in the near future, must have such
a development as will recoup tenfold the present moderate
outlay.
It is impossible in a concise pamphlet to treat the subject
as fully as could be wished, and indeed busy and practical
legislators cannot afford the time to peruse long publications,
and if this short treatise only creates thought upon the subject,
then the object will be gained, as Australia must sooner or later
rise up and protect her people who piorjeer surrounding lands.
Apathy and selfishness should never be found in the
Government of any great nation, and it is only by a liberal and
progressive policy that our commerce can be extended, and our
good name upheld.


n) A T p
&16 l( o
rbrti-
' D
, , . V f


Intending Settlers on the New Hebrides
Group of Islands should communicate with
the Secretary of the Company . Sussex Street ,
Sydney, who will give every information and
assistance.
Reports of the Company’s operations,
together with List of Shareholders in Victoria ,
New South Wales and Queensland, can also
be had on application.
The Company are desirous of securing
further Shareholders , and invite application
throughout the Colonies.
9


