

AUSTRALIAN
WAR MEMORIAL
MUSEUM
The Relics and Records of
Australia's effort in the
Defence of the Empire,
1914-1918.


AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL
MUSEUM.
Exhibition Building,
Prince Alfred Park,
Sydney.
ADMISSION FREE.
Open to Visitors.
Week Days .. .. 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Sundays .. .. .. 2.30 p.m to 5 p.m.
Closed on Good Friday and Christmas Day.
Read Carefully:
1. To prevent over-crowding, admission will, if neces-
sary, be regulated.
2. Visitors are reminded that the exhibits belong to
the Nation, and they are requested to assist in
the preservation of their own property.
3. Attendants will gladly answer questions relating to
the exhibits.
4. Umbrellas, sticks, parcels, &c., must be left at the
cloak room at the entrance to the Museum.
5. Smoking is strictly prohibited.
6. No picture or other exhibit may be photographed,
sketched, or copied in any way, without the per-
mission of the Director.
7. Dogs will not be admitted.
8. Peanut shells, fruit skins, papers, and other litter
must not be dropped upon the floor of the
exhibition hall.
J. L. TRELOAR,
Director.
3rd April, 1925.






In Memoriam
“They gave their lives. For that public gift
they received a praise which never ages and a
tomb most glorious— not so much the tomb in
which they He, but that in which their fame
survives, to be remembered for ever when occa-
sion comes for word or deed ”
*82678 —A


Melbourne Edition ;—
First Published September, 1922.
Second Impression May, 1923.
Third Impression September, 1923.
Sydney Edition ;
First Published April, 1925.
Second Impression June, 1925.
Third Impression September, 1925.
Fourth Impression February, 1926.
Fifth Impression August, 1926.
Sixth Impression January, 1927.
Seventh Impression May, 1927.


FOREWORD
TO THE
Sydney Edition.
Y an Act of the Parliament of the
B Commonwealth passed in 1925,
the Australian War Museum was
formally recognised as the Aus-
tralian War Memorial. As such
it is to be permanently housed in
a suitable monumental building at Canberra,
where a magnificent site on the slopes of Mount
Ainslie has been reserved. Designs for this
building, which is to cost £250,000, are now being
prepared.
Included in the building will be a great Hall
of Memory, on the walls of which will be
inscribed the names of all Australians who died
through the war, listed beneath the names of
the towns or districts from which they came.
The object is that, not only will our descend-
ants during all time be able to come to this
memorial and read the names of those men of
their district who died through the war, but
standing in that silent hall, surrounded by the
names of those who fell and a few of their most
precious relics, visitors may for all time be
impressed with the sense that they are in the
actual presence of the dead, and realise their
larger responsibilities to their memory.
Pending the provision of a permanent home,
the collections were exhibited in temporary
accommodation in Melbourne in 1922-24, and
were there inspected by 776.810 visitors. Early
in 1925, the collections were transferred to
Sydney, where they were officially opened to
the public on the 3rd April by His Excellencv
the Governor-General. Up to the 30th April,
1927, the attendance totalled 967,085, being at
a rate substantially in excess of the splendid
attendances recorded in Melbourne.


INTRODUCTION.
HIS Guidebook is in no sense a
T catalogue of the Australian War
Memorial Museum. Its aim is not
so much to enumerate the exhibits
in this memorial collection of
relics, as to assist the visitor to view
them in their proper sequence.
The Museum is rich in illustrations of the
individual genius of the Australian soldier. A
great army in the field must move as a highly-
organised and complete machine, but in the test
of actual combat it is the quality of its Abre-
ks integral units —which chiefly determines its
success or failure.
Hence, in a national war memorial of this
nature, the true significance of the majority of
the exhibits lies, not in their character as battle-
field curios, but as emblems of those splendid
qualities which made the Australian soldier —to
quote the words of Marshal Foch—“ the greatest
individual fighter in the war.”
Viewed in the right spirit, the Museum inspires
a profound admiration for the great citizen army,
which Germany’s challenge to the world conjured
into being, and a deep and abiding reverence for
those who laid down their lives for Australia.


CONTENTS.
The numbers in brackets indicate the case in which the exhibits
referred to are placed.
PAGE.
How the War Memorial Museum is Arranged ... ... ... 7
Australian Uniform (i) ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
German and Turkish Uniforms (2) ... ... ... ... 9
Memorial Medallions (3, 4) ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
A.I.F. Sports Trophies (5) ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
British and Dominion Uniforms (6) ... ... ... ... 11
Anzac (7 to 9) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
Palestine (11) ... ... ... ... ... 16
The Somme, 1916, and Bullecourt (12 to 17) ... ... ... 18
Flanders, 1916-17 (18 to 22) ... ... ... ... ... 22
How the Digger Spent His Leisure (23) ... ... ... ... 27
Personal Relics (24) ... ... ... ... ... .. ... 28
Regimental Mementoes (25) ' ... ... ... ... ... 28
Army Medical Service (26 to 30) ... ... ... ... ... 30
Defence of Amiens, and Hazebrouck (31 to 35) ... ... ... 31
August, 1918, and Hindenburg Line (36 to 42) ... ... ... 35
Naval and Transport Services (43 to 46) ... ... 42
Allied Uniforms (47) ... ... ... ... ... ... 43
German Substitutes (48) ... ... ... ... ... ... 43
Mechanical Models (49) ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
German Decorations (50) ... ... .. ... ... ... 44
Miscellaneous Medallions and Badges (51) ... ... ... 44
Aircraft and Air Service Equipment (55) ... ... ... ... 44, 47
Camouflage (52 to 54) ... ... ... ... ... ... 44
Anti-gas Equipment (57) ... ... ... ... ... ... 46
Small Arms (58, 59, 60) ... ... ... ... ... ... 47
Grenades and Pyrotechnics (61) ... ... ... ... ... 48
Artillery Ammunition and Instruments (62, 63, 64) ... ... 49
Food Containers, Water-bottles, Cooking and Mess Utensils (65) 49
Signalling Equipment (66 and 67) ... ... ... ... ... 49
Engineer and Pioneer Equipment and Models (68, 69) ... ... 50


'■ PAGE.
Miscellaneous Uniform, Headdress, Boots, &c. (70 to 72) ... 50
Medical Equipment (72 and 73) ... ... 5°
War Memorial Library ... ... ... ... ... ••• 5 2
Sales Section ... ... ... ... ... .v ••• 5 2
APPENDIX.
Descriptive Catalogue of Olficial Photographs on Exhibition ... 57
ILLUSTRATIONS.
" Anzac Undress ” ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Australian Uniform ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
“ To the Cheats among the Bakers ” ... ... ... ... 10
Sports Trophies Won in the Field by A.I.F. Units ... ... 14
46th Turkish Regimental Colours ... ... ... ... ... 13
An Historic Notice Board ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
" Last Dash for Damascus” ... ... ... ... ... 26
“ Charge of the 3rd L.H. Brigade at Nek” ... ... ... 27
” 1 tuns We have Met ” ... ... ... ... ... ... 29
Message Left in German H.Q., Captured by Australians ... 38
The Attack on Mont St. Quentin ” ... ... ... ... 40
” • Emden ' Beached and Done For ” ... ... ... ... 41
“ Gretchen’s Paper Camisole ” ... ... ... ... ... 43
Anti-Gas Equipment ... 44
Two Interesting German Cartoons ... ... ... ... 45
” Sandy ” ... ... ... ... 50
” Landing at Anzac ” ... ... ... ... ... ... 51
“ Watching the ‘ Sydney Emden ’ Action ” ... ... ... 60
” The Hop-over ” ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
“ Australian Light Horse ” ... ... ... gt
“ Off on a Bombing Raid ” ... ... ... ... ... 97
... • I
DIAGRAM.
How to Reach the War Memorial Museum ... On back cover
CONTENTS — continued.


AUSTRALIAN
WAR MEMORIAL MUSEUM.
A GUIDEBOOK
FOR THE USE OF VISITORS.
How the Museum is Arranged.
Along the walls of the hall, courts allotted to the various
campaigns have been built. In these courts are grouped
relics—i.e., articles whose interest chiefly lies in the stories
attaching to them—associated with the respective campaigns.
On the walls are pictures of outstanding incidents, portraits
of prominent leaders, and sketches of places of interest.
Each court is, therefore, a unique and compact “ volume ”
of history of Australia’s war effort.
The south-western corner is devoted to exhibits relating
to the work of the Medical Service.
In showcases at the far end of the hall are representative
collections of modern war material, used by both the Allied
and enemy nations.
On the pillars are hung trophies of flags. Some of these
were captured in battle, others were carried in the field by
Australian units, and others again were presented to Aus-
tralia by Allied nations. On these pillars are also hung
frames containing interesting and important documents.
A specially selected series of photographs, which illustrate
the war services of the Australian Navy and Army, are
hung in the galleries at either end.


TURN TO THE LEFT.
To see the War Memorial Museum to the best advantage,
the visitor is advised, after viewing the exhibits in the
entrance hall, to turn to the left when he enters the main
hall, and inspect in turn each court around the walls; then
to examine the aerial equipment and other exhibits in the
body of the hall, the showcases at the south end, and
finally the photographs in the galleries.
The limited floor and wall space available has permitted
a portion only of the collections held by the Australian War
Memorial Museum to be placed on view. Many special
exhibits, interesting relics, and pictures are, of necessity,
held in store. A number of pictures and several models
have yet to be completed. It is intended, however, to alter
the display in detail from time to time, with the object of
enabling the public to see, if possible, the whole of the
collections.
In the following pages attention is drawn to some of the
more interesting exhibits. Visitors will doubtless note many
others.
All exhibits are accurately and adequately titled, and on
the cards attached to them their full significance is detailed.


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. See Page 12.
"Anzac Undress.”
By Lieut. W. W. Anlerson.




THE COLLECTIONS’ FUTURE HOME.
In the entrance hall is a plan model of the approved
general lay-out of Canberra, where the War Memorial Col-
lections will, as explained in the Foreword, eventually be
permanently housed in a monumental building. The model:
will enable visitors to appreciate the fine site allotted the
Memorial at the Federal Capital.
Ranged around the walls of the entrance hall are speci-
mens of British and French shells, from 4.5 inch to 18 inch,
and, in the case of two French shells, to 20.46 inch. Above
the shells a number of Will Dyson’s inimitable black and
white drawings are hung. This artist spent many months
in France, and his drawings “ reflect more the misery and
the depression of the material conditions of war than any
of its exaltations or cheerfulness.”
Australian Uniform.
THE TRENCH RAIDER.
In the glass case (No. i) are figures of Australian sol-
diers, a seaman, a nurse, and a masseuse. One of the soldiers
is prepared for a night raid on a German trench. His face
and hands are blackened, to make them inconspicuous in the
light of flares, and in order that the enemy, in the event of his
capture (alive or dead), shall not discover the unit to which
he belongs, he has discarded his distinctive Australian uni-
form and wears an English pattern outfit, without regimental
number, name, or mark upon it. To show the appearance
of an Australian infantryman in battle, there is presented
on the figure at the left of this case the actual uniform in
which one of our soldiers fought at Morlancourt. The mud
of that battlefield is still thick upon the clothes and helmet
(carefully preserved by the Museum in the condition in
which they came out of the fight), and rents made by barbed
wire can be seen near the knees.
Standing back-to-back with this showcase is another
(No. 2), containing figures wearing the uniform and equip-
ment of German and Turkish soldiers. One has the body
armour and steel helmet with forehead plate sometimes worn
by the Germans, especially by snipers and observers, who.
not having to move about, did not find the armour too
inconvenient a burden.


Memorial Medallions.
SATIRE AND HERO WORSHIP.
The visitor should next give his attention to two show-
cases which contain a collection of German medallions,
struck in honour of war heroes, or to commemorate im-
portant events. The right half of the first case (No. 3)
is devoted to medallions dealing with civil and political
leaders and domestic events. One of the most interesting
is that dedicated to “ The Cheats Among the Bakers,” who
are shown engaged in the offence with which they are
charged—“meal-stretching” (adulterating flour with saw-
dust). There are several mementoes of the “ Iron Times ”
“To the Cheats among the Bakers.”
when the Germans gave up their gold plate, rings, jewellery,
&c., receiving in exchange their value in paper money and a
similar article in iron with the inscription (translated) :
“ Gold I gave for defence,
Iron I took in honour.”
Some of these iron brooches, watch-chains, tie-pins, &c.,
are shown, and close to them are “ silver ” and iron nails
which German citizens, on payment of a certain sum,
were permitted to drive into a huge wooden effigy of
Hindenburg erected in Berlin, thus paying homage to their
great war hero. - .
The left half of the case is devoted to medallions struck
in honour of great German soldiers. Prominent among them
are Hindenburg (“ Like Siegfried, he bound the bears”) ;


Von Kluck, on the reverse of whose medallion, ironically
enough, is shown a German eagle brooding over Paris from
investing trenches; and Von Haeseler, the Crown Prince’s
chief of staff—they are likened to Chiron and Achilles.
THE “ LUSITANIA ” HORROR.
The medallions in the right half of the second case (No. 4)
are mostly sneers at their enemies. To mention a few: —
“ The hesitating Roumanians,” who are likened to Buridan’s
ass; Sir Edward Crey, “ A mouth is given him for speaking
great things and blasphemies. Who is like the beast ”; the
King of Italy, ‘’Judas Iscariot”; and so on. On the other
side of this case are examples dealing with naval heroes and
maritime events: Graf von Spec, who commanded the Ger-
man Pacific Squadron, destroyed off the Falkland Islands
by Sturdee; Weddigen, the U-boat hero; the famous (or,
rather infamous) “ Lusitania ” medals struck to commemo-
rate the achievement of sinking the great Cunard liner with
its freight of men, women, and children; the Battle of
Jutland, “ Seal-killing at the Skaggerak.”
One of particular interest is that struck for the purpose
of satirising Vice-Admiral Sir Dudley de Chair, who con-
ducted the blockade between Scotland and Norway, and,
despite German statements to the contrary, succeeded in
practically closing that passage-way.
The next showcase (No. 5) contains many fine sports
trophies won in the field by A.I.F. units. At one end of
this case is the bronze palm presented to the Prime Minister
of the Commonwealth by Admiral Gilly, who visited Mel-
bourne, at the end of 1922, at the head of a French Trade
Mission. It is an emblem of the French people’s remem-
brance of those Australians who fought and died on the
field of battle.
Before entering the Gallipoli Court the visitor passes
another showcase (No. 6), containing figures wearing the
uniforms of the British and Dominion armies.


Anzac —The Immortal Beginning.
J * THEIR GLORY SHALL NEVER FADE.”
Approaching the first court, the visitor’s attention will
immediately be attracted by a life-size figure of a man in
the scanty uniform worn by many Australians at Anzac. He
is carrying petrol tins, in which it was the men’s constant
duty to bear water up the steep Gallipoli heights to the firing
line.
Entering the court the visitor finds a number of rare
and precious relics of Anzac. Here (Case No, 7) is some
of the galvanised iron which covered parts of the Australian
line at Quinn’s Post —the most dangerous trenches at Anzac,
where Turks and Australians were only 15 yards apart.
The iron is shot through and through with shrapnel and
bullets. Nearby are some of the Turkish shrapnel bullets
which fell in Shrapnel Gully, and gave the gully its name.
Here, too, is the first flag flown at Anzac. It was hoisted
at the ammunition store on the beach—the holes made in it
by the Turkish gun known as “ Beachy Bill ” can be se«n.
In the opposite showcase is the last flag flown at Anzac.
SENDING HOME THE NEWS.
Here, also, is the signal flag with which a signaller of
the 10th Battalion sent off one of the first reports that the
troops had succeeded in landing on the peninsula, the first
link in the long chain of messages by which Australians at
home learnt that their army was in action. Other relics
are the money-belt of a man of the 2nd Light Horse, found
four years later, with the badges he had collected attached
to it; a heap of bullets picked up within a square yard upon
the Turkish parapet at Sniper’s Nest—a point which was
kept under such constant fire by our men that the lead
pellets lie there to-day in thousands; Turkish bullets fired
at the 2nd Australian Infantry Brigade during its famous
charge near Krithia; and one of the poppies which bravely
flowered there that day.
INTERESTING IMPROVISATIONS.
Two of the old periscopes (the earliest of which had to
be improvised from ships’ mirrors and wood, because this
trench equipment was not then provided) are shown. To
the right in this case there are other makeshifts—a stew
ladle fashioned from a bullet-pierced water-bottle; a
draughts board drawn with a pencil on a piece of an ammu-
nition box; a brush of twigs; and a piece of tin converted,
by means of nail-holes, into a grater, and used for shredding
the wholemeal army biscuits to make porridge—a Gallipoli
luxury.


A FRIEND FROM LADYSMITH.
On the central table (No. 8) is the raised model map of
Gallipoli, used by Sir lan Hamilton, the commander of the
expedition, in working out plans on the headquarters’ ship,
“ Arcadian,” before the expedition landed. Near it is the
representation of a simple device, invented by Corporal
W. C. Scurry, and used at the Evacuation, by means of
which rifles were fired at irregular intervals after the last
man had left, to deceive the Turks into believing that the
trenches were still occupied.
There is also one of the original crude little Garland
trench mortars —the first used by Australians. It is simply
a tube, from which a small bomb is thrown by exploding
beneath it a charge of gunpowder. On the floor in front
of this table is a 4.7 gun —a Ladysmith veteran —which will
be remembered by Australians who served at Anzac as a
good friend on the right flank.
In the next case (No. 9) is a number of improvised
“ jam-tin ” bombs with which nearly all the Australian bomb-
ing at Anzac was carried out. They were made of two
cylinders, fitted one inside the other, the inner one being
filled with high explosive, and the space between packed with
old nails or broken iron.
A LOG FROM LONE PINE.
Here is also some of the galvanised iron headcover (i.e.,
roof) of the Lone Pine trenches, and one of the pine logs
which supported the Turkish headcover, through which
some of the Australians forced their way in one of the
bravest and most costly fights of the war. On this log can
still be seen, scrawled in pencil, the names of Australian
soldiers who afterwards garrisoned Lone Pine. On the
right-hand corner of the table is a steel loophole plate from
the Australian trenches, with the marks of Turkish bullets
crowded round its tiny aperture.
Other exhibits in this section to which attention may be
drawn are tin and wooden crosses erected by soldiers over
their fallen comrades’ graves—since replaced by permanent
crosses; a notice board warning passers-by that there is
“ no admittance to the tunnels,” in which men were silently
mining underneath the Turkish trenches; two small cones
picked up at night by men crawling out over the position
where had stood the solitary pine tree, from which Lone


Pine derived its name; the haversack, shot through and
through, of one of the brave men who fell in the most
famous and deadly charge Australians ever made—that
of the 3rd Light Horse Brigade at The Nek, on 7th
August, 1915* This is almost the only relic which remains
of that wonderful episode in our country’s history. G, W.
Lambert’s painting of this attack hangs upon the wall near
by. Leaves of a Bible found upon the slope upon which the
14th, 15th, and 16th Battalions were decimated on Bth
August, are shown. The spot was not ascertained until
four years later, when the remains of the men were found
and buried there. Lying beside one was this Bible.
“TO THE LAST MAN.”
A blue enamelled water-bottle and a shell-torn bugle are
reminders of a tragic incident. They were found far out
upon Pine Ridge, where, at the Landing, at the end of the
long day s fierce battle, part of the Australian line was cut
off by the Turks at dusk, and was last seen fighting on, but
hopelessly surrounded. Not a man survived, but their actual
fate was not known until, four years later, after the war
ended, their bodies were found lying where they had fought.
They have since been buried on Pine Ridge.
Amongst many interesting documents exhibited in this
court are an unfinished message from a signaller of the
13th Battalion, written during the desperate fighting of
2nd and 3jd May—unfinished because the writer was killed
by a Turkish bullet, and a signal message sent on the 20th
December, 1915, to Army Headquarters on H.M.S. “ Chat-
ham,” announcing that the evacuation had been successfully
completed at 3.25 a.m.
As the visitor leaves the court he will notice on his left a
case containing a small plan model of Anzac. It was made
from Turkish maps by Mr. Justice Ferguson, of the New
South Wales Supreme Court. It shows at a glance the
difficulties of this famous position and the precarious grip
on the Peninsula the Anzacs had.
“WHILE ALL THE WORLD WONDERED.”
The picture of the Landing, which dominates the court,
was painted by G. W. Lambert, the noted Australian artist,
who went thoroughly over the ground four years later with
some of those who were present when the heights were
stormed. It shows the 3rd Brigade making the first rush up
the steep slope of Plugge’s Plateau, in the dim light of dawn,
in the teeth of heavy fire from an almost invisible enemy.


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. See Page 11.
Sports Trophies won in the Field by A.I.F. Units.


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. See Page is 18
The Regimental Colours of the 46th Turkish Regiment.


Unlike many traditional battle pictures, this painting is an
almost exact representation of the actual scene on that
fateful April morning, when the Glory of Anzac was
revealed.*
GENERAL BRIDGES’ FAVOURITE CHARGER-
ONE IN 169,000.
Of the 169,000 horses that left Australia for war service
the only one to return was “ Sandy," General Bridges
favourite charger. He was brought back with his master’s
mortal remains and, after the funeral procession, turned out
to grass. A few years later, becoming blind and debilitated,
he was mercifully destroyed. His head is mounted in a
showcase near by.
* Some visitors to the Museum have claimed that Lambert’s
picture is incorrect in two minor details—(i) that men at the
Landing wore caps, not hats, and (2) that the scrub was then
higher and thicker than is shown. As regards the former, it is
true that the majority of the Australians at the Landing wore
caps, but it is also true that many wore hats; this can be con-
firmed by photographs in the Museum’s collection, notably No.
18 on exhibition in the north gallery, and reproduced facing page
5: in this guide book.
An officer of the 9th Battalion, who was one of the first
ashore, and who climbed the slope shown in Lambert’s picture,
after consulting brother officers, stated, “ the consensus of
opinion is that the men wore hats, though a percentage wore
caps.” Having this foundation in fact, the artist decided to paint
the men with hats, to secure a distinctive Australian feature.
As regards the scrub on the slope, it was mostly cut down or
worn away during the campaign, and possibly it had not re-
gained its full growth when the artist visited Anzac after the
Armistice, but it had had three years to recover.


The Holy Land Campaign.
WITH THE LIGHT HORSE TO DAMASCUS.
The next court is devoted to the operations in Palestine,
in which the Australian Light Horse played a prominent
part —how prominent may be judged by the following
extract from a tribute written after the Armistice by General
Sir Edmund Allenby, their Commander-in Chief, which is
exhibited in a frame on the centre pillar in the court: —
“. . . In this dual role (mounted or on foot), on
every variety of country—mountain, plain, desert, swamp,
or jungle—the Australian Light Horseman has proved him-
self equal to the best. He has earned the gratitude of the
Empire and the admiration of the world.”
The visitor’s attention will at the outset be attracted by
a large plan model in the centre of the court. This shows
the country where was fought the opening and decisive
phase of the Battles of Megiddo in which General Allenby
destroyed the Ottoman armies in Palestine and forced the
Turks to sue for peace.
The country modelled stretches>.from Hebron to the Sea
of Galilee, and from the shores of the Mediterranean to the
Jordan —an area measuring roughly 100 by 50 miles. The
scale employed is of necessity small, but the visitor will have
no difficulty in grasping the formation of the country and the
manner in which the battle developed.
A LONG RIDE.
It will be recalled that General Allenby, while causing the
enemy to expect an attack in the Jordan Valley sector, con-
centrated his forces on the coastal flank. Here on the 19th
September, 1918, the British infantry pierced the Turkish
line and made a gap through which the Desert Mounted
Corps, commanded by Lieutenant-General Sir Harry
Chauvel, passed, and after traversing the coastal plain,
wheeled to the north-east, crossed the hills of Samaria and,
in the plain of Esdraelon, took up positions from which they
intercepted the Turkish retreat. The 3rd, 4th sth Aus-
tralian Light Horse Brigades, composing the Australian
Mounted Division, took part in this long ride. The Ist and
2nd Australian Light Horse Brigades in the Anzac Mounted
Division remained stationary, although not inactive, in the
Jordan Valley sector during the opening phase of the battle.


The area in which this battle was fought is rich in Biblical
associations. The interesting manner in which the model
illustrates the geography of this part of the Holy Land where
are situated Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Nazareth, and Jericho
(to mention a few of the towns shown) will add to the
attraction it holds for visitors.
Showcase No. n contains many interesting relics of the
fighting in Palestine. One is a range-finder captured at
Romani, the most important battle in this theatre of war,
and one in which the Australian Light Horse played a
decisive part. The case also contains some relics of
Napoleon’s Syrian campaign in 1799, found on battle-fields
where the Australian Light Horse fought, and of the
Bedouin tribes who prowled aroupd the armies in search of
loot. Worthy of mention among the latter is a rifle, on
the breech of which is engraved a text from the Koran:
“Nothing can be accomplished unless God is willing”—a
consoling thought for a poor marksman !
In the right-hand corner of the case is a Turkish entrench-
ing tool, neatly drilled by a bullet. A Turk held this up in
a trench near Rafa. A Light Horseman fired at it, and
found it when the position was captured a little later.
OUR FRIEND THE ENEMY.
The sportsmanship which marked the relations between
the airmen on both sides, is demonstrated by the black
message bag and its contents in the showcase, and the framed
letter on the pillar close at hand. What could be more
friendly than the presentation of the packet of cigarettes
upon which is inscribed, “ For my dear Murray Jones,
Felmy”? Lieutenant Felmy was the German flying officer
who dropped the bag.
FROM ZENOBIA'S PALACE.
Another interesting exhibit is a bas-relief from Zenobia’s
Palace, in Palmyra. An airman’s forced landing, a rescue
by a friendly Sheikh, recognition of his services to the Aus-
tralians by the presentation of a gold repeater watch by
their leader, and a reciprocal gift by the Arab chieftain of
an ancient relic, enter into the story of this exhibit, which
is told in full in the description attached to it.
On the walls are portraits of the leaders of the Light
Horse, and a picture by G. W. Lambert of the famous
charge of the 4th Light Horse Brigade against the Turkish


trenches at Beersheba and another, by the same artist, of
the charge of the 3rd Light Horse Brigade at The Nck,
Gallipoli. The latter brigade’s final dash on Damascus is
depicted by H, S. Power.
Particularly interesting trophies are the colours of the
46th Turkish Regiment and Von Falkenhayn’s flag. Regi-
mental colours are most coveted trophies, and are generally
captured only after desperate fighting. In the war of
1914-18, however, few regiments took their colours into the
field, and the capture of such a trophy was a unique event.
As far as the A.I.F. is concerned, the colours of the 46th
Turkish Regiment were the only ones captured. They were
secured by the 9th Light Horse Regiment, which encountered
and completely disposed of this Turkish regiment at Khan
Kusseir, near Damascus, on the Ist October, 1918.
The German flag was found flying over Fast’s Hotel,
Jerusalem, the headquarters of General von Falkenhayn,
the senior German officer with the Turkish Army.
The Somme, 1916.
LIVING IN MUD.
This court contains relics of the first entry of the Aus-
tralians into the line in France, near Armentieres; of the
Battles of Fromelles, Pozieres, and Mouquet Farm; of the
terrible winter upon the Somme in 1916-17; and of the
German retreat to the Hindenturg Line, and the Battles
of Bullecourt which followed.
Immediately the court is entered the visitor is confronted
by Lieut. Wallace Anderson’s model illustrating the
conditions in which the troops lived and fought in the
Gueudecourt sector during the awful winter of 1916-17 —
the worst experienced in Northern France for thirty-six
years. Snow and frost covered the back areas with a
mantle of white, but the shell-torn forward areas were
terrible morasses. Two attacks were attempted in this sec-
tor, but were foredoomed to failure. In the model a
carrying party is shown entering the trench with rations
and duckboards while wounded receive attention.


THE SOMME MODEL.
The visitor should now pause to study the large plan
model on his right. This model (scale approximately 12
inches to the mile) is an exact representation of the country
in which the Australians fought during the First Battle of
the Somme. It has been carefully marked, and the visitor
will have no difficulty in following the operations which
took place there. The soldier who fought on these fields
will find his memory wonderfully refreshed.
The white thread on the right, a little outside Albert,
marks the line from which the British Army began this
great battle on the Ist July, 1916. Other threads of different
colours show clearly the line when the Australians entered
the battle near Pozieres, and when they were withdrawn,
and the boundaries of the area they won—roughly, a square
mile—at a cost of some 25,000 casualties. Australians who
fought at Pozieres and Mouquet Farm will note on the model
many familiar landmarks, including the ‘peculiarly-shaped
Sausage Valley, through which they passed to the line, and
in which their dumps, aid posts, dressing stations, and
batteries were located; the concrete shelter at the entrance
to Pozieres, known as “ Gibraltar”; the Windmill standing
on the summit of the hill beyond the village, and the most
heavily shelled point in the sector; and the old Chalk Pit,
where reserves and headquarters were sheltered.
A little further to the left, coloured threads mark the
line to which the Australians returned after a few weeks’
“ rest ” in the Ypres Salient, and the sections of that line
which they held during the severe winter of 1916-17. The
terrible bombardments of the summer and autumn, and the
heavy winter rains, had converted the forward areas into
muddy wastes, which were spanned by a few duckboard
tracks. Such conditions were a serious menace to health
and moral, especially of troops accustomed to the sunshine
of Australia and Egypt. At the end of February, 1917, the
Germans began their withdrawal to the Hindenburg Line,
and in the war of movement which followed, the Australians
quickly recovered from the effects of the winter.
On the model the boundaries of the area advanced across
by the Australians during this withdrawal are clearlv
shown. In most cases the villages were captured only after
sharp actions' with the German rearguards. A notable ex-
ception was Bapaume, which was occupied by the Australians
on the 17th March. Beyond Bapaume the country was
comparatively untouched by shell-fire, though most of the
villages had been deliberately destroyed by the Germans. The


fresh, green fields were in striking contrast —as the model
suggests —to the belt of desolation stretching through France
from the sea to Switzerland, where the Allies and the
Germans faced each other during 19 1 5 an d I 9 where
the Australians had spent most of the previous twelve
months.
By the beginning of April the Germans nad established
themselves in their famous Hindenburg Line. On the nth
April the 4th Australian Division made a gallant but un-
successful attempt to seize a section of the Line near Bulle-
court. On the 3rd May the 2nd Division attacked the same
position. Helped by previous systematic artillery prepara-
tion, the Division reached its objectives, and in the following
days other Australian and British units enlarged the foot-
hold won in the German position. By the end of May
operations in this neighbourhood were discontinued, and
the British offensive transferred to Messines and Passchen-
daele.
With Bullecourt, the Australians’ interest in this area
ceased. As a result of the enemy offensive, which began
on the 21st March, 1918, the whole of this area again fell
into the Germans’ hands. The Australians, when they re-
turned to the Somme to oppose the enemy onslaught, entered
a sector to the south of that here modelled.
RELICS OF TERRIBLE BOMBARDMENTS.
In the showcase (No. 15) against the wall there will be
noticed portions of the windmill which once stood on the
summit of the hill beyond Pozieres, in the “ 0.G.” (old
German) lines there. This windmill was the most heavily
bombarded point in what proved to be one of the most
devastated areas along the front. In the case is also a rifle,
with bayonet fixed and broken through, dropped during the
attacks by the 2nd Australian Division upon the “ 0.G.”
lines, some of the fiercest fighting in which the Australians
ever engaged. Near this is the kilt of a “ Jock ” —as the
Scottish soldier was familiarly called—who fell on this battle-
field. It was evidently cut away to allow his wounds to be
dressed.
WHAT ENGLAND ESCAPED.
Here, also, is a book captured about this time, containing
phrases which German soldiers were to employ in conver-
sing with English country people in the event of an invasion
of England. One reads: ", . . We are no barbarians,


as people often say ”; but another conversation-book shown
elsewhere in the Museum contains the illuminating phrase:
“I will have you shot and destroy the village.” Near the
corner of the case are fragments shovelled at random from
the site of the village of Pozieres, showing the condition to
which the whole area was reduced—literally a desert of hum-
mocks and hollows. Portions of a house, tree, and tile can
be seen in the heap. It is doubtful if any village was more
completely destroyed than this one, it being almost the only
hamlet in which there were no bricks left even to mend the
roads with when the battle ended. Portion of the railway
line taken from near Pozieres Copse bears evidence of the
fury of the same bombardment.
STRIKING PICTURES.
On the wall of the court are pictures by F. R. Crozier,
who was present at this battle as a runner in the infantry.
They show the honeycomb of shell craters around the village
during its bombardment by German artillery, and the famous
“Sausage Valley,” through which for five weeks the whole
traffic to and from the Australian front at Pozieres had to
pass.
Two others, by Charles Wheeler, D.C.M., depict the death
of one of the famous personalities of the A.I.F. (Major
Percy Black) and the fighting in Delville Wood, in which
the artist, serving in a British Regiment, took part.


Below these pictures are seen, amongst other objects (on
Table No. 16) a notice-board erected in the famous Centre
Way communication trench at Pozieres, after the Canadians
took over from the Australians. Even at that date it was
dangerous for long files of men to use the trench in day-
light, as is explained by the instructions on the board. In
the centre of the table is a piece of reinforced concrete from
the entrance to the most famous of the German headquarters
dugouts at Pozieres, known as “ Gibraltar.”
THE TRAMP OF ARMED MEN.
Nearby is a duckboard ( i.e ., floorboard) of the old
trenches at Fleurbaix, from which the sth Australian Divi-
sion made its desperate attack near Fromelles on the 19th
July, 1916. The iron covering of the duckboard has been
worn by the feet of many thousands of men who passed
through these trenches.
Of the tragic Battle of Fromelles, in which the sth Aus-
tralian and a British Division were cut up in a most gallant
feint attack, intended to distract the attention of the Ger-
mans from the Somme battle, few relics can ever be
obtained. For three years the area was unapproachable
from the British lines. When, however, in 1918, the tide
of battle finally passed beyond it, a few mementoes were
collected, as here shown (in Case No. 17) : the hat of an
Australian,killed in the fight; the boot of a Victorian soldier
of the 15th Brigade, shot through the heel; and an Aus-
tralian water-bottle carrier, found several hundred yards
behind the German line, beside the flooded ditch in which
the advance ended, and where the 14th Brigade held out
for a night against the enemy, retiring only when ordered
to do so in the morning
Of the Battle of Bullecourt there are, like that of Fro-
melles, few relics obtainable. Amongst those on view are
a water-bottle and discharged belt from a German machine-
gun posted in the Plindenburg Line. It was the machine-
guns in this Line which wrecked the attack of the sth
Brigade of Australian Infantry on the 3rd May, 1917.
Flanders Fields.
AN EXTENSIVE MODEL.
Passing - along the court, the visitor enters the area devoted
to the fighting in Flanders. On the large plan model on the


right, constructed on a scale of 12 inches to the mile, the
battle lines and the ground covered in the various attacks
at Fromelles, Messines, and during the Third Battle of
Ypres, are shown. The white cord indicates the British
front line in April, 1916, when Australians first entered the
forward area in France. The actual sector of the line taken
over by the Ist and 2nd Anzac Corps is marked. A strip
of pale blue cord indicates the area over which the ill-starred
attack at Fromelles was delivered.
THE YPRES SALIENT.
The model clearly demonstrates the necessity for the
capture of Messines before an offensive elsewhere in Flan-
ders could be launched. With the salient in front of Messines
straightened, an attack with the high ground east of Ypres
as its objective was possible. The green line shows the
limit of the advance at Messines on 7th June, 1917, and
subsequent days. From that line and to the north of the
Messines battle area the Third Battle of Ypres was launched
on 31st July, 1917. During the first few weeks the British
armies succeeded in driving the Germans back to the position
shown by the red line. The only Australians engaged were
some of the artillery brigades. On 20th September the Ist
arid 2nd Australian Divisions, with other divisions on their
flanks, delivered an attack along the famous Menin Road, and
succeeded in capturing Glencorse and Nonne Boschen
Woods. Subsequently other successful attacks were made
in which these two and the 3rd, 4th, and sth Australian Divi-
sions participated, and in which Zonnebeke, Broodseinde
Ridge, and other places of heroic memory were captured.
Passchendaele, the ultimate objective, was not captured
until early in November, after the Canadian Corps relieved
1 st Anzac.
Standing by this model, Australians who saw service
in Flanders in 1916 and 1917 are able to fight their battles
over again and recall old scenes and incidents.
MEMORIES OF MESSINES.
Souvenirs of Messines include cavalry spikes thrown out
by the Germans, probably in the first year of the war, when
British cavalry was then fighting near Messines. Con-
structed so that whichever way one falls a spike sticks
straight up, they were intended to lame horses treading on


them. Here is one of the footbridges the 40th Battalion
carried in the first rush of the attack at Messines immediately
after the explosion of the great British land mines at dawn.
The bridges were thrown over the little River Douve, to per-
mit the infantry to cross and reach the German front line.
There is also a black sandbag of some sham silk material.
Many of these were in the German line near Messines, used,
it was thought, as a form of camouflage to make loopholes
difficult to detect. An object resembling a lump of ore
is really part of a truck of ammunition, which stood by a
vast British ammunition dump, blown up near Bailleul by
a German aeroplane bomb.
THE DEADLY MENIN ROAD.
In the next showcase (No. 19) is the tailboard of a
waggon which was hit by a shell while passing along the dead-
liest thoroughfare in Flanders —the Menin Road. The sign
of the 2nd Australian Division can be seen upon the exhibit.
(In order to ensure some secrecy, the names of divisions
were not allowed to appear upon their waggons or other
transport, but each division’s transport was marked by a
sign.)
Near this is a map of a German artillery observer, whose
post was on the heights surrounding Ypres. The black
marks which lie thickly upon the left half are British gun
positions noted and numbered by the Germans, despite the
fact that each battery occupied, as far as possible, a hidden
and secret location. The map shows the precarious position
which the British held for three years at Ypres, with the
Germans looking down upon them from a semi-circle of
hills.
TERRIBLE CASUALTIES.
Here is also the actual tape from which the great attack
started upon the 4th October, 1917, when the Ist, 2nd, and
3rd Australian Divisions, together with the 7th British
Division, the New Zealand Division, and other troops finally
captured the commanding Broodseinde Ridge. As they lay
upon this tape, just before dawn, the Ist and 2nd Divisions
were subjected to a murderous bombardment, which killed
or wounded no less than 20 per cent, of the men in some
of the units.


When the moment for the attack came, the men rose,
and had advanced a short distance ordy when they ob-
served, in the dim light ahead, a line of Germans rising to
their feet not 50 yards away. The Australians realised in an
instant that an enemy attack must have been planned for the
same hour, neither side knowing the intentions of the other.
The Australian Lewis gunners dropped on the ground and
began to fire; the German line broke, and the Australians
advanced and seized the ridge. One of the helmets of the
Germans who were killed in this action can be seen, covered
with a sandbag. Incidentally, it may be mentioned that the
sandbag is made of paper.
FAMILIARITY BREEDS CONTEMPT.
In the same case is a small cardboard box containing
cartridges filled with highly inflammable and explosive
German flares. The contempt with which explosives were
treated in war-time is indicated by the fact that the Aus-
tralian infantry who captured the dugout in which this box
was found, used the container, with the flares still in it, as a
candlestick. The marks of some of the candles, which burnt
to the end and scorched the cardboard top, can be seen.
In the next case (No. 21) are the warm flying boots of
a German pilot brought down by Lieut. Sandy and Sergeant
Hughes, of the Australian Flying Corps, who, after attack-
ing in their single slow aeroplane a flight of six German
’planes, and shooting down one of them, were themselves
killed by a bullet which passed through the lungs of one
and lodged in the other’s heart.
AN AERIAL DERELICT.
This, however, was not known at the time, as the machine
remained in the air. At nightfall it had not returned, and
next morning news came that the aeroplane, containing the
two dead Australians, had been found in a field 50 miles
south of the point where the fight took place, having
apparently landed with but slight damage when the petrol
gave out. The German machine which Sandy shot down
is also exhibited in the War Museum.
In this case are also the remains of a theodolite which
was being used by Lieut. Russell and Sapper Carden, of the


3rd Australian Tunnelling Company, near Lens, when a
shell killed them both. The instrument was preserved for
this collection by the 3rd Tunnelling Company as a memorial
of these gallant men.
HOODWINKING THE GERMANS.
The paper slips exhibited were used as substitutes for
the ordinary identity discs during a raid near Messines, in
February, 1918. As most people know, an identity disc is
a small metal plaque worn by each soldier in order that he
may be identified in the event of his death. It usually
contained particulars of the wearer’s unit, but as it was
desired to conceal such information from the enemy when
raiding him (the raid being made precisely in order to dis-
cover what German division was in the opposing line),
special identity discs were carried on these occasions, so
that if any of the raiders were captured or killed, their
discs would yield nothing but misleading information. One
of the uniforms actually used in this raid of February, 1918,
is that worn by the raider with a blackened face, in the
showcase near the entrance.
In the corner are the original enamelled plates from the
memorial to the men of the Ist Tunnelling Coy., A.E., who
were killed during the mining operations at Hill 60. On the
table is the muzzle of a British 60-pounder gun, blown off
by the premature explosion of a shell. Near this is one of
the actual signboards from the Menin-road, pointing the
way to the most dangerous point along that awful thorough-
fare—Birr cross-roads and the “ village ” of Hooge. Dif-
ferent types of the devilish flame-projector sometimes used
by the Germans in making a surprise attack at close quarters,
are also exhibited.
CYLINDERS OF DEATH.
The flame-projector was, however, nearly as dangerous
to the man who carried it as it was to those against whom
it was directed. It was said that German military offenders
sometimes received a pardon upon condition that they
carried this weapon in a coming attack. If struck by a
bullet, the highly inflammable contents of the cylinder were
apt to catch fire and the bearer instantly burnt. Such a
fate befell those who carried the flame-projectors here
shown, and their charred bodies were lying alongside their
weapons when the Australians found them.


See Page 18.
Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. "The Last Dash for Damascus.”
A Light Horse Picture by Septimus Power.


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. “ Charge of the 3rd Light Horse at The Nek.”
By G. W. Lambert. A.R.A. See Page 18.


The principal pictures on these walls illustrate the diffi-
culties with which both artillery and infantry had to contend
in Flanders. H. S. Power’s “ Artillery in Action on July
31st. 1917/’ and “Transport in the Mud,” graphically illus-
trate the trials and achievements of the Australian artillery.
F. Leist’s “ Attacking a Pill-box ” depicts an incident which
took place during the fighting at Polygon Wood, when a
platoon of the 57th Battalion commanded by Lieut. Tumour
was held up by a machine gun in a pill-box. Tumour
divided his men in two parties, and sent them round either
flank while he drew the machine gunner’s fire upon himself.
He was killed, but his men were able by his sacrifice to
capture the pill-box.
OVERCOMING THE PILL-BOX.
The method of dealing with these pill-boxes is illustrated
in a model made for the Australian War Memorial by
Lieut. Wallace Anderson. It shows the stage of the fight
where the bombers, rifle-bombers, and Lewis gunners having
beaten down the German resistance, the bayonet-men charge
the pill-box while the Lewis gunners continue their fire and
the bombers follow the bayonet-men.
Sport and Pastimes.
Continuing his inspection, the visitor finds in Case No. 23
exhibits illustrating how the soldier spent his leisure hours—
gambling, sport, devising souvenirs for his friends, needle-
work (when convalescing in hospital), badge collecting, and
autograph hunting, are a few of the pastimes in which he
indulged. The most interesting exhibits in this case, how-
ever, are connected with the daring escape of prisoners of
war from Holzminden Camp. An Australian in the camp
(Pte. J. R. Cash) helped the escapees considerably by
secretly, and at great personal risk, photographing in sections
and printing many copies of a large scale German map.
His negatives are among the relics shown.


Prominent Australians.
The visitor now comes to a large case (No. 24) contain-
ing relics connected with prominent members of the A.I.F.
Here are shown, to mention but a few, the tunic which
General Birdwood wore in Gallipoli and France, and a
walking-stick he carried at Anzac, where it was knocked
out of his hand by a bullet, which was discovered long
afterwards, embedded just above the ferrule, by a friend to
whom General Birdwood had given the stick; the Victoria
Cross awarded to the late Sergeant M. V. Buckley, and the
pistol he used when he won it.
Here are also a peculiar pencil used by General White
in Gallipoli, and a page of the most important document he
ever wrote with it (the plan upon which he declared Anzac
and Suvla could be evacuated, and on which the operation
was subsequently carried out) ; and small articles worn or
carried by Sergeant Martin O’Meara and by Sergeant
Lowerson when they won the V.C.
WOUNDED IN THIRTY-SIX PLACES.
This case also contains a tunic worn by General Sir
Charles Rosenthal at Gallipoli when a shrapnel shell burst
in his dugout and wounded him in thirty-six places; and
the bridle and breast-plate of General (“Pompey ”) Elliott’s
charger which the men of his brigade averred drew the
General’s attention during inspections to soldiers who were
unshaven or improperly dressed. How it acquired this
reputation is explained in the description which accompanies
these pieces of its harness.
Regimental Mementoes.
The next case (No, 25) contains a number of miscel-
laneous relics, the interest of most of them lying in their
association with A.I.F. units. Here will be found the drum-
major’s mace of the 37th Battalion, which was presented to
the battalion by a unit that accompanied it on the voyage
overseas, and which was “ wounded ” by a German air bomb
in Peronne; a stretcher used by the 10th Field Ambulance,
on the handles of which are carved the names of bearers
killed at various times in 1917.


Shoulder-straps of many German regiments were pre-
sented by the 18th Battalion under the brief war-time
title, “ Huns we have met.” An Australian flag of coloured
paper, which the Belgians in Charleroi made and presented
to the 22nd Battalion as an expression of admiration and
gratitude for their share in the liberation of Belgium, is
shown; also another flag, similarly made, by the 7th Brigade
H.Q. staff in anticipation of a visit by Mr, Hughes, to fill
the blank left by the withdrawal from the wall of their
dugout of all Bulletin and other caricatures of the Australian
Prime Minister; and two war-scarred record books, with
interesting histories, belonging to the 7th and 49th Bat-
talions.
DODGING DISCIPLINE.
Near the seaplane is a billiard table made in the field by
men of the 2nd Divisional Train, in October, 1917, with


timber “ acquired ” (generally a euphemism for surreptitious
methods) from an R.E. dump, and cushions purchased in
England.
It was the unit’s inseparable companion in its subsequent
adventures in France, the men setting it up and indulging
in games wherever they halted. The officers were encour-
aged to take a cue because, says the soldier who was in
charge of the table, “We found that when they were playing
billiards they didn’t have time to insist on us cleaning
harness and grooming the horses.”
Army Medical Work.
HOW THE WOUNDED WERE EVACUATED.
Amongst the most important considerations when exten-
sive operations were being prepared were the arrangements
by which the battle area was to be cleared of wounded.
The serial model which now attracts the attention of the
visitor illustrates the scheme of evacuation practised at the
Battle of Messines. Constructed in nine sections, it pictori-
ally shows the stages from the battle line to the base.
In the next showcase (No. 27) numerous relics and
articles of equipment associated with A.M.C. units are dis-
played. As will be seen, many of these are souvenirs
collected by the late Colonel St. Vincent Welch, of the
Australian Army Medical Corps. One of the most interest-
ing exhibits in this case is an artificial leg, worn by the only
man with this disability known to have been accepted for
service in the A.I.F.
The s.s. “ Warilda,” a model of which is exhibited, was
one of the Australian ships which served as transports.
She was lost while plying as a hospital carrier between
England and France. She was camouflaged to make her
less easily visible to enemy submarines. The next case
contains a model of the pharmacy coach of a hospital train,
and illustrates the interior arrangement of this important
unit. . .
In the centre of the court will be seen a model of the
3rd Australian General Hospital at Abbeville, constructed
by German prisoners under the supervision of several
members of the hospital staff. During the course of the war
this hospital treated nearly 48.000 patients.


Defence of Amiens and Haze-
brouck.
WHERE THE TIDE TURNED.
In the spring of 1918 the Australians formed part of the
British forces which barred the way of the Germans to
Amiens and Hazebrouck. Many interesting relics of these
operations will be found in the court which the visitor will
now enter.
THE VILLERS-BRETONNEUX MODEL.
Particularly interesting is the large circular plan model
of the Villers-Bretonneux area (table No. 31), where were
fought two of the crucial actions of 1918. Except that the
elevation has been slightly exaggerated to secure the proper
effect, the model is an exact representation of the district,
every house and field being reproduced with the greatest
accuracy. Those who were billeted in the precarious houses
in Villers-Bretonneux will be able to recognise their oM
quarters.
On 4th April a German attack almost reached the town,
but was driven back by British cavalry and the 9th
Australian Infantry Brigade, who established a line run-
ning along the outskirts of the town, about where it is
seen in the model. On 24th April the Germans again
attacked, and, using tanks, drove through the British lines,
seizing the town of Villers-Bretonneux and reaching the
road, which can be seen running across the centre of the
extensive wood in the right foreground (Bois de Aquenne)
and the arch in the railway embankment close by. On the
side of the railway, away from the wood, however, the
enemy did not penetrate so far, their line there running
along the hedges outside the town, since they were unable
to seize the high land north of the town, which was held
by the Australians.
GUIDED BY BLAZING TOWER.
After dark on that night two brigades of Australians
(13th and 15th) were launched in a counter-attack. The
15th moved up the open valley on the north side of the


railway and town, and the 13th through the open country
skirting the big wood to the south. The two brigades were
assisted by the moonlight and the burning church tower of
Villers-Bretonneux. Shortly after midnight they had
reached the line at the point where the trenches are shown.
Neither had touched the town, but had almost completely
shut it in between them.
In this model, which shows the situation as it was at
about 9 a.m. on the 25th April, several tanks can be seen
moving up from the plain towards the front leaving behind
them the two broad tracks which always betrayed their
passage. Files of men belonging to carrying parties are
making their way across country to and from the line, a
normal part of the day’s work. Both Australians and Ger-
mans are shown (much as they appeared to observers in
aeroplanes) in their respective front lines. '
A BRITISH OFFICER S TRIBUTE.
The importance of Villers-Bretonneux was that it lay on
the edge of the nearest high ground east of Amiens, and
had the Germans seized it they could certainly have de-
stroyed that city. This model shows clearly the conformation
of the ground which gave Villers-Bretonneux this important
bearing upon the course of the war. A prominent British
staff officer has written:—“ Even if the Australians had accom-
plished nothing but the capture of Villers-Bretonneux, they
would have won the right to be considered amongst the greatest
fighting races of the world.”
AN APPRECIATIVE ENEMY.
In the case No. 32, on the left, is a particularly interesting
exhibit, in the shape of a rough, slender wooden cross erected
by German soldiers over the body of an Australian who fell
on the sth April, 1918, at Dernancourt. On that day the
Germans made a determined attempt to penetrate to Amiens,
after failing in a similar attempt on the previous day at
Villers-Bretonneux. The attack at Dernancourt was repulsed
by the 12th and 13th Australian Infantry Brigades.
Long afterwards, on a spot where a company of Western
Australians and South Australians resisted until forced
shghtiv to retire, tuere wea found, over a line of graves,
two wooden crosses bearing m pencil meaning, “Here


rests a brave English soldier.” (To the Germans, of course,
the Australian and all other white troops fighting with the
British were generally known as “ English.”) When an-
other cross was placed over one of the graves, the original
wooden one was preserved for inclusion amongst these sacred
memorials of those who fell for Australia and the Empire
during the war.
A MODEL MAYOR.
Another relic of this battle is a tri-coloured scarf—the
French mayor’s insignia of office. One of the Australian
batteries engaged (the mth Howitzer Battery) suffered
heavily, and after the action sent its dead back to be buried
in the civilian cemetery at Behencourt. This village was
in the danger zone, and the citizens had fled to safer parts,
the mayor alone remaining at his post. He attended the
burial, and removing his scarf, with tears in his eyes, begged
the battery commander to accept it as an expression of his
esteem for the gallant defenders of his town and his respect
for their dead.
On the same table is the notice posted over the famous
tea-rooms at the village of Heilly, not far from the Somme
front. These rooms were kept by a French lady and several
charming daughters, one of whom is now the wife of a
British officer. Near this is some body-armour worn by an
Australian and pierced by a bullet. Here, also, is a mous-
tache trainer of the sort frequently used by the Germans.
The wearer would sleep with his moustache curled in this
to give the ends an upward turn.
GERMANY’S GREATEST ACE.
Relics of that supremely gallant German airman, Baron
von Richthofen, whose machine was shot down by a bullet
from within the Australian lines, are also shown here.
Amongst his documents was an order to clear the air of
British airmen. On the corner table (No. 33) is a “gas
container,” fired at the Germans near Hazebrouck, on the
front held by the Ist Australian Division. Numbers of
these cylinders containing poison gas were placed in pro-
jectors embedded in the ground, and discharged in the
enemy’s direction by means of an electrical device. On
this occasion, one or two cylinders falling near the British
lines caused injury among British and Australian posts.
WINNING A V.C.
In the corner is a German machine gun, which is a relic
of one of the finest actions by which an Australian (in this
case, Lieut. Storkey) ever won the Victoria Cross. The
*82768 —B


incident is described in full on the card attached to the
trophy. In this court is also shown the telephone which a
German officer was holding in his hand when his post near
Morlancourt was rushed by the 18th Battalion. He bravely
attempted to shoot the attackers with his revolver, but was
killed. Here, also, is a German rifle, dropped by a patrol
near Hamelet, on the Somme. The patrol had been seen
and fired at, and an Australian bullet is in the barrel of the
rifle just in front of the second band. On this table is a
piece of damaged equipment and a water-bottle, relics of
the co-operation of the American infantry with the Aus-
tralians in the Battle of Hamel.
A RUSE THAT FAILED.
On the pillar opposite this court is a document of extra-
ordinary interest. It is a letter, purporting to come from
Von Linsingen, commander of a German Guards Division,
ordering the Australian troops, who had half surrounded
Villers-Bretonneux, to lay down their arms, on the ground
that they were themselves cut off by the Germans. The
bearer of this message, which was a piece of bluff, came
in under the white flag, and it was afterwards a matter for
inquiry whether he should not be put upon his trial for this
misuse of that emblem.
The relics of this important battle are not confined to this
document; others are on view in the showcases. Of these,
one may mention the rough notice hung outside the house in
Villers-Bretonneux, occupied after its capture by the battle
headquarters of the ist Battalion of the German 207th Regi-
ment. Written in pencil on a piece of cardboard tacked to
the side of a ration case found lying in the street, this notice
was still there when the Australians mopped up the town
next day.
VILLERS-BRETONNEUX GIVES THANKS.
On the wall of the court is placed the simple stone tablet
which the people of Villers-Bretonneux presented to the
Australians after the Armistice, as an expression of gratitude
to their deliverers. Overhead is one of the parachutes de-
signed by Captain (now Squadron-Leader) L. J. Wackett,
and used for the dropping of ammunition at Hamel, the
first occasion on which aeroplanes were used for this pur-
pose. The method was employed extensively in the closing
stages of the war. The mechanic who fastened the para-
chute exhibited to a machine, being somewhat of a wag,
wrote on the canvas above the loop to which the ammunition
was fastened: “ With Billy Hughes’ Compliments.”


Important pictures decorate the walls of this court. One
by Louis McCubbin is an exact panorama of that portion
of the Somme Valley along which the Australian Corps
attacked on Bth August, 1918, as it appeared about half-way
through the morning. Another (by Septimus Power) de-
picts the 12th Army Brigade, A.F.A., saving its guns in the
face of an unexpected break-through by the Germans near
Robecque, in April, 1918. A third (by George Bell) deals
with the Battle of Hamel. It shows the battlefield at dawn,
with the wounded and prisoners coming back, aeroplanes
dropping ammunition, and tanks assisting in mopping up,
while the infantry consolidate the captured position under
cover of a smoke barrage.
On the benches a number of machine guns which figured
prominently in the winning of Victoria Crosses are exhibited,
together with several interesting notice boards.
Final Phases of the Great War.
GERMANY’S DAY OF DOOM.
“After the severe defeat of Bth August, I gave up the last
vestige of hope.” (Ludendorff.)
This court also contains relics of the first part of the
great offensive, in which the British Fourth Army, attacking
mainly with Australian and Canadian troops, and with the
French First Army on its right, on the Bth August, 1918,
broke through the German line at Villers-Bretonneux, near
Amiens, and began the great forward movement which
ended the war.
In a small showcase in the centre of this court are two
unusual exhibits—a German messenger dog and a French
carrier pigeon. The former was captured by the 13th
Battalion near Villers-Bretonneux. In the message carrier
attached to his collar was found a letter from a German
platoon commander to his C. 0., reporting that his men were
tired and had been without food for forty-eight hours. On
this the latter had written (translated) :
“ Weber (a brother officer) has been in longer than
you, and he does not complain. We will send you food
to-night. Give ‘ Roff ’ (the dog) any further messages.
He also does not complain.”
After his capture the dog was adopted by the battalion as
a mascot. His name was changed to “ Digger.”


The pigeon was found dead from exhaustion or gas, after
a flight from a French battlefield, with a cipher message
attached to its leg.
A MAN-TRAP.
In case No. 36 is a man-trap, not unlike a very large
rabbit-trap, set by the Germans near Herleville to catch a
patrol, and a dummy stick bomb roughly made of wood
and used for training German bombers. At the back of
the table, in the centre, is a British steel helmet which a
German cleverly made into a clock case. The hole made
by the bullet which killed the British soldier to whom the
helmet belonged can be seen just above the opening made
for the mechanism to which the hands were attached.
A MARVELLOUS ESCAPE.
Near it are the equipment and arms cf Lieut. C. E.
Steadman, 51st Battalion, who was blown up by a shell on
the 22nd August. His revolvers were smashed to pieces,
and his equipment peppered with holes, but he himself go
off with nothing worse than concussion. At the end of the
table is a neatly-made raised plan, the work of Germans
opposite the Australians near Morlancourt. It shows accu-
rately the country between the Somme and Ancre Rivers,
depicted in Streeton’s picture on the wall of the court.
MONT ST. QUENTIN MODELS.
The visitor will be interested in what many will consider
the gem of the collection—the large inset picture model
showing the final phase of the Australians magnificent feat
of arms which resulted in the capture of Mont St. Quentin.
The general idea of the operation depicted can, perhaps, be
most easily understood by an inspection of a plan model
which stands to the left and in front of the picture model.
This plan model shows the marshes of the Somme River
at Peronne, together with the heights of Mont St. Quentin
and the town of Peronne at their foot. _ It was made to
show how the capture of Mont St. Quentin also meant the
fall of Peronne. While the commander of the Australian
Corps, Sir John Monash, endeavoured to deceive the Ger-
mans into thinking that he would attempt to seize Peronne
by attacking it across the river, he secretly transferred the
2nd and part of the sth Divisions to the north of the Somme.
As the 2nd Australian Division was storming Mont St.
Quentin, a portion of the sth, slipping between the hill and
the river, attacked Peronne from the north.
Heavy fighting took place about the old ramparts, moat,
and citadel, the bridge near the citadel (the two round towers


of which can be seen in the model) being blow’n up as the
Australians reached it. But a footing was gained on Ist
September, and during the following day, after street fight-
ing, the whole town was occupied, the 7th Brigade having
on the same day completed the capture of Mont St. Quentin.
The marshes of the Somme had also by then been crossed
by the remainder of the sth Division. The course of the
River Somme through these marshes has been transformed
by the French into a canal, to permit the passage of boats.
This canal can be seen winding below the hills opposite
Peronne. The lines held by the Australians on each of the
days during which fighting was in progress are marked on
the model.
MAGNIFICENT FEAT OF ARMS.
Having obtained a general idea of the operation from
the plan model, the visitor should study the picture model.
The position in the foreground is the old German trench,
known as Elsa Trench, to which, after reaching the crest
upon the 31st August, 1918, the sth Brigade was driven
back by a German counter-attack. All through the night
the sth held on in this trench near the summit of the hill
and the ruined village which crowned it, and in the morning
of Ist September an attack was launched against the summit
by the 6th Brigade. This attempt miscarried, but at 1.30
p.m., after a short, intense bombardment of the summit,
the 6th advanced from Elsa Trench, and, making its
way through the shattered wall and across the road, after
very heavy fighting, seized the hill. The model shows the
attack at the moment when the bombardment ended and the
infantry began to leave the trench.
Probably this model (the work of the late C. Web
Gilbert, landscape by Louis McCubbin), more than any
other exhibit at present in the Australian War Memorial
Museum, will bring home to those who did not take part
in it the actual nature of the fighting during this last phase
of the war. No live Germans, except prisoners, can be
seen, but in the scrub and ruins on the hill, within a
hundred yards or so, are German machine guns which had
begun to fire and were already causing casualties. The
chalky trench, the battered trees, the scattered shell-
craters, the rusty barbed wire of the old German defences,
the German machine-gunners lying where they had been
killed the day before beside their machine guns—for the
Germans were brave fighters—the gallant Australian young-
ster who, 12,000 miles from his home, has been hit by an
enemy bullet and fallen across the wire which he was trying
to surmount; others struck in the trench and lying there


with home letters beside them, and the packs of cards with
which they had wiled away the tedium of waiting; Lewis
gunners and Vickers gunners with their respective machine
guns; the trench mortar crew serving their Stokes gun —
every attitude, incident, and detail of this model will vividly
recall to those who were present at this and other battles
of 1918 the complete setting of the stupendous drama in that
terrible terrain.
A picture by Arthur Streeton shows the beautiful country
of the Somme Valley around Corbie, where the German
advance was stopped, and the final offensive launched.
Streeton’s picture is painted from a point in front of
Amiens, looking over the junction of the Somme and Ancre
Rivers at the old town of Corbie, and across the heights
between those streams. It was upon these heights that the
Australians had stemmed the German advance in March,
and the line was still there in August. The picture visual-
ises, in the distance, the bombardment put down near Albert
by way of a feint during the Battle of Hamel. This work
is flanked by two others worthy of special mention —one of
the 3rd Divisional Artillery passing through Sailly-le-Sec,
by Louis McCubbin, and the other, by Will. Longstaff,
depicting “ The Breaking of the Hindenburg Line.”
1 < AUGUST, 1918.
On the pillar opposite the Mont St. Quentin model is a
message hurriedly written with blue pencil on the brown
wall-paper of a German headquarters just before it was
captured by the Australians. It is reproduced below.


In the same frame two important documents are dis-
played. One, an inspirational message to his troops, was
issued by General Monash on the day preceding his big
advance. The other is a message of congratulation issued
later by Lord Rawlinson, G.O.C. Fourth Army.
In case No. 41 are reminders of the attack upon Mont
St. Quentin, one of the famous assaults of the last year
of the war—some of the cartridges fired from a German
machine gun on the hill against the Australians as they
attacked, and picked up afterwards where the brass shells
lay beside the old gun position; a fragment of a verandah
post from one of the larger houses in this village; an Aus-
tralian mess-tin, perforated with bullets, found in a German
trench there; fragments of the barbed wire defences which
made the hill formidable; and a draughts-board roughly
improvised by the Germans (who occupied the hill) upon
a trench mortar bomb-carrier; a map used by a company
officer of the 23rd Battalion in the attack; a white flag, under
which some Germans surrendered; and a fire-brand employed
by the Germans to set fire to their dumps in Peronne.
In the centre of the case is a relic of considerable interest.
It was intended by the Germans that the high ground across
the Somme at Peronne should be held, although the rest
of their line was being withdrawn behind the river. When,
however, on the 29th August, 1918, the enemy carried out
this withdrawal, the 2nd and sth Australian Divisions
advanced with such dash that Germans left to defend this
important locality were rushed from their positions and
driven back with the rest.
CANNON FODDER.
This occurrence had consequences of the greatest import-
ance in making possible the subsequent attack by the
Australians upon Mont St. Quentin and Peronne. On the
day of this attack there was found in the German position,
in a dying condition, a young German officer who had
defended it. Beside him was an unfinished message, written
by him on a signal form. It ran:—“From sth Company,
28th Regiment, to 2nd Battalion, 10 a.m., 29th August.
Artillery is shooting constantly too short. The shots fall
right in front of the left flank of the sth Company.” Before
he could sign this message he was terribly wounded behind
the left ear, probably by one of the very shots which he
was endeavouring to regulate. In the showcase is the red
and yellow flag he used, apparently unsuccessfully, to indi-
cate his position to his own artillery.


THE FAMOUS 11 CORPSE ” FACTORY.
Near this is a traffic direction notice-board, “ Nach der
Kadaver-Verwertung ” (to the factory for utilising
cases). A British official, mistranslating “ kadaver ” as
corpse instead of carcase, innocently started the famous
controversy as to whether the Germans were not actually
utilising the bodies of their dead. The factories, however,
were really used to secure by-products from the carcases
of animals. Here, also, is the famous notice which was
erected over the village of Carbonnel, on the old Somme
battlefield. It was usual to mark up the names of villages
in all areas near the front, but some British officer, im-
pressed by the complete destruction of this small hamlet
(which was but a few heaps of stone upon a moor reaching
as far as the eye could see), put up the notice, “ This WAS
Villers Carbonnel.”
FIGHTING SPIRIT EXTOLLED.
In a frame on the pillar opposite the model is Marshal
Foch’s tribute to the Australians: —
“. . . By their initiative, their fighting spirit, their
magnificent ardour, they proved themselves to be shock
troops of the highest order. . .
Standing against a nearby pillar is a large cross, roughly
and hurriedly fashioned by the men of the 21st Battalion,
and erected over the graves of their comrades killed in the
attack on Mont St. Quentin. Later, it was replaced by a
more elaborate memorial. It is perhaps worth adding that,
while it was on view in Melbourne, the majority of the
parents of the fallen soldiers whose names it bears made
special visits to see it.
BEGINNING OF THE END.
On 29th September the Americans and Australians
attacked the Hindenburg Line at the point where the hills
covered the course of the St. Quentin Canal. The fighting
for several days was very fierce, but on the first day, while
the Australians were struggling to force their way through
the lines where the Americans had been checked, the 46th
British Division succeeded in crossing the canal some miles
to the south.


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. “ The Attack on Mont St. Quentin.” See Page 36.
A fine picture model by the late C. Web Gilbert.


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. "'Emden ’ beached and done for."
A picture by Arthur Burgess of this historic action.


One of the life-belts used by the 46th Division is exhibited
in showcase No. 41. The equipment worn by a soldier of
the 27th American Division in the attack upon the Hinden-
burg Line is also shown.
On the table on the right, near the wall (No. 42),
are two sets of street names—one German and the other
Australian. The happy-go-lucky Australian names “ Roo
de Kanga,” “ Dingbat Alley,” and “ Wallaby Lane,” are in
striking contrast to the sober German nomenclature—
“ Hohenzollern,” “Tirpitz,” and “Moltke ” streets. Close
to these is a notice-board roughly inscribed by the Germans
with a plan of the Bellicourt tunnel built by Napoleon I to
carry below the hills at Bellicourt the canal which joins the
sources of the Somme and Scheldt Rivers. This canal,
with the two rivers, formed a very strong line of defence,
behind which the Germans had constructed a portion of
their great defence system, known as the Hindenburg Line.
CHAMBER OF DEATH.
It may be recalled that when the troops captured the
Bellicourt tunnel a chamber was found in it containing the
dead bodies of eleven Germans, one of them in a copper
boiler, while nearby were several tins of fat. Reports
spread that this was a corpse factory, and credulous journal-
ists cabled the story to their newspapers. Upon examina-
tion, however, the place was found to be beyond doubt a
kitchen, into which a shell had penetrated, killing the order-
lies and throwing the body of one into the copper. The
iron food containers in which they were about to transport
the meal to their companies were standing on the floor. One
of these, pierced by fragments of the shell, is exhibited.
As one leaves this court, one notices in a frame on a
pillar, fac-simile reproductions of letters written by German
soldiers interned in England to their relatives in the Father-
land, describing the good treatment they were receiving.
These copies were taken out in British aeroplanes and
dropped in bundles, with a label attached: “ OefFnen! Lesen
und euren freunden zeigen ” (Open! Read and show your
friends ”), over the enemy lines, with the object of tempting
other Germans to surrender. This was one of the British
propaganda methods which undermined the enemy’s moral
and contributed to the overthrow of the German army.


Naval and Transport Services.
The next court—that of the Navy and other marine
services—is dominated by the scroll and other relics of
H.M.A.S. “ Australia.” They consist of her motto, scroll,
name letters, bell, binnacle-head and two flags, one a silk
Rear-Admiral’s flag and the other the flag flown by Rear-
Admiral Halsey on the proud day on which the Australia
led the 2nd Battle Cruiser Squadron at the surrender of
the German Fleet. Nearby are relics of the “ Emden and
specimens of mines, one of which, laid by the German
raider “ Wolf,” was recovered by the Australian Naval
Auxiliary Mine-sweepers.
In showcase No. 43 are a number of relics of actions In
which Australian sailors were engaged, including the
“ Sydney Emden ” fight and the Zeebrugge raid.
Perhaps the most interesting relic is a secret German code
of signals, which was found on the German steamer
“ Hobart ” when that vessel was seized in Melbourne upon
the outbreak of war. The key was cleverly worked out y
Dr Frederick Wheatley, of the Royai Australian Naval
College, and the Admiralty was thus enabled to read many
intercepted German signals. On the left of the showcase
containing these relics is the figurehead of the German
raider “ See-Adler.” Another relic of great interest is the
skirt made from the saloon table-cover aboard the German
raider “ Wolf,” by Mrs. J. W. Flood, who was captured
wkh others when the s.s. “ Matunga ” fell into the Germans
hands. When captured, all the passengers were attired n
tropical clothing, quite unsuitable for the cold climate to
which they were taken. In the absence of anything better
the table-cloth had to be used. A model of the transport
“ Ballarat,” which was torpedoed in the English Channel on
Anzac Day, 1917* is also in this court.
A recent and valued addition to this section of the collec-
tions is a model and the bell and steering wheel of
H I I M S “Ibuki,” the Japanese warship which helped to
escort the Ist Australian Convoy across the Indian Ocean.
This model was constructed at the Japanese naval ship-
yards by specially selected workmen. These exhibits
were presented to Australia by the Japanese Government
to commemorate the services rendered to Australia during
the war by the “ Ibuki.”


OUR ALLIES.
In the case (No. 47) near the stairs leading from the
photograph gallery will be seen figures wearing the
uniform of the chief of the Allied armies. These uniforms
were donated by the respective Governments.
PAPER SUBSTITUTES.
The visitor now comes to case No. 48. It is filled almost
entirely with articles which the Germans were forced,
through the efficiency of the British blockade, to make with
paper—shirts, braces, trousers, saddle-cloth, and so forth.
At one end is powdered wood for mixing with flour when
that staple commodity ran short, and “ substitute ”
tobacco, consisting chiefly of willow leaves.
Gretchen’s Paper Camisole.


MECHANICAL MODELS.
ORIGINAL AUSTRALIAN TANK MODEL.
On the opposite side of the case containing the German
substitutes the visitor will find a number of mechanical
models —types of lorries used by the Australian M.T. com-
panies, railway locomotives, and, most interesting of all,
the model of a tank submitted to the War Office in 1912 by
Mr. L. E. de Mole, an Australian inventor. Unfortunately,
the military value of such a machine was not realised at the
time. It will be noted that in shape and in other ways
Mr. de Mole’s design approached very closely to the tank
adopted for the British army in 1916, to which it was
admittedly, in many respects, superior.
FAMOUS DECORATIONS.
The cases adjoining (Nos 50 and 51) contain a collection
of German decorations and medals, including specimens of
the famous Iron Cross, Order Pour le Merite, Blucher Star
(awarded only to Blucher in 1813, and to Hindenburg in
the Great War), and other famous orders, Italian medal-
lions, Austrian mementoes, &c.
AN HISTORIC AEROPLANE.
The Vickers-Vimy aeroplane, in which the late Sir Ross
Smith and his party made the historic first flight from
England to Australia, and won the Commonwealth Govern-
ment’s prize of iio,ooo, dominates the air service exhibits
and next engages the visitor’s attention. Behind it are two
German scouts brought down in France by Australian pilots.
The history of one, the “ Albatross,” is given on page 25 in
connection with another exhibit.
After examining the Vimy and the cases referred to
above, the visitor should turn to the right, passing down
the hall and turning to the exhibits between the two groups
of aeroplanes.
Camouflage.
HIDING an aerodrome.
After examining the Albatross aeroplane, the application
of the principles of camouflage and screening (No. 52) will
engage the visitor’s attention. One example is that of an


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. Anti-gas Equipment. See Page 46.


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum.
Two Interesting German Cartoons


aerodrome, on the outskirts of a village, while another shows
a heavy railway gun, the concealment of which necessitated
the camouflaging of a large area and a switch line. Other
models show how ammunition dumps were hidden; the
camouflaging of a gun, by stretching a net of painted scrim
above it; how movements along roads at right angles to
the front were screened from enemy observers, and
bridges masked.
IMITATION TREES.
Opposite this showcase one passes sham trees, a heap of
bricks, counterfeit rolls of wire, &c., used when the line
was stationary to facilitate the work of observers. Out-
standing among these is a tree from Oostaveene Wood, near
Messines.
In order to obtain observation from this point, a tree in
the wood was carefully studied, and an exactly similar trunk
made in the camouflage workshops behind the lines.
When ready the tree was felled at night and before morn-
ing the substitute was standing in its place, presenting,'
apparently, no difference to those who saw it.
The “ trunk ” is a hollow steel column, made in sections,
and was enclosed, when erected, with “ bark ” made of black
sheet iron, crinkled and coloured to give the desired effect.
Behind, at the foot of the “ tree,” is an entrance, and inside
the “ trunk ” a ladder, by means of which the observer
could safely climb to a lookout station near the top. This
tree was brought out of the line at the cost of great trouble
by the 3rd Battalion, that it might be preserved in this
memorial institution. Beside it stands a smaller tree, used
to conceal a periscope, and several steel observation posts.
PEEPING OVER THE PARAPET.
Further along (Table 53) are British parapet observation
posts. These are steel-lined boxes, with a loophole covered
with wire gauze. They were dug into the parapet, and the
observer stood with his head in the box, which had been
treated to harmonise with the natural surroundings. The
types shown include one covered with broken bricks for a
trench running through a village; another with sandbags,
similar to those utilised in trench construction; and a third
with green scrim, for use on a grass-covered parapet.
Rusty rolls of barbed wire in the trenches and on the
grass in No-Man’s Land, where wiring parties had left


them, were likewise simulated. Such a roll would be re-
placed at night with a sham roll, the ground below having
been excavated to admit an observer, whose head could be
inserted into the hollow space in the substitute, which had
an opening through which he watched.
SNARING A SNIPER.
I he two papier-mache heads near these observation posts
were employed in locating snipers. Raised above the para-
pet, a short distance apart, they would be quickly drilled
by the sniper’s bullets. A line was then taken through the
bullet holes in each head, and at the point where they inter-
sected was the sniper’s lair. This was frequently the only
means of locating him, especially if he took care to conceal
his position and wore camouflaged overalls, such as are
shown close to the heads.
A GIANT PERISCOPE.
The telescopic periscope near by is one of the very few
which the Germans had in their possession, and was ceded
under the terms of the Armistice. When fully extended
the top lens reaches to a height of 73 feet, and enabled the
observer to see from behind the houses of a village, the
trees of a forest, or from the reverse slopes of a hill.
. Having viewed the aeroplanes from the central aisle, and
inspected the smaller exhibits in the vicinity, the visitor
should, after inspecting the De Haviland in which Lieu-
tenants Parer and Mclntosh made their adventurous flight
from England to Australia, pass to the cases at the end of
the hall, which contain other technical exhibits.
The Fairey seaplane, in which Wing-commander Goble
and Flight-lieutenant Mclntyre circumnavigated Australia
is passed on the left-hand side.
ANTI-GAS EQUIPMENT.
The case between the aeroplanes contains a remarkably
fine collection of anti-gas equipment. The contents of one
side consist chiefly of respirators, which illustrate stages in
evolution from the nose-pad used at first, through the helmet,
to the efficient small box respirator. The Melbourne Uni-
versity respirator is worth noting. So far as is known, it
was the first British box respirator, and was produced' at
about the same time as the German mask. It was never
used in the field, as by the time it reached England superior


designs had been brought out. The changes which took
place in the German respirator were necessitated chiefly by
the shortage of rubber, rubber straps being replaced by
cloth-covered springs and rubber fabric by leather.
The other side contains respirators for horses and mes-
senger dogs; oxygen outfits for the resuscitation of gassed
soldiers; instruments and devices for watching the direction
and strength of the wind (of great importance in gas war-
fare) ; alarms; fans for driving gas from the bottoms of
trenches and dugouts; and goggles to protect the eyes against
“ tear” gas. Nearby are projectors which throw gas bombs
—one of the chief methods of waging offensive gas warfare.
AERIAL EQUIPMENT,
In showcase No. 55 are a number of small air-service
exhibits. Probably the most interesting are a German air
camera and a British camera gun. The latter is in the form
of a Lewis gun, and was used in the training of air gunners.
Instead of firing bullets, it took photographs. From the
developed negatives it was possible to determine the trainee’s
accuracy as an air-gunner, and so thoroughly test him before
sending him out on service with the life of his pilot in his
keeping.
Amongst the aeroplanes, engines and larger articles of
equipment are on exhibition, including a collection of aerial
bombs. The largest weighs 850 lb., and is twice the height
of a tall man. It is, nevertheless, comparatively small.
When the Armistice was signed, British aeroplanes, loaded
with 2,000-lb. bombs, were waiting for the weather to im-
prove sufficiently to allow them to raid German cities. The
small Cooper’s bomb was most used, and, weight for weight,
gave the best results.
Allied and Enemy War Material.
SMALL ARMS.
The next three cases (Nos. 58, 59, 60) contain a represen-
tative collection of small arms—rifles, bayonets, light
machine guns, pistols, ammunition, &c. The heavy
machine guns are exhibited near the Pfalz aeroplane, and
include the Russian pattern, with its convenient wheeled
carriage, a British Vickers (a veteran of nearly 1,000
days’ service—an unusually long life for a machine gun in
the field), and the German type, with its sleigh mounting.


Amongst the light patterns are the British Lewis gun,
cunningly constructed so that the cartridge gases operate
the gun, and the bullet draws air after it at such a rate
that the barrel remains cool during prolonged bursts of
rapid fire, and the Madsen gun, which needs a spare
barrel, and which it was sometimes claimed should have
been adopted by the British army in preference to the
Lewis.
MANY TYPES OF RIFLES.
Close to the British rifles, which include a few recaptured
from Turks, by whom they had been peculiarly carved
and altered, is the first barrel manufactured at the Common-
wealth Small Arms Factory at Lithgow. In the case which
contains the German and other enemy rifles, is the German
anti-tank rifle, the largest weapon of its kind used during
the war. An interesting contrast has been provided by
standing one of the cartridges it fired alongside the ordinary
service cartridge. Bayonets are shown close to the rifles
with which they were used. It will be noticed that some
of the German bayonets are very short, and others have a
jagged, toothed edge. The former were used with the short
rifles carried by enemy storm troops, who found it awk-
ward to handle the long service rifle and bayonet in the
confined space of a trench; the latter are the saw-bayonets
of the German pioneers.
TRENCH CLUBS.
Here also are automatic pistols and revolvers. It will be
observed that the German automatic pistol is fitted with a
butt attachment, which permits it to be fired from the
shoulder, while a special circular magazine increases its
ammunition capacity from ten to thirty-two* rounds. In
striking contrast to these modern weapons are the primitive
raiding clubs alongside them. Types of daggers, occasion-
ally carried on raids, are. also shown.
GRENADES AND PYROTECHNICS.
Representative collections of hand and rifle grenades and
pyrotechnics will be found in Case No. 61. Here are the
primitive “jam-tin” type of Gallipoli days; the Mills,
favoured by the British armies; the German stick grenade
or “ potato-masher,” as, for obvious reasons, it was more
commonly called; and the German “ oyster ” grenade,
interesting because of its unusual shape, designed to give


increased range. Among the rifle grenades, perhaps
the most interesting, though not the most effective, is a
German grenade with a hole through the centre, which
allowed it to be fired with ordinary ball ammunition.
The bullet in its passage through the hole ignited the
time fuse, which subsequently exploded the grenade,
while the cartridge gases propelled both the bullet and
the grenade.
A feature of the pyrotechnics which will attract attention
is the parachute attached to most of the rockets to maintain
them in the air, and thus secure a maximum effect. This
was an improvement upon the earlier types, which quickly
fell to the ground and burnt themselves out. These para-
chutes were generally made of paper, though the large silk
specimen shown was used for the same purpose in a German
flare.
ARTILLERY AMMUNITION AND INSTRU-
MENTS.
In the centre of the hall, in Case No. 62, artillery instru-
ments and equipment, such as range-finders, sights, clino-
meters, &c., are exhibited.
The next case is devoted chiefly to gun cartridges and
devices for firing them.
Case No. 64 contains various components of artillery
ammunition, such as sectioned shell fuses (including the
highly sensitive No. 106), driving bands, explosives, and
several exhibits which show in a striking manner the
superiority of amatol over gunpowder.
In Showcase No. 65 are exhibited water-bottles,
and food-containers, which, constructed on the familiar
Thermos flask principle, enabled the men in the front line
to get in a reasonably hot condition food cooked at kitchens
established at a safe distance in the rear.
THE SIGNAL SERVICE.
In the centuries which have elapsed since the spent runner,
the first famous soldier of a signal corps, hurled himself
through the gate of ancient Athens, and with his dying
breath gasped out the news of the success of the Athenians
against the Persians at Marathon, in 490 8.C., the Sigtial
Service has marched steadily forward with the other
branches of military science.
The varied equipment of the Signal Service in the recent
war is indicated by the contents of two cases (Nos. 66 and
67. They include telephones, telegraphs, fullerpho’nes,


automatic telegraph printer, lamps, flags, message-carrying
rockets, wireless, and carriers for messages dropped from
aeroplanes.
ENGINEER AND PIONEER EQUIPMENT AND
MODELS.
Engineer and pioneer equipment is displayed in Case
No. 68. The visitor is likely to be most interested in the
geophones and other listening sets, used chiefly in tunnelling,
and a simple, though effective, German tank mine. The
work of the engineers and pioneers is further illustrated in
Case No. 69 by a number of models showing the progressive
stages in the construction of a typical fire trench and wire
entanglement; methods of supplying water in the field,
bridging, &c.
Turning to the right around the end of the case, the visitor
next examines (Case No. 70) a collection of entrenching
tools. It is worthy of note that each British infantryman
carried the same type of tool, whereas it was the practice in
nearly all other armies to supply some members of a batta-
lion with picks, others with shovels, and others again with
With regard to the collection of body armour, it
may be pointed out that, despite the claim that the introduc-
tion of gunpowder sounded the death-knell of armour, it
was more or less extensively used (especially to protect the
head) during the recent war. Included in an interesting dis-
play of boots is one of the large wooden type worn by
German sentries on duty during the winter, to protect their
feet from the chilling effect of snow. Spurs are shown near
the boots. It will be noticed that, as a rule, Continental
armies prefer to screw these adjuncts into the heel rather
than strap them to the boot.
UNIFORM.
The next two cases (Nos. 71, 72) contain uniforms, head-
dress, &c. The visitor will doubtless be amused with a
tunic on which a German interned at Holdsworthy Camp,
m New South Wales, painted in bold letters, “ Gott strafe
England,” and afterwards wore on parade. His enterprise
was rewarded by thirty days’ imprisonment after trial by
court-martial.
MEDICAL OUTFITS AND APPLIANCES.
The visitor finds in the last case exhibits illustrating the
work of the Medical Service. These embrace medical packs


“Sandy.”
General Bridges’ favorite Charger.
Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. See Page 15.


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. No. 18. “Landing at Anzac.” Official photograph No. G905.
See description in Catalogues.


and haversacks, models of sledges, cacolets, and other un-
usual methods of transporting the wounded, rendered
necessary by the difficulties of the Sinai desert; field dress-
ings and splints; models of incinerators and other sanitary
equipment; labels to be attached to the wounded and sick
to save duplication of work and ensure continuity of treat-
ment by the various medical authoritie's through whose hands
they would subsequently pass; and so on.
This completes the inspection of the exhibits on the
ground floor. After examining the photographs of the
fighting in France and Belgium hung in the South Gallery
the visitor should pass along the hall, renewing acquaintance
with favourite exhibits, and, before leaving, see the photo-
graphs of Anzac, Palestine, and the minor theatres of war,
in the North Gallery. His inspection of Ihe Australian War
Memorial is then complete.


The War Memorial Library.
The official records of the war, comprising unit and staft
war diaries, correspondence files, maps, air photographs, and
publications, are deposited in the War Memorial Library.
Owing to the absence of suitable accommodation at the
Exhibition Building, the Library is temporarily housed
in the old Money Order Office, Post Office Place, Mel-
bourne.
The records are already proving of the greatest value to
the official historians appointed by the Commonwealth
Government, to unit historians, and others. Relatives of
many fallen soldiers have, in response to requests, received
descriptions of the battles in which their soldier relatives
made the supreme sacrifice. The records are available,
subject to certain simple conditions, for any proper historical
purpose. Special arrangements may be made for the inspec-
tion of records at this exhibition.
The Library, although the least spectacular, is probably the
most important branch of the War Memorial.
Have Your Own Souvenirs.
Near the entrance is the Sales Counter, where the
visitor may purchase—
Reproductions in colour of some of the more im-
portant of the war pictures on view in the Main Hall.
(See page 82.)
Copies of Official War Photographs. (See pages 59
and 86.)
A.I.F. publications and unit histories. (See page
7 3.)
Genuine bronzes of A.I.F. subjects. (See page 89.)
Ornaments made from German cartridge cases salved
on the battlefields. (See page 53.)
Pot stands and coal buckets made from German steel
helmets. (See page 54.)
Machine gun belt boxes for use as deed boxes. (See
page 58.)
Souvenirs from German rifle cartridges. (See page
10 3-)


POPULAR
SOUVENIRS
CAPTURED
Jardiniere (8" Howitzer).
GERMAN CARTRIDGE CASES
TRANSFORMED INTO ATTRACTIVE UTILITIES.
Pedestal
I*. (6*9" Gun and 8" Howitzer.)
COLLECTED on the Western
Front during the war, they are
unique and useful, and are the most
popular of War Souvenirs. Strongly
constructed of the best brass, they are
practically everlasting. Having most
of their weight in the base, they are not
easily overbalanced, and are therefore
ideal for the display of large bunches
of flowers or gum tips. They are
specially lacquered and retain in-
definitely the highly-polished finish in
which they are delivered.
For prices and particulars apply to —
AUSTRALIAN WAR
MEMORIAL MUSEUM,
Exhibition Building,
SYDNEY.


wm
“TIN HATS
99
But with other uses.
POT STAND.
COAL BUCKET. HANGING BASKET.
The Australian War Memorial Museum has a limited
number of German steel helmets for sale—plain or con-
verted for use as coal buckets, pot stands, or hanging
baskets. Designed to protect the heads of soldiers from
rifle and artillery fire, their outstanding feature is their
strength.
PRICES:
Helmet, only 5/-; with ball feet or
wrought-iron stand, or with chains
for hanging (as in illustration), 10/-.
Camouflaged Helmets, 2/6 extra.
Obtainable from —
Australian War Memorial Museum,
EXHIBITION BUILDING,
SYDNEY OR MELBOURNE.


APPENDIX.
Description of the War Photographs exhibited in
the Galleries.
Copies may be purchased.


Acknowledgment.
A few of the photographs included in this exhibition were
selected from the many thousands lent by members of the R.A.N.
or A.I.F. In these cases, the name of the lender is mentioned
in the description in this catalogue. A few were drawn from a
series taken for the Commonwealth during the Pozieres fighting
by the British Official Photographer, and one or two others from
a series taken during the Gallipoli operations by an Admiralty
Official Photographer. The remainder were taken by Australian
Official Photographers, the first of whom was not appointed until
the end of 1916.
The following is a list of Australian Official Photographers
who served at various times in the field:—
FRANCE.
Captain G. H. Wilkins, M.C. and Bar,
Captain J. F. Hurley.
The late Lieut. H. F. Baldwin.
Warrant-Officer A. W. W. Casserley.
Staff-Sergeant R. W. Martin.
Staff-Sergeant C. J. Jackson.
Sergeant W. H. Joyce, M.S.M.
Sergeant H. J. Lowe.
Corporal—Shirley.
S L ;“gla S n.ii } After .he Armistice.
PALESTINE.
Captain J. F. Hurley.
Lieut. J. P. Campbell.
Lieut. O. H. Coulson, M.S.M,
Warrant-Officer D. Macpherson.
GALLIPOLI (AFTER ARMISTICE).
Captain G. H. Wilkins M.C. and Bar.
Sergeant S. W. Swanston, R.A.F.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY.
Captain G. H. Wilkins, M.C. and Bar.
Sergeant R. Hazelwood.
A series of 1,100 photographs taken at sea, in Egypt, and in
Gallipoli, in 1914-15, by Mr. C. E. W. Bean, Official War Corre-
spondent, has been presented to the War Memorial Museum.
These are treated as official photographs.
J. L. TRELOAR, Director.
Australian War Memorial Museum, Sydney,
3rd April, 1925. .


You can buy Copie* of these Photographs. See page 59.
ENLARGED WAR PHOTOGRAPHS.
EXHIBITED BY
THE AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL MUSEUM,
SYDNEY.
COPIES MAY BE PURCHASED.
SECTION 1.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY.
1. THE FIRST SHOT. (AllB4. Lent by Mr. J. Purdie.)
Almost simultaneously with the receipt of the cabled news
that Great Britain had declared war on Germany, a German
merchant vessel then in Port Phillip, s.s, “ Pfalz,” endea-
voured to pass through the Heads. A shot from a gun in
the fort fired across her bows changed the Captain’s mind,
and she hove to, and was later interned. This was the first
shot fired by a British gun in the war. The photograph
shows the crew of the gun at action stations.
2. AS SEEN FROM ALOFT. (Official Photograph EN.199.)
The deck of H.M.A.S. “ Brisbane,” as seen from the aft
mast. The light cruisers of the Royal Australian Navy
served in every ocean during the war. At the time this
photograph was taken “ Brisbane ” was on patrol duty in
the Red Sea.
3. —A TRAP THAT FAILED. (J 1919. Given by M. Luquet.)
The tunnel near Rabaul through which the landing party of the
Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force had to pass
had been mined by the Germans. Natives had been set in
the trees to watch for troops, upon whose appearance they
were to fire the mines. A party of the attacking force
deploying through the bush cut the wires before the main
body had reached the danger zone.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Ensure the Safety
of Your Documents !
DEED BOXES
Originally
German Machine Gun
Belt Boxes.
Large
Size
10/=
• ■■
Small
Size
7/6
Built to withstand rough handling in the field, these boxes
are strongly constructed and fire-resisting. They are
admirably suited for use as Deed Boxes or for any
purpose for which a strong metal box is required.
PRICES :
LARGE. SMALL.
In original condition ... ... ... 7/6 5/-
Stove-enamelled in black or grey ... 10/- 7/6
DIMENSIONS :
HEIGHT. LENGTH. BREADTH.
Large ... ... 6| ins. 15 ins. ins.
Small ... ... 6| ins. ins, ins.
The large box is divided lengthwise into two compart-
ments. The small box can be padlocked.
Obtainable from
Australian War Memorial Museum
EXHIBITION BUILDING.
SYDNEY OR MELBOURNE.


Unframed.
Framed.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
15 X 12...
... 0 12 6
1 5 0
18 X 12...
... 0 16 0
1 10 0
20 X 16..
... 1 0 0
1 17 6
23 X 17...
f ...
... 1 5 0
276
40 X 30...
...
... 3 15 0
5 5°
12 X 7 •••
Unframed.
£ s. d.
... 1 1 0
Framed.
£ s. d.
I 5 0
15 X 12...
1 12
6
250
20 X 16...
...
... 2 7
6
3 3 0
23 x 17...
... 3 3
0
476
40 X 30...
... 8 17
6
10 10 0
OFFICIAL WAR PHOTOGRAPHS.
PRICE LIST.
Whole Plate (8i in. x 6 i in.), Black and White.
When Order is for 1 Single Photo., Unmounted .... 1/6 each.
„ „ h i „ „ Mounted 2/6 „
When Order is for 2 to 9 Photos., Unmounted 1/3 ..
„ „ 2to 9 „ Mounted 2/3 „
When Order is for 10 or more Photos., Unmounted l/- „
„ „ 10 „ „ Mounted 2/- „
Sepia 6d. extra.
NOTE. —The above prices include Postage and Packing to
any address in Australia.
Whole plate photographs may be purchased, framed, at 4s. 6d.
and 6s. 6d. each.
ENLARGEMENTS.
MOUNTED, COMPLETE, READY FOR FRAMING, OR
FRAMED AND GLAZED.
Sepia.
Artist-coloured.
By latest process, converting the Photograph into an Artist’s
Picture.
So per cent, additional to be added for Portrait Work.
NOTE.—The dimensions as above, are of the enlargement
itself, the mount being additional. The above prices include
packing and postage of unframed prints to any address in Aus-
tralia. Owing to the heavy cost of transport on the 40 x 30
size MOUNTED, it is suggested that, when this size is required,
it be ordered UNMOUNTED, in which case the sum of 10s. may
be deducted.
Museum Representatives at Counter will book orders, or
they may be sent direct to
DIRECTOR, AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL MUSEUM,
EXHIBITION BUILDING, SYDNEY OR MELBOURNE.


There are 40,000 Photographs from which to select. Enquire at Counter,
4— THE “ SYDNEY ”-“ EMDEN ” ACTION. (En. 392. Lent
by Sub-Lieut. Munro.)
At about 6.30 a.m. on the 9th November, 1914, the ships of
the first Australasian convoy received from the Cocos Island
station by wireless “ S.O.S. Strange warship approaching.”
H.M.A.S. “ Melbourne ” started off to investigate, but in a
few minutes her commander realised that, as officer in com-
mand of the convoy, he must remain with the transports.
He sent “ Sydney,” which within an hour was over the
horizon. At 10.45 a.m. she was in action. At 11.10 a.m. she
signalled, “ ‘ Emden ’ beached and done for.” This photo-
graph shows some members of the staff of the Eastern
Extension Telegraph Company watching the fight. Faintly
against the horizon, shells can be seen bursting around the
doomed German cruiser.
5. —AFTER THE VICTORY. (En. 211. Lent by Seaman
Lennon).
Some members of the crew of H.M.A.S. “ Sydney,” delighted
with their splendid success, enjoying a brief respite while
the light cruiser was chasing the “ Emden’s ” collier,
“ Buresk.” The forebridge bears evidence of the engage-
ment, The shipwright (in blue on the right) is standing
alongside the hole in the “Sydney’s” deck made by one of
the “ Emden’s ” shells, which passed into the men’s quarters.
When the “Sydney” came up with the collier, the latter’s
crew scuttled their ship and surrendered. “ Sydney ” took
off the crew and fired a few shots to hasten the sinking of
the vessel.
6. “I WISH TO GO AND HELP ‘SYDNEY.’” (Official
Photograph G 1553.)
When the “ Sydney ” left the convoy, in response to the
S.O.S. call from Cocos Island, the Japanese cruiser, " Ibuki,’’
was on the far side of the convoy. She crossed to the other
side to put herself between the transports and the route the
“ Emden ” was reported to be taking. As she crossed in
front of the convoy, she presented a magnificient spectacle.
Enormous clouds of black smoke poured from her funnels.
From her masts flew two huge Japanese ensigns. Her upper
works were padded with hammocks, and her crew were at
their action stations. She moved fast, driving through the
sea, and leaving a broad, white wake behind her. She
signalled, “I wish to go and help ‘Sydney,’” but “Mel-
bourne ” was unable to grant permission.
7. THE FIRST CONVOY. (Official Photograph G 1547.)
Concentrating in King George’s Sound (W.A.), at the end of
October 1914, the first Australian convoy, with the Ist Aus-
tralian Division, and Ist A.L.H. Brigade on board, put to sea
Order* Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Cent by Sub-Lieut. Munro. No. 4. ‘Watching the Sydney' - Emden ’ Action. A.W.M. Collection No. En392.
See description on Page 60.


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museu m. No135. Hop-over.” Official Photograph No. E5988 (composite),
on Page 87.


The Names of Soldiers in thrise War Photographs are Recorded and
Indexed. Enquire at Counter.
on Ist November, escorted by British, Australian and
Japanese cruisers. The convoy of 28 ships steamed in three
divisions, the flagship “ Orvieto ” leading the centre division.
Ten New Zealand transports followed in two divisions, ine
outstanding event of the voyage was the Sydney
“ Emden ” action.
8. DAZZLE PAINTED. (En. 154. Lent by Seaman Harrison.)
H.M.A.S. “ Melbourne,” well camouflaged, lying at anchor
off Charlestown. Scotland, in January, 1918. The camou-
flage rendered the character of the vessel and her course
very difficult to detect.
9. MOVING WOUNDED UNDER DIFFICULTIES. (Official
Photograph En. 551.)
The confined space on a warship makes the movement of
wounded a difficult operation. Special stretchers and splints
helped to overcome the difficulty.
10. DESTROYERS TO THE RESCUE. (En. 209. Lent by
Stoker I. Ingram.)
H.M.A.S. “ Warrego ” and H.M.A.S. “ Parramatta steam-
ing to the assistance of the s.s. “ Orione, torpedoed off
Brindisi, in April, igi?-
11. A SUBMARINE AT RABAUL. (A 1587. Lent by Dr.
A. J. Trinca.)
The Australian submarine A.E. I, lying in the harbour at
Rabaul, New Britain. The peculiar vessel on the left is the
French warship “ Montcalm.’
12—GETTING READY FOR SEA. (Official Photograph
En. 550.)
Coaling operations in full swing on H.M.A.S. “ Australia.
13.— AUSTRALIA’S DEFENDER. (Official Photograph En. 7.)
T-T M A S “ Australia ” in the Firth of Forth in December,
was t*he luck of the "Australia” to miss the
soectacular events of the war. She was unable to bring
t? action the German Pacific Squadron, under Von Spec
thnue-h she diligently hunted for it. An accident prevented
her f?om taking part fn Jutland. But her presence in Australian
w?ters“a*e”lu P r coastal cities from raids such as those to
which the Germans subjected English seaports, and in the
Padfic and the North Sea she carried out ceaseless patrolling.
A? the surrender of the German fleet, she led her squadron.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Are you interested in Bronze Statuettes? See Page 89.
14.—TAKING OFF. (En. 544. Lent by Associated News
Agency.)
An aeroplane leaving the turret platform of H.M.A.S. “ Aus-
tralia ” for a flight. In June, 1915, for the first time, sea-
planes, working from a mother ship, co-operated with the
Grand Fleet in battle exercises. From this beginning there
were great developments. The first step was the provision
of a flying-off deck in a ship for seaplanes, thus overcoming
the limitations placed upon the use of seaplanes by rough
seas. The next step was the replacement of the heavy and slow
seaplanes by aeroplanes, working from special carriers; and
finally (as here illustrated),) the provision of flying-off plat-
forms in the fighting ships themselves, first in light cruisers,
afterwards in battle cruisers, and eventually in battleships.
In this way naval power was given the assistance which air
power could afford it, both in reconnaissance and in making its
gunnery more effective.
SECTION II.
EGYPT AND GALLIPOLI.
15. MANCEUVRES IN THE DESERT. (Official Photograph
G 1633.)
At Mena, at the foot of the Pyramids and within a mile of the
Sphinx, the ist Australian Division spent four months fitting
itself for active service. In March, 1915, divisional man-
oeuvres were carried out. In this photograph is shown the
divisional headquarters in the desert, a few miles from Mena,
while manoeuvres were in progress. It will be noticed that
the native orange sellers did not hesitate to ply their trade
amongst the troops.
16. READY FOR THE GREAT ADVENTURE. (C9O. Lent
by Lt.-Col. A. G. Butler, D. 5.0.)
At the end of February, 19x5, the 3rd Infantry Brigade left
Mena Camp for a secret destination, later revealed as
Lemnos, 50 miles from Gallipoli. The photograph shows the
9th Battalion of that brigade formed up ready to march out
of camp. The remainder of the division marched out early
in April.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


You can Purchase Reproductions in Color of the Battle Pictures, by
Official War Artists on Exhibition in Main Hall. See page 82.
17. A MIGHTY FLEET. (C 2156. Lent by M. Rene de
Marigny.)
Mudros Harbour, Lemnos, the place of concentration for a
large part of the force entrusted with the landings at Galli-
poli. In April, 1915, this vast harbour was crowded with
transports and battleships, mosquito craft and dummy war-
ships, supply ships, and submarines, gathered together for
the forcing of the Dardanelles. Even the old “Askold ” was
there.
[The “ Askold ” was a small Russian cruiser which was at Vladivostock at the
outbreak of war. The Australians first saw her at Colombo. She had five tall
funnels, and was promptly nicknamed “ The Packet of Woodbines” (a brand of
cigarettes, sold in packets of five, and popular with British troops).]
18. LANDING AT ANZAC. (Official Photograph G 905.)
Troops landing in Anzac Cove on April 25, 1915. The horse
boats (with the ends down) had landed mules of Jacobs’ 26th
Indian Mountain Battery. Troops can also be seen landing
at the southern end of the beach (later known as Hellspit).
The battleshio is the “ Bacchante,” standing in to shell Gaba
Tepe. To the left may be seen one of the two wireless sta-
tions, through which the troops on shore communicated
with the battleships. The photograph was taken about
10 a.m.
19. INTO ACTION. (Official Photograph G 907.)
Australian troops going into action across Plugge’s Plateau,
about midday on April 25. Men in front may be seen kneel-
ing in the scrub. The troops were under fire from the other
side of Shrapnel Valley. This photograph was taken from
a Turkish trench overlooking the beach. Plugge’s Plateau
was one of the first heights captured by Australians.
20. —AN R.A.P. AT ANZAC. (Official Photograph G 920.)
Australian wounded coming down Monash and Shrapnel
Gullies, past the 3r' Battalion aid post, on the 26th April.
The R.M.O. was wounded the day before, and the aid post
was being run by a non-commissioned officer (Corporal
Carruthers), who is standing on the left of the photograph.
The aid post is typical of those established close behind
the front line during the early days at Anzac.
21. A WELCOME ARRIVAL. (Official Photograph G 918.)
Australian artillerymen dragging an 18-pounder gun belong-
ing to the 4th Battery up Queensland Point. This, the first
gun to land, was got into position during the evening of
the day of the landing. At 6 p.m. it went into action, and
its second round appeared to silence for the night the last
persistent gun in the Gaba Tepe battery. The sound of their
own artillery in action greatly cheered the sorely-tried
infantry.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Copies of these Photographs prepared in Natural Color may be
Purchased. See Page 59.
22. FRATERNISING WITH “YOUNG GREEKS.” (G 422.
Admiralty Official.)
The islands of Imbros and Lemnos, off Gallipoli, were in-
habited by Greeks. The Australians, who were fortunate
enough to spend a few days there, found their villages and
customs interesting, and their shopkeepers profiteers! Inci-
dentally, it may be mentioned that the Australian soldier
during the war showed himself to be possessed of a great
capacity for making friends. In France he was completely
at his ease with the peasants. In the East he sauntered
through the native villages as confidently as he walked the
streets of his home-town. He was on familiar terms with
his comrade-in-arms of the various allied forces.
23. AGROUND, BUT DEFIANT. (G 559. Admiralty
Official.)
H.M.S. “Albion” went ashore close to Gaba Tepe in May,
1915. The Turkish batteries immediately subjected her to
a heavy fire, partly to damage her and partly to hamper the
ship’s company in their efforts to get her off. The “ Albion ”
replied, and gave the Turks a hot time. Eventually she was
towed off, none the worse for her experience, by H.M.S.
“ Canopus.” The tow-line can be seen in the photograph.
t
24. THE PIPE OF PEACE. (Official Photograph E 1960.)
Most Australian units had mascots—dogs, goats, kangaroos,
monkeys, and so on. One remembers' with amusement the
stir among the neighbouring Egyptian fellaheen caused by
the kangaroos that escaped occasionally from Mena Camp.
Many of the mascots were presented to the Zoological
Gardens in Cairo and London when the units found them-
selves obliged by the exigencies of military service to part
with them.
26.—BEHIND QUINN’S. (Official Photograph G 1011.)
The weakest spot in the Anzac line became known as Quinn’s
Post, after an officer of the 15th Battalion, who took a
prominent part in its defence in the early days. Here the
opposing lines were, in places, only 15 feet apart. Both
sides made frequent sorties to improve the position, but the
situation remained much the same until the evacuation in
December. This photograph shows supports of the 4th
Australian Brigade waiting behind Quinn’s Post on the 29th
May. On this day the Turks succeeded in entering the post.
They were routed and driven back by a counter-attack, led
by Major Quinn, after whom the post was named, and who
was killed during the fight.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


You can buy Copies of these See page 59.
26.—A TURKISH ENVOY ARRIVES AT ANZAC. (Official
Photograph G 989.)
On the 22nd May the Turks sent an envoy, under a white
flag, along the beach from Gaba Tepe. He was met and
blindfolded. Obviously it was not an easy task for a blinded
man to negotiate the wire entanglements extending into the
sea. How the problem was solved is here illustrated. Ihe
object of the visit was to seek an armistice to allow of the
burial of the dead lying in No Man’s Land. The armistice
was subsequently arranged for the 24th May.
27—A “JACKO” FATIGUE PARTY. (G 456. Admiralty
Official.)
The majority of the prisoners captured at Anzac were sent
off to the neighbouring islands, under the Allies control, or
to Egypt. A few were kept behind the line for sanitary and
other fatigues. The Turks at Anzac were, as a rule, splendid
types of the Ottoman forces. They were generally referred
to by the Australians as “Jacko” or “Abdul.”
28 —RAIDING GABA TEPE. (G1534p. Lent by Major Giles,
10th Battalion, A.1.F.)
Gaba Tepe was a strong Turkish position to the south of
Anzac. On the 4th May a party of 100 men of the nth
Battalion, under Captain R. L. Leane, raided it. The main
body landed from destroyers by means of life-boats. An-
other small party of twelve men advanced along the beach
to cut the wire between Anzac and Gaba Tepe, and so
provide a land route for the withdrawal of the raiders.
Leane’s party landed about 4 a.m., in the face of heavy fire.
A dozen were killed or wounded in the boats. The others
took shelter under a bank which bordered the shore. The
position was quickly seen to be hopeless, and the only
avenue of escape was an embarkation on an open beach
under heavy fire, the land route being covered by the Turks.
This was successfully undertaken, but not without casualties
In this photograph the destroyers are shown covering the
embarkation with gun fire.
29.—A BOMB FACTORY. (G 267. Admiralty Official.)
Within a few days of the landing at Anzac, the Turks were
using bombs. Quickly appreciating their value, the Aus-
tralians having none supplied to them, set out to make
their own, introducing the famous “jam-tin” pattern. The
container, as the name implies, was an issue jam-tin. In the
centre was placed a cylinder containing high explosive, in
which was inserted a fuse and detonator. The space between
the explosive and the side of the jam-tin was filled with
scraps of metal—pieces of iron, cartridge cases, nails, punch-
ings barbed wire, &c. The fu?e was lit before the grenade
was thrown. Towards the end of the Gallipoli campaign
more elaborately designed grenades became available.
•82678—c
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


There are 40,000 Photographs from which to select. Enquire at Counter.
30. —SAFETY FIRST. (Official Photograph G 408.)
To lean over the parapet of a trench at Anzac to lire a rifle
in the ordinary way was certain death. The periscope rifle,
invented by an Australian soldier on Gallipoli, was taken
into use to maintain the necessary fire without risking exces-
sive casualties.
31. THE HEART OF ANZAC. C 958. Lent by M. de
Marigny.)
The crescent-shaped bay, 1,000 yards in length, between An
Burnu and Hellspit, the scene of the landing, was named
Anzac Cove. It was open to the Turkish observation posts
at Nibrunesi Point and Gaba Tepe. From one end to the
other it was crowded with stacks of rations, dumps, dressing
stations, transport, water —in brief, everything necessary for
the existence of the Anzac forces. The slopes rising trom
its narrow strip of beach were honeycombed with dugouts.
It provided facilities for bathing, gossip, and news-gathering.
The frequent and irregular bursts of shell-fire by “ Beachy
Bill ” interfered little with its usual activities. When
“ stunts ” were not in progress, “ the beach ” was admitted to
be more dangerous than the line, and in quiet periods most
of the daily casualties occurred the’re. In the centre of this
photograph, Watson’s Pier may be seen in the early stages
of its construction.
32. —DESERTED. (Official Photograph G 1287.)
Taken two days before the evacuation, this photograph, when
compared with No. 31, indicates the extent to which the
Anzac forces were able to remove their stores and equip-
ment. It was obviously risky to make such changes, but
fortunately the occasional Turkish airmen who came over
flew too high to observe the change. The white-domed
structures are the water condensers.
33. —IN LONE PINE. (Official Photograph G 1126.)
An interior view of Turkish trenches at Lone Pine captured
by the Ist Infantry Brigade on 6th August. The officer with
the bandaged hand was one of the five officers of the 3rd
Battalion remaining on duty after four days’ fighting. The
photograph shows the stout overhead cover, the breaking
through of which was the great difficulty of the attacking
troops. Some tried to prise it up with their rifles. Others
dropped, feet first, through the small holes made here and
there in it. It required great courage to drop thus into a dark
trench filled with enemies. In one way or another the infantry
forced their way in, captured the position, and held it against
repeated desperate counter-attacks.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


The Names of Soldiers in these War Photographs are Recorded and
Indexed. Enquire at Counter.
34—LOOKING TOWARDS SUVLA. (G4lO. Admiralty
Official.)
The tangled foothills over which the Australian, New Zea-
land. British. and Indian troops detailed for the capture of
Hill 971. moved on the night of the 6/7 Ht across
was a notable feat for a force to find its way by night across
such difficult country, and carry out nearly all that .was
required of it. The operation was not a complete sura
It enlarged the Anzac area, but Hill 971 remained in Turkish
possession. The white line at the foot of the distant hills
is the Salt Lake.
35.—A BLIZZARD AT ANZAC. (Official Photograph G 1261.)
A scene on the morning of 28th November. The view is
from rear-headquarters of the Ist Australian Division,
circular construction down the gully is a " Pier
the right can be faintly seen the piles of Watson s
which was wrecked by the storm.
36- LANDING FROM THE “ RIVER
CLYDE” AT HELLES. (Official Photograph G 957.)
Tim “ River Clvde ” played an important part in the gallant
20th Division’s landing at Cape Helles. Early in the morn
ing of the 25th April she was beach e / 1 ’ ligh^ rS 8 7 5^s e h 'troops
into position between her and the shore, the Bntishto p
feTe \ h a e „d C e h f^ a ?h d ri.hX at "S 2
pliant attack,' advancing
the British line by several hundred yards.
37- BEACH, ANZAC. (G 592. Admiralty Official.)
This was the name given the strip of beach running from
Anzac Cove to Suvla Bay. This photograph was taken after
the operations in August.
Order. Accepted «<J Arnwcd .1 Counter ne.r the Entr.uc.


Arc you Inleretled in Bronze Statuettes? See Page 89.
SECTION III.
SINAI, PALESTINE, and SYRIA.
38—9th LIGHT HORSE GOING INTO ACTION. (82869.
Lent by Col. W. H, Scott.)
The pth Australian Light Horse going into action at Mag-
dhaba, on 23rd December, 1916. After a 23-mile night march,
the mounted troops surrounded Magdhaba at dawn. Gallop-
in S mas close as the Turkish fire permitted, they dismounted,
an d pressed forward on foot. The Turks, strongly en-
trenched, put up a stout resistance, and the town was won
only as darkness fell.
39.— GAZA—THE GATEWAY OF PALESTINE. (Official
Photograph 8969.)
The Australian mounted troops participated in two attempts
(one on the 26th March and the other on igth April, 1917) to
capture Gaza. Both were unsuccessful. The position was a
strong one skilfully fortified by the Turks. The cactus
hedges shown in this photograph added to the difficulties
encountered by assaulting troops.
40—THE CAMELS GO INTO ACTION. (Official Photo-
graph 83575.)
This photograph illustrates admirably how the Camel Corps
goes into action. Riding as close to the enemy as prudent,
the camels are then left, in shelter if possible, while the men
move forward on foot. The white-hooded litters attached
to some of the camels are the cacolets, in which the wounded
were carried. They were the cruellest method of transport-
ing wounded devised. More than half the Camel Brigade
m Palestine consisted of Australians. The Cameliers had a
great fighting reputation.
41 ‘ LIGHT HORSE SNIPERS. (Official Photograph B 1506.)
Snipers of the 2nd Australian Light Horse Brigade in the
iront line during the fighting at Nalin, in Palestine, on 17th
January, 1918. _ In making the most of natural cover, and in
sniping, the Light Horseman was without a peer.
T HE MOSQUE OF OMAR. (Official Photograph 83573.)
“ A d ome graceful as that of St. Peter’s—though, of course,
on a far smaller scale—rising from an elaborately-finished
circular edince, this edifice raised on a square marble plat-
urnif 0n t “ e highest ridge of a green slope . . . this is
the Mosque of Omar . . . the second most sacred spot
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance


You can Purchase Reproductions in Color of the Battle Pictures, by
Official War Artists on Exhibition in Main Hall. See Page 86.
in the Mohammedan world—that is, next after Mecca- the
second most beautiful mosque—that is, the next after Cor-
dova.” Such is Dean Stanley’s description of this splendid
building, which proved of great interest to the Australian
Light Horsemen who visited the Holy City. Another view of
the mosque is given in the panoramic photograph of Jeru-
salem (No. 50).
43. GOING TO JERICHO.. (Official Photograph B 1468).
The ist Australian Light Horse Brigade zig-zagging down
the hillside on the way from Bethlehem to the Jordan Valley,
prior to the attack on Jericho. The brigade occupied Jericho
on the morning of the 21st February, 1918. The motor
cyclist despatch rider on the right appears to be having
rather a rough time.
44. LANDING STORES (Official Photograph B 1501.)
Natives of the Egyptian Labour Corps, photographed while
unloading stores and equipment for the Australian Light
Horse from a cargo boat, at Nahr-Sukereir, in Palestine,
on 10th January, 1918. The stores were carried from the
ship in surf boats, manned by natives.
45. A PALESTINE RAILHEAD. (Official Photgraph 81434.)
Australian Light Horse transport at railhead dump at
Dieran, in the Philistine Plain, in Palestine, in January, 191 b.
46 NEAR NALIN. (Official Photographs 81505-6.)
This photograph is similar in subject to No. 4L and provides
a further illustration of the rugged nature of the country m
the Judean Hills.
47 GRAND MOSQUE, GAZA. (Official Photograph B 1613.)
Gaza was more heavily beleaguered and more stoutly de-
fended than any other town in the Palestme Three
attacks were necessary before it finally fell. This photograph
bears testimony to the havoc wrought by gun fire.
48 — DEFENCES OF JERUSALEM. (Official Photo-
graph 83574.)
(London) with little wooden crosses,
which* ten o* the spirit and sacrifice of the gallant Cockneys.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Copie* of these Photographs prepared in Natural Color may be
Purchased. See Page 59.
VALLEY DUST. (Official Photograph 825.)
A dust trail on the Auja Ford Road, in Palestine.
50.—THE HOLY CITY. (Official Photograph 81718 abd.)
This photograph was taken from the Mount of Olives. In
the immediate foreground is the Russian Church, while the
Mosque of Omar stands out, deservedly, as the most pro-
minent building in Jerusalem. The Light Horsemen were
greatly disappointed in the Holy City, with its squalor and
filth, smells, and mendicants.
5L AFTER THE VICTORY. (Official Photograph 81456.)
Squadrons of the 4th A.L.H. Brigade among the ruins of
Gaza. By their dashing charge, mounted, over the Turkish
trenches at Beersheba, these troops played an important
part in driving the Turkish force from the Gaza-Beersheba
line.
52—A WINDING TRACK. (Official Photograph 829.)
Horse descending a winding track to the
middle pontoon bridge at Auja Ford, in the Jordan Valley.
53. CAMEL’S HUMP. (Official Photograph 835.)
Camel’s Hump, at Musallabeh, in the Jordan Valley. Be-
tween 9th and nth April, 1918, while it was being held by
the Ist (Anzac) Battalion of the Imperial Camel Brigade
the enemy launched a series of strong attacks (led by a
German storm battalion) against it. They were repulsed,
after hard fighting, with considerable loss to the enemy.
Because of this gallant defence, General Allenby decreed
that m future this hill should be called “ Camel’s Hump.”
54. SEEN FROM GETHSEMANE. (Official Photograph
B 1738.)
The Russian Church, near Jerusalem, from the Garden of
jCthsemane. One compensation for the generally disagree-
able conditions of service was the frequent privilege the
Light Horsemen enjoyed in visiting historic places.
55-WATERING AT MOUNT ZION. (Official Photograph
B 1518.)
Water supply was one of the chief administrative problems
during the Palestine campaign. As the troops advanced
across the Sinai Desert water had to be conveyed with them
by the famous pipe line from the Sweet-water Canal along
the Suez. Later, streams and wells provided a sufficient
supply. Here some troopers of the Anzac Mounted Division
are seen watering at the foot of Mount Zion, near Jerusalem.
Order? Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


You can buy Copies of these Photographs. See page 59.
56. HORSE HOLDERS NEAR ES SALT. (Official Photo-
graph 863.)
Horses of the Australian Light Horse under cover, whilst
their riders were holding the line, during the second raid on
Es Salt, in Palestine, 30th April-4th May, 1918. In this
operation practically all the Australian mounted troops, with
the exception of the camels, crossed the Jordan, and,
after some rare mountaineering feats in the darkness, took
possession of Es Salt. Large numbers of prisoners and
stores were captured, but finally the mounted troops had to
be withdrawn.
57. LIGHT HORSE RAIDERS IN ES SALT. (Official
Photograph 865.)
A view of the town of Es Salt, in Palestine, from the post
office. At the time the Australians were in possession of the
town, but later they were compelled to withdraw.
58. AUSTRALIAN LIGHT HORSE. (Official Photograph
B1510X.)
Australian Light Horse crossing the steep sandhills at
Esdud, in Palestine, January, 1918.
59. —FLOODS! (Official Photograph 81542.)
A scene near Esdud, on the Philistine Plain, in January,
1918. The camels did not relish this change from the sand
and desert to which they were accustomed.
60— JORDAN VALLEY VISTA. (Official Photograph
81622 X.)
A view of the Jordan Valley, taken from an old Roman fort.
Jericho may be seen in the middle distance. It was the
fate of the Light Horse to spend the summer of 1918 in the
Jordan Valley. The intense heat, clouds of dust, snakes,
scorpions, mosquitoes, and shelling, notably by “Jericho
Jane ” or “ Nimrin Nellie,” all contributed to make the ex-
perience one the Light Horsemen who endured it are not
likely to forget.
61. THE CAMELIER. (Official Photograph 81479.)
62, JORDAN BRIDGEHEAD. (Official Photograph 89.)
The left flank outpost of the sth Australian Light Horse, at
Ghoraniyeh Bridgehead, in April, 1918. This bridgehead was
won by the New Zealanders on the 23rd March, after two
attempts to effect a crossing had been frustrated by enemy fire
and by the swift current. The New Zealanders crossed to
the south, and then galloped north and drove the enemy
back. A few hours later three bridges had been constructed.
The Turks and their German allies made, later, several
attempts to recapture the position, but each time they were
repulsed.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


There are 40,000 Photographs from which to select. Enquire at Counter.
63. —A PALESTINE SUNSET. (Official Photograph B 1686.)
64. —COMRADES. (Official Photograph 8221.)
A Light Horseman and his mount.
65. —RESTING. (Official Photograph 81652 ab.)
An Australian Light Horse camp at Belah, in Palestine,
near the sea.
66. WAITING FOR WOUNDED. (Official Photograph 872.)
A Camel Field Ambulance in a valley outside Es Salt, during
the raid of 30th April-4th May, 1918.
67. AN AMUSING DECEPTION. (82667. Lent by Lt.-Col.
Cave.)
The complete success which attended General Allenby’s final
campaign in Palestine was due, in a large measure, to the
skilful way in which he misled the enemy as to his intentions.
He planned to break through on the coast, but made the
Turks believe the blow would fall elsewhere. The dummy
horses in a camp in the Jordan Valley, shown in this photo-
graph, represent one of a number of amusing ruses which
were adopted to fool the Turks.
68. —A GREAT HAUL. (Official Photograph B 90.)
General view of 4,500 prisoners captured by the 2nd Aus
tralian Light Horse Brigade during the operations at Am-
man, in Syria. They were captured by the Anzac Division
in their third expedition to the plateau of Moab and the
heights of Gilead. The previous expeditions had been raids,
but this time the Division came to stay. Altogether, it cap-
tured ii.ooo Turks, of whom these are some, at a cost of a
few score casualties.
69. —ON THE MARCH. (Official Photograph B 1619.)
The First Australian Light Horse Brigade on the march
near Jerusalem.
70. OFF TO BOMB THE TURKS. (Official Photograph
63576.)
The aerodrome of the Ist Squadron, A.F.C.. at Mejdel, with
Bristol fighters ready to take off or in the air. On the port-
able field hangar may be noticed the conical-shaped flag,
which indicated to machines about to land the direction in
which the wind was blowing.
Order* Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Are you interested in Bronze Statuettes? See Page 89.
Australian Official War
Publications.
These are excellent War Souvenirs, and should be in all
Australian Homes.
“ THE ANZAC BOOK.” s . d>
Actually written and illustrated on Gallipoli by
the men of Anzac. A book that will live for
ever.
Trice 2/6 Posted 3 4
“ FROM THE AUSTRALIAN FRONT.”
A.I.F. Christmas Book, 1917. Drawings and War
Photographs taken on the Western Front up to
November, 1917.
Price 2/- Posted 2 9
“AUSTRALIAN WAR PHOTOGRAPHS.”
The A.I.F. Christmas Book, 1918, The War in
Photographs, from* November, 1917, to the end.
Unique Battle Pictures of the Western Front.
Price 3/- Posted 3 9
“AUSTRALIA AT WAR.”
A series of Black and White Sketches, by Lieut.
Will Dyson, the well-known Australian Artist.
Price 5/6 Posted 6 o
“ BEFORE AMIENS AND AFTER,”
A small booklet containing the story of Australia’s
part in smashing the Hindenburg Line.
Price 6d. Posted o 7
“FIRST CONVOY SOUVENIR.”
Of interest to members of First Expeditionary
Force. Compiled early in 1915, but publication
forbidden by Censor until after the War.
Price 2/6 Posted 2 9
“AUSTRALIA IN PALESTINE.”
The Light Horse Souvenir Book, beautifully illus-
trated. The complete story of the Holy Land
Campaign.
Price 3/6 Posted 4 o
THE COMPLETE SET POSTED TO ANY ADDRESS, 17/6.
Cash must accompany all orders. Exchange to be added to
Country Cheques..
THE AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL MUSEUM,
Exhibition Building, Melbourne and Sydney.
*82678— D
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


You can Purchase Reproductions In Color of the Battle Pictures, by
Official War Artists on Exhibition in Main Hall. See Page 86.
71.—0 N THE HEELS OF THE TURKS. (Official Photo-
graph 8259.)
This photograph was taken on the 21st September, 1918, and
shows Light Horse moving through Jenin on their way to
Damascus. The town had been captured on the previous day,
together with a haul of 8,000 prisoners.
72 SEMAKH RAILWAY STATION. (Official Photograph
8284.)
Semakh is on the southern shore of the Sea of Galilee. In
the advance to Damascus the Australian Light Horse en-
countered there stout opposition, which was overcome only
after a bitter struggle. The nth Light Horse Regiment
attacked from the east (some of its horses killed in the
action are shown in this photograph), and the 12th from the
west. The defenders were driven back to the railway build-
ings, which the enemy fiercely defended for an hour. The
enemy casualties numbered 120, and 389 prisoners were taken.
73.—THE SCENE OF A TURKISH DISASTER. (Official
Photograph BI112).
A view of the narrow and singularly beautiful Barada Gorge,
near Damascus, where disaster overtook an enemy column
several miles in length. Light Horsemen of the 3rd and
sth Brigades, perched in pockets of the cliffs on either side,
harried the enemy beneath them. Germans in the column,
working their machine-guns from the tops of motor lorries
and waggons, fought to the death. Three hundred and
seventy officers and men were killed, and fell among the
dead and dying horses of chaotic column. The Aus-
tralians had scarcely a man hit.
74 —PREPARING THE DAILY STEW. (Official Photograph
8361.)
Turkish prisoners preparing the daily stew at the concen-
tration camp, Kaukab, near Damascus.
75—BY THE SEA OF GALILEE. (Official Photograph
B281A.)
The 3rd Australian Light Horse Brigade “ trekking ” by
the Sea of Galilee, en route to Damascus. At the time the
brigade was the advance guard of the Desert Mounted
Corps.
76 VIEWING THE PROMISED LAND. (Official Photo-
graph B 1618.)
A delightful photograph of an Australian Light Horseman
on a strange mount. Each regiment had a few donkeys,
which were ridden by the grooms and batmen. The little
animals showed remarkable powers of endurance, and were
great favourites. The ammunition bandolier round the
“ donk’s ” neck and the bundle of firewood are worth noting.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


The Names of Soldiers in these AVar Photographs are Recorded and
Indexed. Enquire at Counter.
77. THE SHORE OF THE DEAD SEA. (Official Photo-
graph £55.)
A motor boat patrol and landing stage on the Dead Sea, in
the vicinity of which the Anzac Mounted Division spent
some months during the summer of 1918.
78. —NEAR JERICHO. (Official Photograph 8234.)
The camp and transport lines of the 9th A.L.H. Regimental
Headquarters and “C” Squadron in a valley near Jericho,
in August, 1918.
79. —CAPTURED TURKS. (Official Photograph £94.)
A group of Turkish officers, under guard of Australian Light
Horsemen, near an old mosque at Amman, in Syria. They
were captured in September, 1918, when the Anzac Mounted
Division crossed the Jordan and seized Amman, cutting off large
Turkish forces to the south.
80. —NAZARETH. (Official Photograph £273.)
Troops of the Australian Mounted Division passing through
Nazareth during the advance to Damascus, in September,
1918.
81. ENTRY INTO DAMASCUS. (Official Photograph £316.)
The Australian Light Horse entering Damascus, in Syria,
on Ist October. 1918. The 10th Light Horse Regiment was
the first into Damascus, and received the surrender of the
city before passing through in pursuit of the Turks. As they
rode through, the Australians received an enthusiastic wel-
come from the Damascenes, who showered them with con-
fetti and perfume, and pressed gifts upon them, while all
the time the air was filled with the crackle of firearms
discharged into the air by excited Arabs.
82. A PRIMITIVE WATER WHEEL. (Official Photograph
£1498.)
Native women water-carriers by an old water wheel in the
village of Zernukah, in Palestine, occupied by the Australian
Light Horse on 16th January, 1918.
83. TIBERIAS. (Official Photograph £1298.)
A view of Tiberias, on the Sea of Galilee, occupied by the
Light Horse during the advance to Damascus.
84. THE PLAIN OF MEGIDDO. (Official Photograph £255.)
The Headquarters of the Desert. Mounted Corps, near Lej-
jun, at the time of the battle of Megiddo, the commencement
of the advance on Damascus.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Copies of these Photographs prepared in Natural Color may be
Purchased. See Page 59.
85. AN ADVANCE PARTY. (Official Photograph B 1282.)
After capturing Damascus the victorious Desert Mounted
Corps pushed on to Aleppo. Here an advance party of the
12th A.L.H. Regiment is seen crossing the Dog River, near
Beirut.
86. GREAT-HEARTED HORSES. (Official Photograph
8515.)
A group of big bay horses, attached to the ist Australian
Light Horse Brigade, at Richon, in Syria, November, 1918.
These animals served right through the campaign, keeping
in good condition throughout. During the final offensive,
the Australians’ horses covered, marching and fighting, an
average of 30 to 40 miles a day, a remarkably fine perform-
ance, when it is remembered that they carried a load ex-
ceeding an average of 250 lb. and had been on short rations.
87. FIGHTING FORDS. (Official Photograph 8707.)
The No. 1 Australian Light Car Patrol, at Aleppo Railway
Station, in Syria. This unit, accompanying the sth Cavalry
Division, took a prominent part in the capture of Alpppo,
on the 26th October. The capture of this town practically
ended the war in Palestine. Australians were, therefore, “in
at the death.”
88. CAMEL TRANSPORT. (Official Photograph 83577.)
At one time 35,000 transport camels were employed by the
British force operating in Palestine. The strength was
always in the vicinity of this number. The drivers were
recruited in Egypt, and, with their sky-blue galabiehs, added
a pleasing touch of colour to the drabness of the country
and monotonous khaki of the fighting forces. The camels
proved impervious to shell-fire, and stood their ground
under difficult circumstances, showing themselves well en-
dowed with the fatalistic courage of the East. In this
photograph, convoys going to and from the line—one march-
ing loaded, and the other returning empty —are shown pass-
ing each other on the outskirts of a village.
89. OFF ON A BOMBING RAID. (Official Photograph
E 5989.)
Australian aeroplanes, in battle formation, setting out to
bomb the Turks, in Palestine.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


You can buy Copies of these Photographs. See page 59.
SECTION IV.
MINOR THEATRES.
90. A HOSPITAL IN MACEDONIA. (C 4350. Lent by
Sister Kellick.)
Four of the British General Hospitals serving with the
horce at Salonika—the 42nd, 50th, 5 2n d, and 60th—were
starred with Australian nurses, who rendered particularly
gallant service. No other Australian units served on this front.
This photograph shows the 60th General Hospital.
91. MERSA MATRUH. (A5Ol. Lent by Kerr, Ist Aust.
Div. Train.)
Mersa Matruh was the base for the force of British, Aus-
tralian, and South African troops operating against the
Senussi tribe of Arabs, on the western front of Egypt. The
objects of the operation were to subdue the Arabs and rescue
the crews of torpedoed British ships, who had been taken
prisoner. They were carried out during the period December,
IQIS-March, 1916. This photograph shows rather an unusual
combination of subjects—bathing horses, a British monitor, a
hospital ship, and a wireless station near the old fort on the hill.
92. WASHING DAY. (C 4337. Lent by Sister Kellick.)
Nurses at the 60th General Hospital, Salonika, apparently
enjoying their washing day.
93. THROUGH SPACE. (J 2042. Cpl. E. K. Burke.)
Personnel of No. 24 Station Australian Wireless Squadron,
trying out a pack set at Sumara Atika post, on the British
line of communication in Central Kurdistan.
94. ENTERTAINMENT. (J 1327. Lent by Capt. F. E.
Williams.)
This party of Kurd minstrels wandered into the camp of
the 3rd Party, Dunsterforce, at the foot of Bisitun Crag, and
were doubtless welcomed at this distant outpost.
95. IN MESOPOTAMIA. (AlOB4. Lent by Capt. E. W.
Latchford.)
A party of Dunsterforce officers and N.C.Os. on the march.
96. —-RAW RECRUITS. (Official Photograph 83572.)
Early in 1918 a small force of specially-selected officers and
N.C.Os., drawn from the British armies in the field, was
raised for a secret purpose. The force, which came to be
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


There are 40,000 Photographs from which to select. Enquire at Counter.
known as the “ Dunsterforce ” (after its commander,
General L. C. Dunsterville, a distinguished Indian Army
officer, and Kipling’s “ Stalky ”), subsequently learned it
had been raised to combat enemy influences in Persia and
around Baku. An attempt was made to raise and train
native levies. Thus, the Australian soldier’s felt hat made
its appearance in this farthest-flung outpost of the Allied
battle line.
97.— AUSTRALIANS IN MESOPOTAMIA. (J 206. By Cpl.
E. K. Burke, Aust. Wireless Squadron.)
A photograph of Sweet’s Column, on its long trek over diffi-
cult country to Zingan (Persia), in September, 1918. A few
members of the Australian Wireless Squadron serving in
Mesopotamia were attached to the column, which was sent
forward to reinforce the Dunsterforce, and stave off a Turkish
threat at that force’s L. of C. The expedition proved a some-
what tame affair, though it was full of interesting possibilities.
'•' ) ■* ... I
98—NEAR BAGHDAD. (J 2019. Cpl. E. K. Burke.)
Horse and mule lines in the Australian Wireless Squadron
Camp near Baghdad.
99.—AN OUT STATION. (J 2056. Cpl. E. K. Burke.)
No. 9 Station of the Australian Wireless Squadron, erected
in an old felt shelter left behind by the Russians who
returned home when the Revolution broke out.
100— REFUGEES. (J 2057. Cpl. E. K. Burke.)
The principal work of the Dunsterforce and other British
organisations in Mesopotamia in the last months of the
war was assisting and succouring refugees from North-west
Persia and Kurdistan. A vast horde, numbering 30,000,
passed down the line of communication to Mesopotamia.
In this photograph a few are seen passing through Hamadan.
101— A NORTHERN BATTLE FRONT. (Official Photo-
graph Q 16635.)
Murmansk, a port on the White Sea, was one of the bases
from which the North Russian Expeditionary Force operated.
The task of the Force was to assist the Russian “Whites”
against the “ Reds.” After the Armistice 250 Australians,
discharged from the A.1.F., were re-enlisted by the War Office
as a machine gun company for service on this front.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


The Names of Soldiers in these War Photographs are Recorded and
Indexed. Enquire at Counter.
SECTION V.
FRANCE, 1916.
102. —“ GIBRALTAR.” (Official Photograph EZ9B.)
Originally, “ Gibraltar ” was a concrete cover built by the
Germans to protect the entrance to the cellar below, which
had been converted into a strong underground shelter.
Under the terrible bombardments to which Pozieres was
subjected, the house disappeared, leaving the concrete struc-
ture as a prominent featyre of the battlefield. It was
originally used by the Germans as a headquarters, and when
it was captured by the Australians, they put it to similar
use during the five weeks of desperate fighting they experi-
enced in this area. The photograph shows an Australian
fatigue party carrying sandbags up to the front line.
103. THE SCENE OF A GALLANT FAILURE. (Official
Photograph E 5990.)
An oblique air-photograph of the Australian and German
lines near Fromelles, where the sth Division made its gal-
lant but ill-fated attack on the 19th July, 1916. The small
salient to the right, known as the Sugar Loaf, was chiefly
responsible for the failure. The division detailed to capture
it was unable to do so. It enfiladed the Australians’ extreme
right. The infantry oh this flank made several gallant
attempts to advance, only to be decimated by the German
fire. Elsewhere the division was successful, but with the
Sugar Loaf uncaptured the position was untenable, and the
division had to withdraw to its jumping-off trench. In a
day it suffered 5,500 casualties.
104. ALBERT CATHEDRAL. (Official Photograph E 2067.)
Passing through Albert on their way to the line near Pozi-
eres or Mouquet Farm, Australian soldiers looked up to see
the far-famed Leaning Madonna which crowned the tall
spire of the Cathedral. From the French people, on whom
they were billeted, they learned the prophecy, “ When the
Madonna falls the war will end.” Many of them were still
with the A.I.F. in April, 1918, when the Australians were
again near Albert, then in German hands, and saw it fall.
A few months later the tide of battle turned, and the Allies
commenced moving forward to victory.
105. SAUSAGE VALLEY. (Official Photograph EZ113.)
Opinion differs as to the derivation of the name. Some say
the valley was so named because of its shape; others claim
it was because of the large number of “ sausage ” balloons
which were stationed in it. However that may be, Sausage
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Are you interested in Bronze Statuettes? See Page 89.
Valley, during the fighting around Pozieres and Mouquet
Farm, was one of the busiest thoroughfares on the western
front. Through it moved the troops passing to and from
the battle. In it, in long lines, were ranged the field and
heavy guns engaged in supporting the infantry. Everywhere
were dumps of rations, ammunition, engineer material, field
cookers, and so on. No Australian who fought at Pozieres
will forget Sausage Valley.
106. WATCHING THE ARTILLERY PREPARATION.
(Official Photograph EZB3.)
Pozieres was remarkable for the unparalleled concentration
of artillery fire directed against it. The powerful artillery
forces of both sides concentrated their fire on an area of
about one square mile on the summit. Under the maelstrom
of fire, Pozieres village completely disappeared. The surface
of the tortured ground was continually changing. The crater
made by one shell was completely filled in by another burst-
ing alongside. An interesting feature was the fact that the
area under shell-fire was clearly defined, and men outside this
area could watch in comparative safety the inferno into which
they were to go, or from which they had come.
107. SUPPORTING THE INFANTRY. (Official Photograph
EZ141.)
In their ordeal by fire at Pozieres, the Australian infantry
received the utmost support from their own and British
artillery. In the heat of the French summer, the gunners,
stripped to the waist, served their guns until they were
exhausted. Reliefs were few and far between. This photo-
graph depicts an Australian gun contributing its share to a
barrage on the German trenches near Pozieres.
108. —“ AT THE TOOT.” (Official Photograph EZ72.)
Australian transport moving at the gallop past a heavy gun
in action behind the Australian lines near Pozieres.
Sausage Valley, behind Pozieres, was lined with guns of all
calibres. They were well camouflaged, and many an unsus-
pecting soldier was startled to hear a big gun booming just
behind him. It paid to keep away from them, or to pass
them as quickly as possible.
109. —MOUQUET FARM. (Official Photograph E 5.)
Though this substantial farm-house was reduced to a heap
of broken brick by a well-directed artillery fire, its cellars
and dugouts were not destroyed, and it proved to be one
of the few nuts Australian soldiers failed to crack. They
captured the position several times, but each time it was
retaken by the Germans. It was eventually captured, several
weeks later, during a general advance by British and
Canadian troops. This view was taken looking towards
Pozieres.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Yo " rcha ® e Reproductions in Color of the Battle Pictures, by
mcial War Artists on Exhibition in Main Hall. See page 82.
110. UNDER THE WHITE FLAG. (Official Photograph
E 4946.)
Stretcher-bearers of the 6th Australian Infantry Brigade,
under the white flag, passing the old cemetery of Pozieres,
on 20th August, 1916, having come from the line near
ouquet Farm. At this point Tramway Trench crossed
tJnnd s Cut. The chief interest of this photograph lies in
the white flag. Strictly speaking, the flag should have shown
tne Ked Cross, but not having a regulation flag, the Aus-
tralian bearers improvised this substitute, which was re-
spected by the Germans,
***• FALLEN COMRADES. (Official Photograph
EZ125.)
An Australian Chaplain, delivering an address at the unveil-
mg of the memoral to the ist Australian Division at Pozieres,
°th July, 1917. The Australian soldier never forgot his
fallen comrades, and never failed to do what he could to
perpetuate their memory.
112.— SOMME MUD. (Official Photograph E 577.)
Wading through the mud in Gird Trench, near Gueudecourt,
in France, in December, 1916. The fortune of war gave the
ist, 2nd, 4th, and Divisions the experience of spending
the winter of 1916-17 in the wrecked trenches of the Somme
battlefield. It proved to be the coldest winter known in
France for a number of years. But the freezing cold was
preferable to the milder weather, which filled the trenches
with liquid mud, as in the case of Gird Trench here photo-
graphed. At first the terrible conditions were responsible
for a heavy sick wastage, but the problem was faced, and
after a short time the Australian wastage figures were among
the lowest.
113. —MOVING UP. (Official Photograph E 54.)
An Australian artillery column moving along the Mametz-
Montauban Road, in France, in December, 1916, to take up
positions in the forward area.
114. AN AUSTRALIAN ENTENTE. (Official Photograph
EZ138.)
. This pleasing photograph was taken behind the lines at
Pozieres. It suggests the cordial relations which existed
between the Australians and their French comrades. Fol-
lowers of Bairnsfather will also be interested to see that the
French army also had an “ Old Bill ”!
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


REPRODUCED in COLOR
■
IOUUWb
hk
m
High Class Art Reproductions of the remarkable War Pictures on view
in the Australian War Memorial Museum, Sydney.
Size of Plate: 17 inches x 8£ inches, Mount additional.
Mounted, Ready for Framing, 5/- per copy.
18/- per set of 4
Postage extra (1/- per order).
NOW READY.
“The Landing at Anzac,”
by Captain G. W. Lambert.
‘7 s/ Die. Artillery Qoing into Action at Vpres,”
by Lieut, H. Septimus Power.
“ Charge of the 4th L H Brigade,* Beersheba,”
by Captain G. W. Lambert.
“The Battle of Hamel,”
by Lieut, George Bell. ,
OBTAINABLE! FROM
Australian War Memorial Museum,
EXHIBITION BUILDING,
PRINCE ALFRED PARK. SYDNEY.


Copies of these Photographs prepared in Natural Color may be
Purchased. See Page 59.
115.—FLERS—OF EVIL MEMORY. (Official Photograph
E 520.)
The village was in the forward area of the sector, where the
Australians spent the winter of 1916-17, and close to the scene
of two attacks in November, 1916. These failed chiefly because
of the mud, which the infantry found the greatest difficulty in
crossing, and from which it was well nigh impossible to rescue
the wounded. Being close to the line, Flers received much
attention from the German gunners, and was quickly reduced to
ruins. The brick wall shown in this photograph was all that
was left of the church.
SECTION VI.
FRANCE, 1917.
116. COLD WATER. (Official Photograph E 174.)
A winter scene in the Somme area in January, 1917. Pipe-
stands, such as these, and water tanks were situated at inter-
vals along the roads in the forward areas, and from these
the supplies of water for the troops were drawn. Care had
to be exercised in the packing of the pipes with straw and
cloth to keep the water from freezing.
117. THE BAPAUME ROAD AT LE SARS. (Official
Photograph E 432.)
Australian transport returning along the Bapaume Road for
supplies for the troops fighting beyond Bapaume, in March,
1917. Le Sars Railway Station, the Quarry, and the Butte
de Warlencourt are in the background. The line on which
the Germans opposed the Australians during the winter of
1916-17 included the Butte. It gave them a splendid obser-
vation post, and was heavily shelled by the Australian guns.
It was raided on several occasions also.
118. A TRIUMPHAL ENTRY. (Official Photograph E 426.)
On 17th March Bapaume fell into the hands of the advancing
Australians, and on the following day the Sth Brigade Band
marched through the ruined town. Smoke is still to be seen
rising from the embers of scarcely extinguished fires. The
fighting was proceeding a few miles outside the town.
Order* Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


You can buy Copies of these Photographs. See page 59.
119. THE WRECKAGE IN BAPAUME. (Official Photo-
graph E 384.)
The wreckage in the Rue de Peronne at Bapaume, France,
on 19th March, 1917. In their withdrawal to the Hindenburg
Line, the Germans systematically laid waste the countryside.
Houses were destroyed, fruit trees cut down, wells poisoned.
Here is shown the wreckage in the Rue de Peronne,
Bapaume, after the retreating Germans had passed through.
120. A FORWARD OBSERVER. (Official Photograph E 603.)
An officer of the 22nd Machine Gun Company, near Bulle-
court, on 23rd April, 1917, on the look-out for movement in
the gaps made by our artillery in the enemy’s wire before
the Hindenburg Line. At the time the wire, which was
chiefly responsible for the failure of the 4th Division’s
attack a fortnight previously, was being subjected to a
prolonged bombardment, which was intended to destroy the
wire and open the way for an attack by the 2nd Australian
Division. This was launched on 3rd May, and was success-
ful, though it is very doubtful if the gain was worth the
heavy casualties the Australians suffered.
121. HEADS ARE RIGHT.” (Official Photograph E 453.)
Australians playing “ two-up ” in the support line in the
sunken road near Noreuil, in France, on 20th April, 1917,
during the fighting at Bullecourt. Although prohibited, this
“ national game,” as the French came to refer to it, was
played by the diggers everywhere and under all conditions.
123. HELPING HIS WOUNDED ENEMY. (Official Photo-
graph E 481.)
A scene during the Battle of Messines, showing an Aus-
tralian stretcher-bearer assisting a wounded German prisoner
towards a field dressing-station on the St. Quentin Road,
on 7th June, 1917.
124. THE TANKS GO INTO ACTION. (Official Photo-
graph E 1416.)
Tanks going into action during the afternoon of the attack
on Messines Ridge, on 7th June, 1917, when they co-operated
with the Australian troops. In this battle sixty-four tanks
were employed. Great care was taken to prevent their
presence becoming known to the enemy before the battle.
For example, the tracks made whilst they were moving to
assembly positions, whch show up unmistakably in air-
photographs, were harrowed over. During the assault the
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


The Names of Soldiers in these War Photographs are Recorded and
Indexed. Enquire at Counter.
tanks were seldom needed, and, in fact, they could hardly
keep up with the infantry. Of the 64, 11 were disabled and
48 ditched.
125. —NO PLACE TO LINGER. (Official Photograph E 649.)
An Australian motor lorry speeding along the road towards
Hill 63, on sth June, 1917, during the shelling of the Anzac
batteries concentrated in the sector to take part in the battle
of Messines two days later. A shell can be seen bursting
over the battery position in the wood.
126. STUDYING THE BATTLEFIELD. (Official Photo-
graph E 632.)
Australians of the 13th Brigade, on 6th June, 1917, studying
the large contour map of the Messines battlefield made near
Petit Pont, Belgium, to enable the troops to acquire a
thorough knowledge of the ground. This was one of the
many means adopted to make victory certain. Indeed, the
battle of Messines was a masterpiece of careful planning and
organisation, and the thorough staff work was largely re-
sponsible for the complete success with which the operation
was attended.
127. —KANDAHAR FARM DRESSING STATION. (Official
Photograph E 482.)
A 3rd Australian Divisional Field Dressing Station at Kanda-
har Farm, on the afternoon of 7th June, 1917, during the
battle of Messines. The majority of the Australian casual-
ties passed through this dressing station. The Australian
casualties for the battle and the remainder of the month
were 8,999, but the majority occurred after the capture of
the position, when the Germans deluged the whole area with
high explosive and shrapnel shells,
128. SCREENED FROM ENEMY OBSERVATION. (Offi-
cial Photograph E 1407.)
Horse transport moving along the Menin Road, in the Ypres
Sector, in September, 1917. The canvas screens were put
up to hide movement on the road from enemy observers.
129 UNDERGROUND —AND SAFE. (Official Photograph
E 1400.)
Sappers of the 6th Field Company resting in the vaults
beneath the ramparts of Ypres, on Ist November, 1917, after
their splendid work in improving conditions on the Ypres
battle ground.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entranca


There are 40,000 Photographs from which to select. Enquire at Counter.
SPECIAL NOTICE.
The photographs on exhibition are a selection from 40,000
official and lent war photographs (which include groups of
nearly every A.I.F. unit, and of the ships’ companies of
some of H.M.A. Ships) held by the Australian War
Memorial. Albums containing the complete collection of official
photographs are available at the counter near the entrance, where
all inquiries will be answered.
The Memorial has a record of the names of the soldiers who
appear in most of the photographs. The names of 60 per cent,
of the members of the A.I.F. are so recorded, and are indexed
in such a way that, given a man’s name and unit, it is possible
for the staff at the counter to produce, within a few seconds,
any official photograph in which he appears.
Give the name and unit of any friend or relative who served
with the Australian Forces, and it is probable an official photo-
graph in which he appears will be located.
There are official war photographs taken during every
campaign in which the A.I.F. fought; also views of practi-
cally every place visited by Australian troops when abroad,
and many of the work of H.M.A. Ships.
COPIES OF ALL OFFICIAL WAR PHOTOGRAPHS MAY
BE PURCHASED.
Deposits will be accepted. All orders will, as far as
possible, be completed and delivered within 21 days. See
that you receive an official receipt for all moneys paid.
If desirous of ordering photographs for presentation
purposes, the staff in attendance at this Exhibition will be
pleased to assist you in making a selection.
Make all Inquiries at—
COUNTER NEAR THE ENTRANCE.
Or by Post.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Are you interested in Bronze Statuettes? See Page 89.
130. —EMPTIES- (Official Photograph E 810.)
A dump of 18-pounder shell cases at Birr Cross Roads, in
the Ypres Sector, where positions were occupied by the 2nd
Divisional Artillery, during the battle of Zonnebeke, on 20th
September, 1917, when these shells were used. When this
photograph was taken, the batteries had moved forward to
positions between Bellevarde and Westhoek Ridges. The
cartridge cases could be used several times, and they were
therefore returned from battery positions for despatch to the
base. Those the batteries missed were later collected by the
salvage companies, whose duty it was to clean up the battle-
field, saving the equipment and stores worth keeping. In
this way the reckless waste of modern war was somewhat
minimised. , *
131. GETTING READY FOR ACTION. (Official Photo-
graph E 697.)
Members of the nth A.F.A. Brigade, near Bailleul, in Sep-
tember, 1917, cleaning their guns preparatory to going into
action in the Third Battle of Ypres.
132. FLANDERS—AS THE WAR LEFT IT. (Official
Photograph E 1238.)
Chateau Wood and Bellevarde Lake, in the Ypres Salient,
in October, 1917. The war quickly reduced the pleasant
fields of Flanders, with their smiling lakes and beautiful
forests, to ugly, menacing wastes. In the autumn of 1917.
when the Australians were engaged in a succession of attacks
near Ypres, torrential rains converted the crater-pitted coun-
tryside into a sea of fathomless mud, which could only be
crossed by the duckboard tracks or few corduroy roads.
133. ON THE MENIN ROAD, NEAR HOOGE. (Official
Photograph E 711.)
A scene on the Menin Road, near Hooge, looking towards
Birr Cross Roads, during the battle on 20th September, 1917.
The wounded on the stretchers are waiting to be taken to
the clearing station; others able to walk are making their
way along the road as far as possible.
134. CAMOUFLAGING BULLY BEEF. (Official Photograph
E 1064.)
Cooks of the 2nd Battalion preparing bully-beef rissoles for
an evening meal in November, 1917. With the aid of the
mincer, the eternal “ Bully ” was turned into a variety of
dishes.
135. A HOP-OVER. (Official Photograph E 5988.) (Com-
posite.)
Australians, with fixed bayonets, going over the top to meet
the enemy.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance;


Y °" Can , cha A Se Reproductions in Color of the Battle Pictures, by
Official War Artists on Exhibition in Main Hall. See page 82.
136. AN AUSTRALIAN “HEAVY” IN ACTION. (Official
Photograph E 659.)
h l OWitZer ' t fe e 1 I ? t Australian Siege Battery, in
Thi? mfn Y?° r r, me f. eele ’ Bel guim, on 15th September, 1917.
$ he tlme ’ T as not on a Vickers platform, as
shown by the large scotches behind the wheels. The photo-
graph was taken at the moment of extreme recoil, after the
gun had just fired, and the blur of the landscape in front of
the muzzle is due to the discharge of the heated gas.
137. A BEAUTIFUL WOOD. (Official Photograph
* • E 1220.)
Australians passing along a duckboard track through the
daele. tatCd Chateau Wood dunn S the fighting for Passchen-
I
138. BATTERY HEADQUARTERS. (Official Photograph
E 661.)
The dugout occupied by the Headquarters Staff of the loqth
P in 6 ?-’ in F]an ders, in August. 1917
At t h at time the sth Australian Field Artillery Brigade and
Battle 8 S'Ypres 1118 “ the ° pening stages of the Third
139. KNOCKED OUT.” (Official Photograph E 1421.)
th e B Yores^Serfrlr* pm °- f aCti s n near Cla Pham Junction, in
during* a f* ' Be, ? lu . m > by , an enemy anti-tank gun
during the attack on 20th September, 1917. Flanders proved
n P fr r f Veyar u f^ r - the u tanks * and ' inde ed, their failur e P there
t«niv re ? ed - m death J of the Tank Corps. But, for-
tunately, those in whose hands the fate of the Corns rested
realised that the failure was due not so much to the machines
a tbeircr< r ws as to the absolute unsuitability of the ter-
exoerts" ° P s atlons - Against the advice of the tank
battle sent :™ chin f e . S were ’ the opening phases of the
cattle, sent into action near Ypres in scores and then in
hundreds, only to drown ineffectually in the morasses. Aus-
me la £ er P assed numbers of them
stranded and tlerehct, many of them sunk so deep in the
mud that their salvage was impossible.
BLIGHTIES. (Official Photograph E 713.)
Men wounded in the Ypres Battle, of 20th September, 19x7
ZIT? a r ng thG enin Road to be taken to the cfcarffig
bearing German P nsoner s are seen assisting at stretcher-
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


GENUINE
BRONZES
"by Lieut C. Web Gilbert, ' r=:r^^y-|
the famous —w
Australian Sculptor
m
3
Obtainable only from
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL MUSEUM
Exhibition Building
Prince Alfred Park, SYDNEY
and prices upon application


Copies of these Photographs prepared in Natural Color may be
Purchased. See Page 59.
141. THE WASTE OF BATTLE. (Official Photograph
E 1187.)
Australian troops, on their way to the front line, passing
along the wreckage-strewn track from Bellevarde Lake and
Chateau Wood to Westhoek, in the Ypres Sector, October,
1917. As this track was one of the main routes to the front
line, it was heavily shelled at all times by the enemy, and the
toll exacted in lives and material was heavy.
142. YPRES, FROM THE AIR. (Official Photograph E 1257.)
Viewed from an observation balloon, 1,000 feet in the air,
Ypres presented a tragic picture of devastation. Of its
magnificent Cloth Hall and Cathedral, only gaunt skeletons
remained.
143. BRIDGING ZONNEBEKE’S MUDDY WASTES. (Offi-
cial Photograph E 837.)
Pioneers of the Ist Australian Division preparing a duck-
board track over the muddy wastes near Zonnebeke, in the
Ypres Sector, in Belgium, on sth October, 1917, the day after
the Australian attack on Broodseinde Ridge. Apart from
the roads, the duckboard tracks were the only practicable
routes across the Flanders battlefield. In the morasses on
either side men became bogged, and some were drowned.
144. A FLANDERS BATTLEFIELD. (Official Photograph
E1123A.)
Stretcher-bearers coming back with wounded, and troops
moving up to the front line over a duckboard track
running across Anzac Ridge, near Garter Point, in the Ypres
Sector, on 10th October, 1917, when the attack upon the
enemy’s position on Passchendaele Ridge was being pressed,
in spite of adverse weather conditions prevailing and stub-
born resistance by the enemy.
145. IN ACTION DURING A GAS ATTACK. (Official
Photograph E 658.)
Gunners of the 2nd Australian Siege Battery, in their gas
masks, at Voormezeele, working a 9.2 inch howitzer, during
an attack, in September, 1917. The camouflage screen over-
head concealed the position from enemy aeroplanes.
146—REGISTERING A HEAVY BATTERY. (Official
Photograph E 692.)
Nos. 1,2, and 3 guns of the Ist Australian Siege Battery in
position at Lock 8, on the Ypres-Comines Canal, in Belgium,
in September, 1917. At the moment the photograph was
taken the “ shoot ” was about to commence.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Are you interested in Bronze Statuettes? See Page 89.
147. IN THE OLD BARRACKS AT YPRES. (Official
Photograph E 1404.)
Members of the Ist Australian Infantry Battalion outside
their billets in the Cavalry Barracks at Ypres, on ist Novem-
ber, 1917. The Belgian peace-time cavalry school was in
Ypres, where there were also large infantry barracks. The
barracks were frequently occupied by Australian troops
during the fighting near Ypres.
148. —SUPPORTS MOVING UP. (Official Photograph E 833.)
Supporting troops of the ist Australian Division, photo-
graphed on a duckboard track near Hooge, in the Ypres
Sector, on sth October, 1917, as they moved towards the
front line to relieve their comrades, whose attack the day
before won Broodseinde Ridge, and deepened the Australian
bite into the German line,
149. GERMAN DUMP OF CONCRETE BLOCKS. (Official
Photograph E 1595.)
Blocks of reinforced concrete at an abandoned German
dump near Wytschaete, in Belgium, in January, 1918. Concrete
was used to a considerable extent in the construction of field
defences.
150. THE RAMPARTS OF YPRES. (Official Photograph
E 4607.)
Australian troops resting near the famous moat and ram-
parts of Ypres, on 19th September, 1917, the day prior to the
entry of the Australian troops into the Third Battle of Ypres.
Ypres is a very old town that reached its prime in the four-
teenth century, when its population numbered 200,000, and
it held its own with Bruges and Ghent. In 1914 its popu-
lation was only a tenth of this number. Ypres figures largely
in the military history of Flanders, and historians record
that the English soldiers of a century ago had as much
difficulty in, and as many variations of. the pronunciation
of its name as those who served in Flanders during the
recent war.
151. “ HELL-FIRE CORNER”—AND APPROPRIATELY
NAMED. (Official Photograph E 1889.)
” Hell-fire Corner,” on the Menin Road, in the Ypres Sector,
m Belgium. This well-named locality was under direct
observation, and was accurately registered by the German
artillery. It was always taken at the trot. The surrounding
wreckage bore eloquent testimony to the fate of those who
aid not move quickly enough or were taken unawares.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


You can Purchase Reproductions in Color of the Battle Pictures, by
Official War Artists on Exhibition in Main Hall. See page 82.
152. IN FLANDERS FIELDS.” (Official Photograph E 844.)
Looking across flooded shell craters to the Menin Road, on
aBth September, 1917, showing horse and motor transport
taking supplies through the desolate area beyond Ypres to
the fighting troops in the forward zone. Menin Road was
the main communication in the Australians’ sector. It was
frequently shelled by the Germans, especially at night, when
the movement along it was heaviest. As a result, it was
lined on each side with wrecked vehicles and dead horses.
153. “ CARPETED WITH SHELLS.” (Official Photograph
E 1890.)
“ The whole scene behind our infantry is massed with guns
and carpeted with shells.” A battery of 8-inch howitzers
(Ist Australian Siege Battery), near Gordon House, in the
Ypres sector, in Belgium, on 25th September, 1917, with
shells of an adjacent 9.2-inch battery dumped in the fore-
ground. There were great concentrations of artillery in this
area, and the shell-torn ground bore eloquent testimony to the
intensity of the fire.
154. HOPEFUL LEWIS GUNNERS. (Official Photograph
E 740.)
A labour company machine gun post on the lookout for
enemy aeroplanes, near Chateau Wood, in the Ypres salient,
in Belgium, on 20th September, 1917. For a long time posts
such as this were established more in hope than in expecta-
tion of results, but as the war progressed sighting devices
were evolved which made the Lewis gun a formidable anti-
aircraft weapon.
155. DEATH’S MESSENGER. (Official Photograph E 737.)
Taking shelter from a heavy shell-burst at Glencorse Wood,
in the Ypres Salient, on 20th September, 1917. Some diggers
are dropping into shell holes, and others running to shelter
ahead, not to avoid the shell which is shown bursting (it
was too late then!) but the further shells they knew would
follow, or perhaps could hear on their way.
156—MAINTAINING COMMUNICATION. (Official Photo-
graph E 798.)
Signal engineers, with a reel of cable, leaving a signal
office on Westhoek Ridge, in the Ypres sector, in Belgium,
to lay a surface telephone line to a forward unit, during the
battle of Zonnebeke, on 26th September, 1917. Buried cable
routes were mainly relied on, but when these failed through
shell fire, surface lines were run out as a temporary measure
until communictaion by the buried lines was restored.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Copies of these Photographs prepared in Natural Color may be
Purchased. See Page 59.
157. FOR THE FATHERLAND. (Official Photograph E 765.)
German dead along their front line posts near Hannebeek,
after its capture in the Battle of Menin Road, on 20th Sep-
tember, 1917. The sth, 6th and 7th Brigades advanced over
this area from Westhoek Ridge, which faintly shows in the
distance.
158. —CAGED. (Official Photograph E 835.)
German prisoners in the compound at Hoograaf, in the
Ypres Sector, in Belgium, on Sth October, 19x7, captured as
the result of the Australian advance the day before, at Brood-
seinde Ridge. In this attack the Ist, 2nd and 3rd Divisions
fought alongside each other. By a strange coincidence, the
Germans had also planned an attack, to commence a few
minutes later than the Australians’, who found them lining
up in No Man’s Land, and quickly disposed of them.
159. —SHELTER OF A SORT. (Official Photograph E 839.)
Medical details of the 45th Battalion sheltering in a trench
at Anzac Ridge, in the Ypres sector, in Belgium, on 28th
September, 1917.
160. AN ADVANCED DRESSING STATION. (Official
Photograph E 714.)
A stretcher case being attended to at an advanced dressing
station of the 3rd Australian Field Ambulance, near the
Menin Road, at Ypres, on 20th September, 1917. On this
day the Ist and 2nd Australian and some British divisions
made a. notable advance, in the course of which were
wounded the men receiving treatment in this dressing station.
161. TIRED, BUT HAPPY. (Official Photograph E 843.)
A scene along the Ypres Road, showing a tired Battalion
coming out to rest, on 28th September, 1917, after participat-
ing in the fierce fighting during the Third Battle of Ypres.
The main thoroughfare to Ypres is one of the most beauti-
ful roads in the world, being lined by avenues of glorious
trees.
162. THE HEART OF THE WAR. (Official Photograph
E 1394.)
A scene outside the famous Menin Gate, situated on the
Menin Road at the eastern entrance to Ypres, in Belgium,
on 20th September, 1917, the day when the Australian troops
of the Ist and 2nd Divisions, by their attacks in the vicinity of
Glencorse Wood and Nonne Bosschen “ wove a fresh and
brilliant strand into the traditions of the Imperial Armies.”
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


You can buy Copies of these Photographs. See page 59.
163. TELLING THE LATEST. (Official Photograph E 1223.)
Members of the ist Australian Division around a fire in a
billet at Ypres in October, 1917, listening to “ the latest ot
one of their comrades just back from Pans leave. It is a
typical scene, for billet life with the Australian was as cheer-
ful as his fighting was terribly earnest. This photograph
has been exhibited in a number of cities and towns in
Australia, and, judging by the copies sold, it has everywhere
been the most popular photograph in the exhibitions.
164. THEIR NAME LIVETH FOR EVERMORE.” (Offi-
cial Photograph E 848.)
A view of the military section of the graveyard in the village
of Vlamertinghe, near Ypres, in Belgium, on 3rd October,
1917. At the head of each grave is a simple wooden cross,
with the brief inscription, “ Here lies a British soldier.
R.1.P.” These have since been replaced with permanent
headstones.
165. TAKING AMMUNITION TO THE GUNS. (Official
Photograph E 829.)
A silhouette of Australian artillery limbers, loaded with
ammunition, proceeding along the Ypres Road with ammuni-
tion for guns in the forward areas.
166. MOBILIZED LONDON ’BUSES. (Official Photograph
E 1102.)
’Buses conveying the 2nd Australian Division to the front,
in the Ypres Sector, passing along the road near Rening-
helst, on 26th October, 1917. In pre-war days these ’buses
formed part of the London transport system. Like many
of their passengers, they were mobilised and did useful work
in France. They were particularly valuable in emergencies
necessitating the rapid movement of troops.
167. A POWERFUL FRIEND. (Official Photograph E 1210.)
“Hilda,” a 12-inch howitzer, on Railway Hill, in the Ypres
sector, in November, 1917- “Hilda” was accustomed to
taking up different positions on the railway line, and firing
on special targets in the enemy territory.
168. ROAD CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL. (Official Photo-
graph E 991.)
Heavy timber being dumped from lorries near Hooge, on
12th October, 1917, for use in construction of the corduroy
roads put down in the Ypres Sector.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


There are 40,000 Photographs from which to select. Enquire at Counter.
169 TRENCH FEET. (Official Photograph E 939.)
Men of the 40th Battalion having their feet attended to at
Dragoon Farm, near Ypres, on 14th October, 1917. after
several days’ fighting in the mud, during the Battle of
Passchendaele. The chief enemy to be fought during the
winter was trench feet. Elaborate precautions were taken
to keep the men fit. These included the regular supply of
dry socks, hot food, rubbing, frequent inspections, and so on.
170— A FIELD OPERATING THEATRE. (Official Photo-
graph E 1304.)
The photograph was taken in the xst Australian Casualty
Clearing Station, at Outtersteene, in November, 1917. Of
the units of the medical service having a staff of nurses, the
casualty clearing station is the one which works closest to
the front line. Its function is to receive the wounded and
prepare them for and load them into the hospital train,
which conveys them to the base hospital.
171— TRANSPORTING WOUNDED. (Official Photograph
E 886.)
Members of the sth Australian Field Ambulance bringing in
wounded during the Australian attack at Broodseinde Ridge,
in the Ypres Sector, in Belgium, on 4th October, 1917. This
photograph, taken between Ideal House and Westhoek,
shows the useful light railway by which the majority of the
casualties of that sector were transported to Westhoek
Ridge, being taken from there by horse ambulance back to
Birr Cross Roads, from which loading post they were re-
moved in motor ambulances to the advanced dressing
stations on the Menin Road.
172. —THE ROLL CALL. (Official Photograph E 4521.)
Calling the Roll of “A ” Company, 40th Battalion, at
Dragoon Farm, near Ypres, on 14th October, 1917, to check
the casualties suffered during the fight for Broodseinde
Ridge.
173. —IDIOT CORNER. (Official Photograph E 1480.)
Men and pack mules rounding Idiot Corner, on Westhoek
Ridge, in Belgium, en route to the forward area, in November,
1917. To follow the duckboard or corduroy track was to be
seen silhouetted against the skyline, both from the Australian
position and the enemy’s—before he was driven from the
Broodseinde Ridge. But the mud on either side forced the
troops to run the gauntlet of the German fire. At this point
many waggons and guns were wrecked by the constant shell
fire, and others were lost in the muddy quagmires on either
side. Indeed, one vehicle sank out of sight in the ooze a
little to'the right of the picture.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


The Names of Soldiers in these War Photographs are Recorded and
Indexed. Enquire at Counter.
*74.—THE CORDUROY ROAD. (Official Photograph E 800.)
Men of the 2nd Australian Pioneer Battalion engaged in
putting down a corduroy road through Chateau Wood, To
the right of the road will be noticed a small ammunition
dump, while pack-horses, with 18-pounder ammunition, are
leaving the road to struggle across country to a battery
position.
175. —THE R.A.P. (Official Photograph E 1202.)
An advanced aid post in a pill-box near Zonnebeke Station,
to which the wounded were carried from the Battle of Pas-
schendaele, on 12th October, 1917. The captured pill-boxes
made admirable shelters for the wounded.
176. —A GERMAN PILL-BOX. (Official Photograph E 760.)
- A German concrete shelter near Hannebeek, photographed
on 20th September, 1917. As a result of their experience on
the Somme, the Germans were forced to the conclusion that
lines of defences were not impregnable. They therefore
adopted a system of defence in depth, in which whole areas
were fortified. In this new system the chief feature was the
pill-box, a small concrete fort, capable of holding twelve to
forty men, and proof against all but the shells of the heaviest
guns. This new system, where the German defenders were
scattered over areas, instead of along clearly defined trench
lines, made it more difficult for the artillery to support an
attack, and gave German counter-attacks a chance of success.
The British solution was to cover the infantry by a creeping
barrage, which allowed them to fall upon a pill-box before
the garrison could get into action; to train infantry in special
methods of reduction; and to consolidate in depth, so that
at least a part of the ground gained might be held.
SECTION VII.
FRANCE. 1918.
177.—COPIED FROM THE ENEMY. (Official Photograph
E 2346.)
Australian engineers, of the ist Army Troops Company,
completing the roof of a concrete pill-box, at Wytschaete,
in March, 1918. The camouflage netting screens the work
from enemy observation. Along the British front the winter
of 19J7-18 was spent in building defences against the Ger-
man offensive, expected in the spring. In their area the
Australians erected a number of concrete forts, similar to
the German pill-boxes.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter hear the Entrance.


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. No. 58. “Australian Light Horse.” Official Photograph B1510.X
See description on page 71


Copyright by Australian War Memorial Museum. No. 89. “ Off on a Bombing Raid.” Official Photograph No. E5989 (composite).
See description on Page 76.


Are you interested in Bronze Statuettes? See Page 89.
178. BACK TO THE OLD LINE. (Official Photograph
E 1860.)
When the Germans broke through near St. Quentin, in
March, 1918, the only Australian unit in the area was the
2nd Tunnelling Company. In the face of overwhelming
numbers, the British forces commenced falling back. The
tunnellers, lacking transport, had to remove their kit and
stores in relays. This photograph shows some members of
the company guarding their equipment, waiting for the
lorries to return. This was at Le Sars, the position from
which the “Germans commenced their withdrawal to the
Hindenburg Line in the spring of the previous year.
179. AUSTRALIAN SCOUTS. (Official Photograph E 1877.)
A flight of Australian scouting machines at Bruay, in France,
on 24th March, 1918, ready to start on a bombing trip over
the enemy lines. At this time the German advance was in
progress, and the Australian airmen assisted the Royal Air
Force in bombing German transport and troops.
180. IN RESERVE, NEAR BRESLE. (Official Photograph
E 1871.)
Australians of the 4th Division in reserve near Bresle Wood,
fatigued after their hurried move to the Somme to defend
Amiens, taking a short spell behind a bank in an open field,
on 28th March, 1918.
181. WATCHING THEIR HOME GO SKYWARDS. (Offi-
cial Photograph E 2088.)
The shelling of the 9th Battalion billets, in the reserve line,
at Borre, in Northern France, on 17th April, 1918, when the
men were forced to leave their billets and take up a position
at a safe distance in the open fields. While the photograph
was being taken, two men were killed in the act of leaving
the building.
182. TYPICAL WINTER CONDITIONS. (Official Photo-
graph E 1497.)
Walking knee-deep in slimy mud along a communication
trench at La Bassee Ville, forward of Messines, in January,
1918. The photograph fairly illustrates the conditions en-
countered in the trenches in this low-lying area during the
winter.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


You can Purchase Reproductions in Color of the Battle Pictures, by
Official War Artists on Exhibition in Main Hall. See page 82.
183. A DUGOUT IN THE MAKING. (Official Photograph
E 2094.)
Miners of the Ist Australian Tunnelling Company excavat-
ing dug-outs, 25 feet underground, at Hooge. On the West-
ern Front the three Australian tunnelling companies were
constantly employed in mining, constructing dug-outs, and
gun positions, boring and fighting underground. It was
seldom, however,' that they were worked with the other arms
of the Australian forces.
184. AT A BOMB-STOP. (Official Photograph E 2834.)
A bomb-stop, within, 40 yards of the enemy, in the newly-
captured trenches near Morlancourt, in France, the farthest
point reached in the advance of the 15th Australian Infantry
Brigade (assisted by a detachment of Americans) on 9th
July, 1918. During this period, by a series of similar en-
gagements, the Australians prepared the way for the great
Somme advance, which commenced a month later. “ Bomb-
stop ” was the military term for a barrrier built in a trench,
the whole of which was not captured, as an obstacle to the
enemy’s counter-attack.
185. DRIVEN FROM HOME. (Official Photograph E 2037.)
Men of the 3rd Australian Infantry Brigade in the fields
near the village of Borre, on 17th April, 1918. Just prior to
the taking of the photograph, they were in occupation of the
house seen in the background, but the enemy’s sudden bom-
bardment of the vicinity with incendiary, gas and high ex-
plosive shells caused them to seek safety clear of the village.
The Ist Australian Division, to which these men belonged,
had been moved to the Amiens Sector, only to be hurried
back to the Hazebrouck area, to meet a new German thrust.
186. AN AUSTRALIAN TOCK-EMMA. (Official Photo-
graph E 2429.)
A trench mortar of the 3rd Australian Medium Trench Mor-
tar Battery in action at Vi)le-sur-Ancre, in France, on 29th
May, 1918.' The German front line was only 400 yards
beyond this farmhouse.
187. —GASSED. (Official Photograph E 4849.)
Australians, suffering from the effects of gas, walking down
in groups from the front line, near Monument Wood, to a
first-aid post, near Villers-Bretonneux, on 27th May, 1918.
188. A FOOTBRIDGE ACROSS THE SOMME. (Official
Photograph E 2364.)
Australian troops, on 24th May, 1918, encamped in a pleasant
part of the Somme Valley, alongside the canal, near Hame-
let. The photograph shows a footbridge constructed by the
Australian engineers for the passage of infantry operating
in the sector.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Copies of these Photographs prepared in Natural Color may be
Purchased. See Page 59.
189. BETWEEN PEAR TRENCH AND HAMEL. (Official
Photograph E 2704.)
Looking towards Hamel, along the communication trench
running from the village to Pear Trench, over the fiercely
contested ground won from the enemy in the Australian
attack of the 4th July, 1918. The photograph, taken next
day, shows the bodies of two German machine-gunners,
bayoneted during the fighting, and the village being shelled
by the enemy.
190. AUSTRALIAN BARRAGE AT HAMEL. (Official
Photograph E 2632.)
The Australian barrage on enemy territory, to assist the
attack on Hamel, on 4th July, 1918, by the 4th, 6th, and nth
Infantry Brigades, assisted by a battalion of Americans.
The photograph was taken from the high ground above
Sailly-le-Sec. The attack was launched before dawn. Later
in the day the enemy was harassed with shell-fire and smoke
screens, under the cover of which the Australians consoli-
dated.
191. THE PURSUIT COMMENCES. (Official Photograph
E 2791.)
Members of the 15th Infantry Brigade, having waited two
hours after the capture of the first objective, on Bth August,
1918, advance over a hill near Warfusee-Abancourt, in pur-
suit of the retreating enemy. The presence of the artillery
with the infantry was due to the somewhat novel decision
of the Australian Corps Commander to place an artillery
brigade under the orders of the infantry brigade com-
manders, for this attack.
192. ANXIOUS MOMENTS. (Official Photograph E 3017.)
German prisoners, taken during the Australian advance along
the Somme on Bth August, 1918, proceeding up a hill near
Morcourt, in France, in charge of a single Australian. Ihe
prisoners are looking anxiously oyer their shoulders to the
hills in the background, over which the German guns are
shooting at any movement in the Australian area noticed
from an observation balloon.
193. MOPPING-UP MACHINE GUNS. (Official Photograph
E 2881.)
Front line skirmishers, assisted by a tank, working with
Canadian troops, dislodging some enemy machine-gunners
from a hedge, during the attack towards Lihotis, on ioth
August, 1918. Some difficulty was experienced in obtaining
this photograph, owing to machine-gun fire from the trees
on the skyline.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


You can buy Copies of these Photographs. See page 59.
194. CHURCH. (Official Photo-
graph E 2155.)
A picturesque view of the ruined tower of the church of
Villers-Bretonneux, in France, in May, 1918.
195. INVESTIGATING GERMAN DUG-OUTS. (Official
Photograph E 3059.)
A daylight patrol of No. 5 Platoon, “B” Company, 9th Batta-
lion, after having advanced about half a mile from their
front line towards Gappy, in France, on 25th August, 1918,
is here seen in the act of challenging a dug-out, which it
was expected to find occupied by the enemy.
196*—FINAL INSTRUCTIONS. (Official Photograph E 2790.)
Lieutenant Downes (29th Battalion) giving the men of his
platoon final instructions, near Warfusee-Abancourt, before
the advance on the second objective commenced on Bth
August. The photograph, which shows the men in a variety
of poses, with their helmets at various rakish angles, sug-
gests the insouciance of the Australian soldier in battle.
The background is obscured by the smoke of heavy shell-
fire.
197. WAITING FOR THE BARRAGE TO LIFT, (Official
Photograph E 3142.)
Members of the 24th Battalion, awaiting the lifting of the
artillery barrage on Mont St. Quentin, on Ist September,
1918, photographed a few minutes before moving out of the
trench to engage in the renewed attack at 1.30 p.m. It was
this attack, following a 30-minute intense bombardment, that
finally won the position.
198. —AT ZERO HOUR. (Official Photograph E 3139.)
A photograph, taken at 1.30 p.m. on Ist September, 1918,
showing members of the 6th Australian Infantry Brigade
moving along a communication trench to renew the assault
upon Mont St. Quentin, which resulted in the final capture
of this highly-important position.
199—THE FINAL RUSH. (Official Photograph E 3104.)
The first wave of “A ” Company, of the 21st Australian
Battalion, advancing in extended order towards Mont St.
Quentin, in France, on Ist September, 1918, after leaving
their trenches to join in the renewed assault by the 23rd and
24th Battalions, at 1.30 p.m. This magnificent assault of the
6th Brigade resulted in the capture of the strongly-defended
enemy The German garrison consisted of Prus-
sian Guard regiments; machine-guns were more numerous
than usual, and the old wire of 1916, in thick belts on the
hill slopes, was a serious obstacle to the attacking troops.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


There are 40,000 Photographs from which to select. Enquire at Counter.
200. THE GAP IN THE WIRE. (Official Photograph E 3149.)
A photograph, taken at Anvil Wood, near Peronne, in
France, on 2nd September, 1918, showing the gap in the
tangled wire through which some of the 53rd Battalion ad-
vanced the day before in the face of heavy machine-gun
fire. In the background a shell is bursting on an old
casualty clearing station, near Quinconce, between Peronne
and Mont St. Quentin.
201. THE NEW FRONT LINE. (Official Photograph E 2887.)
Troops of the nth and 12th Australian Battalions, near Bois
de Crepy, in France, about midday on 10th August, 1918,
smoking cigars salved from captured enemy dug-outs. Half
an hour before the 12th Battalion had passed through the
nth at this point, to press the attack towards Lihons, which
was captured after a desperate struggle.
202. IN ACTION AT BRAY. (Official Photograph E 3114.)
The 108th Howitzer Battery in action at Bray, in France, on
26th August, 1918. The troops of the 3rd Australian Divi-
sion, whom the battery was supporting, were then engaged
beyond Suzanne. Through the final advance, the artillery,
working sometimes in the open, wheel to wheel, among the
crops, sometimes in long, straight rows behind a cut bank,
had continually to change positions. One often saw a
battery commander among the infantry, as they went for-
ward, choosing a position in the evening light, and then at
dawn found the guns there hurling shrapnel at the enemy.
203 RUNNING OUT A TELEGRAPH LINE. Official Photo-
graph E 3265.)
A cable section of the 4th Divisional Signal Company lay-
ing telephone lines with a cable waggon near Vendelles, on
17th September, 1918. The signal service is one of the most
important of the auxiliary services. The continuous and
prompt transmission of orders and information is of vital
importance in the successful conduct of war.
204 BRIDGING A RAILWAY CUTTING. (Official Photo-
graph E 3711.)
A photograph, taken on 27th September, 1918, looking down
the railway cutting near Vendelles, showing members of
the 12th Field Company of Australian Engineers at work on
a bridge being built alongside a destroyed brick arch bridge.
The new structure, which was completed the following day,
had a span of 86 feet and a height of 32 feet. It was built to
take a load of 14 tons, being available to all traffic except
tanks.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


The Names of Soldiers in these War Photographs are Recorded and
Indexed. Enquire at Counter.
205. —“ KAMARAD.” (Official Photograph £3274.)
* »
A photograph showing a party of German soldiers in the
act of surrendering to troops of the 45th Australian Batta-
lion who were advancing beyond Ascension Farm, near Le
Verguier, on 18th September, 1918.
206. ADVANCING AGAINST HINDENBURG LINE. (Offi-
cial Photograph E 3568.)
Troops of the 3rd Australian Division, on Ist October, 1918,
moving forward, near Ronssoy, in France, to relieve
American troops operating in the Le Catelet Sector. They
are here seen passing half a dozen British heavy tanks,
blown up by the “plum pudding” bombs, set in the wire in
front of the section of the Hindenburg Line attacked by the
27th American Division on 29th September, 1918. The
“knocking out” of the supporting tanks, and its failure to
mop up, cost this division dear. The failure threw added
responsibility upon the 3rd Australian Division, which, how-
ever, as a result of skilful leadership and determined fight-
ing, completed the capture of this section of the Hindenburg
Line—the Germans’ last stronghold in France.
207. THE FAMOUS HINDENBURG LINE. (Official Photo-
graph E 3581.)
A section of a trench, which formed part of the Hindenburg
Main Line, near Bony, photographed in October, 1918.
Trench strong points—one of which can be seen in the
photograph—with supports for wooden fire-steps projecting
from them, were very numerous, and mostly strengthened
by huge blocks of concrete. The Germans had spared no
effort to make this line impregnable. It was their “last
ditch,” and soon after they had been driven from it by the
valor of British, Australian and American troops, they
sought the armistice.
208. MECHANICAL TRANSPORT ON THE ROAD.
(Official Photograph E 2186.)
Mechanical transport played an important part in the war.
It is doubtful if the millions of troops engaged could have
been maintained in the field without the fast-moving mech-
anical transport columns.
209. —IN BILLETS. (Official Photograph E 2176.)
Australian soldiers resting in their billet at Querrieu, in
France.
Orders Accepted and Enquiries Answered at Counter near the Entrance.


Inexpensive G ifts.
The German Rifle cartridge
(from which the explosive
has been removed) used in
their construction, lends to
these small articles that
sentimental value so often
lacking in ordinary presents.
The variety caters for all
tastes.
For prices and other particulars apply to
Australian War Memorial Museum,
EXHIBITION BUILDINGS*
MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY.


Are you interested in Bronze Statuettes? See Page 89.
210. A SMOKE BARRAGE. (Official Photograph E 3191.)
The commencement of a smoke barrage put down on sth
September, 1918, to screen the movements of the Australian
infantry, who at that time were crossing the Somme marshes
near La Chapelette, to engage in the fighting beyond Peronne.
The crossing was a difficult and dangerous task, as the
Germans had wisely destroyed all bridges, and their rear-
guards, well armed with machine-guns, fought to the bitter
end.
Sydney: Alfred James Kent, Government Printer— 1927.


Please Read Carefully.
The Australian War Memorial Museum will
be glad to accept further exhibits for the national
collections of war records. When exhibited, the
giver’s name, or that of the member of the R.A.N.
or A.I.F. in whose name the exhibit may be
presented, will be attached.
Any such gifts may be handed in to attendants
or at the Director’s office, or will be collected if
the address is given. An official acknowledgment
will immediately be issued.
The Museum will also be glad to receive
documentary war records of any nature and
photographs. In the case of the latter, if nega-
tives or prints are lent, copies will be made by the
Museum, and the originals safely returned within
three weeks of the date on which received.
It is important that all gifts, whether of
trophies, relics, pictures, photographs, documents,
&c., should be accompanied by an adequate de-
scription. Date, place, and unit are particularly
important details.
Those who have collections which they are
not prepared to give at present are invited to
consider the suggestion that they should bequeath
their collections to the Australian War Memorial
Museum.
The collections in the Museum belong to the
Nation. It is earnestly hoped that all will assist
in preserving and making them as nearly com-
plete as possible.
J. L. TRELOAR, Director.
3rd April, 1925.


Part of the City of Sydney
showing location of the
Belmore
Park
S'-
r
CENTRAL
STATION
Railway Institute
i
(0/ »
x /
Prince Alfred'k/ 1
l! •» /•w I /
S’ Pauls / Park H
k "1
/ /c•• Public .J / 1 '^i J
School
These trams pass the door.
Fftm Circular Quay i Henderson Road, Bay Street, Zetland, Botany,
Alexandria, Daceyville, Roseberry.
From Railway: Cleveland Street, Coogee, Maroubra Junction.
