

\
1
of South Australia
!
*
Australian
An Address to the Electors
SCRYMGOUR AND SONS, PRINTERS, KING WILLIAM STREET
l frs~9/oa.
i
*
t
♦
t






V. L. SOLOMON, Esq., M.P


Biographical Sketch.
Mr. V. L. SOLOMON, M.P.
Mr. Vaiben Louis Solomon, M.P., is a son of the late Hon.
Judah Moss Solomon, M.L.C., who for many years was a member
of the Legislature of this colony, and Mayor of the City of
Adelaide from 1869 to 1870. Mr. V. L. Solomon was
born in Waymouth Street, Adelaide, in May, 1853, and
educated at the late Mr. J. L. Young’s Educational Institu-
tion in this city, and at the Scotch College, Melbourne. Mr.
Solomon spent many years in the Northern Territory, con-
ducted the Northern Territory Times and Gazette , and was
a prominent worker for the advancement of the place, being
connected with almost every institution in the chief town
of the Northern half of the Province. About eight years ago
Mr. Solomon travelled through the colonies lecturing against
the immigration of Chinese, and his views on the independence
of the Northern Territory, and on labor and other questions,
as affecting the Territory, are most pronounced. Mr. Solomon
was returned to the Assembly to represent the Northern
Territory in 1890, and has represented that district ever
since. When a resolution was passed in 1891 in favor of the
appointment of a Government Whip, the choice of the Playford
Government fell upon Mr. Solomon, and he continued in
that office until the Ministry was defeated on a motion of
no-confidence moved by Mr. Holder. When the Downer
Ministry took office a few months later, Mr. Solomon was again
appointed to the position, and he was subsequently asked to
join the Government, but he declined. Mr. Solomon has
taken a prominent part in all important political questions of
the day, and has specially advocated the establishment of the free
interchange of colonial products and manufactures.
SO ifo
11 SEP 1953




AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION.
To the Electors of South Australia.
Ladies and Gentlemen —ln addressing you upon the subject of
Australian Federation, I am deeply impressed with the importance
of the various questions to be dealt with, and feel that their con-
sideration requires and merits the very closest study.
The brief space at my disposal will not permit more than a
passing glance at the history of the Federal movement, and it would,
in my opinion, be unwise to waste precious time upon this portion
of the subject, or in a review of the Constitutions of America,
Canada, and Switzerland, which have been so frequently referred to
and quoted. I will therefore be satisfied with giving you merely
a condensed outline of the Federation movement, and devote the rest
of this address to dealing with the draft bill to constitute the
Commonwealth of Australia, which was agreed upon by the Con-
vention held at Sydney in April, 1891, and the most important pro-
visions of that measure. My reason for adopting this course is
because I feel satisfied that the draft bill alluded to WILL FORM
THE BASIS OF THE TERMS OF FEDERATION, which will
be considered at the forthcoming Convention.
The first practical step towards Federation may fairly be con-
sidered to have been the Conference held in Melbourne in 1890,
when a resolution was agreed to affirming the desirability of a Union
under the Crown.
Subsequently in 1891 the National Australian Convention was
held at Sydney; South Australia being represented by by the Hons.
R. C. Baker, J. H Gordon, J. C. Bray, C. C. Kingston, J. A,
Cockburn, and T. Playford, and Sir John Downer. After six weeks
most careful consideration, a draft Bill to constitute the Common-
wealth of Australia was adopted, and whatever adverse criticism
may be levelled at some of the provisions of that measure, everyone
must admit that the delegates from our own colony, and their
colleagues from the adjoining colonies, deserve our best thanks for
the intelligent manner in which the important question was dealt
with, the spirit of compromise shown by them, and the kindly and
tolerant tone adopted throughout the debates.


The first resolutions submitted to the Convention by Sir Henry
Parkes and agreed to, were as follows :
That in order to establish and secure an enduring foundation
for the structure of a Federal Government, the principles embodied
in the resolutions following be agreed to :
(1) That the powers and privileges and territorial rights of the
several existing colonies shall remain intact, except in
respect to such surrenders as may be agreed upon as
necessary and incidental to the power and authority of the
National Federal Government.
(2) No new state shall be formed by separation from another
state, nor shall any state be formed by the junction of
two or more states or parts of states, without the consent
of the Legislatures of the states concerned, as well as of
the Federal Parliament.
(3) That the trade and intercourse between the Federated
colonies, whether by means of land carriage or coastal
navigation, shall be absolutely free.
(4) That the power and authority to impose customs duties and
duties of excise upon goods the subject of customs duties,
and to offer bounties, shall be exclusively lodged in the
Federal Government and Parliament, subject to such dis-
posal of the revenues thence derived as shall be agreed
upon.
(5) That the military and naval defence of Australia shall be
entrusted to Federal forces, under one command.
(6) That provision should be made in the Federal Constitution
which will enable each State to make such amendments in
its Constitution as may be necessary for the purposes of
the Federation.
Subject to these and other necessary conditions, this Convention
approves of the framing of a Federal Constitution, which shall
establish—
(1) A Parliament, to consist of a Senate and a House of
Representatives, the former consisting of an equal number
of members from each colony, to be elected by a system
which shall provide for the periodical retirement of one-
third of the members, so securing to the body itself a
perpetual existence combined with definite responsibility
to the electors, the latter to be elected by districts formed
on a population basis, and to possess the sole power of
originating all Bills appropriating revenue or imposing
taxation.
(2) A Judiciary, consisting of a Federal Supreme Court, which
shall constitute a High Court of Appeal for Australia*
(3) An Executive, consisting of a Governor-General, and such


persons as may from time to time be appointed as his
advisers.
These resolutions having been approved as a basis, a draft bill
was prepared by a committee appointed for that purpose, and sub-
mitted to the Convention. After careful consideration, long debate,
and some amendment, the draft bill was adopted, and was subse-
quently considered by both branches of the South Australian Legis-
lature.
Before proceeding to discuss the details of the bill, I think it
will be well to deal with the general question of Australian Fede-
ration and its desirability, and in this connection I will first ask the
following questions(l) Is Federation desirable ? (2) Has its
desirability been agreed upon by the people of South Australia ?
There is little doubt in my mind that the majority of thought-
ful people in the colony are favorable to Federation , and although it
must be admitted that the subject has not been as fully discussed and
understood as its importance warrants, there is a strong feeling in
the minds of the people that Federation, upon wise and equitable
lines, will tend to the commercial and social advancement of the
whole of the colonies, increase of their wealth and power, and decrease
of the taxation burdens of the people.
If the electors of South Australia are favorable to this first
proposition, THAT FEDERATION IS DESIRABLE, it only
remains for them to put their best intelligence to work to consider
the terms upon which the proposed union should be entered into,
and in deciding upon the important questions involved, due con-
sideration must be given, not only to what is best for South Aus-
tralia, but what is best, from a broader and more liberal standpoint,
for the whole of Australia.
No union is possible, unless from the very outset each colony is
prepared to meet the others in the most liberal spirit, and so
long as their individual independence is conserved and protected, to
give and take in turn, in order to accomplish this object.
The Draft Commonwealth Bill, the provisions of which I now
propose to submit for your consideration, will probably only form
the ground work of a more perfect measure, which after considera-
tion by the Federal Convention about to be elected, will be sub-
mitted to the Parliaments of the colonies interested, That many
of the details of that measure will undergo material alteration there
is little doubt, and I cannot too earnestly impress upon the electors
of South Australia the utmost importance of choosing representa-
tives who will bring the best intelligence to the work of preparing
a Bill for their consideration, which, whilst conserving the interests
of our own colony, will form a solid foundation upon which an
enduring Federal Constitution will be built. The importance of
this question demands that it should be considered fairly and calmly,
untrammelled by party politics.


As all sections of the community are deeply interested in the
terms of the proposed union, it seems to me both wise and just that
the best talent of the most clear-headed men in the colony should be
chosen for the work. Men who can and will fight for a Federal
Bill which will protect the best interests of South Australia, and
meet with the approval of the whole of the people of the Federat-
ing Colonies.
It will be little use to choose delegates who represent the
opinions of one section of the community only ; such a course might
be flattering to the section represented, but the victory would be
indeed an empty one, and the ultimate result to delay the accom-
plishment of Federation.
The duty now placed in the hands of the electors of South Aus-
tralia is the important one of selecting ten delegates to meet the
chosen representatives of the other colonies, and to draft a scheme
for Australian Federation, which will be fair and just to all the
colonies concerned; not a light task, but one which will exercise all
the best intelligence of those chosen, and in order that you may more
fully appreciate the nature of the work, I will now proceed to the
discussion of the draft Bill agreed upon in 1891.
The preamble of the draft bill sets forth that certain colonies
therein named have agreed to unite in one FEDERAL COMMON-
WEALTH UNDER THE CROWN, and upon this point I think
there can be little difference of opinion, for although we sometimes
hear suggestions of “ Cutting the painter,” I am pleased to think
that the great majority of Australians feel proud of their connection
with Great Britain, and ungrudgingly recognise her fostering care
and protection, under which the colonies of Australasia have made
such marvellous progress. Recognising this view of the position,
the members of the last Convention agreed to the first provision
that the Legislative powers of the Commonwealth should be vested
in a FEDERAL PARLIAMENT, which should consist of HER
MAJESTY, A SENATE, and a HOUSE OF REPRESENTA-
TIVES, and following the custom which has obtained in the whole
of the Australian colonies, provided that the Queen should appoint a
Governor-General as Her representative.
There was some debate upon this point, and an amendment by
Sir George Grey, who sought to place the appointment of the
Governor-General of the Commonwealth in the hands of the people,
was negatived by 35 votes to 3, those voting for the amendment
being the Hons. Dr Cockburn and C. C. Kingston.
After a careful consideration of the manner in which the
elective principle works in the United States, and of the debt of
gratitude due by Australia to the mother country, I am of opinion
that the decision to leave the appointment of the Governor-General
in the hands of Her Majesty was a wise one.


After a number of clauses relating to the opening and dissolution
of Parliament, and other formal details, the Bill proceeds to deal with
the constitution of the Parliament, which is to consist of a Senate
composed of eight members for each of the Federating States, and a
House of Representatives, to be elected on a population basis, each
State having one representative for every 30,000 of its population.
Dealing with the Senate first, it is provided that the members
shall be chosen by the Houses of Parliament of the several States;
shall hold office for a term of six years, except in the case of the
first Senate, half the members of which shall retire at the expiration
of three years.
You will agree with me I think, that the provision for the
equal representation of each State in the Senate, is a wise and just
one; and I think you will also agree that the election of Senators
should be placed in the hands of the people, and not in that of the
Parliaments of the day. You will recognise that the clause in the
draft bill is a dangerous one, and that it might probably result in
the election of the whole of the Senators by the strongest party in
Parliament, to represent only one section of the community, instead
of the interests of the whole colony.
To make my meaning more clear, let us imagine for one
moment that a Federal Bill has been agreed upon, and the duty of
electing eight Senators to represent South Australia devolved upon the
present Parliament. Ido not think there would be much difficulty in
prophesying what the result of such an election would be, and
although it might be highly satisfactory to the supporters of the
present Government, it would not be so to the general body of
electors of the colony. If, on the other hand, a more Conservative
party held the reins of Government, and had the dominant power
in the Legislature, the result of the selection of Senators by such a
Parliament would be equally unsatisfactory to the more Democratic
sections of the community. I am, therefore, in favor of the election
of the Senators by the WHOLE OF THE ELECTORS OF THE
PROVINCE on the basis of adult suffrage.
The only qualifications provided for a Senator in the draft bill
are—lst, that he must be 30 years of age; 2nd, be entitled to vote
in some State for the election of members of the House of Repre-
sentatives ; 3rd, must have been resident for five years within the
limits of the Commonwealth; 4th, must be a natural born subject
of the Queen, or naturalized in Great Britain or one of the colonies.
The House of Representatives will, according to the draft bill,
be composed of members elected for three years by the States, each
State being entitled to return ONE MEMBER FOR EVERY
30,000 OF ITS POPULATION, provided only that in the case of
any colony, until the number of its people is such as to entitle it to
four representatives, such State shall have four. The qualification


of electors for the House of Representatives being the same as the
qualification of electors of the more numerous House of Parliament
of the State.
Under these provisions I find that in the event of the colonies of
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, Tasmania,
and Western Australia agreeing to federate, New South Wales would
be entitled to return 42 members, Victoria 39, Queensland 15,
South Australia 11, Western Australia 4, and Tasmania 5; that
would give 81 members to Victoria and New South Wales com-
bined, whilst the other four colonies would only return 35. This
form of representation on a population basis seems to me eminently
LNSATISFACTORY, for although the numerical strength of the
two neighboring colonies is entitled to reasonable representation,
such a predominance of voting power IN THE HOUSE WHICH
WILL HAVE TO DEAL WITH THE LEVYING OE TAXA-
TION AND THE EXPENDITURE OF REVENUE, would be
extremely dangerous.
I admit at once that Victoria and New South Wales are justly
entitled to return a larger number of members to the popular House
than the other colonies, but I would suggest a sliding scale, which,
in my opinion, would be more equitable to all the colonies concerned.
MY PROPOSAL is that each colony should have a right to return
six members for the first 100,000 of the population, three members
for the second 100,000, two members for the third 100,000, and one
member for every additional 100,000. Upon this basis, New South
Wales and Victoria would return 20 members each, Queensland 12
members, South Australia 11 members, Tasmania 6 members, and
Western Australia 6 members, so that even under this scheme Vic-
toria and New South Wales combined, would return 40 members as
against 35 for the remaining four colonies. I fully anticipate
that Victoria and New South Wales will make a strong effort to re-
tain the number of representatives stipulated for in the dratt bill,
but I confidently affirm that the scale of representation I have sug-
gested is a much more equitable one. In regard to the qualification of
members of the House of Representatives, the draft Bill provides
that the candidate shall be an elector in some State, of the full age
of 21 years, have been resident for three years within the limits of
the Commonwealth, and be a natural born or naturalized subject of
Her Majesty.
I now come to the most important provisions of the bill
adopted by the last Federal Convention, namely, the POWERS
WHICH IT IS PROPOSED SHOULD BE GIVEN OVER
BY THE STATES OR COLONIES TO THE FEDERAL PAR-
LIAMENT, the most important of which are as follows :
First in importance, I consider, the control of the regulation of
trade and commerce, imposition of uniform customs duties and
establishment of freetrade between the colonies. In this connec-


tion, the various colonies have to consider the advantages and
disadvantages which may arise from the assimilation of the tariffs,
and the establishment of intercolonial freetrade. I HAVE FOR
MANY YEARS EARNESTLY ADVOCATED THE REMOVAL
OF THE VEXATIOUS BORDER DUTIES UPON THE PRO-
DUCTS AND MANUFACTURES OF THE VARIOUS
COLONIES, and although I can conceive that some degree of
hardship may at first be felt by a few producers and manu-
facturers, I believe that the immense benefit to the many will far
outweigh the consideration of such cases.
The results of a uniform tariff against the outside world, and
freetrade across the imaginary border lines of our colonies cannot
well be estimated, and when we consider the limited market pro-
vided by South Australia’s 360,000 population, and compare it with
the market of the whole of the Australian Colonies with their popu-
lation of three and a half millions of people, it must be admitted that
the opening of such enlarged outlets for our produce and manufac-
tures will lead to increased general prosperity.
Under our present system, barriers have been erected which
tend to check enterprise, hamper trade, and foster the cultivation of
unsuitable industries ; let these barriers be removed, and each colony
will be able to produce and manufacture the products best suited to
its soil, climate, and natural conditions, FINDING AN UN-
LIMITED MARKET OUTSIDE OF ITS OWN BORDERS, FREE
FROM THE PARALYSING INFLUENCES OF HOSTILE BOR-
DER DUTIES. The establishment of a uniform tariff against the
outside world will, in my opinion, render it unnecessary to lock up
such immense sums as are now virtually sunk in stocks of similar
foreign products and manufactures, and will enable the volume of
trade of the whole of the colonies to be conducted with considerably
smaller working capital. To the uninitiated this may not appear to
be a very important point, but to those who are well versed in com-
mercial business, the immense saving in interest will be at once
apparent. Ido not imagine that Intercolonial freetrade will be
brought about immediately, but I feel assured that there can be no
Federation of a useful or lasting nature until the unnatural barriers
to Intercolonial Commerce have been removed.
It is further proposed to give the Federal Government power
to raise money by any other system of taxation, but I feel satisfied
that such a power MUST BE CAREFULLY SAFEGUARDED,,
and, perhaps, limited to the raising of revenue in times of urgency,
for defence, or other similar Federal purposes.
If it is decided that the Federal Parliament should take over
the whole of the revenue from customs, it will, as pointed out at the
recent Convention, have control of from seven to eight millions of
money; while the expenditure on other public departments, which
it is proposed to hand over to the Federal Parliament, will only


amount to about £2,500,000, so that there would be, roughly, about
£5,000,000 surplus to hand back to the contributing colonies. This
question of giving such an immense revenue to the Federal Parlia-
ment has been debated by the most able men in the colonies. Some
of them have urged that it would be better to establish a uniform
tariff, and permit each colony to still collect its customs revenue, and
to pay their proportion of the cost of Federal Government according
to their population. On the other hand, it has been pointed out that
THIS SYSTEM HAS BEEN TRIED IN OTHER COUNTRIES,
AND FAILED, and that, if we are to have Federation, we must
commence by fully trusting the Federal Parliament.
Another suggestion in reference to dealing with this surplus
revenue is that the Federal Parliament should take over a portion, or
the whole, of the bonded debt of each colony, and pay the interest
thereon from the surplus customs revenue.
I am inclined to think that a modification of the latter sugges-
tion would perhaps be the simplest mode of dealing with this some-
what difficult question, and, as it is contemplated by those who are
most strongly in favour of Federation, that the whole of the national
debt of the Federating colonies should be dealt with by the Federal
Parliament, with a view to its consolidation, and the consequent
saving of a large amount of interest, 1 feel sure that this proposal will
meet with considerable favour. According to statistics for the
year 1894-5, the indebtedness of the six colonies was as follows :
New South Wales, £56,451,369; Queensland, £31,873,934;
South Australia, £22,304,332; Tasmania, £7,414,345; Victoria,
£46,939,328; Western Australia, £3,992,681, or a total of
£168,975,989.
The nominal rate of interest at present being paid by the
colonies for their existing loans ranges from 3-78 per cent, in the
colony oi New South Wales to 4*04 per cent, in the colony of South
Australia, the average rate being approximately 375 per cent. I
think it may be confidently estimated that the Federal Parliament
would by conversion of the existing debt of £169,000,000, in round
figures, be easily able to effect a saving of per cent, interest or
about £845,000 per annum, a sum which would go a long way
towards lightening the burden of taxation. In estimating this
small saving of per cent., I think we would be allowing a very
fair margin to make up for the premiums that would have to be
paid to secure a conversion of the loan at a comparatively early
The Post and Telegraph Service is another branch which it is
proposed to hand over to the Federal Parliament, and on this ques-
tion I would prefer to hear fuller discussion before expressing a
definite opinion. At first glance it appears to me that the only
advantage to be’gained by placing it under the Federal Parliament
would be that the Transcontinental Telegraph line, which has cost


South Australia such an immense sum of money, and from which
the whole of the colonies reap equal benefits without contributing
to South Australia’s expenditure on construction, would be handed
over to the Federal Parliament, and this colony would be reimbursed
for its outlay.
The Military and Naval defence of Australia will also be
placed in the hands of the Federal Parliament, and by this means a
greater degree of efficiency will be attained in both branches of the
service, and a large saving made in the cost of maintenance.
I do not consider that Australia has much to fear from foreign
enemies, but while I see no necessity for the establishment of an ex-
pensive navy and standing army, I think that it is wise for the
whole of the defences to be placed in the hands of one administrative
power.
Navigation and Shipping, Beacons and Ocean Lighthouses, and
Quarantine are all to be controlled by the Federal Parliament.
Currency, Coinage and Legal Tender, the Incorporation of Banks
and issue of paper money will also be handed to the same authority,
and I think there can be little doubt that the need of a uni-
form system in dealing with the incorporation of banks and con-
trolling their business, has been amply demonstrated during the past
few disastrous years.
The law relating to Copyrights, Patents, Trade Marks, and Natura-
lization of Aliens, will also benefit by being handed over to the
same authority ; all these matters require bringing into line, es-
pecially those which deal with protective Patents and Naturalization.
It is also proposed that the Federal Parliament shall have the
control of all railways, with respect to transport, for the purposes of
the Commonwealth, that is to say, that in case of war they would
have the right to use the railways of all the colonies for defence
purposes. It has also been suggested that with a view of preventing
a continuance of a cut-throat policy of differential rates in rival
states or colonies, that the Commonwealth shall take over THE
WHOLE OF THE RAILWAY SYSTEMS, and it has been
pointed out in this connection that the benefits of free interchange,
which would be obtained by the abolition of intercolonial customs,
might be materially interfered with, if not absolutely nullified, by
the continuance of unfair differential tariffs on the railways.
This question of nationalising the whole of the railways
requires most serious thought, and a careful analysis of the
railway accounts of each colony. I find by the statistics
that the railways of the six colonies of Australia (10,891
miles in length) have cost .£112,293,221, of which £107,568,378
has been paid for out of loan money, carrying an annual
payment of interest amounting to £4,286,603, while the nett
earnings of the railways only amount to £3,272,642. Thus
you will see that the working of the railways involves A LOSS OF


A MILLION STERLING PER ANNUM in round numbers. The
working expenses amount to £4.579,806, but it is extremely prob-
able that if the whole of the lines were under one careful adminis-
tration, a substantial saving might be effected. I think I am
therefore justified in waiting for further information before advocating
the nationalization of our railways.
LAST, but not least, the Bill deals with the appointment of a
Federal Court of Appeal, the decision of which will be final. I
need hardly point out that the establishment of such a tribunal will
prevent the costly and vexatious appeals to the Privy Council.
Another important question, which it is proposed to delegate to
the Federal Parliament, is the control of river navigation, and I hardly
think there can be any doubt as to the desirableness of referring such a
delicate and difficult question to the Parliament of the Common-
wealth.
The framing of laws to deal with the question of the admission
of undesirable emigrants to Australia is also very wisely placed in
the hands of the Federal Parliament. At present we have
'restrictive legislation in reference to the Chinese, and it is, in my
opinion, equally important that the Federal Parliament should have
power to enact uniform legislation to prevent the influx of other
undesirable people.
I have now touched upon the main points involved in the pro-
posed Federation, the most important, in my opinion, being :— lst.
The constitution of the Parliament of the Commonwealth. 2nd.
The representation of the States, and their manner of election.
3rd. The powers which it is proposed to vest in the Parliament of
the Commonwealth.
As to the constitution of the Parliament, it is based partly on
the American Constitution and partly on existing Australian Con-
stitutions, the best portions of each having been adopted, and I
think the result is satisfactory; at any rate, it forms the ground-
work of a sufficiently elastic Federation to leave room for its im-
provement in years to come.
The most important question to us, as South Australians, is
THE JUST AND EQUITABLE REPRESENTATION OF
EACH COLONY in the Parliament of the Commonwealth, WITH-
OUT WHICH FEDERATION HAD BETTER BE LEFT
ALONE. Now, let us look at this question in relation to the
powers which it is proposed to hand over to the Federal Parlia-
ment. The proposed representation in the Senate by eight members
from each colony SEEMS PERFECTLY FAIR, but this will
entirely depend upon the amount of power given to the Senate. I
have already expressed my opinion that the constitution of the
House of Representatives proposed in the draft Bill, gives too great
a predominance to Victoria and New South Wales, MORE
ESPECIALLY AS THE RIGHT TO INTRODUCE AND


AMEND MONEY BILLS is entirely retained by the House of
Representatives, the Senate having only the right to veto money
bills or suggest amendment. The importance of this question
cannot be overestimated, for however much we may be inclined to
trust the neighboring colonies in questions of smaller moment, we
should have every safeguard in dealing with the questions of
taxation and expenditure of revenue. There are two ways in which
the interests of the smaller colonies, in regard to financial questions,
can be protected—the first is to give the Senate equal powers with
the House of Representatives in dealing with money bills, the other
is to increase the representation of the smaller colonies in the House
of Representatives. I have now dealt with the subject of Federation
from its most important standpoints. I have gone some-
what into detail, because I desire to put all the information
possible before the electors, with the hope of arousing a
genuine interest in the Federation question, and discussion,
which must prove of educational value. We are not now engaged
upon the work of framing a Federal Constitution—that you will
have to leave to your representatives, and after they have dealt with
it, and the measure, which they prepare, has been thrashed out in
your Parliament, you will then have an opportunity of saying
whether you will accept the scheme of Federation offered, or reject
it. In concluding, I would like to point out to you once more (Ist)
that the question is one which should not be mixed up with party
politics; (2nd) that your representatives, whoever they may be,
cannot be bound down to any special line of action, as it is certain
that they will have to give and take in matters of detail. It
remains for you to choose men who you think are fitted for the
work of framing a Constitution for your approval. I will only add
that if I am fortunate enough to be chosen as one of your repre-
sentatives, the work entrusted to me will have my most earnest and
•careful thought, and while endeavoring to assist in framing a Con-
stitution of which Australians may be proud, I will not forget to
safeguard the best interests of South Australia, my native land.
I am, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Yours faithfully,
V. L. SOLOMON.
Adelaide, February Ist, 1897.
NOTE.—ELECTORS ARE PARTICULARLY REQUESTED
TO NOTE THAT THEY MUST VOTE POR TEN CANDI-
DATES, AND NO MORE OR LESS, OR THEIR VOTE
WILL BE INFORMAL.


JAfp
Bi6U(O
ISntQ'v
SCRYMGOUR AND SONS, PRINTERS,
ADELAIDE.


1508
00543874


