

AUSTRALI AN
Co ffee, Spice, Rice and Oatmeal Mills
90 BOURKE STREET WEST.
OFFICES:
Front Elevation to Bourke Street.
MILLS:
At rear of Offices in Bourke Street.
MELNOUREN, August I, 1877.
In 1872 we had the pleasure of addressing you under circumstances somewhat similar to
the present. In that year we completed the erection of our first Oatmeal Mill, and signified our intention
of establishing ourselves as Oatmeal Millers, in connection with our other business as Coffee and Spice
Merchants. Feeling confident that we were able to supply the Trade with a first-class article, at a much




lower price than that which had ruled the Melbourne market for years previous, we gave the undertaking our
closest attention, bestowed upon it our best services, and our friends were not slow to recognize the
efforts put forth, as was shown by the difficulty we experienced in keeping pace with their numerous and
extensive orders.
On the present occasion we have to intimate that, with a very trifling exception, the entire of the
Old Premises in which we carried on business for the many past years, are now wholly removed, and that a
new and splendid pile of bij/ldings have been erected on their site, an engraving of which we herewith
attach, with our best respects.
We have furnished our New Premises with Mills, Machinery, and appliances of the latest, the best,
and most approved construction, comprising new OATMEAL MILLS, Improved RICE SHELLING, and
Dressing Mills, Barley Mills, Chicory Mill, Spice Mills, Steam Coffee Mills, and Four
Coffee Roasting Cylinders.
With our new and extensive Stock of Plant and Machinery, we may with confidence say, we were
never in a better position for serving our Customers to their advantage, nor conducting our business with
satisfaction to ourselves, than at the present time. But while steadily keeping in view the many advantages
to be gained by using only the most approved appliances, we have on the other hand not overlooked the
equally important fact, that neither Merchant nor Manufacturer can be expected to hold his own with
satisfaction, or sell to advantage, unless he himself buys from first-hands, and in the best markets. Acting
on this principle, we have for the past few years imported on our own account, direct, the greater portion
of our Eastern products, and having connected ourselves with Houses of acknowledged standing, whose
business is similar to our own, in London, Colombo, Singapore, Java, Japan, and other parts in the East,
we have been able to conclude arrangements for keeping ourselves regularly advised with the state of the
markets, with the view of availing ourselves of any advantage that may occur when buying Eastern
Produce.
We have only further to add, that as it has been our constant aim in the past, so it shall be our
steady endeavour in the future, to supply our Friends and Customers with the best description of Goods at
the lowest market prices ; and by conducting our Business on just and liberal terms, we hope to secure a
full share of your esteemed confidence and support.
With thanks for your numerous past favours,
We remain,
Your obedient Servants,
PARSONS BROTHERS & CO.
