

AUSTRALIA
AND THE WAR
BY
Archibald T. Strong
“It seems to me certain that
Australia has even more at stake
in this war than has Britain; that
her very existence depends on
its being carried through to a
clean finish; that the worker
has more at stake in the war
than any other class in the
community; and that no sacrifice
is too great which will rid the
Empire, to which we owe every-
thing, of the hideous Teutonic
menace.”






BY THE SAME AUTHOR
Sonnets of the Empire
"THE TIMES”: —Mr. Strong is a skilled craftsman of the
Sonnet and is inspired by a fine Imperial Spirit.
“THE SCOTSMAN”: —These admirable Sonnets will con-
firm Mr. Strong’s already high repute.
Cloth, 4/-
Sonnets and Sonģs
“THE ATHENAEUM”: —Mr. Strong excels at the ballade
and rondeau; the translations from the Greek, Latin, and
French are generally effective—in particular the gay grace
of a song from Alfred de Musset is happily caught. His
book is a brilliant reminder that scholarship gives a terse-
ness which is the best gift for the poet of any fluency.
"THE GLOBE”:—Mr. Strong is a poet who treats with
particular grace and delicacy the simple themes he can express
in the dainty Gallic forms. His Rondeaux and Ballades are
charming, and among the best of recent examples.
Cloth, 4/-


AUSTRALIA AND THE WAR


JUST PUBLISHED
Sonnets
of the Empire
BY
Archibald T. Strong
Cloth 4/-
For Reviews, see second page of cover


AUSTRALIA
AND THE WAR
By
Archibald T. Strong
Author of
“Sonnets and Songs” “ Peradventure, A Book of Lssays,”
“Sonnets of the Empire,” etc.
GLORGL ROBLRTSON & CO.
PROPY. LTD.
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, and BRISBANE


To
Professor R. 5. Wallace .
In all Friendship


CONTENTS:
Page
Q
Foreword
Why Germany Made War
The Message of Treitschke
Bernhardi’s Warning 18
Life or Death
The Worker and Germany 27
Our Stake in the War
“World-Power or Downfall’’
Our Dangers and Duties
A Volume of Warning
Facts to be Faced
Nietzsche and the War
Australia’s Deadly Danger
The Agony of Belgium
Self and the State 99
Women and the War 78
Dernburg’s Two Voices 78
Kuno and “Kultur” 82
The Case for France 87
“Bernhardi” Shaw 92
German Atrocities—The French Report 97
An American View of Germany 191
France and Germany—Civilization and Barbarism .. 105
“A Capitalists’ War” 198
The War and Socialism
Ourselves and the Empire H 8
Our Spiritual Debt to France 1 23
Germany on Trial 1 27
No “Drawn War” 732
“Naturalisation” and Treason .. 735
Germany’s Bid for Peace
Australia and Sea Power 145
German Atrocities —the British Report 150
The Issue for Australia 155


FOREWORD.
ALL the articles contained in this volume originally
appeared in the Melbourne “Herald, 1 ” and are here
reprinted by the kind permission of the proprietors
and editor of that paper. I have dated each of them in
order to show the circumstances in which it was written.
In several cases where I wish to hammer certain things
home I have purposely allowed repetitions of fact or infer-
ence to stand. At the time when I began to write these
articles the community was not so fully alive to the im-
mensity of the issue as it has been made to-day by fuller
experience of the facts. Hence it seemed to me that every-
one possessing the habit of study—even if, as in my own
case, the study were rather literary than historical and poli-
tical —should play his part to the best of his ability and
opportunity in trying to throw light on a situation involv-
ing our very existence as a free people. Whatever be the
defects of this volume, I can at least claim that there is not
a single sentence in it which is not the embodiment of
earnest conviction. It seems to me as certain to-day as it
seemed twelve months ago that Australia has more at stake
in this war than has Britain; that her very existence
depends on its being carried through to a clean finish; that
an inconclusive peace jeopardising British naval suprem-
acy, and giving Germany a chance of beginning again, might
easily mean our eventual subjugation; that the worker has
more at stake in the war than any other class in the com-
munity ; that even while we are in the throes of the present
struggle we must look ahead to the effect our action or
inaction will have on the coming generation; and that no
sacrifice is too great which will rid the Empire, to which
we owe everything, of the hideous Teutonic menace.
A.T.S.
Melbourne University,
August 6, 1915.


WHY GERMANY MADE WAR.
October 20, 191 U.
I have heard in one or two quarters lately a certain
amount of talk about the war, which seems to me to be
most wofully and mischievously beside the point.
It is said that “when we have beaten the great nation
against whom we are fighting”—it being, of course, assumed
that we actually shall beat her, and that probably the day
after to-morrow —“we must be very careful that we do not
crush her, but must treat her with the same magnanimity
that we extended to the Boers in South Africa.” Such
magnanimity, it is suggested, is not only the most virtuous
course, under the circumstances, but the most paying, and
it is certain to awaken gratitude and reciprocity in the
generous Teutonic heart. The nation which produced
Goethe and Schiller must needs be a noble one at soul; it
will respond with quick sensitiveness to any liberal treat-
ment we may mete out to it when vanquished. When we
have birched it a little we can begin appealing to its heart
and soul, can follow the Platonic scheme of education and
turn its eyes toward the light of peace and goodwill toward
men. It needs must love the highest when it sees it; it
will kiss the hand that whipped it, and the golden age will
begin anew.
I hasten to add that this is the speech of no one person,
but represents fairly the point of view of several who have
spoken to me about the war in the last few weeks. It
seems to me, I repeat, that if such an outlook became
general it would be likely to result in the most grievous
harm to our Empire. The first requisite for a proper
understanding of this war, and, when the time comes, for
its wise and profitable termination, is that we should
realise the spirit in which our enemy is waging it.
9


The present struggle is not a stern and gigantic game
of cricket, to be followed by a social banquet, in which each
side will make pretty speeches about its opponent’s prowess,
and will modestly disclaim any material advantage as the
result of victory. We are fighting a nation which has been
lectured and dragooned into a deadly and calculated hate
of all that stands, however innocently, in the path of its
maniacal ambition —a nation which is convinced, as Bern-
hardi himself has told us, that its destiny is either dominion
of the world or utter annihilation; and a nation which has
declared, through its national historian, Treitschke, and its
greatest and most popular journalist, Maximilian Harden,
that that destiny will never be realised till the Britain whom
it loathes and despises is utterly destroyed.
These things being so, it becomes a matter of vital im-
portance to realise that our bounden duty is not only to
beat Germany, but to break her utterly, or at least to break
utterly her present national spirit. It is not a question
of leniency nor yet of vengeance; it is one at once of the
direst physical necessity and of supreme moral obligation.
We have to win this war, though it may take us years to do
so. For this end each member of our Empire must be
willing, if necessary, to spend his last sovereign and his last
drop of blood; and once we have won it, we have to see
that all our brave troops have fought and died for is not
flung away by a parcel of armchair sentimentalists.
It will, therefore, be wise to have done with folly from
the start, and to understand what is in our foemen’s
hearts. In order to contribute my mite towards this end,
I intend to devote a series of articles to the matter in hand
and to illustrate these, as far as possible, by reference to
the actual deeds and words of our enemy.
I suppose that everyone who reads at all has within the
last few weeks read the White Book, so that I may deal with
it here by way of allusion rather than of quotation. Firstly,
one may regard it as axiomatic that Austria never intended
Servia to accede to the Note she sent her on July 23. The
two following articles which she dictated to her would in
themselves make this evident:—
10
AUSTRALIA AND THE WAR


Servia further undertakes: —
4 To remove from the military service and from the administra-
tion in general, all officers and functionaries guilty of propaganda
against the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, whose names and deeds the
Austro-Hungarian Government reserves to itself the right ot com-
munication to the Royal Government.
5 To accept the collaboration in Servia of representatives of the
Austro-Hungarian Government in the suppression of the subversive
movement directed against the territorial integrity of the Monarchy.
Fancy any nation with an ounce of spirit left in her
accepting such proposals as these! They were tantamount,
be it noticed, to a demand that Servia should cease to have
any foreign policy at all, as far as Austria was concerned,
and that she should, furthermore, allow Austria to treat
her as a gaoler treats a criminal. Well might the English
Ambassador at Vienna record his impression that the sur-
render of Servia (to the terms of the Note) is neither
expected nor desired”!
As a matter of fact, the Servian reply clearly embar-
rassed Austria by its abject humility, and deprived her of
her last possible vestige of a true case for the war she had
determined to make. Servia practically conceded all the
Austrian demands, offering, if necessary, to submit the
whole matter to the Hague Conference, or to the arbitra-
ment of the great European Powers.
Well might Sir Edward Grey remark a day or two later,
that the Servian reply had “already involved the greatest
humiliation that he had ever seen a country undergo.
Even the German Secretary of State had to pretend (No.
18) that he thought “the Note left much to be desired as a
diplomatic document.” He earnestly assured the British
representative at Berlin that he had known nothing of its
contents, but Sir Edward Goschen subsequently discovered
that he had been lying, and that the whole of it had been
shown to the German Ambassador at Vienna and tele-
graphed to Berlin before being forwarded to Servia.
The Secretary of State lied again to Sir Edward Goschen,
when he denied that the German Government was recalling
officers on leave (No. 76) ; but perhaps the most delicious
instance of the fundamental ungentlemanliness and disin-
genuousness of the Prussian diplomat is to be found in the
following terse sentence of Sir E. Bertie’s (No. 59) : Ger-
11
WHY GERMANY MADE WAR


man Ambassador has stated that Austria would respect the
integrity of Servia, but when asked whether her indepen-
dence also would be respected, he gave no assurance.”
Equivocations of this sort show why German “State-
craft” is suspected and loathed all the world over. This
parvenu among the great Powers has not yet learnt the
first beginnings of gentlemanly behavior.
How far the world may trust a German diplomat’s
word may also be seen from the following extracts (No.
85), interpreted in the light of subsequent events:—
His Excellency said that, so long as Germany’s adversaries re-
spected the neutrality and integrity of the Netherlands, Germany was
ready to give his Majesty’s Government an assurance that she would
do likewise.
Well might M. Sazonof tell Sir George Buchanan (No.
54) that the key of the whole situation was to be found at
Berlin. Germany clearly wished to incite Austria to the
utmost in her aggressive policy against Servia, her own
desire being to increase the Teutonic sway in the Balkans,
and for this purpose, and as a matter of general policy, to
humiliate Russia, as she had previously humiliated her in
1909.
There is room for the supposition that Germany and
Austria during the early stages of the negotiations, did not
believe that Russia would fight, but thought that Germany
could once more diminish her prestige by the mere “rattling
of the sabre.” (See No. 71, end and No. 139, where Sir G.
Buchanan tells Sir Edward Grey that the German Ambas-
sador at Petersburg “had reported to his Government that
Russia would never go to war.”)
A consideration which makes itself obvious throughout
the Book is that Germany could have prevented the war,
if she had wished to do so, at any and every stage of the
negotiations. It is also certain that Russia, even when
her armies were mobilised against Austria, would have
accepted mediation up till the last moment. (See No. 74,
end.) How inevitably the whole burden of this ghastly
business falls on Germany, and how utterly free England is
of blame in the matter is well indicated in these words of
Sir Edward Grey’s (No. 84): —
12
AUSTRALIA AND THE WAR


I urfred that the German Government should suggest any method
hv whiclf the influence of the four Powers could be used together to
prevent between Austria and Russia France agreed. Italy
a e-reed The whole idea of mediation or of mediating influence was
ready "to be put into operation by any method that Germany could
suee-est if mine was not acceptable. In fact, mediation was ready
to come into operation by any method that Germany thought possible
if only Germany would “press the button” in the interests of peace.
In this connection, be it clearly understood, Sir Edward
Grey, though striving throughout the whole negotiations
for peace, had made it clearly and repeatedly understood
that Germany could not count on Britain s remaining neu-
tral in contingencies vitally affecting her Allies. Sir
Edward Goschen’s description of Bethmann-Hollweg’s
patently sincere consternation when he found that Britain
had rejected his disgusting offer regarding France is one
of the most graphic and suggestive episodes in the whole
book. Germany was not ready for England yet. Her
Allies had to be destroyed first. How surely our own
destruction was her ultimate goal I hope to show in subse-
quent articles.
November 3,191 -
Mr. Sydney Whitman in a recent number of an English
magazine gives the following account of a conversation
which he had with a German professor of history, who was
staying at his house last year:—
It was thus with amazement and alarm that I listened to the
uncompromising cocksureness of his views regarding the conditions
under which Germany might allow England to retain her leadership
in the world, the compensations Germany expected in Africa, in iur-
key, if not in the Solar System. “Compensations for what. I asked.
“Surely not for the immense indebtedness which German commerce
owes to British Free Trade, which gives her greater openings to the
markets of the world than you might possess rf you half our
colonies under your own flag.” “My dear sir, lat last exclaimed,
“has it ever occurred to you that in the case of a war between France
and Germany your country might possibly get the worst ot it. /no,
he replied, in a most confident manner. “That is very interesting,
I retorted. “It reminds me more of the Prussia of 1806 than that ox
1870.”
13
THE MESSAGE OF TREITSCHKE.
THE MESSAGE OF TREITSCHKE


The professor in question was Hans Delbriick, Professor
of History in the University of Berlin, and successor of the
famous Heinrich von Treitschke, the fiercest Anglophobe
who ever lived, who moulded Young Germany to his will,
imbuing it with undying hate of Britain and investing that
doctrine with the dignity of a philosophy and the fervor
of a religion.
I quote the conversation in order to show how fully the
teaching of the master has been inherited by the disciple,
and to show, too, that hatred of Britain is apparently an
indispensable condition of appointment to the highest aca-
demic position in Prussia.
Mr. Whitman compares Professor Delbriick’s remarks
with the kind of talk so frequently uttered before the war,
to the effect that Germany would magnanimously spare
Britain, unless Britain showed signs of giving up Free
Trade—talk which, as Mr. Balfour once remarked, was
enough to make any Englishman’s blood boil.
Treitschke was elected to the Berlin chair in 1875. He
had earned his position by his uncompromising and un-
scrupulous defence of Bismarckism from 1864 onwards.
Slav by extraction, and Saxon by domicile, he was from first
to last Prussian in sympathy, and before the end of the war
of 1870 he had written his pamphlet defending the Prussian
doctrine of “Might is Right” against all comers.
It is interesting to read the exact words in which, even
thus early, he formulated the deadly and sinister philosophy
which has occasioned the present war. The first sentence
is Gilbertian in its quaint assumption of virtuous indigna-
tion, and shows an equal deficiency of morals, logic and
humor:—
In view of our obligation to secure the peace of the world, who
will venture to object that the people of Alsace and Lorraine do not
want to belong to us ? The doctrine of the right of all the branches
of the German race to decide on their own destinies shivers to pieces
in presence of the sacred necessity of these great days. These
territories are ours by the Right of the Sword.
Elsewhere he says, “Why talk of founding colonies ? Let
us take Holland: we shall then have them ready made.”
Again, he remarks, with an even more than Teutonic lack
of humor, “The people of Alsace will learn to love us when


the strong hand of Prussia has educated them”—just, one
supposes, as Wackford Squeers might have learnt to love
his father. He naively adds, “The sober and upright prin-
ciples which we have applied in all newly-taken provinces
are completely applicable here in the West.” The follow-
ing passage, considered in the light that kindled Louvain
and Rheims, is really a perfect little gem:
We Germans despise the babyish war against stone and bronze
in which the French are adepts. We left the monuments of Hoche
and Marceau standing in honor in the department of the Lower
and we have no intention of transgressing against any of the glorious
memories of the people of Alsace and Lorraine. It would contradict
Sf our Russian ways of thinking, too, were we to assail with
violence the customs of domestic life.
This makes particularly interesting reading when we
remember how the customs of Belgian domestic life have
recently been handled by the exponent of “Prussian Ways
of Thinking.”
Enough has been said to illustrate the general outlook
of him who remarked “that the strong should triumph over
the weak is an inexorable law of nature.” Before passing
to his view regarding England it may be well to add one
word more about Treitschke the man. All who knew him
bear witness to the striking appearance of the tall, rather
slim figure, with its stately bearing, “dark eyes and dark
masses of thick hair.” Like Nietzsche, with whom he had
so much else in common, he was the victim of chronic physi-
cal affliction, being stone deaf from his childhood upward.
Having none of the external graces or gifts of oratory,
he yet held and swayed the Reichstag when he spoke in it
through the earnestness of hate with which he attacked all
that stood between his beloved Prussia and the world-power
which she was to exercise when all her possible rivals had
been cowed and broken.
But it was above all things in the lecture room that he
made his power felt in a degree unparalleled since the day
of Fichte. First at Kiel, then at Heidelberg, then at
Freiburg, and finally at Berlin his lecture-hall, says one
writer, “did actually suggest a concourse such as in the
Middle Age met to hear an Abelard, or in the Renaissance
time thronged round Giordano Bruno or Pico della
Mirandola.”


It was at this period that he wrote his five-volume his-
tory of Modern Germany, bringing this up to 1848. I have
consulted this work and find in it much disparagement of
Britain, especially in the matter of Waterloo, but little of
that stem and calculated hate of her which is ascribed to
his later lectures and his two-volume treatise on statecraft.
“Die Politik. ,,
This hatred grew upon him with bitter intensity during
his latter years. What made him detest Britain above all
countries was his belief that at every point she stood in the
way of German ambition, and wielded a world-influence
which, so he pretended, was not backed by any commen-
surate degree of prowess or military power.
Professor Cramb, in his fascinating little volume,
“England and Germany,” details how, when Treitschke
returned from Britain, six months before his death, he
poured out to all his friends the vitriol of his scorn,
antipathy and hate for Britain and the British enduring
no word of comment or contradiction. Finally, someone
quoted the question of Heine, how so ignoble a nation as
Britain could ever have produced Shakespeare, and the
meeting broke up in laughter.
Professor Cramb states eloquently the reasons which
Treitschke had invented in order to justify his hate of the
island which prevented the whole world from becoming
Prussianised:—
nnli / or Treitschke it is not genius, it is not valor, it is not even great
hnt tL a l m tl !f C f S u ° f Venice, which has built up the British Empire-
hut the hazard of her geographical situation, the supineness of other
nations, the measureless duplicity of her Ministers and the natural
and innate hypocrisy of the nation as a whole. These have let this
monstrous empire grow-* colossus with feet of clay. Together with
this, he has the conviction that such a power can be overthrown. And
with what a stern joy and self-congratulation would not the nations
acclaim the destruction of the island-state—“ Old England-” old in
deed, and corrupt, rotten through and through! & ’ 01(1 in ’ I
It is a pity that Treitschke could not have lived to see
that the nations have taken a slightly different view of the
matter, and have recognised with the unerring instinct of
self-preservation that, as far as they are concerned, Ger-
many stands for slavery and death, Britain for life,
freedom, and the expansion of every race after every form


of its own genius which is compatible with the world’s
peace.
My object in giving this account of Treitschke is to show
that it is not the Kaiser alone who is guilty of the present
wa r though, heaven knows, he is guilty enough, and may
stand as the symbol of the diabolical force which has
systematically poisoned the soul of a great and once noble
nation. The real cause of the war is the organised teach-
ing of violence and hate which, during the last three gene-
rations, has emanated from Prussia and spread through
every German university and school.
Magnanimity, chivalry, and the sincere desire to live
and let live, qualities which are native to the modern British
political genius, have been studiously represented to young
Germany as the effects of cowardice and hypocrisy. Con-
versely, the Prussian cult of blood and iron has been, as far
as might be, invested with a false idealism, not unlike the
phosphorescent glow which plays above masses of corrup-
tion. This deadly venom has sunk into the very soul of the
nation, and has occasioned the astonishing outburst of hate
recently directed against Britain in every quarter of Ger-
many, public and private.
We are the end, France and Russia only the means—
let there be no mistake about this. Our utter annihilation
is to-day the ideal of almost every German soul. And that
is why we must not only beat Germany, but break her
utterly. And that, too, is why we must awaken to the peril
in our midst, even as England has awakened within the last
few weeks. For where hate, unscrupulousness and effi-
ciency combine it behoves every man to be on his guard.
17
THE MESSAGE OF TREITSCHKE


BERNHARDTS WARNING.
November 5, 1915.
Everyone who wishes to understand the present war
should read Bernhardi’s “Germany and the Next War,” if
he has not already done so. Some people who have gone
through it tell me that they particularly admire the
author’s general tone and think him a fine, frank, breezy
fellow—the literary counterpart, in fact, of the captain
of the “Emden” as seen through the swimming after-dinner
spectacles of a maudlin sentimentalism. I tried to point
out recently that there were two sides to the last-named
individual, and that one of these was distinctly nasty.
It is the same with General Friedrich von Bernhardi.
A great part of his book is indeed frank—brutally and
naively so. Otherwise the reading of it would not have
had the effect of rousing England since the beginning of
the war to the full deadliness of Germany’s purpose. But,
together with “frankness,” with outspoken justification of
violence and unscrupulousness, there runs throughout its
pages the cant of “culture” which has in the last few weeks
of atrocity and pillage brought upon Germany the scorn
of the civilised world. This defect apart, one may acknow-
ledge that the book is cool and soldierlike, and free, except
in one or two passages, from the rabid hate which Bern-
hardi’s master Treitschke so constantly vented against
England.
The false ring which Bernhardi’s volume carries is
indeed the false ring which the national pretensions of
Germany have carried to the world to-day. His country,
so he contends, is ringed round with enemies, intent on
thwarting her development and expansion, if not on actually
destroying her. These conspirators have for their own
malign ends devised the conception of the “balance of
power,” and have invested this with a wholly unjustifiable
sacrosanctity. Germany’s first duty must be to sweep this


away, in order that she may obtain her “merited position
at the head of a federation of Central European States.”
Her position as slave-mistress of Europe will then be satis-
factory.
But she must also have colonies. The great difficulty
here is that these are already in the possession of other
countries, most of which have obtained and developed them
peacefully during the days when Germany had hardly been
thought of as a great nation. The “moral” is obvious. It
is that of the highway robber dogging the man with a
sovereign in his pocket. Colonies are not to be had by
peaceful occupation; consequently they must be wrested
from their present possessors by force.
It should always be remembered that the German desire
for colonies has only taken practical form within the last
20 years or so. Even in the eighties Bismarck repudiated
colonisation on behalf of Germany, and tried to involve
France in colonisation schemes which, it was hoped, would
embarrass her, and distract her attention from her great
European grievance. To the surprise and disgust of Ger-
many, France, instead of failing grotesquely in this field,
achieved a striking success.
Bernhardi’s comment on this point illustrates with re
freshing naivete the envy of the German national heart for
the success of others:—
It must be admitted with mortification and envy that the nation
vanquished in 1870, whose vital powers seemed exhausted, which
possessed no qualification for colonisation for want of men to
colonise, has yet created the second largest colonial Empire in the
world
These colonies, especially the African ones, Germany
must have. “If necessary, they must be obtained as the
result of a successful European war.” There might be
other windfalls. “A financial or political crash in
Portugal might give us the opportunity to take possession
of a portion of the Portuguese colonies.”
Then there are the British dominions. Here the out-
look is particularly rosy for the German depredator. Eng-
land, it is admitted, has “done a great work of civilisation”
here; but it has been purely material; she has never “justi-
fied her sovereignty by training up a free and independent


population, and by transmitting to the subject peoples the
blessings of an independent culture of their own.”
It is, therefore, very doubtful whether Canada, Aus-
tralia, and South Africa “will permanently retain any trace
of the English spirit.” Indeed, the policy of the dominions,
“though not yet planning a separation from England, is
contemplating the future prospect of doing so.”
Finally, the “colonies have at their disposal a militia
which is only in process of formation. THEY CAN BE
COMPLETELY IGNORED AS FAR AS CONCERNS
ANY EUROPEAN THEATRE OF WAR.”
I have given prominence here to the aspect of this
volume which most nearly concerns ourselves, and I think
the quotations I have selected from this representative
Teutonic writer illustrate not only Germany’s unscrupulous-
ness and envy, but also her astonishing inefficiency in the
matter of political judgment. Her other miscalculations
must be matter for a separate article. They illustrate
clearly what some of us were slow to believe even on the
word of Germany’s own Chancellor, von Billow, that “the
Germans are a nation of political donkeys.”
Bernhardi’s remarks regarding the other European
powers are peculiarly interesting. What he has to say
about Italy and Turkey may be especially commended to
the reader’s notice. Unfortunately, I cannot develop these
aspects of the matter here, and can only add a few more
quotations which illustrate better than reams of comment
the spirit in which Germany has manufactured the present
war:—
I must, first of all, examine the aspirations for peace, which seem
to dominate our age and threaten to poison the soul of the German
people.
Efforts to secure peace are extraordinarily detrimental to the
national health so soon as they influence politics.
Our people must learn to see that the maintenance of peace never
can or may be the goal of a policy.
The appropriate and conscious employment of war as a political
means has always led to happy results.
When Belgium was proclaimed neutral, no one contemplated that
she would lay claim to a large and valuable region of Africa. It
may be well asked whether the acquisition of such territory is not
ipso facto a breach of neutrality.


That England would pay much attention to the neutrality of
weaker neighbors, when such a stake (as the confiscation of Holland,
Belgium, and Denmark) was at issue, is hardly credible.
A pacific agreement with England is, after all, a will o’ the wisp,
which no serious German statesman would trouble to follow.
In such a contest we should not stand spiritually alone, but all
on this vast globe whose feelings and thoughts are proud and free
will ioin us in this campaign against the overweening ambitions of
one nation (England), which, in spite of all her pretence of a liberal
and philanthropic policy, has never sought any other object than
personal advantage and the unscrupulous suppression of her rivals.
So much for “frankness.” What is not frank in Bern-
hardi’s volume, what is, in fact, thoroughly and con-
temptibly hypocritical, is his attempt to attach the modern
German spirit of aggressiveness and tyranny to the great
German names of the past—those of Goethe, Kant, and
Schiller, which, as we all gratefully recognise, represent
one of the mightiest spiritual forces which the modern
world has ever felt. Fancy the great Goethe being pressed
into this devil’s gang—Goethe, who wrote that the end of
man was to be “noble, helpful, and good,” and whose hatred
for national aggression was such that he even refused to
write war songs to be used against the French!
Little less hypocritical is the attempt to reconcile the
modern German spirit, which is the outcome of
Nietzscheism, largely misunderstood and misapplied, with
the spirit of Christianity which Nietzsche himself hated
and despised, and recognised to be utterly fatal to his own
teaching that Might is Right. Nietzsche was truly frank,
but in the following passage, which for reasons of space I
have had to abridge slightly, we find Bernhardi trying to
run with the Christian hare and course with the
Nietzschean sleuth-hounds: —
Christian morality is based, indeed, on the power of love. “Love
God above all things, and thy neighbour as thyself.” This law can
claim no significance in the relations of one country to another, since
its application to politics would lead to a conflict of duties. The
love which a man showed to another country as such would imply
a want of love for his own countrymen. Christian morality is per-
sonal and social, and in its nature cannot be political. Christ s
teaching can never be used as an argument against the universal law
of struggle. There never was a religion that was more combative
than Christianity.
Perhaps some find “frankness” here. I’m afraid I do
not.


LIFE OR DEATH.
November 10, 191 U.
The grim and intense attitude displayed toward the
present war by the average Englishman of education is
well illustrated in a letter recently written to “The Times”
by that distinguished schoolmaster and scholar, Mr. T. E.
Page. Mr. Page was replying to a certain person, ap-
parently quite worthy and guileless, who had deprecated
acrimony in the discussion of Germany, and had written,
“It is our interest, as well as our duty, to respect them (the
Germans), and make it clear that we desire their friend-
ship.”
As this represents the exact kind of nonsense against
which I have been protesting during the last few weeks,
and the effeminate thinking which has eaten into the Eng-
lish race, and brought it to the very brink of destruction,
I may here quote the concluding paragraph of Mr. Page’s
letter, every word of which applies with tenfold force to
Australia. Recent advices from England make it evident
that a keen and vigilant press, in co-operation with writers
like Mr. Page, has, at last, awakened the nation to the
tremendousness of the issue it is facing. Ido not believe
that Australia is even yet fully awakened, nor that she
realises that England’s defeat in the present struggle might
quite conceivably mean the subjugation of herself to the
race of devils who have just been perpetrating unnamable
atrocities upon Belgian boys and women. If anyone wishes
his imagination quickened as to the certain consequences
of such subjugation, let him, if he has a sufficiently strong
stomach, read in “The Times” of September 16 the precise,
clear, and duly attested report of the official Commission
recently appointed to inquire into the German outrages.
For my own part, I confess that, after I had read it, I felt
physically sick for 24 hours. Anyone who can peruse this


document and still talk of “philosophy” or “charity” must
be something less than man or woman. Let the reader
remember, too, that these scarcely thinkable horrors are
not the mere acts of a few drunken'soldiers who have got
out of hand, but are the direct result of the deliberate offi-
cial policy of “frightfulness” (Schrecklichkeit). When
these things and a few others are understood, it will be
also understood why some of us feel towards Germany
to-day as we have never yet felt towards any thing or
person. And until people have taken the trouble to ascer-
tain the facts, they have absolutely no right to object to
the existence of this feeling throughout our Empire.
However, let Mr. Page speak for himself. He is deal-
ing with his opponents’ naively-expressed fear that “Free
speech about such matters might lead to bitter denuncia-
tion” :
As if, sir, any denunciation could be too bitter, and, as if it were
not imperatively needed! For to many of us the nation seems, as
yet, only partially alive to what may possibly confront ourselves. It
only half realises that, if defeated, we shall have to submit to the
utmost degradation and suffering that a victorious enemy can inflict.
There will be no sparing: and it is necessary that the people should
understand the truth. No rhetoric or denunciation can exaggerate
the grim realities we may have to face, and talking about knowing
and loving Germany,” or about “a people exceptionally conscientious
and upright” is not only idle and fatuous, but at the present time
misleading, hazardous, and disloyal. It is by listening to such fan-
tastic and academic stuff that we have been lured into apathy in the
past, and it may be fatal to us if we give ear to it in the present.
The struggle before us is of life and death, and it is a struggle in
which truth and justice are at grips with barbarism and wrong’. We
need an angry and indignant spirit; there are crimes which demand
it, and in this crisis a righteous wrath must quicken our spirit and
nerve our arm. The private virtues of Germans are, we know, many;
but in this public action they have shown themselves the enemies of
the human race, and it is as such that they must be faced. When
the end comes, if God helps us, we will be generous, but love and
“friendship” are at this hour words that honest tongues refuse to utter.
This letter surely disposes of the queer idea still ap-
parently held by certain sections of the public that because
the scholar does not run readily into the arena of action,
he is therefore an anaemic being, brooding on interests aloof
from the nation’s soul, and given up to a lifeless
“philosophy” begotten by indifference upon sentimentalism
—the “philosophy” which, till the present crisis startled us
into our better selves, threatened to rot all manly thought
and action out of our race.


The English Universities, indeed, may almost be said
to have led the great outburst of indignation which the
country has just been venting on the modern Superhuns.
The undergraduates of Oxford and Cambridge gave ex-
pression to this feeling in the most practical fashion.
Sixty per cent, of them volunteered for active service at
the very beginning of hostilities, and the proportion is
probably now even greater. Nor have the dons been
behindhand in educating the country out of its apathy,
and displaying to it the deadly and calculated hate of the
nation it is fighting. Messrs. Trevelyan, Fletcher, Davis,
and other representative historians have all played their
part effectively here. There is hardly an English poet or
man of letters, from Wells to Bridges, who has not written
or spoken to the same effect.
One of the most striking pronouncements on the war is
contained in a letter recently contributed to “The Times”
by Paul Vinogradof, the distinguished Russian jurist, who
holds a legal chair in Oxford University. The Professor
states eloquently the claims of Russian culture, and shows
scornfully how hollow are the pretensions of Germany to
possess anything resembling true culture at all.
In Europe the extraordinary attempt of Gerhart
Hauptmann, the mannikin upon whom the dramatic mantle
of Schiller has fallen, to justify recent German outrages,
has been annihilatingly rebutted by Remain Rolland, who,
besides being the author of the most remarkable work of
the present century, “Jean-Christophe,” is, or was till re-
cently, also a professor at the Sorbonne.
What renders these pronouncements all the more valu- '
able is the fact that they are the free and spontaneous
expression of individual wills. In Germany, professorial *
tenure is held at the caprice of the State, which keeps a ]
most jealous control upon each teacher’s utterance. As a 1
result, the country which once stood for “Lehr-freiheit,”
absolutely unrestricted freedom of University teaching, is, f
to-day, as far as its higher education goes, the most J
obscurantist nation in Europe. Young Germany has never J
had a chance to learn the truth, and has been industriously
fed with the lies which have caused the present war.


As is remarked by Mr. Phillip Terry, of Harvard Uni-
versity, who fled from Bonn just after the declaration of
war: “Publicists will write later in English newspapers
that there are two Germanics, the intellectual and the mili-
tary, opposed to each other. Now we teachers know
better!”
“The complaisant professor is decorated,” Professor
Morgan tells us, “the contumacious is cashiered.” The
well-known historian Sybel, in his history of Prussian
policy, exalted Bismarck at the expense of the Hohen-
zollerns; consequently the award of the Verdun prize to him
was vetoed by the present Emperor. The depth of moral
and intellectual degradation attained at German Uni-
versities can hardly be conceived by those educated in free
and civilised foundations. How low that depth may reach
can be seen when we find Delbruck saying of Bismarck’s
falsification of the Ems telegram which caused the war of
1870, “Blessed be the hand that traced those lines,” when
Sybel can remark of Frederick’s second partition of Poland,
“Wrong? I grant you; but necessity knows no law, and
Prussia thereby gained considerable territory;” and, to
crown all, when the once honoured names of Harnack and
Eucken appear at the foot of a document defending the
hideous policy which has reduced Louvain to ashes, and a
thousand innocent homes to unutterable and inconsolable
woe.
The fact is that it is only since the present war began
that the greater number of thinking Englishmen have be-
come alive to the deadly policy Germany has been hatching
during the years of peace. Every educated Briton has
within the last few weeks grown alive to the vital necessity
of educating himself and others in this regard. Up till that
period they had flouted and scorned the earnest warnings
given them by men like Maxse and Blatchford, as the
vaporings of a hysterical jingoism, and had scouted the
great crusade of Earl Roberts as the erratic pilgrimage
of some half-witted White Knight. Now, however, they
have learnt that for the last decade the editor of “The
National Review” has been rather understating the truth
than otherwise, and they have become ashamed and con-
trite at their indifference.


But if they had listened to the German writers them-
selves, they could have learnt their lesson long ago; for
never has the German position been stated with more
cynical brutality than by Billow in his “Imperial Germany,”
and by Bernhardi in “Germany and the Next War.”
I propose to deal at length with the latter volume in
a subsequent article; but the following quotations, chosen
almost at random, will show how natural it was that a
perusal of it should have turned Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
from a Teutophile into an uncompromising Teutophobe.
It must be remembered that Bernhardi is no irresponsible
scribbler, but a writer who for a generation has had the
ear of the whole German nation: —
All which other nations attained in centuries of natural develop-
ment —political union, colonial possessions, naval power, international
trade—was denied to our nation till quite recently. What we now
wish to attain must be fought for, and won, against a superior force
of hostile interests and powers.
We must square our account with France if we wish for a free
hand in our international policy. France must be so completely
crushed that she can never again come across our path.
We must endeavor to obtain our merited position at the head of
a federation of Central European States.
We must defeat France so decisively that she would be compelled
to renounce her alliance with England and withdraw her fleet to save
herself from total destruction.
A pacific agreement with England is, after all, a will-o’-the-wisp
which no serious German statesman would trouble to follow.
These extracts and the rest of Bernhardi’s volume show
clearly that the defeat of Germany’s other European foes
is only regarded as a means toward the utter annihilation
of her arch-enemy, ourselves. If such a thing could happen,
Australia would inevitably become a German colony—with
what results, I hope to demonstrate in a future article.
Those who may still think that we must first beat Ger-
many and then speak to her kindly and fatherly, instead of
breaking utterly her present national spirit, are answered
annihilatingly out of Bernhardi’s own mouth: —
Such a war—for us more than for any other nation—must be a
war for our political and national existence. This must be so, for
our opponents can only attain their political aims by almost annihilat-
ing us by land and by sea. If the victory is only half won, they
would have to expect continuoug renewals of the contest, which would
be contrary to their interests.


Read “destruction of England and enslavement of
Europe” for “political and national existence,” and
“national freedom” for “political aims,” and you have in
the above passage a most accurate statement of the case.
If we beat Germany without breaking her, she will never
rest till she has utterly destroyed us. It is hardly wonder-
ful that England should have read this book and one or two
others, and instantly cast off her apathy and “tolerance.”
When Australia follows suit, she will perhaps be a little
more careful regarding both her safety and her dignity and
honour.
November 17, 19H.
The Melbourne “Socialist” reproduces, in its issue of
November 6, the manifesto addressed to the workers of
Canada by the Canadian Social Democratic Party. This
document represents the patriotic appeal which has just
borne such fine fruit in Canada as being merely a call to
the workers to “go forth and shed their blood in the in-
terests of the master class.” The war, it is contended, is
being waged simply and solely on behalf of a few inter-
national capitalists intent on securing markets. The
worker is, therefore, exhorted to “refrain from lending
any assistance in this war,” and to “let the masters fight
their own battles.”
Now, this pronouncement appears to me to be based on
an absolutely mistaken view of the case. I desire to put
this interpretation upon it rather than to accept the only
other alternative and regard it as a sinister and insincere
pretext put forward to justify a policy of cowardice and
selfishness—the policy of men who allow British blood to
be shed on their behalf, and then vent all their scorn upon
the heroes to whom they owe their very lives and liberty.
We are part of a great Empire, which is to-day fighting for
its very existence against all the powers of hell; wherefore
it behoves us to put away all effeminacy and cant, and to
ensue sternness and vigilance and unflinching resolution.
THE WORKER AND GERMANY.


In this respect the German Social Democrat sets a
striking example to his Canadian brother. He owes far
less than the other to the Government of his country; this,
as I shall show, has always regarded him as its bitterest
enemy and has tried to suppress him by every means in its
power. Yet the very page of the “Socialist” which con-
tains the aforesaid manifesto, also contains a letter written
by an English Socialist in Berlin, which tells us that
what the Kaiser said a month ago is literally and entirely true —
this present struggle for existence has abolished all parties, class
divisions, and opinions in the Empire of Germany. . . . The
organised German Labor Party deplores, as every Socialist must, with
the greatest of all heartaches, the present disaster. But they, too, in
view of the magnitude of their adversaries, recognise that there is
only one thing now to be done—to fight for existence.
That is to say the German Socialist, snubbed and bullied
as he is at every turn by the dominant German parties,
yet when the crisis comes recognises something that
transcends all parties—the principle of national existence
—and is willing to fight for it to the death. How much
more should this be the case with the Canadian worker,
with the worker, indeed, of every English-speaking
country, and especially of countries like our own, where
the only condition interposed between Labor and
supremacy is its obligation of convincing the great masses
of the country that its claims are reasonable.
It would be ridiculous to represent the present war as
a clear-cut issue between the worker and the capitalist.
For good or for bad we are not yet come to this pass; but
it is the soberest truth to represent it as a struggle between
a power which, politically speaking, sternly refuses to
emancipate the toiler, and one which affords him great
and ever-growing means of self-emancipation and self-
enlightenment and self-realisation.
The more closely one studies the present war the more
clearly does one see it to be a fight to the death between
Might and Right, between cast-iron repression and the
principle of free and organic growth and expansion. The
great consolation attaching to the whole ghastly business
is the reflection that at the moment of supreme test,
civilisation is justified of herself and the whole world re


spends to a great moral issue. No one has greater cause
to share this feeling than the worker.
In most parts of our Empire he has shown, in the most
resolute and practical of fashions, that he does feel and
share it to the utmost. In England in the first week or two
of hostilities, the Labor associations voted in favor of con-
scription should this be found necessary for finishing the
war satisfactorily and speedily. Very significant was the
rejection by English Labor of Mr. Ramsay Macdonald and
his preposterous doctrine that the present war was made
by Sir Edward Grey. Mr. Arthur Henderson, leader of the
English Labor Party, has recorded the firm determination
of the organised Labor movement to support the Govern-
ment through thick and thin, and see the war through to
a successful finish. Again, in the matter of armaments,
no part of the Empire has responded more magnificently
to the Mother Country’s call than our own Labor-governed
Australia. For those workers who still share the views of
the Canadian Social Democratic Party, the following con-
siderations may be of interest.
The attitude of official Germany, or, at least, of official
Prussia, toward labor is fairly accurately summed up in
the answer recently made by a Prussian Minister of Com-
merce to a demand that the standard of wages should be
raised in some of the undertakings under his control. “The
State,” replied the Minister, “should not be in advance of
private employers.” The attitude of the private employer
may be gathered from the significant remarks made a few
years ago by Herr Kirdorf, a Westphalian Coal and Steel
Magnate, apropos of labor organisation:—
It is regrettable that our work-people are able to change their
positions at any time. An undertaking can only prosper if it has a
stationary band of workers. Ido not ask that legislation should
come to our help, but we must reserve to ourselves the right to take
measures to check this frequent change of employment. The proposal
has been made that all work-people should be compelled to join
organisations, and that employers should be required to negotiate with
these organisations. For myself, I would remark that I refuse to
negotiate with any organisation whatever.
Mr. W. H. Dawson notices in his “Evolution of Modern
Germany” that as far as wages, and for the most part, as
far as hours go, the State has been true to its word, and


has made but little attempt to ameliorate the conditions
imposed by the employer on the employe. One feels that
where it has done more, as in the case of pensions, housing,
and insurance, it has always done it as a favor magnani-
mously conferred by a master upon a slave, and has
stubbornly resisted the attempts of Labor to work out its
own destiny by means of its own choosing.
The Prussian prohibition of combination in trades
unions, prevailing in 1908, must have seemed almost
mediaeval to an English, still more to an Australian, artisan
settling in Germany. The obscurantism, moreover, which
I noticed last week as prevailing at German Universities
is applied in the most tyrannical fashion to every attempt
made by labor to educate itself by other machinery than
that provided by the reactionary State authorities.
Thus, a few years ago a course of lectures on juris-
prudence, advertised for delivery at Potsdam by a well-
known socialist educator, was forbidden by the Potsdam
Provincial Government under an almost obsolete statute of
1834, originally directed against unlicensed private schools.
Similarly, a socialist kindergarten opened at the same
period in Charlottenburg was closed by the police, whose
action was justified by a Ministerial Decree going back
to 1839.
How true has been the instinct which since the begin-
ning of the war has caused most of the world’s workers to
regard Germany as their arch enemy, may be gathered
from a glance at the official opinions of Prinz von Billow,
late Chancellor of the German Empire. In his “Imperial
Germany” he offers a few remarks upon the Social Demo-
crats, who in Germany stand for Labor and the Labor
Party. It will be at once noticed by any reader of this
volume that there is no attempt to understand or conciliate
the worker, similar to that which might be manifested by
any non-labor Minister or government in any part of our
own Empire to-day.
In the Chancellor’s opinion, the Labor Party must be
shattered, even as Belgium has been shattered; and it must
be shattered first and foremost because of its love of
freedom and independence of thought and action. Prussia,


Billow points out, is essentially a Government of soldiers
and officials; it can never allow any form of expansion
which is not strictly organised and controlled by its own
bureaucratic caste.
In a section headed “No Conciliation Possible,” he
deprecates analogies drawn from other countries, such as
France and Italy, where Labor ideals have prevailed
without detriment to the State, and shows that the Prussian
policy must be, now as always, one of stern repression. No
indictment of Prussian tyranny could be more telling than
Billow’s defence:—
If the Prussian Government wanted to come to terms with the
Social Democrats, and was willing to recognise as legitimate the
demands of a party which for decades has been combating the monar-
chical and military foundations of the Prussian State, the Prussian civil
servants, the middle classes, the country population east of the Elbe,
and possibly the army itself would be at a loss what to make of the
State and the authorities. If the Government renounced the fight
against the Social Democrats Prussia would take it to mean that they
had yielded to the forces of revolution. And they would be right if,
after half a century of fighting, the Government could find no other
solution than a shameful peace with the enemy.
Billow discusses seriously the advisability of applying
force to the suppression of the whole Social Democratic
movement, but though he considers that it would be
theoretically best to crush it out of life at once he thinks
that for reasons of practical utility it may be better to let
it remain uncrushed for the present, as if it is unduly perse-
cuted it may become dangerous. Elsewhere there are cold
and academic professions of sympathy with the working-
man; but the cloven hoof appears again in such a passage
as this:—
Forcible proceedings against the Social Democrats would imme-
diately come into question if they were provoked by any violent out-
burst of the Social Democratic movement. That, however, is hardly
to be expected, and is improbable, if the Government attacks the
problem of dealing with the Social Democrat skilfully and performs
its task energetically. There are politicians who think it would be
no misfortune if a violent outburst took place, because then there
would be a possibility of cutting the Gordian knot of the Socialist
question with the sword and thus attaining a final solution.
To much the same effect speaks Bernhardi, whose “Ger-
many and the Next War” has awakened so many of us
Britons to Germany’s true intention. Bernhardi repre-
sents fairly accurately the military and aristocratic govern


ing caste, and one can gather at once from a reading of
him and of Biilow that, if the Germans ever could take Aus-
tralia, the first thing they would do would be to make
a swift and scornful sweep of our wages boards, Factory
Acts, Arbitration Courts, and whole machinery of advanced
social legislation.
Bernhardi claims that the first duty of the legislator is
to protect the worker against social democratic propaganda
—one fancies the worker has heard this kind of thing before
—and he proceeds to show that “the wish to shorten the
working hours on principle”—except under certain very
limited conditions —“is an immoral endeavor and a com-
plete miscomprehension of the real value of work.”
All things considered, fellow-workers of Australia, is
not the British Empire a good kind of place to live in ? Re-
member that if it be this, it must also, by a law of inexor-
able necessity, be a good kind of place to die for. Remember
this, I say, and—in the name of all that is honest and manly
put the manifesto of the Canadian Social Democratic Party
quietly behind the fire!
OUR STAKE IN THE WAR.
November 2U, 191 J/..
I tried to show last week that this war is so far from
being a capitalists’ war that it is one of life and death,
materially and spiritually, for every worker in the British
Empire. This evening I wish to show that it is a war of
life and death for Australia, no less than for Britain. Even
were our own material interests unjeopardised, we would
still be bound in all honor and duty to spend our last sove-
reign and our last drop of blood for the general cause of
civilisation, and for the Mother Country, to whom we owe
our very life and freedom. As a matter of fact, however,
our own material existence is as vitally endangered as is


Britain’s; more so, indeed, for even if she could be utterly
defeated it would be difficult to imagine her becoming a
German province, whereas it would not be at all difficult to
imagine that we might undergo this unspeakable fate.
We may look for a moment at what Germany hopes
still may happen in the near future, and at what might
quite conceivably happen in the remote future should we
not carry this war to a clean finish.
It should always be remembered that next to the
suzerainty of Europe, Germany’s most ardent desire is a
huge and flourishing colonial Empire. Further, as she has
hitherto proved herself totally incapable of doing any effi-
cient pioneer work, her colonies must be wrested, ready-
made, from others.
The French colonies in North Africa are sufficiently
obviously her immediate goal; but she has the insatiable
ambition of the parvenu, and no scheme is too wild for
her, as witness her designs upon South America, luckily
foiled by the resolute application of the Monroe Doctrine.
We need not, therefore, regard ourselves as lying outside
the scope of her ambition. Indeed, as has just been pointed
out by the eminent English historian, Mr. C. R. L. Fletcher,
if Germany could once beat England to her knees, the first
thing she would demand of her would be her colonies; and,
given permanent command of the sea, she would certainly
obtain at least some of them. No place would be more
suitable for giving her her coveted “place in the sun” than
Australia.
She will not have failed to reflect that our two largest
cities, the ganglia of our great nervous system, lie practi-
cally on our sea coast. Bernhardi has himself told us that
she looks upon our naval and military forces as utterly
contemptible. We may be sure that she has taken every
means to prepare the way for herself here, as elsewhere
throughout our Empire, and to obtain the fullest possible
information regarding means for our assault and possible
subjugation.
It has not been for nothing that a man who has been
going regularly backwards and forwards between London
and Berlin and has displayed in his correspondence his
2


longing for England’s defeat, should have found it possible
to gain a commission in our forces and obtain technical
knowledge imperilling our safety. Nor is he in the least
likely to be the only one of his kind throughout Australia.
The harm is, of course, now done: but the pity of it, the pity
of it!
Herr Maximilian Harden has recently informed us in
“Die Zukunft,” what most of us have already realised for
ourselves, that Germany wilfully made this war, and made
it in order “to obtain more elbow-room.” Remember, too,
that if we confidently believe that we must beat Germany
in the end, Germany, or a great part of her, believes no
less confidently, even now, that she will beat and break us.
Now, as at the beginning, this matter is one of life and
death for every man of British blood.
It is not by fossilised “philosophy,” nor yet by tolerance
run rancid, but by the grimmest intensity of effort, that we
shall foil the steadfast and determined hate embodied in
such a message as this, from the “Kreuz Zeitung,” quoted
in “The Times” of September 19:—
No hour is more ardently desired by us than that of the reckoning
with England. History tells us that no wars are so gruesome and
so hard as those between peoples of the same race. So be it, then.
We must have satisfaction, and if ever a war should be regarded as
a judgment of God, it is this one. We know and feel more every day
that England is not unconquerable. We have seen her mercenaries
in France fight, and fly. We have noted the disparity
between killed and wounded, and the number of those made prisoners.
We know that the more England sends troops to the Continent, the
more her position of military defencelessness must be accentuated.
We know, as many instances have recently shown, that her ships
are now approaching the place, whether in the Baltic or the North
Sea, from which we shall be able to drive a blow into the heart of
the British Empire.
Without troubling to refute this utterance, we may
glance at what might be imagined as happening to our-
selves could Germany conceivably realise her plan for Eng-
land’s downfall.
It is perhaps hardly necessary to point out that, in the
first place, the scarcely thinkable atrocities recently inflicted
upon Belgium, whom Germany has no cause for hating,
would be vented tenfold, were that possible, upon ourselves,
whom, as part of the British Empire, she hates with an
accumulated and systematised loathing.


I would like here to point out once more that these
excesses can no longer be considered as isolated or excep-
tional occurrences; they are the direct outcome of the policy
of terror deliberately inculcated in the Prussian military
handbooks for ‘‘keeping in order” conquered country con-
taining lines of communication which it may be found
necessary to hold with a relatively small force.
This fact is now recognised throughout the representa-
tive English press, and has been emphasised by Mr.
Fletcher in a recently published pamphlet.
Atrocities apart, however, it is somewhat instructive
to consider, by glancing for a moment at Alsace-Lorraine
and Posen, what is implied by permanent German occupa-
tion of a conquered country.
As has been pointed out by Dr. Charles Sarolea in his
admirable work, “The Anglo-German Problem,” the
Prussian treatment of Poland supplies the most striking
example possible of the difference between the German
and the English conceptions of Empire. Dr. Sarolea con-
tinues :
It reveals the Prussian belief in force and authority, the super-
stition of the State; the disbelief in human freedom, the disregard of
the rights of other nationalities. And better than any other study
the Polish policy explains the failure of Germany as a colonising power.
For colonisation means sympathy and imagination, elasticity and the
capacity of adaptation, and, above all things, the capacity of assimi-
lating alien elements. The German absolutely lacks that capacity.
Germany’s treatment of the Poles is just as tyrannical
as her treatment of the Socialists. Prinz von Biilow has
pointed out regretfully that there was a time when a liberal
policy was meted out towards these despised Slavs. Ac-
cording to him, this was the beginning of the whole mis-
chief, because if the Poles had never known what decent
treatment was, they would never have objected to the
sublime brutalities subsequently devised for them by Bis-
marck.
No one would accuse him at least of the vices of sym-
pathy or Liberalism. Appalled by the multiplication of
the Poles, both within German Poland and without it, and
by the fact that they were actually settled thickly on their
own land, he deliberately resolved to break the nation by
instituting the notorious Colonising Commission of 1886.


As the Poles were gradually to be dispossessed of their land, so
they were to be deprived of their language. The use of Polish was
prohibited in public meetings. The national language was ousted
from the schools, and children were forbidden to pray to God in their
mother tongue.
The aim, if not the result, of this enactment was to
drive the Poles forth from their own country, even if this
had to be done by compulsory expropriation. The land
thus resumed was occupied by Germans, and doubled in
value, the only sufferers being the Polish peasant and tax-
payer, for whom life became almost impossible.
The intense hate and determination which this policy
aroused among the Poles is, in itself, sufficient proof both
of Germany’s political incapacity and of the sordid self-
seeking with which she administers conquered territory.
As a matter of fact, she has not even scored the practical
success of obtaining the coveted land, for the Poles have
been drawn together by persecution, have set their teeth in
the stern determination to foil her, and have managed by
adroit scheming to thwart the Prussian plans for their dis-
possession. The intensity of feeling which Germany has
succeeded in creating may be gathered by reference to the
notorious school strike of 1907, which lasted nearly a year.
As has been pointed out, Germany’s administration of
Poland to-day resembles the administrative methods which
England applied to Ireland in the eighteenth century, and
has now utterly discarded and discredited. Indeed, the
contrast is a most striking one between Germany’s ex-
propriation of Polish peasants for the benefit of Prussian
land grabbers and the costly latter-day resumption by the
British Government of large estates in Ireland for the
settlement thereon of Irish peasant proprietors.
The condition of Alsace-Lorraine is equally pitiable.
Under French rule, she enjoyed happiness and prosperity,
and played her part worthily in the national life in all the
arts of peace and war. Then, she possessed universal
suffrage, and was a happy member of a great and civilised
nation. To-day, she is plunged in poverty and misery as
the result of German rule.
Never was a country so poverty stricken. The cost of
living has been trebled; in France, everything, bread, meat,


fruit, vegetables, is cheaper by more than half. Under
French rule a pint of wine cost three pence; to-day it costs
more than a shilling, and is of inferior quality. The whole
country is administered by, and for, interested German
officials, and the taxes are enormous. The reason for this
is that the position of these functionaries is so unpleasant,
owing to the general detestation of German rule, that they
have to be bribed by double salaries to go to the province,
and the cost of this, of course, falls on the taxpayer.
A blood tax is imposed on the families of those who
leave Alsace-Lorraine to serve in the French army; and
soldiers who have done this cannot return to the province
under the age of 45, unless they are prepared to pay a huge
penalty. In spite of this, there were in the French army
in 1910, sixty-eight generals of division of Alsatian origin,
while a year or two before two natives of Strasbourg were
simultaneously Ministers of War and Marine.
This will show how passionately the provinces still cling
to France, and what an utter failure German political “cul-
ture” has again made of the spoils of conquest.
As for the insolent brutality with which Germany treats
her Alsatian subjects, the Zabern incident is fresh in the
minds of all of us.
Altogether what seems important at present for us Aus-
tralians is that we should divest ourselves utterly of the
provincial outlook still prevalent in some quarters, and
should try to “think European.” Our first duty is to face
the problem fearlessly for ourselves, and to think how we
should like it if what has happened to Belgium, Alsace, and
Posen should ever happen to us. If we do this we should
drop all talk of a “drawn war” and an “unbroken enemy,”
and shall realise that we must follow the lead of civilisa-
tion, and be prepared, each one of us, to spend our all in
carrying this struggle against barbarism and devilry
through to the end.
Our motto must be “Never again,” for if there is an
again,” the fate of our nation may be death or slavery.


“WORLD-POWER OR DOWNFALL.”
December 1, 1914.
It is the paramount duty of every Australian to educate
himself and others in the origins of this war, in the general
principles it involves, and in its possible results. No
matter what any man’s or woman’s occupation is, he or
she should get hold of the best literature, or some consider-
able part of it, written on the subject, should master it,
and should take every possible opportunity of passing on
the.result to others.
This is a branch of knowledge with which no teacher
or learner may in common decency grow bored. The men
who are fighting for our existence on the Yser are not bored,
though they may be sore wounded and a-weary. Nor
have we any right to our leisure till we have first done this
thing. It is but little leisure that is falling now to the
learners in the school of death.
The men who are doing the fighting are the only people
exempt from the duty of reading about it and what led to
it. They need have read but little to know that the cause
for which they are facing death is as righteous as it is
vital to the existence of their race.
Of volumes published before the war began, Mr. R.
G. Ussher’s “Pan-Germanism” is, speaking generally, per-
haps the best interpretation and criticism yet published of
Germany’s material ambitions and her schemes for their
realisation.
The main defect of this book is that it gives too little
weight to the vast moral issue at stake in the antagonism
between England and Germany: M. Sarolea’s volume, “The
Anglo-German Problem,” is much better here. “Pan-Ger-
manism” shows clearly enough, however, that Germany’s
ambition and her hope of realising it are based on a repu


diation of the whole ethical ideal entertained by her anta-
gonists and by most civilised countries of the world,
Mr. Ussher, writing as an impartial American observer,
seems rather to favor such a repudiation when he says:—
The moral code of the financial world, like the moral code of the
political world, is based upon the notions of England and France, upon
ideas obviously themselves the result of a peculiar situation, on whose
continuance the welfare of England and France depends.
The “peculiar situation” in question is the peculiar
situation upon which all human life and honor throughout
the whole world are at present founded—the situation
which enables our towns to avoid the fate of Louvain and
our women to avoid the fate of those other women who
have lately, according to a recent number of “The Times,”
returned to England wishing they had undergone death
rather than the fate meted out to them by German officers.
It is the “situation” which makes for dignity and worth and
freedom, which lives and lets live, which is the basis of
every kind of personal and international trust and honor.
All these things, on Professor Ussher’s own showing, Ger-
many has deliberately set herself to destroy.
Most instructive are his remarks on her dealings in
international finance. She wished to make war with Eng-
land and France in 1911 over the Morocco crisis, which
she had deliberately created for this purpose, and she had
actually made everything ready for hostilities, when she
found to her intense chagrin that almost the whole of her
financial credit, private and national, depended upon
loans secured in England and Paris. Those who controlled
the financial market in these capitals at once took steps to
recall these loans, with the result that all ready money was
moved out of Germany, and the whole nation was on the
verge of a huge financial catastrophe. War was clearly
impossible on that occasion.
But the fiasco set the authorities thinking along lines
which have since become familiar and they concluded, so
Mr. Ussher tells us, in words possessing a peculiar signi-
ficance, written as they were eighteen months before the
war:—“Whatever is written on paper is paper: things
ARE, and writing on paper does not change a thing or its
position.”


Moreover, England has been simple enough to trust to
Germany’s honor, and lend her vast sums of money. The
remedy is obvious:—
The moment the borrowers refuse to recognise the validity of
England’s claims upon their revenues and incomes, and begin to
realise that they hold with a clutch which she cannot loosen the actual
substance of wealth, then they will begin to see that her wealth is not
real, but depends purely upon their willingness to continue to pay
her revenue which they may stop paying her at any moment
without suffering any consequences. To be sure, such notions as
these presume the violation of every notion of commercial morality
and expediency at present existing in the world, but as the Germans
say, if they were violated, what could England and France possibly
do to avoid destruction ? It is true, they admit, that such a wholesale
repudiation of debts would undoubtedly make it difficult for nations
to borrow from each other for some time to come; but, they retort, if
such a repudiation took place, the debtor nations would not need to
borrow money for generations to come.
The experience of many English firms at the beginning
of the war furnishes a startling confirmation of Mr.
Ussher’s surmise regarding Germany’s corrupt financial
intentions.
The rest of the book is directed to showing that in the
last few years Germany has steadily pursued a tendency
towards “world-dominion”—to use Bernhardi’s phrase—
which Mr. Ussher seems to consider justifiable, but which
is only so if you grant her premisses, and admit that her
strength and appetities give her the right to “transvalue all
values.”
He shows how her attempts at aggression have been
foiled at every turn by the statecraft of her rivals—how
the staunch stand of France and Britain in North Africa
prevented her seizing the French colonies there; how Bri-
tish diplomacy in Persia and the Russian railway to Herat
baffled the designs on India which she had hoped to con-
summate through the Baghdad railway; and how the Bal-
kan States detected and defeated her subtle designs for their
subjection to Pan-Germanism.
The whole of these negotiations show that, while dis-
playing remarkable acuteness—most would call it cunning
—along the lower diplomatic levels, she has conspicuously
failed in the higher sphere, and has thus displayed in the
international field the political inefficiency attributed to haf
by her own Chancellor, Biilow, and conspicuously evident,


as I have already shown, in her internal relations with the
Socialists and her conquered dominions. Her failure to
gain the confidence of the nations, and to induce them to sub-
mit to her wishes, is absolutely one in origin with her failure
in the other fields—is due, in fact, to her utter inability
to take account of the ethical element in national and inter-
national life.
Nations and men which disregard this factor must
always fail grotesquely in the end, both materially and
spiritually. And civilisation has welcomed England to-day
and rejected Germany precisely because she knows that
the first country is pledged by self-interest and by some-
thing considerably higher to respect the order and decency
of the world, while the latter has striven with might and
main to trample these things under foot for the sheer sake
of her own selfish aggrandisement.
December 8,191 k.
We have recently been told by a leading Australian
statesman exactly what this war means for us. He showed
that if Germany could once gain permanent possession of
Belgium and control the Channel, English command of the
sea would quickly be at an end, and it would follow almost
inevitably that we would, sooner or later, come beneath Ger-
man sway.
I wish to help to hammer it home to every Australian
that this is no empty fear nor airy speculation, but a truth
which must force itself on the conviction of every reason-
able man who has once reviewed the evidence. Since that
statesman’s speech, one thing has happened which bears
immediately on this issue. It has been officially declare
by America that while the Monroe Doctrine would permit
a German invasion of Canada, it would on no accoun
sanction permanent German occupation of that Dominion.
This puts the richest part of Britain’s Empire outside Ger-
41
OUR DANGERS AND DUTIES.
OUR DANGERS AND DUTIES


many’s ambition unless she should be able to defeat both
England and the United States in quick succession.
For our own subjugation, it would only be necessary
for her to defeat England. Most of us, allowing the wish
to father the thought, will probably declare such a catas-
trophe to be for the time-being excessively unlikely. Even
though we admit this, we are morally bound to face the
consequences of a failure, which, could it ever occur, might
quite conceivably result in our national slavery or death.
As an eminent authority put it to me a few days ago,
what we have already done, and what we intend doing, is
not a mere matter of lending the old country a helping hand
though we would, of course, have been proud and glad
to do this in any case, to our utmost ability. What is
actually occurring is that the Mother Country is imperilling
her life to save ours. It is the soberest fact that on Ger-
many’s forfeiture or retention of Belgium hangs the ques-
tion as to what shall be our future language in Australia.
None but the fool or the coward will wish to blink this
vital and tremendous fact. The wise and strong will face
it unflinchingly, and take swift steps to forestall disaster.
Mr. H. E. Egerton, Beit Professor of Colonial History at
Oxford, in his recently published pamphlet on “The War
and the British Dominions,” proves himself no shirker of
this issue. He shows that the interests and freedom of
the whole world are imperilled by what he calls “the devil
of Prussian militarism.” England’s victory would mean a
renewed lease of peace and security for the nations: Ger-
many’s would at once change their whole outlook to one of
peril and fear.
The United States, for instance, would have to alter its
whole way of living and prevent German invasion by means
of a strong fleet and powerful army. In South Africa,
according to General Smuts, Germany has already prepared
the way for her occupation of the country, and the South
African Government possesses clear evidence of her intri-
gues to this end.
Our own subjugation might take longer:—
Germany would probably, at first, be content to put pressure to
bear so that the other Dominions should sever their political con


nection with Great Britain, and then would attempt to obtain the
monopoly of their trade by enforcing preferential treatment. Were
emigration from Germany again to become necessary or expedient, the
emigrants would be encouraged to go to Canada or Australasia, by
which means the German element in these communities would be
strengthened. Meanwhile, in various directions, the emissaries of
German “culture” would be spreading their nets.
What would follow next should be fairly obvious. Ger-
many would make the fullest use of such information as
she might have gleaned from—well, shall we say the regular
visits to Berlin of the ex-member of our own military forces,
whose correspondence recently expressed a wish that there
were seventeen or eighteen “Emdens” round our coast?
At this point, information regarding our railway system,
if any should be locally forthcoming, would become vitally
important to her, and so would inside information —could
such be possibly given—concerning the official and unofficial
communications made through our telegraph and telephone
services.
One hopes one has the right to assume that those in
authority have eliminated all present possibility of treach-
ery in these terribly important quarters.
The last phase would occur when the traitors within co-
operated with the foemen without.
After this, one imagines, the end would come quickly.
These things being so, we Australians should prepare
to take an even greater part in the struggle than we have
hitherto taken. What may be possible in detail here I
leave to more expert heads than mine. But on the general
issue I would like to point out that unless something entirely
unforeseen occurs, this war is not going to end swiftly,
even if Germany should be driven out of Belgium within
the next week or two. It is our first duty, so it seems to
me, to regard ourselves, for the purposes of this war, as
being morally, and even geographically, part of Europe.
In Europe, within the next few months, or years, will be
decided the question of our life or death.
It seems to me that every man of military age should
be ready to volunteer for active service should a fresh call
be made. In England it is now considered disgraceful for
any man of such age not to have offered his services to his
country, and few women will have anything to do with the


shirkers. And Australia’s stake in this war, as I have
shown, is even greater than England’s.
Those of us who to their bitter chagrin may be pre-
vented by age or ill-health—the only valid excuses—from
responding to the call, may at least do their best in helping
the authorities by every means in their power to maintain
the safety and honor of this country. It seems to me that
in both these respects the local conditions are far healthier,
more English, and less parochial than they were a few weeks
ago.
People have been educating themselves in the causes and
issues of this war by reference to German and English pub-
lications, and they have learnt that they are locked in a
death struggle with “the monster of militarism”—to use
Professor Egerton’s words —“with its god, which is but
the devil of ordinary folk and its moral creed, which to us
Philistines is the negation of morality.”
They have also read the English papers with their sober
and documented and duly attested accounts of the officially-
sanctioned German atrocities, and they know what to expect
should they or their wives and children fall for a few hours
into the hands of Prusian officers. Some people I have
met seem to think it rather bad form that one should men-
these horrible happenings, and to consider that if one does
so, one is in some sense responsible for their occurrence. As
a matter of fact, no one can understand what this war
means unless he takes these things, too, into account, and
remembers that they are not isolated occurrences, but the
national expression of a race which has become thoroughly
brutalised through evil education and sudden material pros-
perity.
How thorough this process has been may be seen from
a glance at Mr. Austin Harrison’s article on “Intelligent
Brutality,” in the current number of the “English Review.”
Generally speaking, there is little to be said for the
spiritual cowardice which smarts and shrinks and turns
away when the searchlight of truth is flung upon the darker
and more terrible recesses of human nature. And in this
case, where full understanding of the truth is the first moral


necessity, ignorance becomes not only reprehensible, but
utterly contemptible.
Speaking as an Australian who has a fair first-hand
knowledge of England and her spirit, and some knowledge,
too, of the chief European countries, I may say that what
filled me with indignation in the first few weeks of the war
was the position adopted by some Germans, and accepted
by many Australians, that this Australia of ours was a
kind of Tom Tiddler’s ground—a place lacking utterly the
soul and spirit of a great nation, where any man might
say what he would to the disparagement of our flag and
the men who were fighting for our existence on the other
side of the world.
Such a state of affairs was as perilous to our honor as
it was to our security. Things are considerably better
now. The wave of earnest feeling which recently caught
England has spread to ourselves; and I believe that it would
today be dangerous for any man to utter the sentiments
publicly expressed a few weeks ago by Australians, who, I
repeat, may have had definite material reasons for concilia-
ting local German opinion.
Still, certain cases recently made public, and others
which I know to have been recently reported at head-
quarters, lead me to believe that the foeman in our midst
is still active and dangerous; and, while we must on no
acount sink to our enemy’s level and persecute the innocent
and honorable aliens amongst us, we must, it seems to me,
be more vigilant than ever, and where sedition or treachery
have been proved, considerably more stern. Otherwise we
shall be untrue to ourselves in this supreme crisis of our
national existence.


A VOLUME OF WARNING.
December 15, 1914.
I suppose that it is only since the beginning of the war
that most people have become fully awake to the sinister
intention which Germany has entertained against the peace
of Europe for the last generation.
The fact that we have just begun to understand this
does not in the least mean that we have reached our con-
clusions merely as the result of the present hostilities, nor
built up a case after the event to justify the intensity of
feeling which our struggle with Germany has awakened in
every part of our Empire. One of the most remarkable
things about this war is that it has been foretold with abso-
lute accuracy in a very great number of quarters, both
English and German, and that its causes have been analysed
by various writers with the most uncanny precision.
We have been too simple, too careless, and too ignorant
in the past to realise the truth. We might have learnt it,
had we wished, over and over again. We are only learning
it now, but we will not forget it in a hurry, nor allow our
British guilelessness and trust in German “honor” to bring
us once more to the brink of disaster. At least, I devoutly
hope we will not, for some of the things one still hears said
about this war and our opponents make one despair as to
whether we Britons will ever realise that all do not mean
as decently by creation as we do ourselves, and that the devil
still walks abroad, and becomes incarnate in nations, no less
than in men.
I have already had occasion in this series of articles to
refer to “The Anglo-German Problem,” by Charles Sarolea
(Nelson and Company, Edinburgh), one of the best books,
in my opinion, if not the very best, on the causes which
have produced the present war. M. Sarolea is a Belgian


bv nationality, but has lived for a considerable number of
years in the United Kingdom, and is, or was till recently,
Professor of French in the University of Edinburgh. He
is also the editor of “Everyman’s Magazine, and is well
known to students of Tolstoy as the author of a brilliant
little book on the great Russian. He is a great linguist,
and a man of rich and various culture. , .
If I may venture a personal reminiscence, he stayed at
roy home in England several years ago for a , daya ’ a " d
I have a vivid recollection of his width of outlook and bnl-
iancy of conversation. He has travelled widely through-
out Europe and the Near East, and is acquainted mth
many of the most notable men in Europe. It will thus
be sera that he is no mere superficial writer, nor yet an ar -
chatr student of European affairs. His outlook is ca m,
his language measured, and his thought balanced and just.
ThTelings
tha" Ms booMvraswritten two years before the beginning of
th6 Hte opotb" with an eloquent passage on the meaning to
civilisation of the British Empire:-
The British Empire may be world’s history,
decisive experiment in liberal statesma h P m the most con-
the most effective power m worm ] p utical ng hts of
vincing proof that an unswerving respect 10 l a^ty> that order is
the people is the strongest bond claims of nationality
compatible with liberty, and that c humanit In
C p a associated with the idea
0t WS. unique glory of "‘S
solubly associated with and syno y rpr)re sentative government, so
England has been the tj« l£d Slflar of all free
will the British Empire be the perfect typ md comm unities, the
- bee ”
philosopher’s stone of human statesman P- Fnffland
This ideal, he shows, is one which has won to
the respect, and even the affection, of races^
the . earth ’ to Power, over countries she
cises effectively and bene cia y ding to the separ-
development of her individual parts, according


ate genius of each, and in maintaining such relations with
other nations as allow this expansion to develop quietly and
harmoniously.
Germany, on the other hand, is neither liked nor trusted
by a single civilised nation. This might possibly be attri-
buted, in the case of England, to commercial jealousy, but
even here the explanation will not hold good, for, as M.
Sarolea points out, commercial rivalry does not by any
means necessarily produce mutual dislike or mutual depre-
ciation. Neither will it do to attribute the French hatred
of Germany to the war of 1870, for it is one of the strangest
and one of the noblest features of human nature that as a
rule war leaves no permanent bitterness behind it. The
case of Germany is, therefore, exceptional.
Nor would either of the above explanations account for
the cordial detestation with which she is regarded by smal-
ler nations like Belgium and Holland and Denmark. Her
position in the world is unique in the distrust it inspires,
and it inspires this because she is instinctively recognised
as the supreme menace to European peace, the one nation
which will not live honorably and quietly in decent, neigh-
borly relations with its fellows. Germany, then, has no
political hold upon her fellows, and inspires no political
confidence in any quarter of the globe.
Similarly, says Monsieur Sarolea, the moral and intel-
lectual influence of her culture is steadily diminishing.
“There is not one contemporary German writer who exerts
anything like the influence which Tolstoy or Ibsen or
Maeterlinck wields in contemporary thought/'
M. Sarolea has not been the only one to emphasise these
facts. Even Germany herself has been driven to recognise
the tacit vote of no confidence which has been cast against
her by the nations. You will find Billow complaining in
his “Imperial Germany” that no nation seems to like his
country. Bernhardi still more plaintively makes the same
complaint. Maximilian Harden, the most prominent jour-
nalist in Germany, whimpers in the “Zukunft” of Septem-
ber, 1911, “We have no friend in the wide world.”
Few Germans have any true sense of humor. If they
had, one would hardly find these eminent writers, each one


of them, making the above admission, and at the same time
claiming that their culture was absolutely essential to the
well-being of the universe. What a situation for Mr. Gil-
bert ! If he had striven his utmost in his most preposter-
ous vein, he could hardly have out-Bernhardied Bernhardi.
What then is the cause of all these things? Nations,
like men, do not forfeit the esteem of their fellows except
for some weighty cause.
It has been a favorite German device to attribute Ger-
many’s unpopularity to the machinations of the wicked
schemer, England, and the arch villain in the piece, the
supreme plotter against injured virtue, has been, so it is
suggested, the late Edward VII. He, by his diplomacy,
unscrupulously strove to isolate Germany from the respect
and sympathy of the world, to hedge her round with a
ring of hostile conspirators, and to put a bridle upon that
engaging Will to Power which has striven so valiantly to
enslave the nations for their own improvement.
Germany, if we are to believe this interpretation, is
the femme incomprise of the nations, the kind of female,
familiar to most of us, who goes about suggesting that
nobody understands her, and that everyone would love her
if they did.
It is hardly to be supposed that any intelligent German
at the present day hopes for a moment that this theory of
the case will be generally accepted. Edward VII. was
hardly clever enough for this—as cleverness is understood
by the Berlin diplomatists who have striven to reduce
international politics to the level of a spielers’ game ot
poker, and have made Prussian “honor a bywor or a
that is contemptible and base. And if he was no c ever
enough he was, on the other hand, far too mean-spirited
for such an audacious project—mean-spirited, e i un er
stood, as “spirit” is defined by the pseudo-Nietzschean
“thinkers” and “moralists” who regard Christian charity
and good-will as contemptible signs of weakness, and ta
about the “mawkish save-virtue of pity”—the virtue fro
which the official spoilers of Louvain, the official murderers
and mutilators of innocent children, the official violators


of tender and innocent women, have shown themselves so
conspicuously free.
Again, it is really to impose too great a strain on the
simplicity of the nations to ask them to believe that the
whole world can be gulled, as has just been indicated, by
one nation and one man, and forced to regard the angel of
Prussian “culture” as a particularly shady devil of the pit.
France, Russia and Italy, not to speak of the smaller
nations, will probably realise the insult to their intelligence
implied in this suggestion.
Nor is it seriously possible to think that Germany her-
self really believes this view of the matter, though she will
hope that it may be forced on many of her subjects and
neighbors, if it is only taught sufficiently hard and long by
the Prussian professors whom she hires to do her dirty
work of misinterpreting history and international politics.
It is not to England that we must look for the true cause
of Germany’s unpopularity, but to Germany herself. The
nations have realised that her supreme aim is their sub-
jugation, and they have also realised that that subjugation
means nothing short of slavery. I have already shown, by
describing the conditions of Alsace-Lorraine and Posen,
exactly what we have to fear in this regard. I have further
pointed out exactly what subjection to Germany would mean
to the Australian worker.
Germany in the last generation has become utterly dis-
trusted, and, morally speaking, utterly despised, because it
is realised that her conception of nationality is wholly un-
ethical and unhumanitarian. M. Sarolea points out that
the French national conception resembles the English in
that it is willing to live and let live. The French patriot
is all the prouder of his country, he is all the more en-
thusiastic in its service, because he feels that the cause of
France is identified with the service of humanity:—
The Frenchman has always been a humanist. In the words of
Macaulay, “the French mind has always been the interpreter between
national ideas and those of universal mankind.” It is the law of
France, the Code Napoleon, which has been adopted to-day by the
greater part of the civilised world, and the universality of French
culture is expressed to-day in the wonderful internationality and
universality of the French language. As in England, so in France,
the human ideal does not exclude and impoverish the national ideal;
rather does it include it and enrich it.


And, further, the world realises that this doctrine of
force-at-any-price is not the expression of a man nor of a
clique, but of a whole nation. ‘‘We willed it,” recently
wrote Harden, editor of the most popular paper in Ger-
many, regarding the present war. As M. Sarolea says:—
The whole German people have become Bismarckian, and believe
that it is might which creates right. The whole of the younger
generation have become Nietzschean in politics, and believe in the
Will to Power, der Wills zur Macht. That political philosophy is
to-day the living and inspiring ideal which informs German policy.
Enough has probably been said to show that long before
the present war Germany occupied a position of general
suspicion and dislike probably unique in the world’s history.
Since the war has begun this fact, and its reasons, must
have forced themselves with tenfold vehemence upon the
world, and in particular upon the British race. It is not
a generous foe that we are fighting, not a foe
of the kind which, at the battle of Fontenoy,
chivalrously invited the English Grenadiers to fire the first
volley. It is a ruthless and supremely powerful Force
which has vowed our downfall, and out of its lust for our
destruction has created a whole sinister religion.
It is a Force which, if we beat it without breaking it,
will never rest, so Bernhardi himself has told us, till it has
redressed the balance, and brought us to our knees. If we
look to the future, we shall realise that a drawn war would
be hardly less perilous to our Empire than a lost war.
Our motto, like England’s, must be “Never again.” And
to ensure its fulfilment, we Australians must be prepared,
should the call be made, to sacrifice our last sovereign and
our last drop of blood.


FACTS TO BE FACED.
December 22, 1914.
It is the bounden duty of every Australian speaker and
writer to help to create in this country to-day that intensity
of national feeling without which no nation can possibly
be brought to make the last sacrifice. Flippancy and “good
humor” are here utterly out of place; and so is the “philo-
sophy” which cowards so readily display when confronted
with the suffering and death of others.
Such ways of thinking may at present be left to the
half-witted and half-hearted and the half-sexed. The men
fighting by land or sea, the men encamped beneath the
Pyramids, or on the way there, are the only ones who have
earned the right to take this war laughing. What we
others chiefly need at present is far more fervor with
regard to this quarrel of our race—and a far keener realisa-
tion of what defeat would mean to our Empire and our
nation.
It is no object of mine to lull or flatter the readers of
this paper. I wish to point them relentlessly to the truth,
that however strong or well-founded our hopes may appear,
no man can yet say how this war will go. Many things
give us encouragement for the future: for the present, the
stark facts are that in the west the Germans remain within
sixty miles of Paris, while in the east, as we were yesterday
informed, they are within thirty miles of Warsaw.
How necessary it is from the standpoint of national ex-
pediency to keep these things ever in view may be gathered
from Lord Kitchener’s words of November 9:—
The British Empire is now fighting for its existence. I want
every citizen to understand this cardinal fact, for only from a clear
conception of the vast importance of the issue can come the great
national moral impulse without which the Governments, War Minis-
ters, or even their navies, can do but little.
52


We in Australia surely stand in even greater need of
this warning than does England. As Sir Arthur Stanley
reminded us on Friday, we have been marvellously blessed
here for the last fifty years, and free of the threat of ex-
ternal interference which has always been a danger in the
crowded parts of the old world. It is at once our national
virtue and our national weakness that we take things
lightly. The question we have to ask ourselves is whether
we are not taking things a good deal too lightly to-day. No
one who knows our national will and temper can think that
they are anything but sound in essentials; and I fancy it
would take but little to awaken us to the great lesson
preached by Meredith to France after 1870:
The lesson writ in red since first Time ran
A hunter hunting down the beast in man,
That till the chasing out of its last vice
The flesh was fashioned but for sacrifice.
A further source of national weakness is the presence
in our midst of certain persons who go about stating what
they call “the case against England,” deprecating the say-
ing of “anything harsh about Germany,” endeavoring to
palliate or deny the revolting cruelties which have been
proved up to the hilt against the German military authori-
ties by the findings of the Belgian Commission, and the
diaries of Prussian officers; and—perhaps most detestable
of all—declaring that we “must not do or say anything with
regard to Germany which we may regret when the war is
over, as we shall then need her good-will for sound com-
mercial reasons.”
I would like to point out to these frail but interesting
intellects that they only hold their life and freedom and
honor—such as it is—by grace of the men who are fighting
for them on the Yser and in the North Sea, and that if they
cannot in common decency and gratitude admit this fact,
they should at least in common prudence hold their peace.
Yet there are still people among us whose love and sym-
pathy seems exclusively reserved for the nation which is
striving with the utmost might and unscrupulousness for
our downfall. The only version of the present quarrel
which these valuable citizens will accept is that of the noble


nation which has referred to its solemn bond as a mere
“scrap of paper” to be torn up whenever convenient and
flung in the face of its partner in the pact.
The country would be the stronger and cleaner if it
were purged of these people’s presence, and if they were
given free tickets to America or some other neutral country
that they might think better worth defending than the one
which is now giving them life and safety at the cost of
its own life-blood.
Their influence may not be great, but in so far as it
exists at all it is dangerous from the standpoint of national
policy—how dangerous may be gathered from the words
addressed ten days ago by Sir William Cullen, Chief Justice
of New South Wales, and Chancellor of Sydney University,
to a body of students.
This utterance, like so many made recently in England,
gains added impressiveness through being that of a thinker
and a scholar and a man at the head of the greatest edu-
cational foundation in his State. I reproduce it from
“The Australian Statesman and Mining Standard,” a
journal whose comments on the progress of the war should
be widely read throughout Australia:—
“I have been rather entertained by certain discoveries
of writers who seem to fear, above all things, that we will
hold unkindly feelings towards our opponents, and who
are endeavoring to place in front of us the view that we
must suppress every hard feeling towards those who are
fighting against us. It is like a benevolent old lady who
preaches to men engaged in mortal combat: ‘Let brotherly
love continue.’ I believe this of the British, and of Aus-
tralians, men of the same breed, that they will never be
mean or unchivalrous. They will be just, but, as for
preaching generosity when nobody knows who is going
down, I think those sermons, directed towards modifying
any feeling of resentment against the actions of our op-
ponents are sadly misplaced. (Applause.) The persons
to whom our generosity should go out are the victims of
cruelty, meanness and brutality, unsurpassed in modern
history, and scarcely equalled in ancient history; and those
who tell us that we are to regard this matter from the


philosophic standpoint, declaring that we should feel love
for the people with whom our nation is engaged, are wast-
ing our time, and they are, to some extent, no one knows to
how great an extent, taking the fibre out of the men who
could help us if they threw their whole heart and soul into
The vital application of the whole matter to Australia
lies in the last two lines.
December 29, 191 b.
During the last few weeks I have repeatedly heard the
question, how far may Nietzsche be held f ° r y^®
Present war? It cannot be seriously doubted that a vast
body of German public opinion regards, or to re-
crard it as a struggle after the very heart of him who
scouted pity as the most contemptible of the Christian
“virtues,” regarded war as one of the main actmto of the
Superman, and gave unto his chosen ones the supreme
commandment “live dangerously. ..... ~
Before and since the outbreak of hostilities all so
queer statements have been made by pubhc i«ien in Ger
many, from the Kaiser upwards which sound to any true
student of Nietzsche much as the notes of a g
might sound when transmitted through some cheap and
Waring megaphone. To the grotesque misapplication of
Nietzsche’s teaching regarding the ; all
moral values is in large measure ue Germany to
repudiation of national honor, { Wh ic h caused
dismiss the Belgian treaty as a scr gbe sbo uld
make to England the disgusting propo bbed of her
stand quietly by while her chief ally was
colonies. . , . certain context and with
Nietzsche, again, had, in a certa
marked reservations, defended > {or the sakc
that the weaklings of this earth existed y
NIETZSCHE AND THE WAR.


of the Superman, that sovereign incarnation of the Will to
Power. It is seemingly to a perverse misrendering of this
precept by a hundred brutal militarists and professorial
pedants, that we owe the German official policy of “Schreck-
lichkeit,” or “awfulness,” which has resulted in a succes-
sion of organised horrors probably unparalleled in the
world’s history.
If anyone still doubts these occurrences, I repeat, let
him consult recent numbers of “The Times” for the official
reports of the Belgian Commission on the behaviour of the
German army in Belgium. This testimony is confirmed up
to the hilt by the special war correspondent of “Nash’s
Magazine,” who, in the current number, describes a few
of the horrors he has lately seen. The report just men-
tioned and the other reports of the Commission should
be sufficient proof of these things even for the most un-
compromising Australian Anglophobe, or Teutophil.
I may add that I am not recurring to this subject be-
cause I like it, or because I expect other people to like it.
The details given are as odious to me as they must be to
every normally constituted man or woman. My sole object
is to point out to Australians that they have to expect this,
and worse—if worse were possible—should German troops
ever set foot on English or Australian soil; and if I can
help in nerving the heart and will of every Australian of
fighting age to enlist at once, and make such a hideous
contingency impossible, my purpose will have been amply
served.
To return to our subject, we have for long been informed
that modern Germany is steeped in Nietzsche’s teaching,
and that his influence has been especially strong in German
universities. Gerhart Hauptmann, the leading German
playwright of the day, in his contribution to the manifesto
recently addressed to America by German writers, enlarged
on the “culture”—convenient and elastic word! of the
German army, and said that it was common for a German
soldier to go to the front with one of Nietzsche’s master-
pieces in his knapsack.
One is tempted to ask whether all Nietzsche’s works are
equally acceptable to the “cultured” spoilers of Louvain,


or whether any are placed on the index by the military
censor. Certain it is that if the German army reads
Nietzsche extensively, it must get some rude shocks. The
following is a literal translation of a passage in
Nietzsche’s “Ecce Homo,” and I would draw special atten-
tion to the last sentence: —
Not only have the Germans entirely lost the breadth of vision
which enables one to grasp the course of culture and the values of
culture; not only are they one and all political (or church) puppets;
but they have also actually put a ban upon this very breadth of
vision. A man must first and foremost be German, he must belong
to “the race”; then only can he pass judgment upon all values and
lack of values in history—then only can he establish them. To be
German is itself an argument.
“Deutschland, Deutschland fiber alles” is a principle. The Ger-
mans stand for the “moral order of the universe” in history. There
is such a thing as writing history according to the lights of Imperial
Germany; there is, I fear, anti-Semitic history—there is also history
written with an eye to the Court, and Herr von Treitschke is not
ashamed of himself. When I listen to such things I lose all patience,
and I feel inclined, I even feel it my duty, to tell the Germans, for
once in a way, all that they have on their conscience. Every great
crime against culture for the last four centuries lies on their con-
science.
The reference to Treitschke is interesting, and bears out
what I stated a few weeks ago that in certain German
Universities European is “made to order” at the
sweet will of the authorities, and that students are care-
fully guarded from those truths which would lead them
to favor a peace based on a fair view of their neighbors.
But Nietzsche’s loathing of the German character was vast
and various. As a writer in “The Times” has recently
pointed out, one of his main causes for disliking Wagner
was the fact that “he condescended to the Germans, and
became a German Imperialist.”
Nietzsche expressly repudiates any identification of his
own teaching with the spirit of modern Prussia, and in-
stances as a sign of that Teutonic stupidity which he
despised, the fact that his book, “Beyond Good and Evil,
was seriously regarded in Prussia as a genuine and typical
example of “Junker-Philosophie.” He thus repudiated by
anticipation the exact misapplication with which I am now
dealing. When living in Switzerland he almost hugs him-
self with joy at his remoteness from Germany.


The following extracts, one imagines, must have caused
the volume which contains them—“Ecce Homo”—to weigh
rather heavily in the Prussian knapsack:—
It is even part of my ambition to be considered as essentially
a despiser of Germans. I expressed my suspicions of the German
character even at the age of six-and-twenty (see “Thoughts Out of
Season,” Vol. 11., pp. 164, 165). To my mind, the Germans are im-
possible. When I try to think of the kind of man who is opposed to
me in all my instincts, my mental image takes the form of a German.
As Nietzsche continues to speak of the Germans, his
language becomes “curiouser and curiouser”:—
You can scarcely even fathom their depths—they haven’t any,
and that’s the end of it. Thus they cannot even be called shallow.
That which is called “deep” in Germany is precisely this instinctive
uncleanliness towards oneself of which I have just spoken. Might I
be allowed, perhaps, to suggest the word “German” as an international
epithet denoting this psychological depravity?
And again:—
A man lowers himself by frequenting the society of Germans.
The Germans have not the faintest idea of how vulgar they are; but
this in itself is the acme of vulgarity—they are not even ashamed
of being merely Germans.
It is not my present object either to justify or refute
this estimate of the Germans; all that I wish to do is to
point out that perhaps some of them are carrying more
in their knapsack than they may be aware of.
Enough has probably been said to show that to judge
by Nietzsche’s utterances, Germany on the whole is some-
what mistaken when she claims him for her prophet and
seer, and claims that if he had been living to-day he would
have favored the present war. An esteemed friend of mine
has pointed out to me that Nietzsche’s love of beauty alone
would have led him to repudiate utterly the nation which
has destroyed Rheims Cathedral, and given to the flames
the immemorial treasures of Louvain.
How utterly he detested this kind of thing may be
gathered from a letter of his to Baron von Gersdorf,
apropos of the German excesses in Paris and the burning
of the Louvre in 1871.
The following sentences seem especially striking if read
in relation to the crimes of two months ago:—


We shall do wrong if we consider with a peaceful conceit the
unchaining of a war against culture, and if we impute the fault
merely to the unfortunates who do the deed. When I heard of the
firing of Paris, I was for some days utterly powerless, lost in tears
and doubts; the life of science, of philosophy, and of art appeared to
me as an absurdity when I saw a single day suffice for the ruin of
the finest works of art.
In his autobiographical notes of 1870 he writes:—“The
War: my profoundest affliction, the burning of the Louvre.”
His biographer, M. Halevy, further tells us that when he
heard the news he “walked the roads like a desperate man,”
and subsequently recalled his own words that “without
discipline, without a hierarchy, culture cannot subsist.”
The love of beauty, too, beauty manifested in the moral
sphere, would certainly have kept him from sympathy with
the recent German outrages on innocent human life.
Transvaluer though he was of moral values, he never
wavered in his allegiance to the noble, as he understood
nobility, nor strove to transvalue it into the ignoble; and
if ever there was a supremely ignoble act, it was surely
the German invasion of Belgium. No, as far as the present
war is concerned, Nietzsche must be treated as a hostile
witness by Germany. I must postpone an analysis of his
general teaching for the present.
January 5, 1915.
The important thing, it seems to me, for each one of us to
keep in the foreground of his mind at present is that this
war is not only the biggest thing which has ever befallen
England or Australia or the Empire, but that it is also the
biggest thing which has befallen each one of us individually.
Even were our own existence as a nation not imme-
diately imperilled, we might have been expected to contri-
bute worthily to the Imperial cause; nor inded is there
any reason to doubt that in ordinary circumstances our
response would have been disinterested and adequate to the
occasion. Thrice already—in Egypt, in China, and in
AUSTRALIA’S DEADLY DANGER.


Africa—have our soldiers fought beside British troops in
wars which in no sense jeopardised Australia’s existence
as a nation. This shows that we are capable of thinking
and acting Imperially and unselfishly on all occasions in
which our imaginations have been awakened to the import-
ance of the issue at stake.
In the present crisis, however, if we may judge by
results, it seems certain that our imaginations have not
even yet been thus awakened, and that, as a nation, we
have not fully grasped the fact that the language and
liberty and life of each one of us is at present hanging in
the balance; that a grain may serve to turn the scale this
way or that; and that every Australian who now volunteers
for service may be the grain in question—the means of
giving his nation and Empire life instead of death.
Once this simple but tremendous fact is generally
grasped, I do not think we shall have much difficulty in
getting the increase of recruits which our national honor
and safety at present imperiously demand.
I may say, in passing, that both now and in my previous
articles, I have approached this matter from the national,
and not from the party, standpoint. I have not the
slightest interest in parliamentary cabals or manoeuvres,
and it does not seem to me to matter in the least from which
side help or action comes in this supreme crisis, so long
as it does come. All that I wish to do, to the best of my
humble ability, is to point readers of this paper to a few
main issues of the matter in which better understanding
may lead to better and fuller achievement than has hitherto
been attained by Australia.
In the first place, we have heard in the last few days
that Germany has 1,000,000 fresh troops ready for the
front, and 1,000,000 others in actual training. These
numbers together equal, or exceed, the army now in train-
ing in Britain. Yet it is largely on this latter force, so
we are told, that the Allies rely for turning the balance
against Germany in the west when spring comes.
But as against this we have to remember that Germany,
according to the best recent information, has altogether at
least 4,000,000 fresh military men to draw on, or 2,000,000


in addition to the numbers just specified. It is difficult,
therefore, to see how Britain, assuming that the Allies look
in large measure to her for the final effort, is going to turn
the scale without vastly increased exertions and sacrifices.
Toward aiding her in these it is Australia’s bounden
duty to contribute, if necessary, “her last man and her last
shilling,” and to take steps, I may add, toward effecting
this not only in word, but in deed.
We may look at the matter in another way. Nobody
who has studied carefully the negotiations leading to the
war can doubt for a single instant that Germany was de-
termined from the start that it should occur, and that when
the other negotiating parties had arranged matters satis-
factorily, she wilfully thwarted their agreements and forced
her ally into the combat. At any stage of the negotiations
a word from her would have ensured a peace which would
have been doubly honorable to her through the gratitude it
would have gained her from the whole world. Yet when
peace would have saved the world she deliberately manu-
factured war, and manufactured it for the sheer sake of
her selfish aggrandisement.
It is utterly beside the point to point to her alleged fear
of Russia as the cause of her decision. It is only another
instance of her manifold political mis judgments that, in-
stead of fearing Russia, she despised her, and twice in the
last ten years chose to humiliate her diplomatically, with
every circumstance of arrogant insult, in the belief that she
could not and would not retaliate.
Five months ago she attempted the same thing. Per-
haps she believed that Russia would again be humiliated,
if she did, she forgot that nations, to their everlasting
credit, resent insult far more deeply than injury, and that,
as surely as Russia possessed a soul, this thing might not
be done again. It is far more probable, however, in the
light of her attitude throughout the negotiations, that s e
knew Russia would fight this time, but believed she could
easily be crushed. Whichever explanation be correct, it is
utterly untrue to say that Germany made this war because
she feared Russia. She made it because she wanted some


thing, and was determined to obtain it at any sacrifice of
life or honor or the world’s peace.
This is no mere English interpretation of her conduct:
it is recognised as an axiomatic fact in every neutral
country of the world to-day. Thus Professor Charles W.
Eliot, Emeritus President of Harvard University, writes
in “The New York Times” of November 17:—
The real cause of the war is this gradually developed barbaric state
of the German mind and will. All other causes—such as the assas-
sination of the heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary, the sympathy
of Russia with the Balkan States, the French desire for the recovery
of Alsace-Lorraine—are secondary and incidental causes, contributary,
indeed, but not primary and fundamental. If anyone ask who brought
the ruling classes in Germany to this barbaric frame of mind, the
answer must be Bismarck, Moltke, Treitschke, the German Emperor,
their like, their disciples, and the military caste.
Those self-constituted apologists for Germany who know
her mind so much better than she does herself, and who
still cling to the belief that she was forced into this war,
must feel considerably annoyed with Herr Maximilian
Harden for letting the cat out of the bag. Herr Harden
is the editor of “Die Zukunft,” the most widely-read paper
in Germany. I believe I can offer readers of this paper a
somewhat fuller extract from his recent notorious mani-
festo than has yet been published in Australia:—
Let us drop our miserable attempts to excuse Germany’s action.
Not against our will and as a nation taken by surprise did we hurl
ourselves into this gigantic venture. We willed it. We do not stand
before the judgment seat of Europe. We acknowledge no such
jurisdiction. Our might shall create a new law in Europe. It is
Germany that strikes. When she has conquered new domains for
her genius, then the priesthoods of all the gods will praise the God of
War.
So much for the nonsense about the “Russian menace”
and “the war forced on Germany.” Germany, I repeat,
made this war deliberately and provocatively, and because
she wanted something. What did she want? Not, cer-
tainly, an immediate struggle with England. To give the
devil his due, I believe that the hysterical excitement and
surprise of Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg in the final inter-
view between him and the British Ambassador were per-
fectly genuine. It had been hoped and believed that
England would stand out on this occasion, violating her


treaty obligations to Belgium, and allowing France’s
colonies to go to her conqueror.
Germany would then fight Russia to a standstill, crush
France, and subsequently make peace—for a time. But the
point to notice is—and it is one of supreme value to us
Australians —that what she hoped to win in this war would
be the sure means of her attaining in the end the object
at which for the last generation and a half her whole
national life has been directed—the crushing of England.
Treitschke, Bernhardi, Billow have all told us that this
is the supreme goal of Germany’s national ambition. And
in the article just mentioned, Herr Harden frankly
makes a claim which illuminates her whole policy
—one which, could it be realised, would certainly
lead before long to Australia’s becoming a German colony.
We will make peace, he says, if we are allowed to retain
Belgium and the coastline of France down to Calais.
In other words, now that Germany’s designs on Paris
have failed, she wishes at least to obtain as the result of
the present war the taking-off point for the next war the
war in which she is to smash England and obtain the
colonies which are her heart’s desire. Even short of war,
German control of the Channel would destroy England s
command of the sea, and, with it, her power to frustrate
Germany’s designs upon ourselves. I have shown else-
where that these designs are unmistakable and fully
formed. No country would be so well calculated as Aus-
tralia to give Germany her coveted “place in the sun.
It is, therefore, no exaggeration to say that on Ger-
many’s retention or evacuation of Belgium depends our
very existence as a nation. That is why we Australians
must, every one of us, make it our business, as far as in us
lies, to see that Germany is not only foiled but broken. For
us, a drawn war would be hardly less dangerous than a
lost one. So far, England has borne the brunt and carnage
of the day. Besides what she has given, and is giving, a
force of a hundred thousand men seems a little thing
indeed.
Shall we not give it, then —and even give more.


THE AGONY OF BELGIUM.
January 12, 1915.
Wordsworth describes in the Ninth Book of “The
Prelude” how, at the beginning of the French Revolution
he was walking by the Loire with his friend, the wise and
noble Michel Beaupuy, who was afterwards to become one
of the revolutionary generals, and to die fighting bravely
in the cause of liberty. Michel discoursed to him of the
wrong his people were undergoing at the hands of tyrants,
and set the mind of the young poet and enthusiast aglow.
Wordsworth continues:—
And when we chanced
One day to meet a hunger-bitten girl,
Who crept along fitting her languid gait
Unto a heifer’s motion, by a cord
Tied to her arm, and picking thus from the lane
Its sustenance, while the girl, with pallid hands
Was busy knitting in a heartless mood,
Of solitude, and at the sight my friend
In agitation said, ’Tis against that
That we are fighting.”
Symbols for the most part speak far more truly and
profoundly to the human heart and mind than syllogisms.
It is characteristic of Wordsworth that this picture of
human suffering, seen against a background of natural
beauty, should have bitten deep into his soul, and, like some
vehement acid, should have etched upon it for all time the
suffering of France.
Similarly with regard to the present war, it is an easy
and obvious thing to prove by constitutional argument, by
reference to the documents in the case, and most important
of all, by the repeated testimony of German publicists that
England and her Allies are fighting for the moral order of
the world against that which would shatter its existence;


but here again the truth comes home to us, far more
annihilatingly if we glance for a moment at Belgium and
regard her in the guise in which, since the war began, she
has been portrayed by a hundred artists—if we see her as a
maiden stricken, shamed, and swooning with hunger, and
then say to ourselves with passionate indignation, “ ’tis
against that that we are fighting.”
For Belgium after all—Belgium with her immemorial
temples shattered, her fair cities pillaged and burnt, and
her innocent and heroic population given up to torture,
outrage and starvation —is the victim and the truest symbol
of that devilry—this is the only name for it, and it is one
which rises instinctively to the lips—that must be killed
utterly out of existence if the world is to be clean again.
If we regard in any wise the memory of our dead, the honor
of our living, and the salvation, moral and spiritual, of those
that are to be, we must each one of us look to it, after our
several abilities, that the malignant Force that has done
this thing is paralysed or slain. The spirit which has now
mastered the German nation must be crushed utterly.
Many will hope that through that crushing we shall
liberate Germany’s better self, the self that a hundred years
ago spoke to us with spiritual authority and colored all our
thought and poetry. But at present no half measures are
possible, otherwise this Thing will occur again in ten years
time or so, when Germany will have grown more cunning
through sharp experience, and more determined and
malignant through shame at her temporary failure. That
time there will be no failure, for she will have laid her
plans too carefully; and this is why every man of Britis
breed must do the uttermost that is in him to make any
such happening inconceivable.
I have already shown that even materially speaking,
the very existence of Australia as a nation is imperilled
as long as Germany is allowed any hold upon the English
Channel. But the present issue involves something far
more high and vast than a mere consideration of material
expediency. , ~
It is no exaggeration to say that on the question whether
Belgium is to be righted or avenged hangs the whole moral


order of this world in which we live. If these things can
still be done and the transgressor go unpunished, then it is
meaningless to talk of good and evil, for Judas will have
conquered Christ, and life be but “a tale told by an idiot,
full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.” No man
might henceforth believe with Stevenson in the “ultimate
decency of things.”
Even as mere men, therefore, if we are to lay claims
to any civilisation higher than the Prussian, we stand
bound to help in righting this foul wrong: but what I would
like to point out is that we of British stock stand together
with France in a particular relation to Belgium to-day,
and lie under a supreme obligation to her: for if she had
not made her superb stand against the violators of the
“scrap of paper” which symbolised her honor and freedom,
it is as likely as not that the Germans would be in Paris
to-day. Nor could anyone have really blamed Belgium if
she had given way before the vast Teutonic hordes.
In a most eloquent article in the special Belgian Relief
Number of “Everyman,” which arrived in Australia last
week, the eminent Belgian publicist and scholar, M. Charles
Sarolea, discusses the exact value and significance of her
resistance. He first asks whether it can be explained on
the hypothesis of her merely having done her duty and
fulfilled her treaty obligations. He shows that if the
matter had stood at this, and nothing more, she would have
done quite enough if she had made a temporary stand at
the Liege fortresses, had given France time to come to the
rescue, and then, when France did not appear, had retired
at once to her last stronghold, Antwerp, and concluded a
nowise dishonorable armistice with her invaders.
As things were, of course, she did far more than this,
far more than any ordinary claim of duty or honor necessi-
tated. And if her action cannot be explained merely on
these grounds, still less can it be explained on the ground
of enlightened self-interest which some curious people still
consider the only moving force of nations:—
If this were so, Belgium might reasonably have thrown in her
lot with Germany. So far as material prosperity is concerned, she
had everything to gain and nothing to lose from the victory of Ger-
many. If Belgium, after offering an honorable resistance, had come
66
AUSTRALIA AND THE WAR


to honorable terms; and if Germany, in consequence of that Belgian
Surrender had crushed the French armies, as she would certainly have
Hone Belgium would probably, after the triumph of Germany, have
become part of the German confederation. But she would have
remained a self-governing kingdom. She would have retained a large
measure of autonomy. Antwerp would have risen into the most
flourishing port on the Continent, Brussels into the most popular
German capital. Belgium would have shared more than any other
country in the expansion of the German Empire.
The alternative for Belgium, continues M. Sarolea, lay
not between honor and dishonor, nor yet between duty and
enlightened self interest; it lay between a commonplace
political realism and a lofty political idealism: —
The Belgians preferred the unpractical course, which meant ruin
and starvation, to the practical reasonable course, which meant ease
and comfort and material prosperity. They did not choose to take
the lax and broad view of honor, they took the narrowest path; they
took the strictest and sternest view. They did not adopt the attitude
of frigid reason and enlightened self-interest. They took the heroic
and disinterested attitude. They left entirely out of account all
commercial and economic considerations. They did not calculate
their chances, they did not count the cost.
They realised that their country had been made the
subject of a cowardly attack by an insolent and brutal
aggressor, and they decided that a fight to the death was
preferable to surrender or compromise. Hence they sank
all differences of class, race and party, stood together as
one man, and at the cost of unspeakable carnage and misery,
fought Germany inch by inch as they fell back from town
to town and fort to fort. And by so doing they turned the
course of the whole campaign, perhaps even that of t e
whole war. They knew that on them depended more even
than their existence as a nation: “The Belgian War was a
crusade of Civilisation against Barbarism, of eternal right
against brutal force.” .
And they fought silently, uncomplainingly, knowing at
Liege that unless the French and British forces came up
immediately they were lost. Yet that relief never came,
and as the hours went by, the Belgians saw their doom
was upon them and accepted it with a tragic and heroic
simplicity. ...
The two points for us to notice are, firstly, that tins
supreme sacrifice was made in our cause; and, secon y,
that had the preparations and information of France and


ourselves been more perfect, we might have saved these
heroes from their fate. And that is why every man of
British breed, be he English, Canadian, or Australian, is
bound by the high claim of honor no less than by the lower
claim of expediency, to make every sacrifice that will re-
lease Belgium from the nightmare of horror which at pre-
sent has her in its grip.
It is to be hoped that the final reports, communicated
to Australia last week, of the Belgian and French Com-
missions on the unnamable atrocities committed by the
German Army will for good and all close the mouths of
those among us who for some sinister cause or other are
bent on softening that feeling of passionate indignation
which every true man must feel against Germany at pre-
sent. The Chancellor of Sydney University has already
pointed out the grave spiritual and material harm that
this kind of talk may do to the country. What we now
need, above all things, is honesty of heart and brain. It
is certain that any Australian who, knowing what has hap-
pened, still constitutes himself a defender of Germany,
must be either morally or intellectually deficient.
Whenever one thinks of Belgium to-day one always sees
her, I repeat, in the shape of suffering womanhood—the
shape that appeals to all that is knightly and compassionate
and great in the heart of man. Perhaps some Australians
will laugh at me when I call them knightly, but they are
this none the less, knightly in the sense that they are as
chivalrous where women are concerned as any nation in
existence.
This being so, it may be worth while to remind them of
the valiant maiden, Catherine Douglas, surnamed for her
heroism Barlass, who when assassins attacked that noble
king and poet, James 1., of Scotland, thrust her arm through
the staples of the door and allowed it to be shattered,
thereby prolonging for a short while her monarch’s life.
Rossetti, in “The King’s Tragedy,” makes her speak
thus:—
And now the rush was heard on the stair,
And “God, what help?” was our cry.
And was I frenzied or was I bold?
I looked at each empty stanchion-hold,
And no bar but my arm had I!


Like iron felt my arm, as through
The staple I made it pass:—
Alack! it was flesh and bone—no more?
’Twas Catherine Douglas sprang to the door,
But I fell back Kate Barlass.
Catherine is an almost exact symbol of Belgium to-day.
Belgium’s right arm has been shattered, and she lies broken
and in torment that we may live.
What are we going to do for her?
January 26, 1915.
In some quarters of Australia it is still apparently con-
sidered a tremendously “intellectual” thing to stand aloof
from the present war and regard it from the standpoint
of a “superior” cosmopolitanism. Strong national feeling
may be good enough for the poets of our race, its Miltons,
its Wordsworths and its Swinburnes; but, as every sub-
urban “intellectual” knows, the poet is a wretched creature,
constantly swayed by the vulgar promptings of feeling,
honor, and conscience, and incapable of taking a strict,
cold, cerebral view of anything.
He, poor creature, has not the boldness and brilliancy
which enables his critic to tell the country which is fighting
against unprovoked aggression for her existence and his
own that she is a State not worth belonging to, and richly
deserves every reverse she may encounter.
I do not know, by the way, whether the provincial cos-
mopolitan has yet hit on the happy device of proclaiming
himself “superior” to the mother who bore him on the
ground that she was a woman of ill-fame. If he and his
kind have done this, their point of view is not a whit more
despicable than that which enables them to profit by t e
life blood now being shed for them at the other side of the
world, and to render back nothing but disloyalty and malice
to the great country which is the Mother of their being.
SELF AND THE STATE.


This is no imaginary case: you may still hear such talk
occasionally in Melbourne streets, while as I write I have
a specimen of it before me in a Melbourne publication. It
is, of course, harmless in its effect on the thinking part of
the population—especially on that part which has some
first-hand acquaintance with European ways of life and
thought; but insidiously, relentlessly, and to an extent
which no man can calculate, it affects a certain portion of
our population and renders them unwilling to play their
part worthily in this supreme crisis.
The evil fruits of it may declare themselves a little later
on, when recruiting becomes necessary on a vastly increased
scale. It is already a very present menace in the effect
it is likely to have on such seditious aliens as those who
have recently been causing trouble in South Australia; but
above all things, it is a menace to our national honor, and
though it is only the work of a handful it should be
stamped out utterly from among us if we are to remain a
clean and decent nation.
Apart from such extreme talk as this, I also notice
in some quarters a certain apathy regarding this war which
seems to be due not so much to disloyalty as to an imper-
fect realisation of the individual’s obligation to the State
and the Empire.
In the hope of making this clearer to some, I wish to
glance for a moment at the teaching of one who though he
did not label himself as an “intellectual,” and constantly
described himself as a mere groper after truth, was never-
theless one of the world’s greatest thinkers. The man I
means was Socrates, the teacher of Plato and, intellectually
speaking, the father of Aristotle, and of all learning. In
the first place, be it noted, Socrates did not claim the cheap
privilege, so eagerly arrogated by the modern pseudo-
thinker, of keeping out of the firing line on the ground of his
“superior intellectual attainments.” On the contrary, he
took the view that intellect confers the privilege and the
obligation of giving a lead in this respect, when the safety
of the State is at stake.
When Athens was at war with Potidsea, Socrates served
as a common soldier, and surpassed every one in his powers


of enduring hunger, thirst and cold, and all the hardships
of a severe Thracian—l had almost written Belgian—win-
ter. He earned the Victoria Cross, or its Athenian equivalent,
for saving the life of his brilliant and dissolute pupil,
Alcibiades, yet characteristically relinquished the prize of
valor to the man he had rescued.
A few years later, when Athens was at handgrips with
her inveterate foe, Sparta, even as we are at handgrips with
Germany to-day, Socrates again played his part bravely,
and in the great retreat from Delium—the contemporary
Mons —he demeaned himself after such a fashion that both
friend and foe were aware of his valor. A third time we
find him fighting bravely against the Spartan forces, and
showing that he was both willing and able to perform most
valiantly the first and noblest duty of citizenship.
Twenty-five years later Socrates was tried at Athens
and condemned to death for reasons which are now univer-
sally considered most honorable to him. His pupil Plato
was present at his trial, and in a series of dialogues, in
which Socrates is the chief figure, he gives an account of
that ordeal, and of Socrates’ last days and death. In one
of these conversations a certain friend of Socrates, Crito,
appears in his cell and urges him to escape, offering him
the means and opportunity of doing so. Socrates declines
the suggestion, and gives full reasons for staying where he
is. He has no right to escape, he says, for if he did so,
he would be injuring the State of which he is a citizen. He
may have been condemned unjustly, but he still has no
right to take the matter into his own hands.
Members of all bodies of men, and therefore o e
State, must sacrifice their individual wills to the w o e o
which they belong. Even in bodies banded toget er or
evil, a certain harmony of action is necessary. ocra es
imagines the laws of Athens as reasoning with im, an
indicating the duty he owes them. They pom ou a
they are his parents: through them his father oo
mother in marriage. They gave him education: tey gav
him his very being. Even if they should as or
because they think it right to do so, he has no jus
for complaint or retaliation.


They continue, hitting hard in the first sentence, be it
noted, at the pseudo-intellectual:—
Are you too wise to see that your country is worthier and more
august and more sacred and holier and held in higher honor, both by
the gods and by all men of understanding, than your father and your
mother and all your other ancestors; and that it is your bounden duty
to reverence it and to submit to it and to approach it more humbly
than you would approach your father, when it is angry with you; and
to obey in silence if it orders you to endure stripes or imprisonment,
or if it send you to battle to be wounded or to die? That is what
is your duty. You must not give way, nor retreat, nor desert your
post. In war, and in the court of justice, and everywhere you must
do whatever your city and your country bid you do, or you must
convince them that their commands are unjust.
These words are as vital in their application to Aus-
tralia at the present moment as they were in their own
place and context over two thousand years ago. The State
is not many, but one: it is a single organism, inseparable
from the individuals who compose it.
Each individual, if he disagrees with the State, has the
right of trying to persuade it that he is right and it is
wrong—that is to say, of trying to transform his minority
into a majority. But if he fails in doing this, and if any
dire need falls upon the State, it is his bounden duty to
sink his will in its will, and to do its bidding, even “if it
send him to battle to be wounded or to die.”
Our own State has issued its bidding, or its request, to
the above effect, and it is for all men who are of fighting
age to reply. There may be some who, like myself, have
volunteered for active service abroad and have been re-
jected on the ground of some physical defect. For us, and
for the other non-combatants, the course of decency and
duty is plain. It is to help the Government of Australia
to-day by every means which lie in our power. If it has
a material difficulty—and we all believe it has—in doing
what may be ideally necessary, it is our duty to understand
that difficulty and be patient, and to prepare the country so
that when the authorities make a further call she may be
ready to respond.
Those who dislike the British Empire and prefer the
country which has ground Alsace and Posen beneath her
heel, and outraged Belgium, have, morally speaking, only
two alternatives open to them in this supreme hour of the


Empire’s peril—either to hold their peace or to leave the
country at once, and for good. Let them again hear the
words addressed to Socrates by the laws of his country:—
We brought you into the world, we nurtured you, we educated you,
we gave you and every other citizen a share of all the good things we
could. Yet we proclaim that if any man of the Athenians is dis-
satisfied with us, he may take his goods and go away whithersoever he
E leases; we give that permission to every man who chooses to avail
imself of it, so soon as he has reached man’s estate, and sees us,
the laws, and the administration of our city. No one of us stands
in his way, or forbids him to take his goods and go wherever he likes,
if he is dissatisfied with us and with the city. But we say that every
man of you who remains here, seeing how we administer justice, and
how we govern the city in other matters, has agreed by the very fact
of remaining here, to do whatsoever we bid him. And, we say, he
who disobeys us, does a threefold wrong: he disobeys us, who are his
parents, and he disobeys us who fostered him, and he disobeys us
after he has agreed to obey us.
There remains only one thing to add, namely this, that
if a country is worth remaining in, it is also worth fighting
for, if necessary, to the death.
February 2,1915.
Upon the women of Australia depends in large measure
the attitude of this country toward the war.
The vast majority of Australian women feel, I believe,
the natural repulsion for Germany’s present spirit and
methods, which is inspired at once by good sense and sound
ethical feeling; but it seems to me that there is a minority
whose members have allowed themselves to be blinded to
the true issue, either by false sentimentalism or by the
glamor constantly exerted over certain types of woman by
such superb practical force and efficiency as Germany un-
doubtedly possesses to-day.
Such women may be reminded that by virtue of their
sex they are the first guardians of civilisation, and that
civilisation, to be worth the having, must be clean as well
WOMEN AND THE WAR.


as powerful and well organised. Nobody who has gone
carefully into this war can have failed to realise that it
represents a clean-cut issue between civilisation and bar-
barism, and that in it the balance of right and justice is
overwhelmingly on the side of the Allies.
In previous articles I have endeavored to show what
would probably happen to Australia were she ever to
undergo the unspeakable fate of becoming a German pro-
vince. I took the case of the worker, and I showed that
whereas in Germany organised labor is pursued and perse-
cuted with relentless tyranny, in England, and still more in
Australia, it is free to work out its destiny as it thinks best,
after the law of its own being.
I illustrated this point by copious quotations from Ger-
man authorities, and I proceeded to show, by reference to
the cases of German Poland and of Alsace-Lorraine, exactly
how Germany treats the great masses of any country which
she has conquered.
To-day I wish to deal with the matter from a domestic
stand-point and to show how intolerable the lot of women
and children may become under German occupation and
how urgently it becomes the interest and duty of Australian
mothers to help the world, as women may, toward the
suppression of Prussian “Kultur.”
In the first place, let them reflect that there are hun-
dreds of Belgian women in England to-day who are about
to become mothers as a result of the outrages to which
they have been submitted by the Germans. Has everyone
realised the full significance of the problem which presents
itself here? What is likely to be the relation between
their mothers and these children of violence and shame, and
how much natural motherly love will they be able to show
them?
What chance will these wretched little beings have in
life? And, remember, that if these things are done under
official sanction in Belgium, which Germany has no parti-
cular cause to hate, things tenfold worse, were this pos-
sible, would be done in any part of that British Empire
which she hates to-day with maniacal intensity.


This riotous excess, be it noted, is not a mere product
of wartime any more than it is the doing of a few black-
guardly soldiers who have got out of hand. It comes from
the growing brutalisation which has been overspreading
her for the last two or three generations, and from which,
so we may devoutly hope, the great war will at last set
her free.
Mr. Austin Harrison, in a recent number of ‘‘The Eng-
lish Review,” has shown that the Kaiser deliberately set
himself to turn Berlin into a city which should hold the
European record in the matter of fashionable debauchery.
Excess of this kind, it was considered, was a token of that
irresistible Power which the world must be forced to asso-
ciate with the Prussian genius: it afforded a dazzling
exhibition of Teutonic “Kultur.” “When it became
known,” says Mr. Harrison, “that it was the Emperor s
wish to make Berlin the gayest and most ‘vicious city in
Europe, Germans felt indeed that their young Emperor
was a ‘fair knockout.’ ”
Hence the Eulenburg scandals, and hence the unpre-
cedented prevalence in Germany to-day of certain
monstrous types of crime—a “crime so common, so
strangely brutal as to contribute unmistakable scienti c
ground for speaking of a pathological state of Germany
as the direct product of the Imperial physical force
doctrine.”
It is needless to draw attention to the direct bearing
which this state of things has on the condition of women in
any country in which it occurs. It is only necessary to
indicate one or two of the things which go on in Germany
and her dominions under official sanction. The distin-
guished Pole, Dr. Ehrlich, Fellow of Exeter College,
Oxford, draws attention to the case of a “white-slave
trader in a Polish town who was granted immunity by
the police because he was doing useful service as a political
agent.”
As a result of these proceedings, a Socialist Deputy
revealed in the Reichstag the terrible corruption prevalent
among the German police in this respect. The criminal in
question had been expelled from Russia and Austria for


acting as the “chief white-slave tout” of the Hamburg-
Amerika Line. Under German rule he found safety and
protection. It appeared that a police official named
Helemba had actually been dismissed for having resisted
the white-slave traffic. The whole of these proceedings
were reported in “The Times.”
In the light of these happenings, the recent occurrences
in Belgium need cause no one any astonishment.
Now let the mother look for a moment at what would
probably happen to her children if they ever came beneath
German rule. Perhaps the most striking example here is
that supplied by the great school strike which occurred in
Prussian Poland in 1906-7. A vivid account of this is
supplied in “The Times” of October 12, 1906:
The Prussian Government persists in endeavoring to give reli-
gious instruction in German to the Polish children in most of the
schools, although that language is not understood. The children
and their parents, above all the working classes, are determined to
resist this abuse of power. Hundreds of children have spontaneously-
declared to their teachers that they will not use a single word of
German. They persist in their refusal, in spite of being beaten and
locked up in the dark.
They can be seen in tears, begging the priests to pray to God
to have pity on their sufferings and to save them from being taught
their religion in a language which they do not understand. The
school teachers and the Government are exasperated, and persecute
both parents and children in an unheard of fashion. The children
are locked up, not even being allowed to return to their homes to
dinner. In many schools the teachers have flogged the children
till they lost consciousness.
On another occasion, such treatment of the little ones
“led to a great uproar among the parents and friends of
the children,” says “The Times,” “some of whom succeeded
in forcing their way into the school while the punishment
was being administered, and were only expelled by the aid
of the police.” A physician, Dr. Krzyzagorski, certified
that the children’s fingers were so swollen that they could
not close their hands. One woman, a mother of five chil-
dren, received a sentence of two and a half years for
having tried to save her children from this brutality.


These and similar proceedings were defended by the
German authorities on the delightful ground that they were
calculated “to render the children’s education more uni-
form and, therefore, efficient, while they also possessed
certain economic and political advantages since they tended
to reduce the number of teachers of Polish nationality.
Persecution had small effect on these heroic little rebels.
Soon their numbers rose to 45,000, and eventually to
100 000. According to the semi-official German organ, the
education authorities faced the situation “with calmness
and deliberation.” They imposed severe penalties on the
children, and crushing fines on the parents. ( Times,
Nov. 2, 1906.) Under a rule that parents are pumshab e
for the non-attendance of their children at school, many
parents were now fined for the delicious reason that by
their disobedience the children were “absent in spin .
Many other things were done, too, some of them even
more tyrannical than these. But it is unnecessary to pur-
sue the Polish Children’s School Strike further at present.
Perhaps this description of it may help to show some of the
women of Australia exactly what it is that we are fight g
to-day.


DERNBURG’S TWO VOICES.
February 9, 1915.
Some of the queerest criticism of the war yet put for-
ward emanates from the German or German-American
professors and diplomatists of the United States. Week
by week Bernstorff, von Mach, Dernburg, and Munster-
berg continue, through the medium of the American press,
to represent Germany to the world as the injured innocent
who has at last fallen a victim to the long and subtle plot-
ting of England.
The abuse at present directed at our mother country
and the hysterical songs of hate written and sung to her
supposed detriment, seem due to two main causes—the cer-
tainty felt by Germany that if it had not been for the
British fleet and army she would by now be in Paris, and
would possibly have dashed back and smashed the
Russians; and, secondly, the longing of her diplomatists,
outlined frankly by Bernhardi before the war, to isolate
Britain from her allies and then smash her—if they only
could!
It is safe to say that there is not a single diplomatist
or professor in Germany or America who believes in his
heart of hearts that England made this war, or even helped
to make it; but it is also certain that the order has gone
forth that this is to be the account of the matter supplied
to the masses of Germany and to neutral nations; and when
one remembers the kind of stuff imposed on the aforesaid
masses before the war by men like Treitschke and Sybel,
and apparently docilely accepted on all hands as the truth,
one has very little doubt that Germany to-day has made
herself believe the above-mentioned convenient, if prepos-
terous, fabrication.


Perhaps she may have even accepted the not less con-
venient theory put forward by the celebrated Berlin
alienist, Dr. Albert Moll, that the reports of atrocities
issued by the Belgian Commission are evidence that the
whole Belgian nation is suffering from “collective hallucina-
tion’ ’ one of the many phrases coined of late by German
publicists which would have been the making of one of
Mr. Gilbert’s librettos.
However, the idea of diplomatic Germany at present
appears to be that if she could only make it generally be-
lieved that England made this war she would alienate the
sympathy felt in most neutral countries for her opponent,
would evince her own readiness to make peace with Eng-
land’s allies separately, and might even cause these to
believe that they were like herself, innocent victims of the
“arch-schemer.” Hence the broken-backed indictment
of England recently addressed by Professor von Mach to
“The New York Times”: hence the weekly fulminations ot
Herr Dernburg, late Secretary of State for the German
colonies, a gentleman to whom I shall return directly, and
hence the remarkable mission recently undertaken to the
American Irish by Professor Kuno Meyer, of the University
of Berlin.
I knew Professor Meyer intimately when he was a Pro-
lessor of German at the University of Liverpool. He was
treated with general respect, for he was one of the greatest
Celtic scholars in existence. Everywhere he came he was
petted and feted, and when he threatened to leave Live -
pool, a special—and successful—effort was made to retain
him, and his salary was materially increased. Would we
at that time have done as much for a mere Englishman,
I wonder?
At all events, Kuno, as he was generally called, accepted
for some thirty years all the hospitality which England
could offer him. Subsequently he went to Ireland an
taught Celtic there. Then he was “translated” to Berlin
Now we find him in New York, stirring up the Irish against
England, and declaring to the leading Irish Association in
that city that he had just been dining with Theodore


Roosevelt, and that Roosevelt had told him he believed
Germany would win the war.
Whether Roosevelt really said this or no I cannot say:
it appears unlikely, considering his public utterances.
Also, I leave it to others to apportion the exact amount of
blame attaching to Kuno Meyer in this matter. We Eng-
lish have a proverb that blood is thicker than water, and
the Germans have another which says that you can’t keep
a cat from mousing, and yet another to the effect that it
takes more than you might think to destroy a certain kind
of weed. Ido not wish to pass judgment on Kuno’s Ameri-
can utterances, irritating as they are; still less do I wish
them to be used as an argument against innocent and
honorable German men of learning.
A man of decent feeling might at least have held his
tongue concerning the country to whom he owed so much.
He could have done so without any disloyalty to his own
nation.
But the really serious thing is that, as I am assured
on excellent authority, this man, while still enjoying the
homage and hospitality of Great Britain, attempted to
tamper with the loyalty of the Irish students whom he was
teaching before the war began. If this is so, it shows
what manner of men they are who are maligning our cause
in America.
And now for a word on Herr Dernburg, who to-day
can find no name too bad for us. On June 24, 1914,
exactly five weeks before the beginning of the war, this
gentleman was present at a dinner given by the London
Chamber of Commerce to 120 members of the Berlin
Society of Merchants and Manufacturers. “The Times”
of June 26 says that on this occasion
Herr Dernburg made generous acknowledgment of the debt
which Germans owe to England. He referred particularly to British
colonial policy, the study of which had provided him with the solution
of many a difficult problem. Before the war of 1870, enterprising
Germans, in quest of some larger field of action, could not find it at
home, and it was notably England that offered them the commercial
possibilities they were looking for. When Germany had become
strong enough to acquire overseas possessions of her own, it was
again the English, who, by their example, statesmanship and experi-
ence, gave Germany the best help.


Whenever he was in difficulty as to how a certain colonial problem
ought to be handled he had found a solution in the study of British
methods, and he was pleased to record here his most sincere thanks
for the kindness and friendly interest he had received in these matters
from the central authorities in London and from the statesmen in the
British possessions in Africa and elsewhere. His travels had taken
him through a number of British possessions. He knew from history
how much blood and money it had cost the English nation to gather
the experience which had always been most fully placed, gratuitously,
at his disposal.
The above words are remarkable as coming on
the very eve of hostilities from the man who is now assur-
ing the world that England deliberately made this war in
order that she might destroy Germany’s commerce, and
thwart her schemes of colonial expansion. Comparison of
Dernburg’s two voices shows how desperately hard put to
it Germany is to-day, when she wishes to make out a case
against her enemies. It is obvious that if we had wished
to injure her commerce we could have done so years ago
by abolishing free-trade; while Sir Harry Johnston has
shown in a notable article that, so far from thwarting Ger-
many’s commercial ambitions, we have repeatedly made
concessions to her, and helped her, lest we should be accused
of dog-in-the-manger behavior.
It would be interesting to read a review written by
Herr Dernburg in September of his speech of June.
Then there is Mr. Bernard Shaw—but I am not sure
whether he is a German-American or not. It is at least
pleasant to reflect that he is not English.


KUNO AND “KULTUR.”
February 16, 1915.
Since I gave my views on Professor Kuno Meyer in
these columns last week, I have received from public and
private sources some fresh information concerning this
learned and unscrupulous foe of England.
One of the utterances which have aroused such indigna-
tion among English scholars and men of letters was de-
livered recently before a meeting of the Clan na Gael, of
Long Island, N.Y. It is reported in “The Times.” In it
Dr. Meyer mentioned various occurrences which had
inspired him with hope as he travelled through Germany
on his way to America.
Firstly, he had met on the railway station at Hanover
a former pupil of his own, aged seventeen, who was on his
way to the front. This occurrence appeared to have im-
pressed the Professor greatly, and he evidently wished the
Clan na Gael to regard it as evidence of Germany’s self-
sacrifice and alacrity regarding the war. Perhaps it did
not strike him that it might also be interpreted by enemy
and neutral nations as showing that if Germany was forced
to fling her boys into the firing line, she must rapidly be
coming to the end of her adult resources.
Secondly, Professor Meyer remarked, he had encoun-
tered at Minden a trainful of French prisoners—
Mahommedan,. Turcos, Senegalese, and others—who were
on their way to Berlin, there to be newly equipped and
formed before joining their fellow-believers, the Turks, in
the campaign against Egypt. Professor Meyer’s exulta-
tion at this alleged occurrence comes rather queerly from
a member of the nation which has based one of its chief
grievances against England on the fact that she has
employed her “barbarous” Indian troops against the “cul-
tured” German army.


It may be said in passing with reference to the afore-
said “grievance,” that anyone who has read anything about
the Sikh or Gurkha regiments, or has talked with their
English officers, must realise that these troops habitually
conduct themselves with a degree of restraint and discipline
which even the “civilisers” of Louvain and Dinant might
find it hard to surpass.
The most interesting piece of information, however,
imparted by Kuno Meyer to the Clan na Gael was to the
effect that at a station called Lohne he had fallen in with
another train containing Irish soldiers who were being
drafted from all parts of Germany into one camp, where
they were to be formed into an Irish Brigade, and used
against the British.
He further remarked that he firmly believed that a
German invasion of both England and Ireland would take
place sooner or later, and —he was always devoid of humor
he instanced the raid on Yarmouth as a promising sign
of its success. And he concluded by telling the Clan na
Gael: —
When Germany has obtained the great object for which she
fights, the nations that now bear the yoke of England unwillingly will
not be forgotten. And in the case of two of them at ieast, the oldest
and the youngest of England’s conquests, Ireland and EgYPb the
restitution of their autonomy must be one of the conditions of peace.
To that hannv day let us look forward. Meanwhile, it is not pro-
mises, words! and scraps of paper, but deeds that will count and carry
the day, and the less said at this juncture the better. It there are
any among you who remember the ancient language of Ireland, rise to
your feet and say with me:
“A Dhia saor Eirinn agus Almain.”
(“God save Ireland and Germany.”)
Readers will note that Professor Meyer shares his
Chancellor’s contempt for “scraps of paper” embodying
solemn agreements and promises. Facts are the only
things that count: they are things that you can seize and
use in the present; they are based on force, and force is
immediate and real—is, in fact, the only true reality.
Theft is a forcible fact, realisable immediately upon oppor-
tunity, and so is arson, so is rape; all these things count,
therefore, and are worthy of respect.


But honor and trust are assets not immediately realis-
able: they imply a future obligation based on a past pro-
mise. Hence they are not real or present, and are thus
of inferior value. The temporary assumption of them
may, it is true, be used by the cunning to extract material
advantages from the simpletons who still regard them as
sacred. They are not, therefore, utterly worthless, and it
must also be always remembered that the world at large
—whose good opinion is sometimes a valuable material
asset—is still sentimental enough to respect them and to
regard their violators with considerable suspicion. The
man wise with Prussian wisdom will therefore not despise
them utterly.
But he will constantly remember that they are not
realities, that they are, in fact, mere “scraps of paper,”
and that whenever occasion suits he may tear them up and
fling them contemptuously in the face of his partner in
the pact.
The above line of argument represents, with hardly a
word of exaggeration, the conception known as “Real-
Politik,” or politics and diplomacy based on a transvalua-
tion of all moral values, which has in the last generation
been dinned into the ears and hearts of unfortunate
Germany by her vociferous politicians and professors. A
chance phrase will often tell you more of a man’s mind
than a set treatise; and in the phrase of Kuno Meyer which
I have just discussed you see revealed the mind, not only
of a man, but of a whole nation.
It is no disgrace to Meyer that though he has lived in
England for thirty years, and taken the best it could give
him, his heart is still German; everyone must sympathise
intensely with the Germans who are men of honor, and
feel torn asunder by the claims upon them of the two
countries. The disgraceful thing in Meyer’s case is that
he should be using the special opportunities granted him
by England for learning and teaching Irish, in order to try
to arouse hatred among Irishmen against the country
which during all these years gave him hospitality and
honor, and the means of renown.


At the University of Liverpool, Kuno Meyer was held
in special honor as a fine scholar belonging to a great and,
as we then thought, highly civilised nation. I can well
remember the cordial homage offered him by men like
Andrew Bradley and Walter Raleigh—perhaps England’s
greatest contemporary literary critics—Oliver Lodge, and
C. S. Sherrington, who, as I am informed by those who
know, is the greatest physiologist alive. It was Kuno
here, Kuno there, and Kuno everywhere—no one could do
too much for the man.
In a private letter of recent date which I have before
me from a distinguished man of science, who was pre-
viously Meyer’s colleague, I find him referred to as “our
erstwhile Prussian dictator.” The writer continues:
I always knew that his frequent visits to Ireland were not only
for Celtic study, but for the encouragement of anti-British feeling.
This struggle is a national struggle, and I am not sorry to have one
cause of remorse and pity removed from my breast. Certainly, now
I shall not grieve for Germany’s downfall because it is the fatherland
of Kuno . • I was prepared for K. M. s apostasy, though not
for his association with the Clan Na Gael. He wrote to the Univer-
sity Council recently, and said that he had hoped to lecture in Liver-
pool on his return from America; that this now seemed impossible,
and that he therefore wished to put off lecturing in the Umversity till
after the German invasion. The Council replied that his postpone-
ment to such an indefinite date was equivalent to resignation, and
that his holding of his honorary Chair of Celtic ceased from the date
of their meeting.
These facts are interesting, but the best comment on
Kuno is the following correspondence, published in “The
Morning Post” of January 6. Apart from its immediate
reference, George Moore’s letter is worth publishing in its
own right, as a fine piece of prose—prose possessing that
quality which can only come of strong and indignant feel-
ing:—
[COPY.]
The City Club of New York, Dec. 8, 1914.
Mv Dear Moore,—Can you tell me what has become of Kommer ?
Please y write me (or dictate) a nice long letter to the following
address:— Care of p N Robinson>
Longfellow Park,
Cambridge (Mass.).
where I am going to deliver some lectures. I took leave of absence
from Berlin for as long as the war lasts, and have made up my mind


for a year at least. How different America is in reality to what I
thought and what I had heard. It is always so. I like both the
people and the life here greatly—the climate suits me better than
almost any which I have tried, and I am getting gradually accus-
tomed to the food and cuisine. I move much in Irish circles, have
met Yeats here, John Quinn, the patron of Augustus John, and many
others. I shall go as far as San Francisco, and would return by
way of Japan and India if those countries were not barred to a
German, but perhaps when the war is over I may have a chance.
I fancy life in London is pretty much what it always was, just
as in Berlin, where you might live without noticing anything of
the war. I left it mainly because I had no students, no Britishers
turning up, naturally.
I think there will be a new chapter to add to an old Irish book
called “The Invasion of Erin.”
Meanwhile, my dear old friend and new enemy, I remain, in peace
or war, Always yours sincerely,
(Signed) KUNO MEYER.
[COPY.]
Kuno Meyer.—l owe a debt to France, and if war were to break
out between England and France I should not write scurrilously about
France. I should remain silent, and I think that my countrymen
would understand and approve of my silence. Your debt to England
is ten times, a hundred times, a thousand times greater: I lived in
France a few years, you have lived in England the greater part of
your life; nearly all the money you have earned was English money;
England gave you an opportunity of applying your talent to Celtic
scholarship, the subject that called you; all your friends were English,
and the last time I saw you you told me how much you regretted
England and how lonely you were in Berlin. But the moment war
broke out between England and Germany you lost your pupils, and in
consequence took ship for America, where you are now trying to
stir up enmity between my countrymen and England; nor is this all,
for while engaged in this work you write a hypocritical letter to me
asking for a long letter—hypocritical, I say, because in view of your
conduct I can only regard it as an attempt to entrap me into some
expression of sympathy with Germany which it would suit your pur-
pose to read to the audiences you are addressing—audiences that I
hear from our friend Bergen are not over-anxious to listen to you.
No doubt America is hostile to German views, but part of the anti-
pathy your lectures awaken may be traced to yourself; your audiences
know you to be a traitor to the country that fostered you. I can
respect the German soldier, the German officer, and the German spy,
but I cannot respect you. Nor do I think that your own people
respect the work you are doing, or attempting to do. They pay you
to do it, and are glad that you do it, but renegades, traitors and apos-
tates do not win respect even in the country that employs them. You
will return to Germany discredited, for there are honorable men in
Germany, and if the letter you sent to me and the letter I am writing
to you come before them, they will prefer my letter to yours of a
surety.
It is hardly necessary for me to add that I am taking leave of you
for ever, but not because of the German that is in you, but because
of the man that is in you.
GEORGE MOORE.
One wonders whether Kuno read Moore’s letter to the
Clan na Gael.


Since receiving a proof of this article, I have received
a private letter saying that at a recent meeting of the
Liverpool University Club it was suggested that Kuno’s
portrait should be raffled, the winning member to have
the privilege of burning it!
February 23, 1915.
Although the French Yellow Book deals with past his-
tory and covers to some extent the same ground as the
English White Book, it suggests a considerable number of
new points, and, as it has only recently been made available
in Australia, it seems worth while to discuss it brie y.
The despatches it contains are divided into chapters, and
the very first of these strikes a note of strong interest, for
it is headed “Warnings,” and shows that as early as the
spring of 1913 the French Government was fully aware
that Germany intended to make war at the first oppor-
Itwas not surprising that she should have had this know-
ledge for as far back as 1875-6 Bismarck had planned a
campaign of destruction against her when he saw how
easily she was recovering from the disaster of 1871. ihi
war was prevented, as M. Viviani gratefully pointed out
to the Chamber of Deputies in August last, by the inter-
vention of Russia and Great Britain, so that it will be seen
that the Triple Entente existed in spirit and in practice
almost a generation before its formal ratification.
In later years, too, France would indeed have been
simple had she imagined that she had got free of the Ger-
man menace, for the Algeciras Conference and the Aga
incident clearly showed Germany’s malevolent intention,
the sending of the Panther to Agadir being indeed
calculated by her that she might discover how far shecould
go in the direction of bullying France without Engla
interference.
THE CASE FOR FRANCE.


I have already shown that on that occasion Germany
had actually determined to make war, but found, to her
bitter chagrin, that her financial position made this im-
possible. When one remembers, moreover, that France
had to dismiss from office her strongest statesman, M.
Delcasse, at Germany’s dictation, one finds added point in
M. Viviani’s words: “Bearing in silence in our own bosom
the wound which Germany dealt us, we have offered to
peace an unprecedented sacrifice.” France in the last
generation has made the above claim entirely good, and has
suppressed her ancient grudge against Germany in order
that she might help to preserve the balance of power and
the peace of Europe.
The ardent desire for peace and its humanising arts
and virtues is reflected in the writings of her greatest
living son, M. Anatole France, himself in so many ways the
incarnation of the French genius. Peace has always been
a cardinal article of M. France’s creed; yet confronted with
the hideous menace of Teutonism, this first of living
Socialists has set a badly needed example to certain social-
istic small-fry by declaring that no peace is possible while
the “barbarians”—the word is his own—remain unbroken.
Both his present resolve for war and his past sympathy
with peace are typical of his country’s successive moods.
The clean-cut issue between French pacifism and self-
sacrifice, and German militarism and self-seeking, is thus
indicated by the French President:—
Gentlemen, I do not know if I am mistaken, but it seems to me
that this work of peaceful reparation, of liberation and honor, finally
ratified in 1904 and 1907 with the genial co-operation of King Edward
VII. of England, and the Government of the Crown, this is what the
German Empire wishes to destroy to-day by one daring stroke.
Of startling significance, in view of the above statement
and of subsequent developments, is the hint given as early
as March 15, 1913, by M. de Faramond, Naval Attache
to the French Embassy at Berlin, to M. Baudin, Minister of
Marine. In this year Germany levied an extraordinary
tax, amounting to the huge sum of a milliard of marks,
exclusively on acquired capital.


It was only possible to obtain this by pretending that
the security of the Empire was threatened. In reality the
German Government were determined that the fiasco suc-
ceeding the Agadir “coup manque” should never occur
again, and that when they next saw a chance of manufac-
turing war, they would not lack the financial means of so
doing.
But the really interesting thing to note is the uncanny
coincidence —if it be a mere coincidence —between the date
at which the payment of this tax was to be completed, and
the date of the outbreak of the present war. The following
extract shows that the French attache, writing more than
a year beforehand, had forecast the outbreak of hostilities
almost to a week, and this fact supplies remarkable cor-
roborative evidence —were such evidence needed —of Ger-
man premeditation:—
If it is established that the German Government are doing their
utmost to secure that the payment of this enormous loan should be
made in full, and not by way of instalment, and if, as some of the
newspapers say, the whole payment is to be complete before Ist July*
1914, these facts have a formidable significance for us, for nothing
can explain such haste on the part of the military authorities to obtain
war treasure in cash to the amount of a milliard.
A writer in the Special War Number of the “Round
Table,” in an article which is the best thing yet done in
English on the relations between Austria and Servia, indi-
cates that there is fairly strong evidence for thinking that
the Serajevo murder was connived at by a certain clique
within the Double Monarchy, who disliked the Arch-Duke,
and wanted a pretext for war with Servia. No living man
now doubts that Austria had determined on such a war
once the pretext was given, and this without regard to any
offer of submission or reparation on Servia’s part. If one
could assume that the suggestion regarding the murder
was correct, its date would correspond with startling
accuracy to that at which the German war-tax fell due.
I doubt whether there was German official collusion in
the murder. But could it have been possibly brought about
by those militaristic malcontents in Austria, who wanted
war with Servia, and knew the exact date at which such a


war would be most convenient to Germany? The whole
thing gives one to think furiously. It is, in any case, fairly
generally known that Germany had determined on war in
1914 or 1915, in whichever of these years the Kiel Canal
should be completed.
These things being so, it is not surprising to find that
throughout the French despatches, as formerly throughout
the British, Germany is shown to have deliberately
thwarted all efforts at peace, and when Russia and Austria
had practically settled matters between them on a satis-
factory basis, she stepped in and deliberately precipi-
tated the greatest war of all time by presenting the
ultimatum to Russia. The Yellow Book gives abundant
new evidence regarding England’s strenuous efforts to keep
the peace throughout the whole negotiations.
Testimony is borne to this in turn by all the allies and
neutral powers involved, and most notably by Italy. “I
for my part,” says M. Gambon on July 25, “see in England
the only Power which might be listened to at Berlin.” On
July 27 he writes: “I remarked to the German Secretary
of State that Sir Edward Grey’s proposal opened the way
to a peaceful issue.” On July 26 we find the following
telegram reaching Paris from the French Ambassador at
Petrograd: “M. Sazanof (Russian Foreign Minister) ad-
vises the Servian Government to ask for mediation of
the British Government.” ■ On July 29 the Italian Foreign
Minister “thinks that England can still exercise a great
deal of influence at Berlin in the direction of peace.” This
disposes at once of one-half of Germany’s fantastic claim
that England made the war.
The other and still more fantastic half implies that
England hoodwinked Germany by pretending she would
not come in, and then came in treacherously at the last
moment, having intended to do so from the start. This
is disproved by the whole tenor of the English White Book,
which shows that, hard though England strove for peace,
she left Germany under no illusion as to the certainty of
her going to war in certain contingencies. This aspect of
the matter is hammered home on the reader by such a
passage as the following from the French Charge


d’Affaires in London to the French Foreign Minister (July-
-27) :
Sir Arthur Nicolson has told me, however, that Prince Lichnowsky
(German Ambassador at London) cannot, after the conversation he
has had with him to-day, entertain any doubt as to the freedom
which the British Government reserved of intervening in case they
should judge it expedient.
That Germany believed—as was apparently the case till
a fairly late stage in the negotiations—that we were not
coming in, is, of course, nothing to the point. This was
only one of her innumerable and egregious political mis-
takes—the mistakes which have caused her own Chancellor
to call her “a nation of political donkeys.” She also
believed as late as July 29 that Russia would not fight-
see Yellow Book No. 96:—“The Austrian Ambassador at
Berlin also told his English colleague that he did not believe
in a general war, since Russia was not in the mood or the
condition to make war.”
The question for us is not what mistakes Germany
made, but whether we ever gave her just cause to believe
we would stand aloof, or hoodwinked her in any respect
regarding the line we would take in certain contingencies.
This question must be emphatically negatived by any
man who has studied the facts in the case, unless, like
Bernard Shaw, he has deliberately resolved to distort or
suppress or falsify these to his country’s detriment. For
decent, fair-minded folk there can be only one conclusion,
namely this, that if ever a nation was at war with
righteousness on her side, that nation is England to-day.
And this consideration I commend to the notice of every
man who is still hesitating as to whether he will help in
the Great War.


“BERNHARDI” SHAW.
March 2, 1915.
It is one sign of Germany’s spiritual degeneracy, that,
not content with giving credit to Shaw for his brilliant,
if superficial, wit, she should have hailed him as England’s
“greatest thinker and genius” in a generation which pos-
sessed Swinburne and Meredith, and still possesses Hardy,
and should have done this despite the fact that throughout
his whole career he has shown himself blind to most of the
great and tragic issues of life.
This thing she has certainly done; and it is therefore
without surprise that we learn from a recent cable message
that his pamphlet has been translated and widely dis-
tributed throughout Germany, and has been hailed with
glee by England’s foes, because it plays straight into their
hands, and can be represented to the unwary and ignorant
as the “conscience”—save the mark!—of England, upbraid-
ing her for her misdeeds.
As it was originally published in the “New York
Times,” as well as in the (British) “New Statesman,” it
also had the effect of giving an utterly false idea of
Britain’s moral position to the neutral power she is to-day
most anxious to conciliate; and here, again, it played
straight into the hands of Dernburg, Munsterberg, von
Mach, and the other Germans in America who are at pre-
sent blackening our name. “The New York Times” not
unnaturally headed it “An Extraordinary Article.”
I do not know whether Shaw intended all this to be the
result of the wild and incoherent indictment which he has
hurled against his country while she is fighting for her
life; perhaps, as Mr. Chiozza Money has charitably sug-
gested, he “desires his article to be treated as pure fun.”


Much of it, indeed, looks like the usual Shavian horse-
play; in one place, while enlarging on the expense of the
war, Shaw suggests that after the National Anthem and
the Marseillaise, we should sing “That’s the way the money
goes; Pop goes the Ten-Inchand, a little later on, he says
that as we shall have to finish the war with our fists if
it goes on much longer, “we may congratulate ourselves
that Georges Carpentier and Bombardier Wells are on our
side.” And so the fun, such as it, waxes fast and furious,
and may, perhaps, lead one to think the rest, the part in
which he acridly satirises England, is pure folly, too—
the kind of jest some half-witted creature might make at
the expense of his mother’s character, when that and her
life were being assailed by her deadly enemies.
Nearly all Shaw’s Shakespearian criticism, as I pointed
out long before the war, gives evidence of
The witless thirst for false wit’s worthless lees
The laugh mistimed in tragic presences,
The ear to all majestic meanings blind,
and shows him skipping, like Stevenson’s peculiarly deco-
rated ape, “among the trees of Paradise,” and “swinging
with his irreverent tail all over the most holy place.” You
might as well take a cockatoo to see “Lear” as show Shaw
anything great and terrible and ask him to understand its
meaning.
It is even so with the present war. His fellow-Socialist,
Mr. H. G. Wells, has recently dealt with him ungloved, and
has shown that his pretensions to deep or original thought
are false and hollow, and that, for all his surface brilliancy,
he is a thing of shreds and patches clipped from the goodly
garments of greater men. And Mr. Wells has also warned
us that as long as the war lasts we shall have in our ears
what he calls Shaw’s “senseless screeching.”
What, then, is the pronouncement which has awakened
against Shaw the wrath of England’s thinkers, and has
caused her caricaturists to represent him being decorated
by the Kaiser with the Iron Cross? Minor issues apart, it
consists of an attempt to prove that owing to the part she
played in the negotiations preceding this war, England is
in great measure, if not wholly, responsible for its occur


rence. And this attempt is substantiated by what to any
close student of the aforesaid negotiations—as comprised,
for instance, in the British White Book, the German White
Book, and the French Yellow Book—must seem a deliberate
distortion and suppression of material facts. Shaw states
the view which Germany has now been invited to accept
by her official apologists, that England deliberately en-
trapped her into this war by pretending at first that she
herself was going to stand out of it, and by then coming
treacherously in—as she had from the beginning intended
—when she saw all the other great Powers involved.
I have already shown by close analysis of the British
and French official documents, that this is an utterly pre-
posterous contention, and that from the beginning England
made two things quite clear:—
(1) That she ardently desired peace and was prepared
to make any sacrifice for it consistent with her honor and
obligations.
(2) That if certain contingencies should occur involv-
ing that honor and those obligations, Germany could in no
wise count on her neutrality.
No honest man who reads the British White Book
through can doubt these facts. If you wish to see both of
them emphasised in a single passage, turn to that
memorable and illuminating despatch of Sir Edward
Grey’s, No. 101 of the aforesaid Book. At the beginning
of this he tells Germany most definitely that England will
not remain neutral if Germany (1) attacks France, with
the view of taking her colonies; (2) invades Belgium. But
if Germany will forego her aggressive designs and co-
operate with England for the world’s peace, he promises
that England will side with her even against England’s
present allies, should these in their turn prove aggressive.
He makes this promise in words the passionate sin-
cerity of which could only be doubted by the most petty
and cynical of souls, words which are in keeping with all
we know of Sir Edward Grey’s life and character and with
his whole attitude throughout the negotiations; words
which represent all that is highest and truest in the national
ideal of Britain:—


And I will say this: if the peace of Europe can be preserved, and
the present crisis safely passed, my own endeavor will be to promote
some arrangement to which Germany can be a party, by which she
could be assured that no aggressive or hostile policy would be pur-
sued against her or her allies by France, Russia or ourselves, jointly
or separately. I have desired this and worked for it, as far as I
could, through the last Balkan crisis, and Germany having a corres-
ponding object, our relations sensibly improved.
The idea has hitherto been too Utopian to form the subject of
definite proposals, but if this present crisis, so much more acute
than any that Europe has gone through for generations, be safely
passed, I am hopeful that the relief and reaction which will follow
may make possible some more definite rapprochement between the
Powers than has been possible hitherto.
Yet this is the man whom Shaw calls a Junker hardly
less dangerous than the Kaiser himself, representing a
country hardly less militaristic and menacing to the world’s
peace than the Germany of Treitschke and Bernhardi!
I pointed out last week that it is not England’s fault
if Germany mistook her plain warning for bluff—Germany
who throughout the last generation has made it her busi-
ness to learn everything about other nations except the
stuff they are made of. I have also shown, in closest
detail, how at any moment up to the very end, Germany
could have secured peace by “pressing the button,” how
she deliberately refused to do so, and how, when Russia
and Austria had actually come to terms, she deliberately
kicked out the wedge that secured the world’s peace.
Yet all these irrefutable facts are nothing to the man
who puts his own notoriety-hunting instinct first and the
truth which vindicates his country’s honor, a very bad
second.
The grotesque injustice of Shaw’s criticism of England
can only be paralleled by the grotesque inconsistencies with
which he strives, in the teeth of the facts, to make out his
case against her. These have been incisively exposed by
my old friend and fellow-student, Professor Ramsay Muir,
who under five brief headings states the contradictory
reasons advanced by Shaw for his attack on England. I
give the first three: —
(1) Our military preparations and ambitions, according to Mr.
Shaw, have forced Germany to make war. But, according to Mr.
Shaw, we should have established military service three years ago.


(2) If we talk about being drawn in to the war by an honorable
obligation to Belgium, we are hypocrites: we should have taken part
in it in any case, and indeed, had labored to bring it about. But “it
is our sacred duty to drive the Germans out of Belgium,” and if Ger-
many had concentrated her forces on the eastern frontier it would
have been “impossible for England to have attacked Germany.”
(3) If Sir E. Grey had followed M. Sazanoff’s advice and told
Germany that we would certainly join France and Russia, there would
have been no war. But when Sir E. Grey refused (in the famous
No. 123) to pledge England to neutrality, this made it clear (according
to Mr. Shaw) that England would join France and Russia, and there-
fore (!) left the Kaiser no alternative but to fight. It appears, there-
fore, that Sir E. Grey caused the war (a) by not making it clear that
we would join France and Russia, (b) by making it clear that we
would join France and Russia.
I challenge anyone who has read Shaw’s statement of
the case against England to say that this is an unfair
presentation of it. In any case, Muir’s letter proved un-
answerable to him, though he has striven with might and
main to answer it.
The sting of that letter lay in its tail:—
It seems impossible to resist the conclusion that this sort of stuff
must be the work either of a muddle-headed fool or of a person who
condescends to play tricks with the facts about a very grave crisis
in order to show off his own cleverness, and does it very badly. Mr.
Shaw is not a muddle-headed fool.
Altogether, one imagines that Shaw really had one
serious purpose in writing his article—that of keeping
himself before the public, even at the price of his country’s
honor and safety. In the course of that article he remarks
that a year or two ago he was beginning to be somewhat
out of fashion when he suddenly regained popularity by
introducing the word “bloody” into one of his plays. After
this experience, he instructively remarks, he found it diffi-
cult to take England seriously. Now, he has not paid her
the compliment of taking her seriously in the crisis which
threatens her very being; and, conscious perhaps of his
dwindling popularity, he has again tried to attract her
attention by his old method of saying something outrageous.
He has achieved his end—but this time at the cost of
all honest men’s respect.


GERMAN ATROCITIES—THE FRENCH REPORT.
March 17, 1915.
One still meets individuals in Melbourne who seem to re-
gard this war as something lying entirely outside their own
existence, as a pageant resembling those gigantic games of
chess arranged in certain parts of Europe a few years ago,
in which each of the pieces was a human being.
To these people, this almost cosmic struggle, which in-
volves the very being of their Race and its civilisation,
appears no more than a huge sporting event, which they
behold with cold and critical interest. Talking to them,
one feels that when the War is ended they will be rather
sorry than otherwise because the newspapers will then be
so very dull.
To this class belongs the interesting individual who
assured me a little while ago that he rather hoped Italy
would not come into the war, as the odds against Germany
would then be so very unsporting. He might just as well
have said that it would be unsporting if anyone were to
step in and save his brother from the assault of a mad dog.
To him it was apparently nothing that a hundred thousand
more of the best lives of Britain should be spilt like water,
so long as he could lean back over his morning coffee, and
exult in the admirable handicapping which ensured to him
the continuance of so exciting a struggle. Recalling our
conversation, I am haunted by the disquieting reflection
that I was within an ace of keeping my temper with this
person.
Paradoxical as it may seem, there is something
abnormal and sinister about anyone who can look at this
War quite normally and aloofly. The Bishop of London
has recently dealt scathingly with this type of person.
Sometimes he is an “intellectual,” in which case he will
invite you to apply to the war his own particular brand
of “philosophy”—a brand which apparently excludes all
strong and honest and manly feeling. Most of us have


probably within the last few months undergone the chilly
exhortations of this kind of person. He is at the opposite
pole from the poets and the artists—the men and women
who see life clearly, feel it acutely, and thus become the
“nerves o’er which do creep the else-unfelt oppressions of
this earth.”
Throughout the civilised world these, the giants of
thought and art have spoken their minds regarding the
unspeakable Teutonic outrage against beauty and freedom,
and have spoken it with that passion from which the afore-
said “intellectual” boasts himself so enviably free. Their
spirit has gone forth among the people and prevailed. It
has helped to quicken that strong and fiery national feeling
without which there can be no national heroism or self-
sacrifice.
As for the others, the “Tomlinsons” whom one still en-
counters, they are apparently afflicted with the two sins
which are the root of all evil, intellectual and moral-
frigidity and lack of imagination.
“If their own front door is shut, they’ll swear the whole
world’s warm.” They have utterly failed to realise that
this war is not only part of their own lives, but is probably
the greatest thing which has happened to each one
of them individually. They do not realise that Melbourne
is to-day as vitally jeopardised as London, and that apart
from this the whole civilisation is at stake by which they
live and move and have their being.
If these people want to understand what is at present
being done and suffered in Europe on their behalf they
cannot do better than acquaint themselves with the
recently-published report of the French Commission ap-
pointed to enquire into the German atrocities. And it is
devoutly to be hoped that when they have read this report
they will set about helping, by whatever means they may,
toward the triumph of decency and freedom, and the
annihilation of what can only be described as the power
of the devil.
The Commission consisted of four of France’s leading
judges, and its results are, therefore, put forward with
full responsibility and may be accepted as trustworthy. Its


opening lines inform us that it has only accepted such
evidence as has been substantiated up to the hilt. It fur-
thermore assures us that most of the excesses it chronicles
can only be explained on the assumption that they were
officially authorised, and, in some cases, officially ordered.
The responsibility for these, it continues, extends to those
in the highest positions of command in the German army.
It is, indeed, ridiculous to pretend that the officers of a
force whose organisation is the most perfect in the world
could not have prevented, if they had wished it, the hideous
sexual outrages with which the pages of this document aie
spotted. And in other cases, notably those of arson,
assassination, and pillage, the order for the crime was
repeatedly given by highly-placed officers.
The Commission further deals with the German sugges-
tion that a good many of the outrages were perpetrated by
way of reprisal for the shooting of German soldiers by
French civilians. So far was this from being the case,
they say, that the Germans have been repeatedly proved
to have let off guns near villages and farms whose inhabi-
tants they wished to massacre under pretext of reprisal,
their ultimate object being, of course, “loot.” A diabolical
attempt of this kind, luckily checkmated by the ingenuity
of a village priest, is quoted early in the report.
For the rest, the atrocities are of every kind, and in a
startlingly large number of cases were committed either by
officers or in their presence. At Champuis, a man of 70,
named Jacquemin, was tied up to his bed by an officer, and
allowed to die of gradual starvation. At Sermaize, an old
man named Brocard was arrested with his son. His wife
and stepdaughter took to the river (the Saulx), preferring
death to the mercies of the apostles of “Kultur.” Brocard
struggled free, and tried to save the women. The German
soldiers recaptured him, and pitilessly dragged him off,
leaving the women to struggle in the river. When Brocard
got free, after a few days, and found the bodies, he dis-
covered that both women had been shot through the head.
At the village of Soumeilles, on the Meuse, Madame X.
took refuge in a cellar with four small children and a mar-
ried couple. Several days afterwards their dead bodies


were found among a sea of blood. The right breast and
arm of Madame X. had been cut off, also one foot of her
little girl, aged 11. The little boy, five years old, had his
throat cut. And, besides this, there were unnamable
sexual horrors.
The unoffending village of Nomeny, after it had been
pillaged, was burnt to the ground with torches, petrol and
compressed tablets of dynamite, officially provided for the
purpose. As the wretched inhabitants ran out of their
cellars under pressure of the flames the German soldiers
shot them down like game. This outrage was obviously
officially ordered.
At Einville, on August 22, a poacher was horribly tor-
tured, so that, to a bystander, who saw him with his
nose cut off, he seemed to have aged 10 years in a quarter
of an hour. At Croismare, on August 25, an officer of
Uhlans shot with his revolver a peasant named Treugel,
who was digging potatoes, and shortly afterwards made two
other peasants stand up against a hedge and shot them
with his own hand.
At Crezancy, a peasant was disgustingly tortured by
German soldiers, while at Senlis a German officer was
proved to have tormented a wounded Frenchman by flog-
ging his face with a stick. At Compiegne, a German cap-
tain named Schroeder, when asked to stop the outrages
committed by his soldiers, replied, “It’s only war, and
besides, I’ve no time.”
The Germans boasted to their interpreter at Gerbe-
viller that they had burnt alive in a farm near that village
a man with his five children, in spite of their cries and
appeals for pity. This account was confirmed by the
fact that afterwards charred human remains were found
among the ruins.
The present account has only dealt with a fraction of
the crimes and has hardly touched on the numerous and
unspeakable sexual outrages committed upon women and
children; but enough has probably been said to show how
useless it is to talk of “philosophy” until this diabolical
Force has been broken and this “spittle wiped off from the
face of God.”


AN AMERICAN VIEW OF GERMANY.
March 23, 1915.
One of the considerations which is likely to damn pre-
sent-day Germany beyond hope in the eyes of posterity
is the almost unanimous condemnation of her methods re-
gistered by the best thought of all neutral countries.
English papers have recently been full of extracts from
the Dutch press which show that, though Germany has
made every effort to conciliate Holland, that country is so
appalled by her neighbor’s perfidy and barbarism that she
utterly refuses to be won over. No one can read an Italian
newspaper without being struck by the fierce indignation
against Germany smouldering through its paragraphs.
The American press has taken and held the same posi-
tion, and “Life,” despite the fact that many of its readers
must be German-Americans, recently published a powerful
cartoon showing Germany as a huge and fierce gorilla, with
the maiden Belgium swooning to death in his hideous arms.
One of the most telling indictments of Germany yet
put forward comes from that eminent pacifist, Professor
Harden Church, President of the Carnegie Institute, Pitts-
burg, and author of the “Life of Oliver Cromwell. It
takes the form of a reply to the “Appeal to the Civilised
World,” recently issued by ninety-three Germans of t e
highest distinction in science, literature and art, who
endeavoured to win the suffrage of neutral countries by
saying that Germany’s enemies, “by their lies and
calumnies, are endeavoring to stain the honor of Germany
in her hard struggle for existence—in a struggle which has
been forced upon her.” ,
Professor Church’s reply is primarily addressed to the
German savant, Dr. Schaper, who had sent him the mani-
festo in question. It gains greatly through its extreme
politeness and restraint, and also through its expressions


of sympathy with innocent Germans. But with all its
suavity and polish, it constitutes a ruthless indictment of
present-day Germany, as regards both her attitude during
the negotiations of last autumn and her general policy
throughout the last few years.
Professor Church begins by pointing Dr. Schaper re-
lentlessly back to a study of the original documents concern-
ing the negotiations, viz., (1) The Austro-Hungarian Note
to Servia; (2) the Servian reply; (3) the British White
Paper; (4) the German White Book; (5) the Russian Yel-
low Book; (6) the Belgian Grey Book. He lays very
great stress on the German White Book, and shows that this
document alone would be sufficient to condemn Germany,
and to blow sky-high her contention that war had been
forced upon her.
Every man who studies these papers, he says, will regret
two things—first, that Germany has not dared to publish
her correspondence with Austria, and, second, that Austria
has not dared to publish her correspondence with Germany.
Did we possess these documents, he thinks, we might learn
some startling facts.
As things are, we have already learnt much from the
remarkable despatches constituting “the blank cheque given
by Germany to Austria.” These prove that at a time when
every other European power was straining with might and
main to help to keep the peace and submit contentious mat-
ters to the Hague Tribunal, Germany aided and abetted
through-thick and thin the hectoring and infatuated atti-
tude of her chief ally, though, as she herself tells us, she
knew that persistence in that attitude must necessarily pre-
cipitate a European war.
The famous passage quoted by Professor Church runs:
—“We were able to assure our ally (Austria) most heartily
of our agreement with her view of the situation, and to
assure her that any action that she might consider it neces-
sary to take in order to put an end to the movement in
Servia directed against the existence of the Austro-Hun-
garian monarchy would receive our approval.”
The implication that Servia was officially fathering a


movement “directed against the existence of the Austro-
Hungarian monarchy” is of course, mere German moon-
shine, and it looks all the queerer when we remember that,
as I pointed out in a recent article, the murder of the
Arch-Duke was almost certainly connived at—though not
originated—by the Austrian authorities themselves. (See
“Round Table,” No. 16, p. 660.)
One point made by Professor Church I may recommend
to any Australian worker who still doubts that the cause
of the Allies represents freedom and the people’s cause,
whereas Germany stands for nothing but the assertion of
individual and tyrannous will.
One of the Kaiser’s telegrams to the Czar points to the
Arch-Duke’s murder, and continues: “Undoubtedly you will
agree with me that we two, you and I, as well as a
sovereigns, have a common interest in insisting that all
those morally responsible for this terrible murder shall
suffer deserved punishment.”
On this sentence Dr. Church comments pertinently
We begin to see now why those German soldiers have died, and
why those German women are weeping. A
uL, a usurner and invader, has been shot. Therefore let ail neu
Wk loose ?n Europe! And those of us who have been shocked
wbpn bombs were hurled at Emperors, are now astounded to learn
that Emperors in emulation of the most despicable anarchists, have
themselves hurled bombs at defenceless women and children in Ant
werp and in Paris.
Professor Church also directs attention to such phrases
of the Kaiser as “my mobilisation,” “I shall in a certain
event refrain from attacking France,” and expresses a
devout hope that the day will soon come when there will be
no Kaisers “with power to mobilise armies as a child plays
with tin soldiers.” . ,
The Professor next deals with the assertion made by the
ninety-three, to the effect that “It is not true that we tres-
passed in neutral Belgium.” The question he raises here
is one that must have forced itself on most English and
neutral students of the war—Can the apologists of Ger-
many have been furnished with anything like a true or full
account of what her own public men have said and written.
If they have, the present “Appeal” is nothing but a sinister
perversion of the facts, for Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg


himself has written “We were compelled to override the
just protests of Luxemburg and Belgian Governments. . . .
The wrong—l speak frankly—that we are committing we
will endeavor to make good as soon as our military goal
has been reached.”
This systematic habit of falsehood and self-contradic-
tion has done Germany hardly less harm with the
world than her hideous brutality and violation of the law
of nations.
These latter qualities are also annihilatingly dealt with
by Professor Church, who, referring to the German denial
of atrocities, gives specific instances of these, and points
especially to the appalling instances of Louvain, Alost, and
Termonde. Referring to the Kaiser’s complicity in these
doings, he says:—
Your Emperor was admired as one of the greatest men in the
world. But what will be the fame that he leaves to posterity ? Oh,
what a fall is there! His inexcusable provocation of war has stung
humanity to the uttermost depths of its soul. Besides drenching
Europe with human blood, he is giving her a new population of weep-
ing widows and bereft mothers, of fatherless children, and of men
without legs and arms. A heritage of hate!
He also proves with overpowering logic that what Ger-
many has done since the war began is the natural sequel of
her aggressive and irreconcilable policy in time of peace,
and shows that “when the working classes of the world
began to stagger under the taxation for prospective war
(about 75 per cent, of the revenues of all Governments
going into these wasted expenditures) the English Cabinet
proposed a cessation of further preparation for one year,
but the Emperor’s answer to this humane suggestion was to
add four battleships to his fleet and 300,000 men to his
army, immediately requiring France to lengthen out her
term of service from two years to three.”
All the indignation and fear felt by the more intelligent
Americans for Germany to-day is summed up in these
burning words of Professor Church:—
These war dreams, this German solidarity, this Pan-Germanism,
this mendacious diplomacy, this policy of being armed to the teeth,
this false principle of the State above the individual, the still more
fallacious sentiments of Germany above humanity, the contempt of
your military rulers for human life, their eager will to destroy the


whole body of property which marks the progress of mankind—all
this has made the world afraid of you. Your insatiate spirit has
terrified us all. Your General Staff have even published a plan for
attacking America, If you beat down the British Empire why will
not our turn come next?
Why, indeed?
FRANCE AND GERMANY—CIVILIZATION AND
BARBARISM.
March 30, 1915.
When writing two weeks ago of the French official re-
port of the German atrocities I emphasised the point that
the outrages committed by the German Army in this war
differ not merely in degree but in kind from those occurring
in any war of modern times. It speaks badly enough for
an army when hideous acts of arson, pillage and rape are
committed by bodies of its soldiers who may have got tem-
porarily out of hand.
But when to these crimes are added acts such as those
quoted in my former article, and when it is realised that, as
the French Commission remarks, the responsibility for
these occurrences extends to the highest ranks of the Ger-
man Army, the matter becomes increasingly sinister and
terrible.
No reasonable man who has followed the progress of
this war can now doubt that many of the German outrages
were officially permitted, and even officially ordered. This
would seem certain even if we had to depend only on the
carefully weighed and tested depositions of responsible
French or Belgian citizens; but even were this testimony
insufficient of itself, it could be substantiated up to the hilt
by the admissions of German prisoners.
Two of these are quoted towards the end of the French
report, the deponents in each case being patients in the
hospital at Nancy. One of these, a man suffering from a
stomach wound, informed Doctor Rohmer that it had been


inflicted upon him with a revolver by his commanding
officer, because he had refused to despatch a wounded
Frenchman. Another German, wounded in the back by a
shot fired at point-blank range, declared to Doctor Weiss
that in obedience to an officer’s order, a soldier had shot
him to punish him for having had several wounded
French soldiers conveyed to a village near the battlefield.
It is hardly surprising that this kind of thing should
be occurring now when we remember that even in peace
time “a lame shoemaker living in a conquered province, who
muttered words against the Kaiser’s troops, was cut down
with a sabre, and the officer who committed the cowardly
assault was effusively praised by the German Crown
Prince.”
The notorious Zabern incident is indeed only one of
many which might be quoted in illustration of Germany’s
method of dealing with conquered territory, and with the
weak and oppressed. I have also cited her treatment of
German Poland in this connection, and would once more
urgently request anyone who doubts the hideous facts to
turn to Charles Sarolea’s volume, “The Anglo-German Pro-
blem” (written a few years before the war), and to the
recently published Oxford pamphlet of Dr. Ehrlich. Simi-
larly the bullying policy of Germany throughout last
autumn’s negotiations, and the calculated brutality of her
methods of warfare, are all led up to by the domineering
and provocative attitude which she has adopted towards
Europe through the last generation.
In striking contrast td this is the earnest endeavor made
by France through the whole of this period to keep the
world’s peace, and to ensue that high and helpful tradition
of civilisation which her art, literature, and history have
led us to expect from her.
Her noble and self-sacrificing attitude has been well
brought out in a little pamphlet recently published by the
French Government, and supplied to me by the courtesy of
the French Consulate.
It deals with the part played by France in European
politics since the Franco-Prussian war, and shows that for
forty-three years she has loyally tried to carry out the


terms of the Treaty of Frankfurt, though that Treaty
meant the forfeiture of her two great Provinces. She paid
off her huge war indemnity of five milliard francs before
the due term, so that by 1873 she obtained the right to
demand the evacuation of her territory by the forces which
Germany had stationed there till the exaction should be paid
in full.
Slowly she began to recover, with the result that in 1875
Bismarck conceived the monstrous plan of making a fresh
war upon her, to complete the destruction begun in 1870.
She had given no provocation beyond that of continuing to
exist, and it was only by a kind of political chance that she
escaped the horrors of a fresh invasion.
Germany now by sucessive enactments extending from
1874-1913 increased her own effective army to the enormous
total of 866,000 men, this force being expressly stated by
the “Gazette of Northern Germany” to be for offensive pur-
poses. France, as an earnest of her pacific policy, had in
1905 reduced her term of military service to two years, and
it was only as the result of the alarming increase of 1913
in the German army estimates, that she substituted three
years as the necessary period. It need hardly be added
that this measure was purely defensive, yet Germany imme-
diately seized it as a pretext for levying her huge war tax
of a milliard marks. This was imposed in 1913, and it is
startling to note (see French Yellow Book) that it fell due
in July 31, 1914, the very week of the war’s beginning.
Germany had made it her business in all these years to
keep France at her mercy, from a military point of view,
and to use Metz as a pistol held at her temple.
The French publication deals elaborately with the rela-
tions between the two countries in Morocco and elsewhere,
and shows that in the former country Germany, who had
deliberately renounced her rights in 1880, arrogantly re-
vived them in later years, and tried to destroy France be-
cause she resisted this brutal injustice, such destruction
being only averted by the timely intervention of England.
The pamphlet further deals with Germany’s extraordin-
ary contention that she was impeded by France in her policy
of colonial expansion, and shows clearly that France s own


policy of colonisation in Tunis and Tonkin was actively
forwarded by Bismarck, who wished to distract her atten-
tion from Europe, and to embarrass her in distant projects
of conquest. Her success in this field aroused the jealousy
with which for 50 years Germany has consistently regarded
the success of other nations, and elicited from Bernhardi
a remark thoroughly characteristic of the man and his
nation:—
It must be admitted with mortification and envy that the nation
vanquished in 1870, whose vital powers seemed exhausted, which
possessed no qualification for colonisation from want of men to
colonise, has yet created the second largest colonial Empire in the
world, and prides herself on being a World Power.
“Mortification and envy”—are not these the exact quali-
ties which have driven Germany on throughout the last two
generations, and have at last forced her into making this
devil’s war against the world’s peace and beauty and
righteousness ?
“A CAPITALISTS’ WAR.”
April 20, 1915.
In certain quarters of this community one may still hear
the cry that this is a “capitalist’s war,” and one, therefore,
from which the worker may stand aloof; and many Aus-
tralian workers seem tacitly to accept the idea that this
is the opinion prevailing among English, American, and
European workers and socialists.
It will be the object of the present article to deal with
this fallacy. Later, I hope to show that the better, and
also the greater, part of responsible socialistic thought
throughout the world is strongly on the side of the Allies,
and realises that the victory of Germany in this war would
be a death-blow struck at freedom’s heart, and at every
possibility of social regeneration.


The phrase, “a capitalists’ war” may mean one of
several things. It may imply that individual capitalists,
or sets of capitalists, in Germany and England have pushed
both of these countries into war because they hoped they
were going to get something out of war. If this be the
meaning of the contention, it is ludicrously beside the
point.
Capitalism in both countries —to leave France, Russia,
and Austria out of the question for a moment was keenly
interested in keeping the world’s peace, for that peace
enabled it to make huge fortunes.
In Germany the capitalistic class was making money
hand over fist owing to the doorway to British markets
kept open for it by Britain’s adherence to freetrade.
Owing to the remarkable organisation adopted in peace
time by protectionist Germany, German capitalists were
in a condition of unprecedented prosperity. “The only
party in Germany,” says the great English Socialist, H. M.
Hyndman, “which was deeply interested in making war,
was the Junker party and its militarist friends.” It was
they, as he shows, who thrust the capitalist into this war
against his will: and it is on them, and not on him, that
Germany’s responsibility for the present war must neces-
sarily fall. . , ~
The first point for us to seize, then, is that German
Junkerdom, the true cause of the war, is a totally different
thing from capitalism, though both may be very unpleasant
things after their own fashion. j ,
The second point to notice is that, for all that Shaw an
his German friends may say, the junker, if he exists in
England, has to-day no political weight, and that Englan s
participation in the war is not due to him, but to the
spontaneous action and well-nigh unanimous action of the
British nation. . . .
In Britain the capitalist class was still more keenly in-
terested in the maintenance of peace. In saying tis
am not defending that class, for which, be it English,
Australian, or foreign, I have little liking or sympat y.
The quarrel which patriotic Britons to-day have with t
British capitalistic section of the Liberal Party, is that it


led Britain to believe that war with Germany would never
occur, and thus discouraged her from making any prepara-
tion for it. The pacifism of that section was due to no
higher motive than self-interest; but the only sense in
which it can be held responsible for the war is this, that
through its hostility to war-like preparation it had so
weakened England that Germany thought she would not
have the spirit to fight for her own existence. Hence
Germany made war, which she certainly would not have
done had she found England as ready as herself.
Mr. Lloyd George, who will not be suspected of any
sympathy with capitalism, remarks in his recent speech:—
Powerful city financiers whom it was my duty to interview this
Saturday (just before the declaration of war) on the financial situation,
ended the conference with an earnest hope that Britain would keep
out of it. A poll on the following Tuesday would have resulted in a
vote of 99 per cent, in favor of war, and the city interests, which
knew that our participation in a great European war would mean
heavy loss, and might bring ruin on them, and were, therefore, on
Saturday unanimously opposed to war, by Tuesday were quite as
unanimously in favor of it.
British capitalism then did not wish this war, or take
the lead in making it; and, as Lloyd George’s speech im-
plies, as a class they did not gain by it, but lost. Doubt-
less money has been made by individual contractors since
the war began; but this is an accident and a side-issue, a
fact inseparable from the whole existing economic order.
It affects comparatively few people, and has been now met
by the commission appointed by Lord Kitchener and Mr.
Lloyd George.
But the phrase, as used by certain socialists, may mean
that wars are at present made by Governments in which
the worker has no part, or but little part, and that his
country’s quarrel is therefore not his quarrel. As against
this, it is in the first place not true to say that in Britain,
whose franchise, as contrasted with Germany’s, is highly
democratic, the worker and his representatives have no
part in their country’s affairs. From the socialistic stand-
point, and, indeed, from the labor standpoint generally,
much has yet to be done in Britain before the worker will
come into his own; but the fact that one’s country, or one’s
empire is not ideal is no argument for leaving it in the


lurch when it is in dire straits, any more than such a con-
dition would be an argument for leaving one’s friend in
the lurch under similar circumstances. #
What is certain is that in England the reactionary ele-
ments are gradually being eliminated, as is shown, for Z°°
or for bad, by the progress of Lloyd Georgism, and the
restrictions placed on the House of Lords: in Germany, on
the other hand, the tendency is ever to tighten the grip ot
tyranny, and, politically speaking, to regard the worker
as an enemy who must be kept down at any cost. T ose
who doubt this should read what Prinz von Bulow, late
Chancellor of Germany, has to say about the Social Demo-
cratic Party, in his “Imperial Germany”; and if they wish
to see how little share the German worker is allowed to
have in the government of his country they cannot do
better than consult “Britain’s Case Against Germany, by
Professor Ramsay Muir. # . .
There is a deeper and more complex, yet, in my opinion,
a not less false and misleading meaning, which may be
attached to the phrase, “A capitalists’ war; but I shall
have to postpone discussion of this till a future article.
With reference to the issues I have already raised I wou
like to add that an aspiration, however ardent and sincere,
for universal peace and brotherhood cannot excuse any man
or woman from holding aloof from the present struggle.
Rather ought such an aspiration to be an additional reaso
for coming into the fight and trying to help with might
and main the power which makes for progress towards
this goal rather than that which has resolutely denied I i
and has striven to drag the world down into the netherm
abyss of barbarism. . ,
In no field can progress be made by dreaming, however
sublime, nor yet by sudden miracle; by steadfast effort
alone can it be won, by slow gains wrung with agony and
bloody sweat out of that eternal struggle which is life. As
long as life lasts each man who wishes to make it a highe
and a better thing must take the happenings of the presen
as he finds them, and must try to fashion out of them that
better order which shall be the future. If there is any-
thing which holds the promise of that order, the germ o


the greater life that is to be, he should attach himself to
this and combat to the uttermost all that would thwart its
free development.
Can anyone who looks at Germany and at the British
Empire to-day doubt which contains the higher civilisation
and the greater possibility of progress? That Empire
stands for the free development of each of its parts accord-
ing to its own free law and intuition of life and liberty; and
we Australian workers should be the first to fling ourselves
on Britain’s side in this struggle and to maintain her cause
at home, even if we cannot go to the war. For we enjoy
social, economic, and political conditions unique in the
world to-day and unparalleled in its past history: and we
do this solely because Great Britain keeps the sea free for
the world and ourselves in peace time, and has, during the
last few months, borne the brunt of this titanic struggle
which threatens our very existence as a free nation.
Australian fellow-workers, let us who have everything
to gain by Britain’s victory in this war and everything to
lose by her defeat, for very shame put away this baby-talk
of our refusing to support her to the uttermost because,
forsooth, she is engaged in “a capitalists’ war”!


THE WAR AND SOCIALISM.
April 27, 1915.
In some quarters of this community it seems still to be
assumed that Socialism implies an adherence to peace-at-
any-price, and that consequently it is inconsistent with true
socialistic convictions to render support to any kind of war.
This seems to me to be a complete fallacy, and one closely
connected with that other fallacy, with which I have already
dealt, that the present war is “a capitalists’ war.” In
Australia we are all of us apt to get into narrow grooves
of thought, and it is always refreshing to see what Euro-
pean thinkers are saying, and thus once more to regain the
main current.
It is noteworthy that some of the leading Socialists in
the world have for the time being completely renounced
their aspirations for peace, and have thrown themselves on
the side of the Allies, realising that their cause implies the
struggle of freedom and civilisation against barbarism and
the most tyrannous reaction. These men have taken the
view that no one can attain his ideal through inaction, and
that it is a man’s part to take sides in the eternal struggle
between that which makes for evil, and that which is
steadily making for good, even if it has not yet been able
fully to realise it. No man has ever preached peace more
earnestly and constantly than Anatole France, a whole-
hearted Socialist, and probably the greatest living man of
letters. Yet since the beginning of the present war this
great thinker, now over seventy years of age, has declared
that no peace is possible till the forces of barbarism have
been broken, and as he is unable to bear arms himself, he
has offered his services to the French Government, and is
now editing a military newspaper.


Everyone knows the part which Wells has played since
the beginning of the war, in endeavoring to render help
towards the cause of the Allies. He has given Shaw a
trouncing for his writings; but even Shaw himself, as he
now proudly claims, was before the war in favor of
strengthening England’s military forces, and for all his
faults he has certainly not, since the war, sunk utterly into
the slough of pacificism. That most forcible Socialist,
Blatchford, was one of the first men to warn England of
the German peril, and to urge that instant steps be taken
to meet it. In France the pacificist, Herve, and the leading
Socialist, Guesde, are solidly behind their country, and
against the Huns, and an equally strong stand has been
taken by the eminent Belgian Socialist, Vandevelde.
The same conviction is held by that most brilliant and
learned of Australian Socialists, Mr. Maurice Blackburn.
It is indeed quite a mistake to think that Socialism
necessarily means entire pacificism, and the meek accept-
ance of armed brutality. In 1848, Karl Marx advocated
war against Russia, which he considered at that date to
be the greatest stronghold of reaction in Europe. In 1870
the great German Socialist, Engels, was prepared to fight
for France against the aggression of his own country, and
was only dissuaded from doing so by Marx, who believed
that his action might, perhaps, be misinterpreted by France
herself. During the American Civil War, thousands of
German Socialists, as we have been recently reminded by
leading American Socialistic writers, took up arms for the
North against the Slave Power of the South. “The war
for the Union became their war.” Similar instances might
be multiplied almost to infinity, but it will be even more
instructive to glance for a moment at the opinion regard-
ing the present war recently endorsed by H. M. Hyndman,
one of the greatest Socialists whom the world possesses
to-day, and leader of the British Socialist party.
Messrs. Hyndman and Belfort Bax, in an article pub-
lished in the December number of “The English Review,”
point out that:
It is only a minority of Socialists who favor the extreme doc-
trinaire dogma that all wars in modern times arise out of capitalism
and capitalist antagonism, and that, therefore, Socialists should take


no part in them whatever, even when national freedom and national
independence are at stake. The majority, on the other hand, con-
tend, and act upon the contention, that by no means all modern
wars are capitalist wars, or due to capitalist antagonism, and that,
even if they were, capitalism plus foreign militarist domination, or
racial repression, is worse than domestic capitalism by itseit. me
former opinion is in opposition to the decisions of International
Socialist Congresses; the latter is in accordance with them.
The fallacy actuating the minority arises, so he clearly
shows, from their acceptance of the Marxian or material-
istic view of history, which believes that every event
occurring in the world is the product of blind economic
forces working ruthlessly upon mankind in society, which
“is thereby reduced to a collection of merely sentient auto-
mata, unconsciously dominated, from generation to
generation, by economic circumstances, outside of their
own cognition or control.”
Hyndman illustrates the Marxian theory at consider-
able length in Marx’s own words, and then proceeds to
refute it, which he has little difficulty in doing. For my
own part, I find it impossible to see why even those who
accept this doctrine should find themselves more opposed to
participation in a just war than to participation in any
other form of righteous effort. Hyndman, however, points
out that to say that all warfare is due to economic factors,
is the most ludicrous of fallacies. Some wars, he shows,
are indeed to be ascribed to such causes, and he cites in-
stances of these. But he proves that on the other hand
history bristles with instances of warfare which can in no
sense be ascribed to economic pressure. Some of the most
terrible conflagrations the world has ever seen have been
due, not to such causes at all but to the antagonisms of
race, of religion, of customs and so on. In this connection
he cites the early movement of Mohammedanism, and Peter
the Hermit’s Crusade, which no sane person would ascribe
to the economics of the time.
The present war, he goes on to show, is likewise not
a capitalists’ war in its origin—not a carefully prepared
struggle of capitalists’ aggression against rival capitalists.
On the contrary, it is directly due to the jealousy felt
by German Junkerdom, representing the war party, for


German capitalism, which ensued peace, and was making
enormous strides through it:—
It is the final effort of Prussian militarism to retain its pre-
dominance at home by conquest and annexation abroad. The
Junkers were losing ground; war might enable them to recover what
they had lost and a good deal more. Therefore, foreign war was de-
liberately engineered in order to save the domestic situation. Hence
the intrigues of this Camarilla around the Kaiser and his family, as
well as in every capital in Europe; hence the constant and at last
successful efforts to embroil Austria and Russia against their will
in the trouble arising out of the Sarajevo assassination; hence the
sudden attack upon Belgium as a preliminary to the crushing of
France; hence also the miscalculation about the attitude of England,
which the Junkers could not understand.
With regard to the ultimate issue of the present
struggle, it is worth while to let Hyndman speak for him-
self at some length, as it is highly important that Aus-
tralian Socialists should have in his own words the opinion
of this great Socialist leader:—
Victory for such a power would inevitably bring about a long
set-back, not only to Socialism in Germany, but to democracy all
over Europe. For that democracy, as well as Socialism, will be
attacked and repressed if the Prusso-German army wins is apparent
from what is already to be seen in Germany itself. Prussia, the
headquarters of Junkerdom and militarism, bristles with reaction.
Her political system and methods of election are entirely behind the
times. So far, also, notwithstanding the great and growing power
of Social-Democracy in Berlin and throughout Prussia, it has been
found impossible to introduce reforms. Not only so, but reaction
has gained ground in the south. In Saxony, where Social-Democracy
had made most effective use of universal suffrage, that democratic
right had actually been taken away from the people, and no effective
protest was made by Social-Democrats against this high-handed
action of the reactionary minority. As the Social-Democrat poll
mounted up, at General Election after General Election, the Junkers
openly threatened to suppress universal suffrage throughout the
Empire in the same way. Should they win in war they will carry
out this policy in peace, and the countries they conquer, annex, or
put under tutelage will be subjected in like manner to the rule of the
sabre. Culture is only useful in the minds of the Junkers in so far
as it enables them to dominate and oppress. Triumphant abroad,
they will be the despots of Central and Western Europe.
I have repeatedly pointed out, since the beginning of
this war, that one of the strongest indictments of Ger-
many’s schemes and methods is supplied by the condemna-
tion of neutral countries, which have no self-interest in
condemning her, but do so because they regard her to-day
as the great foe of human progress and freedom. This
condemnation is eloquently voiced by the leading American


Socialist, Floyd Dell, in an article on militarism, published
in “The Socialist War Manual,” a publication issued by
“The New Review,” of New York. Mr. Dell points out
that it is only since the present war that Socialists have
realised how great a menace Prussian militarism has been
to their plans; and with this, he adds, should come another
realisation, that the duty of the Socialist movement to
smash militarism is more important than we ever guessed.
Nothing can be done, nothing that has been done can stand,
programmes of social reform and of revolution alike are
futile, until the menace of militarism is driven from the
world.
For the rest, I may allow Mr. Dell to speak for him-
self :
To some people it may seem ridiculous to conceive of a war
against militarism. Yet more than anything else, m the light of our
Socialist purposes, the war conducted by the Allies against Germany
assumes the aspect of a war against militarism. At least we can
believe that the crushing of the Power which has forced militarism on
Europe, and which stands before the world as the great example of
a militaristic nation, would leave the way clear for a thorough, deter-
mined and efficient campaign of anti-militaristic P ro P a S^ n . da V,
Germany triumphant, the success of militarism blazoned to the four
ends of the earth, we must be prepared for a period of militaristic
enterprise too desperate for sanity to hold out against. It is a tragic
necessity now to crush by force of arms the great exponent of the
virtues of militarism. The defeating of Germany is a task in which
the Allies should have our Socialist sympathies. In a very real sense
this is “our war.”
Mr. Dell proceeds to correct the impression that
“Socialists do not believe in war.” On the contrary, he
says that they are ready to meet the supreme test of a
conviction, to kill and be killed for it; and this, not only
for their ultimate ideal, but for something smaller, some-
thing that will help towards the realisation of that ideal,
without at once achieving it. No progress, so he shows,
can be obtained on this earth except through its ugly and
evil things, and he concludes: —
It is our high privilege as Socialists to face this truth and admit
it It is because P we have seen mankind working through these
dreadful agencies toward happiness that we are Socialists. Only
through these things, we know, can happiness come to the human
race g We cannot turn from this last horror of Armageddon. We
must think about it; and perhaps fight in it. It is our war.


It is just as well that Australian Socialists should have
the truth declared to them by writers of their own per-
suasion, and I would like once more to remind them that it
is not myself, but their own great thinker, Hyndman, who
has told them that the majority of Socialists believe to-day
that this war is their war, and that this belief is in accord-
ance with the decisions of the International Socialist
Congresses.
OURSELVES AND THE EMPIRE.
May 11, 1915.
Official figures published a few evenings ago regarding
the relative amount of unemployment in Australia, and in
the belligerent countries of the Old World, must have
brought home to many people the extraordinarily fortunate
conditions which Australia is to-day enjoying in spite of
the fact that she is at war with Germany.
It is an object-lesson at once salutary and terrible to
compare her condition with that of Belgium—the latter
country harried with fire, sword, and outrage, and on the
verge of utter starvation; ourselves enjoying conditions
which, even when the grave ravages of drought have been
discounted, hardly vary for the average Australian from
those of peace and prosperity.
This is not to say that we do not possess an unemployed
problem or that our rate of living is precisely that which
we enjoyed eight months ago. It is practically certain,
too, that before the war is over we shall feel to a greater
degree than heretofore the pinch which is operating
throughout England and Central Europe. But the fact re-
mains that for the average Australian non-belligerent life
is at present a thing free from hardship and horror. Not
only is he so far immune from “frightfulness” as practised
by the valiant Teuton upon innocent non-combatants, such
as the inhabitants of Belgium and the passengers on the


Lusitania; but he is comfortably housed, clothed and fed,
and, as far as one can see at present, is likely to remain
so for a considerable time, with the aid of reasonable
economy. , _ , -
All these things we owe to England, her command ot
the sea, and the heroic struggle which she is at present
undertaking in Belgium and Northern France—a strugg e
in which we, in our own place and fashion, have at las
been able to play our part right worthily.
Australia’s debt to Britain at the present moment should
seem fairly obvious, except to those sinister folk who take
all that the British Empire can give in the way of safety
and prosperity, and when that Empire is in her utmost
need turn round and rail upon her as if she were their
tyrant, or foeman. These people are as far past hope as
they are past shame. To the normal patriotic Australian
it may be useful to recall the fact that it is not only m
this crisis of warfare that Australia enjoys unprecedented
conditions of life, but that the condition of her workers in
peace-time too is one of economic, social, and political
prosperity unprecedented in the world to-day. It is cer-
tain that if Australia could possibly become a German
possession to-morrow her Wages Boards, Arbitration
Courts, and whole system of industrial regulation would
at once go by the board and be replaced by that condition
of tyrannous repression to which I have repeatedly referred
in these columns. The point to notice here is that even
if the Australian worker were permitted, in this con-
tingency, to fare as does the German worker, his who e
standard of living would be out of all comparison inferior
to that which he enjoys at present.
But it is furthermore inconceivable that the Australian
worker would be allowed to enjoy even the relatively low
standard of existence which prevails in Hamburg and
Charlottenburg. If he wishes to see what his fate might
have been had it not been for the British flag, he should
glance at the description of Germany’s administration in
Poland, supplied by Germany’s own Chancellor in Im-
perial Germany,” and by M. Sarolea in “The Anglo-German
Problem.”


He would find by reference to these books that in the
case indicated he would have been regarded as belonging
to a subject, nay a servile, class, and that if he happened
to possess land of his own he would have been compulsorily
expropriated for the benefit of the Prussian capitalist. As
a matter of fact, he probably would not fare even thus well,
since he comes under “the most hated nation clause” as far
as Germany is concerned, and would be lucky if he were
allowed to possess property of any kind, or even life. But
to put such a hideous possibility for a moment out of the
question, let us glance at a few figures which will show the
comparative status of the worker in Australia, the United
Kingdom, and Germany.
Through the kindness of my friends, Mr. G. H. Knibbs,
the Federal Statist, and Mr. Gerald Lightfoot, I have before
me a list of the wages and hours aifecting eighteen trades
in these three countries. To take hours first, the standard
number in Australia is 48 (for all trades), as against from
58 to 52 in Germany, and 57 to 49£ in the United Kingdom.
These figures speak for themselves, but they become all the
more significant when we glance at the scale of wages.
There are only two of the trades in which the Aus-
tralian rate is not more than twice that of the German,
while in two or three instances it is three times that rate.
In the furniture trade, for instance, the weekly Australian
wage is 58/- as against 27/- in Germany. Nearly the
same proportion holds in brass-working, paper-making,
saddlery, carriage-building, and the tobacco trade, the Aus-
tralian wages here being respectively 54/6, 55/2, 51/-, 53/6,
40/-, the German 27/11, 27/10, 26/-, 25/6, and 22/-. The
corresponding English rates are 36/4, 47/-, 29/2, 29/5,
and 30/6. By far the most startling figures, however, are
those for saw-milling, hosiery, machinery, and electric
working. Here the Australian rates are 60/3, 61/8, 62/7,
and 61/9. The German rates are 21/7, 21/3, 23/5, and
29/11. The English rates are 31/5, 35/4, 37/7, for the
last three trades, no return being furnished for the first.
Comparing the German with the English rates of pay,
we find that the superiority in the United Kingdom ranges


from about 5/- a week to about 20/-. In no single case is
the English rate of pay as low as the German.
These figures hardly require comment; but, of course,
the question will at once be asked:—Yes, but what about
the relative cost of living? Well, as far as England and
Germany go, the cost of living is given as 18 per cent,
lower in England on the basis of the English food regimen,
and 8 per cent, higher in Germany on the basis of the
German food regimen.
That is to say, if an English worker were to live in
Germany at the same standard of diet which he enjoys in
England it would cost him 18 per cent, more than it did
in England. If he were to live in England on the dietary
scheme of a German worker, he could live 8 per cent,
cheaper than the German rate. Rents are practically the
same value in Germany and England, and expenditure on
rents is, roughly, about one-half of expenditure on food,
so that the above value will not be sensibly affected by
the addition of this item. To put the matter in another
way, an English workman in Germany, living as far as
possible as he had been accustomed to live in England,
would find his expenditure on rent (exclusive of local
taxation), food, and fuel increased by some 18 per cent.
As regards wages and hours of labor, the results given
in the afore-mentioned list of wages may be reduced to
the following proportions:—
Weekly money wages of the working classes in German
towns are to weekly wages of the same classes in England,
in the trades selected for comparison, as 83 to 100.
The average working hours a week of the working
classes in German towns are to those of the same classes
in England, in the trades selected for comparison, as 111
to 100.
Consequently the hourly rates of money wages for the
working classes in German towns are to those of the same
classes in England for the trades selected for comparison,
as 75 to 100.
Thus, on the above basis, the German rate of money
wages an hour is about three-quarters of the English rate,


and the cost of rent, food, and fuel nearly one-fifth greater
than in England.
The above figures, which are, of course, absolutely re-
liable, dispose at once of the cant, still occasionally to be
heard in our community, as to the high standard of living
guaranteed by Germany to her workers, and the relatively
low one guaranteed by Britain.
When we come to Australia, however, the result is still
more remarkable.
On the basis of the Australian food regimen, the cost of
food in England and Germany compared with Australia, is
as 89 and 116, respectively, are to 100; that is, it is 11 per
cent, lower in England than in Australia, but is 16 per cent,
higher in Germany than in Australia. The above figures
do not include house rent.
That is to say that if he had to confine himself to the
ordinary necessaries of life, an Australian could live 16
per cent, cheaper in Australia than in Germany. But what
is the actual state of affairs? Australian rates of pay are
so high compared with German that the Australian work-
man, not having thus to restrict himself, and living at his
own standard, actually spends 56 per cent, more on all
items than does the German.
These figures bring us back to our original point,
namely, that the Australian workman to-day enjoys abso-
lutely unprecedented social, political, and economic condi-
tions of living—conditions which are only made possible for
him to-day by his participation in the British Empire. If
Australia were not a part of that Empire, but were forced
to depend on her own resources, it is certain that with her
population at its present strength—or weakness —within
six months she would become the vassal of some foreign
power; and in this case, where, I ask, would be her
minimum wage and her eight-hours day? As a matter of
self-interest alone, Australia would be bound to spend her
“last man and her last shilling” in helping England to carry
this war through to a clean finish.
But everyone who knows her spirit to-day, the spirit in
which her heroes have just met their death, knows that
it is something far higher than self-interest which has


nerved her to play her part worthily in this supreme
struggle. The vast majority of her citizens realise that
they belong to a race which exercises power only that it
may preserve, as far as may be, that which makes for the
peace of the world, for humanity, mercy, and clean living
—a race which guarantees to each of its component parts
the power to realise itself freely and independently after
the law of its own being. All that we have of good in life
we owe to Britain to-day; and never has any citizen of our
race had greater cause to be proud of the Empire than in
this supreme moment of her trial.
OUR SPIRITUAL DEBT TO FRANCE.
May 18, 1915.
The present war represents something far deeper and
vaster than the mere sum of the economic and diplomatic
conditions which led to the actual outbreak of hostilities.
Seen in its true bearings, it is not solely a matter of trade
rivalry nor of naval or military competition, nor even of
conflicting political ideals.
As far as England goes, its causes must be traced into
the very soul of the race. They affect its thinkers first and
most strongly, and represent a steadily increasing reaction
against the spirit of one nation and an equally steady in-
crease of sympathy, springing from fuller understanding,
for the spirit of another.
A hundred years ago, English thought and poetry were
profoundly affected by the great poets and philosophers of
Germany, and the spirit of German culture —not “Kultur”
—fanned, if it did not kindle, the leaping and glorious
flame of our great Romantic movement. Coleridge became
the interpreter to England of German metaphysics, while
the poetry of Wordsworth was, consciously and uncon-
sciously, in close kinship with the sublime ethical theory of
Immanuel Kant—the preacher of universal peace, whom


the degraded and humorless Teutons of to-day actually
saddle with responsibility for their present national spirit.
Hazlitt’s writing, for all its vigor and gusto, has a
sombre metaphysical background largely derived from the
Germany of his day, while the Teutophil tradition was car-
ried on by Carlyle, who extended his admiration from
German poetry and philosophy to German politics, from
Kant and Goethe and Schiller to the dubious memory of
Frederick the Great.
For some sixty years the German thought of the pre-
vious generation maintained its spell over England, and
then came the reaction. It was seen that Germany had
become possessed by a new spirit of aggression and
materialism, and that the old light of idealism which shone
from the soul of Fichte was now well nigh dead in the
nation. And now it was that France came into her own.
The transition is clearly marked in the writings of Matthew
Arnold, who is in touch with the spirit of both nations, and
owns allegiance both to Goethe and Sainte-Beilve. Nor
did England ever go back, save in one or two instances,
on her German idols of the past.
But Swinburne had drawn her attention to the manifold
glories of French poetry and drama, existing not in the
wistful past, but in the splendid and aspiring present, and
from this day onwards French art and thought and civilisa-
tion gripped young England and aroused all its ardor of
sympathy and admiration. The towering genius of Hugo,
the prolific and remorseless inspiration of Balzac, the
superbly morbid imagination of Baudelaire, the Par-
nassiens with their passion for perfect phrase and thought,
all served to show the range and depth of the French in-
tellect and soul.
It was noticed, too, that writers like Sainte-Beuve and
Renan represented not only an incomparable style, but a
whole civilisation based on tolerance, sympathy, insatiable
curiosity as to the inner meaning of life and a keen realisa-
tion of the fact that for nations as for men, the highest
meaning of life can only be found in giving others their
due. Englishmen now understood that France stood for
freedom and enlightenment, and that after the Franco-


Prussian War she was willing to make any sacrifice for
the world’s peace which was compatible with her own
honor.
On the other hand, they realised that Germany was
every day becoming more infatuated with her chimera of
vain-glory and aggression, and that the countrymen of
Goethe had now surrendered themselves utterly to the
hectic and straining rhetoric of Treitschke.
Not only were German political aims utterly in-
compatible with Britain’s own political ideal, but Germany
had now ceased to give the world any of her old light in
the world of thought or poetry. Her typical genius to-day
is the powerful but brutal playwright Wedekind. If any
one wishes to see the very spirit which has driven her into
her present paths of violence and horror let him glance for
a moment at Wedekind’s drama, “Spring’s Awakening.”
Hauptmann’s dramas, for all their natural force, are gothic
and unwieldy, whereas young England had long ago de-
tected in the sinister Sudermann a mere mannikin of the
German theatre. The greatest Teutonic man of letters,
Schnitzler, is not a German but a Viennese.
In German literature to-day there is nothing of the
idealism and strong simplicity which makes Schiller great
for all time.
Turning back to France, England found in Anatole
France the epitome, as it seemed to her, of all that was
greatest and best in the country whose name he had taken
for his own—the love of joy and beauty, the sympathy
with all life, lowly not less than lofty, the passionate love
of sincerity and truth, and the not less passionate hatred
of violence and oppression. And Anatole France was only
one of innumerable writers who seemed to supply England
with the literary and artistic complement of her own
civilisation, which, as far as its influence on the modern
world went, had been mainly political.
The result was the same when England turned to the
world of music, sculpture, and philosophy, and encountered
the great names of Manet and Monet, of Rodin and
Fremiet, of Debussy and Saint Saens, of Renouvier and
Bergson. On every side France radiated light and beauty


and spiritual freedom, while Germany stood in the realm
of politics for harsh repression, in that of thought for
learning without soul, and for efficiency without conscience
or mercy.
England’s bond with France, then, is one far stronger
and nobler than one of pure political expediency: at the
same time such expediency has set up a mutual claim be-
tween the two nations which has been recognised on both
sides with the most scrupulous honor. We stood by one
another’s side at Algeciras and at Agadir in the face of
the Teutonic menace, and by so doing were enabled to pre-
serve the world’s peace.
If France is profiting by our navy to-day, let it be re-
membered that what we are doing for her is the least we
could honorably undertake, seeing that the withdrawal of
her ships from her western coast and their concentration
in the Mediterranean had been effected by mutual arrange-
ment, and had released the greater part of our own Medi-
terranean squadron for service in the North Sea.
It is all moonshine to say that it was solely the invasion
of Belgium which brought us into this war. If national
honor means anything, we were bound to fulfil our obliga-
tion to France. She has “titles manifold” to the gratitude
of every Englishman and of every Australian, for, as I
have already pointed out, Australia’s stake in this war is
even greater than England’s. We are bound to help her
now and always to the utmost of our power.


GERMANY ON TRIAL.
May 25, 1915.
A superficial observer of this war might be inclined to
assume that the intensity of feeling which possesses Ger-
many’s opponents to-day is a mere expression, heightened
no doubt by the vastness of the operations, of the national
feeling common to all wars. There could hardly be a
greater fallacy. The sentiment felt by civilisation for Ger-
many to-day is unlike that inspired by any modern wars
or rumors of war.
It is unnecessary to go back as far as Fontenoy, when
the French grenadiers politely offered the British the right
of shooting first, or to the literature of the Peninsular War,
which contains many tributes of chivalrous esteem ex-
pressed by the British for their opponents.
No Englishman felt for our foe in the South African
war the “righteous and consuming indignation,” which all
Britain, according to her Prime Minister, feels for Ger-
many to-day. We realised then that we had to do with a
brave and not ignoble enemy, that we had to beat him, but
that we could do this in such a spirit as to keep the door
open for eventual reconciliation. We behaved towards the
Boer no more rancorously nor less generously than we
normally behave towards honorable foemen: and within
a few years of the war’s conclusion, we handed over to him
the entire administration of the conquered country, with
results which have borne the excellent fruit of the last few
months.
At the time of the Boer War I remember dining as a
bar student at the same mess in the Middle Temple Hall
as a Boer, a former member of the Inn, who on the out-
break of war had gone out to the Orange Free State to
fight against us, and after his capture took the opportunity


offered him by our soft-hearted selves of continuing the
legal studies which would lead to his becoming a member
of the English Bar.
Fancy a German captive, with similar antecedents, en-
joying a similar privilege to-day! I remember, too, being
in France at the hour of the momentous Fashoda incident,
when the two countries, so happily allied to-day, were on
the brink of hostilities owing to the clashing of their
African interests. No Englishman in that crisis fell
towards France as most normally constituted Englishmen
must have felt towards Germany nine months ago.
It was realised that if war had to come, it would come
through normal causes and would be waged by normal
means; and it can hardly be doubted that if it had occurred
then and been got well over, there would have been so little
rancor on either side that our subsequent relations would
have been substantially what they are to-day.
Perhaps they might have been even more cordial than
at present, for it is one of the strange and noble things
concerning war that, even when it has been most fierce,
its eventual result is often an improved relation between
the combatants.
It is certain, however, that the feelings of intense ab-
horrence occasioned by Germany’s methods in the present
war will not die out of English, French, or Russian hearts
in a year, nor yet in a generation. Like Carthage’s war
against her Mercenaries, the present struggle is “in-
expiable.” In the first place, no sane man who has read
the documents immediately preceding hostilities, or the
German militaristic literature of recent years can for a
moment doubt that Germany deliberately manufactured
this war for her own selfish aggrandisement, and prepared
for it with every circumstance of cunning and duplicity.
Nations have to-day got well beyond the stage when
this kind of thing can be done with impunity: they simply
will not stand it, and that inference of France is a fair one,
which regards Italy’s intervention as a sign to Germany
that she lies beyond the pale of civilisation.
But we might have regarded her as an outlaw without
regarding her as a thing utterly abhorrent and morally


contemptible. The animal instincts die hard in man, and
are too closely interwoven with his highest qualities for us
to abhor them for themselves. We do not detest the tiger
of the jungle whom it may be our business to destroy: for
he may well be a noble animal.
No one who knows the British character will deny that
despite the ruthless aggressiveness of Germany’s original
motive, if she had fought this war fairly we would have
respected and even admired her for the grim determina-
tion with which she is waging it. As things are, her mean
and hideous crimes have cancelled all possibility of this,
and have left room in our hearts for nothing save
“righteous and consuming indignation.”
No sane man or woman who has read the recently pub-
lished quotations from the report of the British Commis-
sion can now doubt that the German Army has been guilty
of crimes probably unparalleled in ancient or modern war-
fare, and has committed these hideous acts by official
connivance and authorisation as part of a deliberate policy
of terror. Exactly the same conclusion had been reached
independently by the French and Belgian Commissions,
which were each composed of men of the highest legal and
moral standing in the two countries.
The constitution of the British tribunal forbids the
slightest possibility of the report having been in any way
doctored or heightened beyond the warranty of the facts.
Viscount Bryce is notable —some would say notorious —as
a cosmopolitan and a pacifist. Some who met him here will
recollect his extreme reluctance to think evil of foreign
nations, and his point-blank denial of any aggressive inten-
tion on their behalf as regards Australia. Sir Frederick
Pollock, as all students of literature know, has been intel-
lectually in the closest touch with Germany, and is not only
steeped in her literature, but has actually written poetry in
her language. Sir Edward Clarke is the last person to
distort evidence in his country’s favor; at the time of the
South African war he gave up his seat in Parliament be-
cause he did not believe our part in that war to be just.
The findings of this Commission confirm the foreign
5


findings up to the hilt, and the combined evidence is abso-
lutely annihilating.
It is borne out to the full by the admissions made by
Germans themselves—by Treitschke, who explicitly en-
dorses Machiavelli’s statement that “no act that will serve
the State is to be counted common or unclean;” by the
German “Customs of War,” which prescribe that “all
destruction and damage brought about for military reasons
is permissible;” by the placards put up in Belgian cities
by the German authorities—e.g.:—
In the case of civilians shooting on the German Army a third
of the male population will be shot.
A rigorous inspection of houses will commence at four o’clock.
Every soldier found will be immediately shot.
And the bolt is shot home by the admissions found in
the notebooks of German soldiers—e.g., in that of Gaston
Klein, who comments thus on the unnamable horrors of
Louvain:—
was a P °f hounds let loose; everyone did what he
[ lked -i T "e officers led the way and gave good example. The day
has filled me with a contempt which I cannot express.
It is hardly necessary to detail the fully-attested record
of German infamy, which comprises mutilation, child
murder, the burning alive of civilians (e.g., the old man
of Malines), the burial alive, by official order, of French
and Belgian wounded (as at Tamines—Belgian Supple-
mentary Report No. 1) ; torture, by boiling water or tight-
drawn wire, of captives who refused information (Seventh
Belgian Report) ; screening of advancing German forces
with French and Belgian women and children (as con-
stantly throughout all the reports) ; and public and suc-
cessive acts of rape (Belgian and English Commissions)
committed upon women, as an official exhibition of lust
and horror and “frightfulness.”
On one day—Saturday, May B—three different items
appeared in the Australian press which explain our feeling,
as defined by Mr. Asquith, for the foe we are fighting to-
day. The last and most sensational of these was the sink


ing of the Lusitania —the deliberate sending to death, for
no cause but blind hate, of many hundred innocent men
and women and children. The second was Sir Edward
Grey’s official statement that the British officers kept pri-
soner in solitary confinement at Cologne are denied decent
sanitary accommodation, and shut up in cells lit by a single
loophole high in the wall; and the third was the account
given in a British report of the effect of the poisonous
German gases on their British victims: —
The patients were propped up in bed, with their faces, arms, and
hands turned to a shiny grey or black color. Their mouths were
open, and their eyes were as if they had been glazed with lead. They
were all swaying backwards and forwards, struggling for breath.
It was an appalling sight, and yet practically nothing could be done
for the men beyond giving them emetics. The gas fills the lungs
with a watery, frothy matter, which gradually increases until the
lungs are filled, and the men die of suffocation in a day or two.
These are a few of the reasons why it is impossible
for us to respect Germany as a foe, or to regard her as
any longer belonging to the comity of civilised nations.
This, too, is the reason why our first care when the war is
over must be to see that entry is sternly denied to the
thousands of Germans who will seek to swarm into our
country and contaminate its national life. We all know
that there are decent and honorable Germans, but then
there are so many others: and for the sake of our younger
generation we must take no chances. We may treat Ger-
mans here as we find them, and as our duty to the Empire
demands; but no man will be able to tell concerning any
German immigrant whether he has not been privy to the
abominable crimes above recorded. “For God’s sake,” a
great Australian surgeon wrote to me just before he left
for the war, “help to keep Australia clean!”


NO “DRAWN WAR.”
June 1, 1915.
To those who have not followed this war and its causes
carefully, it might seem that the phrase wdiich heads this
article was the outcome of mere racial vindictiveness, and
that the world’s peace and security would be satisfied if
peace were made to-day on terms which, without “humili-
ating Germany,” showed her that she had failed of her
object in this war, and that her militaristic advisers were
to blame for its occurrence.
Such an assumption, however, is based on the most dan-
gerous of fallacies—one more dangerous perhaps to Aus-
tralia than to any of the other nations which it affects. If
we were merely fighting a single caste which had hood-
winked the German nation as a whole, and driven it into
this war against its real will, we might possibly accept this
view of the matter, and think that German militarism and
all its attendant horrors w T ould cease directly we had turned
the eyes of the nation towards the light and freed them
from the tyrants’ bandage.
Unfortunately, the matter goes much further than this.
As Professor Sir Walter Raleigh has put it in his admir-
able Oxford pamphlet, “Might is Right”:—
It is now recognised in England that our enemy in this war is
not a tyrant military caste, but the united people of modern Germany.
We have to combat an armed doctrine which is virtually the creed of
all Germany. Saxony and Bavaria, it is true, would never have in-
vented the doctrine; but they have accepted it from Prussia, and
they believe it. The Prussian doctrine has paid the German people
handsomely; it has given them their place in the world. When it
ceases to pay them, and not till then, they will reconsider it. They
will not think until they are compelled to think. When they find
themselves face to face with a greater and more enduring strength
than their own they will renounce their idol.


Professor Raleigh proceeds to demonstrate, what most
of us are gradually coming to realise, that Germany, so far
from being an intelligent nation, is a very stupid one. It
was her own Chancellor Billow, who described her as a
nation of “political donkeys.” Her spy system has taught
her everything about other nations except the stuff they are
made of.
She has next to no political sense, and if we wish to
show her that the world will not stand this kind of thing
any longer, we shall have to do so by hard knocks, and not
by reasoning, nor yet by a mistimed display of clemency,
which she would only mistake for cowardice.
It follows from this that there can be no “drawn war”:
and it seems a fairly obvious consequence that unless there
is some unexpected development there can be no short war.
Even Professor Allen, of Leeds, who urges that great
clemency be shown to Germany when the war is over, con-
siders that if peace is to be permanent and profitable, it
can only be dictated by the Allies at Berlin.
Lord Kitchener is credibly declared to have stated that
the main stage of the war will only have begun when the
Germans have been driven over the Rhine: and his view
is borne out by so eminent a military expert as M. Hilaire
Belloc, who in a recent magazine article shows that an in-
vasion of Germany along this line is at once possible, and
indispensable to success.
Three things seem to follow from this: firstly, that
compromise and concession can only begin when Germany
has been beaten to her knees; secondly, that even Italy s
intervention does not necessarily mean that the final stage
will come swiftly; and thirdly, that although the Allies have
Germany now in such a position that they are bound to
beat her if they make a sufficient effort, such a victory will
only be achieved if each of them, and each of the Dominions,
does, not only its “fair share,” but the very utmost, in men
and money, of which it is capable.
The convenient Bernhardi has prophetically shown us
why Germany’s enemies can never be content with a “drawn
war,” and what would be the certain result if they were
to accept it. “If the victory is only half won,” he says,


“they would have to expect continuous renewals of the
contest, which would be contrary to their interests.” It
is absolutely certain that within a generation or so, the
Thing would occur again, and if it did, we could hardly
assume that Germany, stupid though she is, would in the
light of her hard-bought experience make the egregious
political mistakes which she has made to-day.
She would, at any rate, endeavor to arrange matters
so that one, or more, or all, of our present Allies would re-
main neutral. And she would strain every nerve to destroy
or reduce our command of the seas, so that even if we were
able to maintain this, we could only do so at the expense of
vast sums of money urgently needed for social reform. The
modest peace proposals recently put forward by Herr Har-
den, the most influential journalist in Germany, show that
her present object, now that she has failed of Paris, is to
obtain that which will sooner or later give her her chance
of striking a death-blow at the heart of England. We will
make peace, he says, if we are allowed to retain Belgium,
and the coastline of France down to Calais.
The mere fact that neither we, nor Britain, nor her
Allies, take these proposals seriously, does not mean that
they are not entertained in deadly seriousness by united Ger-
many. Realisable or not, they demonstrate beyond all
doubt the trend of her insatiable ambition, and they show
what her goal will be in the next war, unless we beat her
so completely now as to show her that there must, and can,
be no next war.
We need have no doubt that Australia is part, and not
the least envied part, of the prey she has marked out for
eventual conquest. The parting remarks and actions of
her recent Consul-General in Australia, Herr Kiliani, point
to a carefully organised German intrigue against our
liberties and British supremacy.
It must never be forgotten that Germany’s heart’s desire
is a great colony, and that she cares not how she gets it, nor
from whom. “Let us annex Holland,” says the amiable
Treitschke, “then we shall have colonies ready-made.”
Bernhardi remarks: “A financial or political crash in
Portugal might give us the opportunity to take possession


of a portion of the Portuguese colonies.” And, again, “if
necessary, colonies must be obtained as the result of a suc-
cessful European war.”
So much for Germany’s ambition, and its bearing on
ourselves. We must not be lulled into a sense of false
security by our natural belief that Germany will not realise
it in the present war. It is the future that is fraught
with infinite peril for ourselves should the Allies fail to beat
Germany utterly. A drawn war, a war which would allow
Germany to retain her North Sea fleet, would be almost as
perilous to us as a lost war. For, if that fleet remains
uncaptured it will continue to menace Britain’s supremacy
at sea, as it has menaced it in the past: and on that
supremacy depends our very existence as a nation. Where-
fore we may have to make considerably greater sacrifices
even than the great and splendid ones we have made
already.
“NATURALISATION” AND TREASON.
June 15, 1915.
No sane man or woman who has read the British and
German White Books and the French Yellow Book can pos-
sibly doubt that Germany was throughout the negotiations
of last autumn, bent on forcing war on the civilised world,
when, as was stated at the time, she could have ensured
peace by simply “pressing the button.”
Far from doing this, she gave Austria the famous
“blank cheque” which empowered her to wreak her mur-
derous will on Servia, and guaranteed her immunity from
righteous retribution.
Nor can anyone who has followed the facts doubt that
Germany, besides forcing war at the last moment, had
hatched and schemed it throughout the preceding months,
and was only waiting for a colorable pretext to unloose it
on the world.


We have been informed on the high authority of the
“Round Table” that there is good evidence for believing
that the murder of the Arch-Duke Francis Ferdinand was
connived at by people high in place in Austria who were
interested in his disappearance, and may well have noticed
that it would give Germany her coveted pretext for war at
the very date that would suit her best.
“The fellow will get the Golden Cross of Merit for this,”
exclaimed the Arch-Duke to his suite after the explosion
of the bomb. Now the Golden Cross of Merit is an Aus-
trian decoration. The date of the murder corresponds most
startlingly with that at which the great German war loan
fell due. A year before the outbreak of the war,
as I recently showed by quotation from the
French Yellow Book, the French naval attache at Berlin
had warned the French Minister of Marine that this vast
impost of a milliard marks was being levied for an aggres-
sive campaign, and was to become due—here is the sensa-
tional fact—on July 31, 1914—the very week in which Ger-
many was to launch upon the world the most terrible war of
all time.
Further evidence of premeditation is hardly necessary,
but if it were it is forthcoming from the fact that it was
exactly at this period that Germany had completed the
Kiel Canal and could, consequently, risk for the first time
a naval struggle. Also, we know that several months be-
fore war broke out, Germans of military age in South
America were officially recalled to Germany, and sealed
war instructions were issued to German merchant vessels.
Concrete foundations, as we now know, had been secretly
laid in the preceding months for the great howitzers that
were to batter Namur to pieces.
Nor was Germany’s activity confined to Europe, for,
as I recently showed, General Smuts has informed us
that the South African Union Government possesses clear
evidence of a German conspiracy to seize South Africa im-
mediately on the outbreak of hostilities.
These things being so, it may be worth while to look a
little more closely into the attempt made by the German
Consul-General, Herr Kiliani, to spread treason and sedi-
136
AUSTRALIA AND THE WAR


tion throughout Australia on April 29, 1914—a bare three
months, be it noted, before the outbreak of hostilities.
Many of us met the individual in question, and found him
a suave, erudite, and forcible talker. We welcomed him
at our learned societies, we entertained him at our banquets.
We little knew that we were heaping our honors on a
man who was busily urging a large section of our subjects
to forswear treacherously their solemn oath of allegiance
to the British Crown. That he did this is certain: whether
he also had been warned of what was coming, and was
preparing them to join with Germany for the downfall
of their adopted country, readers may judge for them-
selves in the light of the foregoing and following considera-
tions.
They may reflect, for instance, on the fact that at this
most significant date, when, as is now everywhere realised,
Germany was meditating an early war, her Consul should
have taken the trouble to explain to Germans naturalised
in Australia that, by a recently ratified law, military service
in Germany had been facilitated for them, that doctors
domiciled in Australia would examine them for this pur-
pose, and that “if they had acquired in Australia an
established position as merchants or business men” they
might, on special application, be excused the ordinary
course of training and be transferred directly, for fighting
purposes, to the “Landsturm” or Reserve.
flr».nmfnl ■fr* IIid **r»ViQ‘nnrTnnr rYiAllno^-lil/o
I think it fair to state that the Schools conducted by
the Lutheran Evangelical Synod are exempt from the charges
of treason conveyed in the final paragraph of p. 137, and
the semi-final paragraph of p. 140. These schools have no
connection with the German School Association, and do not
receive its literature. ATS
UVJ vn mg i/nb cueing o goxxic uy loDuiug i/W me
generation of Austral-Germans “valid certificates concern-
ing the educational qualifications for the German one year
voluntary service” —that is to say, have been expressly
training their pupils intellectually, if not physically, for
service in the German Army.




tion throughout Australia on April 29, 1914—a bare three
months, be it noted, before the outbreak of hostilities.
Many of us met the individual in question, and found him
a suave, erudite, and forcible talker. We welcomed him
at our learned societies, we entertained him at our banquets.
We little knew that we were heaping our honors on a
man who was busily urging a large section of our subjects
to forswear treacherously their solemn oath of allegiance
to the British Crown. That he did this is certain: whether
he also had been warned of what was coming, and was
preparing them to join with Germany for the downfall
of their adopted country, readers may judge for them-
selves in the light of the foregoing and following considera-
tions.
They may reflect, for instance, on the fact that at this
most significant date, when, as is now everywhere realised,
Germany was meditating an early war, her Consul should
have taken the trouble to explain to Germans naturalised
in Australia that, by a recently ratified law, military service
in Germany had been facilitated for them, that doctors
domiciled in Australia would examine them for this pur-
pose, and that “if they had acquired in Australia an
established position as merchants or business men” they
might, on special application, be excused the ordinary
course of training and be transferred directly, for fighting
purposes, to the “Landsturm” or Reserve.
The scornful reference to the “changing, mollusc-like
orms of the defence schemes of many other lands,” and
he contrasted praise of the “massive block” of German
nilitarism, represents a subtle but unmistakable attempt
o make naturalised Germans despise the country of their
idoption, while it is interesting to note that the German
chools, which we have fostered in our midst, and which
night have been expected for very shame and decency to
>ring up their pupils as loyal young Australians, have
oeen playing the enemy’s game by issuing to the younger
generation of Austral-Germans “valid certificates concern-
ing the educational qualifications for the German one year
voluntary service”—that is to say, have been expressly
training their pupils intellectually, if not physically, for
service in the German Army.


To put the matter in a nutshell, the Consul’s speech
shows that since the beginning of 1914, Germany has syste-
matically used Australia as a recruiting ground for the
German Army.
For this purpose, our Dominion has been treated as a
province of the German Empire.
The second matter is even more serious. The new law,
so Herr Kiliani told his audience, makes it possible “to
acquire a foreign nationality in addition to holding the
German nationality without the German nationality being
lost thereby.” The conditions necessary for the enjoy-
ment of this remarkable status are two. First, the appli-
cant must show “that he has been led by constraining rea-
sons to acquire the foreign nationality because of the
serious hindrance to his gaining his livelihood,” and,
secondly, “by his whole personality he must offer a guaran-
tee for his national (i.e., German) sentiment.”
The plain effect of all this is to encourage every German
to regard his solemn British naturalisation oath as a cloak
which he may suddenly assume for the sake of financially
exploiting the contemptible country of his adoption, and
which he may equally suddenly discard as soon as he has
amassed enough money to enable him to show himself in
his true colors—as a common perjurer who has sold his
solemn word of honor for gain.
The fact that Germany, through her official representa-
tives, deliberately encourages her subjects to perjure them-
selves in this fashion at the expense of the country which
has sheltered them, is only a fresh instance of the conduct
which has to-day earned her the contempt of the whole
civilised world.
The British oath of allegiance runs as follows
I, A. 8., do swear by Almighty God that I will be faithful and
bear true allegiance to His Majesty King George the Fifth, his heirs
and successors according to law.
The effect of this is perfectly simple and unmistakable.
It implies unswerving allegiance to the British Crown. No
man, save one in whom honor was dead, could take it with
the reservation in his heart that he was still a German


subject, and that when a crisis came between the two
nations he “by his whole personality could offer a guarantee
for his national (i.e., German) sentiment.” It is no
exaggeration to say that those who knew of this law and
yet accepted its conditions and became naturalised after
it had passed, are dishonorable men, and utterly untrust-
worthy Australian citizens.
It is astonishing that naturalisation on these terms and
conditions should still be permitted to Germans in Aus-
tralia.
I may add that I have made careful inquiries as to the
naturalisation laws of other countries, notably France and
Italy, and have been authoritatively informed that none of
them authorises the extraordinary state of affairs I have
just outlined. They all allow renaturalisation under cer-
tain circumstances; what they do not allow is the profession
of allegiance to two countries simultaneously.
It may be worth while to quote once more the para-
graphs which show that Germany has extended her
scheming to weakening the allegiance even of the second
generation of naturalised British subjects.
This possibility of being again received into the German Imperial
Association is provided not only for former Germans, but also for the
descendants of former Germans.
There is still a further important innovation, viz., a DIRECT
IMPERIAL NATIONALITY has been created, which may be conferred
on former Germans who have not taken up their residence at home
or on persons who are descended from such.
%
The above considerations make one thing absolutely
dear —that through Germany’s own act, the British oath
of naturalisation, as far as her own subjects are concerned,
has been constituted a “scrap of paper” to be flouted and
destroyed directly it has served its first money-getting
purpose. .
Doubtless many Germans who naturalised as British
subjects before the new law came into being are immune
from the definite and most sinister imputation attaching
to those who naturalised afterwards, but this does not alter
the fact that for Germans generally, British naturalisation
has been rendered by Germany herself a meaningless for


mula, and that we cannot attach the slightest importance
to it in considering any individual German’s claims. Each
man, naturalised or unnaturalised, must stand on his own
merits and acts and declared sentiments.
The most sinister thing about the whole matter is that
the substance of Herr Kiliani’s speech and of the new law
was known to a number of “naturalised” Germans who had
sworn allegiance to the British Crown, yet, as has been
pointed out by an esteemed contemporary, not one of these
thought it his duty publicly to repudiate the position to
which this utterance committed him, or to warn Australia,
through the medium of her British press, of the machina-
tions which were endangering her safety and her citizen-
ship. On the contrary, the speech was printed verbatim
in German in the official organ of the German School Asso-
ciation, and circulated throughout the German schools of
Victoria, with the certain object and effect of weakening
the younger generation of Austral-Germans in their
allegiance to the British Crown.
I have before me a list of the office-bearers and members
of the aforesaid Association, which comprises some of the
leading “naturalised” Germans in Victoria. It may still
be necessary to print this list. Meanwhile, it has been
enough to call public attention to this very sinister and
significant episode.


GERMANY’S BID FOR PEACE.
June 22, 1915.
One of the strongest reasons for the sense of moral
security felt by the Allies in the present war has been the
interpretation put upon their cause by the best opinion
in neutral countries, and by those sections of the world s
thought whose interests and sympathy are normally rather
international than national.
I have already shown in these columns, by copious
quotations from English, French, American, and even Ger-
man writers, that the vast majority of Socialists in the
world to-day realise that on the Allies’ efforts depends
their only possible hope of realising their aims, a hope
which Germany’s victory would utterly and instantly
destroy.
Similarly, the condemnation of Germany so vigorously
expressed of late by representative Americans, such as
Mr. Roosevelt and the Principal of Harvard University,
confirms the verdict of our own conscience, which tells
us that no nation in the world’s history ever entered on
war with cleaner hands and hearts than ourselves, or with
a juster certitude that it was helping to redress a vast and
intolerable wrong.
It is certain, too, that Italy’s participation in the war
has not been dictated merely by the desire, however just,
to regain lost territory, but that she also feels it to be the
duty of every civilised nation to play its part in ending
this hideous menace to all clean and decent life.
These neutral observers not only understand the justice
of our quarrel, but realise that it is one which, in their
interest no less than in our own, must be carried through
to a clean finish. As a leading American scholar recently
wrote in reply to a German correspondent, “if you win this
141


war, why may not our turn come next?” Why, indeed?
And the certitude of neutral nations regarding Germany’s
deadly aim against the world’s freedom has become
stronger and stronger as the list of her enormities grows
longer, and as her spirit of hatred and “frightfulness”
waxes more and more intense.
Germany has, of course, noticed these things, and there
are fairly clear signs that they have made her uneasy, and
that she is striving in the teeth of possibility to neutralise
their effect. A nation possessing either taste or humor
would have realised long ago that you cannot write “hymns
of hate” without earning the world’s ridicule as well as its
dislike: and even to a nation as strong as Germany the
world’s opinion is worth at least something, physically and
morally.
This is one reason why we now find responsible German
journals deprecating, if not ridiculing, the insane expres-
sions of hatred recently levelled against Britain throughout
the German Empire. But, in my opinion, there is a much
more subtle and practical end in view than the mere con-
ciliation of neutral opinion. In order to see what this is,
it will be convenient to glance for a moment at one or two
points of the war.
Germany’s original objective in the west was obviously
Paris and the subjugation of France. Foiled of this by
the genius of Joffre and French, she turned her attention
to Calais, her hope being that from here she might strike
a swift blow at Britain’s heart, and that if she could per-
manently hold this vantage on the Channel, Britain’s pre-
dominance by sea would be for ever at an end.
Some months ago Maximilian Harden, Germany’s lead-
ing journalist, wrote:—“Germany must take her place as
the leading power. She must retain Belgium and a narrow
strip of coast as far as Calais. She does not desire
indemnities. Her object is to hoist her flag on the Channel
which opens and closes the way to the Atlantic. When
this is done, she will voluntarily close the war.”
Fantastic though this suggestion seems to us, there is
little doubt that at the time it was made, it was made in
all sincerity, and that it represented a vast body of German


opinion. The belief indicated in the last sentence that
Germany could have peace when she wished it, and dictate
its terms, is sufficient evidence, were this still needed, o±
Germany’s ludicrous incomprehension of the temper ot her
foes The situation has to-day changed somewhat, and
with it her pretensions; but the incomprehension has not
fully changed. . ,
Germany now realises, as Harden has again told us,
that Britain is now thoroughly roused, and will never
slumber again save in death. She will fight to the last
man sooner than accept a situation which would vitally
imperil her life and honor. Her western ally and herself,
moreover, have power to back their will, and can outlast
and probably outfight Germany. Calais, in fact, represent ®
rather an aspiration than an objective, and for the time
being, at least, the coup has failed; the game is up. Slowly
there is dawning on Germany, one would imagine, the con
viction that if the Allies can only maintain their effort,
and if Britain’s internal foes of drink and economic disse -
sion do not prove too strong for her, or if she cannot stil
be hoodwinked into peace, as Germany hopes she may,
Germany herself must not only disgorge her ill-game
spoils, but must come within dire peril of her Itfe-
The future, then, she would seem to feel, is black for
her but in the present, and on paper, things are in her
Foiled of Paris, she was till a few weeks ago still
within sixty miles of it; she holds well nigh all Belgium,,
on the Eastern front she has driven her foes from he
territory has invaded theirs, and is certainly now
winning, though doubtless only for the time.
Here then, she would say, would be a capital time for
peacTeven for a peace by which she would forfeit much
that Herr Harden originally claimed for her.
There are signs that she would now be content to con-
clude hostilities on much easier terms than before, could
she retain the equal honors of war. She clearly now recog
nises however, that her own record and past utterances
make it impossible for the Allies to conclude peace with
hef so long as her insane ambition for world dominion
prevails and makes her a menace to the universe. If


can induce the nations to believe that she has learnt her
lesson, or never really meant what she said, perhaps some
such peace as this, so she seems to reason, might still be
possible for her—a peace which would preserve her from
disaster and dishonor, and give her leisure to repair the
ravages of this war—and to prepare, we doubt not, for the
next.
It is obviously for this reason that we find Bernhardi
now trying to explain away to incredulous America the
plain meaning of his militaristic volumes. For the same
reason, a leading German newspaper has published a con-
demnation signed by eminent German jurists, of the party
of militaristic aggression. Hence, too, we find even Harden
trying to pour oil on the waters of his own troubling by
admitting that Sir Edward Grey strove for peace: and
hence it is that that most influential paper, the “Berliner
Tageblatt, suggests the formation of an advisory com-
mittee to treat for peace, and remarks: “Our diplomacy
must do its utmost to bring about a speedy peace, and,
above all, to prevent further additions to the ranks of our
enemies. The Kaiser still believes that he can have peace
for the asking, and, apparently, on his own terms; but we
learnt yesterday that the President of the Prussian Upper
House has warned that tribunal that Germany must be
content with much less than this.
In making these proposals, Germany obviously counts
on the support of the witless British sentimentalists, the
Lytteltons and Macdonalds, who cry, “Don’t humiliate
Germany, and would be ready to accept at any moment
a peace fraught with danger and dishonor.
With its customary genius for misjudgment, however,
this “nation of political donkeys,” as their own Chancellor
has called them, assumes that the spirit of England will
be to some degree affected by such men and their utter-
ances, and it therefore throws open to them and their
country the broad and easy path of shame. Britain is
awake, it thinks, but perchance she may even yet be gulled.
Unfortunately for Germany, however, Britain now knows
exactly how far to trust Prussian faith and Prussian pro-
fessions of peace. She and her Allies and Dominions know


that the only persuasion to which Germany will yield will
be the force which beats her to the dust. Peace made now
would be little less disastrous than defeat to Britain and
her Empire.
It would mean that all her heroes’ lives had been spilt
for nothing, and that within a generation the whole
damnable business would begin again. Britain knows this
to-day: Germany has apparently yet to learn that she
knows it, and is prepared to act upon it to the uttermost.
AUSTRALIA AND SEA POWER.
June 29, 1915.
Since the great landing the minds of Australians have
been very naturally turned rather landwards than sea-
wards, though the rattle of the Turkish machine guns has
been agreeably varied by the booming of the great war-
ships helping our men off-shore. The foundation last week
of an Australian branch of the Navy League may remind
us that the very existence of Australia, as of England, in
peace no less than war, depends on sea power.
Whether or no we still need the warning contained in
these lines of Swinburne, the final truth they assert affects
ourselves as vitally as the Mother Country to whom they
were addressed: —
At the gate of the sea, in the gateway,
They stood as the guards of thy fate.
Take now but thy strengths to thee straightway,
Though late, we will deem it not late.
Thy story, thy glory,
The very soul of thee,
It rose not, it grows not,
It comes not save by sea.
Every patriotic Australian should join this League at
once, for one of its main objects, so I am assured, is to
stimulate enlistment in the Australian Navy.
Anyone who will reflect for a moment will realise that
if it had not been for the presence of that navy in the
Pacific, it is as certain as fate that Sydney would have


been shelled by the “Scharnhorst” and “Gneisenau,” and
it is possible that these vessels might have remained in
the Pacific, at least for some time, instead of being driven
to their destruction in the Atlantic. The fact that Aus-
tralia possessed the most powerful war vessels in the
Pacific, save Japan, enabled her to rid this ocean, and, in-
directly, to rid the world, of the marauding cruisers, while
in the sinking of the “Emden” our navy performed a piece
of work which was not only brilliant and sensational, but
of the first Imperial importance.
Still more important from the Imperial point of view
is the fact that the Australian fleet has kept open all the
trade routes to Colombo, Singapore, the Pacific Islands and
America, and that, owing to its presence, not a single
British merchant vessel has hitherto been captured by the
enemy in Australian waters. Australia has, indeed, good
cause to be proud of her navy to-day, and of the sacrifice
she has made to maintain it.
Perhaps, by the way, it is not generally realised that,
as I have pointed out elsewhere, her defence estimates for
the year 1913-14 amounted to £4,752,735, which represents
a larger proportion of expenditure than Germany’s defence
estimate of the previous year. Of this sum, over
£2,000,000 was allotted to the navy.
Would either the Empire or ourselves have fared so
well if we had continued to use a hired fleet at our old
annual contribution of £200,000? I think not.
Of sterling use though our own navy has been to us
and the Empire at large, the glamor of it must not blind
us to the fact that it is ultimately not on it, but on the
British Navy, that our existence depends.
The Australian worker, as I have repeatedly ventured
to point out since the beginning of the war, enjoys a degree
of social, economic, and political prosperity unparalleled in
the world to-day. This is only made possible by Britain’s
maintenance of her sea dominion.
Germany is now trying to convince the world, in the
teeth of fact, that Britain has used her sea power
tyrannously and to the detriment of the nations, and that
she, Germany, the enslaver of Posen, Schleswig, Alsace,


and Belgium, is endeavoring to free the ocean for their sake
from the tyrant’s yoke. The world, of course, knows
better, and laughs at so childish a pretension. If there is
one thing absolutely certain, it is that for many years past
the British fleet has stood for the world’s peace, and for
the open door in respect of trade.
If Germany had possessed dominion of the sea, would
she have granted either of these things? lam certain she
would not, and the world is certain too.
Our Imperial fleet was absolutely necessary to our exist-
ence, and to the maintenance of free intercourse between
the separate parts of our far-flung Empire. Germany’s
fleet, on the other hand, had no such excuse of defensive
necessity, and had one aim only—the destruction of our
navy and ourselves. In aiming at Calais, as we know, Ger-
many hoped, and still hopes, to compass that destruction.
What is certain is that if she could capture and hold that
town permanently, and through it control the Channel, with
her present spirit and force to back her, our Empire would
be at once at an end, and we Australians doomed to certain
slavery. So much does the war on the western frontier, so
so much does British sea power, mean to us.
We may look at the matter in another way. Had it
not been that Britain’s navy was stronger than Germany’s
it might have been pent up somewhere, just as Germany’s
was at the beginning of the war. Had this been the case it
is almost certain that the war would have ended months
ago with a crowning victory for Germany. One may say
this without reflecting in any sense on the heroism and
efficiency of our gallant French ally, whose western sea
ports would have been at once invested after the fashion
indicated by Germany in the last days of the negotiations.
The mere fact that we have made this inestimable con-
tribution to the success of the Allies does not in the least
excuse any single part of the Empire from doing a vast
amount more—from doing, in fact, not merely its fair
share” according to its own easy-going notions of fairness,
but the very utmost of which it is capable. Yet the work
of the British Navy in this war must be a source of the


loftiest pride to every Australian no less than to every
Briton. Without its help not a single Australian soldier
could have been certain of reaching the front. It would
be unnecessary to point to the freedom of the seas enjoyed
by British and Australian shipping as being due to the same
cause, if it were not that we are all inclined to take this
for granted and forget the men and ships to which we
owe it.
Joining the Navy League might help some of us to re-
member: for one of its main objects is to supply literature
showing exactly what the work of the navy is. I may
mention that the Australian secretary is Percy S. Webster,
“Lincoln/’ Domain road, South Yarra, Melbourne, and that
the annual subscription for membership is only five
shillings.
In the year before the Armada the permanent ships of
the Royal Navy numbered twenty-four. It must be re-
membered that the majority of the vessels which defeated
the huge Spanish fleet were privately-owned merchant
vessels. Old Harrison tells us that the Queen at this period
was building a new warship every year, and that the whole
navy at fighting strength numbered 10,000 seamen. A
battleship in these days ran to something over 500 tons
and cost £2OOO, concerning which estimate Harrison says:
—“lt is possible that some covetous person, hearing the
report, will either not credit it at all or suppose money so
employed to be nothing profitable to the Queen’s coffers.”
From this it is clear that there were little-navyites in
Elizabeth’s day, too, though I hardly suppose they gave the
great Queen much trouble.
In any case, the “money so employed” was found as
“profitable” in 1588, the year of the Great Armada, as it
was in August, 1914.
It is interesting to contrast with the above figures a
few of those given in the “Naval Annual” of 1914, just
before the outbreak of the war. One hundred and fifty-
one thousand officers and men were on the list for sea ser-
vice, this estimate only including active combatants. The
Naval Estimates were £51,000,000. There were 82 battle-
ships and battle cruisers built or building; 127 first-class


and light cruisers, 238 destroyers, 70 torpedo boats, and 96
submarines. At such cost does Britain keep the seas for
us to-day.
In my re-reading of Harrison I have come upon a rather
picturesque contrast. Australians have good cause to be
grateful to the Queen Elizabeth, the great battleship of
27,500 tons and 60,000 horse power, whose eight 15-in.
guns on the day after the landing, and since, have treated
the Turk to so monstrous a bombardment. In Elizabeth’s
time, too, there was a battleship named after the Queen,
and so named by herself. I take it to have been about the
size indicated above. It was called the “Elizabeth Jonas,”
for the following delightful reason:—
The name was devised by Her Grace in remembrance of her own
deliverance from the fury of her enemies, from which, in one respect,
she was no less miraculously preserved than was the prophet Jonas
from the belly of the whale.
As I opened this article with a quotation from Britain’s
greatest sea poet, I may close it with some lines from the
same pen—lines which, when The Day comes, will hold as
good, we may trust, of the British Empire as it held, in
reference to Armada Year, of England:—
She that cares not what man’s rage, but only what the sea wind saith,
She that turned Spain’s ships to cloud-wrack with the blasting of her
breath.
By her strengths of strong-souled children and of strong winds done
to death.
North and south the great kings’ navies came in Persian-wise: and
here
She with Aeschylean music on her lips that laughed back fear
In the face of Time’s grey god-head shook the splendor of her spear.
Fair as Athens then with foot upon her foeman’s foot, and strong
E’en as Athens for redemption of the world from sovereign wrong,
Like as Athens crowned she stood before the world with crowning
song.
All the world’s is theirs with whom is freedom: first of all the free
Blest are they whom song hath clothed and crowned with blessing;
these are we,
These alone have part in spirit with the sun that crowns the sea.


GERMAN ATROCITIES—THE BRITISH REPORT.
July 6, 1915.
The official report of the British Commission recently
appointed to examine into the German atrocities is, I should
imagine, easily the most terrible document ever given to
the world. It is far fuller than either the reports of the
Belgian or the French Commissions, and the occurrences
it chronicles are infinitely more horrible than anything to
be found in their pages.
It seems hardly possible to explain some of the things
in this book as the acts of men in any sense normal; one
is tempted to assume that the Fiend himself has entered
into the German nation and possessed it. Natural charity
towards one’s kind would lead one to disbelieve the evidence,
as many have hitherto disbelieved it, were there the
slightest loophole for doubt.
As things are, however, the evidence is simply over-
whelming. As I have already pointed out, the Commission
consists of men noted for their high integrity, their judicial
mind, and, in more than one case, for a certain readiness
to condemn their own country where they believed her to
have been in the wrong. The names and natures of Bryce,
Clarke, and Pollock are known to all, and the rest of the
Commission inspire hardly less trust. They have been
assisted by skilled counsel, and have accepted evidence only
after cross-examination and the most careful sifting.
Both counsel and Commission confess that they began
their inquiry with considerable scepticism, and that it was
only after witness on witness had come forward that this
gradually disappeared and gave way to complete convic-
tion. The Commission has been scrupulously fair. In
several cases where there seem to be discrepancies in the
witnesses’ accounts, the members expressly draw attention
to these, and in cases where witnesses have been shown on
general grounds to be in any sense unbalanced or untrust-
worthy, their evidence has been summarily rejected.


Further, in innumerable cases the same act or condition
of affairs has been solemnly attested by witnesses unknown
to each other, and giving their evidence with perfect
freedom and independence.
The result is an overwhelming indictment, one sufficient
to damn Germany for ever in the eyes of the world, and
one which explains absolutely the intense hardening of feel-
ing against Germany and Germans which has been notice-
able in England since the report was published.
The first thing to notice is that the document disposes
of the last possibility of doubt as to the complicity of the
German authorities in the wholesale massacre of non-
combatants which succeeded the occupation of Belgium. If
there were no other evidence this would still be proved up
to the hilt by the diaries of captured German soldiers.
Here is one entry, dated August 10:—“The next morning
we get the order that civilians with whom Frenchmen are
found in hiding are to be shot immediately.”
Again (near Lille, October 5, appendix, p. 175) “We
had no fight, but we caught 20 men and shot them.”
Many more instances might be given. The diaries also
supply ruthless evidence of the atrocities themselves, e.g.
(near Liege, August 10; diary of Stephan Luther; p. 170) .
“There was terrible destruction; in one farmhouse was
a woman who had been completely stripped, and who lay
on burnt beams. There was, of course, reason for such
procedure, but how savage!”
Reason for such procedure!
Diary of Johann van der Schoot (p. 173) :—“On the
23rd August everything was quiet. The inhabitants have
so far given in. Seventy students were shot, 200 kept
prisoners.” .
How certain it is that this reign of terror was officially
ordered may be gathered from the very instructive case of
Louvain. The Commission shows that during six days,
from August 19 to August 25, the German Army was in
peaceful occupation of the city. “The condition of Louvain
during these days was one of relative peace and quietude,
presenting a striking contrast to the previous and con-
temporaneous conduct of the German Army elsewhere.”


This shows that the authorities could perfectly easily re-
strain the troops when they wished to do so. The report
continues:—
On the morning of August 25, a sudden change takes place. The
Germans, on that day, repulsed by the Belgians, had retreated to, and
re-occupmd Louvain. Immediately the devastation of that city and
*s® holocaust of its inhabitants commenced. The inference is irresis-
tible that the army as a whole wreaked its vengeance on the civilian
population and the buildings of this city in revenge for the set-back
which the Belgian arms had inflicted on them.
The next important point is that the report proves, with
absolute certainty, the systematic mutilations of captives
and non-combatants by the German Army. How far this
was officially ordered I do not presume to say; that it was
officially permitted is beyond all doubt; and the strange
similarity of the cases (which are attested on page after
page of the report by innumerable independent witnesss)
seem to point to some prearranged plan, some secret and
hideous injunction set down beforehand in the devil’s hand-
book of “frightfulness.”
Up to the present I have carefully refrained from com-
menting on this particular class of atrocity, because I
thought that the available evidence, while establishing its
probability, came short of absolute certainty. The present
report, however, puts the matter beyond all doubt. It also
shows the simplicity of those who doubted these occur-
rences because of the difficulty of finding instances of them
in England. If you cut off both a child’s hands and fling
it out upon the fields by night, you must not be surprised
if it refuses to live in order to be made a raree show for
London sight-seers.
Here are a few, a very, very few of the facts. Each
paragraph represents the deposition of a separate witness,
writing at widely separated dates and places:—
The German soldier, whom I have mentioned, struck the elder
woman in the middle of the back with his bayonet, and I saw the blade
coming through her breast as she faced me. She immediately fell down.
I was then about 100 metres from her. The younger woman was a
simple peasant, and wore nothing but a skirt, a blouse, and under- ,
neath it a chemise. The soldier immediately pulled off the blouse
of the younger woman, and her breasts were quite naked. I saw
him then cut off both the woman’s breasts, and I saw two large red
wounds on the woman’s chest. I believe this was done with his
bayonet, but it may have been done with a knife, as the German
soldiers also carry knives. The woman fell dead.


The other woman was about 20 years old. She had a bayonet
wound in the head and her legs had been cut almost off. The whole
room was covered in blood. The bodies of the two women were
lying side by side, and that of the man a little apart. We entered
another house further on, on the same side of the road. In the
downstair room was a hanging lamp, and a boy of about 10 years of
age was hanging to it by a piece of string. The string was round
his neck. He had a bayonet wound in the stomach. There was a
pool of blood under the body. The blood had dried, I think. I did
not touch any of these four bodies.
I looked through the window; I only had a glance. I saw a man
in his skirt with his stomach opened with a bayonet. By the bridge
over the river between the park and Hofstade I saw a woman on a
stretcher. Some people were with her. She was dead; I saw her.
She was pregnant, it was very obvious. The people about told us
she had been bayoneted in the stomach.
In the blacksmith’s shop in Hofstade I saw the blacksmith dead
with his hands cut off and his wrists still tied. Our whole company
saw him, I should think. In another house I saw a child of 10 to 11
years kneeling; he was dead, a bayonet had been stuck through his
chest.
In the dancing-room lying close together in a corner were two
bodies. One was the body of a woman of 40 to 50 years old. She
had been bayoneted or thrust in the side. Ido not remember which
side it was. She was fully dressed. Her bodice was undone and
torn at the side. Her breasts were cut off. I saw that, but I did
not examine the body very closely. I should say the Germans had
used a knife. The body of the young man was lying beside her. He
was about 17 years old. He had a bayonet thrust in the throat.
Both his hands had been cut off at the wrist, and were lying on the
floor beside the body.
The body was lying in the dancing room of a cafe, and the right
arm had been severed at the elbow and the severed part was lying
by the body. The left hand had been cut off at the wrist and was
also lying by the body.
On opening the back door of the house I saw four Germans climb-
ing over the wall and trying to escape. Three got away and the
fourth I shot dead. Lying on the ground I found four children,
three little girls and a boy. Each had its hands cut. They were
dying but not quite dead. Their hands still hung to their arms by
the skin. There was blood all round on the ground.
The fourth corpse was that of a boy of 4or 5 years old. His
body was lying in the middle of the German marines’ bodies. His
hands and feet had been cut off. I did not see the hands or feet lying
near by. There were four patches of blood where the stumps of the
arms and legs were lying. The blood was dry.
The house had been burnt, only the walls standing—-it was not
detached. There were the remains of the table there; it had been
partly burnt. On it was the body of a dead child of 2or 3 years old;
it was partly burnt. Both hands and both feet had been cut off;
the hands at the wrist and the feet at the ankle.
To escape we had to go through the water and make a detour.
While doing so and crawling along a ditch we came across five, six, or
seven women. I did not stop to count them. They were in the ditch.
We had to climb over them. They were dead. Their clothes had
been torn, partly torn off, and pulled up over their bodies, as if they
had been violated. I cannot say how they had all been killed, but
one or two had their throats cut and one or two had their breasts half


cut off. The breasts were hanging. It was easy to see—the front
was all open, and someone had pulled down the petticoat a little off
the head, as if to see what had happened.
On August 24 we were obliged to come out of our houses by order
of the Germans. At about 15 yards distance from us were a man
and a woman with hands tied behind them whom I knew by sight, and
their little girl about six years old. While we stood there the Ger-
man began to cut the child in pieces with a bayonet. First they
cut off the girl’s foot, then her hands, then the forearm, and so on.
I fainted. They also cut off the girl’s head and stuck it on a lance.
I did not see this last—my parents did.
Here is a triumph of “Kultur,” attested by a Belgian
soldier (Sept. 10, village of Haecht, p. 79): —
On September 10 we came to the village of Haecht, and I and
some others were sent out as a patrol: we passed a river and came
to a farm-house. On the door of the farm I saw a child—two or
three years old—nailed to the door by its hands and feet. It was
clothed and quite dead. There was no wound of any sort on the
body; the face was horribly drawn with pain. In the garden of
the same house I saw the body of another child—a little girl of five
or six; she had been shot in the forehead.
The things set down hereunder were seen by a Belgian
refugee at Louvenier in October. Note that it is the Ger-
man officer who takes the lead:—
When we got to the dairy the farmer told us we could see every-
thing that happened through this window. We took the bench away
from underneath the window and stood it about 1 metre or more away
from the window, so that we should not be seen from the kitchen.
We all got up on this bench and I stood next to the farmer himself.
The kitchen was quite bright, being lit with electric light, which
is installed all over Louvenier. As I looked into the kitchen I saw
the Germans seize the baby out of the arms of the farmer’s wife.
There were three German soldiers, one officer and two privates. The
two privates held the baby and the officer took out his sword and cut
the baby’s head off. The head fell on the floor and the soldiers
kicked the body of the child into a corner and kicked the head after
it. When the farmer, who was with us in the dairy, saw this he
wanted to shout out and go nearer the window. The two men and
I prevented him from doing this, as we said we should lose our own
lives. One of the men put a cloth in the farmer’s mouth so that the
noise of his weeping should not be heard. It takes practically no
time to get from the kitchen to the dairy by the way we went.
We ran round. You could not hear anything that was said in the
kitchen. We could see that the wife was crying, but we could not hear
her.
After the baby had been killed we saw the officer say something
to the farmer’s wife and saw her push him away. After five or six
minutes the two soldiers seized the woman and put her on the ground.
She resisted them, and they then pulled all her clothes off her until
she was quite naked. The officer then violated her while one soldier
held her by the shoulders and the other by the arms. After the
officer each soldier in turn violated her, the other soldier and the
officer holding her down. The farmer did not see his wife violated:
the two men-servants had pulled him down from the bench after the
baby had been killed, and they would not let him get up again. After


the woman had been violated by the three the officer cut off the
woman’s breasts. I then saw him take out his revolver and point
it at the woman on the ground. At this moment the farmer broke
away from the two men-servants, jumped on to a chair and put his
foot through the window.
I have only dealt here with a fractional part of the
deeds of horror detailed in the present report. They in-
clude such minor offences as indiscriminate burning and
looting, official insults to women and priests, and the com-
mission of unprintably filthy acts by German officers in the
living rooms of Belgian dwelling-houses; and such major
ones as the indiscriminate murder of captured British,
French, and Belgian soldiers, as well as non-combatants;
the repeated violation, in public, of Belgian women by
relays of German soldiers; the torture and mutilation, as
just instanced, of women and tender children.
I believe this report should be reprinted at a nominal
price, and read by every adult in Australia, in order that
we may all see exactly what we have to expect should
Germany not be utterly beaten in this war. I believe that
no manly man or womanly woman could read it without
feeling compelled to do everything humanly possible to free
Australia from the menace of this horror and to rid the
world of it for ever. The circulation of such a document
should do more good than a thousand recruiting speeches.
July 20, 1915.
A fortnight ago I tried to show by reference to the
British Report on the German Atrocities the exact kind of
fate which Australia would have to expect if Germany
were not beaten in the present war.
The horrors outlined in this truly appalling volume
represent a deliberate policy of “frightfulness” pursued
with the object of striking terror into a conquered popula-
tion, of deterring, as far as possible, all neutral nations
from entering into the fray, and of enabling the conqueror
THE ISSUE FOR AUSTRALIA.


to hold his lines of communication with a military force
which is, technically speaking, inadequate for the purpose.
The fact that Germany considers no means of securing
these objects common nor unclean, that she deliberately
adopts for their attainment the practice of torture, rape,
child crucifixion, the burning alive of captives and non-
combatants, and the systematic mutilation of women and
children, has probably brought home to some people for the
first time the full horror of the fate which is certainly in
store for us should the Allies lose this war. Every man who
enlists will now feel that he is doing something to save his
own home from becoming the prey of all the fiends of hell,
and will determine that neither he nor his comrades will
cease till they get this “spittle wiped off from the face of
God.”
The British Report represents the first stage of horror
which would succeed the conquest of Australia by Germany;
this evening, I propose to glance for a moment at the second
stage, that in which occupation would follow conquest as
Germany struck her iron heel into the bosom of our swoon-
ing land.
The matter is stated simply by K. F. Wolif in “All-
German Leaves,” the official organ of the Pan-German
League. The following passage is quoted by Mr. C. R.
Fletcher in one of the Oxford Pamphlets:—
There are two kinds of races, master races and inferior races.
Political rights belong to the master race alone, and can only be won
by war. This is a Scientific Law, a Law of Biology. The rights of
men may be, and ought to be, allowed to the inferior race, and these
include individual liberty, the right to work, and the right to express
opinions; but all other rights belong only to the master race.
The master race should be rich in men; only the races which are
so are properly master races. It is unjust that a rapidly increasing
master race should be struggling for room behind its own frontier
while a declining inferior race can stretch its limbs at ease on the
other side of that frontier. The inferior race will not be educated in
the schools of the master race, nor will any schools be established for
it, nor will its language be employed in public.
Elsewhere Wolff says equally significantly:—
We shall exact from France the cession of so much territory
that we can be for the future in security. This territory will be
evacuated by all its French inhabitants.
There in a nutshell is the permanent condition to which
Australia must certainly sink should Germany win this


war, and to which she may quite conceivably sink should
Germany make so good a draw of it that she can begin in
another generation where she has left off to-day.
The very life of Australia is at present at stake, and
depends entirely on every man and woman among us doing
his or her utmost to get Germany not merely checked but
broken utterly as an offensive force. There must be no
“next time,” for the the next time may be the last time for
all of us.
It is utterly futile, moreover, to say that we must neces-
sarily win because we have right on our side. History
teems with instances in which right has, materially speak-
ing, gone down before wrong. Right is a powerful ally
to steadfast and vehement effort, but where effort is
inadequate, right will not of itself prevail, as far as practical
success goes.
It is effort such as this that we need to-day, and also
that absolute internal unity which can alone make success
possible.
If we doubt this, let us ask ourselves a few questions.
Do we wish our country to come beneath the Prussian
heel, so that our children may be driven crazy with hatred
and despair, as occurred in several instances in Prussian
Poland, where in the year 1906 a hundred thousand school
children went on strike rather than endure any longer the
hideous cruelty of “Kultur?”
Do our farmers wish to be compulsorily expropriated
from the land they have tamed and made fruitful, as the
Polish peasant proprietors were expropriated for the sake
of the Prussian capitalist by the Prussian Expropriation
Acts of 1886 and 1908, and as the native Schleswig pro-
prietors were expropriated in 1912? Do we wish the use
of English to be abolished throughout our schools, as the
use of Danish was abolished throughout Danish Schleswig
in 1886? . . .
Do our parents wish to be deprived of the very control
of their children, as in 1889 those parents were who sent
their children from Schleswig to school in Denmark? Do
we wish to be contemptuously gulled by the Prussian con-
queror with a Gilbert-and-Sullivan constitution, as Alsace-


Lorraine was gulled in 1911, or to see the sentence applied
in 1890 by Caprivi to the conquered provinces altered so as
to run, “The experiment of Germanising the people having
failed, there is only left the resource of deepening the ditch
that divides Australia from Britain.”
Finally, do we wish to see applied to ourselves the
impious blood-tax of Lorraine, or to submit to the official
murders and insults meted out to Alsace by the most brutal
soldiery in the world during the notorious Zabern incident?
and in the case of unsuccessful resistance, do we wish to
experience the “Wolfish mercies” thus threatened us by the
writer named above: “It is necessary to use the most
violent means to suppress such insurrection, and not to
encumber the prisons afterwards” ?
The above picture is a lurid one, but there is not a single
incident in it which is not matter of strict historical fact;
and it represents the certain result for ourselves of German
victory. It is idle to reply that we should resist to the
death. Of course we should. What has that got to do with
the matter? Schleswig resisted to the death, and so did
Belgium; each is now a slave to the Prussian captor. The
present moment represents a supreme crisis in the life of
Australia, and of every Australian man and woman. Never
again will the British Empire face Germany and her allies
under such favorable circumstances, or with so strong a
coalition to help her. If we cannot win to-day, we are not
likely to win next time—indeed, “next time,” I repeat, may
be the last time for us all. On the other hand, we have
now the chance of striking the blow which will secure our
liberty for ever. We are facing that
tide in the affairs of men
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune.
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
If we miss the tide, and Germany wins the war, or
makes an advantageous draw of it—God help us all!


BY THE SAME AUTHOR
The Ballades of
Theodore de Banville
(A Translation, with Critical Essay)
CLOTH, 4j-
‘‘THE ATHENAEUM ” (in a review of three columns): —
It is not too much to say that Mr. Strong possesses every
qualification needed to effect a successful translation of
Banville’s Ballades into English verse. In a work of such
general excellence there is little to criticise.
"THE NATION” (in a review of two columns): —It is with
much gratification that we welcome Mr. Strong’s subtle
translations of de Banville’s "Trento-six Ballades” .... Mr.
Strong’s volume is full of felicities.
Peradventure
A Book of Essays in Literary Criticism
CLOTH, 3/6
“THE MORNING POST”:—Mr. Strong’s judgments are
recorded in prose which it is a pleasure to read, and sup-
ported by particularly apt quotations. None but a poet of
catholic experience could have planned the charming itinerary
among “ Ballads Old and New.”
“THE LITERARY WORLD”:—Both in its grave and gay
moods the book is one of unusual charm.
The Specialty Press Pty. Ltd., 189-191 Little Collins St., Melbourne.
