

AUSTRALIA.
To the King's most excellent majestv.
The humble Petition of the undersigned your Majesty's most loyal subjects
S heweth—
x. Prior to May, 1900, George Ramsdale Witton was a gunner of the Royal Australian Artillery, in the seivice
of the Crown in the Defence Forces of the Colony of Victoria, Australia. He was born on the 28th day of June,
1874, and is now twenty-eight years of age.
2. On or about Ist Maty, 1900, the said left Australia for Africa with the Inrpeirai wusb alian
Regiment, under Lieutenant-Colonel Kelly, with the intention purpose 'of serving ifi the military forces of the
Crown against the Boers.
3. After being some time in South Africa, he offered his services as a member of the Inegulai Coips of the
Bushveldt Carbineers, and was accepted; receiving, in consequence of his previous knowledge and practice ot
artillery, and notwithstanding his inexperience as an officer up to that time, a commission as Lieutenant in 1a
corps. He joined the corps on 13th July, 1901.
4. On 3th August, 1901, he joined the Spelonken detachment of the corps, then under the command of
Captain Hunt. Captain Hunt, however, with the main body of the Spelonken detachment, when Lieutenant Witton
arrived, was some miles away engaging the enemy, and was killed on 7th August. Lieutenant Witton ne ver saw ot
had communication with Captain Hunt, but was always under the immediate command of Lieutenant Morant as
superior officer : and Lieutenants Handcock and Picton, all of whom were senior to Lieutenant Witton.
3. Lieutenant Witton is at present a prisoner of the Crown at Lewes, England, undei sentence of pena*
servitude for life, by way of commutation by the General Commanding Officer, Lord Kitchener, of a sentence o
death by court-martial, upon the trial of Lieutenant Witton on two charges of the murder of Boers.
6. No official copy of the proceedings is at present obtainable in Australia, but reliable infoimation has
been collected from reports in public newspapers, notably in the weekly edition of the Times for i^th : Apn , 1902,
and from persons having actual knowledge of the events, and from communications from Lieutenant Witton. 10m
these sources the following circumstances appear to be those connected with the two cases in question.
7. The first charge was that of murdering a Boer named Visser. Visser was captured wounded shortly aftei
Captain Hunt's death. Lieutenants Morant, Handcock, Picton, and Witton had a consultation with re eience o
Visset, and after that Visser was summarijy shot, without trial and without charge. When capturec le wote a
soldiers khaki jacket cr anirt, and was in possession of a pair of Captain Hunt s brousei s. _ thougn 01 n gui y o
the charge by the court-martial, your Majesty's petitioners humbly urge that for the reasons following no guilt 111
respect thereof is properly imputable to Lieutenant Witton.
8. He was the junior subaltern. He had so recently joined the corps and the detachment that he could not
have personal knowledge of the material facts hereinafter mentioned. It was within a week of his joining the
detachment that Visser's case occurred. Lieutenants Morant and Handcock had been for some time (ovei a mont 1)
under the direct control of Captain Hunt, and, therefore, in a position to know exactly what ordeis he had given and
transmitted. The first witness for the prosecution—Sergeant S. Robertson —admitted in cross-examination that
Captain Hunt had given direct orders that no prisoners were to be taken, and had also on one occasion abused the
witness for bringing in three prisoners without orders. Lieutenant Morant deposed that not only had Captain Hunt
given these orders, but also that he had named his authority, Colonel Hamilton. It is true that at the court-maitial
Colonel Hamilton proved that no such orders had been issued, but that, as your Majesty s petitioneis humblv uige,
could not be known to Lieutenant Witton at the time Visser was shot. If Captain Hunt informed his subordinates
that Colonel Hamilton had given such orders, and Captain Hunt directly required obedience to them, it is humbly
submitted that Lieutenant Witton had no course open to him as a soldier but to obey. The order and the
interpretation of that order were not left in any doubt according to the statements of his superiors. It is humbly
further submitted that Lieutenant Witton would have much exceeded his right, would have been insubordinate, and
as an officer been guilty of a serious dereliction of duty if he had ventured to demand from his superior officer pioo
of the truth of his statement as to the issue and meaning of the orders in question before yielding obedience, because
if justified in demanding such proof from Lieutenant Morant, such demand might, as it seems to yout Majesty s
petitioners, be equally demanded from every officer short of the General commanding.
Your Majesty's petitioners humbly submit there was no criminality in a young and comparatively inexperienced
Lieutenant, with no previous experience in the field, less than a month with his corps, less than a week with his
detachment, placing faith in and yielding obedience to the distinct assurances and positive commands oj two
superior officers, having vastly better means of knowledge, and with all the advantage and power ot rank and
authority.
We also rest reliance on the circumstances of time and place, which seem to be of the highest
At a great distance from still higher authority, even had he been disposed to question the authenticity and
construction of his orders, immersednn services of continuous activity and serious pressure, engaged with an enemy
whose methods, in some instances at least, as is well known, lent some colour to the likelihood of such orders, and
having no reason for disbelieving what he was told, and led by a masterful mind and strong personal force, your
Majesty's petitioners beg your Majesty's most gracious consideration to the difficult position of this young and
inexperienced officer. Lieutenant-Colonel Pratt, in his " Handbook on Military Law," at page 113 says A
soldier, again, is bound to obey the lawful command of his superior officer, and before a court-martial it would be
held that a soldier was bound to obey the command of his superior officer, if the illegality of it was not on the face
of it apparent." -Clode's " Military and Martial Law," at page 56, states that " The power and responsibility of the
superior officer, i.e., the senior officer, of the highest rank present is always supreme.




No doubt can ever have existed, as your Majesty's petitioners believe, that Captain Hunt had given the
orders referred to. Civil-Surgeon Johnson testified that he had heard Captain Hunt reprimand Lieutenant Morant
for bringing in prisoners ; so did Captain Taylor. Collateral corroboration that Captain Hunt believed that such
orders were justified appears also from the evidence in other cases as to the practice in other coips.
o. The second charge of which Lieutenant Witton was found guilty was called the eight Boers case. He
was indicted, along with Lieutenants Morant and Handcock, with having murdered or instigated the murder of eight
prisoners. The facts were : that about 20th August, 1901, an intelligence officer named Ledeboer 111 charge ot a
party captured the Boers and handed them over to a patrol. On 23rd August they were shot. So far as Lieutenant
Witton is concerned, he was present with others, but did not take part in any decision regarding the fate of the men
One of them rushed at him, and seized hold of him, and then Lieutenant Witton shot him, apparently to protect
himself. He neither ordered nor participated in the shooting of the other seven.
The prosecution proved that Lieutenant Morant again asserted his orders as his justification, and also stated
he had been congratulated by headquarters over,the last-affair, and mehnt to go thiloughl with 1!- Cl^|&-a§_l2^
Majesty's petitioners submit, Lieutenant Morant t|ok comnpind of the situation and everted iu# antnonty.
The defence of obedience to orders, and the view that Lieutenant Witton honestly and reasonably believed in
the existence of lawful orders were, as your Majesty's petitioners believe, materially corroborated and supported by
evidence in other cases before the same court-martial, that other corps believed the same thing anc ac ec
accordingly. Lieutenant Ilamman stated that when he was a trooper in the Queensland Mounted Infantry, on one
occasion at Bronkhurst Spruit, in 1900, his squadron took some prisoners and was reprimanded by Colonel Lradock
for taking them. Sergeant Waller-Ashton deposed to Brabant's Horse receiving orders to take no prisoners in
consequence of specific acts of treachery on the part of the Boers. Your Majesty s petitioners hum :> ysu mi in
such reprimand and orders could have but one meaning, and that they afford strong reason for not imputing criminal
conduct to Lieutenant Wittcn.
10. Lieutenant Witton states, in a letter of Bth March, 1902, that Sergeant-Major Clarke asked him to
intercede with Lieutenant Morant on behalf of the men (British) in favor of Visser that he agreed with the men that
Visser should not be shot, and mentioned it to Lieutenant Morant. Lieutenant Morant, he sI Y s > o gian
intercession, telling Lieutenant Witton he was justified in what he was doing, and says that if the men made any tuss
he would shoot the prisoner himself.
11. Your Majesty's petitioners, while believing that, under the circumstances hereinbefore appearing.
Lieutenant Witton ought not to have been punished as a criminal, desire to.place before your Majesty further
considerations which they humbly submit should move your Majesty's clemency towards Lieutenant Witton.
12. These circumstances are as follow Early in the morning of 23rd January, 1902, and while the court-
martial was still in course of trying the prisoners at Pietersburg, an attack on the town by Commandant Beyers took
place. So far as your Majesty's petitioners can learn, Lieutenant Witton, then under arrest, but undei no peis< , .
danger from the Boers, was ordered and permitted to, and did, resume his arms, and until die attack w,,s happily
rennlsed stand reallv if needed to .chi. honorable perilous serviQS m hes.mov.- cy s .'.«f Jfig y ?
Your Majesty's petitioners, while acknowledging tlfat by ycftfr Majesty's regulations, such circumstances were not
technically or necessarily an answer to the charge, if the sarne were otherwise established, do nevertheless most
earnestly beg your Majesty to graciously regard them as of sufficient weight to induce your Majesty to pardon
Lieutenant Witton.
At one period of the history of the British Army such circumstances would have been considered as almost
equivalent to condonation. Clode, at page 103, states the general principle thus "The discharge of duty involves
condomttien," and quotes the Duke of Wellington as writing : "The performance of a duty of honor and ot trust
after the knowledge of a military offence committed ought to convey a pardon,' and the author adds that according
to the practice of the Duke of Wellington in the Peninsula it did so. That such was the practice o. so distinguis lec
a commander at a period of our history noted for the rigour of military discipline appears we think, tiom a perusal
among other sources ot the despatch of the Duke of Wellington of nth April, 1813, and the General Order of His
Grace dated nth February, 1811.
12. Your Majest\'s petitioners, without desiring to rest their prayer upon any technical grounds, would
humbly beseech your Majesty to consider whether Lieutenant Witton has not suffered some disadvantage in not
having as one member at least of the court-martial an officer of an irregular corps in accordance with the Ku.es ot
Procedure.
Reviewing the whole of Lieutenant Witton's unfortunate case, your Majesty's petitioners venture humbly to
express to your Majesty the confident hope that your Majesty may perceive room and occasion for Royal clemency.
Now that peace has been happily re-established, now that pur late foes have been enrolled as our fellow
sublets, when even rebels have sought leniency, and not in vain, we approach the Throne asking that your Majesty
may be graciously pleased to direct the liberation of the young and inexperienced soldier who at an anxious m ° m en
of our hislorv ardent.lv offered to his country the last gift of a brave and loyal citizen, and who if contiary to the
views of your Majesty's petitioners, he erred at all, has erred, we venture most humbly and earnestly to submit, no _
from wilfulness or design, but, according to the great weight of testimony and probability from a mistaken sens
duty to obey the official commands of his superior officer.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that your Most Gracious Majesty may be pleased to take this matter
into your most gracious consideration, and pardon and direct and order the release of the said George K. V 1
and your petitioners will in duty bound ever pray.




Name. Address. Name. Address.
R-XTPFA '
ijfcpJt It!U < i: / " .;
~.*_ .: - —
I . : , S
_ // • _ _ —
f4 . — - U M —-
OmjuBf,$x « _ - .£$*.'... *"•**"•■
11 Jf. /%&r __
_^^et*4eud — &£&.
... f | — r — T
'
/- " *......£...*r.£..
fd&8,fo/kzzj- <gu&r- r _ _ _ __
L v " x . "* ~ *- *
-^j&JLar& : , t .-.
JCKTVULs,. J - •— — —
*6<&tje£4L — —




Name.
Address.
Name.
Address.


