

AUSTRALIA FOR THE INDUSTRIOUS,
MY EXPERIENCE
Q,ITEEH SHi-A-ZtsTID ,
GIGKGI Ei'1041.1.,
(13 YEARS A COLONIST.)
TO WHICH IS ADDED BY THE SAME AuTHOE A RePEINT OF “ Th*
Emigeant : his Thoughts, Peelings and Aspirations : An
APPEAL TO THE WORKING MILLIONS OF GREAT BRITAIN,”
as Published in 1867.
PRICE FOURPENCE.
Lacbbt, Grimsby;
Printed <t Published by H. Watson & Son, Steam Printers,


JOHN H. WHITE,
SIiIGB&TSeSI offi€li s
OSBORNE-ST., GRIMSBY,
Willingly answers enquiries and affords any counsel in his power to guide
persons contemplating emigration. Stamp should be enclosed for reply.
AIMS OF THIS AGENOY.
To promote judicious emigration of the rightly adapted.
To make known facts concerning all fields.
To furnish enquirers with free , faithful, an I friendly counsel.
To secure happy association and utmost comfort at sea.
To ensure economy when combined with safety and efficiency.
To co-operate with bona-fide Colonial Agencies.
To substitute Organized Emigration for hap-hazard exodus.
ORIGIN OF THIS AGENCY.
Entirely undesigned, the outgrowth of chair-taking at a Lecture on New Zealand nine
years ago,—it was at first conducted in connection with the Free Passages then given by
the New Zealand Government. Correspondence in Christian World and other religious
weeklies widened sphere of operation, until opportunity of service and pressure of
claims pointed to business-relinquishing, as a duty, and prosecution of emigration as s
life work. Further extension and usefulness of this ministry is made possible by the
earnest co-operation of my brother, Mr. Joseph T. White, who in full sympathy with the
work has cordially devoted his energies to its joint promotion.
OPERATIONS & BASIS OF THIS AGENOY.
, Over 2,000 Free Emigrants have gone to New Zealand, some hundreds free
and assisted already to Queensland. Special Temperance and Christian Parties
have been grouped by Orient Steamers to Australia, Monarch Steamers to New
York,—ralso to Canady, New Zealand, &c., &c. This system it is hoped tc
widely extend. Shipping Commissions remunerate time and trouble, and
every client who negotiates passage through this agency may rely upon utmost
service, and will strengthen our hands and enlarge its area. Commendation?
to friends on the part of those who read this will be esteemed by
JOHN H. WHITE,
JOSEPH T. WHITE,
OFFICES,
OSBORNE-ST., GRIMSBY.
July 25th, 1882


AUSTRALIA FOR THE INDUSTRIOUS,
MY EXPERIENCE
Q,TrEEIT SXj_A.3STID 7
SIGHS! Mißill.,
(IS YEARS A COLONIST.)
TO WHICH IS ADDED BY THE SAME AUTHOR A REPRINT OF “ THE
Emigrant : his Thoughts, Feelings and Aspirations : An
APPEAL TO THE WORKING MILLIONS OF GREAT BRITAIN,”
as Published in 1867.
PRICE FOURPENCE.
Lacebt, Grimsby;
Printed & Published by H. Watson & Son, Steam Printers.




AUSTRALIA FOR THE INDUSTRIOUS,
MY EXPERIENCE IN QUEENSLAND,
AS GIVEN IN
UMLHIi AND OTHEiI UNTIES IN ENGLAND.
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I have come here this evening to tell yon something about
Australia, —or at least about that part of it with which I am most
familiar. I hope some of you have some idea of emigrating :
otherwise my subject may prove a dull one; because I am no
professional lecturer, but have come straight from hard work of
a very different kind, and hard work has been my lot since I was
a boy of thirteen.
In the battle of life from then till now, I have had neither
time nor opportunity to prepare myself for a work of this nature.
I base my claim to your indulgence on the earnestness I feel,
on my whole heart being in this work, and because what I say to
you comes from experience I have gained. I must confess I
was always an enthusiast in the matter of emigration, and that
years before I went out to Australia, I had made up my mind to
make one of the Colonies my future home, and the more I read
and thought about them, the more determined I became to go to
one of them. And I believe the same would be the case with
many of you—with thousands of my fellow-countrymen if they
would only look to this subject, weigh it well over in their own
minds, and the advantages that are likely to follow from its being
carried into execution —I feel certain that tens of thousands of
Englishmen would come to the same conclusion that I did nearly
twenty years ago, and which I am proud to say has abundantly
proved to be the case —namely : that in these young Colonies, tke
chances of success in life, — (apart from a freer mode of living, a
more enjoyable climate, and so on than you have the


small capitalist, the farmer, fdie mechanic, and the labouring man
are as a hundred to one against this country. I thought so much
on this subject that I could not rest satisfied in going out myself
only, but I wrote and published a small pamphlet entitled “ The
Emigrant, his Thoughts, Feelings and Aspirations,” an appeal to
the working millions of this country, in which I strongly urged
any of my fellow-countrymen who were dissatisfied with their
position and prospects, to adopt the same course. This was no
doubt an act of some presumption on my part, because I knew no
moi’e of the country then, than they did. But a deep conviction
had taken possession of my mind, and I gave vent to it. Sub-
sequent events as I will presently show you, have fully justified me
in every line of the appeal I then made. (Applame.)
I do not happen to be a Lincolnshire man, my wife, however,
is a Lincolnshire woman, and that perhaps is the next best
recommendation in the estimation of Lincolnshire people. lam
a Hertfordshire man ; and the Hertfordshire Mercury, of February
Ist, 1868, in reviewing that little pamphlet, spoke of me as “ a
humble man, and unlearned : but not stricken down by poverty,
for I was young, healthy and energetic; and had been fairly
successful in the condition of life to which I was born. I was not
an unfortunate man, nor disaffected, nor a grumbler; but I was
discontented,” the reviewer said “ with the pardonable discontent
which is at the root of all enterprise, of every generous effort,
and every ennobling aspiration.” I stated in the preface that I
had seen how hard it was for humble men to improve their
position in this country : I had observed the misery about me,
and I had read of the wider scope which the Australian Colonies
afforded to energetic industry ; upon these hints I spoke, and
while advising my countrymen of my own rank in life to emigrate,
I purposed setting them, the example. It was not because I loved
England loss that made me think of leaving it.
“ Ifc was nob because I’d ceased to love the land that gave me birth,
For I deem’d it to be fairer than the fairest land on earth;
It was not because 1 saw no beauty in its quiet vales,
In its shining silver rivers—in its fruitful blooming dales ;
No! 1 loved them all as dearly as the poets who have sung
In every age their praises— ......
For all were lovely, all were dear, —all weie very dear to me,
But I left them all to gain a home —my own—beyond the sea! ”
(Applause.)
And in some other lines which, were quoted, showing I was


as proud too of my country’s great history as any man, and
further I contended that Englishmen, even though they go to the
furthest corners of the globe, as long as they revere and admire
all that is good and great in the laws and institutions, and
remain true to the traditions of their country, instead of
ceasing to be Britons, they only in reality become more British !
(Cheers.) And this I think is proved to you more and more
every day. Referring also to a line in which I said:—
“ Does it matter where we go if your great names still are ours ? ”
The reviewer said “there was a vision of the future in it. The
day may come when this island will cease to he the seat of
empire, and when Europe itself —the home of art and science,
and the centre of political power, —will he dwarfed into insigni-
ficance by the overwhelming magnitude of the Australian and
American Empires. But does it matter, if these new realms are
our legitimate offsprings, animated by our spirit, inheriting our
traditions, and carrying our civilization into wider regions ? ”
“ No, we go to help to build distant empires that shall be
Counterparts of our dear father-land—our Britain fair and free.”
I must not detain you longer by referring to this little
pamphlet of mine. I merely do so now to show you what
some of my ideas and aspirations as an intending emigrant were.
About a year after the publication of that little pamphlet found
myself and wife at Brisbane, the capital of Queensland, on the
other side of the globe. I had chosen this Colony for a variety
of reasons. One, because I thought its climate would be
beneficial to my health: its land laws seemed liberal, its territory
was wide, and although at the time of my going there, I knew it to
be in anything but a prosperous condition, still I felt convinced it
would again raise itself up, and join once more in the march of
progress: and I felt I should like to make one, in however
humble a way, to help on the great work of colonization in this
the youngest Colony of the Australian group. I must here
confess, that with all my reading and acquired information, I
was as disappointed as nine-tenths of people when they arrive in
a new country generally are. But I was very far from being
dispirited or discouraged by what I saw around me. There was
a total absence of any of that appearance of want and wretched-
ness that so often strikes the eye in this country. There —no
matter how dull the times —(and the times were exceedingly dull
—the grass was growing in many of our now busy streets, and
half the houses were unoccupied)—there was an appearance of


plenty and comfort about the people and their homes ; and with a
bright sky over-head, and many other advantages I could see,
I felt convinced that it only needed patience, perseverance, and
courage, and we should be able to make our way in the new land !
I was disappointed too about the land laws —and of course it is to
Land that people going to these young Colonies should
mainly look. At the time of my going the Land-order System
was in vogue, and we, having paid our own passage, held two of
these land-order warrants. But I need not dwell on this, for the
simple reason, that the land laws of the Colony have since then
been completely altered and re-modelled, and there is not the
slightest fear or danger of any one going there now being
disappointed on that head.
I merely mention it to show you that it was a source of
very serious disappointment to myself on landing.
We wasted, I may say, three months in looking about us, not
knowing really what to do. This is, undoubtedly the most
anxious and trying time in the new comers experience, but I can
safely say, no matter how dull or unpromising my prospects
appeared, I never once lost faith, I never once lost heart, in the
Colony I had come to ! At the end of three months, we com-
menced business in a very small way, and very much against my
will. But I had gone out there to succeed at something; and I
was not afraid of working or pulling off my coat to do it. I
worked hard—excessively hard, a good deal harder than I should
have been called upon to work in this country. For,here, I
contend men work more in a groove. You say you work hard
here. I believe you do. But I believe we work harder. There
is more work for us to do, and there is more encouragement for
us to do it! Well I worked very hard, and perseveringly
struggled on at an occupation that certainly was not congenial
to me; whenat the end of about two years and a half I began to find
the tide turn slowly in my favour. And this instead of causing me
to relax (as some people might when they find themselves hand-
ling money pretty freely) only made me redouble my exertions:
with this result Ladies and Gentlemen, that by the time I had
been in tLe Colony a little over seven years, with the money I
had been able to save from my bumble business, the way I bad
been able to invest those savings, and the way in which those
investments had grown into value with the growth and prosperity
o the Colony, I was able to turn round and look upon myself as


a comparatively independent man. (Applause.)
I have not made a large fortune, and the mere mention of what
I have done in that time, will I know, only excite a smile from
many of my fellow-colonists. Hut lam satisfied ; more particu-
larly when I look back at what might—at what would in all
probability have been my position, had I like thousands of others;
■ —lingered on in “ Old England ! ” Yet no man’s memory clings
with fonder tenacity to his native land: no man’s heart beats
warmer at the recollection of all her time-honoured associations
and traditions than mine does, but when I look back on its
fearful mass of poverty and destitution, and reflect on the
thousands of struggling spirits that are crushed, and whose lives
go out in the bare fight for their daily bread —-when I look on
these dark spots that loom large on the old land, and con-
trast them with the bright, free, elastic, present, and great
prospective future of the new, I cannot help thanking the
Divine beneficence that created this great island continent in
the Southern Hemisphere to become a free, happy, and prosperous
home of plenty, for millions of the human race! (Applause.) I
wish no one to misunderstand me. What I have accomplished
has not been done without the exercise of self-reliance, continued
perseverance, carefulness and determination.
At the same time, I must not disguise from you that I
laboured under some disadvantages, that many I see before me
here to-night going there, would not. Apart from the extreme
dulness of the times when I landed there, I was anything but
strong in health : I had no trade; I was unused to any sort of
business ; not fit for very much laborious work perhaps, and not
without my disappointments as I have shown you, yet I have succeed-
ed as stated; though not, as 1 freely admit without a somewhat
severe struggle. But for that I contend I am none the worse.
On the contrary —and apart from any consideration of gain what-
ever —ithasenabled meto prove myself,—as thousands ofmenfrom
this country might go and do—prove themselves better men than
they dream they are: capable of doing far more than they think
they can: it has enabled me to do this, and prove at the same time
that all I wrote, and thought and urged years ago in favour of the
Colonies can be accomplished there, if men have the determin-
ation, the wish and the will ! (Applause.) I had worked very
hard—very hard indeed : I felt that I should like a holiday: I
felt that I had earned one: and as wo could afford it, I resolved


on taking a year or two’s trip to this country,
To show oar boys—Australians—field and farm,
Woodland and school-ground, where ourselves once played.
. wi . th thought uppermost in my mind, that during my
visit to this Country I should be able to tell some of my fellow,
countrymen what I had done in Queensland, in the hope that
they might be induced to follow my example —go out and do
likewise! (Applause.)
I came to this Country with my family and spent nearly two
years here, and when I returned the knowledge was forced upon
me that our Colony of Queensland was absolutely unknown in
your agricultural districts, and I felt fully persuaded that more
English people would come out to ns if they were only made
acquainted with the advantages we could offer them. I had been
back about two years, when seeing our Government intended to
renew emigration, by offering free and assisted passages to four
thousand people per annum, I offered my humble services
in the interest of the Colony, without the payment of a single
sixpence beyond my bare expenses ! (Cheers.)
I felt, Air. Chairman, not only that it was a duty, but viewing
the conditions of things in the two countries as I could—and
from the depth of interest I have always felt in this matter—
proof of which I think I have given you :• —and having at
heart the welfare of my striving fellow-countrymen, as well as
the interest of my adopted country —I felt it would be criminal
on my part as an Englishman to remain silent!
The Government accepted my offer, but would insist on my
accepting a small salary, on the ground that the labourer was
worthy of his hire ! (Applause.) I gave up my business, I have
left my family and friends, and a comfortable home beneath
sunny and pleasant skies, to come to this country—to impart this
information—which if acted on and carried out in a right spirit,
will result in conferring benefits, which you, who do not know
our country, little dream of! So much then for my own experi-
ence and position, and although I am now acting on behalf of
the Queensland Government I claim being able to speak to you
with perfect independence ! (Applause.)
I will now with your permission, and in as few words as
possible, offer you a few remarks about Australia—about
Queensland in particular. There is not the least doubt that
Australia is rapidly—is every day becoming more and more


familiar to Englishmen. Trade and commerce are great educators
and the yearly increasing trade between the two Countries is
something enormous. Australian victories on your cricket
fields a few years ago : then the champion oarsmanship of the
world being won by an Australian, and later, our shipments of
frozen meat, have become an accomplished fact. All these
things have directed a large amount of attention toward us, by
people who would never otherwise have given us a thought. Of
course every school boy is now well acquainted with the history,
geography, and general productions of Australia : but I believe
a large amount of ignorance still exists —especially among the
classes who would in all probability make the best of Colonists
as to the enormous extent of territory, beauty and geniality of
climate, variety of soils and productions, and the wonderful
mineral wealth of these countries that a few years ago were
wildernesses, but are now lands teeming with wool and wine
with corn and gold, with plenty and comfort. 1 should like did
time permit, to say a few words about the other great Colonies
South and Western Australia, Victoria and New South Wales,
because many interesting partipulars might be given about them —
their cities of Melbourne and Sydney for instance, whose streets
are as alive with traffic and bustle as the streets of London are.
And the same may be said of the principal streets of our
rapidly growing city of Brisbane.
If we look at the map of Australia, we shall see that Queens-
land occupies the north-eastern portion of that Continent, and
contains an area of nearly 700,000 square miles, considerably over
four hundred millions of acres. A better idea may be had of its
size by my stating that it is nearly twelve times larger than
England and Wales. This is Queensland alone. So that you
will see we have plenty of elbow-room. (Laughter.)
Of course over such an enormous extent of territory stretching
as it does from South to North towards the Equator there must be
considerable diversity of climate : yet all writers, and indeed all
the people I have come in contact with, agree in stating that the
climate is in no way prejudicial to the European constitution. As
this question is a rather important one, and I find a good deal of
prejudice exists in this country about our climate, I think I cannot
do better than read you a short extract from a paper read before
the Royal Colonial Institute, in London, a few months ago, by Mr.
Thos. Archer, who is a very old Queenslander, and is our present


Agent-General, lie says:—“ It is now time to saysomethingof the
climate and sanitary state of Queensland : the hoast of those that
n7ri^ ere > an< i bugbear of those who have not. To an
old Queenslander it is partly amusing, and partly annoying
to hear the remarks that are made even in the Colonies, by
people who have no personal experience in the matter. After a
residence of nearly twenty years during which I have explored
a good deal of new country, and helped to form several new
stations, which involves much hardship, camping out, and
general knocking about and travelling over a large propoition of
the Colony, I will venture to affirm that, though the climate is hot
for three or four months in the year, it will in point of healthiness
compare favourably with that of any newly settled country in the
world that I have ever heard, seen, or read of. There are not many
places save Australia, where a man can with impunity lie night
after night with only a blanket between him and the damp
earth, perhaps finding when he wakes in the morning that his
slender covering has been soaked by some passing shower, or
that his hair is stuck together with hoar-frost; and yet this is
the life led by hundreds in all parts of Australia, and perhaps
more in Queensland than in the Southern Colonies when travel-
ling in the bush, or camping out with stock. On a journey of
four months from Rockhampton to the Flinders and back, I did
not pitch my tent half a dozen times, except for rain, preferring
to lie under the glorious stars, with a mackintosh over my
blankets to keep the dew from soaking them: and in that
time I gained half-a-stone in weight, and my groom, who also
preferred sleeping out, looked the picture of health when we
returned home ! ” (Applause.) Now I think that should settle
the question as to the general healthiness of our climate.
When we see men exposing themselves in that way, for a
period of four months, and yet return in the condition stated we
may take it for-granted that our climate must be a very healthy
one. For my own part I can safely say our climate is our boast,
and I could say very much in its favour in contrasting it with
the climate of this country. It enables us to live an almost nut
of door life, and enjoy an amount of freedom in the open air, the
whole year round, that people in this country cannot possibly
realize.
The next question will be perhaps, what can we grow there ?
And in answer to this Imay state there is hardly anything—lbelieve


there is nothing known to man, that cannot be grown and
brought to perfection in some part of Queensland.
From English farming on the Darling Downs —magnificent black
soil country, two thousand feet above sea level —and where in
many places the scenery closely resembles that of your noblemen’s
parks—English farming is carried on. Wheat and Barley, Oats
and Lucerne, for Hay and for green food, Maize, English
Potatoes, all your English Vegetables, and your familiar Fruits,
the Apple, the Pear, Plum and Gooseberry flourish in the
settlers’ gardens, side by side with the Orange, the Peach,
Apricot, Nectarine, and many other fruits that will not of course
grow in the open air here. Whilst on the coast lands from Moreton
Bay right up to the North, we grow Maize, Oats and Lucerne
again for Hay and green food, English and sweet Pota-
toes, nearly all your varieties of Vegetables, and in addition
we grow Sugar, Cotton, Arrowroot, Coffee, Tobacco and many
other productions of that nature, while the whole year round
we have an abundant supply of beautiful and delicious
fruits. Every variety of the Orange, some of them surpassing
anything I have ever seen at Covent Garden, or the best shops
in London —Lemons, Citrons, Rock and Water Melons, Bananas,
Pine Apples, Peaches Guavas, Passion Fruit, Grenadillas, Figs,
Custard Apple, Strawberries, Dates, and a number of others, ray
reading a list of which would only tire you, and if it happened to
be a warm evening make some of you long to be there among
them ! (Laughter.)
Grapes I have omitted to mention ; we have grapes for nearly
four months of the year, they come in generally about the middle of
December —just in time for our Christmas tables. The vine flour-
ishes luxuriantly—even as far inland as Roma, a distance of 300
miles from the coast, and already connected with Brisbane by Rail-
way,and where it was confidently stated by the Colonists themselves
a few years ago, that as much as a Cabbage would not grow :
there are settlers successfully cultivating the vine—who have
thousands of gallons of wine maturing in their cellars, and who
have magnificent Orangeries besides ! So that all over this great
country, w'hether on the coast or in the interior, the vine flourishes
luxuriantly, and Wine must become an article of considerable
importance in our export trade of the future. To give you an
idea of the cheapness of our fruit, and as a further proof of the
genial character of our climate, I may tell you that any man


growing Pine Apples there —whether a few in his garden, or
some acres for market—and we export a large quantity to the
Southern Colonies—he may go at any time of the year and break
off a ripe Pine Apple for his table. We have two distinct crops,
a winter crop and a summer crop, —the summer crop being the
most prolific and comes in during January, our warmest,
and your coldest month, and during that month, dray
loads, or cart loads of Pine Apples may be seen about the streets
of Brisbane, as common as Mangold Wurzel are to be seen about
the roads of Lincolnshire, and just about as cheap !
In point of agricultural produce—a matter of much greater
importance —I must admit that as long as our farmers only grew
Maize, Oats and Lucerne, Vegetables and Fruits, and dairy
produce to supply our local markets, we being only a very few
people, our markets were easily glutted with these articles, and
there was no great prospect for the Agriculturalist making much
money very rapidly. He owned the soil he cultivated, he was
conscious that the property on which he spent his time and labour
was every year growing into greater value, he was free from many
of the cares that press heavily upon the same class here, and had
many other advantages: and one reason why he seldom accumu-
lates money undoubtedly is, because as soon as made it is again
spent in improving his holding—his own estate ! I am only
speaking of our small farmers —our Homestead selectors. Very
large fortunes have and are being made by the Squatters in Queens-
land ; that is, capitalists who lease enormous blocks of our
back country and stock it with Sheep and Cattle. But with
the successful cultivation of Sugar, Cotton, Arrowroot, Coffee
and Tobacco —for which we have the world for a market,
there is the prospect now of Agriculturalists making money
rapidly, and often very large fortunes, and as a result of this
tens of thousands of acres of our magnificent land, rich alluvial
soil, on the river banks and on the coast, have been taken up
during the last few years, and much of it put under these crops.
The cultivation of the Sugar Cane has proved highly success-
ful, and is creating an almost insatiable demand for all kinds
of labour, both skilled and unskilled. Capitalists are freely
embarking in this profitable industry. Just before I left the
Colony a few gentlemen had formed themselves into a company
and had taken up land, and were going in for machinery and
improvements that were to cost one million sterling. They had


the steam plough there at work, and were laying down tramways
through their estate !
When we see capitalists embarking their money at this rate,
I think wo may take it for. granted, that it is likely to turn out
profitable, and that the industry is an assured success. It is open
to the small capitalist as well as the large. He would not of
course take up as large a quantity of land, or go to the expense of
erecting a mill, during the first two or three years, but get as
much land under cane as possible, and when the cane had arriv ed at
maturity, sell it to the nearest mill-owner at so much per ton,
or so much per acre, as might be agreed upon—and find this a
most paying crop. And gentlemen, it is no exaggeration for me
to tell you, that any energetic man, going out there, and going
into this industry with a few hundred pounds—not afraid of
working hard—would find himself in a few years worth
as many thousands, and a splendid freehold estate to the bargain
that is bound to grow into great value in a few years.
I had an extract from a Devonshire paper put into my hands
when I was in that county, a few weeks ago—relating to a Mr.
James Spiller, and in a recent number of the Brisbane Courier,
reference was made to the same gentleman, by which it appears
that Mr. Spiller sold one of his Sugar plantations up at Mackay,
a few months since for Ninety-five Thousand Pounds.! Now
Sugar growing was only in its infancy when I went to the Colony,
different varieties were being grown to find which would best suit
the soil and climate, so that there is hope in this for the distressed
Agriculturalists in this country. Of course this gentleman and
many others took up the land at Five Shillings per acre, in 2560
acre blocks having seven years to pay it in. So rapidly did this
industry grow, and the demand for land become so great—the
Government thinking they had made a mistake by selling this
splendid land at so low a price, and fearing large quantities
would get into the hands of speculators—-which they were
anxious to avoid, —while offering every facility to the bona-fide
settler—withdrew this land from selection, and when offered
for sale again it was at one pound an acre, and enormous
quantities were at once applied for. And, Mr. Chairman, since
I have been in this country, I have been told that land in the
Mauritius, and other sugar growing countries is worth at this
moment for that purpose £IOO per acre ! From which you will
see at a glance the tremendous margin there is for the growth into


value of this land of ours to be bad now at a pound an acre ! I
need not dwell on the other crops grown in the Colony. I have
mentioned them by name. Of course an increased and growing
population means greater demand and better prices for Maize
and other grain crops —Fruit supply, and Dairy produce.
I should like to say a word now about some of our Towns;
I think the idea about being able to pick up gold if you went to
the Colonies, has long since died out of English people’s minds,
and I think it is generally known and felt, that in going out
now, you are not stepping beyond the pale of civilization. I
believe a few years ago, people used to have the idea that on
lauding they would be set down in some impenetrable forest,
without roads to guide them, or houses to cover them, until they
made and built them, or any other evidences of the great world’s
progress visible about them. But that idea lam sure has now-
gone by for ever. You are still how r ever too apt to look upon, and
speak of us as a “foreign country.”—A term wdiich I repudiate
Mr. Chairman ! We are just as English as you are. Why the
first thing that would strike you on landing would be the Union
Jack flying over our public buildings ! (Cheers.)
We are in no sense a foreign country. In laws, customs,
institutions, language, coinage; our people active, industrious,
self-reliant in mode and manner, government and religion,
as some writer has observed, even “More English than the
English.”
I have a small view here of the city of Brisbane, our capital—
situate at the southern end of the Colony, and containing’ a
population of about 35,000, which is very rapidly growing. It is
lookeduponby strangers as a remarkably beautiful and picturesque
city, with its broad noble river winding coil-like about it, and those
ranges of forest-clad hills —green the whole year round —range
upon range in the distance. A splendid iron bridge spans the
river, that would take you nearly ten minutes to walk over, and
Cunningham’s Gap, an opening in the Main range, distant about
70 or 80 miles in a straight line, can be distinctly seen from many
of the houses and terraces on a clear day. And let me tell you
we generally get. clear days in Brisbane ! Fogs are absolutely
unknown to us.
I could tell you a g’ood deal about the beauty of this city
and its surroundings, that would amuse and possibly interest
you. One traveller who had visited us, in speaking of the beauty


of our gardens and suburban villas, states: “So lovely are these
that they might almost suggest the idea that they covered the
dwellings of angels,” but my object is not to amuse. To give yon
an idea of the value of property in our rising city—(this will be of
more interest to some than its beauty)—l may mention that at a
Government land sale held about a month before I left the
Colony—land in Queen Street, the principal business thorough-
fare was sold by auction, which realized £156 per foot frontage,
being equal to £45,220 per acre! Forty-five thousand two
hundred and twenty pounds per acre for land that a few years ago,
—a very few years ago gentlemen—was only the haunt of the
kangaroo and the blackfellow ! And when you remember that
the gentlemen buying this land would have to expend a large
amount in putting suitable buildings thereon, you will I think
agree with me, that somebody has faith in our future growth and
prosperity ! I saw a paragraph in one of your local papers the
other day, mentioning that some land had recently been sold in
one of the streets in Sydney for £9OO per foot, and I have not the
least hesitation in saying we shall see this land in Queen Street
in the course of a few years realizing the same price.
Corner allotments in Queen Street were sold for £37 per foot
twenty years ago. So that you see the stride that has been
made in that time. Five years ago, when I was coming to this
country on my holiday trip, I bought an allotment of land in
South Brisbane, on the other side of the river, for which I gave
£25. I have done nothing with the land, but when I was
coming to this country a few months ago, had I felt disposed to
sell it, I could easily have realized £lOO or more for it! This is
better interest I think than you get in your Savings Banks !
I merely mention these things to show you—to show working
men and others—that it is not altogether what we work for—-
not altogether what we earn by the sweat) of our brows, but
to show you that by the investment of a few pounds of your
savings—and I contend that every man and woman in Queensland
can save if they like—how rapidly you often have the chance of
growing as it were into wealth. In all our other towns—and we
have a number of them up this great coast line—leaving Brisbane,
we come to Maryboro’, Bundaberg, Gladstone, Rockhampton,
Mackay, Bowen, Townsville, Cardwell, Cooktown, and some
others; or leaving Brisbane and travelling over the Southern and
Western Railway we come to Ipswich, one of the oldest towns in


the Colony—Gatton, a splendid district for English potatoes,
Toowoomba, the first city on the Downs; then on to Dalby,
Miles, and Roma, from which place the Railway is at this
moment being still further extended some fifty miles; or coming
back to Toowoomba, and going toward the New South Wales bor-
der we come to Allora, a splendid wheat growing district, then to
Warwick, the most English looking town, perhaps, in the Colony,
and then on to Stanthorpe one of the finest, and in all probability
will turn out to be the richest, and most permanent tin field
in the world ! leaving Maryboro’ we have a Railway running to
Gympie, our oldest, and still one of our best gold fields, and
another is being constructed to the Burrum Coal Fields. From
Bundaberg a Railway has been made to the Mount Perry Copper
Mines—from Rockhampton we have a long line of Railway
running into the interior; and Townsville again has a Railway
already connecting it with Charters Towers and Millchester —■
gold-mining townships, and many other lines are in course of
construction.
Now in all these towns and townships no matter whether on
the coast or in the interior, whether connected by Railway or
not, property is rising at the same rate in value, and they are
growing in importance and prosperity as rapidly as Brisbane is
that I have told you about. I believe some of our northern towns
are going a-head even more rapidly, in Townsville for instance
land was selling seven years ago at £l5O per acre, while recent
sales effected have been at the rate of £lO,OOO per acre !
Now the entire population scattered over this great country —
nearly twelve times larger than England and Wales —only
numbers 230,000 people, and is estimated to contain not
more than 80,000 adult males. In looking at these figures I
always feel certain that any impartial person who will take the
trouble to examine the statistics of the Colony —the value of
our imports and exports —the railways we have made, and we
have a thousand miles already open—we have 8,000 miles of
telegraphic wire already in operation—to the schools and other
public buildings we have erected—the towns and cities we have
built —the money we have spent in the improvements of our
harbours and rivers all up this great Coast; and many other
matters ; I say that any impartial person looking at these things,
will freely admit that as a mere handful of people—and we are
nothing else—scattered over this great country, we have done


wonders in the past, and it is a guarantee to the English people
that we are not likely to lag behind in the van of the future !
(Applause.)
The live stock in the Colony at the end of 1880 was 178,443
horses, about three millions of cattle, and seven millions of sheep,
the increase for one year was 15,000 horses, 331,000 cattle, and
309,000 sheep, so that to the population I have named you will see
we have plenty of beef and mutton for ourselves and some to
spare. Seven millions of sheep looks a large number to the
population I have named, but I may tell you it is estimated on
reliable authority that if our back country was taken up —-and
let me tell you it is being very rapidly taken up by capitalists
from this country and from the other Colonies, in view of the
frozen meat trade and further railway developement:—because
if English working men and women hesitate about taking this
step, the younger sons of your nobility and aristocracy do not;
but many of them may be found carving their way to
fortune on our back country sheep and cattle stations, or on our
sugar plantations on the coast, —and I want to know why work-
ing men and women will not come out too ? But to return, if
this back country was taken up and fully stocked, it is capable
of carrying not seven but fifty millions of sheep ! So that here
again you see at a glance the tremendous scope there is for further
developement in this one industry alone.
Of course it would be useless for me to attempt in a single
evening to give you anything like detailed information, about a
gteat many subjects of interest. My object this evening is to
arouse in your minds if possible a serious thought on the ques-
tion of emigration, and to direct your attention to the colony of
which I myself cannot speak too highly.
A large amount of useful information and statistics will be
found in the handbooks I have here for distribution—about our
land laws, education, religion, mode of government, trade,
agriculture, shipping, and commerce, and many other matters.
And I think the information relating to our mines and mineral
wealth will also be read by you with interest.
Last year we exported 260,000 ounces of gold, and gold is
worth £3 : 10: 0 per ounce, so I think there must be a few
lucky diggers among our gold miners in Queensland 1 The total
quantity of gold that has been got in the Colony from the time
it was first discovered there, (which was about a year before I


went to the Colony, when Gympie was discovered still remaining
one of onr best gold fields, many of the claims yielding richer returns
than ever)- —amounts to 3,477,600 ounces, which at £3 :10 : 0 per
ounce represents a sum that few gentlemen would object to
having as a balance at their bankers ! And yet it is the confi-
dently asserted opinion of our oldest and most experienced
diggers that all the mining yet done in Queensland has been but
as so much scratching!
Now, I should like to say a word about our present
position and prospects. I believe that a good many prejudices
and false ideas that used to be held regarding Queensland are
fast dying out; this is due to a great extent, to the magnificent
and varied shows she has made of late years at the World’s
Exhibitions of her wonderful resources, which has placed her in
the position she is justly entitled to occupy. This has caused a
feeling of wide spread confidence to be felt both in this country
and the other Colonies, as to her future greatness and
stability.
The rapid strides made by the great Sugar Industry to which
I have before alluded, has undoubtedly done much —possibly
more than anything else to send us rapidly a-head, by giving us
as I before explained, an article for which we have the world for
a market, and we shall see the value of its products—Rum and
Sugar—that will be exported in a few years, exceeding in value
the clip from our seven millions of sheep, which has up to the
present been our principal article of export.
A large amount of capital is being freely invested in it, thousands
of acres of land are being brought under cultivation through it,
and tens of thousands of pounds worth of machinery is being
brought into requisition. It is causing a demand for every
description of labour, skilled and unskilled.
When I came to this country with the endeavour of making
Queensland known, the Ag-ent-General was instructed to offer
free and assisted passages to 4,000 persons per annum, but I had
not been here many months when instructions were sent from the
Government to increase the number to 10,000. I think this fact
ought to speak volumes as to the demand there is for labour.
Outside capital is rapidly flowing in to develope our mineral
wealth, for in addition to gold we have every other mineral. Tin
and Copper we have in abundance. I have mentioned Stanthorpe,
our first tin field, others, of great richness, in different parts of


the Colony have since been discovered, from which thousands of
tons of pure tin have been sent to you. Our copper mines are
equally rich—in fact it has been stated that if all the tin and
copper in the world was exhausted to-morrow, we have enough
in Queensland to keep the whole world going !
We have Silver, Lead, Zinc, Antimony, Bismuth, Manganeze,
Precious Stones, and every other mineral; while more important
than all —even than our gold —(and we are more fortunate in
this respect than some of the other Colonies) —we have
unbounded resources of Coal and Iron. And I need not say a
word to any one here on the importance of these two articles,
which you will readily admit have been the making of this
country.
Scientific men state that our coal basins as far as they have
been discovered are practically inexhaustible, and iron ore is
known to exist in immense quantities, and I believe half has not
yet been discovered —half our mineral wealth is not yet known.
Long hindered from profitable working by expensive carriage,
but with the Government rapidly pushing railway communication
towards them, their even partial developement, means, wealth
and remunerative employment to the Colonists themselves, and
to those who will come out and help us ! (Cheers.)
I have casually alluded to the Frozen Meat trade. I think this
ought to be a matter of considerable interest to people here.
You are as well aware as I am, that shipments of frozen meat
have been made to this country with every promise of success ;
and you know as well as I do, that the voyage to and from
Australia is being performed in a very short time —in
forty and forty-two days, by the Orient Company’s boats.
When I was on my way to this country one of them—-
the “Cotopaxi” performed the journey in thirty-five days. Now
these vessels are being fitted with the necessary apparatus for
carrying this frozen meat, and other lines of steamers are being
fitted for the same purpose, receiving Depots are being fitted at
the Docks, and I see no reason why the frozen meat trade between
the two countries should not be a very great success. It is only
at present in its infancy —in its experimental stages, and no
Colony will be more benefited by its developement than Queens-
land will be ; not only on account of its enormous size—twice the
size of that great Colony of New South Wales, but from its
capacity for carrying’ such an enormous amount of stock. At


present a large trade is carried on in Preserved Meats for
export, and a slight advance in the value of stock, which this
trade must cause, will make sheep and cattle raising profitable to
our small farmer and grazier, as well as our princely squatters,
whose “ runs ” are sometimes hundred of miles in extent!
Another matter of importance to our Colony, is the
proposed construction of what is called a trans-continental
Railway. This red line here marks the route it is proposed to
take —a gigantic undertaking—the construction of a thousand
miles of Railway, at an estimated cost of about eight millions
sterling, to be carried out byEnglish capitalists, and to run through
country that a few years ago was deemed by everybody to be
nothing but a useless wilderness I—marked1 —marked on your school-maps
as _ desert. It is proposed to be carried out on the land-grant
principle —that is the company making the Railway will receive
alternate blocks along the line they construct.
I need not say a word on the advantages this will give our
Colony—-the demand it will create for labour, the impetus
it will give to trade and commerce in every direction, and the
land it will open up for selection and settlement; but far more
important than this, it will place us in nearer railway commu-
nication with the Countx-ies of the Old World.
The bulk of traffic between the two Countries already comes
through the Suez Canal; our railway is already close on the
Hew South Wales border, and we can go at this moment from
Sydney to Melbourne by rail, which will no doubt before long be
connected with the railway system of South Australia ; so that
with this trans-continental railway, with its terminus at Point
Parker on the Gulf of Carpentaria the ocean journey will be
considerably shortened, and we shall have agrand trans-continental
railway running half round the entire continent. (Applause.)
With all these things in the near future for Queensland —■
with propex-ty rising in value all over the Colony—seeing these
industries I have named so firmly established and so rapidly
growing, and many other matters that indicate and fore-shadow
a brilliant future, I think that no time could possibly be more
opportune than the present for British capital, British labour,
British enterprise and British pluck ! to seek the shores of our
young country, because it must in a few years grow into a great
and prosperous nation, and will carry those who now seek itsshores
upward in the scale with its own rapid growth and prosperity !


(Applause.)
You may depend upon it Ladies an d Gentlemen, these things
will be accomplished —they will he carried out, whether you
come to us or not. We are only a young people; but we have
shown you what we have done in the past. We are only a very
small people, but we are in the midst of one of Nature’s vast
storehouses —with every resource possible at our command —we
must progress —we cannot stand still; and unless the Anglo-
Saxon race are alive to the opportunity, and will come out and
help us on with this great work of colonization —will come out and
possess themselves of what is really their glorious heritage, we
are in danger of being over-run, or having to call in the aid of the
irrepressible Chinaman, or other inferior races to help us to do
it! (Applause.)
I do hope that some of my fellow-countrymen will be alive to
the opportunity —will strike manfully out, and under our liberal
land-laws possess themselves of estates as large, and that will
grow into as great value, as any of the estates you know of
around you here —(and this is within the reach of the humblest
among you)'—that you can hold in fee simple yourselves and
hand down to your children ! (Applause.)
I should like to say a word now about the voyage. I am sur-
prised at English people allowing this bugbear to stand in their
way, and yet I am frequently told by many that if it was not for
the voyage they would come out without further hesitation.
But it is really impossible that you are afraid of water —the element
on which Britons have ever been first and foremost —it must be
that yon raise it like many other objections and excuses, as a
reason why you should put off, or shrink from taking this step
which as men and women, many of you feel and know it to be
your duty to undertake. You know that thousands of brave men
and women have gone before you, and that millions will follow.
Some people tell me if we had a bridge they would come over.
We have bridged the distance as far as time is concerned,
being accomplished now in less than half the time it was a few
years ago.
I do not wish to appeal to your patriotism as Englishmen,
nor will I say one word in disparagement of the great Republic
on the other side of the Atlantic —or any of the other Colonies,
—I believe them all to be better places for the energetic and
persevering than this country—but I believe that English people


would as a rule find themselves better pleased with the Australian
Colonies than they often do with America, and although our
voyage is longer, it is pleasanter and safer; while for Queensland,
the ocean journey accomplished, your destination is reached: —
as unlike America there is no need for long and expensive railway
travelling to get to our settled districts, and best agricultural
lands.
The strides that have been made in communication between
the two countries during the last few years is something astonish-
ing, and is yet going on. We have now too, a direct Mail
Service of our own —leaving London and Plymouth once a
month, and going direct to the Colony—this we had not a few
months ago. You can get on board these fine Mail Steamers
of ours at Plymouth, and going over the Bay of Biscay, round
Gibraltar’s famous rock —a sight worth the whole voyage to see
—down the blue Mediterranean, with land often on both sides of
you, stopping at Port Said; then through that wonderful
engineering work, the Suez Canal. Leaving Suez you go down
the Red Sea, (full of historic associations,) and the Gulf of Aden —-
stopping at Aden, then across the Indian Ocean to Batavia, the capital
of Java, stopping there to coal. Leaving there, another eight or
nine days brings you to Torres Straits, our first port of call:
when dropping down our coast line, fifteen hundred miles in
extent, and unrivalled in the world for grandeur and beauty-
calling off our Northern Ports one by one you reach Brisbane the
capital of the Colony, and the termination of the journey, by the
end of the seventh week, or commencement of the eighth.
Now, when I went to the Colony it took me eighteen weeks to
reach it, so that you see the advantage people have in going
there now, compared to what they had a few years ago. There
is considerable difference between eight and eighteen weeks.
And I may tell you the Queensland Government are sending
the bulk of their emigrants by this service and route' —a step in
advance I think of any of the other Colonies so far as I am
aware, —although we are the youngest —that is—sending
Emigrants by Mail Steamers.
The Queensland Government are offering at this moment free
passages to single women as Domestic Servants, free passages to
Farm Labourers both married and single, and assisted passages
to Mechanics and others, and the greater part of these are being
sent by the route and service I have described.


One word more I should like to say before leaving this subject
—because I find the idea prevailing wherever I go —and that is
that people in this country have the idea, that if they accept free
or assisted passages at the hands of our Agent-General they will
be hound in some way when they arrive in the Colony. Now
to this I can give an unqualified denial: and I give you my word
as an Englishman that any person so going will b e as free on
landing in the Colony as I shall be, or as if they paid 70 guineas
for their passage ! (Applause.)
Now I think there should be no misunderstanding on this point.
Of course if time permitted I could give you any number of
instances of the way in which I have seen people succeed,
whether farmers, mechanics, labourers and others. My place of
business being opposite the Immigration Depot, I have seen
thousands of people land there —I have seen a thousand land
there in one day, and a few days after you would not know that
one had landed. I have known the circumstances and conditions
of hundreds of these people, and I know their circumstances and
position to-day!—Men landing with their wives and families,
penniless often, and who have been unable—do what they would
—strive as they might —to earn more than would make both
ends meet, —who now sit beneath their own roof-tree ! contented
and well satisfied with the change they have made! (Cheers.)
I have given you my own case, and I consider that I succeeded
under difficulties, and I often think when looking at the stout
hard-working men I see before me, and remembering the pros-
perous condition of the Colony to-day, and its state when I
landed; there is no reason why tens of thousands of Englishmen
should not only go out and do as well, but a good deal better!
I might be permitted to give you one instance, that of a
labourer—a Lincolnshire man. When I was in this country
before, pleasure took me one day to a village in that County.
It happened to be the feast-day of the village club. An old man
came up to me, and wanted to know if I was going back to
Australia, because he had a son there. I enquired in what part
and to my surprise I found that he was not only in Queensland
—not only in Brisbane, but in South Brisbane, the very place I
had come from. I did not happen to know his son, but I felt an
immediate interest in him, and my first questions were how does
he like the country ? and how is he getting on ? because I thought
it possible if he had only been there a year or so, he might have


sent back some indifferent repoort, as people sometimes do during
the first few months they aree there: but Mr. Chairman, we
have people go out who will send a report until they can
send a good one ! Well, in annswer to my enquiries the old
man drew out of his pocket a i letter, and gave it me to read,
and I will read part of that let n .ter to you : “A few months ago, I
bought a piece of land with a I house and stable on it, for whichl
gave £29 and two pounds for thhe deeds.” Not a very ambitious
property you will say, nor was it. but if sold to-day would realize
probably £IOO to £l5O. I didd not know it ihen, but 1 know it
now, and however humble it innight be, the last time 1 passed it,
it was covered with those beaut titnl trailers, creepers and flowers,
that give beauty and charm to i our humblest dwellings.
But here’s where the true Coblonist comes in—“ So now I have
a home of my own. I have beenn working very hard in my garden,
where I have planted some orannge trees, and I send you a leaf
from one of them. lam not lilike you now father: when I plant
my garden I know there is no onne can give me notice to quit it ! I
can take my gun when I like, aand go out in the bush for a day’s
shooting; and when I sit downn to dinner I am not afraid now to
draw my knife a second time acnross a leg of mutton ! (Laughter.)
I came out to Australia with aa good heart."’ and there’s more in
this than some people at first mnight think. The fact is brought
painfully under my notice everyy day, that people in this country
will not give the subject of emiigration a thought—they will not
think of leaving this country; until they’re fairly starved out
of it !
Then they are are ready to to the furthest ends of the earth
by the aid of charity, but long as they can obtain a bare
living here they are too often ; satisfied. This I complain of in
the English people: this shouled not be so, and we know perfect-
ly well when people are as it were forced out of their country,
they do not carry their hearts with them; and you all know as
well as I do, that in order to svuccessfully carry out any under-
taking a man must throw his hieart into the work he engages in.
(Applause.) And every man groing out to the Colonies should go
there with a good heart as this man did, but he continues, “If I
was compelled to come back to England it would be with a very
heavy one. My wife is as pleaded with the country as I am, and
says our brothers and sisters are all “duifers” if they don’t
soon come too !” (Laughter.)


Now this was a labouring man, and he was working in a brick
yard at the time he wrote that letter, and I could well under-
stand him—being face to face with his father, and in the village
where he was born and brought up —I could well understand
him contrasting the feeling of freedom he enjoyed, and the
plenty and abundance he saw before him for his children’s future
with what his own early experience had been at home. Because
as one of a large family of an agricultural labourer, he had
known in all probability when a boy:—in common with how
many in this country ft/ would be hard to say —what it had been
to see his father’s table anything but abundantly provided : and
long years had not taken away the sting then felt, —the lesson
then learned—but like a true man ! he had sought our wide fields
of plenty to bring his own children up in! There was real
manliness about this man, and it would reflect to the credit of
thousands of his countrymen if they would follow in his footsteps
if only for the sake of their children.
I found this man out when I returned to the Colony, and took
messages from his father and mother, and shortly after he left
Brisbane to go farming. He had the offer of a good situation as
a labouring man, but he wanted to go farming. When I was
coming to this country this time, I wrote up to him, and told him
I should be going to Lincolnshire again, and would go and see
his friends. He came down to see me. He gave me a sovereign
to give his father, and a rug made of oppossum skins that he had
shot in the bush to take to his mother, to keep her warm he said
in the winter. And he gave me a letter to his mother and
father, which he wished me to read to his brothers and sisters,
and as he said, “ to any one else you like,” and I will read a few
of the lines to you.
After referring to myself, he says : “ I have been here six years
and I’m not rich yet. When I landed at Brisbane I had but a
few shillings, but I very soon got work. I did not look for
money ; I went for my food and £lB for six months. But at the
end of my six months I knew where to go to make or work for
more money. I had not been here a year-and-a-half before I had
a block of land and a house on it, my own, and the deeds in my
box. (The one he refers to in his other letter.) And by the
time I had been four years here, I had another block, twice as big,
and that belongs to my wife, and we have the deeds of that too.
We’ve been up at Rosewood two years. I have six head of


Cattle, two Cows in Calf, twoo Heifers in Calf, two Steers one
year old, and a draught Horse,', and three Pigs in the sty, one I
am going to kill this month, annd one I have in the house, and I’m
busy harvesting, but for mystself now. I think very often to
myself when I see my neighbonurs that have been out here for ten
or fifteen years, what a difi'erenuco there is between them and my
father and mother. Here thhey are with their eighties, their
hundreds, and five hundreds of f acres of land all their own, and my
poor old father has worked as 1 hard as they have. But what is
the cause of it P like a lot morire people, too 'fraid to come away
from being a slave I I can’t say ■ nothing else. I many a time wish
I had come out years before II did come out.” And this is the
constant cryi of our Colonists. ““ There is plenty done better than
me in the time,” he says, “ butt I have had sickness —six months
—four months in one time.” ““ But ” he adds in conclusion, “if
you want to transport me, send : me back to my native village, or
anywhere else in England ! ”
Now these are the words of : a man who was an agricultural
labourer here. I have not givenn it as an example of success, for as
he himself has expressed it, “ pblenty have done better than him in
the time/’ but as showing you after his seven years experience,
in what light he regards, and ian what way he can speak, of the
two countries.
And I am not surprised he noow speaks of England as ho does.
How many of the same class hoorn to the glorious inheritance of
freedom and liberty of which EEnglishmen are so wont to boast—
have passed their lives in one coontinued round of unremitting toil
and hardship, in a condition woorso than some states of slavery :
and then in the evening of tlieirir days instead of being surrounded
by the fruits of their hard-earnood toil—instead of sitting beneath
their own roof, and by their ownn firesides—have found themselves
within the cold walls of a Unionn Workhouse, separated from all
kindred ties, and have sunk at blast into pauper graves !
How widely different might hhave been the fate of such men—
and their labours’ reward in ouir bright lands of plenty ! They
had not your knowledge, or youur opportunity. And when I look
on the condition of thousands off mechanics —working and toiling
on from years end to years end4—careful, sober, and industrious
men, but having large families too provide for —when I look at their
wages, the cost of living, andl other expenses, I regard their
condition as little better. And what prospect I want to know do


such men see for their children ?
One word more before I quit this subject as it affects the
labouring class —a few lines written by a clergyman of the church
of England, resident at Mackay. He happened to be a fellow-
passenger of mine when on my way to this country, and he
kindly jotted these notes in my pocket book. Speaking of
female servant’s wages he states, “ They get from lls. to
16s. per week, Married Couples from £5O to £75, Farm
Servants £1 ;5 : 0 and rations. Good Ploughmen always find
work. Good plan always to bring letter of introduction to a
clergyman, or minister of religion from their own minister.
Land to be selected in any quantity for Sugar, which is the
industry of North Queensland, but a small capital is absolutely
necessary. Good free education in the Colony, and school within
easy distance of selectors. Winter weather like summer in
England, with cold nights: summer hot, but a good breeze
blowing from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. There are no poor in North
Queensland,” and I may add there are no poor in South Queens-
land ! (Cheers.) “Good, steady, hard-working people,” he
concludes, “ cannot fail to get on in this country.”
Now these are the words of a gentleman who takes great
interest in Emigrants on their arrival in the Colony.
Without further delay I must pass on to say a few words about
Mechanics. I was told by a gentleman who had come from one
of our sheep or cattle stations, about 300 miles in the interior,
that they kept a blacksmith up there, and gave him £3 : 10 : 0
per week, and they often had to offer him £4 ; 0 : 0, £4 : 10 : 0,
£5 :0:0a week, and “ the beggar would’nt work then only
when he liked, and that was’nt often ! ” (Loud laughter.)
Well gentlemen, these are facts, —there are many such facts in
Queensland, but it would not be fair to take that as a criterion for
Mechanics wages. They differ slightly in various parts of the
Colony, men earn a little more in the North than they do in the
South, a little more in the interior than they do on the
coast —but if we strike a broad average all over, and include
all kinds of mechanical employments, I shall be perfectly
safe in stating that their wages average from 9s. up to 13s. and
lls. per day of eight hours. (Cheers.) The idea does prevail in
this country I believe, that men get better paid out there for
their labour than they do here, but I believe the idea also prevails
that the cost of living is much dearer.


Now when I tell yon we ■ can get plenty of good Beef and
Mutton for three-halfpence pejr pound. (Laughter and Applause.)
I have seen Beef offered for tsale at Id. a pound ! —and if you
could be dropped down to-morrrow morning in passing some of our
butchering establishments youu would see a row of splendid Beef
with a large ticket thereonn, marked “ Id. per pound ! ” A
glorious sight I often think four hungry Englishmen ! (Applause.)
And our Farmers —our Homeestead Selectors who have brought
and disposed of their producee, when returning home take a sack
into the butchers and bring/ out their hundred-weight or two
hundred-weight of splendid (Horned Beef for which they pay Id.
and L|d. per pound. Our besst joints are a little dearer, and run
up to 3d. and 3|d. Fresh P6ork is sd. and 6d., Veal about the
same price, and so on.
Bread is the next important article. I have told you we grow
Wheat—we do- —some of thee finest samples in the world have
been grown on the Darling LDowns, which will yet become the
granary of Queensland. Ift is only for the want of more
English Farmers to come outt and enter on its cultivation, but
you must see as plainly as I dlo, that with our scant population
engaged in the variety of occupations I have named—in trade
and commerce ; building our itowns and cities, making our roads
and railways, developing our gold, tin, and copper mines, and
having the care of our millioms of sheep and cattle —that there
are very few left to grow uts our breadstuffs. We import the
balance from Adelaide, and firom Victoria. Australian Wheat is
very common in your Corn Exchanges here, and when you
remember the distance betwreen Adelaide and Brisbane, about
1,600 miles —and Adelaide amd London —about 16,000 miles, you
will see we are likely to get clheaper bread than you are.
I hear a good deal about yoour plentiful and abundant Potato
Crop last season ; well Sir, wee get two crops a year ! —a winter
crop and a summer crop. Tlheir average price is from 6s. to Bs.
per hundred-weight. In aeddition to this we get enormous
quantities of the Sweet Potalto, an article hardly known in this
country —or known only as am article of luxury; when obtain-
able commanding from 6d. andl upwards per pound. With us they
grow almost wild in some locailities, and they are planted in a very
peculiar manner. Instead off a Potato, a small slip of Vine is
planted at regular intervalls, which striking root form the
Potatoes, long and irregulair, many of them very large, not


unlike your Mangold Wurzel, and weighing sometimes as much
and more than fourteen pounds each, while above it throws out
a vine that mats and interlaces itself all over the ground, and has
to be mown before the Potatoes can be dug. Both the vine and
root are much in favour with stock, and would answer all the
purposes for them of your Mangold Wurzel and Turnip, if
required, besides furnishing us with a very favourite article of
diet—a very favourite article indeed. We can get them for eight
or nine months in the year, at from 3s. to 4s. per hundred-weight.
So that with these prices for the common necessaries of life
you will see we are able to live well—and cheap ! The impres-
sion prevails very strongly in my mind Mr. Chairman, that there
are tens of thousands of people in this country who have to live
cheap, whether they will or not! (Cheers.)
Then people tell me that clothing and boots and shoes are
dearer :—in answer to which I can only say that in our bright
and genial climate we do not need so much clothing as you do.
I have no doubt that the millinery and dressmaking bills of
some of our ladies would surprise the leaders of fashion in
some of your most fashionable towns. To give you an idea how
closely this is followed, I may mention that in a recent number of
the “ Queensland Punch,” (a publication that would be a credit
to any community) there was an engraving representing a man
hurrying up the street with a band-box in his hand, and being
met by some old companion, desirous of a “ yarn,” he exclaimed
“ for goodness sake old friend don’t stop me —I’ve got a new
bonnet here for my wife, and if I don’t make haste home it’ill
be out of fashion ! ” (Loud laughter.) Now that looks as if we
followed the fashions pretty closely out there! (Renewed
laughter.)
My experience is that there are many articles of drapery and
ready-made clothing sold in Queensland cheaper than they often
are here, and at prices the lowness of which would astonish you.
I cannot account for this, but the fact remains. Of course
the gentleman going to his tailor, and the lady to her dressmaker
would have to pay a little more perhaps for the work performed
there than here, for the simple reason, that all labour is letter
paid ! (Cheers.)
In boots and shoes again—wo are making our own leather, and
are sending leather to this country, and shall send you more and
more every year. We have boot and shoe factories in the


Colony, and they are in no way dearer with us than with you.
In groceries I can only say there may be a slight difference in
some articles, but the freight on these things does not amount
to much when spread over a large quantity, and we hardly
notice the difference; and I may add that we are making our
oWn soap and candles, and manufacturing our own tweeds and
flannels.
I hare been asked at the close of my lectures sometimes,
whether we have gas P because I mentioned candles. I can
point you out our Gas Works in this view of Brisbane, and may
tell you that in all our towns of any importance we have not
only gas, but an ample supply of water also, and in the case of
Brisbane, our Capital, we have a system of Telephonic communi-
cation all over it !
House rent I admit is a little dearer with us than with you,
and this appears strange to some people when they look at the
enormous amount of land we possess, —but I have shown you how
valuable the land in our cities and Towns becomes —and although
we have a splendid supply of Timber, (a subject like many others
I am unable to touch on) —millions of cubic feet of Cedar, are
felled every year, and find their way to the Southern Markets, —we
have Hard woods, Pine, Beech, Yellow-wood, and many others of
great value; but of course the men engaged in our saw-mills —our
Carpenters and Builders being better paid there than they are
here, and investors in house property obtaining a higher per-
centage for their money than they do here —these things help to
make house rent a little dearer.
But I have tried to show you—l have tried at any rate to
leave this impression on your minds—that no man going to
Queensland —whether Parmer, Mechanic, or Labourer —willing
to work, prepared to face and overcome early difficulties if met
with—determined and desirous to succeed in life—to make the
Colony his future home, —who goes there in fact with the slightest
degree of ambition about him, and anxious to find some better
mspect for his children’s future than his own has been, —I say
'■ no such man need be long in Queensland without becoming
n landlord. And I consider this a very great advantage,
mce a working man attains this position it places him
road to acquiring more property, which he invariably
■coming independent long before reaching old age !
course if a man who has been earning a pound


or thirty shillings a week here, goes there and earns double that
amount and spends it as fast as he earns it, he will never get on.
He will be able to live better, enjoy life more, and have many
other advantages that he has not here, hut he will never “ get
on,” in the sense I mean it. This however will be his own fault.
Our Colony presents an equal chance for women—not only the
Domestic Servant, but all kinds of female labour, is not only in
great demand, but very highly remunerated. About their matri-
monial chances I need not say a word, but as bearing me out on
this question of female labour, I may state that I have known
instances of women who have been left with large families totally
unprovided for—because there are improvident husbands there as
well as here—who have been able to bring up their families well
and respectably, without once holding out a hand for charity!
(Applause.)
Young men I always recommend to get married before they go.
(Laughter.) I earnestly recommend this step from experience.
A good wife is valuable to a man anywhere, but doubly valuable
in the Colony. Some men seem incredulous about this, and
think it quite a venturesome undertaking to go out themselves
and as to taking a wife —as something too dreadful to be thought
about. They have seen perhaps how hard it is for men to support
their wives here, but they need have no such fear in that respect
about Queensland. There a wife will be found worth her weight
in gold ! I could give you many reasons why I recommend the
adoption of this course; at the same time I will give you an
instance of success (one out of many) attained by a single man
of the labouring class.
I know him well. He landed there about seven years ago
and without a penny in his pocket. He obtained a situation as
drayman or carter soon after landing, and has followed it since.
He has been very steady and careful—is respected and trusted by
his employers. I was speaking to him a few evenings before I
left Queensland, when he said to me, if any one had told him when
he was coming to the Colony that he would ever he half as well off
as he then was he could not have believed it. And no wonder, as
he was at that moment worth eight or nine hundred pounds !
( Applause.)
And how many in this country, starting as he did—let them
be ever so careful, persevering and industrious, would find them-
selves at the end of a like period, in a similar position ? Very


few I think: while I can safely say I never knew a married man
land there with anything like moderate ideas, who set himself to
work in the way I have described, who not only succeeded, in
gaining that which he desired, but who realized far more in a few
years than he ever expected or dreamed of. (Applause.)
Now a word about our Land Laws —an important matter —but
I will not detain you long—or trouble you by reading a number
of its clauses, but briefly state that any man or woman over
eighteen years of age may select blocks of 80 acres of land under
the “ Homestead ” clauses of the Land Act by paying 6d. an acre
per annum for five years ; being 2s. 6d. an acre for the land, and
five years to pay it in. Larger blocks of 640 and up to 5120
acres may be selected under the “ Conditional ” clauses by paying
Is. per acre per annum for 10 years, that is 10s. an acre for the
land, and 10 years to pay it in. At the end of five or ten
years, or at an earlier period if the selector chooses and is
prepared to pay up the balance of rents, and has complied with
the necessary conditions, the Government issue the selector a
certificate of title, making it his, and his heirs for ever ! These
are the principal features of our present Land Act, from which it
will be seen that our land is liberally placed within the reach of
all classes. Our millions of acres of virgin soil await but the
busy hand of man to turn them to his own and the world’s account!
Any man may become a farmer; it does not need a scientific
education to become successful, it only needs ambition and
determination to become so, whether backed by experience and
knowledge or not. To my mind no position is more enviable than
that of the Queensland farmer. He is thoroughly independent,
has no lurking fear of want looming in the future, and sees
plenty of scope and elbow-room for his sons and daughters to
make a fair start in life. His life and property are as safe there
as here. —after the first few years even the trifling rent he has to
pay ceases for ever ; whilst every tree he fells, every acre he
clears, every building he puts np is done upon his oivn estate; to
which every passing year adds a rapidly increasing value, by the
making of roads, railways, and further settlement. He is as well
able to grumble as anybody, —and he uses that Englishman’s
privilege. He may have adverse seasons —he does not always
reap that which he sows; but he has no long winter season to
put a stop to his out-door operations —not a day, —little or no
fopd to provide for his stock, no fuel for himself, —Hot for


generations : and the loss of a crop is not like the staking of his
last chance, as it often is here.
I think farmers in this country who have known what it is to
struggle against bad seasons, against taxation, and other expenses
that cannot be cut down, and the anxiety that must be felt as
to how they will meet that ever recurring Rent Day from year to
year, —these men will be best able to understand and appreciate
the Queensland settler’s independent position !
We have a splendid system of free education for every child in
the Colony, and when I say free, you must not understand it as a
pauperised system —because we have no paupers ! (Cheers,) but
schools scattered lavishly all over this great Colony, wherever there
is any settlement —where the children of our Judges, our Members
of Parliament, our Professional men, and leading Merchants,
receive their instruction side by side with the children of the
Artizan and the Labourer ! (Loud Applause) We have schools
for higher branches of instruction, Grammar-schools for those who
like to pay for it, and even these are partly endowed by the Govern-
ment, and I am proud to say that many of our Queensland boys have
gone down to the Universities in the Older Colonies, and carried
away the prizes. (Cheers.)
One great fact you must have gathered I think from whatl have
told you to-night, and that is, that no industrious, hard working
man or woman, going to Queensland, is doomed there to a life of
downright hard work from the cradle to the grave, as many such
people too often are here, and I can safely say that any such
person, landing at any of our Ports to-morrow, even though they
do so without a coin in their pocket, —such is the changed,
condition of things—they may, and will feel themselves freer
and more independent, from the moment they land there, than
they ever will here ! (Applause.)
In viewing the condition of things in the two Countries as I
can,—our bright sunny climate in contrast with that of yours—
the many advantageous openings our Colony presents for all
sorts of energetic and persevering people, and the many advan-
tages we enjoy superior to this country, socially, politically and
morally, —and then looking on the other hand, seeing thousands
that are stagnating here, tens of thousands that are living from
hand to mouth from year’s end to year’s end, it passes my
comprehension how it is that so few people from this crowded
country find their way to the fresh fields and pastures new of our


Sunny South!
I have seen thousands of Irish people land there—and they
make splendid Colonists—thousands of German people—-and
they make splendid Colonists also —and people of other nation-
alities, land upon our shores, penniless often, and with families.
These people come there prepared to take our Colony as they find
it —prepared to work, to toil, and plod on —They get work, they
are careful—they earn a little money —-they take up blocks of our
splendid country, and if you were to visit them a few years after
they landed there, you would find them in comfortable homes;
surrounded by plenty of the common necessaries, and many of
the luxuries of life: with plenty of stock —good horses to ride
and to drive, their children growing up well educated, and free as
the air they breathe ! —and I want to know why it is that more of
my own countrymen—more Englishmen do not come out and
possess themselves of what is really their glorious heritage !
(Applause.)
I can only believe it is for the want of more information ; for
the want of some one that will tell you what our country really is,
and arouse in your mind one serious thought on this subject.
This has been my humble endeavour this evening, however
unworthily I have fulfilled my task,—and will be, during the short
stay I purpose making in this country. I have left unsaid much
—-very much—-that I might have urged in favour of my adopted
Country, about which I can, in all sincerity and truth say, —for
myself and on behalf of my fellow-Colonists —■
Queensland! with thy few faults, we love thee still!
(Loud applause.)
And in conclusion let me read two or three of the lines I wrote
fourteen years ago, trusting now that I have experience and truth
on my side, my appeal to you to look to this subject will not be
made in vain, —
The world resounds with Britain’s praise—Britain foremost in the race,
First among the world’s great people’s, stands she in the highest place;
And we sound “ Old England’s ” praises,—boast her mighty, great, and free !
True; but in her very centre, starving hundreds do we see !
Surely this should rouse you brothers: but to think some future day
Thus your children may be standing, and at workhouse doors may pray
For the bread they might be winning—winning in fair honours sight,


Helping to build up an empire, that shall be the future’s light!
What to you is England’s greatness ? what to you her power and might?
In the midst of plenty living—toiling hungered in its sight.
Where your children know no childhood, but must enter in the strife.
So young and early, that they know no day of childish life.
Then come out my brothers ! —come to where there is more room and space
Where there is more chance for all to win who enter in the race.
Trials and troubles we shall meet with, ’tis the lot of man below.
To have shade as well, as sunshine —no matter where we go,
But the thought of those to follow on this over-crowded track.
Is enough to urge us forward! —forward! looking not once back!
(Continued applause.)


THE EMIGRANT:
Uta ®ljmigl)ts Jftclmgs, & Aspirations;
AN APPEAL
TO THE
WORKING lIILLIONS OF H FELLOW-COIMRII,
GEORGE RANDALL
As Published in 1867,
F. Pitman, 20, Patbknositeb Row, E.O,


The “Hertford Mercury” of February Ist, 1868, under the head of
“Literature,” contained the following notice of “The Emigrant.”
“ Though no one would infer it from the title, the work before us is a poem, in which
the writer expresses his “thoughts feelings and aspirations ” in reference to the old and
the new world. He is a humble man and unlearned; but not stricken down by poverty,
for he is young, healthy, and energetic, and ha s been fairly successful in the condition of life
to which he was born. He is not an unfortunate man, nor disaffected, nor a grumbler.
Yet he is discontented, with the pardonable discontent which is at the root of all enter-
prize, of every generous effort, and of every ennobling aspiration. Mr. Randall tells us,
in a very modest preface, that he has seen how hard it is for humble men to improve their
position in this country, he has observed the misery about him, and he has read of the
wider scope which the Australian Colonies afford to energetic industry. Upon these
hints he speaks, and while advising his countrymen of his own rank in life.to emigrate
he purposes setting them the example.
But we have to speak of a poem, written by a man who tells us that he ‘possesses but
few of the advantages which education and cultivation bestow.’ It would be but
poor praise to say that, considering the want of culture, the poem is creditable; and it
would be absurd to speak of it as an outflowing of poetic genius. Yet there is some-
thing of the true fire of the poet in many of the lines, and a melody and strength in the
versification which are suggestive of indefinite possibilities if the culture had been higher
and the experience different. At all events Mr. Randall will carry a poets heart with
him to the Antipodes, and his life will he lifted above all that is mean and sordid, and
his energies invigorated to do and dare in the hopeful struggle of existence by the
thoughts he will think, and the songs he will sing to himself in his distant home.
It is not because he loves England less, that our Author purposes leaving it
There is deep pathos in the line
* But I leave them all to gain a homo,—my own, beyond the sea! ’
He is proud, too, of his country’s great history .... Ever and anon he reverts
to all that is pleasant in his recollections of England—to its village greens, its Sabbath
bells, and its church-yards rich in the dust of loved ones, Over these things he lingers,
loth to leave them all for the new and untried j but he breaks away again, for
* A brighter future beckons.
There is real eloquence in the passage commencing: ‘Can you gain no home in
England ? ” In some other passages, descriptive ot the terrible struggle forthe means of
living which is going on in England, there is more of ardent poetic fervour, but still no
bitterness. The Author looks at society from his own point of view, and not being born
in the lap of luxury, it is not surprising that our social and industrial arrangements pro-
voke his anger, and that in addressing working men he can speak of England as a place—
* Where your children know no childhood, but must enter in the strife
So young and early, that they know no day of childish life.’
And roused by his own song can call upon the jaded operative to ‘ Come outand bring
your children *
Most heartily do we hope, that Australia may have many such citizens, to build up in
her wide dominion, the empire of the future, and to hand down from generation to gener-
ation the language and the traditions of England.”


In giving these few pages to the public, I wish it to be understood that they
contain merely the expression, and that very inadequate, of the thoughts and
feelings of the author, who, after long and careful consideration of the whole
subject, in all its bearings, its lights, and its shades, had made up his mind to
make one of the English colonies his future home.
I have withheld it from publication for some time, thinking it would serve no
useful purpose, as persons seeking information on the subject would consult
nothing but “Practical Guides,” and Handbooks; but as all the recent and re-
liable information from the colonies represents them to be on the whole in a.
very flourishing condition; and the most urgent want of them all being emi-
gration to their shores (for the want of which their immense resources remain
undeveloped, and their progress arrested), and as hundreds are starving here,
and thousands are but little better off-while pauperism continues on the
increase, and our towns swarm with ragged and uneducated children, prostitutes,
and beggars; in spite of “homes,” “ midnight meetings,” “institutions,
and the efforts of the benevolent; I thought, if this feeble expression of the
feelings that animate me in leaving my native land and seeking a distant home,
would be the means of inducing any of my fellow-countrymen to do the same,
thereby leaving more room for those that must and those that will stay; it
might do some little good.
It may be as well before going further, if I state that l am totally disinter-
ested ; that I come forward as the advocate of no particular colony, and that
what I have said, or may say, results from a deep convict ion that emigration
confers great and lasting benefits upon all parties concerned. Should any
words of mine show the least partiality, it must be attributed to this, that
I have set my face towards one of the colonies of the Southern hemisphere.
This should lead no one to infer that I under-estimate the advantages and
claims of the other colonies to the notice of the emigrant. They all demand
bis attention : it is for him to weigh and compare the advantages of each, and
choose for himself.
The emigrant’s mission is, in my estimation, a great and glorious one, hut to
he successful it wants undertaking in the right and true spirit. To be looked
upon in the light of a duty, and the good resulting therefrom to future
generations, as well as mere personal gain. The subject has been fully and
ably written upon by men of experience and ability. It is an old subject,
but it is one that must always continue to be of great interest, and will always
demand the serious attention of a country so over-populated as this is. My
object in the following lines has now been partly stated : it is also to arouse
the mind and direct attention if possible t<o the subject, feeling certain that
if this is done, few will rest until it has beien thoroughly mooted and studied.
A recent writer observes “ There are jprobably few of the more intelligent
and energetic inhabitants of the British isliands, depending for a livelihood on
their own exertions, who have not at som® time m their lives had the subject
of emigration in their thoughts.” I apjpeal to such men to leave a land
•< where competition is so intense that (the applicant for employment is a
suppliant not a negotiator.” They may hoe doing well to-day, but I ask them
to think of to-morrow; they may have bread enough now m their young
days, but I appeal to them to look to the f future, to the generation to come;


for it is in the future more than the present that the effects of -judicious and
well-timed emigration will be seen and felt.
It is a common thing to hear people say, “If you are getting a living here)
if you are doing at all well, the colonies should not be thought about • they
are for people to go to, who cannot lire here ” And yet I have many’ times
heard almost m the same breath that, « It’s no use sending starring and penniless
people to the colonies; they want men of energy and capital, to create a
demand for labour. We know all this, but according to what they say no
one would go ; though it is readily admitted on all hands that we are’too
thick here, and that the extensive emigration from this country for years past
has proved a great blessing, and conferred upon it great and material benefits •
while no Englishman can look without a feeling of pride upon the magnificent
colonial empire which “the emigrants,” principally from these shores have
been mainly instrumental in founding ; and whose rapidly growing interests
are daily demanding and receiving more and more attention.
I appeal to my countrymen, to look to the subject, to consider it for the sake
of their children; and 1 am answered that, “They have, up to the present
obtained a living here —their children may do the same.” Without pausing to
say one word upon the selfishness of such an answer, too frequently heard, I
will make bold to assert that it is an impossibility! Unless great numbers
of people continue to leave this country, its population will go on increasing,
and consequently competition will become more and more intense, making the’
means of obtaining a livelihood more difficult: therefore your children cannot
have the same chance that you have had.
I appeal to you, my brothers, fellow-workers in this great hive of human
industry, to come out, “ where o’er houndless plains and pastures new.” the
rich and untouched stores of nature’s wealth await and invite you. Where
millions of acres of virgin soil await but the busy hand of man to turn them to his
own and the world s account. leave the old hive: we are too crowded in it
for all to he comfortable; there is plenty in it, but it is beyond our reach, we cannot
often obtain it. Wemay obtaina share sufficient forourselves, but wearesickened
by the spectacle of Want and Starvation grovelling on the floor of the hive
while above us the great bees are luxuriating in plenty, and have to spare. ’
We are not drones: the entrance is still open—let us go out. Let us leave
it to those who have plenty, who are in no fear of knowing what it is to want
when the cold winter days of life come on. Let us leave it to those who have not
the means, to those who have not the inclination, or, having both, lack the
spirit and pluck necessary to encounter the change and come out.
As to those persons who, from ignorance or short-sightedness set up their
dolorous cries; anti-emigrationists, who will neither listen to reason, nor be
convinced by facts; people who are ever ready to pounce upon a colony, that for a
time, through the mismanagement of its Government, or any other cause may
be placed in some embarrassment,—they will not remember that every nation and
government must have their first lessons in the use of money, and the best way
to spend it; but hold it up to us as an example of the colonies in general and
a warning of what we may expect to find, declaring that such colony cannot
recover; and that after all they are best offwho remain in J‘dear Old England.”
By this, they only show their entire ignorance of colonial history, which records
in the career of almost every colony similar embarrassments; but from which
they have sprung with astounding elasticity, and are now bidding fair, erelong,


to make themselves numbered among the foremost nations of the earth.
Let us leave these “ croakers” and decriers of emigration to themselves;
let us leave “imbecility, prejudice, and conceit to compare notes and profit by
example.”
In concluding these desultory remarks, therefore, I will only add that the few
extracts I have given by way of notes* I have met with principally since the
lines to which they refer were written. They might have been multiplied to
almost any extent. And should any one feel disposed to judge the following
lines, as a poem, they will, I hope, bear in mind that it comes from one who
possesses but few of those advantages which education and continued cultivation
bestow ; and has had but scant time, and been placed in anything but favour-
able circumstances for courting the Muses. I trust the earnestness I feel, and with
which I have endeavoured to treat the subject, will in some degree compensate
for a more correct diction and polished style; remembering it comes from one
who is himself an intending emigrant,—one who, though no giant, feels a giant's
strength, nerving his arm and animating his heart at the prospect that lies
before him in one of the English colonies.
London, September , 1867.
* For “ Notes ” see page 13.


THE EMIGRANT.
“ Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father s house,
unto a land that I will show thee: and I will make of thee a great nation, and bless
thee.”— Gen. xii. 1, 2.
“ The increase of mankind may be in a limited spot, as in the case of onr own
country, and is eventually productive of over-population with its natural concomi-
tants of degradation and misery to the masses. The multiplication of mankind
has no limit but the world itself, and is productive of prosperity and additional
happiness to all. The emigrant then is the agent of Providence in carrying out its
greatest work.” — G. P. Earp.
“ What man o’er some old thought would pore and pore,
Shut like a book between its covers thin,
For every fool to leave his dog’s-ears in,
When solitude is his, and God for evermore,
Just for the opening of a paltry door?”
— J. R. Lowell.
S C; AM going, lam going to a land beyond the sea,
And I ask my fellow country-men, Will any follow me ? ”
I am going, not for wealth, not to toil for glittering gold ;
That at best is but a canker—a destroyer of the soul.
No ; my heart is longing for a home—my own, my own, and free, —
And I feel that I shall gain it in the land beyond the sea.
It is not because I’ve ceased to love the land that gave me birth,
For I deem it to be fairer than the fairest land on earth.
It is not because I see no beauty in its quiet vales,
In its shining silver rivers, in its fruitful blooming dales.
No; I love them all as dearly as the poets who have sung
In every age their praises. They are known in every tongue.
Yes ; I love to see the hills and fields when covered o’er with snow.
And feel the frosty winds that o’er my native hills doth blow j
And I love to see the myriad buds come bursting out in spring.
And hear the songs of all the birds that make our woodlands ring ;
And I love to mount the hill, and look across the stretching plain,
When the summer sun is shining on a sea of waving grain.
And I love to winder in the fields when autumn days have come.
When leaves have fallen on the ground, to watch the setting sun


Casting over old familiar scenes his mellow parting rays:
Then lingering memory linked to fancy, flies to other days.
For all are lovely, all are dear, all are very dear to me.
But I leave them all to gain a home—my own—beyond the sea !
And think not, 0 fellow-countrymen, I lightly prize the land
Where of old our fathers fought so bold, with head and heart and hand:
Fought for freedom, fought for law’s—“ Magna Charta,” “ Bill of Bights; ”
Giving many glorious martyrs, seeing many ghastly sights—
Sights of noble patriots dying, sinking into bloody graves;
Pouring out their precious blood that ,e Britons never should be slaves ! ”
Leaving names behind immortal —names that set our hearts a-glow.
With a love and admiration only true-born Britons know!
Ours are these, and will be ever, Milton. Sidney, Hampden—all;
Does it matter where we go to, if still ours these names w r e call?
No. We go to help to build distant empires that shall be
Counterparts of our dear Fatherland, our Britain fair and free !
Laws and customs, institutions, language—all shall be the same,
Making every corner of the globe redound to Britain’s fame t
Spreading over all the w’orld the freedom that our fathers gained :
Making known in distant lands the deeds that made this isle so famed.
Oh, we cease not to be Britons, though we far from Britain go.
If our hearts with emulation at such names and deeds will glow!
Oh, we cease not to be Britons, though upon another shore
We may go to live and w’ork and die, we shall but love it more!
Oh, we cease not to be Britons, though to other lands we stray,
Though wide oceans roll between us, and our night may be your day.
Though we go to live beneath a colder or a warmer sky,
There’s the same great God above us, and the same bright sun on high!
And, think not, 0 fellow-countrymen, that I no longer see
The beauties of our Island-home, our Britain fair and free.
Fair and sunny are her summers, fresh and pleasant are her springs,
Bracing are her winter days, and mellow shades her autumn brings.
Pleasant are her hills and valleys, and her fields and meadows green,
All through life to be remembered—here is beauty in each scene,
Graven deeply in the mind and heart, and in the memory too;
And that in our dreams at night will come, a,s faithful and as true
As though we still -were gazing on them as im other days,
Ere we thought of going there : where now imy fancy strays !
There is beauty, there is loveliness to charm; the poet’s eye;
There’s the broad expanse of heaven, and a cloudless summer sky ;
There are rivers, gushing torrents, winding Ithrough the silent glen ;
There are beauties undiscovered, and as yet unknown to men:
Sloping mountains covered over with a verdmre ever green.
And the trees fantastic growing, forming mamy a lovely scene.
There the orange-tree, the fig-tree, and the sstately plantain grow;
And through dark primeval forests, broad ancd stately rivers flow,
While voices of a millions birds, on rainbow tinted wings
Flit thro’ the sun-lit forest glades where training foliage clings.
And at night the heavens are filled with starrs, and stately rides the moon;


While around discordant noises make an unfamiliar tune.
And the morn in splendour rises, for a warmer sun will shine,
And the glowing East will tell us, “ we are in another clime!
Where the land they till is fruitful, bringing forth a hundred-fold.
And in rocks and rivers hidden, lies that precious metal--gold.
Where the land they till is theirs ; they are undisputed lords,
Where are ye whose hearts respond not to the feeling this affords ?
Yet, I know, in spite of all these things, my heart will long and sigh
At times to see my native land and its familiar sky;
Will long to see once more the fields where I was wont to roam,
And sigh to see once more my dear, my old, my native home.
Britain, with its smiling hamlets studded over all the land;
And its towers and time-worn castles scattered with a lavish hand ;
Stately abbeys, noble minsters, that were reared in ages past.
And that seem the ages to defy, for ever seem to last.
Mansions in their lovely parks of woodland, hill, and stream, and glade,
And where art is lavished to adorn the beauties nature’s made.
See its village greens, its wayside inns, with sign-boards up in air;
See its orchards and its cottages, with little gardens fair;
See its cultivated fields, and see its smiling winding lanes;
See its many busy cities, and its rustic village fanes:
Whose bells will peal on Sabbath-days, to all the country round;
Oh joyous are our English bells—l love to hear them sound.
And on that day the villagers with reverent feelings go
To hear the words which tell of “ Peace! good will to men below ! 99
Oh we shall hear those village bells, although in distant climes.
The distance will but make them soynd in more enchanting chimes ;
Awaking memories, oh what memories ! in the wanderer’s breast.
Of friends he loves, of land he’s left, and where his fathers rest.
Here, beneath the shadow of these walls in peaceful rest doth lie
The dust of many that we loved, now gone beyond the sky;
Generations sleeping here, on their own dear English soil.
They are " resting from their labour,” —gone beyond the world’s turmoil!
Here we stay, we love to linger, for we love the time-worn walls ;
But a brighter future beckons, in the mighty distance calls.
And my heart is longing for a home—my own, my own, and free.
And I feel that I shall gain it in the land beyond the sea !
“ pan you gain no home in England ? 99 Yes ; but look at yonder smoke
Rising from your mighty cities ; listen to the falling stroke —
Stroke of many hammers falling ; listen to the noise and roar
Of machinery ever going, factories growing more and more.
See the over-flowing markets ; every pathway, high or low,
Leading to the desk, the workshop, to the loom, and to the plough,
See the strife and see the tumult; listen to the noise and din.
For this is the competition we shall have to enter in.
‘‘We may enter in and conquer.” Yes, there are a few that will:
But how many human lives it takes, one purse with gold to fill!
Do the great and wealthy think or know how struggling millions strive
To keep the lamp within them burning—to keep it just alive ? ”


See the stunted forms and palid faces, void of healthy bloom :
Oh the shadow of their early graves, o’er Britain spreads a gloom.
Doubtless you will call me “ coward,” that I shrink before the strife :
1 hat 1 enter not these surging, swaying ranks of human life.
I might enter in, and struggling hard, the prize perchance might gain.
But with health for ever lost to me, its glory sure would wane.
I might enter in and conquer, but the penalty to pay
Might be that in the silent grave my bones would early lay.
Is it this affrights me ? this that makes me turn to you my back ?
No . it is the thought of generations coming onward in the track
That we are treading—that we find already crowded o’er
With competitors and rivals, still increasing more and more
There is something glorious in this strife, and in the prize we view.
ull oi hope, there’s many enter in, but conquer, oh how few !
How many in the struggle sink, and never more will rise.
Will never reach the longed-for goal, or grasp the fought-for prize !
iheie is something noble in this strife, and glorious in the sight
Ot a spirit bravely bearing up, however dark the night • °
Till triumphantly emerging to the glowing light of day!
But how many, faint and weary, fall and die upon the way!
Hearts and brains have they as good perchance, but not the strength to bear
The strain that is demanded on the road that leads them there.
So I long for room—for freedom—where to strive and where to toil •
And where doing which the hard-earned gains from none I shall despoil
And there is room, and there is freedom, there is virgin soil to till •
There to gam an independence, all that’s wanted is—the will!
There is health, and there’s enjoyment; there is plenty for ns all.
■ri f olloiv ? wll ° 18 going ? who will answer to the call ?
f° r i a hour—call for arms and brains, and energies to work —
Cali that gives you independence, if these things you will not shirk.
‘‘Be content,” an idle saying, for if all should rest content,
thoi -6 he a link connecting continent to continent ?
Wnnld aj thl "S s bave been accomplished which have startled man to view ?
Would Columbus have succeeded, searching for a world then new ?
-No. I tear me ye that say it envy but the glowing breast
That you call the “ discontented ” “ rolling stone that will not rest' ”
Better to be discontented,” better far thiat we should “roll ”
To every corner of the world, and on from pole to pole
Than to sit us down “contented,” with a Hot that we should spurn.
But I know their are some spirits that for ffreedom do not yearn ■
There are spints, slavish spirits, who will p.rate of “ England dear »
baying I will never leave it while I gain ai, living here ■ ”
And they talk of “many comforts,” and off “sights they here may see,”
Thinking they alone admire and love this IBritain fair and free !
free . but is it freedom when your toil brinpgs not its rightful gains
And a hungry, starving family cry aloud witith hunger-pains ? ’
When h°eni r tb l is n° a V tholl i g , h Y " ield but small and scant supply,
When health is flying from the,check, and 1 brightness from the eye f> 117
When wUh head and arms m willingness tdo work, you none can find
And the sight of those you love but adds a f pang more to the mind?


When their cheeks grow daily thinner: you find work and hard you strive.
And you earn a scanty pittance which will keep them just alive ;
Is it freedom when you cannot help them falling thus away ?
And your children work and toil for bread, when they should be at play,
Have to enter in the great world, have to leave a parent s roof ;
And their young and tender frames must struggle, hearts be put to proof :
And beneath a stranger they must toil to win their daily bread.
Is there nothing in all this that you—you true-born Britons dread .
Oh is it but for this we strive, for this our fathers bled ?
Men, my brothers, where’s your spirit, can it be no higher led ?
When beneath the iron heel of Want you’re crushed, and cannot rise,
And in sad tormenting vividness before your aching eyes,
Memory pictures brighter days and hopes, for ever gone and fled ;
And you know you’re working out your life-blood, just to earn your bread.
Oft you falter, sick at heart, worn out with this ceaseless strife,
And with Want and Care’s oppression, you grow weary of your life.
Brothers, let your spirits sink not —Hope may falter, shall not set
While the ocean bears a sail upon it! Go. We’ll conquer yet !
Bid Hope’s bright Star arise once more, the clouds shall pass away
That Despair has cast upon you :he has had—shall end his day.
The land of promise dawns before us : dreams of brighter days shall rise,
Dark despair and want shall vanish ; wo will gain the longed-for prize !
Gain —what well I know is dear to all—a home your own and free,
Then does it matter, if your own , it is beyond the sea ?
Here your hearts grow sick and weary, after struggling on for years.
And how many seek that demon Drink, to hide, to drown their cares ?
But increasing more their misery, carrying downward as they go,
Self, and all that once was loved and dear, to deep distress and woe .
Many a noble soul has perished, gone to ruin, gone to hell;
And because he sunk, and saw no hope to rise from where he’d fell,
Saw his brothers with more cunning in the world’s great strife succeed,
Pass by : “ too busy—had not time,” —the fallen one to heed.
So he sunk (no hope was there to animate the lingering spark)—
Downward, lower—lower, downward, to an abyss deep and dark !
0 ye worldlings with your pockets filled with Mammon’s worshipped gold,
Do you never fancy you can hear the cry of some lost soul
That you might have helped—have saved ? tf They were drunkards worse and
worse.”
Aye ! but still more tight, at that sad sight, you grasped your god, the Purse!
“Had we given—had we helped them, they would have sought more drink.”
So you make your peace with all the world, and conscience too you think.
’Tis as well if you are happy. All are welcome to their gains,
Who thus can pass a brother by, so heedless of his pains !
Though some one from out among you, passing by, to him will say —
“ This you should do, or should not do and pass upon his way.
And another. “ Persevere, work, be steady, you will then succeed; ’
Aye; perhaps he may, but barely so, with many mouths to feed.
Cease your preaching: it is useless : he is down and cannot rise,
Though I doubt not he will rise as high as you do in the skies 1


You will smile, all self-complacent, conscicous of your money’s power.
Well! smile on: the banquet waits yon: rrevel in your halls—an hour;
For this life at best is but a shadow—dawning of a longer day;
And who will know the rich from poor wlhen all have passed away ?
Kevel, heedless of the misery in the land,, yea, at your very door
Pass, saying—“ It always was so : will bes; God’s universal law! ”
Brothers, as you prize your freedom, yea, 'by your forefather’s graves,
Never drink, but work and hope on ever:; never be ye slaves.
Let all those who will god Mammon worship, ye are men though poor,
If ye are not the slaves of self: and for right and freedom war !
Oh how many of you entered in with hope and promise fair,
With reliance on your own stout hearts—Yon never would despair ;
You would conquer, you would win! ” You have tried and found it vain.
Found that perseverance,—what you longed for—here will seldom gain.
Then come out. my brothers, come to where there is more room and space,
Where there is more chance for all to win who enter in the race.
Oh come out, and leave this land of ours to all who’d rather stay
And toil and starve, than move one jot from their “ dear, old home away.”
Aye, “ dear home,” it is, for all possessing Mammon’s potent gold.
But mockery sad to thousands, shivering, homeless in the cold.
And “ dear home ” it is for all who own fair fields and acres broad;
But are not other lands as dear as this to one great God ?
And does.not His ever-watchful eye keep guard upon them all—
Stretch not His wings o’er all the world, shall we unnoticed fall ?
Here are homes I know in plenty, that with wealth and splendour shine;
And wretched over-crowded hovels, haunts of vice and sin and crime,—
Haunts where death is always lurking, and where foul example stands.
Ever waiting, ever ready on their victims to lay hands.
Yet our country’s “highly favoured ! ” yes, ’tis favoured for the few—
For the great and wealthy of the land, but not for me and you.
The world resounds with Britain’s praises : Britain foremost in the race.
First among the world’s great peoples, stands she in the highest place.
And we sound “ Old England’s ” praises, boast her mighty, great, and free !
True; but in her very centre, starving hundreds do we see!
Surely this should rouse you, brothers; bint to think some future day
Thus your children may be standing, and :at workhouse doors may pray
For the bread they might be winning—wimning in fair, honour’s sight;
Helping to bnild up an empire, that shall Ibe the futures light.
What to you is England’s greatness, what to you her power and might p
In the midst of Plenty living, toiling, hungered in its sight.
Where your children know no childhood, brat must enter in the strife
So young and early, that they know no dajy of childish life
Ye that boast of England’s greatness, ceasse your boasting while there be
Thousands little more than infants— slavess! where loud you boast “ all free ! ”
Thousands who through life’s stern battle i never once can turn the ray
Of one happy childhood hour, upon life’s (dim and chequered way.
Then come out, my brothers, come to wherre there is more room and space,
Where there is more chance for all to win;, who enter in the race.
Trials and troubles we shall meet with, ’tiss the lot of man below,


To have shade as well as sunshine : and no matter where we go.
But the thought of those to follow in this over-crowded track.
Is enough to urge us ior ward—forward! looking not once back.
Come out, ye men that strive and toil for but starvation’s wage;
Come out, and leave the scenes that well might shame this boasted age;
Come out, and bring your children, from that stifling, crowded street.
Where all day long the sun’s scarce seen, nought heard but treading feet.
Bring them out where they at least may see the blessed, blessed sun.
And breathe the fresh free air that God has made for every one !
And come out, ye men that till the soil, that tread behind the plough.
Where you’ll be men, and not machines, as you are treated now;
Come out, ye men whose spirits rise above your present state,
Who sicken at the poor’s distress—will fawn not to the great;
Who feel your souls within you rise, to something nobler far
Than stooping here to those you feel and know no better are!
Whose only power is in their purse, which you are made to feel,
Is useless to be fought against: too oft ’tis “ starve or kneel! ”
And, ye that love fair Freedom’s form, that boast ye have a soul
Above the cankering lust of gain, the gnawing curse of gold;
Come out where you may feel your manhood —a glorious manhood rise
Untrammelled, free! with fearless front—God’s gift,—man’s highest prize
Come out, ye men, and leave your crowded noisy busy towns;
Come out where room and freedom is, and Gods free air abounds ;
Where o’er boundless plains and pastures new in countless numbers go,
Flocks and herds, and herdsmen riding gaily to and fro :
Far and near resounds with shouting, and the cracking of their whips :
Oh there is a glorious freedom there, then let us to the ships,
That are lying here in waiting : let them spread their flapping sails,
I am going, I am going, fair and seaward blow the gales.
Bid farewell to mother England ; it may be tor ever-more,
For we go to gain a home —our own —though on a distant shore.
Well I know I shall not leave it without shedding bitter tears,
But new hopes are rising in me and they overcome my fears.
While my soul it is uplifted! and I feel me borne along
With a trust and dauntless courage that I felt not in the throng.
Faith is growing strong within me, and I feel my spirit glow,
At my prospect in the future, for there’s truth in this, I know —
Though we go to live beneath a colder or a warmer sky;
There’s the same great God above us, and the same bright sun on high !


IsTOTES.
For lack of space only a portion of the Notes are reproducer!. The specimens given
show how Standard English Authors endorse tliie sentiments of the Poem.
“To keep the lamp within them harming—to keep it just alive”
“ When health is flying from the cheek,, and brightness from the eye.”
From a Medical Report on “ Preventable Deatfih.” —Practically, too, itmust be reckoned
that, even with the high civilization of this coumtry, and witli its unequalled system of
poor law relief, privation still exists as a cause rof premature death. Among the surgical
cases treated at hospitals and dispensaries, disejnso from insufficient nourishment form a
very considerable part. Children especially sufffer from this cause, and many of their so
called scrofulous ailments are, in fact mere starvation disorders, which a few weeks of
better feeding can cure ; and besides the direct of food, and that indirect stint which
consists in the use of damaged and adulterated provisions, there are other kinds of
privation practically inseparable from poverty.. It must have scanty Imuse room ; and
this—at least till the means of ventilating poor dwellings are thorough!} l - popularised—
is an increased liability to disease, It must hawe scanty clothing and scanty fuel, and
with little other protection than habit, must enciounter inclemencies of weather, It must
have a weight of care in its daily struggle for subsistence ; it must have little of the
variety and pleasurable excitement which are good for mind and body. Few tasks can be
more difficult than to estimate the diffusion of poverty, as distinguished frctn pauperism,
in different parts of England ; and I have no means of determining whether poverty, in
this sense, be one of the local conditions to which any preventive disease at all closely
proportions itself.”
“ Where there is more chance for all to win who enter in the race.”
It is admitted on all hands that there is more chance for a man to succeed in a new and
averagely populated country than in a densely populated one, where, to succeed, a man
has to contend against and outstrip thousands.
“ Wretched over-crowded hovels, haunts of vice and sin and crime.”
“ The great moral blot on this country is pauperism and its squalid offspring, engen-
dered crime. Did time permit, might see how a wise system of pauper emigration
would convert this costly curse into a wealthy blessing.”— llursthouse.
“Helping to build up an empire that shall be the future’s light”
“ Are there none to come forward now—are there none with the ambition to leave
behind them the undying fame that through all time will wait on those who have the far-
sightedness to conceive, and the courage to create, an empire more vast and imperishable
than any which ever inspired the dreams of the wildest heroes of the past—by peaceful
means to construct that for which the blood of countless thousands of human creatures
has been wasted ? ” — Great Britain and her Colonies.
“ In a few more years Anglo-Saxon emigration will root the language of Shakespeare,
and Milton over half the earth; that the emigrrant’s plough, rather than the warrior’s
sword, has made us first of nations ; and that if ours be the empire on which the sun
never sets, ’tis mainly to emigration we owe thie boast.”— llursthouse.
“In the midst of Plenty, living , toiiling, hungering in its sight”
An excellent article in a recent number off Lloyd's Newspaper upon the distress of
the East end of London and the Docks, bear out the painful truth of this line in a
remarkable manner, I quote the following wotrds from it: —
“ Yet, can there be a more scandalous spectaicle than the richest docks in the world,
belted by the most ragged townships in the wtorld ? It is upon pauper backs that the
riches of the Indies are carried from shipboarrd. It is by hungry men that the great
food supplies of the east are cast into our gramaries. Let the severe moralist think of
this. The man who has not broken his fast is (called to stack the golden grain. He who
has not a pinch of sugar for the sick wife ■ is set to roll the hogshead. He who is
faint is busy landing wine all day. The crueltsy of these predicaments is acute. Shall
we lay a heavy hand upon our palefaced brothier when he trips ? He is hungered from
his cradle.”


a . d !? Uv !, n f and working within sight of ships that are continually oarry-
mg thousands of hopeful people to lands of plenty, they remain chained as it were to the
f Jr 1 . ll lg to g0 ’ J hey are doomed through their helplessness and poverty to stay,
in truth, they are down and cannot rise.” In cases of this kind it becomes the duty
or a Government to come forward with its assistance.
Thousands little more than infants —slaves ! where loud you boast * all free ! ’ ”
If any reader should feel disposed to dispute this, or think I have in the leas*
exaggerated the subject, I beg them to recall to mind, that which they can hardly have
forgotten, the revelation made by Lord Shaftesbury at the Social Science Congress held
at Mauchester—the revelation that nearly one million and a half of women and young
persons were still under the cruel slavery of oppressive trades. I need not quote the
words used on the occasion, they made tuo deep an impression, I trust, to be forgotten.
* Come jut and leave the scenes that well might shame this boasted age.”
Such revelations as those made by Lord Shaftesbury, and alreadv alluded to. and by
the Commissioners appointed t. report on the Agricultural Gang system, are a disgrace
enhghtenment GoUntr * y ,)oasfcs * ts advanced civilization, its broad Christianity and
Under the heading “A Plea for Emigration,” an article
appeared in Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper, for August 25th, 1867,
which is in part reproduced here.
The accounts which have recently reached this country from Australia
abundantly show that the importance we have long attached to the necessity for
encouraging emigration has been by no means misplaced. An article will be
found in another part of our columns, quoted from a Melbourne paper, which
is well calculated to produce the most salutary reflections in the minds of those
philanthropic gentlemen who make it their special business to study the inter-
ests of the working classes; who occupy much of their time in endeavouring to
cure the many ills that Bethnal-green, Poplar, and other kindred districts, are
heir t". It appears from the statement, that “ local production, in all that
concerns a supply of the necessaries of life, is corsiderably in excess of local
consumption; and the progress of the colony is literally arrested by the want of
immigration/* Intelligence such as this cannot be too urgently pressed upon the
attention of those who would cheerfully find abroad a remedy for some portion of
the misery which is experienced at home. It is sad to think that, as each sue-
ceeding winter comes round the wants and calamities of the poor are daily brought
under public notice, and the Zealand patience of local authorities are sorely taxed
to obtain some temporary alleviation of the distress. Why should the relief be
merely temporary, when the money which is collected, for the purpose might,
in a large proportion of cases, be appropriated to its distribution through a
permanent channel ? It is idle to dwell upon the defects of our poor law, and
the many evils which spring out of the system prevailing between the employer
and the employed. With a population whose misfortune it is to be under the
influence of a state of things, as regards “production’* and “consumption/*
precisely the opposite of that which is described as existing in Australia, it is
hardly to be supposed that poverty will be on the decrease, unless every oppor-
tunity be taken—not to feed our colonists with what is sometimes politely called
the “ refuse ** of this country, but to supply them with labour such as they
demand ; and such as would help to consume the provisions which are being sold
at infinitesimal prices, owing to their super-abundance. A correspondent, who


has well studied the subject, offers his opinion and advice in the following
terms:— &
An effort is being made to rescue some of the starving thousands from their present
hopeless state, and to place them where at least employment may be obtained, giving
them, as it were, a new lease of life, and enabling them to bring up their children as
Christian children in the nineteenth century should be brought up. My object in writing
to you is to ask whether you do not think it likely, if a medium were opened by which
the small donations of working-men could reach the East-end Emigration Fund com-
mittee, a respectable, and very acceptable sum would soon be subscribed by the working
classes to assist their unfortunate brethren ? In the event of your doing so 1 will
forward my five shillings to begin with. It is not a very large sum : but lam only one
individual working man; and if hundieds out of the thousands of working men will
only contribute their mite, in the aggregate it will amount to a sum which will I trust
place many an unhappy man and woman, whoso hearts have grown sick and weary in
the ceaseless fijjht against poverty and starvation, in a land where a fair and fresh start
in life will be given them, and where, with perseverance and labour, every pathway
leads to comfort and independence.” Ought such things any longer to exist while
Australia affords a ready means of relieving the sufferers whose only desibe is to
EMIGBATE—NOT TO BEG.
{Lloyd’s Weekly Newspaper .)
“THE EMIGRANT.”
The Author of “Australia for the Industrious,” was the
Correspondent referred to above and he reproduces the extract
with the more pleasure, shewing as it does, that his emigration
advocacy is no “ thing of yesterday,” and that experience verifies
early convictions on the subject. British philanthropists and
statesmen will doubtless give practical shape ere long, for the
people’s sake to the people’s opportunity, which emigration has
really proved itself to be. The deputations of unemployed
artizans to the Lord Mayor, in London, are present painful proof
of dire necessity, and the failure of the fund proposed to promote
their emigration, is a sad indictment against British wealth.
Well may it have called forth the forceful words of one, an
experienced emigration fellow-worker, as given below :
EMIGRATION AND BRITISH PHILANTHROPY.
Sin,—l am utterly ashamed as an Englishman that the recent appeal of the
Lord Mayor has not met with appropriate response. Famine anywhere abroad ;
destitution in the end of the earth, and Christian hearts are touched and purse
strings opened, but the cry of the unemployed at our doors, not for charity,
hut for practical help goes by unheeded. Is the question “ Who is my
neighbour out of fashion ? Do we not need a Galilean prophet again to open
our eyes to his presence and necessity ? With population increasing according
to Mr. Gladstone’s Budget speech of Monday iasLat the rate of 1,000 per day
for the last 14 years, and our working-classes in town and country unable to
get work, what more practical philanthropy- than removal to a wider field can
we have or achieve? Some seven years’ experience of actual emigration


service, and the marvellously uniform success and satisfaction which attend it
led me to rejoice when so influential a committee endorsed the process, and to
expect a movement on a large scale fraught with beneficent issues to this and
generations following. I must confess to a sad, sore, and sorrowful disappoint-
ment. Do our magnates and millionaires designedly seek labour necessity and
cheapness in permanence for the building up of their own fortunes ? Does our
Christianity prefer paupers for its alms, giving with sound of trumpet and
receiving with “Uriah Keep ” humbleness, to the preventing of pauperism by
sending forth the willing where scope, opportunity, and plenty will meet reward
and enrich their industry ? If not, why this failure in this practical chanty
to-day ? In co-operation with one of our Colonial governments 1 sent out
2,000 Lincolnshire peasants, with large families and almost penniless, seven
years ago. I cannot hear of one disappointed that went, but hundreds are
left disappointed they did not go. “ Pacts are stubborn things,” and emigra-
tion facts point to the conclusion that the Lord Mayor’s project was one of the
happiest, healthiest, quickest, and Divinest remedies for a social difficulty. I
hope yet it may meet the success it deserves,—Yours truly,
JOHN H. WHITE.
Osborne-street, Grimsby,
May sth, 1882.
H. Watson k Son, Steam Peintbes, Laceby, Gbimsby.


EMIGRATION LITERATURE, POST FREE FROM
JOHN H. WHITE, (Osborne-st. Grimsby,
AUSTRALIA FOR THE INDUSTRICDUS, OR s d
MY EXPERIENCE IN QUEENSLAND!), by G. RANDALL ... 0 5
Resources of Queensland, by J. Bonwiobk ... I 2
Queensland Letters to Christian World, by John H. White 0 li
Report of Conference on Queensland ... ... ... ... .. 011
EMIGRATION TO NEW ZEALAND,, BY JOHN 11. WHITE 0 7
Earm Labourers Report of New Zealand!, by Henry Tomlinson ... 0 H
Lincolnshire Tenant Fanners’ Delegateas Report of New Zealand 1 8
New Zealand, by Rev. J. Berry ... 0 7
Ten Years in New Zealand, by F. W. Ilsitt... 0 7
England of the Pacific, by A. Claydem 1 1*
.New Zealand, by Rev. J. Berry ... 0 7
Ten Years in New Zealand, by I'. W. Ilsitt... 0 7
England of the Pacific, by A. Claydem 1 1*
EMIGRATION! '
ALL INTENDING TO EMIGRATE SHOULD WRITE FOR
GUIDE TO TEXAS,
Before deciding wheee to go tto. Post Free, (With Map.)
W. G. KINGSBURY , 41 , Finsbury Pavement, London, E.C.
IMPORTANT TO EMIGRANTS!
Mead the following Testimonials from Emigrants , &c„ in New Zealand.
Mission Farm, New Plymouth, March, 1879.
Dear Sir, —So many thanks for the Pills yom so kindly sent me ; since first trying
them I have had no others (when yours were obtainable), and have not needed a doctor.
Shall he glad to get them here, and shall not fail to recommend them to my friends.
Elizabeth H. Burton.
Extract from a letter from Mb. Paulger. Tsaranaki, New Zealand, to Mr. John H.
White, Emigration Agent, Laceby, ne> r Grirmsby.
“Could you send me some of Watson’s Famiily Pills : having used them from a child,
I do not know what to do without them, as theoy suit the constitution better than any
others I can get here.”
# West Eyreton, Cantterbury, New Zealand, April Bth, 1877.
Dear Sir, —I feel greatly indebted to you for the benefit I and my family have derived
from the use of your valuable “ Family Pills.”’ After a good trial of several years when
an inhabitant of the same place as yourself, allso a trial of two years under the climate
of New Zealand, I find them to he a Quick anal Sure Relief to the Stomach, to all the
disease it is subject to, and to give a healthy cintculation to the blood throughout the body.
. From yours truly, H. Tomlinson.
From Mrs. G. Hill, Doyllstou, Now Zealand.
Whoever comes ought not to leave home witihout a good supply of Watson’s Family
Pills and Cholera Mixture. I hope if any of yarn come out you will bring a good supply
with you.
Prepared and Sold by H. WATSON. (Chemist, Laceby, near Grimsby, and
sold by most .Chemists and Patent Mediciine Vendors, in boxes at 1/H .
2/9. each.
WHOLESALE AGENTS : —Kempthorne, IProsser & Co , Dunedin; RETAIL by
Messrs. Williamson & Co., New Plymouth. Taramaki: Mr. Baxter,. Chemist, Christchurch,
New Zealand. Any Chemist not having in stoick will proctii-o from any of the London
or Colonial Wholesale Houses.


EMIGRATION TO QUEENSLAND.
FREE PASSAGES to bona fide Farm Labourers and Domestic Servants.
ASSISTED PASSAGES to Skilled Artisans and others approved by the Agent-
General.
GOVERNMENT LAND
To be be obtained under Deferred Payment.
Vessels sail from PLYMOUTH & GLASGOW
at frequent intervals.
For Handbook and Forms of Application apply to
THE AGENT-GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND
1, Westminster Chambers, Victoria Street, S.W.,
JOHN 11. WHITE OSBORNE-STREET GRUB!.
JOHN H. WHITE,
EMIGRATION OFFICES,
Osborne-street, Grimsby,
PASSAGES BOOKED EVERYWHERE!
To QUEENSLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES, VICTORIA,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, TASMANIA, NEW ZEALAND,
The CAPE COLONY, NATAL, INDIA, The UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA, The GREAT NORTH-WEST,
and all the CANADIAN PROVINCES, &c., &c.
For Rates of Passage—Lists of Ships, and all particulars, write to
JOHN H. WHITE, OSBORNE-ST., GRIMSBY.
(See full page advertisement of Agenoy, Aims, Ac.)
