

Australian
Musical Resources
HENRY TATE


Australian
Musical Resources
Some Suggestions
By
Henry Tate
Commonwealth of Australia
Sydney J. Endacott
Melbourne
1917


Wholly set up and printed in Australia
at the Galleon Press, Norris-street, Surrey
Hills, Vic., for Sydney J. Endacott, 14
Cumming-street, Moonee Yale, Vic.


AUSTRALIAN
MUSICAL RESOURCES
AUSTRALIAN composers have a virgin page.
Tradition does not cramp them wjth set for-
mulae. They are free to exploit the technical
and tonal resources of the world. Australia has
traits which should lead to the evolution of character-
istically Australian musical Images. The Idea of this
essay is to indicate a possible starting point for a con-
structive school of Australian creative music. A
scheme is here submitted which tentatively breaks
ground in the principal divisions of practical composi-
tion.
(i) A “Deflected Scale” based on the
ordinary major scale.
(2) Figure and melody developed from Aus-
tralian bird calls.
(3) Cadences and chord progressions built
upon the “special chromatics” of the
“deflected” scale.
(4) Contrapuntal features.
(5) A special form.


(I) THE DEFLECTED SCALE
Accepting the major scale as a basis, two notes,
called here the “special chromatics,” have been
attached to the ordinary major scale to add color and
poignancy to the melody and harmony. The notes
referred to are the semitone which lies between the first
and second degrees and the semitone between the fifth
and sixth degrees of the major scale. In straightout
scale and melodic passages it is quite possible to take
these “special chromatics” with freedom. It is not
proposed, at the present time, that these chromatics
should be regarded as substitutions of the notes they
displace, but only as points of oscillation from the
normal which practice may in time establish as a
definite and characteristic feature of Australian music.
The scale may be written as at (A) for easy
notation purposes, but (B) shows the idea of the
deflected scale more clearly. The special chromatics
mav resolve into their parent note or they may be
treated with perfect freedom.
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL RESOURCES


(C) A melodic fragment, simply harmonised,
showing the deflected scale.
(D) A characteristic treatment of the “special
chromatics” in a slightly complex medium. The pedal
point in the bass displays the special chromatic in its
less characteristic resolution downwards.
SOME SUGGESTIONS


(2) FIGURE AND MELODY DEVELOPED
FROM BIRD CALLS
Four native calls are set down in (E), (F), (G), (H).
(I) shows (E), and (FI) combined In a
figure.
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL RESOURCES


(L) is a morsel of melody worked up from (G).
(M) Is (F) “transformed” for a codetta.
(N) should be easily recognised, while (O) is
the “scale” running as a “ground bass.”
SOME SUGGESTIONS


(3) CHORD PROGRESSIONS
Modulation may be made on the special chroma-
tics. Pedal points of the “Passacaglia” type may be
developed with figures and a superstructure of
“special chromatic” harmony, see (D) and (O). A
simple example of special chromatic harmony is given
below In (P). It will be seen that the third voice
(tenor) shows a delayed resolution of the chromatic
of the second degree. The chromatic of the sixth
degree is resolved immediately in the treble part of the
same example.
The next example (Q) is a further study on (P).
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL RESOURCES


(4) CONTRAPUNTAL FEATURES
The building of bird calls into mobile figures
should provide admirable material for “imitation.”
(R) is the bird call (F) transformed and com-
bined with a “special chromatic” into an image suit-
able for contrapuntal treatment. The turn given to
the harmony by the “special chromatics” may be
noted. Contrapuntal methods seem In accord with
the mystery of our bush with its hidden past and with
the complexity of modern psychologic stimuli. Effort
to incorporate our bird calls (possibly with “special
chromatic” effects) in contrapuntal combinations of all
degrees of intricacy should reap a rich reward.
SOME SUGGESTIONS


(5) THE CYCLE FORM
A form seems desirable which possesses a wide
developmental scope combined with ample freedom
and a large structural unity. A form is here sub-
mitted which may meet the case. The plan is to make
it essential that there shall be a central idea from which
a number of themes are evolved. These essential
themes should permeate the- entire cycle. The essen-
tial themes should appear and be worked out by
means of transformation of rhythm, melody, or har-
mony as the Cycle Individual numbers
may have their own features, but each number should
have at least one characteristic episode which will link
it with the rest of the Cycle. The last number might
aim at a gathering together of the essential themes, but
of course such a procedure would depend entirely upon
the composer’s judgment. The separate numbers
might assume any known or unknown form. The
Important point is the linking of the numbers by
themes and transformed themes carried out through-
out the Cycle.
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL RESOURCES


(S) is a phrase from a Cycle of piano pieces by
the writer of this esSay. Most of the examples given
are from the same source. (T), (U), and (V)
are variants of (S) used In different numbers. This
Cycle, which consists of sixteen piano sketches, repre-
sents the writer’s attempt to apply the ideas outlined
here to practical composition.
SOME SUGGESTIONS


This essay has not been written with the notion of
formulating a fixed method, but only for whatever
suggestive value it may possess. Our composers may
find in its point of view or in its specific ideas a sug-
gestion which will lead in the direction of distinctively
Australian work.
AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL RESOURCES


Songs of Reverie
Words by Furnley Maurice
Music by
HENRY TATE
Illustrating the musical ideas set
out in this essay
Price Is 6d
Cole’s Book Arcade
