

tfl it'*'/
■ ■■ . . —
AUSTRALIA:
aP&S&S ■ V. ■ - ' — . : . S -
-s\ x
\
■ v ' —
i® #1 j erKEKiG^^
-
v \. v"^
„ --:v^
5 -V- #■
■ ■ ■ .
Sgs-v, - a|»*-v.
‘ «. - * .
k v
I \ >
A CHARCOAL-SKETCH
FRANK COWAN.


THE DAILY PACIFIC COMMERCIAL i
native place to practice medicine. \
Here he married a daughter of Con- e
gressman Jack, and pursued the la-
borious but useful life of a country 1
physician. Having sustained a very
serious loss of property from fire, Dr. c
Cowan turned his attention to journ- 1
FRANK COWAN.
A Distinguished American Tray
eler, Scientist, and Author. alism> in whic h he was fairly success-
ful. He started a journal in his t
native town, named “Frank Cowan’s f
i Paner,” which became a reflex of his l
v individuality. But this field was far \ f
Points la the Career of a >eij k limited for his versatile genius f
marfeabie Man. and well stored mind, although he g
continued there for a time. He aban- J
doned the practice of medicine, and {
served as District- Attorney for West- 1
Among the passengers by the Ala- mQreland county, Pa. His wife (
meda on her last trip from San Fran- &bout this Ume an j left him (
• cisco was Dr. F. Cowan, an American daugbter , who survives. .
' citizen, whose range of travel is more Hig QWn health became precarious.
* 1 extensive, perhaps, than that of any During this unto ward period he com-
' other living representative of the d aud published a very interest-
' Great Republic. Americans, as a and or iginal book, entitled
8 rule are not great travelers, except <lgouth Weste rn Pennsylvania, in
in the wake of fashion. Their annual gong and stor ywith an appendix,
0 European tour is an evidence of this. ( , The Battle Ballads, and other Poems
0 European tour is an evidence of this,
England, France and Germany are
' represented in the four quarters of
8 the <>lobe at all times, and in all sea-
Lu* uy ~ distinguished scientists,
2 while several of the minor countiies
9 of Europe are similarly represented
? in fields of original investigation by
» eminent men. But the United States,
1 as yet, has not produced many men
' who apply themselves to foreign
travel and investigation for the pure
love of science, The conditions of
• life in the States, the vast area of that
country, and the eminently practical |
ft character of the American people,
ft sufficiently account for their neglect
ft of the foreign field. But the gentle-
ft man whose name heads this article is
ft an exception to the rule of hiscountry-
ft meU) and is accumulating material for
■ future use which will win fame for
■ himself, and reflect credit upon his
country. . 3
Dr. Cowan was born in Greenaburg,
Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania,
in December, 1844. Being of a deli-
cate constitution, he spent much of
his youth rambling through the ro-
mantic highlands of South-western
Pennsylvania, and thus early imbibed
that love of nature which has since
possessed him as a consuming file.
He received a collegiate education,
and is a ripe scholar, although still a
1 laborious student. His first public
employment was that of clerk to the
Senate Committee on Patents and
Patent Office, for nearly four years.
In that position he was brought into
I contact with all the prominent poli-
-1 ticians, generals, and diplomatists in
[ Washington during the Civil War.
I The bent of his mind at this time is
[ thown by 4 a remarkable article from
I his pen *n Dr. Toner’s “Handbook
I of Washington City,” on the “ Phys-
of South Western Pennsylvania,”
and in 1881, a volumeof short, quaint ,
stories, illustrating me habits and
customs of the people of that little
known region. He also prepaied
“An American Book of Ballads, and
Album of Ancient Art,” which is in
i the hands of a Loudon publisher.
Dr. Cowan, like all Americans, ran
for an office, his ambition being Con-
gress. He was defeated, fortunately
for himself and the interests of science
and literature. He then made up bis
mind to devote himself wholly to
literary pursuits, and set out on his I
travels. He has already visited every |
! European country, as a careful I
student, and was in Tunis just before I
the French occupation of the
Regency. He made a study of
the social conditions in Tunis and |
Algeria; visited Greece, Sicily,
I Turkey, Egypt, Syr a, Palestine and
Asia Minor, and made an ex-
haustive tour through India, the
Malay peninsula, Clina and Japan.
Dr. Cowan was als* the first man
of the Aryan racj who visited
. Corea without a man-of-war to pro-
tect him, and he succeeded in pro-
; curing valuable specimens of butter-
‘ flies from the Hermit Kingdom be-
’ fore Commodore Stufeldt arrived
1 there. An interesting narrative of
C his visit to Corea hasbeen published,
e . and his valuable collection is in the
States.
This distinguished naturalist also
visited South Araerija, and made a
thorough exploration of the Amazon
region. He accumulated a great deal
of useful information regarding this
part of Brazil, wMch will ulti-
mately be published by him. On his
arrival at Rio Janeiro he lectured on
India before the Emperor Dom Pedro
ique of the United States Senate at the ( the Empress amWroyal family,
close of the war,” from actual measure- t be diplomatic and consular bodies,
ments taken by him aud from other nob ßity, clergy and learned societies,
sources of information. He also read and be Emperor took occasion to
law as a serious study, and found his p ub licly express his high apprecia-
recreation in the Smithsonian Insti- tion of the lectures. The present jour-
tution, and the genial and instructive Q owan is intended to wind
intimacy of Prof. Spencer F. Baird, hig travelS) an( ] j g to in-
now head of that grand establishment. c j ude tbe Hawaiian Islands, New
Dr. Cowan had accumulated a large
quantity of natural history specimens
during his Pennsylvania rambles,
and his Smithsonian studies enabled
Zealand, Australia, probably New
Guinea and Java, taking in South
Africa on his way home. Upon his
return to America, Dr. Cowan will
. return iu a-'*, vonuu
him to compose “A Curious History, begin working up the very abundant
of Insects,” published in 1865 by** x, ' ma t er i a i he possesses, and publish
I Lippincott & Co., of Philadelphia,
h This book was his first literary effort,
L and it enjoys a good sale to-day.
y. Having been admitted to practice
L at the bar. Dr. Cowan applied him-
the same in volumes pertaining to
each country. Hawaii will have a
special place in Dr. Cowan’s books of
travel, and it is possible that he may
be induced to repeat to Honolulu
self assiduously to that profession. aucbences the lectures on India,
He was soon after appointed feecre- wb j cb so delighted the Emperor of
tary of the President to sign land Brazß and his court, as well as the
patents in 1866. Until the end of learned scientists of his Empire. Dr.
President Johnson’s administration £ owan sa ii e d by the Likelike on its
he occupied a room in the White j ast trip, to visit Maui and Hawaii.
House, in daily intercourse with the bis return he will doubtless
President. This exceptional position
enabled him to gain an insight into
Johnson’s policy, aud he after wards
favor us with his impressions of what
he has seen on the islands. Being a
keen observer, and a man of unique
published a highly interesting article ex p er i ence in the field of travel and
in the Pittsburg Leader, headed | nves tigation of natural phenomena,
“ Reminiscences of Andrew John-
son.” Indeed, this gentleman is iu a
position to throw a great deal of light
upon that eventful period in the his-
tory of the United States. He also
continued his scientific and literary
[labors and prepared for publication
his impressions should be valuable to
the Hawaiian Kingdom. He is an
admirable conversationalist and an
attractive lecturer. The following
are some of the lines in which he ex
presses his impression of Rio de Jam
eiro, the capital of Brazil:
“ A Curious History ol Shells,” also a au overarching sky, as blue
“Dictionary of the Proverbs and n( j c i ea r, and bright, ae ever woman’s eye
Proverbial Phrases of the English
Language,” a work which is steadily
growing on his hands. During his
«« ** reemar contributor
a, regular contributor to the
Legal Times, edited by Clinton Rice.
He also perpetrated the most success-
ful hoax in modern literature. We
refer to the article which appeared in
the Constitutional Union, at Wash-
Appear’d to bending lover, prying throng
The lace and lattice of a long curv’d arch.
***.**
~ „i.o vuy B aggregated art,
Alone, in pairs, in groves, and endless row
A peerless palm in grandeur and in grace,
Uplifting, in its overarching frouds,
A royal crown of God’s own handiwork,
Unto itself and all that it o’ershadowa
The city spreading far, and fair as far.
, i »» - * o lau a,a lar,
mgton, upon relics of the Norsemen, Up° n the shore of the communing sea,
found on the banks of the Potomac, the chaos of granitic mounts,
which bore evidence of their having Beneath the sky of love-lit, blue-eyed glance
occupied that region five centuries be- The City of the Royal Palm -
fore the arrival of Columbus. Al-
though Dr. Cowanpromply explained
I the joke, «Jh eTunte TREA ™“ T ° F LABORERS
| the report of the SmithsonianTnsU- Ihic! 'ZhIT-”“««•.
ij tution for 1867. This clever and fa- v *, issued to employers
| oetious Action is now published in the nJlKration 08 " 1 '” 1 ° f tl ’ e B ° a ‘' d ° f Ira ‘
I “International Series,-by Appleton J
I & Co., being incorporated in a book 10 ™f T ERS AND othee s Employ-
| e on “The Human Species,” by M Japanese Laborers :
I s Quatrefages, of Paris. Still further tions teslntfd'Tr P and . SU^es ‘
to equip himself for his chosen path Lwin fn a Commissioner
f 1 m life, he studied medicine and sur- bv him fo, P rfc P ared
h gery, and graduated from the Georee- oflmmi 8 Resident of the Board
p. town Medical College, D C g “migration, are published for the
fe sSrf^
I was retired, and he returned to his I avoid mtaunderatandTog” prl°


✓
■
issll ■


fS. " V'V ,. ■
1 ' -Si !\
,
■
■ ■ '• ’
-'>V "
.
-
' & , *" ' ' ■ ' . - '1* •-
'' > y'/ • ‘A'..'' ' -/ ' ■ - ' • ' '•■■■■'•
'
V
’ • ■ : • , V':-’. ;/■ ■■
,
■
... . ..... ...^
■ ' • -
" ■ : ' ; : • - ■ /; „
• ■ :


AUSTRALIA:
A CHARCOAL-SKETCH,
FRANK COWAN,
HON. MEMB, AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY; MEMB. GEOGRAPHI-
CAL SOCIETIES OF PORTUGAL AND AUSTRALASIA; CORRESP. MEMB.
ACADEMIES OF SCIENCE OF PHILADELPHIA AND DAVENPORT;
HISTORICAL SOCIETIES OF PENNSYLVANIA AND WISCON-
SIN; MEMB. WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYL-
VANIA STATE, AND NATIONAL MEDICAL SO-
CIETIES; WESTMORELAND BAR, ETC.;
AUTHOR OF “THE TERRACES OF ROTOMAHANA,” AUCKLAND, N. Z.; “A VISIT
IN VERSE TO HALEMAUMAU,” HONOLULU, H. I.; “THE CITY OF THE
ROYAL PALM AND OTHER POEMS,” RIO DE JANEIRO, BRAZIL;
“ SOUTHWESTERN PENNSYLVANIA IN SONG AND STORY ;”
“ A CURIOUS HISTORY OF INSECTS;” “AN AMERI-
CAN STORY-BOOK;” “ ZOMARA;” “THE BRAVE
OLD BURG OF GREENE,” ETC.
1 K
V w
GREENSBURG, PA.: CC LLiiCVICU
Printed at “The Press” Printing House. C
MDCCCLXXXVI.


Mr ■ ' W 5K
COPYRIGHT,
Frank Cowan,
18S6.
✓
-


TO THE VENERABLE
Dr. GEORGE BENNETT, F. L. S., F. Z. S., Etc.,
OF SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES:
TO WHOM THE WORLD IS INDEBTED FOR
MUCH THAT IS KNOWN OF
AUSTRALIA;
AND TO WHOM THE WORLD BOWS IN
GRATEFUL RECOGNITION.


Across the bows of the “ Zealandia,”
Betwixt the sea and sky, involved in haze,
I see a faint gray line—Australia!
An ancient, outcast island-continent;
An Ark adrift within the flood of Time,
Preserving through unnumbered days and years,
The fruitful pairs of a primaeval life
Long vanished elsewhere and forgotten quite;
As well, as it hath happed, through Providence
Or Chance, a goodly portion of the Earth
Disjunct and set aside long ages since
For welling England’s overflow to-day.
June, 1885.


INTRODUCTORY.
“ What is the dominant note of Australian scenery ? That which is the dominant
note of Edgar Allan Poe’s poetry—Weird Melancholy. A poem like L’Allegro
could never be written by an Australian. It is too airy, sweet, too freshly happy.
The Australian mountain forests are funereal, secret, stern. Their solitude is deso-
lation. They seem to stifle, in their black gorges, a story of sullen despair. No
tender sentiment is nourished in their shade. In other lands the dying year is
mourned, the falling leaves fall lightly on his bier. In the Australian forests no
leaves fall. The savage winds shout among the rock clefts. From the melancholy
gums strips of white bark hang and rustle. The very animal life of these frowning
hills is either grotesque or ghostly. Great gray kangaroos hop noiselessly over the
coarse grass. Flights of white cocatoos stream out, shrieking like evil souls. The
sun suddenly sinks, and the mopokes burst out into horrible peals of semi-human
laughter. The natives aver that, when night comes, from out the bottomless depth
of some lagoon the Bunyip rises, and, in form like monstrous sea-calf, drags his
loathsome length from out the ooze. From a corner of the silent forest rises a dis-
mal chant, and around a fire dance natives painted like skeletons. All is fear-in-
spiring and gloomy. No bright fancies are linked with the memories of the moun-
tains. Hopeless explorers have named them out of their sufferings—Mount Misery,
Mount Dreadful, Mount Despair. As when among sylvan scenes in places
‘Made green with the running of rivers.
And gracious with temperate air,’
the soul is soothed and satisfied, so, placed before the frightful grandeur of these
barren hills, it drinks in their sentiment of defiant ferocity, and is steeped in bitter-
“ Australia has rightly been named the Land of the Dawning. Wrapped in the
mist of early morning, her history looms vague and gigantic. The lonely horseman
riding between the moonlight and the day sees vast shadows creeping across the
shelterless and silent plains, hears strange noises in the primaeval forest where
flourishes a vegetation long dead in other lands, and feels, despite his fortune, that


the trim utilitarian civilization which bred him shrinks into insignificance beside the
contemptuous grandeur of forest and ranges coeval with an age in which European
scientists have cradled his own race.
“ There is a poem in every form of tree or flower, but the poetry which lives in
the trees and flowers of Australia differs from that of other countries. Europe is the
home of knightly song, of bright deeds and clear morning thought. Asia sinks be-
neath the weighty recollections of her past magnificence, as the Suttee sinks, jewel
burdened, upon the corpse of dread grandeur, destructive even in its death. Amer-
ica swiftly hurries on her way, rapid, glittering, insatiable, even as one of her own
giant waterfalls. From the jungles of Africa, and the creeper-tangled groves of the
Islands of the South, arise, from the glowing hearts of a thousand flowers, heavy
and intoxicating odors—the Upas-poison which dwells in barbaric sensuality. In
Australia alone is to be found the Grotesque, the Weird, the strange scribblings of
Nature learning how to write. Some see no beauty in our trees without shade, our
flowers without perfume, our birds who cannot fly, and our beasts who have not yet
learned to walk on all fours. But the dweller in the wilderness acknowledges the
subtle charm of this fantastic land of monstrosities. He becomes familiar with the
beauty of loneliness. Whispered to by the myriad tongues of the wilderness, he
learns the language of the barren and the uncouth, and can read the hieroglyphs
of haggard gum-trees, blown into odd shapes, distorted with fierce hot winds, or
cramped with cold nights, when the Southern Cross freezes in a cloudless sky of icy
blue. The phantasmagoria of that wild dreamland termed the Bush interprets itself,
and the poet of our desolation begins to comprehend why free Esau loved his herit-
age of desert sand better than all the bountiful richness of Egypt.”— Marcus
Clarke : Preface to the Poems of Adam Lindsay Gordon.


AUSTRALIA:
A CHARCOAL-SKETCH.
Here rhyme was first framed without fashion,
Song shaped without form.—Adam Lindsay Gordon.
A Saunterer : poetic, philosophic, fanciful, facetious, or grotesque, as
time and chance and circumstance determine: on the wallaby
a second time around the world ;
Assuming for the nonce to be
A Seer and a Singer : all his senses to the sense of sight subordinate,
involving his environment; and all his energies concentred
and expended in his speech, evolving his environment in song :
I see and sing
AUSTRALIA !
The Austral World ;
The World beneath the Cross, the Coalsack, and the Magellanic
Clouds of Southern Skies;
The Nether World ;
The World below the Belt;
The World Antipodal ;
The World of Shakespeare’s Anthropophagi (PAntipodes) whose Heads
do grow beneath their Shoulders for a verity ;
The World Upset;
The World Turned Upside Down ;
The World of Topsiturvia !
A Somewhere South to the Chinese for untold ages ; whence trepang
pr beche-de-mer j


A Somewhere South and East associated with the Golden Chersonesus
to the Greeks of Alexander’s time and centuries succeeding:
whence the vessels of the seas beyond the shores of India :
deep-laden with the silks and spices of the Orient expanding
North and South : fact-founded, fancy-formed: a stolen kiss
evolved into a marriage-dream ;
The Lochac of the mediaeval Marco Polo : first of European wander-
ers to face the rising sun and point with left hand to a won-
drous habitable North, Cipango, or Japan, and with the right
hand to a wondrous habitable South, the world of Australasia !
Kai Dowdai: Little Country: to the natives of the Northeast Coast:
from Muggi Dowdai: Big: New Guinea; Papua: the flats of
York Peninsula appearing small beside the heights of Papua:
and that not in the eye of savages not in their speech ;
The South Land of the Holy Ghost to the Pacific’s pioneers, the
pious Portugese ;
New Holland to the Dutch;
The Austral Great Unknown unto the English till the time of Cook ;
AUSTRALIA from the days of Captain Flinders for all time !
I see and sing
The Seas Surrounding: sweeping, swashing, gnawing, gnashing : com-
ing to and going from: a mighty ravenous amoeboid monster
having in its maw a continental animalculum : alternately de-
vouring and rejecting it; eternally digesting and ejecting it:
Amoeba panpelagica !
The Arafura Sea : Molucca-ward ;
The Coral: Micronesia-ward ;
The South Pacific : Maori-ward ;
The Indian : Wilkes’ Land- and Madagascar-ward ;
And all their inland Teachings: friths and forths, creeks, inlets, sounds,
bays, bights, and gulfs ;
The Great Australian Bight;
The Gulf of Carpentaria;
Ports Jackson, Phillip, Denison—all, in a word the sound of which
has been a falling clod upon a living sepulchre to millions of
mankind,
The Bay of Botany !
I see and sing
The Great South Land,


In its totality and ultimate divisibility !
The largest of the fragments of the broken and dissevered continent
of Australasia;
An area approximately kidney-shaped,
About the size of Uncle Sam’s domain from sea to sea;
Astride the Line of Capricorn,
Half in the Torrid Zone and half in the South Temperate ;
An almost rainless desfert bowl irregularly rimmed and ridged with
mediocral mountains : rain-condensing, forest-clad ;
An Austral Great Sahara Desert, ringed and ridged, and flecked and
fringed, with Atlas Mountains, Aspen Oasis, Nile Valley, and
Algerian Tell !
I see and sing
Lake Amadeus : Dead Sea centre of the Austral World : Symbolic here
of the ten thousand inland fluctuating saline lakes and marshes,
ponds, and swamps, and the lagoons along the sea-coast of Vic-
toria : the correspondents of the Shotts of Algiers and the Bitter
Lakes of Utah and Nevada: pools of ocean water left within
the pits and hollows of the Continental Kraken when it came
up from the bottom of the sea ;
The Murray: Goolwa : Hume; the largest of the rivers of the Aus-
tral World : the correspondent in its course and current of the
Orange of South Africa : in periods of drought decaying by ab-
sorption and evaporation as it nears the sea into a chain of stag-
nant pools: A symbol here of all the rivers of Australia evan-
ishing in earth and air: and those, as well, the sea-board
streams that hasten from the heights along the coast into the
inlets of the ocean meeting them halfway;
Mount Kosciusko : highest of the summits of Australia: flecked with
snow throughout the summer : canoned grandly ; showing scars
of ancient glaciers : Symbol here of all the earth-ascendings and
-descendings of the Continental Isle :
The barren beach of the surrounding sea: the Utgard of Australia;
The dreary dunes along the coast;
The seaward grass-green mountain flanks ;
The weathering walls and frowning precipices overhead ;
The summit beauties and sublimities of the Australian Alps: the
Asgard of Australia;
The dark depths of the gorges and defiles;
The withering widening wastes;


The parched plateaux;
The stretches strewn with fire-flaked flint;
The cracked and baked black bottoms of evaporated pools;
The blistering belts of rocks ;
The burning sweeps of sand;
The simmering salt and soda sinks;
The dim delirious outlining of Lake Amadeus: a descent unto a depth
below the circle of the all-surrounding ocean : down, down,
down, through all the stages of a burning fever to delirium and
Death ! the centre of the Midgard of Australia !
I see and sing
The Riverina : ’twixt the Darling and the Murrumbidgee : richest of
the austral regions: typic here of all the fertile oases that band
and belt and dot the continental sink ;
The Caverns of Jenolan: wondrous water-wormings through an an-
cient coral strand upheaved into a mountain: filled with
. stalactitic jets and pendants, stalagmitic pillars, beads, and
buttresses, depending robes with crystal-diamonds spangled,
and a myriad of phantasies of form besides; the concrete cor-
respondent of the dreaming of the youth who fashioned at
maturity the Taj Mahal: Symbolic here of all the antres of
Austral World ;
The Canons of Katoomba; Cowan’s Canon, Govett’s Leap, the
Witch’s Leap, and the ten thousand gaps and gorges, Fairy
Dells and Devil Glens besides: romantic, picturesque, grim,
ghastly, hellish: which compose in quarto the Grand Colorado
Canon Region of America in folio ;
The Barrier Reef surnamed the Great: incomparable coral strand:
the largest of the world : A symbol here of the infinity of
reefs and bars, projecting points, peninsulas, capes, rocks, and
islets which compound the shore-line of Australia.
I see and sing
The NEVER-NEVER COUNTRY: Word within itself an Epic of
the Austral Continental Isle !
And therein of the Something-Nothing which the Eye must bring with
it the Something-half to see at all:
The sea-like solitude of the primaeval wastes;
The Inca-corse-like desiccation and decay ;
The cavern-like vacuity;
The OM-like mystery;


The ever-present eldritchness;
The fixed and glassy eye-stare of ineffable despair;
The spectral shadows of the starving Burke and Wills: with stagger-
ing steps zigzagging on the burning banks of Cooper’s Creek
in search of Nardoo seeds; with feeble fingers clutching them
spasmodically as their last resource: with gasping greed de-
vouring them: with eating only famishing the faster and more
horribly: a Barmecidal feast of most appalling ghastliness ! the
Austral tale of Tantalus !
The melancholy memories of Leichhardt’s fate : to fashion every stain
of gray upon the yellow sand into the very spot where down the
wanderer sank to rise no more: the sand discolored by his dis-
solution and decay ; his dust indissoluble with the desert: his
eternal monument!
The ghost of Gordon galloping upon a phantom Favorite; the bright
white moonlight entering the hole made by a self-directed bul-
let through his skull and streaming out a flame of spirit-burn-
ing blue : the while an echo of the beating of his heart is heard
within his haunting rhymes !
And Spectral Shades of Sin and Crime: hulk-smelling, fetter-galled,
demanhoodized ; enough to demonize another Dante-Hell!
And scintillating over and amid the phantom forms, the hammerflush
of Henry Kendall: master saga-smith of Australdom : his
stithy in the bush beneath a fire-charred stringy-bark: his bel-
lows’-blast the buster and brickfielder: and the ghastly glow-
ing iron taking beauteous shape beneath his measured blows, or
this or that: a brother murdered “in a far-off sultry summer
rimmed with thunder-cloud and red with forest fires:” a kins-
man slaughtered on “the windless downs : blue-gleaming like a
sea of molten steel 1”
I see and sing
The Record of the Rocks !
The Cosmic Elements of which the Continental Island is composed :
forever changing their relationships with one another ; coming,
going: building up and breaking down : Protean ! Symbol
here of one and all, the King and Queen of Metals, Gold and
Silver : now, diffused through land and sea, atomic ; now, con-
centrated in dust and grain and ingot: now, composing the
blood-globules —red and white—of the world-roaming monster,
Commerce: now, returning by attrition to the indivisible
atomic to begin another round anew;


The Movements and the Moldings of the Planet as a whole involving
as a part the Continental Island : incidental to Rotation, Revo-
lution, Cooling and Collapsing, Differentiating into divers
densities : Evolving from an Unit into an Infinity ; The Kid-
ney-contour of the Continental Island here a type of all;
The Alternation of the Land and Sea: the going up and down of the
vast area in part or as a whole : and all the incidents to the
seesawing of the continent: upheaval into mountain and subsi-
dence into sink: climatic change, organic change: erosion,
drift: the dead o’erlaid with loam and hardened into stone :
connection made or disconnection with adjoining lands: ad-
mitting or excluding plants and animals, or here or there, or
now or then: effecting a peculiar isolation in the end, with
distant or long dead affinities elsewhere, most marvelous: com-
mingling fossils elsewhere separated and defining geologic ages :
puzzling scientists ; The Great Dividing Range symbolic here
of all;
The Alternation of the Geologic Seasons ; Dry and Wet; an Eon-
Summer baking the vast isle into the correspondent of the
Great Sahara Desert, as to-day : an Eon-Winter drenching it
into the correspondent of the Valley of the Amazon, as yester-
day;
The hot and humid Eocene evolving through the Miocene and Plio-
cene into the cool and wet Post-Pliocene: the era of the ele-
phantine in Australia as in America and other continental re-
gions of the globe;
The cool and wet Post-Pliocene evolving through succeeding centu-
ries into the Recent: hot and dry : A continental emperor de-
caying in his robes of state: his flesh and bones dissolving
into desert-dust: his gorgeous forest-raiment vanished —all,
save here and there, within a cool and humid mountain-gorge,
a shred or patch: revealing in a part the grandeur and the
beauty of the whole !
I see and sing
The Dykes and Overflowings of Basaltic Trap : the squeezing upward
of the molten lavas of the centre of the Planet through the
adventitious crackings of the cooling and collapsing crust:
the paper-pulp to be transformed into the pages of the Record
of the Rocks : decaying, forming soil of marvelous fertility :
Mount Tomah symbol here of all;


The various Volcanic Vomitings : occurring at the intersection of the
Earth-crust cracks : and differing from the preceding only in a
concentration and continuance ot action and discharge : cone-
forming : Mount Canoboias the last and typic here of all;
The Granites and the Porphyries ;
The Diorites and Serpentines ;
The Old Silurian : the mausoleum of the Adam and the Eve of the
biologists;
The Coral Strands compacted and converted into Marble Beds;
The Shales and Sands of the Devonian : entombing Scale-tree, Rhyn-
chonellse, Spirifers;
The Lower Coals : entombing ocean shells ;
The Upper Coals: entombing air-plants: notably Glossopteiis: and
yielding Iron, Coal and Kerosene ;
The thick Hawkesbury Sands : entombing Cleithrolepis : forming the
grand mural precipices of the Austral Alps;
The overlaid Wianamatta Shales; Palseoniscus sepulchre;
The Clarence Beds;
The vast Cretaceous Strata: water-charged : great inland reservoirs
awaiting but the Diamond Drill to make of burning sand a Par-
adise ;
The Tertiary Rocks and Drifts: entombing plants approximating
those of the same geologic age in other continental areas : a
Flora rich and varied : tropical or semi-tropical: and not sub-
ordinated to one genus as the Flora of the Present to the
ghastly Gums or Eucalypts;
The Present Depositions; aggregating and compacting film on film ;
by overflowing or evaporating waters: here distributing disin-
tegrated quartz and sandstone far and wide o’er fertile valleys :
there concentrating suspended marl and limestone in vast
desert clay-pans : filling them with dazzling snow-white gypsum
crystals : selenite ; or other salt;
The Whole: the Record of the Rocks: the scattered leaves of the
Cumaean Sibyl of the Ages of the Earth turned into Stone: a
word on one: a letter and a fragrant of a sentence on a second
and a third : a mystic symbol on a fourth : each unintelligible
in itself: but joined aright with this or that, Oracular: an
utterance of an Eternal Truth !
I see and sing
The Ether Circumambient!


And therein of the Sun : to the observer, going round the earth from
right to left: and casting shadows ever pointing southerly: a
World of Widdershins ;
The Seasons upside down ; midsummer in December, midwinter in
July;
The Autumn’s aromatic breeze ;
The Winter’s ozone-bringing wind;
The wattle-perfumed zephyr of the Spring;
The Summer’s furnace-blast;
The thermometric readings running up to Nine and Thirty plus One
Hundred, Fahrenheit!
The noon and midnight variations reaching Ninety-nine degrees : the
Eye of Heaven, the fiery eye of a hot-blooded warrior by day:
the icy eye of an assassin in the night: forbidding hope:
repelling prayer : transfixing in a gasp or shudder of despair !
The Buster and Brickfielder: austral red-dust blizzard and red-hot
Simoom;
The Drought: a blast like that which smote the Assyrian host;
The pools diminishing from day to day becoming poisonous to bird
and beast: attracting with deceitful glare for many miles
around and leaving on their fatal shores the gasping staggering
forms of myriads: their decomposing carcasses: their bones :
a problem to the future scientist;
The pools becoming poisonous : to the surviving Black a terrible ex-
perience : a ghastly spectacle: an exhibition of mysterious
malignity and might: the fact before his eyeballs to evolve into
the phantasy behind of this or that dread monster dwelling in
the venom-vats : or Bun-yip, Wan-gul, Myn-die, Mul-ge-wan-ke,
or the like: assuming this or that familiar shape, or emu,
snake, or kangaroo ; the austral correspondent of the Many-
headed Hydra of the Greeks ;
The pools becoming poisonous: to the surviving Black as well the
cause compelling him, in order to allay his burning thirst and
live, to take the desert frog from out its hole and squeeze into
his mouth the precious water-drops its bladder holds: the fact,
as well, before his eyeballs to evolve into the phantasy behind
of this or that inexplicable fable otherwise: the Tid-da-lick, a
giant frog, that, laughing at a dancing eel —prosaically, croak-
ing at the Black’s unearthing crooked stick, —disgorges water
to supply mankind, create a deluge, or the like;
The heated air uprising from the burning deserts: swirling, sweeping,


gathering the dust and sand and withered herbage: forming
lofty, swaying, fast-revolving desert-spouts; inverted spiral
cones: now, scattered o’er the plains a score or more of merry
waltzing Brobdingnagian sylphs ; anon, evanishing : succeeded,
haply, by an all-involving overwhelming hurricane: a demon-
god of inexsuperable rage, malignity, and might;
The Rain : the chief of all the wonder-workers of the Austral World :
where, haply, for a time beyond the memory of man, naught
but the glare of burning sands appeared, behold ! before the
cloud-wrack of an adventitious desert-drenching storm has van-
ished from the sky, a myriad of pale-green sprouts uprising
from as many earth-secreted seeds : and then a maze of dark-
green foliage; a crazy-quilt of floral bloom spread over count-
less leagues: a wilderness of sweets ; a broad-cast scattering of
seeds to sleep again mayhap for centuries ! the fable of the fall-
ing show’r of gold into the lap of Danae a grand and glorious
fact!
The Whole the Song of Solomon Unsung: in chaos: hottest of hot
breaths commingled with the rarest perfumes : kisses: swelter-
ings: exhaustions: Life and Death !
The while—O wonder of the World Turned upside Down !—the
Southern Hemisphere of the revolving Earth is in a Glacial
Age!
I see and sing
The Bush : the Flora of the Austral World !
The Stag-horn Fern : its fronds expanding like the flat palmated ant-
lers of the moose of Maine ;
The Bird’s-nest Fern: its canna-leaf-like fronds encompassing the
trunks of lofty trees: composing fitting capitals unto the
columns of the forest Parthenon ;
The Arborescent Ferns : Alsophila australis running up to forty, sixty,
eighty feet before expanding into a gigantic parasol of vegetable
plumes, or metamorphosing into a fount of sea-green water :
passing into spray and air before descending to the earth;
The Pherosphoera; intermediate between a Lycopodium and Juniper ;
The Kangaroo-grass: from the sea of salt surrounding to the sea of
salt enclosed, enticing ever on and on the hungriest of the flock
and herd : the shepherd and the stockman following : and then
the town and city : wanting which, the continental island were
four-fifths a blank to-day;


The Microzamias: half fern, half palm: the austral substitute of the
symbolic palm of Rome ;
The Cocoanut, the Fan, and Cabbage Palms;
1 he Cocoanut, the ran, ano x aims ,
The Grass-tree : Black-boy: Yellow-gum : a monstrous aborescent
Rush : anear, resembling tussocks of coarse overarching grass
upon a stunted, stumpy, blackened branching palm: afar, a
native Black : its flowering spike, his spear : of divers uses and
diverse : from dyeing silk to making an illuminating gas ;
The gorgeous Illawarra Lily: Doryanthes: bearing crimson
floral clusters on a lofty spike : from ten to twenty feet in
height;
The glorious Cyrtosia: the orchid marvel of the austral bush: its
myriad of beautiful and fragrant flowers strung along a trailing
stem for thirty feet !
The Cherry Tree : with fruit turned inside out;
The Bunya-bunya; noble representative of a most ancient gens of
pine : broad-leafed, big-coned : its nut-like seed a store of fat-
tening food : a grove the only heirloom of the Black ;
The She-oaks : Beefwood : Austral Larch, or Fir: in lieu of leaves,
the terminations of the branches subdivided into pendent tufts
and tassels of attenuated and articulated twigs: like the
antennae of a beetle or a prawn ! a spectral aborescent Equise-
tum ! smoky-green, funereal: The curtained chamber of the
dead, the tasseled pall, the hearse’s drooping plumes, the mel-
ancholy of the cypress-shaded grave, the closing lashes wet
with tears, the blank hereafter —all organic in a tree !
The Murn or Mallee-oak : in times of drought its hollow stems supply-
ing life-sustaining water to the Black : competing as a fountain
with the dew-conserving bladder of the desert-frog ;
The Mulga-tree : its water-yielding roots another rival of the bladder
of the desert-frog;
The Giant Nettle-tree : a hive of bees in every leaf;
The Banyan-tree : the grandest of the Figs: in its expansion and
extension, self-supporting its long arms with outward-leaning,
life-renewing, supplemental props : the fable of Antaeus in the
form of tree : or, happily, the British Empire symbolized in
its expansion and extension round the world : adventurous de-
pendent filaments here taking root and there, and, in the course
of time, becoming independent props and nourishers, and pass-
ing the o’erspreading and o’ersheltering sway to farther points:
until the branches, North and South and East and West, o’erlap


and interlace : the grandest governmental growth the globe has
ever seen !
The Big-leafed Fig; related closely to the last: its sprawling, widely
buttressed base, compounding and confounding root and trunk
and twisting limb, a wonder of the vegetable world ;
The Boabab : the Gouty Stem, the Monkey-bread, Sour Gourd, or
Cream-of-Tartar-tree : of all the vegetable monsters of the
earth, the chief: a huge, aerial, aborescent yam ! a bulb be-
come a tree without a bole ! a root, compounding sponge and
mucilage, Barbadoes’-leg and the deformities of gout, rejected
by the earth, and heaved and humped up in the air into a tree !
defying ax, drought, fire, and time : endowed with a shark-heart
vitality: deciduous: its gourd-like fruit filled with a mealy
melting acid mass: a desert substitute for lemonade !
The Desert Pea : the floral beauty of the Midgard scrub;
The Wattles : many kinds of many qualities: of some, the footstalks
simulating leaves and substituting them : in the evolvement of
the Leaf, a stage beyond the She-oak, with its leafless terminals
divided into jointed threadlike twigs;
The Lilac or White Cedar-tree : deciduous : its purple bloom, night-
scented, beautiful;
The Flame-tree : all the beauty and the splendor of a conflagration in
its bloom !
The Salt-bush of the inland flats;
The Christmas Tree : the holly of the Austral World ;
And chief among the world of wondrous worts besides,
The Eucalypts: bark shedding, camphor-scented, gum-exuding, fever-
frighting evergreens : a probable suggestion of the Boomerang
within their leathery leaves : vertical suspended : shadowless;
The Eucalypts: their bark depending from their naked limbs and
trunks in swaying, fraying ribbons, tatters, shreds : Stripped to
the waist, a forestful of grizzled, gaunt, and haggard gaber-
lunyie-men : A myriad of outcast Lears: The summer dream of
Sydney Smith : stripped of his flesh and sitting in his bones :
here realized in grim and grotesque forestry;
The Eucalypts: of the Black Spur, with slightly tapering trunk,
high-reaching slender branch, long, light, and airy limb, and
spectral finial twig, uprising to a point o’ertopping the Big
Trees of California: A formula objective of the operations of
the human brain : evolving, ramifying, and attenuating 1 bought


into an ultimate: a point in philosophic or poetic phantasy
ne’er reached before !
The Whole; the Austral Bush in its totality : The spectral shadows of
the dead and buried Miocene of Europe still within the wood :
A musty mediaeval folio on Demonology perused alone at dusk:
the savor and the subject of the volume giving to the wilder-
ness of the blackletter text an all-pervading eldritchness: a
woodcut here and there imparting shape and visual reality unto
the diabolic and the weird : and the illuminated letters serving
rather to intensify than to relieve with their bright hues the all-
involving spectre-haunted gloom !
I see and sing
The Fauna of the Austral World—
The Fauna of the Water and the Land !
The Idia : a symbol here of all the lowest forms of ocean life;
The Giant Earthworm : six feet long : the Anaconda of the Annelids;
The rare Trigonia : a Mesozoic memory : a baby kiss in an objective
unobjectionable form in its opposing pinkish pearl-lined shells:
an idyll of the young world’s beauty, innocence, and purity;
The Case- or Lictor-moths ; Metura : marvelous among the marvels
of the insect world ;
The Wattle- and the Grass-tree-boring Moth-grubs : fried or roasted
luscious morsels: titbits for the gastronomic gods of old: the
Blue Point oysters of the Austral World ;
The Honey-bee : about the bigness of the housefly : stingless : black :
before the bigger armed incomer with the Colonist fast disap-
pearing with the Black : one savage weakling going with an-
other everywhere upon the advent of the civilized and strong ;
The Dromia conchifera ; a stalk-eyed crab upholding with a supernu-
merary pair of walking legs a mollusk half-shell as a shield : a
grotesque little Ajax Telamon ;
The Cobble-toothed Port Jackson Shark : Cestracion : crab-crushing,
mollusk-munching : old-world ocean ghoul : organic shadow of
the Secondary Seas forecast into to-day;
The Burnett Salmon of the Queensland streams : Ceratodus : nor fish,
nor flesh, nor good red herring; Fish-branch of the Zoologic
Iree just at the point of forking into Frog: and like the last
and the Trigonia, belonging rather to an early Mesozoic age of
the Earth’s history than this !
The Leafy Dragon-fish : Phyllopteryx: the most fantastic of all piscine


forms ; the ultimate of the bizarre and Japanesque : the fancy
of the heretofore incomparably whimsic artist Hokusai out-Hok-
usai’d in fact! The male pouched somewhat like a female
kangaroo : enveloping the eggs laid by the female in a soft sub-
caudal sack, and thus transporting them till hatched !
The Crested Serpent-fish: Regalecus: a length attaining—fifteen,
twenty—who can say how many feet? the dorsal fin extending
its whole length and rising from the head into a long back-
streaming crest: a sea-chimsera or sea-serpent for a verity !
The Pygopods : with rudimentary fore-limbs : three-quarters lizard
and one-quarter snake ;
The Lialids: with no external trace of limbs ; one-quarter lizard and
three-quarters snake ;
The dread Death Adder : typic here of all the austral snakes ; an ul-
timate depending and perverted offshoot from the Reptile-
branch of the great Zoologic Tree : the fore- and hind-legs of
the lizard gone, and its innocuous saliva turned into the venom
of a tooth-formed sting ;
The Long-necked Turtle of the inland creeks : reptilian crane;
The mighty Megalania : a monstrous, many-horned, gigantic saurian
of old : in miniature within the living Moloch horridus;
The Lizard ruffed or frilled like pictured Queen Elizabeth : Chlam-
ydosaurus ; hopping on its hind-legs ; Frog-branch of the Zoo-
logic Tree just at the point of forking into Bird ;
The Emu and the Cassowary : and the huge extinct Dromornis : desert-
formed into an avian giraffe : its energies expended in evolving
legs and neck in lieu of wings : the needful for the not: the
Bird-branch of the Zoologic Tree just after forking from the
Reptile : pelvis, sternum, cranium Reptilian ;
The Mound-birds : Megapods: as yet which have not learned to build
a nest and hatch their young themselves, but still, remembering
their reptile origin, when they have scratched and scraped to-
gether a great mound of sand and herbage-mold, depositing
their eggs therein, and leaving them to be brought forth by the
engendered heat and moisture of the heap fermenting in the
O ...
sun : the new-born chicks, like new-born crocodiles, requiring
not a mother’s care; like China’s symbol sage, born hoary-
headed, worldly wise;
The Bower-birds : with not yet specialized in song and art-
ideas not yet fixed and fashioned in fair nests: unto the typic


Bird, as prattling, playhouse-building children unto Man and
Woman : present fiction fingerings tow’rd future facts;
The Crested Cockatoo : the golden-crowned White Parrot Czar of all
the Russias of the Austral Continent;
The Piping Crow : the magpie of the South ;
The Lyre-bird : wondrous-tailed, mimetic, shy : afar in the seclu-
sion of the bush involving its environment and then evolving
it in vocal correspondents to the wondering world : the sym-
bol of the austral Son of Song;
The Sable Swan: beneath the Southern Cross the Night incarnate, as
the White, beneath the Northern Bear, the Day;
The Honey-suckers : feather-tongued ; Australia’s humming-birds;
The Curaduck; a kind of crane: in quaker garb a pantomimic clown :
from grave to gay alternating in a surprising manner: now, as
solemn as a self-subduing saint: anon, a flighty and fantastic
Merry Andrew ! dancing, kicking, pirouetting ! turning, tum-
bling, twisting, twitching ! halting, hopping, moping, stalking !
Spider-monkey metamorphosed into Bird !
The Cereopsis : bird compounding goose and crane: and yet not of
the water but the land !
The extinct Phillip Island Parrot: cousin-german to the honey-sucking,
sheep-destroying and -devouring kea of Zealandia;
The Great Kingfisher: alias, the Gogobera: alias, the Laughing
Jackass : alias, the Settler’s Clock : robbed of its birthright as
a fisher by the Buster-bandits of the Austral World—its occupa-
tion gone, turned scoffer, mocker, loon, in the expression of its
unavailing rage and all-involving feelings of revenge ; an avian
demoniac Democritus: its laughter loud, chaotic, and maniacal:
a voicing of the wild, the weird, the eldritch, and the ghastly
of the Never-Never Country not to be encompassed by the
mutterings of Man : a desert dirge inimitable, unapproachable,
unique !
I see and sing
The Monotremes : egg-laying, suckling at the waist: the halves of the
cerebrum not connected: the Reptilian-branch of the great
Zoologic Tree just at the point of forking into the Mammalian!
The Cogera: Echidna: hedgehog-shaped, fossorial, shade-loving, myr-
mecophagous: the Austral World’s Ant-eater, Aard-Vark,
Hedgehog, Porcupine, and Mole in one;
The Tambreet; Duck-mole : Platypus: Ornithorhynchus: fur-clad,


duck-billed and web-footed, sun-abhorring, water-haunting,
and earth-burrowing: half-bird, half-beast! Old Mother Na-
ture mentally confused : compounding and confounding her
new Bird and Mammal types !
I see and sing
The Myriad of Mammal-makeshifts of the austral Fauna: The Mar-
supials : (albeit, some with pouches, some without: some with
pouch-bones, some without: ) the Mammal-branch of the great
Zoologic Tree just after forking from the Reptile: inchoate,
chaotic, monstrous : Nature-dreams incorporate;
The Kurboroo: Koala: Phascolarctos: bunty, bob-tailed, big-
paunched, browsing bugaboo: the mythic wise beast of the fic-
tions of the Black : a makeshift Monkey, Bear, and Sloth : the
most grotesque of all the gargoyles of the old cathedral of
Australia;
The Wombat: thickset, chisel-toothed, fossorial: a makeshift of the
Groundhog of America, the weather-wise “Old Probabilities;”
The huge, extinct Diprotodon and Nototherium: the makeshifts and
contemporaries of the Megatherium and Mylodon ;
The Phascogals: not pouched : the makeshifts of the Weasels, Minks,
and Stoats;
The Phalangers : prehensile-tailed : the makeshifts of the Monkeys of
America;
The Bandicoot; a makeshift of the Mole: “as miserable as a Bandi-
coot,” a popular comparison of problematic truth and odious
accordingly to man and beast;
The Belideus and the Petaurist: the makeshifts of the Flying Squir-
rels —rather, Squirrel-parachutes;
The Myrmecobius ; not pouched : a puny makeshift of the Great Ant-
eater of the Amazon : resorting, it is said, to strategy to sup-
plement its lack of strength and claw: instead of tearing up
an ant-hill and devouring its inhabitants within their subterranean
cells, enticing them without, by running rapidly around the
hill, and licking up a legion ere they can return !
The Dasyures : the makeshifts of the little cat-like carnivores;
The Thylacine : without pouch-bones; the makeshift of the wolf-like
carnivores;
The jaw-determined, fierce, extinct Thylacoleo: makeshift and con-
temporary of the Sabre-tooth;
The Kangaroos, the Wallaroos, the Wallabies, and Pademelons : make-


shifts of the Deer and Antilopes: their evolution back and
downward into tail and hind-legs, the reverse of that which has
effected Man : In this the correspondents of the Spider Monkeys
of the Amazon ; depending and distorted off-shoots from the
Mammal-mainbranch of the Zoblogic Tree ; corrupted lines of
the grand Iliad of Life descending into doggerel, or muttered
backward, like a witch’s prayer, converted into senseless gib-
berish !
I see and sing
The Orders of the Mammals not included in the Monotremes and the
Marsupials, indigenous :
The curious Hapalotis : a little rodent in the form of a kangaroo: in
Kangaroodom doing as the kangaroos;
The Land-rats and the Water-rats : for such there be in Netherdom as
in the Upperdom of Avon’s Bard ;
The great, gregarious Bat: the Flying-fox ;
The Eared and Earless Seals;
The Dugong : Halicore : the oriental Manatee : the father of the fic-
tion of the half-man half-fish monsters of the sea;
The yelloAv-sided delphic Bottle-nose ;
The Whales : Balsenidae : organic tanks of oil sea-piped around the
world: a score or more : among the small, the Diplodon and
the Mesoplodon : with long and tapering beak : and in the
lower jaw two pairs of teeth: that meeting, as they sometimes
do, above the upper jaw prevent the animal from opening its
mouth and causing thus its death ;
The Dingo : dusky, brush-tailed, fox- and wolfish : howling, screech-
ing : barkless : tamable : allied to the Coyote of Nevada and
the Dhole of Bengal: the Wolf-twig of the Mammal-branch
just at the point of forking into Dog!
And last of all the Mammals to the manor born, I see and sing
The Black : the Austral Man : an offshoot from an ancient Asian Man-
branch of the Zoblogic Tree, depending, withering, decaying,
almost leafless now: a figure in the grand Dissolving Panorama
of the Earth evanishing into a memory : a myth : a mystery
for aye;
The Black : brown-mud-black skinned : thin-armed, thin legged, and
bottle-pouched : small-handed and small-footed : finger-toed :
dark- cavern-eyed, flat-nosed, maw-mouthed : with burnt-black
waving hair and full crisp beard : well-shouldered and high-


chested : savoring of phosphorus: keen-visioned, sharp-eared,
agile, and alert: precocious babe : aborted man : a svveenied,
swarthy, savage scrub: a weasened, wolfish wanderer forever on
the wallaby : on : on : himself, and his belongings all and
singular, into the Never-Never Country of Eternity !
His Gin : a woman, wife : Symbolic here of all pertaining to the
woman-half of his humanity ; his loves and hates, his jealousies
and feuds, his virtues and his vices as a Man in his totality
among his kind : especially, his partiality for adipose combined
with femininity to supplement his want of fat combined with
masculinity !
His 800-hoop: babe : first cradled in a hole scooped in the warm dry
sand : then folded in a bag of ’possum skin and slung upon the
mother’s back : then set astride a shoulder or her neck : and
then, as soon as it can crawl, provided with a digging-stick and
started out in search of roots and frogs ; to feast or famish as it
may henceforth ! Symbolic here of all the stages of his growth
from birth to premature maturity : his struggle for existence in
his wretched world from first to last: escaping this destruction
to encounter that: his cradle and his grave the self-same desert
sand : his life a ling’ring living burial !
His Coo-ee : a peculiar call: Symbolic here of all his mimicries and
mutterings: his speech, his songs, his war-cries, and his dying
groans : Primaeval Man Mort-Mumblings ; incoherent: lapsing
into whisperings : lip-quiverings : death-rattleings : and there
an end;
His Chir-rin-chir-rie; knocking out the upper front teeth: Typic
here of all his mutilations and disfigurements: his scoring,
scarring, gashing, slashing, piercing, lopping, clipping—all ;
His Yin-ka: string of human hair three hundred yards in length
wound round the waist: A symbol here of all his dress and or-
naments: of skins and feathers, bone and shell bark, rush, and
hair;
His Nar-doo-flour ; the crushed seeds of the Clover-fern : the one ex-
treme of his variety of food : a' Stranded Whale the other !
This, the latter, haply once within a life-time: an Australian
Oil-strike! incommensurable, overwhelming, maddening! ex-
alting and expanding for the moment the emaciated famine-
haunted wretch into an open-handed and big-hearted benefactor
of mankind! fire-signaling afar to share his feast the very
enemy perhaps whom but the night before he sought to stun in


sleep and rob of his prized kidney-fat ere he recover and awake
to linger through succeeding days and nights in an unutterably
agonizing death! The Fern and Whale symbolic here of all
his food ;
His Gun-yah : Wur-ley: Mi-am : Will-am ; lean-to, hut: but one re-
move from the Bornean ape’s arboreal retreat: Symbolic here
of all his artificial bields and shelterings against the winter’s
cold and rain ;
His Won-guim : Boomerang of play: an Eucalyptus-leaf-like toy of
wood : a form compounding bend and twist, convexity, and
flattening, (suggesting a propeller-screw with parabolic blades,)
and when impelled by skill, rotating and revolving in a most
eccentric orbit: going through the air an hundred yards and
half again as far and coming back ; alighting as it has been
willed behind the thrower’s back or at his feet: gyrating,
swirling, forward, backward, upward, downward, like a merry
waltzing thing of life and play: a rondo of the mirth and joys
of youth re-echoing among the tombs and sepulchres of the
inimitably vast God’s-acre of Australia! Symbolic here of all
his toys and games and sports besides: among them, notably,
his Weet-weet: Kangaroo-rat: second only to the Won-guim
as a toy-projectile: antedating the Fish-bullet as a special form
designed to meet the least resistance in the air;
His Barn-geet; Boomerang of work and war: Symbolic here of all
his weapons, tools, and implements: of wood and bone and
stone and shell: his spears and clubs: his Wammerah, or
Throwing-stick, increasing wondrously the length and leverage
of his right arm: his axes, chisels, knives, and hooks: his fire-
drills, baskets, nets, and weirs;
His song-and-dance Cor-rob-bor-ee : by firelight in the forest: Naked
women seated in a semicircle singing and hand-beating on a
skin stretched tight between their spread knees : Leader in the
centre with two signal-sticks, click-clacking, striking, waving:
droning, humming, chanting : pacing to and from the women and
the dancers: Dancers decked with bent-bough anklets, ’possum
pinafore, and ringed and streaked and striped with pipeclay:
simulating skeletons : with clacking sticks: arranged in line or
lines in front of women ; all together as an unit swaying, bend-
ing, jerking, twisting: leaping this way, leaping that way:
chanting, clacking: kicking, jumping, stamping: fast and
faster: loud and louder: high and higher ; imitating dingo,


emu, kangaroo, or curaduck: enacting fishing-, hunting-, war-
ring-, wiving-scenes : fantastically, diabolically : culminating
in the highest leap and loudest shout of all; then disappearing
in the dark: ere long to re-appear in a new guise, with voice
and vigor as before ; Symbolic here of all his concertings and
caperings in the expression of his social pleasures, savage rage,
religious rite, and eldritch demonism: in the expression of his
wild and weird environment; in emulation of the Laughing
Jackass, Bird, and Dingo, Beast: in rivalry of each and every
living thing that has involved the Never-Never country in its
flesh and blood ;
His Be-a-ma; exchanging wives ; A symbol here of all his marriage
customs and restrictions, and his complicated Tamil system of
relationships;
His Kidney-fat Diablery : the chief of all the involutions of his hor-
rible environment into his mind and body and its evolutions
thence in horrible imaginings and practices : his desert life de-
priving him of all his adipose save that about.his kidneys and
their capping glands: his hunger forcing him betimes to feed
upon his fellows and discovering to him the luscious morsels of
the loins: his murderous propensities and anthropophagous
proclivities becoming growth-inwrought, developing in this or
that direction thence to the most diabolic of extremities! Sym-
bolic here of all his sorceries and mystic demonism : his Mur-
ro-kun: a magic bone ; his Bulk or Mur-ra-mai: a talisman or
magic stone : imparting a mysterious and awful pow’r to its
possessor, a Co-rad-jee, doctor, priest, or sorcerer : a piece of
quartz, chalcedony, a crystal, glass decanter-stopper, or the like:
concealed especially from woman’s eye: enclosed in yarn and
net, hid under arm-pit, in the mouth, or otherwise : r lhe aus-
tral correspondent of the Cannel Coal of Dr. Dee, the mythic
Urim-Thummim of Joe Smith, the meteoric Blackstone of the
Kaaba of Mecca, and the like;
His Ten-di: judgment council: Symbol here of all his rude and crude
imaginings of law and government; his punishments with
Waddy Blow upon the Head ; Spear Thrust through Arm and
Leg: and chief of all his Ordeal of Spears: the culprit with a
narrow shield exposed to a succession of swift-flying well-direct-
ed darts : or slain outright or famous ever after for his bravery
and skill;
His Koot-chee; mythic monster: many-visaged, many-voiced : chaot-


ic concept of the baleful in the form of a tormenting and de-
stroying devil: growling in the thunder : moving in the whirl-
wind : building fires in the Aurora Austral: causing sickness;
carrying contagion : material and immaterial: to be opposed
as well with won-guims as with witchery : Symbolic here of
all his gods and devils fashioned by his wants and wishes, hopes
and fears, in the mirage of his imagination : mirroring eternal-
ly the desert wilds and wastes: The mental correspondents of
the malagrugous Mexique images conceived but not yet cut in
black basalt: as well, the air-drawn monsters of the drunkard
and the maniac;
His Moo-ra-moo-ra : smallpox: Typic here of all the ills to which
his flesh is heir and thief;
His Grin-ka-ri: flayed corpse: A symbol here of all his rites and
customs appertaining to the dead;
His Mirrn-yonk: shell and refuse heap, or kjokkenmodding: last of
all his monuments and memories to disappear: incorporate in-
dissolubly with his island sepulchre !
The Whole ; the Fauna of the Austral World in its totalitv: the
*
Shadows of the Fauna of the world besides commingling and
compounding in peculiar forms: fantastic, weird, grotesque:
familiar, strange, chimerical: a hashish-dream menagerie !
I see and sing
The Slayer and Successor of the Black :
The Master of the Austral World to-day ;
The Problem of the Centuries to Come:
The CORNSTALK: Man compounding millions of mankind : from
all the airts the wind can blow: of all conditions, colors,
creeds, shapes, sizes, aims, and ends: invading, over-running,
and appropriating: dwelling, killing, tilling ; digging, delving :
multiplying, ramifying, modifying all;
The CORNSTALK; Man involving and evolving an enlarging uni-
verse : inverting, and everting; intermingling, interacting:
many, one: colonial, intercolonial: dependent, independent:
national and international : corporeal and incorporeal: Com-
posite Cosmopolitan ;
The CORNSTALK: Man of the To-Day expanding and extending
into the To-Morrow’s Homo-Ultimate: inheriting the World
within his Blood and Brawn and Brain and parting with his
Birthright only with the Mooning of the Earth;


The CORNSTALK: People-Pyramid of Austral Egypt: course on
course contracting from a base of savagery deep-buried in the
desert-sand unto an apex of enlightenment bright-gleaming in
the ether of the tiptops of the Black Spur Eucalypts;
The CORNSTALK: People-Poem in a Word : the Kalevala of the
Suomema of the South : the Finland, not of Frost, but Fire !
I see and sing
His Grasses, Flowers, Fruits, and Grains, now fringing the vast sepul-
chre of Dingodom with mind and body sweets and surfeitings;
now fringing Hell with Paradise !
I see and sing
His baneful weeds: Sweet-briar, Thistle, Vervaine, Milkweed, Sida,
Furse: the Devil that aye lurks behind the Cross;
I see and sing
His Singing, Game, and Table-birds: now frighting to the Never-
Never Country fast the Laughing Jackass with its eldritchness
and demonism !
I see and sing
His Beasts of infinite subservience and use :
The Dog : the first slave of the Master of the World : the first ex-
tension of the hand and tooth of Man into a substitute to catch
and kill for him: the point at which the Man-branch of the
Zoblogic Tree forks from the wholly Beast into the Barbarous :
the first stage in the evolution of the Cosmopolitan : the first
scene of the Drama of the Hundred-handed son of Ouran6s
and Ge, Bri&reos :
The Cat: the second servant of the Master of the World: the first ex-
tension of the noonday sense of sight of Man into a substitute
to guard at night his precious stores while he is fast asleep;
The Pig : the waste and kitchen refuse of the Master of the World com-
pacted, purified, and put again upon his pantry-shelf;
The Rabbit and the Hare : fast-breeding, inland-pressing, irrepressi-
ble : slaves that would fain be masters: typic elsewhere of the
timid, here the terrible! out-leaping in the race for life the
Kangaroo and Wallaby;
The Sheep; the first and foremost of the beasts to equalize the ever-
changing hot and cold winds of the earth : to keep the Master
of the World within an artificial favored clime at the equator


and the poles: now multiplying marvelously in the austral
wastes in spite of their Sahara heat, aridity, and barrenness;
converting fast the Never-Never Country into Colchis—Country
of the Golden Fleece;
The Ox : the Back and Belly of the Master of the World in an infinity
of outside supplemental forms ;
The Ass; the first-draft of the Drama of the Centaur: myth com-
pounding Man and Horse ;
The Camel: desert-dune incarnate ; desert-junk ;
The Horse ; the thews and muscles of ten men or more subordinated
to the will of one : the prototype in an organic form of the
infinity of Steel and Steam combined in the World-master’s en-
gines and machinery to-day
all which I see and sing here in a
word,
The Iron-Hors£ !
I see and sing
The Mob of Millions who compose
The CORNSTALK : mythic Man
supposititious personality: ideal
individuality : the counterfeit presentment of a multitude in
one;
The Mob of Millions: each a Leaf upon the Man-branch of the Zob-
logic Tree : the universal Yggdrasill;
The Mob of Millions: each an Iliad : an actual epitome of all: a sum
organic of the world !
I see and sing
Them in their Finite Individuality
And Infinite'
One, picking cotton on the Brisbane plains: a turkey-foot of tribal or
totemic scars upon each cheek, and down his forehead and his
nose a line of artificial ornamental warts as big and round as
peas: a Negro, from the western coast of Africa : symbolic of
the African in his totality ;
Another, hoeing sugar-cane hard by : his skull compressed and con-
ified with bandages in infancy, old Inca-like in shape: a Black
from Mallicollo, one of the New Hebrides : a type of all the
Melanesians ;
One, bending sail, aboard a Labor Trading Schooner : Yankee Stars
and Stripes tattooed with other figures on his brawny fore-arms :
a Kanaka from Hawaii: typic of the Polynesian ;
Another, taking beche-de-mer in Roebuck Bay : a kris scar on his neck ;


his left eye out: a lithe Malayan from Malacca; typic of the
great Malayan multitude;
One, in the suds at Collingwood : new-saddle hued : his head in
shape, like the great cooling and collapsing Earth, according to
the figurings of Green, a compromise between a sphere and
tetrahedron : round it coiled the pigtail badge of his political
minority : a Chinaman : symbolic of the Mongol third or fourth
of all mankind;
Another, with a Trio of Gilt Balls above his door in Perth : an angler-
fish in human guise : his head upheld and half turned round by
a carotid aneurism; a Jew from anywhere, except Jerusalem :
a type of all the Wandering Tribes of Israel;
One, mining kerosene at Hartley Vale : a leather thong about his
wrist to fend against rheumatic joints : a Stonehenge Briton
handed down unto to-day, from Basingstoke: a typic Celtic
Aryan ;
Another, mining silver in the Sunny Corner Mines: club-footed, am-
bidextral, deaf: a Cymric Welshman from the Clwyd : an-
other typic Celtic Aryan ;
One, personating Peace and Order in the City of the Plains : auroral-
haired, pockmarked, pugnosed, long upper-lipped, and mon-
key-mugged : a bobby with a Bishop Barker in his hand, hob-
nobbing with a cattle-duffing lag : an Irishman from Inch-a-
Goill : a third type of the Celtic Aryan ;
Another, paper-making and fellmongering at Liverpool: as neckless as
a fish, bow-legged, and pigeon-toed : a Gaelic Scot from Augh-
nasheen : a fourth type of the Celtic Aryan ;
One, selling snuff, tobacco, and cigars in Armidale : a musty, mouldy
shadow of the-man-that-lost-his found : consumptive : dieting
on dugong oil : a Spaniard from Valencia : a typic Latin
Aryan : a Diego : commonly prefixed with Damned, by Gringo
tars;
Another, making wine at Germantown : forever swallowing the Adam’s
apple in his neck alternately with twirling his moustache : a
Frenchman from Boulogne : another typic Latin Aryan ;
One, bullock-punching on the Cambridge downs of Kimberly : a stam-
merer, and stutterer: afflicted with St. Vitus’ dance : a sore
affliction at a pinch : a Portuguese fromSantarem : a third type
of the Latin Aryan ;
Another, fiddling in the streets of Ballarat: a green silk blind before
his sightless eyes, and golden buttons in his ears, in lieu of


rings: an old Italian of Mantua: a fourth type of the Latin
Aryan;
One, shipping copper-ore at Wallaroo : strabismic to accommodate a
wryneck twisting to the right and a peculiar nasal turning to
the left: a Swede from Gottenburg : a typic Teuton Aryan : a
Gringo, in the Diego lingo of the sea ;
Another, in the office of the telegraphic company at Palmerston ; his
left arm off at upper third of humerus: homesick; a Dane
from Elsinore: another typic Teuton Aryan ;
One, mining gold in Bendigo: a flaxen-haired Apollo Belvidere:
tormented with a tapeworm for ten years: a Dutchman from
the Hague: a third type of the Teuton Aryan ;
Another, rolling iron at the Eskbank works in Lithgow Vale : Thor-
bearded, shaggy-browed, loquacious, bibulous, and quarrelsome
when drunk : an old Norwegian from Hammerfest: a fourth
type of the Teuton Aryan ;
One, building a great iron railway bridge across the broad Hawkes-
bury: long, lank, leathery, and lantern-jawed: a mule-kick
scar between his eye-brows; Sankey-hymn-book singing, and
profane : a Yankee from Sang Hollow, Pennsylvania: a fifth
type of the Teuton Aryan ;
Another, pen-depicting a new Gonodactyl from Port Jackson:
laying his forefinger to the left side of his nose, in emphasizing
“Yes ; I know,” or as a sign in lieu thereof: a Holstein cow-
lick over his right eye cascading his unkempt, long, silvery
locks into a fishtailed fountain playing silently and ceaselessly
upon his thinking-heated brow: a German from Aschaflfen-
burg : a sixth type of the Teuton Aryan ;
One, in the parliament of New South Wales: round-headed and
round-bodied : pinkish-skinned : well-clad : the parting of his
hair, moustache and beard, midway between his ears symbollic-
ally indicating him in his essential legislative individuality ;
divided into hemispheres, a Northern and a Southern, or, a
Home and a Colonial: a positive and negative : “My word !”
one minute, and “No fear!” the next: an Englishman from
Liverpool: a seventh typic Teuton Aryan :
And all the millions of the people of Australia besides in the infinity
of the expression of their individuality : the all-involving one
idea of existence : each to be
What he has never been ;
What he is not ;


And what none other than himself can be;
A further evolution of the Finite in Himself into the Infinite!
The Lifer; for the term of his existence in the flesh a banished brand-
ed man : a gnarled and crook’d and twisted scrub, transported
from the densely crowded forest of the British Islands to the
open empty wastes of Topsiturvia, to straighten out, untwist,
and grow erect: to be reversed from bad to good, if not by
homilies and hulks, by the machinery that turns and twists the
Earth itself and the infinity of circuravolving spheres—or kill-
ed in the attempt;
The Lifer : haunted by a hopeless hope : a happy dream by night, a
harrowing thought by day: to go back Home: to breathe the
air of England and of Liberty : to be a Man : the sky above
his head, the earth beneath his feet, and North or South, or
East or West, an open way for him to walk in manly strength
and pride;
The dread Bushranger: austral outlaw : Robin Hood : Frank James:
succeeding the extinct Thylacoleo as the greatest of the austral
beasts of prey ;
The Larrikin : the Hoodlum of the Austral World ; (The word from
Lark , the same as Hark / the outcry of our language-forming
sires on hearing the melodious and joyous bird high overhead,
a tiny twinkling song-star in the sun-lit heavens; thence,
through metaphoric Lark , a noun, extreme hilarity, and Lark,
a verb, to riot—or, from On a Lark, Out Larking, and the
like, to the last phase of its development and lowest stage of
degradation, Larrikin /. a word that may be likened to the
Kangaroo, developed down and backward into a monstrosity !)
The old Beachcomber: gaunt, grim-visaged, eager-eyed, tar-smelling,
and tatooed: a ship-deserter, runaway : the jetsam and the
flotsam of the waters of the world in human guise;
The Whaler; of the Murrumbidgee and the Darling: when it suits his
pleasure and convenience, a dolce-far-niente outcast in the fer-
tile valleys of the rivers named, beyond the running of a war-
rant or a writ; a fisher, hunter, cut-throat, thief, or what he
will, time, place, and circumstance suggesting and determining:
by day affrighting phantoms of remorse with Thatcher’s songs :
by night, with rum ;
The Swagman : bed and board upon his back—or, having humped his
drum and set out on the wallaby, the austral tramp : in search


of work, or, haply, aimless, trudging on and on into the Never-
Never Country; lifting listlessly his hat in silent awe and
clammy-skinned, heart-sinking introspection while he halts be-
fore a gaunt, gigantic, ghost-white gum, graved with the mystic,
fateful letters, L’- D-T : the ghostly hand of Leichhardt beck-
oning to him from out the yawning all-involving sepulchre be-
yond !
The sly Sundowner: swagman timing his arrival at a station that the
time, the place, and circumstance, appealing to the hospitality
of worthy pioneers, may never fail to get for him a supper, bed,
and breakfast ere he trudge again ;
The Bushman ; eking out a weird existence in the spectral forest:
dwelling in an endless eldritch dream ; half in the world of
Something, half in that of Nothing : Gunyah, his bark hovel;
Skillian, his bark lean-to kitchen ; Damper, his unleavened
bread baked in the ashes; Billy, his tea-kettle, universal pot
and pan and bucket; Sugar-bag, his source of saccharine, a
bee-tree ; Pheasant, his facetious metaphoric euphuism for Liar,
quasi Lyre-bird ; Fit for IVoogooroo, for Daft or Idiotic;
Brmnby, his peculiar term for wild horse ; Scrubber, wild ox ;
Nuggeting, calf-stealing ; Jumbuck , sheep, in general; an Old-
man, grizzled wallaroo or kangaroo ; Long-sleever, Bishop
Barker, and Deep-sinker, synonyms of Yankee Schooner;
Station, Run, a sheep- or cattle-ranch ; and Kabonboodgery—
an echo of the sound diablery forever in his ears, from dawn to
dusk of Laughing Jackass and from dusk to dawn of Dingo—
his half-bird-and-beast-like vocal substitute for Very Good ;
The Squatter: camping for a week, a fortnight, or forever, where he
finds none to dispute his right: ignoring title-deeds ; in bliss-
ful ignorance of judgments, liens, and mortgages ; a retrover-
sion to the Bedouin-nomadic stage of his forefathers on the
desert wastes and steppes of Asia ;
The Stockman : austral Cowboy : by the magic of a whip-crack herd-
ing cattle half a league away ;
The manor-born Moonlighter: austral Guacho ; fearless, skillful,
breakneck, rider: in the bush and in the open : over stones
and thorough marshes ; lassoing the Scrubber and the Brumby,
when, at night, to slake their thirst, they leave the scrub or
bush to find a pool, a water-hole, or billybong ;
The Dummy : man of straw in buying land ;
The Jackaroo : the austral Tender-foot;


The Cockatoo ; the austral small freeholdiug tiller of the soil; his
house, belike, with roof of thatch, and walls compounding
stones and sun-baked mud, whitewashed within and -out, and
decked within with lyre-bird tails and emu eggs ; upon a shelf
above an open hearth, a Bible, Yankee clock, and Clarke’s
blood-curdling novel: dog-eared, thumb-worn, brown; his
paddocks fenced with overlapping tree-trunks, interlacing limbs,
and upturned roots—a ghastly spectacle !
All, one and all the Mob of Millions who compound and aggregate
The CORNSTALK: Mythic Man :
The Laborer ;
The Miner, Metallurgist, Manufacturer ;
The Carrier by land and sea;
The Builder, Engine-driver, Agriculturist;
The Druggist, Surgeon, Counselor;
The Actor, Author, Editor;
The Soldier, Statesman, Scientist;
The People scattered o’er the Land, like Seeds Broad-cast;
The People gathered in the Cities and the Towns, like Garnered
Stores—
All, one and all,
The Man-half and the Woman-half in One: all-comprehending, all
idealizing, and all-uttering,
The BARD!
I see and sing
The Evolution of the Austral World,
Effected by
The CORNSTALK: the Norwegian Thor turned topsy-turvy with
the world around him : crushing not the skulls of the Frost-
giants of the North, but, strange mutation ! hurling his fell
hammer at the Fire-gods of the South : the Warmth, the Light,
and Life of Muspellheim : his olden good gods metamorphosed
into monstrous fiends !
I see and sing
The Evolution of the Austral World
In general and in detail:
From Desert to Domain ;
From Mallee-scrub to Orange-grove;
From Cockatoo to Cock and Hen;


From Kangaroo to Cotswold Sheep;
From Black to White : from Lowest Type to Highest Type of Man ;
From Solitude to Cityful;
From Want to Wealth ;
From Bunya-bunya seed to Bread;
From Billybong to Beer;
From ’Possum Pinafore to Silken Gown ;
From Boomerang to Armstrong Gun ;
From Shanksmare to the Iron-horse ;
From Message-stick to Universal Mail;
From Red-hand-daubing to Photography ;
From Coo-ee-ing to Telegraphing round the World ;
From Song-and-Dance Corrobboree to Parliament;
From Noon-day Nightmares to Grand Galleries of Art;
From Agony to Anaesthesia;
From Memory to Monument;
From Laxity to Law;
From Demonism to Darwinism ;
From Chaos-Speech to Kosmos-Song ;
From all the Negatives of the sepulchral No-Man’s-Land, the Never-
Never Country, to the Positives of Queensland, New South
Wales, Victoria, Australia South, Australia West —collectively,
The Hand Five-fingered of the Mistress of the Seas that grasps the
Grand Prize of the Southern World ;
The Paw Five-taloned of the Lion of the North that takes the Lion’s
Share of the Huge Carcass of the South ;
The YANKEELAND beneath the Southern Cross;
Among the Nations of the Earth, a Nation of Enlightenment, the
blazon of whose glorious banner has not been an empty boast,
ADVANCE!


NOTES
Australia
Australia, in her varied forms, expands,
And opens to the sky her hundred lands. —
Thomas Kibble Hervey
Pass we drear New Holland’s shoals,
Where no ample river rolls,
World of unwakened souls ! — James Montgomery.
Immortal shades of More and Raleigh rise !
Behold the Past is to the Present wed ;
Utopia is here ’neath southern skies,
And gleamy El Dorado looms ahead. — Thomas Bracken
Three centuries have scarcely rolled along
The slopes of time, since on the Dutchman’s view
The golden sun-burst of the south streamed down
On shores that stretched athwart the placid sheen
Of Father Neptune’s unexplored domains. — Ibid.
O day of days ! when first the British flag—
That silken shield of Justice —waved on high
Above the peaceful coast, to consecrate
Our giant island for the use of man ;
O day of days ! when first a British cheer
Resounded far and wide ’mong vales and hills,
Proclaiming the foundation of a State,
The birthday of an Empire ; day of days !
When on our shores that prince of British tars,
Immortal Cook, stood forth in England’s name,
And claimed the mighty continent for her. — Ibid.
There is a place in distant seas
Full of contrarieties:
There, beasts have mallards’ bills and legs,
Have spurs like cocks, like hens lay eggs.
There parrots walk upon the ground,
And grass upon the trees is found;
On other trees, another wonder!
Leaves without upper sides or under.


There pears you’ll scarce with hatchet cut;
Stones are outside the cherries put;
Swans are not white, but black as soot.
There neither leaf, nor root, nor fruit
Will any Christian palate suit,
Unless in desperate need you’d fill ye
With root of fern and stalk of lily.
There missiles to far distance sent
Come whizzing back from whence they went;
There quadrupeds go on two feet,
And yet few quadrupeds so fleet;
There birds, although they cannot fly,
In swiftness with your greyhound vie.
With equal wonder you may see
The foxes fly from tree to tree ;
And what they value most, so wary,
These foxes in their pockets carry.
There the voracious ewe-sheep crams
Her paunch with flesh of tender lambs.
Instead of beef, and bread, and broth,
Men feast on many a roasted moth.
The north winds scorch, but when the breeze is
Full from the south, why then it freezes;
The sun when you to face him turn ye,
From right to left performs his journey.
Now of what place could such strange tales
Be told with truth save New South Wales ?
Richard Whately.
On the Wallaby : page 7, line 2 ; page 23, line 5.
An Australianism signifying traveling, wandering, tramping, on the go:
wallaby being a generic term of native origin for a number of kangaroo-like
animals specifically distinguished as the rock-wallaby, blaek-gloved-wallaby,
nail-tailed-wallaby, and the like.
Cowan’s Canon : Page 10, line 23.
The weird and picturesque gorge in which the new bridle-path has been made
from Katoomba to the Caves of Jenolan. Dingo-haunted : laughing-jackass-
echoing: tree-fem-shaded: orchid-scented : glow above and gloom below : here
an overhanging iron-stained cliff : there a multiple waterfall: presenting a novel
interest and fascination at every turn of the tortuous path descending nine
hundred feet in a beeline distance of half a mile. So named, in July 1885, by
Mr. George E. Cook, of Lithgow, N. S. W., Superintendent of Roads, while on
the wallaby with the writer : exploring, geologizing, botanizing : hungering,
thirsting: every muscle aching : burning the bush of Australia to make the
charcoal for the preceding sketch.
The Never-Never Country : Page 10, line 33 ; et sparsim.
Within the ruthless Australasian wastes. — Henry Kendall.


In central wastes afar from any home
Or haunt of man, and in the changeless midst
Of sullen deserts and the footless miles
Of sultry silence.—lbid.
Ludwig Leichhardt: page n, line 10; page 32, line 5.
Ye, who prepare with pilgrim feet,
Your long and doubtful path to wend,
If, whitening on the wastes, ye meet
The relics of my murdered friend ;
His bones with reverence ye shall bear
To where some mountain streamlet flows,
There, by its mossy banks prepare
The pillow of his long repose.
It shall be by a stream whose tides
Are drank by birds of every wing,
Where every lovely flower abides
The earliest wakening touch of Spring.
When ye have made his narrow bed
And laid the good man’s ashes there.
Ye shall kneel down around his head
And wait upon your God in prayer.
What though no reverent man be near.
No anthem pour its solemn breath,
No holy pall invest his bier,
With all the sacred pomp of death ;
Still humble minds shall find that grace
Devoutly bowed upon the sod
Which calls those blessings round the place.
And consecrates the soil to God.
Oh, meet that he who so caressed
beauteous Nature’s varied charms, —
That he, her martyred son should rest
Within his mother’s fondest arms.
And oh, bethink in other times,
And be those happier times at hand,
When Science like the smile of God,
Goes frightening o’er that weary land;
How will her pilgrims hail the power
Beneath the drooping myall’s gloom,
To sit at eve and mourn an hour,
And pluck a flower from Leichhardt’s tomb. —
H. G. Lynd.
(Reproduced as recited from memory by a stockman of New South Wales, and
doubtless at variance with the poem as written.)


Henry Kendall: page n, line 23.
Fair Austral’s eldest daughter veils her face,
And drapes her sunny splendors in the gloom,
Her first-born son of song, in manhood’s bloom—
The sweetest singer of her brave young race—
Has joined the Dantesque shadows in the space
Beyond the sapphire arch, and o’er the tomb ;
He faded ere the wattle’s golden plume
Perfumed the sylvan scenes he loved to trace.
He who hath witch’d and charm’d the South’rn lute
Till strains mellifluous swept o’er the land
In floods of euphony ; whose soul could shoot
To Nature’s heart, and pluck out, at command,
Her secrets and her mysteries, is mute.
The harp has fallen from the Minstrel’s hand. —
Thomas Bracken,
The Brickfielder : Page 14, line 16.
So comes the Southern gale at evenfall
(The swift “brickfielder” of the local folk)
About the streets of Sydney, when the dust
Lies burnt on glaring windows, and the men
Look forth from doors of drouth, and drink the change
With thirsty haste and that most thankful cry
Of, “Here it is—the cool, bright, blessed rain !”• —
Henry Kendall.
The Gums or Eucalypts : Page 17, line 27; et sparsim.
When the gnarl’d, knotted trunks Eucalyptian
Seem carved, like weird columns Egyptian,
With curious device —quaint inscription,
And hieroglyph strange.— Adam Lindsay Gordon.
Then I took out my sheep in the bush as they call it;
Faith, ’twas no bush at all but a mighty great wood;
And the trees grew so tall and so thick you’d have thought they
Were bushes there once in the time of the Flood.—
Charles Thatcher.
The Laughing Jackass : Page 20, line 23.
The stoic bird, —
That winged philosopher who laughs at change
And all things else with weird and mocking laugh.—
Thomas Bracken.
At last the great kingfisher came and called
Across the hollows loud with early whips,
And lighted, laughing, on the shepherd’s hut,
And roused the widow from a swoon like death. —
Henry Kendall.


The Black :Page 22, line 32, et sparsim
The Tierra-del-Fuegian and the Black of Australia are approximately equally
low in the scale of humanity. They are so, however, not from the same but
contrary causes. The Fuegian has never attained a higher stage of development
than that in which he is found to-day; while the Black has degenerated from
a higher stage than that in which he is disappearing at present. The Fuegian
represents the babyhood of mankind in general; while the Black is the expres-
sion of the premature decay and second childhood of a race that at one time or
elsewhere to-day might be set down as semi-civilized. The one is a resultant of
the evolution of Growth ; and the other, of Decay. The one is an overgrown
baby ; and the other, a stunted man.
Curiously, moreover, they are the organic expressions of opposite environ-
ments : the Fuegian, of winter and water; and the Australian, of summer and
sand : extremes as great perhaps as may be found in the inhabitable globe. And
that the contrast between them may appear in detail as well as in general, the
following lines by the writer may serve. They were written from a study of
several boatloads of Fuegians encountered in November, 1884, in the Strait of
Magellan and Smyth’s Channel.
THE FUEGIAN.
Crown-cropped ; while, in a dank and matted fringe,
His black hair hangs around his brow and ears ;
As if in mask or mimicry of the
Less densely clouded zenith overhead
And the obscuring curtain round about
Of dark, depending, dripping fog and mist.
Low-browed ; with broad, flat face obscurely barred
With reddish-brown or smeared and daubed with white;
The counterfeit presentment of the band
Of shore surrounding, ’twixt the sea and clouds ;
With dusky moss and lichens seamed ; or flecked
With snow, low-lying in the dark ravines.
Broad-shouldered and big-bodied; brawny, bare ;
With cramped and dwindled legs, and slender arms ;
With thongs about the wrists ; small hands and feet—
So disproportionate unto his body,
The latter lapses in its likeness to
The limbless, glacier-smoothed and -rounded isles
Of quartz and gneiss and granite that appear
Above the line of the horizon, huge,
Unshapely,—weathered humpings, smooth and bare.
Subsisting on the shellfish of the shore —
The mussel, limpet, sea-egg, and the like, —
With now and then a duck-egg or a fish,
And rarer still, an otter, goose, or seal;
Incorporating aught and everything
Of life around him, till, existing as
Subsisting, he embodies and expresses


The shore-line of mankind —the lowest level—
Or the horizon of humanity.
Within the frail walls of his birch-bark boat, —
With wicker strengthened and with crushed moss calked,
With paddles crudely fashioned, and the skin
Of seal suspended in the bow for sail, —
Upon a hearth of clay, the ash and coals
Of an uncertain lire, fanned into flame
Before the bellows of the Long Reach gale;
Or spread and flattened into smothering smoke
By the descending williwaw ; or whirled
Into a cloud of sparks and ashes by
The swift revolving gust; or, haply, quenched
By long continued rain or sudden splash
Of the foam-crested billow o’er the boat.
This fire the symbol of the slanting sun ;
Now, glowing o’er the glaciers of the North
And scorching all upon the sheltered shore ;
Now, frozen to a faint, vague, whitish spot
Beyond the overarching clouds, the while
An icy chill succeeds the dewy sweat;
Now, out of sight—its presence in the sky
Determined by a dim, diffusive light
Indissoluble with the mist and fog,
The rain and sleet and snow and hail, in which
It is involved, —revealed by that which veils.
This fire, as well, the symbol of the soul
Of the poor savage ; now, aglow with joy
In the expression of incarnate greed
At the appearance of a coming ship,
With, haply, in exchange for eggs and pelts
And an inspection of his nakedness,
A string of beads or palm-length of tobacco;
Anon, a melancholy, wretched gloom,—
A sullen, silent, dark and dank despair,—
A deep and all-pervading murderous mood, —
In which the blear-eyed, gaunt and grizzled hag
That bare him in her womb, the rather than
His shiv’ring, cow’ring dog, falls at his feet
Beneath his club, to fill his hung’ring maw !
No mercy knows he than the south-pole wind ;
No pity knows he than the south-pole wave ;
No sympathy with mother, wife, and babe,
Than quartz and granite underneath his feet —
Than walls of ice-capped mountains on all sides —
Than sleet and hail upon his naked hide —
Than maws as hungry, hands as strong, and clubs
As ready as his own to kill, around.


. * .
■», ' --**•


k


-
#
.
• \
■
‘
I
•*
v
■ ■ ■
■


■J-*?- -• . ... vr . . . Wf.: .... /•** •:*£■*•*/;
