





,1r I'HHtfj
;
■■■':. :oIU :Vi'
V.- ' v :>V »
Nafeg^


BMOIAMS OF THE STOMACH INmiIIOIJS C'OMIITMI.M S-.
'Troedei.litho.. Yeld.


AUSTRALASIAN
TEXT BOOK OF TEMPERANCE.
SCIENTIFIC FACTS,
MEDICAL TESTIMONIES, STATISTICAL RETURNS,
AUTHORITATIVE OPINIONS,
DRAWN FROM RELIABLE SOURCES,
CONCERNING THE FOLLOWING SUBJECTS OF UNIVERSAL INTEREST AND
GREAT NATIONAL IMPORTANCE, VIZ.:—
The nature and, effects of Alcohol upon the human system, when
administered as a medicine or taken as a beverage.
The character and tendency of the traffic in Intoxicating Liquors,
and its effects upon the moral, social, and material welfare of
individuals, families, and nations.
The class and properties of the articles used by distillers and
brewers for the purpose of Adulteration.
Has the increasing culture of the vine and the manufacture of
Wine abated drunkenness, or superseded the use of stronger
drinks?
What is the legitimate use and value of the Fruit of the Vine?
Personal responsibility and individual duty touching the great
social question of License or No License for the sale of
Intoxicating Beverages.
MASON, FIRTH, & M'CUTCHEON, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST.


p , ' ' \ ij:
■


AUSTRALASIAN
TEXT BOOK OF TEMPERANCE,
SIX DIAGRAMS OF THE STOMACH, MARKING THE STAGE’'!
AND PROGRESS OF ALCOHOLIC DISEASE.
Publishe l by the Victorian Tract Distribution Society, Melbourne.
The education of the “masses” is the distinguishing feature of the
age in which we live. The development of mental power, by the cul-
ture of the national intellect, has become one of the leading objects of
governmental solicitude throughout the civilised world. To evoke
and discipline the latent forces of a nation’s intellectual wealth, is a
great and glorious work; but to imbue that wealth, and graft upon that
power the inspirations of practical wisdom and philanthropy, is a
greater and more glorious achievement. “ Knowledge is power,” but
it may be a power for good and it may be for evil. As the legitimate
outcome of the great educational movements of the last half-century,
vast changes have already taken place, and greater are impending.
Ancient systems, dogmas, and beliefs, venerable for their antiquity—
customs, usages, and special licenses based upon self-interest and forti-
fied by legal sanctions—are now being summoned to the bar of an
enlightened public opinion to take their trial, and stand or fall by their
own intrinsic merits. The tendency of the popular mind will be, if
wisely directed, not only to prove all things, but to hold fast that which
is good. Education should teach man to know himself and the true
hygienic conditions of his being; it should make him intimately
acquainted with the marvellous adaptation of all nature’s provisions
to the perfection of his physical organisation. That education is
essentially defective which does not seek to impress upon the youthful
mind personal responsibility and individual duty in relation to those
beneficial constitutional laws ordained of God for man’s welfare—that
wrong impulses, indulged, pass rapidly into habit, thence into fixed
principles of action and character—that once a youth permits the
lower propensities of his being to usurp enlightened reason’s divine
right to govern, the great battle of life, is all but for ever lost. A
knowledge of, and conformity to the physical laws of our being would
add immensely to the sum of human happiness, and many years to the
average duration of human life. We have now, in abundance, the clear
light of established scientific truths; a host of medical experiences
A 2


and opinions from men of high standing in the profession ; and nume-
rous testimonies of eminent statesmen, judges, magistrates, governors,
ministers, and others ; all bearing upon this important and interesting
study. A few of these we have selected, referring to the public sale
and general use of intoxicating liquors as subversive of all that is good
and promotive of all that is evil. Despite the emphatic and solemn
protests of science and medical testimony, we continue to sanction, or
passively submit to, a state of things which a future age will look back
upon with amazement and abhorrence. We have now in our midst
legalised rights and usages which the writers of a coming day will
describe as the barbarisms of a vitiated and demoralised civilisation.
Every right-minded and true-hearted man will then feel, as every
genuine lover of humanity now feels, that the first duty of a Govern-
ment is to suppress every public source of moral pollution and social
degradation, and thus remove snares and temptations from the pathway
of those just entering upon life; also to encourage every well-directed
effort to promote a high-toned public morality, and the social and
intellectual elevation of all classes. To legalise a traffic which is the
acknowledged source of three-fourths of all crime, pauperism, prostitu-
tion, lunacy, and suffering, will in that good time coming be branded
as an infamous perversion of delegated power, opposed to the first
principles of good government, and subversive of all right, both
human and divine. The following pages are earnestly commended to
the unprejudiced consideration of all who desire individual well-being
and enduring national prosperity.
A candid and impartial perusal cannot fail to establish the fol-
lowing conclusions :
That alcohol is nowhere to be found in any product of nature, and
was never itself created by God; but is essentially an artificial thing,
prepared by man through the destructive process of fermentation
or decomposition of organic matter.
That alcohol—the stimulating, intoxicating property of all fermented
liquors—is a powerful irritant poison, and generates in the human
system a tendency to death.
That alcohol is the principal cause of disease, that it has no specific
effect on any organ of the body for the cure of any disease, and that
almost every disease is aggravated by it.
That alcohol yields neither food nor force to the body; that it im-
pairs digestion by dissolving and coagulating the pepsin—an essential
element of the gastric juice ; that it produces fatty degeneracy more than
any other agent, by corrupting and impoverishing the blood; that this
death-producing principle of rotting vegetable matter, when used as a,
beverage in the form of light wines, ales, or distilled spirits, destroys
health, and powerfully conduces to premature old age and death, and
when used as a medicine prevents the recovery of some, and retards
the recovery of others.
That nearly all the wines, ales, porter, and distilled spirits now used
are adulterated with either strychnine, stramonium, belladonna,
tobacco, cocculus, opium, or other dangerous vegetable irritants and
narcotic poisons.
*


That to license the sale of intoxicating liquors is to license drunken-
ness, crime, and prostitution.
That drunkenness, crime, and licentiousness increase in the ratio
of facilities for obtaining intoxicating drinks.
That in wine-growing countries, and where the greatest facilities for
obtaining fermented and distilled liquors exist, drunkenness most
abounds, producing such unbridled licentiousness as to necessitate
governmental restriction and supervision.
That it is much easier to suppress the sale of intoxicating liquors
by prohibition than to regulate the sale of them by the most stringent
license.
That the suppression of the sale of intoxicating liquors would most
effectually obviate any necessity for legislative enactment to repress or
regulate any and every form of social evil. “ Prevention is better than
cure. ”
The testimony borne by the impartial and competent witnesses
produced, cannot be gainsayed, and we call upon the people in this and
all other lands to summon all interested in this traffic to that tribunal
whose supreme law is the public good, and show cause why this traffic
in intoxicating poison should not be at once and for ever abolished ;
and failing to do so, to demand from the legislature a Permissive Bill
empowering a majority of the ratepayers in each district to finally
deal with the question of license or no license.
Dr. Storey, in his work on Alcohol , its Nature and Effects, very justly
observes:—“To educate the public mind, and to awaken the public
■conscience, concerning a given subject, is equivalent to enacting laws
upon that subject, because out of the mind and heart of the people
the laws of the land are made. The trickery and chicanery of the
selfish and avaricious cannot long prevail against a just and righteous
cause upon which the people are well educated. And the temperance
cause will be triumphant only when the people are thoroughly
informed upon the subject. All information given to the people
should be principles and facts drawn from standard medical, scientific,
and other reliable sources of authority. Such information, thus
obtained, will have more weight on the mind of the people than mere
eloquence, and do more to convince them that the cause of temperance
is just and worthy than any other form of appeal. Theory and fancy
do very well for ornament; but argument is worth more than rhetoric
only, and facts have more value than high-sounding words. In
respect to alcohol, its nature and properties, and what it does in the
living body, can we produce an unquestionable authority, measuring
by a reliable standard, drawing conclusions no man can gainsay,
uttering judgments that will be law? Yes; science is accustomed to
■exactness. It measures to a ten-thousandth of an inch, and to a
millionth of a second ; it detects a ten-millionth of a grain diffused
through a dozen pounds ; it can make solid silver float invisibly in a
transparent fluid, yet its eye sees every atom of it, and gathers it to a
solid again, no particle being lost. As easily can science see every
particle of alcohol in a living body.' Science is the realm of certain-
ties, not opinions; of facts, not theories. It is not a theory that water


is composed of oxygen and hydrogen, it is a fact. And men hang their
all upon established scientific certainties, and shape their conduct
accordingly in defiance of opinion, and without doubt or apprehension.
Now, if science can give us any certainties about the effect of alcohol
on the living body, we will depend upon them. If it says ‘ use it, ’we
will use it in spite of all temperance advocates, teetotal societies, and
thunders of pulpit and press. If it says ‘ refrain, ’we will refrain, spite
of the power of habit, the calls of a clamouring appetite, the interests
of innkeepers, the necessities of political machinery, and the delusions
of those doctors who are willing to throw physic at us if we throw fees
at them. Now, what certainties has science on this subject 1 Science
assures us that alcohol is never changed into any other compound in
the living body, hence it can never be food or fuel. It is never appro-
priated by any organ for its sustenance. It is alcohol when it goes in,
while it stays, and when it comes out. The theory that it is in any
sense food or force is distinctly disproved, and has been everywhere
abandoned. When alcohol invades the stomach, digestion, assimila-
tion, and growth nearly or wholly stop, that the enemy may be
expelled; the blood carries it to the lungs, and scents the surrounding
ajr for hours with pure alcohol; it goes to the kidneys, and they
throw it out; the whole skin exudes it ; the whole man smells like a
distillery. What cannot be immediately thrown oft' is deposited in
liver and brain, from which pure alcohol, that will burn, can be col-
lected. To obtain some idea of the rapidity with which alcohol
reaches the brain, the material organ of reason, and the special object
of the poison whenever it gains access to the body, consider the fol-
lowing experiment of Dr. Percy. He injected about two ounces and a
half of alcohol into the stomach of a dog, and the animal dropped dead
almost instantaneously. Within a few minutes he extracted from the
brain more alcohol than he could obtain from an equal weight of any
other part of the body, or of the blood itself. Christison (than whom
no higher authority either as regards poisons or the articles of the
Materia Medica could be quoted) says:—“The sedative action of
alcohol on the brain constitutes it a powerful narcotic poison. For its
effects as such, if rapidly brought on by a large dose, there is no
antidote known , the only efficacious treatment consisting of speedy
evacuation of the stomach, and the employment of brisk external
stimuli.” Professor James Miller says that “In chemistry and
physiology alcohol is a poison , and this is its proper place; that when
taken it is almost at once absorbed by the veins of the stomach, and,
mixing with the blood, is carried to all parts of the body, affecting
specially the nervous centres, paralysing their functions, causing the
heart and lungs to act most imperfectly. The blood fails to receive
its due proportion of oxygen in its oozy passage through the lungs,
and is, besides, directly altered for the worse by the alcohol’s actual
presence in it. The man is choking gradually, as if with a rope round
his neck; breathing becomes slower and slower; the heart beats more
and more faintly; the body grows cold; and in no long time all is still
in death.”
Baron Yon Liebig (one of the ablest chemists the world has yet


produced, and acknowledged as an authority in the science of chemistry
everywhere) in his Book of Chemistry says:—“Fermentation is-
nothing else but the putrefaction of a substance containing ao
nitrogen. Fermentation and putrefaction are stages of the return of
the nourishments of the vegetable to their original sources. Life
gathers strength ; fermentation or putrefaction destroys that life, and
scatters that strength.” “Life,” says Liebig, “is opposed to putre-
faction ; that alcohol cannot be evolved from the sugar of vegetable
matter until after vinous fermentation sets in, which is the death or
decomposition of vegetable matter. Alcohol is in fact the death
principle of vegetable matter out of which it is evolved, or the
resulting principle of decomposition. It is found nowhere in living
and growing nature, but everywhere in dying and dead nature. Dr.
Henry Munroe, professor and lecturer, says : —“Every kind of sub-
stance employed by man as food consists of sugar, starch, oil, and
glutinous matters, in which not one particle of alcohol can be detected.
All these substances must first decay before alcohol can be obtained.
Alcohol contains none of these substances, and therefore cannot be
food.” “There is more food,” says Baron Yon Liebig, “in one
bushel of barley than there is in 12,000 gallons of the best beer.”
All food, when taken into the stomach, is digested and transformed
into something that will renew and build up the body, but alcohol
passes out of the body just as it comes in.” Dr. F. R. Lees, F.S.H. r
author of the Text-Book of Temperance, says “If we search through-
out the wide range of vegetative and animated forms for the presence
of alcohol, there is not one plant or flower, not one creature or
compound resulting from the formative processes of life and
growth, in which it can possibly be detected or developed. Crea-
tion, growth, maturity—these are terms which refer to life; but
alcohol has nothing to do with life, except to destroy it—it is a poison
alike to plants and animals ; it is the outcome of vegetable death and
decay, not of life, growth, or creation. It is not a creature, but the
result of the death and decomposition of a creature.” Dr. Rudolph
Masing, one of the ablest physicians of Germany, prepared a solution
of bichromate of potash and sulphuric acid as a test for alcohol. He
found the breath of a drunken man turned the red to an emerald green,
whilst the breath of a sober man had no effect. Dr. Lallemand and Dr.
Perrin (at the head of their profession in France), with the great
French chemist Duroy, found that the breath of a man who drank a
pint and a half of wine at half-past ten o’clock turned J he test solution
at noon green in two minutes, the same at one o’clock, at two o’clock
it took four minutes, at five o’clock fifteen minutes, at six o’clock it
made but a slight change, at seven o’clock none at all. Thei’efore no
part of it is food, but only an irritant, a scorcher, poisoner—a thing
that inflames whatever part it touches while rushing through the body,
and causes terrible ulcers and putrefying sores wherever it stops. If a
person not accustomed to alcohol should fill his mouth with it, within
a few minutes he would find the small veins of the mouth congested
or filled with blood, and the whole lining of the mouth inflamed and
sore. Hence, whenever alcohol touches the interior parts of the


human system, it irritates and bums and inflames. The United
States Dispensatory says, this irritating poison “is a very powerful
diffusible stimulant.” Dr. Munro adds, “Alcohol, whether taken in
large or small doses, immediately disturbs the functions of the body
and the mind, and the only influence of alcohol on the stomach is that
of an irritant.”
Dr. T. K. Chambers, physician to the Prince of Wales, says, “It is
clear that we must cease to regard alcohol as, in any sense, an aliment,
in as much as it goes out as it goes in.” Drs. Magendie and M'Nish
and others, who have dissected and examined the dead bodies of
drunkards, found pure alcohol in the blood, the heart, liver, kidneys,
bowels, and in the brain. They found it everywhere in the system,
causing sores and diseases. The liver suffered most, the brain next,
then the kidneys and the blood. They found the stomach and other
organs where alcohol was and had been, irritated, congested, inflamed,
sore, burned, charred, ulcerated, and diseased by the irritant narcotic
poison. They found that those who drank the most were injured the
most, but all injured in proportion to the alcohol consumed in the
beer, ale, or wine drank. A man fell suddenly dead in the streets of
London, and was carried into Westminster Hospital and dissected;
they found a quantity of gin on the brain, which on the application of
a lighted match took fire. Alcohol, further, prevents digestion. The
strong solvent principle of the saliva, gastric and pancreatic juices which
combine for complete digestion of food, is pepsin; this alcohol dissolves,
and therefore stops digestion in an instant, and continues to do so
as long as alcohol remains in the stomach.” Dr. Figg, of Edinburgh,
was sent for by some men who continued drinking for twenty-six
hours after they had dined. An emetic produced the undigested food
taken twenty-six hours before ; whereas, in a healthy stomach, it will
digest in two or three hours. Dr. Dundas Thompson says, ‘ ‘ Alcohol,
when added to the digestive fluid (the juices named), produces a
white precipitate, so that the fluid is no longer capable of digesting
food.” Drs. Munro, Todd, and Bowman agree that “the use of
alcoholic stimulants retards digestion by coagulating the pepsin. ” Dr.
Figg remarks, “If a man, after dinner, drinks two or three glasses
of spirits, the gastric juice in the stomach will be neutralised.”
About fifty years ago, a young Canadian, Alexis St. Martin, had a
portion of his stomach torn away by gun-shot, which ultimately left
a clear hole into the stomach of about half-an-inch diameter. For
fourteen years, Dr. Beaumont daily examined this young man’s
stomach, to test the effects of various kinds of food and drink. Dr.
Sewell, then a young man, also examined St. Martin’s stomach with
Dr. Beaumont. Dr. Sewell afterwards got into a large practice, and
became president of Columbia College, Washington, U.S. He dissected
and examined more than three hundred dead drunkards, and published
the results of forty years’ observation of the effects of alcohol, and
an account of alcoholic diseases. He says that in the stomach of the
temperate drinker, the man who takes his grog daily, but moderately,
nr sips his wine with his meals, the living membrane always becomes
red and inflamed; and that the blood-vessels of the inner surface are so


far enlarged as to be visible, and distended with blood. Dr. Beaumont,
in his published work, says that on examining St. Martin’s stomach
after he had been drinking freely, he found the natural light, soft,
pink tint of the stomach turned to a fiery red, and very much con-
gested and inflamed. He says, “ The free use of ardent spirits, wine,
or beer invariably produced those morbid changes in St. Martin’s
stomach. When he discontinued the use of intoxicants, the stomach
gradually assumed the healthy light pink colour.” (See plates No. 1
and 2.) Dr. Sewell further observes that “in the stomach of the
habitual drunkard, or hard drinker, the mucous or internal coat is
in a state of irritation, with its blood-vessels, which are invisible while
in a healthy state, enlarged and distended with blood, similar to the
‘ rum blossoms’ sometimes seen on the face of the drunkard, and very
frequently corroded with small ulcers, which are covered with white
crusts, with the margin of the ulcers elevated and rugged ; that after
a debauch of several days, the internal or mucous surface of the
stomach of the drunkard shows a high degree of inflammation extend-
ing over the whole surface, changing its colour to deep red, and in
some points exhibiting a livid appearance (see plate 4) ; that with a
great many drunkards, or habitual hard drinkers, the stomach becomes
thickened, and has large corroding cancers upon it.” (See plate 5.)
He dissected a large number of men who died of delirium tremens,
and always found such stomachs very much thickened and swollen,
leaving but a small cavity for food, and this lined with a dark brown,
flaky substance, which was really grumous blood that had oozed out
of the sores and cancers of the inflamed surface; and when this flaky
substance was removed, the stomach looked quite dark, like an incipient
state of mortification.” (See plate 6.) Again, he says, “If the morbid
effects of intemperance are not always developed with the same power
and rapidity in the one case as in another, it is nevertheless true that
alcohol is a poison for ever at war with man’s nature, and in all its
forms and degrees of strength produces irritation of the stomach, which
is liable to result in inflammation, ulceration, and mortification, a
thickening and induration of its coats; and, finally, scirrhus, cancer,
and other organic affections; and it may with confidence be asserted
that no one who indulges habitually in the use of alcoholic drinks,
whether in the form of wine, beer, or more ardent spirits, possesses
a healthy stomach. Dr. Beaumont (who, for fourteen years, closely
watched and recorded the most secret operations of the inner man)
says that ‘ ‘ even a small amount of alcohol in a glass of beer retarded
digestion, that the flow of gastric juice was arrested, and the organ
sought to protect itself against the liquid fire by exuding an enlarged
supply of mucus as a sheathing. He saw the stomach give imme-
diate evidence of inflammation on the introduction of spirit. It flushed
fiery red, like the tell-tale face of an angry man. He says, after drink-
ing hard for eight to ten days, the stomach would show alarming
symptoms of disease, and yet the man St. Martin would only feel a
slight headache, and a general dulness and languor. Alcoholic drinks
are not a source of strength. Trainers of men for feats of strength
invariably forbid all kinds of intoxicants.”


Dr. Brinton says, “A moderate dose of beer or wine would in most
cases at once diminish the weight which a healthy man could lift
below his teetotal standard. Milo, the Samson of Italy, and his fore
runner, the Samson of Judea, were both total abstainers. Neither '
alcohol a producer of heat. Volumes of testimony, from experience i.j
Canadian and Russian winters, from travellers on arctic and antarctic
ice, can be produced to show that alcohol is death to men exposed to a
temperature ranging towards 100° below zero. Here science, with
thermometer in hand, demonstrates the fact that alcohol actually
reduces the temperature of a body receiving it.” We have also the
testimony of Archdeacon Jeffries, Sir Charles Napier, and a host of
surgeons in the East Indian army, that alcohol is equally death fur
men who have to face the heat of a tropical sun. Let any constant
abstainer draw off a little of his blood, and microscopically compare it
with the blood of the recent drinker, and he will be confirmed in his
abstinence. The one is full of bright round electric discs of life.
The other has bedraggled fibres, pale in colour, shapeless in form,
deprived of power to absorb oxygen and eliminate carbon ; a devitalised
condition of the life-giving fluid that must result in a devitalised con-
dition of the tissue it feeds.
Lallemand and Perrin proved that a small dose of alcohol would
cause globules of fat, clearly distinguishable by the naked eye, to float-
in the blood. This fat is deposited instead of real muscle, producing
what is called fatty degeneracy. Take a microscope and examine a
section of a temperate man’s muscle; it is firm, elastic, of bright red
colour, in parallel fibres, with beautiful crossings. That muscle means
business, and is able to do it. Now, take a similar section of a man
who indulges in intoxicating drinks, and you see at once a pale,
inelastic, flabby, oily aspect. Fat has displaced fibre. This espe-
cially takes place in the involuntary muscles, such as the heart and
those concerned in breathing. After such degeneration, it is not
strange that the heart should stop its work and never act again. It
requires no excitement, no sudden shock, for that mass of fat, that
ought to be muscle, to cease responding to nervous influences, and so
cease w'orking. It may be in the street, in quiet conversation, and
especially in sleep. This man, a picture of health, suddenly dies, and
men say, “ What a mysterious dispensation of providence !” We had
better say, “ What a dispensation of the evil one !” or with more pro-
priety, “ What an inevitable result of taking intoxicating drinks !”
These conclusions, drawn from scientific investigations, are sure as
fate—viz., alcohol never digests food, nor helps digestion; never assists
the body to permanently resist cold; brings no increase of strength;
vitiates the blood; emasculates the muscles; indurates the brain;
injures the nerves; never acts as food, either alimentary or respiratory ;
but is always and everywhere a poison, in sickness and in health;
and the vital powers try their utmost to throw it off, even to the extent
of perishing in the attempt. Now, these are facts, not opinions; cer-
tainties, not deductions No man can gainsay them. Neither are
there any counter facts. That drinkers of all grades are a terribly
vitiated part of humanity is seen in the sureness with which con-
tagious diseases smite them down.


Four-fifths of those who were swept away by the dreadful visitation
of the cholera in 1832 were addicted to intoxicating drinks. In St.
Petersburg and Moscow the whole population ceased to drink spirits,
so sure were they that they drank death. Out of 1200 attacked in
Montreal, not a drunkard recovered; out of 1000 deaths only two
were members of a temperance society. Of 30,000 victims in
Paris nearly every one was a user of intoxicating liquors. Nine-tenths
of those who died in Poland were of the same class. In some towns
every drunkard was swept away. Monsieur Hesber saw 2160 persons
perish in twenty-five days, in a town in Russia. He says, “ Persons
given to drinking were swept away like flies. In Tiflis, containing
20,000 inhabitants, every drunkard fell. Dr. Sewell stated that of 204
cases of cholera in the Park Hospital, New York, there were only six
temperate persons, and they recovered. Out of 366 who died in
Albany 326 were habitual drinkers, while of those who drank no
spirit whatever there were only seven.”
Dr. Edward Johnson, author of Life, Health and Disease, says :
“Beer-tipplers and Bonifaces are prone to obesity. This corpulence
is accepted by the deluded populace as a proof of health. Nothing
can be more fallacious. Let these persons be stricken by the
shaft of disease, and the rottenness of the popular notion becomes
palpable. These persons are utterly prostrated, and frequently perish,
from injuries and slight attacks of disease, which would have passed
quite harmlessly over others. Let one of your jolly fellows, as it
has been fashionable to call them, prick his finger or graze his leg—
what follows ? Why, the wound rankles and festers, a dusky livid
inflammation embraces its circumference to a considerable distance,
then a portion of the tissues beneath the skin mortifies, after a certain
period of intense pain a dead mass or core separates, and a foul, ugly,
spreading sore remains. There is a peculiar sore or ulcer, of an
exceedingly ill-conditioned character, which appears in gin-topers, and
known at Guy’s Hospital by the name of the ‘geneva ulcer.’ ”
Dr. Russell T. Trail says : —“lf you go to medical records to learn
how alcohol affects the human system, you learn there that it inflames
the coats of the stomach, disorders the liver, excites the blood-vessels,
vitiates the secretions, renders the bland juices of the body acrid and
irritating, poisons the blood, paralyzes the nerves, hardens the brain;
produces dropsy, dyspepsia, jaundice, marasmus, consumption, gout,
rheumatism, eruptions, ulcers, tumours, and carbuncles; leads to
imbecility, insanity, and delirium tremens —so on through nearly the
whole catalogue of human maladies. Conclusive on this point is the
fact that nearly all pathological authors have noticed that dram-drink-
ers of all sorts, wine-bibbers and ale-soakers, are ever liable to
severe and fatal consequences from wounds, cuts, and injuries which
in water-drinkers are scarcely objects of solicitude.” “There is
another consideration of more appalling magnitude, and I would that
its truth could be clothed in sunbeams of light, and sped like light-
ning’s flash to the judgment and conscience of every member of the
human family— l mean the transmission of a vitiated organism from
parent to childr We know that the alcoholic poison diseases and


vitiates the whale organisation. We know, too, organisation, good or
bad, is transmissable. What a thought!—a drunken parent can never
be a father or mother of healthy offspring, nor can an habitual
moderate drinker be the progenitor of an issue as sound and as perfect
as it should be.”
Dr. King Chambers remarks: —“Alcohol is really the most
ungenerous diet there is. It impoverishes the blood, and there is no
surer road to that degeneration of muscular fibre so much to be
feared. Three-quarters of the chronic illnesses which the medical man
has to treat are occasioned by this disease. In fact, alcohol seems to
produce the peculiar condition of the tissues called ‘ fatty degenera-
tion’ more than any other agent known.”
Lionel S. Beale, M.8.F.R.0.5., F.R.C.P., Bond., F.R.A.S.,
Physician to King’s College Hospital, &c., &c. : —“ Alcohol does not
'act as food ; it does not nourish tissues ; it may diminish waste by
altering the consistence and chemical properties of fluids and solids.
It cuts short the life of rapidly-growing colls, or causes them to live
more slowly.”
W. B. Carpenter, M.D., F.R.S., T.L.S., M.R.C.S., L.S.A. :
“ Nothing in the annals of quackery can be more empirical than the
mode in which fermented and distilled liquors are directed or per-
mitted to be taken by a large proportion of medical men.”
Edward Smith, M.D., Bond., LL.B., 8.A., F.R.C.P., F.R.S.,
&c. ;—“Alcohol is not true food, and it neither warms nor sustains
the body by the elements of which it is composed.”— Philosophical
Transactions.
Samuel Wilks, M.D., Bond., F.R.C.P., Physician and Lecturer
on Medicine to Guy’s Hospital;—“ I say it is assumed that a strength-
giving property lies in these drinks; that just in proportion to a man’s
feeling of weakness, so he will require one of them. Now, this popular
opinion is shared in, I am sorry to say, by many in the profession. I
constantly hear medical men say that they give brandy to all their
patients, for they always find them low. If you kill a dozen patients
with brandy, you need have no fear. It is a medicine which the
patients approve and friends commend. You have done your best.” —
Lecture, in Lancet.
J. W. Beaumont, M.D., L.R.C.P. Edin., Lecturer on Materia
Medica in Sheffield Medical School, &c.; —“Besides inducing an inflam-
matory condition of the system, alcohol perverts the blood—diseases it;
and it is owing to this circumstance that many chronic complaints are
made worse and more prolonged by wines, ales, and other liquors
ordered habitually by medical attendants. I have treated several
thousands of cases of all kinds, occurring in general practice, without
alcoholic liquors of any kind, and have been gratified with the successful
results. The medicines take effect more potently, and answer their
end better. If I must tell the ,h, it is I who am the sufferer by my
non-alcoholic treatment, for the patients get well much sooner, and,
as a natural consequence, my bills for professional attendance are very
considerably less. No doubt, if I were to follow the usual custom, and
order wines, ales, and spirits freely, the patients would be much


longer under my care, and yield me a much larger revenue in the way
of fees. Alcoholic liquors are bad in every way ; they are bad for the
sick, and worse for those who are well and in good health. They are
not nutritious, they are not tonic, they are not beneficial in any sense
of the word. They cause disease of body, disease of mind, and, worse
than all, disease of morals, and ought not only to be banished from
every household, but put under the most uncompromising and strin-
gent legal prohibition.”
Dr. J. A. Adams stated, as the result of his experience in the treat-
ment of 225 patients in the epidemic of 1848-9 :—“ I have found the
use of alcoholic drinks to be the most powerful predisposing cause of
malignant fever with which lam acquainted. So strong is my opinion
on this point that were I one of the authorities, and had the power, I
would placard every spirit shop in town with large bills containing the
words ‘ Cholera sold here’ .”
Dr. Buchanan (sent by Government as a special commissioner to
report upon the causes of the fever epidemic which for a long time
raged in Liverpool) states that ‘ ‘ the disease may be attributed in a
much greater degree to the drinking habits of the classes amongst whom
it is principally found , and to the lamentable over-crowding in the
houses of the poorer people, than to any great defects in the sanitary
system, which have hitherto been generally supposed to breed the con-
tagion.”
Dr. Henderson, of Shanghai, reports that “by the non-stimula-
ting treatment of fever he reduced the deaths from 28 per cent, to 7.”
Dr. W. T. Gardiner, Professor of Physic in the University of Glas-
gow, says : —“ Wines reduced from an average of 34 ounces to ounces
per patient, and spirits from an average of 6 ounces to 2\ ounces, was
followed by a reduction of deaths from 17 per cent, to 10; while of 210
cases of children under the age of fifteen, treated without the aid of
alcoholic stimulants, all except one recovered. In many hundreds of
cases (nearly COO), of all ages, the mortality lessened exactly as the dose of
alcohol diminished, milk or buttermilk being given in its place.”
Dr. S. Nicholls, the medical officer of the Poor Law Union, Langford,
states that “out of 231 patients, treated altogether without wines or
alcohol in any form, 220 recovered. I continue the non-alcoholic treat-
ment, which for the last 18 years 1 have found most successful.”
Dr. Storey observes; —“ That part of the nerve which is coiled up in
the skull we call brain, and that part of the brain which is outside of
the head, reaching all over the body like little telegraphs, we call
nerves, so that the nerves and the brain are essentially the same thing.
Dissection shows the little arteries of the brain to be strained, irritated,
inflamed, engorged, ulcerated, and often burst by the poisonous effects
of alcohol. The arch-destroyer leaves a fiery path on his journey
through the brain, and the mind that has to act through such a brain
must be injured in proportion.”
John Higginbottom, F.R.S., F.R.C.S.:—“ I have amply tried both
ways. I gave alcohol in my practice for twenty years, and have now
practised without it for the last thirty years or more. My experience
is, that acute disease is more readily cured without it, and chronic


diseases much more manageable. I have not found a single patient
injured by the disuse of alcohol, or a constitution requiring it; indeed
to find either, although I am in my seventy-seventh year, I would
walk fifty miles to see such an unnatural phenomenon. If I ordered or
allowed alcohol in any form, either as food or as medicine, to a patient,
I should certainly do it with a felonious intent.”
Dr. Cheyne, Dublin, Physical! to the Forces : —“ The benefits
which have been supposed from their liberal use in medicine, and
especially in those diseases which men once universally and are still
vulgarly supposed to depend upon, mere weakness, have invested
these agents with attributes to which they have no claim; and hence,
as we physicians no longer use them as we used to do, we ought not to
rest satisfied with the mere acknowledgment of error, but we ought
also to make every retribution in our power for having so long upheld
one of the most fatal delusions that ever took possession of the human
mind. ”
Henry Mudge, M.R.C. S. : —“ I became deeply impressed with the
awful character and extent of drunkenness, and desired the diminution,
and if possible the extinction, of that horrible and deadly sin. I saw
scores and hundreds arrested by abstinence in their downward courses
but of these not a few were set moving again towards the abyss by medi-
cal advice. I thought I would do with as little as possible of alcoholic
stimulants in the form of drink, and was thus led to try cautiously to
do without them in cases in which before they had been administered.
The result of these trials was very decidedly in favour of abstinence ;
and consequently alcoholic drinks have legitimately disappeared from
my list of medicines. ”
W. O. Markham, M.D., F.R.C.P., Lond., Physician to St. Mary’s
Hospital, says:—“That medical men had been stimulated to the
modern extensive use of alcoholic drinks in disease and in health
by chemical theories ; that those chemical theories upon which they
founded their practice have at length been found untenable. That
alcohol is not a supporter of combustion, and tends rather to poison
than to feed the body of man. It does not prevent the wear and tear
of tissues ; and none of it, as far as we know, is assimilated, or serves
for the purposes of nutrition. It is therefore not a food in the eye
of science.”— British Medical Journal.
Henry Munro, M.D., F.L.S., Lecturer on Medical Jurisprudence,
&c.: —“ Alcohol is nowhere to be found in any product of nature—was
never itself created by God ; but is essentially an artificial thing,
prepared by man through the destructive process of fermentation.
Perfect health can only be obtained by total abstinence from all intoxi-
cating drinks, because alcohol deranges the natural functions of the
body, and produces a morbid condition of the tissues with which it
comes in contact.”—“Lecture on the Physiological Action of Alcohol.”
James Edmunds, M.D., L.R.C.P. Edin., M.R.C.S.:- I “We all
know that nothing but food enables us to sustain our bodies, and
to perform our work. If you take food into the body, it is consumed,
decomposed, and the refuse thrown out again. Alcohol passes out of
the body just in the same way that coals may fall out of a grate


Water.
Alcohol.
Sugar.
Acetic Acid.
Strong 1 Ale
2 czs.
2
ozs. 163 grs.
.67 grs.
ild Ale
... 18| „
U „
2
„ 280 „
38 „
Pale Ale
... 18 „
2
2
» 240 „
40 „
without being consumed. If a man takes a glass of brandy or beer, the
intoxicating property passes out just as water passes through a sponge.
Alcohol is, in fact, treated by the human system not as food, hut as an
intruder, aiod as a poison. They scorch and infuse the body, wherever
they go ; they injure the blood and rot the tissues ; and, in fact, spoil
everything they come in contact with. They always do harm, and
never do any good.”
Dr. M'Culloch says:—“ Alcohol stands high in the list of narcotic
poisons in all standard works on poisons. Alcohol is a poison, and
total abstinence from the dietetic use of these drinks, in every shape,
form, or quantity, is the' only true, the only logical, temperance
and moderation in regard to them. These narcotic stimulants tend to
create an artificial, persistent, and uncontrollable appetite or craving
which renders their votaries slaves to habit. When this appetite is
formed, the first glass, however moderate, by its effects on the brain,
paralyses the mind, and thus destroys all resolutions to moderation.
This artificial appetite is formed, and long in force, before it is
suspected by others, or even by the victim himself. The proportion of
this destructive principle entering into the several drinks in general
use will be seen by the following table: —
Analysis oe an Imperial Pint.
1 d» it; -rVIC JO U yy Lt yy jLd i' / yy ±\J ,y
Port Wine 10 ~ 4 ~ 1 ~ 2 ~ 80 ~
Brandy 9J ~ 10J ~ 1 ~ 80 ~ 120 ~
Rum ft „ Ift „ 1 „ 80 „ 10 „
Gin (Old Tom)... 12 „ 8 „ 1 „ 80 „ 10 „
Gin (retail) 16 ~ 4 ~ 0£ ~ 80 ~ 10 ~
That the average quantity of alcohol consumed yearly by each person
in England in the form of beer and spirits is three gallons.”
Professor Regnault says: —“Concentrated alcohol acts as a poison
on the animal economy, and will produce death when taken in large
quantities.”
Dr. Gordon says ; —“ It would be difficult to find a more destructive
poison than ardent spirits .”
Professor Pereira says ; —“ The local effects of alcohol are those of
a powerful irritant and caustic poison .”
“ It is a mistaken notion,” says Dr. O’Sullivan, “that ale, wine, or
spirits communicate strength, and it is disgraceful to see medical men
endeavour to propagate the error.”
Dr. Lee says : —“There is more real nourishment in a threepenny
brown loaf than there is to be found in three barrels of Alsopp’s ale
containing 365 gallons, and costing £35. ”
In a question of the actual value of foods, the item of price must be
considered. Now, assuming, for the sake of argument, that alcohol,
narcotic, hop, and gummy residue of beers are really consumed in the
body, the following tables of Professor Frankland show how, in any
case, the drinker “ pays dear for his whistle.” To generate energy


Bread
177, Price per lb. 0
2,
Total cost
0
Oatmeal
.... 1-05
0
-i
0
Pea Meal
.... 1-21
0
3i
0
Sugar
.... 1-15
f)
0
5
if
0
6
Good Cheese
.... 1-07
0
9
0
10
Beef Fat (Dripping)
... 0-52
f)
0
9
ff
0
8
Lean Beef Steak
.... 3-42
1
0
3
5
Lean Ham
.... 2-06
1
3
ff
3
6
White of Egg
.... 8-02
0
6
f>
4
0
Guinness’s Stout, 64 bottles at lOd. each ...
5
5
Bass’s Ale, 9 bottles at lOd. each ...
7
6
enough to enable a man weighing 140 lbs. to ascend Mount Blanc,
10,000 feet high, would require—
Professor Youmans, of New York, says:—“lt has been demon-
strated that alcoholic drinks prevent the natural changes going on in
the blood, and obstruct the nutritive and reparative functions; that
chemical experiments have demonstrated that the action of alcohol
on the digestive fluid is to destroy its active principle, the pepsin ; thus
confirming the observations of physiologists, that its use gives rise to
the most serious disorders of the stomach, and the most malignant
aberrations of the entire economy. It is evident that, so far from
being the conservatory of health, alcohol is an active and powerful
cause of disease, interfering as it does with respiration, the circulation,
and the nutrition; nor is any other result possible. ”
Dr. Aitken, in his valuable work, Practice of Medicine, says: —“ It
is now a matter of fact, determined by direct experiment, as well as
by observation, that alcohol is absorbed directly into the circulation,
and is capable of acting as a direct poison upon the nervous tissue,
through which the infected blood circulates.”
Dr. F. R. Lees, F.S.A., observes: —“The old mode of treatment
with opium and drink killed in Edinburgh 25 per cent., in Glasgow 50
per cent.; while now hundreds are treated with warm baths, nourish-
ing food—no alcohol and no opium—and scarcely any die.”
Dr. Anstie (opposed to temperance principles) admits that “in case
of fever the slight and trivial symptom of flushing in the face is a sign
of the first degree of the poisonous action, and shows that at least we
have touched the border line at which the beneficial action of alcohol
ceases, and its poisonous effects begin.”
Dr. R. D. Massey says that “under the stimulant practice, trains
of morbid symptoms are often aggravated, and new centres of irritation
established, which, if not sufficient to destroy the patient, prolong the
period of the fever, and frequently cause relapses or a lingering con-
valescence.”
Dr. Lyon Playfair, C. 8., Professor of Chemistry in the University
of Edinburgh, explodes the popular fallacy, bolstered up by brewers
and others, that ale and porter are nutritive and strengthening, by
analysing a specimen of this drink, and reports that “ of blood-forming
matter it contains exactly one part in 1664 parts. ”
Baron Liebig states that the whole purpose of brewing is to get
rid of the nitrogenous blood-forming elements of the grain, and to
transmute the useful sugar into alcohol. “We can prove,” says he,


“ with mathematical certainty, that as much flour as can lie on the point
■of a tableknife is more nutritious than eight quarts of the best Bavarian
beer.” That a person who is able daily to consume that amount of
beer, obtains from it, in a whole year, in the most favourable case,
exactly the amount of nutritive constituents which is contained in a
five-pound loaf, or in three pounds of flesh. “ Spirits, by their action
on the nerves, enable the drinker to make up deficient power at the
expense of his body. He consumes his capital instead of his interest.”
Dr. R. Druitt, the great eulogiser of the light wines, admits that
“ alcohol is a mere drug, and, although a constituent, is not the valuable
one in wine.”
Sir Benjamin Brodie, F.R.S., surgeon to Queen Victoria, after a
long life of experience, gives in his Psychological Inquiries his final
verdict thus :—“ Alcohol removes the uneasy feeling and the inability
of exertion which the want of sleep occasions, but the relief is
only temporary. Stimulants do not create nervous power, they merely
enable you as it w r ere to use up that which is left, and then they leave
you more in need of rest than before.”
Professor Pereira, in his treatise on Foods, says : —“Ales are not fitted
for ordinary use, on account of their intoxicating and stupifying
qualities.”
Dr. Charles Wilson, in his Pathology of Drunkenness, says:—“No cir-
cumstances of ordinary life can render even the moderate use of
intoxicating fluids either beneficial or necessary, or even innocuous.”
Dr. E. Smith, in Ids Practiced Dietary, says : —“ The proper place for
these compounds is as medicines, but not as food, and they should
not find any place in mere dietetic arrangements.”
Dr. H. R. Madden, on Stimulating Drinks, observes :—“Alcohol is
incapable of being assimilated or converted into any organic proxi-
mate principle, and hence cannot be considered nutritive. The
ultimate exhausting effects of alcohol, owing to its stimulating pro-
perties, produce an unnatural susceptibility to morbid action in all
the organs, and this, with the plethora superinduced, becomes a fertile
source°of disease. The more frequently alcohol is had recourse to for
the purpose of overcoming feelings of debility, the more it will be
required; and by constant repetition, a period is at length reached
when it cannot be forgone, That the daily use of stimulants is inde-
fensible under any known circumstances. ”
Professor Lehmann, in his Physiological Chemistry, says;—“We
should forbid the use of spirituous drinks, and not even prescribe
tinctures which hinder the necessary excretion of carbonic acid, or
a copious supply of oxygen to the blood.”
John Higginbottom, Esq., F.R.S., Nottingham, says: —
1. Alcoholic rhuematism is the result of a distinct cause.
2. It is produced by drinking fermented alcoholic beverages.
3. It is slow in effecting a marked visible change in the system,
4. It does not usually appear before middle life.
5. Its effects are produced by the accumulation of the fermented
alcoholic fluids taken into the system.
6. It causes stupidity, stiffness in the body, hobbling gait and ulti-
mate lameness.


7. It causes changes of structure, produces chronic alcoholic
rheumatism.
8. The remedy is abstinence from the use of all fermented alcoholic
drinks, and taking vigorous exercise.
Dr. Edward Johnson, author of Life, Health and Disease, says:—
“ There is good physiological proof, supported by numerous well-con-
ducted experiments, that there are but two ways in which it is possible
for a man to die; that whenever he dies, he either dies because no
blood is conveyed by the arteries from the heart to the capillaries, or
because they convey black— i.e., venous —blood. Alcohol has a
direct tendency to produce death in both these ways. The daily use
of alcohol in any considerable quantity generates a daily tendency
to death by the presence of black blood in the arteries, and he who
would save his health must obviate this tendency by discontinuing
the use of the poison which generates it. When alcohol is taken in
repeated, but small doses, it then generates a tendency to death by the
other mode, by deficiency in quantity of the blood in the arteries.
The effects of drinking customs are clearly to generate a tendency to
death by both of the only two modes in which it is possible for death
to happen.”
Walter Johnson, M. 8., remarks:—“Those who are in the slightest
degree conversant with physiology are familiar with the fact that in
the human frame there is incessant decomposition and recomposition,
destruction and regeneration. Every particle of the economy suffers
change—certain old atoms are daily removed and certain new atoms
(derived from the blood) substituted. It is by the direct agency of
oxygen that the removal of the old atoms is effected. An atom of
flesh, muscle, blood, gluten, are indentical in composition, and consist
of fibrine and albumen, or of oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen. Now,
when the oxygen introduced into the blood by respiration meets with
an atom of old worn-out flesh, it instantly attacks, seizes upon a por-
tion of the carbon it contains, combines with it, and forms carbonic
acid gas, or poisonous charcoal fumes; and by this combustion the
warmth of the body is maintained.”
Says Mr. Parton:—“When we have taken from a glass of wine the
ingredients known to be innutritions, there is scarcely anything left
but a grain or two of sugar; and pure alcohol, though a product of
highly nutritive substances, is a mere poison, an absolute poison, the
mortal foe of life in every one of its forms.”
Dr. F. R. Lees, F.S.A., remarks:—“ All alcoholic liquors are bad in
the degree in which they contain alcohol. Wines, beers, or ciders are but
alcohol, diluted and flavoured differently. The last deadly agent of
intemperance, madness, and disease introduced into France, absinthe,
owes its worst effects simply to the strength of its alcohol. No possible
drugs or adulteration can be so bad as this essential and characteristic
element.”
The following opinion has been signed by Dr. Carpenter, author of
Carpenter's Physiology, and five thousand more first-class physicians:—
“ We, the undersigned, are of opinion that a very large proportion of
Human misery—including poverty, disease, and crimes—is induced by
the use of alcoholic or fermented liquors as beverages. That the most


perfect health is compatible with total abstinence. That persons
accustomed to intoxicants may with perfect safety discontinue them at
once. That total and universal abstinence from alcoholic beverages of
all sorts would add greatly to the health, the prosperity, the morality,
and the happiness of the human race.”
From all these we learn ‘ ‘ That the effect of alcohol upon the human
body is that of an irritant and poison. That it burns, and inflames,
and ulcerates, and injures every organ that it touches. That no
part of the drunkard’s body is free from disease. That it does not
contain any of the elements of food. That it dissolves the juices of
the body, and hinders and prevents digestion. That as a medicine it
can only be safely used in acute cases, characterised by great prostra-
tion. That it is the chief source of crime.”
The Hon. Charles Buxton, of London, says:—“lt is intoxication
that fills our gaols, our lunatic asylums, our workhouses. But for
this, pauperism would be nearly extinguished in England.”
The Westminster Review states ;— ‘ ‘ Drunkenness is the curse of
England, a curse so great that it fairly eclipses every other calamity
under which we suffer. It is impossible to exaggerate the evils of
drunkenness. ”
Rowland Burr, Esq., for nearly twenty years a magistrate in
Toronto, stated to the Canadian Parliament that nine-tenths of the
male prisoners and nineteen-twentieths of the female prisoners are
sent to gaol by intoxicating liquors. In four years there were over
25,000 prisoners in Canadian gaols, of whom 22,000 owed their im-
prisonment to drinking habits.”
From tables carefully prepared for a prominent London insurance
company, it appears that ‘ ‘ averaging the whole period of life from
fifteen to ninety years, thirty-two intemperate persons die to ten
others.”
The Rev. G-. Holt, chaplain of the Birmingham Workhouse, says :
—“ From my own experience, I am convinced of the accuracy of.
a statement made by the late governor, ‘ that of every one hundred
persons admitted, ninety-nine were reduced to this state of humiliation
and dependence either directly or indirectly through the prevalent and
ruinous drinking usages.’”
The report of the Legislature of the State of New York for 1863
states that “the whole number of paupers relieved that year was
261,252, in the ratio of one pauper annually to every fifteen inhabi-
tants throughout the State. In an examination made into the history
of those paupers by a competent committee, seven-eighths of them were
reduced to this low and degrading condition directly or indirectly
through intemperance.”
The late eminent Judge Cady, of the State of New 1 ork, who died
upwards of eighty years old, declared in a public assembly, “ that the
greater portion of the trials for murder, and assaults and batteries,
that were brought into court since his entrance on the practice of law,
originated in drunkenness.”
Judge Patterson, of Norwich, -England, addressing a i-ury, said
“If it were not for this drinking, you and I would have nothing oo do.
B 2


Home-made Spirits
Foreign Spirits
Malt Liquor
Wines q'qqs’qqt
Cider, Perry, &c
£101,260,000
Judge Coleridge, at the Oxford Assizes, stated “that he never knew
a case brought before him which was not directly or indirectly con-
nected with intoxicating liquor. And at Newcastle he said that three-
fourths of the crimes committed in Great Britain are committed under
the influence of drink. I really believe that nothing would tend more
to make this country moral, and to make the courts of justice empty
sinecures, than abstaining from excessive drinking.”
Sir William A’Beckett, who was some time since the Chief Justice
of Yictoria, and Sir Alfred Stephen, the Chief Justice of New
South Wales, state that more than three-fourths of the criminals
brought before them was owing to the influence of strong drinks.
William Hoyle says “that the consumption of intoxicating liquors in
Great Britain for the three years ending 1869 was £304,039,333, an
expenditure of more than £3 6s. per head of the entire population,
men, women, and children, or of more than £l3 for every adult male.
Taking the population at 30,000,000, the expenditure for three years
was equal to £lO 12s. 6d. for each man, woman, and child for drink,
and only 19s. 6d. each for cotton goods. A “turn-over” in a
distillery employing 100 men would, in the manufacture of clothing,
give employment to about 2000 men ; the latter giving to labour
7s. 4d. in the £, the former only 4d. in the £. In Yictoria, with a
population of 776,000, calculations based upon Government returns
show that not less than £3,800,000 is annually expended in intoxi-
cating liquors.
Statisticians whose learning and research command our confidence
inform us that in the United States there are not less than 133,000
places licensed to sell intoxicating liquors, employing 390,000 persons,
which, added to those engaged in the manufacture and wholesale
traffic, makes 570,000 persons, or one man to every 75 inhabitants.
The whole number of clergymen and teachers are only 150,000. The
total cost of intoxicating liquors is 1,246,530,868 dollars, while the
entire clergy of the country does not cost 30,000,000 dollars. It is
estimated that every year intemperance sends to prison 100,000
persons, reduces 200,000 children to worse than orphanage, adds
from 60,000 to 70,000 to the long list of drunkards, and sends 60,000
to a drunkard’s grave, and indirectly brings from 30,000 to 40,000
more to a premature death.
In New York, within the last ten years, out of 133,000 persons
arrested for intoxication, 66,000 were women.
Dr. Lees says : —“ln 1867 the expenditure upon liquor in Great
Britain was as follows :
In this year 50,217,828 bushels of malt paid duty for home consump-
tion, equal to the production of 1,000,000,000 gallons of beer for


30,000,000 of people, being at the rate of 33 gallons each person,
exclusive of other alcoholics.”
Dr. Lees, in his Text Book of Temperance, furnishes a vast amount
of statistical evidence to prove that to license drink-selling is to license
felony and breed crime. In confirmation of the truth of the saying
of the jurist Mittermaier, that “ all his investigations led him to this
sad truth, that society prepares the crime ; that as temptations increase
drinking extends and increases”—in 1857 each person in England
averaged a consumption of nearly two gallons of pure alcohol, in 1866
two and one-fifth ; in Scotland it increased from one and one-fifth to
one and a-half gallon, and in Ireland from three-quarters to four-fifths
of a gallon, during the same period.
“In England,” says Dr. F. R. Lees, “we have one million of
paupers receiving relief from public funds, another million on the
verge of pauperism living or starving on charity. About every eighth
person is either beggar, or pauper, or criminal, or publican who
creates him, or policeman who catches him, or judge who tries and
condemns him. Upwards of 46,000 persons are lunatics, not less than
600,000 drunkards, of whom 60,000 die annually, their places being
supplied from the ranks of the moderate drinkers.”
Mr. Neison, by a series of approximate calculations, reached the
fact that in England 1 in every 74 persons is a confirmed drunkard ;
that out of all the deaths between the three decades from 30 to 60,
which expresses the matured nature of man, the proportions from
drinking were 1 in 21, 1 in 16, and 1 in 22.
Professor Huss, of Sweden, says that Eskilton, containing 4000
souls, was so addicted to drink that 1 in 30 of the males, and 1 in 40 of
the females, annually perish.
Mr. Huydecoper says that among the Dutch it is reckoned of their
soldiers sent on service to the East from 70 to 75 per 100 die from
drink.
Intemperance in Russia. —The frightful ravages of intemperance
in “Holy Russia” are beginning to excite the attention of the Govern-
ment and the influential upper classes. The official journal of the
Russian empire has recently given some interesting statistics concern-
ing the attempt which was initiated in the province of Iver in 1871 to
combat the abuse of spirituous liquors by the opening of shops all over
the country for the sale of tea. The rivals of the Russian gin shops
were licensed for an experimental period of three years, on condition
that nothing should be sold in them but ready-made tea, to be drunk
on the premises, cream, small loaves, little cakes, and lemons, slices of
which the Russians usually put into their tea, which they drink very
weak, and usually without milk or cream. The number of the tea
shops, which was 277 in the first year, rose to 322 in the following
year. They paid in 1872 a sum of £364 in licenses, besides yielding a
small profit of some £33 to the local authorities by which they were
established.
Russia has been cursed for ages with intemperance, and since the
abolition of serfdom drunkenness has become at once more com-
mon and more dangerous. To abate the growing evil, and check the


increasing destruction of corn converted into deadly poison, the
Government, in December, 18G8, decreed that the price of corn brandy
should be trebled by increase of duty ; that no tavern shall exist in
any main thoroughfare, to tempt the people passing, and shall pay 350
dollars license fee ; that no tavern shall be open within eighty yards of
any Government office.”
The Rev. Albert Barnes, the great commentator, says:—“The use
of Avine, by professing Christians, and by ministers of the Gospel, is
highly injurious by example, and is that to which men constantly
appeal to keep themselves in countenance; that, in fact, the principal
danger among the young men of our cities and towns, and especially
among those Avho claim to be of the higher class, is from the use of
Avhat is called wine; and that, as a consequence of this use, sustained
as they are to some extent by the example of professing Christians,
multitudes of them are on the way to the grave of the drunkard. Are
not those who love the Saviour bound to set their faces against any
form of evil Avhich has robbed the church of many Avho might have
lived to bless it by their talents and piety—which, more than anything
else, has spread poverty and mourning over the land 1 What should
a Christian have to do with customs which by any possibility
CAN LEAD TO SUCH RESULTS V’
Dr. Lees observes :—“ Of all the curses that ever visited this earth,
intemperance is the most deadly. Fever and plague may visit us, but
they do not tarry ; famine may come, but it is folloAved by plenty ;
while drink, worse than pestilence, sits and broods amongst us, engen-
dering a horrible offspring of sensuality and sin, whose license is
pleaded by the victims, under a stolid delusion, from Holy Writ, and
made legal by the crooked and corrupting policy of legislators !”
In New York the question Avas publicly debated, “ What right have
legislators to pass laws which enable men legally to injure their fellow-
men, to increase their taxes, and expose their children to temptation,
drunkenness, and ruin 1” The ans Aver was the denial of the right to
ruin, and opinion rapidly ripened into the initial shape of prohibition.
The returns in the following table illustrates the partial operation of
the New York laAv for six months :—Committals for offences, excluding
drunkenness —six months in 1854, 4900 ; six months under the neiv
law, in 1855, 2898 ; decrease, in favour of the law, 2062. So far back
as 1832, the no-license principle triumphed where the Pilgrim Fathers
first settled. In Barnstable and Duke’s counties, in 1855, after
vacations of three, four, and seven months, the judges had to preside
over two criminals only, and these for a petty larceny of less than
two dollars. “In 1845, the effects of prohibition in Massachusetts
were thus stated: —From more than 100 toAvns the traffic is entirely
removed. In one town, with a population of 7000, there were, four
years since, 469 paupers ; no-license has reduced them doAvn to 11.”
“In the county of Ontario, under the operation of no-license, the
inmates of the gaol were reduced from 125, in 1845, to 53, in 1846.
In 1847, licenses were again granted, and the inmates of the gaol
increased to 132. In the county of Genessee, similar results followed.
In Potter county, Pennsylvania, the traffic has been for a considerable


time suppressed, the judge refusing to grant any license.” “ The prison
has become tenantless ; there is not a solitary pauper in the county; the
business in the criminal court has ceased; and taxes have been reduced
one-half.” The general results were found to be, that “ four times as
many crimes were committed in places in which liquor is sold as in
places in which it is not sold ; and in a number of cases, after the
sale of it had been abandoned, the criminal docket had been cleared,
and the gaols comparatively empty.”
“ Taking the whole of Greene county, it was shown that of 300
criminals who had been imprisoned in the gaol during seven years
all save three were intemperate ; of sixty debtors every one ; of those
who had received aid at the county poorhouse during three years,
one-fifth were juveniles (of whom seven-eighths were children, often
orphans, of the intemperate), one-fifth dependents on intemperate
husbands. But for intoxicating liquors, any public provision for the
support of the poor would scarcely have been necessary.”
The Philadelphia Medical Society testified, after full inquiry through
a special committee, that out of 4292 deaths in that city above 700 (or
one in seven) were occasioned by drink. Connecticut became the
seventh State which adopted a prohibitory law.
The Governor says :— ‘ ‘ The law has been thoroughly executed,
with much less difficulty and opposition than was anticipated.”
The Newhaoen Advocate says:—“From all parts of the State the
tidings continue to come to us of the excellent workings of the Con-
necticut liquor law. The diminution of intemperance, the reduction
of crime and pauperism, the better observance of the Sabbath, &c.,
are the theme of rejoicing from every quarter. Men who voted against
the law, and who have heretofore been its bitter opponents, are now
its firm friends. ”
New York State illustrates the power of prohibition, by its absence.
There followed the return of the license system an alarming increase
of crime, both in city and country. The Albany Morning Times, of the
16th October, 1856, an Anti-Maine Law paper, said “The peni-
tentiary is filling up ; the inmates amount to 270; of this number
180 are women. The number of prisoners is greater than it has been
during the past eighteen months.” The Hon. Neal Dow says, in a
published statement, that before the prohibitory law there were
in Portland between 300 and 400 rumshops, and, immediately after,
not one. During ten months before the prohibitory law there were
298 commitals for crime. During ten months following only 106.
Paupers, during corresponding periods, were reduced from 24 1 to 180.
In 1855 the Hon. Horace Greeley visited Maine, and in the New
York Tribune gave the following testimony : —“ Me spent three days
in travelling through the State without seeing a glass of intoxicating
liquor, or an individual who appeared to be under its influence ; and
we were reliably assured that at the Augusta House, where the
Governor and most of the Legislature board, not only was no liquor
to be had, but even the use of tobacco had almost entirely ceased.
Mr. A. Farewell and Mr. G. P. Ure, who made a tour of inspection,
say, as the result of their investigations, “It is almost universally


1850-51. Inmates of Almshouse and House of Correction ..
1051-52. ,,
Decrease during the operation of the law ”
1850- Number of Public Prosecutions
1851-
. 12,20S
9,192
. 3,104
101
58
Decrease in favour of the prohibition law
43
acknowledged to be as successful in its operations as any other penal
law that ever was enacted and they found a vast number of testi-
monies to the same effect from persons of the highest character,
including bishops, judges, governors, physicians, counsellors, repre-
sentatives, &c.
Mr. Sydney Peahan, Speaker of the House of Representatives,
says:—“ My knowledge of the workings of the law extends over a large
section of the Calais district. I can assure you the law works well. ”
Professor Pond, of Bangor, says :—“I have not seen a drunken
man in our streets for the last six months. The house of correction
has been at times almost empty. I know not but it is so now.
The expense of paupers is greatly diminished.”
The Commissioner thus reports of Waterville :—“ln 1844 the cost
of pauperism rose to SIBOO a-year, from excessive drinking. In 1854,
with twice the population, the public payments for the poor will not
exceed SIOOO. The amount of crime is also greatly lessened.”
In March, 1852, the Marshal of Gardiner reports :—“At the com-
mencement of the official term of office there were in this city fourteen
places where intoxicating liquor was sold, some of them the habitual
resort of drunken, riotous, and disorderly persons. But one person
has been convicted of drunkenness for the last six months, but two
sent to the watch-house for the last six months. The law has been
rigidly and quiety enforced. ”
The Marshal of Augusta reports for 1852 as follows: —“ The police
used to be called up one hundred nights in the year. Since the passage
of the law they have not been summoned once.”
The well-known philanthropist, John Candler, in writing to Dr.
Lees, says ;—“ln 1854, whilst travelling in the State of Maine, we
came to Augusta, its capital. We were driven through the city in a
sledge, by our friend, J. B. Lang, who, as we passed along, pointed
out to us the city gaol, the windows of which were boarded up.
‘This,’ he said to us, ‘is owing to our Maine Law.’ I think he
remarked, ‘lt is empty now.’ ”
The Mayor of Bangor, in his message to the Council in 1852, reports
the following statistics: —
In Maine 117 towns elected temperance men, 8 chose mixed boards,
and 34 elected opposition councils. The towns in favour represented
a population of 254,891; those against, 55,565. In 1855 the Prohibi-
tionists in Maine lost the election of Governor. The temporary repeal
of the law, and substitution of stringent license, with pecuniary penal-
ties, was all for the best, making the enemies of truth to illustrate it
by the workings of error.” The Portland Journal reported a vast
increase of drunkenness, rows, burglaries, and other crimes, under the
renewed license system. The Calais Advertiser said:—“We have


more men reeling drunk through our streets the last three months
than we have seen before in the last three years.”
From Massachusetts, the Hon. H. W. Bishop, Judge of the Court of
Common Pleas, says:—“The violations of the law itself add to the
criminal business. The operation of this new law has diminished the
other class very much. Crimes of personal violence have hitherto
constituted two-thirds of all our criminal business.”
Mr. Counsellor Chapman said:—“ There is not the one-hundredth
part of the drinking in Springfield that there was before the tempe-
rance movement began. Assaults were almost always committed
under the influence of drink, and already that class of crimes has
nearly ceased. Legal and moral agencies should be combined; they
are like the soul and body, and cannot act well separately. ”
The Hon. Mr. Huntington, Mayor of the city of Lowell, reports
that “ for two months ending 22nd September, 1851, there were 500
cases of drunkennesses; in the two corresponding months of 1852,
only 180; diminution, 320.”
Mr, D. W. Alford, of Greenfield, said;—“The law has been a
blessing beyond anything we ever had. I was afraid to send my own
child, a boy, often into the streets unprotected, a year ago. Now,
females are perfectly safe.”
Dr. J. W. Stone, one of the representatives of Boston, says; —“I
looked upon the law, when first enacted in our sister State, with some
suspicion. It is one of the peculiarities of this law that where it has
been most efficiently executed there the greatest results in the suppi'ession
of crime have been satisfactorily achieved, and it has seized with such
strong hold upon the hearts of the people, that its popularity has in
those places become invincible.”
Speaking of a great political meeting held in 1856, the Boston
Telegraph says:—“We did not see a drunken man on the ground.
This was owing to the fact that no liquor was sold. Two or three
men attempted to sell, but were soon routed, and took to their heels.”
Of Hartford, Connecticut, Mr. H. Y. Phelps says, in 1855: —‘The
fighting and rioting, so common, have entirely disappeared, and open
drinking is stopped. ”
Rev. Dr. Clark says : —“ The general effects of the law are good, and
very apparent in connection with our city mission.”
Chief Justice Williams says:—“Since the Ist August, 1854, I have
not seen more than one or two instances of intemperance in the.
streets.”
Mr. L. S. Cowles says:—“1 have seen ten men drunk, before the law
passed, for one since.”
Mr. D. Hawley, Hartford city missionary:—“l have a mission
school. Since the Ist of August it has increased one-third. I have
seen in my rounds wives, mothers —even young women—-the worse for
liquor. But all that has changed now ; and in my conversations with
the people, many of them say that the law must have come from
heaven, it is too good to have been framed by man. ” One resident in
Hartford, containing 20,000 people, said “ he had not seen a single
intoxicated person during the year.”
Dr. F. Farnsworth, of Norwich, says:—“The amount of disease in


poor families is not one-tenth what it was. Casualties are largely
diminished. ”
The Home Journal, of 7th July, 1855, says:—“The Maine Liquor
Law has ruined the gaol business completely.”
The gaol at Wyndham is to be let for a boardinghouse.
Mayor Brooks, of Bridgeport,' says that “when mayor three
years ago, he was called up three nights out of five, throughout the
entire year, to disperse brawling and noisy mobs. During the past
year I have not been called upon in a single instance by watch at
night. All this change I attribute to the working of the new liquor
law. It is a rare sight to see a person drunk.”
The Rev. L. Bacon, D.D., of Newhaven, says:—“Never, for
twenty years, has our city been so peaceful and quiet as under the
operation of the no-license law. It is no longer simply a question of
temperance, but a governmental question, one of legislative foresight
and morality.” Governor Dutton said;—“Criminal prosecutions are
rapidly diminishing. The home of the peaceful citizen was never
before so secure.”
In July, 1853, Mr. L. Underwood, State’s Attorney, of Chittendon
County, wrote from Burlington;—“The law has put an end to
drunkenness and crime almost entirely. Within this town there
were almost daily breaches of the peace caused by drunkenness.
During the past four months only two complaints have been made for
such offences, and only one was caused by drunkenness.”
Mr. M. L. Church said:—“ lam very much pleased with the law.
You might stay here for a month and you would not see a drunken
man in the city. ”
The Grand Jury, in their report, said : —“We feel highly gratified to
find the gaol destitute of inmates, a circumstance attributable in a very
great measure, we believe, to the suppression of the sale of intoxicat-
ing liquors.”
General Fletcher, Governor of the State, in delivering his message,
used these words ;—“ Coming from all portions of the commonwealth,
you have personal knowledge of the practical operation of this law,
and its adaptation to accomplish the purposes for which it was
designed.”
From New Hampshire the Enquirer, published at Dover, says :
‘ ‘ The gaol, which usually has a good supply of tenants, has been
entirely empty for several weeks. The Jburned of March, 1856, states
that * ‘ the law works admirably in all parts of the State. Pauperism
and crime are almost unknown. ” The General Association of the Con-
gregational Churches, held on the 26th August, 1856, in their report,
say :—“We are called upon to give thanks to God for the prohibitory
law, which has been attended with such happy results.”
Under a knowledge of these facts, the Rev. John D. Lawyer, Chaplain
to New York State Prison at Auburn, said ;—“ Owe us the Maine Law,
and in five years Auburn Prison is no more. ”
The trial of a License Law in Massachusetts for one year, after the
trial of prohibition for more than ten years, furnishes many instruc-
tive statistics for taxpayers throughout the land to study. All the
restraints of prohibition were swept away by the November election of


1867, in which the license movement prevailed. At once the sale of
intoxicating liquors was renewed with vigour, and intemperance rapidly-
increased, filling (as Governor Claflen says, in his message to the
Legislature of 1869) the State prison, gaols, and houses of correction,
thereby confirming the prophetic language of General Bullock, in his
message to the Legislature of 1868, respecting the License Law
enacted: —“It leads into temptation the young men, and the
weak; it spreads a snare for the stranger and the unwary; it is
destructive of the influence of the family and the fireside ; adverse
to good morals; and repugnant to the religious sentiment of the
community. ”
The Rev. W. M. Thayler, quoting from the reports of the Board of
State Charities, says;—“That the whole number of commitments to all
the State prisons in Massachusetts was larger by one-third under license
than under prohibition, whilst the number of State paupers rose from
57,261 in 1867 to 91,157 in 1868, an increase of 33,896 under license,
compared with the previous year under prohibition. That whilst
crime in general has increased more than 36 per cent., compared with
1865, before the war, drunkenness has increased more than twice as
much. The Board of State Charities report that the enonnous sum of
53,733,980 is the cost of crime and pauperism, with their attendant
evils, to Massachusetts under license for the year ending 30th Septem-
ber, 1868. Nor does this estimate include the costs of courts and
legal processes, loss of labour, and other actual expenses and losses
occasioned by the traffic in intoxicating liquors.” The Rev. W. M.
Thayler adds:—“ Arithmetic cannot compute the domestic and social
miseries spread by licensing the sale of liquors. The young men de-
bauched, the husbands and fathers lured to ruin, the homes made
desolate, the hearts broken, the lives sacrificed by the traffic, and the
wide-spread desolation of the people, do not admit of computation or
description.”
On page 175, the Board of State Charities adds ;—“ The prison
registers indicate that more than two-thirds of the criminals in the
State are the victims of intemperance, but the proportion of crime
traceable to this great vice must be set down, as heretofore, at not less
than four-fifths. Its effects are unusually apparent in almost every
grade of crime. A noticeable illustration appears in the number of
commitments to the State prison, which during the eight months of
the present year, 1868 (in which the sale of intoxicating liquors has
been almost wholly unrestrained), was 136 against 66 during the cor-
responding months of the preceding year. Similar results appear in
nearly all the prisons of the commonwealth.”
Bessbrook is an Irish manufacturing town, near Newry. The Bess-
brook spinning factory gives employment to 3000 hands, most of
whom reside in the neighbourhood of the works. In Bessbrook there
is no licensed public-house, nor is there one in any of its surrounding
lands. The Irish constabulary, armed, occupy every other town in
Ireland, and have barracks for half-a-dozen men each along every
roadside, but in Bessbrook there are neither police, pawnshops, nor
poor-rates.


NATIVE WINES,
Will their Manufacture Promote or Hinder the Cause of
Temperance 1
Professor Butler, who lived several years in Europe, both in city
and country, says :—“We have heard it frequently asserted that there
is no drunkenness in any country where wine takes the place of
stronger liquors. Now, we have sifted this matter thoroughly, both
in Italy and Switzerland, and are bound to deny the truth of this
statement. Why is it, then, that so little drunkenness is seen by
strangers ? Because Italian labourers rarely begin their potations until
their day’s work is over. They carouse from about nightfall until
midnight. When money spent or credit exhausted, they reel home,
and the cries and groans of wives and children soon tell of the fury
and brutality which mark the drunkard the world over. Thinking it
probable that brandy did most of the mischief, I inquired as to this
point. In every case my questions caused surprise, and the answers
were always the same— ‘ No, no; it is wine, always wine.’ ”
When E. 0. Delanan, Esq., was in Rome some years ago, Cardinal
Acton, the Supreme Judge, assured him that nearly all the crime in
Rome originated in the use of wine.
The Rev. E. S. Lacy, of San Francisco, recently spent several
months in Switzerland, and he writes: —“I have just spent six months
in a country place of Switzerland, where the people do nothing but
work in the vineyards; where wine is cheap and pure. Here more
intoxication ivas obvious than in any other place it was ever my lot to live
in. On holidays and festal occasions you might suppose all the male
population drunk, so great are the numbers in this deranged and
beastly condition. On Sunday afternoons young men go shouting
along the streets. Intelligent Germans inform me that this is the
great social evil of their country—a place where wine, if not very
cheap, is never adulterated.”
Before the Legislative License Committee of Massachusetts the
following testimony was given in March, 1807, by Professor W. F.
Warren, who resided seven years in Germany ;—“ That one-third of
the students in the Universities of Berlin and Halle were once a-week
what you would call drunk. As it regards the people, I can only say
that during the last five years drunken people have gone past my
house, I suppose every evening, sometimes boisterously drunk, and
sometimes reeling drunk.”
Henry G. Carey, Esq., Professor of Music, testified ‘ ‘ that at a musi-
cal festival which he attended in Switzerland, three or four hundred
musicians being present, a large proportion of them were drunk, a
great many of them dead drunk, quite a number of them fighting
drunk, and more of them reeling drunk.”
The Rev. J. G. Cochran, Missionary from Persia, said of the people
where he lives, in the wine-making season;—“The whole village of
male adults will be habitually intoxicated for a month or six weeks.”
The Rev. Mr. Labarree, also a missionary in Persia, says:—“ If I had


any sentiments favourable to the moderate use of wine when I left
America, my observations during the seven years I have resided in
this paradise of vineyards have convinced me that the principle of
total abstinence is the only safeguard against the great social and
religious evils that flow from the practice of wine-drinking. As you
might suppose, drunkenness, in its various grades, becomes too common
to excite surprise.”
M. Jules Simon describes the drunken scenes in France as dis-
gusting, and states that ‘‘ in some towns the women rival the men in
habits of intoxication.” E. C. Delanin, Esq., had an interview with
the King of France, Louis Philippe, in 1838, in which the king
described the intemperance of his people as great, and added: —
“ The drunkenness of France is our wine.” The Duke of Orleans
said the same thing, and added that “in those districts where wine
was made there was also the greatest wretchedness, and the most
frequent appeals to Government for aid.”
The distinguished American author, Cooper, wrote from Europe :
“ I came to Europe under the impression that there was more
drunkenness among us than in any other country, England, perhaps,
excepted. A residence of six months in Paris changed my views
entirely. I have taken unbelievers with me into the streets, and
have never failed to convince them in the course of an hour. ”
Horace Greeley wrote from Paris that “ Wine will intoxicate,
does intoxicate ; that there are confirmed drunkards in Paris, and
throughout France, is notorious and undeniable.”
Hon. James M. Usher, Commissioner of Massachusetts to the
World’s Exposition in Paris, in 1867 (and his residence there of
several months gave him ample opportunity to judge), wrote; —“I
this day counted, within the space of one mile, ten persons very much
intoxicated. The drinking habit runs through every phase of
society. ”
The well-known excursionist, Thomas Cook, of England, established
a temperance hotel in Paris a few years since, and he wrote ; —“ln
over 35 years’ experience of workmen and servants, we were never
more plagued by irregularities connected with drinking customs and
practices than we have been in this apparently quiet quarter of a
miscalled sober city.”
Hon. Caleb Foote, of Salem, Mass., said:—“Persons here, who
have been for years familiar with Paris, tell me that there is a vast
amount of drunkenness here, taking away half the usefulness of the
working classes. Our informants, who are people of large travel, and
are neither fanatics nor ascetics, have seen enough to make them deny
in toto the theory that the people of the wine-producing countries are
sober.”
Charles Dickens says :—“ The wine-shops are the colleges and
chapels of the poor in France. The wine-shops breed, in a physical
atmosphere of malaria, and a moral pestilence of envy and vengeance,
the men of crime and revolution. Hunger is probably a bad com-
panion, but drink is worse !”
Dr. E. IST. Kirk, of Boston, who resided in Paris for some time,


says ;—“I never saw such systematic drunkenness as I saw in France
during a residence of sixteen months. I never saw so many women
drunk.”
The Paris correspondent of the Chicago Republican recently wrote :
—“ The curse of the Parisian workmen is wine. . . . The idea is
prevalent that people don’t get drunk in France because it is a wine
country; and I acknowledge that I once thought so too, before I had
really seen the life of the common people ; but it is all foolishness.
They do get drunk here—drunk on wine—and just about as much as
people do anywhere.”
A member of the French ISTational Academy, Count de Montalem-
bert, said:—“ Where there is a wineshop there are the elements of
disease, and the frightful source of all that is at enmity with the
interests of the workmen. ”
Robert Tomes, American Consul at Rheims, in his work entitled
The Champagne Country, says The common people, brutalised by
ignorance, are rude in manners, and given to sensual indulgence.
They are deep drinkers and gross feeders. During the carnival at
Rheims a rabid thirst for champagne, hot punch, &c., prevailed, and
every one seemed eager to reach intoxication as the summum bomom.
Success crowned their efforts, and universal drunkenness was the
result. The production of intoxicating drinks of all kinds in France
in 1805 was 1,516,746,000 gallons.”
California is already known for its manufacture of wine, and the
following testimony respecting its sad results is direct and unanswer-
able. A State convention of the friends of temperance at San Fran-
cisco, October, 1866, adopted the following resolution : — £ ‘ That we
consider the project of banishing intemperance from California, by
introducing the general use of wine as a beverage, to be a delusion
and a snare.” Also a State convention of Congregational ministers
and delegates from the churches in San Francisco, in 1866, denounced
the manufacture of wine as destructive to the highest political and
religious interest of the commonwealth.
The Rev. Dr. Stone, of Boston, writes :— <£ I had entertained a sort
of hope that the manufacture of pure wines, and their introduction into
general use, would crowd out the gross strong liquors, and diminish
intemperance. lam now fully convinced that this hope was ground-
less and delusive. It is in evidence that full two-thirds of all the
wine manufactured is converted into brandy. It also appears that in
the wine-growing districts intemperance is on the increase, extending
to the youth of both sexes. There is no way but to take ground
against the production of grapes for all such manufacture. This
touches a very large and growing pecuniary interest, and will provoke
strenuous opposition ; but we must save this State, if it can be done,
from such investment of capital and labour, and from the unavoidable
result of drunkenness, profligacy, and Crime.”
Joseph Weed, of San Francisco, writes ;— ££ There is probably not a
village in the State, where wine has been made to any extent, that has
not witnessed the gradual fall of individuals and families to intemper-
ance and beggary among those engaged in this occupation. Not a few


church members have fallen from this cause, to the ruin of body and
soul.”
The editor of the Rescue, California, says:—“Wine-making in
El Dorado county, as an element of wealth, has proved a delusion
and a snare—it has paved the way to poverty and drunkenness only.
These facts cannot much longer be concealed, and when they are known
wine-making is doomed.” Also the editor of the Pacific, another
California paper, writes (after having travelled extensively through
the wine-making districts): —“But through some parts of these moun-
tains, as well as in the valleys, there is arising one species of produc-
tion, fraught with dire evil to the producers and the country. It is
that of wine-making. Already wine has become as cheap as milk, and
is as freely drunk, till many, once sober men, are growing habitually
intoxicated. In one wine-growing neighbourhood we are told that
young girls, seventeen years of age, reeled through the streets under
the intoxication of pure Californian wine. Men, once of worth, are
now, through wine, lost to society, and become a fear and disgrace to
their families.”
One leading man enumerated to us five of his acquaintances who,
once noble men, are now drunkards through wine.
The report of the National Temperance Society of the United States
of America, for 1872, says that a new interest and increased discussion
relating to the entire wine question has marked the past year. Not
only the pulpit, but the press and the platform, have given it careful
and earnest attention.
The theory, that light wines promote temperance, has been more
thoroughly disproved than ever before. From California comes a mass
of facts against it.
The Rev. John C. Holbrook, D.D., who is on the ground, writes :
‘ ‘ This question, considered in the light of reason, has found its appro-
priate verdict in that of experience. The man who takes fermented
wine drinks it for the sake of the effects the alcohol produces, which are
the same as in brandy or other spirits. It has been found to create
the same appetite and habit as the use of ardent spirits.”
The Rev. S. Y. Blakeslee, travelling editor of the San Francisco
Pacific, says :—“The effect of this wine-making is beginning to tell
disastrously on large numbers of those engaged in it. They are not
often drunk, but are becoming habitually boozy. At length wine
ceases to be strong enough, and brandy is substituted, and the man
ultimately becomes a drunkard.”
The Rev. J. H. Shedd, of Persia, says that “light wines are no
friend to the cause of temperance. Beastly intemperance is the beset-
ting sin of the people. The worst destroyer of the soul and obstacle to
the gospel is wine and its attendant intemperance.”
The Rev. H. 0. Burt, D.D., who has been spending some time in
the wine-producing districts of Switzerland, says : —“I am living here
in the midst of a wine-growing region. The amount of drunkenness
amongst the people has surprised me, abounding more than in our own
country. Here in Switzerland, still more in Germany, and most of all
in France, and in portions of Italy—the wine-growing regions par


excellence —the use of distilled liquors has become fearfully prevalent
and excessive.”
The Rev. J. B. Corning, writing to the Independent , says : —“About
a year and a-half ago, I sent to your columns a letter on ‘ The Vin-
tage of Switzerland. ’ When I came to this fair country, during the
vintage of 1871, I saw only the romantic side of the wine question.
Every man with five acres to plant sees more money in wine than he
does in cereals, and some have a drinking shop on every corner , and the
land is cursed with the hateful effects of alcoholic, poison. The great
majority of the Swiss men are poisoned ivith alcohol. The tables of
longevity do not run very high in this land of mountains. To my
mind, the universal tippling and guzzling habits of the people furnish
the most satisfactory cause. ”
The National Temperance Report , published in New York, informs
us that the question, “What wine shall we use at the celebration of the
Lord’s Supper 1” has occupied much earnest attention and discussion.
That the Rev. Dr. Patton’s new work indisputably proves that two
kinds of wine were known amongst the ancients, and referred to in the
Bible—the one fermented and intoxicating, the other unfermented
and harmless—the former always referred to in the Bible as a mocker
and a curse, the other as a blessing. Over fifty churches in New York
and Brooklyn, and over forty in Philadelphia and vicinity, together
with a large proportion of the churches in the country, have banished
the intoxicating cup from the communion table, and are using the
fruit of the vine, pure and unfermented, which can now be easily
obtained.
Long ago, the good and wise Fenelon thus counselled Louis XV.;—
“You ought never to allow wine to become too common in your
kingdom. It causes diseases, quarrels, seditions, idleness, aversion to
labour, and family disorders.” Lord Bacon too truly said:—“Of
all things known to mortals, wine is the most powerful and effectual
for exciting and inflaming the passions of mankind, being common fuel
to them all.” France consumes more wine than any other nation, and
no pen or tongue can pourtray the vileness of her social state. Licen-
tiousness is systematised, and prostitution is licensed. The connection
between this consumption of wine, her licentious living, and recent
humiliation may be worth the serious and earnest study of those who
have or may have governmental control in this and neighbouring
colonies.
Schlossers, in his History of the Nineteenth Century, says: —“The
ruin and corruption of the Swedish nation was accomplished by Gustavus,
in 1755, when, for purposes of revenue, he introduced distillation,
when the com necessary for their subsistence was converted into liquid
poison. From 1785 to 1825, the population increased 20 per cent.;
but the consumption of brandy, 400 per cent.; notwithstanding the
full and active machinery for instruction. “ Hence,” he observes, “it
is well to remember that centuries of education will not remove the
evils of bad and mischievous customs and laws.”
Twenty years ago, says the Kreuz Zeitwng newspaper;—“Pastor
Krummacher complained before the Ecclesiastic Assembly, Berlin,


that out of a population of 440,000 not more than 40,000 attended
divine worship. Since that time, the number of churchgoers has
steadily decreased, until it has fallen to one per cent, of the adult popu-
lation. Of 23,000 funerals in 1870, 20,000 were performed without any
religious service or ceremony. Gustav Fretag’s Review says :—“ That
for many years past the influence of the Berlin stage has been most
baneful; that every evening the popular theatres of the capital trample
underfoot marriage, morality, and religion, amid the exhalations of
wine and tobacco, and the laughter of the attendants. At the end of
1867, the number of criminals in Berlin amounted to about ten per
cent, of its entire adult population, and since then the number has
increased. Several localities in the environs of the city are infested
with swarms of thieves and vagabonds. In the evening the streets
are rendered dangerous by these hordes, and no one thinks it safe to
appear in the streets at night without being provided with a revolver.”
Says the Berliner Zeitung and Publicist: —“And it may safely be
added, no one acquainted with the history of the traffic in intoxicating
drinks in Prussia and its capital can fail to mark the share which this
desolating traffic has had in producing this state of affairs.”
Dr. Wald, of Konigsberg, at a public conference, stated that Berlin,
in 1844, had one church less and 1500 taverns more than in 1745,
illustrating the tendency of alcoholic liquors to create an ever increas-
ing demand for themselves, and thus perpetuate the evils of intem-
perance.
In the conscription of 1852, out of 174 young men from a western
district only four were admissible: the rest were physically incapacitated
by dram-drinking.
From year to year, prisons and lunatic asylums became more crowded,
while thousands became permanently mad through delirium tremens .
Out of 60 children under six in the Berlin Orphan Asylum, 40 had
been taught to sip drams, and 9 had a depraved desire for them.
In the vale of Barmen, renowned for its religious profession, with a
population of 80,000, not less than 13,000 were habitual dram-
drinkers. Drinking, by promoting domestic misery and discord,
occasions nine-tenths of the increasing divorces of the country. Dr.
Wald further declares that “ one-half of the entire corn and potatoes
grown in the north of Germany are converted into spirits, the use
of which had increased ninefold since 1817.”
French journals note that years of plenty in the wine districts are
years of disorder and crime for the country at large. The Annals of
Hygiene for 1863 observes that “in wine-growing countries delirium
tremens and alcoholism are most frequent. In France, where everybody
drinks—young and old, male and female—we find one centenarian
amongst 360,000 persons, but in the United States of America one in
every 9000. Dr. Bell states that “the consumption in France is equal
to four gallons of proof spirit per head annually for all ages —men,
women, and infants.” French Government returns show for 1865,
1.089.000. gallons of wine; distilled spirits and other drinks,
427,746,000 gallons—of which only a small portion is exported;
77.000. gallons of wine are consumed in Paris alone, equal to 42


gallons per head yearly. The cost of all this to the retail consumer
cannot be less than $1,500,000,000, spent in what is not food, but which
vitiates the morals, poisons the brain, and destroys the happiness of
the people. In 1856 there were 300,000 drink-shops, besides inns,
cafds, &c., one drunkery to 100 persons of all ages.
Mr. Schauffler, American Missionary at Constantinople, wrote in
1827:—“The prevalence of drunkenness upon pure wine has been on
the increase for some ten years past—before it was checked by the
high price of wine. It is a matter of regret that the poor German
farmers settled in Moldavia should have entered upon a field of
industry (vine-growing) promising in pecuniary respects, but so ruinous
in its moral bearings. The number of wine houses and cellars has
been on a most alarming increase since wine has become indigenous.
It has often been said that pure wine did not produce that artificial
appetite for more. This is certainly incorrect.” The universal
history of the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors demon-
strates this fact—that as are the facilities for the production and sale
of wine and strong drink, so are the proportionate drunkenness,
pauperism, and crime of the people.
The Legislature of Ohio directed Dr. Hiram Cox, a distingv 'shed
chemist of Cincinnati, to analyse and examine the liquors in that
market. He laboured more than two years, but meanwhile the liquor
men brought their influence to bear upon the Legislature so as to sup-
press his report, and it has never been published; but he has written a
number of letters, from one of which I will quote a few lines :
“ I was appointed to the office of Chemical Inspector in 1855. Since
then I have made over six hundred inspections of stores, and lots of
liquor of every variety, and now positively assert that over ninety per
cent, of all that I have analysed were adulterated with the most perni-
cious and poisonous ingredients.” He says ; —“ I called at a grocery
store one day, where liquor was being sold. A couple of Irishmen
came in while I was there, and called for some whisky. The first one
drank, and the moment he drank the tears flowed freely, while he at
the same time caught his breath like one suffocating or strangling.
When he could speak he said to his companion, ‘ Och, Michael, by the
powers, but this is warming to the stomach, sure !’ Michael drank,
and w'ent through like contortions, with the remark, ‘Troth, and
wouldn’t it be foin on a could, frosty morning, Timothy.’ After they
had drank, I asked the proprietor to pour me out a little tumbler. On
examination I found it 17 per cent, alcoholic spirits, when it should
have been 50 ; and the difference in percentage was made up by sul-
phuric acid, red pepper, pelitory, caustic potash, brucine, and strych-
nine. One pint of such liqu rat one time would kill the strongest
man.”
“A druggist in Cincinnati sent to New York for two hogsheads of
seignette brandy, so as to supply the physicians with the very best
article for medical purposes. Dr. Cox tested them. In fifteen minutes
he found that a polished steel blade turned the brandy black as ink.
The steel spatula itself corroded, and when dried was found coated
with copper. On a careful analysis, he found in one cask sulphuric acid,


nitric acid, prussic acid, guiana pepper, an abundance of fusel oil, and
pronounced it base, common, adulterated whisky. In the other cask
he found the same adulterations as the first, but in greater abundance,
with the addition of catechu. So complete was the deception that the
druggist and other good judges pronounced it a superior article,
showing that taste and smell are incomplete tests.”
“A bushel of the sweetest and best corn will make three gallons of
pure whisky, but distillers, by mixing strychnine in their yeast, have
averaged four gallons to the bushel. The strychnine only costs three
cents to make the extra gallon. A few years ago, the distillers in
Miami Valley undertook to make five or six, and even seven, gallons of
whisky out of a bushel of corn, by adding more strychnine, some of the
additional strychnine remaining in the slop. Soon afterwards great
excitement prevailed by the appearance of a malignant and fatal disease-
called the ‘ hog cholera. ’ It was soon found that it was confined to
districts in the immediate neighbourhood of distilleries, and that the
fish in the streams on the banks of which distilleries were located
died in large numbers, manifesting all the symptoms of poisoning by
nux vomica. Finally the swills of the distilleries were analysed, and
the presence of strychnine discovered. This at once accounted for the
fatality among the hogs and fish. At first the distillers were very
indignant; but seeing the thing could not be hid, afterwards acknow-
ledged that they used the drug to aid them in obtaining more spirits
out of the same quantity of corn. Physicians say that since the intro-
duction of strychnine, &c., in the manufacture of whisky, it has become
impossible to cure delirium tremens. The following are extensively
and almost universally found in all spirits Strychnine, stramonium,
belladonna, tobacco, cocculus, opium, and many others. One drug-
gist in London, last year, sold to one liquor firm in that city more
strychnine than the whole medical profession of the city would require
in the same time. Strychnine is chiefly obtained from the seeds
and bark of the nux vomica tree ; stramonium, the next most popular
poison in adulterating liquors, is from the juice of a poisonous weed
which grows abundantly by the roadsides, and in vacant lots of ground,
everywhere. A retailer buys a gallon of corn whisky, of which at
least one-fourth of the intoxicating strength is strychnine, and proceeds
according to receipt to make two gallons by adding stramonium and
water; but as stramonium may cramp the stomach, a little opium is
added, and a little potash to counteract the peculiar taste and smell,
the ingredients costing four to five cents. Cocculus is the fruit of an
East Indian plant. Ten thousand pounds of it were shipped to Great
Britain in a single year, and used in adulterating liquors, which makes
equal to 6,000,000 gallons of beer. Immense quantities of tobacco are
used for purposes of adulteration. In one cask of whisky about fifteen
to twenty pounds of dogleg tobacco was found soaking, and from appear-
ance had been there for a year; and it is stated upon good authority
that in some breweries the largest bills are not for malt and hops, but
for tobacco. It is well known that the common port and sherry wine of
commerce are composed chiefly of chemicals, with a portion of spirits ;
that a hundred times more port wine is sold than ever left the banks
c 2


of the Douro. James Dunn, author of Bible Wines, dee., says :
“ That the United States are reported to be the largest consumers of
champagne wine in the world, that of 1,000,000 baskets. The
whole champagne district is about 20,000 acres, and the quantity of
wines manufactured for exportation is 10,000,000 bottles, or about
800,000 baskets. Of this Russia consumes 160,000, France 162,000,
Germany 146,000, England 22,000, leaving only 120,000 for the United
States, which proves that 880,000 baskets of wine drunk for imported
champagne are counterfeit, an amount more than equal to the whole
supply of the champagne for the world.” Take that of Madeira—Dr.
Nott states, on reliable authority, that but 30,000 barrels of wine were
produced on the island of Madeira, and yet 50,000 are claimed to be
drunk in America alone.
There is more port wine drunk in London alone than all the port-
wine growers in the world produce, and yet London professes to
supply nearly the whole civilised world. Under the streets of London,
adepts in the transmutation of liquors, known as “wine-brewers,”
raise the choicest products of the hills and valleys of France and
Portugal.
From the report of the Commissioners on the Internal Revenue Sys-
tem, made in 1866, we learn that four firms in the city of New York re-
ported to the commissioners a consumption of 225,000 gallons of pure
spirits, for the manufacture of imitation wines. As about 20 per cent,
is the proportion of spirits used, we have from four firms alone nearly
2,000,000 gallons of this death-dealing mixture palmed off for con-
sumption. Conceive, if you can, the whole amount manufactured in
the States, with about 300 firms engaged in this debasing traffic.
Professor C. A. Lee, of New York, says cheap Madeira is made
here by extracting the oils from common whisky, and passing through
carbon. There are immense establishments in this city where whisky
is turned into wine. One party, after he had left this nefarious traffic,
assured me that he had often purchased whisky of a country merchant,
and sold the whisky back to him turned into wine at a profit of
from 400 to 500 per cent. We have testimonies the most unquestion-
able that modern wines are manufactured and adulterated to an
awful extent.
The Vintners Guide and the Wine Merchants' Companion fur-
nish the most shocking directions on this subject, showing the
ingredients that enter into composition of those fabrications called
wines prepared in those garrets, cellars, and vaults of our large cities,
where fraud underground finds protection, and wholesale deeds of
darkness are securely and systematically performed. It is but recently
that a writer (no ways favourable to abstinence, but one who ought to
know) said, in an article on Adulterated Wines :—“ We know very well
that the Spaniard would not touch the wine he manufactures for us,
and the Portuguese would spit out our port like so much poison.”
. answer to certain questions, Dr. Cox, the celebrated chemist and
inspector for Ohio, mentions the following as the compositions of all
the port wine he had inspected that spring:—“ As a basis, either water,
cider, vinegar, or a mixture of water and sulphuric acid with the juice


■of elderberries, privet berries, beet root, juice of logwood, alum,
potash, with sugar to cover the pernicious mixtures ; and sometimes I
found one or two per cent, of Jamaica rum or neutral spirits added.”
Of sherry, Madeira, muscatel, &c., he says all are, or at least all that
he has inspected, either mixed or have as a basis water, cider ; wort
made of pale malt, or a mixture of sulphuric acid and water to the
acidity of weak vinegar; with brown sugar, honey, orris root, and
neutral spirits to give it alcoholic percentage. These abominable
mixtures are flavoured with various oils, mixed to suit the flavours of
different wines.
Accum says;—“Many thousands of pipes of spoiled cider are
annually brought to New York from the country, for the purpose of
being converted into fictitious wines. Artisans are regularly employed
in staining and crusting casks and bottles, and making an astringent
extract, for old port!”
Mr. Cyrus Redding, celebrated as an author who has written much
on the subject of wine (in the description he gave before the Select
Committee of the House of Commons of the mode by which wines
were manufactured in London) stated that brandy-come—that is, wash-
ings of brandy casks, colouring made of elderberries, logwood, salt of
tartar, green dragon, tincture of red sanders or cudbear —were exten-
sively used in preparing an article which sells as port. “ The entire
export of port wine,” he added, “is 20,000 pipes, and yet 60,000, as
given in evidence, are annually consumed in this country. ”
Dr. Nott says;—“ln reply to a question put to a gentleman, who
had himself been a winedealer, as to the verity of the startling state-
ments then published with reference to wine-brewing, this response
was made, ‘ God forgive what has passed in my own cellar, but the
statements made are all true, I assure you.’ ”
Another friend, who had been the executor of a winedealer, assured
him that in the inventory of articles for the manufactory found in the
cellar of that dealer, and which amounted to many thousand dollars,
there was not one dollar for the juice of the grape; and still another
friend informed him that in examining, as an assignee, the papers of an
insolvent wine merchant, he found that many hundreds of casks of
cider, but no wine, had been purchased. One of the most poisonous
ingredients used is lead. Frauds committed in the city of New
York amounted, it is supposed, to $8,000,000 annually.
Whilst the wines now current are proved to be a mess of drugs—a
concoction of vile compounds—malt liquors are little better. In
England, a few years ago, public attention was strongly called to this,
and the result was some terrible revelations as to what the intelligent
British public had been swallowing. It was found that salt, molasses,
sulphate of iron, gentian, quassia, camomile, ginger, coriander, para-
dise seed, alum, sulphuric acid, capsicum, cocculus indicus, tobacco,
opium, strychnine, were component parts of the different specimens
of porter and ale obtained from various beershops through the city of
London. Cocculus indicus, or Indian berry, is an article rarely used in
medicine, and of no importance in the arts, but is extensively used in
the adulteration of malt liquors, to increase the apparent strength of


the beer, and improve its intoxicating qualities. Ten to twelve grains
will kill a dog; and in India it is employed by the Nagus and other
Indian tribes to poison the water in the wells and tanks, to impede the
progress of an invading army. Foxglove is a poison, and used on
account of the bitter and intoxicating qualities it imparts to the liquor.
Green copperas gives the porter a frothy top, and hartshorn shavings
prevent it from becoming sour. Henbane, a poisonous plant, pro-
duces intoxication, delirium, nausea, vomiting, and death, but is used
for its intoxicating qualities. Grains of paradise are also largely used,
possessing similar properties.
Jalap prevents intoxicating liquor from souring. Multum is a
mixture prepared by the chemists for the brewers, and used to increase
the intoxicating power of the liquor. It is of a highly poisonous
nature, and, doubtless, contributes to the fatal effects of the liquor.
Nutgalls are used to impart colour.
Nux vomica, a violent narcotic acrid poison, is extensively used in
the manufacture of intoxicants, but is such a deadly poison that
medical men rarely prescribe it.
Opium, the thickened juice of the white poppy, is the most intoxi-
cating of narcotic poisons, and largely used by the brewer.
Oil of vitriol, a mineral poison, is used to increase the heating
qualities of the liquor.
Potash as a purifier.
Quassia, an intense bitter, as a substitute for hops.
Tobacco for its stupifying and intoxicating qualities.
Wormwood for its bitter and stimulating properties.
In view of the facts here presented, is it not a monstrous absurdity
to style liquors, composed of such vile abominations, healthful
beverages ? And is it not sheer blasphemy to speak of protecting a
traffic whose whole history is one gigantic fraud. We solemnly aver
that if ever there was a State prison offence, it is that of putting into
the market liquors manufactured out of articles infernal in their charac-
ter, and labelling them as pur„ and wholesome. And what can be said
of the wholesale prescription of such liquors by so many medical men ?
Dr. Ure, one of the most celebrated chemists, says if the gluten
or yeast, which is an insoluble substance, is separated from the juice of
the grape, vinous fermentation cannot take place. This was known to
the ancients. Pliny, in speaking of the most valued wines of the day,
says—“ That is the most useful wine whose strength is utterly broken
or destroyed by the filter which was used to separate the fermenting
principle of gluten or yeast.” Pliny and Yarro speak of this filtered
wine as being very sweet wine, highly esteemed, and conceded to the
ladies because it could not intoxicate. Plutarch speaks of wines fre-
quently filtered as being the most valuable, and as wines from which
the strength was excluded, and which neither inflame the head nor
infect the mind and passions. And a number of other ancient writers
bear clear and decisive testimony that tie wine then most valued was
not intoxicating.
In 38 passages in the Bible, wine is distinctly spoken of as a blessing,
in which the Hebrew word Tirosh is translated wine, new wine, sweet


wine. In many other portions it is spoken of as a curse, as “Wine is
a mocker; whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise “Look not on
the wine when it is red,” which clearly indicates that intoxicating
and non-intoxicating wines were in use from the earliest ages. The
notion that unfermented wines will not keep is a popular error,
grounded on ignorance. The unfermented wines of the ancients were
the only wines that would keep. All the fermented wines speedily
became sour, and, the art of distillation being unknown, they had no
distilled spirits to preserve them. Plutarch, Pliny, Columella, and
others, name the r ethods then practised to preserve the unfermented
juice of the grape—To remove the gluten by r peated filterings, by
boiling, and by hermetically sealing the juice in vessels.
Dr. Pereira, in his Elements of Materia Medica, says : —“ Grape juice
does not ferment in the grape itself; this is owing solely to the
gluten being contained in cells distinct from those in which the
saccharine juice is lodged, and to the exclusion of atmospheric oxygen.
The constituents of “ wine in the cluster” are —gluten, a blood former,
plentiful; sugar, in varying but always large amount ; gum, which is
chiefly a mechanical lubricant, with smaller portions of aromas, malic
and citric acids, phosphorus and sulphur, cream of tartar, &c. When
these mingled elements are “ worked,” the old products are in
great part destroyed. The nourishing gluten putrifies by exposure
to air and moisture, resulting in alcohol, a powerful and narcotic
poison, with some ether, acid, and volatile oils. The medical pro-
perties and uses of the unfermented fruit of the vine are valuable.
The ripe fruit of the vine is cooling and antiseptic ; and when eaten
in large quantities, diuretic and laxative. Grapes are very useful in
febrile diseases, particularly in bilious and putrid fevers, dysentery,
and all inflammatory affections. In Syria the juice of ripe grapes,
inspissated, is used in great quantities in these diseases. Grapes have
been strongly recommended as an article of common diet in phthisis,
and they certainly contain much bland, nutritious matter, well fitted
for phthisical habits. In the inflammatory form of dyspepsia, and in
pulmonary affections, ripe grapes are eaten in considerable quantities
in Switzerland and other parts of the continent, occasionally with
considerable benefit, and forming what is called the “ Cure de Raisins. '’
Raisins, as an article of ordinary food, were much used in primitive
times, and large quantities are still consumed in the East as a refreshing,
nutritious article of common diet. They are easily dried and pre-
served, and constitute a light, wholesome, and cheap fruit for domestic
use in warm climates.
Dr. Grindrod says ;—“Grapes have a surprising effect on invalids.
During the grape season patients reduced to skeletons are directed to
live almost exclusively on ripe grapes, and soon regain their former
flesh. Many consumptive persons entirely recover by using grapes ;
hence the well-known ‘ Cure de Raisins, or Wine Cure.’ ”
When the grape is fresh from the vine, or in the form of jelly, or
grape cake, or raisins, or as unfermented wine, the fruit of the
vine contains those elements requisite to build up and maintain the
body in perfect health and vigour. In all warm climates, the grape


might be used as a cheap and wholesome article of diet more generally
than it is, with advantage to the public health, and comfort and
economy to the working classes.
‘‘ An important witness has taken the stand, ” says the Interior
newspaper of Chicago, “ in favour of temperance, and it will not be
easy to gainsay his evidence. At a recent meeting of a hundred or
more gentlemen, respecting the rebuilding of breweries, William Lill,
a citizen of large wealth, whose thirty years’ experience as a brewer
has placed him confessedly at the head of his guild in the north-west,
was amongst the speakers. Mr. Lill said ‘ that he should never build
nor own another brewery. It was a business that demoralised both
master and man. He had found it impossible to keep sober men on
his premises. It was a manufactory of drunkards, in constant opera-
tion, and the curse began in the brewery itself, where every man was
a beer barrel in the morning, and a barrel of beer at night. He would
have no more of it. He would be content to make less money in
some other way. ’ ”
Dr. J. Cory says that “in Chicago there were about 2000 retail
liquor-dealers ; a drinking saloon to every 35 adults. In 1867 her 100
breweries made 8,000,000 gallons of beer and ale, equal to 32 gallons
to every inhabitant, and used up 400,000 bushels of grain.” And
remarks that ‘ ‘ intoxication is the infernal source from which flows the
black and filthy stream of crime. Drunkenness is the filthy nest in
which depravity, shame, and wickedness are hatched, and from which
the hellish brood of crime crawls forth. That alcohol is the father of
four-fifths of all the crimes, whether small or great. That in the
United States in 1867, during one year, there were 600 suicides, 800
murders, 1500 rapes, 5000 robberies, 5000 cases of arson, 100,000
cases of larceny and theft, besides a countless host of petty crimes.”
An Ex-Brewer on Teetotalism. —Mr. Frederick N. Charrington,
late a member of the brewing firm of Charrington, Head and Co., was
chairman of a meeting of Sabbath-school teachers held in Exeter Hall,
London, on the 18th February, 1873. The hall was crowded, and
hundreds were refused admission. Mr. Charrington, who was received
with much applause, said:—“Dear friends, as one who has lately
come out of the fearful business generally known as the liquor traffic
(cheers)—l consider that cheer as a welcome to me from you, who have
been a long time fighting this soul-destroying and hell-filling occupa-
tion. There are, I believe, many persons here to-night who are not
total abstainers. lam thankful to say that I have been one for four
years. When first spoken to on this subject, I said I did not see any
reason why I should be one. I said I never drank too much in my life,
and saw no reason why I should deny myself the one glass of ale or
wine which I had at my dinner. But my objections then were simply
for want of thought upon the subject, and because I was ignorant in
those days of what the drink trade was doing in this country. Some
of you who are now present may possibly never have heard of what
the drink is doing, or, if you have, perhaps you have never considered
that it is filling our workhouses, crowding our prisons, and, worse than
all, filling our madhouses with the insane. Do you think, as I used to


do when spoken to about this subject, that we were saying too much ?
Then let me tell you, as one who once thought as you do now, that we
are not doing this at all, we are not exaggerating the real facts of the
case. We might quote numberless instances of what the devil is
doing by means of his prime agency, strong drink. Need I quote the
case reported in the public papers as an illustration, in which a man,
under the influence of drink, went home one evening to his mother,
seventy years of age, rushed into the room, and seizing hold of her, he at
once began to bite her arm, and actually ate the flesh whilst she was
alive. I ask you, as fellow Sunday-school teachers, to try and
realise what is your responsibility to God in relation to those under
your care. When I read the facts which have been brought out in
connection with Sunday-schools, I have been forced to ask myself
whether we have done our duty to the full by these children. It is
drink that causes so many to fall back, who have been carefully taught
in the Sunday-schools; and it seems to me that you should really
consider this deliberately, and come to a conclusion upon it in accor-
dance with the facts, and as God shall lead you to decide. It was as
a Sunday-school teacher that I began to reflect on what I was doing,
while I was engaged in this dreadful traffic. Then it was that I began
to think that whilst I was trying to benefit a few, I was the means of
sending many to that doom from which they could never return. Of
all the inventions of the devil—and he has fearful nets for entrapping
the unwary—there is nothing like drink. An aged minister at
Brighton, who had reached fourscore years, in addressing young men,
said:— ‘ Young men, if you wish to reach my age, if you want to be
strong, if you want a head which never aches, and a hand which never
shakes, and a voice which never falters, do not touch the intoxicating
cup.’ Contrast this with the utterance of an English judge;—‘Over
the doors of all public-houses in the land there ought to be written, in
large letters, these words—The way to hell, leading down to the
chambers of death.’ Warn your children against the first glass,
which leads to another and another, and in the end they may become
like the reeling drunkards who are to be seen in our streets.”
The London Saturday Review, in a recent article, says:—“ It is impos-
sible to doubt the growing intemperance of the working classes. In
Great Britain, as a rule, high wages seem to mean only more drink-
ing, and drinking means wife-beating at home and fighting in the
streets. The excise returns, the statistics of criminal offences, the
warnings of the doctors, the feverishness and excitement of social life,
the prevalence of nervous disorders, the crowded drinking bars, and
the marked increase of the number of reeling drunkards in the streets,
all point to the same conclusion. It is doubtful whether the present
high wages will be maintained; but if they fall, the passion for stimu-
lants which has already been developed, will unfortunately remain.
Anybody who reads the police reports will see the steady increase of
cases of brutal assaults, especially on women, which may be traced to
drinking. The criminal statistics compiled by the police show an
increase of more than 40 per cent, in the convictions for drunkenness
•before the magistrates in England and Wales in 1871, as compared


with the average of the previous ten years. The excise and customs
returns show a vast increase in the consumption of all kinds of drink,
and especially of spirits.”
The Melbourne Daily Telegraph observes— ‘ 1 Dr. Routh, at a recent
meeting of the Medical Society, London, stated that mental disease
had increased in this generation fourfold, and that the increase is
still going on. The proportion of lunatics to the population in 1868
was I’B6 to the 1000, and in 1872 it was 2'54. This alarming increase
finds its parallel in Victoria.”
At the Social Science Congress, held at Bristol in 1869, William
Hoyle, a large cotton manufacturer, said:—“The main, if not the
only, cause of the great depression which has existed in the cotton
trade has arisen from the falling-off in the home trade. We are the
richest nation in the world, and yet a great portion of our population
are in rags. Why is this ? Because they squandered their earnings
on intoxicating drinks. It is an astonishing fact that in the three last
years we spent in intoxicating drinks £304,039,333, whilst upon
cotton goods, our staple production, we spent only £28,858,000; or for
drink for the entire population £lO 12s. 6d. per head, and for cotton
goods only 19s. 6d. per head. Say in the production of spirits a turn-
over of £1,500,000 employs 150 men; the same, in the manufacture of
cotton, &c., would employ 3000 men.” The latter gives 7s. 4d. to
labour, the former only 4d.
The Melbourne Argus, of the 2nd June, 1873, in a leading article,
observes “ The working classes of Great Britain have succeeded in
obtaining a large increase in wages of late, and the excise returns
clearly show in what way their additional earnings have been
expended. The duty from home-made spirits shows an increase for
the year of £1,330,000, upwards of £25,000 per week, whilst the duty
on malt is £866,000 more than the preceding year. These figures
aft or d very serious matter for reflection. Every right-thinking person
must rejoice to see, year by year, the working-man partaking to a
larger degree in the profits arising from his labour; but it is evident
that if all his gains are to be squandered in the gin-palace or the ale-
house, his success, so far from proving a blessing, must turn out an
unmitigated curse. Setting aside all moral considerations—although, of
course, they are by no means of secondary moment—a large increase
in the consumption of intoxicating liquors cannot fail, if persisted in,
to undermine the health of the industrial classes, and, by impairing
their efficiency, strike a heavy blow at the manufacturing supremacy
of the country. It is a significant and melancholy fact, that, whereas
the consumption of drinks chiefly used by the rich had only increased
by some 3|- per cent., the consumption of gin had risen 11 per cent,
and beer 13 per cent.”
The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the United
States, in May, 1871, resolved to publish the continued testimonies of
the past Assemblies for the last sixty years in behalf of temperance and
prohibition. We can here only make a very few short extracts: —In
1830, the Assembly resolved “ to express its very deep regret that any
member of the church of Christ should feel himself at liberty to manu-


facture, vend, or use ardent spirits. ” In 1834, resolved that “the traffic
in ardent spirits, to be used as a drink by any people, is, in our judg-
ment, wrong, and ought to be received as such by the churches of
Jesus Christ universally.” In 1835, resolved that “ the use of ardent
spirits as a communion drink, and the traffic in it, are immoralities
not to be countenanced by the church of Christand says, “Here let
us take our stand, and, by divine assistance, endeavour as speedily as
possible to purge the church from this deadly infection.” In 1837,
1840, 1843, 1848, 1854, the Assembly reaffirmed the deliverances of
former Assemblies ; and in 1855 the Assembly declares “the expe-
rience of two hundred years proves that this evil can never be removed
or effectively repressed while the traffic in intoxicating drinks continues,
it being necessaxy, if we would stop the effect, to remove the cause
that, “ in the opinion of this body, laws prohibiting the sale of intoxi-
cating drinks can interfere with tlxe right of no man, because no man
has a right to be at war with the welfare of the community ; that we
earnestly recommend to the ministry and congregations in our connec-
tion, and to all others, to persevere in vigorous efforts until laws shall
be enacted in every State and territory of our beloved country prohibit-
ing entirely a traffic which is the principal cause of drunkenness and
its consequences, pauperism, crime, taxation, lamentation, war, and
ruin to the bodies and souls of men, with which the countxy has so long
been afflicted.” In 1864 the Assembly enjoined its ministers and
members to refrain from the use of cider, beer, and ale as a beverage,
and also from the manufacture and use of domestic wines. In 1865,
resolved that, ‘‘ to render the influence of the church effective, she mxxst
free herself from all participation in the sin, by removing from her pale
all who are engaged in the manufacture and sale of intoxicating drinks
for use as a common beverage.” In 1866 the Assembly declared that
“total abstinence from all intoxicating drinks, as a beverage - , is
demanded from every Christian by the condition of society, the purity
of the church, and the word of God.” In 1871, the General Assembly,
after reiterating the testimonies of former Assemblies, also affirmed
their conviction “ of the reprehensible complicity in the guilt of the
aforesaid traffic of those who knowingly rexxt their premises for such
purposes, or endorse licenses that legalise it.”
President Jefferson said, a little before his death : —“ Were Ito com-
mence my administration again, with the knowledge which, from expe-
rience, I have acquired, the first question I would ask with regard to
every public candidate for public office would be, ‘ls he addicted to
the use of ardent spirits V ”
Mr. E. C. Delanan says :—“ I know of two bishops who fell through
wine, both brothers. X know of one drinking a whole goblet of sacra-
mental wine, axxd then going from the communion table and disgracing
himself with women, for which he was tried and unseated.”
Professor Leonard Woods, D.D., said : —“ I remember at one period
I could count up forty ministers, and none of them at a great distance,
who were either drunkards or so grossly addicted to the intoxicating
cup as to ruin their ministerial reputation and impair their useful-
ness. I have seen two aged ministers drunk, and another indecently


excited at one ordination. It is a poison to the soul as really as to
the body.”
The Hon Henry Wilson says ;—“ln my judgment, the church must
take up the matter. It must become one of the living issues of the
moral warfare in which it is engaged.”
At a meeting held in St. James’s Hall, London, Lord Claud Hamil-
ton said: —“There is a district in Ireland, in the county of Tyrone,
61 square miles, containing about 10,000 people, in which there are no
public-houses. The result has been that, whereas the high roads
were in former times constant scenes of strife and drunkenness, neces-
sitating the presence of a considerable number of police in this district,
there is not one single policeman ; the poor rates are half what they
were before ; and all the magistrates testify to the great absence of
crime.”
At this meeting, the Baboo Keshub Chunder Sen, of Calcutta,
said : —“lt grieves me to say that there are blots in the administration
of India, some of them of a very serious and appalling character; and
when I throw my heart and soul into this meeting, and stand forward
on this platform to call for legislative suppression of liquor traffic in
India, I feel far more strongly than any of you here can possibly feel.
The British Government in India has no excuse or pretext whatever
for carrying on this dangerous and iniquitous traffic there. In the
rural villages and towns in the provinces, before intoxicating liquors
were introduced, you would have seen homely Hindoo life in its
purity and charming simplicity. You now see scores and hundreds of
young, intelligent, educated natives of India falling away and dying
victims of intemperance. The wailings and the cries of widows and
orphans at this moment fills the whole horizon of India. The whole
atmosphere of India seems to be rending with the cries of thousands
of poor helpless widows, who oftentimes go to the length of cursing
the British Government for having introduced this thing. ”
Archdeacon Jeffries says : —“Thirty-one years’ experience in India
has shown me the bad results of the use of strong drinks upon both
Europeans and natives. A large portion of native Christians were
spread over Madras; and in consequence of the numerous cases of
intemperance among them the name of Christian was synonymous
with that of drink, and when the Hindoos called a man a Christian
they for the most part meant that he was a drunkard. For one really
converted Christian as the fruit of missionary labour, the drinking
practices of the English had made 1000 drunkards.”
Edward Baines, Esq., M.P., and proprietor of the Leeds Mercury ,
said ; —“The peculiar danger of intoxicating drinks is their extreme
seductiveness, and in the all but unconquerable strength of the
drinking habit when once formed ; and their peculiar malignity is in
their being the parent or nurse of every kind of crime, wickedness,
and suffering. I say boldly that no man living who uses intoxicating
drinks is free from the danger of ultimate and habitual excess, and
there seems to be no character or circumstances that free men from
the danger. I have known men of the strongest and clearest intellect,
and of vigorous resolution, whom it has made weaker than children


and fools. I have known gentlemen of refinement and taste whom it
has debased into brutes. I have known poets of high genius whom it
has bound in a bondage worse than the galleys. I have known states-
men, lawyers, and judges whom it has killed. I have known kind
husbands and fathers whom it has turned into monsters. I have
known elegant and Christian ladies whom it has converted into bloated
sots. I have known ministers, in and out of the Establishment, of
high academic honours, of splendid eloquence, nay of vast usefulness,
whom it has fascinated and hurried over the precipice of public
infamy, with their eyes open and gazing with horror at their fate. It
is this which almost exclusively fills our prisons, our workhouses, our
lunatic asylums, our dens of pollution, our hospitals ; which causes
most of the shipwrecks, fires, fatal accidents, crimes, outrages, and
suicides. And of all the victims of intemperance, be it remembered,
there is not one who did not begin by moderate drinking, or who had
the remotest idea when he began that he should be led into excess.
Such, then, being the peculiarly seductive danger of the practice of
taking intoxicating liquors, and such the enormous malignity of its
consequences, is there not a strong, and even resistless ground for
appealing to good men, to patriots, to philanthropists—above all to
Christians, and to Christian ministers—if not for their own sake, yet
for the sake of others whom they see gliding down by scores of
thousands to the gulf of temporal and eternal ruin—to take their stand
on the platform of total abstinence 1”
Hon. Schuyler Colfax, Vice-President of the United States, in an
address delivered at Washington, said : —“1 see before me to-day, as I
look on this audience, many persons distinguished in Washington, in
political life, in social life, in business life. But some of them, I fear,
are to-day voluntarily enrolled in the great army of moderate drinkers.
When we appeal to them to give the force of their personal influence
to the suppression of this evil, their answer is that they have strength
to resist, they can quit when they please. Possibly they may, but
before you all I can frankly acknowledge to you, from what I have seen
in public and private life, I dare not touch, or taste, or handle the
intoxicating bowl. You say you are strong! I can point you to those,
who are stronger than you, who began as you have, and who
lost their power of resistance before they knew they were in the
thraldom of the tempter, and went down before the people of this
country to a drunkard’s death, and sleep to-day in a drunkard s grave.
You say you are strong in intellect ! I can point you to men, tenfold
stronger in intellect and judgment, who laughed to scorn the appeals
of their fellow-men, and ended at last in going over that terrible abyss
into the drunkard’s tomb. I dislike to present to you personal illustra-
tions, yet some of them rise to my mind as I speak. I will give no
names nor states. I remember a gentleman, with a charming and loving
wife, distinguished as a speaker. I have listened to him with interest
and enthusiasm as his eloquence thrilled my heart. I have sat with
him in the councils of the nation. One time I remember. When the
scales hung in Congress doubtfully, when a single vote was to decide a
most important question, I remember him coming to his seat so mtoxi-


cated, so lost to all conception of what were the convictions of his judg-
ment (and for which I suppose he would have almost given his life to
secure their triumph) that he was only kept in his seat to vote by hav-
ing a friend stationed at every door from which he could obtain exit to
seek more of the liquor which had already maddened his brain. I
remember another, one of the most brilliant conversationalists to whom
I ever listened ; a man who adorned his conversation and his speeches
with the most beautiful and classic illustrations, showing a culture far
above what I possess or could ever hope to. I saw him going each
year downward, constantly claiming that he could stop when he pleased ;
but at last, inebriated, degraded, and dishonoured, reckless and friend-
less, careless whether he lived or not, he died the death of the inebri-
ate—unsorrowed and unmourned. I remember another, a warm and
generous, genial heart, whose impulses were ever towards the right.
He swayed the hearts of the people before him, and stirred them with
his own enthusiasm, having a magnetic sympathy with his hearers as
much as any man I ever met or heard. But I saw him in this very
capital, in spite of promises that never would he again touch intoxicating
spirits, seduced by fashion, and usage, and temptation, till at last he cared
no more for the duties devolved on him than the worst vagrant you can
find in your streets, when under the influence of liquor; but when out
from under its effect would, with tears in his eyes, pray God and man
to help him to resist temptation. My friends, from the most learned
profession, from the bench, and the bar, from even the sacred desk,
this demon, like death, has seemed to love to choose a shining mark.
Not the narrow soul and heart, not the one who clutches in his grasp
the pennies, are the most in danger, but the genial, large-hearted
men, who are not fortified as we are fortified by the determination not
to yield to the first temptation. None of them are safe From every
profession he has drawn his victims. There is but one class from
whence he has never drawn any. The coronet on the brow of the
noble of the earth, the grandest statesmanship, the highest culture,
the most brilliant eloquence, have not saved men. There is but one
class that has defied him, and will to the end. It is we who stand,
God helping us, on the rock of safety, against which the waves of
temptation may dash, but they shall dash in vain. I implore you to
come and stand with us. I plead with you, for I believe that all man-
kind are my brethren. I believe in the fatherhood of God and the
brotherhood of man. And if I see an inebriate reeling along the street,
I feel that, though debased and fallen, he is my brother still, created
in the image of God. And it should be your duty and mine to take
him by the hand, and seek to place his feet on the same rock of safety
with ours.”
The Rev. A. H. Granher, D.D., states that “at an ecclesiastical
convention, a discussion on ' Temperance’ brought up the wine ques-
tion. A part of the clergy advocated its entire disuse, and a part took
the other side. At length an influential clergyman rose and made a
vehement argument in favour of wine, denouncing the radical reformers
for attempting to banish this token of hospitality from use. When
he had resumed his seat, a layman, trembling with emotion, rose, and


asked if it was allowable for him to speak. The chair having signified
that he would be heard, he said; —‘ Mr. Moderator, it is not my pur-
pose in rising to answer the learned argument you have just listened
to. My object is more humble, and I hope more practical. I once
knew a father in moderate circumstances who was at much inconve-
nience to educate a beloved son at college. Here his son became dis-
sipated; but after he had graduated and returned to his father, the
influence of home, acting upon a generous nature, actually reformed
him. The father was overjoyed at the prospect that his cherished
hopes of other days Avere still to be realised. Several years passed,
Avhen the young man had completed his professional study, and being
about to leave his father, for the purpose of establishing himself in
business, he Avas invited to dine with a neighbouring clergyman, dis-
tinguished for his hospitality and social qualities. At this dinner,
Avine Avas introduced, and offered to this young man, and refused;
pressed upon him again and again, firmly refused. This was repeated,
and the young man Avas ridiculed for his singular abstinence. He was
strong enough to overcome appetite, but could not resist ridicule ; he
drank, and fell; and from that moment became a confirmed drunkard,
and long since has found a drunkard’s grave.’ ‘ Mr. Moderator,’ con-
tinued the old man, Avith streaming eyes, ‘ I am that father, and it
Avas at the table of the clergyman who has just taken his seat that this
token of hospitality ruined the son I shall never cease to mourn.’ ”
The Hon. Judge Goodrich, a distinguished jurist, says : —“ Prohibi-
tion of the sale of intoxicants is justified upon principles fundamental
to all social and governmental organisations. In entering into society,
every individual surrenders certain of his natural rights. If a man
erect on his premises a dangerous or unhealthful business or nuisance,
society can remove it, and the injured party can recover damages
resulting from the same. So we say —‘ If the natural result of the sale
of intoxicating liquors to minors, or persons liable to intoxication, is
to inflict any injury upon the persons purchasing it, or other persons,
society is bound to prevent it, or afford to the parties damnified
adequate compensation for the injury sustained.’ This law is just to
the A r endor, and is founded on well-established principles of the com-
mon law. The law holds a man responsible for the consequences of
an act which he had reasonable ground to know Avould be the result of
the act; and doing the act, Avith such knoAvledge, is held to have
intended the consequences. Therefore, as a vendor of intoxicating
drinks knows its sale to a minor, or habitually intoxicated person,
usually produces acts of violence, pauperism, &c., he should be
regarded as ha\ T ing intended to produce such results, and liable for
the injurious results.”
Rev. C. H. Fowler, D.D., Centenary M.C. Church, Chicago,
observes:— ‘‘ I have little faith in the policy that wull allow a man to
injure a whole neighbourhood, send numbers to gaol and to the poor-
house, and retard the legitimate operations of commerce, for the small
income the murderer pays on his booty. Nor do I see how the State
can innocently barter the blood, and health, and character of my
brother or son for a feAV dollars for the treasury. It is not a question


whether personal or governmental interests can be served, but what is
the demand of the public good. The public good is the supreme law,
and enacted law is the judgment of the majority as to what is the
public good. It is purely a question of public opinion. Legislatures
have no power to make rights —no Congress or Parliament can give a
man a right to destroy his fellow for money, even though he does drop
a part of°the price of his crime into the public coffers. The license
helps to make this systematised murder respectable. Good citizens
do not engage in killing their fellows. Reputable men do not go into
this work of making criminals and paupers. This awful work is dis-
graceful. License legalises it, and cloaks it with public sanction.
They become public servants, doing the public will.”
The dying testimony of John Girwood is that of thousands who
have suffered for crimes instigated by this spirit of evil:—“Fellow-
men, before God, in whose presence I shall stand in a few minutes, I
declare that I would as soon have taken my own life as that of my
dear boy, for I loved my wife and children as dearly as any man
could do; but I was maddened by the drink, and knew not what I was
doing.”
James Parton, Esq., says “ The ‘ Coming Man,’ lam firmly per-
suaded, will not drink wine, nor any other stimulating fluid. If, by
chance, he should be sick, he will place himself in the hands of the
coming doctor, and take whatever is prescribed. The impression is
strong upon my mind, after reading almost all there is in print upon
the subject, and conversing with many physicians, that the coming
doctor will give all his patients alcoholic mixtures about as often as he
will give them laudanum, and in doses of about the same magnitude,
reckoned by drops.” Speaking of the drunkenness abounding in wine
countries, he says:—“l have been surprised at the quantity, the
emphasis, and the uniformity of the testimony that light wines do not
prevent or abate intemperance. Close observers of the famous beer
countries, such as Saxony and Bavaria, where the beer is pure and
excellent, speak of this delicious liquid as the chief enemy of the
nobler faculties and tastes of the human race. The surplus wealth,
time, and force of these nations are chiefly expended in fuddling the
brain with beer. Now, no reader needs to be informed that the
progress of men and of nations depends upon the use they make of
their little surplus. It is not a small matter, but a great and
weighty consideration—the cost of these drinks in mere money. We
drinkers must make out a very clear case, in order to a
country as France in producing a billion and a half of dollars’ worth
of wine and brandy per annum.* With regard to the daily drinking of
wine and whisky, by ladies and others, for mere debility, it is a
delusion. In such cases wine is, in the most literal sense of the word,
a mocker. It seems to nourish, to warm, to strengthen —but it does
not. It is an arrant cheat, and perpetuates the evils it is supposed to
alleviate. If the teetotallers would collect into one small volume the
* According to French numeration, $1,500,000,000, equal to £300,000,000. E. C. Delajjau,
Esq. estimates the consumption at 1,516,740,000 gallons, value $1,516,546,000; and states
that one-half of the liquors drunk in Paris, and nearly all exported, are fabricated.


substance of the investigations of science—of Dr. Beaumont’s valuable
experiments, and the French professors’ work, and others—it could
not but carry conviction to every candid and intelligent reader that
spirituous drinks are to the healthy system an injury, necessarily and
in all cases. The coming man, then, so long as he enjoys good health
(which he usually will from infancy to hoary age), will not drink wine
nor, of course, any of the coarser alcoholic dilutions. Science—or, in
other words, the law of God as revealed in nature, life, and history,
and as ascertained by experiment, observation, and thought—this will
be the teacher and guide of the 1 coming man.’ ”
The Rev. Theo. L. Cuyler, D.D., Brooklyn, New York, says :
“ Every true and timely moral reform should be born and nursed in
the church of Jesus Christ. There is not a single moral precept
which sinful humanity needs, but the church should teach it; there Is
not a wholesome example to be set, but the church should practise it.
That Christian church will be most Christ-like which does most to
‘seek and to save the lost.’ Among all the great moral reforms, none
has a stronger claim on Christian men and Christian ministers than
the enterprise for saving society from the crime and curse of drunken-
ness ; and intemperance never will be checked, the liquor traffic never
will be prohibited, the drinking usages of social life will never be
overthrown, until the members of Christ’s church all feel that they
are also members of Christ’s great temperance society. If the church
does not save the world, then the world will sink the church. And
what a burlesque it is to style that church organisation a ‘ salt of the
earth,’ which has a trimmer in its pulpit and tipplers in its pews.”
In Surrey Chapel, London, the Rev. Newman Hall has a temperance
society, which has enrolled 8000 members in fifteen years; 150
reformed inebriates have been received into membership with the
church in which Brother Hall is so bold and faithful a spiritual leader.
There is also a Band of Hope, which enrols a great number of
children. Here is the point to apply prevention. As the Sunday-
school deals with the beginning of life, it should logically deal with
the beginnings of sin. If all our children could be kept from touching
the first glass, intemperance would disappear.
The Rev. William Reid, Edinburgh, asks: —“Is the suppression of
crime an object for which laws are framed 1 What source of evil so
fruitful of crime as the liquor traffic ? The trafficker in strong drink
is a trader in tears, and blood, and misery. To one he sells the
excitement and blackguardism that pours itself out upon wife and
children; to another he sells the appetite for theft, or lust, or murder.
Nothing can go beyond this wickedness. It is a fountain of evil, a
germinating crime, an accumulating and multiplying crime, a sin that
tempts others to sin. It is worse than putting arsenic on one’s food—
it is poison for the souls of men, poison for the great heart of society.
Drinking renders men reckless, it begets habits of sloth and idleness,
and under its influence men will perpetrate deeds from which they
would shrink in their perfectly sober moments. Whatever goes to
promote home feeling, goes to consolidate and protect society; and as
there is nothing so destructive of home feeling as intemperance,


there is nothing more hostile to the general interests of society.
The annual cost of juvenile delinquency has been estimated at
about £1,000,000 in Great Britain. It has been calculated that every
child rescued from evil courses is a clear saving of from £3OO to £SOO.
Of the 297 children committed to Edinburgh prison in 1846, 37 were
the offspring of utterly worthless parents, and 200 the offspring of
drunken and depraved parents.
Dr. Guthrie says that ‘ ‘ 99 out of every 100 parents of ragged-school
children are dissipated characters.” Before the passing of Forbes-
M‘Kenzie’s Act, upwards of 40,000 visits were paid on a single
Sabbath to the open dram-shops of Edinburgh. There could be seen
long, dreary trains of bloated, haggard, ragged, wretched beings, men
and women, whom whisky and ale had deceived, and robbed, and
ruined. Young apprentice lads, too, might have been seen treading on
the heels of their older shopmates; young women, too, clad in their
Sunday attire, and with Bibles in their hands, hesitating and blushing
on the threshold of these dens of infamy, ere they yielded to the
allurements which have so often proved fatal to female virtue. Even
boys and girls might have been seen crowding in to buy drink for their
parents, or to order drink for themselves.
The Sunday-School Teachers’ Magazine for November, 1846, states
that “ in a village school near London, out of 100 boys taken from the
school register, 91 were known to be open drunkards.” The publica-
tion of this fact led to other investigations. At another place, out of
74 boys who had attended a Sabbath-school 40 had become drunkards.
The governor of the Edinburgh prison states that out of 171 prisoners
whose cases he had investigated, 121 had attended Sabbath-schools.
The chaplain of Northampton gaol says that in June, 1867, more than
half the prisoners then in that gaol had been five years and upwards
at Sunday-schools. On further inquiry, it was found that out of
10,365 inmates of the principal prisons, not fewer than 6572 previously
received instruction in Sabbath-schools; and it was almost uniformly
found that the use of intoxicating liquors was the cause, directly or
indirectly, of so many Sabbath-school children becoming criminals.
What, then, can we do in present circumstances 1 We can give, both
from the platform and the press, sound Maine-law teaching, and in the
meantime accomplish all we can in reducing the number of public-
houses through our licensing courts. The restrictions placed upon the
traffic by Forbes-Mackenzie’s Act has been attended with the most
beneficial results. Taking the 17 largest towns in the country, and
comparing the last three years of the old with the first three years of
the new law, we find a decrease of crime combined with drunkenness
of 29,365; a reduction of one-fourth. In 1852 there were 2315 prisoners
in the Scottish gaols, while under the new law in 1857 it was only
1434. But as the law bears chiefly on the Sabbath, so we find the
happiest and most marked change on that day. The last three years
of the old law sent 11,471 drunkards to the police stations, and the
first three years of the new law we had only 4299 cases. In Edinburgh
the Sabbath cases were reduced from 2009t0 488, while the average
daily number of prisoners in the gaol has need reduced one-half, anb


the city saved the cost of building a larger prison, which it was about
to do when this Act came into operation.
In 1832 a little village near Edinburgh was visited by a deputation
from the Board of Health, with a view to prevent the invasion of the
cholera. The inhabitants were found in a state of remarkable health
and comfort. Their dwellings were patterns of cleanliness, and
everything betokened a superior social condition. And what was the
secret ? It was a district without a public-house. A few years after,
when the cholera threatened to return, a similar survey took place;
and what was the condition of the population then ? Its cleanliness
and comfort were gone ; filth, rags, and debasement met the inspector
on every threshold. But all mystery as to the sad change was dis-
pelled as they read over a door, “Spirits, Porter, and Ales sold here.”
In seeking to create a public opinion that will render trading in
intoxicating liquors a crime, we are endeavouring to introduce no
novelty in legislation. From the very first, this trade has been a
vagabond, always in the hands of the police. From the very first, our
legislators have aimed at protecting the community from its effects.
Day by day, as their customers come and go, they see the process of
debasement in all its stages of progress. They mark the gradual dis-
appearance of the outward indications of respectability—the hand
more tremulous, the face more haggard, the garments more mean.
Wherever their victims have suffered and died amid the wreck of a
ruined home, or in the almshouse, or on the scaffold, the wail of their
misery has appealed to their destroyers. Well do they know the
effects of their traffic; and yet to-day this iniquitous fraternity are
banding together to sustain this system of cruelty and wrong at every
hazard. To talk of persuading such men is worse than folly. We
regard the Chinese as a barbarous people, and yet from first to last
the Emperor refused to legalise the trade in opium, saying:—“l
cannot prevent the introduction of the flowing poison; gain-seeking
and corrupt men will, for profit and sensuality, defeat my wishes; but
NOTHING WILL INDUCE ME TO DERIVE A REVENUE FROM THE VICE AND
MISERY OF MY PEOPLE. ”
Dr. Livingstone informs us that Waterboer, the head of the
Griquas, having witnessed the deleterious effects of ardent spirits
among his people, decreed that all intoxicating liquors be prohibited,
and if introduced would be destroyed.
Madagascar, with its four million inhabitants, is a Maine Law
island. When the Rev. David Griffiths was on the point of adminis-
tering the sacrament for the first time, he received a message, inti-
mating that to use intoxicating wine would be a breach of their laws.
Sir W. Denison, in the constitution he framed for the Pitcairners
transferred to Norfolk Island, provided that “ no wines or spirits may
be landed, except for medical stores.”
The Rev. Joseph C. Foster remarks :—“All who drink intoxicating
beverages, by their example and influence encourage others to drink,
and so become, in no small degree, responsible for the evil which may
result from their example. With even more truth may it be said, that
he who sells to those who drink is a partaker of their sins in drinking,.


and responsible for the unparalleled evils of the practice he encourages.
Those who do anything in favour of licensing the sale of intoxicating
liquor, to be used as a beverage, are partakers of the sin of those who
drink to excess. Nothing is so well calculated to give the traffic
respectability and power to do harm as licensing it. Pointing to his
license, the liquor-seller can claim that his occupation is not only
lawful, but also moral and useful. He must remain unlicensed in order
to be ranked with such criminals as are his true fellows in crime. To
license him is to assign him an undeserved place among good citizens,
where he cannot be looked upon as the open and avowed enemy of
law and order. Shall he be thus raised above his proper level—which
is only with the most worthless and dangerous men ] God forbid !
If liquor-sellers are to be legislated into men of good reputation, then
let all other culprits, even the very worst, be at once introduced into
good society. Not so much harm would come from licensing other
wrongs and outrages to which society is exposed as must come from
licensing this parent vice and giant crime. Liquor-selling has un-
questionably occasioned more ruin than can be traced to any other
causes of suffering, and I might almost say all other causes combined.
From no other source could nine-tenths of all the pauperism and crime
result, as from this prolific source of evil. The most conclusive and
overwhelming evidence can be produced to prove that but for this
dreadful traffic there would hardly be any occasion for almshouses or
prisons, or indeed any provisions to meet the requirements of the new-
existing evils. If such a crowning evil is to exist, let it be without the
sanction of law. Let it not be made legally respectable, and let not
those engaged in it have a license with which to quiet their own con-
sciences, and silence all the complaints made against them by an
outraged community. To aid, in giving them a license, is to be a par-
taker of their sin. Not to license the sale of liquor requires the prohibi-
tion of the sale. Free-trade in this article cannot be allowed. The only
alternative is impartial and entire prohibition of the traffic. The
strong hand of interdictory law must be laid upon the traffic, and the
loud and imperative voice of irrevocable veto must be uttered in the
vendor’s ear, saying to him, ‘ You must stop this destructive business.
You must cease to seek your own benefit at the expense of so many.’
The justice of this cannot be questioned. All are agreed that there
are some things which must be prohibited, or else society could no
longer exist. No one seriously calls in question the propriety or
necessity of such restrictions as are placed upon piracy or highway
robbery, and various other invasions of common rights from which
society is liable to suffer, and against which prohibitory laws are
enacted. The murderer who takes the life of his victim, by any other
instrument of death than that furnished by the intoxicating cup, in so
doing forfeits his own life. The man who by forgery, gambling,
swindling, or in any other way, seeks to enrich himself by dishonest
gain, is made to feel the power of civil authority, which has imposed
stern restraints upon these criminal acts. Yet what one of these
crimes had not better be left unrestrained than that greatest of all
crimes against God and man—from which flows intemperance with all
its woes!


Daniel Webster was once asked what was the most important
thought that ever occurred to his mind. He placed his hands on his
brow, paused, and then replied, “ The most important thought that
ever occurred to me is the sense of my individual responsibility to
God and man.” May this just and weighty sentiment dispose the
mind of the reader to a realisation of personal responsibility and duty
in relation to this, the great social question of the day, and to give
practical effect to those convictions which an impartial consideration
of the foregoing facts and opinions cannot fail to produce.
The Convocations of Canterbury and York have adopted a series of
important resolutions with reference to the Temperance movement;
and the Church of England Temperance Society has been reorganised
on a new basis. The inaugural meeting was held under very favour-
able auspices in the Lambeth Palace Library, His Grace the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury being in the chair. There was a large attendance,
including the Bishops of Lichfield and Ely, the Dean of Westminster,
Archdeacon Sandford, Rev. Lord W. Russell, Canon Jenkins, and the
Revs. Robert Maguire, H. J. Ellison, R. O. West, H. Huleatt, and
Thomas Rooke. The general objects of the society are threefold, viz.,
to promote habits of temperance, to reform the intemperate, and to
remove the causes of the evil. A common ground of action has been
adopted, and non-abstainers are to be admitted as members. Among
other objects specified, the society will direct its efforts toward “ the
progressive diminution of the number of public-houses and beer-shops;”
“the closing of public-houses on Sundays, and the limitation of the
hours of sale on week-days;” “the promotion of ‘British Workman ’
public-houses, recreation grounds, and other counter-attractions to the
ordinary public-house;” “the diffusion of correct and reliable infor-
mation by temperance literature, tracts, and other publications ; by
sermons, lectures, and readings; by addresses to members of the
Universities, theological colleges, and training colleges for teachers;
and also by missionary efforts in prisons, workhouses, and other places
where the victims of intemperance are usually found;” and (as work
for total abstainers) “ the establishment of Parochial Temperance
Societies, Guilds, and Bands of Hope, based on the principle of total
abstinence, under the superintendence or with the sanction of the
parochial clergy, as the proved and most effectual human means of
bringing the intemperate under the teaching and power of the gospel,
and so setting them free from the bondage of their sin; and of pre-
serving others from the abounding temptations of the day.”
The Times, in a leading article, says;—“Drunkenness is at length
understood to be as systematic a curse to the nation as any of the
diseases whose ravages are weekly recorded by the Registrar-General
and the church appears to understand that she would be behind the
age if she failed to take a distinct and prominent part in attacking this
national foe. It is certainly her place, and, as the Archbishop of
Canterbury said, she has advantages which no private association can,
command. She has her organisation ready in every parish, and a man
is everywhere present to work it. The only wonder is that with such
an agency more has not been done before; but, perhaps, the church


has too long neglected the influence which other communities have
found to lie in the force of association. It has dealt with men too
much as individuals, and has neglected to bring an organised common
opinion to bear on them. But we may also anticipate some advantage
to the cause of temperance from its being grasped by such compara-
tively steady hands as those of the church. It will be made moderate
and respectable; and if it do not at the same time lose its energy, it
will be all the stronger and more successful.”
The Daily Telegraph says“ The main value of the incident lies
in its force as a moral protest against a growing and destructive vice.
It is impossible to ’doubt the energy of that public opinion which is
now enlisted on the side, if not of total abstinence, certainly of
temperance; and vain to question that some day it will powerfully
influence our legislation. When wealthy brewers give up their
business to address Bands of Hope in the capacity of total abstainers,
and the chief bishops of the English Church, following Archbishop
Manning, deliberately declare that the time for a merely passive
attitude is gone by, it is clear that the 1 drink problem ’ has made a
long step towards solution.”
The Standard says ;—“ There is no need to justify the establishment
of such a society. As one of the resolutions moved at the Lambeth
Palace meeting puts it— ‘ Looking to the extensive and continued pre-
valence of the sin of intemperance, the Church of England, as charged
with the spiritual and moral interests of the masses in this country, is
bound to put forth special efforts, with a view to its removal.’ It was,
indeed, high time that the church should show itself alive to its duty
in this respect. In virtue of its national character, it could not remain
indifferent in the presence of an evil which is producing such disastrous
effects upon the moral well-being of the people.”
The following is a copy of the important Pastoral Letter just
issued by His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury to his suffragans,
on the subject of intemperance, and urging the bishops, archdeacons,
rural deans, and parochial clergy to aid the Church of England
Tempeiauce Society, recently inaugurated : —“Lambeth Palace, 24th
February, 1873. My dear Lord—The alarming extent to which
intemperance prevails in this country has been fully established by
the report of the committee on intemperance of the Lower House of
Convocation in this province, which, with its valuable and exhaustive
appendix, has been for some time before the country, and has been
the means of calling general attention to the degrading and destructive
vice of which it treats. But hitherto no effort has been made by the
church in its collective capacity for the suppression of this great
national evil. A society, however, based upon the principles laid
down in a supplementary report of the said committee now before the
House, and likely to enlist the co-operation of all persons interested
in the suppression of intemperance, has been recently inaugurated at
a meeting held in Lambeth Library, on the 18th of this month, at
which I myself presided. It seems desirable that the organisation
possessed by our Church through its bishops, archdeacons, rural
deans, and parochial clergy, should now be employed for the purpose


of supplying information, and for dealing with a vice so injurious to
the welfare of our people in every parish. I hope that you will
employ such means as you may think best suited for the purpose to
bring this important subject under the notice of the clergy and laity
in your diocese. —I remain, my dear Lord, your faithful brother,
A. C. Cantuar.”
At a large and influential meeting held in the Great Hall, Tunbridge
"Wells, in England, on 20th February last, under the auspices of the
United Kingdom Alliance, the Very Rev. the Dean of Canterbury
took the chair, and we extract the following from the long and elo-
quent address which he delivered on the occasion : —“The object of
the Permissive Bill was the carrying out of the principle he had men-
tioned, and simply provided that the people themselves should have
the power of saying whether they would have those drinking places
amongst them or not. A landowner, if he thought proper, could
sweep from his property all the public-houses and beershops, as in the
case of the Marquis of Westminster, who would not have on his valu-
able property in London a drinking-house, and numbers of other land-
owners throughout the land did likewise. If the landowners did such
things, the people themselves would be expected to do still better
things for themselves from real conviction. They did not want pater-
nal government—even if paternal government did that which was good
and right—they did not want it because it dwarfed the minds and
intelligence of the people themselves. The great object of all social
movements was to lead the people themselves to do right, and not to
have it done for them. They did not wish to make men mere machines
—they could construct machines to rule any number of straight lines
—but they wanted to rouse men so that they might for themselves
walk straight, and that was a thing which no drunkard ever did.
Now, that was the question they had met to discuss, and he was glad
to see on the platform beside him the great author of the particular
movement —Sir Wilfrid Lawson. Before Sir Wilfrid, however, ad-
dressed them, he wished to make a remark or two to show the impor-
tance of the movement. It was, as he had previously remarked, the
most important social and moral question of the day. That had been
shown beyond dispute by the report presented to Convocation, and
that report had in many respects done a great deal of good. In that
report it was shown that the great cause of the chief amount of poverty,
crime, and distress in this country were the drinking habits of the
people. This was borne out by the testimony of a great majority of
the magistrates, governors of gaols, army chaplains, and other public
officers, and the judges bore similar testimony. Without the present
drinking habits the gaols would be empty, and there would be a great
diminution of poverty and pauperism. With regard to taxes, which
were said to be particularly heavy at this time, a very large proportion
of the rates went as a fine upon sober people, because of the faults of
those who were not sober. Thus the sober were fined because of the
intemperate, and had to maintain them in their old age, in their sick-
ness and decay, out of the poor rates, in consequence of their intem-
perance. If the money they were called upon to pay went for any


good, purpose, they should pay with pleasure, but, unfortunately, the
reverse was the case. Not only was a large amount of wealth squan-
dered by intemperance, but the health, life, and prosperity of the
people were also sacrificed. They had considered it as a great social
question, and in the next place, let them consider how the trading
classes of the country would be affected if the enormous amount of
money spent in drink was diverted into the channels of legitimate
trade. When Father Mathew brought about his temperance reforma-
tion in Ireland, people were afraid that the revenue would suffer, but
the result was totally opposite to what was foretold, for all the other
branches of trade were patronised to a greater degree. If the one
hundred and twenty millions of money spent annually in this country
on beer and gin, to say nothing of the cost of tobacco, was turned into
■other channels, the people would be better clothed, better fed, better
housed, and have better furniture in their houses.”
The whole of the thirteen bishops of the Methodist Episcopal
Churches of the United States have issued a joint address to the
ministers and members of that powerful body, the largest religious
denomination in America, with a request that it be read in all their
churches. The following is a brief extract: —“ The leading reform of
the hour is the abolition of the sale and drinking of intoxicating
beverages. These stimulants are sending multitudes annually to a
drunkard’s grave and a drunkard’s doom. They are undermining our
national life. They are the cause of almost all the crimes that infest
society. They are the chief foe to the progress of the church. The
record of our church in two successive general conferences is in favour
of prohibition. This is the ultimate goal of her efforts. She will not
rest from these labours until the use and sale of intoxicating drinks
follow to their grave other iniquities once as powerful as these, and as
deeply-rooted in the appetites and interests of society. Let prohibi-
tion receive your support in your personal abstinence, and in all other
Christian efforts for the overthrow of intemperance. ”
Mr. Thomas Cooke, who is now making a journey with a party of
tourists round the world, writes as follows of the work of the Rev.
W. Taylor in Bombay:—“ In Bombay the most prosperous mission is
that of the Rev. Mr. Taylor, of the American Episcopal Methodist
Church, who is supported by a staff of zealous preachers, and whose
church is formed on the principle of entire abstinence from intoxicat-
ing drink, that being a qualification of membership. At a great con-
ference of missionaries, recently held at Allahabad, the claims of
temperance on all missionaries were strongly urged by several abstain-
ing ministers.”
The foregoing pages, bristling with facts and figures, verified by
the experiments and writings of competent scientific men, may well
awaken profound astonishment that, notwithstanding the advanced
light of the age, such multitudes should yet be found to patronise the
sale and use of intoxicating liquors. In this land (the most pros-
perous colony under the sun) the temptations and ravages of intoxi-
cating drinks are patent to every candid observer. The circuit and
police courts, and the columns of our daily press, reveal an appalling


state of immorality, nearly all of which is traceable to the demo-
ralising power of intoxicating liquors. The frauds, trifling and
gigantic; the blasted reputations; the ruined homes; the stricken,
bleeding hearts; the desertion of families; the starving of children in
body and mind; the widespread open and secret prostitution; the
infanticide and wife-beating; the seductions, lunacies, and suicides;
with all their far-reaching and blighting influences upon domestic
circles, once united and happy, are the legitimate fruits of this body-
and-soul-destroying traffic 4 In our culpable ignorance or wilful
blindness, we may lay the flattering unction to our souls that the
multiplication of churches, schools, and literary institutions in our
midst are sufficient guarantees of moral and social progress; but if we
look a little deeper into the body politic, we shall find, despite the
appearance of a healthy and vigorous constitution, deep-seated sources
of moral pollution and social degradation, corrupting the life-blood of
society, and undermining the foundations of our social and political
institutions.
We license drinking-houses, and hedge them around with restric-
tions, prohibitions, and penalties, to repress or otherwise mitigate in
some measure the admitted evils resulting to society from the traffic;
but by unimpeachable testimony we can prove that the Licensing Act
is almost a dead letter, that many public-houses are the resort of gam-
blers, prostitutes, and thieves. The scenes witnessed almost nightly in
the immediate neighbourhood of our leading places of public enter-
tainment—in the supper rooms, gambling saloons, assignation places,
and private retreats, technically known as ‘ ‘ saddling paddocks, ” baffle all
attempt at description. Within them may be found aged men of posi-
tion in society, and our “young men,” some of them holding responsible
situations, but, under the beguiling influence of the intoxicating cup,
fast graduating for the cells in Pentridge. With them may be seen
bedizened prostitutes, intent only upon entrapping and fleecing their
deluded victims. In view of these things, attested by competent
witnesses, we ask, Is there no law forbidding the assembling of known
fallen women in our public hotels, and in the semi-detached drinking
and gambling saloons connected with public places of amusement!
Is there no law against enticing the working-man to spend his Sabbath
and his weekly earnings in the snug bar-parlour? Is there no law
against luring our young men into the private upper chambers, to pass
away the Sabbath (as they spend their week evenings) in smoking,
drinking, and gambling? Let fathers, mothers, brothers, and sisters—
and, we might add, employers of our youth—look at the picture, and
ask, Is such an awful state of things to continue and flourish in our
midst, without an effort to subdue and utterly eradicate them ? We
could point out a spot in the centre of our city, accessible through a
flourishing hotel, where you may see a crowd of young men and boys
mingling with swindlers and vagabonds, until in the game of skittle-
pool they are stripped of every fraction of their week’s earnings, and
are thus frequently led to enter upon a career involving their utter
ruin. Not only so, but we can name hotels that continue far beyond the
prescribed hours to retain their deluded victims by the well-lighted


room and well-furnished table, while the game of “poker” absorbs
attention through the early morning hours, and frequently throughout
a Sabbath day. The all-but-universal violation of the Licensing Act
on the part of the publicans, especially on the Sabbath, is a matter of
general notoriety, encouraging numbers in their career of dissipation
and ruin; and it is equally patent to all that, with few exceptions, our
magistrates suffer the convicted transgressor to escape with comparative
impunity. This evasion of the restrictive clauses of the Wine, Beer,
and Spirit Statute is the crying evil of society, and vinless those who
ought to be the guardians of public morality bestir themselves, the
evils which we deplore in others may, ere long, reach our own house-
hold, to the destruction of those dear to us, and thus corrupting the
very purity and chastity of family life. Let no one who has read the
foregoing statement plead ignorance, or think that he can with impu-
nity treat the matter with indifference, asking ivith an air of reckless
unconcern, “Aml my brother’s keeper 1 ” Rather let him remember
the words of inspired Writ, “ If thou forbear to deliver them that are
drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain; if thou
sayest, Behold, we knew it not; doth not He that pondereth the heart
consider it % And He that keepeth thy soul, doth not He know it ?
And shall He not render to every man according to his work ? ” An
article in the Melbourne Age of the 31st May furnishes ample evidence
in corroboration of the sad picture we have but slightly sketched.
With such an accumulation of testimonies, experiences, and facts
(derived from most reliable sources) before it, it would not be strange
if the whole community rose up and denounced so monstrous a tyranny,
so demoralising a traffic, carried on for the pecuniary benefit of a
class, irrespective of its dreadful consequences, and at the expense of
all the best interests of man. Is it not to be wondered at and deplored,
that this traffic has been so interwoven in the churches generally
as too often to tie the hands and even restrain the heartfelt yearnings of
ministers desirous of warning their people to wash their hands from any
participation in it, and for ever have done ivith its use as a beverage 1
O, for the spirit of the holy, self-denying Paul, who would neither eat
flesh nor drink wine if either would cause a weak brother to fall!
Alas ! alcohol is found to be no respecter of persons; the prince and the
peasant, the learned and illiterate, the minister and church member,
alike have frequently fallen victims to its insidious and debasing influ-
ences; and for want of decisive training and warning as to its dangerous
and seductive character, f e former Sunday-school scholars are found
now in numbers in our gaols, lock-ups, and asylums, their lives more
than wasted by intemperance.
It is a cause of heartfelt gratification, however, to those who see
the havoc it has wrought in the churches, to hear of the constant
protests of the American Presbyterian Assembly against it, from year
to year; also that twenty thousand ministers and two millions of mem-
bers of the Episcopal Wesleyan Church there are abstainers from prin-
ciple-awake to their individual responsibility as to their example and
influence on the masses of the population, and on their children more
especially; while we learn with pleasure that on 18th February last


the Archbishop of Canterbury presided over an influential meeting,
held in Lambeth Palace, for adopting measures for the suppression of
the vice of intemperance. What more can be done, it may be said,
to stay the onward march of this traffic—which, it is acknowledged,
cannot be regulated, owing to the general absence of principle among
the vendors, leading to evasions of the law, and the protection they
receive from the wealth, influence, and numbers of those who have
vested interests in, or otherwise derive pecuniary emolument from, it ?
To the lasting honour of Great Britain be it said, that when her
people awoke to see the infamy and horror of slavery in the West Indies
—while Wilberforce and his friends fought the battle in the parliament
or on the platform, to do justice to the oppressed slave and clear the
country from the blood-guiltiness of that inhuman traffic—there were
tens of thousands of men and women, no less noble-minded, who
abstained from the use of slave-made sugar till slavery was for ever
abolished, giving at once a practical evidence of their sincerity, and
influencing the surrounding masses. Is it less our duty or privilege,
as patriots, philanthropists, or lovers of our hearths and homes, to not
only abstain from using alcoholic liquors, but use every energy and
power to uproot it from the land, by disseminating information on the
subject, by seeking to train the rising generation in abstinence prin-
ciples, by obtaining local self-government on the subject, as is pro-
vided for in the proposed Permissive Bill, and so to carry out its
provisions as to rid the country of this curse, slavery, and detestable
tyranny.
We have, in these pages, furnished indisputable and conclusive
evidence that this demoralising traffic in intoxicating liquors cannot
be effectually controlled by the most stringent regulations, and further,
that could the licensed victuallers be induced or compelled to respect
the law which sanctions the traffic, it would still remain the greatest
of all national evils. We therefore appeal to the members of all
temperance organisations, and to the friends of moral and social pro-
gress, to combine for the entire suppression of the sale of intoxicating
drinks as a beverage. We earnestly solicit the active co-operation of
all men throughout the colony, in the name and for the sake of Him
who came not to destroy, but to save men’s lives. In conclusion, we
would respectfully suggest to our legislators the appointment of a
Royal Commission to investigate the working of our present Licensing
Act, and its effects upon the moral and material interests of our popu-
lation, with power to obtain reliable information respecting the opera-
tion and effects of the Maine Liquor Law in those countries where it
has had a fair trial.
m c m >


VICTORIAN TRACT DISTRIBUTION SOCIETY.
The Victorian Tract Distribution Society was established in 1870 for the
purpose of facilitating the work of tract distribution, and imparting to its
operations increased efficiency and success. The primary objects of this
movement were, to evoke the missionary and aggressive spirit of Chris-
tianity, to develop individual responsibility and personal service for Christ
in the great work of disseminating religious truth amongst the masses of
the people, thereby seeking to neutralise the demoralising literature of the
day, and counteract the various forms of error and scepticism now spreading
throughout the land. Prior to this date, no systematic arrangement existed
for supplying districts with a continuous variety of suitable publications,
nor any well-matured plan devised to economise time and material, by the
united action and harmonious co-operation of the various denominations in
this vast field of Christian labour. The Committee of the Victorian Tract
Distribution Society have met this long-felt want by making arrangements
with the principal tract societies, and publishers of cheap religious and
other valuable literature, in Great Britain and America, for regular supplies
of their best publications in continuous variety, and suited to the require-
ment of the work undertaken. Four separate selections have been made up
to this date. The first was issued in April, 1871 —the last in December, 1872.
Each selection, when assorted and arranged, is divided into sets of 50 tract
books, each cover or tract book containing publications of several societies,
and averaging about 60 pages, or 3000 pages to each set of 50. One set
serves a district of 40 families from 9 to 11 months; thus, reckoning 4 to
each house or family, 160 persons can be weekly supplied with 60 pages of
interesting and profitable reading for that period at a cost of Bs. 6d.
All the public institutions have been gratuitously supplied, also coasting,
intercolonial, and homeward-bound vessels, and many of our large lodging-
houses ; churches of every Protestant denomination in Victoria now use the
tract books of this society; and the system has recently been introduced into
several of the neighbouring colonies. The reproduction in a cheap tract
form, for free distribution amongst the masses of the people, of valuable
Christian and other literature of Great Britain and America, too expensively
got up for general and free distribution, was another work undertaken by
this society. By permission of the author, the Committee have brought out
an Australian edition of John Ashworth’s Strange Tales for the People ,
which has been stereotyped by Messrs. Mason, Firth, and M‘Cutcheon, and
are now supplied for free distribution at 20s. per thousand. This society
thus seeks to unite in systematic harmonious co-operation all Christian
philanthropists in the diffusion of religious, moral, temperance, sanitary,
and other healthy and improving literature amongst the people, by carry-
ing to their homes a valuable and interesting circulating library, thereby
cultivating habits of reading and self-improving thought, rendering the
homes of the masses of our population more attractive and enjoyable, and
prompting and encouraging heart-felt aspirations to a nobler and better
life. The organisation and agency of this society furnishes the most satis-
factory solution yet offered to the problem so often proposed, How can we
best promote the social and moral elevation of the masses of our population ?
Further information can be obtained on application to —
John Singleton, M.D., President, Clarendon-st., East Melbourne.
, Henry Cooke, Hon. Secretary, East Melbourne.
Richard Hodgson, Hon. Treasurer, Lonsdale-street West.
The Committee mill he glad to receive Contributions from parties milling
to aid in promoting the circulation of the “Text-Book of Temperance”
amongst the masses of our population. Price Sixpence.
Mason, Firth, and M'Cutcheon, Printers, Flinders Lane West, Melbourne,




