

Australia! . . .
Land of the Dawning
By VENI COOPER-MATHIESON.
Author of A Marriage of Souls.




Australia! . . .
Land of the Dawning
By VENI COOPER-MATHIESON.
Author of “A Marriage of Souls. *’


“A DEDICATION.”
To eastward when cluster by cluster,
Dim stars and dull planets that muster,
Wax wan in a world of white lustre
That spreads far and high.
In the gathering of night-gloom o’erhead in
The still silent change;
All fire-flushed when forest trees redden
On slopes of the range.
When the gnarled knotted trunks euealyptian
Seem carved, like weird columns Egyptian,
With curious device —quaint inscription,
And hieroglyph strange.
In the Spring when the wattle gold trembles
’Twixt shadow and shine,
When each dew-laden air draught resembles
A long draught of wine;
When the sky-line’s blue burnished resistance
Makes deeper the dreamiest distance
Some song in all hearts hath existence —
Such songs have been mine,
—Adam Lindsay Gordon


AUSTRALIA !
LAND OF THE DAWNING.
All Hail i
art like a lovely virgin freshly
risen from the waves to greet the dawn
of a new creation; clothed in thine own
pristine beauty; covered only with a trans-
parent robe of tender green, fleecy white and
ethereal blue. Thy foundations rest upon the
heaving bosoms of three great oceans, the
meeting-place of many waters. Thou art won-
drous in variety, changeful in thy moods, the
centre of extremes—for in thy vast solitudes
extremes meet.
What a strangely mysterious land is Aus-
tralia! Rightly is she called “Land of the
Dawning,” since, yet enfolded in the mists of
early morning, her future destiny looms vague
though gigantic—a Dream—a Prophecy.
Other lands have their own peculiar charms,
but Australia differs greatly from them all.
Grotesque, weird, sternly grand; a haughty
and solitary queen in her own domains. Dis-
daining all others, proudly scornful, she ig-
nores the taunts and jeers and slights of na-
tions that will have declined when she shall
flourish and shall be sufficient unto herself.


Dwelling in a solitude akin to desolation, she
has no knightly legend or tender sentiment of
romantic story to soothe and charm the ear, A
silence that might be felt is experienced by the
wanderer through those vast solitudes the
primeval forests, funereal and stern, which
clothe the valleys and bases of the mountains,
all bare and awe-inspiring in their rugged
grandeur; mountains whose deep, dark gorges
strike terror to the heart of man and make him
feel but a pigmy in those mighty fastnesses,
where no voice but his own disturbs the awful
stillness. Here it is when savage winds roar
through the rocky clefts, a mournful dirge
echoes across the desolate stretches of forest,
plain, valley, or hill tops, like the eerie wail of
a troubled spirit that will not be comforted.
In the Australian forests life is eternal, and
the foliage always green. The leaves fall not
when the year is dying, but the great white
gum-trees shed their bark, which hangs from
their giant trunks in long strips that rustle in
the night-winds with a weird, ghostly sound,
accentuating the melancholy of the scene and
filling the heart of the lonely bushman with an
unwholesome fear and dread as he rides
through those silent forests, or across the bare
and trackless wastes of arid plain or desert
land. Here between day and night he fancies
he sees shadows vast and imposing stealing
across his pathway, or creeping silently behind


him; or again hears strange noises that make
his nerves quiver with suppressed horror of—
he knows not what. The very silence and
mystery in itself is terrifying, as any traveller
ean testify who has tramped through weary
miles of this strange Continent.
The animals, too, are grotesque. Some of
them, while they have not learned to walk up-
right as men, yet do not go on all fours as
beasts. They appear to be in a state of partial
development, as though civilization had come
upon them and arrested their growth before
their evolution was complete. The great kan-
garoos hop noiselessly through the scrub and
disappear among the tall, coarse grass; or at
night, when the brilliant moonlight floods hill
and forest till all is as bright as day, they ap-
pear and disappear like ungainly ghosts, gaunt
and grey.
The flowers, too, have not yet evolved their
soul’s incense, and have no perfume, though
arrayed in many gay colours and of strange
forms and markings. The birds have not yet
learned to sing, but swell their notes into a
weird medley of sounds, at midnight as well as
at morn, and the echoes ring through the
wooded valleys and mountain ravines with a
sad note of mourning, interrupted by the shrill
discordant shriek of cockatoo or paroquet, or
the wail of the curlew; while the mocking
laugh of the kookaburra, the “laughing jack


ass/’ joins hilariously in the chorus. Yet what
they lack in song they are amply compensated
for in their glory of plumage, which outrivals
the rainbow in variety of tints and brilliancy
of colouring.
Summer oppresses with fervent heat, and
brings fierce hot winds, droughts and bush fires,
with the consequent desolation; while spring-
time is glorious in her revelry of beauty. Win-
ter in turn unlocks her floodgates and deluges
fields, valleys, plains and villages, while moun-
tain torrents tearing down the deep ravines
flood creeks and rivers, scattering devastation
throughout their tumultuous course to the sea.
Thus, in one fell swoop obliterating, with Na-
ture’s well-known recklessness, the results of
man’s long years of patient toil, throwing back
in his face the efforts he has made to subdue
her by blind force or by scientific inventions
in his attempts to win his rightful sphere of
dominion over all things, while he pushes on-
ward in the March of Progress to a higher Civi-
lisation.
But is Australia civilized? Nay, her history
is yet to be made, her possibilities to be dis-
covered, her education to be completed, before
she can take her place among the civilised na-
tions of the world, and reign, as she eventually
will, Queen of All! Now, like an uncultured
child, she revels in her wild, untramelled free-
dom, her extremes of originality as expressed


so vividly in her native wilds—a country that
is like no other under the sun.
Her moods are unique, fear-inspiring, gloomy,
grand or awful, except where the refining touch
of civilization has trained her into softer as-
pects and gentler tones. In early days her very
mountain peaks were named after the gloomy
sensations which their aspect awakened in the
breasts of the explorers, such as “Mt. Desola-
tion,’ ’ “Mt. Terrible,” and “Mt. Despair,”
These are the monuments which stand to tes-
tify to the sufferings which Nature inflicted
upon those who, with intrusive feet and van-
dal hands, attempted to force their way into
those secret places or pluck aside the veil that
concealed her mysteries, hidden in the bosom of
this her youngest-born child of nations—Fair
Australia. This was the punishment inflicted
upon those who strove to wrest from her that
virgin seclusion which had for so many centu-
ries enveloped her as with a shroud, enfolding
her in an oblivion that was deeper than the
tomb—such an oblivion as can alone surround
an undiscovered country—and rendered her
secure from the prying eyes of nations that
flourished, declined, and decayed while Aus-
tralia slept upon the bosom of the blue Pacific.
This long, long sleep was not disturbed by
the sounds of aught but her own native tribes
and the animal life that found sustenance from
her capacious bosom; slept, since the hour un


known to living man, when, as the resurrected
portion of the lost Lemuria, she first emerged
by slow degrees from the womb of the waters
and stood forth naked and solitary under the
Southern Cross, beneath a canopy of vivid blue,
illuminated at intervals by the wondrous glory
of the Southern Lights, the beautiful “Aurora
Australis,” till at length, after long ages of
darkness, “the day broke and the shadows fled
away,” and Australia stood revealed in all her
beauty before the rising sun of Civilization.
Still no man knoweth thee, 0! Virgin Land I
No hand hath yet uncovered thy secret parts,
nor eye searched out thy hidden mysteries. In
thy fair bosom thou boldest treasures unknown
and even undreamed of. In thy great heart
are hidden countless tons of golden ore and
wealth unlimited. In thy unexplored wilder-
nesses mysteries of dead centuries lie conceal-
ed.
Yet the hand of time has but touched thee
lightly, and on thy white brow rests the diadem
of youth and beauty undimmed by decay, while,
like an aureole, the bow of promise arches over
thy mimosa-wreathed head.
The promise written there we read by the
spirit of prophecy. It is the vision of the Future
that reveals to the waiting nations that thou,
0! Queen of the South! thou last of the lands
to arise from the sea, shall yet be first in splen-
dour, greatest in wisdom and highest in power


and glory. Out of thee shall sons and daughters
arise that shall be mighty before the Lord of
Life; and from them shall come the seed of the
new and regenerate humanity—the Children
of the Resurrection, which shall claim the pro-
mised Kingdom of Christ upon earth—a King-
dom of Peace and Goodwill in the hearts of all
mankind. Then shall dawn the day when the
prophecy shall be fulfilled that “the kingdoms
of this world shall become the kingdom of our
Lord and His Christ,”
This, then, is the compensation that shall be
accorded thee for all the indignities and slights
that have been heaped upon thee, 0! Beauteous
Land of the Southern Seas! Thou who hast
been abused, defiled, degraded, and ravished of
thy purity and beauty in thy early days; thy
water-locked shores made to serve as prison
walls for thousands; thy silent fastnesses to echo
with the cries and groans of suffering human
beings; thy very maidenly modesty and retire-
ment, hidden as thou wert in sweet seclusion
and solitary grandeur, was thy greatest at-
traction and caused thee to be singled out from
among so many that flaunted their charms and
claims to preference before the civilised world.
These were thy rare virtues and they led to thy
early fall. Hence thy first years were blighted
with a myriad shameful defilements before thy
true worth and beauty were recognised, thy
loveliness prostituted and thy virginity ravaged
by making thee a charnel house for criminals, a


scapegoat for sins not thine own. Those who, in
thy infant days constituted themselves thy
guardians and the possessors of thy charms,
while “drest in a little brief authority/’ soiled
the opening pages of thy fresh girlhood’s his-
tory with the taint of their own lawlessness, and
by crimes unmentionable. This, too, till thy
once unknown name rang in the ears of all civi-
lized nations with an unenviable notoriety, and
was blazoned in large black letters on the annals
of England’s criminal calendar.
But, despite thy early defilement, thou shalt
once more arise like a Phoenix from the ashes
of that dead past; rise to triumph over all thy
detractors, and put to shame those who once
scoffed and sneered at thee in the hours of thy
affliction and the days of thy bitterest humilia-
tion. Like Jerusalem, thou shalt yet put on
thy beautiful garments of purity and righteous-
ness and rise superior to all thy foes; rise to
reign a Queen Regnant, For, 0! mysterious
Land, thou hast never been conquered, but, like
a gem upon the bosom of the sea, thou wast dis-
covered, and, because of thy then un-
known character, thou wert lightly held
and little esteemed, thy value un-
recognised. But soon thy redeemer shall arise
from out thine own bosom and shall restore
thee to thy original perfection and reveal thee
to the whole world as the fairest among the
Cities of Peace (daughters of Jerusalem) and
the altogether loveliest of all lands.


Now, having awakened from thy long, long
sleep of oblivion and risen in silence and soli-
tude from out the great heart of the Universe,
thou shalt indeed evolve from within thyself—
from out the very centre of thy being—the
Love-life which shall prove to be the salvation
of all nations. Yea, “the leaves of the trees
shall be for the healing of the nations,” and
already are the leaves and sap of the fragrant
eucalyptus, whose roots find sustenance in thy
soil, a healing balm to thousands.
Then in a more elevated sense shall this same
healing be effected, for the day is at hand when
Australia’s righteous laws of wisdom, justice,
and truth and her unfailing abundance and con-
tinued prosperity shall be known throughout all
lands, and the fame of her shall go forth like
unto the fame of Solomon, while many kings of
the earth, like the Queen of Sheba, shall seek
the precincts of her shores seeking wisdom, or
in time of dire disaster and world-turmoil, a
City of Refuge, a Place of Peace. For her ways
shall be ways of pleasantness and her paths
peace, and her laws just and righteous laws.
Health, happiness and prosperity shall be estab-
lished within her water-locked gates, to which
all the weary ones of earth shall come seeking,
finding rest therein, and they shall not go out
any more forever, for the Sun of Righteousness
shall shine in that City of Harmony, and there
will be no night of sin or ignorance there.


Australia shall be a second Nazareth, since
out of her shall come the New Messiah—a great
teacher—who will prepare them for the Com-
ing Kingdom, and will reveal unto the nations
the great and glorious truths that are to be un-
veiled in these latter days—the same vital
truths which Jesus taught the multitudes over
nineteen hundred years ago in the cities of
Judea. This truth has already been re-born in
America—the Cradle of Liberty—which is the
modern Bethlehem. There it has received new
birth through the free womanhood of that race
who have nursed and cherished it with tender-
ness and unselfish devotion to their high ideals,
till it has grown in stature and grace, and has
already become a power in all lands, and the
wise men of the earth have heard of it.
But out of Nazareth must the saviour come:
there is a mystic duality in unity revealed be-
tween America and Australia, the first “A”
represents the modern Bethlehem, and the sec-
ond “A” symbolizes the Nazareth of these lat-
ter days. Yet in these two a third is included,
the “Z,” which is New Zealand, the Zion of the
New Dispensation; therefore, as the first two
A’s represent the Alpha , so the third—the “Z”
—represents the Omega. Thus we have a trinity
in unity, for in this vast Australasia (the resur-
rected Lemuria), the first of the lands though
now the last, we behold the perfect Whole re-
vealed—the Promised Land,


History repeats itself. As the mystic sym-
bolism of man’s soul was represented in the
Bible by cities, nations, and peoples through
individuals, so shall these things be; and we
may now look for the early appearing of the
Great Prophet of these latter days, who will
again teach the buried Truths in purity and sim-
plicity, the Truths of Life and Being hidden for
ages beneath the dust of dogmas and traditions;
and when these are revealed to all the waiting
world a new era shall be opened up for this
dawning century that will herald the coming
of the new Kingdom of Love, which is everlast-
ingly the Kingdom of Christ on earth.
Then, in the words of the Prophet of Israel:
Rejoice and be glad, 0! Australia, thou New
Jerusalem of the South, for great is thy future,
grand, mystical and glorious beyond compare.
Dark, drear and long has been thy night of
gloom and ignorance, but behold! joy cometh in
the morning; and thou shalt sing, 0! barren
that thou didst not bear, for truly greater and
more numerous shall thy children be than are
those of the nations that reviled thee, and thou
shalt triumph over all thy foes. The day is now
dawning when thou shalt awaken to a full
realization of thine own power and know thy
strength, and shall show forth in splendor and
undimraed brilliancy thy eternal beauty and
perfection, the Crown of Civilization.


0! Civilization, thou mighty conquering god
born of the mind of Man, what wilt thou not win
and hold inviolate from that vast Universe that
brought thee forth, and of which thou, too, art a
part in the great plan! Surely thy power is
limitless? Thy future destiny a thing too glori
ous, too wonderful for even the present age of
Man’s development to conceive of with any de-
gree of accuracy. Thy growth is marvellous,
and still thou art evolving to greater and still
greater heights. Thy dominion over all things
is a promise that is being daily fulfilled—“Yc
shall be as gods,” and gods we verily are; for
in the same degree as Man is the expression of
the Mind of God —is the effect of First Cause—
so Civilization is the higher expression of the
mind of Man. Therefore, inasmuch as Civiliza-
tion to-day reveals the growth of Man’s ad-
vancement from ignorance to knowledge, from
knowledge gained by experience to ultimate
wisdom, or from glory to glory, so does Man
thus reveal to himself his own inherent powers
and manifests the great Life Principle of the
Universe—the Principle which brought him into
Being, and which Principle man has named God.
Thus, as Civilization is inseparable from Man’s
highest expression of himself—individually, na-
tionally and universally—so is Man inseparable
from his One Cause: That which expresses Itself
through Man to highest perfection, and in this
manner the seeming two are united; God and
Man are One.
Sydney , 1904. —Ex. “A Marriage of Souls.”


“A Marriage of Souls”
by veni cooper-mathieson. f.1.1.c,
Extracts from the Critics.
‘ ‘ ‘ A Marriage of Souls ’ has been written with a
high and lofty purpose, the upliftment of Humanity.
Its whole tone breathes purity of thought and action,
while its high spirituality, erudition, and the mystic
teaching it imparts, constitutes it a distinct acquisi-
tion to The New Thought Literature and a credit to
Australia, being, as it is, the product of the recently
evolved Progressive Christianity, born of the New
Civilisation. ’ *
“A Metaphysical Novel, typically Australian in
tone and colouring. It is written to uplift and educate,
and it fulfils a dual purpose by depicting in a wonder-
fully realistic manner, the life and characters, scenes
and incidents inseparable from life in the Land of
Wattle and Gum Trees.
There are some thrilling chapters and splendidly de-
scriptive passages throughout the book, while the
theme is admirably chosen to act as a medium for im-
parting the principles of The New Thought Teaching
in simple, yet interesting form. The expositions upon
metaphysical and esoteric subjects are masterly, re-
vealing a grasp of combined scientific and religious
knowledge that is rare. In the chapters dealing with
Mental Healing, the Science of Health is explained in
a manner which reveals the experienced practitioner
of Metaphysical Healing,
Cloth, 7s. Wrappers, ss.
Post Free Australia. Foreign Postage, Is. 4d. Extra.
THE UNIVERSAL TRUTH PUBLISHING CO.
Telephone: City 10087, TRUTH CENTRE,
1,0,0. F. TEMPLE,
138 Elizabeth Street. Sydney, Australia


The HOME of T
AND ESOTER
39 BROWN ST.. PADDINGTO
3 1508 01723920
Sister VENI CooPER-MathIESON. Principal.
Teleph'one"46s Padd.
A HOME FOR TRUTH SEEKERS,
METAPHYSICIANS, & NEW THOUGHT STUDENTS
who desire the advantage of Health Diet, com-
bined with a true Mental and Spiritual atmo-
sphere. Insure Health, Happiness, and
Prosperity. These blessings can be the more
easily acquired in an environment where they
are taught and demonstrated.
TERMS £2 2s. Weekly
(full board and residence).
Freewill Offerings in addition for those desiring
Mental or Divine Healing Treatment.
Wholly Set up and Printed in Australia, by MORTON’S, LTD.,
75 Ultimo Road, Haymarket, Sydney.


The Truth Centre.
(Centre of the New Thought Movement in Australia)
VENI COOPER-MATHIESON, F.L.L.C,. PRINCIPAL.
What is the New Thought Movement ?
A Progressive Movement that means the
betterment of Humanity on Physical, Mental,
Moral and Spiritual Lines. A New Way of
Thinking about Life, Health, Wealth and
Happiness.
Are you a New Thinker ? If you desire to be
a partaker in the New Life Wave that is now
sweeping our Earth, come and learn of the Good
Things in store for Humanity Here and Now.
Higher Thought Lectures on Sunday Nights.
Meetings, Classes, and Healing Services
throughout the Week.
All Welcome. Freewill Offerings.
THE TRUTH CENTRE LECTURE HALL.
i.0.0.f. Temple.
140 ELIZABETH STREET.
Sydney, n.s.w.


THE REVEALER
A Monthly Journal devoted to the teaching of the
Laws of Truth, the revealing of the secrets of Being,
the unfolding of the Mysteries of Life, and the explain-
ing of the Occult and Metaphysical Teachings of ,all
ages.
EDITOR: VENI COO PER M ATHIESON F.L.L C.
Subscription, 6/6 per annum, post free throughout
Australasia; other countries, 6d. extra.
Single copies, fid. each.
THE UNIVERSAL TRUTH PUBLISHING COMPANY,
THE TRUTH CENTRE.
138 ELIZABETH ST.. SYDNEY. N.S.W., A(I STRAUA
TELEPHONE 10087 CITY
£
THE
&
TSljc
rnstsM
few Thought
Movement
iuumination!
Let us teach you
the New Science
of Health, Happi-
Prosperity.
Join our Lending
Library of New
Thought Litera-
ture covering all
aspects of the New
and Progressive
Thought of the
New Age for the
New Humanity.
