

1)
• v








r ' MB’ ' - I BA
o2£I2Cm /
11*


v u
/ : r
■ , .
; ;
*
4.
-
s * *
\




Registered at the General Post Office, Sydney, for Transmission through
the Post as a Book.


Descriptions and Verse
by J. MacCallum
Illustrations by
Walter Dowman
Australian


5 /
35
59
45
4~
5 <
CONTENTS
PAGE
Introduction
The Bandicoot
The Tasmanian Devil n
Fhe Tasmanian Wolf
-15
The Flying Squirrel
The Possum
The Rock-Wallaby
Fhe Echidna
The Dingo
The Wallaby
The W ombat
Fhe ( us-(us
The Koala
1 he Wallaroo
7 he Duck-Billed Platypus
Ehe Native Cat
ua oy 27
55
eel Platypus 59
at 65
The Kangaroo
67


IMTROIDUeTIOM
In Australia there is hardly a wild creature that
cannot be domesticated. There is hardly an animal
that can properly be termed savage True, we have
the Wild Cat and the Dingo, and, in Tasmania, the
Devil and the Wolf; but on the mainland the most
destructive creatures, such as the Fox and the Rabbit,
were imported by misguided English migrants. The
big majority of Australian animals are not only harm-
less; they are friendly, too.
My home is in a place, just outside Sydney,
where koalas, possums, bandicoots, currawongs, kooka-
burras, minahs, crows yes, crows kangaroo -rats,
geckos and a host of other living things have become
friendly .. . except the ticks and mosquitoes. They are
altogether too friendly. They not only come to us;
they insist on burrowing into us. So we discourage
them . in their seasons, with kerosene and mosquito-
nets.
This little book is intended to make you aware,
especially if you are a city-dweller, of a few of the
animals that we Australians have, for the most part,
treated very badly in the past. The more you come
to know them the less you will feel inclined to slaughter
them. Rather, you will encourage them to be friendly.
pro


INTRODUCTION—Continued
Australians are noted for their easy tendency to
mateship. It is high time that they extended mateship
to their native animals. Vain women and men
greedy for money have been mutually responsible for
the slaughter of millions of lovely possums, koalas and
squirrels. Paddy-melons, kangaroos, wallaroos, wallabies,
have been butchered in millions because they interfered
with the development of the wool and cattle industries.
It still remains to be proved whether Australia would
not have been better off in the long run by intensive
cultivation than by reserving vast spaces for the rearing
of sheep and cattle. I do not pretend that I can
settle the question ; but it is plainly true that the
sheep-men and the cattlemen are responsible for the
wholesale slaughter of native creatures, in order to
grow other animals also destined to be slaughtered and
their carcases and skins sent overseas for the ultimate
profit of a very few people.
Most of the readers of this little book will be,
I hope, young people in cities. That is why I have
introduced into the Foreword what is called a
controversial note .
The writer who prepared the verses and
descriptions and the artist who drew the pictures are
both lovers of Australian animals. They have taken
a great deal of trouble to be as accurate as possible.
If you like their book, then we shall prepare another
hook about Australian birds.
-LLW.


THE
BANDICOOT


THE BANDICOOT
How would you like to be a Bandicoot?
With long, sharp nose and rabbit-ears to boot;
Would you raid gardens, farms and stations,
Watching for cats on their night explorations-
Listening, while dining on grub or root,
For the great, grey owl that warns with a hoot?


y
BANDICOOT
"Bandicoots, like Wombats,
are night-loving animals."
(Turn to next page)


THE BANDICOOT
Bandicoots, like Wombats, are night-loving animals, though they
move about much more in the daytime than do their larger cousins.
They are found almost everywhere in Australasia, but the largest species
comes from Tasmania and measures about eighteen inches from the
snout to the body's end.
Each species of Bandicoot has a longish nose and a tail like a rat s.
Its usual colouring is a mixture of yellow-brown with bands of darker
brown over the back and rump.
One variety is known as the Rabbit-eared Bandicoot. At a distance
it can easily be mistaken for Bunny—until you see its tail.
All Bandicoots have "piggy" snouts, some larger than others, and
prominent ears. There is something very rat-like about some of them;
but the quaintest and most graceful Is Master Rabbit-ears.
They are all great burrowers and hearty eaters. Their food consists
of insects (particularly the large grubs called "bardies" that infest our
wattle-trees), worms, bulbs, roots and berries. They have learned enough
about Man to know that where he lives there are usually vegetable
gardens and orchards worth exploring, especially in the dark! He has
quite made up his mind that fruit and vegetables are good for Bandicoots
as well as for Human Beings; so people in the country make unkind
remarks when they find that "Bandy" and most of his relatives within
coo-ee have had a feast in the orchard or the kitchen-garden. But
there are numerous instances on record where Bandicoots have been
coaxed into coming along at about the same hour every night for their
ration of wholemeal bread, which they prefer to any other food. After
this habit is formed, they leave the vegetable patch untouched.
Bandicoots often prefer to build a nest in suitable country; but
they usually have an underground retreat to go to in case of danger.


THE
TASMANIAN DEVIL


THE TASMANIAN DEVIL
They dub me a devil-1 am;
'm partial to poultry and lamb;
When I've eaten my fill
just go and ki
Till the owner appears-then I u scram."


TASMANIAN DEVIL
"The Tasmanian Devil is
about half the size of the
striped Tasmanian Wolf."
(Turn to next page


THE TASMANIAN DEV
The Tasmanian Devil is one of Australia's few carnivorous marsupials.
For sheer ferocity and lust of killing, the Devil is without an equal in
Australia's animal families. It is only about half the size of the striped
Tasmanian Wolf (whose picture and description you will find next in
this book). The Tasmanian Devil is about twenty-eight inches long, with
a tall that adds about another twelve inches.
At first glance, the Tasmanian Devil can be mistaken for an innocent
Wombat; but at a second glance, the Devil's long tail betrays him for
what he Is! He is compactly and powerfully built, with a short, broad
muzzle, strong jaws and teeth, wide, well-defined ears, and (almost
always) white patches round the eyes. His coat is stiff and coarse,
with a few white markings, usually on the front. His tail Is much like
that of a cat. and. cat-like, he does his hunting at night. He will eat
anything that offers; and tackles sheep, goats, small calves, all poultry
and birds, rabbits, rats, and all the smaller wild denizens of the Bush.
He will turn on any dog. and even fly at human beings, If cornered.
So destructive was the Devil in the early days of Tasmanian settle-
ment that campaigns of extermination were waged against him. His
numbers have been greatly reduced and he has been driven into the
hills and rough country in Tasmania, some of which is so wild that the
Devil is ungetatable!
The story of how this fierce and untamable marsupial got its name
is worth recalling. The settlers who suffered from Its constant marauding
sent a deputation to the (then) Governor, Sir John Franklin, R.N., who.
naturally, asked what the animal was called. Nobody knew exactly.
Some said it was a sort of wild dog; others called it a kind of cat: but all
agreed It was a terror, killing everything and fearing nothing. "A
perfect devil, Your Excellency," said one man. "Ah!" said the Governor.
"There's a good name for it." And the name stuck.


THE
TASMANIAN WOLF


THE TASMANIAN WOLF
(Sometimes called the Australian Tiger)
When the first settler saw my stripes
He stared, and said: "A tiger-Cripes!"
But I'm a wolf, so he was wrong,-
Though, tiger-like, I'm fierce and strong;
A ruthless killer? Yes, by Jingo!
Much more ferocious than the dingo.


TASMANIAN WOLF
"As big as a very large
dog."
(Turn +o next page


THE TASMANIAN WOLF
(Sometimes called "Tiger")
The scientific name for the Tasmanian Wolf is the Thylacine. H
Is Australia's largest and most dangerous carnivore, or flesh-eater. It
is not a true wolf, according to the scientists of the Northern world, but
it has some true wolf characteristics. It Is also related to the dog family,
but the relationship Is complicated by certain cat-like attributes, such
as furred ears, "whiskers.“ and tiger-like stripes: while, like the cat tribe.
It can see in the dark and does most of its hunting at night.
As the Tasmanian Wolf (or Tiger) Is as big as a very large dog,
with a great, broad head and powerful jaws armed with many terrible
teeth, we can easily understand what a nasty customer it must have
proved to the early settlers and what a terror to their flocks and herds.
It is far more dangerous than that other Tasmanian pest, the "Devil";
and almost as ferocious.
Once upon a time it was comparatively common on the mainland
of Australia; and, for all that Is known for certain, a stray specimen or
two may still be living in the rocky fastnesses of our Southern Alps, or
in the mountain ranges of Queensland and Northern New South Wales.
Every now and then, from these more inaccessible districts, come reports
of strange, wild animals being seen, and of calves and sheep, as well as
poultry, found mysteriously killed and torn. Hence the talk of 'tigers,
as at Tantanoola and in the New England district. What the whites
call "tigers," the abos. call "bunyips." There is never smoke without
fire, so there may be some connection between "Tantanoola Tigers"
and "Bunyips," and our friend, the Tasmanian Wolf (or Tiger). At any
rate, this really Big. Bad Wolf Is still to be found in Tasmania, in the
rough Nor'-western country. He lives In the caves and gullies in the
mountains, or In the hollow bole of some huge old tree. He is a solitary
and unsociable beast, never hunting In packs, but capable of running
down any four-footed creature unfortunate enough to cross its hunting-
track. It Is extremely hard to get at, for It is as cunning as it is fierce.
To trap it is very difficult, as it rarely shows Itself: and it is dangerous
to any pursuer. It is a true marsupial, or pouched animal. The usual
litter of the female Wolf Is about four cubs. "Quite enough, too!" says
the man on the land.


THE
FLYING SQUIRREL


THE FLYING SQUIRREL
History tells us that Sir Walter Tyrre
Shot Red William in a forest-glade;
Now, had he fried to shoot a Flying Squirrel
He'd probably have missed it, I'm afraid;
For here's the greatest jumper Nature made’


/ <MsjflS^
— '
FLYING SQUIRREL
"Body fitted with a sort of
natural parachute/'
(Turn to next page)


THE FLYING SQUIRREL
Imagine the fun you could have jumping about in the treetops, if
you had four hands instead of two. Imagine what greater fun still you
could have, if your body were fitted with a sort of natural parachute
that enabled you to make prodigious jumps into space!
The Australian Flying Squirrel is so equipped. Here, indeed,
Australia has a world-champion jumper.
Rightly he should be called the Flying Possum, for he is a true
Possum; but he is also related to the squirrels of the colder countries.
He excels them all for grace, beauty and jumping ability.
The largest Flying Possum is a good three feet in length, from
nose-tip to tail-tip, and his coat is long, silky and exquisitely soft and
warm. Hence his fur is much coveted, especially by women who love
to deck themselves with expensive coats, without ever giving a thought
to the misery caused by the wholesale slaughter of harmless animals.
Along and underneath the Flying Possum’s sides, from fore-foot to
hind ankle, the skin expands to form a regular parachute, which opens
tautly when he launches himself from a height for a jump. His paws
have strong claws, curved and very sharp; and he may be said to possess
a thumb on each paw, to enable him to grasp Instantly and unerringly
the branch at which he aims. He launches himself from a tall tree, aiming
at a bough below, on another tree perhaps a hundred feet away. Down
he swoops and then upwards in a glorious curve, landing with a slightly
ascending motion on the exact spot he set out to reach.
He is marked curiously as with a mask around the eyes and the
base of the ear; also down the spine and at the tip of his tail.
Flowers and their juices, insects, wild honey (when he can get it)
and delicate tree-shoots form his diet. He has a sweet tooth and is
extremely fond of any sugary cake. He is also fond of certain moths
and grubs that abound in the big scrub.


THE
POSSUM


THE RING-TAIL POSSUM
When spring's in the air, and the Bush is in blossom,
Just stand near the ti-trees and watch the grey possum-
The cheeky young Ring-Tail who must "have a 100k"....
First white man to catch one was bold Captain Cook!


POSSUM
"Inquisitive habits and a
friendly disposition."
(Turn to next page)


THE POSSUM
There are no Opossums In Australia! That may seem a stupid
statement; but it Is true. The only true Opossums are to be found In
America. In Australia, what we call Opossums should strictly be called
Phalangers. But let us stick to the word as we have shortened it —
Possum, the most beloved animal In our continent. Beloved, now that
he Is protected; but what a shameful history of slaughter lies behind
his name!
Of all Australian animals, the Possum least needs Introducing or
describing, especially to Australian boys and girls; for it Is a common
pet in every district where a patch of gum-trees or a scrub-area Is still
to be found.
The Possum's inquisitive habits and friendly disposition make It
easy of observation, whilst Its beautiful coat and long, furry tall have
caused It to be hunted well-nigh to extermination In many parts of
Australia. At last, protection has been extended to every variety of
this trusting little animal.
The Common Grey, a small Possum found throughout the continent
(Including Tasmania) Is perhaps the best-known of the tribe—certainly
by those who wear furs. The Tasmanian variety Is larger and handsomer,
with a coat of rich, deep brown, shading to nearly black In parts. The
animal is sometimes called the "Sooty" Possum, and the fur Is still much
sought after, unfortunately. Then there Is the Ring-tailed Possum,
slightly larger than the Grey. The "Ring-tali' also has larger ears, a
darker coat, and a long, white-tipped, prehensile tail. "Ring-tall" Is
the fellow whose remote ancestor had the honour (though he didn't
regard It so) of being caught by Captain Cook In 1770, at the mouth
of the Endeavour River. "Ring-tall" makes a nest, like a bird, In thick
bush or any suitable tree. Most of his cousins live In holes or hollows
in the big gums.
We must not forget the tiny Dormouse Possum, from Western
Australia, with the quaintest tall: one-third, from the root, being furred;
one-third (in the middle) being scaly (like a mouse's); and the last section,
to the tip, being prehensile and hairy, so that the Dormouse can swing
by it.
Most Possums are vegetarians; but a few varieties will sometimes
eat small birds and their eggs.


THE
ROCK-WALLABY


THE ROCK-WALLABY
In quiet places near the hills
I live among the rocks and rills:
As nimble as the famed Swiss goat,
Or India's Himalayan sheep,
wear a lovely, furry coat
Which, naturally, I want to keep,
'm really a harmless chap
So, please, don't hunt me off the map!


ROCK-WALLABY
"Hard/, active and
inquisitive/'
(Turn to next page)


THE ROCK-WALLABY
There are several kinds of Rock-Wallaby, the most commonly
encountered being the Brush-Tail shown In the picture. While some of
our other varieties of Wallaby are to be found in New Guinea and other
Islands of the East Indies, the "Rocks" are peculiar to Australia and so
may be taken as truly representative.
The largest and the most striking specimen is the Yellow-Foot,
which has a grey-brown coat and tail ringed alternately with brown and
light yellow. Nowadays, he Is rarely met with anywhere near settled
districts. He prefers the depths of the Bush, and If there are plenty of
rocks and gullies, so much the better.
The Brush-Tail has a dull brown (sometimes greyish-brown) coat of
coarser texture, with darker markings on the head and shoulders. There
Is a smaller variety with very short ears and brown-tipped tall, known as
the Short-Ear Wallaby. Sometimes an all-white (albino) Is caught.
It Is worth remarking, just here, that among Australian marsupials,
"albinism" (or all-white) Is astonishingly common, considering how rare
it Is In other orders of the world's mammals. Stripes, too, seem to be a
definite bar to albinism; nobody ever saw (or even heard of) an albino
tiger, for instance. Australia has white Kangaroos, white Wallabies
(usually with red bellies), white possums, and so on. The pretty little
Rock-Wallaby Is sometimes an albino, but the Ring-Tails of all kinds seem
to be exempt from this freakish colouration.
Rock-Wallabies occur all over the coastal districts of Eastern Aus-
tralia. They are hardy, active and inquisitive little chaps, making excellent
pets. That they stand up well to extreme changes of climate is proved
by the fact that many Australians, when visiting England, have been
astonished to find Australian Wallabies running wild with deer and other
animals, in private parks in Sussex, Hampshire and other Southern
counties!


THE
ECHIDNA


THE ECHIDNA
(or Spiny Anf-Safer)
They call me the Banded Ant-Eater;
At ant-catching I'm a world-beater,-
put out my long tongue
And scoop ants, old and young,
Oh, I don't know of anything sweeter!


3
KiAireA oowvnA n - '■ ■''
ECHIDNA
"A relation of the Duck-
billed Platypus."
(Turn to next page)


THE ECHIDNA
You may not believe It, but we assure you it is true that the Echidna,
or Porcupine Ant-eater, or Spiny Ant-eater (they are all the same) is a
relation of the Duck-billed Platypus, of which you will find a picture and
a description in another part of this little book. The Platypus and the
Echidna both belong to the monotremes, or the lowest order of mammals.
The Echidna is an egg-laying mammal found only In Australia and
New Zealand. He is nowhere mentioned in Australian literature until
1847; but our aborigines of course knew about him for many centuries
before that date.
He is toothless and a great burrower. In fact, he has an amusing
habit of making for the nearest obstacle, when he hears the tramp of
approaching feet or paws, and tries desperately to burrow beneath that
obstacle, In order to hide himself from a possible enemy. When a
human being comes near him unawares, the Porcupine Ant-eater will
make for the nearest foot of the unwelcome visitor and try to hide
under It!
Australian investigators have stated that the Echidna is found only
in a few districts of Australia; but the writer of these notes has found
the Echidna In Western Australia, South Australia, Queensland —and In
New South Wales, within twenty miles of Sydney.
Despite his armoury of quills, the Australian Porcupine Ant-eater Is
a harmless creature. The back of his head and body Is covered with
short spines that he fluffs out when he thinks he is in danger. The head
Is provided with a slender beak.
The female lays a single egg, which Is incubated in a pouch on the
underside of the body.
Three species are known, all having five claws on each foot. In a
larger type found In New Guinea there are three claws to the foot.
Our aborigines used to be very fond of the cooked flesh of the
Echidna, and white people who have tasted It say that It cannot be
distinguished from pork. After all. "porcupine" means "a prickly pig"!


THE
DINGO


'W&k'
THE DINGO
(The only true Australian Dog)
The Dingo is a powerful brute;
He's hard to poison, trap, or shoot,
Yet, if you catch him as a pup,
He can be tamed and well brought up,
And taught from killing to refrain,-
Unless he just "goes bush" again!


- ■ m, j' <•
' • 1 w
DINGO
"He is a true wild dog
not a mongrel/'
(Turn to next page}


THE DINGO
This formidable creature, known to Science as Canis Dingo, is the
worst enemy of our cattle and sheep. He Is a true wild dog, and not a
"throwback," or mongrel, as was held erroneously for so many years.
Quite simply, it used to be assumed that the cunning, wide-awake, and
silent customer from the wilds—for the Dingo rarely (if ever) barks—
was the offspring or descendant of domesticated dogs that had "gone
bush." No doubt there have been (and still are) animals at large which
were bush-bred from the mating of the genuine Dingo with an escaped
dog of either sex; and which, therefore, looked like the Dingo; but all
doubt was set at rest some years ago when the semi-fossilized remains
of a large animal were found —and proved to be those of a dog which
had flourished in Australia In the Stone Age. The scientists finally
decided that, If not indigenous (that is, original native), the animal at
the very latest could not have appeared on this continent before the
coming of the aborigines—who may have brought him with them about
30,000 years ago.
Anyway, the Dingo got away from Blnghi long before Peisart, or
Dirk Hartog, or Tasman, or Dampier, or Captain Cook set eyes on
Australia, The abos. hunted the Dingo, and even ate him; and the Dingo
returned the compliment In his own way. He is a fine, big, upstanding
fellow, with a yellow-tawny coat, white throat, belly, and paws. He has
a long flattish head; short, upright ears which seem to be always pricked
up, and a large, furry, white-tipped tail which (unlike his ears) Is never
raised. He Is strong, fast, and a great tracker; and if not got rid of
quickly he does great mischief. A price Is set on his head; and some of
the wary, old veterans (with hundreds of "kills" to their record) have
been worth as much as £2OO each to the men who have trapped, shot,
or poisoned them.
As a pup, the Dingo is a fine pet; but there is always the fear that
he may "go bush." He is an inveterate killer of poultry, pigs, lambs,
and all bush life. He is not really cowardly, but very wary and cunning.
He has need to be; for every man's hand Is against him.


THE
WALLABY


* v At
•^^*“^^^^4|'|((i| > | l }' » g|,, /
THE WALLABY
(Sometimes called The Paddy-Melon)
Much smaller than the Kangaroo,
The Wallab/s more graceful, too.
Than his marsupial cousin,
Far outback, when the grasses grow
In springtime, everywhere you go
You'll see them by the dozen.
Perhaps the one you've most heard tell on
Is Little Me-the paddy-melon.
'H.*
Ilf:
} I


powmaM -
WALLABY
"Wallabies are
miniature Voos."
(Turn to next page)


THE WALLABY
Most people seeing Wallabies for the first time will say, "Hullo!
Kangaroos?"; and, as a matter of fact, Wallabies are miniature 'roos;
and there are so many varieties of them that it would take a special
volume to describe them all properly. They are usually more vivid In
colour (and more varied) than the big fellows, which live in the "open"
country or the sparsely-timbered foot-hills. The Wallabies are always
found In the real bush where, of course, there is more colour than on
the plains; and it is a rule of Nature that bright-hued "scrub" and
flowering vegetation always produce the more highly-coloured fauna
(or animal and bird life).
Wallabies range from "Red Necks" (found mostly along the N.S.W.
and Victorian border), standing nearly four feet high, down to the tiny,
little Rat-Kangaroo and the Rock Wallabies. They are all graceful,
lightly-built, and attractive animals, some having short tails and long ears;
others (like the "Rocks") very long tails, with short hind legs and small ears.
They do well In captivity, if treated well. Their natural food consists
of grasses, young shoots, and tender roots; and they are unpopular with
wheat-farmers and pastoralists because they raid young crops of all kinds
and are destructive of grass-roots; thus Injuring pasture-land.
Some of the best-known' Wallabies, still to be found In less-settled
parts of Australia, are the "Black Tails," found nearly all along Eastern
Australia's sea-board where scrub or timber still exists; the pretty little
"Black Gloved" Wallaby, which has four black paws that look exactly
like gloves; Parry's Wallaby (which is perhaps the best-known of all);
the Agile Wallaby found in South Australia and (occasionally) in Queens-
land: the "Red-Bellied" Wallaby (Tasmania and South Australia); the
"Short-Tail" (from W.A.); several kinds of Rock Wallabies, and, of course,
the "Paddymelon," the commonest of the lot.
One of the most human things about the Wallaby is the way in
which he uses his short, but muscular, forepaws and "arms," When
feeding, or examining anything, the animal uses them much as we use
our hands. He digs up roots and cleans off the soil in a very human way.
You will find plenty of Wallabies in our zoos and public gardens, and
they are always worth watching.


THE
WOMBAT


THE WOMBAT
I'm the Wombat; I hate combat-all my habits are nocturna
At dawn you'll see me homing through the bushland
green and vernal:
If you catch me, treat me kindly
I'm a pet who'll follow blindly-
But the folk who live in cities see me only at the Zoo!


I : ** / 41
O I/O r > — N I
WOMBAT
"A great burrower and
usually lives deep under-
ground/'
(Turn to next page)


THE WOMBAT
Of all our bush animals, the most maligned Is the Wombat, or
Australian Badger. A more harmless and Inoffensive creature does not
exist; and, though he has often been called "ugly" and "bad-tempered"
and destructive," he Is none of the three. In the early days, the
Wombats, which are of four varieties, used to be known as "bears"—
especially the big ones. This was because whenever Mr. Wombat was
noticed going home very early In the morning, what was seen was only
a bulky, thick-set, blg-sterned. tailless creature lumbering Into the Bush,
and looking much like a small bear. His even closer resemblance to the
badger of the Northern Hemisphere caused him to be called "the
Australian Badger ; but, finally, the scientists (and the public) decided
to call him Wombat.
The Wombat grows to the size of a large terrier, weighing up to
forty or fifty pounds. He has a short, shovel-shaped head with a broad
muzzle, prick ears and intelligent eyes. His coat is thick, strong and
coarse. As his hide Is very tough, he is not easily Insulted.
The South Australian or Hairy-Nosed Wombat, however, has a
silky coat, rather darker In colour than that of the common variety.
Usually the Wombat has a brown-and-grey coat, though at times yellows,
all-greys and all-browns are to be seen. An albino, or all-white, has
been found on rare occasions.
The animal Is a great burrower and usually lives deep underground;
but In rocky country, he selects a dark, deep cranny where he cannot be
disturbed. His food consists usually of grasses, roots, leaves and certain
ground fruits and creepers (such as wild strawberries). He never goes
out till sunset and he likes to be home before the sun rises. He Is easily
tamed, if caught young, and makes a faithful, amusing, long-lived pet
which learns to eat almost anything, except meat or fish. His disposition
Is a friendly and placid one, and in a rather clumsy way is quite playful
while young. This quaint, nocturnal "beastle" can be found in South
Australia, Tasmania. Victoria. New South Wales and Southern
Queensland.


THE
CUS-CUS OR
TREE-CLIMBING
KANGAROO


'I K)ACifri\ e>owM*-%*k*i -
THE CUS-CUS
(The Tree-climbing Kangaroo)
Now here's a quaint fellow who hails from our
tropical North;
The Cus-cus. He climbs the wild fruit-trees for a
the/ are worth-
A habit that helps him to dodge foes he's
constantly meeting;
But the big Queensland carpet-snakes find him
most excellent eating!


CUS-CUS
"A round head and a
wonderfully prehensile tail."
(Turn to next page)


THE CUS-CUS OR TREE-CLIMBING
KANGAROO
Until quite recently, it was difficult to make people believe that
there are several kinds of Kangaroos that climb trees!
The Cus-Cus Is a specimen of this curious marsupial, found in
Northern Queensland, New Guinea and the Celebes. A Cus-Cus is
about the size of the ordinary Wallaby.
The kind that comes from North Queensland is the smallest of all.
He Is called the Spotted Cus-Cus; and, If treated kindly and Intelligently,
he makes a most attractive and affectionate pet. Two other varieties
are found in our North, but they are dark In colour, without spots.
The Cus-Cus has a round head and a wonderfully prehensile tail—
that Is, he Is like certain kinds of monkeys in that he can use his tail as a
fifth paw, or "hand."
All these tree-climbers feed, like their distant cousin, the Koala, on
leaves, fruit and young shoots. They also come down from the trees
at night to eat ferns, creepers and other ground vegetation. In captivity,
they will readily eat bread and milk, fruit and sweet potatoes.
When the Cus-Cus Is irritated or frightened, he will spit at his
tormentor—very rude, of course, but what else can a small, defenceless
beast do?
Of the other tree-climbing Kangaroos, one is known as the Ursine,
because he Is bear-like; one as the Bennett and one as the Lumholt,
after their discoverers. They are larger and clumsier than the Cus-Cus.
Their tails are not prehensile and are used to balance the animal In the
cleverest way. Often they sleep with tail outstretched like a stick, as
they poise on a bough. As jumpers they are excelled only by the
Flying Squirrels; and they have been seen to fall like a stone, forty, fifty
or sixty feet to the ground, landing always on their feet, like cats!
The worst enemies of the Cus-Cus and his cousins are the big
carpet-snakes (pythons) which climb silently after them, or lurk overhead
to get a "strike" at them before they can jump.


THE
KOALA OR
NATIVE BEAR


THE KOALA
(Better known as the Native Bear)
When strangers come from oversea
The/ alwa/s want to call on me!
You hear them cry: "Oh, don't go yet!
Look at this darling little pet.". . .
Then I look dignified and deep
Or turn right round and go to sleep;
Though I'm good-tempered, please beware-
Don't irritate the Native Bear!


ff
DOWMA^J
KOALA
"Refuses to live anywhere
except in his native
country."
(Turn to next page)


THE KOALA OR NATIVE BEAR
If the Possum is the best beloved of Australian animals, the Koala
is the most admired. He would be the best beloved if he were not
so shy.
i hough he is called the Native Bear," he is not related to the bear
family. He is found only In Australia, and he has proved to be a great
source of publicity for our country abroad. Yet, so far, he has never
yet been acclimatised in any other country. Americans have tried to
export him; but he refuses to live anywhere except in his native country.
"Billy Bluegum," as Norman Lindsay, the Australian artist, has named
him, is probably the most-photographed wild animal In the world. "Billy
Bluegum" is the last representative of an otherwise extinct genus (or
group), and as he bears a certain external resemblance to a bear—short,
oroad head with round and tufted ears, a stout, tailless body, and strong
paws our first settlers thought he really was a bear, and called him one.
The Koala Is found only in Eastern Australia, from Queensland to
Victoria, and mainly along the coast. Koalas are tree-dwellers and live
mostly on gum-leaves, blossoms and shoots (or "tips"): though, sometimes,
the dignified, slow-moving little fellows will climb down at night and dig
for roots.
Mother Bear carries her baby on her back (as does Mother Possum),
until he is guite big. She has a most human way of slapping her youngster
if it disobeys or annoys her.
In day-time the Koala usually sleeps high up on a branch, or in the
crook of a tree. In cold weather, the family retires for the day Into a
hollow or a hole. The Koala has been blessed with a beautiful thick,
fur coat, pale brown on the back, grey on the sides, and "near-white"
underneath. He has a most noble nose that looks as If It had been cut
out of solid rubber. The Koala Is easy-going and amiable, but if irritated
he screeches like a naughty child. When he fights, he screeches and
scratches, too.
To keep him in captivity, he has to be fed scientifically; that is to
say. he must be fed on different kinds of gum-leaves at different times
of the year. That is why It is so cruel to keep him in Zoos where they
have not taken the trouble to find out how to feed him properly]


THE
WALLAROO


THE WALLAROO
'm the Wallaroo. My coat's a brown grey-blue,
They know me up in Queensland as the Warrior Kangaroo;
HI wrestle any man—Hi drown him if I can—
As I drown unwary dogs that try to kill me too!


ii iiiim— ———————
WALLAROO
"Nowadays rarely found
outside North Queensland/'
(Turn to next page)


THE WALLAROO
One would like to think that the days of the Wallaroo, one of the
largest species of Kangaroo, are not numbered; but nowadays he is
rarely found outside North Queensland.
Fifty years ago the Wallaroo flourished almost anywhere "wild"
in the coastal plain areas of South Australia, Southern New South Wales
and Queensland. But settlement has driven him far from his old haunts.
Merciless "drives" and shootings have thinned the ranks of this grand
Australian animal.
The Great Grey and the Great Red Kangaroos are the only ones
that equal, or surpass, the Wallaroo in size, weight and speed. Ail
three reveal the same intelligence and daring when forced to defend
themselves.
Compared with the other big Kangaroos, the Wallaroo is shorter
and more stoutly built, with a thicker coat. Usually the coat is of a
smoky-grey hue, sometimes tinged with brown, and lighter on the belly
and underpants. In Queensland and New South Wales there Is a variety
with a black coat. Like all the 'roo and wallaby tribes, the Wallaroo is
inoffensive and harmless, until he is attacked. Then he will turn at bay.
with a tree or a rock at his back, and wait for dogs or humans to close
in on him. Seizing the enemy with his forepaws, he kicks upward and
forward with his long and powerful hind legs, which carry formidable
claws that can rip a dog to pieces, and may seriously Injure, if not kill,
a man. Often, when pursued, the Wallaroo (and his big grey and red
brothers) will take to water, wade out up to his middle, and stand with
forepaws ready to catch the unwary dog that dares to swim near him.
Then he grabs the animal and holds It under water. Unless promptly
rescued —good-bye, dog! In the old days, it is said, men, ignorant of
the Big Fellow's fighting technique, sometimes lost their lives by going
alone into the water with knife or club, or to save a pet dog, and were
promptly seized and held under the surface. The abos. have, and always
have had, a healthy respect for the big Kangaroos and Wallaroos when
brought to bay, and kill them by long-distance methods—that Is, by
hurling spears at them.
By the way, a town In South Australia is named after the Wallaroo.


THE
DUCK-BILLED
PLATYPUS


THE DUCK-BILLED PLATYPUS
You might not believe it but, still, it is true
I'm the quaintest Survival-a bird and beast too-
A very queer fish altogether, indeed
can live under water and thrive on fish-feed;
Ve a soft, furry coat; I lay eggs; I've a bill,
And a beaver-like tail to swim with a wi
You may see me at dusk in a pool or a creek-
The shy Duck-Billed Platypus, truly unique!


PLATYPUS
"An animal that forgot to
grow up."
(Turn to next page)


THE DUCK-BILLED PLATYPUS
When you look at this quaint, shy, attractive animal, remember tha +
you are looking at the direct descendant of a prehistoric Peter Pan—
an animal that forgot to grow up.
The Platypus Is the prize example of "arrested development"; that
is to say, It could have become a handsome bird, or a beautiful cat, or
remained what it started from—a curious lizard! But it seems to have
remained undecided for so long that every condition around It changed
before It could make up its mind. So Nature just said, "Oh, well, stay
as you are. You'll be very Interesting, anyway." So Platypus "stayed
put." As you can see In the picture, he has a beautiful fur coat, a large
duck-bill, a broad, flat tall, like a beaver's, and webbed feet with
claws. In the front feet these claws are set back In the web; in the
hind feet they extend over the edges of the web, so that the strange
creature digs with the hind claws and swims with the front feet,
Further, the hind feet of the male are armed with hollow spurs that
connect with poison glands. In soft soil, such as usually occurs beside
creeks and pools, the Platypus digs rapidly and cunningly to form his
home. He will burrow, under water. Into the bank, and then work
upwards a couple of feet and dig out a tunnel running about twelve
feet either way from the entrance under the water. At one end he
excavates his home, a chamber of about four feet In diameter and
about two feet high. At the other end he has his "get-away." usually
covered from prying eyes by sticks, leaves, soil and rubbish. In the
chamber, the female lays her eggs (from two to four) and sits on them
till they are hatched, quite naked and helpless, like young birds. They
are fed by the parents on snails, water-insects and water-weeds; perhaps
also small fish, as Platypuses taste and smell fishy when full-grown.
Usually, the Platypus sleeps in the daytime. Being very shy, he Is seldom
seen, except, occasionally. In the early evening, when he may be found
floating and playing on the surface of the pool or creek wherein he
lives. In captivity, provided natural conditions are Imitated as closely
as possible, the Platypus thrives. Like a puppy, he likes being scratched
or tickled gently. He enjoys playing In shallow, clear, weed-growing
water. He cleans and preens his coat with his bill, just like any aquatic
bird.
When young, Platypuses have real teeth; but these become flat,
horny, grinding surfaces In the adults. And they "pouch" their food
like monkeys!


THE
NATIVE CAT


THE NATIVE CAT
At first sight you might say: "Why, that
Can't possibly be called a cat!"
But there you'd be mistaken;
For I climb trees, catch mice and birds,
And make the farmers use hard words
About the fowls I've taken!
Of other cats there's lots and lots;
You II always know me by my spots!


.
NATIVE CAT
"Fierce, cunning
and bloodthirsty."
(Turn +o next page)


THE NATIVE CAT
Australia has few dangerous animals; but, for its size, the Native Cat
is as nasty a beast as you could meet on a dark night In this country.
The Native Cat occurs in most parts of Australia, and like the
Tiger" and the "Devil," whose pictures you will see on other pages,
flourishes in Tasmania, the Australian State that has the dubious honour
of harbouring more animal pests than any other on the mainland.
The Native Cat is usually about the size of our ordinary cat. He
ranges in colour from black to a light, drab grey, and is easily recognised,
even at a distance, by white spots of all sizes that bespatter his coat and
give the protection of camouflage In the trees and rocks he frequents.
Like the Koala, the Native Cat lives mainly in holes and hollows In
the big gums. He is a bad neighbour; for, when hungry, he will not
hesitate to grab and eat a baby bear or possum, If he comes across one
without its parents. But his favourite food is poultry; next, wild birds and
the smaller, harmless bush-folk, such as the jerboas (or rat-kangaroos),
the bandicoots and the mice. As a destroyer of birds, the Native Cat
Is a terror. Certain species, such as the once-plentiful Australian Ground
Parrot, have been exterminated by the Native Cat and his alien partner
In destruction, the Fox,
There is little rest for poultrymen in any country district Invaded
by the Native Cat, until the unwelcome visitor is killed. Like the
! asmanian Devil, the Native Cat is fierce, cunning and bloodthirsty. If
he cannot get hens, he will take eggs or chickens or ducklings, or even
the pet canary, if he can reach it.
If birds and animals are lacking, or all safely stowed away from
danger, the Native Cat sups on any insects, mice, moles or bush-rats
he may chance upon in his night-wanderings. He can climb almost
anything. He despises dogs and is a most ferocious fighter when
cornered.
The zoologists call him the Dasyure and although we call him the
Native Cat he Is said to have no affinity with the cats of other lands.


THE
KANGAROO


THE KANGAROO
Ot course you know the Kangaroo-
The "boomer" and the "Old Man/' too:
Though chased off stations, runs and farms
He's on Australia's Coat-of-Arms,
And stands for vigour, grit and speed-
He's very, very tough, indeed.
fhtrp.


<*> < i H»'t fr*fl —
KANGAROO
"Weighs anything up to
200 lbs."
(Turn to next page)


THE KANGAROO
Australia will always be identified with Captain James Cook, the
Great Navigator, and. of course, with the Kangaroo. It is, therefore,
doubly Interesting to know that the Great Grey Kangaroo was first
discovered by white men when Captain Cook landed from H.M.S.
Endeavour, In 1770, at the mouth of the river he named after his famous
ship. There are many genera, or branches, of the Kangaroo family, but
the Old Man is the king of them all. He weighs anything up to
220 lbs., stands over 7 feet when he really means business, and can
jump about 30 feet when he gets Into his stride! He has immense
strength in his hind legs and quarters; and his long and powerful tali
serves him as a fifth limb, giving him a perfect tripod (or three-legged
stool) "stance," In which he will fight to the last gasp. When caught
young he is easily tamed, and can be taught to box, with gloves, being
no mean opponent with his weight and speed. Kangaroos vary in colour
from albino (all white) to brown, grey-blue, red, silver-grey and even
brindle. And they vary In size from the "Old Man" and the strongly-
built Wallaroo (shown on another page) down to the graceful and
attractive little fellows about the size of a rabbit. One of these smaller
species was discovered by an English peer. Lord Derby, not so many
years ago, another by a French zoologist. Though so many Australians
have regarded the Kangaroo as a subject for summary extinction, "a
noxious animal, scientists and explorers have found it exceptionally
Interesting and worthy of the closest study. It Is a paradox that Australia
has treated the Kangaroo as a pest, while proudly displaying It on its
coat-of-arms and service badges.
Kangaroos are sociable creatures; they run in "mobs" (or herds),
and are usually found on grassy slopes in thinly-timbered country, or on
the plains. Before the invading sheep and cattle, they have retreated
West and North, and are now scarce in the more settled parts of
Australia. They eat grass, roots, leaves, and shoots of trees. There are
tree-climbing Kangaroos, such as the Cus-Cus (see elsewhere in this
book), which look like very big squirrels.
The generation of the baby Kangaroo provided a controversy which
lasted for more than 100 years. When born, the baby Kangaroos are
very tiny and perfectly helpless; but the mother puts them at once into
her pouch, where they are suckled by a natural flow of milk; and in which
they find shelter until they are quite big. "Joey." as the baby is called,
takes refuge in the pouch at any sign of danger, and is then safely and
rapidly removed from the scene.


.


Wholly set up and printed in Australia hy the Commer-
cial Printing Company, 81 Campbell Street, Sydney, for
the Currawong Publishing Co.. 32 Jamieson Street.
Sydney.


.
.
.
f
V






3 1508 01526622 9




S'
\ c*
