

(? i
V "
Australian Fedemtioi) League,
FIRST MEETING.
First Resolution.
Mover:
Seconder :
(i) That it is expedient to advance the cause of Australian
Federation by an organisation of citizens owning no class
distinction or parjty influence, and using its best energies to
assist Parliamentary action from whatever source proceeding
calculated to further the common aim of Australian Patriotism.
(n) That there be now formed an Australasian Federation League,
open to all adult citizens, for the purpose of advocating,
promoting, and, after its attainment, defending the Federal
Lnion of Australasia on such lines as may be constitutionally
approved by all the Colonies concerned after further delibera-
tion and report by assembled representatives of each.
Second Resolution.
Mover :
Seconder
(i) That it be among the duties of the League to co-operate fully
and earnestly with all similar bodies not influenced by the
aims and interests of the parties contending on matters of
domestic policy ; and to promote the formation of such
associations throughout the several Colonies.
(n) That steps be taken in due course to unite all such bodies
throughout the Colonies under one organisation with one
plan of operations.
7e 1—93




Third Resolution.
Mover ;
Seconder
(i) That the Major of Sydney from time to time be the President
of the League, unless he declines, in which case the President
shall be chosen by the whole League.
(n) That there be annually elected in addition to the usual
office-bearers, a General Council and an Executive Com-
mittee, the general administrative control being vested in
the latter body; that not more than two-fifths of the General
Council shall be Members of either House of the Legislature;
that no Member of either House be qualified for election
to the Executive Committee; and that office-bearers be
ex-officio Members of both Council and Committee.
Fourth Resolution.
Mover:
Seconder:
(i) That the Eight Worshipful the Mayor of Sydney be now
requested to act as first President of the League, and to
convene a Public Meeting, to be held in the Town Hall, on
next, the instant, for the purpose of
considering the foregoing resolutions, enrolling members, and
transacting such other business as the Mayor holds necessary.
(it) That, until the further election of Office-bearers and
Committees and the adoption of a code of Eules, Messrs.
and be requested to act as Honorary
Secretaries and Treasurers, and to enrol members.


At f>
S I & L-f o
F ’ 4 % u
00383563
