

AUSTRALIA
BUILDS A MOTOR CAR
THE FIRST BOOK OF A SERIES
DEALING WITH MOTOR CAR
DEVELOPMENT and MANUFACTURE
IN AUSTRALIA.




FOREWORD
IN organising General Motors (Aus-
tralia) Pty. Ltd., involving as it did
the investment of many thousands
of pounds in purchasing lands and erect-
ing buildings, or acquiring extensive
premises on lease, for the establishment
of motor car Assembly Plants at the
five base ports in Australia —which is
unique—General Motors very definitely
expressed its great confidence in the
future of Australia. Having been in
operation for over two and a half years
in Australia, the Company can reiterate
its confidence in the country, and in the
splendid body of Australian workmen
and employees which has been built up
in the organisation, and to whom the
admiration and gratitude of the Com-
pany is due, for the manner in which
they have carried out their respective
duties.
The organisation in Australia, in
which are included the Australian dis-
tributors, dealers and the many suppliers
of the large volume of locally purchased
materials, can only be held together by
bonds of mutual respect and confidence.
An organisation of the scope and
magnitude of General Motors (Aus-
tralia) Pty. Ltd. renders service, through
its dealers and distributors, in helping to
increase the efficiency of these important
contact organisations with the public. It
also provides useful and profitable em-
ployment for large numbers of Aus-
tralians, both directly and indirectly, as
through its distributors and dealers, and
also through its many Australian sup-
pliers.
By increasing the Australian content
of the products of General Motors as it
does, and by enlarging the scope of pur-
chasing in Australia along economic lines
as it has, the Company is constantly
striving to achieve the expressed desire
of Australians for the development of
secondary industries in this country.
The comprehensive and important
programme which has been laid down,
to realise this objective, will take time
and much effort to put into practice, so
that the accomplishment may be lasting
and built on a sure foundation. With,
however, a determined purpose ahead
combined with the splendid co-operation
of the many and various local manu-
facturers and suppliers, General Motors
(Australia) Pty. Ltd. looks forward,
with great hope, to the future.
The Company is daily earning the right
to be considered an Australian organisa-
tion, by virtue of large investment in
Australia, an ever-expanding list of em-
ployees—who now number 2,041 Aus-
tralians to whom salaries and wages
amounting to approximately six hundred
thousand pounds are paid annually—and
increasing purchases of Australian pro-
ducts which represent an expenditure of
approximately two million pounds per
annum.
General Motors (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
has made a total expenditure in excess
of ten million pounds in Australia since
the Company was established on Ist
November, 1926. This definitely gives
expression to the Company’s policy to
purchase within the Commonwealth all
materials and supplies which can be
successfully and economically produced
in Australia. Thus by this unique
method Australia actually builds a motor
car.


“The obvious advantage of an abun-
dance of goodwill in a business is that
there are no cross-purposes. All are
working to a common end by methods
which all approve. All are pulling
together; none is pulling against.”
Australian workmen in their places on
the assembly lines in Australian motor
car Assembly Plants with utmost pre-
cision assemble the motor car chassis.
With equal precision other workmen
mount Australian-built bodies to the
assembled chassis. All along the line
inspectors watch every function of
assembly, until, after their final testing,
cars are ready to leave the Assembly
Plant.
At all points there is unity. While
workmen assemble the chassis—Aus-
tralian-built bodies, tyres, batteries,
Duco, paint and many other components
of car production in Australia are being
received into Assembly Plants.
BODIES.
In Australian body building works
the building of passenger bodies proceeds
day in and day out. Here are builders of
the highest quality products, with plant
and modern equipment capable of neces-
sary expansion to take care of volume,
and an Australian personnel with a
background of valuable experience to
carry on the specialised work.
TYRES.
Precision methods also prevail in Aus-
tralian rubber mills, where trained hands
and intricate machinery deftly mould the
shapely and long-wearing tyres from
rubber largely procured from Empire
sources.
WOOL.
In Australian woollen mills Australian
operatives manipulate efficient machinery
over the changing patterns for broad-
cloth manufactured from the wool of
Australian sheep.
TIMBER—BATTERIES.
The timber areas of Australia and
Tasmania supply much of the fine
timber used in motor body construc-
tion. From Queensland come the large
consignments of cotton for upholstery
padding requirements. Lead miners re-
cover from actual Australian soil lead
ore for building Australian batteries, and
other deposits that yield the basic ore for
various constituents of the motor car
Australia is building.
HARDWARE.
Hardware, fittings and accessories,
developed by direct association with
sources rich in experience, are designed
and manufactured in Australia, while,
automatically, the market for replace-
ment parts widens as car ownership
multiplies.
PAINT—LEATHER.
Hundreds of Australians work under
clean and healthy conditions in the pro-
duction of Duco and colorful paints, for
style is demanded in the car of to-day—
nor is style apparent only in the ex-
teriors. Whether upholstery is of Aus-
tralian broadcloth or Australian leather,
interiors are equally highly developed.
Every trend of design is absorbed in the
leather industry which gives employment
to hundreds of Australians in the crea-
tion of long-wearing beautiful leathers
from first-grade hides.
Everywhere manufacturers and mech-
anics of a progressive and inventive turn
of mind step forward in Australian
industry, as large scale operations pro-
ducing the units required become more
and more common.
The industry and its growth in Aus-
tralia was no one man’s inspiration, nor
that of any one group, and it did not
happen on any particular morning of a
particular year, but it has made definite
progressive strides within the last few
years.


MOTOR CAR ASSEMBLY PLANTS.
THEIR PLACE IN THE INDUSTRIAL
LIFE OF AUSTRALIA.
THREE years ago the term “Assembly
Plant” was a vague one in the Aus-
tralian vocabulary, and the trained
workman of to-day’s assembly line was
practically undreamed of. To-day he is a
reality—present in thousands—and in allied
and subsidiary industries that manufacture
products required by the automotive industry
are many more thousands of Australians
enjoying regular employment and fair wages.
Five Assembly Plants for the assembly of
motor cars and trucks commenced operations
in Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide
and Perth when General Motors (Australia)
Pty. Ltd. was established as an Australian
Company on Ist November, 1926. This Aus-
tralian Company made impressive purchases
of real estate, erected modern buildings and
provides employment for thousands of Aus-
tralians. From the outset, its policy has been
to purchase from Australian manufacturers
and suppliers all supplies and materials
required in its five Assembly Plants, wherever
these materials can be successfully and econo-
mically produced in Australia; to increase
opportunities of employment for Australian
labor, both directly and indirectly, and to
continually increase the proportion of Aus-
tralian products incorporated in cars and
trucks assembled within its Plants.
General Motors (Australia) Pty. Ltd. there-
fore assembles cars and trucks in Assembly
Plants in five capital cities of the Common-
wealth. Each of these plants is spacious and
equipped with the most modern and approved
facilities for assembly purposes. Each plant
covers a large area, provides daylight working
conditions, and gives employment to a large
Australian personnel. An approximate ex-
penditure of £400,000 has been made by the
Company in establishing Assembly Plants, and
equipping them with plant and machinery,
much of which was fabricated in Australia.
The operations of General Motors (Aus-
tralia) Pty. Ltd. therefore have threefold
value to Australia-—as to sources of materials
that go into the assembly and production of
motor cars—labor employed to put these
materials together—and distribution and use
of the completed vehicles.
In the story “Australia Builds a Motor
Car,” an endeavor is made to portray the


increasingly Australian character of the motor
industry, and of the motor cars which, every
day, leave these Assembly Plants for the
Australian establishments of metropolitan
distributors and country dealers throughout
Australia.
It is hoped there will be revealed to the
reader some measure of by just how much the
motor car benefits the country in which it is
built and used—in this case Australia- —and
how it has become, as one economist has said,
“the greatest creator of wealth the world has
ever known,” for national wealth is largely
founded on efficient and economical trans'
AUSTRALIAN COMPONENTS.
The work of assembling cars and trucks is
but one chapter of a vital story of industry
that progresses, largely without the searchlight
of publicity. The public, not familiar with
the industry, may not realise how many com'
ponents of Australian origin a motor car con'
tains, nor how much of the purchase money
is expended in the Commonwealth, to benefit
growing industries and to find its way into the
pockets of Australian workers, and thence
through all channels of trade. They may
think only in terms of the “nationality” of the
Chevrolet frames are received in Australian Assembly Plants completely disassembled,
and riveting work is done by workmen operating presses and pneumatic riveting ham-
mers, the power for which is derived from Australian-built electric motors
portation. Experience everywhere is demon'
strating that “Easy progress of men and
things from place to place makes a nation
great and strong.”
The story of how national wealth and
progress are helped to fulfilment, in Australia,
may well begin with the greater prosperity
flowing through channels of industry that
lead, each in turn, to the motor car in the
making in Australia to'day.
name plate, whereas in the case of many cars
production is largely Australian.
The purchaser of a Chevrolet touring car
is really making a purchase in which 65.05%
of the amount expended remains in Australia.
The chassis and the engine, in disassembled
form, are imported, and the work of complete
assembly is carried out by Australian work'
men; the body is built in Australian Body
Building Works, tyres and tubes are Aus'


tralian, so are the Duco, the colorful paints,
the battery and numerous other components,
even to the rubber mat under the driver’s feet.
In the closed car range, many models are
upholstered in broadcloth manufactured in
Australia from Australian wool, for body
building craftsmen recognise Australian wool
as the finest wool procurable for upholstery.
A great variety of units enters into the
assembly of cars and trucks, and many phases
of industry are essential for production. Pre-
dominating is the passenger bodybuilding
industry—a flourishing employer of thousands
BUILDING MOTOR CAR BODIES—
AN EPIC OF AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY.
HOLDEN’S Motor Body Builders Ltd.,
manufacturers of passenger car bodies,
have spread their great works over 40
acres at Woodville, South Australia, where
expansion of plant and installation of new
equipment keeps pace with development.
It was during the last two months of 1917
that Holden’s laid the nucleus of their
bodybuilding business by constructing two
passenger bodies. To-day this Company
manufactures 100% of Australian passenger
Australian workmen in Assembly Plants are provided with modern tools. Illustration
shows workmen hot riveting cross members to side members of the chassis frame, which
has been received in a completely disassembled condition.
of Australians and the mighty reservoir into
which pours the aggregate output —often
totalling volume figures—of many allied and
subsidiary industries.
Development of efficient manufacturing
continues on every side, and the fruits of
painstaking precision labor are obvious more
clearly in the automotive than in any other
industry. This is clearly apparent in the
expansion of subsidiary industries.
car bodies required by General Motors in
Australia, which is 60% of the total Holden
output per annum.
It has all come about in due season. The
manufacture of motor bodies was commenced
by Holden’s Motor Body Builders with a
capital of £25,000. During the first year the
value of material used was £84,000, 45% of
which was Australian material. Progress once
having stepped on the stage, remained there,


the central figure To'day the capital of this
Australian Company is £1,174,000, and the
value of material used during 1928 was
£1,500,000, 75% of which was Australian
material.
BODY BUILDING INDUSTRY BRINGS
LARGE EXPENDITURE IN INVEST
MENT, SALARIES AND WAGES.
Holden’s have grown from a small concern
into an organisation giving employment to an
average number of 3,000 Australian work-
men, to whom an expenditure in salaries and
wages of £14,500 is made per week. (The
automobile industry records in its meteordike
progress extremely illuminating comparisons;
when the manufacture of motor bodies was
commenced, the pay roll was £SO per week!)
The wages bill in the peak period to'day when
a total of 4,300 men is employed rises as high
as £23,000 per week.
Passenger body building in Australia is
conducted on lines comparable with those of
world automobile centres, having highly skilled
supervision and labor, allied to modern
machinery. Large expenditure has been made
in machinery and equipment, 70% being of
British Empire manufacture, of which 50% is
of Australian manufacture. Holden’s Motor
Body Builders estimate that an expenditure of
£750,000 to date has been made in plant and
machinery—over and above capital investment
in land and extensive buildings which alone
have involved expenditure of £500,000.
To put into effect their huge programme
Holden’s require a mill having an area of
185,100 square feet, die and panel shops with
an area of 176,900 square feet and engineer'
ing and smiths’ shops 220,245 square feet.
Huge modern presses in this up'tO'date plant
shape the motor body panels from the sheet
steel at present brought from England and
America, but which, it may be assumed, will
eventually be rolled in Australia from iron
ore produced in Australian mines. In the
great die and panel shops with their costly
equipment simplifying the various processes
to the pitch of highest efficiency, steel, a fun'
damental of motor car body building, is de'
veloped from its condition —when brought to
the industry—of crude sheet steel, to the pre'
Chassis assembly conveyor in an Assembly Plant, showing chassis in early stages of
assembly. Assembly conveyor equipment in each Assembly Plant was built in Australia.


Assembling a Buick chassis. The chassis is on the assembly conveyor—at a position
where mudguards and running boards—previously prepared in the Plant—are
assembled.
In the Body Storage Department of an Assembly Plant. When bodies are received
from the Australian Body Builders they are carefully inspected and stored until required
for mounting to the chassis.


Materials.
Timber
Quantity.
3,000,000 super feet '
,
.
Country.
Australia
Timber - ' -
'
'
-
'
1,000,000 „ „
New Zealand
Leather -
*
'
1,200,000 square feet -
-
Australia
Duco
'
'
'
'
30,000 gallons - -
55
Thinners ' <■
-
-
*
-
25,000 „ ' '
-
55
Undercoats - - -
-
*
-
-
16,000 „ ' '
*
55
Cloth ' - - -
'
'
-
'
37,000 square yards
-
'
55
55
'
'
'
'
30,000 „
-
-
England
Castings - - - -
'
'
300 tons ' ' -
-
-
Australia
Nails
-
-
*
50 „ — *
*
-
55
Bolts - ' ' - '
-
-
'
-
1,250,000 ' - - '
-
55
Screws ' > ' -
'
*
'
200,000 gross - - -
-
55
Hood Lights - -
-
'
-
-
31,000 ' ' ' -
-
-
55
Curtain Fasteners -
'
*
'
-
3,500,000 pieces - -
-
*
55
Chipboard - - -
-
'
150 tons - ' '
-
-
Leather'Cloth, Hood
Fabrikoid
Material
and
600,000 square yards
55
Upholstery Padding
'
-
'
-
'
300 tons ' - -
-
55
Glass Products
>
'
'
-
250,000 square feet -
55
Rubber Products -
-
-
*
-
175,000 lbs. ' - *
55
Wire
-
1,000 tons - - -
Bar Steel - - -
-
-
-
-
200 „ ' —
55
Sheet Steel - - -
'
'
'
40% ' ' '
'
England
55 55 X
-
'
-
-
60% ' * -
America
Burlap ' ' ' '
-
'
'
'
330,000 square yards
England
Bow Covering - -
-
-
'
200,000 „
-
Carpets •> ■' ' -
-
-
'
40,000 „
55
Thread ' - - -
'
-
5,000 lbs. ' ' *
-
55
cision form of motor car body panels. This
process is of utmost importance, for it is par-
ticularly true that the body panels bulk large
amongst the units that make up a car, not
only helping to form the lines and shapes that
delineate style, but in the precision methods
that attend production—contributing sub-
stantially to the safety of the completed motor
car.
WIDESPREAD EXPANSION IN ALLIED
INDUSTRIES.
It is coming to be an easy matter to
enumerate industries that have, wholly or in
part, launched into operation manufacturing
Australian supplies for the bodybuilding
industry; sometimes all that has been imported
is the idea. All are concerned in a widespread
progressive movement, for Australian indus-
tries from which Holden’s Motor Body
Builders draw supplies are timber, steel and
wire, motor leather enamelling, lacquer manu-
facturing, woollen, founderies, die casting,
rubber, leather-cloth, paper, nail, screw and
bolt, curtain fastener, and hood light, uphol-
stery padding, glazing.
Extensive employment follows in due course,
and to-day the approximate number of Aus-
tralian workers in outside industries who
supply Holdens is estimated to be 1,300.
APPROXIMATE VOLUME SUPPLIES REQUIRED ANNUALLY BY HOLDEN’S


Aerial view of Holden’s Motor Body Builders, Woodville, South Australia, who
manufacture passenger car bodies, representing more than £1,000,000 per annum, for
General Motors (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
The body shop at Holden’s, showing panel assembly line. The body frame is placed
on the beginning of an assembly line, and panels, cowl, doors, etc., added in proper
sequence, until the body is completely panelled at the end of the line.


ENTERPRISE—A KEYNOTE.
Australian industries manufacturing sup-
plies required by the automotive industry are
established throughout the Commonwealth.
The picture resembles a net-work of inter-
woven threads, each thread leading from some
manufacturer or mill or factory to assembly
plant, body building plant or allied industry.
These establishments are the direct outcome of
progress, and as they move forward their
ranks open for the employment of more and
more Australians.
Duco as against the old-time paint methods is
meteoric, for whereas the Ducoing process
requires two days it previously took some ten
days to paint a car. The Australasian demand
for Duco proved so great that local manufac-
ture became essential, and the rights and for-
mulae for manufacturing Duco in Australia
were vested in this Australian concern. The
highly technical task of erecting the Duco
factories was commenced in May, 1928.
Manufacturing operations were inaugurated
within six months at Cabarita, in the group
Careful inspection prevails, as elsewhere, on Australian closed body trim lines where the trimming
is fitted into the bodies. This is in keeping with precision production methods of the industry.
A scene in the Holden Body Building W orks.
DUCO MANUFACTURE IN
AUSTRALIA.
They include Duco manufacture—a factor
of prime importance, for Duco has greatly
facilitated the growth of the motor car in-
dustry. Duco, thinner and undercoats, are
manufactured by an Australian company in
their modern factories at Cabarita, Parra-
matta River, New South Wales. Duco, which
replaced the old fashioned paint work on
motor cars, is a nitro cellulose product per-
fected in 1923 by scientists and chemists
associated with General Motors, and its use
has solved the finishing problem for motor car
manufacturers in all countries. The rise of
of Duco factories which incorporate latest
British and American ideas, represent a
capital expenditure of approximately £200,000,
and give employment to a growing Australian
personnel. The output of the factories com'
prises enamels, lacquers, undercoats, polishes,
thinners, solvents and allied products required
in the building of the Australian motor car.
Supplies of Duco required in the five As'
sembly Plants of General Motors (Australia)
Pty. Ltd. make a considerable volume. It is
estimated that within the ensuing 12 months
an expenditure of approximately £30,000 will
be made by the Company in purchase of
Australian'produced Duco and paint materials.


A portion of the Duco Filling Floor at the Duco Factories of British Australian Lead Manufac-
turers Pty. Ltd., Cabarita, N.S.W. Output comprises enamels, lacquers, undercoats, polishes, thinners,
solvents, and other products required by the automotive industry.
PROGRESS OF THE PAINT INDUSTRY.
It is the policy of General Motors to build
its plants into the economic structure of the
countries in which they are established. In
fulfilling that principle, the large volume of
supplies purchased from Australian suppliers
is so distributed as to cover as wide a range as
is consistent with economy and equality.
Large quantities of paint supplies are
drawn from Australian factories established
at Rhodes, New South Wales, where health-
ful conditions of employment are provided
for hundreds of Australians. In the well-
equipped laboratory it is the duty of a staff
of chemists to continually maintain the highest
standards of quality in the lacquers, paints,
varnishes, white lead and other products.
In the analytical laboratory, Works of Sherwin Williams Company (Australia ) Ltd., Rhodes, New
South Wales, manufacturers of paints, lacquers, varnishes, and other products required in Assembly
Plants and Body Building W orks.


HIGH GRADE UPHOLSTERY FROM
AUSTRALIAN WOOL.
These roots of industrial growth and ex-
pansion go increasingly deep into Australian
industry. Amongst new industries is the
manufacture from Australian wool of broad-
cloth which is being increasingly used for
upholstering many closed motor car bodies.
Significant of to-day’s progress is the fact that
it was only late in 1927 the experiment of
manufacturing Australian broadcloth was
begun in extensive up-to-date woollen mills
at Collingwood, Victoria. Early 1928 saw
GREATER PROSPERITY IN LEATHER
INDUSTRY.
The motor car has also increased prosperity
for the leather and subsidiary industries.
Leather required in the motor body building
industry, for upholstery purposes, is pre-
pared from Australasian hides, up-to-date
methods making it possible to produce the
various grains and colors with utmost effici-
ency. Australian bark is used in tanning, and
with the exception of a few imported colors
and chemicals, the industry is wholly Austra-
lian, giving employment to large numbers of
Australians and involving circulation of con-
Australian broadcloth for upholstery purposes is manufactured from the wool of Australian sheep
in the woollen mills of Foy Gibson Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.
the infant industry getting under way, and
now in 1929 broadcloth from the wool of
Australian sheep is entirely prepared and
manufactured in these Australian woollen
mills, which give employment to many hun-
dreds of Australians. Development of this
industry should, in a normal way, result in
further expansion and consequently increase
employment opportunities for Australians.
Manufacture of Australian broadcloth is a
new enterprise which has developed through
the building of motor car bodies in Australia.
siderable expenditure annually in salaries and
wages.
The extensive requirements of motor body
builders have helped the leather industry to
become more firmly established, enabling it to
improve its products so that leather now pro-
duced is a first-grade product supplied to the
body building industry. Leather manufac-
turers say—“ The use of leather in motor cars
has given a great impetus to the tanning busi-
ness in Australia, and indications are that this
business is likely to be increased.”


ASSEMBLY PLANTS OF GENERAL MOTORS (AUSTRALIA) PTY. LTD.
MELBOURNE PLANT
The Central Administration of the Company in Australia has Headquarters at Melbourne.
SYDNEY PLANT




BRISBANE PLANT
ADELAIDE PLANT


IMPORTANT NEW ENTERPRISE
ESTABLISHED.
By the establishment of Leathercloth Pty.
Ltd., in Victoria, to manufacture leather-
cloth— which hitherto has come from over-
seas sources —the body building industry will
draw future supplies from this new enterprise,
which in coming close to the growing Aus-
tralian market will also produce materials for
use in manufacture of curtains for open motor
car bodies and roof covering for both pas-
senger and commercial motor bodies.
SEAT SPRINGS OF LOCAL
PRODUCTION.
For use beneath the padding a Spring
Company locally manufactures thousands of
seat springs. Seat and squab springs for pas-
senger bodies are also being manufactured at
the Holden Plant at Woodville.
EVOLUTION OF THE DOOR HANDLE.
Even the door handle for the motor car
body built in Australia is the result of ex-
periments patiently pursued. The evolution
Australian leather for motor cars produced by Howe & Co., Melbourne, from local hides. Methods
of production in the leather industry are up-to-date.
A NEW MARKET FOR QUEENSLAND
COTTON.
The upholstery, whether leather or broad-
cloth, covers padding worked up by Aus-
tralian workmen from cotton produced by
white labor in Queensland. A considerable
proportion of padding required for seats and
squabs is prepared by an Australian company.
In 1926 this firm was looking for a market for
cotton Enters, which is short staple cotton.
They found it in the value of cotton products
to the automotive industry, and since 1926
quantities used have steadily increased.
of the door handle only came about after much
time spent in experimentation and hard work
carried out by an Australian firm, who also
manufacture robe and foot rails for passenger
bodies. Handles are cast in steel dies from an
alloy of which Australian sine is the main con-
stituent, and to obtain the characteristically
smooth finish, extreme care and accuracy are
essential in preserving the balance of different
metals used in this alloy.
Die casting is one of the new industries
which, through the help and encouragement
of the motor industry, is making rapid
progress.


ALL PRODUCTS CONVERGE TO
CENTRAL POINTS.
THE FINAL BASE—AN ASSEMBLY
PLANT.
As each industry that contributes towards
the building of motor cars in Australia pre-
pares and completes its products for despatch
to a central point, the various units pass
through precision manufacturing methods.
Much care is also taken in the transportation
of these units so that all shall reach their
destinations in first-class condition. The goal
may be directly or indirectly an Assembly
Plant, Motor Body Building Works, Rubber
Mills or other of the major industries prepar-
MOTOR CAR ASSEMBLY IN AUS-
TRALIA BRINGS PROSPERITY TO
THE TYRE INDUSTRY.
For use in its five Assembly Plants, General
Motors (Australia) Pty. Ltd. places orders for
volume quantities of tyres, and it is estimated
that approximately £400,000 is expended per
annum by this Company in the purchase of
Australian tyres and tubes manufactured by
the Dunlop, Barnet Glass, Perdriau and
Goodyear Rubber Companies. At frequent
intervals, large supplies of Australian-manu-
factured tyres are received into these Assembly
Plants for fitting to the chassis on the
assembly lines.
A scene at Federal Felters Pty. Ltd., Melbourne, showing padding being prepared from Australian
cotton for use in seat and squab cushions in the motor body.
ing materials and supplies required by the
parent automotive industry. In the final
analysis, however, the ultimate goal of all these
products, in whatever form fabrication and
manufacture may blend them, is a motor car
Assembly Plant where the motor car is com-
pleted—“built from the ground up”—until it
is ready to leave the plant under its own
power.
Growth and expansion, and the establish-
ment of new enterprises, characterises Aus-
tralian industries which are playing so impor-
tant a part in the successful development of
motor transportation in Australia.
The large volume of business the automotive
industry is able to place with Australian
suppliers results in impressive expenditure.
While bodies and their manufacture stand
for an epic of Australian industry, tyre
manufacture is another movement of first
importance. The visitor to any of the large
Australian tyre factories, where regular em-
ployment is given to many thousands of
Australians, would see production carried on
along methods approved in famous tyre manu-
facturing factories of England, America and
Europe. The tyre industry plays a most im-
portant part in the development of successful
motor transportation. It is a volume supplier
to the automotive industry, and by reason of
large original equipment orders, tyre manu-
facturers are able to use volume production
methods, which ultimately cheapen the cost of
tyres to replacement consumers.


Expansion, progress, and a large Australian personnel characterise the Rubber Mills
of the Dunlop Rubber Company of Australasia Ltd., Melbourne, producing tyres,
tubes, rubber floor mats, etc.
When the motor car arrived, the rubber
industry in Australia—dating back to 1870 —
commenced to forge steadily ahead. To-day it
is the factor of first magnitude in the industry.
Manufacture of motor tyres was commenced
in 1908 and by 1914 capital had increased to
£700,000 with approximately 1,750 operatives
engaged. This figure jumped to 3,700 in
1925-26 and continued on the up-grade until
in 1928 in the rubber mills of the Dunlop,
Barnet Glass and Perdriau Rubber Companies
(which have recently amalgamated) there was
a personnel of about 5,200 —exclusive of
administrative, clerical and sales staffs.
An annual expenditure of considerably
over £1,000,000 was made in 1927G928 in
salaries and wages to employees (exclusive of
high executives and proprietors) on the per'
sonnel of these three companies, whose capital
in 1928 was approximately £4,500,000. Facts
Australian operatives in the Rubber Mills of Barnet Glass Rubber Company Ltd., Melbourne,
engage in constant production of motor tyres and tubes, for here, as elsewhere, the needs of the
industry have spelt growth.
At the modern Works of Perdriau Rubber Company Ltd., Drummoyne, N.S.W., manufacture
of tyres for Australian-built motor cars proceeds on a regular schedule.


Manufacturing tyres and tubes for Australian motor cars—the Goodyear Tyre and
Rubber Company (Australia ) Ltd. has extensive works at Granville, N.S.W., where
employment is given to hundreds of Australians.
and figures of the industry are spectacular.
An approximate sterling value of output in
1927 was assessed at £6,221,000, while the
output of tyres in 1928 was double that of
1925. Property values and real estate have
substantially increased and were estimated at
approximately £1,300,000 in 1928, when large
expenditure in expansion and equipment was
made. An analysis of equipment now reveals
the arresting fact that approximately 75% of
machinery and plant has been made in Aus-
tralia.
This period of swift expansion has a most
desirable effect on the economic scale of indus-
trial Australia, an expenditure of more than
£550,000 having been made by the companies
concerned in 1928 in purchase of Australian-
produced materials, including chemical com-
pounds.
The call for tyres comes from the four
corners of the Continent, and to cover trans-
portation costs by sea, rail and road, a further
expenditure of approximately £210,000 was
made in 1928.
ANOTHER AUSTRALIAN COMPANY.
The history to date of the Goodyear Tyre
Company (Australia) Ltd. also shows the
onward march of the tyre industry. Whereas
formerly, tyres and tubes were brought to
Australia from the Canadian and United
States factories of the Goodyear Company,
local requirements are now filled from modern
rubber mills established at Granville, New
South Wales. Australian production was
actually started in November, 1927, and sub-
stantial progress has resulted in additions being
made to the mills which, when completed, will
represent six acres of floor space. The Com-
pany’s present personnel is in excess of 800
Australians, but it is estimated that, when
plans in hand—which include increased per-
sonnel —are put into operation, expenditure in
salaries and wages will be approximately
£300,000 per annum
EMPIRE TRADE FOSTERED.
Empire trade is fostered by the growth of
the tyre industry. The bulk of the rubber and
cotton used in the manufacture of tyres in
Australia is procured from Empire sources of
production, a large volume of the cotton being
grown in Egypt and that of the rubber
emanating from various British Possessions.
Here are no isolated instances of manufac-
turing progress, for Australian manufacturing
history contains many records of such progress
peculiar to the motor industry.


AUSTRALIAN-BUILT BATTERIES
DEVELOPMENT IS STORY OF EN-
COURAGEMENT BY AUTOMOTIVE
INDUSTRY.
A clear example is that of battery manu-
facture in Australia, for battery manufacture
is now a thriving and responsible local
industry. Less than two years ago batteries
were imported. To-day two-thirds of the
batteries used on General Motors products
are Australian—to-morrow it is believed the
figure will be greater, in turn growing greater.
Measured by any standards, this is advance-
ment to new economic levels in the industry.
The ability of the battery manufacturers to
produce, and the desire of the automotive
industry to helpfully co-operate in develop-
ment, were the major factors in building up
the battery business.
Early in 1927, General Motors (Australia)
Pty. Ltd. commenced to experiment with
Australian batteries to determine upon a
battery of 100% efficiency. In Australian
Universities, and in New York, batteries were
submitted to exacting tests involving consider-
able expenditure. These tests, conducted over
a long period, resulted in an Australian
battery being proved thoroughly efficient.
Straightway, large orders were placed for
Australian-made batteries manufactured from
lead produced right at hand, for the
manufacturers are at the fountain head of the
world’s supply for the main base of the
electric storage battery—pure Broken Hill
lead.
All original wealth may come “from the
soil,” but successful battery manufacture in
Australia is largely the outcome of encourage-
ment by the automotive industry.
A conservative estimate of expenditure
made in purchase of Australian batteries by
General Motors (Australia) Pty. Ltd. approxi-
mates £30,000 per annum.
Australia is also a source of other raw
materials of first importance to automotive
manufacture. Copper and sine (the main
constituents of essential parts bushings,
bronse castings of many different kinds, car
hardware, etc.) are basic Australian materials.
An era of development on all sides has
meant that many manufacturers of a mech-
anical and inventive turn of mind have
commenced to manufacture essentials that
Assembling Australian Batteries in the factory of Chloride Electrical Storage Company Ltd.,
Sydney, who manufacture many thousands of batteries annually for General Motors (Australia)
Pty. Ltd.


enter into the production of motor cars in
Australia. On factory floors throughout
Australia are being produced hardware,
bumper bar equipment, steel tool boxes,
switches, windshield wipers, rubber pads,
door handles, kick plates, number plates, step
pads, aluminium fittings, car fasteners, name
plates, screws, nuts, bolts, washers of many
kinds, rubber strips, leather straps, rubber
mats, tyre covers, and numerous other items,
the purchase of which in volume quantities by
the Australian Company producing motor
cars results in substantial expenditure per
annum for each item concerned.
COMMERCIAL BODIES ARE BUILT
IN AUSTRALIA.
The smaller, just as the larger, organisation
is expanding, and the motor era develops along
commercial, as well as passenger, transporta-
tion lines. In the one case, as the other, the
ideal combination is Australian materials and
Australian labor.
In timber mills of Tasmania and the
mainland, timber—one of the most important
raw materials in quality body construction—
for both passenger car and commercial body
building is milled, and later worked up in
woodworking factories. Whether at modern
passenger body-building works, or in manu-
facture of commercial bodies, only the finest
timber is used, first being subjected to rigid
tests as regards grain, percentage of moisture,
weight, etc. In all body building no rule of
thumb is tolerated, but parts are fitted
together in jigs rendering body structure ab-
solutely accurate. Here, as elsewhere in a
specialised programme, the needs of the
industry spell growth. The purchase of wood
parts required for manufacture of General
Motors’ commercial vehicle bodies represents
an approximate expenditure of £35,000 per
annum.
Let us consider another phase of industry—
the casting, stamping and forging in Aus-
tralia of hundreds of thousands of different
kinds of iron work. The many thousands of
metal panels, required in construction of these
commercial bodies, are fabricated by Aus-
tralian metal-working firms, and in turn the
Company estimates that an annual expenditure
of approximately £20,000 is being made in
metal parts and £16,000 in sheet metal panel
parts. Old-established firms in Melbourne and
Sydney enter the picture as suppliers. In
malleable castings manufacture, too, Australian
factories are producing and supplying products
equal to the imported article.
The bolt and nut and screw industries
carry on the story of growth. In the giant
bridge now being thrown over Sydney Harbor
the bolts and nuts used are products of
Bolt manufacturing scene in the Melbourne works of McPherson's Pty. Ltd., suppliers of volume
quantities of bolts and nuts for motor body building in Australia.


A section of the Screw Mill—Nettlefolds Pty. Ltd., Melbourne, who manufacture annually tens
of thousands of gross of wood screws, metal threads, rivets, cotter pins, etc., required by the
automotive industry.
an Australian company, who are volume sup-
pliers to the automotive industry.
Empire traditions are maintained in many
phases of the industry. An Australian firm,
who at their modern Melbourne works turn
out millions of high-grade screws, commenced
their Australian operations in January, 1925,
curiously enough 99 years after the original
company made its first screws in an old mill
at Sunbury-on-Thames, England. The Aus-
tralian company has a modern plant for the
production of wood screws, metal threads,
rivets, cotter pins, tens of thousands of gross
of which are required by the motor industry,
this company estimating that approximately
50% of its total annual output is thus ab-
sorbed. Strengthening factors of inter-Empire
trade are the facts that 99% of the plant and
machinery is British, and all material and labor
required to turn out the finished article is
Australian and English.
REPLACEMENT PARTS INDUSTRY
AND ACCESSORY AND EQUIPMENT
MANUFACTURE.
A feature of the motor industry is the rise
of the progressive manufacturer to the top,
as inevitably as a cork in water. Whether he
is concerned with body building, tyre mami-
facture or any other of the hundred and one
components Australia requires to build a
motor car, he has necessarily the qualities that
succeed. He may be a replacement parts
manufacturer. Well and good. In this field,
too, every effort has been, and is being, made
to locate satisfactory sources of supply of
replacement parts. This applies also to de-
velopment of accessory and equipment manu-
ture, which in turn is absorbing Australian
products. Although this particular phase of
the industry is only at the beginning, many
smaller companies are being given an oppor-
tunity, through volume supply, to use volume


Where Australian replacement gears are made. One bay of the shop in the establishment of
John Sonnerdale & Son, Sydney, gear manufacturers, showing some of the up-to-date machinery.
production methods, and thus reduce their cost
to a minimum, at the same time retaining
quality of product. There is the story of
replacement gears, of which General Motors
(Australia) Pty. Ltd. purchased over 10,000
in 1928. These gears are manufactured in
Sydney from British high-quality alloy steel.
Orders have been placed for tens of
thousands of bushings from Australian firms,
who for years have been pioneering along the
right lines, and are now established as sup-
pliers to the automotive industry.
Laminated chassis springs are bought from
spring makers in Brisbane, Sydney, and Mel-
bourne; coil springs of different types from
Sydney and Melbourne suppliers; and thou-
sands of felt washers from other suppliers.
Bright steel finished bolts manufactured from
S.A.E. standard steel are made in Australia,
the factory of manufacturers in Sydney
supplying large quantities of these items sold
by General Motors’ dealers in all States. Ap-
proximately 100 machines of automatic and
semi-automatic design in the works of these
suppliers continually engage on volume pro-
duction lines in manufacture of bright bolts,
nuts, set screws, studs, motor replacement
parts, and all classes of repetition work in steel
and brass. Small metal stampings of different
kinds, service tools and a host of miscellaneous
items are purchased from Australian manufac-
turers. Replacement part items required each
month from local factories include tyre
covers, steel shafts, rim nuts, switches, hub
caps, steel pins, steel ball sockets and seats,
push rods, steel sleeves, gaskets, valve springs,
etc. Even many tools for servicing cars are
now manufactured in Australia, replacing
those previously imported.
To keep abreast of developments in the
industry Australian companies study all trends
of trade and embody them in manufacturing
practice. This policy, in application to acces
series and equipment, results in very few
accessories being imported. One concern, for
example, supplies thousands of sets of bumper


bar equipment per annum for the operations
of General Motors in Australia and New
Zealand.
Manufacturing scenes of this kind are
essential in the building of the motor car in
Australia, and they provide a striking
example of what can be accomplished by the
Australian manufacturer and the Australian
craftsman.
THE POLICY OF A LOCAL PURCHASE
PROGRAMME.
Numerous other items, which it is believed
can be successfully and economically produced
in Australia, are listed for investigation by
General Motors (Australia) Pty. Ltd. The
Company will continue the policy of extend'
ing its local purchase programme to include
all products proven satisfactory, in this way
continuing to add to the Australian content
of General Motors’ cars and trucks, which
every day are en route in Australia to some
destination in the Commonwealth.
By increasing the Australian content of its
products and enlarging the scope of local pur'
chasing along economic lines the Company is
helping to develop the secondary industries of
the Commonwealth.
TRANSPORTATION OF PRODUCTS.
LARGE EXPENDITURE MADE TO
AUSTRALIAN AND BRITISH
INTERESTS.
It may be passenger bodies or commercial
bodies, or completed cars and trucks on road
or rail or steamship going somewhere to supply
that individual transportation which is AuS'
tralia’s need. Even little'dreamed'of factors
enter into the great programme of national
development multiplication of the motor car
represents. Heavy expenditure in transpor'
tation and attendant charges, which benefit
both Australian Railways and Steamship
Companies, is made by General Motors
(Australia) Pty. Ltd., who, in 1928, ex'
pended approximately £197,000 to cover com'
plete transportation costs affecting its products
within the Commonwealth. Very important,
too, is the amount of money disbursed to
British shipping interests for ocean transpor'
tation. It is estimated that, in 1928, the
expenditure in freight charges on materials
shipped to General Motors (Australia) Pty
Ltd. in vessels owned by British interests
represented the amount of £91,247/12/9 —
equivalent to approximately 90% of all its
annual ocean transportation.
Up-to-date plant is required in Australian production, by Storey Bros. Ltd., Sydney
of bumper bar equipment and other products.


AUSTRALIAN-MADE MACHINERY
AND EQUIPMENT STANDARDISED
FOR USE IN ASSEMBLY PLANTS
These figures and facts reveal, to a great
extent, the unity of interests involved in the
automotive industry, and in the efficient func'
tioning of Assembly Plants. A programme of
expansion has recently been put into effect
in these Assembly Plants and additional
Australian machinery and equipment installed.
This is in keeping with the policy of General
Motors (Australia) Pty. Ltd., for in the
initial equipment of the plants, machinery and
equipment purchased included:—Australian'
made lathes, electric motors, electric cranes,
furnaces, steel lockers, trucks, woodworking
machinery, bench equipment, office equip'
ment, hot water heating equipment, fire proof
safes, etc., which were standardised for use in
each of the plants. The further equipping
and enlarging of plants result in an additional
expenditure of approximately £70,000, the
bulk of which will go to local industry.
Additional Australian'made equipment, in'
stalled during the past few months, includes
steam boilers, steam ovens, water heating units,
oil and water tanks, gas furnaces, pressure
gauges, grinding and polishing machinery,
conveyor equipment, fans and blowers, electric
motors, wood and steel trucking equipment
and other appliances fabricated in Australia.
With this programme of motor car assembly,
major operations are performed in Assembly
Plants, by Australian workmen, which pre'
viously were put into effect before the chassis
arrived in Australia.
The policy of the Company towards Aus-
tralian manufacturers and suppliers is thus
made clear. During 1929 it is hoped to in'
crease the volume of Australian supplies and
materials required, so that purchases made in
Australia may be continually added to, and
expenditure in Australia increased.
All over the world, General Motors is
putting into everyday practice this policy of
support for local industry. It is investing
greater sums in the various operations to
handle increasing business, give more employ'
ment to local labor and increase the volume of
materials purchased in each country. At the
same time, trade and trading relationships are
being expanded in such a manner that the ultb
mate consumer —the purchaser of a General
Motors car or truck—may enjoy efficient and
economical motor transport for all purposes.
Thus we recognise a fact and not a theory—
Australia does build a motor car.
Australian-built Motor Cars ready for the road.


General Motors (Australia) Pty,. Ltd. is thus contributing daily, by reason of its requirements,
to the expansion of Australian industry. During 1929 it is hoped to increase the volume of
Australian supplies and materials required, so that purchases may be added to and expenditure
increased.


Manufacturers and Suppliers of Australian-made Machinery and Equipment in the
five Assembly Plants of General Motors (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
Atherton, A. E., Melbourne. —Sheet metal work.
Bodington, R., Melbourne. — Machines, steel and
iron unloading trucks, steel runways for plat-
forms, Duco spray booths, dip tanks, tyre burn-
ishing machines (electrically driven).
Babcock SC Wilcox, Sydney.—Oil-fired boilers.
Bevan SC Edwards, Melbourne.- —Drilling machines,
shaping machines, power hack saws, grindmg
machinery, planing machinery.
Britons Ltd., Sydney. —Duco spray booth equip-
ment.
Chubb SC Co. (Australia) Ltd., Sydney.—Fire-
proof safes.
Crossle, Scott SC Duff, Melbourne. —Oven equip-
ment, conveyors, reduction gearing.
Dawn Manufacturing Co., Melbourne. —Vice equip-
ment.
Engineering Products Pty. Ltd., Melbourne. —In-
fusorial earth for insulating purposes.
Forward, Down Sc Co., Adelaide. —Fuel oil tanks.
Flood, James, Pty. Ltd,, Melbourne. —Material
trucks, handling equipment, body building jigs.
Gregory Steel Products Ltd., Melbourne. —Wrench
and other tool equipment.
Gibson, Battle Pty. Ltd., Melbourne and Sydney.—
Assembly line conveyor equipment.
Gardner, Waern SC Co. Pty. Ltd., Melbourne. —
Steam coils.
Garfield, Andrews SC Co., Sydney.—Air cylinder
hoists.
Gardner SC Naylor Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.
Califoriers.
Hardware Co. of Australia, Melbourne. Black-
smiths’ tools.
Ludowici, J., Sc Sons Ltd., Sydney.—Belting, etc.
Malcolm Moore Pty. Ltd., Melbourne. Electric
cranes.
Malley’s Ltd., Sydney.—Sheet metal work.
McPherson’s Pty. Ltd., Melbourne. —Lathes, wood
and iron working machinery.
McAuley Bros. Pty. Ltd., Melbourne. —Steam heat-
ing coils, steam pipe lines, lead-lined dip tanks.
Oxygen Supply Co. —Oxygen.
Parkinson (Australia) Ltd., Sydney.-—Electric
motors.
Russell SC Russell, Melbourne. —Pressure gauges.
Richardson SC Co., Melbourne. —Exhaust fans and
blowers.
Tiger Steel Sc Welding Co., Melbourne.— Steel
doors and Duco spray booths.
Vincent, George SC Co., Sydney.—Exhaust fans
and blowers.
Walls, J. R., Sydney.—Fuel storage tanks.
Webster, A. R., Melbourne. —Gas furnaces and
heating equipment, and solder dip pots (gas
fired).
Wolfenden Bros. Pty, Ltd., Melbourne. — Australian
wood sawing machinery of different kinds.
Waters Manufacturing Co., Melbourne. —Conveyor
equipment.
Wormald Bros. Ltd., Melbourne and Sydney.—
Sprinkler installations and metal lockers.
Wagner Bros., Melbourne. —Ball-bearing polishing
machinery.
Welling Sc Crossley, Melbourne. —Mixing machines.
Machinery and Equipment purchased through Australian suppliers.
Australian General Electric Company, Melbourne.
—Electric lighting equipment.
Buzacott SC Co., Sydney.—Electrically'driven fuel
oil pumps.
Downer, George, Melbourne. —Fire-fighting equip-
ment.
Gregory, H. V., Sydney. — Reducing valves.
Harding Sc Halden, Sydney. — Blue-print machines.
Mair, Alexander, Sc Co., Melbourne. —Tool-shop
equipment.
Pizzey Machine Company, Sydney. Sewing
machines.
Peabody, H. W., Sydney.—Air drills.
Stott Sc Hoare, Melbourne. —Typewriters.
Eliza Tinsley Pty. Ltd., Melbourne. Platform
trucks.
Vial, Frank, SC Sons, Melbourne. —Metabdrilling
machines.
Warburton, Franki, Melbourne. —Electric drills.
Wilson-Reid, W., Melbourne. —Recording ther-
mometers for ovens.
Australian Manufacturers and Suppliers of Materials and Supplies used in Assembly
Operations in the Assembly Plants of General Motors (Australia) Pty. Ltd., and for
equipment and replacement part purposes.
Adverts Pty. Ltd. - Melbourne
Alloy Castings Company -
Australian Metal Equipment Co.
Australian Motor Panel SC Guard
Manufacturing Co. Pty. Ltd. - ' „
Australian Paper SC Pulp Co. - - „
Alpha Engineering Co. - - ' Sydney
Atlantic Union Oil Co. Ltd. ' ' ~
Adelaide Motor Metal Works - - Adelaide
Australian United Paint Co. - ' »
Atkins (W.A.) Ltd. - Perth
Atlas Engineering Works - Fremantle


Barnet Glass Rubber Co. Ltd.
British Australian Lead Manufac-
turers Sydney
Brogan 8C Tracey - - - - ~
Berger, Lewis, & Sons - - - Adelaide
Bateman, J. & W., Ltd. - - - Perth
Bateman, M. J., Ltd. - - - ' „
Boltons Ltd.
Cooke, S., Pty. Ltd. - Melbourne
Chloride Electrical Storage Co. - - Sydney
Commonwealth Oxygen & Acces-
sories Ltd.
Carr Fastener Co. of Australia Ltd. - Adelaide
Clarkson Ltd.
Colton, Palmer & Preston Ltd. - ' „
Cornell Ltd.
Dunlop Rubber Co. of Australasia Ltd.
Die Casters Pty. Ltd. - - - Melbourne
Doyle Bros. Sydney
Duly & Hansford - - - ' „
De Luxe Motor Bodies Ltd. - - Brisbane
E. Ltd.
Exton, R. S., Ltd.
Flood, James, Pty. Ltd. - - - Melbourne
F. Ideal Spring Co. - - - Sydney
Finlay, R. M. - - - - - Brisbane
Faulding, F. H., & Co. - ' ' Adelaide
Goodyear Tyre 8C Rubber Co. Aus-
tralia Ltd.
Henderson’s Federal Spring Works
Pty. Ltd. - Melbourne
Howe 8C Co. Pty. Ltd. - ' - „
Hope, Charles, Ltd. - Brisbane
Holden’s Motor Body Builders Ltd. - Adelaide
Harris, Scarfe Ltd. - - - ' „
Harris, Scarfe 8C Sandovers - - Perth
Industrial Engineeers - Adelaide
Joyce, A., & Co. - Melbourne
Leathercloth Pty. Ltd. - - - Melbourne
Lloyds Timber Mills ' Adelaide
Mackie, A. H. - - - - - Melbourne
Moore, James, 8C Sons Pty. Ltd. - - „
McPhersons Pty. Ltd. - - - Melbourne
Malleable Castings Ltd. „
Miller, John H,, Ltd. ' ' ' „
Muller, F. ' - - - » - „
Motor Parts Ltd. - - - - ~
Motor Supplies Ltd. - Brisbane
McCallum Ltd. - Adelaide
Motor Specialties
Motor Vehicles Ltd. - Perth
Nilsen, Cromie Pty. Ltd. - - - Melbourne
Nettlefolds Pty. Ltd. - ' - - „
Nutting & Young - - - - „
O’Donnell, W.
Olding, G. H., 8C Sons Ltd. - - Sydney
Perdriau Rubber Co. Ltd.
Purvis Glover Engineering Co. - - Melbourne
Phoenix Motors - - - - „
Peters, A. H., 8C Co. - Sydney
Pioneer Spring Co. Ltd. - - - „
Rhodes, W. 8C T., Ltd. - - - Adelaide
Shell Company of Australia Ltd.
Stokes 8c Sons Pty. Ltd. - - - Melbourne
Scott, James - Sydney
Sherwin Williams Ltd. - - » „
Sonnerdale Ltd. ' ' ' ' „
Storey Bros. Ltd. ' ' ' ' „
Texas Company Australasia Ltd.
Taubmans Ltd. - Sydney
Thompson & Harvey Ltd. - - Adelaide
Todd, J., 8C Sons ' ' ' ' „
United Engineeering & Malleable
Castings Melbourne
Unbehaun & Johnstone Ltd. - - Adelaide
Vacuum Oil Co. Ltd.
Vale, Arthur, & Co. - Melbourne
Wakefield, C. C., & Co. Ltd.
Westcott, Hazell, 8C Co. Ltd. - - Sydney
Whale, R. W., Ltd. - „
While, J., & Sons ' ' ' ' „
Zwar Bros. Pty. Ltd. - - •> Melbourne
Australian Companies from whom Holden’s Motor Body Builders Ltd., who build
all passenger bodies required by General Motors in Australia, draw a large volume of
their Australian supplies.
Australian Paper Manufacturers Ltd., Melbourne.—
Ragboard.
Broken Hill Pty. Ltd., Newcastle.—Steel bar.
Die Casters Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.—Door handles.
Carr Fastener Co. of Australia Ltd., Adelaide.—
Fasteners.
W, Fieldgate, Sydney.—Hoodlights.
Foy & Gibsons Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.-—Upholstery
cloths.
T. G. Cover, Sydney.—Rug rails, tassels, and rope
pulls.
British Australian Lead Manufacturers Pty. Ltd.,
Sydney.—Duco.
Leathercloth Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.—Fabrikoid.
Howe & Co. Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.—Leather.
Holder Stroud Ltd., Sydney.—Cowl lamps.
Lloyd Reed Loom Co., Sydney.—Piping cord.
Nettlefolds Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.—Screws.
Rol-Felt Mfg. Co., Melbourne.—Paddings.
Rylands Bros. Ltd., Newcastle.—Wire.
W. K. Thomson, Adelaide.—Paddings.
Arthur Vale 8C Co., Melbourne.—Paddings.
Whiteloid Products Ltd., Sydney.—Duco polish.


WHAT GENERAL MOTORS (AUS-
TRALIA) PTY. LTD. MEANS TO
AUSTRALIA.
GENERAL MOTORS (Australia) Pty.
Ltd. has made a total expenditure ex-
ceeding ten million pounds in Australia
since the Company was established on Ist
November, 1926.
An expenditure of approximately two mil-
lion pounds is made annually in purchase of
raw materials and manufactured products
from Australian manufacturers and suppliers.
An investment of approximately four hun-
dred thousand pounds has been made in real
estate, plant and equipment in the establish-
ment of five Assembly Plants.
The average number of Australians on the
personnel is 2,041, to whom salaries and wages
amounting to approximately six hundred
thousand pounds are paid annually
The Australian personnel in 1928 increased
12.8% over the figures for 1927.


