

THE SPREAD OF PRINTING
EASTERN HEMISPHERE
Australia


THE SPREAD OF PRINTING
A history of printing outside Europe in monographs
EDITED BY COLIN CLAIR
After printing with movable type was invented in Central
Europe about the middle of the fifteenth century, the craft
began to spread over the world almost at once, though it ar-
rived in some areas much earlier than in others. This series
aims to give a concise history of early printing in all parts of
the world outside Continental Europe and Great Britain.
Each monograph is written by a specialist on the subject and
covers one specific area. The series will be complete in ap-
proximately twenty monographs, equally divided between
countries of the Western and the Eastern Hemispheres.
The monographs in the series appear uniform with tins
volume, in Crown 4 0 size, fully illustrated, sewn in paper
covers. As the bulk of the text and the amount of illustration
vary considerably from volume to volume, monographs are
divided into three classes and priced accordingly. The
volumes of the series may be bought separately at the full
prices or by subscription at the reduced prices given below.
Subscriptions may be taken any time, but subscribers are
under the obligation of buying all volumes published and to
appear. The series is scheduled to be complete in 1971.
Prices in Dutch guilders (/). Separate Subscription
Single volumes (up to 100 pp.) f 35.- /30.-
Double volumes (100-200 pp.) f6s~ f 54-~
Triple volumes (over 200 pp.) /90.- /76.-
MONOGRAPHS TO BE PUBLISHED IN 1969
Cohn Clair, Malta single volume
Benedikt S. Benedikz, Iceland single volume
Auguste Toussaint, Mauritius, Reunion,
Madagascar, and the Seychelles single volume
Fiona Macmillan, New Zealand single volume
Dennis E. Rhodes, India, Pakistan, Burma,
Ceylon, and Thailand single volume
H. J. de Graaf, Indonesia single volume
D. H. Borchardt, Australia single volume
Knud Oldendow, Greenland single volume
Anna H. Smith, South Africa double volume
MONOGRAPHS IN PREPARATION
Bradford F. Swan, Caribbean Area and West
Indies single volume
James M. Wells, United States of America triple volume
H. Pearson Gundy, Canada double volume
Colin Clair, Missionary Printing in the Far East single volume
The series is being continued
See also back flap Single volume


THE SPREAD OF PRINTING
EDITED BY COLIN CLAIR
AUSTRALIA




THE SPREAD OF PRINTING
EASTERN HEMISPHERE
Australia
1969
AMSTERDAM: VANGENDT & CO
LONDON: ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL
NEW YORK: ABNER SCHRAM
by
D. H. BORCHARDT


© ig6g A. L. van Gendt & Co, Amsterdam
This book or parts thereof must not be reproduced in any form by print, photoprint, microfilm, or any other means
without previous permission in writing from the publishers.
Commonwealth of Nations
ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL LTD LONDON
SBN 7100-6476-4
North America
ABNER SCHRAM (SCHRAM ENTERPRISES LTD) NEW YORK
SBN 8390-0024-3
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 76-78404
Set in Monotype Bembo Series 270
Koninklijke Drukkerij G. J. Thieme, Nijmegen
Printed in the Netherlands


Acknowledgements
The author is indebted to his colleagues G. D. Richardson, Principal Librarian, Pub-
lic Library of New South Wales, and Miss P. Reynolds, Librarian, LaTrobe Library,
State Library of Victoria, and to bis friend Professor D. Pike, for advice.




Contents
Acknowledgements 5
Introduction 11
The first Australian Printer 13
George Howe 16
A second press set up 20
Tasmania 27
Victoria 3 1
South Australia 32
Western Australia and Queensland 34
Supplies 3 8
Bibliography 45


Sketch map of Australia
Scale i: 15,625,000
1 cm = 156.25 km; 1 inch = c. 245 miles
Approximate areas
km 2
sq.miles
Victoria
227,700
87,900
New South Wales
804,700
310,700
Queensland
1,731,400
668,500
South Australia
1,052,600
406,400
Northern Territory
1,288,000
497,300
Western Australia
2,527,600
975,900
Tasmania
67,850
26,200
Commonwealth
7,699,850
2,972,900






Introduction
The invention of printing with movable type has been generally considered one
of the great blessings of mankind. Its early development was due to a number of
social and economic factors and to advances in industrial techniques which direct-
ly and sometimes indirectly enabled the printer’s craft to attain a degree of public
support not again accorded a technological change until the heyday of the Indus-
trial Revolution. The use of the printing press has never ceased to increase,
and each of its many improvements has enabled successive generations to print
more words more quickly on more paper. Yet the first years of Australian print-
ing history here surveyed took place at about the same time as the first revolu-
tionary change in printing technique since 1450 —the introduction of the cylinder
press.
The changes in the social and political life of Europe which occurred during the
last quarter of the eighteenth century necessarily also affected the European colonies
which were then being established. Though the voices of Australia’s earliest political
journalists are all too often heard as the cries of rebels and convicts against civil and
military authorities, the sonorous appeals ofj. P. Fawkner differed little from those
which advocated revolution in England and Europe.
Since the beginning of printing history there has existed a constant and inextri-
cable nexus between publishing and printing but it seems to me unnecessary always
to deal with these quite distinct activities in the same breath. I have therefore limited
myself to a description of the establishment of the industry in Australia. Several ac-
counts have already been written of early printing in Australia, most of them deal-
ing with one or another protagonist of the craft. Most of the following brief history
is therefore based on secondary sources but I have tried to bring many diverging
views together and have consulted archival sources where there was any doubt. If


Australia had not been conceived as a penal colony but as a haven for free settlers
whose minimum admission requirement would have been a pass in the university
entrance examinations, there would have been no problem in establishing printing
presses at a rate of so many per thousand inhabitants. As it was, Howe’s contribution
to Australian civilization and culture is not that he successfully overcame real tech-
nical problems but that he overcame minor technical hurdles in the face of strong
social disapproval, both in England and in the colony.
The social structure of early colonial New South Wales was strongly paternalis-
tic. Once the Governor himself supported the development of printing, the
road to further development of the industry was wide open. In fact, printing was
introduced by proconsular decree and example, and if the raw material available
for the process was inadequate it was so because social pressures in England did
not favour the supply of better materials or of free settlers trained in the craft of
printing.
To the colonists of 1790-1820, ‘communication’ meant in the first place the reg-
ular supply of food and implements with which to create more food, but it also
came to imply even then the propagation of news and the relaying of information
from the mother country. Caught as they were between unconscious and conscious
needs to develop and show independence, and the inevitable dependence on mother-
child ties, the communication of news became for them early an important stimulus
for the establishment of printing presses. It is therefore quite natural that the be-
ginnings of printing are linked with the publication of news sheets and other serials,
used for the dissemination of information. Journalism was the handmaiden to the
growth of early printing in all Australian colonies.


The First Australian Printer
It is impossible to present an account of the beginnings of printing history in Austra-
lia without quoting the following passage from David Collins: ‘A small printing-
press, which had been brought into the settlement by Mr. Phillip, and had remained
from that time unemployed, was now found very useful; a very decent young man,
one George Hughes, of some abilities in the printing line, having been found equal
to conducting the whole business of the press. All orders were now printed, and a
number thrown off sufficient to ensure a more general publication of them than had
hitherto been accomplished.’ 1
This unassuming statement is the only reference to the establishment of an in-
dustry at the end of the eighteenth century in what was then the ‘other end of the
earth’. By 1965 this same industry provided employment for over 21,000 skilled
persons, 2 or 0.56% in the total work force of that year.
Collins was personally interested in the use of the press for more efficient com-
munication and his own contribution to the establishment of printing in Australia
will be mentioned later on. His comment that the press ‘had remained from that
time unemployed’ is interesting because it allows us to conclude that there were no
printers among the convicts and few settlers who had come to Australia before 1795.
Those who are engaged in the craft today will of course also be thankful that the
first person to follow this calling in Australia was ‘a very decent young man’—as
the father of so important a craft should be. George Hughes had other abilities be-
sides his knowledge of printing and his name appears as an actor on some broad-
[. Collins, David, An Account of the English Colony in New South Woles. .. London, T. Caddell and W.
Davies, 1798 (p. 435).
2. National Conference on Employment and Technological Change in the Printing Industry, May
1966. Employment and Technological Change in the Printing Industry; Report of the National Conference
...[Canberra], Department of Labour and National Service, 1966 (p. 4).


sides probably printed by himself. The biographical note in the Australian Dic-
tionary of Biography 1 contains no information about his origins, or the dates and
places of his birth and death. His arrival in Australia is not even marked by inclusion
on a passenger list of the ships known to have come to Sydney in the relevant years
and for all we know he may have been a convict, a soldier, a sailor, or perhaps one
of the few free settlers that arrived in Australia during the colony’s first years. There
is no evidence that he had ever been apprenticed to the printing trade and the first
fruit of his venture as a printer looks indeed a rather amateurish effort.
Among the first documents printed in Australia at the command of Governor
Hunter, is an official notice spelling out ‘lnstructions to the watchmen of the town
divisions’. Dated 18 November, 1796, about 350 years after printing with movable
type was developed in Europe, its aesthetic quality leaves much to be desired.
(Plate i). 2
Perhaps we should not expect this specimen of early Australian printing to have
been more competently produced. The old wooden screw press which had been
set up in a room at Government House, Sydney, had been lying idle since it
arrived on board the First Fleet. Most likely it had been old before it was ‘sent for
use in the Colonies’, a discard from one of the London or provincial printers. There
is no record of the date when type founts, ink, and suitable paper arrived in the Col-
ony but it must be assumed that some of these essential items had come together
with or soon after the wooden press was landed. Sometime in 1795-1796 Hughes
began experimenting with the material at his disposal 3 and in the absence of suitable
proof of his having received training as a printer, we may assume that he was prob-
ably self-taught. The quality of his work is certainly considerably inferior to that of
trained printers of his time.
Besides the above-mentioned ‘lnstructions’ Hughes printed a small number of
the Governor’s orders and some playbills but none bear his name as a printer. It
seems that he went back to England sometime after March 1800 —when his name
last appeared on a playbill as a performer —leaving no record of his movements.
1. Australian Dictionary of Biography. Melbourne, Melbourne University Press, 1966 (Vol. 1: 562).
2. In this connexion it is interesting to note some contradiction in Ferguson’s account of Australian
incunabula. In his book The Howes and their press Ferguson refers on page 18 to a playbill dated July
23, 1796 but in his Bibliography of Australia he makes no reference to that particular playbill.
3. Historical Records of Australia. Sydney, Library Committee of the Commonwealth Parliament,
1914-25 (Section 1, Vol. 2: 555, 744).


Whatever criticism posterity may have levelled at Governor Hunter, it was under
his patronage and in his own residence that the first documents were printed on this
Continent. From then until October 1801 there is no evidence of anyone having
made use of the old press and its sorry collection of type. However, on 9 October,
1801, Governor King issued the following important notice: ‘A printed abridge-
ment of certain General Orders from the 28th September, 1800, to the Bth October,
1801, are distributed for the purpose of reminding the inhabitants at large of those
ordinances, which are to be placed in some conspicuous part of the houses of such
as they are sent to.’ 1 No copy of this collection of General Orders appears to have
survived but there can be no doubt that this was the first book-like publication pro-
duced in Australia. If this was not a book in the generally accepted sense of the term
it was certainly a reprint of General Orders more or less in broadside form and sewn
or stuck together like a pamphlet. We don’t know the craftsman who reprinted
these Orders but it is possible that it was the first larger effort of George Howe, who
is usually referred to as the father of printing and most appropriately of journalism
in Australia.
t. Historical Records of New South Wales. Sydney, Government Printer, 1892-1901 (Vol. 4: 590).


Georoe Howe
However little we may know of Australia’s first printer, we know quite a lot of
George Howe who succeeded Hughes as printer for the Colonial Administration.
Howe 1 was born in 1769 in St. Christopher in the West Indies where his father,
Thomas Howe, worked as a printer. George learned the rudiments of the craft in
his father’s house where he also received a thorough education along classical lines
as was the custom in the eighteenth century. To further his education and craftsman-
ship he went to London in 1790 and worked on a number of newspapers, including
The Times, both as a printer and as an editor. He was sentenced to death for shop-
lifting in 1799, but this was commuted to transportation for life and in November
1800, Howe arrived in the Royal Admiral He had been granted permission to take
his wife and son with him but his wife died on the voyage.
Soon after his arrival, Howe was called to take charge of the printing press aban-
doned by George Hughes. He quickly proved his ability and though he had only a
very limited range of type and small quantities of paper and ink at his disposal he
impressed the Governor sufficiently to he granted a conditional pardon within three
years of his arrival. During these first few years Howe was mainly engaged in the
printing of Government Orders and was soon referred to as the Government Print-
er, the first of this important group of public servants in Australia. In 1802 he print-
ed and issued as the first Australian book a cumulation of official notices, instruc-
tions, and regulations for the control of life in the convict colony, under the title,
New South Wales General Standing Orders. Its imprint was ‘Sydney, printed at
Government Press, 1802’.
In his effusive reference to George Howe, Timperley stresses that Governor King
had a full appreciation of ‘the salutary effects which the Press, wisely conducted,
i. Australian Dictionary of Biography. Melbourne, 1966 (Vol. 1: 557-9).
Plate 1. ‘lnstructions to the Watchmen of the Town Divisions’
printed by George Hughes on the first press brought to Sydney.
(Original in the Mitchell Library, Sydney.)


| INSTRUCTIONS to the WATCHMEN of the TOWN DIVISIONS. j
THE Watchmen are to apprehend *ll Night Walken an! all Difo'rddrly and Sufpiciott*, J
Pv*rf»i»*, an I to detain them till they are examined by the Sitting Magiftrate. * --JM
[, They are to interrogate all who are fonnl lifing about in their Diviiion not being
1 th rreof, *nd caufe them to give an account of|hemfclves. If they call themfelvca Free PcopleffJ
an i oi? the Store, they are to produce if they are People travelling front pi
r Pirramuta, the flawkefb iry or any other diftwit place to Sydney, they are to produce thcif \ I
JPallporsS‘or Leave from the perfons authf)rife| togive them ■'* * D
k - Grot le mens Sgryjiitp PaiEr* fron^heir
wlHie"WatcWm ?n will to for in themlelves of all Strangers who may Pome lo refide Within their !
Dsvifioa and report‘them at the end of the Week to the Civil Magiltrate. They will be par- j
ticularly careful to fecure and bring befdre the Magiftrates all Gametteri and Drunkards, and 1
t 40enforce in their refpe£tive Divifions a due reference for the Sabbath Day, and not to permit |
f aoy to be I ily Strolling about during Divine Service. p|
pL. A B*!l will be hang as foon as poflide, whd|h will ring the WorkifgdParties to *and from 1
t their Labor, and alfo at the Hour of Nine in the Evening, at which time it ilex pelted that’ail |
f *the inhabitants fhall betake themfelves to their fevcral habitations unleft they are obi ged tobe
L abroad on any particular bnfinefs.
The Watchmen on going their rounds are to examine the doora and windows of the different 1
j he nit's in their Divifion, and to call ’the hour of the Night as nearly as they can gueis.
. the office->f inriioflTWiisis fmm i# 1
r tants, being for the public fecurity, yet the Governor inronfideration of the trouble attenSUog 1
f the ‘faithful difeharge of Rich a duty thinks fit iro order that the | trions io officiating hHI he ,
r allowed what m qj* lied the Free Ration for themfelves and families, an occahdnal fnppdy ofc j
Y Slops and half a‘pint of Spirits every if their diligence may dcfcYve farther not.ee v
I the Magiftrates will have an ra to them and recommend them to other indulgences, j
I 'y* y ‘ ** 4
r ' -Sydney, Nov. • \ ■ - f 1
% . •' . 1 By Command of His Excellency.




could not fail to exert upon the crude elements of which the population was com-
posed’. 1 Seen against a background of probably no more than 30 per cent literacy
in a population of about 7,000 such praise might have been appropriate from Gov-
ernor King’s contemporaries but leads one to assume that Timperley lacked a prop-
er understanding of the social conditions of the early nineteenth century. Howe’s
Sydney Gazette and New South Wales Advertiser which began on 5 March, 1803, con-
tinued until 1842 when it became one of many victims of an economic depression.
(Plate 2.)
The political, social, and economic problems which beset this first Australian
newspaper have been adequately dealt with by a number of writers. 2 From the
printer’s point of view the principal obstacle to continued success of the Sydney Ga-
zette was the persistent shortage of type, paper, and ink, not to mention the inade-
quacy of the wooden press. On the point of inadequate supplies Timperley’s com-
ment is very much to the point. Having stressed the difficulties frequently caused
by the delay ofvessels plying between London and Sydney, he goes on to say: ‘Now
and then some solitary adventurer would bless the inhabitants with an “investment”
—i.e. a melange of ill-sorted goods banished from the lumber-rooms of London, for
the express accommodation of the good folk at “Botany Bay”,—for whom, in
sooth, “anything was good enough!” ’
1. Timperley, C. H Encyclopaedia of Literary and Typographical Anecdote (2nd cd). London, Bohn,
1842 (p. 379-8 i).
2. Ferguson, J. A. [and others], The Howes and their Press. Sydney, Sunnybrook Press, 1936.


A second Press set up
It appears that sometime in 1799/1800 a second press arrived in the Colony. On 24
December, 1802, David Collins wrote to Under-Secretary Sullivan for the supply
of‘some of the articles which have occurred to me, and appear the most indispens-
able requisite in forming the new settlement’. 1 The settlement in question was that
at Port Phillip and the letter bearing the request was the first reference to the expedi-
tion which Collins was to undertake in 1803. In the context of this survey the inclu-
sion of‘A bill of printing type’ is of course of prime importance.
As can be seen from the copy of this request printed on p. 23, a general demand for
‘paper for printing’ was included, besides the two dozen of printing ink . The refer-
ence to the source of supply for type, ‘either from the late Messrs. Caslon or Mr.
Figgins’, indicates an awareness of the latest taste in type design. Abroad-sheet adver-
tising the new Figgins two-line letter fount had been published by T. Bensley m
1801 2 and it is possible that a copy of it might have been available in New South
Wales at the time Collins wrote the request. However, Caslon’s type founts were
traditionally accepted by the British public and his large two-line and placard types
had been in use since the 17605. There is no evidence that Figgins’s type founts
were sent to Australia in the early years of the nineteenth century, perhaps because
Figgins was not ready for delivery until about 1815* In fact Caslon s typefaces are
found in practically all documents of that period that have been preserved.
1. Historical Records of New South Wales. Sydney, 1892-1901 (Vol. 4: 921-4).
2. Wolpe, Berthold, (ed.) Vincent Figgins Type Specimens, 1801 and 1815, reproduced in facsimile.
London, Printing Historical Society, 1967.
Palte 2 . The first newspaper published in Australia.
(Original in the Mitchell Library, Sydney.)


SYDNEY
And New South
PUBLISHED BT AUTHORITY.
Vol. I. SATURDAY, MARCH 5, 1803. " Number 1.
It is hereby ordered, that all Advancements, Orders, Sec. which appear under the Official Signature of the Secretary of Cm Colony, or
of any other Officer of Government, properly authored to publish them in the Sydney Gazette, and New South Ware#
Advertiser, are meant, and mull be deemed to convey official and fufficient in the fame Manner a* If they were
particularly fpecified to an> one Individual, or Others, to whom fuch may have a Reference.
By Command of His Excellency the Governor and Commander in Chief, WILLIAM NEATE CHAPMAN, Secretary.
Sydney, March sth, 1803.
General Orders.
jp EPEATED Complaints having been
made of the great loffes fuftaiaed by the
SrtErs at Hawkefbary, from the vexatious
condu-ft of the Boatmen by whom they fend
thotr Grain to Sydney, the following Regula-
tions are to be obferved.
Every perfon (ending grain from the
Havkeibury to Sydney in an open boat, or a
read to the Guard on board the Supply
Hulk.
By Command of His
Excellency W, N. Chapman, Sec.
Government Houfe, Feb. 21, ISO 3.
''jpHE Receiving €hamri?s at Parramatta
and Hawkdbury, bung filled with Wheat
which is fpoiling, no more can be tak -n in
at thofe places until farther Orders, excq t
in payment for Government Debts, and the
Whalers Invedmcnts lodged in the Public
g A *■ " "■
G A Z ET T E,
Wales Advcrtifer.
To be thilii bated to fuch Per funs as the
Governor may think proper to grant
Permits to, toao Gallons.
'1 he above to include the Civil and Mill-
ary Officers at Norfolk Iland.
Sv Command, Sec. W. N.
GrnvemmentlHM he, ,
ADDRESS. <
■ v’
Innumerable as the Ob lades were which




A BILL OF PRINTING TYPE
£ s. a.
A small fount of pica roman letter of 80 lb. weight, in which is to be included
twelve metal French rules of 3 and 4 m’s, and six alphabets of two-line pica full face
letters, except the letters A, E, R, T, of which there must be nine of a sort 6 00
Note.— This small fount is only for doing jobs, and must consist of but a pro-
portional quantity of lower-case sorts, capitals, small caps, a few figures, points,
quadrats, spaces, &c., and no double letters or long f s are to be included in it,
but a double quantity of round s’s.
Twenty lb. of double pica roman as before-mentioned in lower-case sorts, caps,
&c. 1 10 0
Forty lb. of double pica roman, sorted for working jobs as above, in which is to
be included eight alphabets of italick caps, sorted as the two-line pica mentioned
above, and fourteen of the lower-case letters a, c, d, e, h, m, n, o, r, s, t, w, and eight
of the rest of the alphabet 2 00
The figures of these founts are to be of the new cut as well as the caps, and small
caps.
One dozen lengths of brass rule of the usual size, four of which are to be thick 050
One dozen skeins of thick and thin scabbard 030
Two dozen of good printing ink 2 80
£l2 6 o
This type must be had from the founderies of either the late Messrs. Caslon or Mr.
Figgins.
Paper for printing.
On 9 May, 1803, Governor King requisitioned supplies ‘useful for the Public
Service’, and concluded his letter with the following special request: ‘I have also
enclosed a List of Articles that would be very useful for our Printing Press if it meets
Your Lordship’s Approbation.’ 1 This list includes a request for printer’s ornaments,
namely 4 ships, 1 brig, 1 sloop, 12 ornamental French Rules, 6 Kings Coats of Arms,
for all which sizes are given, and also 6 lbs. of long primer flowers in various un-
specified sizes. The request also includes To Rheme of Printing Paper’. The con-
cluding sentence of the requisition seems to suggest that either the commissary or
the Governor had some doubts about the justification of the Government Printer’s
list of necessary supplies, because it reads: ‘lf this comes to be expensive half each
quantity may be done with...’
i. Historical Records of Australia. Sydney, 1914-15 (Section 1, Vol. 4: 233-4, 241-2).


Collins whose cultural and educational background was superior to that of most
of his military colleagues in Australia was especially taken with the importance of
having a printing press available in a new settlement. If the first Australian printer
made history by operating a press in Government House, Sydney, no less significant
were the conditions under which the first printed documents were issued at the Port
Phillip settlement. Collins arrived on 9 October aboard the Calcutta and after dis-
charging provisions and equipment from his ships on 10 October, 1803, almost im-
mediately proceeded to set up a hand press on the beach at Sullivan Bay where a gum
tree offered some shelter. 1 By 16 October with the assistance of a convict, George
Clark, 2 he had the first of his daily General Orders and Garrison Orders struck off.
As in the case of George Hughes, we have no record of Clark s training as a printer
but there is reason to believe that Collins closely supervised this work. It is interest-
ing to note that not a single copy of these printed orders is to be found in Australia
today. The only set that has come down to us is kept in the Public Record Office,
London. However, manuscript copies of the orders are preserved in the Mitchell
Library, Sydney. The last of Collins s General Orders was printed on 25 January,
1804, on which day he embarked on the Lady Nelson to leave the Port Phillip settle-
ment to its native population.
1. The Tasmanian Almanack for the Year... 1829... Hobart Town, compiled and printed by Andrew
Bent, 1828 (p. 84).
2. The entry for Thomas Clark(e) in the Australian Dictionary of Biography (Vol. 1:226-7) does not
agree with the entry for Andrew Bent in the same volume (p. 86-7) where Bent’s master is referred
to as George Clark. J. West in his History of Tasmania (Vol. 1:46) refers to him as T. Clark.
Plate 3. The first newspaper published in Tasmania, though not the first issue.
(Original in the Mitchell Library, Sydney.)


AND
Tax DERWENT STAR
No. 7.
ESTO MEMOR BREVIS MLVI.
€ * Ah ! what is human life l
** Hew like the dud'* tardy moving Slade
44 Day after day Hides from ns ur*perceived-
f< The cunning fugitive, is fwift by Health—
\ Too fuhtlc is the movement to be (ecu!
** Vet foon the hour i* tip—and, we are gone l \
melancholy and awful event which ha* happened fine#
the Publication of our laft Number, was fo leaden, so unexp* ti-
ed that it appeals like a frightful dream ; The mind is averse to at-
kowlcdge the fatal truth* and with difficulty we hi tog iiuviehes
to receive the couf irmiuon of iu reality*"-! fe lojsof friends is at
all time* a eauiefor for row, even when through dileafe, or age
and mftimitres, Inch an occurrence has been kn g looked forward
to and when without toy previous waining-thcy are
removed from us, and in one inliant we arc deptivdl of thole moil
dear ; it becomes ftdf more diflheuit to reconcik our ndnds to the
loft, and w e are airm.ft tempted ro arraign the JuUicc ot U-au Pk>-
eidence which has taken them from tins to another and .a better
world forgetting in our yam conceits that~—
** Each friend inatched from us is a plume
u Plucked from the wings of human vanity **
The event alluded to is f> re ' n? in the memory of every one,
3&d the death of kitut. Covirkok Coti.ix* is fo fincercly felt
and deplored by all the refpeflable, the induftriou* and houeft in*
habitant* of this Colony, to whom he was indy a friho and a
Itiend ; that n« apology U neceffa \y for appropriating this Number
foidy to record the mournful occurrence.
The Lit t?r. Coy* in on, had for feme days been indifptv
fed by a Cold, and had partially confined himfeif to the honfo
but or* the day of hi* demise (Satmday the *<|th of March iaft)
he hmndr Mmielf conliderably better, and transacted bwwtis with
S. Gardner hi* Clerk *t 4 undock in the afternoon. When Mr.
feowckn the Medical Gen tie man who attended him called, he ex-
prefsed his hope that he fhould very foort he about again—He
was then taking a cup of tea, and fhortly after defiling M*. Bowden
to make ule of ionic refreflimrm, he was obieived to ftreich * ut
hit hand* and fuddenly W\ back in his Chair apparently in a fit.
Mr. Bowden immediately gave the alarm procured a&ftanee and
got feme co rdtal down tie Guv* a * o a** th r oat wit hou t etteft
he nearer fpoke more I* And only when removed to a Couch
gave one deep figh and expned—Ail Medical aid was in vain for
tlaal the tide of life hid ebbed, never to flow agaui""—He died
tKtfilf at h*lf pa ft 7 o’Clock P) Me
The Grief and con dentation depifted in all countenance*
when the fad tidings were announced 1* more easy to conceive then
de*cribe~cvery one wifhcdto doubt the truth of tlie report* —But
€i When the death bell hnote the ear
Sad founding on the gale—’'
Deep and filenl dejeflion feemed to take poffeffion of each bread,
md nothing wt* hcitd bul the low voice ot mutual cc&doAtuee*
Publijhed by Authority.
Vak DiimiVi Lamb IKTELUCIHCER.
TueMtj-, April j<J. tSiO.
Thus then depsrted this life at the age of about 54 year*
** AVlf> Cointtt Blq. Ljiut. CoviiKiu of Hia
Majefty * at the - Derwent and Colonel in the Royal
Marine Forces, m which Corps he had been for upward* of 3S
years. In his youth he Served feveral Campaign* m America under
ms father the late General Collins, and was at the Battle of Burt-
kers Hill —in the Territories of New South Wale* he had lieen t*
aftual employment nearly a quarter of a Century, having (when
* * a Ps a . m S Corps} been appointed judge Advocate on tb*
firft eitabnihment of the Coboy at Port jackftm under Governor
Phillip,
In thk hr nation he continued until the year tyqS. when he
returned to England and publdhed hi* history ©f the woiony in two
Volumes—That he faithfully and ably diichaiged thear-
ol lh f kn F ort3nt Office he held, is fully demon ft n-
ted hy the favour fhewn him by his Sovereign, who reinitiated him
to all the rank he had loft m the Army by ’accepting a civil cm.
ploy meat, and when, during Loan Hosajit* Aiimirnltiation,
the preknt Settlement was projected to be eftabltflted at Port PMU'
bp in mu » Stiatts, tot, Cottin*, wu recttinmended from hi*
aoiliues, long Service* and h eal knowledge of the Country and
i:,hyblunts, to have the Command aod direction of Settling the
Tdam Colony ; and accoraingjy received Hi* Maitfty’s graebu*
appointment to be Lj*ut. Covaaj<©» thereof*
In April 1803. He failed in Hi* Majefty’* fliip Caknlta,
accompanied by the Ocean Uaniport, having on board the Ihip*
moft of the civil and Miiitaiy Ufiicei* &c. on wh» m devo ved the
iokiiin ufk of paying tii« Uft itibute of refpeii to hi* Memory—*
In October the lame year the fhtps * - lived at their delUncd Fort
and the troops, prisoners {lore* &c. were dts m arkcu—but*
iliort rehdencc proving that the Spot wa* inadi qua:e to the pur-
pose of a Settlement, the whole of the eftabl.Shmuit was removed
early in the enSumg tear to its pre.ent fituatton at the Derwent,
where the Litisr. Covaxxoa has cooifantiy refided’till this
calamitous event, re (petted by ail with ft living and urmtnahy l*.
memed in h.s Death.
The perfon of our late Lteur. Ccv** u o », rea? grateful
end Commanding—His manners uiere affable and kind—He had
rtad much an# in his i&nvtrmtten was equality inftrvUivt and
mmujmg~~*Uis Humanity to the unfortunate v*Mims under his C *ri
*** s hang ever no+c tmif tapurdm then bun*
tjh the ojf<ndcr~\* far as his drcumlcribcd mean* aftorded in
zn infant Hate he attended to and complied with the wants ax»
vrmus or au Dfcseaj.*noN#,
Thofe who moft intimately knew him will allow that thisim*
perfect attempt to delineate hi* Chafer is not the voice of a«
duUuon—*An the is now equally inicofible to the bUndtlhmcnt#
of flattery and to the fhaft of Cenfuxe—But the language ok
cetity hi* Memory demands.
u Alas! he claims it from the fahte bier,
“ Where cold and wan the flumb’rcr reft* hi* head
In ftill Imail whilpers to reflections ear.
* He breathe* the ioiemn ditfates of tha dead. **
* '
Are there any being* in this Colony, (o despicable, fo devoid
h u «»nuy, »s to wifh to •* rake up the alhes t f the honoured
dead ' and call reflettron* on «h< Memory of him who is now
unable to refute their calumnies?—lf there arc Such, vve recommend
them to apply to themfe-ve* this text of Scripture.
“ Thou hypocrite firft caft the beam out of thine own eyej
and then tuou Quit fee clcanf to caft out the mac from thy bro-
VwCjf* C*




Tasmania
When Collins landed on the bank of the River Derwent he again set up his printing
press and published his General Orders and Garrison Orders with the help of J.
Barnes and G. Clark. It was not till 1810, however, that he made the first effort at
promoting a Government sponsored newspaper, the Derwent Star and Van Diemen’s
Land Intelligencer. Barnes and Clark arecited as Government printers —the establish-
ment of which office represents another significant example of Collin’s appreciation
of the printing press as an important factor in colonial development. The Derwent
Star did not survive for more than a few weeks and it appears that only three copies
of the seventh number, containing a funeral notice of Collins have survived to this
day. (Plate 3.)
J. Barnes disappeared from the records of history soon after this year and in 1812
G. Clark’s name appears as the only Government Printer on the pages of the ‘new
series’ of The Derwent Star. 1 In the same year a convict named Andrew Bent joined
the press and from 1815 on he seems to have been the only official Government
Printer in Tasmania until he was imprisoned and fined on a charge of libel in
1825. 2
Andrew Bent learned printing in London where he is said to have served his ap-
prenticeship on The Times. There is no doubt that he considerably improved the
standard of printing in Australia by the example of his work. Some enthusiasts re-
ferred to him as the ‘Tasmanian Franklin’. 3 The first issue of the Hobart Town Gazette
and Southern Reporter, ‘Published by Authority’ appeared on Ist June, 1816, but a
1. Ferguson, J. A., Bibliography of Australia. Sydney, Angus & Robertson, 1941- (Vol. 1: 196, 215).
2. Australian Dictionary of Biography. Melbourne, 1966 (Vol. 1: 86-7).
3. Calder, J. E., ‘Something about Old Colonists: Andrew Bent’ in The Mercury (Supplement), Ho-
bart, 5 February 1881.


copy of an earlier issue, dated n May, 1816 has been recorded. 1 It bears the serial
number 'volume the third number 158’ and besides carrying an account of the
voyage of H.M.S. Kangaroo from Port Jackson to Ceylon, it has the interesting final
note ‘want of type prevents insertion of several advertisements etc. which will ap-
pear in an Extra Gazette on Monday next’. There is no record of that extra issue.
On the northern shores of Tasmania printing was first undertaken by two of
George Howe’s sons, Robert and George Terry, 2 who set up a newspaper press and
printed early in 1825 the Tasmanian and Port Dairymple Advertiser. It lasted only until
May of the same year when Governor George Arthur invited G. T. Howe to join
James Ross as Tasmanian Government Printers.
The important struggle for the freedom of the press has been adequately dealt
with by E. Morris Miller 3 and though the appearance and disappearance of many
interesting characters on the stage of printing history is closely linked with that
struggle it is beyond the scope of this article to repeat an account of their fate.
In 1828 the enterprising jack-of-all-trades, John Pascoe Fawkner, of Launceston,
acquired from Andrew Bent the old press which had been the property of David
Collins and had been used by George Clark and others to print Collin’s first orders.
Fawkner moved the printing press together with some type to Launceston —accord-
ing to contemporary accounts it was a difficult journey during which press and type
were several times nearly lost —and began the printing and publishing of the Laun-
ceston Advertiser in 1829. Fawkner did not retain possession of this newspaper for
long and soon embarked upon his expedition to Victoria.
1. Miller, E. M., ‘An Unrecorded Hobart Town Gazette’ in Papers and Proceedings of the Tasmanian
Historical Research Association, 1964 (Vol. 7: 34-43, 59—65).
2. George Terry was one of the five children born to George Howe and his de facto wife Elisabeth
Easton ( Australian Dictionary of Biography, Vol. i:557~9)-
3. Miller, E. M., Pressmen and Governors... Sydney, Angus & Robertson, [1952].
Plate 4. An early number of the first newspaper published in Victoria
(Original in the La Trobe Library, Melbourne,


THE
Melbourne Advertiser,
PORT PHILLIP, AUSTRALIA.
VOIUMK 1,
MONDAY MARCH 5, IBiB-
-9 :■■■
foh freight or fassaok
**. , ... , * :
The Sitmng bu : it rotier Reiaecc#, '**nqf kid ®u«* a re-
gular Trader between fiktWirnl a d tau * aiwiw
ut « ol the fastest sadu g craft in this trade, will prove to
shippers «<i goads or to j a->*et>grr* th** most eligible convey*
at ce between Melbourne anti I •»«».€♦* on
Apr* y to Captain Bt.iL.
Melbourne January £4lh 1838.
FCB SYDNEY
THE febnonrr Sarah. C*ft, WilUsm Win K worm
Will lemadjr to have for the above Port on Thor* ay »h*
bill of M*l« I for 1 might or passag** App y to the Ma»tet
on board, or *o W. P. A. Ki'CKSR.
Jauosiy 24th 1838.
ON SALB
AT the Store* of the Mr. J. Batman at low prices fei
P»«kpcr Use Arr : v4*.
Tnykr’s Brown • tout ifiltTidi? * * **'
r «i,bar & Son* B »«t!H At* in three dneen e*»e*
Msr**H» Wine m Hl»d*. Q »t ter Casks and naif Aums
Superior Cognac lltaiidy
Grneva
Jama ca Bum
Mauritius Sugar
Jlveon %kin Tea
Flour
Paint Oil
'furpentii»
White Lead
Black aud C. foen F*i t
{ annis:er Gonp&wd* r H E
Shot of Sices
Hat Square and Round Iron, Assorted
Vacht Shirt*
Scotch Cat s
Moleskin Tiowsrr*
i or \ and Oliva Velveteen do.
Superior blue f loth dn.
Swan&down »nd Flash Waistcoats
H tipud St irt*
Duck Frocks
Velveteen Shooting Jacket*
Fnatian do.
Superior Witney Blanket* B*4 4 4 10 4 11 4
Packet Knives
Wnolbagging
Window Glass
Superior Cavcndidi Tob ,Cf ®
Columel do,
ALBG
h ! B e' Mutton and Lamb si 5 pc-c# per IS
Potatoes &e he.
Melbourne, Very, 10 ft, 1833.
OTMBRR 10*
THE Undersigned hegs to in form *b« pufeHc, tha| H*
*~mM**«* ‘•f.tJi* 1 * injeminvM far
crossing &’ recrwMingbet wees V\ illfeda i IbWiV
and tiie oppo* te beach.
Parti*:* from Melbourne are requested to raise a smoke.
• r*d twe Boat writ be st *heir *er»tir as soo« a* practicable,
he lenat charge is five shillings add two stalling* e«b vhen
die lumber exceed* two.
H. Me'LEAS.
Williams Town Feby. 9ih 1838,
—— —— — n —*
T* T 3 nrr* WT&TJIBr
«*> « W X*xi. A j£J* fcJtSiAA * •
TAKES this early opportunity io Inform hot friend*
and the public, that he supplies families with the best
whestei Bread at the lowest possible price, and tu those
“ho wish it he allows one Moulds credit.
Fehy. 27*h. 1838.
FAWKNJBR' BOTRX.X*
MELBOURNE. PORT PHILLIP.
*S€ PT* iits t o tft«F r rare *er a m Sojouri-er, !»« «*?.,-.1
rrq'ositea of a Boarding Bouse and iiolei and of the eery
he*t q >al ly, beingwioatty Utd in from the first Mercantile
Boose in Cornwall V. l>. Land, in addition to which them
will be found mental recreation of a high order. There
sie procied seven English and five Colonial weekly news-
paper*. Seven British Monthly MUga sines, three British
Quarterly Reviews «>P to October 1837. A v« ry choice
(•election of Looks including Novels, Poetry, Theology,
Hi*«or|r« Ac. -
N. B. A ta’e Encyclopedia, «ny of those works will be
ree to the Lodgers at the above Hotel.
Melbourne Feby. 27th. 1838.
THAT STRONG BUILT SCHOONER ENTERPRISE.
Will continue to trade between the Ports of Melbourne
«nd La«nc»«ton, at the Bbooceo freight of Two Pounds
per Ton, Wool rent over per Enterprise will be »lured
.nd shipped at Melbourne free of expence to Ihegrower, *n»<
good* from Launceston mil bo carefully housed at a low
ate, This Vessel has been Two years and a half constantly
' Biployed in this Trade, and has never damaged any part
of her cargo.
Apply at Melbourne of.*» P, F AWKNRR.
nt 1 suucestun, of J. C. UNDERWOOD.
FOB SAX*B
Ten young fine Weeded lt»t*i*» price five guinea* esch.
Enquire ul Mr. lAWKNKR.
ON SAIaR
On ‘‘ale a few Bo*He!» nf g md * one V ote,
fc quit o‘ Mr. PAVKNEH.




Victoria
Due to Fawkner’s enterprise printing was once more started at Port Phillip, about
a generation after Collins had issued his first Garrison Orders from that area. The
Melbourne Advertiser was first issued by Fawkner in manuscript form but when the
long awaited printing press finally arrived from Launceston the ioth to 17th issues
of Melbourne’s first newspaper were printed. (Plate 4.) The editor’s column con-
tains the following statement: We earnestly beg the public to excuse this our first
appearance in the absence of the compositor who was engaged. We were under
the necessity of trusting our first number (in print) to a Van Demonian youth of
eighteen, and he had only worked at this business about a year, from his tenth
to his eleventh, 1830 to 1831. Next the honest printer from whom the type was
bought, has swept up all his old waste letter and called it type, and we at present
labour under many wants, we even have not as much as Pearl Ash to clean the
dirty Type.’
In its essence, a familiar tale for all who tried to introduce improvements in the
colonies. Fawkner s efforts as a printer-publisher were undoubtedly inspired by
the best of political motives but his press work remained very inferior to that of
the Sydney and Flobart craftsmen.


South Australia
The establishment ofprinting in Sydney, Hobart and Launceston, then in Melbourne
was in all respects a natural development, given the fact that the settlers, free or
bond, were anxious to establish and improve lines of internal communication. The
social and political conditions which led to the establishment of the colony of South
Australia were so different that it is not surprising that the establishment of a print-
ing press there should be surrounded by peculiar conditions. The British struggle
for a free press demonstrated to the would-be-pilgrims to South Australia that their
utopian view of a free society would not be realizable unless their settlement was
supported from the beginning by a free press. In their anxiety to organize heaven
before departing from this world as they knew it, the South Australian Gazette and
Colonial Register was started in London by Robert Thomas, 1 with the intention ‘to
print the first number of the paper in the capital of the civilized world, and the sec-
ond in a city of the wilderness, the site of which was then unknown’. 2 However, a
year lapsed before the second issue of the South Australian Gazette was printed in
Adelaide, in 1837. Robert Thomas and his associate, George Stevenson, brought
with them two presses, one of which was a cast-iron Stanhope press and the other a
wooden press. The Stanhope press was more modern than any other imported into
Eastern Australia until then. It is interesting to note that the planners had not over-
looked the necessity to have a competent printer in the ‘wilderness’ and Robert
Fisher had been engaged as a journeyman. He was to be assisted by an apprentice
called Osborne, but the latter unfortunately died soon after landing at Kangaroo
Island. Due to an oversight the type destined for the printing of the Gazette was al-
lowed to be taken to Hobart instead of being unloaded at Glenelg and when Robert
1. Pitt, G. H., The Press in South Australia, 1838-1830. Adelaide, Wakefield Press, 1964.
2. Ibidem, p. 3-4.


Thomas & Co. were appointed Government Printers on 4th January, 1837, they
had barely enough type for small job printing. Nevertheless they, too, set up the
first chapel in a tent under one of Australia’s many historic gum trees and on 11
January, 1837, printed a hundred copies of Governor Hindmarsh’s proclamation
issued a few days earlier (28 December, 1836).
A second proclamation was printed on 5 January and on 23 January an appeal
was published over the name of Edward Stephens, the pseudonym of George
Stevenson, partner of the firm of Robert Thomas & Co. and Private Secretary to
the Governor.
By the end of May, 1837, Thomas had been able to transfer the printing press to
a mud hut in the town and on 3 June, 1837, the second issue of the South Australian
Gazette appeared. From then on, printing progressed on conventional lines in this
State.


Western Australia and Queensland
It is of special interest to note, when determining the dates on which printing was
established in the various Australian capitals, that a press was set up in Perth some
six to seven years before those in Melbourne and in Adelaide. J. S. Battye, one of
the few Australian historians of repute to consider the history of printing and of
the press as an integral part of a people’s history, refers in Western Australia to the
press as ‘other evidences of civilization’ 1 which were found relatively early in
Western Australia. In the same passage he goes on to say: ‘That great want of Brit-
ish communities —a newspaper —was met by the issue, in manuscript, of the Western
Australian Chronicle and Perth Gazette , which was born and died after four issues in
1831. Later in that same year a press was brought to Fremantle from Tasmania
(apparently printing presses were a notable export from Tasmania during the first
25-30 years of that colony) by a certain Charles Macfaull and associates, and the
first issue of the Fremantle Observer, Perth Gazette and Western Australian Chronicle
was published on 25 April, 1831.
In the beginning the press was set up in a wheat shed but discord among the
owners and publishers forced the victor in the dispute to remove the press to a place
called Hamilton Hill where the Fremantle Observer etc. lingered for about 12 months
before it finally ceased publication, partly because of lack of news, partly because
of squabbles among the owners of the paper. The owner of the plant then began
another paper called The Inquisitor which lasted even less long for the simple reason
that two of its editorial staff found it appropriate to settle their political differences
by a duel, in which one of them was mortally wounded. (Plate 5.)
In the meantime another paper had been started in Perth with the title Western
i. Battye, J. S., Western Australia: a History from its Discovery to the Inauguration of the Commonwealth.
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1924 (p. 113).
Plate 5. An early number of the short-lived but exciting second West Australian newspaper.
(Original in the Mitchell Library, Sydney.)


The
IN QUISITOK
IN
WEST AUSTRALIA
Turilalit tinplex or alio tit.
FRRMANTLB, A&guat, J*33.
THIS IS THE KING* BIRTH DAY.
The Monarch of England competes hi* 67 H
year of Age, on this dale; and ilie Thunder of
Artillery, the bustle of the Levee, the tbeers of
the Banquet, and the Shout* of the mu'tttode will
resound in every part of the World, We love to
witness the Loyal Enthusiasm, of Free and Indev
pendent Britons/ from our Infancy we have bean
accustomed to it! Th* day t« c »aa- the Chandlers
are at work a. usual* «od iho evey dag glo«M»
pervades, and we cannot see, nor do we hear a
•ingle show of rejoicing, or note of prep eratioo.
U there not something (to say the least) unusual
in all tilts? To b* sure there is. The people
♦ant the ‘•Toni’* and there is nobody to girt ft.
I—-
We have new witnessed more anxiety
than that . which prevails h«»v, respecting the,
/JNewt from England* up io h »*€?**
there is no appearance of the wished for Vowel.
The weather has been for some uni past very
severe, not only from wind and rnmj out from
iutense cold; as it fcs* become soraewhit m rderate
ii is like y, we shall sown have a good account of
fcbe expected stranger, ~ _________
Vo tb« EDITOR.
• /£. Uader*t*ndiag that yoo Utak high '*
AOtirtit «nd Hosoferablta Cr* r t of FREE and AUCEPTEi*
MA>ONt, I with to bt informed, Why * Lodga ba§ t><?t
bcon fumed here ire this? *» • “PRINCE” M»#on, (»f
]%m mfouMd nght f ) YOU b»ro chtf ontbomy Co do if.
Your «arij autuuon trill oblige. tiiRaRL
Wt sh.ll h. happy to fot"*rd lhe ce»i of tat C.rrwp.o-
denti .1 ii, oar hounden Doty* Ihe matter h«i not hr*,
ioit li.bt of hy us, reason* »hich ca>» only be etplanted to
a qualified Brother, itnerveowl* Interview eraulil thsre »*
he deurabla. Ed. . _
Tbs F.mpbUt, the Picture, and l*he "aPOSTATR*
ws will g»va due attention ts. Ed.
If*,?.




Australian Colonial News. It lasted only for about eighteen months (from the end of
1831 till early 1833) when it was replaced by a new venture sponsored by the in-
defatigable Macfaull. The Perth Gazette and Western Australian Journal, Australia’s
second oldest newspaper, was printed on a Stanhope press which Macfaull had suc-
ceeded in importing in 18 32; this paper continues till this day as The West Australian,
thus providing a continuous link with the earliest printing efforts in Western
Australia.
Brisbane was the last State capital to benefit from the establishment of a printing
press. The foundation of the Moreton Bay Courier appears to have been an act of
deliberate policy and there is little of the heroic in the setting up of the first press by
James Swan and his sponsor, A. S. Lyon. The first issue of the Moreton Bay Courier
appeared on 20 June, 1846, and it has continued ever since, albeit its name was
changed to The Courier Mail. 1
i. Knights, J. J., In the Early Days; History ami Incident of Pioneer Queensland, with Dictionary of Dates in
Chronological Order... Brisbane, Sapsford & Co. ... Printer, 1895 (p. 45).


Supplies
If the absence of trained craftsmen hampered the development of quality and tra-
dition in Australian printing —quite apart from the socio-political difficulties that
stood in the way of a free press movement —the lack of printers’ supplies presented
no less a hurdle. Brief mention has already been made of the many requests sent
‘home’ for ink, paper, and type. Even today, more than a century and a half since the
first attempt was made to produce some of the basic materials for printing in Austra-
lia, there is a quite unreasonable tendency to rely on British manufacturers for many
high-quality goods. The perishable nature of the paper used during the earliest years
of printing in Australia has been often remarked upon. The broadsides, government
orders, and public notices were at any rate not usually looked upon as historical
documents, but rather as simple means of communicating news often of an ephem-
eral nature. The paper sent to the colonies at the beginning of the nineteenth cen-
tury had to be both relatively light and resistant to moisture. A high clay content
was therefore the least desirable of qualities and explains the predominance of a
type of rice paper today most commonly found in East Asia. It is not surprising
therefore that there are few copies extant of these original documents illustrating
early printing in Australia.
A real paper shortage continued in Australia during the first 50 years. Through-
out the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries the consumption of newsprint
could not be met by the local paper mills. Better than any historian could depict it,
the situation is summed up in this note carried in the Sydney Gazette of 12 January,
1806: ‘To Subscribers. The scarcity of Paper which has long and generally been felt
throughout the Colony, at length terminates our prospect of continuing this publi-
cation for a much longer period. Solicitous at the same time of supporting the
chain of Colonial Occurrences without total interruption, a further retrenchment


becomes the work of necessity, and as this can only take place in the frequency of
publication we doubt not the public acquiescence in the measure. This paper will
therefore be only published every fortnight instead of weekly; the alteration to take
place from Sunday next, should no supply be received in the interim, of which
Advertisers are requested to take notice.’ 1 It is one of many ‘cris de coeur’ on this
subject.
The first mill to manufacture paper in Australia was established at Botany Bay.
An advertisement in the Sydney Gazette of 18 April, 1818, calls for raw materials
for paper making: ‘Warren and Duncan respectfully beg leave to inform the Pub-
lic that having by Permission erected a paper mill at a short distance east of the
New Road to Botany Bay, they want rags, linen and cotton, and will pay good
prices.’ 2 Of course rags, linen, and cotton had to come from Europe. In the 1860 s
several other paper mills were started in New South Wales but the first Victorian
mill was not set up until 1868 when Samuel Ramsden, a self-made businessman,
ventured into this manufacturing field. He was most successful, and soon bought
out his two competitors. 3
The supply of type founts presented another problem of considerable magnitude.
As already mentioned, some type reached Australia during the 17905. This supply,
probably second-hand when it reached Sydney, was becoming more and more
worn through constant use and in 1815 George Howe persuaded Governor Mac-
quarie to ask the Colonial Secretary for an extensive supply of new founts. 4 There
appears to be no record in the official correspondence that this request was met
either wholly or in part. However, when, in 1821, Robert Howe succeeded his
father as Government Printer, he requested a further substantial replacement of
type: ‘I discovered there was a necessity for having a speedy reinforcement of Type,
etc. that now in Use being from long and continued Service, much worn and
defaced.’ 5
The dependence on imported type became increasingly irksome and in the early
1850’s attempts were made to produce type founts in Australia. On the 7thjanuary,
1843, the Sydney Morning Herald could proudly proclaim: ‘The Government Ga-
1. Sydney Gazette, 12 January 1806.
2. Ibidem, 18 April 1818.
3. Illustrated Australian News. Melbourne, 21 March 1877 (No. 248: 42).
4. Historical Records of Australia. Sydney, 1914-25 (Section 1, Vol. 8: 605-6).
5. Ibidem (Section 1, Vol. 10: 545-6).


zette is now printed with a fount of long primer type, cast in the colony by a Mr.
Thomson, who arrived here about two years ago. The successful establishment
of this foundry will be highly advantageous to the printers, not only of Sydney,
but of Port Phillip and the neighbouring colonies, as old worn-out letters can be
recast instead of being sent to England at a heavy cost. We trust Mr. Thomson may
meet with encouragement, for his types, as may be seen upon reference to the
Government Gazette, are handsome, and in fact equal to those cast in London or
Glasgow.’ 1
Ink was imported into Australia for quite some time during the early years but
successful attempts to produce this important adjunct to printing are reported in
the Sydney Gazette in 1829: ‘Among the manufactures which have been successive-
ly attempted in the Colony, and which are daily advancing in number and in
character we are truly rejoiced in being able to record that of printing ink. Dr.
Walker, of Campbelltown, has ventured on this difficult but invaluable process and
has certainly succeeded beyond our most sanguine expectation. We had long ob-
served his advertisement but concluding his article would be necessarily of a very
inferior quality we never thought it worthwhile, till a few days ago, to procure
a sample; but, to our great astonishment, we find his ink immensely superior to a
large stock of English ink now in our Office. The Public mayjudge for themselves,
for the Sydney Gazette is now printed with Dr. Walker’s ink, with the exception
of a very insignificant proportion of English ink being mixed with it.’ 2
By the end of the 1840’s printing was firmly established in all Australian capitals
and the basic industries connected with the printing trade had also achieved a mod-
est beginning. Melbourne’s Evening Star, which began in October 1867, is claimed
to be the first Australian newspaper printed on Australian-made paper with Aus-
tralian-made ink. (Plate 6.)
It remains to mention briefly two processes closely connected with book produc-
tion and illustration. Before the advent of photographic reproductions, pictures and
other illustrated matter could only be reproduced in a book if engraved or copied
on wood or metal blocks, or drawn on lithographic stone. Australia’s first en-
gravers were P. Sieger, W. Preston, and I. R. Brown who worked for Absalom
West, a convict, who arrived in Sydney in 1798 and had become an able brewer
1. Sydney Morning Herald, 7 January 1843.
2. Sydney Gazette, 3 March 1829
Plate 6. The first Australian newspaper printed on Australian-made paper and with Australian-made ink.
(Original in the Mitchell Library, Sydney.)


* “jp ? '
n'fStr PXTBXfISIIED EVERY AFTERNOON. ’
~ No. 1:] MELBOURNE, MONDAY, OCTOBER 14, 1867. [Price, Id.
pROSPECTUB
OF
«the EVENING STAR,"
wmex ose rKjfsrv;
A JST MBI*BOX?KNX
BVEUV AjrrSRKOOX AT HALF-FAST FOtTK
O'CLOCK FUKCTUAIeLy, ON AK» AFTER THE
14xH CKTTOBEK, I#67*
It has long to a matter of surprise that
Melbourne, a city of nearly fty thousand
inhabitants, and one which can justly
boast of being the most important and in
every respect iht 3fsiTopoUs of Australia,
should ncA por-e&s an Evening Newspaper,
an indication of progress and refinement
w ch, In s# many other places of far less
importance, is regarded as an institution
indispensable as a medium adbrding, to all
sections of the community , that which
cannot be obtained by any other means,
ail the Nem of the Day of isme up to a<
late hour in the afternoon.
In presenting to the public this new
journal, the Proprietors of the Evening
Eior need scarcely state that their object
is to supply a want that has of late been
much felt, in a manner worthy in every
respect of its important responsibilities,
in a form which will reflect credit upon
themselves, and at a price which will plaoe
it within the reach of everybody, and thus
aacure a very large and legitimate circula-
tion.
In order to fulfil these Intentions, the
Proprietors of the Evening Star ’have
A r. l a*hi**h wffl
A Notice of Removal
G 1 OR O E CARS AB Y, j
Merchant Tailor,
Removed to 11 Coliins-street wmi.
Opposite Langvdll and Co., Wholesale
Ironmongers. *
Alfred cooper, auctioneer I
and Estate Agent, 48 Collins-street:
east. Sales of Fnmitnre, Ac., by Auction, j
at Private Residences, conducted with j
punctuality and attention, at reasonable
charges. Advances made upon Freeholds j
or other securities#
/N A RYE*DE* VISITS PORTRAITS, j
V 12s. per doxen.
D. WOOD, PHOTOGRAPHER, j
41 Coliins-street West j
BARTER, GILDER, PRINT SELLER, j
and Picture Frame Maker, 220 j
I Bourke-street East (near Parliament |
Houses). , _ j-
Frames Re-gilt, Oil Paintings and in- j
gravings cleaned. Gold, Fancy Wood, \
and Corapo Mouldings. Frames of every |
description to order. j
Tt M. WALTON, SUgGEON-DEN-
jj, TIST. J2O Collins-attoet east (three
doors from Eussell-streetjs ■
... ~,. jL
qA U L A DUN N,
PHOTOGRAPHERS,
75 & 77
SWAN S T 0 N ST HEE T.
Prize Medal awarded for excellence in
CARTE DE VISILE
MJL MWSRS, R.A., Drawing, j
* Writing, and Arithmetic Master, j
who visits some of the principal Scholastic j
Establishments in Melbourne and its j
vicinity, a few hours per diem I
I disengaged, Reference is kindly permitted i
! to the Tice*Chancellor of%he University; |
Dr. Mueller, Government Botanist; Count |
Do @asfclenau, Consul-General for France; j,
j the Mieses Murphy, Wattle Hpuse, St j
| Kilda ; Monsieur and Madam Permezcl j
and Evans, Talbot Lodge, East j
j Melbourne ,and other Patrons, *
| Ko« $ Lincoln Place South, Carlton.
jpAEIS EXPOSITION, 1867. j
j X The Sewing-machine Result
Wheeler and Wilson carry the day.
j The only GOLD MEDAL for perfection !
in SEWING MACHINES has been!
I awarded to WHEELER and WILSON, j
j There were 82 competitors, and the great- !
j eat interest attended the announcement j
of the result, j
j At the present* reduced prices there is j
fno excuse for bfvmg inferior machines, j
| From £lO Testimonials and ilius-
| trated circulars sent post free.
LONG and CO., 106 Bourke-street east;
(three doors below the Eastern Market), ;
agents for the Australian and New Zea-
land.
DATING to families,— henry
0 DAY, 12 Eastern* Market, and 206.
Stephen Street, Butcher, supplies families
with the best and choicest <jualitiea of
Meat, at most reasonable j>ri<&«t Orders
punctually attended to.
(V HE t G& 0 V E R & BAK E R
A BE WING* MAC HINIL ODM PAN Y
{Purveyors of Sewing*liaoM»es to •
HER MAJESTYM
The EXPRESS of the PflpCHy <
Another Royal
Manufacture Marixmef making the
ELASTIC %IC6,
\TEW GOO m BY EVERY
Aa excellent Stock of the Kewa*t
Patterns now on hwaL Saits of Casils** *t
oae day’s notice. Lad tea’ Eidiag Tt&mn
an! Riding Habits, of the cbok**s d*-
scricfejonss. latest fft&hiaas,
mads.
* ■ , S.'. BtNTI,
Tailq? aad Habit Mifcit, Ho. J3B Bomrks-
cast, nsar aad
mat door to WMto S,%i IWbeg* to
easi attention to 1m |<otrScai« ofPnee*:-
Good Tweed Saits, to meaaitra, from M
to £4 10a.; lEftack Dresa Saito £4jUk;
trousers and Ve*i, 27a, SdL *
N. B.—Promj*t ArriiKTioSTo G6cjrr*t
« Okosrs.
** to-..-,... .
THE MELBOURNE BANKING
.^COMPANY
aad Hltooiito},
Corner of Q«sca uad Little Coiiis* streets.
Proprietors:
’Hie Hon. J. P. BEAR, M.L.&
HUGH GLASS, Esq., J.p.
M CHIRNSIDE, Esq.
LAWRENCE ROSTRON, Eaq.
the Hon WM. HIGHETT, M.L.C,
The Hon. Capt. M‘MAHO2%
? THOMAS H. BEAR, IMd#
AMBROSE KYTE, Esq., M.L.A. **
A*
liability Unlimited.
v
* t
Directors: *
J vTke Horn X P. BEAR,
ALAE6Bi T 0 e K '
.*# OF
StMMtR GOODS,
S&ifar opened at
Nos. 3 & 5 Boarke-sfcroet, next Post Office®
Silks, Shawls, Mantles, Ladioa’ Under-
clothing, hmm, Fancy Trimmings, Ibaiery
and Glows, M Collars, Ties,
Cloths, Tows, Tweeds,
Longclotbs, SM-rtings. Hollands,ftmadb,
Cp'antergiaifis, OMaasks, Printed Caines*,
&e. *
Panof press Inode in
andfcMonrfngs: also a very ch%ddWt#isi4oa,
of Millinery Bonnets in all the newest ;
shapes for "the season, beside* a great
vaanSt-y of Bonnets end Hats.
Feathers, PTowtrs, o#»d Flower Wreaths,&c
HUGH COPELAND,
I WATERLOO H O U 8 E. ■
;
[ OUR ROYAL PRINCE’S. VISIT.
. " W ;
nVKRYBODY WHO WSBBX&m
j lit due regard for the comfort of%mir
i feet, should not fail to visit. those justly
j celebrated establishments of
t *
ENOCH tIyLGE’S.
4 * >
The bssi mi
BOOTS AN D SH 0 E €
9 *
is 181 world.
57 BOURKJS STREBii^te^ :
and
4' i
15 BRIDGE STREET, BjJJEAMkT.\
A < i
'
♦ 'A * Ja ,
KB,—New shipments coratanliriAl^




and publican. 1 West’s fame rose to still greater heights when he financed and pub-
lished some first-class engravings ofjohn Eyre’s Views oj Sydney which first appeared
in 1812.
Lithography appears to have come to Australia in 1821 with Sir Thomas Bris-
bane, Australia’s astronomer-governor. His interests and scientific pursuits prompt-
ed him to set up a couple of lithographic presses in the Parramatta Observatory
where he had installed C. C. L. Riimker as his personal astronomer. 2 When Riimker
fell out of favour and resigned his post in 1823, one of the presses became the prop-
erty of the painter A. W. Earle, who used it to produce in 1826 three illustrations
for his Views in Australia.
In conclusion, I must reiterate that this brief essay deals solely with the general
history of the establishment of printing in Australia. Though a good deal of anec-
dotal material is available about the early publishers, there is practically no record
of the incidentals of the printing houses, of the difficulties encountered with the
second-hand presses and the adaptations to them necessitated by the lack of spare
parts. Save a few brief comments concerning the wearing out of type, we don’t
even know precisely who brought out the first few founts. Of the surely unavoid-
able struggle of the early master printers with their apprentices, we have no tales.
However, it may justly be doubted whether snippets of information which exten-
sive historical research might produce, would substantially add to the history of
the spread of printing to the Pacific region.
r. Dixson, Sir W..., ‘Absalom West, and West’s Views’in Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Australian
Historical Society, 1945 (Vol. 31: 45-52).
2. MacKaness, G., ‘Printing in Australia’ in Journal and Proceedings oj the Royal Australian Historical
Society, 1951 (Vol. 36: 121-5).




Bibliography
Australian Dictionary of Biography. Melbourne, Melbourne University Press, 1966.
Battye, J. S. Western Australia: a history of its discovery to the inauguration of the Commonwealth. Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1924.
Bonwick, J. Early struggles of the Australian press. London, Gordon & Gotch, 1890.
Collins, David. An account of the English colony in New South Wales. London, T. Caddell & W. Davies
1798.
Ferguson, Sir J. A. Bibliography of Australia, Sydney, Angus & Robertson, 1941-.
Ferguson, Sir J. A. (and others) The Howes and their press. Sydney, Sunnybrook Press, 1936.
Gartner, J. Australian printing history. (In Bastien Bros. Bastien typographica. London, Bastien
Bros., 1938)
Gartner, J. The Victorian printing history. Melbourne, Hawthorn Press, 1935.
Historical Records of Australia. Sydney, Library Committee of the Commonwealth Parliament, 1914-
1925.
Historical Records of New South Wales. Sydney, Government printer, 1892-1901.
Knights, J. J. In the early days... Brisbane, Sapsford & Co., 1895.
Miller, E. M. Pressmen and governors. Sydney, Angus & Robertson, 1952.
Penfold, W. C. & Co., A century of progress in printing, 1830-1930. Sydney, Penfold & Co., 1930.
Pitt, G. H. The press in South Australia, 1838-1830. Sydney, Wakefield Press, 1964.
Timperley, C. H. Encyclopaedia of literary and typographical anecdote. 2nd ed. London, Bohn, 1842.
Wakefield, N. J. The genesis & development of printing in Australia. Pts 1-3. (In The Australasian
printer. Jan. 1951: 33-35; Feb. 1951: Mar. 1951: 43-45)
West, J. History of Tasmania. Launceston, H. Dowling, 1852.








THE SPREAD OF PRINTING
A history oj printing outside Europe in monographs
AUSTRALIA
about the author - Dietrich Hans Borchardt was born
in 1916 in Hanover, Germany. He received his early educa-
tion in Germany and Italy and completed his M. A. in philos-
ophy and psychology at Victoria University, Wellington,
New Zealand, in 1946. He holds the diploma of the New Zea-
land Library School. He is an Associate of the (British) Library
Association, and a Foundation Fellow of the Library Asso-
ciation of Australia. He has had several year experience in
the book trade in Europe and New Zealand, and he has also
spent some years farming in various parts of the world.
Since 1950 he has worked as a professional librarian in New
Zeeland and Tasmania, until he was appointed chief Libra-
rian at La Trobe University in 1965.
Dr Borchardt has been active in several functions to
further the standards of librarianship in Australia and teaches
bibliography at the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technolo-
gy. He visited the US A on a Carnegie Fellowship and worked
as a UNESCO Library Expert in Turkey.
Among his many contributions to the literature of libra-
rianship and bibliography are his Australian Bibliography (2nd
edition 1966) and How to find out in Philosophy and Psychology
(1967). His inaugural address Senescense and Fertility was also
published in 1967.
about the edit o R - Colin Clair, who began his career as
author and journalist in Paris, was, on his return to England,
for many years on the staff of the Encyclopaedia Department
of the Amalgamated Press. During the Second World War
he was sent to various parts of Africa, first as a staff reporter on
a national newspaper, and later as a member of the French
Service of the Ministry of Information. After the war he
travelled extensively in Argentina, Poland, and the Near
East before settling down in London to the steady routine of
authorship combined with editorial activities.
His interest in printing was first aroused when as a young
man he visited the Plantin-Moretus Museum at Antwerp.
This lead him eventually to write the first biography in Eng-
lish of the famous printer Christophe Plantin. A member of
the Bibliographical Society, London, Cohn Clair has con-
tributed articles on the history of printing to journals in var-
ious countries. Among his books are A History oj Printing in
Britain and a Chronology oj Printing and Publishing. He is now
preparing for future publication a History oj Printing in Europe.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 76-78404


AMSTERDAM: VANGENDT & CO
LONDON: ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL (s B N 7100-6476-4)
NEW YORK: ABNER SCHRAM (SBN 8390-0024-3)
