

AUSTRALIAN WINNERS
OF THE
VICTORIA CROSS
IN THE
IKpKS
SYDNEY 13x9




Australian Winners
OF THE
VICTORIA CROSS
A RECORD of the DEEDS
that WON the DECORATION
DURING the GREAT WAR,
1 9 1 4 - 1 9 1 9-
With Foreword by
His Excellency SIR WALTER E. DA VIDSON,
K.C.M.G., Governor of New South Wales
Compiled from Official Records
by K. R. CRAMP, m.a.
Honorary Secretary of the Royal Australian Historical Society


. . The Gratuitous Printing and
Presentation of this Publication
was offered by
mcgarron. Stewart $ go. Cut.,
to, and accepted by,
Che Rjyal Australian historical Society,
as a tribute of respect and
admiration for the numerous
Australians who so ably defen-
ded our country’s interests in
the Great War, 1914 - 1919.


Foreword by His Excellency
Sir Walter E. Davidson,
K.C.M.G.
I AM privileged to write a Foreword to the Roll of the
Winners in the Australian Forces of the Victoria Cross.
This Record of the achievements for which these
highest proofs of Valour were bestowed, should live for ever
in the annals of Australia.
The Victoria Cross stands alone; it has a place in British
hearts, without rival. All battle honours will be heirlooms
in many a home for generations to come, as a proud proof of
Manhood in the Great War. Such battle honours will not
again—that is my fixed belief—be won in so great a War as
this, as I‘ am convinced that no momentous issue such as we
fought for—and won—will ever be submitted to the Arbitra-
ment of Battle. The civilised world has learnt the lesson ;
and will see to it that it shall never again be in the power of
any individual to soak the earth with lifeblood in furtherance
of any scheme of world-supremacy.
Medals for pre-eminent gallantry or for distinguished
service will still be bravely won and honourably worn ; but
more will be earned by the display of these qualities amid the
risks and dangers in civil life than on the stricken field.
This proud Roll and Record is compiled by the Royal
Australian Historical Society, as the first contribution to
the history of Australia’s share in the War. And rightly so.
For it immortalises in the eyes of the World certain natural
qualities of the Australian Race which may have been sur-
mised but which had not been put to the proof.
It is something to be proud of that the Australian Forces
have wen more Victoria Crosses, in proportion to the number
of men in the field, than any other component part of the
British Army. But none know better than the gallant,
heroes themselves, as.thejf wear on their breasts the supreme
badge of Valour, that the opportunity came to them which


would have been seized, as instantly, by many others of their
comrades. The Honour that Australia should have won
the highest proportion of Crosses is really a national Honour.
The honour typifies the race : for it shows that Aus-
tralians are worthy scions of their sturdy forebears, and that
they add to the cool courage and constancy innate in the
British stock something more. It means that the men—and
it applies to the women, too —have retained the old qualities
and have added to them a fearlessness in face of danger, and
a resourcefulness amid unknown difficulties which are special
attributes of their upbringing in this fair land of Australia
some day to become the greater Britain of the Southern Seas.
The People which produce the heroes of to-day and have
attained to a Nation’s manhood, are a race of born and
trained athletes, because they are free and well nurtured
and are reared under ideal conditions.
The lads of to-day have a right to bear themselves
proudly ; and the lads of to-morrow will have before them, in
the thrilling story of this terrible conflict, a lesson which I
trust that they will ever treasure. This generation has won
great honour ; and the generations to come will maintain the
tradition which has won the World s homage for Australian
Valour.
W. E. DAVIDSON.


Introductory Comments
During the war that has just ended with the overthrow
of autocratic fallacies and the triumph of freedom’s cause,
about 580* Victoria Crosses have been bestowed on valiant
soldiers whose deeds have rendered them renowned even to the
uttermost parts of the globe. These doughty heroes came
from every quarter of the Empire. But the deeds of none
thrilled us more than those of the 63 Australians who, with
an utter contempt for danger, contributed to the scroll of
history records surpassed by none of any Clime or Age.
These representatives of our new-born nation —which received
its baptism of blood at the font of Gallipoli as recently as
April 25, 1915 —constitute nearly one-ninth of the total
number decorated with the Victoria Cross during the war.
They were drawn from all ranks ; 18 were Privates, one a Driver
11 Corporals, 9 Sergeants, 18 Lieutenants, 5 Captains, and,
one a Major who, at the time of his achievement, was acting
as Lieutenant-Colonel of a Battalion. Some, alas, fell,
“ riddled with bullets,” victims of their own impetuous
bravery, and the award of Valour’s highest honour had to be
bestowed posthumously, doubtless bringing a certain mourn-
ful consolation and pride to the relatives and friends of the
departed heroes.
But in all such cases the supreme sacrifice was not paid
until “ prodigies of prowess ” had been performed in their-
country’s cause. Indeed, it is to such heroes as these intrepid
Australians that, we can ascribe a very substantial share of
the credit for the Allies’ final victory. Time after time the
reader of the official records learns that their amazing coolness,
magnificent courage, utter disregard of danger, and fierce
determination converted what might have been “ a severe
check into splendid success,” or “ rendered it possible to con-
solidate and hold positions of vital importance ” ; that
“ it was entirely owing to this gallant conduct that the situa-
tion was relieved, and the advance enabled to continue ” ;
* Probably tbe exact number is 577


or yet again that “ his valour and determination resulted in
the successful capture of the final objective and saved the
lives of many of his comrades.” The subsequent capture of
the village of Mont St. Quentin, if we may rely on the official
despatch, was “ entirely due to the exceptional valour and
determination ” of Private Mactier in the preliminary work
of reaching a jumping-off position, though, unfortunately,
the distinguished valiant laid down his life in the effort.
The example thus set, time after time, by a solitary officer
or man frequently saved a critical situation, inspired others to
similar deeds of prowess, and had a deterrent effect upon the
enemy’s operations. Repeatedly our soldiers faced exceeding
odds, single-handed, or with the bare support of as many
comrades as could be counted on one’s fingers. One magni-
ficent record states that, practically unaided, an officer
captured two enemy officers and 61 other ranks, together with
six machine guns ; another officer is declared to have “ mopped
up single-handed a post of 32 ” ; yet again we read “ single-
handed he rushed a ‘ Pill box ’.” Often an officer, dashing
forward alone, would kill a whole crew at the machine gun
and, by sheer audacious ‘ bluff,’ force those who had taken
shelter in a neighbouring dug-out to surrender en masse.
Alone Lieutenant Gaby mounted the enemy’s parapet, and
by point-blank revolver fire forced four crews away from
their machine guns, all of which he secured along with 50
men. Lieutenant McCarthy advanced 700 yards and, single-
handed for part of the time, and with one comrade for the
remainder of the exciting period, disposed of 20 of the enemy,
captured another 50 with their four machine guns. Lieu-
tenant Storkey, with a handful of comrades, faced nearly
100 attacking enemy, put over 30 out of action, and brought
back 50 prisoners of war.
Thus by bayoneting, bombing, rifle-firing, carrying
ammunition in dangerously exposed areas, building and re-
building barricades under most searching fire, handling the
enemy’s live bombs and returning them to the senders,
advancing 600 or 700 yards beyond the lines to obtain in-
formation, conveying the wounded from No Man’s Land,
extricating comrades buried alive by hostile-shell, and by a
hundred and one other similar meritorious deeds, our men have
not only rendered their own fame imperishable, but have
also made their country incalculably better known. The
world has been impressed with the gallantry and worth of
Australia’s sons, and the prestige thus gained proved a factor
of no mean value when the Peace-Makers gathered round
their Conference Table. Australian valour lent the weight
of authority to the voice of Australia’s Prime Minister


It would be invidious to class these 63 heroes accord-
ing to the States they represented. It matters little whether
they hailed from the north, east, south or west of this vast
continent ; whether they were bronzed under the semi-
tropical suns of Queensland, or breathed in the more temperate
breezes of New South Wales or Victoria, or drank in the
balmy air of the southern garden of Tasmania, or roamed
amidst the golden grain of South Australia, or the golden
nuggets of the westernmost State, they are first and last
Australians. From Corporal Jacka, who opened the chapter
on the slopes of Gallipoli in May, 1915, to Lieutenants Ingram
apd Maxwell, who clcsed it near Mont St. Quentin, in France,
in October, 1918, they all, as members of the Australian
Imperial Force, represent our common heritage—Australia—
and thus belong equally to all of us.
K.R.C.


.. Acknowledgments..
THIS Souvenir Pamphlet is the outcome of an
address given by His Excellency Sir Walter
Davidson, K.C.M.G., Governor of New South Wales,
at the Eighteenth Annual Meeting of the Royal Aus-
tralian Historical Society,
The Compiler desires to acknowledge the assistance
of the Principal Librarian and the Staff of the Public
Library, Sydney ; and also the Proprietors and Editor
of the Sydney Mail, who supplied some of the blocks
from which the portraits are reproduced.


The
Victoria Cross
THE Victoria Cross is a bronze Maltese Cross, measuring
one and a half inches in diameter, with the Royal
Crown and Crest in the middle, and the phrase “ For
Valour ” on a scroll below. A bronze bar ornamented with
a laurel and connected with the cross by the letter V, forms
the mounting. On the back of the bar is engraved the name
and corps of the recipient. The ribbon is one and a half
inches wide, and is of a red colour for the army, and blue
for the navy. The names of all recipients are published
in the London Gazette.
The Cross was instituted during the Crimean War by
Royal Warrant dated January 29, 1856. It is awarded for
acts of valour or devotion to one’s country in the presence of
the enemy. Those below the rank of commissioned officers
receive in addition an annual pension of £lO. A Royal
Warrant in 1858 rendered persons eligible for the decoration
even though their brave deeds had not been performed in the
enemy’s presence; even civilians who had distinguished
themselves in the suppression of the Indian Mutiny might
be recommended for it. But, subsequently (in 1881), the
qualification was again defined as “ conspicuous bravery or
devotion to the country in the presence of the enemy.”
The Colonial forces were rendered eligible in 1867, and
the auxiliary and reserve forces, both naval and military, in
1881.
The original Royal Warrant of 1856 ordained that " to
place all persons on a perfectly equal footing in relation to
eligibility for the decoration, neither rank, nor long service,
nor wounds, nor any other circumstance or condition what-
soever, save the merit of conspicuous bravery should be held
to establish a sufficient claim to the honour.”


(Sob Save tbe Iking


. . The following pages contain a complete
compilation of the official records of the deeds
which won the Victoria Cross for Australians
during the recent Great War. The date furnished
in each case has reference to the issue of the
London Gazette in which the notification of the
award appeared. In several instances a date has
been inserted at the end of the record to indicate
when the services which gained the decoration were
performed. The rank mentioned is that attaching
to the officer or private at the date of the award.
The alphabetical list of the recipients of the
decoration indicates, amongst other detail, the
theatre of war in which the recognised services
were rendered. This information will be the
more interesting since it was not included in
many of the original records, and has but
recently been officially notified.
A noticeable feature of this souvenir is the
completeness of the portrait gallery. It is the
first publication to contain a full set of the photo-
graphs of the sixty-three Australian heroes.


No. 465, Lance-Corporal ALBERT JACKA,
14th Battalion, A.1.F., July 24, 1915.
For most conspicuous bravery on the night of the 19th-20th
May, 1915, at “ Courtney’s Post,” Gallipoli Peninsula.
Lce.-Cpl. Jacka, while holding a portion of our trench with
four other men, was heavily attacked. When all except himself were
wounded, the trench was rushed and occupied by seven Turks.
Lce.-Cpl. Jacka at once most gallantly attacked them single
handed, and killed the w’hole party, five by rifle fire, and two with the
bayonet.
Corporal (later Captain) Jacka is
a native of Wedderburn, Victoria,
and was prior to enlistment con-
nected with the Victorian Fores-
try Department. He belonged
to the 14th Battalion. He was
the first Australian to win the
coveted honor in the Great War.


Capt. ALFRED JOHN SHOUT,
Ist Battalion, A.1.F., October 15, 1915.
For most conspicuous bravery at Lone Pine trenches, in the
Gallipoli Peninsula.
On the morning of August 9, 1915, with a very small party Capt.
Shout charged down trenches strongly occupied by the enemy, and
personally threw four bombs among them, killing eight, and routing the
remainder.
In the afternoon of the same day, from the position gained in the
morning, he captured a further length of trench under similar conditions,
and continued personally to bomb the enemy at close range under* very
heavy fire until he was severely wounded, losing his right hand and left
eye.
This most gallant officer has since succumbed to his injuries.
Captain Shout was bom in 1882 in
New Zealand,and resided at Darling-
ton, Sydney, prior to his enlistment.
He was mentioned in despatches in
the Boer War. He belonged to the
Ist Battalion in the recent war. He
succumbed to his wounds on a
hospital ship, and was buried at sea.
He had also been awarded the M.C.


Lieut. WILLIAM JOHN SYMONS,
7th Battalion, A.1.F., October 15, 1915.
For most conspicuous bravery on the night of August 8-9, 1915,
at Lone Pine trenches, in the Gallipoli Peninsula.
He was in command of the right section of the newly captured
trenches held by his battalion and repelled several counter attacks with
great coolness. At about 5 a.m. on August 9 a series of determined
attacks were made by the enemy on an isolated sap, and six officers
were in succession killed or severely wounded, a portion of the sap
being lost.
Lieut. Symons then led a charge and retook the lost sap
shooting two Turks with his revolver. The sap was under hostile fire
from three sides, and Lieut. Symons withdrew some fifteen yards
to a spot where some overhead cover could be obtained, and in the face
of heavy fire built up a sand barricade. The enemy succeeded in
setting fire to the fascines and woodwork of the head cover, but Lieut.
Symons extinguished the fire and rebuilt the barricade.
His coolness and determination finally compelled the enemy to
discontinue their attacks.
Lieut. Symons is the oldest son of Mrs. M. K.
Symons of East Brunswick, Melbourne. He
was attached to the 7th Battalion of the 2nd
Infantry Brigade.


Lieut. FREDERICK HAROLD TUBB,
7th Battalion, A.1.F., October 15, 1915.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty at Lone Pine
trenches, in the Gallipoli Peninsula, on August 9, 1915.
In the early morning the enemy made a determined counter-
attack on the centre of the newly captured trench held by Lieutenant
Tubb. They advanced up a sap and blew in a sand-bag barricade,
leaving only one foot of it standing, but Lieut. Tubb led his men
back, repulsed the enemy and rebuilt the barricade. Supported by
strong bombing parties the enemy succeeded in twice again blowing
in the barricade, but on each occasion Lieut. Tubb, although
wounded in the head and arm, held his ground with the greatest cool-
ness and rebuilt it, and finally succeeded in maintaining his position
under very heavy bomb fire. t
Lieut. Frederick H. Tubb was the fourth son of
Mr. Harry Tubb, and was born in November,
1881, at St. Helena, Long wood East, Vic. He'
was educated at the State School. Longwood
where his father was the head master. At the
opening of the war he was appointed Trans-
port Officer to 7th Battalion, 2nd Infantry
Brigade. He was present at the historic
landing at Gallipoli, and was wounded at
Lone Pine, 9th August. 1915. He it was
who recommended Sergeant Dunstan and
Corporal Burton for their V.C.’s. He died of
wounds received at the Menin Road battle
while leading his men to their final objective


2nd-Lieut. HUGO VIVIAN HOPE THROSSELL,
10th Light Horse Regiment, A.1.F., October 15, 1915.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty during opera'
tions on the Kaiakij Aghala (Hill 00), in the Gallipoli Peninsula, on
August 29 and 30, 1915. Although severely wounded in several places
during a counter attack he refused to leave his post or to obtain medical
assistance till all danger was passed, when he had his wounds dressed
and returned to the firing line until ordered out of action by the Medical
Officer.
Bv his personal courage and example he kept up the spirits of his
party, and was largely instrumental in saving the situation at a critical
period.
Lieut. Throssell was bom at
Northam, Western Australia,
and is the son of the Hon.
George Throssell.


No. 384, Corporal ALEXANDER STEWART BURTON,
7th Battalion, A.1.F., October 15, 1915.
For most conspicuous bravery at Lone Pine trenches, in the
Gallipoli Peninsula, on August 9, 1915.
In the early morning the enemy made a determined counter-
attack on the centre of the newly captured trench held by Lieutenant
Tubb, Cpls. Burton and Dunstan, and a few men. They ad-
vanced up a sap and blew in a sandbag barricade, leaving only one foot
of it standing, but Lieut. Tubb, with the two Corporals, repulsed
the enemy and rebuilt the barricade. Supported by strong bombing
parties the enemy twice again succeeded in blowing in the barricade,
but on each occasion they were repulsed and the barricade rebuilt,
although Lieut. Tubb was wounded in the head and arm, and
Cpl. Burton was killed bv a bomb while most gallantly building
up the parapet under a bail of bombs.
The late Corporal Burton was the youngest son of
Mr. and Mrs. A. E. Burton, of Euroa, Victoria.


No. 2130, Corporal WILLIAM DUNSTAN,
7th Battalion, A.1.F., October 15, 1915.
For most conspicuous bravery at Lone Pine trenches, in the
Gallipoli Peninsula, on August 9 1915.
In the early morning the enemy made a determined counter-
attack on the centre of the newly captured trench held by Lieutenant
Tubb, Cpls. Burton and Dunstan, and a few men. They ad-
vanced up a sap and blew in a sandbag barricade, leaving only one foot
of it standing, but Lieut. Tubb, with the two Corporals, repulsed
the enemy and rebuilt the barricade. Supported by strong bombing
parties the enemy twice again succeeded in blowing in the barricade,
but on each occasion they were repulsed and the barricade rebuilt,
although Lieut. Tubb was wounded in the • head and arm, and
Cpl. Burton was killed by a bomb while most gallantly building
up the parapet under a hail of bombs.
Corporal (afterwards Lieutenant) Dunstan, V.C.,
is tlie third son of Mr. and Mrs. William
Dunstan. of Cameron Street, Ballarat, Victoria,
where lie was born in March, 1895. He
belonged to the 7tli Battalion Infantry, and since
his return has entered the Department of Re-
patriation (Jolimont, Victbria), as accountant.


No. 943, Pte. JOHN HAMILTON,
Ist Battalion, A.1.F., October 15, 1915.
For most conspicuous bravery on August 9, 1915, in the Gallipoli
Peninsula.
During a heavy bomb attack by the enemy on the newly captured
position at Lone Pine, Private Hamilton, with utter disregard to per-
sonal safety, exposed himself under heavy fire on the parados, in ordei
to secure a better fire position against the enemy’s bomb throwers.
His coolness and daring example had an immediate effect. The
defence was encouraged and the enemy driven off with heavy loss.
Private John Hamilton hails
from lielmore, Sydney. He be-
longed to the Ist Battalion, New
South Wales. His rank was sub-
sequently that of 2nd Lieuten-
tant. He won the V.'C. at Lone
Pine.


No. 958, Pte. LEONARD KEYSOR,
Ist Battalion, A.1.F., October 15, 1915.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty at Lone Pine
trenches, in the Gallipoli Peninsula.
On August 7, 1015, he was in a trench which was being heavily
bombed by the enemy. He picked up two live bombs and threw them
back at the enemy at great risk to his own life, and continued throwing
bombs, although himself wounded, thereby saving a portion of the
trench which it was most important to hold. *
On August 8, at the same place, Private Keysor successfully
bombed the enemy out of a position, from which a temporary mastery
over his own trench had been obtained, and was again wounded.
Although marked for hospital he declined to leave, and volunteered
to throw bombs for another company which had lost its bomb throwers.
He continued to bomb the enemy till the situation was relieved.
Private (afterwards Lieutenant) Leonard Keysor is an English Jew,
and the son of Mr. and Mrs. Benjamin Keysor and the brother of
Miss M. Keysor. He was born in November, 1895, at Maida Vale,
London, and lived for a while in Canada. He had been in Sydney
but three months when he enlisted and was attached to the Ist
Battalion. He was in the first party that landed at Gallipoli. He
was subsequently transferred to the 42ud Battalion, and gained his
commission on the field.
(Photo by Miss Judith Fletcher.)


2nd-Lieut. ARTHUR SEAFORTH BLACKBURN.
10th Batt., A.1.F., September 9, 1916.
For most conspicuous bravery. He was directed with 50 men to
drive the enemy from a strong point. By dogged determination he
eventually captured their trench after personally leading four separate
parties of bombers against it, many of whom became casualties.
In face of fierce opposition he captured 250 yards of trench. Then
after crawling forward with a Sergeant to reconnoitre he returned,
attacked and seized another 120 yards of trench, establishing com-
munication with the Battalion on his left. July 22*, 1916.
Lieut. Blackburn is the son
of the late Canon Blackburn
of Woodville. South Aus-
tralia, and step-brother of
Dr. C. Bickerton Blackburn
of Potts Point, Sydney. The
decoration was won at
Pozieres, France. He was
attached to the 10th Batta-
lion.


No. 3055, Pte. THOMAS COOKE,
Bth Batt., A.1.F., September 9, 1916.
For most conspicuous, bravery. After a I,ewis gun had been
disabled, he was ordered to take his gun and gun-team to a dangerous
part of the line. Here he did fine work, but came under very heavy
fire, with the result that finally he was the only man left. He still
stuck to his post and continued to fire his gun.
When assistance was sent he was found dead beside his gun.
He set a splendid example of determination and devotion tc duty.
July 24-25, 1916.
Pte. Cooke was from Wellington,
N.Z., but enlisted in the Bth
Australianßattalion. His glorious
but fatal deed of valour was
performed at Pozieres.


No. 588, Pte. WILLIAM JACKSON,
17th Batt., A.1.F., September 9, 1916,
For most conspicuous bravery. On the return from a successful
raid several members of the raiding party were seriously wounded in
“No Man’s Land” by shell fire. Pte. Jackson got back safely
and, after handing over a prisoner whom he had brought in, immedia-
tely went out again under very heavy shell fire and assisted in bringing
in a wounded man. He then went out again, and with a sergeant was
bringing in another wounded man, when his arm was blown off by a
shell, and the sergeant was rendered unconscious.
He then Returned to our trenches, obtained assistance and went
out again to look for his two wounded comrades.
He set a splendid example of pluck and determination. His work
has always been marked by the greatest coolness and bravery. March
22, 1918.
Private Jackson is the eldest
son of Mr. John Jackson of
(runbar, near Hay (New
Soutli Wales). He was born
in 1897, and was only seven-
teen years of age when he
joined the 17th Battalion in
February 1915. He was under
nineteen years when he won
the V.C. for conspicuous
bravery near Armentieres.


No. 2053, Pte. JOHN LEAK,
9th Batt., A.1.F., September 9, 1916.
For most conspicuous bravery. He was one of a party which
finally captured an enemy strong point. At one assault, when the
enemy’s bombs were outranging ours, Pte. Leak jumped out of the
trench, ran forward under heavy machine gun fire at close range and
threw three bombs into the enemy’s bombing post. He then jumped
into the post and bayonetted three unwounded enemy bombers.
Later, when the enemy in overwhelming numbers was driving his
party back, he was always the last to withdraw at each stage, and kept
on throwing bombs.
His courage and energy had such an effect on the enemy that,
on the arrival of reinforcements, the whole trench was recaptured.
July 23, 1916.
Private Leak left Australia
with the Queensland Rein-
forcements (9tli Battalion).
The V.C. was won at Pozieres,
France.


No. 3970, Pte. MARI IN O'MEARA,
16th Batt., A.1.F., September 9, 1916.
For most conspicuous bravery. During four days of very heavy
fighting he repeatedly went out and brought in wounded officers and
men from “ No Man’s Dand ” under intense artillery and machine gun
fire.
He also volunteered and carried up ammunition and bombs
through a heavy barrage to a portion of the trenches which was being
heavily shelled at the time.
He showed throughout utter cont empt of .danger, and undoubtedly
saved many lives. August 9-12, 1916.
Private O’Meara is a native
of Ireland but, prior to enlist-
ment. was resident at Collie,
Western Australia. He was
attached to the 12th Rein-
forcements of the 16th Batta-
lion, and won his decoration
at Pozieres, France.


No. 1352, Sgt. CLAUDE CHARLES CASTLETON,
late Aus. Machine Gun Corps, September 26, 1916.
For most conspicuous bravery. During an attack on the enemy’s
trenches the infantry was temporarily driven back by the intense
machine gun fire opened by the enemy. Many wounded were left in
“ No Man’s Land ” lying in shell holes.
Sergt. Castleton went out twice in face of this intense fire,
and each time brought in a wounded man on his back.
He went out a third time and was bringing in another wounded
man when he was himself hit in the back and killed instantly.
Fie set a splendid example of courage and self sacrifice. July 28,
1916.
The scene of this deed of
valour was near Pozieres.
France. His parents re-
side in Suffolk, England.


Capt. HENRY WILLIAM MURRAY, C.M.G., D.S.O (and bar)
D.C.M., C. de G.
A.1.F., March 10, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery when in command of the right
flank company in attack. He led his company to the assault with
great skill and courage, and the position was quickly captured. Fight-
ing of a very severe nature followed, and thrice heavy counter-attacks
were beaten back, these successes being due to Capt. Murray’s
wonderful work.
Throughout the night his company suffered heavy casualties
through concentrated enemy shell fire, and on one occasion gave ground
for a short way. This gallant officer rallied his command and saved
the situation by sheer valour.
He made his presence felt throughout the line, encouraging his
men, heading bombing parties, leading bayonet charges, and carrying
wounded to places of safety.
His magnificent example inspired his men throughout February
4-5, 1917.
Captain (now Lieut.-Colonel) Murray, V.C.
C. D.S 0. and Bar, D.C.M., 0. de G., was
born at Breadalbane, near Launceston, Tas-
mania, in 1880, but enlisted as a Private with
the Western Australian forces. He was twice
wounded in Gallipoli, where he won the
D. and a commission in the 13th Batta-
lion. He was promoted to a Captaincy in
March. 1916, and in September was wounded
in France. The V.C. was won at Stormy
Trench, near Gueudecourt, France. He has
secured more military honours than any
other Australian soldier, The King has
recently conferred on him the distinction of
C.M.G. (May, 1919).


2nd Lieut, (temp. Capt.) PERCY HERBERT CHERRY, M.C.,
Late 26th Batt., A.1.F., May 11, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery, determination and leadership when
in command of a company detailed to storm and clear a village.
After all the officers of his company had become casualties he
carried on with care and determination in face of fierce opposition,
and cleared the village of the enemy.
He sent subsequent reports of progress made, and when held up
for some time by an enemy strong point he organised machine gun and
bomb parties and captured the position. His leadership, coolness and
bravery set a wonderful example to his men.
Having cleared the village he took charge of the situation and beat
off the most resolute and heavy counter-attacks made by the enemy.
Wounded about 6.30 a.m. he refused to leave his post q,nd there
remained, encouraging all to hold out at all costs, until, about 4.30 p.m.
this very gallant officer was killed by an enemy shell. March 26, 1917.
The late Captain Cherry resided at Cradoo, near Hobart, Tasmania. He
was the son of Mr. and Mrs. John G. Cherry, of Cherry Yale, and was
born in June. 1895, at Drysdale. Victoria. He left for the front as Q.M.S.
and was made Regimental Sergeant-Major at Gallipoli, and later was
given a commission. He was severely wounded and invalided to Egypt.
On recovery he was attached to the Australian Machine Gun Corps, and
was again dangerously wounded at Pozieres, but received the M.C. for
meritorious services there. He received appointment as Adjutant at
Wareham Camp, but on application was allowed to go to the front again,
He was killed in action in Prance on March 27, 1917, in his twenty-
second year. The V.C. was won at T.agnicourt. France.


Cant. JAMES ERNEST NEWLAND,
12th Batt., A.1.F., June 8, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty in the face of
heavy odds on three separate occasions.
On the first occasion he organised the attack bv his company on a
most important objective, and led personally, under heavy fire, a
bombing attack. He then rallied his company, which had suffered
heavy casualties, and he was one of the first to reach the objective.
On the following night his company, holding the captured position,
was heavily counter-attacked. By personal exertion, utter disregard
of fire, and judicious use of reserves, he succeeded in dispersing the
enemy and regaining the position.
On a subsequent occasion, when the company on the left was
overpowered and his own company attacked from the rear, he drove
off a combined attack which had developed from these directions.
The attacks were'renewed three or four times, and it was Captain
Newland’s tenacity and disregard for liis own safety that encouraged
the men to hold out.
The stand made by this officer was of the greatest importance and
produced far reaching results. April 7-9, 15, 1917.
Captain Newland was born
.at Camperdown (Victoria)
but enlisted in Tasmania.
He saw service in South
Africa at the age of 18 years.
He was present at the landing
at Gallipoli, and there re-
ceived his commission and
became instructor to the
Machine Gun Section, and
then Transport Officer at
Alexandria. He took part
in the capture of Pozieres
and won his V.C. at Bapaume.
His Battalion was the 12th.


Lieut. FRANK HUBERT McNAMARA,
Aus. Forces, R.F.C., June 8, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty during an
aerial bomb attack upon a hostile construction train, when one of our
pilots was forced to land behind the enemy’s lines.
Lieut. McNamara, observing this pilot’s predicament and
the fact that hostile cavalry was approaching, descended to his rescue.
He did this under heavy rifle fire, and in spite of the fact that he him-
self had been severely wounded in the thigh.
He landed about 200 yards from the damaged machine, the pilot
of which climbed on to Lieut. McNamara’s machine, and an
attempt was made to rise. Owing, however, to his disabled leg,
Lieutenant McNamara was unable to keep his machine straight, and
it turned over. The two officers, having extricated themselves,
immediately set fire to the machine and made their way across to the
damaged machine which they succeeded in starting.
Finally, Lieutenant McNamara, although weak from loss of blood,
flew this machine back to the aerodrome, a distance of 70 miles, and
thus completed his comrade’s rescue. March 20, 1917.
Lieut. McNamara was the first Australian
Airman to win the V. 0., which was
granted for a deed of valour in Egypt.
He is the son of Mr. W. F. McNamara,
of Caulfield, the Chief Inspector of the
Victorian Wheat Commission. Prior to
enlistment Lieut. McNamara was a
teacher.


Lieut. CHARLES POPE,
Late 11th Batt., A.1.F., June 8, 1917.
lor most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty when in com-
mand of a very important picquet post in the sector held by his battalion,
his orders being to hold this post at all costs.
After the picquet post had been heavily attacked, the enemy in
greatly superior numbers surrounded the post. Lieutenant Pope,
finding that he was running short of ammunition, sent back for further
supplies. But the situation culminated before it could arrive, and in
the hope of saving the position, this very gallant officer was seen to
charge with his picquet into a superior force, by which it was over-
powered.
By his sacrifice Lieut. Pope not only inflicted a heavy loss on the
enemy, but obeyed his order to hold the position to the last. His
body, together with those of most of his men, was found in close
proximity to eighty enemy dead—a sure proof of the gallant resistance
which had been made. April 15, 1917.
The late Lieut. Pope belonged
to Perth, Western Australia. He
was attached to the 11th Batta-
lion and won his V.C. at Louveral,
France.


No. 2902, Sgt. JOHN WOODS WHITTLE, D.C.M.
12th Batt., A.1.F., June 8,1917.
For conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty on two occasions.
When in command of a platoon the enemy, under cover of an
intense artillery barrage, attacked the small trench he was holding.
Owing to weight of numbers the enemy succeeded in entering the
trench, and it was owing to Sgt. Whittle personally collecting all
available men and charging the enemy that the position was regained.
On a second occasion when the enemy broke through the left of
our line Sgt. Whittle’s own splendid example was the means of keeping
the men well in hand. His platoon were suffering heavy casualties
and the enemy endeavoured to bring up a machine-gun to enfilade the
position. Grasping the situation he rushed alone across the fire-swept
ground and attacked the hostile gun-crew with bombs before the gun
could be got into action.
He succeeded in killing the whole crew and in bringing back the
machine-gun to our position. April 9, 1917.
Sergeant J. W. Whittle, V.C., D.C.M., is a
native of Hobart, where he was born in
August, 1883. He is the son of the late
Mr. Henry Whittle. He had seen previous
service with the 2nd Imperial Bushmen
in the South African War. He was
awarded the D.C.M. on 24th August, 1917.
The V.C. was in recognition of valour
near Boursies, France. He was attached
to the 12th Battalion.


No. 2389, Pte JORGAN CHRISTIAN JENSEN,
50th Batt., A.1.F., June 8, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery and initiative when, with five
comrades, he attacked a barricade behind which were about 45 of the
enemy and a machine gun. One of his party shot the gunner, and
Pte. Jensen, single-handed, rushed the post and threw in a bomb.
He had still a bomb in one hand, but taking another from his pocket
with the other hand he drew the pin with his teeth, and by threatening
the enemy with two bombs and telling them that they w ere surrounded
he induced them to surrender.
Pte. Jensen then sent one of his prisoners to order a neighbouring
enemy party to surrender, which they did. This latter party were then
fired on in ignorance of their surrender by another party of our troops ;
whereupon Pte. Jensen, utterly regardless of personal danger, stood
on the barricade, waved his helmet, caused firing to cease, and sent
his prisoners back to our lines.
Pte. Jensen’s conduct throughout was marked by extraordinary
bravery and determination. April 2, 1917.
Private Jensen was a naturalised
Dane, and an ex-sailor. He was
resident in South Australia
before his enlistment. His de-
coration was won at Noreuil,
France. He belonged to the 50th
Battalion.


No. 4195, Pte. THOMAS JAMES BEDE KENNY,
2nd Batt., A.1.F., June 8, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty when his
platoon was held up by an enemy strong point, and several casualties
prevented progress. Pte. Kenny, under very heavy fire at close range,
dashed alone towards the enemy’s position, killed one man in advance
of the strong point who endeavoured to bar his way. He then bombed
the position, captured the gun crew, all of whom he had wounded,
killed an officer who showed fight and seized the gun.
Pte, Kenny’s gallant action enabled his platoon to occupy the
position, which was of great local importance. April 9, 1917.
Private (afterwards Corporal)
Kenny is the son of Nurse
Kenny, of Drynane Private
Hospital, Bondi, Sydney. He
was educated at Christian
Brothers College, Waverley.
He joined the Forces at 18
years of age and sailed with
the Second Battalion in Dec-
ember, 1915. The V.C. was in
recognition of his valour at
Hermies. France. His unit
was the 2nd Battalion.


Lieut. RUPERT VANCE MOON,
58th Batt., A.1.F., June 14, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery during an attack on an enemy strong
point.
His own immediate objective was a position in advance of the
hostile trench, and thence against the hostile trench itself, after the
capture of which it was intended that his men should co-operate in a
further assault on a strong point further in rear.
Although wounded in the initial advance he reached the first
objective.
Leading his men against the trench itself he was again badly
wounded and incapacitated for the moment.
He nevertheless inspired and encouraged his men and captured
the trench. Lieut. Moon continued to lead his much diminished
command in the general attack with the utmost valour, being again
wounded, and the attack was successfully pressed home.
During the consolidation of the position, this officer was again
badly wounded, and it was only after this fourth and severe wound
through the face that he consented to retire from the fight.
His bravery was magnificent, and was largely instrumental in the
successful issue against superior numbers, the safeguarding of the flank
of the attack and the capture of many prisoners and machine guns.
May 12, 1917.
Lieut, (now temp.-Captain) Moon is the son of Mr. Arthur
Moon, an Inspector in the National Bank of Australasia,
Melbourne. He was born at Bacchus Marsh, Victoria, in
1894, and was educated at Kyneton Grammar School.
His valorous deed was performed near Bullecourt,
France. His unit was the 58th Battalion.


No. 2445, Cpl. GEORGE JULIAN HOWELL, M.M.
Ist Batt., A.1.F., June 27,1917.
For most conspicuous bravery.
Seeing a party of the enemy were likely to outflank his battalion,
Cpl. Howell, on his own initiative, single-handed and exposed to heavy
bomb and rifle fire, climbed on to the top of the parapet and proceeded
to bomb the enemy, pressing them back along the trench.
Having exhausted his stock of bombs he .continued to attack the
enemy with his bayonet. He was then severely wounded.
The prompt action and gallant conduct of this N.C.O. in the face
of superior numbers w 7 as witnessed by the whole battalion, and greatly
inspired them in the subsequent successful counter-attack. May 6,
1917.
Corporal (later Sergeant) Howell,
V.C., M.M., is the son of Private
anil Mrs. Howell, of Boyle Street,
Enfield. N.S.W. He was born at En-
field and educated at the Croydon
Park and Burwood Schools. He
went through Gallipoli as a Private
unscathed, but was wounded at
Pozieres, where his conduct gained
him promotion. His V.C. was
awarded for valour near Bui lecourt,
France. He was attached to the
Ist Battalion,


Capt. ROBERT CUTHBERT GRIEVE,
37th Batt., A.1.F., August 2, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery.
During an attack on the enemy’s position, in the face of heavy
artillery and machine gun fire, and after all his officers had been
wounded and his company had suffered very heavy casualties, Capt.
Grieve located two hostile machine guns which were holding up his
advance. He then, single-handed, under continuous fire from these
two machine guns, succeeded in bombing and killing the two crews,
reorganised the remnants of his company and gained his original
objective.
Capt. Grieve, by his utter disregard of danger, and his coolness in
mastering a very difficult position, set a splendid example, and when
he finally fell wounded, the position had been secured, and the few
remaining eneni)’- were in full flight. June 7, 1917.
Capt. Grieve is the son of
Mrs. A . Grieve of Brighton,
Victoria. He was attached
to the 37th Battalion, and
won his decoration at
Messines, France.


No. 1804, Pte. JOHN CARROLL,
33rd Batt., A.1.F., Ausust 2, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery.
During an attack, immediately the barrage lifted, Pte. John
Carroll rushed the enemy’s trench and bayoneted four of the enemy.
He then noticed a comrade in difficulties, and at once proceeded
to his comrade’s assistance and killed one of the enemy. He continued
working ahead with great determination until he came across a machine
gun and team of four men in a shell-hole.
Single-handed he attacked the entire team, killing three of the men
and capturing the gun.
Later on two of his comrades were buried by a shell, and in spite
of very heavy shelling and machine gun fire, he managed to extricate
them.
During the 96 hours the battalion was in the line Pte. Carroll
displayed most wonderful courage and fearlessness.
His magnificent example of gallantry and devotion to duty inspired
all ranks in his battalion. June 7-12, 1917.
Pte. (afterwards Lanee-Corporal)
Carroll was born in Brisbane, Qld„
in 1892, He enlisted in Kalgoorlie,
W.A., in April. 1916. Hisdeedof
valour was performed at St. Ives,
France. His Battalion was the
33rd.


2nd-Lieut. FREDERICK BIRKS.
Late 6th Batt., A.1.F., November 8, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery in attack when accompanied by only
a Corporal, he rushed a strong point which was holding up the advance.
The Corporal was wounded by a bomb, but 2nd-T,ieut. Birks went on
by himself, killed the remainder of the enemy occupying the position,
and captured a machine gun.
Shortly afterwards he organised a small party and attacked another
strong point which was occupied by about twenty-five of the enemy,
of whom many were killed and an officer and fifteen men captured.
During the consolidation this officer did magnificent work in re-
organising parties of other units which had been disorganised during the
operations.
By his wonderful coolness and personal bravery 2nd-Lieut. Birks
kept his men in splendid spirits throughout.
He was killed at his post by a shell whilst endeavouring to extri-
cate some of his men who had been buried by a shell. September 9,
1917.
The late Lieut. Birks was born
in Wales, but was a member of
the A.I.F. His honour was
won at the cost of his life at
Glencorse Wood, east of Ypres,
France. His unit was the 6th
Battalion.


No. 2060, Sgt. JOHN JAMES DWYER,
Aust. M.G. Corps, A.1.F., November 26, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery when in attack, Sgt. Dwyer, in
charge of a Vickers machine gun, went forward with the first wave of
the brigade.
On reaching the final objective this Non-Commissioned Officer
rushed his gun forward in advance of the captured position in order to
obtain a commanding spot. Whilst advancing he noticed an enemy
machine gun firing on the troops on our right flank and causing casual-
ties. Unhesitatingly he rushed his gun forward to within 30 yards of
the enemv gun and fired point blank at it, putting it out of action and
killing the gun crew. He then seized the gun, and totally ignoring the
snipers from the rear of the enemy position, carried it back across the
shell swept ground to our front line and established both it and his
Vickers gun on the right flank of our brigade.
Sgt. Dwyer commanded these guns with great coolness, and
when the enemy counter-attacked our positions he rendered great
assistance in repulsing them.
On the following day, when the position was heavily shelled, this
Non-Commissioned Officer took up successive positions. On one
occasion his Vickers gun was blown up by shell fire, but he conducted
his gun team back to Headquarters through the enemy barrage,
secured one of the reserve guns, and rushed it back to our position in
the shortest possible time.
During the whole of the attack his contempt of danger, cheerful-
ness and courage raised the spirits of all who were in his sector of the line.
September 26, 1917.
Sfrt. (now 2nd Lieut.) Dwyer is from Bruny Island, Tasmania, and was born at
Cygnet in 1890. He left Tasmania in 1915 as Lance-Corporal, and after seeing
service at Gallipoli was attached to the 4th Machine Gun Co. (Aust.) He won
his decoration at Zonnebeke, France.


No. 456, Sgt. LEWIS McGEE,
Late 40th Batt., A 1.F., November 26, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery when in the advance to the final
objective, Sgt. McGee led his platoon with great dash and bravery,
though strongly opposed, and under heavy shell-fire.
His platoon was suffering severely and the advance of the company
was stopped by machine gun fire from a “ Pill-box ” post. Single-
handed Sgt. McGee rushed the post armed only with a revolver. He
shot some of the crew and captured the rest, and thus enabled the
advance to proceed. He re-organised the remnants of his platoon
and was foremost in the remainder of the advance, and during the
consolidation of the position he did splendid work.
This Non-Commissioned Officer’s coolness and bravery were con-
spicuous and contributed largely to the success of the company’s
operations.
Sgt. McGee was subsequently killed in action. October 4,19 J 7,.
The late Sgt. McGee, V.C.,
resided at Avoca, Tasmania,
and was 27 years of age when
he enlisted in 1916. He was
killed in action on October
13, 1917. He won his decor-
ation east of Ypres. His
Battalion was the 40th.


No. 114, Lce.-Cpl. WALTER PEELER,
3rd P. Batt., A.1.F., November 26, 1917
For most conspicuous bravery when with a Lewis gun accompany-
ing the first wave of the assault he encountered an enemy party sniping
the advancing troops from a shell-hole.
Lce.-Cpl. Peeler immediately rushed the position and accounted
for nine of the enemy, and cleared the way for the advance. On
two subsequent occasions he performed similar acts of valour, and
each time accounted for a number of the enemy.
During operations he was directed to a position from which an
enemy machine gun was being fired on our troops. He located and
killed the gunner, and the remainder of the enemy party ran into a
dug-out close by. From this shelter they were dislodged by a bomb
and ten of the enemy ran out. These he disposed of.
This Non-Commissioned Officer actually accounted for over 39
cf the enemy.
He displayed an absolute fearlessness in making his way ahead
of the first wave of the assault, and the fine example which he set
ensured the success of the attack against most determined opposition.
September 20, 1917.
Lee -Corporal Peeler belongs to
Richmond, Victoria, He won
his decoration east of Ypres,
France, He belonged the 3rd
P. Battalion,


No. 3774, Pte. PATRICK BUGDEN,
Late 31st Batt., A.1.F., November 26, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty when on two
occasions out advance was temporarily held up by strongly defended
“ Pill-boxes.” Pte. Bixdgen, in the face of devastating fire from
machine guns, gallantly led small parties to attack these strong points
and, successfully silencing the machine guns with bombs, captured the
garrison at the point of the bayonet.
On another occasion when a Corporal, who had been detached from
his company, had been captured and was being taken to the rear of
the enemy, Pte. Bugden, single-handed, rushed to the rescue of his
comrade, shot one enemy and bayonetted the remaining two, thus
releasing the Corporal.
On five occasions he rescued wounded men under intense shell and
machine gun fire, showing an utter contempt and disregard for danger.
Almost foremost in volunteering for any dangerous mission, it
was during the execution of one of these missions that this gallant
soldier was killed. September 26-28. 1917.
The late Private “Paddy” Bugden, Y.C., was born at Gundurimba in
March 1897 and was the son of the late Mr. T. Bugden and Mrs Bugden
(now Mr*. J. J. Kelly of Alstonville). He was a tall well developed
athlete, and had distinguished himself on both football and cricket fields.
General Birdwood is said to have “singled him out as a splendid Aus-
tralian”. Prior to his enlistment in May 1916 he resided with Mr. and
Mrs. Kelly at Alstonville and Billinudgel. He was attached to the 31st
Battalion. His deed of valour was performed at Polygon Wood, near
Ypres, France.


No. 506, Pte. REGINALD ROY IN WOOD,
10th Batt., A.1.F., November 26, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty during the
advance to the second objective. He moved forward through our
barrage alone to an enemy strong post and captured it, together with
nine prisoners, killing several of the enemy. During the evening he
volunteered for a special all-night patrol, which went out 600 yards in
front of our line, and there—by his coolness and sound judgment-
obtained and sent back very valuable information as to the enemy’s
movements.
In the early morning of September 21 Pte. Inwood located a
machine gun which was causing several casualties. He went out alone
and bombed the gun and team, killing all but one, whom he brought
in as a prisoner with the gun. September 19-22, 1917.
Corporal R. R. Inwood V.C., was
born July 1890, at North Ade-
laide, S.A., and is the son of Mr.
Edward Inwood. His present
rank is that of Sergeant. He
enlisted from Railway Town.
Broken Hill. He won his V.C. at
Polygon Wood, east of Ypres.
France. His unit was the 10th
Battalion.


Capt. CLARENCE SMITH JEFFRIES,
Late 34th Batt., A.1.F., December 18, 1917.
For most conspicuous bravery in attack when his company was
held up by enemy machine gun fire from concrete emplacements.
Organising a party he rushed one emplacement, capturing four machine
guns and 35 prisoners. He then led his company forward under ex-
tremely heavy artillery barrage and enfilade machine gun fire to the
objective.
Later he again organised a successful attack on a machine gun
emplacement, capturing two machine guns and 30 mere prisoners.
This gallant officer was killed during the attack, but it was entirely
due to his bravery and initiative that the centre of the attack was not
held up for a lengthy period. His example had a most inspiring
influence. October 12, 1917.
The late Captain Clarence Smith Jeffries, V.C., was a son of Mr. Joshua
Jeffries, superintendent of the Abermain Collieries (N.S.W.) He was born at
Wallsend (N.S.W.). in October. 1894. and was educated at the Newcastle
Collegiate and High Schools. He was a mining surveyor by profession.
Prior to the outbreak of the w'ar he held the rank of Lieutenant in the
14th Infantry Regiment, West Maitland. In August, 1914, he was called up
for training purposes. He sailed as a Lieutenant in the 34th Battalion
('• Maitland’s Own.”) on 2nd May. 1916. He was severely wounded at Mes-
sines (June, 1917), and on recovery was promoted to a captaincy. He took
part in the battles for Passchendaie. and was killed in action on Oct. 12, 1917
after qualifying for the Victoria Cross.


No. 4061, Sgt. STANLEY ROBERT McDOUGALL, M.M.
47th Batt., A.1.F., May 3, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty when the
enemy attacked our line and his first wave succeeded in gaining an
entry.
Sgt McDougall, who was at a post in a flank company, realised the
situation, and at once charged the enemy’s second wave, single-handed,
with rifle and bayonet, killing seven and capturing a machine gun which
they had. This he turned on to them, firing from the hip, causing
many casualties and routing that wave. He then turned his attention
to those who had entered until his ammunition ran out, all the time
firing at close quarters, when he seized a bayonet and charged again,
killing three men and an enemy officer who was just about to kill
one of our officers. He used a Lewis gun on the enemy, killing many,
and enabling us to capture thirty-three prisoners.
The prompt action of this Non-Commissioned Officer saved the
line and enabled the enemy’s advance to be stopped. March 28, 1918.
Sgt, McDougall, V.C., M,M„
enlisted in 1915 at the age of
25 years. He is the son of
Mr, John McDougall, of
Recherche, Tasmania. His
Y.C, was won at Dernan-
court, France, He belonged
to the 47th Battalion and
was afterwards transferred
to the 48tli.


Lieut. PERCY VALENTINE STORKEY,
19th Batt., A.1.F., June 7, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery, leadership and devotion to duty
when in charge of a platoon in attack. On emerging from the wood
the enemy trench line was encountered and Lieut. Storkey found him-
self with six men. While continuing his move forward a large enemy
party—about 80 to 100 strong—armed with several machine guns,
was noticed to be holding up the advance of the troops on the right.
Lieut. Storkey immediately decided to attack this party from the flank
and rear, and while moving forward in the attack was joined by Lieut.
Lipscomb and four men. Under the leadership of Lieut. Storkey
this small party of two officers and ten other ranks charged the enemy
position with fixed bayonets, driving the enemy out, killing and
wounding about 30, and capturing three officers and 50 men, also one
machine gun. .
The splendid courage shown by this officer in quickly deciding his
course of action, and his skilful method of attacking against such great
odds, removed a dangerous obstacle to the advance of the troops
on the right, and inspired the remainder of our small party with the
utmost confidence when advancing to the objective line. April 7, 1918.
Lieut. Storkey is a native of Napier, N.Z., but was for some years in
Sydney, being attached for a while to the clerical staff of the Sydney
Teachers’College; subsequently he went through a course at the
University of Sydney, and is now pursuing a legal career. Lieut.
Storkey’s deed of valour was performed at Bois de Hangard, France.
His unit was the 19th Battalion.


Lieut. CLIFFORD WILLIAM KING SADLIER,
51st Batt., A.1.F., July 11, 1918.
For conspicuous bravery during a counter attack by his battalion
on strong enemy positions.
Lieut. Sadlier’s platoon, which was on the left of the battalion,
had to advance through a wood where a strong enemy machine gun
post caused casualties and prevented the platoon from advancing.
Although himself wounded, he at once collected his bombing section,
led them against the machine guns, and succeeded in killing the crews
and capturing two of the guns.
By this time Lieut. Sadlier’s party were all casualties, and he alone
attacked a third enemy machine gun with his revolver, killing the crew
of four and taking the gun. In doing so he was again wounded.
' The very gallant conduct of this officer was the means of clearing
the flank, and allowing the battalion to move forward, thereby saving
a most critical situation. His coolness and utter disregard of danger
inspired all. April 24-25, 1918.
Lieut. Sadlier is a son of
T. G. Sadlier of Adelaide,
S.A- He was born at
Camberwell, Victoria. He
went from Perth to Sydney
just prior to enlistment.
The V.C. was won at
Villers-Bretonneux,
France. .He belonged to
the 51st Battalion.


No. 1946, Sgt. WILLIAM RUTHVEN,
22nd Batt., A.1.F., July 11, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and initiative in action. During
the advance Sgt. Ruthven’s company suffered numerous casualties,
and his company commander was severely wounded. He thereupon
assumed command of this portion of the assault, took charge of the
company headquarters, and rallied the section in his vicinity.
As the leading wave approached its objective it was subjected to
heavy fire from an enemy machine gun at close range. Without
hesitation he at once sprang out, threw a bomb which landed beside
the post, and rushed the position, bayonetting one of the crew and
capturing the gun. He then encountered some of the enemy coming
out of a shelter. He wounded two, captured six others in the same
position, and handed them over to an escort from the leading wave
which had now reached the objective.
Sgt. Ruthven then reorganised the men in his vicinity and es-
tablished a post in the second objective.
Observing enemy movement in a sunken road near-by, he, without
hesitation and armed only with a revolver, went over the open alone
and rushed the position, shooting two enemy who refused to come out
of their dug-outs.
He then single-handed mopped up this post and captured the whole
of the garrison, amounting in all to thirty two, and kept them until
assistance arrived to escort them back to our lines.
During the remainder of the day this gallant non-commissioned
officer set a splendid example of leadership, moving up and down the
position under fire, supervising consolidation and encouraging his men.
Throughout the whole operation he showed the most magnificent
courage and determination, inspiring everyone by his fine fighting
spirit, his remarkable courage and his dashing action. May 19, 1918.
Sgt. (now I Lieutenant) W. Ruthven, V.C., is the son of Mr. P. Ruthven, of
Collingwood, Victoria, where he was horn in 1893. The decoration was won at
Ville-sur-Ancre, France. He belonged to the 22nd Battalion.


No. 1327, Cpl. PHILIP DAVEY, M.M.,
11th Batt., A.1.F., August 17, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and initiative in attack. In a day-
light operation against the enemy position, his platoon advanced 200
yards, capturing part of the enemy line, and whilst the platoon was
consolidating, the enemy pushed a machine gun forward under cover of
a hedge and opened fire from close range,, inflicting heavy casualties
and hampering work.
Alone Cpl. Davey moved forward in the face of a fierce point blank
fire, and attacked the gun with hand grenades, putting half the crew
out of action. Having used all available grenades he returned to the
original jumping off trench, secured a further supply, and again attacked
the gun, the crew of which had in the meantime been reinforced,
He killed the crew, eight in all, and captured the gun.
This very gallant N.C.O. then mounted the gun in the new post,
and used it in repelling a determined counter-attack, during which he
was severely wounded.
By his determination Cpl. Davey saved the platoon from annihila-
tion, and made it possible to consolidate and hold a position of vital
importance to the success of the whole operation. June 28, 1918.
Cpl. Davey qualified for the Victoria
Crossat Merris, France. He belonged
to the 11th Battalion, and came from
Exeter, South Australia.


No. 1689 a, Cpl. WALTER ERNEST BROWN, D.C.M.,
20th Batt., A.1.F., August 17, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and determination when with an
advanced party from his battalion which was going into the line in
relief.
The company to which he was attached carried out during the night
a minor operation resulting in the capture of a small system of enemy
trench. Early on the following morning an enemy strong post, about
70 yards distant, caused the occupants of the newly captured trench
great inconvenience by persistent sniping.
Hearing that it had been decided to rush this post, Cpl. Brown, on
his own initiative, crept out along the shallow trench and made a dash
towards the post. An enemy machine gun opened fire from another
trench and forced him to take cover. Eater he again dashed forward
and reached his objective. With a Mills grenade in his hand he
at the door of a dug-out and called on the occupants to surrender.
One of the enemy rushed out, a scuffle ensued, and Corporal Brown
knocked him down with liis fist. Loud cries of “ Kamerad ” were then
heard, and from the dug-out an officer and eleven other ranks appeared.
This party Corporal Brown brought back as prisoners to our line,
the enemy meanwhile, from other positions, bringing heavy machine
gun fire to bear on the party. July 6, 1918.
Cpl. (afterwards Sgt.) Brown, V.C.,
D.C.M., is a native of New Norfolk,
Tasmania. His V.C. was won at
Villers Bretonneux, France. He
was attached to the 20th Battalion.


No. 3399, Lce.-Cpl. THOMAS LESLIE AXFORD, M.M.,
16th Batt., A.1.F., August 17, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and initiative during operations.
When the barrage lifted and the infantry advance commenced,
his platoon was able to reach the first enemy trench through gaps which
had been cut in the wire. The adjoining platoon being delayed in
un-cut wire, enemy machine guns got into action and inflicted many
casualties, including the Company Commander. Lce.-Cpl. Axford,
with great initiative and magnificent courage, at once dashed to the
flank, threw his bombs amongst the machine gun crews, jumped into
the trench, and charged with his bayonet. Unaided he killed ten of
the enemy and took six prisoners ; he threw the machine guns over the
parapet, and called on the delayed platoon to come on. He then re-
joined his own platoon and fought with it during the remainder of
the operations.
Prior to the incidents above-mentioned he had assisted in the lay-
ing out of the tapes for the jumping off position, which was within 100
yards of the enemy. When the tapes were laid he remained out as a
special patrol to ensure that the enemy did not discover any unusual
movement on our side. His initiative and gallantry undoubtedly
saved many casualties, and most materially assisted towards the com-
plete success of his company in the task assigned to it. July 4, 1918.
Cpl. Axford gained his V.C. for mer-
itorious deeds at Vaire and Hamel
Woods, France. He was a resident
of Kalgoorlie, Western Australia, and
was attached to the 16th Battalion.


No. 1936, Driver HENRY DALZIEL,
15th Batt., A.1.F., August 17, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and de'votion to duty when in action
with a Lewis gun section.
His company met with determined resistance from a strong point
which was strongly garrisoned, manned by numerous machine guns,
and, undamaged by bur artillery fire, was also protected by strong
wire entanglements. A heavy concentration of machine gun fire
caused many casualties and held up our advance.
His' Lewis gun having come into action and silenced enemy guns
in one direction, an enemy gun opened fire from another direction.
Pte. Dalziel dashed at it, and with his revolver killed or captured the
entire crew and gun, and allowed our advance to continue. He was
severely wounded in the hand, but carried on and took part in the
capture of the final objective.
He twice went over open ground under heavy enemy artillery
and machine gun fire to secure ammunition, and though suffering from
considerable loss of blood, he filled magazines and served his gun
until severely wounded through the head.
His magnificent bravery and devotion to duty was an inspiring
example to all his comrades, and his dash and unselfish courage at a
most critical time undoubtedly saved many lives and turned what
would have been a severe check into a splendid success. July 4, 1918
Driver Henry Dalziel. V. 0., was born at Irvinebonk, North Queensland, in February,
1893 and is the son of Mr. and Mrs. James Dalziel. Prior to enlistment he was a fireman
on the Oairns-Atherton Railway. He enlisted bn 16th January. 1915, and spent a few
months in active engagements in Gallipoli. Subsequently he became a transport driver
and was eventually attached to the machine gun section in France. His “deed of
valour” was performed at Hamel Wood, France. His Battalion was the 15th.


Lieut. ALBERT BORELLA, M.M.,
26th Batt., A.1.F., September 13, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery in attack.
Whilst leading his platoon with the first wave Lieut. Borella
marked an enemy machine gun firing through our barrage. He ran
out ahead of his men into the barrage, shot two German machine-
gunners with his revolver, and captured the gun.
He then led his party, now reduced to ten men and two Lewis guns,
against a very strongly held trench, using his revolver, and later a
rifle, with great effect, causing many enemy casualties. His leading
and splendid example resulted in the garrison being quickly shot or
captured. Two large dug-outs were also bombed and thirty prisoners
taken.
Subsequently the enemy twice counter-attacked in strong force,
on the second occasion outnumbering Lieut. Borella’s platoon by ten
to one, but his cool determination inspired his men to resist heroically
and the enemy were repulsed with very heavy loss. July 17-IS, 1918.
Lieutenant A. C. Borella, V.C.,
M.M., was born in Borung,
Victoria thirty-two years ago,
and is one of four brothers
to go to the front. His father,
Air. L. Borella, is now resident
at “ Thyra,” Mosman. The V.C.
was won at Villers Bretonneux,
France. He was attached to the
26th Battayon.


No. 506, Sgt. PERCY CLYDE STATTON, M.M.,
40th Batt., A.1.F., September 27, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and initiative in action when in
command of a platoon which reached its objective, the remainder of
the battalion being held up by heavy machine gun fire. He skilfully
engaged two machine gun posts with Lewis gun fire, enabling the re-
mainder of his battalion to advance.
The advance of the battalion on his left had been brought to a
standstill by heavy enemy machine gun fire, and the first of our assault-
ing detachments to reach the machine gun posts were put out of action
in taking the first gun. Armed only with a revolver, in broad daylight,
Sgt. Statton at once rushed four enemy machine gun posts in succes-
sion, disposing of two of them, and killing five of the enemy. The
remaining two posts retired and were wiped out by Lewis gun fire.
Later in the evening, under heavy machine gun fire, he went out
again and brought in two badly wounded men.
Sgt. Statton set a magnificent example of quick decision, and the
success of the attacking troops was largely due to his determined
gallantry. August 12, 1918.
Sgt. Statton, VIC., M.M., was prior to enlist-
ment engaged in farming in the Tyanna
District. Tasmania He left Tasmania as
Lance-Corporal in the 40th Battalion. He
won the V.C. near Proyart. Franoe.


Lieut. ALFRED EDWARD GABY,
Late 28th Batt., A.1.F., October 30, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and dash, when, on reaching the
wire in front of an enemy trench, strong opposition was encountered.
The advance was at once checked, the enemy, being in force about
forty yards beyond the wire, and commanding the gap with machine
guns and rifles.
Lieut. Gaby found another gap in the wire, and, single-handed,
approached the strong point while machine guns and rifles were still
being fired upon it. Running along the parapet, still alone, and at
point-blank range, he emptied liis revolver into the garrison, drove
the crews from their guns, and compelled the surrender of fifty of the
enemy with four machine guns. He then quickly re-organised his
men and led them on to his final objective, which he captured and con-
solidated.
Three days later, during an attack, this officer again led liis com-
pany with great dash to the objective. The enemy brought heavy
rifle and machine gun fire to bear upon the line, but in the face of this
heaw fire Lieut. Gaby walked along his line of posts, encouraging his
men to quickly consolidate. While engaged on this duty he was killed
by an enemy sniper. August 8, 1918.
Lieut. Gaby qualified for the Decor-
ation at Villers Bretonueaux, France.
He was attached to the 28th Battalion.
Prior to enlistment he was resident
at Burnie, Tasmania.


Lieut. WILLIAM DONOVAN JOYNT,
Bth Batt., A.1.F., November 27, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty during the
attack on Herleville Wood, near Chuignes, Peronne, on August 23,
1918.
His company commander having been killed early in the advance,
he immediately took charge of the company, which he led with courage
and skill. On approaching Herleville Wood the troops of the leading
battalion, which his battalion was supporting, suffered very heavy
casualties and were much shaken. Lieut. Joynt, grasping the situation,
rushed forward under very heavy machine gun and artillery fire,
collected and re-organised the remnant of the battalion, and kept them
under cover pending the arrival of his own company. He then made
a personal reconnaissance and found that the fire from the wood was
checking the whole advance and causing heavy casualties to troops
on his flanks. Dashing out in front of his men he inspired and led a
magnificent frontal bayonet attack on the wood. The enemy were
staggered by this sudden onslaught, and a very critical situation was
saved.
Later at Plateau Wood, this very gallant officer again with a
small party of volunteers rendered invaluable service, and after severe
hand-to-hand fighting turned a stubborn defence into an abject sur-
render.
His valour and determination was conspicuous throughout, and
he continued to do magnificent work until badly wounded by a shell.
Captain W. W. Joynt, V.C., is a Victorian, and is 30 years of
age. He was educated at the Grange, South Yarra. and also
at the Melbourne Grammar School. Prior to enlistment he
was engaged in farming at Flinders Island. His unit was
the Bth Battalion.


Lieut. EDGAR THOMAS TOWNER, M.C.,
2nd Batt., Aus. M.G. Corps, December 14, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery, initiative and devotion to duty
on September 1, 1918, in the attack on Mont St. Quentin, near Peronne,
when in charge of four Vickers guns. During the early stages of the
advance, he located and captured, single-handed, an enemy machine
gun which was causing casualties, and by turning it on the enemy
inflicted severe losses. Subsequent]} 7 , by the skilful, tactical handling
of his guns, he cut off and captured twenty five of the enemy.
Later, by fearless reconnaissance under heavy fire, and by the
energy, foresight and promptitude with which he brought fire to bear
on various enemy groups, he gave valuable support to the infantry
advance. Again, when short of ammunition, he secured an enemy
machine gun, which he mounted, and fired in full view of the enemy,
causing the enemy to retire further, and enabling our infantry to
advance. Under intense fire, although wounded, he maintained the
fire of this gun at a very critical period.
During the following night he steadied and gave valuable support
to a small detached post, and by his coolness and cheerfulness inspirited
the men in a great degree.
Throughout the night he kept close watch by personal recon-
naissance on the enemy movements, and was eventually exhausted
thirty hours after being wounded.
The valour and resourcefulness of Lieut. Towner undoubtedly
saved a very critical situation, and contributed largely to the success
of the attack.
Lieut. Towner was born at Glencoe Station near Blackall, Queensland, 27 years ago.
He enlisted as a private and gained bis commission on the field. He belonged to
the 2nd Machine Gun Battalion.


Lieut. LAWRENCE DOMINIC MCCARTHY, C. de G.
16th Batt., A.I.F. December 14, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery, initiative and leadership on the
morning of August 23, 1918, in attack near Madame Wood, east of
Vermandovillers (north of Chaulnes).
Although the objectives of his battalion were attained without
serious opposition, the battalion on the left flank was heavily opposed
by well-posted machine guns. Lieut. McCarthy, realising the situation,
at once engaged the nearest machine gun post, but still the attacking
troops failed to get forward. This officer then determined to attack
the nearest post. Leaving his men to continue the fire fight, he, with
two others, dashed across the open and succeeded in reaching the block.
Although single-handed, as he had out-distanced his comrades, and
despite serious opposition and obstacles, he captured the gun and
continued to fight his way down the trench, inflicting heavy casualties,
and capturing three more machine guns. At this stage, being' some
700 yards from his starting point, he was joined by one of his men,
and together they continued to bomb up the trench until touch was
established with an adjoining unit. Lieut. McCarthy, during this
most daring advance, single-handed killed twenty of the enemy and
captured in addition five machine guns and fifty prisoners.
Ev his gallant and determined action he saved a critical situation,
prevented many casualties, and ivas mainly, if not entirely, responsible
for the final objective being taken.
Lieut. McCarthy V.C., C de & is a native of York (Western Australia) and the son
of Mr. F. McCarthy of County Cork, Ireland, and Mrs. McCarthy (nee Sherry) of
York, W.A. He is 27 years of age.


No. 2358, Sgt. ALBERT DAVID LOWERSON,
21st Batt., A.1.F., December 14,1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and tactical skill on September Ist,
1918, during the attack on Mont St. Quentin, north of Peronne, when
very strong opposition was met early in the attack, and every foot of
ground was stubbornly contested by the enemy. Regardless of
heavy machine gun fire, Sgt. Lowersou moved about fearlessly directing
his men, encouraging them to still greater effort, and finally led them
on to the objective.
On reaching the objective he saw that the left attacking party
was held up by an enemy strong post heavily manned with twelve
machine guns. Under the heaviest sniping and machine gun fire, Sgt.
Rower son rallied seven men as a storming party, and directing them to
attack the flanks of the post, rushed the strong point, and by effective
bombing captured it, together with twelve machine guns and- thirty
prisoners.
Though severely wounded in the right thigh, he refused to leave
the front line until the prisoners had been disposed of and the organisa-
tion and consolidation had been thoroughly completed.
Throughout the week of operations his leadership and example
had a continual influence on the men serving under him, whilst his
prompt and effective action at a critical juncture allowed the forward
movement to be carried on without delay, thus ensuring the success of
the attack.
Sergeant A. D. Lowerson, V.C.
resides at Myrtleford, Victoria,
where lie was born in August,
1896, being ihe son of Mr. Henry
I.owerson.


No. 6594, Sgt. GERALD SEXTON, (Sgt. M. V. BUCKLEY) D.C.M
13th Batt., A.1.F., December 14, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery during the attack near Le Verguier,
north-west of St. Quentin, on September 18, 1918.
During the whole period of the advance, which was very seriously
opposed, Sgt. Sexton was to the fore dealing with enemy machine
guns, rushing enemy posts, and performing great feats of bravery
and endurance without faltering or for a moment taking cover.
When the advance had passed the -ridge at Le Verguier, Sgt.
Sexton’s attention was directed to a party of the enemy manning a
bank, and to a field gun causing casualties and holding up a company.
Without hesitation, calling to his section to follow, he rushed down
the bank and killed the gunners of the field gun. Regardless of
machine gun fire he returned to the bank, and after firing down some
dug-outs induced about thirty of the enemy to surrender. When the
advance was continued from the first to the second objective the com-
pany was again held up by machine guns on the flanks. Supported
by another platoon he disposed of the enemy guns, displaying bold-
ness which inspired all.
Later, he again showed the most conspicuous initiative in the
capture of hostile posts and machine guns, and rendered invaluable
support to his company digging in.
Sergeant Gerald Sexton, who is stated to be Sergeant Maurice V.
Buckley, V C., D.C.M , is the son of Mr. and Mrs. T. Buckley, of
Malvern, and was born at Upper Hawthorn, Vic., in April, 1891. He
belongs to the 13tli Battalion (N.S.W.) The D.C.M. was awarded
on Bth August, 1918 and the Y.C. six weeks later (18th September,
1918). He enlisted under his mother's maiden name of Sexton.


No. 2631, Cpl. ARTHUR CHARLES HALL,
54th Batt., A.1.F., December 14, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravely, brilliant leadership and devotion
to duty during the operations at Peronne on September 1 and 2, 1918.
During the attack on September 1, a machine gun post was check-
ing the advance. Single-handed, he rushed the position, shot four of
the occupants and captured nine others and two machine guns. Then
crossing the objective with a small party, he afforded excellent covering
support to the remainder of the company. Continuously in advance
of the main party, he located enemy posts of resistance and personally
led parties to the assault. In this way he captured many small parties
of prisoners and machine guns.
On the morning cf September 2, during a heavy barrage, he carried
to safety a comrade who had been dangerously wounded, and was
urgently in need of medical attention, and immediately returned to
his post.
The energy and personal courage of this gallant non-commissioned
officer contributed largely to the success of the operations, throughout
which he shewed utter disregard of danger and inspired confidence in
all.
Corporal A. C. Hall, V.C., is the son of
Mr. and Mrs. Charles Hall of GHenelg
and Willeroon Station in the Nyngan
District (N.S.W.) He was born at
Granville in August, 1896,and educated
at All Saints’ College, Bathurst. He
enlisted on April 3rd, 1916, and left
Australia with the 6th reinforcements
of the 51 th Battalion.


No. 1876, Pte (T.-Cpl.) ALEXANDER HENRY BUCKLEY,
late 54th Batt., A.1.F., December 14,1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and seif sacrifice at Peronne during
the operation of September 1 and 2, 1918.
After passing the first objective his half company and part of the
company on the flank were held up by an enemy machine gun nest.
With one man, he rushed the post, shooting four of the occupants and
taking 22 prisoners. Later on, reaching a moat, it was found that
another machine gun nest commanded the only available foot-bridge.
Whilst this was being engaged from a flank Corporal Buckley en-
deavoured to cross the bridge and rush the post, but was killed in the
attempt.
Throughout the advance he had displayed great initiative, re-
source and courage, and by his effort to save his comrades from casual-
ties he set a fine example of self sacrificing devotion to duty.
Tho late Corporal Alex. Henry Buckley,
V.C., of the 54th Battalion, was born
at Warren, Macquarie River, N.S.W.
and was the son of Mr. and Mrs. James
Buckley. Prior to enlistment he resided
at Homebush, via Armatree and was en-
gaged in sheep and agricultural farm-
ing. He was present at the taking of
Bapaume and at Bullecourt, and Ypres.
He was killed in action at Peronne on
September Ist. 1918. His death was
greatly regretted by his fellow officers
by whom lie was highly respected


No. 6939, Pte. ROBERT MACTIER,
late 23rd Batt., A.1.F., December 14, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty on the morn-
ing of September 1, 1918, during the attack on the village of Mont St.
Quentin.
Prior to the advance of the battalion, it was necessary to clear
up several enemy strong points close to our line. This the bombing
patrols sent forward failed to effect, and the battalion was unable to
move. Pte. Mactier, single-handed and in daylight, thereupon jumped
out of the trench, rushed past the block, closed with and killed the
machine gun garrison of eight men with his revolver and bombs, and
threw the enemy machine gun over the parapet. Then, rushing for-
ward about 20 yards he jumped into another strong point held by a
garrison of six men who immediately surrendered. Continuing to the
next block through the trench, he disposed of an enemy machine gun
which had been enfilading our flank advancing troops, and was then
killed by another machine gun at close range.
It was entirely due to this exceptional valour and determination
of Pte. Mactier that the battalion was able to move on to its “ jumping-
off ” trench and carry out the successful operation of capturing the
village of Mont St. Quentin a few hours later.
The late Private Robert Mactier, Y.C., of the 23rd Battalion,
was born in May, 1890. and was the son of Mr. and Mrs. R.
Mactier, of “Reitcam,” Tatura, Victoria. He enlisted in
February, 1917, and sailed from Australia three months
later. He most faithfully honoured his Battalion’s motto—
“ Foward Undeterred." He made the supreme sacrifice at
Mont St. Quentin on Ist September, 1918.


No. 2742, Pte. ROBERT MATTHEW BEATHAM,
late Bth Batt., A.1.F., December 14, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and self sacrifice during the attack
north of Rosieres, east of Amiens, on August 9, 1918, when the advance
was held up by heavy machine gun fire, Pte. Beatham dashed forward,
and, assisted by one man, bombed and fought the crews of four enemy
machine guns, killing ten of them and capturing ten others, thus
facilitating the advance and saving many casualties.
When the final objective was reached, although previously
wounded, he again dashed forward and bombed a machine gun, being
riddled with bullets and killed in doing so.
The valour displayed by this gallant soldier inspired all ranks in a
wonderful manner.
Pte. Beatham’s nearest of kin reside
in Cumberland, England.


No. 726, Pte. GEORGE CARTWRIGHT,
33rd Batt., A.1.F., December 14, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty on the morn-
ing of August 31, 1918, during the attack on Road Wood, south-west
of Bouchavesnes, near Peronne.
When two companies were held up by machine gun fire from the
south-western edge of the wood, without hesitation Pte. Cartwright
moved against the gun in a most deliberate manner under intense fire.
He shot three of the team, and, having bombed the post, captured
the gun and nine enemy. This gallant deed had a most inspiring effect
on the whole line, which immediately rushed forward.
Throughout the operation Pte. Cartwright displayed wonderful
dash, grim determination, and courage of the highest order.
Pte. Cartwright's nearest of kin
reside in London.


No. 1584 A, Pte. WILLIAM MATTHEW CURREY,
53rd Batt., A.1.F., December 14, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and daring in the attack on Peronne
on the morning of September 1, 1918.
When the battalion was suffering heavy casualties from a 77 mm.
field gun at very close range, Pte. Currev, without hesitation, nished
forward under intense machine gun fire and succeeded in capturing the
gun single-handed after killing the entire crew.
Later, when the advance of the left flank was checked by an enemy
strong point, Pte. Currey crept around the flank and engaged the post
with a Lewis gun. Finally, he rushed the post single-handed, causing
many casualties. It was entirely owing to his gallant conduct that the
situation was relieved and the advance enabled to continue.
Subsequently he volunteered to carry orders for the withdrawal
of an isolated company, and this he succeeded in doing despite shell
and rifle fire, returning later with valuable information.
Throughout the operations his striking example of coolness,
determination and utter disregard of danger had a most inspiring effect
on his comrades, and his gallant work contributed largely to the success
of the operations.
Private William M. Currey. V.C.,
is a native of Wallsend, near
Newcastle, New South Wales,
and is the son of the late Mr.
Robert Currey and Mrs. M. E.
Currey, who at present resides at
Leichhardt, Sydney. He was
twenty-three years of age in Sept-
tember last (1918).


Major BLAIR ANDERSON WARK, D. 5.0.,
32nd Batt., A.1.F., December 26, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery, initiative and control during the
period September 29 to October 1, 1918, in the operations against the
Hindenburg line at Bellicourt, and the advance through Nauroy,
Etricourt, Magny, La Fosse and Joncourt.
On September 29, after personal reconnaissance under heavy fire,
he led his command forward at a critical period and restored the situa-
tion. Moving fearlessly at the head of, and at times far in advance of,
his troops, he cheered his men on through Nauroy, thence towards
Etricourt. Still leading his assaulting companies, he observed a
battery of 77 mm. guns firing on his rear companies and causing heavy
casualties. Collecting a few of his men, he rushed the battery, captur-
ing four guns and ten of the crew. Then moving rapidly forward with
only two N.C.O.’s he surprised and captured fifty Germans near Maguv
La Fosse. On October 1, 1918, he again showed fearless leading and
gallantry in attack, and without hesitation and regardless of personal
risk dashed forward and silenced machine guns which were causing
heavy casualties.
Throughout he displayed the greatest courage, skilful leading and
devotion to duty, and his work was invaluable.
Major Blair Anderson Wark, V.C , D. 5.0., the son of the
late Mr. Wark. of Bathurst, and Mrs. Blanche Wark, now of
113 Berry Street, North Sydney, was born at Bathurst.
N.S.W., in July, 1894. After serving for some time as
instructor at the Liverpool Camp he joined the 30th Bat-
talion and left Australia in November, 1915, with the rank
of Lieutenant. In 1916 he was promoted to the rank of
Major. The D.S.O. was awarded to him for good work at
Yillers-Bretonneux. He. was severely wounded at Fleurbaix
in July, 1916, and on his return to the front was trans-
ferred to the 32nd Battalion, of which he was acting
Lieutenant-Colonel.


No. 1153, Lee.-Cpl. (T.-Cpl.) LAWRENCE CARTHAGE WEATHERS,
late 43rd Batt., A.1.F., December 26, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty on September
2, 1918, north of Peronne, when with an advanced bombing party.
The attack having been held up by a strongly held
enemy trench, Cpl. Weathers went forward alone under heavy fire
and attacked the enemy with bombs. Then, returning to our lines
for a further supply of bombs, he again went forward with three com-
rades, and attacked under very heavy fire. Regardless of personal
danger, he mounted the enemy parapet, and bombed the trench, and,
with the support of his comrades, captured 180 prisoners and three
machine guns.
His valour and determination resulted in the successful capture of
the final objective, and saved the lives of many of his comrades;
The late Corporal Lawrence Carthage
Weathers was born at Te Koparu on
the Northern Wairo River, New
Zealand, on May 14th, 1890, and came
to South Australia at twenty-one
years of age with his parents, Mr. J.
J. Weathers, squatter of M intaro,
and Mrs. E.F.J. Weathers, ofGlenelg,
SA. He was attached to 43rd Inf.
Battalion (S.A.). and after two and a-
half years service he died of wounds
on September 29th, 1918.


No. 23, Lce.-Cpl. BERNARD SIDNEY GORDON, M.M.,
41st Batt., A.1.F., December 26, 1918.
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty on August
26 and 27, 1918, east of Bray.
He led his section through heavy shell fire to the objective, which
he consolidated. Single-handed he attacked an enemy machine gun
which was enfilading the company on his right, killed the man at the
gun, and captured the post, which contained one officer and ten men.
He then cleared up a trench, capturing twenty nine prisoners and
two machine guns. In clearing up further trenches he captured twenty
two prisoners, including one officer and three machine guns.
Practically unaided he captured, in the course of these operations,
two officers and .sixty one other ranks, together with six machine guns,
and displayed throughout a wonderful example of fearless initiative.
Lance Corporal Gordon belongs to
Beaconsfield, Tasmania.


No. 1717, Pte. JOHN RYAN,
55th Batt., A.1.F., December 26, 1918,
For most conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty during an
attack against the Hindenburg defences on September 30, 1018.
In the initial assault on the enemy’s positions Pte. Ryan went
forward with great dash and determination, and was one of the first
to reach the enemy trench. His exceptional skill and daring inspired
his comrades, and, despite heavy fire, the hostile garrison was soon
overcome and the trench occupied. The enemy then counter-attacked,
and succeeded in establishing a bombing party in the rear of the position.
Under fire from front and rear the position was critical, and neces-
sitated prompt action. Quickly appreciating the situation, he organised
and led the men near him with bomb and bayonet against the enemy
bombers, finally reaching the position with only three men. By
skilful bayonet work his small party succeeded in killing the first three
Germans on the enemy’s flank, then, moving along the embankment,
Pte. Ryan alone rushed the remainder with bombs. He fell wounded
after he had driven back the enemy, who suffered heavily as they
retired across “ No Man’s I y and.”
A particularly dangerous situation had |ieen saved by this gallant
soldier, whose example of determined bravery and initiative was an
inspiration to ali.
Private John Ryan, V.C., is a native of Tumufc, N.S.W. where his
parents Mr. and Mrs. Michael Ryan, still reside. He was born in
February 1890. and enlisted on Ist December, 1915, at WaggaWagga,
from which town he marched with the “ Kangaroos ” to Sydney. His
valor on 30tli September. 1918. gained for him the V.C. at the
expense of a flesh wound in the shoulder. He returned to the
front in the following December.


No. 3244 a, Pte. JAMES PARK WOODS,
48th Batt., A.1.F., December 26, 1918.
For conspicuous bravery and devotion to duty near Le \ erguier,
north-west of St. Quentin, on September 18, 1918, when, with a weak
patrol, he attacked and captured a very formidable enemy post, and
subsequently, with two comrades, held the same against heavy counter-
attacks.
Although exposed to heavy fire of all descriptions, he fearlessly
jumped on the parapet and opened fire on the attacking enemy, in-
flicting severe casualties. He kept up his fire and held up the enemy
until help arrived, and throughout the operations displayed a splendid
example of valour, determination and initiative.
Pte. Woods’ nearest of kin is a sister
residing at Perth, Western Australia.


Lieut. GEORGE MORBY INGRAM, M.M.,
24th Bait., A.1.F., January 6, 1919.
For most conspicuous bravery and initiative during the attack on
Mcntbrehain, east of Peronne, on October 5, 1918, when early in the
advance his platoon was held up by a strong point, Lieut. Ingram,
without hesitation, dashed out and rushed the post at the head of his
men, capturing nine machine guns and killing 42 enemy after stubborn
resistance.
Later, when the company had suffered severe casualties from
enemy posts, and many leaders had fallen, he at once tock control of
the situation, rallied his men under intense fire, and led them forward.
He himself rushed the first post, shot six of the enemy, and captured a
machine gun, thus overcoming serious resistance.
On two subsequent occasions he again displayed great dash and
resource in the capture of enemy posts, inflicting many casualties and
taking 62 prisoners.
Throughout the whole day he showed the most inspiring example
of courage and leadership, and freely exposed himself regardless of
danger.
Yana, Victoria
Lieut. Ingram belongs to South
Yarra, Victoria.


Lieut. JOSEPH MAXWELL, M.C., D.C.M.,
18th Batt., A.1.F., January 6, 1919.
P'or most conspicuous bravery and leadership in attack on the
Beaurevoir- Fonsomme line near F.strees, north of St. Quentin, on
October 3, 1918.
His company commander was severely wounded early in the
advance, and Lieut. Maxwell at once took charge. The enemy wire,
when reached under intense fire, was found tc be exceptionally strong
and closely supported by machine guns, whereupon Lieut. Maxwell
pushed forward single-handed through the wire and captured the most
dangerous gun, killing three and capturing four enemy. He thus
enabled his company to penetrate the wire and reach the objective.
Later he again dashed forward and silenced, single-handed, a gun
which was holding up a flank company. Subsequently, when with
two men only, he attempted to capture a strong party of the enemy,
he handled a most involved situation very skilfully, and it was due to
his resource that he and his comrades escaped.
Throughout the day Lieut. Maxwell set a high example of personal
bravery, coupled with excellent judgment and quick decision.
Lieutenant Maxwell is tlie son of Mr. John Maxwell
of 35 Oalvert Street Marriokville, and was born in
N.S.W. Sydney 23 years ago. He was educated at
Gilberton Public School. Prior to enlistment he was
apprenticed at Messrs. .!.& A. Brown’s works, Hexham,
Newcastle. He served in Gallipoli and France, and as
Warrant Officer won in November, 1917, theD.C.M.for
conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty. As
Lieutenant early in 1918 he won the M.C. at Point
Rouge for gallantry.


Australia was unofficially represented in other units than those
of the A.I.F. As examples, reference may be made to Lieut. W. T.
Dartnell, Captain (afterwards Major) L. C. Hawker and Pte. John
Mayman. Lieut. Dartnell, who, when wounded, deliberately sacrificed
himself by insisting that other wounded comrades should be rescued
in preference to himself from the cruel stabs of approaching black
troops in East Africa, was a Victorian by birth though attached to the
Royal Fusiliers; Captain Hawker, who distinguished himself by a
successful encounter with three German aeroplanes, was connected
with the Royal Flying Corps though his birthplace was Bungaree,
South Australia ; and Pte. Majmian, a native of Timor, Victoria, was
attached to General Botha’s forces in East Africa. It is also asserted
that Pte. Nicholas, of the New Zealand forces, voyaged to the Dominion
to enlist only after three unsuccessful attempts to do so in Brisbane.
But the records of such as these are not officially credited to Aus-
tralia, and are therefore not included in this souvenir.


AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCES
ALPHABETICAL LIST OF VICTORIA CROSS WINNERS
Kegt.
No.
Present
Rank
(May, 1919)
NAME
Unit
Date
of
Award
Other
Decorations
Theatre of War where the Special
Services were rendered
Remarks
.1399
Cpl.
Axford, Thomas Leslie
16th Batt.
Aug. 17, 1918
M.M.
Vaire and Hamel Woods, France.
2742
Pte.
Beatham, Robert Matthew
8 th „
Dec., 14, 1918
North ot Rosieres, east of Amiens,
France
Deceased
2nd T,t.
Birks, Frederick
6th
Nov. 8, 1917
M.M.
Glencorse Wood, east of Ypres,
France
Deceased
Lieut.
Blackburn, Arthur
10th „
Sept. 9, 1916
Pozieres, France
Seaforth
Lieut.
Borella, Albert
26th .,
Sept. 13, 1918
M.M.
Fillers Bretonneux, France
! 689a
Sgt.
Brown, Walter Ernest
20th
Aug. 17, 1918
D.C.M.
Fillers Bretonneux, France
1876
L.-Cpl.
Buckley, Alexander Henry
54th
Dec. 14, 1918
Peronne, France
Deceased
3774
Pte.
Bugden, Patrick
31st
Nov. 26, 1917
Polvgon Wood, near Ypres,
I'rance
Deceased
384
Cpl.
Burton, Alex. Stewart
7th
Oct. 15, 1915
Lone Pine, Gallipoli Peninsula
Deceased
1804
L.-Cpl.
Carroll, John
33rd „
Aug. 2, 1917
St. Ives, France
726
Pte.
Cartwright, George
33rd „
Dec. 14, 1918
Road Wood, south-west of Bou-
ehavesnes, near Peronne,
*
France
1352
Sgt.
Castleton, Claude Chas.
2nd M.G. Batt.
Sept. 26, 1916
Near Pozieres, France
Deceased
Capt.
Cherry, Percy Herbert
26th Batt.
May 11, 1917
M.C.
Lagnicourt, France
Deceased
3055
Pte
Cooke, Thomas
8 th
Sept. 9, 1916
Pozieres, France
Deceased


Regt.
No-
Present
Rank
NAME
Unit
Date
Other
Theatre of War where the Special
Remarks
(May, 1919)
Award '
Decorations
Services were rendered
1584a
Pte.
Currey, William Matthew
53rd
Batt.
Dec. 14, 1918
1936
Pte.
Dalziel, Henry
15th
>>
Aug. 17, 1918
Hamel Wood, France
1327
-w.-Cpl.
Davey, Phillip
10th
,,
Aug. 17, 1918
M.M.
Merris, France
2130
C.S.M.
Lieut.
Dunstan, William
7th
,,
Oct. 15, 1915
Lone Line, Gallipoli Peninsula
Dwyer, JonN J ames
4th M.G. Batt.
Nov. 26, 1917
Zonnebeke, France
23
Lieut.
Gaby, Alfred Reward
28th
Batt.
Oct. 30, 1918
Villers Bretonneux, France
Deceased
I/. Cpl.
Cordon, Bernard Sydney
4 1st.
Dec. 26, 1918
M.M.
Fast of Bray, France
2831
Capt.
CtRieye, Robert Cutiibert
37th
Aug. 2, 1917
Cpl.
Hall, Arthur Chas.
5 4th
yy
Dec. 14, 1918
Peronne, France
2445
2nd Lt.
Cpl.
ITamti.ton, John
Howell, George Julian
1st
1st
”
Oct. 16, 1915
Tune 27, 1917
M.M.
I,oue Pine, Gallipoli Peninsula
Near Bullecourt, France
Montbrehain, Fast of Peroune
506
Lieut.
Ingram, George Morby
24th
,,
Ian. 6, 1919
M.M.
Cpl.
In wood, Reginald Roy
10th
„
Nov. 26, 1917
Polygon Wood, east of Ypres,
588
Capt.
Pte.
Jacka, Albert
14th
yy
Julv 24, 1915
M.C. &. Bar
France
Courtenay’s Post, Gallipoli
J ackson, William
17th
yy
Sept. 9, 1916
Near Armentieres, France
2389
Capt.
Teffries, C.i.arence Smith
34th
yy
Dec. 18, 1917
Passchendaele, France
Deceased
Cpl.
Jensen, Torgan Christian
50th
yy
June 8, 1917
Noreuil, France
Capt.
J oynt, William Donovan
8th
„
Nov. 27, 1918
Herleville Wood, near -Chuignes,
*
4195
Cpl.
Kenny, Thomas Jas. Bede
2nd
June 8, 1917
Peronne, France
Hermies, France
2053a
Lieut.
Pte.
Keysor, Leonard
Leak, John
1st
9th
«
Oct. 15, 1915
Sept. 9, 1916
«
Lone Pine, Gallipoli Peninsula
Pozieres, France
2358
Sgt.
Lowerson, Albert David
21st
,,
Dec. 14, 1918
Mont St. Quentin, north of
Peronne, France


Regt.
No-
Present
Rank
(May, 1919)
NAME
Unit
Date
of
Award
Other
Decorations ‘
Theatre of War where the Special
Services were rendered
Remarks
6939
Pte.
Mactier, Robert
23rd „
Dec. 14, 1918
Mont St. Ouentin, France
Deceased
Lieut.
Maxweee, Joseph
18 th
Jan. 6, 1919
M.C. and Bar
The Beaurevoir-Fonsonime line
D.C.M.
near Estrees, north of St.
Quentin, France
T.-Capt.
Moon, Rupert Vance
58th Batt.
June 8, 1917
Near Bullecourt, France
Lt.-Col.
Murray, Henry Wieeiam,
13th „
Mar. 10, 1917
D.S.O. & Bar
Stormy Trench, north-east of
C.M.G.
D.C.M.,C.de G.
Gueudecourt, France
Lieut.
McCarthy, Lawrence
16th „
Dec. 14, 1918
C. deG.
Madame Wood, east of Vermado-
Dominic
villers, north of Chaulnes,
France
4061
Sgt.
McDougale, Staneey Robert
47th&48th Batt
May 3, 1918
M.M.
Dernaneourt, France
456
Sgt.
McGee, Lewis
40th Batt.
Nov. 26, 19!7
East of Ypres, France
Deceased
Capt.
McNamara, Frank Hubert
Flv Corps
Tune 8, 1917
E"ypt.
Capt.
Newi.and, James Frnest
12th Batt.
June 8, 1917
Bapaume, Cambrai Road, west of
Boursies, north-east of Lagm-
court, France
3970
Cpl.
O’Meara, Martin
16th „
Sept. 9, 1916
Pozieres, France
114
Sgt.
Peeeer, Waeter
3rd P.-Batt.
Nov. 26, 1917
East of Vpres, France
Lieut.
Pope, Charees
llth Batt.
June 8, 1917
Louveral, France
Deceased
Lieut.
Rutiiven, Wieuam
22nd „
T uly 11, 1918
Ville-sur-Ancre. France
1717
Pte.
Ryan, Jottn
55th
Dec. 26, 1918
The Hindenberg Defences, France
Lieut.
Sadeier, Ci.ifford Wm. King
51st
Tulv 11, 1918
Villers Bretonneux, France.
6594
Sgt.
Sexton, Ghrai/d (stated to be
13th „
Dec. 14, 1918
D.C.M.
Near Le Verguier, north-west of
Ruckeev, Maurice Vincent)
St. Ouentin, France
Capt.
SnouT, Aefred J ohn
1st
Oct. 15, 1915
M.C.
Lone Pine, Gallipoli Peninsula
Deceased


Regt. Resent
No.
Name
Unit
Date
Other
Theatre of War where the Special
Remarks
|(May, 1919)
Award
Decorations
Services were rendered
506 Sgt.
Capt.
t Capt.
! Capt.
Statton, Percy Ct.yde
Storkey, Percy Valentine
Salmons, William Joitn
Throsselt., Hugo Vivian H.
40th „
19th „
7th „
10th L.H. Rgt.
vSept. 27, 1918
Tune 7, 1918
Oct. 15, 1915
Oct. 15, 1915
M.M.
Near Proyart, France
Bois de Hangard, France
Lone Pine, Gallipoli Peninsula
Kaiakij Aghala (Hill 60), Galli-
Lieut.
Towner, F,dgar Thomas
2nd M.G. Batt.
Dec. 14, 1918
M.C.
poli Peninsula
Mont St. Quentin, near Peronne.
Major
Major
Tttbb, Frederick Harold
Wark, Blair Anderson
7th Batt.
32nd „
Oct. 15, 1915
Dec. 26, 1918
D.S.O.
France
Lone Pine, Gallipoli Peninsula
Bellicourt, and in the advance
through Nauroy, Etricourt,
Magnv, La Fosse and Jon
Deceased |
i
1153 L.-Cpl.
Weathers, Lawrence
Carthage
4 3rd „
Dec. 26, 1918
court, France
North of Peronne, France
!
Deceased ;
2902 Sgt.
3244a Pte.
Whittle, John Woods
Woods, James Park
12th „ June 8, 1917
48th „ Dec. 26, 1918
D.C.M.
Near Boursies, France
Near Le Verguier, north-west rf
St. Quentin, France


The Royal
Australian Historical Society
PATRONS
HJS EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR-GENERAL of AUSTRALIA.
HIS EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR of NEW SOUTH WALES.
A Souvenir Booklet “ The Australian Winners
of the Victoria Cross in the Great War 1914-1919,”
compiled by the Honorary Secretary ot the Royal
Australian Historical Society, and printed by
Messrs. McCarron, Stewart & Co. Ltd., has been
forwarded you by post.
The work of compiling and printing has been
done gratuitously, the sole purpose being to secure a
permanent collective record of the events inscribed
therein, and offer a personal tribute of admiration
and respect for each recipient of the Victoria Cross,
whose valour assisted to uphold Australia’s fame in
the great war just closed.
S. H. SMITH, President.
K. R, CRAMP, Honorary Secretary.
September. 1919.
