

AUSTRALIA'S DESTINY
Lord Rosebery's Prophecy
BY
C. BRUNSDON FLETCHER
1942




Australia’s Destiny.
Lord Rosebery’s Prophecy.
PREFACE.
When my paper on “The Centenary of the Sydney
Morning Herald ” was written and later on appeared in
the Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Australian
Historical Society (Yol. XVII., Part 11., pp. 89-111), the
following paragraph was included in pp. 94-5 :
The Sydney Gazette was still the news record of the colony
and there was no other. Its columns contained leading articles,
well written, direct and forcible, and gave reports of important
matters as in the case of the seizure of the vessel Almorah. This
was a startling business, leading to a clash between the Navy and
the Civil Court. I have given some prominence to this in my
chapter on “Australia and the Pacific 1788 to 1885” in the seventh
volume of the Cambridge History of the British Empire now in the
Press.
Asa matter of fact, my chapter on “Australia and
the Pacific” had been crowded out when the history
appeared, and it is due to members and to myself that
an explanation should now be made. Professor Ernest
Scott had written to me from Paris in December, 1925,
when the co-operative History of the British Empire was
projected, to convey to me the invitation of the three
Editors at Cambridge—Professor Holland Rose, Professor
A. B. Newton, and Mr A. E. Benians, of St John’s College
—to write the chapter mentioned. Professor Scott had
been asked to represent them in Australia, and strongly
urged me to accept the invitation. But it was a very
doubtful proposition. My stamping ground had been
rather the Western Pacific; and I was to take the first
century of Australian settlement, and not all of it. The
year 1885 was to limit my area of research, because a
chapter on “Australia and the Empire” had been added,
and the account of the German occupation of New Guinea
was to be left to another writer.
When the Australian chapters were assembled it was
found that nobody had been able to cover the Western


Pacific, and Mr Benians wrote the necessary chapter him-
self. This meant that someone had to give way, and at
the last moment my chapter was held over. The contract
for it had been signed, and when I was in London for the
Imperial Press Conference in 1930 and called at the office
of the Cambridge University Press in Fetter Lane, there
was no hint of possible squeezing out. My chapter had
been accepted and partly paid for.
Professor Scott, in a subsequent letter written when
he reached Australia in the beginning of 1926, told me
that the Editors in Cambridge were “severely disposed”
to prevent the overlapping which had been a difficulty in
the previous co-operative history. It meant in the event
that overlapping reduced to a minimum had created a
gap which had to be filled, and the Editors decided to
take out a chapter which probably would not be missed.
The following is the chapter I wrote, and it is published
by the Royal Australian Historical Society with the
permission of those who asked me to write it in the first
instance. This chapter was written in 1926. It might
have been written in 1942, with Japan now our deadly
enemy.*'
I have to thank the Royal Australian Historical
Society and the Sydney Morning Herald for permission to
reprint this matter.
C. BRUNSDON FLETCHER.
July 25, 1942.
LORD ROSEBERY AND THE PACIFIC.
Lord Rosebery was a visitor to Sydney in December,
1883, when a noteworthy Convention was sitting to con-
sider Australia’s relation to the Pacific and Great Britain’s
attitude towards Australia. He was studying an outpost
of Empire whose possibilities concerned him, and at the
dinner of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of New
South "Wales he made an impressive speech. Addressing
the assembled Australian Premiers and representative
public men, he said that when the history of Australia
*See Appendix.


came to be written there would be “ nothing more memor-
able than the fact that in the year of grace 1883 a Con-
vention of leading statesmen met in Sydney and
recognised the destiny of Australia—that the destiny of
Australia was to be the trustee of the Pacific.” When
Lord Rosebery spoke, several island groups and many large
islands were still available for any Power that cared to
take them and was not afraid of complications with Great
Britain. For another year a considerable portion of New
Guinea, and the whole of New Britain, New Ireland,
with the vast archipelago embracing the Solomons, waited
upon Bismarck’s diplomacy; then, late in 1884, Germany
hoisted her flag over these areas. Subsequent modifica-
tions did not substantially alter the salient features of
this German acquisition of colonies near to Australia’s
main gate to Asia and the Northern Pacific. Early in
1885 the annexation was complete.
Lord Rosebery made his speech of 1883 within a short
distance of the spot in Port Jackson upon which Captain
Phillip landed on January 26, 1788, to take possession of
a more important estate. The Pacific Ocean was the real
objective, as events proved, though William Pitt the
Younger may have been thinking of a smaller aim at the
time; and Phillip seemed to realize the immensity of his
mission when he exclaimed in July, 1788, even after heart-
breaking experiences : “I do not doubt that this country
will prove the most valuable acquisition Great Britain
ever made.”
Sydney as a city may be said to front the waters of
half the globe, and it is set round one of the finest of the
world’s harbours. But for a quarter of a century after
Phillip’s advent the settlement was little better than an
island. It was only a point of vantage, and the rampart
of mountains behind was not scaled until 1813. Perhaps
the naval governors, having a convict settlement to guard,
did not wish that barrier to be conquered; but, just when
the Battle of Waterloo had been fought and won, the wide
plains of the West were made available for exploitation.
In all that time Port Jackson was essentially a naval
extension of the new Empire, and for the first hundred
years of Australia’s history as a British possession the
Navy was the main factor in its safety and the guarantee


of her progress and prosperity. Lord Rosebery offered
his opinion with this truth in mind, just as James Anthony
Froude, visiting Sydney soon after Germany's annexations
in 1885, consoled himself with the thought of it. Froude
looked proudly at Admiral Try on’s flagship lying dominant
on the waters of Port Jackson, and declared that the
British Navy alone had made it possible for angry colonists
to boast of their freedom when expressing their opinions
upon Germany’s new place in the Pacific. He said that
“it was the shield behind which alone the vaunted liberty
was possible.’’
Lord Rosebery was in Sydney exactly a century after
William Pitt, at the age of twenty-four, became head of
the Cabinet in England. In December, 1783, the builder
of anew British Empire took office with the old Empire
in pieces about him, and in the same month a hundred
years later one of his successors made a note of the conse-
quences half the world away. The Empire, strong and
united, with Australia a capable trustee of the Pacific,
was Lord Rosebery’s vision of the future.
In his monograph on Pitt, published in 1891, Lord
Rosebery indicates “the flat prosperous years as they
passed in England from July 1789 to January 1793.’’
Those were the years in which New Holland might fairly
have received more succour. Out of sight was out of
mind; the operations of the East India Company, and the
condition of India and the islands beyond, were the
dominating interests. Asia and the Dutch monopoly, the
Spice Islands and China, were filling the picture, and
possession was being taken of valuable strategic points
not far from Australia in the Malay Archipelago. The
East India Company had accepted the Island of Penang
from the Sultan of Kedah just before Captain Phillip
reached Port Jackson in 1788. This has been well de-
scribed as “the first new acquisition for the British
Empire, the first sign of the turn of the tide since the
final collapse of the old Empire in 1783.’’*
There is an element of romance for Australia in this
event. Captain Francis Light landed with a body of
*Times Literary Supplement, June 10, 1926.


marines at Penang in 1786, hoisted the flag, and in the
same year became father of a son whose name is a house-
hold word in Australia as that of the man who laid out
the city of Adelaide. This son was born of a Malay
mother—daughter of the Sultan of Kedah—whose dowry
had been the same Island of Penang taken over by the
East India Company. On the urgent representations of
Captain Light, the Company accepted the island in ex-
change for an annuity to be paid to the Sultan, a bargain
which is honoured to this day by Great Britain.
THE NAVY.
No just summary of the relation of Australia to the
Pacific is possible without an appreciation of the fact that
the Navy soon became something more than her wet nurse.
It was her defender and helper throughout the first
century of her existence as a colony under the British
Flag. Anew development of the Navy had found ex-
pression in the rare ability and fine character of the first
Governor of Australia, and in the valuable and intrepid
explorations, soon after, of Matthew Flinders. Phillip
was carrying on the naval progress of a century, begun
with Dampier, continued by Cook and other able men,
and illuminated by Flinders in the first years of British
settlement, but he also represented at its highest the new
Navy which had been developing with a keener national
conscience. Pitt had endorsed the appointment of Phillip
against the opinion of the First Lord of the Admiralty,
for Lord Howe thought him hardly suited to the task in
view in 1786. Captain Mahan has paid a great tribute
to Lord Howe as a fighting man, and no doubt the British
naval administrator would argue that the successful results
of so many sea battles were due to the discipline and the
system of the time. Yet Lord Rosebery gives the year
1797 as the “darkest and most desperate that any British
Minister had to face.” It began, indeed, with a magnifi-
cent naval victory when Jervis and Nelson crushed the
Spaniards at St Vincent and prevented a junction of the
Dutch, French and Spanish fleets for another Armada.
The mutiny at Spithead and the Nore, however, began
before the year was half through. At Portsmouth the
Channel Fleet was in the hands of the mutineers, with


the red flag hoisted and the officers turned out. For
more than a month the crisis lasted, and affected the Navy
everywhere. Even at the Cape the British squadron
began to give serious trouble, and the firmness of the
Admiral afloat and the Governor on shore alone saved the
situation.
How Australia fared in the general crisis may be
read rather in the records of transportation and in the
protests of Governors than in the attitude of crews on
naval vessels at Port Jackson. One of Sydney’s suburbs
is named after a naval surgeon who, having sympathized
at the Nore with sailors treated more like beasts than
human beings, was sentenced to death. His suggestions
of moderation to the men when they asked him for advice
counted in his favour, and the sentence was commuted to
transportation to Botany Bay. This story of Dr Redfern
is full of interest and instruction. He died a wealthy
man in Sydney, one of its leading and most honoured
citizens. He was freely pardoned early in his colonial
career, and was the subject of much acrimonious debate
in despatches and reports. But in him, and in so many
other of its officers who settled in Australia, the British
Navy served the Empire well. This little-considered side
of the new settlement is the more important for the light
it throws upon Australia’s relations with the Pacific at
the outset.
MANY SAILORS TRANSPORTED.
Captain Phillip has made it plain that there were
many sailors among the prisoners whom he took from
English gaols in 1787. Press gangs had been at work
up and down the kingdom, and sailors were made out of
all kinds of material in the process of building up the
Navy as a fighting machine. Men indignant at such
invasions of personal liberty reacted in different ways,
and, with those under sentence (many for naval offences),
much of the scum of England was gathered to be sent
ultimately to Botany Bay. But mutinous sailors were
full of British grit and stubborness, and they developed
into magnificent fighting men under Nelson, Rodney and
Howe. When some of these had to be guarded at Port


Jackson, or elsewhere in the Pacific, trouble began.
Phillip’s reference to the matter is to be found in his
letter to Mr Secretary Stephens in 1791 :
It appears to me that the great number of seamen that are
amongst the convicts will make the employing of any other than
King’s ships very dangerous.
So difficult was the position that the Governor laid it
down as imperative that at least two King’s ships should
always be stationed at Sydney, and the controversy lead-
ing up to Phillip’s conclusion is interesting. For the
moment it may be said that neither at Port Jackson nor
at Norfolk Island were vessels or boats, other than those
of the Navy, allowed the freedom of the anchorages or
landing places. It was among Phillip’s instructions to
Captain Hunter, as given in Stockdale’s account of the
voyage to Botany Bay, that he was not under any pretext
to build or permit to be built, decked or otherwise, boats
exceeding twenty feet in length, and any such vessels, if
driven on the island, were to be scuttled or put out of
service. Phillip himself had been reminded in his instruc-
tions that he must carefully watch the goings and comings
of civil craft, and his determination naturally in such
relation was to make Port Jackson a safe depot for im-
mediate needs—as nearly a naval station as circumstances
would permit. A King’s dockyard soon came into exis-
tence at Sydney Cove, and Commissioner Bigge noticed
that chained gangs worked there to keep the King’s Navy
in condition. But convicts began to escape, and stolen
boats made their way into the Pacific and gave interesting
point to the despatches of the day.
RELATION WITH MALAYSIA.
Malaysia and the new settlement had an early re-
lation, and the name of Sir Stamford Raffles is stamped
upon the coast in a bay of Northern Australia. But the
Pacific Ocean was not released from the large grasp of
the East India Company without the exchange of many
despatches; and a vigorous dissent at last found expres-
sion in open defiance. From 1788, till a memorable pay-
ment by the British Treasury in the case of the Almorah


in 1831, the Pacific became a battle ground for many
urgent Australian interests—trading, administrative,
scientific, and, last but not least, religious, since the
missionary activities of powerful bodies had to be recog-
nized as being generally of great value. The very life
of the new settlement—in a larger sense than the call to
be fed in those earlier anxious days, when outside pro-
vision against famine was indispensable—was seen to be
dependent upon the free use of the waters around, and
on an open passage to the world beyond Australia for all
primary products.
French reports contain expressions of surprise at the
shipping of Port Jackson in those initial years. The
nineteenth century had hardly begun when Australian
coal was being sent to the Cape, and whalers and sealers
came and went as they followed their prey in the ocean
or sought seals among the islands round Tasmania. The
trade in timber with New Zealand developed because the
Navy needed spars; and naval captains could see that flax
also would be a great asset as the North and South Islands
opened their resources to the Admiralty. The United
States made calls upon Australia with various craft, so
French observers further reported, and Captain Wilkes
led an exploring expedition into the South Pacific and
received a warm welcome from Sydney in 1840, to his
evident surprise. South America was within the compass
of mercantile interest and attention, and smugglers from
the other side of the Pacific used Port Jackson to some
purpose.
EAST INDIA COMPANY.
Thus in the earlier years of settlement in Australia
the activities of trade and transport were exercising many
minds both in Europe, where Pitt was on guard, and in
Asia, where the East India Company’s staff kept watch
and ward. Yet the Company proved a friend as well as
a jealous monopolist in those opening periods of progress
in the Pacific. Its navy had been, and still was, a real
factor in securing the Far East for British trade and in
making sure of the paths for Australian development.
The exploration of Australian waters by the East
India Company’s surveying vessels, and the adventures


of men like Captain Hayes and Captain John McCluer,
made the Pacific better known and the coasts of the island
continent more accessible. Their explorations and sur-
veys at the end of the eighteenth century gave the
Directors information of great value about Australia, New
Guinea, and island groups of unexpected extent. But it
was private enterprise that led to still more interesting
results. Hayes was a member of the Bombay Marine,
and an officer of the East India Company’s navy, when
he set out with The Duke of Clarence and The Duchess
as representative of a syndicate to find the real nutmeg
(Banda) and other spices beyond the Dutch sphere. This
was in 1793. Adverse weather drove him west when he
should have sailed east for New Guinea, and took him
round the other side of New Holland down to Van
Diemen’s Land, where he left his mark.
A good deal of Hayes’ work was new and valuable,
and the East India Company was given the fullest par-
ticulars when he returned to Calcutta. His letters and
reports had so impressed Sir John Shore, Governor-
General-in-Couneil, that at first he was disposed to support
the proposal to assist the spice settlement which had been
made tentatively by Hayes on the northern coast of New
Guinea at Dorey Bay—an action anticipating that of Sir
Thomas Mcllwraith nearly a century later at Port Moresby,
which the British Government refused to ratify.
Dorey Bay was described by Hayes as on a fine line
of trade between Port Jackson and Canton, and easily
reached from India. Moreover, it was urged that the
nutmeg of commerce and true spices grew there, and the
specimens brought back as the ship’s loading were offered
as evidence. But eventually the scale turned against the
enterprise, and the scheme of Hayes and his syndicate
went the way of other proposals of the sort. These
activities added materially to the Company’s information,
but did not lead to wealth or position for the adventurers.
The East India Company’s navy had so far reinforced
the labours of the British Navy itself, which were constant
from the beginning. But the British Navy, thougli
ubiquitous, never formed part of the scheme of govern-
ment in Australia. The relationship was an extraordinary
one, as Froude noted after dining on board the flagship


Nelson during his visit to Sydney in 1885. “The deck
of an English man-of-war, wherever she may be, is English
soil,” he says in Oceana. “Colonial jurisdiction reaches
to the ship’s side, but gets no further.”
PORT JACKSON A NAVAL BASE.
The Admiralty in London was the Navy’s master;
and, until Port Jackson became a naval base, its captains
were under orders from the East India station, and at
times were subject to such officers of senior rank as might
happen to call in. But the first Governors, though naval
officers, were masters in their own domain. Captain
Phillip had been careful on that point. Phillip, Hunter
and King were made senior officers of the port even when
ashore as Governors. This was to prevent friction in a
young settlement, and to make easy the carrying on of
all services. Nearly every study of Australian history
accepts this relation of the Navy to Australia and the
Pacific, and there leaves it. But the certainty of sea
power after Trafalgar, which made Great Britain confident
of control in the Pacific and elsewhere, did not seem so
clear to colonists half a world away from London and
conscious of the possibilities of mischief in the ocean itself.
The Navy was never displayed there in its strength during
the first century of settlement, and its might was hardly
to be judged by its continuing presence. A few war
vessels were felt to be inadequate for emergencies whose
import was often magnified by rumour when not exag-
gerated by anxiety.
Only once in the first half-century was a line-of-battle
ship seen in Port Jackson, and then it was by accident.
Sir James Brisbane, Commodore of the East India station,
arrived in 1826 in H.M.S. Warspite, and it was a great
event. But the cause was sickness, and not any wish to
reassure colonists doubtful about the Navy. The Com-
modore was on his way across the Pacific to South America.
Being very ill, he had altered his plans, only to die in
Sydney and be buried there.
Now the East India Company’s navy—the alleged
precursor of an Australian navy—was in being while
Samuel Pepys was active at the Admiralty in London,


and in his diary for 1664 he remarks that the Dutch East
India Company had demanded that its home-coming
vessels from Indian waters should not be molested by the
English, although the Dutch themselves were to be free
to act as they pleased. In 1668 the English East India
Company had made the Island of Bombay its naval head-
quarters and had increased its small fleet, giving it anew
name—the Bombay Marine. In 1830 the name was
changed again, and the Board of Directors by a fiat of
its own became possessed of an East India, navy. When
India was taken over by Great Britain in 1858 the
Company’s navy ceased to exist, after two centuries of
activity.
THE ALMOBAH.
As friction developed in Australia on occasion—as in
the case of the Almorah, chartered by the Government of
New South Wales, arrested by H.M.S. Slaney in 1825, and
taken to Calcutta by a naval officer—so the relation of
the Royal Navy to the East India Navy had caused heart
burnings when war with Holland and France was a con-
dition of existence. The East India Company carried
hostilities against the Dutch into the Malay Archipelago,
but, when its navy was making good headway, Captain
Hayes and his comrades in command protested that the
British Navy appeared at the critical moments to gather
the fruit already within reach. British naval officers
always took command, and the Indian officers complained
that they were ignored, if not superseded, when despatches
were sent home and honours were distributed. But the
commodore on the East India station kept the Pacific
Ocean under surveillance until Port Jackson was officially
made a base about the middle of the nineteenth century.
By 1850, after some friction between British naval officers
on the spot, the change-over was complete.
If these two factors be kept in mind—a watchful and
powerful East India Company, and an establishment in
Australia conducted by naval Governors practically on
prison lines with convicts composed in part of seamen or
of men disciplined by the Navy—it will be understood
that the first twenty-five years of settlement was largely
a period of prison life tempered by freedom for adventure.


With continual temptations for resourceful prisoners
gazing at the Pacific to face the sea, and with many oppor-
tunities for escape, trade seemed to be the last possibility.
Much that happened in this initial period belongs to naval
history, and it may seem to challenge the recorded facts
of colonization and of progress in trade and production.
While the beginnings of anew life, however, were
made possible under naval Governors exercising a control
and discipline natural to their habits and traditions,
friction developed because other Governors were adminis-
trators in a growing settlement of free men. Troubles
with military officers led to many misunderstandings, until
civil life evolved Legislative Councils and a Parliament
which at last laid down the law under a definite Consti-
tution. Through every change the Navy was on guard,
and it remained a power behind each government when
the problems of the Pacific were dealt with. It was
always the Empire’s best word for fair play and justice
between white men and brown in the island groups, and
the native races learned to interpret even Australian
activities by the light of an experience gained with British
naval officers. “Government by commodore” was thus
no idle phrase.
Eventually the Empire’s sea power was represented
in Australia by many units in the population who had
passed through the Navy and who knew the Pacific by
hard experience. Time-expired seamen were in evidence
in increasing numbers in each of the colonies, and naval
officers were among the original grantees of Crown lands
who handed down their names and possessions to genera-
tions proud of such an origin. Deserters from the Navy
often made good colonists, and among sailors transported
for naval misdemeanours were some genuine pioneers.
Free settlers, of course, resented the emancipist policy of
Governor Macquarie, and they had intrigued against his
predecessor, Governor Bligh, who was a naval captain, so
that something like revolution was feared.
GOVERNOR MACQUARIE’S ARRIVAL.
Macquarie arrived in 1809 upon a man-of-war, H.M.S.
Hindostan, which, with H.M.S. Dromedary, carried his
own regiment (73rd of the Line), and his orders were to


send the New South Wales Corps home. If the Corps
was inclined to be mutinous the 73rd would be ready.
Joseph Holt, in his account of the entry of the Ilindostan
to Port Jackson, says that Macquarie expected that he
and his battalion would have to tight, and the two war-
ships "came up to the Cove with every preparation to
give a broadside if they saw occasion.” Yet the Navy
which gave the first military Governor of Australia so
much support in 1809 received his vehement condemnation
in 1812. Captain Chase, commanding the war sloop
Samarang, reached Sydney in February of the latter year
with £IO,OOO in silver dollars from India, New South Wales
being in need of currency. Requiring more men to com-
plete his crew, he "pressed” them to Sydney as a matter
of course, because Britain was at war with the United
States. Ilis justification was that he would be caught
short-handed in a fight unless he exercised his rights as a
naval officer upon Governor Macquarie’s community.
Macquarie, in his despatches of August, 1813, charged
Captain Chase with "most tyrannically trampling upon
the personal freedom of His Majesty’s subjects.” Yet
Captain Hunter as Governor had advised the Home
authorities that New South Wales would be a good recruit-
ing ground for seamen, and had sent one batch—probably
more—to the Cape for the use of His Majesty’s ships.
The Samarang's parcel of dollars from abroad in 1812
is another reminder that the link with India was real from
the beginning. The Treasury report concerning an
indemnity which was paid in 1831 in the matter of the
arrest of the Almorah may be quoted here in illustration.
It is important as showing the progress of events in the
final elimination of the East India Company as a factor
of control over the trading relations of Australia, and as
explaining how far the currency problems had been com-
plicated by competition. It illustrates also the anomalous
position of the British Navy when exercising jurisdiction
independently of the Government in Australia, and at
last clashing with it when the wider relations through the
Pacific had to be settled.
The facts may be briefly covered by a short summary
of the report of the King’s Proctor to the Lords Commis-
sioners of His Majesty’s Treasury dated June 30, 1831.


The Almorah was chartered in 1824 by the Ctovernment of
New South Wales to go from Sydney to Batavia for pro-
visions lest there should be any lack of food, for the pre-
vailing drought threatened a diminished wheat harvest.
Mr Clements, one of the Deputy Assistant Commissaries-
General, was on board, with authority to transact the
necessary business. On February 17, 1825, the Almorah
reached Sydney with a cargo of sugar, rice, and 300
quarter-chests of tea, and was seized next day by Captain
Mitchell, of H.M.S. Slaney, on the ground of alleged illegal
importation. On March 2 she was despatched for Calcutta
under the command of Lieutenant Matthews of the Slaney,
as there was no court of competent jurisdiction in New
South Wales. At Calcutta she was seized again by
Captain Bremer of H.M. Navy, but a compromise was
reached and the cargo restored. Then arose another com-
plication. The owner of the Almorah claimed compen-
sation, and £SOOO was ultimately paid by the British
Treasury.
INDIGNATION AND EXCITEMENT ABOUT
THE ALMORAH.
Behind this bald statement of fact in an official report
to the British Treasury in London is a record of indig-
nation and excitement in Australia, though not all on one
side. The paradox of the King’s ships arresting the
King’s goods was sufficiently novel, but the Sydney Gazette
of February 24, 1825, raised another point of interest.
It appeared that the Almorah had arrived with more than
tea, sugar and rice on board. “A considerable quantity
of dollars” was included; and the ship and cargo were
valued at between thirty and forty thousand pounds.
The Gazette said that it was a tolerable prize to make in
time of peace. The capture was declared to have come
about through a breach of the navigation laws, “alleged
to originate in an infringement of the East India Com-
pany’s Charter.” This was the main point, and the
Gazette continued :
That the East India Company have “the sole and exclusive
right of trading and using the business of merchandise in, to, and
from the dominions of the Emperor of China, and the whole, sole
and exclusive right of trading in tea in, to, and from all the islands,


ports, and places between the Cape of Good Hope, and the Straits
of Magellan, &c,” is a fact with which we are necessarily acquainted;
but that the East India Company, or even a British man-of-war,
has any right to interfere in the trade of a foreign port, is quite
novel doctrine.
Chief Justice Forbes here steps in to explain. In his
report to London, he pointed out that the “settlers or
agriculturists” and the merchants of the colony were much
upset by the importations of food and dollars, the latter
tending to depreciate the value of dollars in circulation,
while the importation of flour, rice, etc., made the wheat
harvest, recently assured by good rains, difficult to dispose
of at expected prices. The merchants had given infor-
mation of a breach of the navigation laws, and negotiations
with the Attorney-General were interrupted by the removal
of the Almorah to the Sydney Heads. When the Attorney-
General sent the police thither with a warrant to seize
Crown property—the cargo of the ship—they were fired
on and had to retire. Captain Mitchell was then sued
under information filed by the Attorney-General, charging
him with being accessory to the felony in firing upon officers
of justice in the execution of their duty. The Attorney-
General obtained a bench warrant to arrest him. Mean-
while Lieutenant Matthews, in charge of the Almorah, had
taken the ship away, and the Chief Justice reported that
he had admitted Captain Mitchell to bail.
THE KING AGAINST HIMSELF.
The whole story is full of interest because it connects
India, Australia and the Dutch East Indies. It shows
what a crisis could be created by the conflicting interests
of the Crown in New South Wales and those of merchants
and settlers who were able to move the King against him-
self through the Navy. But the denouement, after six
years of controversy and cross-firing, was still more
interesting. The new Empire had begun to find itself,
and the relation of Australia to the Pacific was placed
upon anew footing. The right of trading had been
already established, and complications were in future
avoidable in the light of the Almorah case, which had
decided two important questions. First, it was clear that
the King could not be set against himself simply because


courts of sufficient jurisdiction did not exist. The courts
were established, and that was an end of the controversy
in one phase of it. The second was that the Navy in its
general relation with the colonies was the servant of all,
though not subject to any one of them, and the power of
a colonial government to arrest even a captain of the
King’s Navy was demonstrated. Meanwhile one great
fact was never in dispute. The Navy was a shield and
buckler. It was the guarantee of all liberty in the Pacific,
but its work was becoming more and more that of a police-
man. Since the day when sea power had been settled
past peradventure in the hands of Great Britain, Australian
interests half a world away were as surely a matter of
Imperial care as those of England, Scotland and Ireland.
Australia as a naval station with recognized status
and freed from the East India Station was, nevertheless,
Great Britain’s confession of a need for special control in
the Southern Pacific. The remark has been made that
up to the consummation of Federation in 1901 Australia
was politically a hermit continent. This is no doubt true
of her as looked at from within. But the scrutiny of
Australia from outside had been constant during the first
century of her existence as a British settlement, and her
relation to the Pacific was being steadily appreciated and
accepted by those whose business it was to co-ordinate the
facts as they were recorded. Port Jackson in Australia,
the Derwent Estuary in Tasmania, and the Waitemata
Harbour in New Zealand attracted increasing attention as
naval surveys and surveillance developed a better know-
ledge of the Pacific. These three great harbours, com-
paratively so close together, meant much to the British
Empire in the southern hemisphere, and European rivals
and critics were not slow to recognize the fact. France
and other foreign powers watched the progress of explora-
tion and settlement there in the last years of the eighteenth-
century with increasing attention; and this interest was
carried on into the nineteenth century by the accumulation
of significant incidents. Translations of the voyages and
journals of Cook, Phillip, Tench and Hunter—to mention
some part of the much read literature of the day—were
being closely studied when Hobart on the Derwent in


1803 was added to Sydney on Port Jackson as a British
settlement; and in 1840, when the results of explorations
and surveys had been reviewed, the maps were ready for
the proclamation of Auckland as anew capital city on the
Waitemata. Here again was a harbour of great value—
a third defensible base of national importance—and the
Empire was correspondingly strengthened. *
PARADOXES OF A CONTINENT.
When Captain Phillip traversed three oceans—the
Atlantic, the Great Southern, and the Pacific—on his
voyage to New Holland he had no knowledge of a world
harbourage anywhere in the last of them. No opening
to indicate with certainty a magnificent prize such as Port
Jackson had been discovered by Captain Cook, and it
remains one of the paradoxes of the continent of Australia
that her only river worth the name has no estuary to help
a quest from outside.
As compared with the other great rivers of the world,
the Murray where it meets the ocean shows little trace of
its existence. Froude, writing of Adelaide in 1885,
mentions the fact :
The broad Murray falls into the sea at no great distance to
the westward; but it is cut off from Adelaide by a line of moun-
tains, and loses itself in 6hoals and sands before it reaches the ocean.
This was the eternal puzzle for explorers by sea, that
vast waters known to be provided inland by recurring
floods, and carried by various streams somewhere, should
leave no notable trace round the coast. So with Port
Jackson; its existence was missed by Cook through its lack
of an evident entrance. Thus when Captain Phillip
reached the Pacific with the First Fleet in 1788, his great
predecessor had not left word of a single harbour in either
New Zealand or Australia likely to prove a prize.
It may be argued that Cook kept to his task of ex-
ploring the Pacific, and did not trouble too much about
harbourage. But had he known the truth, after leaving
Botany Bay to continue his voyage northward, he would
never have made the entry in his log that at noon on
May 6, 1770, he was “abreast of a bay or harbour, in which
there appeared to be good anchorage.” This, no doubt,


he called Port Jackson, but in reality it was missed. Had
he actually discovered this harbour, and had it been
advertised to the world, the history of Australia might
have been written in different terms. But Cook had made
the same observation on the Waitemata, which now gives
Auckland Us place with Sydney and Hobart as one of a
trio of cities on harbours so fine that they made an
additional wonder of the -world.
THREE GREAT HARBOURS.
Before Cook reached the Australian coast in 1769 he
had called a part of the New Zealand waters the Firth of
Thames, because there seemed to be a promise in the new
world of some of the importance of London’s river in the
old. Yet as Cook sailed away on November 25, 1769,
loth to leave these reminders of London’s great waterway,
he had noted certain islands beyond which harbourage
seemed to be indicated. He said of them, as afterwards
he noted of the “bay or harbour’’ named Port Jackson,
that “it appear’d very probable that these formed some
good Harbours.” So also was it with the great Derwent
estuary, which competent naval men consider a better
harbourage for their purposes than Port Jackson.
Captain Cook, in his search for the main facts of the
world’s widest ocean, came as near to it as Adventure
Bay. With a little more enterprise by Furneaux, or some
further effort of Cook’s genius when he left the exploration
of the southern point of Van Diemen’s Land to his
assistant, the discoveries of D’Entrecasteaux and Hayes
■would have been anticipated by twenty years.
These three great harbours—Port Jackson, the Waite-
mata, and the Derwent—may be placed on the circum-
ference of a circle of 800 miles radius enclosing the
Tasman Sea. It includes all the principal cities of
Australasia—except Adelaide and Perth—much of the
two great islands of New Zealand, Tasmania almost
wholly, and it embraces Port Phillip, Port Jackson, and
Moreton Bay within its sweep. More than 85 per cent,
of the total population of Australia and New Zealand in
1885 lay herein, and the relation of Australia to the Pacific
from the beginning has to be read in the interest and


enterprise radiating from these strategic points. Every
island group in the Pacific more or less, and every large
island, has felt the impact of forces let loose from them.
Yet with all that Captain Cook accomplished no sight of
any of these harbours was vouchsafed to him. He could
not even emulate Moses on Mount Pisgah, though he
believed that the promised land of safe harbourage might
be found.
Map of portion of the Pacific area showing strategic points mentioned in
accompanying letterpress.
Much new geography was learnt in these earlier years
of Australia’s first century, and German activities every-
where in the Pacific kept the lessons in progress.
Necessarily the people living in the cities and towns within
the Tasman circle reacted to the new knowledge, and with
the continuing controversy over the New Hebrides—
largely a missionary contribution to the Empire’s problems
in the Pacific—Australia at last realized how vital to her
peace of mind was a satisfactory settlement of the owner-
ship of the group. Also a better understanding of other
groups and islands in the Pacific was reached.


It was through the missionary enterprize of James
Chalmers that the way was opened for the final solution
of the New Guinea difficulty and the emergence of Papua
as a possession under the British flag, just as the Treaty
of Waitangi in 1840 would have been impossible had not
the missionaries combined to use their influence upon the
Maori chiefs whose signatures were considered to be indis-
pensable. So, in Fiji, the cession in 1874 was a natural
outcome of missionary work in preparing the ground and
making King Thakombau amenable to reason. All these
acts of possession doubtless came about as a resultant of
several pressures. Trade interests specially demanded
attention, and the extended responsibilities of the Navy
in the Pacific had to be considered. But the final and
formal deeds were performed by the Queen's representa-
tives after exhaustive inquiry and profound deliberation.
A HEMISPHERE OF OCEAN.
The waters of the Pacific extend from Pole to Pole,
and stretch across a hemisphere of ocean from west to
east. Bland interests may have held first place in
Australia’s growing concern about this great ocean in that
first hundred years, but other factors came in through the
Navy. There was a wider Pacific than the ocean im-
mediately before her. Comparatively near as Singapore,
Penang and Malacca were, they might have remained un-
related to the growing settlement round Port Jackson had
not the King’s ships working from station to station been
on guard. When these three islands were united under
a single control with supervision from India in 1826, and
forty years after became a Crown colony, a great deal
had happened in the progress of British settlement in both
the Indian and Pacific Oceans. The Navy was uniting
far away interests in an ever extending activity.
The Cape of Good Hope, which was Dutch when
Captain Phillip called there in the Sirius with the First
Fleet at the end of 1787, and which remained Dutch
throughout his term in Australia, became British before
Macquarie appeared in the Hindostan with his regiment
in 1809. In all the earlier records of Australia, the Cape
appears as the half-way house—the central calling place
for Australian immigrants. When the crews of the King’s


ships needed reinforcement, word from the Cape was sent
to Port Jackson, and the demands for naval activity from
that base never ceased. Hong Kong was acquired by
Great Britain in 1841 as a result of the abolition of the
East India Company’s monopoly in 1833. This was at
a time when Australian feeling over French activities in
the Pacific was growing warm again—Tahiti was acquired
by France in 1844. New Caledonia was taken in 1854
and placed under the French flag just when preparations
were being made to fly the Union Jack there, and the penal
establishment subsequently placed on the island led to
much indignation when escapees found their way to the
Australian coast.
The whole Pacific, however, now began to engage
Australia’s attention. California and its gold made one
subject for discussion, and China and her arrogance
another. Australians had gone to San Francisco seeking
gold, only to return, and Chinese were attracted to Aus-
tralia by the gold rushes in the ’fifties. Hong Kong
became known as the outlet for China’s millions—soon to
be classed as undesirable immigrants and largely respon-
sible for a White Australia policy. The growing diffi-
culty with China was one of Australia’s greatest problems
in the Pacific, and the proximity of Asia remained a most
serious question for thoughtful white folk south of Torres
Strait in that first century of settlement.
Increasing pressure upon the Navy in the Pacific
came with these discoveries of gold in California and with
the development of Australian fields. Population swung
each way like a pendulum, leading at last to sound settle-
ment and the development of resources other than gold.
But while enterprizing men from abroad, once gold seekers,
became Australian settlers of the best type, a vast number
of loose characters, who were parasites of the new gold-
fields, crossed and recrossed the Pacific, and complications
already serious enough with the natives in various islands
and in New Zealand became aggravated. The British
Government was approached to annex New Guinea—long
before Germany forced the hands of ministers—because of
alleged discoveries of gold, but the reply was always in
the negative.


As the islands were explored and their character and
resources better understood, there came demands for native
labour in Australia, and a “black labour” scandal grew
to portentous dimensions. Far back in the nineteenth
century British administration had declined to extend
British authority or control for this very reason. A
suspicion that the natives would be exploited to their un-
doing moved Mr Secretary Stephens, for instance, during
the years of his power at the Colonial Office, to set his
face like a flint against proposals to settle and annex New
Zealand.
NATIVES AND LAND CONTROL.
Ignorance of the principles of native land control in
the Pacific led to complications, staged the farce of a
native government in Fiji, and developed the numerous
points of friction which culminated in Germany’s annexa-
tions in 1884. Black labour and its scandals centred on
Fiji right up to 1874, when the group was ceded to Great
Britain. Possession was taken by Sir Hercules Robinson,
Governor of New South Wales, as the King’s representa-
tive, and a strange story of difficulty was on record.
Naval vessels had been constantly patrolling the islands
of several groups, only at last to find it impossible to
obtain convictions for the grossest crimes committed by
white men against the natives. It is true that a Colonial
Court sat in Sydney, and those charged with crime ap-
peared before it; but, as native evidence was essential to
conviction, charge after charge failed, because the natives
could not be carried over such long distances and were
otherwise hard to handle. Yet Fiji had in Thakombau
a king who was ready to make any experiment to save his
face and to meet his creditors in the gate. He had a
government after the British model, with white men in
office, and all the trappings of administration. But in
the end the farce became a tragedy. The worst of white
men found Fiji a convenient hunting ground, Australian
capital was involved in speculations that added to the
general coil, and at last Great Britain had to accept the
responsibility of absolute control. Had this decision
been made in 1859, when the issue was first raised in


concrete form, probably much of the black labour scandal
would have been avoided.
The controversy over Fiji brought the New Hebrides
and other groups into notoriety. With Germany’s
activity in New Guinea and in the immense archipelago
of New Britain, New Ireland and the Solomons, the mis-
chief grew. Ten years before Germany defeated France
in 1870, German firms, and especially the house of
Godeffroy, had established trading stations and were re-
cruiting labour, with Samoa, Tonga and Fiji as bases.
From 1870 Australia’s anxieties increased and Great
Britain’s troubles in the Pacific multiplied. Soon the
United States stepped in with the annexation of Pago
Pago in Samoa to show what she thought of the general
outlook. This American move upon a fine harbour in
1872 was significant, and it prompted Germany to think
that Fiji might be secured before it was too late. But
the cession to Great Britain in 1874 was an effectual block,
and then German attention was concentrated upon Tonga.
Vavau was to be a German coaling station under agree-
ment with the King in 1876, and the Kev. Shirley Baker,
who had become Prime Minister of Tonga, carried
through the negotiations. He had been a Wesleyan
missionary under Australian control, had established a.
church of his own, and seemed to be ready to go to any
lengths to aggrandize himself and make Tonga a power
in the Pacific. This only served to sharpen Great
Britain’s anxiety, and eventually Tonga was drawn
definitely out of the whirlpool to become a self-governing
group under British protection—with Mr Baker in exile.
Then the Godeffroys advanced upon the Solomons and
New Guinea with a steady policy of penetration by trade
and the securing of vast areas of land from unsuspecting
chiefs at strategic centres. By the end of 1884 German
plans were matured, and the annexations which so aroused
Australia were completed, with the British Government
looking on.
Australia’s relation to the Pacific was, therefore,
naturally one of increasing knowledge as these extensions
of the Empire were made, and her interest was continually
being aroused. The Navy’s police activities were extend


ing in all directions. Port Jackson, as a naval station
from 1850 onward, was a centre of increasing importance,
though the Admiralty insisted upon ecenomy, and the local
construction of several naval schooners for patrol work in
the Pacific became imperative. Australian loyalty found
expression with an increasing knowledge, and the naval
leaven in her population spread to bear witness in un-
expected ways. The best illustration of this is to be
found in the fact that, when Australian indignation was
deepest over Germany’s final success in the Pacific in 1885,
the Soudan Contingent was being formed to assist Great
Britain in Egypt.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
Necessarily the materials for this chapter are to be
found in the literature dealing with discovery and ex-
ploration in the Pacific in the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries.
The journals, logs and despatches of the great navigators
from Dampier to Flinders must be studied. The British
Navy, its units and their activities in the first century of
Australian settlement are übiquitous in the records. The
following authorities may be taken to cover the general
ground :
The History of New South Wales from the Becords.
The Historical Becords of Australia.
The Commonwealth Year Books, No. 2 and No. 12.
The Parliamentary Becords before separation of Victoria and
Queensland, in the Sydney Public Library, at Parliament House, and
in the Mitchell Library.
Naval Chronicle.
Cyclopaedia of Australasia —a Dictionary of Facts, Events,
Dates, Persons, and Places to the year 1881. By David Blair.
(Fergusson & Moore, Melbourne, 1881.)
Australian Dictionary of Dates and Hen of the Time, by J. H.
Heaton. (George Robertson, Sydney, 1879.) This is a helpful
book, but needs to be checked as to details of reference, and often
as to statements of fact.
The Australian Encyclopaedia, Vols. I. and 11. Angus &
Robertson, 1925.)
Professor Ernest Scott’s researches have cleared much
ground, and are indispensable :
Terre NapoUon. (Methuen, 1910.)
The Life of Matthew Flinders. (Angus & Robertson, 1914.)
The Life of Laperouse.


A Short History of Australia. (Oxford University Press, 1925.)
The Coming of the British to Australia, 1788 to 1829. (Long-
mans.) By Ida Lee, F.R.G.S. (Mrs C. B. Marriott); and
The Logbooks of the “Lady Nelson.” (Grafton & Co., London,
1915.)
The Discovery of Australia, by G. Arnold Wood, Professor of
History in the University of Sydney. (Macmillan, 1922.)
The Making of Australia, by Thomas Dunbabin, B.A. (Oxon.),
M.A. (Tasmania). (A. &C. Black Ltd., 1922.)
The History of Australia, by Arthur W. Jose; 10th Edition.
(Angus & Robertson Ltd., 1924.)
Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Australian Historical
Society throughout, and specially Vol. XII., Part V. “The Relations
between Australia and New Guinea up to the Establishment of
British Rule in 1888,” by A. C. V. Melbourne, M.A.; also Vol. XIII.,
Part 1., “Alexander Dalrymple,” by Francis J. Bayldon.
The Life and Letters of the Bight Hon. Sir William Molesworth,
by Mrs. Fawcett. (Macmillan, 1901.)
Fifty Years in the Making of Australian History, by Sir Henry
Parkes. (Longmans, Green & Co., 1892.)
Life of Charles Sturt, by Mrs. Napier George Sturt. (Smith,
Elder, 1899.)
The Naval Pioneers of Australia, by Louis Becke & Walter
Jeffrey. (John Murray, 1899.)
A Century of Our Sea Story, by Walter Jeffrey. (John Murray,
1900.)
The Memoir and Journal of Commodore Goodenough, by his
Widow. (Henry S. King & Co.)
Two Admirals — A Becord of a Hundred Years, by Admiral John
Moresby. (Methuen.)
The East India Company, and its place in any study
of Australia’s relation to the Pacific, are covered by several
works of value and interest. Malaysia and the Archi-
pelago also come in as a vital section. The Encyclopaedia
Britannica (Eleventh Edition) is an important work of
reference for the whole, but the following books have their
place for the student :
A Hundred Years of Singapore, 2 Vols. (John Murray, 1921.)
The story of Sir Stamford Raffles is well summarised for students
in Baffles, 1781-1826, by R. Coupland. (Oxford University Press,
1920.) This is also a good book of reference for the authorities
on the subject.
British Malaya, 1824-1867, by L. A. Mills. (Printed and pub-
lished at Singapore as Vol. 111., Part 11., of the Journal of the
Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society.)
Colonel William Light, the Founder of Adelaide, by Thomas
Gill. (Adelaide, 1911.)
Commodore Sir John Hayes ( 1767-1831 ), by Ida Lee. (Long-
mans, 1912.)


In the case of the Almorah, the report of the King’s
Proctor to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury may
be found in Parliamentary Documents, Vol. 6 (1826-32),
No. 9, in the Sydney Public Library. Comments on the
case and the news from day to day appear in The Sydney
Gazette in the earlier files of 1826; and Chief Justice
Forbes’ report is published in The Historical Records of
Australia, Series IV., Vol. 1., pp. 514 et seq.
“William Pitt,” by Lord Rosebery, in Macmillan’s Twelve
English Statesmen (1891).
The books of Dr J. Holland Rose must be studied in this con-
nexion, and specially his Life of William Pitt, 2 Vols. (G. Bell &
Sons, 1911); and Short Life of William Pitt (1925), published by
the same firm. This is a valuable new survey and review of all
the later evidence.
On the general development, the following books may
be consulted :
The Life of Sir Joseph Banks, by Edward Smith, F.R.H.S.
(The Bodley Head, 1911.)
Sir Joseph Banks, the Father of Australia, by J. H. Maiden,
F.L.S., Director of Sydney Botanic Gardens. (Government Printing
Office.)
Journal of Researches during the Voyage of the “Beagle," by
Charles Darwin. (Nelson & Sons, 1890.)
Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition during the
years 1838, 1839, 1840, 1841 and 1842, by (Admiral) Charles Wilkes,
Published in Philadelphia (1845) and London (1852).
The Treaty of Waitangi, by T. Lindsay Buick. (S. & W.
Mackay, Wellington, 1914.)
The Pacific : Its Past and Present, by Guy H. Scholefield.
(John Murray, 1919.)
The New Pacific (Macmillan, 1917) and The Problem of the
Pacific (Heinemann, 1919), by C. Brunsdon Fletcher.
Oceana, by James Anthony Froude. (Longmans, Green & Co.,
1886.)
A Lady's Cruise in a French Man-of-War, by C. F. Gordon
Cumming. (Blackwood, 1882.)
Coral Lands of the Pacific, by H. Stonehewer Cooper. (Bentlev,
1882.)
Papua or British New Guinea, by J. H. P. Murray. (T. Fisher
Unwin, 1912.)
Historical Geography of the British Colonies, Vol. VI., by J.
W. Rogers. (Oxford-Clarendon Press, 1907.)
A Short History of British Colonial Policy, by 11. E. Egerton,
M.A. (Methuen, 1897.)
A short History of British Expansion, by James A. Williamson.
(Macmillan, 1922.)
The files of The Sydney Morning Herald.


Lord Rosebery’s visit to Australia, and especially his
speeches in Sydney during December, 1883, are reported
in the Herald. Also in the ’seventies special articles on
the history of Fiji by Rev Lorimer Fison (“Hardy Lee”)
appeared, and threw light upon events leading up to the
cession of Fiji in 1874. In the ’eighties Rev George
Brown, pioneer missionary and explorer in New Britain
and the Bismarck Archipelago, contributed special articles
under the nom de plume of “Carpe Diem” to the Herald,
which attracted much notice and gave valuable informa-
tion and advice as to Germany’s activities in the Pacific.
The bibliography of the Pacific has been covered very
completely in Stewart’s Handbook of the Pacific Islands
for 1922 (McCarron, Stewart & Co. Ltd.). Mr Percy
S. Allen, who is responsible for the text, has put students
under a great obligation with this comprehensive summary,
part of which deals generally with the literature of the
Pacific, and the rest particularly with each island group
or prominent island. A few books may be indicated
otherwise as authorities :
The Western Pacific and New Guinea, by Hugh Hastings
Romilly. (John Murray, 1887.)
The Diversions of a Prime Minister, by Basil Thomson. (Black-
wood, 1894.)
Brown Men and Women, by Edward Reeves. (Swan Sonnen-
schein, 1898.)
The Long White Cloud, by Hon. William Pember Reeves.
(George Allen & Unwin, 1898.)
Old Neiv Zealand, by A Pakeha Maori. (Whitcombe & Toombs,
1912.)
Maori and Pakeha, by A. W. Shrimpton, M.A., and Allen E.
Mulgan. (Whitcombe & Toombs, 1922.)
The City of Auckland, by John Barr. (Whitcombe & Toombs,
1922.)
Proceedings of the Royal Colonial Institute, Vols. I. (1868-69)
to XIV. (1882-83).
Cruise of the ‘'Rosario," by (Commander) Albert Hastings
Markham. (Sampson Low, 1873.)
The Settlement of the Pacific, by Sir William Macgregor.
(Scottish Geographical Magazine, May, 1918.)
Mission literature includes the following :
The Life and Episcopate of G. A. Selwyn, D.D., by Rev. H. W.
Tucker, M.A. (Wells Gardner, Darton & Co, 1879.)
Life of John Coleridge Patteson, by Charlotte Mary Yonge.
(Macmillan, 1875.)


George Brown, D.D., Pioneer Missionary and Explorer. An
Autobiogrophy. (Hodder & Stoughton, 1908.)
A Century in the Pacific, edited by Rev. James Colwell, Metho-
dist Book Room, Sydney (1915).
Fiji of To-day, by John Wear Burton. (Kelly, 1910.) Also
The Call of the Pacific (1912).
James Chalmers : His Autobiography and Letters, by Richard
Lovett. (Religious Tract Society, 1902.)
James Chalmers of New Guinea, by Cuthbert Lennox. (Melrose,
1903.)
W. G. Lawes of Savage Island and New Guinea, by Rev. Joseph
King. (Religious Tract Society, 1909.)
Solomons and Santa Cruz, by (Bishop) J. R. Selwyn. ( Journal
of the Royal Colonial Institute, 1894.)
The Light of Melanesia, by H. H. Montgomery, D.D. (S.P.C.K.,
1908.)
A History of the English Church in New Zealand, by H. T.
Purchas, M.A. (Simpson & Williams Ltd.)


APPENDIX.
Story of a Missing Chapter.
Link of Empire History to be Forged in Sydney.
By C. BRUNSDON FLETCHER.
{Sydney Morning Herald, July 4, 1942.)
A chapter missing from the great Cambridge History
of the British Empire is being published by the Royal
Australian Historical Society. Literally, the chapter did
not go astray, though it was approved, a contract signed,
and was partly paid for by the editors of the history.
It just wasn’t included. The circumstances make an
interesting story, particularly in the light of Pacific events.
When Professor Ernest Scott, as he was then, wrote
to me from Paris in the middle of December, 1925, he sent
me no Christmas greetings, for his mind was full of some-
thing else.
He had not long arrived in Paris from London, where
he had been in close touch with the editors of the projected
Cambridge History of the British Empire. Later on, the
first volume took away the breath of the reviewer in the
Times Literary Supplement. His first sentence began :
‘ ‘ Previous co-operative histories from Cambridge had made
us all accustomed, with a certain amount of fear and
trembling, to co-operative histories of large bulk and
infinite detail and erudition.” This was in 1929, and
here was Professor Ernest Scott in 1925 writing to me
about what was to be the last word in co-operation in a
history of many volumes with an army of the ablest writers
throughout the Empire working to one end. In each
Dominion an adviser to the editors in Cambridge (Professor
Holland Rose, Professor A. B. Newton, and Mr A. Benians
of St John’s College) was selected, and Professor Scott
informed me that he had been asked to become adviser in
Australia.


SURPRISE PACKET.
The “surprise packet” for me, however, came early
in this letter from Paris. The editors in Cambridge had
requested Professor Scott to invite me to write the chapter
(in the projected Australian volume) headed “Australia
and the Pacific—l7Bß to 1885.”
In the rough draft of chapters sent to me, New
Zealand was to be given two chapters in a common volume !
Partly a New Zealander myself, it was easy to imagine the
feelings of New Zealand at this proposal, and eventually
she was given a volume to herself. But why was not the
Western Pacific given a prominent place in this forecast ?
And was not New Zealand its point of departure ?
My letter in reply explained that I was like a cat on
a large wet floor with a dry patch somewhere, but I was
doubtful even about that ! Nevertheless, an adventurous
chapter was written by me. It was approved, a contract
was signed, and a part of the fee coming to me was paid.
The balance was to be sent as soon as the volume was
published. Naturally, when Professor Scott and I fore-
gathered in Melbourne in 1930 (I was on my way to
London as a delegate to the Imperial Press Conference)
there was plenty to talk about. At lunch at the Melbourne
University we went over the ground. The other writers
of chapters had apparently done their work, and when I
got to London the interest in the coming volume-—some
volumes had already been published—increased. I called
at Fetter Lane, where were the premises of the Cambridge
University Press. The activity everywhere was amazing.
One room, for instance, was full of a publication which was
apparently being distributed as fast as the books could be
printed. It was Sir James Jeans’s Mysterious Universe,
and cartloads were leaving while I was there. “It is a
best-seller,” the manager said.
BEAR IN THE PATH.
I never saw Professor Scott again, but we kept in
touch, and a paragraph in one of his letters comes to mind.
He had written announcing that the editors, after he left
London in December, 1925, “had put into the plan of the
book another chapter, ‘Australia and the Empire.’ ” I


had pointed out that it seemed strange to cut the First
Century for my chapter down to 1885 instead of letting
it run out to 1888. His reply was that the editors, with
this new chapter interpolated, thought that Germany’s
jump on New Guinea in 1885 should be left to the ad-
ditional writer.
Then came Professor Scott’s final reminder : “It is
difficult in books written on the co-operative plan to avoid
overlapping; and there were such bad examples of it in
the Cambridge History of Foreign Policy that the editors
of this new work are severely disposed towards preventing
its occurrence.” This certainly seemed the bear in my
path; but, as it happened, not overlapping, but what may
be called “underlapping,” led to my chapter being left
out. When the volume on Australia was ready for final
revision and publication, it was found that the Western
Pacific had not been given any reasonable place.
In Mr Benian’s letter to me, expressing regret that
my chapter on Australia and the Pacific had not been used,
he said : “With the development of our plan for the
volume, we found it necessary to give a fuller treatment
of the islands of the Western Pacific than you had scope
for, and we accordingly substituted a chapter definitely
on the Western Pacific.” So that the pressure every-
where had created a hiatus, which from the beginning
seemed to me inevitable. The volume devoted to New
Zealand does not indicate any thought of the Western
Pacific as a whole, and Australian writers have left it
alone.
But, after all, it has been an interesting experience.
It has given me at any rate a chance of seeing how a great
historical work on the co-operative plan may be put
together. In addition, my researches for my chapter led
me into fields which Japan’s treachery had made doubly
valuable.
D. S. Ford, Printers, 44 40 Resetvoir St., Sydney.






