

AUSTRALIAN
Print Coll ectors’ Club
Under the auspices of
THE AUSTRALIAN PAINTER-ETCHERS’
A
SOC' T
CLYNE HOUSF
.FT. SYDNEY.
P. < si-dent . Sydney Long, A.R.E.
Vice-President: Dr. Grant B. Lindeman.
Branch Vice-President: John Shir low (Vic.). M
Hon. Secretory and Treasurer: SquireMerganT
Branch Hon. Secretary: J. C. Goodchild (S.A.).
Council: Will Ashton, Miss Helen Farmer, T. Friedensen, A. H. Fullwood,,
J. B. Godson, Bruce Robertson, Sydney Ure Smith.
Secretary: H. C. Morgan, A.C.I.S.
RULES.
OBJECTS. —The Australian Print Collectors’ Club ( herein-
after called “The Club’’), has been formed by the Australian
Painter-Etchers’ Society (hereinafter called “The Society ”), for
O"'' the purpose of encouraging a keener public appreciation of the
Art of Etching, and of providing funds for the Society to further
its objects.
The Club will afford to those who are interested a means
of associating themselves with the Society.
\S)


MEMBERSHIP. —The Membership of The Club is limited
to 300 for the present, but this number may be altered by the
Council of The Society at its discretion.
There is no entrance fee, the only payment being an annual
subscription of £3/3/-, payable to The Society, which payment
must accompany the application for membership in the first
instance.
All subscriptions become the property of The Society, and
may be dealt with as part of the ordinary funds of The Society.
It is understood that members of The Club are associated
with The Society in a purely complimentary sense, and shall
have no jurisdiction whatever in the government of The Society,
The President and Council, for the time being, of The
Society, shall be also the President and Council and controlling
body of The Club.
The Club year shall terminate on 30th June.
ADVANTAGES OF MEMBERSHIP
PRESENTATION ETCHINGS. —For the annual subscrip-
tion of £3/3/- paid by a member of The Club to The Society,
each member of The Club shall be entitled to select one Etching
to that value from a number made available by The Society
at the Annual Exhibition, held about July each year, or at such
other Exhibition as may be determined by the Council,
The Etchings, and the number of proofs of each, available
for selection by members of The Club, will be indicated in the
Catalogue of any Exhibition at which Presentation Etchings are
exhibited, but, the selection must be made during the course of
the Exhibition.
By this method of distributing presentation proofs, members
of The Club will have a considerable range of choice, both as
regards Artists and Subjects.
In the event of any member of The Club not making a
selection within the time allowed therefor, the Council reserves
the right of selecting and allocating an Etching to such member.
In the event of any Etching indicated as open for selection,
being selected by a number of members exceeding the number
of proofs allotted, the preference shall be given according to
priority of selection, and the members thereby deprived of their
first selection, shall have another choice.


Etchings are to be delivered mounted, but unframed.
Framing may be arranged for through The Society at the
expense of the member of The Club.
LECTURES, DEMONSTRATIONS, ETC.— Lectures and
Demonstrations will be arranged from time to time, and these
will enable the members to gain an insight into the processes
adopted in making an etching.
ADVlCE. —Members of The Club may obtain, without
expense, authoritative advice and information regarding prints,
from a Committee appointed for that purpose by the Council
of The Society.
ADMISSION TO EXHIBITIONS.— Members of The Club
will be entitled to Free Admission to all Exhibitions of The
Society.
To THE SECRETARY,
Australian Painter-Etchers’ Society,
Clyne House, 72 Pitt Street, Sydney.
I hereby make application for admission to membership
of the Australian Print Collectors’ Club, and enclose herewith
the sum of £3/3/- in payment of my subscription for the year
ending 30th June, 192
In the event of my election I undertake to subscribe to the
Rules of The Club formulated by the Council of The Society.
(Signature).,
(Date).
Candidate’s name in fu11...
Address..
H,i, etc/{oft
