

We are iLdvertised. toy Our Loving Friends.
99
in'
61%
Very kind of them it is, and deeply grateful we are. They know us and we know them. Their wants are our study, and so,
by a system of mutual help and confidence, and with the aid of that co-operation which is believed by many to be the essence
of success, a satisfactory conclusion is arrived at on behalf of buyers of every class, who recognise us as
Tlie Only Universal Providers.
OUR ONLY ADDRESS—
“ SO MOTE IT BE. ”
ANTHONY HORDERN & SONS.
Palace Emporium, Haymarket (Only), Close to the Railway Station.
For Influenza, Colds, Consumption, and other Winter Ills, Use the
BLiLCK CTJRnA.TffT BALSA.M,
Senior’s Is the Genuine.
All other preparations similarly named are IMITATIONS. Can be obtained at all Chemists.
Price Is. 6d. and 2s. 6d.
PARIS HOUSE,
STREET^
UNDER NEW MANAGEMENT.
-H Table d’Hote Papisienne.h
OYSTERS.
10 COURSES,
Including Lindeman’s Claret.
GAPE ROYAL & CIGAR.
ss/e
The editor of an Illinois paper thinks
that fishing, as a general rule, doesn’t
pay. He says, “We stood it all day in
the river last week, but caught nothing
—until we got home."
2240-lb TO THE TON.
T| y BROWNE & CO.,
MATTHEW-STREET, DARLING HARBOR,
and STATION, NEWTOWN, for
Chopped Wood Ready for Use,
Jid Stove Coal (Nuts).
PrompJfDelivery City and Suburbs. Terms Cash-
Species Rates to Dealers and Large Consumers.
AGENTS for the METROPOLITAN COAL Co.
ROS
S
LIME JUICE
Is the
Most Refreshing and Thirst-
Quenching Beverage for the
Summer.
G. W. PRINCE,
CONFECTIONER,
Try our Patent Cough Drops.
Eucalyptus Drops for Colds.
Best Boiled Lollies.
Best Almond Creams. Best Jujubes.
Strong Musk Lozenges.
French Nougat, Prince’s Jersey Almonds.
Pure Lime Fruit Drops.
Try Gondoliers & Dorothy Chocolates.
114 Market Street
(One Door from Castlereagh St.)
Most men like to see themselves in
print. Ladies like to see themselves in
silks and velvets.
Fishing Tackle , Fishing Tackle
OF EVERY DESCRIPTION AT
S. CORNFORTH’S
(IiATB W. CEAWBOBD AND SON),
WHOLESALE & RETAIL IROKMONBERS,
672. GEORGE STREET,
Brickfield Hill, Sydney.
Importer of Fishing Tackle of every description
Carpenters’, Joiners’ and Bricklayers’ Tools, and
all kinds of General Ironmongery.
G. A. HAWORTH.
Cutler and kor Strop Manufacturer.
All kinds Cutlery Ground, Set and Repaired.
401 GEORGE STREET.
MARKET CLOTH HALL.
Established 1864
J. TURNER ROBINSON & CO.,
478 George Street,
One of the oldest and best Tailoring Houses in
the City.
Suits to order from 63/-
Trousers „ 16/6
All Q-arments well made, well Shrunk, and a
perfect Fit Guaranteed.
Matalgia
Matalgia
Matalgia
HYDROPATHIC BATHS,
Cure for All Diseases Undertaken:
CONSULTATION FREE.
Jevett’s, 129 Regent-street, Chippendale.
ATHENS CAFE,
Purveyors to His Excellency, The Earl of Jersey,
If you would add the acme of bliss to your evening’s
entertainment, partake of an
otstbb iiffii
At EL Andrews’ Oyster Saloon, 104 King Street,
Where you will receive Attention, Civility and the
Bivalvular Shell-flsh served to perfection. The Saloon
is beautifully fitted up, no expence having been spared
in the effort to please the most exacting of patrons.
It beams with the Electric Light
Every Evening.
NOTE THE ADDRESS—
G. ANDREWS,
104 KING ST., SYDNEY.
Purveyor to
the
His
Excellency
Governor.
Wm. BUTTEL,
Family Butclier,
154 PITT ST., SYDNEY.
WAVeS’S 3AKINO POWDSE. Always
DETECTIVE Cook has resigned from the
Police Eorce and opened Divorce, Missing
Friends, and Next of Kin Offices at 133 King-st.j
Sydney. Testimonials from E. Fosbery, Esq.,
Inspector-General of Police; George Read, Esq.,
Superintendent of Police; H. M. Chomley, Esq.,
Chief of Police, Victoria; and Leading Judges,
Magistrates, Barristers, and Government Officials,
Sydney, forming a mass of reference unequalled
Tjy any private inquiry office in the world.
What may one have his pockets filled
with, even when they are empty ? Holes.
Why is your shadow like false friends?
Because it follows you only in sunshine.
Why is a laundress like conscience ?
Because she brings so many things home
to us.
“ Husband, I must have some change
to-day.”—“ Well, stay at home, and take
care of the children; that will be change
enough.”
Vain attempts at high art —Painting
the weathercock on a church-steeple.
The measures spoken of in music refer
generally to time. An exception is made
in the case of hand-organs, which furnish
music by the barrel.
Why are potatoes and corn like
certain sinners of old ? —Because, hav-
ing eyes they see not, and having ears
they hear not.
When Shakespere wrote about patience
on a monument, did he refer to doctors’
patients ? No, How how do know he
didn’t ? Because yon always find them
under a monument.
. An afflicted husband was returning
from the funeral of his wife, when a
friend asked him how he was. “ Well,”
said he, pathetically, “ I think I feel the
better for that little walk.”
L* Esi.tr’ Acte.
Registered under the Copyright Act of 1879.] Established 24 Years.
TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 6th, 1893.
HER MAJESTY’S THEATRE.
Sole Lessee and Manager ... ... MR, GEORGE RIGNOLD.
Stage Manager ... ... ... MR. J. W. HAZLITT.
Treasurer MR. 0. R. BAILEY.
Prompter ... Mr. CECIL CALYERT.
Every Evening till Further Notice.
MAGGIE MOOSE
In her World Famous Impersonation of “LIZZIE STOFEL,”
—in —
STRUCK OIL.
MISS MAGGIE MOORE’S performance of “ LIZZIE STOFEL ” (in which
character she has appeared over 6,000 times), has been universally received
with the utmost enthusiasm throughout the world. The Press have accorded
her the most glowing eulogies, and in Australia her Great Success has become
a household word.
Struck Oil
CAST OF CHARACTERS
John Stofel .... ... ... ... ... Mr. John F. Fordo
Ehin Skihner ... ... ... ... ... Mr. Stirling Whyte
Sergeant Flinn ... ... ... ... ... Mr. Albert Norman
Dr. Pearson ... ... ... ... ... Mr. H. R. Roberts
Corporal Sharp ... ... ... ... ... Mr. J. W. Sweeney
Captain Becks ... ... ... ... ... Mr. C. Keightley
Peter Rowley ... ... ... ... ... Mr. Frank Harconrt
Billy Patterson ... ... ... ... Master Freddy Thompson
Sheriff ... ... ... ... ... ... Mr. F. Foster
Susan Stofel ... ... ... ... ... Miss Flora Anstead
AND
Lizzie Stofel ...(her Original Character)... Miss MAGGIE MOORE
Hgf During the action of the Play, Miss Maggie Moore will sing her Original
Songs, “ His Fader Keeps a Brewery,” ‘‘ Lizzie’s Farewell ” “ Don’t make me
Laugh,” and “ Pretty Wilhelmina,” written expressly for her
by G. W. Hunt, Esq,, of London.
For Synopsis of Scenery See Page 3.
A gentleman recently broke off a
marriage because the lady did not
possess good conversational powers. A
cynical friend, commenting on the fact,
says, “ He should have married her, and
then refused her a new bonnet, and then
he would have discovered her conversa-
tional powers
Giving an Order. —There is nothing
like being explicit in giving your orders,
as may be seen from the following con-
versation, which took place at a New
York restaurant the other day. “ Give
me some cold rice,” said a guest at a
hotel to a black waiter. —“ There ain’t
none, sah.” —“ Why, what’s that on the
sideboard, in that dish there ?” —“ Dat,
sah, am cole b’iled rice. You asked
simply for cole rice, sah. Please be
exact in your language, sah. Shall I gib
you some of ob de b’iled rice, sah ?”
A young man in New York read some-
where that more deaths occured at five
o’clock in the morning than at any other
hour, and now gets up regularly at four
in order to be out when Death makes his
morning calls.
it gentleman asked an Irishman to do
him a small service, on the completion of
which he rewarded Pat very liberally.
Pat immediately addressed him thus,
“Arrah, by the powers, I have a good
mind to hire you for my master !”
We recently saw an old book, printed
over fifty years ago, the title of which is,
“ Was she engaged ?” We of course
have no personal knowledge on the sub-
ject; but, on general principles, we’ll
engage that it was not her fault if she
wasn’t.
An Irriplic^ion, —A coloured gentle-
man, in New York, went to consult one
of the most conscietious lawyers, and,
after stating his case, said, “Now, Mr,
James, I know you’s a lawyer, but I
wish you would please, sir, jiss tell me
de trufe ’bout dat matter.”
All full Inside. Charles Lamb, one
afternoon, returning from an early dinner
party, took his seat in a crowded omni-
bus, when a stout gentleman subse-
quently looked in, and politely asked,
“ All full inside ?” —“ I don’t know how
it may be with the other passengers,”
answered Lamb, ■“ but that last piece of
pie did the business for me.”
A lady correspondent wants to know
why, since the invention of needle-guns,
women can’t fight as well as men.
A school-boy having helped a fellow
pupil in his arithmetic, the teacher
angrily asked, “ Why did you work his
lesson ?”—“ To lessen his work,” replied
the boy.
“ Marry a widower ? Not I ! ” said
Matilda; “babies are tooth-brushes
Everybody wants their own,
A Yankee Toast.—“ Let come what
will come, for it is sure to come ; so
come and let us take a drink!” And
they all came.


THE N.S.W. 10NT DE PIETE DEPOSIT
& INVESTMENT CO., LTD.,
74 Castlereagh St., Sydney.
(New Building).
Advances Money npon Jewellery, Silver Plate, Diamond
and Precious Stones, Surgical, Mathematical, Musica
and Surveying Instruments, Pianos, Piece Goods, Cloth-
ing, Mortgages, Bills of Sale, &c., negotiated, Bills
Discounted, and every description of General Merchan-
dise at
One third of the Bate of Interest charged ty
other Pawnbrokers.
Interest from 3d In the Found per Month.
Weekly and Monthly Instalments accepted.
LEWIS LEVY, Manager.
N.B.—The only offices of the above Company are the
New Buildings in Castlereagh Street, next to St. James’s
School; and others styling themselves “ Mont de Fiete”
are in no way connected.
Pledge Department has side entrance np the
Bight-of-vay.
ALL COMMUNICATIONS must be addressed to the
MAN AO Bit, or will not be recognized.
PEMELL’S
“ A.8.C.” Granulated
WHEAT MEAL.
P. DAWSON'S
Perfection Whisky.
DUFFTOWN, GLEN LI VET.
Solo
C. D’ARCY & COMPANY
474 George Street.
0
Beg to announce that they are now printing
PHOTOGEAPHS IS PLATINUM
At the same charges they formerly made for the ordinary silver
prints, the latter being reduced 25 per cent, all round.
:o:
Possess not only the delicacy and artistic appearance of steel
engravings or etchings, but are guaranteed equally as permanent.
&TN ew Address-
-318 OEOBCHB ST,
Always the Best.—Waugh’s
Baking Powder.
WE ALL SAY that DR. WAUGH’S
BAKING POWDER IS THE BEST.
N*. 5 SILVEE SONGSTE I now ready, con-
taining over 50 parodies specially written. All
Booksellers, 63.
Waugh’s Baking Powder is
the Best. Try it.
OSIERYr%& GLOVES
NO MISTAKE ABOUT WAUGH’S
BAKING POWDEH.
Use Waugh’s Baking Powder
always, because it is the Best.
To be had of all Drapers,
WHEATENA,
THE GERM OF WHEAT,
A BREAKFAST GEM.
“ Thespians & Theatre goers ”
should remember
‘THE ROYAL CUTLERY DEPOT”
401 GEORGE STREET,
Opposite Royal Hotel.
N.B.—Razors and. Scissors Ground and Set.
G. A. HAWORTH.
WAUGH’S BAKING POWDER—
Proved and Approved.
DO
NOT
LOOK
AT
THIS.
Mew Soutla. Wales
FRESH FOOD AND ICE COMPANY, Limited.
FISH! FISH! FISH!
Owing to the perfect arrangements in the FISH & GAME DEPARTMENT,
the Company is now supplying FISH to an enormous section of the inhabitants of
the City, and residents in every Country town of New South Wales (as a matter of
fact to many towns outside, notably Brisbane).
A telegraph order from any Country town despatched before 1 p.m. (provided
the Telegraph Department do their part), is certain of execution by mail train
same day, and as Fish is carried at half parcel rates —equal to about |d. per lb. for
the most distant towns, the luxury of a fish diet is within the reach of all, the
Fresh Food and Ice Company’s prices (free on rail) being extremely moderate.
We prepay trainage, thereby effecting a saving of 60 per cent.
The Company stock %11 kinds of New Zealand and N.S.W, Fish, also some
American kinds —notably Salmon, and arrangements have been concluded with the
Orient line to fit a steamer. The first consignment of English Fish and Game
leaves London, sth May, 1892.
Price lists and all information can be obtained on application at the Company’s
Depot, 135 King Street, or from the Manager N.S.W. Fresh Pood and
Ice Company, Limited, 25 to 33 Harbour Street.
NOTE.—We shall be pleased for visitors from the Country to inspect our
refrigerating establishment at Harbour Street. Application at the Head Office
will at any time ensure admission to the Works, without doubt the most extensive
and expensive of their kind in the world.
The Company deliver daily to all parts of the City and Suburbs —Milk, Ice,
Cream, Butter, Poultry, Fish, Game, Pastry, &c.
Hy. Pateson, Manager.
25 to 33 HARBOUR STREET, SYDNEY,
February 22nd, 1893.
PEMELL’S
SNOW-WHITE
ROLLER FLOUR.
It is said that the light of a match
will frighten a wolf ; bnt a love match
sometimes fails to keep the wolf from
the door.
Waugh’s Baking Powder is
the Best. Try it.
Printed and Published by J. W. EEDY,
Q-eneral Printer, Royal Standard Printing
Works, 227 Castlereagh Street, Sydney (4
doors below Metropolitan Eire Station)
No Baking Powder equal to
to Dr. Waugh’s.
Use WAUOH’S BAEIHB POWDER. Always the Best.
As endeavours are being made to in-
duce Mme. Albani to visit Australia,
this reference to her singing in “ The
Golden Legend,” produced at the Cry-
stal Palace with a gigantic chorus, will
be read with pleasure : —“ No vocalist
has ever appeared in the Handel
orchestra with greater success than
Madame Albani, whose fine voice, after
years of hard work, retains its quality
and volume, and rings out as it did
when first heard in the same locality.
Fresh, vigorous, and with a breadth of
style equal to the quality of voice,
Madame Albani almost stands alone as
an interpreter of vocal music on a large
scale.”
Mr. C. M. Leumane has entered upon
operatic management, and is touring the
Victorian provinces with a company
which includes Miss Marie Elster
(soprano), Miss Carrie Bilton (singing
soubrette), and Herr Josef (baritone).
Dibdin’s ballad opera “ The Water-
man,” “ The Bohemian Girl,” scenes
from “ Faust,” and comedy sketches, in
which Mr. George Leopold is the main-
stay, are among their productions.
“A Woman’s Revenge,” Henry
Pettitt’s new Adelpi melodrama, has
been produced at the re-opening of that
playhouse, with Mr. Charles Warner as
the hero, Mr. Charles Cartwright as a
wicked solicitor, Miss Elizabeth Robins
as an heiress, and Miss Fanny Brough
as her companion. The Figaro adds
that “ Mr. Herbert Flemming, a stout
little body with plenty of ‘ go,’ played
the other villain most effectively.” The
scenery by Mr. Bruce Smith was
especially fine, but the drama itself did
not leave the old, well-beaten traqk.
Ne. 5 SILVER SONGSTER now ready "Daisy
Bell,” “ After the Ball,” and 100 others. All
Booksellers, 6d.
Miss Myra Kemble has engaged Mr.
Edward Sass as leading man throughout
her Eew Zealand tour, and Miss Emma
Gwynne has also been added to the
company. It is probable that “ Pauline
Blanchard ” will be added to the reper-
toire.
Some of the London papers chronicle
the receipt of a cablegram announcing
Mr. Edward Terry’s Australian debut
at the Princess’s Theatre. The comedian
opened at the Sydney Lyceum, but in
London it is popularly supposed that
everything that happens’out here takes
place in Melbourne.
A Gentleman caught cold by kissing a
lady’s snowy brow.
A practical Kentucky editor calls the
autumn foliage the Dolly Varden cos-
tume of the trees.
The river is so low at Pittsburg that
milk is rising.
Why is a filter like the fortune of a
spendthrift ? Because it is soon run
through, and leaves a great many
matters behind to settle.
\
What we wish to do we think we can
do, but when we do not wish a thing it
becomes impossible.
“Well, Mr. Tree, if you’re about to
leave, I shall detain your trunk /” ex-
claimed an incensed landlady to her
lodger, who was slightly in arrears.
The real reason of Signora Duse’s
failure as Cleopatra was passed over by
the London dailies, but the Era states
that “ not only Signor Ando and others,
but the leading lady herself, repeated
most of the lines of the last act after
that useful functionary the prompter.
The prompting was very neatly done,
but the delicate and distinct whisper
was quite audible by all present.
At Convent Garden Theatre last
month, “ Cavalleria Rusticana ” and
“La Favorita ” were played together.
The curtain rose at 7.30 and did not
finally fall until midnight.
It is in vain to hope to please all alike.
Let a man stand with his face in what
direction he will, he must necessarily
turn his back on one-half of the world.
Much sympathy is expressedin London
with Miss Genevieve Ward (Queen
Eleanor), whose absence from the cast
of “ Becket ” has been due to the death
of her mother.
Mr. Herbert Standing, prior to his
departure for America, had a splendid
benefit at the Gaiety Theatre, when he
was assisted by the “ Charley’s Aunt ”
Company and a score of famous operatic
artists.
“ Haven’t I a right to be saucy, if I
please P asked a young lady of an old
bachelor. — “Yes, if yon please, but if
you displease,” was the answer.
It is said that a human being has
seven millions of pores through' which
perspiration and exhausted particles of
the system escape. We are all pore
creatures.
A traveller said that in Spain um-
brellas differ in size, from an ordinary
dinner-plate to small tent, and their
colours are as varied as the tints of the
rainbow.
Can a lamp be said to be in a bad
temper when it is put out.
Nonsense has been described as sense
that differs from one’s own.
Problem for financiers; to convert a
Seating debt into a sinking fund.
A New York paper savs a former
principal of Middleborough Academy, at
one time, on the approach of a tempest,
insulated a chair on four pieces of glass,
and, as he thought, politely invited a
young lady to sit on his lap for safety.
To show the popularity of the man of
letters, the young lady replied she had
rather been struck by lightning.
Why is an attorney like a cart wheel ?
—Because he cannot proceed properly
until he is on the roll.
When is soup likely to run out of the
saucepan ? —When there’s a leek (leak)
in it.
“ Ah, ladies,” said an old epicure, as
he opened a bottle of wine, “ what is
more delightful than the popping of a
champagne cork P”—“ The popping of
the question !” unanimously cried the
ladies.
What grows less tired the more it
works F—A carriage wheel.
Why is a restless man in bed like a
lawyer P —Because he lies on all sides.
i Why should people who wish to lead
peaceable lives never go to evening
parties ? —Because hops produce great
bitterness.
Being positive in judgment to-day is
no proof that we shall not be of a differ-
ent opinion to-morrow.
“ They say ‘ cotton is declining,’ ”
exclaimed an old lady, as she removed
her spectacles, and laid down her paper.
“ I thought so,” she continued, for the
last thread I used was very feeble.
“John,” said the father to his son one
day when he caught him shaving the
“ down ” off his upper lip,'- 4 ' don’t throw
your shaving-water out where there are
any barefooted boys, for they might get
their feet pricked.”
My sou, know thyself! ” solemnly said
a father to one of his offspring.—“ Thank
you, sir,” replied the son, “ hut my list
of acquaintances is sufficiently large
already.”
A man’s dearest object should be his
wife; but sometimes it is his wife’s
wardrobe.


P. DAWSON’S Perfection Whiskr
DUFFTOWN GLENLIYET.
Sole Agents: C. D’AECY Sc CO., 474 GEORGE STREET.
The Practical Tailor’s
REMOVAL.
D. Zi. GREENBERG,
TAILOR, HABIT-MAKER, &c.
(Late of 53 Market-street),
Has Removed to No. 43, opp. Roberts Hotel.
Owing to his increasing trade, Mr, GREENBERG has
found it necessary to take this step for the convenience
of his patrons, and trusts for a continuation of their
esteemed favors.
EYS
Y
I
With Soda or Tonic Water, is
the best and most popular
Drink.
J. J. iILLEAM (The well-known Carrier),
Having been the successful tenderer for the business lately carried on by the
CITY CARRYING COMPANY, begs to inform the Merchants and General
Public that he is now carrying on business at
ALBERT BT., CIRCULAR QUAY (the office of the late Company),
CHANGE ALLEY, and also at SUSSEX ST. as usual.
Goods and Parcels forwarded per each Mail Steamer,
and Sailing Vessels.
ESPECIAL ADVANTAGES OFFERED FOR CONVEYANCE OF
THEATRICAL WARDROBES & PROPERTIES.
Telephony, No’s. 161 and 461.
For a GOOD SMOKB
532
George Street
Try Rutherford
Opposite
lown Gall.
Ask for the REGATTA CIGARS, 5 for 1/-
Mind the Three Essential
heot®
EASE, ELEGANCE and ECONOMY,
May be secured by having Shirts made to order.
C. CORBETT,
Practical Shirt Cutter, 35 Park St. Sydney
Shirts Repaired, New Cuffs and Necks.
Miss JT. 33 El -A. IKT,
COSTUMIER,
Begs to inform her numerous customers that she
has not relinquished business, but may still
be seen daily at
286 GEORGE ST. (One Door from Hunter St.)
SYDNEY.
Mo 5 SILVER SONGSTER now ready “Ju
Jah,” “ How they Apologise,” and 100 others
All Booksellers, 6d.
Use Waugh’s Baking; Powder
always, because it is the Best
PBMELL’S
GOLDEN MEAL.
NO 5 SILVER SONGSTER now ready,
“ Twiggy Yoo,” “ I Love the Rowdy Dowdy
Boys,” and 100 others. All Booksellers, 6d.
At 249 PUT SI, Opposite Lyceum Theatre,
At 145 King St., Opposite Theatre Royal,
AND AT
376 George St., Three Doors from G-.P.0.
YOU CA-N HAVE
A. Bowman’s 21s. Porpoise Boots at 16/6 per pair.
A. Bowman’s 21s. Glace Kid Boots at 16/6 per pair.
A. Bow r man’s 21s. Russian Leather Boots at 16/6 per pair.
A. Bowman’s 21s. Shooting Boots at 16/6 per pair.
A. Bowman’s object is to serve the Public with First Class Boots,
at an Extreme Low Price.
They are the best that can be made, and
if all our Customers will get their Boots
at these three Shops,
We believe we shall be able to keep them at this Low. Price,
Look for the Bow-man
on the Window.
a
Registered Trade Mart
For Modern Portraits,
For Cheap
Enlargement,
7 PARK STREET, SYDNEY.
Use WAUGH’S BAKING FOVDSE. Always the Best.
The notes of a gas company are usually
all set to the same metre.
When you have lost money in the
streets, every one is ready to help you to
look for it; but when you have lost your
character, everyone leaves you to re-
cover it as you can.
An Illinois paper states that a con-
gealed rattle-snake was recently found in
his neighbourhood by a man with thirteen
rattles.
City and Country Q-entlemen will do well to
look at Howes and Howes’ New and Selected
Stock of Cloths. Really New and Fashionable
Suits well finished, Latest Cut, 75/-. Howes
and Howes, Pitt Street, next Market Street.
Canada wants a name tor a newly
discovered island in one of its un-
pronounceable lakes, which is said by
trappers to swarm with beavers enough
to supply the fur trade for all time.
We would suggest Castor Isle as a
smooth-sounding title.
The maddest man in Chicago is Smith.
He wound up his clock. regularly for
fifteen years, and then discovered that it
was an eight-day clock. He muses on
the work that he might have done in
those wasted minutes, and his profanity
is dreadful,
“You should live within your income,
sir.’’said a hard old capitalist to a clerk
who asked for an advance of wages.—
It’s easy enough to live within an income”
modestly replied the clerk, “ but what I
should like to know is, how a fellow is
to live without one.”
When is an army like a tack in a
lady’s dress F —When it is hemmed in.
Gaiety. —There are twokinds of gaiety,
the one rises from want of heart, being
touched by no pity, sympathizing with
no pain, even of its own causing; it
shines and glitters like a frost-bound
river in the gleaming sun. The other
springs from excess of heart—that is, a
heart overflowing with kindliness toward
all men and all things, and suffering
under no superadded grief; it is light
from the happiness which it causes, from
the happiness which it sees. This may
be compared to the placid river, spark-
ling and smiling under the sun of summer
and running on to give fertility and
increase to all within, and even to many
beyond, its reach.
In the far West, mosquitoes are so
plentiful that they are unable to get on
a stranger all at once, so they stand in
reliefs, .and wait for their turns.
A Chicago paper tells the story of a
noctural serenader who sang, “ When
the mo-hoons’ sh-hi-hi-ning o’er the la-
hake, O, the-hen I’ll thi-hink of thee
he-he-hee! 0, the-hen I’ll thi-hi-hi-hi-
hink of thee ! ” The music aroused a
dog about the size of a flour barrel, and
the musician is doing as well as could be
expected.
What is the difference between an
engine-driver and a passenger who lost
the train ? One is right in front, and
the other is left behind.
A Georgia newspaper informed its
readers that it was not worth while for
them to raise boys. The agonized editor
insists that he wrote the word hogs.
Love without money has been com-
pared to a pair of shiny leather boots
without soles.
ACT X.
SCENE I—lnterior of John Stofel’s House and Shop.
ACT XX.
SCENE 1 - - A Boom in John Stofel’s House.
Scene 2—THE VOLUNTEER’S CAMP.
View of Pittsburg in the Distance.
SCENE 4—The Guard Room of the Volunteer’s Camp.
SCENE 3 ... ... ... Outside the Camp.
ACT 111.
Scene I—Oilsburg with its Wells, Derricks, etc.
SCENE 2 ... ... ... A Street in Oilsburg.
SCENE 3 ... ... ... John Stofel’s House.
ENTIRELY NEW SCENERY BY Mr. JOHN BRUNTON.
After which will be presented the Intensely Am using Farce, entitled,
The Chines© Question
fam y s?e S Lo ne ] - Miss MAGGIE MOORE
Billy Biff h
Ali-Ka-Fung-te Yang-SlimJ - Mr, John F. Forde
Mr. Freewill ... ... ... ... ... Mr. J. W. Sweeney
Fred Contrast ... ... ... ... ... Mr. H. R. Roberts
Harry Intrigue ... ... ... ... ... Mr. F. Ambrose
Mrs. Freewill ... ... ... ... ... Mrs. Melville
Nelly ... ... ... ... ... ... Miss V. Vivian
During the Farce Miss Maggie Moore will introduce “ The Irish Farmyard ”
sung for the first Time in Australia, and with Mr. Forde give
choice selections from a favourite Chinese Opera.
Conductor ... Mr. FRANK BUGARDB.
The whole produced under the immediate supervision of Mr. GEO. RIGNOLD.
Doors open 7.16 p.m. Commence at 8 p.m. Carriages at 10.45 p.m.
Box Plan Open Daily in the Grand Vestibule of the Theatre from 10 till 4.
J, P. MACDONALD, Acting Manager.
The kind of animals admitted at en-
tertainments—White Kids.
At a New York Sunday-school, not
long since, a little boy was crying bitterly.
school-mistress, upon inquiry,
learned that he had lost his mother; and
she, in sympathy, remarked to the
scholars that no one knew what a loss it
was until they had lost a mother, and
that Johnny had good cause for crying.
At this moment a little urchin jumped
up and said, “ Oh, ma’am, you just wait
till he gets a step-mother, then you’ll
hear him cry! ”
A Solomon of a Judge.—-The following
story comes from Ireland : —Two men
had a quarrel in a liquor shop. They
adjourned outside to settle the dispute.
The first man being from Connaught,
immediatdly seized a lamp of stone and
let fly at the head of the opponent, who
dipped his head and missed the stone,
which went through an expensive plate-
glass window and did much damage
A magistrate was called upon next
morning to determine which of the two
shoirld pay the cost. The evidence
clearly showed that the aim was a good
one, and that if the second man had not
dipped his head he would have been
struck. “ Therefore,” said the magistrate
“he must pay the damages, as it is
certain the first man didn’t intend to
injure the window, and the window would
not have been injured if it had not been
for the act of the second man.”
The editor of a New York child’s
paper received a letter from a lady
subscriber recently, in which was
written, “ Our Anna died last week,
after reading the last number of your
valuable paper.”
In speaking of a Yankee local debating
society, a country paper says, “ Our
village debating, clubs are in full swing,
and questions that have engrossed the
intellectual functions of sages ever since
the flood are being decided at the rate
of two a week.”
An exuberant youth of Pitsfield said
to a,supposed friend, “ Hallo, Joe ! Oh,
excuse me, I thought you were another
man !”—Laconic stranger : “ 1 am.”
The most bashful girl we have heard
of was the young lady who blushed when
she was asked if she had not been court-
ing sleep.
When is a house like a bird ? When
it has wings.
Ignorant Interference. —A story is
told about a man who put the saddle
hind-part fore-most upon his horse
while in a condition of dizziness, super-
induced by fire-water. Just as he was
about to mount,, a friend came up and
told him to hold on a minute, because
the saddle was on wrong, and wante d
refixing. The horseman gaxed for a
moment at the intruder, as if in deep
thought, and then said, “You let that
saddle alone ! How do you know which
way lam going ?” And the gentleman
passed on.


N-SCOT
VICTORIA
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE.
CONTRACTS ACCEPTED
SPIRITS
WHISKY OP PROOF STRENGTH
Loch-Dhu
EXTRACT FROM VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT GAZETTE,
OF Bth JUNE, 1891.
SELECTED BEFORE ALL
OTHERS SUBMITTED,
FOR USE IN HOSPITALS,
ASYLUMS, &C.
IN BULK AND CASE.
087 UNABLE ALL WINE AND SPIRIT MERCHANTS,
AND WHOLESALE ONLY EROM
G. H. ADAMS & CO., Ltd.
N ELBOURNE. SYDNEY.
ADELAIDE. BRISBANE.
Open all Migtit.
Telephone, No. 1498.
H. A. ROS
PHARMACIST,
OF
531 George Street,
SYDNEY,
Is the only Chemist in Sydney who keeps his
doors Open all night, Sundays and Holidays.
a
|>g
TV
Sn
R
R
R
R
R
OSE’S EYE LOTION the best Remedy
m the world, and
should be used bj
every one suffering
with Sore Eyes.
OSE’S EYE LOTION i® a Positive
Remedy for Sandy
Blight, Swellings,
Dimness of Sight,
and all Ailments
of the Eye,
OSB’S EYE LOTION-One trial will
prove its worth,
send stamped-
envelope for Trea-
tise on Diseases of
the Bye, with
Simple Instruc-
tions of Self-cure.
OSE’S EYE LOTlON— Manufactured
only by the Pro-
prietor, H, A.
ROSE, 531 Qeorge-
etreet, Sydney.
This Wonderful
Remedy is Worth
OSE’S BYE LOTION »• Weight in
Gold.
Sterii^^LACK
Guaranteed
TO
ALL OTHERS
JIM WALKER & JACK ROWAN,
Hath Opened at
236} PITT STREET,
(Opposite School of Arts,)
With Best Brands of Cigars and Tobaccos in
Stock.
OOUB LES ON ALL WEEKLY EVENTS.
Double and Straight Out on Caulfield
Melbourne Cup and V.S.C. Derby.-
To be had of all Drapery
DO
NOT
LOOK
AT
THIS.
Ladies, Save the Pieces!
LARSENS’ P. P. CEMENT
will mend them.
Oca.. FEB. BOTTLE. 6d.
China, Glass, and Work of Art repaired at
202 Oxford Street, Paddington.
R. T. BELLEMEY (late Rigney),
Family and Dispensing Chemist, 161
King-st., Sydney. Prescriptions dis-
pensed at any hour of day or night.
Qualified assistants always on the pre-
mises.
A WOLF IN SHEEP’S CLOTHING
Is to he avoided, but Wolfe’s Schnapps
in bottles, especially when they have
one pound orders in the wrappers, is to
be prized.—Advt.
WHEN YOUR HEALTH is impaired
by unhealthy surroundings or hard
work, take Wolfe’s Schnapps, which is
a great tonic and reviver.—Advt.
TO LADIES ONLY.
THE SEOHET OF TOILET
Sent in strict confidence to any address.
Enclose 10/-; Koragi, No. 24 Room,
3rd Floor, 63 Pitt Street.
Use WAUGH’S BAKING POWDER. Always the Best.
A lady having bought a suit to recover
a chignon from a hair-dresser with whom
she had left it for repair, her little boy
wanted to know “if that chignon was
what is called, ‘ hair-at-law ! ’ ”
“Prevention, ’ said a sanitary reform ej|
“is better than cure.” The medical man
to whom this observation was addressed,
smiled, and replied, “ That may be very
true in theory, but the reverse is what we
always find to be the case in practice.”
The greatest truths are the simplest,
so are the greatest men and women.
A New York saloon-keeper advertises
for “ a boy to open oysters about fifteen
years old.”
Why do people doubt the merits of
Mr. Buchanan or any other bachelor
President ? Because his excellency
(His Excellency) is not apparent (a
parent).
A notorious rogue being brought to
the bar, and knowing his case to be des-
perate, instead of pleading, he took the
liberty of jesting, and thus said, “ I
charge you, in the King,s name, to seize
and take away that man” (meaning the
judge) “ in the red gown, for I go in
danger because of him.”
To a squire who was boasting of his
horse’s speed, Foote, the witty comedian
replied. Pooh! my horse will stand
faster than yours can gallop.”
A GOOD THING
Is sure to have a host of imitations,
but the imitations of Wolfe’s Schnapps
are too poor to obtainiany great sale. —
Advt.
Why is a man taken ill while looking
at the sun setting like a retired place P
—Because he’s sick-ivester'd (sequestered
As an early morning train stopped at
a station on the Harlem Railroad
(United States), an old gentlemen with
a cheerful countenance stepped out on
the platform, and inhaling the fresh air,
enthusiastically exclaimed. “ Isn’t this
invigorating ? ” —“ No, sir ;it is Ford-
ham,” replied the conscientious guard.
The cheerful old gentleman went back
to his seat in the carriage.
A man of bad reputation was com-
plaining to his uncle that a certain
person had ruined his character. “So
much the better,” replied the uncle, “ for
it was a very bad one ; and the sooner it
it was destroyed, the more to your
advantage.”
What is that which flies without
wings ?—An arrow.
L’Entr’ Acte.
HER MAJESTY’S THEATRE.
“ STRUCK OIL.”
During the last 15 years, if not for a more ex-
tended period,•“ Struck Oil” has been revived
on many occasions in Sydney, and in hardly any
instance has it failed to attract large audiences.
This is no doubt due to some extent to the merit
of the drama itself, but the reason of its sus-
tained popularity is for the most part traceable
to the strong interest which is invariably evinced
in Miss Maggie Moore’s admirable impersonation
of the wayward and quaint Lizzie Stofel. Uhy-
sically, Miss Moore has now become somewhat
robust for the fail -haired, mischief-loving Dutc
girl, but she presents the part with as muc
vivacity as ever, and in that respect there is
little change from the Lizzie Stofel of-old. n
Saturday evening, when “ Struck Oil was
reproduced at Her Majesty’s Theatre, a y ®jT
large audience assembled to witness it, and e
welcome accorded to Miss Moore was ot a most
hearty and flattering character, and at the c ose
of the first act she was called before the curtain,
and retired with a most formidable burden o
floral gifts. is by this time familiar
with the plot of “ Struck Oil,” and it is there-
fore only necessary to say that it was worke ou
very ablv by the company, and that in the
pathetic'scenes of the parting between John
Stofel and his wife and daughter the audience
was evidently strongly moved. The blun enng
of the old Dutchman, too, as he flounders throng
his drill also furnished quite a fund of amuse-
ment. Miss Maggie Moore, as already men
ioned, played with all her old dash ana spin ,
and she gave the incidental songs with exc ® en
vocal effect. Mr. John F. Forde s John o e
is a clever performance, even when wrmpare
with the original impersonation of Mr. WH iam-
son. He brought out the characteristics o ie
lazy but loving old Dutch bootmaker admira y,
and his acting in the scene where Stofel returns
from the war a mental and physical ’
was forceful throughout. The part o e
tender-hearted Mrs. Stofel was charming y
rendered by Miss Flora Anstead, whose acting
was natural, and therefore effective. By his
impersonation of the arch-hypocrite, Deacon
Skinner, Mr. Stirling Whyte added another item
to his list of standard character sketches, and it
was evident during the progress of the drama
that the majority of the audience would have
been glad of the opportunity to have the Deacon
up before Judge Lynch. Mr. Albert Norman s
Sergeant Flynn was as manly and straight-
going as it was intended to be, and Mr, H. R.
Roberts gave a finished of Dr.
Pearson. Mr. J, W. Sweeney was also well
suited as Corporal Sharp. The drama was
excellently staged, and the scene depicting the
volunteers’ camp, with a view of’ Pittsburg in
the" distance, was artistically produced by Mr.
John Brunton, The representation of “ Oils-
burg,” with the wells, derricks, &c., jvas also
an interesting picture. “ Struck Oil, which,
judging from the enthusiasm with which it was
received on Saturday evening, will probably
have a good run, was succeeded by “ The Chinese
Q.uestion,” in which Miss Maggie Moore, as the
Irish help, Kitty O’Shane, afterwards disguised
as Sam Se Lo, provided half an hour s fun.
Mr, Forde appeared in the dual role of Billy
Biff, a butcher boy, and a Chinese cook, and,
while he overdid the vulgarity of the former, he
gave a clever idea of the latter. Mr, Sweeney
waj excellent as the irrascible Mr. Freewill, and
was well supported by Mrs. Melville as Free-
will’s spouse. Miss Vivian was an interesting
Nelly, and Mr. Roberts made the most of the
small part’of Fred Contrast, — S.JH, Herald,
A NEW DENTIFRICE.
We have much pleasure in recommending
Fose’s “ Odonto,” prepared by H.,A. Rose, the
well-known, “ open all-night,” chemist, of 531
George Street, City.
A young lady said she should like to
go up in a balloon. She wished very
much to get up above the clouds, and
look down. It must he so pretty. She
had heard that even the darkest cloud
had a silver lining.
Darwin acknowledged himself sold
when his little niece asked him, seriously,
what a cat has that no other animal has,
and he gave it up after mature deliber-
ation, and then the sly little puss an-
swered, “ Kittens !”
An unfortunate Kentucky editor thus
addresses his delinquent subscribers: —
“ Friends, we are penniless. Job’s turkey
was a millionaire compared with our
present depressed treasury. To-day, if
salt was two cents a barrel, we could not
buy enough to pickle a jay-bird.”
An Irish sailor visited a city where he
said they copper-buttomed the tops of
the houses with sheet-lead. Perhaps it
was the same man who saw a white
blackbird sitting on a wooden mile-stone
eating a read blackberry.
An Irishman's Will, —I will and
bequeath my beloved wife, Bridget, all
my property without reserve; and to
my eldest son, Patrick, one half of the
remainder; and to Dennis, my youngest
son, the rest. If there is anything left,
it may go to Terence McCarthy.
It has been ascertained that light pene-
trates to one hundred fathoms below the
surface of the sea, which is seventy more
than it was formerly supposed to.
The Home Circuit. —Walking about
with a baby in the night.
Why does a lady wearing crinoline
appear comical as well as conicla P
Because she is very funnel-ly dressed.
Why is latitude like a clothes-line?
Because it stretches from pole to pole.
Why is a solar eclipse like a woman
whipping her boy ? —Because it’s a-hid-
ing of the sun. ‘ /
A young husband handed his wife a
dozen buttons the other day, and asked
her to put a shirt to them.
A New York paper wants to know
why it is that “ drowning men catch at
straws ?” Another paper says, “We
don’t know that they do. We have seen
a nupiber of gentlemen drown, but those
bf them who had any preference at all
seemed to be predjudiced in favour of a
plank. We don’t remember ever being
asked for a straw by a gentleman who
was drowning, and it is just as well,
perhaps, because we never carry one
with us.”
Why is the map of Alabama like the
barrel of a soldier’s musket ? —Because
one end has a hay on it (bayonet).
Why is a lady putting on her corsets
like a man who drinks to drown his
grief r—Because in so-lacing herself she
is getting tight.
~~-An Indian lawyer used the word
“ disparagement ” in his plea, and the
judge told him that if he coulden’t leave
off using Latin words he could sit down.
The lawyer undertook to define his
position, and was fined twenty dollars
for contempt of court.
“ I should like,” said a French medical
charlatan, “ to place over the door of
my surgery an inscription, either in
Latin or Greek, borrowed from one of
the great authors.”—“ Give Italian the
preference,” remarked one of his patients;
“ nothing can equal that verse of Dante’s,
“ Abandon hope, all ye who enter here. "■
An American editor published a long
leader on hogs. A rival paper in the
same village upbraids him for obtruding
his family matters upon the public.
Why should physicians have a
greater horror of the sea than anybody
else P—Because they are more liable to
see (sea) sickness.
A distinguished antiquary wishes to
know in whose possession is the chair
on which “ Yerhum sat''
The following knotty question claims
the attention of one or all of our debat-
ing societies : “If a man had a tiger by
the tail, which would he the best for his
personal safety—to hold on, or let go ?”
What is that which never uses its
teeth for eating purposes ?—A comb.
What was the proverb that King Lear
heard from his daughters ?—“ Go, father,
and fare worse.”
ATTEMPTS ARE BEING MADE
To deceive the Public by low-priced
imitations of Wolfe’s Schnapps. See
that you are not imposed upon. —Advt.
Who would you be ? —Two men —
named Shot and Knott —went out shoot-
ing. Knott got shot, but Shot was not
(Knott) ; I would rather be Shot than
not (Knott.)
In nine out of every ten of the leading Clubs
and Hotels in the city, Giibbt’s Dry Gin is
the favorite spirit drunk. Taken with Soda or
Tonic Water it makes a most wholesome and
pleasant beverage. Its effect upon the system
is certainly that of a tonic, being different in
this respect to heavier spirit— vide Sir Charles
Cameron’s certificate on each bottle.
“ Mother, this book tells about the
‘angry waves of the ocean.’ Now, what
makes the ocean get angry ?”—Because
it has been crossed so often, my son.”
Why is a butcher like a language-
master P—Because he is a retailer of
tongues.
Who was the man who first intro-
duced salt provisions into the navy F
Noah; for he took Sam into the ark.
What letter of a foreign language
made Queen Elizabeth establish goose
as a Michaelmas dish P —The Spanish R
made her (Spanish Armada)
