

AND
i
!
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
SYDNEY:
Printed at the Christian World Office, 801 Pitt Street.
I
i
1897.
■SI
M
L
I
f u f i /Li
I
iTION. i
' |
S
AIiSTRAUAN ♦ FEDERATEN.
A LECTURE,
DELIVERED BY
DOHJILD COR.MJICK.. |
AT THE |
TOWN HAH, ROOKWOOD, N.S.W., j
—*l7th FEBRUARY, 1897,-v-




Australian ♦ Federation,
v " : '
A LECTURE,
DELIVERED BY
DORJILD CORJMCK.
AT THE
TOWN HALL, ROOKWOOD, H.S.W.,
-~*l7th FEBRUARY, 1897,-4^-
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
SYDNEY:
Printed at the Christian World Office, 301 Pitt Street.
1897.
f St 01




BY WAY of introductory explanation I may state how I
became associated with the great question of Federation.
During an interview I had with Sir John Downer in
South Australia reference was incidentally made to the subject
of Australian Union. I took occasion to express the view, that
by making Federation a People’s question, instead of a
Politician’s question, the good work of the Convention of 1891
would be better understood and appreciated than it appeared
at that time to be. To make it a People’s question would be to
invest this great subject with interest in the minds of the
whole population. The people, I thought, might be asked to
declare at the ballot-box in each colony on one day —
Ist. Shall Australia federate P
2nd. Shall Australia adopt a policy of protection against
the outside world ?
Brd. Shall Australia appoint an Immigration Committee
to checkmate aliens ?
4th. Shall Australia have a National Bank to conserve
its own credit ?
I pointed out that the freetraders and protectionists,
private capitalists and socialists, masters and servants, would
all express their votes, and so emphatic would the vote for
Federation be that effect could at once be given to the Draft
Commonwealth Bill of 1891 as the ground-work of the union.
Sir John Downer took the view that the Federal sentiment was
so strong that the politicians should give effect to the Bill
of 1891.
On my return to Sydney, and some time subsequently, I
had occasion to write to the press in connection with the
different banking laws in each colony, and argued that
Federation was the only means to do away with the objeotion-
.able conditions under which certain financial institutions were
Pi assjrgrof


then laboring, and I embodied the same fonr questions in my
letter which I had previously referred to Sir John Downer.
Some few weeks after my letter appeared, Sir John Downerissued
an invitation to all the Premiers to discuss in Melbourne, among
other things, these questions, but Sir George Dibbs had
to leave hurriedly, having no time on that occasion to discuss
the National Bank proposal. I mention these facts, which
are peculiarly interesting to me, merely to fix the first stage of
my connection with the great question of Australian Union.
The second stage was still more interesting to me. I
made a speech on the adoption of the platform of the Federal
party, and referred particularly to the enlightenment of the
Asiatic. This address Sir Henry Parkes did me the high com-
pliment to notice, and the following letters passed between
us ;
“Dunvegan, Bexley,
“ June 28th, 1895.
“ Sir Henry Parkes, Gr.C.M.Gr.,
“ Annandale.
“ Dear Sir, —In my hurry to keep an appointment this after-
noon, I had to deny myself the pleasure of acknowledging the
compliment you paid me in suggesting that my name should he
added to the Council of the Federal Party, whose programme
the meeting at the Australia Hotel had just adopted.
“ Whatever the political forces working within our Colony
may he, they must become—not so much as a matter of choice
but as a matter of the utmost necessity and urgency —auxiliary
to the one colossal question of Australian Unity.
To view with indifference the rapid expansion of liberal
ideas in India and Japan—the opening of China to the commer-
cial nations—and the desirable expansions of our own commerce
with undesirable aliens, is to render exclusively provincial legis-
lation, at the present time most highly reprehensible.
“ And whatever may be my own predilections in favour of
our Premier’s efforts to give our Colony domestic legislation,
I am forced to subordinate them to that policy which will give
Federation the first place in our national ambition. lam proud
to regard you as the head of the Federal movement, and I hope
that the Colony will not manifest national blindness in the
presence of those momentous questions which naturally flow
from the enlightenment of Asiatics and the disunion of
Australians.
“ The highest tribute to Australian intellect at the present
time will not be the vote of the cramped and narrow provin-
oialist however devoted he may be, but the vote of the Federal


Party, whose national aspiration will reverberate all over the
continent in unison with that national sentiment which the
other colonies of Australia have been waiting so long for us to
manifest.
“ Thanking you for the honor of working with you in this
great cause.
“ 1 am, Dear Sir,
“ Most respectfully and faithfully yours,
“DONALD CORMACK.”
“ Kenilworth, Annandale,
“ June 29th, 1896.
“ My Dear Sir, —I thank you much for your letter of
yesterday. Your clear view of the relative importance of
questions at this crisis, and your grasp of principles are to me
very comforting amidst the confused ideas which are afloat.
No well-informed mind can be blind to the late revelations of
awakening power in Japan and China in close regard to the
future, and the imperfect comprehension of many men of the
magnitude of the question of Australian Union. This question
ought to govern the elections about to take place. The
attempted civil broil about the Upper Chamber has almost a
comic complexion in contrast with the vast issues which cannot
be set aside.
“ Yours faithfully,
“ HENRY PARKES.”
The third stage of my connection with the question of
Federation was my appointment as Delegate by the Muni-
cipal Council of Rook wood to the People’s Convention at
Bathurst.
The fourth stage was the delivery of this lecture at Rook-
wood on the 17th February, 1897, and the fifth, its publication
at the request of the following gentlemen, who did me the
honor to be present to hear me on that occasion, as expressed
in the following terms, viz. :
“ In view of the increasing interest in Australian Federa-
tion, especially in the financial aspects of that great question,
We, the undersigned, having heard your interesting and in-
r inactive lecture at Rookwood on the 17th February, desire to ex-
press the pleasure we would feel were your views more widely


known, and to say we think the public would appreciate its
publication in extenso at the present time.
“ James D. Richie, ex-Mayor, Auburn.
Henry X. Vkle, ~
John H. Lees, Council Clerk, „
John Ritchie,
Wm, Colley,
F. Lidbury,
James Knox,
Alderman, „
Bank Manager, „
Mayor, Rookwood.
ex-Alderman, „
Jas. Britton Bisset, Postmaster, „
A. H. Thew, Council Clerk, „
Joseph Parry, Overseer, ~
p Miller, Mayor, Bankstown.
Aldermen Godson, Abrahams, and Garthwaite,
Rookwood ; ” &c., &c.
To give my thoughts to the public in all these circum-
stances is a duty I ought not to shrink from. ~
Members of the Convention now deliberating in Adelaide
have generally admitted the abstruse nature of the financial
problem. Any simplification of this problem might be dis-
credited by some as the work of inexperience. To those
I would quote the words of Edmund Burke, “ I have never seen
any plan which has not been mended by the observations ot
those who were much inferior in understanding to the person
who took the lead in the business.”
Should I succeed happily in supplying but one bright idea
towards the solution of any one of the numerous difficulties to
be met with in the practical work of uniting Australia, others
may be stimulated to investigate the conditions of Australian
finance, and by discovering the true dutum point, lead on the
Convention gradually to the consummation of Australian Union,
which, in my judgment, means our political salvation.
Sydney,
April 8, 1897.
*« — —»


THE LECTURE.
IN addressing- the public upon a subject so vast as
Australian Federation, the first thought is not
what to say, but how to avoid perplexing the
minds of the thoughtful by saying too little.
My chief point of view will be the Australasian
debt, and I will try to show how public and private
borrowing, steadily increasing over a quarter of a
century, tends to imperil not only our resources but
our liberties, and further, I will show how by a de-
parture from the rival systems of Freetrade and
Protection, and the adoption of a system to suit the
exigencies created by these outgrown and most un-
suitable fiscal systems, Australia may develop from a
borrowing to a lending power. The Capital imported
into six colonies, excluding New Zealand, aggre-
gated for the years 1871 to 1892 no less a sum than
£240,802,000, and they sent away from their own
control, in the shape of interest and earnings of invest-
ment during the same period, £156,854,000. To
justify a change in fiscal management, it will suffice
to assert that no people but Australasians ever had
thrust upon them so much per head of borrowed
and invested money within so short a period.
Many of those millions which have been borrowed,
instead of being directed into reproductive works


of a permanent character through land settlement
and water conservation, became the sport of party
government and the spoil of industrial war. If
these facts he admitted, no apology is needed for sug-
gesting that the true system for the Australian
Commonwealth is a middle system, involving the use
of the Custom House for State revenue and not for
protective purposes, the establishment of excise duties
on all primary products for the Commonwealth, and
the creation of a Federal system of credit, to be used
for stimulating production throughout Australia, and
thereby opening up employment for every thrifty
and honorable workman who, being without adequate
means, shall not be dependent upon a paternal Gov-
ernment spending borrowed money to keep him alive,
nor upon any money at high rate of interest, with his
assets mortgaged, but upon the guarantee of sound
men at a low rate of interest out of a fund created
by the usufruct of A ustralia’s wealth. A percentage of
private capital employed in the production of wealth, as
a right, should belong to the State, safe-guarding it.
Thus the rich must take not only the advantages but
the responsibilities of their wealth, by using it not as a
weapon for the destruction of their fellows, but as a
means of sustaining life through industrial enterprise.
In other words, just as the farmer reserves from
consumption his seed wheat for future crops, the rich
should annually devote a portion of their products to
the still further development of each colony’s re-
sources, to keep the people alive and contented, and
to provide also an adjustment of the figures of con-
sumption with those of production as a basis of
State finance.
Generally, I shall endeavour also to shew that
some of the leading principles of democracy and
finance, being wrested from their legitimate applica-
tion, are responsible, in a great measure, for the


making of Federation not so much a matter of choice,
as a matter of the utmost necessity and urgency.
My first proposition is : The equities op each
State shall be maintained j in other words, the
movement towards Federation shall proceed with a
strict regard to principles of truth and justice, especi-
ally in relation to assets and liabilities.
Some injustice to New South Wales might easily
he corrected. A small matter, which may serve as an
illustration of the advantages enjoyed by our neigh-
bours at our cost, is the stock routes from Queensland
to Victoria, After we have sunk artesian bores, and
paid inspectors in our neighbour’s interests, it is
against the federal spirit to be smitten with the stock
tax on the Victorian border. Their cattle eat up our
scarce fodder in bad seasons, and fatten on our pas-
tures in good seasons, increasing the weight of profit
out of which neither Queensland nor Victoria contri-
bute a penny towards the expense which is paid by
New South Wales alone. Whether we federate or
not, our Colony must not be allowed to suffer the
slightest loss in matters of this kind, small as they
appear. All must be just before being generous.
Take another case. For years the Eiverina trade
drifted to Victoria, until the Railway Commissioners
awoke to the enormity of outsiders cutting up roads
and using bridges without contributing a copper to
their maintenace. As we ought not to be generous to
any on borrowed money, it is imperative that
absentees investing within our territory shall not be
placed at an advantage over residents. Under our
present fiscal system differential railway rates are
justified, but, under my middle system, they will
cease.


Then, again, as to the Stamp Act. We know
how, through the blindness of our legislators in fixing
certain Stamp duties, New South Wales allowed the
Broken Hill Mining and other companies to be regis-
tered out of our own territory, occasioning the loss of
enormous profits to our own investors, which must now
come back through excise. It has been the boast of
Melbourne that she is the financial centre of Australia,
and not without reason. Many think still that even
under Federation her proud position will be main-
tained. It is not for anyone to blame a Colony for
carefully watching its interests; the blame attaches to
New South Wales for past shiphod legislation. It has
often been said that, upon small pivots, great machinery
turns, and a very small pivot of an exemption in the
"Victorian Stamp Act some years ago might explain a
very considerable advantage enjoyed over New South
Wales, whose Stamp Act did not contain an equally
liberal exemption. In matters of remittances by Bank
Draft on London, the maximum duty in Victoria used
to be £lO, being two shillings per cent on £ 10,000.
New South Wales, without this liberal limit erjoyed
by Victoria, had to pay two shillings per cent up to
any larger sum, and, it followed, that all the heavy
drafts on London were dated at Melbourne instead of
at Sydney, and English and Scottish financiers notic-
ing this would be naturally led in boom times to pour
money into Melbourne as the financial centre of A.us
tralia. All the contingent advantages, arising from
such operations, would accrue to our Southern neigh-
bours, who taunted us with being less wide awake
than they.
Had the New South Wales Parliament been
dominated by commercial men, quick to discern the
probable effects of the acts passed into law, Victoria
might have been saved her land boom, and New South
Wales would have been richer.


Again, take the item of Coal, Large sums of
Government money have been spent to facilitate this
private enterprise. An excise on Coal could easily be
made a factor in the cost of its production, and our
neighbouring colonies, in this way, would in the price
paid return a moiety in the great outlay of our
Government to give despatch to their shipping and
industrial interests. An authentic analysis of the
sums expended out of State funds by successive
Governments for private benefit, would be deeply in-
teresting in the light of Federation, and the settling of
equities as a condition antecedent of the desired con-
summation. Fortunately, New South Wales has had
her gains too. Though they have been more silent,
they have been, and are now, none the less certain, so
that she has not been exactly the sleepy hollow repre-
sented by our fun-poking brothers. The aim in build-
ing up the Commonwealth, however, is not for one
Colony to pnll against the other Colonies, but for all
to pull together. If one Colony should ever remotely
approximate to a default, they are all so interlocked
that the disaster might easily become general, as was
the case in the Bank failutes of 1893.
This matter of banking, too, is not sufficiently ap-
prehended by legislators generally as a means of en-
riching absentees to the disadvantage of borrowing
colonies. Queensland, not having enjoyed a Statis-
tician as New South Wales and Victoria have done,
the following figures may have escaped our northern
friends, and their use now might lead them to alter
their determination, to spurn the hands that can
succour them, and hold them in a Federation designed
to strengthen all. Queensland finance is a caution
to political Micawbers. Her constitution was pro-
claimed on December 10, 1859. In 1861, only two
years after her separation from New South Wales, her
debt stood at £2 Os 9d per head, or a total of £70,000.


In 1871 it stood at £32 6 11, or a total of £4.047,850.
1881 „ 58 7 2 „ 13,245,150.
1891 „ 71 15 9 „ 29,457,134.
1896 „ 69 6 7 „ 32,444,934.
Queensland may thank generous New South Wales
for starting her career with the mere trifle of indebt-
edness of forty shillings and ninepence per head. New
South Wales might have exacted .£lO 17s per head,
which was the average for both colonies in 1860.
Why should Queensland appear so sensitive now
under any reference to what may be fairly called an
objectionable portion of her foreign-born population
being 12-J per cent, of British-born in 1891. No
dictation whatever has been hinted at, for none is
needed. Queensland will learn what many feel, that,
with or without federation, her best interests lie in
jealously maintaining the Anglo-Saxon ascendancy
and in helping to defend the extensive seaboard of
the North and North-West. Let us hope that some
one sufficiently high in authority will remind the good
people of Queensland that it was the great Nelson
who encouraged every Englishman to do his duty in
the hour of need. Although Queensland started with
the least debt (excluding Tasmania and Western
Australia, which stood at nothing in 1860), she stands
highest per head in 1896, and in the following returns,
taken from Coghlan’s u Seven Colonies, 1894,” pages
293 to 302, she appears to exhibit still another phase
of reckless administration
N.S.W. Vic. Qld. S A. W.A. Tab.
fr^mWTlTo 0 85 . 064 . 000 93,329,000 41,101,000 7,655,000 4,165,000 8,888,000
Interest & Earnings
of Investments with.- 62,615,000 21,395,000 51,897,000 11,885,000 2,546,000 5,516,000
drawn in same period.
The capital imported into Victoria in contrast
with the smallness of interest and earnings withdrawn
is a very interesting item for the framers of the
Constitution, and the figures speak volumes in favor


of a reserve system somewhere in Australia approxi-
mating- to the Bank of England system, where ex-
changes may he effected without serious movements
of borrowed gold.
Whether any portion of the £51,897,000 pro-
vided by Queensland for interest on her borrowings
and profits to absentees, or what portion went direct
to Victoria, it is needless to enquire. It is sufficient
to note, as already observed, that exchanges were
mainly done with London through Melbourne.
The same system is in operation to-day, and
wherever the Victorian bankers find it possible to drag
other Colonies’ products within the circle of their
financial influence the system will continue to the
detriment of those producing centres. Had the
Victorian politicians the sagacity to have invested the
wealth thus unnaturally acquired in boom times in her
own loans, she might still be regarded as the financial
centre of Australia. She has missed her opportunity,
and has to face with us within the present decade those
high and important financial obligations which have
resulted from generally incompetent management of
millions of borrowed money outside of legitimate
banking. The present evil system is doomed by
Federation.
A letter appeared some years ago in one of the
Sydney papers on this subject of capital imported and
interest and profits exported by New South Wales
during the years 1871 to 1892. This writer pointed
out that New South Wales alone imported £92,000,
000, and exported interest and earnings of investment
£70,000,000 during the same period. These figures,
though they do not agree with Mr. Coghlan’s, may be
quite correct, including, no doubt, profits on commod-
ities, as well as money through bankers. The author
of the letter, drew the figures from the Income Tax
Eeturns published in the “ London Times,” and they


may be accepted. The other five Colonies would, in
this way, provide £85,000,000 for interests and profits
on investments as against£7o,ooo,ooo fromNewSouth
Wales alone, which proves that the true financial centre
should not be far from Sydney. All the Colonies, in
the adjustment of Federal finance, will require to con-
sider the value of absentees to our system of Govern-
ment. Absentees are the great fact to be faced with
economic caution, unknown to any but experts in
Economic Science, and another great fact, which
might be impressed upon Queensland, is that no
Colony can reasonably object to face the problems
which Federation alone can solve. I will be able to
shew later on why she especially should not be shy of
fraternal advances towards her. Doubtless, she looks
with pride and satisfaction upon the development of
her great resources, but her population is totally
inadequate to manage a territory nearly twice as large
as New South Wales and Victoria combined. The
underscrub alone of her forests will defeat her, unless
she assures her position by Federation, and if her
wealth is constantly drained away into the pockets of
absentees she must be prepared for a day when others
shall discriminate for her between the coin she allows
thus to drift away from her, and the green pastures
and elaborate developments, whose values in the
minds of men always depend on the presence and
needs of that very coin within her own borders. It
IS IMPOSSIBLE, UNDER ANT SYSTEM OF PROTECTION TO
KEEP THE MONET IN THE COUNTRY, THE ONLY WAY TO
DO THAT IS TO PRODUCE MORE THAN IS CONSUMED OR
WITHDRAW INTEREST FROM INVESTMENTS ABROAD BY
becoming a lendi <g country. Neither should
absentees be unreasonably dealt with for taking all
the advantages which each Colony, in its greed for
borrowed money, may have afforded them. Let it
once be seen that for a generation the most objection-


able systems of finance inside and outside of Parlia-
ment have built up Australasia’s borrowing obligations
£73,000,000 in 1870 to £350,000,000 in 1895, and
from a scientific system under Federation will end for
ever the fatal passion of wasting borrowed money. In
the Federation, that is nearer than some suppose, my
fellow colonists ought to hold to the doctrine that all
equities shall be maintained. Each Colony will then
consider and fix upon those equities, and provide
a policy to fit the constitution which carefully
embodies them.
Prior to the consideration of financial obligations
and of the consolidation of State debts, the fiscal
policy of the commonwealth shall be defined. Under
Federation the fiscal question naturally falls into the
hands of the Commonwealth out of the hands of the
States, and there are those who are quite content to
leave it without debate to the Federal Parliament to
fix for New South Wales whatever policy a majority
may decide. My voice is against any system of
Protection in the sense of giving an advantage by
law to the producer over the consumer. Regarding
as I do Protection as a most pernicious policy to fasten
upon a free people, I prefer to enjoy freedom of trade
with the whole world without Federation than free-
dom of trade with barely four millions of Australians,
many of whom might be most highly protected. But
we must never forget that fiscal faith may be defined
by terms so plain that sometimes the extremes of both
sides may strike a middle position without doing
violence to sound economic principles. No matter of
expediency should be allowed to neutralize our pro-
gressive condition of freedom, and my reference to


this question now is to indicate a scheme of taxation
agreeable with those principles. Believing firmly in
the doctrine of taxing consumption, I am favorable
to the Custom House as the machinery best fitted to
spread over the whole people the cost of their own
Government. But as a freetrader in a borrowing
country, the Custom House may be claimed _as_ an
economic right. It must be obvious to e\ ery thinking
person that where money is borrowed by a State for i
general purposes, its repayment in the form of interest
and principal must be devised through general means.
If the present system in Hew South Wales were >
made applicable to Australasia under Federation, the
injustice to the few who would be compelled to carry
the burdens of government would cause Federation to
break down with its own weight. A stronger public
conscience in Hew South Wales would oun
present shameful system of taxation which, if persisted:
in, may ruin us. Under the middle system, not onei
principle of freedom would be sacrificed. The bor-
rower is always servant to the lender, and one object
of Federation in my judgment is to make Australia
a lending country. . . ~.
The debt per head will oblige Western Australia
to render less service for her £47 per bead that
Queensland with her £7 0 per head, and Victoria £
less service for her £4O per head than Hew Soutl
Wales with her £49 per head of debt, and th<
only rational way of adjusting this disparity withu
- the Federal Constitution is to moderately tax privati
consumption without protecting industries, and t
promote State production. My fiscal system for th
Commonwealth would be— Revenue through cus
TOMS ON EEW ARTICLES TO PROVIDE FOR STATE PURPOSES
and Excise duty on primary products for Federa
purposes. The balance of Excise, after cost of Got
ernment, to provide a Federal credit system for Stal


production, wherein every honest, sober and indus-
trious poor man, under personal guarantee, may
obtain sufficient to develop any enterprise requiring
money to do it, labor being free to work more than
eight hours a day. It will be necessary to fairly adjust
the incidence of taxation, which will be impossible
under present unequal conditions of obligations and
resource. Therefore, is it, that jnst as the present
policy of New South if extended to the
Commonwealth, would crush the few producers for
the sake of the many consumers, on the other
hand the adoption of Protection would ultimately
crush the many consumers for the sake of the few
producers. Both systems, therefore, are economically
unfit for adjusting Federal finances.
The middle system, which is more applicable to
our financial conditions, may be examined by the
following propositions, viz ;
I. That the present fiscal systems of Australasia
tend to the constantly increasing burdens of debt and
taxation.
2. That Protection means the ultimate impover-
ishment of the many for the sake of the few.
3. That the Henry George Freetrade of New
South Wales is the exploitation of the few possessed
of wealth for the sake of the many who contribute
nothing to the burdens of government although able
and willing to do so.
4. That Bounties for State purposes are the most
effective means for promoting production under the
unique conditions of Australian Settlement.
5. That the use of the Custom House for revenue
duties is justified on the ground that borrowing for
general purposes must be met with a Federal scheme
of taxation whose incidence shall be general and not
particular.
6. That instead of taxing land and freeing com-


modifies, as taught by Henry George, the true doc-
trine is : Land shall be free, and products shall be
taxed by Excise.
7. That an Australian credit system, supported
by Excise duties is an absolute necessity of our finan-
cial solidity. 2 J per cent, on Australasia’s present pro-
duction would give the Commonwealth £2,600,000.
Deduct £600,000, probable cost of Government, and
issue £4,000,000 of currency against £2,000,000 of
gold in Federal Treasury, to be used for production only.
Doubtless, many may raise the cry that Excise
Duties are a tax on industry. Others may object that
most products are unprofitable to produce. Reply :
They would not be more unprofitable if there were
more consumers who helped to pay the taxes. Again,
many might object that the demand is too limited to
justify larger production. The answer is : Under
Federation there would be more customers bevond
present barriers. The profitable pursuits, such as
woolgrowing, might become alarmed. I would allay i
their fears with increased population, rendering their
values higher than the Excise. Free labor beyond i
eight-hours a day at the workers’ option, with living i
made cheaper through greater production, and new
avenues of employment secured to them through in-
dividual thrift and State production, will increase the
workers’ purchasing power and contentment, better!
than any Act of Parliament of a restrictive character.i
Nothing but hard work will save the country, and
eight hours a day will go a long way to ruin any
borrowing country on the face of the earth. A radical
change is imperative, and some system must be devised'
to promote production and check waste.
Mr. Coghlan, in his “ Seven Colonies, 1890-6,”:
pages 109 and 110, tells his readers that the cost of
living in New South Wales for the year 1894 was no
less a sum than £46,655,900, and that her producn


tions valued only £32,328,000. These figures show
that we had to adjust in the Colony £14,327,900
through our mercantile system, either in the shape of
profits on consignments from investments abroad, or
by failure to pay foreign merchants, or by public or
private loans to maintain the balance temporarily,
while we gradually ate up the wealth which 13 ankers
call liquid, which should continually increase under
economic conditions. The same author shows that
the cost of living for the Colonies was £144,169,500,
and the productions were £103,672,000, or short of
their requirements £40,497,500. This cost of living
in Australia during 1894 was enhanced by protection.
ISTow, as by increasing the cost of living you increase
the cost of production, it follows that by decreasing the
cost of living you increase the value of productions
for exchange purposes abroad. That decrease must be
arrived at by each of the States, before Australia can
become a lending instead of a borrowing country. In
this extravagant cost of living of £144,009,000 for
1894, £12,146.500 represents fermented and spirit-
our liquors. On economic grounds alone, it might be-
come necessary to prohibit the importation of such ex-
travagances. Either through the Commonwealth, or
State, provision for this must he made in the Con-
stitution. It is some times necessary for a country
to declare war to save its honor, and it might be better
to declare war against a wasteful habit, than lose our
honor by borrowing and drinking until unable to pay.
I would favor the production of Colonial Wines,
Spirits, and Beers, under a system of bounty for con-
sumption abroad by the lending countries, and, in this
way, pay off our debts with the same material with
which we constructed them.
Having established the principle that every Free-
trader in a country which is being supported by money
borrowed for general purposes is entitled to a revenue


tariff on as few articles as possible, it must be explained
that the incidence of the tax must be general and not
particular, that is to say, general as to consumption, so
that the cos! of living may not be unduly increased,
and never specially favorable to any manufacturer.
This, it will be observed, is consistent with previous
argument: for, if particular, private enterprises should
not profit by special public expenditure, neither should
private enterprise profit by public enactment, which
would favor the producer at the expense of the consumer.
Bounties are economically justified when they
become a necessity of the State for removing obstacles
to the right application of sound principles of political
economy. The natural law of supply and demand, as
exhibited in true barter, is destroyed by the artificial
borrowing of money, and trade, instead of being free
as in natural barter, becomes forced trade, which is
dangerous alike to the individual and the State en-
couraging it. The incidence of the bounty would be
unfelt by the consumers, and the production, as in
the case of iron, would be justified in cheaper articles.
Were a State to go on ordering iron from British
iron masteis who may have over-sold, prices would
naturally be forced up against Australia, as well as
other parts of the world. A State having in this way
to pay more for its pots and pans and all articles made
from iron, it follows that the State purchases of iron
would be used as a weapon to weaken the purchasing
power of its citizens, leading to the forcing down of
wages in that State and the paralysis of all its man-
ufacturing enterprises. Should any one be disposed
to deny the principle of bounties for State production, i
the history of Australian railways will furnish com-
plete verification of the argument that increased orders
raise prices of iron. I cannot leave this part of myi
subject without a short reference to the great shortage
of production in New South Wales compared with


consumption of over 14 millions in one short year.
Where shall we seek the cause ? Can it be that one
man one vote is responsible for not correcting such
faults of government ?
We have in New South Wales, roundly, 300,000
voters on the rolls, or about a fourth of the population.
These voters being the breadwinners of the people, it
follows that if they are not profitably emploved and
adequately remunerated, or if their families are
thriftless or vicious, wealth naturally flies the country,
wages decline and work is abandoned. In these cir-
cumstances all may deplore, but none can wonder at,
the feverish desire to acquire wealth by a gambling
fluke, leading from the beaten path of industry to the
natural decay of virtue in the breadwinners and to
the forcing down of women and children to the
lowest point of wretchedness. By cheapening Gov-
ernment and liberating capital in healthy productive
pursuits, the surest means of peace and contentment
within Australia will be secured, and the middle
system will be found a better contrivance than either
the Single Tax-cum-Freetrade or Protection to lift
Australia out of the chasm of debt into which these
systems have been forcing the people.
111.
A Cheaper System of Government shall
be Devised,
The highest principle of statecraft is, No more money
shall be taken from the people than will support the
best Government. This will secure stronger reserves
in the hands of the citizens. Canada, with a territory
larger than Australia, governs her population of over
five millions at a cost of roundly seven millions,
Australasia, exclusive of her railway management,
spends <£28,000,000 to govern four and half millions.


It is in this matter of governing a law-abiding people
that the greatest good of Federation will be seen.
Why do these Australasian Colonies spend so much in
comparison with Canada ?Itis a libel on Australian
intelligence, and may be regarded as the penalty for
tolerating politicians of the vampire species. That
mythical creature, it is said, fans its victims to sleep
while its sucks their blood. Even more so do politi-
cians, by ultra-democratic flatteries and socialistic
hypnotics, lull the confiding elector into fancied
security, while all the time the vital elements of
national prosperity are being steadily drained out of
circulation through wasteful channels of administration.
On the authority of Moses, the greatest Constitutional
lawyer the world has ever known, whose doctrines
were ratified and confirmed by the greatest of all
teachers, the lowly Nazarine, I would oppose the
doctrine of one man one vote, and put in its place the
system of every state apart, every family apart, and
every individual apart. Under such a system, the
power would be taken out of the influence of the
youthful, ignorant, and inexperienced voter, and put
under the influence of those with matured judgments,
yet none would be denied an interest in the laws
which govern them, and to which all are amenable.
The Election of the Senate by the States was the
clause in the Draft Bill of 1891 that led _ to a most
interesting debate at the Bathurst Convention, and the
Bill was amended by giving the people the right to
elect the Senate instead of the States. The main
argument employed then against the Bill was-
certain corruption alleged against the appointment
of Committees in the ISew South Wales Assembly.
Against that argument I contended that any
such exceptional condition of violence could never
become general in any association of honourable menj
that our civil institutions could not assume the


dishonour of the people’s representatives who
elected the Committees, and that naturally the
Assembly could purify itself of contemptible
truckers in public appointments. In supporting the
Bill as it stood, I urged that the ordinary voter was
not taught in the throes of an election contest, nor at
any time adequately by Church or State, to discrimi-
nate between the spenders of public funds in their
own electorates, and those high-souled statesmen who
by honorable education, pure environment, and a
noble ambition, sought to understand and properly
poise those subtleties of the human intellect which a
liberal system of politics was constantly bringing into
play. It is obvious to any thinking person that a
voter’s right at the ballot box differs completely from
the right of a composite body such as a State. In the
single voter you expect to find the absolutely indepen-
dent judgment when voting for his representative. In
the composite state the individual is lost, and you can
have, at best, no more than variable judgments as to
principle, and the best compromise of those judgments
is needed to secure a Government with strength,
wisdom, and courage, which can only be secured
under open voting of compeers similarly elected, other-
wise corruption and mob rule would surely lead to
robbing the people of their liberties and their wealth,
which can never occur under the mixed system of the
British Constitution
The Referendum
has been loudly proclaimed by many politicians as
a useful adjunct of democratic Government, and some
innocent suggestions have been made to introduce the
political vice into the proposed Federal system.
Hitherto we have enjoyed the proud distinction of


being the freest people in the world, with whom all
creeds and parties might reasonably dwell. History
furnishes two striking illustrations of the use of the
Referendum, Poland destroyed herself by it, and
Switzerland built it into her constitution with blood.
Other free constitutions are without it, and find no
need for its use. It is not by tinkering with a con-
stitution as free as any of those of the Australian
colonies that peace and prosperity will be established.
Nay, rather, any departure from the mixed system of
representation will assuredly lead not only to civil
distracting broils but to the ultimate loss of those
liberties which, being more a matter of growth than
of law, are destined to become the sure precursors of
success and fame. Moderation is the heart of liberal-
ism, and the human mind is too variable and too
uncertain to maintain its healthy action in the cease-
less throes of political excitement. The Referendum
I, therefore, hold to be a mere excuse and a subterfuge
for incompetent politicians to throw off from them-
selves on to the people responsibilities arising out of
their own evil principles, when as kings they should
rise in the grandeur and might of the people’s trust,
and confidence. Government must rule, and that
Government must not ultimately rest on a minority of
the people any more than on the majority with con-|
fused ideas. Hence, as a system to remove deadlocks
between governing courts, the Referendum wouldi
prove a delusion and a snare. In view of Australasia;
becoming in the near future neighbors of most en-
lightened Asiatics, the Commonwealth might provide
a system of veto against packing the State councils,!
or the Senate, by the State Assemblies, or House of
Eepresantatives. These being elected by the people
on a numerical basis, might easily develop an arbitrary
rule, which is never possible under a true represen-
tation of all classes and conditions in the Union.


The Veto oe Culture and of Wealth.
The veto might be that of culture and wealth. Culture
would include every person who has won a distinction
from matriculation at any recognised College, or Uni-
versity, and wealth would include any depositor in a
Government - avings Bank, or any holder of public
funds. The intention being not only to encourage
learning and the acquistion of wealth, but to trust to
learning - and wealth, which it is the aim and object of
the Commonwealth to create and establish. Summar-
ized my plan would be : The people to elect their own
'■ tate Assemblies by ballot. The States to elect the
Senate by open voting from themselves. The people
of the Commonwealth, as one electorate, to elect the
douse of Representatives. The House of Represen-
tatives to elect the States’ Councils from themselves.
The people to accept the State’s Ministries. Let us now
suppose anew system of franchise such as I would re-
vive with the individual family and State voicing their
desires. The possibility of a deadlock in law-making
would then he remote, and if one did occur, all Lower
and Upper Houses could merge, and ultimately submit
the question in dispute at the ensuing General Election.
As a last resource, culture and wealth to veto and elect
half the Councils and Senate in the event of absolute dead-
lock. By an individual voter is meant all adults over a
recognised age ; by family voter the head of a family,
who would represent also his or her children and
servants having no individual vote. Individual and
family votes would be cast for the House of Represen-
tatives us well as for the State Assemblies. The
State Assemblies would elect from their number in
ratio to the families in that State, and the House of
Representatives would elect from their number the
Councils of the States. A reciprocal system such as
this would tend to produce the flower of the State and


Commonwealth, and secure an ultimate appeal and a
solidarity beyond the influence of objectionable politi-
cal parasites, who are the bane of pure liberalism.
The displacement of power from the youthful voter to
the matured judgment of the parents would not only
tend to conserve the interests of family life, which
is the keystone of the State, but would obviously
improve the calibre of candidates presenting them-
selves for election. Experimental legislation in
the direction of Single Tax, Land Nationalization,
or disregard of the moral code, would then be I
heard less of, to the advantage of the Common-
wealth. The present evil system of adult male i
voting cannot be materially improved by adding i
only the adult female to the franchise. Her
representation would be recognised in the family!
vote if she declined to exercise an independent
franchise. In this way would be admitted to
the ballot every individual, every family, every
State, on the authority of the Prince of LawH
givers, whose laws were fulfilled by a Greater than
he. Some system could be devised proceeding or
the principle that if a man would not govern him-
self he should submit to Government and pay heavih
for it, so that honest people may feel safe, and, if h<
acted like a wild beast, he should be treated as one
While he should be encouraged to do as he ought, h,
should be prevented from doing as he liked to th
damage of others. Then would our politica
, machinery work without violence or encroachmer
of one part upon another.
This high ideal in State craft might not be acconc
plished merely by objective methods, no matter hov
ever perfectly designed by Government. There mu
first be a willing mind in the governed, which 0£
only be produced through subjective influences. r J
avoid the objective influence of punishment, the su


Jectiye influence of morality must be carefully culti-
vated in the people, the Church being, in my opinion,
the great means to that end.
I am in Favour of the Church being Considered
in this Question oe Federation,
And I thought of tabling a motion at the People’s
Convention at Bathurst in these terms : With a view
to the promotion of a Federal Church of Australia,
this People’s Convention at Bathurst earnestly and
urgently desires the various religious denominations
to agree upon a basis embodying the following, viz.:—
1. The Bible shall be the rule of faith and practice-
2. The relations of Church and State shall be defined-
3. A parochial system of education shall be adopted-
4. A parochial system of poor relief shall be supported.
5. A Scriptural system of discipline shall be
established.
6. The system of Government to approximate
as nearly as possible to the constitution of the Hebrew
Sanhedrim,
This proposal rests upon the principle of liberty
to the people who believe in God, and upon their dual
obligation of love to God and love to man. Pegard
the world as divided into two great camps. The
Church is that sanctified portion of the community
that seeks to build up a testimony for truth and right-
eousness by the force of argument through the Bible
and the dictates of sound reason and experience. The
State is the other portion, and it relies upon the argu-
ment of force, by the power of the sword and by the
infliction of pains and penalties, upon lawbreakers.
The measure of freedom we enjoy is the product
of that patient continuance in well-doing inculcated
by all religions worthy of the name. The statesman


who fully realizes the marvellous influence of the!
Church in moulding national life, in the formation of
energy and thrift, and in the creation of a race, ambi-
tious of strength, courage, and veneration for woman,
is the statesman above all others who becomes worthy
of the people’s trust and honour. If the Bible were
persistently studied, and the Church scriptural ly
established, and administered by those possessed o;
sound reason and experience, the principles of Libei
raj ism would flourish to the creation of wealth and tin
destruction of bigotry. It is because men will no
allow themselves to think it is more dignified tj
govern themselves free of cost to the State througl
their own intellects, than pay men who, by wilful ex
travagance, increase the borrowing obligations o
Australia from 73 millions in 1870 to 350 millions ii
1b95, consuming 217 millions of State borrowings i
exorbitant systems of administrations.
There are four leading principles known to oi
national history, which in this connection deserve r«
statement :
Ist. The principle of the Pope’s supremacy ov
Kings, States, and Church.
2nd. The principle of Erastus, that as, “ God f
eluded all under the King,” the King was head
Church, as well as head of the State.
3rd. The principle of the Independents und
Cromwell, known as the Voluntary Doctrine, that t,
State had nothing to do with religion, thus creating
divorce between Church and State.
4th. The principles of John Knox, who taug
that the Creator had appointed two institutions in t
world : 1, The King to be the bearer of the swo
to punish the evildoer and to praise and protect th
who do well; 2, The preacher of truth and righteo:
ness, under Christ as Head of the Church.
This division of duties and responsibilities nr


be illustrated by the arms of the natural body, one
not being able to say to the other, “ I have no need
of you,” but both working for the good of the con-
stitution of man.
These principles can be firmly and charitably
held until the greatest doctrine of all, u One Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism,” is established in one Univer-
sal Church.
The accumulated sayings of all sects could then
be devoted and dedicated to the service of man through
a properly devised system of Church and State, not
independent of each other, but interdependent upon
each other, though spiritually and temporally free in
their respective spheres.
The first of all steps in Federation should be the
recognition of the Creator, whose astronomical worlds
revolve without violence, and whose children, through
Divine love and wisdom, should work no ill in their
intercourse with each other in the affairs of the world.
Australians would then join both Church and State in
all those great labours for the public good, in which
the State would represent strength, and the Church
grace and purity.
ISTo nation has continued rich, prosperous, and
liberal without conserving the virtues, and Australia
has all to gain by doing so. It is to the Church the
State must look for conserving the virtues, and a
recognition of this truth should be expected of the
framers of our Federal Constitution. Let every
thoughtful person contemplate the awful condition of
a State without the ameliorating instruction from week
to week of all ages of the people. If that teaching is
more honoured in the breach than in the observance, it
is because of stronger influences in the State which
are designed by wicked rulers, who refuse to allow
the poor adequate instruction about the Sovereign of
the Universe, who has promised to give them power to


get wealth. It is to the Church, too, we owe a pound
credit system, and as neither can stand alone, without i
both the nation must sink to barbarism and cruelty, ;
or become a dependent State in a condition of slavery. ;
Each Sta.te shall have a System of Local Govern-
ment before Admission to the Union.
The platform of the Federal Party contains the !
principles that provincial interests should be decentra-
lized under local Government, and national interests i
should be centralized under Federation. A deplorable i
fact in our history is that Sir Henry Parkes’ Local Go-
vernment Bill did not become law yearsago. _ The con-
fusion of issues under party Government is rendered i
so easy by a partisan press that the best measures are
frequently destroyed in their passage through Parlia-
ment, if they should ever be permitted to get there.
Bocal Government must be given to New South Wales
before Federation is consummated, otherwise, the fatal:
mistake will be made of giving an unfair start in the 1
race of production to those Colonies having local:
Government. This fact, so manifest to common sense, i
should be emphatically demanded as a condition of the I
Union. The advantages of Local Government in stim-
ulating production, and the consequent employment of
labor naturally suggests the thought that new popu-
lation will quickly follow the opening up of primary
and artificial avenues of employment, and life andi
activity will result in every Colony by still further i
freeing themselves from Party Government restrictions.
The decentralization of Land Administration through;
Local Government would be in every way less expen-:
sive than the present extravagant system.


N.S.W.
Vic.
Qld.
S A.
W.A.
Tas.
British
1,092,322
1,097,037
350,529
302,377
52, 28
143,104
Foreign and unspecified 39,912
43,368
43,189
18,054
3,424
3,563
Percentages
3-20
3-95
12-32
5-97
6-58
2-50
The A emission of Aliens shall be Subject to Special
Regulations by the Federal Parliament.
The most troublesome questions for Liberals to
decide are, what might be the best way to regulate
the admission of aliens to the benefits of a social
fabiic, and in their presence how best to maintain
British Ascendency. The questions are rendered
more difficult through the growth of liberal ideas,
implanted by Britain so successfully in such countries
as Japan, etc. India, too, seems to be rapidly awaken-
ing to a desire for the possession of a place in the
Government of her own Provinces. Ho man can long
resist the impression that remarkable changes, inimical
to Australian interests, may develop in both India and
Japan. It is for the Commonwealth to take prompt
measures by the appointment of an immigration com-
mittee to carefully regulate the admission of Asiatics.
Let Australia’s policy be The National Habitat
without Encroachment, and upon that principle check
the too rapid accession of any but the favoured nations.
All Colonies, excepting Queensland, might safely
absorb a larger proportion of the colored races than
they have, but no movement should proceed outside
the Federal Parliament. Countries, like England,
which have been settled for centuries, can afford to be
more liberal than the Australian Colonies in their com-
paratively pristine condition The following 1891
census returns of birth places of the population of the
following Colonies will be interesting.
No one can disregard the remarkable develop-
ment of Japan, That nation, it has been said by
high authority, has accomplished more in twenty


years than England accomplished in 400 years, and it i
is worthy of attention that Mr. Joseph Chamberlain,
in his reported reply to Japan on the treaty question,
expressed his pleasure that England regarded herself
as one of the favored nations, but that the Colonies
were free to act for themselves. It is only reason-
able if we teach Japan our liberal principles and i
methods of administration and manufacture, that she .
should look to us for an exhibition of liberalism in i
her intercourse with us. Ibis wonderful peoples i
aggressive energy will have to be met by all the
patience and subtility of our best commercial and
governing minds, so as to enable Australia to mam- i
tain the advantage of their commerce without for- •
getting the disadvantages of their racial aggression.
YII.
Finance
Federation Bedeced to its Ultimate Analysis
means in one Word —Finance. Prove that each'
colony of Australasia is to permanently gain finan-
cial strength by Union, and Federation becomes i
the question of an hour. No aspect of the greats
question can be viewed apart from the thought,
a What is to be gained by it ?” and the thought
demands an economic answer. How are we to
approximate to any condition of uniformity o± debt:
incidence ? How are we to attain the true planes in
lustice, possession, and taxation ? In one word, how
shall one portion of the Commonwealth be prevented
from eating up another portion ? These are some of
the problems that demand solution by the framers of
the Constitution for Australasia. Any sound original
idea, any great argument, through whomsoever they
may originate, is more essential as an influence at this!


stage of Federation than the authority of well-known
names. Let every principle of finance be tested in
the light of onr history, in the full blaze of our finan-
cial obligations when expressed in pounds, shillings,
and pence, before settling the terms of Union.
I have made a return to shew how every citizen
is to become a valuable factor in the development of
Australia under Federation. The six Colonies speci-
fied may not all join at once, and the figures will cer-
tainly be altered. They are worked up from Coghlan,
and will be found interesting. The statement, how-
ever, must be regarded only as an illustration of a
scheme of adjustment which might be considerably
modified under the next census, say at the close of
1900. If the equities are to be regarded in a small
trifle, such as the stock route between Victoria and
Queensland, the equities must also be regarded in
matters concerning the public debts of the Colonies.
On a population basis, the average debt per head is
shewn to be £6O 15s. 6d. Hew South Wales, Victoria,
and Westralia are below the average, Queensland,
South Australia, and Tasmania above. To adjust the
incidence of debt, the Federal Treasury will credit the
Colonies whose debt is less than the average, and it
will charge the Colonies whose burden of debt is more,
and the interest thereof shall be merged in the ways
and means of each State. Victorians, who had land-
boomers’ money to play with, borrowed only £4O 6s.
per head. She will be credited with £12,368,109,
at the conversion of loan rate. Hew South
Wales will be credited £2,620,376, and Westralia
£403,685. Queensland will be charged £9,060,508,
South Australia £6,069,186, and Tasmania £28i,124.
It seems anomalous that an already overburdened
colony should have its burden increased, but the
assumption is a fair one that the increased debt can be
justified by the exhibition of increased assets, and


therefore the incidence of debt in the argument is
thrown off. material wealth on to the truest basis of
prosperity-population. The virtue of my scheme
is to promote population, and to tax the people of that
btate who threaten the safety of the Commonwealth
by too heavy a burden of debt per head, displacing
also a wasteful policy by a policy of thrift and pro-
ductiveness, In other words, political virtue is
to be exalted, and vice made to hide itself by a
mechanical contrivance of producing more than is con-
sumed.
The penalty of Queensland and South Australia
exporting a greater amount of interest and profit than
t . ca Pital introduced by them in the years under
review, seems, in this way, to sit upon them still.
±iut there is an alternative in their favor which mav
be availed of at once. If Queensland and South
Australia chose they might attract population from
each of the other Colonies to themselves under a liberal
system of land laws free land with excise on pro-
ducts. If Queensland introduced 171,657 souls, she
would escape the above debt to the Federal Treasury
v ~? outll Australla would escape her debt
by adding to her population 119,135, and Tasmania
would escape £281,124 by adding 5,512 souls. On
this method of Federal book-keeping, every child
added would be worth to that State £SO 15s 6d • a full
grown immigrant, of course, would be worth, at least,
three times as much.
The Commonwealth should require the veneration
ot woman to promote natural increase, but the assisted
immigration of bread-winners, based on the ratio of
population to debt would be the most effective means
of tolatmg all kinds of production. The advent
of the best of the favoured nations would be the surest
way of preventing Australia becoming the recepticle
for the worst of other nations, and by freeing lands


for cultivation and promoting production by bounty
through a sound credit system, would lead to indus-
trial activity that would enable Australia to grapple
with her financial obligations with strength and con-
fidence before the century closed. Free land for the
people would prevent speculation in land, which
always requires folly as one of its principal factors.
Land is essentially a tool of trade, whose worth
depends upon use. Land, energy, and money, are
worth only what they can produce, and my scheme
would increase the spheres of their action, leading to
the employment of all the stored-up energy of the past
in the shape of coin which is now losing interest
through lack of employment under our present system
of finance. The personal element in the possession of
money under existing conditions is a matter of small
concern to the State, provided the reserves aggregate
a constantly increasing amount of small savings, indi-
cating the more general diffusion of wealth. The
accumulation of much money in few hands tends to
lower interest and to open channels of occupation at
steady rates of wages. To raise wages by labor
tactics imposes greater burdens od those to follow.
The safest way, therefore, is for men to study their
own individual interests, teach themselves where their
own best interests lie, and let supply and demand
operate naturally. The two wheels upon which fortunes
are built, as anyone cau prove for himself, are time
and money. By spending time for money, and money
for profit, you learn :
In this, the art of living lies,
To want no more than may suffice.
Our portion is not large indeed,
But then how little do we need.”
A Federal credit system might easily be main-
tained by an ad valoeem excise on products, the credit


N.S.W.
Vic.
Qld.
S.A.
W.A.
Tas.
Productions,
per head.
£26 2s. Gd.
£21 16s. 8d.
£29 19s. 6d.
£20 18s. 2d.
£29 6s. lid.
£20 2s. 4d
Total
£32,328,000
£25,688,000
£13,150,000
£7,311,000
£2,159,000
£3,137.000
to be in ratio to the market rate of products, and
to become available to the State until the aggregate
cost of living in that State shall be exceeded by its
productions, less the Excise duty. When the value
of productions exceeds the cost of living, natural
barter is established, and Excise shall cease. Until
then, every State shall be charged by the Federal
Treasury with the amount of consumption over produc -
tion. The object is to stimulate Australasian pro-
duction, so that the balance of trade shall bo in favour
of the Commonwealth against the outside world. In
this way, men and women idling their time in the
destruction of wealth, will be encouraged to produce
it, and it will be to the interest of property owners to
see that the people are profitably employed to main-
tain values. In this way the children might inherit
from their fathers a noble patrimony instead of a
crushing debt. Without adequate statistical informa-
tion, I am not able to tabulate a scheme shewing the
feasibility of my idea, but I submit the general prin-
ciples of it for consideration and discussion. The
following figures shewing the productions per head of
population in each Colony in 1894-'■)s will indicate
what each State will have to work up from before
commencing to hold its own, viz.:
The cost of living averaged in 1894, according to
Coghlan, £35 Is. ! d.
I have indicated enough to shew that the funda-
mental principle of State finance is economy, which is
essentially the same as individual economy. To keep
the population industriously employed in an economic
way is the acme of State craft. The occupation of the
people is a far more important question to settle than


the incidence of taxation under freetrade or protection.
How far, for instance, is a colony justified in relying
so much upon the wool industry, which requires those
concerned in it to wait almost in a condition of idle-
ness for nearly half the year ? Again, how is it
possible for 300,000 voters as bread-winners to main-
tain 1,200,000 population unless they are constantly
employed at an adequate rate of wages. Nothing but
a radical fiscal alteration can effectually benefit the
Commonwealth. If individuals with energy, skill
and honesty find it handy to enjoy a measure of cap-
ital to keep them moving in the beaten path of
industry, States also may promote a system whereby
a fund created by producers may be available for the
thrifty in that State to go on producing more wealth
for their own benefit, or for the general good as re-
quired by the State. If a man shall not work, neither
shall he eat, contains the doctrine that a man must
eat to work, and therefore the basis of domestic and
State finance must be consumption and production.
If the colonies of Australasia, according to Coghian,
consumed in 1894 £144,169,600 and produced only
£103,672,000, the balance can only be adjusted by
rigorous economy in State and individual expenditure,
or by more prolific production, The Federacy must
not rely upon the money of absentees unless at a very
low rate of interest, nor may absentees be permitted
to withdraw the whole of their profits from the terri-
tory safe-guarding their wealth. But the energetic,
skilful and honest must hold together, and by produc-
ing more wealth and consuming less establish a
healthier condition of political life. And above all,
the financial centre of Australia shall be the Federal
Capital, where exchanges shall be adjusted without
prejudice to any State of the Union.
The Nationalisation of the Colonies’ debts is, un-
doubtedly, one of the greatest problems that could


exercise financiers, but that is no reason why a few
commonsense thoughts might not be profitably put
together in harmony with the previous expressions
of my views. Were 1 asked to solve the problem,
I would first deny the necessity to nationalize the debts
a,t all. I would then classify the assets of each
State as national, provincial, and personal. Such
national assets as Eailways, that would return an inter-
est and provide a sinking fund for repairs, I would
make a loan security. Those assets, which could
be taken over by Local Government bodies at a
replacing basis of value, would be required to yield
an interest on a reproductive basis, and the capital value
would be represented by Local Government deben-
tures, Eailways, waterworks, and other public works,
thus disposed of any remaining debt, would attach
to the people themselves, and the interest of which
would be made a first charge on the States Eevenue.
This system would effectually get rid of unprofitable
Eailways in each Colony, and throw the responsi-
bility upon the people, who suffered them to be built
through political log-rolling. Future borrowings
would be apportioned in the same way, and any State
that was above or below the average indebtedness per
head of the population, would be debited or credited
with the interest, or adjust its accounts through intro-
duction of a working and thrifty population.
In this way, the uniformity of debt per head
would be secured, and each State would have a most
substantial reason for watching carefully its own ad-
ministration, being stimulated thereto by generous
rivalry to maintain the pride of place. Also a com-
plete stop would be put to persons in authority exer-
cising their favor, or generosity to private ownership
out of money borrowed for the general good. The
Commonwealth would secure the repayment of State
debts and interest, and would thereby earn the right


of controlling all lands ontside settled areas, on the
principle of delimitation of territory unoccupied with
a view to creating new Colonies by assisting immigra-
tion. For Defence, Army and Navy, and all purposes
of national interest, the Federacy would apportion the
borrowings per head to each State, and, also, the cost
of maintenance. Each State would have right to pro-
vide a militia and marines for the Commonwealth in
proportion to the families in that State, and to be
credited for the same in adjustments regarding State
production at the average cost of living in that State.
Under my system of Excise on products and a
central reserve exchange system, the necessity of dif-
ferential rates will cease. The railways, of course,
must not pass out of the hands of the States. They
are merely common carriers, whose value will always
depend upon the productive activity of their owners.
The prospective values of railways in New South
Wales being built in anticipation of increased popula-
tion is enormously greater than those of Victoria,
because of the different conditions of each colony and
the occupations of the people. New South Wales
will largely develop her agriculture under Freetrade,
necessitating a more general use of railways. Victoria,
on the other hand, if true to her traditions, will con-
tinue mining and manufacturing, which cannot require
so much rolling stock as primary products do. If
Victoria reserves too much land for mining, it is vain
to expect permanent improvement in the utility of her
railways, and unless her policy is radically changed
so as to approximate to Freetrade the promotion of
land settlement will be difficult. The best solution
for Federal difficulties will be found in larger popula-
tion for all the colonies consistently with debt
obligation.
To show how absolute is the necessity to populate
Australia a comparison of the colonies’ debt per head


£659,000,000 would
increase if at Col- 1,900
1,577
2,757
2,651
1,829
2,054
onial Debt rate in
millions to
Population in 1895 1,277,870
1,181,769
460,550
357,405
101,235
160,834
To reduce our debt
including railways
to £17 per head our 3,662,557
2,802,130
1,908,525
1,424,495
278,622
496,910
population should be
with the British position may be profitably made
Britains’ debt per head is £l7 :
N.S.W Vic. Qld. S.A. VV.A- Tas.
Debt per head £4B 15s. £4O 6s. £7O 9s. £67 15s. £46 15s. £52 10s
England’s Debt of
The question of Bailways and population must
be considered together, and Railway Control by each
State will be justified by Federation. Are the States
to control immigration, or is the Commonwealth ? If
the Railways are federated, the States will have no
guarantee that immigration will not be directed by
the Commonwealth to found new Colonies in the
south, north, or north-west. If the States retain their
railways, their interest will naturally centre in their
principal asset, and increased population will reduce
carriage rates, and provide profitable employment for
manufacturers of rolling stock.
N.S.W. Vic. Qlb. S.A. W.A. Tas.
The Railways cost 36,611,366 37,922,207 16,522,293 13,665,945 2,092,372 3,518,595
or per heal in 1895 £2B 11s. sd. £32 Is. 9d. £35 17s. 6d. £3B 4s. Bd. £2O 13s, 4d. £2l 17s. 6d
These figures, read in connection with debt per
head, including railways, would speak with eloquence
on the financial situation if only the people would
produce more than they consume. There can be no
necessity, under the scheme I have mentioned to pool
the earnings or to federate the railways or the iState
debts. The Commonwealth will probably borrow to
promote settlement in other parts of Australia, and
all the Colonies will participate in the advantages of
that settlement. Bankers and Trustees could find a
very considerable amount for investment with the


Federacy when the necessity for large gold reserves
ceases to exist. All that is wanted is population,
which will surely follow free land and settled society
in preference to free land without social advantages.
The railways are a necessity of the situation in each
State, and to divorce their management from their
present owners on the eve of their becoming- most
valuable factors in State development appears to he
outside the realm of reasonable debate.
No vague or indefinite statement by Federal or
State politician should ever satisfy the electors of
New South Wales on this point of vital interest to
the people. New South Wales wants no monopoly
in matters of locomotion, which must run according
to the exigencies of the districts interested; neither
any aristocratic central system of administration, but
a purely financial administration which will return to
the State all earnings over loan interest, sinking fund,
management and maintenance. Thus should the
equities of each State be faithfully maintained, and
the thrift and energy of the people be allowed to prove
their own rewards.
I have endeavoured in all my thoughts upon
Federation to keep steadily in view not only simplicity
of structure, but harmony of the parts by which the
Commonwealth is to be made permanent. The prin-
ciple of equal representation of the State in the Senate
is a denial of the principle of harmony, as may be
proved by a single instance. Allow the Senate power
of delimitation of territory unoccupied, and power to
found new states, then upon the principle of equal rep-
resentation of these new States in the Senate the most
sacred rights of the older States might easily he viol-
ated, and harmony would be displaced by hate:
Australia has a history free from bloodshed, and the
Commonwealth must not be so clumsily designed as
to alter her peaceful career. The constellation of


Colonies beneath the Southern Cross must, in
this crisis, prove the illuminating glory of peace and
goodwill to men, leading the nations to learn war no
more.
Since the prophetic utterance of that Gracious
Monarch whom all races and colors of men delight to
call our Queen, the Bible has proved itself in very
deed to be The secret of England’s greatness.”
No better conclusion of this lecture could there
be than those sublime words of the Lord’s Prayer :
“ Our Father, which art in Heaven,
Hallowed he Thy name ;
Thy Kingdom come ;
Thy will be done on earth,
As it is done in Heaven.’’




