

AUSTRALIAN
YOUR HOST




When the honour of staging the XVlth Olympic Games was conferred on Melbourne, all Australians, but
especially the citizens of the Olympic city, gladly assumed the national privilege of becoming hosts to
the world. Melbourne welcomed its Olympic visitors to all it had to offer. It welcomed particularly the
athletes of the world, who competed for the first time under southern skies, and it wove many lasting ties
of friendship. This volume commemorates the occasion which brought the world to Melbourne. It also
presents some glimpses of the wide country which the Olympic guests had no time to see in all its vast
diversity. Perhaps it will serve to keep bright their memories of Australia and to introduce Australia to
those who had no opportunity to visit it at a time when so many men and women of so many nations
crossed the world to strive honourably for the highest Olympic award the victor’s laurel crown.


OLYMPIC CITY
Melbourne, with a million and a half people, is not Australia’s
biggest city, but those who live there will tell you that it is the
most urbane and the most quietly beautiful. It is an harmonious
fusion of natural attributes and man-made loveliness. The serene
Yarra River, the “sweet stream of fresh water” which captivated its
discoverers 122 years ago, and on which Melbourne folk have lavished
so much improvement and pride, meanders through the heart of the
city and becomes, in its lower reaches, the busy Port of Melbourne.
The grassy sweep of its sloping banks near the city is covered with
groves of exotic deciduous trees where autumn snares the afternoons
as in the glow of a fire, and the incomparable bird-haunted Botanical
Gardens cover much of its southern margin with deep-leafed quietness.
Melbourne’s skyline is a pleasant blend of old spires and soft green
copper domes with the square and soaring lines of modern buildings.
Its vast department stores have given to central Bourke Street the
evocative title of the “Golden Mile.” Collins Street is trees, glass
and concrete, while the solid elegance of its great public buildings
attests the flow of gold from the young colony of Victoria, which
enriched its capital city in the second half of the last century.


MELBOURNE


OPENING DAY..
In hot sunshine, on November 22, 1956,
before more than 100,000 people, His
Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh
opened the Games. He was met at the
Main Stadium by the President of the
International Olympic Committee, Mr
Avery Brundage; by the President of
the 1956 Games, the Rt. Hon. R. G.
Menzies; Melbourne’s Lord Mayor, Sir
Frank Selleck; the Chairman of the
Organising Committee, the Hon. W. S.
Kent Hughes. A parade by the teams
of 68 nations, an address of welcome
by the Chairman, and then His Royal
Highness rose to say the traditional
phrases: I declare open the Olympic Games
of 1956, celebrating the XVlth Olympiad
of the modern era. Brazen tongued fanfare
awoke the echoes, and in the midst of
a brilliant pageantry of colour and
music, the first South-of-the-Equator
Games were officially under way. This
was indeed Melbourne’s day, so long
worked for and dreamed about; Aus-
tralia’s day and the day of every
soul who ever wanted to share in the
highest and most unifying experience
known among the nations of the world.






THE PEOPLE . . .
If you like the people of your home town, you will like the people of
Australia. There are, really, few marked differences between folk
of Melbourne and those of, say Middlesex or Michigan, Maastricht or
Maddalena, Magnitogorsk or Mindanao. They speak a different tongue,
or speak the same tongue in a different way. Their tastes in food
are not all the same, and neither is their dress. But they all read
books, discuss their neighbours and pay taxes. Their hearts are in
exactly the same place, and when all is considered, beat for much
the same things contentment, love, work and security at the close
of their days. The few differences you may find in your Australian
friends from those you know at home are mainly because they live in
a land which by its age and nature, and more than anything by its
ocean-girt remoteness, differs so widely from any other. Its long
coastline has made sea-farers of many Australians, and the pastoral
empire of its inland plains has created a distinct class of farmers,
drovers and outdoor workers. More than half of its people live in
the cities; they dine sometimes at hotels or intimate cafes, go in
droves to the theatres, mostly own their own homes in the sprawling
suburbs, and spend their yearly holidays on beaches, lakes, mountains
or farms, or touring in a caravan. They don’t worry overmuch about
politics, are usually tolerant about the next man’s religious ideas,
and believe that Jack is as good as his master. They share national
addiction to an all-embracing variety of sport. They have worked to
develop their country’s resources, and have proved not by words,
but by actions their willingness to share whatever they have with
their neighbours. Above all, they are proud of being Australians.


SWANSTON STREET-1856
SWANSTON STREET —1956
Melbourne grew from shanty town to Olympic
City with vigour and without loss of dignity.
A century has passed since the phaeton and
the ox-cart made their leisurely way down
what has become the traffic packed Swanston
Street of today. Laid out by men who rode
in horse-drawn carriages, yet who by chance
prepared for the advent of the motor car,
its wide straight streets are characteristic
of Melbourne. The key to its nature is
to be found with history. There was
nothing accidental in its founding, nothing
haphazard about its plan; whereas sailors
and soldiers founded most of Australia’s
first cities, Melbourne was more fortunate.
The plan for Victoria’s capital was begun
by farmers, businessmen, a lawyer, a doctor,
a surveyor, a clergyman, a school teacher,
skilled mechanics and reliable tradesmen. A
farmer, John Batman, brought them with him
from Tasmania when he settled on the banks
of the Yarra River in 1835 at a “pleasant
spot for a village.” Today, Melbourne’s big
department stores and the tempo of its living
are as modern as jet flight yet delicate
cast-iron balconies and old, bluestone ware-
houses recall a past which, after all, isn’t
so very far away. Wherever they look, if
they care to look, Melbourne’s people find
many reminders, not only of those who built
the city, but also of the men and women of
succeeding generations who have used their
talents and fortunes lavishly to adorn it.


CITY OFFICE
COLLINS STREET
WOOL STORE
DEPARTMENT STORE


PRINCE'S BRIDGE
CRICKET
AUSTRALIAN FOOTBALL
Several bridges span the Yarra River in the
region of the city, the principal one being
Prince’s Bridge, which leads to the parkland
of the southern bank and to bayside resorts
of Port Phillip. Hundreds of acres of park-
land, on either side of the river, provide a
splendid games area for sportsmen the river
itself for rowing, lawns for athletics and
golf, bridle tracks for horse-riding, ovals
for cricket, hockey and especially for the
fast, open, high-leaping game of Australian
football, which draws crowds of up to 116,000
spectators for the most important matches.


ALBERT PARK
Between Wellington Parade and the river, a
grassed area, even then excellently equipped
for sporting activities, was transformed by
the construction of several new arenas into
a splendid Olympic site within a short train-
ing run of the city. There is space in which
to manoeuvre traffic, and shady slopes with
gardens for the comfort of the waiting crowds.
In other years and in other countries the
five bright rings of the Olympic flag might
have flown above equally imposing venues,
but surely, in the modern series, never
have graced any more pleasant than these.
ALEXANDRA GARDENS
YARRA RIVER


MELBOURNE AIRPORT
PORT MELBOURNE
The construction of new venues and other preparations in Melbourne
were completed well in time for more than 5,000 athletes; more than
1,000 press, radio and camera men; scores of thousands of spectators
for the Games. By land, sea and air, they came from every part of
Australia and many countries of the world, and they found a whole
community eager to welcome them. Melbourne, normally, a beautiful
but rather sober city, was gay with decorations and in holiday mood.
Long before the first arrivals, arrangements had been made for all
accommodation, bookings, transport, entertainment and sight-seeing.
VILLAGE GATEWAY
BOOMERANG
OLYMPIC CHEF


VILLAGE SHOPS
DINING ROOM
OFFICIAL DRIVER
CITY LIGHTS
Facilities for news reporting, catering and other activities were
provided and fitted into an abnormal situation. About £5,500,000
had been spent on preparations for the Games. Among the projects was
the building of Olympic Village at Heidelberg, eight miles from the
Main Stadium —a self-contained community of more than 840 brick and
concrete houses and flats to accommodate the athletes and officials
of teams. To the visitors, this was home, in which they lived in
their own national groups, and ate national dishes served from an
incredible variety of ingredients produced almost wholly in Australia.


OLYMPIC STADIUM
OLYMPIC VILLAGE
SWIMMING AND SOCCER


The other main projects of the building plans were
the Main Stadium and the many components of
Olympic Park. At the Main Stadium, a new three-
tier steel and concrete grandstand was added to
the existing facilities of the Melbourne Cricket
Ground, giving it the enormous capacity of more
than 100,000 for the XVlth Games. Half the seats
are under shelter. Fifty temporary broadcasting
radio studios and full-scale news transmission
centre were installed in the new stand, and the
five-acre grass arena was torn up and regraded
to agree with accepted international standards.
The 25-acre Olympic Park is the venue of diving
and swimming, cycling, soccer and hockey pre-
liminaries and athletic training. The pool seats
over 5,500 spectators and the nearby velodrome,
9,000. The hockey ground has space for 22,000,
and the combined athletics training and soccer
field will seat 35,000. Additional venues, such '
as for boxing, fencing, wrestling, shooting and
other events, are located at various points of
the city. In most cases, existing facilities
were admirable, but others required changes to
be brought into line with Olympic requirements.
OLYMPIC STADIUM


SWIMMING STADIUM
HOSTESS HOME
In their appointments, and in some cases in
the originality of their design, the Games
venues show a refreshingly new approach to
the presentation of organised sports. In
designing the swimming pool, for instance,
five graduates of the Melbourne University,
a structural engineer and four architects,
evolved the strikingly handsome, functional
building which contrives to balance itself
as though on a keel, seemingly waiting to be
launched into the nearby Yarra River. This
imaginative quality was expressed in other
ways, as when Melbourne people overcame
the problem of accommodating the big influx
of Olympic visitors. They opened their homes
to those unable to find rooms in hotels and
guest houses a happy move which created
realms of contact to a degree which other-
wise might not have been possible. Also,
when no suitable venue could be found near
Melbourne for rowing and canoeing events,
they chose the inland city of Ballarat, 75
miles distant from Melbourne. It was there
that almost incredible discoveries of gold
were made about the middle of last century;
the Welcome Nugget (2,217 oz.) and the Lady
Hotham Nugget (1,177 oz.); the 501 b. taken
from one tub of dirt; the “Jeweller Shops”
that were solid masses of dust and nuggets
and the “Band of Hope’s” tons of gold.
On Ballarat’s Lake Wendouree, 600 acres of
tree encircled water as lovely as its name,
the facilities were built for canoeing and
rowing, at the same time providing a reason
for competitors and spectators to visit one
of Victoria’s most historic inland cities.


OLYMPIC VENUE
LAKE WENDOUREE
EXHIBITION BUILDING


MELBOURNE RESTAURANT


Visitors to 1956 Melbourne found a variety of foods, a
standard of service and an excellence of restaurant decor
which did not exist a decade or so ago. The differing
culinary skills which have been brought by over a million
post-war migrants from a score of countries have been an
important factor in bringing about this improvement. As a
result, though the plain and massive dishes of Australian
tradition are still by far the most popular and the most
easily obtained, they have been joined in public esteem by
national favourites of many Continental countries. Chinese
cooking, which has long been popular with Australians, now
competes with the rich and highly spiced cuisine of Ceylon,
Indonesia and Malaya, thousands of whose nationals have
visited Australia during the past few years, sponsored by
the Colombo Plan or as private students. The revolution
is even spreading into private homes, where housewives are
mixing imagination and foreign flavours with the abundance
of first-class ingredients to which they have always been
accustomed. As a result of all this, all over Australia
today there is a far wider appreciation than ever before
of good food and the relaxed enjoyment of it. Most hotels
offer foreign cuisine, and the intimate coffee shop, for so
long only a poor cousin of the hotel bar, is now very much
a part of the modern city scene. Over recent years, hotel
accommodation in all parts of Australia has lagged behind
the demand for it, mainly because the building of hotels
was almost completely halted during the war, and since then
the accent has been on construction of homes and industrial
plant. This is being rectified. Hotels of world standard
are appearing not only in the capital cities and popular
resorts, but also in many of the provincial cities. Often
startling in design and the use of colour, and featuring more
and more the inclination towards outdoor entertainment,
they marry modern ideas of overseas countries to enjoyment
of Australia’s climate; Australian architecture, tied for
*
years to imported ideals, is attaining beauty of its own.
APARTMENT HOUSE


OLYMPIA
The Olympic flame which was to burn in the Main Stadium at Melbourne throughout the Games was kindled
late in October at the ancient sanctuary of Olympia, in south-western Greece. The ceremony in which it
was lit was simple but in such a setting it was inescapably steeped in the magnificent traditions and
history of the tiny country whose culture was the cornerstone of western civilisation. The sun’s rays,
directed through a magnifying glass to a small pile of wood, generated the blaze from which the Olympic
torch was lit. It was handed to the first of 350 Greek athletes who carried it 115 miles from Olympia
to Athens on the first stage of its journey half-way across the globe. At the Grecian capital it was
transferred to an old-style miner’s safety lamp, presented by the Olympic authorities of the Saarland
and in a Qantas airliner, via Karachi, Calcutta, Bangkok, Singapore and Darwin, it was carried to Cairns,
10,000 miles away in another hemisphere. At Cairns the flame was transferred to the first of a series
of 400 torches to be used to carry it on its overland journey to Melbourne. By foot and by air, over
mountain and desert and ocean, borne, by over 3,000 athletes in the longest relay 2,865 miles the
world has ever known, it came at last to the place prepared for it high above the green oval of the
Olympic Stadium there to burn steadily while the vivid pageantry of the modern Games unfolded below.


THE FLAME CROSSES THE LINE
PARTHENON CEREMONY
LEAVING GREECE
IN AUSTRALIA


DARWIN. .
DARWIN
PEARLERS
At Darwin, capital of Northern Territory,
the Olympic flame first fed on the air of
Australia. There it began its travels in a
land with a proud record of association and
sympathy with the ideals of the modern Games
since their inception in 1896. Darwin is
least Australian of all Australian cities.
It lies closer to the great centres of Asia
than to its sister capitals of the south,
and has an Eastern flavour, intensified by
the soft, warm perfume of its frangipannis.
During the six months of the dry season, its
climate is hot, clear and delightful; for the
monsoonal “wet” it can be uncomfortable.


PRIMARY SCHOOL
Darwin was blasted by enemy bombs during
the war, but is now almost rebuilt. New and
better wharves now replace those destroyed
in 1942, new schools and public buildings
and hundreds of modern, tropical-style homes
have been completed. The discovery of new
mineral deposits, the inauguration of new,
large scale agricultural projects and closer
settlement have given new life to the Terri-
tory, making all Australia aware of its value.
Happily, this has not affected the Darwin
of legend the tail-tale town of buffalo
hunter, pearl diver and gold miner, the 1956
frontier of romance and bright new promise.
DARWIN BANK


TO CAIRNS . . .
In a few hours, the flame crossed the tropical
north of Australia more than 1,000 miles from
Darwin to Cairns to the north-east coast of
Queensland. As it sped through the sky, there
passed below it the panorama of a country much
of which is still only emerging from the dream
of its lonely past. Drovers know the dry and
dusty miles of its stock routes as they trail the
herds of cattle which flow along them to the
railheads. Crocodile hunters know rivers and
lily-choked lagoons, where the big reptiles are
shot and skinned to provide the world’s most
sophisticated and keenly sought leather goods.
Prospectors have only scratched the surface of
its mineral wealth, but two of those scratches
have grown to such vast enterprises as the lead,
zinc and copper mine at Mount Isa and treatment
plant on the Rum Jungle uranium field, close to
Darwin. These are the natural treasures of the
country, which have awaited discovery since the
dawn of time. Now men are turning to agriculture
in the north. Among the many crops being tested,
rice is the most important. Big areas suit rice
farming, and during the past decade, scientists
have solved many of the problems associated with
large-scale production of rice over a vast area.
RICE GROWING
CROCODILE HUNTERS


MOUNT ISA
DROVING
RUM JUNGLE


BARRIER REEF
HAYMAN ISLAND


The eastern shoreline of Queensland is one of
the most beautiful and most splendidly painted
tropic coasts in the world. Along 1,200 miles,
past such sea-washed cities like Townsville and
Cairns, glittering beaches lie behind the Great
Barrier Reef, a wall of coral, living and dead,
where the rolling surge of the blue Pacific is
caught and tamed in a net of cays and reefs and
islets, green and russet, gold and bone white.
To sail leisurely through Whitsunday Passage or
past Hayman Island or any of the myriad peaks of
the sprawling maze of the reef is unforgettable.
Unforgettable too is the pleasure of a long, lazy
holiday spent on its many island resorts. A few
miles away, on the mainland, a different world
exists. There heavy downpour and tropical heat
have made a hot-house climate which has clothed
the teeming plain with sugar-cane and fields of
pineapples, and has hidden the sides of the high
mountain ranges with forests of valuable timber.
In them lives the shy, saucer-eyed cus-cus, one
of the quaintest of Australia’s rare nocturnal
animals, and from the highest branches delicate
sprays of orchids burn on the green forest air.
CAIRNS
PENTECOST ISLAND
TOWNSVILLE


SOUTHWARD BOUND
POLO


TOBACCO
BANANAS
PINEAPPLES
This rich tropical coastal strip has no counterpart in Australia.
With this, and with the pastoral, agricultural and mineral wealth of
the interior, and the thousands of square miles of splendid country
waiting development, Queensland may well become the richest among the
Australian States. Its produce and pursuits are sharply divided by a
great range of mountains paralleling the coast. Inland from these are
wheat, sheep and cattle, and recreation is often concerned in some way
with horses. On the coastal plain, between the mountains and the blue
sea, perpetual summer and plentiful rains cover the hills and the rich
river flats in the colourful pattern of sugar-cane, pineapple, paw-paw,
mango, tobacco and all the sweet and aromatic crops of the tropics.
PEANUTS


BEEF CATTLE
TROPICAL FARM
SUGAR-CANE
From Cairns to Bundaberg to the south, the torch
was carried through a pattern of green sugar-cane
fields, perhaps the most distinctive feature of
this rich land. The £30,000,000 sugar industry
supplies not only the needs of Australian markets
but a surplus for export. It provides rum, power
spirit and other by-products. The bagasse, the
exhausted fibre of cane after milling, is pressed
to a light, tough building board used extensively
all over Australia. Small 100-acre farms grow the
bulk of the cane, and many mills are co-operative.
Where the plains give way to the heavily wooded
hills which bound them, another harvest is reaped,
of splendid timbers like dark Australian walnut.
West of the ranges are the big grazing properties.
Bananas are a widely grown and profitable crop,
as are the majority of tropical fruits cultivated
in the area. Riverside Rockhampton is the State’s
third city; 25 miles inland from it is the crater
of Mount Morgan, once a golden hill which has
yielded one of the most fabulous treasures of ore
ever taken from any of Australia’s fabulous mines.


ROCKHAMPTON
MOUNT MORGAN


Australia is an island continent about
3.000. square miles in area. It is
2,400 miles from east to west, 2,000 miles
from north to south. Its coastline is over
12,000 miles long. The main western port,
Fremantle, is 4,700 miles from Capetown;
its eastern gateway, Sydney, 11,800 miles
from London by Suez, 12,500 by Panama,
and 7,700 miles from Los Angeles. Its most
northern port, Darwin, is 1,900 miles from
Singapore. From its founding 168 years ago,
Australia’s population has grown to more
than 9,000,000, of whom more than
1.000. came in the last decade as
migrants. Gold production and the farm
were the country’s traditional support, but
the value of its manufacturing industries
now outdoes its rural income. Over half the
population is found in the six capital cities,
but this does not sever the deep affinity of
every Australian with the immense land
which is the core of his country’s story.




First State capital to see the torch was
Brisbane, capital of Queensland, and sunny
home of half a million people. Spread over
serpentine reaches of the Brisbane River,
it sprawls drowsily, but through its busy
warehouses passes much of the great variety
of goods produced in a vast State the
wheat and wool, timbers and sugar, the gold
and the copper and the beef raised on its
western plains. The Brisbane is perhaps the
greatest commercial river in Australia, and
from pleasant verandahs of many of its river-
side homes, miles from its mouth in Moreton
Bay, armchair travellers look down on cargo
ships red with the rust of all the world’s
wide oceans. It is the winter-time goal of
holiday makers from the south, for when the
winter comes to the southern cities Brisbane
goes in summer dress, decks its house with
red poinsettia, dines outdoor on barbecue,
and passes much time on the splendid surf
beaches which lie only an hour or so’s drive
from its warm pavements. Within the city
area are many imposing structures as befits
a great capital the giant Storey Bridge,
high-towered City Hall, mellowed House of
Parliament, the small but beautifully
conceived War Memorial. Its suburbs often
bear names strange to European ears such as
Indooroopilly and Woolloongabba; its flowers
are bauhinia, bougainvillea, poinciana and
jacaranda, painting colour and wafting scent
over its parks, streets and private gardens.
It is big, but not too big; busy but never,
completely occupied with business. Its ways
are neighbourly and its rule is hospitality.
CITY HALL
QUEEN STREET
BRISBANE RIVER


BRISBANE


QUEENSLAND SOUTH COAST
BEER GARDEN


HOLIDAY HOME
SURFERS’ PARADISE
South of Brisbane, the flame was carried through the “Gold Coast,” a
region which, during recent years, has awakened out of a long slumber
to become the tourist playground of the eastern States of Australia.
Its warm seas tumble in year-long sunshine upon the glorious beaches
of Southport, Surfers’ Paradise and Coolangatta; on the Gold Coast,
architecture has freed itself of restraint —it openly courts the sun
and the cooling Pacific Ocean breezes. The days are spent in the sun
and the surf, and the unending parade of holiday entertainment goes
on through the cocktail hour in the luminous tropical dusk and into
the glittering night. On these splendid beaches, the sophistication
of overseas resorts has added a new zest to the Australian holiday.
WOOD CHOPPING
LAWN BOWLS


PRAWN FISHERMEN
This coastline and the equally beautiful
North Coast of New South Wales are in no
way given over entirely to pleasure. Deep sea
trawlers exploit their waters, which contain
an amazing variety and quantity of fish, and
big catches of prawns are taken for domestic
and export markets. The flame entered New
South Wales through the lovely farmlands of
Tweed Heads, having completed half its long
journey between Cairns and Melbourne. It
was in a pleasant undulating countryside.
The North Coast district of New South Wales
yields much of the butter, pigs, cattle and
fruit produced in the State. On the dry,
sweet plains of the New England highlands
dwell many of the fine merino flocks whose
superlative wool clothes half of the world.
Newcastle was now not far off, a fiery glow
in the south with its forest of stacks and
all the iron-throated clangour of the heavy
industrial plants clustered about the city
at the mouth of the sluggish Hunter River.


NEW ENGLAND
N.S.W. NORTH COAST




NEWCASTLE
Newcastle draws its strength from a three-fold source.
Its mighty steel mills and their associated plants, for
long the core of Australian heavy industry, employ more
than 30,000 people. It is the centre of the coalmining
industry on the eastern coast of Australia, and it is
the outlet for the fertile agricultural areas of the
Hunter River Valley, with millions of acres of dairy
farms, wheat and wine, wool, vegetables and maize. It
handles up to 4,000,000 tons of cargo each year and it
is one of the very important Australian “wool-sale cities.”
Another reason for interest in this area is that beach
sands north of Newcastle are rich in rutile and other
important minerals, whose presence and value have been
recognised only in recent years, but which are now a
growing Australian industry. Some distance south, the
Hawkesbury River yields millions of the most succulent
oysters. This noble river is among the most famous in
Australia; the nation’s early story crowds its banks,
and all over the country through which it flows tiny
pioneer settlements nestle among deep-pastured dairy
farms and the fragrant rows of hillside orange groves.
BEACH MINING
OYSTER FARMING
HAWKESBURY RIVER
GOSFORD


And so the torch reached Sydney. It is not
easy to tell properly of Sydney, this big,
beautiful, restless, robust city of close on
2,000,000 people who dwell among monoton-
ous terraces or in settings of a breath-taking
loveliness. Sydney sprawls inland from a
shoreline 180 miles long which encloses one
of the world’s largest, safest and deepest
harbours. It is the cradle of Australians,
gateway to a continent, the largest, oldest
and most cosmopolitan city in the country.
Sydney is many things. It is the mellowing
gold of old sandstone buildings, the glitter
of steel and concrete and glass, the tangled
crowded streets of Redfern, the bush-invaded
North Shore headlands, the belching stacks of
Zetland factories, and the sparkling plumes
of a fountain in the green well of Hyde Park.
It is azure and creaming white on a score of
gleaming beaches, teeming rivers of traffic
in George Street, a dimly lit coffee lounge
or raucous juke-box in King’s Gross, and
it is wind-hammered cliffs by soaring Sydney
Heads. It is the race-track at Randwick,
the great, granite Shrine; it is the green
spire of St. James, designed by a convict,
the rambling colonial mansions of Lane Gove
and Parramatta. It is Woolloomooloo, Forty
Baskets Beach, Man O’War Steps and the
bows of HMAS Sydney, cemented for ever in
the harbour wall. It is this and a thousand
things beside all the cities of the world to
him who knows it well and above all, unfor-
gettably, it is the Bridge, the glittering,
thunderous road in the sky, the beloved “coat
hanger,” true talisman of every Sydneysider.
HYDE PARK
HARBOUR BRIDGE
MANLY


SYDNEY


BLUE MOUNTAINS
BEACH FISHING
SYDNEY HARBOUR
BUSHWALKING
SURFING
TENNIS SCHOOL


BONDI BEACH
Sydney and its surrounding country were made to order for an out-of-
doors people. The sandstone ridges of the Blue Mountains are
made for climbing, bush-walking, or for just sitting and watching
distance melt into the amethyst haze of their tremendous valleys.
There are scores of bays and reefs and quiet river estuaries for
fishing, and for yachtsmen the blue expanse of the Harbour with its
myriad billowing wings. The lovely valleys of the Hawkesbury River
seem to have been created for hiking and camping; above all there
are the salt sea wind, the sun. and the surfing of Sydney’s favourite
summertime playground Bondi, Tamarama, Collaroy, Manly and all
the other glorious beaches strung like pearls along the land’s edge.


N.S.W. SOUTH COAST


South of Sydney, the route of the Olympic
relay crossed the highlands which overlook
the south coast of New South Wales. There,
during recent years, the heavy steel industries
of Port Kembla have arisen to challenge, and
then surpass, those of Newcastle. Largest
Australian steel producer Australian Iron
and Steel Ltd. is established there; with
£62,000,000 outlayed in expansion since
1945, A.I.S. proposes to spend a further
£100,000,000 during the coming ten years.
A late addition to its plant, a £30,000,000
hot strip mill, is capable of producing more
than 1,000,000 tons of sheet steel a year.
The south coast is a region of odd contrasts.
Only a few miles from the incandescent fires
of the steel mills, dairy herds of some of
the finest cattle in Australia graze upon
rolling hillside pastures, and coal-miners
leaving their work on the high slopes look
out over one of the most beautiful and
expansive views of the vivid Illawarra coast.
PORT KEMBLA
ILLAWARRA
COAL MINE


Following the Hume Highway from Sydney,
on a path pioneered over 130 years ago by two
great Australian explorers, Hume and Hovell,
the Olympic torch was carried past thriving
little towns such as Camden and Picton, and
entered a district steeped in the earliest
histories of New South Wales the Southern
Tablelands. At Goulburn, prosperous hub of
a large and well established pastoral area,
it departed Hume’s road, skirted the cafe-
au-lait coloured waters of Lake George, and
came to the beautiful upland valley of the
Molonglo River. There, in view of the blue
Southern Alps, it was welcomed at Canjberra,
the Federal Capital of Australia. This new
city of pleasing, youthful charm has arisen
during the span of a young man’s life, but
its roots are deep in the country’s early
story. The area was first settled in 1823,
but not until 1908, seven years after the
six States federated into the Commonwealth
of Australia, was this site chosen as the
future capital of that Commonwealth. As a
reminder of those early days, dairy cattle
still graze cool lucerne paddocks in sight
of the vast offices of administration. The
aerial view of the administrative area sur-
rounding the House of Parliament shows the
park-like pattern of Canberra; the noble
public buildings envisioned in the plan are
being realised one by one, but the glory of
this city is in its trees the high tides
of summer or autumn foliage, the delicate
blizzard of spring blossom which overflows
its parks, invades homes and offices, and
touches every street with fragile beauty.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE
st. John’s
SUBURBAN STREET


CANBERRA


SNOWY MOUNTAINS
SNOWY MOUNTAINS
Not far from Canberra by Australian ideas
of distance lies the rugged south-eastern
corner of New South Wales. There the Snowy
Mountains Hydro-Electric Scheme, the big-
gest engineering and tunnelling work ever
planned in Australia, has been under way for
eight years. Its purpose is to gather the melting
snows of the Southern Alps for the provision
of electricity and for the irrigation of the
western plains of New South Wales, parts of
Victoria and parts of South Australia. It
involves the building of seven main dams, 17
big power stations, mostly under the ground.
Other work is 85 miles of tunnels, hundreds
of miles of access roads, several new town-
ships and 400 miles of high-level aqueducts
and racelines. It will yield 2,000,000 acre
feet of water a year, and over 3,000,000 kw
of electricity. And it will banish forever the
majestic solitude of the wild setting of Banjo
Paterson’s loved ballad, “The Man From
Snowy River,” which familiarised generations
of Australian school-children with the rough
country in which an undying legend was born.
The wombat, another enthusiastic Australian
tunneller, makes its home in these mountains.


ROADSIDE MAILBOX
SOUTHERN HIGHLANDS


BENDIGO
BALLARAT
WHEAT SILOS
STADIUM ARRIVAL
GEELONG


ROYAL VISITOR
The Torch was now nearing the finish of its long journey. From Canberra it travelled west, through the
citadel of the sheep and wheat country of southern New South Wales. At Albury, over the natural border
of the broad, winding Murray River, it crossed into Victoria; 70 miles south of Albury, at the town of
Benalla, it left the main highway and travelled in a sweeping arc through the heartlands of the State,
through Shepparton and the orchards of the Goulburn Valley, on past Bendigo, Castlemaine and Ballarat,
fine provincial cities whose names are the very breath of the polyglot mining towns out of which they
grew. It was welcomed at industrial Geelong, the second city of Victoria, and from there proceeded in
an ever growing tumult of acclamation until, at last, it was borne triumphantly into the arena of the
Main Stadium, there to kindle the great flame which would burn throughout the 1956 Games in Melbourne.


MT. HOTHAM


Victoria is the smallest, the most closely
settled and perhaps the most extensively
developed of the mainland States. Every-
where there is evidence of this people
are to be seen tilling and harvesting the
plains, harnessing the rivers, husbanding
the soil. But with the irresistible lure
of the Games drawing all thought, effort
and interest to Victoria and its capital,
overseas visitors might forget that there
they see only portion of an old land whose
spell cannot be gauged from a brief visit.
From just below the equator to the margin
of a polar sea, the whole vast continent is
accessible to its most distant places by
road, rail or air. It is a country of snow
and surf, of ancient mountains and new
cities, of scorched red deserts and green
valleys; its birds and flowers are strange
and brilliant, and some of its animals,
such as the platypus, are weird survivals
of a time before history. It was from all
corners of this land that the people of
Australia came to the Games in Melbourne.
WHEAT HARVEST
KIEWA
MILDURA VINEYARDS


CITY SQUARE
HOBART WHARVES
DERWENT VALLEY
GREAT LAKES
They came from the island of Tasmania, the
smallest of the Australian States. Parted
from the mainland by the 200 miles of Bass
Strait, it is barely 180 miles wide and 190
miles long, but into that relatively small
compass it packs a lot of majestic scenery,
tranquil beauty and well-founded prosperity.
It has been described as the most thoroughly
mountainous island in the world; its high-
lands cradle the most beautiful lakes in
Australia. Tasmania’s capital, Hobart, with
95,000 of the State’s 315,000 people, is
Australia’s second oldest city, having been
founded in 1804. By day, seen from the 4,166
ft. peak of Mount Wellington, or by night
among the modern docks where ghosts of old
whalers lie alongside cargo vessels from all
over the world, it is a fascinating city. The
island’s pioneering years have given it an
agreeable legacy in beautiful stone bridges
and English-style country houses which now
immediately identify any Ta’smanian land-
scape. English artisans and craftsmen who
arrived among the first settlers built memories
of home into the open settings of a new land.
This is a verdant island, rich in wool and
minerals, grains, fruit and hydro-electric
power. The orchards of the Huon Valley in
spring draw streams of mainland sightseers,
while its apples and pears are exported to
many lands. The drowsing green hop fields
along the peaceful Derwent River are a most
characteristic part of the Tasmanian scene,
a happy blending of its small cities and the
compact husbandry of its fertile countryside
and the grandeur of a rugged highland heart.


HOBART


They came from South Australia, where the
gracious city of Adelaide is the capital of
380,070 square miles of territory, and for
834,635 prosperous, contented, State-proud
people. A well planned, well kept city this,
its mile-square business centre bounded by
wide belts of parkland which seem to bring
the cool beauty of the Adelaide hills right in
among the tram tracks. Its North Terrace,
one of the noble thoroughfares of Australia,
is flanked on one side by business houses, on
the other by public buildings and schools
of the University of Adelaide, sheltered by
avenues of trees, and brilliant with banks of
flowers. The tiny Torrens River, dammed to
provide the shining stretch of water without
which no city is complete, has been graced
with shady walks where office workers stroll
at lunchtime, where children feed the swans
and old folk sit and watch the world go by.
The Mount Lofty Ranges look down on
Adelaide from the east; from the summit, in
the dusk of a summer’s evening, the outlook
takes on a new beauty, for the lights of this
city, white and green and red and gold, wash
like a jewelled sea on the dark shore of the
foot-hills below. By day the pattern is plain,
of the business centre, suburbs and parks
of a clean and orderly community, and the
uncluttered plan of an expanding industrial
area beyond. Adelaide’s climate is one of
cold, bracing winters and hot, dry summers.
Its time of greatest charm is the spring,
when the fallen blossom of its white almond
orchards blows in deep drifts all over the
green paddocks of the countryside about it.
MOTOR INDUSTRY
MOUNT LOFTY RANGES
TORRENS RIVER


ADELAIDE


SHEEP YARDS
BAROSSA VALLEY
SHEARING
BROKEN HILL
WHYALLA


WEAPONS RESEARCH
ALICE SPRINGS
KALGOORLIE
NULLARBOR PLAIN
Faith, hard work and wise administration have built South Australia into a prosperous State with well
developed primary and secondary industries. Wheat and wool, dried fruits and wines are the backbone of
its primary wealth. Ship-building and manufacture of motor-car bodies are the foremost among expanding
industries, which are served by deposits of high grade iron ore on Eyre Peninsula and by the coal the
only local supply of Leigh Creek, 350 miles north of Adelaide, In 1954, a £5,000,000 uranium treatment
plant began operation at Radium Hill, to the north-east of the State. In a way, South Australia is a
crossroads of the continent. The far places of Australia are joined by road or rail to Port Pirie and
Port Augusta, the Gulf cities north of Adelaide Darwin and Alice Springs, Broken Hill and beyond the
far edge of the lonely Nullarbor, lapped by the western deserts, Kalgoorlie, the city of desert gold.


And they came from Western Australia,
named by its people the “Western Third,”
which is what it is one-third of the land
mass of Australia. The capital, Perth, is
pleasantly situated on the Swan River, so
named for the regal black native bird which
has become the official emblem of the State.
Of all State capitals, apart from Hobart,
Perth is the smallest, a place of easy tempo,
easy friendliness and easy, delightful climate.
Its port, Fremantle, is 12 miles down river.
The winding river passes the University of
Western Australia at Nedlands creamy
sandstone buildings with red tiled roofs half-
hidden in groves of trees. Close to the port
of Cockburn Sound, is the £40,000,000
Kwinana oil refinery. Bunbury is an outlet for
the comparatively closely settled South West,
a district about as big in area as Victoria.
It exports wheat and wool, fruit and dairy
produce, and the magnificent red hardwoods,
karri and jarrah, of the southern forests.
UNIVERSITY
KWINANA
BUNBURY


PERTH


KIMBERLEYS
OIL SEARCH
PEARLING
The Kimberleys, in the remote north of Western
Australia, is what Australians call the Never-
never. It is the country beyond, a citadel of
loneliness and unimagined beauty shielded from
intrusion by its ancient eroded plateaux, its
stony plains and the heat glazed waters of its
tropical seas. Its resources lie in its cattle
stations, in the pearling beds of Broome, which
have yielded some of the world’s most beautiful
gems; and in the immense deposit of iron ore at
Yampi Sound, where some primeval force
squeezed a towering mass of almost pure iron out
of the green waters surrounding the Cockatoo and
Koolan Islands in tide-wracked Buccaneer Archi-
pelago. Distance and isolation have been set aside,
for in this far country, the vivid pageantry of the
Games in Melbourne came like a voice from some
other world to outback people gathered eagerly
around radios in townships, station homesteads
and lonely cattle camps. Essential work and the
difficulties of travel in the north denied most
of them the opportunity of attending the Games,
but for that they were no less interested, and
no less proud that now the name of Australia is
inscribed for all time in the record of Olympic
hosts. Few would not be moved by the spectacle
of the cream of the world’s finest athletes in
friendly competition, against the background of
music, colour and crowds. None could doubt that
the rich experience of selfless trial in fields
of international sport must create understanding
and common ideals among the young people of
the competing teams. Those are the greatest of
all the gifts which Australia hopes to exchange
with athletes and visitors whom she has been
proud to entertain at the XVlth Olympic Games.
AN AUSTRALIAN NEWS AND INFORMATION BUREAU PUBLICATION PRODUCED BY AUTHORITY OF THE MINISTER FOR TIIE INTERIOR, THE HON. ALLEN FaIRHALL.




XVI TH OLYMPIAD
PRINTED IN AIJS'I K All.-, BY !HEHAtD aOIBAVvJRE PRINTERS
