

/ £m uM 9m \ ■ ■ ‘I m W i Hngg| I ” ff




Kelvin Grove College of Advanced Education
; Presented by
" v-
• *v












AUSTRALIAN HOLIDAY
Written by
ALEC and CATHERINE KING
Illustrated by
MARJORIE RANKIN
GEORGIAN HOUSE
MELBOURNE


Registered at the G.P.0., Melbourne, for transmission by post as a book
First published 1945


This Book is Dedicated
CHRISTINE HEINIG
who inspired it, directed it, and for whom it is a symbol of our
deepest gratitude and affection.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: The authors and illustrator wish to acknowledge
their special gratitude to Mr. Croshie Morrison, Editor of Wild Life, and to
Mr. David Fleay, Curator of the Fiealesville Sanctuary, for the very generous
assistance and encouragement they gave; and to Mr. Charles H. Holmes,
General Manager, Australian National Publicity Association, for his assistance
in facilitating the collection of material.


Page
9
18
28
42
52
61
77
87
97
CONTENTS
Chapter
1. Bandicoot ------ - 9
2. Honey Possum - - - - - - 18
3. Bandicoot Caught ----- 28
4. Kangaroos ______ 42
5. Wallaby - 52
6. Possums - - - - - - - 61
7. Koalas - - - - - - - 77
8. Tasmanian Devil, Marsupial Wolf, Wombat - 87
9. Numbats 97


Page
13
26
31
39
58
62
73
79
98
COLOUR PLATES
Frontispiece
Bandicoot
Kangaroos
Tasmanian Devil
Tasmanian Wolf
Wombat
Possum Glider
Possum
Koalas
Numbat




CHAPTER ONE
BANDICOOT
f(Wy \\ OTHER was J ust st °king up the kitchen fire with big chips flaked
7( r 7 \ off a dead gUm when she heard uick footsteps on the
verandah, and AX/alter s red head appeared;
Quick, Mother! he said; come and look. There s a big racehorse down
by the rocks.”
“A really big one?” asked Mother. Walter stretched out his hands as wide
as he could.
“At least this big,” he said.
“Come on, then,” said Mother, “we mustn’t miss him. Run and fetch Eliza-
beth and Francis; they’re digging canals out near the windmill.”
In a few moments the four of them were walking quickly round the house
and down towards the rocks.
“As quiet as you can,” said Mother softly, “or he’ll run away before we can
get near. You lead the way, Walter.”
Walter took them down through the tiny orchard to the rocks, walking on
tip toe, and then very slowly edged round the big pile of stone. Yes, there was
the racehorse goanna, close to a bush not five yards away-but something else as
well, the small brown furred body, the sharp face, the long legs of a bandicoot.
The two animals were motionless, facing each other, not more than eighteen
inches apart. The bandicoot, helplessly caught by the lizard’s cold stare, was
faintly trembling; the goanna, with its armoured body, its long beautifully tapered
tail, and its snake s head, was waiting to pounce. For a moment Mother and


the children were as still as the animals, almost as fascinated as the bandicoot
by what they saw; then Elizabeth, who was only three, gave a big grunt of
excitement. Instantly the goanna’s head was turned half round in the direction
of the noise, and the bandicoot, as the lizard’s stare was switched off, was loosed
from its fright, and darted away.
“He’s gone,’’ shouted Francis, waving his arms; and the goanna, frightened
in his turn by the human animals close to him, turned and disappeared down the
slope, travelling so fast through the low undergrowth that they could hardly follow
him.
“Heck!” said Walter, “can’t he move? I don’t wonder he’s called a race-
horse.’’
“What was the little brown animal, Mother?” asked Francis.
“A bandicoot, Francis,” said Mother; “a rat-bandicoot, one of the smallest
of our pouched animals. I’m glad he got away. He’s a most attractive little
animal. I had one as a pet, when I was your age; and I fed him on milk pudding,
and grubs sometimes, and cockroaches when I could find them.”
“Cockroaches?” said Walter; “let’s find a bandicoot and make a pet of him;
and then he can eat up all our cockroaches.”
“That’s a splendid idea,” said Mother. “I’ll tell you what you can do. You
go over to Tom Woolf’s place and ask him about bandicoots. He knows all this
part of the country as if it were his own private zoo. He might even help you
to catch one, which would be fun for the first day of the holidays. I’ll give you
some lunch; and you can stay out all day if you like.”
“Oh, that’s a stag idea,” said Walter.


“Mother,” said Francis, as they walked back to the house, “are all the
animals in Australia pouched animals?”
“Not the reptiles, of course,” said Mother, “the snakes and lizards; but
nearly all the soft-furred animals are.”
And aren t they found anywhere else in the world?” asked Walter.
“Well,” said Mother, “the only pouched animal found outside Australia is
the American opossum. Australia’s a funny place, you know; it seems to have
got cut off from the rest of the world and left behind. I mean, we’ve still got
plants here, things like the zamia palms and blackboys and grass trees, which
like the first kind of vegetation to appear in the world. They ve died out in
other countries ages and ages ago; but they re still going strong here. And
then there are the animals. The pouched animal is a sort of experiment that
Nature tried millions of years ago in other parts of the world, but everywhere
except in Australia it gave way to other sorts of animal.”
“What do you mean, Mother?” asked Walter. “Why was it an experi-
ment?”
‘Well,” said Mother, “you know the first animals in the world to live on
dry land were the reptiles. The young of a reptile is born quite unformed, a little
blob, inside an egg; and the egg is filled with food which the little scrap of life
needs so as to grow; and when it is fully formed it breaks through the egg and
comes out ready to find food for itself—as chicks do. Laying an egg was the first
experiment in producing a new bit of life. After the reptiles came the mam-
mals, who tried the experiment of producing new life without putting it in the
middle of a bundle of egg food; it was an experiment in which the mother fed
the young life directly with food made in her own body. The marsupial way


of doing this was first tried; the new scrap of life was born very, very tiny and
unformed and then kept in a pocket of skin for protection, where it fastened
itself on to the mother’s teat to get its supply of food, and gradually grew into
a complete little animal strong enough to look after itself. Then, after that, a
still better way was tried; the new scrap of life was kept more safely inside the
mother, instead of in a pocket outside, until it was completely formed and ready
to move round for itself—the way puppies and kittens and foals are made.”
“But why did marsupials only happen in Australia?” asked Walter.
“They didn’t,” said Mother. “Very tiny pouched animals or marsupials
were found all over Europe and North America millions of years ago. Aus-
tralia, then, wasn’t an island but part of the rest of the world, and the marsupials
came into Australia. And then there was some sort of upheaval and Australia
was cut off from the rest of the world by sea.”
“How long ago was that?” asked Francis.
“Oh, a very long time ago,” said Mother; “more than fifty million years.
In the rest of the world the marsupials didn’t survive; they all died out; they
were probably killed off by the cleverer and quicker animals that developed
later, the ancestors of the lions and tigers and cats and wolves and foxes of
to-day. But in Australia the marsupials were protected by the sea all round
them, and they developed and developed for all those millions of years into the
pouched animals we have now. So you see why I said that Australia seems to
have been left behind. We’ve got all sorts of animals that were tried in other
parts of the world ages and ages ago, and then died out.”
“Do you think our marsupials will ever die out?” asked Walter.


They probably will,” said Mother; “unless we can protect them. You see
when the white man first came to Australia he disturbed the animals, and then
he brought his own animals, including dogs and foxes, and both the white man
and his animals have been killing off our native animals for a long time. If
we don’t protect our marsupials properly, most of them may be killed off or
starved out in the end; and that would be a disgrace to us all.”
“What about the platypus?” said Walter;; “is that a marsupial too?”
No,” said Mother; “it’s a very curious animal. It lays eggs like a reptile,
and then when the young are hatched it feeds them with milky fluid like a
mammal; its got hair like a mammal, but the webbed feet and duck-bill of a
water bird. And then there’s the spiny ant-eater or echidna, which also lays
e ggTS» and then hatches the eggs in a sort of pouch like the marsupial. They’re
both very odd creatures, survivals from millions of years ago; they’re more primi-
tive even than the marsupials.”
“Have you ever seen a platypus?” asked Walter.
Oh yes, said Mother, I watched one for a long time at the sanctuary at
Healesville, outside Melbourne. There are two there, Jack and Jill, and they live
in a platypusary which has been made as near as possible like their own home.
They re fed on about 1,600 worms every day and a dish of baked custard. I
watched Jack for a long time; he swims beautifully. You should have seen him
swirling through the water after the worms. When he has had enough of the
water he goes out through a long tunnel full of straw, and squeezes through it to
dry his fur, and goes to sleep at the end. Jack and Jill are rather famous at the
moment, because Jill has just produced a young one, and it s the first young
platypus that s ever been born in captivity. Some people think the platypus is


nearly extinct, but there is still quite a number of them to be found if you’re clever.
But they’re not easy to discover, because they don’t appear in broad daylight,
and they live tucked away in holes in the banks of streams.”
They were back in the house by this time; and the boys were so anxious to
be off to visit Tom Woolf that Mother bundled some food into their haversack
—meat-loaf, bread, butter, cookies, and apples—and sent them off at once.
The house they were living in was a large shack on the edge of the Darling
Ranges in Western Australia. It was a wooden house with an iron roof, a roof that
gave out sharp cracks and grunts on summer mornings when the fierce heat of
the sun first fell on it, and which boomed like a drum under the winter rains. It
was built on stilts to keep the floor level on the sloping hillside, and each stilt
was capped with a metal plate to prevent the white ants, if they did happen to
tunnel their way through to the top of the stilt, from getting into the joists and
floor beams and so into the walls.
Down in the swampy ground round the little creek below the house the
white ants swarmed in every bit of rotten wood. Walter and Francis liked kick-
ing the old black logs, for they crumbled at a touch, being honeycombed with
passages and corridors, in which the white ants lived; the tiny, plump, dirty-
white bodies fell out all round and began to drag themselves away out of the light
which they hated. The boys thought they looked like little scraps of living
meat.
It was to this creek that the boys now first set out. Even in early summer,
it was a dry watercourse.
‘‘Look out!” shouted Walter, suddenly—“ Sergeant ants!” Francis jumped
hastily aside and looked down. He had nearly stepped on a sergeant ant’s nest, a




little mound with a hole in the centre like a small volcano, out of which eight or
nine ants were running. The boys had learnt to be wary of them; they were fierce
insects, nearly an inch long, with slender bodies and long legs, and their heads
ended in a pair of vicious pincers. The boys had both been stung once, and had
not forgotten the unpleasant giddiness which had followed the sharp needle-prick
pain. At a safe distance they watched the ants for a moment scurrying round
looking for the cause of the disturbance. Then they set off again, crossed the
hills’ railway, and struck into the bush.
The Eucalypt trees were mostly jarrah, with a few red gums oozing dark
crimson resin, and an occasional smooth barked white gum, gnarled and pock-
marked. But though the trees were not growing very close together, the boys
could not walk straight ahead even for three or four yards. Out of the bare,
rough, gravelly soil there grew a mass of low plants and flowering shrubs, most
of them with spikey or pricking leaves, so that the boys had to zigzag continually
to avoid being scratched all over their legs. Low zamia palms squatted here
and there, with their big fans of narrow needle-tipped leaves sprouting from big
bulbous roots; blackboys and grass trees dotted the bush with their coal black
stems and top-knots of long thin green spikes. Francis, whenever he passed a
blackboy, liked clutching a handful of the spikes, which broke off clean in his
hand as if they had been sticks of the thinnest green sealing wax. The spikes
as they died drooped down like a skirt of white grass round the black stem.
Walter loved setting fire to these skirts which flared up like great torches; but
he didn’t dare do this in summer, for the slightest flame would set off the dry
vegetation and in a moment a bush fire would be running everywhere out of
control.


A quarter of a mile further on, they came to a big knob of blue stone, and
climbed up to its crown. It was a good look-out. The boys could see over the
trees in every direction. West, the ground dropped away eight hundred feet or
so, steeply to the sandy coastal plain, and away across cultivated land to the city
of Perth. The city’s huge spread of streets and buildings lay along the lake-like
waters of the Swan estuary and the sea; and twelve miles off the coast the boys
could see the island of Rottnest, and even the spike of the lighthouse, whose
light they could see from their house at night, winking its bright eye at them. In
every other direction stretched the eucalypt forest, as far as the eye could see. It
was, from this look-out, a grey green heaving plain, uneven and jagged, streaked
with the black of boughs charred by forest fires which disfigured but could not
kill the tough gum trees, and with the white of dead trees which stuck their
skeletons out through the green. The boys often came here to play, and loved
sitting up above the forest as if they were on a raft. Nothing seemed to change
the bush; being evergreen, it was the same always, summer and winter, if you
looked at it from above. But inside there were changes; at the end of the rainy
season the young jarrah saplings put on tips of glossy orange red leaves, and a
tangle of brilliant flowers appeared on the gravelly floor.
Being eager to get on, Walter and Francis did not stay long at the look-out.
They pushed on over a long slope till they came to a small creek, and turning up
against the run of the water, followed a narrow track for half a mile, till sud-
denly the straggle of trees and undergrowth stopped and they found themselves
looking into Tom Woolf’s orchard.


CHAPTER TWO
HONEY POSSUM
HE Orchard was carved out of the bush on both sides of the creek. The gum
trees and prickly undergrowth, as if sliced by a great jack-knife, were cut off
round a big square patch of red soil on which were rows and rows of orange
trees, dark green in colour, and speckled with ripe fruit. At the far end were
two rows of lemon trees; and round Tom Woolf’s shack were a dozen peach and
apricot trees, two plum trees, a loquat, and a fig. A vine spread along the
verandah, making a green outer wall in summer. And above the shack and the
sheds the clacking windmill spun in the wind.
The boys loved the place, partly because there was so much fruit but mostly
because Tom Woolf always had a small menagerie of beasts and birds there.
There were two great cages on one side of the shack, full of the smaller Austra-
lian parrots, budgerygahs or love-birds, lorikeets, two elegant parrots, and two
blue-browed lorilets; another full of finches, zebra finches, painted finches,
cherry finches, diamond firetails. The boys would simply stand and stare, with
their eyes wide open —such gurgling and twittering and flapping and pecking,
such spots and streaks and blobs of brilliant reds and yellows and greens.
“I reckon they belong specially to this country,” Tom Woolf had once said
to them; that s why I like them here, Australia’s a hot country, a bright
country; and the birds, here, are bits of coloured fire.”
Besides the birds, there were always two or three possums running free about
the place, and, if you came at the right time, you could see two and sometimes
three stumpies feeding on the milk or the occasional eggs that Tom
Woolf put out for them.


Walter, as soon as they had climbed the fence into the orchard started run-
ning.
Come on Francis, I want to see the animals; I expect they’ll be feeding
round at the back.’’
They rushed up the path, but as soon as they came near the house, they
slowed down, and then quietly stalked up the side and peered eagerly round the
verandah.
There they are,” Francis whispered in excitement. “Look! two stumpies;
and a possum on top of the bird cage.”
They stepped cautiously up along the path. The possum immediately, in
alarm, jumped on to a rafter of the verandah and whisked out of sight inside
the roof. The two stumpies, twelve inch stump-tailed shingleback lizards,
with pudgy bodies encased in flexible armourplate, who were feeding at a saucer
of broken egg, did not move. Being sluggish, slow-moving animals, they
stayed quite motionless, only opening their mouths and yawning fiercely at the
two boys, as they stepped past them. Francis was a bit startled; he could see
right down their blue mouths into their throats.
Stupids,” he said, “you haven’t any teeth.”
They knocked at the door. “Who’s that?” came a voice from inside; “you’d
better come in, whoever you are.”
The boys went in, and guided by noise, they went down the passage into the
kitchen. Tom Woolf was working at a mound of butter on the table, cutting and
shaping it into smallish blocks.
“Hullo, you two, he said, “come for some fruit?”
No, thank you, said Walter, and went on quickly; “we want to find a live


bandicoot so we can keep it for a pet. And Mother said you’d be sure to know
all about them and where to find one. So will you?”
Well, that s queer, said Tom Woolf; “as a matter of fact I can tell you
where to find one, and pretty close too—down near the creek just beyond the
orchard. I saw its nest yesterday by accident. You’re lucky, you know. There
aren t many about now; they re getting rarer every year.”
Oh good,” said Francis, ‘‘can we go now?”
“No,” said Tom Woolf; ‘Tve got several things to dcn-finish the butter
pack two cases of oranges, and mend the windmill. I’ll tell you what You’ll
need something to catch the bandicoot with, if you’re not going to hurt the chap
-some sort of net. They aren’t hard to catch in the day time, if you have a net.
Here, Walter, take a hand at the butter, and I’ll go up to the shed and see what
J can rake up.
Tor " W °° lf went out. They heard him routing round in the shed, while
alter dug the butter-patter into the mound and smacked and patted and
banged the butter into shape—rather a queer shape.
Give us a taste, said Francis.
“No,” said Walter.
t , .9° Ol }\ Francis > his forefinger stuck out for a dip. But he hurriedly
put his hand m his pocket as Tom Woolf came back into the room.
Here you are, he said, ‘‘see what you can do with these. Here’s the
trame of an old crabbing net, some wire, and mosquito netting. Fasten the net-
tmg round the frame and then we can drop the contraption over the bandicoot,
and there you are. And just while I finish doing the butter, have a look in my


pocket. I had the little fellow sent me two days ago. He won’t bite, but be
careful of him.”
‘‘Go on, Francis,” said Walter, you look first. Francis rather gingerly
pulled back the flap of the pocket and peered inside.
‘‘Why its only a mouse,” he said; “look, Walter.” Walter put his head
down close.
It s a funny mouse,” he said; “it’s got such a long snout; and look at its tail
curled up round its head and back down its body; it must be trying to tie itself
up with it.”
It s not a mouse, said Tom Woolf, “it’s a honey possum. Take it out care-
fully. It s still sleepy; it’s a nocturnal animal and likes to sleep in the day time.
Put it over there on the cushion and have a look at it. When it wakes up a bit,
you can try and feed it if you like.”
Walter put his hand into the pocket and lifted the small warm animal out
and put it on the cushion. It was about the size of a dormouse, its tail nearly
twice as long as its body, with a brownish fur with three well marked darker
stripes running along its back. The possum was quivering, and tucked its long
snout between its front paws and snuggled down into the hollow of the cushion.
Why does it have such a long snout, Mr. Woolf?” asked Francis.
To eat honey with, said Tom Woolf. “It pokes its snout into the flowers
and sucks the honey out. And it has a long tongue, too, about an inch long,
which it thrusts into the flowers; it’s a funny tongue, with a little tuft at the tip,
for sweeping up sticky foods into its mouth from the flowers. They’re marvellous
little creatures, as agile as birds, darting and swinging along the leaves and twigs


as they collect their sweet food, and sometimes hanging on with their tails and eat-
ing upside down.”
“Where did you get it from, Mr. Woolf?” said Walter.
It was sent me, said Tom by a friend who was going away. Fun-
nily enough he found it when it was quite young, with another little honey
possum, in a deserted bird’s nest. But they make their nests in all sorts of
places— on the tops of grass trees, or even on the ground.”
“But, Mr. Woolf,” said Francis, “what does it want a nest for? Doesn’t it
carry its babies in its pouch?”
Yes, it does, said Tom Woolf, but it wants a nest for itself and prob-
ably for the baby possums too, because the pouch has a very small opening at
the top. It’s quite a nice roomy pocket inside, and it holds four young ones all
at once, but they must be very small still when they leave the pouch, other-
wise they wouldn’t be able to squeeze out at all. So I expect the Mother needs
a nest for them.”
What do you feed it with?” asked Walter.
Oh, honey mixed with water, said Tom and sugar and con-
densed milk, and some flies or moths when I get them; and I give it flowers to
suck—not garden flowers, it doesn’t like them.”
Look, Look! said Francis quickly, “it’s waking up.” Sure enough the
possum had uncurled its snout and tail, and was sitting up looking at them.
Here Francis, said Tom Woolf, “see if it will take a feed. There’s a
sugar canister over there. Wet your fingers at the tap, and then stick them in the
sugar. The possum likes sugar a lot.”
Francis hurriedly got the sugar down and did what was suggested. Then


he went over to the possum and stuck his finger close to the little snout. The
possum seemed to consider for a moment whether it liked the smell, and then
suddenly darted its tongue out and licked off a fragment of the sticky stuff.
“Oh!” said Francis in an excited whisper, “it licked my finger. Did you see
its tongue like the top of a little paint brush? It did tickle.”
“See if it will climb up your hand,” said Tom Woolf. “Hold your hand up
with your elbow on the cushion.” Francis did as he was told; and the possum
ran up over his wrist and, hand, climbed up his forefinger, and began busily
licking and brushing up the moist sugar. Its movements were as quick and neat
as a bird’s. When it had swept up all the sugar on one finger it darted down
to his hand and up another finger and immediately began licking again.
“Did you see, Francis,” whispered Walter, “it thinks you’re a tree and it
went down to the trunk and up another branch.”
Francis, all this time, was too excited to talk. He managed to keep the hand
on which the possum was feeding quite still, but the other hand he was waving
about; and all of a sudden it was too much for him:
It tickles, it tickles,” he cried hopelessly, and began waving his sugary
fingers about. The possum seemed almost to like this, and curling its tail around
Francis’ little finger for a better grip went on rapidly licking. But as Francis’
agitation became more violent, it suddenly took alarm, scurried down from its
perch across his wrist and disappeared from sight behind the cushion.
“I couldn’t hold on,” cried Francis, “it was tickling so; it was the bristles
on its tongue.”
“Well, I’ve finished the butter,” said Tom Woolf, “so I think we’ll put the
little person back in her cage. Bring her along, Walter; and you can see if you
can find a fly for her.” ( f


Walter carefully picked up the possum, and the three went out to the sheds
at the back. The possum was put in its cage, a big roomy old bird cage, in which
Tom Woolf had fastened some branches and made a kind of nest.
Look, said Tom Woolf, Ive got to mend the windmill. You’ll prob-
ably find some flies over there in the cobwebs by the shed door.” He got some
pliers and fencing wire and went out. Walter and Francis immediately set about
searching for flies; and it wasn t long before Walter found a beauty, a fat
blow-fly, still alive, but entangled in a spider’s web. He carried it back in his
closed hand to the cage, and shoved it under the door; and then they both
waited breathlessly. Suddenly the blow-fly began a terrific buzzing, managed
to get one wing free of the clinging web, and started skidding drunkenly in small
circles round the floor of the cage. The possum, who had been scratching her
fur, made a lightning pounce, and in a twinkling was sitting up, holding her
prey in her front paws.
“Got him!” cried Walter. “I wonder if she’ll eat him whole.” The pos-
sum got to work on the fly, and in half a minute or so had sucked off the soft
body of the fly, and had dropped the legs and wings and head on the floor.
I expect,” said Walter, looking at the remains of the fly, “that stuff’s too
tough for a honey-eater.”
The possum appeared to feel she had had enough to eat; for after finishing
the fly she ran off quickly to her nest. She scratched herself for a moment, and
then pushing her snout down between her forepaws and curling her tail round
her head, she composed herself to sleep. The boys watched her.
She s off to sleep, said Walter; we d better get on with making the net,
or we shan’t be ready in time.”


They went back to the shack and collected the stuff for the net, and then
squatted on the floor together.
“Spread out the netting,” said Walter, “and then we can see how to do it.”
The netting wasn’t even square, and the boys had a struggle getting the edges
rolled up so that it would fit round the wire frame. When it looked fairly good,
Francis held the netting round the frame, and Walter threaded the wire round and
round till he got to the beginning of the circle again; and then he twisted the
two ends round each other.
“There,” said Francis, as he held it up; “what a bundle it looks! But it
hasn’t any holes in it anyhow. Let’s go and show it to Mr. Woolf.”
They went out, “I’m going to practise,” said Francis; and stalking forward
with the net in front of him he suddenly dropped it over an old jam tin.
“Got him,” he shouted.
“Got what?” came Tom Woolf’s voice from high up in the air.
“He’s got an old tin,” Walter began, laughing; “he’s practising for the ban-
dicoot.”
“Oh, I see,” said Tom Woolf. “Well, you’re quicker than I am. I’ve fixed
the windmill; but there are the oranges to do still. You can come along and
help.”
Tom Woolf climbed down from the mill, and the three went into the shed.
On the racks against the wall at the far end were hundreds of oranges, and round
the floor nearby was a stack of new milky-red jarrah cases.
“Yes,” said Tom Woolf, as he caught the look on the boys’ faces, “you can
have one.”


" I 4 111 * /
- * A I f> /' 4
V v \, &}


“A big one?” asked Francis.
‘‘The biggest one you can find,” said Tom Woolf. The boys bit off the tops
of their oranges and began sucking them. Tom Woolf got to work, and in about
fifteen minutes the two cases were filled with oranges, and the tops nailed firmly
on.
“Now,” said Walter, “now for the bandicoot.”


CHAPTER THREE
BANDICOOT CAUGHT
M ready,” said Tom Woolf; “I’ll just get a sack to put the creature in when
we’ve caught it. Let’s have a look at the net, Francis.”
Francis handed it over, and Tom Woolf inspected it.
JB “That seems all right,” he said, “it hasn’t any holes in it. A good job, you
two. Well, off we go, now, down through the orchard. The nest is only a hun-
dred yards the other side of the fence.”
“Won’t the bandicoot get a fright when it hears us coming, and run away?”
asked Walter.
“Not if we’re quiet,” said Tom Woolf. “Bandicoots are rather trusting
animals. They hide their nests away very carefully in a thick bush, and trust
that no enemy will find them, and then they go soundly to sleep. If we’re care-
ful we can get close enough to catch it before it wakes up properly. The
aborigine, you know, catches them by getting up close to the nest as quietly as
possible, and then suddenly putting his foot on them and holding them down.
Then he kills them.”
“But what does he kill them for?” said Walter.
For food, said Tom Woolf; Ive never eaten bandicoot myself, but the
aborigines seem to like them. They like a lot of queer things to eat —snakes and
bardies and ...”
What are bardies, Mr. Woolf? Francis interrupted.
Bardies? Why, you know bardies, Francis—those fat white grubs you
sometimes dig up in the orchard.”


Mention of the orchard made Walter suddenly remember a most important
question.
Oh, Mr. Woolf, he said, “we re going away camping the day after to
n
morrow.
Going away camping?” said Tom Woolf, “That’s fun. But what on earth
are you going to do with the bandicoot, if we catch it? Take it along with you?”
We thought . . . began Walter in a hesitating way ....
I know what you thought, Tom Woolf said quickly; “you thought I could
keep it till you came back, eh? Well, I’m blowed!”
The boys looked at Tom Woolf anxiously to see if he was annoyed, but he
was smiling, and Walter, reassured, went on:
“Yes, will you keep it till we get back?”
Well, I will, said Tom Woolf, “but only on one condition; that you make
a cage for it yourselves. It’ll be a bit wild for several days, and will have to be
kept in. 111 find some wood and wire-netting.”
Oh, thank you, said Walter. I know, Francis, we ll do it this afternoon
instead of going down to the creek to have a bathe. We’ve got our lunch with
us, so we shan t have to go back home again.
“Well, that’s that,” said Tom Woolf.
They had reached the bottom of the orchard, and climbing over the fence,
they walked along the track through the bush. In a minute or so Tom Woolf
stopped.
“You see that old dead tree, that one with the aboriginal shield cut out of
it, he said, “over there about thirty yards away; the nest is in a low bush just
this side of the tree. Perhaps I’d better have the net, Francis, because it will have


to be dropped very quickly and firmly just on the right spot, and I’m the only
one of you who knows just where the nest is lying. I’m going to try to get the
net right down over the nest and the bandicoot before it can get away. The bush
is quite small, though it’s thick and close, and the nest is well hidden. You won’t
even see it when you are almost on top of it. I think the net will probably spread
over it all. But I want you two to get round the other side of the bush, and
when you see me drop the net, jump about and make a noise; and then, if the
bandicoot does try to escape it will rush out towards me and into the net. Have
you got that all clear? Now, no noise, no talking, not even a whisper, and tread
as softly as you can. If the bandicoot is still there, it will probably be sound
asleep, but it’s no good taking any risks of frightening it,”
They began to creep forward, Tom Woolf in front, making very little noise.
Francis turned round to make sure that Walter was just behind, and the two boys
grinned ferociously at each other in their excitement. Tom Woolf seemed
naturally to avoid all the things that would creak or crack or snap under his
feet; but Walter and Francis had to glue their eyes on the ground to avoid the
twigs and bits of bark. In a moment or so they felt a touch on their shoulders
and looked quickly up. Tom Woolf was pointing a few yards ahead at a small
tufted bush. That was where the bandicoot s nest must be. Walter and Francis
seeing it so close expected to see the bandicoot rush out; but there was no sound
or movement. Tom Woolf made a circular movement with his arm, and the
boys, understanding the sign, began to creep quietly away so as to get behind the
bush—round a small sapling, lifting their legs very carefully over a dead branch,
skirting a heap of dried leaves. Now they were opposite to him; they stopped.
They tried to keep one eye on the bush and one on Tom Woolf. They saw him


"S t- : ‘-si - i - M#
£>€.V »L
r%„. ypEBilwft' .Or^pS8|MI5^ : *P
• : m*m ;-*
Bh V v• , / . ■**■•"' -ac. ■
g|Sr%I - *,
y «£ ** j >. _
Bk ' ‘*W J ( \ \ , • :
SSI* t ' Tw
JH X\-
1 0^*&4
I ► Jri I
vk
. M
Spp ■.%


carefully arrange the net. In a shiver of suspense they waited. How slowly
he moved! If the bandicoot rushed out now, what would he do? He was almost
on top of the bush now; now he was bending forward, grasping the wire of the
net firmly with both hands. Suddenly over the bush the net was pushed
violently down; and as if a spring had snapped open, Walter and Francis let out
a wild whoop and rushed forward. There was a quick sharp scrabble inside the
bush and a small brown body shot out and fell in a struggling heap in the white
folds of the net.
“Caught! Caught! He’s caught it!’’ shouted both boys together.
“Quick! idiots,” cried Tom Woolf, “the sack; this mosquito netting won’t
hold him for long.” Walter snatched up the sack from the ground, and opened
its mouth. And Tom Woolf, catching the struggling animal in a fold of the
net, lifted it and dropped it, net and all, into the sack, piling in the rest of the
net as far as it would go.
Will it be able to breathe?” asked Francis anxiously.
“Oh, there’s lots of air in the sack,” said Tom Woolf, “and anyhow we
shall only be about five minutes getting back to the house, and then I’ll put it
in a big box till you’ve made the cage. By the way, you two had better have a
look at the nest before we go; it’s rather nicely made.”
The boys went over to the bush, and pulling aside the tufts, peered in. It
certainly was well hidden, tucked away safe from prying eyes, a round neat nest,
made of dried twigs and grass and leaves bound together* with a little earth to
keep it firm. Francis put his hand down and touched it; it was still warm where
the bandicoot’s body had been curled up in sleep. They heard Tom Woolf’s
voice calling them, and, giving a last look at the nest, they hurried to join him.


“I hope it’s not very frightened,” said Walter, as they caught up with Tom
Woolf.
“It’s frightened all right,” said Tom Woolf; “but it won’t be for long; and in
a day or so it will feel quite at home, and won’t remember anything about it. It
would have been better to have made friends with it, instead of having to catch
it in this way, but we couldn t help it, could we? They’re very friendly little
animals, you know.”
“Why is it called a bandicoot?” asked Francis.
It s a queer name, isn t it? said Tom Woolf. “It comes from the native
name for the pig-rat which is found in southern India and Ceylon. Nobody
knows why it came to be used for this creature. Somebody, I suppose, who had
seen a pig-rat in Ceylon, thought this little fellow looked rather like a pig-rat,
only smaller, so he called it by the same name. But the two animals are not
really like each other at all.”
“Are all bandicoots like this?” asked Walter.
Oh, no,” said Tom Woolf, “there are several different kinds, in different
parts of Australia, with slightly different markings; and then there’s the larger
bandicoot, a rabbit-bandicoot, which is usually called a bilby. But they’re all mar-
supials, and they all have long back legs. You see, other countries have rats, dif-
ferent kinds of rats, black rats, brown rats; and they have rabbits. Well, we
have rabbity animals and ratty animals too, but a special sort found nowhere
else in the world—marsupial rats and marsupial rabbits. We call them bandi-
coots and bilbies, because they’re different and have different habits. We’ve
ordinary rats and rabbits, too, of course. But the ordinary rabbits were brought
over here from England by one of the early settlers—and what a pest they are!


“I wish we could kill them all,” said Francis, “I mean the rabbits. Just
squash them all together and chuck them in the sea.”
Tom Woolf laughed: “That’s a grand idea, Francis, but you’d better send
the foxes after them; they don’t belong to this country, and they’re killing off
the native animals.”
“Who brought the foxes here?” asked Walter.
“Some idiot, I believe,” said Tom Woolf, “who wanted to have a bit of
fox-hunting. Of course the foxes kill the rabbits, but they kill our harmless
little animals too.”
They had been walking fast, and were now almost back at the shack. As
soon as they arrived, Tom Woolf handed over the sack to Francis and going into
the shed, routed out a wooden box and some wire netting.
“I’ve got a lot to do,” he said; “you two can carry on, now. Put the box
down somewhere and lay the wire netting over the top, and find four bricks to
keep the netting down. Then you can let the bandicoot out into the box, and
I hope the man who brought them can see what a mess he’s made of things.
Our own bandicoots and bilbies are useful little animals, keeping the grubs down,
eating larvae, and killing mice, but they’re getting rarer and rarer. But the im-
ported rabbits—you know about them; they arrived first in the Eastern States,
and multiplied, and then began coming across the Nullarbor Plain, and we tried
to stop them by building an enormous rabbit-proof fence from north to south for
hundreds and hundreds of miles inside the border of the state; but they got
through that in the end, and spread everywhere. They do millions of pounds’
worth of damage every year, making a mess of the land, and eating the young
corn, and they’re increasing every year.’’


it 11 be quite happy till you ve made the cage. And don’t forget your lunch in
your excitement. You d better come m and have a drink of milk when you’ve
finished the eating. And if you want me in the meantime, I shall be inside.’’
Tom Woolf went off; and the two boys got to work with the box. They
had just got the four bricks in place when Francis cried out:
How can we put the bandicoot in? It’s still in the sack.”
I know, said Walter, ‘‘we ll pick up the bandicoot in the mosquito
netting out of the sack, and then you can lift the corner of the wire and I’ll drop
• • »♦
it m.
But then it 11 still be inside the netting, said Francis.
“Well, we 11 try and wiggle the netting about, till it comes out, said
Walter.
It turned out better than they had hoped; for as soon as the bandicoot had
been lifted out in its cocoon of netting, it began to struggle, and as Walter was
lowering it carefully into the box, it tore through the netting and collapsed on
the floor of the box. It fell on its back, and then quickly righted itself, but not
before Walter had noticed its pouch. He turned quickly in excitement, to
Francis:
It s a she-bandicoot, Francis, did you see? And I’m sure it’s got babies—
its pouch was all swollen. Come on, let’s go and tell Mr, Woolf.”
Tom Woolf heard the boys running up towards the house, and then up the
passage. He raised his voice:
“Here lam in the office. What’s up? Has the bandicoot escaped?”
Oh, no,” said Francis who had arrived first; “Walter saw the bandicoot’s
pouch, and he says it s a she, and there are babies inside. Do come and see.”


“Well, you are a couple of interrupters,” said Tom Woolf, as he took off
his spectacles. “Come along, though. I’d like to see them myself, if they’re
there.”
They went back to the shed, the boys running on ahead. Walter and
Francis peered in; the bandicoot was crouching quite still in one corner. When
Tom Woolf arrived, he took off one of the bricks and lifted a corner of the
wire, then he put in his hand and grasped the bandicoot firmly by the hair of
its back and lifted it out. When it was clear, he grasped the back legs with his
other hand, supporting its body in this way.
Yes, you re right, r alter, said Tom as he saw the swollen
pouch; there must be three or four young ones inside, I should think. Pull
out the skin of the opening a little and have a look inside.”
Walter found this a bit difficult, as the pouch opened slightly backwards.
But he managed to pull back the taut skin of the flap a little, and by peering up,
he could see inside fairly well in spite of the bandicoot s struggling.
At least four, he said; but I can’t see properly. What tiny things they
are, and they haven t any fur on them at all. Come on, Francis, you have a
look.”
Francis, in his turn pulled out the skin of the pouch and bent his head
down.
t sa id* they are queer, they look like little skin bags fastened on.
I can’t see their eyes or anything. Do they hang on like that all the time? Do
put her back now, Mr. Woolf; I’m sure she’s hating it.”
I expect she is, said Tom Woolf, smiling. “They are funny little things,
the young ones, aren t they? All the young of marsupials look rather queer


when they are born, because, in a way, they’re only half made. The young of
other animals 3re born ready to move around in an hour or so, or perhaps a day
or so; but the young of marsupials are only half made when they’re born and
very very small, and then they have to stay in the pouch fastened on to the
mother s teat for weeks till they’re properly made. Even the young of a big
kangaroo is a tiny little thing when it’s born, only about the size of a peanut,
and quite naked; but when it s ready to leave the pouch it’s grown as big as a cat,
and has all its fur and everything.’’
“But how does it get into the pouch, Mr. Woolf?’’ asked Walter.
It crawls up outside the pouch, finds the opening, goes down inside, and
immediately fastens itself firmly on to the teat by its mouth. People used to
believe that the young ones must be born in the pouch, because they couldn’t
believe anything so small and half-made could find its way into the pouch by
itself; but they do find their way. And when they’re fastened on to the teat
inside, you know, it’s impossible to pull them off without tearing the mouth—so
when the mother is running or hopping about, the young ones won’t be in any
danger of getting loose.’’
“How long have these little bandicoots been born?” asked Walter.
“Probably about a week, I should think,” said Tom Woolf. “They’ll be in
the pouch for another three or four weeks before they’re ready to come out.
But, look here, I must get back to my work. You have your lunch, and then
see what sort of a job you can do with the cage. There’s a packing case and
wood and wire netting in the shed, and you know where I keep the tools.”
Tom Woolf went off quickly; and the boys after taking another look at the
bandicoot, settled down to their lunch. They were too anxious to get to work


on the cage to take long, and in a quarter of an hour they were ferreting round
the shed for the stuff they wanted. It took them two and a half hours to make
the cage. When they had finished, they took a good look at it and decided it
wasn’t too bad.
They had found a large packing case with one side stove in; and they had
straightened this side and made it firm by nailing another piece of wood to it in-
side. Then they had fastened a piece of wire netting over the top. So far it had
been plain sailing. But there had been the door to make. They had argued
about this for some time and had finally found a way to do it. They had cut
out a smallish square of wire netting from one corner with the tinsnips; then
they had fastened two slats right across the top of the packing case at right angles
to each other, so that they ran along the edges of the opening in the wire net-
ting; and they had fastened the netting to the slats. Then they had found a
piece of wood and cut it to fit the opening, and put hinges on it, and screwed it
on. And lastly they had made a little catch with a piece of wire and two nails,
one on the door and one on the slat. Then they had turned the case on to its side,
with the door at the bottom, and it became a cage.
“I know,” said Walter, as they looked at it, “we ll make a nest.”
So they collected some small twigs and dried grass and leaves, and then
went off and brought back two handfulls of wet sticky soil from the ground
round the windmill. Then they shaped the twigs and grass and leaves into a
round soup-plate, and tried to stick it all together with the wet soil. It wasn’t
at all easy, but they kept going, and in a few minutes Walter said:
“What a mess it looks, but it’ll have to do. Let’s get it into the cage.”


■- _. y*.- ;
' k i ■ *- ' .1 *•'i * * * • f ;1
9L. \. , /jjfc , -r- » \ . * i' V . | _ j


When Walter lifted it, however, a great piece broke off on one side. So
Francis carried the bit, and Walter the rest of it. The two pieces were pushed
into the cage in one corner, and Walter, lying on his stomach, managed to join
the two fragments together quite well.
“We must cover it over, like a real nest,” said Francis. So they got some
small branches and a lot of dried grass, and built it all up like a bush round the
nest with the help of some stones to keep it firm. And last of all, Walter
made a small hole through the grass, so the bandicoot could get into the nest.
“Now,” said Francis, “let’s go and get Mr. Woolf.” The boys were very
pleased when Tom Woolf had come out to inspect their handiwork, because he
admired the cage, and especially the nest.
“That’s fine,” he said. “Now let’s introduce her to her new home.”
Tom Woolf went over to the box, and took hold of the bandicoot, and in a
moment she was safe in the cage. Francis lay down in front of the cage.
“Go on, Mrs. Bandilegs,” he said, “go on, get into your nest.”
But the bandicoot didn’t move. She crouched in one corner looking at
them.
“She’ll go in soon enough,” said Tom Woolf. “But, look here, you two,
you must nick off home as quick as lightning. It’s getting late, and your mother
won t know what on earth’s become of you. Come and have a drink of milk
first—you forgot to have it at lunch time; and then off you; go.”
The boys got up reluctantly, and went off to the shack. Tom Woolf got
two glasses of milk for them, and a couple of oranges, and then packed them
off home. But the boys n'ipped back to have a last look at the bandicoot before


they went. There was nothing to be seen in the cage as they approached. They
hurried closer.
“It’s got into the nest,” said Francis in an excited whisper. And sure
enough, there the bandicoot was, just showing the tip of her sharp face through
the hole in the dried grass. The boys felt quite happy.
They did not take long to get home. They ran most of the way. As they
scrambled over the slippery gravel of the little railway embankment and came
into sight of the house, they saw Father and Mother outside the gate. Francis
gave a whoop and rushed down:
We caught the bandicoot,” he shouted as he came scurrying along to where
they were.
“Good heavens!” said Father, “so you did get it after all. And is Tom
Woolf going to keep it for you?”
“Yes,” said Walter, we made a cage for it and a nest, and it was in the nest
when we left.”
“Well r m glad to see you back, said Mother, “I was beginning to get
anxious about you. Now hop along and get yourselves washed, and you can
tell us all about it at tea time. The tea s been waiting for ten minutes.”
Tea was a noisy meal, as the boys went over their day’s adventures, re-
minding each other of every detail. They were tired, however, and after they
had helped wash up, and Father had read to them, Mother bundled them off
to bed, reminding them that they had a lot to do tomorrow, as the house had
to be cleared up and everything got ready for the camping.


CHAPTER FOUR
KANGAROOS
HE next day was a busy one for the whole family. Father gave the two
boys the special job of sorting out the tent, the fly-sheet, ropes, poles and
pegs, and of seeing that they were all in good order. In the afternoon the
stuff for camping was wheeled out to the garage by Walter and Francis in
a push-cart, and stacked round the car —the tent and fly-sheet, three stretchers,
four mattresses, five blankets and sheets, a folding table, a safe, five plates, cups,
forks, spoons and knives, a saucepan, two billies, a griller, a primus stove with
its fuel, an old portmanteau with their clothes, tools and an axe, and a spade,
a great many tins of food from chicken soup to condensed milk, and bread,
ham, butter, and fruit. Father then got to work on it, and in about an hour it
was all stowed away, either roped on the carrier at the back, or heaped all over
the inside of the back part of the car and reaching to the roof, except for one
narrow hole on one side where one of the boys was to sit. The car was a small
Morris Eight, and it was a tight squeeze, but with neatness and a good deal of
shoving, it was done at last.
At tea-time that evening they all tried to remember what they had for-
gotten.
“I know,” said Francis, “a water-carrier.”
“We’d better use an old kerosene tin,” said Father; “I’ll take the top off
one after tea, and clean it and fit a wire handle.”
“What about fly nets?” said Mother. “There’s sure to be plenty of flies
down there.”


“And a mosquito net, to eat our meals under,” said Walter.
And a fly-spray,” said Francis,, “and citronella oil.”
Mother got a piece of paper and made a list. After tea the extra things were
stowed away in the car. Father filled the radiator, and pumped the tyres, and
made sure there was enough petrol and oil. By nine o’clock they were
ready for bed.
“When shall we set the alarm for?” asked Mother. “What about half past
four? We should be off by half past five.”
And they got off by half past five next morning. The roads were dark
when they left the house; but by the time they had dropped down from the
range, and had made their way through side roads on to the main highway to
the south-west, the lights of the car could be turned out. They were thirty miles
away when the sun actually got above the hills.
There she comes,” said Francis, as the sunlight began to flood into their
eyes; you said we could have breakfast now.”
Father stopped the car and they all crowded out, and the brain sandwiches
Mother had cut the night before and the milk bottle and oranges were passed
round. They didn t take long, for Mother hurried them up:
We must get as far as possible, she said, before it begins to get really
hot.”
In a few minutes they were off again. The road turned and returned and
rose and fell along the foothills of the Darling ranges, now crossing the fertile
soil of a valley farm, now in the thick trees and scrub of the bush. Rut after
eighty miles or so it settled down firmly on to the coastal plain and stayed there.
They caught up with an empty train of hopper cars bound for the coal mines


of Collie, and raced it for over a mile. Walter and Francis waved frantically
to the driver as they drew ahead, and the driver blew his whistle and waved his
can of cold tea at them. Soon they were skirting Bunbury, the port for the
South-west timber and fruit, and were heading for Busselton.
“Why is it called Busselton?” asked Walter, “its such a queer name.”
“It was called after the Bussel family,” said Father, “the Bussels were the
people who settled in this part first, and opened up the country. They landed
at Augusta, further down the coast, and then pushing up north to find better
country for their cattle, they found open acres of grass land and scrub trees; so
they called their homestead “Cattle Chosen.” And Governor Stirling called the
settlement “Bussel-town”! It wasn’t so long ago, either. We’re a young
country you know. We must find 0ut....” A shriek from Francis interrupted
him:
Roos! Look, Roos! Three of them!”
Everyone turned. There they certainly were, three big reddish-grey kan-
garoos, bounding along as hard as they could go. Hie car was passing beside
a marshy salt lake with the bush on the right-hand side, and going slow because
of pot holes, and the kangaroos were between the lake and the car, not fifteen
yards away.
“Heck!” said Walter, “they’re racing us.”
“So they are,” cried Father, “They must be trying to get in front of us and
across into the bush.”
It was amazing to watch the great animals leaping in line ahead, their
bodies upright but inclined forward, their front short paws dangling, their thick,
long and heavy tails held stiffly out behind as balancers, and beneath them,


the long legs and great haunches sinking and springing as if their bodies were
rhythmically bouncing on powerful springs. The kangaroos were gaining
slightly. They managed every obstacle with ridiculous ease, going over the
smaller bushes and swerving round the larger, soaring over a great fallen tree
trunk as if their bodies were as buoyant as balloons, and in the more open
spaces quickening their speed with tremendous leaps. Suddenly the car gave
a jerk, and Father, pulling his eyes back on the road, saw that they were off
the track and into the soft sand on the side of the road. He braked hard; the car
bumped, bumped, jolted, slithered, slewed round sideways and stopped with a
jar. The kangaroos saw their chance, wheeled right and with a great jump
across the road were in a moment pounding away into the safety of the bush.
The car was left full of excited talking and shouting, especially about the female
kangaroo in the centre of the trio.
“Did you see the joey in her pouch?” cried Walter. “Did you see it?”
“With its head sticking out,” said Francis. “What a ride it was having!”
“I bet it was frightened,” said Walter.
I bet it wasn t, said Francis. It was enjoying itself going up and down
like a swing.”
Well, said Father, it was worth seeing that, even if we are stuck in the
sand. Out we all get and see if we can get ourselves unstuck.”
Everybody hopped out to have a look. The car was facing the road on a
small incline, its back wheels in thick sand.
It sno good, said Father, I can t drive her out of that, she d bury her
back wheels to the axles in a moment, if I tried. Francis, hop in and dig the
spade out, and the axe, from the back seat.”


They were produced.
“Now, everyone scatter round and collect branches, live ones that won’t
snap, and we’ll make a couple of runways for the wheels. Mother, you take the
axe; and, Francis, you sit with Elizabeth on the running board.’’
For several minutes there was the sound of breaking branches and wood
and soon a pile was collected beside the car. Father dug out the sand from in
front of the back wheels and the branches were packed in all the way up to the
road. Finally Father squeezed sacks in as far under the wheels as he could get
them.
“Now, Mother, you get in and drive; and the rest of us will shove behind.
When I say ‘Go,’ you let in the clutch, and we’ll push like blazes.” The engine
was started.
“Are you ready? Well, go!” shouted Father. The back wheels started
to fly round for a fraction of a second, spurting sand out backwards, and then
suddenly caught in the sacking and branches. There was a terrific grunting and
panting from Francis and Walter and Elizabeth, and the car wobbled up un-
steadily, churning the branches and sand up as she went, and finally with a nice
crunchy sound, the wheels gripped the gravel, and she was on the road again.
“Well shoved!” said Mother, as she climbed out. “I think, after that, it
should be lunch.” There were shouts of approval, and food was produced—a
meat loaf of minced steak, onions, bacon and chopped parsley, lettuce fresh
from a wet towel, tomatoes, and cold potatoes; and after that a big tin of
English gooseberries which were handed round and eaten with a spoon, one pier-
son at a time, everyone making sure that nobody else ate more than their share.
While they were eating, Father said: “What do you say to going down after


this, and having a look at those kangaroo tracks? I wish I had a tape measure;
I d like to measure some of those jumps.”
What sort of kangaroos were they? asked Walter. “They were pretty
big.”
“They were Great Greys, said Father, Foresters, as some people like to
call them, because they like this rather open bush country.”
But they weren’t grey,” said Francis, “or only bits of them; they were
rather red.”
Yes, I know, said Father; “but they belong to the group of Great Grey
Kangaroos which are found all over Australia. But our West Australian Grey
has grown a slightly reddish coat.”
How far can they jump when they try?” asked Walter.
I don t think anybody really knows,” said Father. “But they say the larger
ones can easily cover twenty-five feet at a bound when they are travelling fast.
Do you remember, Father, that trapper we were talking to last summer?’
said Mother, He said he’d measured a jump made by a big red Kangaroo
which his dogs were chasing, and it was thirty-seven and a half feet.”
And you remember,” said Father, “that the man admitted the roo was
going down hill, so it wasn’t a really fair jump. Still they can jump along
nicely when they try —and upwards too. There are some amazing stories of kan-
garoos jumping high fences and fallen timber. One big roo, - hunted in
Queensland, is said to have heaved itself clean over a mass of dead timber ten
and a half feet high, and its jump was twenty-seven feet long.”
“Heck!” said Walter. “So these roos could have jumped right over the car
if they’d tried.”


“Yes,” said Father, ‘‘easily; it’s about the right height for a good jump for
most big roos —about five feet or so.”
Mother suddenly interrupted. “I remember, I have got a tape measure. I
put one in my work bag. So we can measure the jumps these roos made after
all. I’ll get it. Baby, you take that piece of bread and butter with you.”
“Come on, Elizabeth,” said Father; “I’ll carry you. Up you go!”
Mother fished out the tape measure, and they all moved down, with Eliza-
beth on Father’s shoulders. The tracks were easy to pick up, but most of them
were rather blurred, as the roos had been travelling one behind the other. But
in a moment of so, they had picked up a set of marks, quite clean and distinct, in
the damp blackish soil near the lake.
“You measure the foot-mark, Mother,” said Father. Mother unrolled the
tape measure, and stretched it along the mark made by its foot from the great
central toe to the back of the heel.
“It’s thirteen and one half inches,” said Mother.
“It must have been a big roo,” said Father, “getting on for six feet or over.
That’s only its foot mark. When it’s sitting it rests on the whole of its back leg
down to the elbow—about two and a half feet long, I should guess.”
“What a huge nail it has,” said Francis.
“And dangerous too,” said Father, “when it’s fighting. When kangaroos are
attacked by dogs, they can grasp the dog with their powerful front hands, and rip
its body open with one stroke of this great hind-nail.”
“But how can they do that?” asked Walter. “They’d be sitting on their
legs.”


They use their tails, said Father. They use them for balancing, and like
a rudder, when they’re jumping. But when they’re standing still, the tail is
used like another leg. In fact, kangaroos boxing each other, balance entirely
on their tails and strike each other with both hind legs at once.”
There was a shout from Francis, who had been exploring the ground some
yards away. Ive found the other marks. Look over here!”
Some jump, said Mother, as she looked from where Francis was standing
to the marks she had just measured. She laid the tape measure out, and using
little twigs to mark the place where the tape could reach at full stretch, she
measured the whole jump.
‘Twenty-one feet, five inches, I make it,” she said, ‘‘now let’s find the tree
trunk they jumped over. I want to measure the height of that too.”
It was much further back, said Francis. He ran ahead and soon was heard
shouting: Here it is.” The rest hurried up, and Mother measured the height
of the trunk. ‘ Just on five feet,” she said.
They certainly were travelling, said Father. They must have been doing
twenty-two or twenty-three miles an hour. We were doing twenty in the car; I
noticed the speedometer just as you shouted out, Francis. Of course they
wouldn t have kept that up for long. AVhen they go flat out, these big roos ex-
haust themselves very quickly.”
‘‘How quickly?” asked Walter.
said Father, they say those big foresters can keep up twenty-five
miles an hour for three hundred yards or so; and for short bursts can do even
thirty miles an hour.”


“But that’s not much good,” said Walter, “only being able to do three hun-
dred yards, when they’re being chased.’’
“But you see,” said Father, “they’re jumpers, not runners. They don t
try to rush out of sight like rabbits, they try to bounce out of immediate danger
in the way fleas do. Roos can jump this way and that, and turn and twist like
lightning—that’s when they need those great tails of theirs, to act as balancers
and rudders. But if they can’t get away from their enemies in this way, they
stand and fight; they often get their backs to a tree, so that they can keep their
enemies in front of them. One of our early Australian naturalists, a man
called Gilbert, noticed how an old-man kangaroo, or “boomer” as they some-
times call them, would take to water when attacked by dogs; then he would catch
a dog as it sprang, in his front paws, and hold it under the water till it was
drowned; or if the water was too shallow, he would catch one dog, and, putting
his great foot on it, hold it down and wait for the next dog to spring. And ap-
parently this is quite a common way for roos to defend themselves against dogs.
But don’t you go thinking the roo is a fierce animal. It’s a herbivore, or grass-
eater, like the deer; and it won’t attack unless it’s cornered and can’t help fight-
ing. But come on, all of you. We must get going, or we shan’t have time to set
up camp properly before it’s dark.”
In a few minutes they were all packed into the car again, and were off.
It was not many miles before they came out of the scrub country into the more
open grassland round Busselton. Soon they were in Busselton itself, where
they stopped to get more petrol, and to buy a bottle of acriflavine solution for
cuts, and a pair of cotton slacks for Mother. The shopping did not take long,


>\
_ I
and after they had all eaten an ice-cream at a little store on the outskirts of the
township, they set out on the short final stage of their journey.
I say, said Walter, as they left the last house; I’ve a good idea. Let s
see how many pouched animals we can find before we get home again. We’ve
already seen three roos.”
And a honey possum, said Francis, ' and two bandicoots, before we came
away.
'That’s a first-rate idea,” said Father.
I know, said Mother, we 11 make a list of the ones we see, starting from
the biggest, and going down to the smallest. You’ve already seen the biggest
and about the smallest. The roo can go at the top of the list, and the honey
possum at the bottom, and the bandicoot a little above the honey possum. And
we can see how many others we can put in.”
111 make the list, said Walter, ‘‘as soon as we get the camp up, I hope
we see a lot,”
‘‘l wonder,” said Francis, who had started thinking about the kangaroos
again, ‘‘l wonder what the roos are doing now. I bet they are lolling about hav-
ing a rest.”


CHAPTER FIVE
WALLABY
OW they were approaching the northern edge of the great Karri forests
which cover all the far south-west of the country; and after travelling for
M about twenty miles, Mother exclaimed: ‘‘Here it comes. I bet we go
into the first Karri timber over this rise.” And sure enough, as the car
came over the crest of the hill, the bush appeared to expand, to stretch itself up-
wards and to open out underneath, and the smoother trunks of the Karri trees,
mottled a pale yellow-red and dove grey, appeared streaking the rough dead
grey and burnt black of the jarrah.
“Do you remember, Walter,” said Father, “going to the Karri timber mills
at Pemberton, when you were four, and watching them fall the trees and haul
the logs to the bush railway with great teams of bullocks?”
“Yes,” said Walter, “and you nearly got knocked down by a train while
you were carrying me, because the donkey engine was making such a noise you
couldn’t hear anything else.”
“What was the donkey engine for?” asked Francis.
“It was pulling some of the logs through thfe forest,” said Walter. “They
hitched a log with clamps to a great steel rope, and then the donkey engine
wound the rope up on a huge drum. The donkey was leaking steam all over
and working fit to bust.”
“They were huge trees, weren’t they?” said Mother. “Some of the
biggest in the world. Do you remember driving through the middle of one in


the car? They’d made a track right through a trunk. And they were
tremendously high.”
Yes, said Father, there s a look-out tree down there somewhere which
goes up one hundred and eighty feet before the first branch appears.”
“What’s a look-out tree?” asked Francis.
A tree for fire-watching, said Father. “They’ve pegged it all the way
up; and a man goes up to the top and keeps a look out for bush fires. He has a
telephone up there, and lets the people know as soon as he spots smoke.”
What a good idea! said Walter. But he must feel pretty dizzy up there.
What do they use the wood for?”
“They export it all over the world,” said Father, “for big roof beams and
for the uprights and cross beams of wharfs and piers. Its one of the tough-
est woods you’ll find anywhere, and seems to be able to stand up for ever to
water and wear and tear —even fire. Someone told me that he saw one of
these Karri roof beams after a fire, and it wasn’t as much damaged as the steel
lattice girders which were hopelessly twisted and wrenched.”
The car topped a rise in the road, and down below them they saw the
bridge over the Margaret River, and soon the township appeared.
“Well, here we are ,” said Mother, as they stopped in the middle of the
straggling row of shops. “We ought to hurry, so I’ll take Elizabeth and get the
vegetables and meat, and you take the boys. Father, up to the baker, and get
six loaves, wholemeal if you can.”
Father and the boys set out. When they arrived, the bread was just com-
ing out of the oven, and the whole bake-house was thick and warm with the
smell of new bread.


“Mind what you do with them,” said the Baker, as he piled the loaves
into the outstretched arms of the two boys. “Don’t sit on them or knock them
about. If you do you’ll find just a crust, when you get home, and a lump of
dough rattling about inside. They haven’t had time to cool yet.’’
Walter paid the baker his one shilling and sixpence, and he and Francis
came out carrying the loaves. As they joined Father and came round the
corner of the bake-house, Francis shouted out suddenly:
“Look! Father, look! There’s a small kangaroo—in the field, over there
near the fence. Hold the bread. Quick! I want to go and see.”
“Here, not so fast, Francis,” said Father, “Don’t frighten it. We may be
able to get up close and have a good look.”
The baker, hearing Francis’ excited cry came out: “She’s always coming
here,” he said. “She’s not a pet, but she’s quite tame and comes in from the
bush nearly every day to see what she can pick up. She’s got a young joey
with her, somewhere.”
“She’s not a kangaroo, Francis,” said Father; “She’s a wallaby, what you
call a Black Glove. Look at her front paws. See how dark they are compared
with the rest of the grey fur; they look as if she has black gloves on. She’s a
good deal smaller than a kangaroo, but otherwise just the same.”
The wallaby was hopping slowly along the field inside the fence, her body
upright, her front paws dangling. Then she stopped, lowered her body hori-
zontally on to her front feet, and planting her tail firmly on the ground behind
for a prop and supporting her body fore and aft m this way, she swung her
great hind legs forward in between; then bringing her front legs and tail forward
as props, she swung her hind legs forward again.


What a funny way to walk, said Francis, looking on fascinated at this
curious way of moving.
Here comes Joey, said the Baker. The boys turned quickly, and Francis
began dancing about with pleasure, for along the line of the fence a small body
not much bigger than a puppy came bouncing hurriedly along. Francis ran
along to meet it; and the joey suddenly seeing him, stopped still in alarm, and
sat trembling.
Come on, Joey,” said Francis in a friendly voice, “come and be touched.”
And he put out his hand to stroke the little animal. But the joey didn’t want
to be touched, and leaped away; and then, catching sight of his mother, he
bounded along as fast as he could go, and, without any hesitation, scrambled
into his mother s pouch. There, feeling safe again, he sat with his head poking
out, watching the intruders with a quivering nose. The boys laughed with de-
light staring at the little head and the big head, one on top and one below. For a
moment or so they stayed quite still, and then the Mother wallaby, feeling the
body of her young one still trembling, decided it was safer to be away, and
bounded quickly across the field and into the bush.
“Oh,” said Francis in a disappointed voice, “I wish they hadn’t gone. I
wanted them to stay.”
He was a funny little chap, the joey, said Father, as they turned away.
“You know, I’ve never noticed how like a deer the wallaby or kangaroo is about
the head and face. When the joey had hidden all his small body inside his
mother’s pocket, he looked very like a small deer, a fawn.”


stead of having a running deer in Australia, we have a hopping deer with a
pouch.”
“Yes, that’s right; that’s the idea,” said Father.
They had been some time watching the wallaby and her joey, and they
found Mother and Elizabeth waiting for them in the car. Francis rushed for-
ward to tell Mother what they had seen.
“What fun,” said Mother; “I wish I had been there.”
“Do you think we’ll see any more kinds of wallaby or kangaroo?” asked
Walter.
“I doubt it,” said Mother. “There used to be a lot of rock-wallabies down
here, but the foxes seem to have driven them all away or killed them. What
I really wish we could see, though, is a tree-kangaroo.”
“A tree-kangaroo?” said Walter. “What a funny animal! Do you mean it
climbs trees?”
“Yes,” said Mother; “it’s a funny looking animal, much bunchier and
thicker looking than the kangaroos we saw. And it’s got short rounded ears and
a much longer tail to help it to balance. It’s a marvellous tree climber, though;
the hind feet are shorter and broader with cushion-like soles to help it get a grip,
and the hands are huge with great nails for grasping and clinging. It can hop
too like an ordinary kangaroo, but rushes up trees for safety. And if you go up
the tree after it, it’s quite likely to jump off from a good height and get away.
It can jump downwards more than thirty feet quite easily.”
“Don’t you think we might find one,” said Francis, “if we had a really
good hunt?”
Not unless we all flew over to Queensland, first,” said Mother, “that’s the


only part of Australia they live in. But look, children, we must get going. We
haven’t much time before dark.”
They were soon all aboard, and off again, this time down the Margaret
River valley towards the sea. The karri trees gave way to twisted jarrah scrub
and then to peppermint. About half a mile from the sea they turned in through
a gate and stopped.
Here we are,” said Father. “Hop out everyone, and see who’s the first
to find a good shady tree for the camp.”
As they stepped down on to the grass, burnt brittle and dry by the summer
sun, they were met by showers of small grasshoppers, thousands of them, which
jumped away from their feet, as they walked, making a sound like the pattering
of big drops of rain all about them. Elizabeth was a bit alarmed, so Father
carried her.
“They won’t be a nuisance in camp,” said Father. “They won’t come in-
side.”
Walter and Francis were the first to find the right tree; they had rushed on
ahead, and shouted to Father to come and inspect the tree they had discovered, to
see if it would do. It was just the right kind, an old peppermint with long over-
hanging branches, and plenty of shade. Father went back and drove the car
close to the tree, and then they set to work to put up the camp.
The tent and fly-sheet were unrolled and the ropes produced. Walter and
Francis helped to thread a strong rope through the top of the tent; and the ends
were tied, one round the trunk of the peppermint, the other to an overhanging
branch, so that the tent was suspended at the right height. Then the guy-ropes
were fastened to the canvas, three on each side.


lu *
I f $
iu
✓s^
wr£T Wombat
M. y, f
-HI-...
*»


“Pegs won’t hold very well in this sandy soil,” said Father. “We must try
to find living wood to tie the guys to. Look! Those two small saplings will do
for two of the ropes.” Two of the ropes were bound fast to the bottoms of the
saplings with clove hitches.
Now Walter, said Father, see if you can find some roots for the other
ropes. The smaller roots will be pretty near the surface.”
Walter got a spade and digging down, he soon discovered two strong roots
about the right distance from the tent, to which two more of the ropes were
tied. For the other two ropes, Father cut two two-foot pegs, and drove them
deep into the sand with the broad of the axe. The tent was secure. Then the
car was driven in broadside to the door of the tent about a yard away, with the
front wheels in line with the tent door, making a square with the tent on one
side and the car on another at right angles. The fly-sheet was then spread over
the tent and the square to form a kind of verandah, and tied securely to the tree
and the branches, and supported into a ridge in the middle by a strongly braced
length of fencing wire.
“I think we’d better get everything ready for the night,” said Mother,
“before we have tea; and then we shan’t have such a rush later on.” So the
three camp stretchers were unrolled and set up, and the mattresses and blankets
brought out. The stretchers were put side by side under the cover of the fly-
sheet, for in the warm dry Australian summer nights, there was no need to
sleep m the tent. When the beds were set up, and the safe had been hooked
to the tree out of reach of ants, and the rest of the movables stowed away in the
tent, Father lifted the back of the front seat of the car out of its sockets and laid
it down flat, so that the inside of the car was turned into a bed with a box-


JL'*
y
«•<,. i* '»•«••• <■
spring mattress. An upper mattress was laid on it, and the sheets and blankets
tucked in. At last everything was shipshape.
“Off you go, you two,” said Father to the boys, “and get some wood and
kindling for the fire. I’ll clear a big patch of dry grass, so that you can build
the fire place in the middle —we don’t want to set the field on fire; it would burn
like tinder.”
In about ten minutes a good fire was blazing in a rough stone fireplace.
Mother brought out bacon, which was grilled slowly in the wire griller over the
fire, and eaten round the fireplace on pieces of bread. And after that there
was bread and syrup, and cocoa, and apples.
Setting up camp, and getting the tea had taken some time, and it was
already beginning to grow dusk and the glow of the fire was getting stronger in
the coming darkness. Elizabeth was already half asleep, and Walter and Francis
were yawning; and, as they wanted to be up early the next morning, they
all decided to get to bed as soon as possible. Mother undressed Elizabeth and
tucked her in for the night. Father and the boys washed up. And before the
dark had properly settled in, they were all in bed, Mother and Elizabeth in the
car, the two boys and Father on the stretchers under the fly-sheet.
“Don’t dream of wallabies, Francis,” were Mother’s last words, “and start
hopping about, or you’ll go right through the canvas on your bed.”


CHAPTER SIX
POSSUMS
next morning Walter was the first awake. He was a little
*7. startlecJ , as he opened his eyes, to find himself looking up at a canvas
Sheet cl ° Se ° Ver his head insteacl of the familiar verandah ceiling
AZy” at home. He sat up excitedly and looked round. Two wag-
tails were hard at work in a neighbouring bush; the grasshoppers were flipping
up and down; and suddenly on a branch quite close appeared the vivid scarlet
chest of a robin. Walter poked Francis in the back, and when he opened his
eyes said:
“Sshl Look!" He pointed with his hand. Francis saw the robin, and in-
stantly wide awake, sat up. The robin was startled and flew away; and the two
boys began a loud whispering which woke Father. In a moment Mother and
Elizabeth, disturbed by the creaking of the beds and whispering, were also
awake.
everyone! said Mother, poking her head over the side of the car;
let s get up. Jump into your clothes, children. You can’t wash this morning;
there isn’t any water."
For the next quarter of an hour there was a noisy scramble, as everyone
got into his clothes, folded up the beds and bedding and stowed them away in
the tent. Then the fire was lit again, and breakfast prepared. While they ate,
they all discussed what they wanted to do on the first day. It didn’t take them
long to decide, for they all wanted to go down to the river mouth and ex-
plore.




Breakfast was soon eaten, and cleared away and the camp tidied up. Mother
collected food for lunch in a big bag. Walter picked up the water-bucket-
Francis took the milk billy down from its hook; Father lifted Elizabeth on to his
shoulders; and they all set off.
They walked down through the paddock, scattering grasshoppers in all di-
rections. The house, in which lived Mrs. Terry, who had allowed them to camp
on her ground, and who was going to provide them with milk and eggs, lay
below them, on a flat patch of ground close to the river. It was a big two
storeyed stone house, with a roof of hardwood tiles, called shingles, which had
been built by Mrs. Terry’s father, the first settler in this part of the country,
with the help of convict labour and skilled workmen out from England They
stopped at the house and Father and Mother talked to Mrs. Terry, while the two
boys went up to the dairy to get some milk in the billy. When they were all
ready to move on, Mrs. Terry said:
You 11 find two big mulberry trees on the way down; you can pick as
many as you like, Walter and Francis; but don’t be foolish and make yourselves
They decided to pick the mulberries on the way home; so they skirted the
trees, and plunged down beneath a thick canopy of paper bark and peppermint
trees, walking along a path close to the river. Father and Mother heard Francis
who was ahead, shouting excitedly to Walter to hurry up, and when they reached
the smooth wind-blown dunes they found the two boys crouched down and
examining something on the sand.
“Look Father!” said Francis, "Tracks. Whatever animal made those
marks?


“I’m not too good at tracks,” said Father, “but they look to me as if they’d
been made by a ‘stumpy’; look at the groove made by its tail, and the way it
wobbled along.”
“There’s some more over here,” shouted Walter, a few yards away.
“Oh, that’s easy,” said Mother, who had come up; “they’re rabbit tracks.
You can always recognise them; three marks together in a triangle and one
mark behind. I know, let’s scatter round and see how many different animals
have been running round the place.”
They counted the marks of at least six different animals. Father thought
that one set of tracks was probably that of a small lizard; and Mother decided
that another set of tiny marks, parallel rows of little dots, might have been made
by a large centipede; but none could make head or tail of the other two tracks.
“I know,” said Father, “Mrs. Terry told us that Barbara, their aboriginal
girl, was down on the rocks fishing; she’ll know all about them. We’ll get her
to come up here and tell us what she knows.”
“Father,” said Walter, as they struggled through the sand; “will Barbara
belong to a native tribe down here?”
“No,” said Father, “she couldn’t, because the last of the tribe that lived in
this part of the country died fifteen or twenty years ago; just as the tribe that
lived round Perth has died out.”
“How did they die out?” asked Walter.
“Partly because they were killed in fighting with the early settlers,” said
Father, “and partly because they couldn’t stand up to the diseases the white man
brought with him. There are practically no aborigines at all, you know, left
in the whole of the south-west of the state.”


“Where would Barbara come from, then?” asked Walter
“From the north of the state, probably,” said Father. “The native tribes
there are still fairly flourishing, though they are dying out too, slowly. Barbara
pr ° .^.“ me , fro " 1 1 a Minion Station, and was brought down as a servant.”
Will we be able to understand her?” asked Walter.
“Good heavens, yes!” said Father;“she’ll probably talk pidgin; but the
aborigines, though they have the most primitive civilisation in the whole world
are intelligent folk as a rule; you’ll certainly enjoy talking to her; like nearly
all aborigines she 11 probably have a wonderful sense of humour and be full of
l-un, and love mimicking and imitating animals, and white people too; and of
course like her own people, she’ll have an amazing knowledge of animals and
irds, because the aborigines live by hunting and have never learnt to plant and
sow.
In a minute or so they had struggled up to the edge of the last dune and
saw the sea below them. This part of the coast, where the Southern and Indian
Oceans meet and clash, was smothered with tumbling water and foam nearly
all the year round, even on the stillest summer days. On the steep sand bar which
closed the mouth of the Margaret River all through the hot dry months, the
swefl broke in a continuous roar, sending little mats of seaweed shooting up
e beach and sucking them back again. Among the rocks they could hear the
hissing and seething of the water as the waves collapsed on the jagged limestone
in cataracts of soapy bubbles.
“Oh!” said Walter, “what a bathe we’re going to have.”
, , k! There ’ s Barbara, ’ cried Francis, "over there, fishing in one of the
rock pools. Come on, Walter, let s see how many fish she’s caught.”


The two boys tore down the slope, Father and Mother following at a slower
run. Elizabeth, bouncing on Father’s shoulders, clutched his hair, and shouted
with laughter. In a moment or so they were gathered round Barbara, and
were telling her who they were. Barbara was very shy at first, smiling
and giggling at them, as they talked, but she soon made friends with Walter
and Francis, and was being dragged by them up the slope to see the
tracks in the sand. Father and Mother had been right about the marks
of the ‘stumpy’ and the little lizard, and the rabbit and the centipede.
“What are those marks?” asked Walter, showing Barbara one of the tracks
that had puzzled them all.
“ ’im rat-kangaroo-walyah,” said Barbara; “ ’im walkin slow-fella—you
see m; im use’m tail b’longta push imself along. This’m mark b longta tail;
’nother one mark belong him hind feet.”
“And what made those?” asked Francis, showing Barbara the other set of
puzzling marks.
That one snake, you boys,” said Barbara —“carpet snake —big fella
‘Was he hunting for food, d’you think?” asked Francis. “What does he
eat?
“Little rabbits and walyahs, possums sometimes too,” said Barbara. “Last
week we catch’m carpet-snake got’m possum. Him bin curled up round that
possum this way . . .”; and Barbara described the curves of the snake with ex-
pressive gestures; —“make’m slime all over that poor little fella.”
“What was he doing that for?” asked Walter.
“ ’im do like that before he can eat’m; make’m all slimy, then he can
swallow’m easy-fella.”


“And what did you do?” said Francis; “I hope you killed the snake.”
“We bin throw’m sticks and stones, he don’ like that, so ’im go away. Then
1 bin climb up tree get m possum—’im can’t move ’im so frightened—’im shiver-
ing all over like this way— ’’ and Barbara gave a wonderful imitation, only
as aborigines can, of the trembling animal, so lifelike that the boys laughed
with surprise. Then we take m inside longa house, clean’m up fur, give’m
little bit banana, im all right soon, then im run away.’’
“Are there any possum tracks up here?” asked Walter.
“No more tracks this way,” said Barbara. “Possum live high-up longa
tree —plenty possums longa paperbark tree, that way river, ’im live longa pep-
permint tree too. You two fella wanta come long me sundown time. I show
you my ring-tail—’im live longa gum tree —I call’m and ’im come down
tucker.”
That s a stag idea, Francis, said V/alter. Let s ask Father if we can go
out tonight.”
The three came racing down the steep slope, and found Father and Mother
and Elizabeth collecting periwinkles off the rocks for lunch.
Can we go out tonight and see Barbara’s possum?” said Walter. “It lives
in a tree and comes down to be fed. Can we? It would be good fun, wouldn’t
it?”
“Sounds all right to me,” said Father.
I think it would be a splendid idea, said IVlother. But now, I want to
bathe. Come on. Who’s coming in with me?”
In five minutes they were all in the water, except Elizabeth and Barbara
who sat watching. The four of them splashed and bounced and slithered in the
67


wash of broken waves on the edge of the steep beach. Then they lay about on
the sand, soaking in the hot sun. And after that the boys went exploring
along the rocks. Soon it was time for lunch. A fire was made, and the peri-
winkles put on to boil in sea water. Barbara showed them how to cook the rock
fish she had caught by wrapping them up in some clayey mud taken from the
side of the river and burying them in hot embers and ash. It was a great meal;
the fish came out of the clay jackets without their skins, and were eaten on bits
of bread and butter; the periwinkles were taken out of their shells with pins. A
tin of fruit, some cookies, and a drink of milk rounded the meal off.
After lunch, Elizabeth went to sleep; Father and Mother talked, and Walter
and Francis constructed a set of canals in the river sand, as complicated as the
inland waterways of the Ruhr valley. By four o’clock they were ready to start
home again.
They stopped at the mulberry trees.
“Let’s fill the whole big billycan,’’ said Mother, “and then we can give some
to Mrs. Terry.”
They all set to work. The trees were dropping with ripe berries, and it
didn’t take long to fill the billy, in spite of the eating that went on. At the end
of it, Francis looked as if he had on a pair of old red gloves with a few tears
in them, and the juice on both the boys’ faces had dripped down their chins like
blood from deep cuts.
“Heavens, children!” said Mother;“we must stop at a tap before we meet
Mrs. Terry. We must all look like pirates.”
When they had washed, they went to the big house, and presented Mrs.
Terry with half the mulberries, which were poured into a deep pie dish.


Walter and Francis are going out with your Barbara this evening,” said
Mother; they want to watch the possums.”
, So J°,V re lnterested in Possums, are you?” said Mrs. Terry to the two
boys. Well, you must come in and see my little pigmy possum when you come
down this evening. He's the most beautiful little creature. He’s a bit sleepy
now but he 11 wake up when it gets dusk. I got him about a month ago; one
of the cats brought him in still alive. And after you’ve seen him, Barbara can
take you to see her pet ring-tail possum.”
On the way to the camp, the mulberries were finished and the billy was
washed at a tap and filled up with more milk, and the water can was filled to
the brim.
“I know what I’m going to do till tea-time.” said Walter, “I’m going to
draw those track marks we saw in the sand dunes.”
He got to work with a pencil and paper, and after a bit of a struggle, he crot
them to look more or less right. °
After tea, the boys were impatient to be off. They put on their sweaters
and were soon running down through the grasshoppers. Mrs. Terry hallooed
to them from the kitchen garden.
"The possum is round at the back of the house,” she called; "come with
me; 1 m just going to feed him.”
They walked round the house; and found the possum in tremendous spirits.
Me was leaping about his cage in pursuit of flies.
‘He’s just like the honey possum,” cried Francis, “Only he hasn’t such a
large snout.


“So you’ve seen the little Noolbenger, have you?” said Mrs. Terry. “He is
about the same size as this little creature.”
“What do you feed him on?” asked Francis.
“He likes soft fruit and rose leaves, and he has a passion for honey and jam;
and even drinks milk,” said Mrs. Terry. “Take him out, Walter, and then you
can feed him on your hand.”
Walter cautiously opened the cage door, and put in his arm gently, so as
not to frighten the possum, but the tiny animal immediately ran towards his
hand, expecting food. Walter picked him up, and putting him on his other hand,
presented him with a small block of pear. The possum grasped it in his front paws,
and nibbled eagerly at it.
“What funny front paws he has,” said Francis; “they’re almost like hands.”
“They’re very useful for climbing,” said Mrs. Terry. “And do you see the
thick pads on the inside, which he uses to grip with, instead of claws? His
claws are hardly to be seen. The big possums have big claws; you notice the
ring-tail, when you feed it tonight.”
“I like his white hands and feet and belly,” said Walter. “Can I put him
back now? I want to see if he will run up his tree inside the cage.”
He put the possum back, and then stuck a piece of pear on a crook of the
branch inside the cage, near the top. The possum immediately sprang up the
branch, with a curious galloping movement, and seizing the pear, retired to a
\ crook lower down, and began eating.
\\ “Can you see pigmy possums in the bush?” asked Walter.
\ I “° h no,” said Mrs. Terry, “they are far too small to be seen at night.”
“How many kinds of little possums are there?” asked Walter.


Oh, said Francis, I wish we could see one of those.”
Well, I don t think you will,” said Mrs. Terry. “There’s only one been
found here in this part of Australia, as far as I know. The forester at the Mar-
garet Settlement brought one home in a large match box to show to his wife.
And the little person escaped, and with one jump off the table was out through
the back door and away to freedom again. But if you go to the Eastern States,
you 11 be able to see glider possums, bigger ones too. The biggest glider has a
bushy tail nearly twenty inches long.”
“Can it fly far?” asked Walter.
Yes, said Mrs. Terry, “quite a long way. They’ve been watched some-
times; and one of them glided away nearly one hundred yards to the foot of
another gum tree. That’s the way they travel, you know-running up one tree,
sailing off to the foot of another, running up that and sailing off to another, and
so on.
“What frightful fun,” said Francis.
“Yes, it is fun,” said Mrs. Terry. “The gliders seem to enjoy themselves
tremendously. When I was over in the Eastern States, my cousin had a sugar
squirrel.”
“Is that a possum too?” asked Walter.
Well, said Mrs. Terry, ‘there is the Noolbenger, and this little pigmy, and
there is a tiny little glider possum. The glider has a sort of loose skin, which
he can stretch out tight by holding out his hands and feet; he jumps off trees
and makes himself into a little glider, and sails through the air with his tail be-
hind him to keep him steady. He looks like a little kite in the air, or like a
square-shaped flying frying pan.”


“Yes,” said Mrs. Terry; “it oughtn’t to be called a squirrel at all. Squir-
rels are not marsupials. The sugar squirrels are gliding possums. This one was
an amazing little busybody. It used to leap and fly round all over the drawing
room, jumping and sailing from the table to the curtains and then away to a
chair on the other side of the room with its gliders at full stretch; climbing and
running and hanging on with one leg, and balancing on top of the most absurd
places, even on the top edge of a big picture, its bushy tail fluffed out and stiffly
held as a balancer. He was a little fellow, though, much smaller than the big
gliders, and loved running up to my cousin’s shoulder and diving inside his coat
to find a cosy hole. He had a lovely dark grey coat with black markings, and a
white and black edge to his ‘glider.’ But, look, children, it’s time you were off
to visit Barbara. Just go through the kitchen garden, and you’ll find her cottage
at the other side.”
The two boys went off, after asking Mrs. Terry whether they could come
again and play with the pigmy possum. In a minute or so they were knocking
at Barbara’s door. Barbara opened it.
“Hullo, you two fella,” she said. “Come in. Mrs. Terry give me two
bananas b’longta you feed’m possum —one fella you” (and she gave a banana to
Walter) —“one fella you” (and she gave the other to Francis).
Then she led the way out of the door, and down to a group of low gum
trees by the river bank.
“Quiet-fella now,” she said; “possum no more know you —might be ’im
frightened. Come close up here under this-one tree —when ’im come down you
hold’m up banana.”


They crept along silently across the grass till they were under one of the
trees. Then they waited. The boys could see nothing at all, and hear nothing;
but Barbara apparently did; for she began making soft chirruping noises. Walter
and Francis, straining their eyes up into the tree, suddenly caught sight of a
ghostly little figure swinging along in the moonlight among the branches. It
dropped down closer and closer, and then catching sight of the three of them,
froze still, its tail wound firmly round a branch. The boys hardly dared breathe.
After a moment or so s inspection, the possum moved again and swung lower and
lower. The boys both held up their bananas, the skins peeled back from the
fruit, and the possum, seeing his food, dropped quickly to a lower branch, and
then, clinging with its back feet and prehensile tail, lowered its body down the
trunk, and with a quick darting movement, bit off a chunk of fruit from Francis’
banana, chumped it, and then took a bite from Walter’s banana. Francis
wriggled with excitement, and the possum, startled, suddenly hauled on its tail
and in an instant was behind the trunk out of sight. There was nothing to do
but wait. In a moment, outlined against the moonlight, a small head peered round
at them, with large bright beady eyes; then the possum’s body followed. Again
using its tail as a kind of tackle, it lowered its head and body down the trunk,
and quickly snipped off another chunk of banana. Francis managed to keep
quite still, until both bananas had been eaten down to the stump, and then, aching
to do something, he let out a loud whoof,’ and the possum, scared for its life, was
up and away as quick as a bird, into another gum tree, its long tail with the ring
curl at the end, flexing like a little rope round the branches as it fled.
‘‘You big silly,” said Walter, ‘‘what did you do that for?”
I couldn t help it, said Francis.


“Finish now you two fella,” said Barbara; “ ’im no more come back to-
night.”
They walked back to the cottage, and said good-night, and then made their
way back to the camp. When they got near, they hallooed, but there was no
answering call. They ran up quickly, but Father and Mother were not to be
seen. They peered into the car. There was Elizabeth all right, fast asleep. As
they turned round they saw Father with his finger to his lips, beckoning them.
They went over to him.
“Come and see what Mother’s found,” Father said.
“What is it?” asked Walter.
“Wait and see,” said Father.
He led the way to an old log lying on its side, and they caught sight of
Mother squatting on the ground at one end, and looking in through the hollow
trunk. The moonlight was shining into the open end, and as the boys stooped
to look, they were confronted with a small solemnly staring face with a pink
nose on top of a tight bundle of fur.
“Whatever is it?” asked Francis in a hushed whisper. “Is it another pos-
•v **
sum?
“Yes,” whispered Mother: “it’s a brush-tail. Hasn’t it got strong hands
and claws? Father, see if you can find a pear to give it.”
Father returned very soon with the fruit, and Walter held it out to the pos-
sum. The result was startling. The animal suddenly let out a chattering cry,
trembling all over, so that both the boys fell backwards. Francis sat up:
“It’s frightened,” he said, “let’s leave it alone.”


j/ i t -
* -•'V'm a *■ * x A*. N $^- *>%_ ; .-v/ v.
v * ,\ i^9
/ m ‘ 'H S V
" BfcsJ *K2r*ft*ft JBb^ 1
A*** jr y ■! •'
P* jBwl, . ■ jfe ■
*®^”” r ' ’v KjKkr) 5 ■*. Bk.' _ •^c^'
m // ■>. > jjt, ,. - *..■ *|(p|


S“I know,” said Walter, ‘‘let’s sit on the log and wait till it runs away, and
then we can see it.”
They sat down. Five minutes passed, and there was no movement. Walter
then peered in at the far end of the log.
“It’s still there,” he whispered. ‘‘Shall I make a noise at it and frighten it
He leant over the end and gave a loud whoop. It worked. The possum
shot out, and trundling rapidly along the ground whisked up a nearby gum tree,
its long bushy tail the last to disappear from sight.
“Finish now you two fella,” said Francis, mimicking Barbara.
They went back to the camp; Walter, while they drank the hot malted milk
\ I which had been kept for them near the fire, told Father and Mother all that had
| happened, and all Mrs. Terry had told them. In fifteen minutes they were in
V I bed, and in sixteen asleep.


CHAPTER SEVEN
KOALAS
FEW mornings later, Mrs. Terry asked the boys if they’d like to go
out in the boat. They rushed back to the camp, and it was immedia-
ately agreed that instead of the usual trek along the riverside, under
7 the peppermint trees and paper barks, the boys should row the family
down to the sea in the boat.
It was a queer old battered boat, full of leaks and creaks, but it only took
about forty minutes for the boys to get down to the mouth of the river, where
Mother and Father and Elizabeth disembarked and walked across the ten yards
or so that separated the river from the ceaseless surge of the blue Indian Ocean.
The boys spent the morning on the river, pulling the boat up little creeks and into
dark caves made by the trunks and branches of the paper bark trees growing in
the shallow water, and rowing for their lives from imaginary blackfellows with
spears.
The other three spent a long time sitting on the rocks, watching the waves
plunging under an overhanging layer of rock, squeezing half a hundredweight
of sea up through a blowhole in a huge fizz of water and air, like the discharge
of a soda siphon.
The early afternoon found the whole family sitting in the shade of one of the
great piles of rocks that the sea has dumped round the mouth of the Margaret
River. Lunch was over, and Francis began to complain because they hadn’t
brought a larger bottle of water to drink, and AValter started to describe a com-
plicated way, which he thought of on the spot, of getting fresh water from sea


water. (This is a problem which concerns most Australians, for although the
great continent is an island, yet fresh water is so scarce that some parts of the
country are uninhabitable.) While this was going on Mother tucked Elizabeth
up under an overhanging rock, with a mackintosh between her and the damp
sand and a bit of mosquito netting, which was always in the lunch bag, wrapped
carefully over her, head and all, to keep the flies off. The flies are a great pest
all over the south west —bush flies, harmless enough, which don’t bite or sting
but just settle round the mouth and eyes and on the hands. By the time Eliza-
beth was settled, Walter’s apparatus for getting fresh water was also settled
with the help of Father; and even Francis (who never sat for long anywhere)
was sitting still, full of sun and sea and wind and good food, but still saying:
“I wish we had some more water to drink.”
“What a pity We aren’t a family of koalas,” said Mother.
“What would be the good of that?” asked Francis. “They don’t have camp
pies for lunch.”
“No, and they don’t complain because one of the water bottles has been
left behind—they don’t drink at all.”
“Don’t drink at all?” said Walter. “How on earth do they live?”
“Well,” said Mother, “they can get enough juice out of the eucalyptus leaves
they eat. That’s what their name means.”
“Is it an aboriginal name?”
“Yes,” said Mother, who thought this was a good time to give the boys a
little information—it might make even Francis sit and rest for a while. “It’s one
of the nice short native names which the settlers had the good sense to adopt.
Most of the native names make a nice noise in the mouth, and it does seem silly




that we have planted our dull names on to these native animals instead of stick-
ing to the aboriginal ones. ‘Walyah’ seems so much pleasanter than ‘brush-
tailed rat kangaroo.’ And I’d much rather talk about a ‘Koomaal’ than a
‘south western brush tailed possum.’ A south eastern ring-tailed possum is
called a ‘Moki poki’—far more fun, don’t you think?”
‘‘Yes, far more,” said Francis. ‘‘But what does ‘koala’ mean?”
“Well, you see, when water was very scarce, sometimes the natives managed
to press a little out of a soak hole into some kind of a drink vessel, and this
would be handed round among the tribe, and if anyone didn’t want any, he’d
say ‘koala’ which meant ‘no drink.’
“When will we begin to see some koalas?” asked Walter.
“There aren’t any over here at all, I’m afraid,” said Father. “The man
who took us over the Mammoth Cave did say that some fossilized remains had
been found there, but they belong to thousands of years ago. I don’t think any-
one knows why they died out here, but even in the east they would have soon dis-
appeared if the Government hadn’t stopped people from killing them.”
Killing them! ’ said Francis. “Not killing those beautiful little teddy bears!
Why should anyone want to kill them?”
“Well, you know,” said Father, “people will kill anything for which they
can get money, and koala fur happens to be one of the strongest and warmest
in the world. So, until our government woke up to what was happening, lots
of people made a fat living out of the little creatures. Do you know that in 1 927,
just one year alone, trappers in Queensland actually sent over 600,000 skins
away ? ’ ’


But that can t happen now, said Mother, who saw how miserable Francis
looked. No one is allowed to kill them, and private people aren’t even allowed
to keep them as pets, in case they haven’t got enough of the right kind of food.
Instead, the koalas are given big stretches of country as sanctuaries, and if there
are not enough of the right kind of trees growing for them, the proper trees are
planted, and everything is done to make them healthy and happy.”
And are they happy? asked Walter. Don’t they mind being kept in
sanctuaries?”
No, of course they don t, said Mother. The sanctuaries are really just
big patches of bush, where the little bears can live as though they were in their
own forest, and be looked after as well.”
“But do wild animals need looking after?”
“Yes, they do sometimes,” said Mother, “especially these little bears. They
do try to scratch and bite when they are frightened, and can be formidable
animals when humans try to handle them. But by nature they are gentle little
creatures, with no effective means of self defence. They also have such delicate
tummies that if they eat the wrong kind of food, which they sometimes do if
the right kind gets short, they are very apt to die.”
What would they need defence against—what animals would hurt them?”
asked Francis.
Dingoes, chiefly. They have always been the most dangerous enemy of
the koala. If they catch one on the ground, the poor little creature hasn’t a
chance. Foxes have killed a good many of the babies too—this is probably why
koalas spend as little time as possible on the ground—they really only feel
safe in the trees.”


“How do they get along on the ground?” asked Walter. “Hopping along
like kangaroos?”
“No, they have a slow, rather clumsy way of lolloping along, really funny
to watch. But their hands and claws have become specially suited to climbing;
on each hand they have two thumbs and three fingers—this gives them a won-
derful grip, as well as being useful for combing their fur. They can get up trees
far faster than a man can. Another interesting thing is that koalas are the only
animals that can raise their arms not only above their heads but even round be-
hind their backs like a man does to scratch it. You’ve never seen a dog or any
other animal do that, have you?”
“No, I don’t suppose I have. It must be fun to see them going through the
trees,” said Walter.
“Yes, lovely; but don’t forget you wouldn’t see them much in the day time.
Like nearly all Australian animals, they sleep most of the day curled up in the
forks of trees, with their babies curled up in their arms. They begin to wake
up about two or three in the afternoon, and by nightfall they are properly awake
and out for play and to hunt for food.”
“Food must be easy enough to get, seeing that they eat only eucalyptus
leaves,”
“Oh no, indeed it isn’t! It’s often so hard to get that that’s one of the big
reasons why they’ve nearly died out. Out of all the three hundred and sixty-
six kinds of gum trees, only a very small proportion have leaves that really suit
the koala’s delicate digestion.”
“Goodness! How on earth do they pick the right ones?”


That s one of the astonishing things about nature —she gives her children
an instinct to select their best food. I heard of one little sick koala that a
woman rescued from a tree, and when she was trying to find what to feed it on,
she brought twelve different kinds of gum leaves. The poor thing just
sniffed at the first eleven, but the last it suddenly started eating up, and then it
began to get better.”
Well, that ought to be fairly easy; they can just live in the part of the bush
where the right gums grow.”
No, it s not so easy as that. They do eat a fairly wide variety of euca-
lyptus, but sometimes they will eat out all of the right kinds in one district.
Then they will set off, sometimes on quite long journeys, to find the right kinds
again. Sometimes they die of starvation, or sometimes they get so hungry that
they 11 eat the wrong kinds, and die of them. So you see, diet is quite a problem
to koalas too.”
What kind of a noise do they make?” asked Francis. “Most of our
animals seem so silent.”
Well, koalas certainly aren t silent. They have almost as many noises as a
human being. They sometimes cry just like a baby, especially when they are
very young or very old. But they also bray like a donkey and grunt like a pig
and wail like a hyena, and hum and murmur when they are contented. And they
scream and yell at each other when they get annoyed—they carry on real battles
at the tops of the trees. They make wonderful parents too they adore their
young ones, but they give them great lessons and insist on obedience. I wish you
could see a mother teaching her young one to climb a tree. They’re very quick


pupils, but they have to be put through the learning stages, just like a baby
learning to walk.”
“Are they marsupials?” asked Walter.
“Yes, of course they are,” said Mother, “Though when we think of their
babies, we more often think of them clinging to their backs or being nursed in their
loving little arms, rather than popping in and out of the pouch like a joey. But
their scientific name is ‘Phascolarctus’ which comes from the Greek and means
‘leather pouch’ and ‘bear.’ So that’s what the early discoverers thought of them.
The baby stays in the pouch till it’s four or five months old, but once it comes out
it stays out.”
“How many young ones do they have?”
“Only one at a time. And they are so fond of babies that they often steal
each other’s. So in one of the sanctuaries, just to stop all the screaming and fight-
ing about stolen babies, the man in charge put a number of toy ones, about the
size of a year old koala, and the mothers who hadn’t any babies of their own, and
even some of the grandmothers, each took one of these and peace was restored.
“Have you ever wondered, Mother,” said Father suddenly, “why it is that
koalas and kangaroos have become almost national emblems—all over the
world? 1 should think, if anyone saw a picture of a kangaroo or a koala, they’d
immediately think of Australia, Yet the cuscus, which is just as quaint to look
at, and just as Australian, hardly anyone has heard of?”
“Cuscus,” cried Francis and Waiter together, “whatever is that?”
Father looked at Mother. “It looks as though you’ll have to go on talking,
Mother—you know more about them than I do we can’t waste this thirst for


information. But answer my question first—why kangaroos and koalas rather
than cuscus?”
Mother laughed, I don t think anyone would like to have a national emblem
that smelt quite so strong as a cuscus—and his smell seems to be the thing that
most people remember about him.”
does he do beside that? asked Francis. Is he a nasty creature
altogether?”
No, said Mother, I don t think he is. There seem to have been only
three or four taken into captivity, but the people who have taken them have
found them very likeable. But I expect he’s not much known because in Aus-
tralia he only comes down as far as Cape York, although he is also found right
up through New Guinea, and as far as Timor.”
But what is he? said Walter. Is he a creature all on his own, like the
koala, or does he belong to one of the others?”
Well, he’s really one of the possums. But he’s peculiar in two or three
ways. For one thing, the outer end of his tail is naked, except for scales. For
another he s much bigger than the other possums—for another he has such
ridiculously small ears that you can hardly see them above the fur. Don’t you
remember when Elizabeth s toy lion cub lost its ears, I always called it
the cuscus?”
Is he like the possums in other ways?”
No, not very. Indeed, some people think he looks more like a monkey—
probably he was the cause of rumours that monkeys were seen on Cape York.
But he s not nearly so lively as a monkey. He spends his days curled in the forks
of trees, as well hidden as possible. In fact he spends so much time there that


he’s worn a different coloured patch on his rump. At night he comes out to
feed, and is a bit more active, but he still moves slowly, and eats great quantities
of leaves. Indeed, the natives used to catch cuscuses easily because of their slow
way of moving, but they’re hard to kill in any other way. I mean, shooting isn’t
much good—the thickness of their fur is like a coat of armour.”
‘‘lf he only eats leaves he ought to be mild and gentle like the koala.”
“Well, he is pretty mild. But he doesn’t only eat leaves. He eats birds and
even young mammals.
“Do they have proper pouches?”
“Yes, and they have up to four young ones in them. I’ve read that a cuscus
is hardly ever killed without having a young one in her pouch.
“I wish there wasn’t so much talk about killing these animals,” said Francis,
“I should think everyone would be too interested in them and proud of them to
want to kill them.”
“Yes, so they are, now, Francis,” said Father. “Or anyway much more so
than they were. There used to be some excuse for the natives killing them be-
cause they needed them to eat. But we don’t, and at last Australia is waking
up properly to the interest of all her marsupials. So don’t worry about them—
only protect them whenever you get the chance. And if you don’t get to bed
soon you’ll develop a different coloured patch on your seat like the cuscus, only
not nearly so ornamental.”


CHAPTER EIGHT
TASMANIAN DEVIL, MARSUPIAL WOLF,
WOMBAT
ALTER, when he woke up next morning, started thinking about
koalas, and suddenly remembered that he had never made the list
of the animals they had seen. He got up quietly so as not to wake any of the
others, discovered some paper and a pencil, and sitting on his bed, began to write.
He decided to put in the animals they had been told about by Mrs Terry or
Mother, but to put brackets round them to show they had not seen them. By the
time he had finished the rest were awake, and he showed them the list.
< LIST OF marsupials
tU
KxruXa.
LUJaXyxA )
R t~UA& P<y±/y*juTr\
P cr'WO-'yrv
( 6 P<y^Qsc\srr\)
rvj P(rW<*-rr»


“Are they all in their right sizes on the list, Father?” asked Walter.
“Yes, that seems about right, 1 think,” said Father; “though you might have
added the tree kangaroo, just below the wallaby, in brackets; we did tell you
about him, didn’t we? You know, I wish we could see a walyah and not only his
tracks. The next time we go to the settlement to get stores, I think I’ll have a
talk with the forester; he may be able to tell us where we can find one. And
I’d like to see if we can’t spot a native cat before we go home.”
But they never saw a walyah, though they got close to one. It was after
two more days of rowing, and fishing, and exploring the rocks, and swimming,
that they drove the car into the settlement. They talked to the forester; and then
went out with him into the bush. He told the boys that they must look out for
a tree with the bark scraped off at its foot.
“The walyah,” he explained, “pulls off pieces of bark with his sharp claws
and loops his tail tightly and neatly round the bundle and hops off with it to his
nest. But they’re such darn clever little creatures that they never spill a single
piece of bark out of the bundle. I’ve often hoped to track one of them to his
nest by finding scraps of bark; but never a bit I’ve found.”
They did find a tree with the bark scraped off, but after looking for a good
hour round about they gave up the search.
“Perhaps he’s run away,” said Francis.
“No,” said the forester, “he wouldn t run away. He stays in his nest in a
bush or thick grass till you’re right on top of him, and then he’s off like light-
ning to a hollow log or cave to find cover. It’s a shame, you know; there used to
be hundreds and hundreds of them, till the foxes started to scare them off or kill
them. They’re the friendliest creatures —I’ve often had them come round my
limy l u a. u
1 ' \ I be hundrec
j | them. Th
i vA
x H h v


camp fire at night, carrying on, and playing, and looking for scraps. But you
hardly ever see one nowadays.”
That night after the evening meal was over, the few dishes washed, the beds
fixed up for the night, and Elizabeth asleep in the car, Mother and Father and
the boys settled down round the fire to roast apples on sticks. First of all they
talked about the walyah and the other animals they’d been seeing and tracking
and talking about to Mrs. Terry and Barbara. Suddenly Francis, who hadn’t
been talking for a while, said:
“Father, are there many of these animals that we couldn’t see over here
—I mean anywhere in West Australia? We haven’t seen a numbat yet, but per-
haps we will on the way home, and we haven’t seen a platypus, and Mother has
told us about the koala and the cuscus, but what about the others?”
That s good, Francis, said Father; I m glad you’ve thought of that. Yes,
there are a few others—ones that never seem to have crossed the great dry Null-
arbor Plain. But Mother is the one to ask about them. Now, Mother, it’s your
turn to do some work. Tell the boys about the animals you knew about when
you were a little girl in Victoria.”
Well, said Mother, “there aren’t very many, because although some of
the ones we used to see were a little different from the ones we’ve been seeing
these last few days, they nearly all belong to the same families, and I didn’t think
it was worth confusing you with cousins and uncles and aunts.”
“But, Mother, surely there were some that didn’t belong over here at all ”
said Walter.
“Well,” said Mother, “there’s the koala; but I’ve told you about him, and
there’s the platypus, but that isn’t a marsupial, so we’ll talk of that another time.


And the only others I can think of now are the Wombat and the Tasmanian
Devil, and the Marsupial Wolf.”
“Goodness! They sound pretty exciting,” said Francis.
“Funnily enough,” said Mother, “even the two Tasmanian animals are kinds
of cousins of ones we have over here. They belong to the same family as the
native cat that Mrs. Terry has been telling us about.
“Oh, he’s the one that comes in and kills the hens and sucks their blood, and
kills far more than he needs —greedy little beast,” said Walter. “Does the Tas-
manian Devil do that too?
“No,” said Mother, “I’ve never heard of him doing that, but he and the
Tasmanian Wolf are interesting because they are the biggest marsupials that eat
meat; all the other big ones eat vegetable food, leaves, grass, and things like
that.”
“But, how big are they?” asked Francis.
“The Devil, as far as I can remember,” said Mother, “is about as big as a
good-sized cat, only thicker and stronger, with a tail as plump as a carrot and a bit
like it.”
“And is he really a devil?” asked Walter. Mother laughed: “Well, I expect
there are nice devils and nasty ones, and some people have caught them young,
and reared them and loved them; but I must admit that most of them are not
very pleasant customers. Perhaps they got their name from their call, which is
a sort of long whining growl, ending in a savage snarl. I remember, when I was
a girl, staying in Tasmania and hearing two of them fighting in the night. Their
snarls got louder and louder, until they sounded like savage screams, and then
there was a horrible sound of teeth clashing and bones breaking. I yelled for


Mother then, and my uncle told me next day that sometimes their jaws get locked
together, and they hang on till one breaks. Anyway, it was a horrid noise, and
I have never forgotten it.”
Heavens! said Francis, “I wouldn’t like to meet one.”
Well, you won t, Francis,” said Mother, “unless you go to Tasmania; be-
cause that s the only place where they are now. Anyway, they’re not all as bad
as that, and I ve known people who were really fond of them.”
“When would you see them?” asked Walter.
“Probably only at night,” said Mother. “In the day time they lie in their
logs and caves, where they arrange leaves and bark and grass into quite com-
fortable beds. They do come out sometimes in the daytime, though, and have
a good bask in the sunlight—just as we give ourselves a good sunning now and
then.”
“And they live on little animals, do they?” said Walter.
“Yes, they do mostly,” said Mother; “but they’re so clever and cunning
that quite often they bring down animals much bigger than themselves. They
mostly live on small wallabies, and rat-kangaroos, and any birds they can get —
and it’s astounding how many they do get. And they’re very tidy, too; they
don’t waste a single scrap, don’t throw away any skins like you do, Francis. They
eat the bones and beak and all. And if any of the young ones die, they eat them
too.
“Oh, how horrible!” Francis shuddered.
“But they still make good parents, in spite of that,” said Mother. “The
mother usually has about four babies, which she keeps in her nice roomy pouch


till they are about four or five months old; and though the father seems to be
pretty proud of them, the mother won’t let him come near them.”
“Mother,” said Walter, “you haven’t told us what he looks like.”
“He’s not very attractive to look at,” said Mother. “He’s thick and strong
and clumsy and has a sort of stiff, slow canter, with his tail held right up. He’s
black with some white markings; and it may have been his surly face that got
him his name. Altogether he’s not so nice as lots of our gentle Australian
animals; and yet to see him sitting up and washing his face with his front paws
is really pretty; and the babies playing together are just as much fun as any
other baby animals.”
Father looked at the fading light. “It’s about bedtime, children, or do you
want Mother to tell you a little about the wolf, before we turn in?”
“Oh, of course, Father,” said Francis, “and about the wombat, too. We re
not making an early start to-morrow, so a few more minutes won’t make any
difference.”
“All right, children,” said Father; “but, look here, we must eat those apples
while they’re hot, or we’ll miss all the juice. Don’t they smell good?”
They set to work on the apples, and presently Father said, “Now, Mother,
about this wolf. You saw one, didn’t you?”
“No, I wish I had,” said Mother. “But he’s a shy, timid creature, unfor-
tunately; and he’s been nearly exterminated. You see, he took to killing the sheep
of the settlers, so they declared war on him, and pretty well stamped him out.
There was an expedition to the fastnesses where he lived, later on, to try to arrange
about protecting him, but they only managed to find his footprints. That shows


he must be there, but there certainly aren’t many of him left.”
“Why on earth is he called a wolf, Mother,” said Francis, “if he’s really
shy?”
“Well, he’s sometimes called a tiger,” said Mother, “because he’s got six-
teen or eighteen dark chocolate stripes across his back, which camouflage him
like a tiger. But he’s really much more like a dog. I believe his Latin name
really means “a pouched dog with a wolf head.”
“Does he make nests, like the Devil, Mother?” asked Francis.
“No,” said Mother, “he really lives in caves in the hills, and he comes out
in the evenings, down to the valleys, to look for food.”
“But what is his food?” asked Walter. “Is he as clever as the Devil about
catching it?”
He mostly seems to live on wallabies and smaller animals,” said Mother;
“but he catches them quite differently. He’s not cunning; he just trots gently
after his prey, when he picks up its scent —just trots after it till it’s exhausted, and
then rushes in and kills it,”
“Can’t he move fast if he tries?” asked Walter.
“Yes, he can,” said Mother. “He breaks into a kind of canter, and the
funny thing is that if he’s chased, he actually gets up and hops like a kangaroo.”
“But does he only run away? Is he just a coward?” asked Francis.
“No, he doesn’t actually retreat, but he’s not really savage like a wolf, and
only fights when he has to. Then he fights so well that dogs refuse to face him.
And I remember one story about a bull terrier that had one in a corner, and when
it came too close, the wolf just shot his head forward, and gave a sharp bite, and
tore a bit out of the dog’s skull.”


“Ugh!” said Francis; “I don’t like the sound of that.”
“Oh. no, said Mother, that s silly; he s a harmless creature, and even in self-
defence he s not very strong. Like all the family he belongs to, the Tasmanian
wolf can quite easily be handled if he has food; and when he’s caught he will
take food out of people’s hands at once.”
Well, would you like to have one for a pet?” asked Francis.
I m not sure, said Mother. “People say they aren’t very nice when
they re full grown, but if they’re caught young, they’re quite gentle and tame.
But look here, there s Francis yawning. Ask me what you want to know about
the wombat, and then we must all get off to bed. What do you all want to know? ”
Oh, just everything, said Walter cheerfully. “Is it any relation to any
of the animals we’ve seen?”
Yes, said Mother, naturalists think it is a very distant relation of the
possum; but its so distant, and it’s developed things that belong to itself and
itself alone—that it’s put in a family all by itself. But it seems quite happy
about it; it s a very cheerful little animal, and quite easy to make friends with.”
What does it look like? asked Francis.
“You can look at its picture, when we get home,” said Mother, “but it
seems to me most like a beaver, except that it hasn’t got a tail. It’s like a beaver
too, in its habits. It burrows with its strong front claws and uses its front
teeth, which are like chisels, to get through small roots and small fence posts
that get in its way.”
But, what does it want to burrow for?” asked Francis.
Oh, Francis, you ought to go to bed, said Walter—“to make a burrow,
of course! What sort of a burrow does it make?”


“They’re really a very good job,” said Mother. “Sometimes the burrow is
only about ten or fifteen feet long, with a neat bark nest at the end; but some-
times they are as much as a hundred feet long, and big enough for a child to
crawl along.”
“Good heavens!” said Father, “what industry! Where do they make them?”
“As far as I remember,” said Mother, “usually in the hillsides, and they
don’t seem to mind how rough the hillside is. And the wonderful thing is that
usually quite near the mouth of the burrow there is a shallow hole, up against a
tree or a log, where the wombat can rest and have a sun bathe—just like our sun
room at home. He is a homely, pleasant creature; but I don’t think very much is
known of him in the wild state, chiefly because of his burrowing out of sight all
the time, and because he’s entirely a night animal. In the daylight he’s almost
blind.”
“Do people make pets of him?” asked Francis.
“Oh, yes,” said Mother; “and very attractive pets, too. Because although
he looks so sleepy and dumb, he’s very affectionate, and I’ve read of one that
lived in someone’s garden and burrowed all over the place without disturbing any
of the plants. People say they’ve actually got a sense of humour, too, and one
that was a pet used to love to be nursed like a baby, and would pretend to go to
sleep. He used to follow the children about, and butt them to attract attention,
and when he was hungry he would go into the house and make a little grunting
noise until he got something to eat.”
“What does he eat, by the way, Mother?” asked Francis.
Grass mostly,” said Mother; “and sometimes bark and fungus. I expect
that s why it is so much more friendly than the Tasmanian Devil or the


Marsupial Wolf. Grasseaters always seem to be much more friendly than meat-
eaters.”
“And do they have their babies in pouches?” asked Walter.
Yes, of course,” said Mother. “All the animals we have been talking about
are marsupials. The wombat has only one baby at a time, and it lives in the
pouch from about June to November or December. And when it comes out
of the pouch, it is properly covered with fur and about the size of a guinea pig,
and as friendly as can be. I’ve heard of one which would follow its owner
about like a little dog, and be as friendly as a real dog, too. She’d keep up on a
walk by bouncing along on her stumpy little legs, and often her owner and the
mother wombat and the baby would walk along three in a line.”
I wish we d seen one, ’ said Francis.
So do I, said Mother; “but you won’t see anything at all to-morrow, if
you don’t get off to bed now.”
And in ten minutes, nothing could be heard in the camp but the distant roar
of the sea, and the swish of the peppermint leaves rubbing on the roof of the
car.


CHAPTER NINE
NUMBATS
ITH sudden dismay they realised that their short ten days’ holiday had
gone. The three children were as brown as berries with the sum for
they had lived in its bright heat from morning to night. The last chance
to catch another black bream in the river had gone; the last chance to go and stare
and stare at the fish in a sort of natural aquarium they had discovered in the
rocks, particularly at the “footballers” with their gay yellow and black stripes
and goggling mouths; the last chance to feed Barbara’s ringtail; the last chance
to listen to Mrs. Terry telling them about the animals, about the early days of
the settlers, about the aborigines, or to hear any more of the aboriginal legends
which she had learnt from the natives and told so vividly.
They got out of bed at sun-up on the last morning, and set to work to dis-
mantle the camp and pack the gear on to the car. It didn’t take long. They
had a quick breakfast, and by seven o clock they were off, bumping slowly
through the grasshoppery paddock and out through the gate.
Ido hate ending, said Walter. It s been the best holiday we’ve ever
had. We ve seen such a lot of things—l feel full up,”
“We never saw a wild cat, though.” said Francis.
“But we’re going to see something even more interesting, I hope,” said
Father. You haven t forgotten we re going cross-country to Narrogin after a
numbat, have you? There s a farmer over there who has quite a lot of numbats
on his property. And I’m putting through a call to find out if we can cr Q and
see him.




“What are numbats?” said Elizabeth; for even Elizabeth had begun to be
interested in the search for the animals of her native land.
“Well,” said Father, “I’ve never seen one in my life. They’re rather a rare
little animal. But I’ll tell you what I know about them and then we can see if
they really are like what I tell you.”
“Come on then, Father,” said the impatient Francis. “Do tell us quickly.’
“His other name is the banded ant-eater, and that tells you quite a lot about
him. He has white bands right across his back, and a white stripe over each eye.
And he has a long brush tail which he usually holds jauntily up like a wag-tail’s
while he’s running for safety. We must watch when we meet him.”
“How big is he?” asked Mother.
“Oh, well, a man could easily grab him quite firmly with his hand—l guess
he’s about as big as a good big rat, and his tail as long again.”
“Is he very wild?” asked Walter.
“No, he’s not; he’s shy and easily frightened, but he has no means of self-
defence at all—that’s why he’s so easily caught by dogs or foxes or even cats.
And when he’s running away, he stops every now and then to turn round and see
what is after him—that makes him very easy prey.”
“So he’s dying out, is he?”
“No, not here luckily ... In South Australia where he used to live he seems
to be gone, but over here there are more than people thought. He is so shy that
it was thought that there were hardly any left, but now that naturalists are
interested in him and people are looking out for him, they find there are quite a
lot. But, alas, they can’t protect him from his worst enemy, and that is the


great bush fires. He runs into logs for protection, and along comes the fire, and
that’s the end of him.”
“Why have naturalists got so interested in him?”
“Because he is really one of the most primitive of all Australian animals.
He’s a relic of the past; someone has called him a ‘living fossil,’ because while all
the other marsupials have developed in various ways down the ages, he has
apparently remained unchanged from the very beginning of marsupial life.”
“Oh, he’s a marsupial, is he?”
“Yes, but not quite like the kangaroo. He hasn’t a pouch. Hie tiny little
babies, about as big as your finger nail, nuzzle their way to the mother’s nipples
as soon as they are born, and cling tightly, each one to a nipple, and travel with
the mother wherever she goes, only protected by her long fur and a little fold
of skin.”
“It’ll be very exciting if we really see one —I wonder will we know it from
what you’ve said?” said Walter.
The children asked no more questions about the numbat, for they were
too interested in the journey they were taking. They were awed into silence by
the grandeur of the giant karri trees in one of the most beautiful belts of timber
in the world. They were silent with anxiety as Father drove the little car
along a boggy road through swamps and blackboys, and they were silent with
excitement when Father twice stopped the car dead because kangaroos suddenly
bounced across the road in front of them and disappeared into the bush (both
times it was in jarrah country which had recently been burnt, so that there were
plenty of young green shoots for them to feed on). It seemed marvellous each
time that anything could take such mighty jumps and yet land so lightly, so


silently and so accurately between the crowded bushes and trees. They had
driven through three timber mill towns; and had marvelled at the courage of the
settlers who had carved thriving dairy farms out of the heart of the forest; they
had gone through great tracts of dairying country, through more timber, and
through the rich hills and valleys of the orchard country.
At last, however, they arrived at Narrogin. A few more miles between
green paddocks, with the mallet gums breaking the monotony along the sides
of the roads, and the beautiful white trunks of the wandoo gums, left standing
here and there about the paddocks, brought them to Minigin, the farm they were
looking for.
After a typical Australian welcome, although they had come with no intro-
duction except the statement that they were looking for numbats, and a typical
Australian morning tea (tea and piles of hot scones), the whole family and the
farmer’s family all piled into an Austin utility truck, and the hunt for the little
banded ant-eater was on.
As soon as they came to a little patch of uncleared country, where a
number of dead logs lay about, out they all tumbled, and scattered to every log
they could see. The children were as excited as they could be, and Mother and
Father hardly less so, though Mr. Higham warned them that, although he knew
there were ant-eaters there, he often didn’t see one for weeks at a time. He
carried a torch with him for peering into likely logs, and as they walked he told
Mother and Father a lot about the habits of the little creature. Suddenly there
was a frenzied yell from Francis, who had wandered off a little by himself.
“QUICK! QUICK! QUICK! Come quick!’’ he screamed but he need not


have bothered. At his first yell, every one of the party started to run to where
he was leaping madly about and pointing under an old grey log. And there sure
enough, beside the log, sat a numbat, the quaintest little creature they had ever
seen. Her fur was reddish grey, with seven or eight white stripes across her
back; her hairy but rather flimsy tail was cocked over her back; over each eye
to the base of her brightly cocked ear was a white stripe; her nose was long
and pointed and her chin hairless.
For a few moments they just looked at her. But not for long. Suddenly
the creature turned and darted away, her tail flat behind her. “Stay where you
are,” said Mr. Higham, “she won’t go far.” And sure enough, though she shot
away so quickly, she was only making for a safe log. As she reached it, instead
of darting into it, the pretty little animal delighted the children by sitting bolt
upright and having a look at them. Her tail helped to balance her, and her two
little front paws hung in front of her. But Walter’s sharp eyes had noticed
something even more exciting than this.
“She’s got babies,” he cried. “Surely we’ll be able to get her.”
Oh, we 11 get her all right, said Mr. Higham, * but let’s try not to frighten
her too much. Come on, Francis, you saw her first, you come and help me.”
As he spoke, the little ant-eater dropped to her forefeet again and shot round
and into the end of the log. But it was not a long one, and while Francis covered
the end of the log with his sweater which he pulled off quickly, Mr. Higham
looked in with his torch, and drew out what is perhaps the most harmless
' and gentle of all wild animals. The children, of course, crowded round now,
j and their delight could be imagined when Mr. Higham turned her over in his


hand, and they saw four tiny hairless little babies firmly attached to her. Sure
enough, she had no real pouch, but the babies were securely attached to the
mother and sheltered by her long hairs. The children tried very gently to take
them off, but their tightened jaws had too firm a grip on their mother s nipples.
“Do let’s take her home,” said one of Mr. Higham’s children; “I do want
Mother to see her, and to see if we can’t tame her.’
“Well, we’ll take her home,” said Mr. Higham, “and Walter and Francis
can watch her eat. But we’re not going to keep her. She belongs to the bush;
that’s where she’s happy, and that’s where she s going back to. Hold her very
carefully, Walter, or she’ll slip away from you before you know it.”
Before long, the numbat was safely secured in an old rabbit hutch, and two
of the children had gone off to find an old bit of wood that was full of termites
or white ants. She was shy and perhaps a little frightened, but she made no
attempt to bite or scratch or move away, when the children put their hands in to
stroke her. She didn’t move at all, until the old wood was put in at the opposite
side of the hutch; then she darted across, and after scrabbling with her forepaws
to dislodge the outer bark, she shot her thin cylindrical tongue into the little
grooves and tunnels in the wood, flicking the termites into her mouth, until they
were all cleared up.
The children watched, fascinated, and then when they went in to lunch,
they discussed how they could get a nice hollow log into their hutch for the new
guest to sleep and hide in. But they needn’t have bothered. When they hurried
out after lunch, they were just in time to see their small striped prisoner streak-
ing across the yard and out through the fence. She had found a weak spot in


the wire of the hutch, and off she had gone back to the country where she had
been bred and where alone she could be happy.
“Well,” said Father, I m glad it was that way. It would have been hard
to let her go, but I’m glad she has gone. Come along, children, thank Mr. Higham
for giving us such an exciting thing to finish with. We’ve got a long way to go
before we get home, so we must be off.”
Yes, said Francis, and it 11 take us a good long time, because we must
look in all the hollow logs we see, in case there is a numbat; and under all the
loose bits of bark and in the blackboys, in case we find marsupial mice or
possums; and at the foot of every tree, in case we see signs of the walyah having
taken bark for a nest; and in every bit of recently burnt jarrah country for
kangaroos and wallabies, and everywhere for bandicoots nests.”
Altogether,” said Mother, “we’re going to have a pretty busy trip. So
pile in, everyone, and off we go.”
It certainly was a long trip, after such a busy day, and they did not arrive
home till close on midnight. The three children had gone to sleep in the car,
and they hardly woke up as they undressed and tumbled into bed. Only
Walter managed sleepily to remind Mother as she said good-night, that he and
Francis would have to fetch the bandicoot from Mr. Woolf in the morning, and
build a cage for it.
The next day was a good one for the two boys, the last day before they were
to go back to school. In the morning they went over to Tom Woolf’s place, told
him all about the animals they had seen on the trip, and brought home the bandi-


\
T
coot in a basket. The creature was still a little wild; so Walter and Francis spent
the whole afternoon knocking together a cage for it. By tea time it was finished,
and the whole family had the fun of seeing the bandicoot eat, not only a
specially cooked milk pudding, but two large black cockroaches which Francis
had caught.
“I wish,” said Walter, “we could have brought home all the animals we’ve
seen and heard about. What a menagerie we’d have.”
‘‘l know,” said Francis, “when I grow up, I’m going to build a sanctuary
and keep all the animals inside; then they’ll never die out.
“Good!” said Walter; “let’s plan it now.” And the two boys spent the rest
of the evening with paper and pencils, drawing the sanctuary and all the animals,
from the largest to the smallest, which they had seen or heard about.






Brisbane College of Advanced Education
RESOURCE CENTRE KELVIN GROVE CAMPUS
DUE DATE SLIP
Fines apply if this item is not returned or renewed
on or before the most recent date indicated below.
Renewals may be requested by telephone
MWL




ill niMl'Mli—1 ' rllii iiittlimMii TTnTr Tra-rt latMKffitilM ifeT
\**t ||
V
■ II "i 1
v :■ 3 i« ■- }. x V I
V "'K*' 5 '- Aa : I
i i’h
mf r W *. M!fv:
m irM
\ 'fc (l..-Jr Ml % Avi
\ \ w *€f fffm - 8
*H5il ■i ; ‘ I -mSSS .■’*■ 81
