

AUSTRALIA-
a hlace in the Sun!


How to get to Australia
FROM UNITED KINGDOM—
Steamship Line Office
ABERDEEN AND COMMON-
WEALTH (Via Suez)
BLUE FUNNEL
(Via the Cape)
CANADIAN-AUSTRALASIAN-
ROYAL MAIL (Via America)
N.Z. SHIPPING CO. LTD.
(Via Panama)
Geo. Thompson & Co. Ltd.
34 Leadenhall Street, London,
E.C. 3
2 Australia House, Strand,
W.C. 2
Alfred Holt & Co., India Bldgs.,
L’pool, 80 Buchanan Street,
Glasgow
Trans-Pacific Passenger Agency
Ltd. P. & O. House, 14
Cockspur Street, London,
S.W. 1
138 Leadenhall Street, London,
E.C. 3
Trans-Pacific Passenger Agency
Ltd. P. & O. House, 14
Cockspur Street, S.W. 1
FROM UNITED KINGDOM—
Steamship Line
ORIENT (Via Suez)
P. & O. STEAM NAVIGATION
CO. (Via Suez)
P. & O. BRANCH SERVICE
(Via Suez)
SHAW SAVILL & ALBION CO.
LTD. (Via Panama)
THE OCEANIC S.S. CO.
MATSON LINE (Via
America)
UNION ROYAL MAIL
(Via America)
WHITE STAR-ABERDEEN
(Via the Cape)
Office
Anderson, Green & Co. Ltd.
3 & 5 Fenchurch Avenue, London,
E.C. 3
14 Cockspur Street, S.W. 1
1 Australia House, Strand, W.C. 2
P. & O. House, 14 Cockspur
Street, London, S.W. 1
122 Leadenhall Street, E.C. 3
130 Leadenhall St., London, E.C. 3
34 Leadenhall Street, E.C. 3
Pickford’s Ltd. 21 Cockspur
Street, London, S.W. 1
Trans-Pacific Passenger Agency Ltd
P. & O. House, 14 Cockspur
Street, London, S.W. 1
30 James Street, Liverpool
1 Cockspur Street, London, S.W. 1
34 Leadenhall Street, E.C. 3
FROM U.S.A. AND CANADA—
Steamship Line
CANADIAN-AUSTRALASIAN
ROYAL MAIL
MATSON NAVIGATION
COMPANY
UNION ROYAL MAIL AND
CANADIAN-AUSTRALASIAN
ROYAL MAIL
Offices or Agencies
VANCOUVER —J. C. Irons, 999 Hasting
Street West
SAN FRANCISCO—2IS Market Street
LOS ANGELES—723 West Seventh St.
CHICAGO —140 South Dearborn Street
NEW YORK —535 Fifth Avenue
PORTLAND, ORE. —271 Pine Street
SEATTLE, WASH.—I3I9 Fourth Ave.
DALLAS, TEX. —1805 Elm Street
SAN FRANCISCO—Hind, Rolph & Co.,
230 California Street (R, Back,
General Representative)
NEW YORK—Norton, Lilly & Co., 26
Beaver Street (M. W. Horton, General
Representative)
LOS ANGELES—63I South Grand Ave.
Passages may also be booked at offices of the
CANADIAN PACIFIC RAILWAY
CANADIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS
at New York and at all points in Canada
FROM THE EAST—
Steamship Line
AUSTRALIAN & ORIENTAL
LINE
EASTERN & AUSTRALIAN
STEAMSHIP CO.
NIPPON YUSEN KAISHA
BURNS, PHILP & CO.
ROYAL PACKET NAVIGA-
TION CO. (K.P.M. LINE)
WEST AUSTRALIAN STEAM
NAVIGATION CO. &
OCEANIC S.S. CO. (United
Service)
Offices or Agencies
HONG KONG —Butterfield & Swire Ltd.
YOKOHAMA—Butterfield & Swire (Japan)
Ltd.
MANILA—G. S. Yuill & Co.
HONG KONG—Mackinnon, Mackenzie & Co.
YOKOHAMA—Mackinnon, Mackenzie & Co.
MANILA—Smith, Bell & Co.
YOKOHAMA—N.Y.K. Office
HONG KONG—N.Y.K. Office
MANlLA—Warner, Barnes & Co.
SINGAPORE—Boustead & Co.
BATAVlA—Campbell, McColl & Co.
SOURABAYA—Burns, Philp & Co.
SINGAPORE—K.P.M, Line Office
BATAVIA—K.P.M, Line Office
SOURABAYA—K.P.M. Line Office
SINGAPORE—Boustead & Co. and Mansfield
and Co.
BATAVIA—McLaine, Watson & Co.
SOURABAYA—Fraser, Eaton & Co.


AUSTRALIA AUSTRALIA


See
AUSTRALIA!
THE COUNTRY THAT IS DIFFERENT
qA New Tourist Mecca
UNSHINE > cobalt skies, the joy of
» f/rlp/X VP surfing on 12,000 miles of the world’s
' I (vi 1 I finest beaches, blue, bush-clad moun-
--11// tain ranges that roll away to infinity,
tropical forests, boundless plains, the
fragrance of eucalypt and fairy
wattle, air that invigorates as only
air beneath the Southern Cross
can
Why not see Australia?
Its atmosphere is not heavy with mediaeval history
and tradition. There are no crumbling monuments of
centuries cf civilisation-building to "do” according to
guide-bock ritual. One doesn’t attune one’s sense cf
enjoyment to the past.
Yet Australia is so old that it is new; so new that its
antiquity amazes. Geologically, Australia is incalculably
the senior of Europe and America. Stone-ago man,
older than the Pyramids, with his firestick and totem and
his weird tribal customs, still lives in the same land
that in a century has created centres of business, culture
and art and has moulded them into some of the Br :ish
Empire’s greatest cities—cities that, like Sydney, which
is now spanning its magnificent harbour with the world's
largest single arch bridge, or like picturesque Canberra,
the infant modern capital where the soul of a nation
is finding expression, reflect Australia’s increasing urge
to develop.
Australia sends her "coo-ee” of invitation across the
world to the tourist, a little jaded, perhaps, by the
ultra sophistication cf old-world holiday tracks. Aus-
tralia has something new, something virile and con-
structive, something infinitely varied, something essentially
different, yet still redolent of the romance of the early
gold diggings and the pioneers, to show him.
Not An Expensive Holiday
A voyage, just the restful, luxurious yet comparatively
inexpensive trip the doctor ordered—and one is con-
fronted with the open door of a continent approximately
as large as the United States of America, where English-
speaking people, with all the hospitality of their race,
are at home to the visitor from January the first to
December the thirty-first.
He is welcomed with warmth and service. His creature
comforts are assured at very moderate cost. He is put
into touch with pecple and things he wants to sec. If
he is a commercial man, Chambers of Commerce and
of Manufactures will advise him, and United Com-
mercial Travellers Association’s residential clubs through-
out the Commonwealth will minister to his needs. He
can travel in excellently appointed express trains that
link the capitals, road service cars, steamships and aero-
planes. He can wander at will or move to a schedule
prepa*. 'd fer him. Fie can concentrate his attention on
the evidences of the country’s vast resources, or cn its
physical beauties, or both. He can do business, go to
the races, play golf, polo or tennis, motor, yacht, ride
a horse, a camel or a surf-board. He can fellow the
hunt or shoot game and wild fowl. The coasts offer
him excellent sport with the mulloway, the kingfish, the
game schnapper and the tunny; the well-stocked streams
of three States, dry fly trout fishing equal to any in the
world. Even pig-sticking, buffalo and crocodile shoot-
ing are net unknown in remoter Australia.
Whatever he does he will enjoy, because the golden
sunshine that is the essence of Australia will
permeate his very being.
Australia’s capital cities—two of them have each a
population of more than a million—will interest him as
evidences of a development that has created a record in
time. Stock runs of four or five generations ago have
given place to parks, boulevards, hotels, shops, public
buildings, cinemas and theatres. Electric railways and
tramways whisk the suburb-dweller back and forth from
his work, his home, and his beach, bush and hill play-
grounds hard by. Ferry boats dart from wharf to quay.
Lines of cars thread busy but well-controlled streets.
The Great Outdoors
But it is beyond the cities that the spacious Australia
of plain and forest, gorge and mountain, river and lake,
begins. Through shimmering miles of golden wheat
belt, past huge sheep and cattle stations, citrus groves,
irrigation settlements, canefields, cotton and banana
plantations, rice fields, orchards, tobacco fields, gold,
silver, and copper mines, and big national develop-
mental works, one senses the unique atmosphere of the
Australia that bred the Anzacs, and is to-day breeding
men and women of broad, constructive vision.
The visitor sees the Australian bush that pen and
pigment have made famous—giant red and blue gums,
mountain ash, tree fern, golden wattle and crimson
waratah, the home of the kangaroo and wallaby, the
emu, the parrot, the mocking lyre bird, the laughing
kookaburra, the golden-throated magpie, the wombat, the
opossum, the tiny native bear and the platypus—that
furred, duck-billed, web-footed, egg-laying mammal
freak at which scientists still marvel. Farther north, he
encounters magnificent tropical forests and palm groves.
The visitor can climb impressive peaks, explore
nature’s cave jewellery, visit spas, or spend days in motor-
ing along magnificently scenic roads. In winter he can
ski or toboggan on exhilarating white slopes in the Great
Dividing Range, and, a couple of days later, plunge
into the rollers of a sun-drenched coast. From per-
fectly appointed guest-houses thousands of feet up, he
can survey panoramas of wonderful Alp country, or he
can explore fascinating tropical marine and vegetable
life on a thousand-mile coral reef of indescribable
colorings, built up through the centuries by "little
globules of animated jelly.”
Australia is one of the world’s tourist Meccas, with
a big place in the sun, and the most genial, most in-
vigorating climate in the world—
"An opal-hearted country,
A wilful, lavish land ”
Come and see it! Leave next winter behind, ami
follow the sun southward!
A TALE OF TWO
CITIES. —One typi
fles Australia’s amaz-
ing century of past
development: the
other, Australia’s un-
abated urge to con-
tinue nation building.
The lower photo
graph is a glimpse of
Canberra Australia’s
picturesque capital
in the making, with
the new Parliament
House in the middle
distance.
Invest in
'A; NTAPPED wealth of soil, mineral and
VjfW 1 power, a public with a tremendous
| -A; ™ buying power, first-class freight trans-
m portation facilities by land and water,
'’l ifsSk.': PI rj .. , . J
m British laws, democratic governments
jvv in the fullest sense, a protective tariff,
a country that needs more private
■S&t developmental capital
Why not investigate Australia as an investment?
Although six and a quarter million Australians grow
every kind of foodstuff, as well as wool, cotton, and
tobacco, and mine gold, silver, coal, copper, tin, iron,
lead, manganese, opals, platinum, wolfram and zinc,
they find it necessary to import about £150,000,000
worth of goods a year. This, together with the fact that
Australia’s savings bank deposits aggregate more than
£225,000,000, or approximately £35 per head of popula-
tion (the third highest for any cduntry in the world)
at once indicates not only public wealth and buying
capacity, but also a field for the extension of manufac-
turing—a field that has already been entered by such
firms of world reputation as Nestle, Lever Bros., Fry,
Cadbury, Pascall, Babcock and Wilcox, Kelsall and
Kemp, Rylands Bros., Bovril, Mellins Food, Schweppes,
SpLer and L)etmolds, Bryant and May, Dorman, Long
and Co., Kynoch, Reckitt’s, Docker, Nobel, de Havilland
Aircraft, Hill, Norman and Beard, Nettlefolds, Standard
Telephones, Vickers, Hadfields, Palmolive, Jantzen, Sie-
mens, Rapson Tyre Co., Henry Ford, General Motors,
Goodyear Tyre, Dunlop Rubber, Kodak, Waygood Otis,
and Lysaght. All these firms have found it profitable
to manufacture inside the Australian tariff, and under
Australian conditions which, contrary to exaggerated,
reports sometimes noised abroad, are, according to official
statistics, fraught with less industrial unrest than those
in other and primarily industrial communities.
If busi/iess men went to the Dominions for even a
few weeks, the visit would transform their trade out-
look,” recently declared the British ex-Secretary of State
for the Dominions, the Rt. Hon. L. S. Amery, who
visited Australia in 1927. '’Sitting in our office waiting
for orders or sending out advertisements, however cun-
ningly arranged, does no good.”
If you look at Australia, you will immediately realise
its wonderful assets, the wonderful prosperity of the
country, its natural resources and the virility of
people,” said Sir Arthur Duckham, leader of the British
Economic Mission to Australia in 1928/29, who, follow-
ing his official investigations, himself acquired a business
stake in the country.
And so on. There are hundreds of other testimonials
to Australia from well-known citizens of the world who
have either visited the Commonwealth, or who have
regarded this country of sunshine sufficiently attractive
to work in, as did the President of the United States
of America, Mr. Hoover, years ago, as a mining engineer
on the Kalgoorlie Goldfields in Western Australia.
Figures that Talk
There is an abundance of electric power in the main
centres of population of most of the States, generated
either from black coal, water, or brown coal. There is
every facility for the business man’s financial transactions
on Stock Exchanges. There are Chambers of Commerce
and Chambers of Manufactures. There are banking
institutions such as the Bank of New South Wales—
one of the world’s largest—with a paid capital of
£7,500,000 and advances aggregating £55,000,000, and
insurance corporations, such as the Australian Mutual
Provident Society, the largest mutual life office in the
British Empire, with an income of £11,000,000 a year
and existing assurances amounting to nearly
£250,000,000. There is, too, the Commonwealth Bank
which is developing into a reserve or bankers’ bank along
the lines of the Bank of England, with a capital of
£4,000,000 built up entirely from profits.
Such institutions —and there are many others equally
important—have sprung up in a century. The investor
and the manufacturer from older communities can help
to consolidate the growth they represent to his own
profit and to the benefit of Australia in the decades
that follow.
Australia as a business proposition is well worth look-
ing into.
Come and see!
oA IVhite Settler’s Country
WHITE man’s continent of nearly two
™thousand million acres less than half
/V ■ pA"' occupied, land that produces the
L- /r-l\ finest wool and some of the finest
white wheats in the world, irrigation
«- wi-'' 1 areas that grow citrus fruits, wine
/ '"grapes and grapes and currants for
S'il v i: drying, a climate and rainfall that in
. t^e ‘ r variations and latitudes from
temperate to tropical, are ideal for
apple, pear, peach, apricot, plum,
nectarine, passion fruit, banana, pineapple, sugar, custard-
apple, paw-paw, mango, rice, maize, coffee, olive, cotton
and tobacco growing, dairying, poultry and bee farming,
mutton and beef raising
Why not examine Australia’s possibilities at first
hand?
You or your son—have just left school or university.
A career in the professions or the Services in some of
the older countries offers less attraction and opportunity
than it did, perhaps, in the past. Circumstances are
more cramped, and by contrast, the open spaces of Bri-
tain s Dominions suggest bigger things. Australia puts
in a strongly backed claim for first preference. But it
isn t suggested that you make a hasty decision to settle
there: Australia would rather you first came, saw and
weighed up, and offers you not only Australian hos-
pitality as a visitor, but arranges itineraries for you to
see given features as quickly, as comfortably and as
cheaply as possible within your time limits. Australia
suggests, too, that you bring your friends and make a
party of it.
Australia for Health!
Australia is, with New Zealand, the healthiest land
in the world. The combined death rate is about
9 per I,COO compared with nearly 12 in Great
Britain and approximately in the United
States of America.
Australia, too, has been from the outset more gener-
ous to her white fsettlecrs than other new lands. Even
to the pioneers faced with the lonely and heavy task of
clearing the rich lands she gave quick rewards, and the
first graziers shepherding their flocks on rolling, fence-
less runs prospered as never before. Along the blazed
trails of the pioneers followed the squatters who pushed
inland with their merinos and shorthorns and Here-
fords, where awaiting them were rich native pastures
unrivalled as builders of beef and mutton and growers
of fine wool.
To-day, man is supplementing nature’s lavish gifts by
huge irrigation and water supply works to secure the
maximum of productivity. Eleven thousand square miles
of the south-eastern wheat belt, for instance, are served
by a gravitation-channel stock and domestic supply
scheme that vies in importance and extent with any other
similar scheme in the world, while three States are
jointly building, on the River Murray, Australia’s Nile,
a reservoir which, with a capacity of 2,000,000 acre feet,
will be the second largest in existence.
The Drought Bogey!
The drought bogey has sometimes been raised against
Australia by the uninformed and the misinformed. No
calumny has less foundation. Some districts occasion-
ally experience dry periods as do those in other countries,
but Australia is no more a country of droughts than is
Canada, South Africa or Central Europe. Australia’s
rainfall varies from five inches in the driest area to
165 inches on the north-east coast of tropical Queens-
land. Nearly a million square miles of country have
a fall of from 10 to 20 inches, and nearly a million
more have from 20 inches to more than 40 inches.
Sydney has twice the rainfall of London, Brisbane twice
that of Paris, Melbourne a little more than that of
Marseilles, Adelaide a little less than that of Berlin,
Perth and Hobart approximately those of Chicago and
Edinburgh. No drought-stricken land could become
the world’s premier wool-growing country, and one of
its largest wheat producers and cattle raisers as Australia
has become.
The investor-settler who takes up land can farm
throughout the year, as winter has no rigors. There are
excellent primary, secondary and public schools, technical
and agricultural colleges for his children who v/ill grow
up, as Australian children do, into the lithe, clean-limbed,
sun-tanned and sun-invigorated young men and women
one sees and admires on any Australian surfing beach.
To the man who is prepared to work and make initial
sacrifices, there is assurance, not necessarily of a quick
fortune which no country can offer, but of comfort, of
plenty, of a good living, of independence, of the finest
career of all—a man’s job.
Invest yourself or your son in Australia, but see the
prospectus first!
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
The Specialty Press Pty. Ltd., Melbourne
AUSTRALIA IN FIGURES
Based on the latest year’s statistics available
POPULATION—
-6,356,770 (84% Australian born, 97%
British extraction)
RAILWAYS—
-26,738 route miles
AIRWAYS—
-5,880 route miles
HOTEL TARIFFS—
City: £1 to £2 a day (Room and Break-
fast, 15/- to 25/-)
Country: 15/- to £1 a day
CLIMATE, Capital Cities—
Average
Mean Mean hours of
Summer Winter sunshine
Temp. Temp. yearly
Perth . . . 72.9 56.0 2791
Adelaide . . 73.0 53.1 2543
Brisbane . . 76.7 59.7 2630
Sydney . . . 71.0 54.1 2128
Melbourne . 66.6 50.0 2255
Hobart . . . 61.5 46.9 1934
EXTERNAL TRADE —
Imports £147,945,000
Exports £143,213,000
PRIMARY PRODUCTION—
Quantity Value (£)
Wool . . 888,130,000 lb. 75,634,000
Wheat . . 118,200,000 bus. 31,895,000
Other
Cereals . 28,437,000 bus. 6,319,000
Hay . . . 2,5*59,000 tons 15,120,000
Sugar Cane 3,764,000 tons 7,469,000
Meats (Ex-
port, . 278,000,000 lb. 6,336,000
Fruit,
Fresh 24,665,000 bus. 9,037,000
Fruit,
Canned and
Dried 161,035,000 lb. 3,234,000
Wine . . . 17,303,000 gal. 1,913,000
Cotton . . 7,Q61,000 lb. 144,000
Tobacco ;10,878 cwt. 123,000
Hides and Skins—
Cattle & Horsed
(Exports) 1,362,000 1,820,000
Butter and
Cheese . 311,572,000 lb. 23,217,000
Bacon and
Hams . . 75,002,000 lb. 3,985,000
MINING PRODUCTION—
Coal . . . 14,978,000 tons 12,260,000
Silver-lead . 298,000 tons 3,774,000
Quantity Value (£)
Gold . . . 508,000 oz. 2,159,000
Iron . . . 847,000 tons 1,491,000
Zine . . . 284 000 tons 1,178,000
Tin ... 3 500 tons 842,000
Copper . . 10,000 tons 607,000
Other 672,000
SECONDARY INDUSTRIES—
No. of Factories .... 22,800
No. of Employees .... 464,200
Salaries and Wages . . . £91,365,000
Value of Land, Buildings,
Plant and Machinery . £231,254,000
TOTAL PRODUCTION—
Primary £294,749,000
Secondary £158,562,000
LIVESTOCK —
Sheep and Lambs 100,827,000
Cattle . . 11,617,000
Horses 2,041,000
BANK DEPOSITS (including Savings
Banks) £548,439,000
MOTOR VEHICLES—
-600,600 (one to every 10 persons)
LET US WELCOME YOU!
WE in Australia are at all times delighted to welcome our brothers and sisters and
cousins from other parts of the British Empire and the United States of America,
and to show them something of the unique, sunlit beauties and the wonderful
potentialities of this, at once the world's oldest and newest continent
The drawing together of the English-speaking peoples in the interests of world harmony
and development makes it more than ever necessary that we should know each other better.
Travel is not only the greatest educator, but the most
potent of friendship makers as well, and when travel
is fraught with such pleasant experiences as is a visit to
Australia, the duties of world-citizenship in this regard
are made doubly attractive.
I ask you to come, see and enjoy, and I offer you
Australia’s hand in greeting.
PRIME MINISTER OF
AUSTRALIA


