

tfefH pl p 'pnr>>
3^BB
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
Australian Repatriation
Scheme
FOR THE INFORMATION OF MEMBERS
OF THE A.I.F.
(PREPARED AND ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF
SENATOR THE HONOURABLE E. D. MILLEN,
MINISTER FOR REPATRIATION).
October 18, 1918.
MC. CARRON. BIRD &
479 COLLINS ST.MELBOI


TO THE MEN OF THE A.I.F.
The purpose of the Repatriation Department is to
help you back to civil life. It can do this thoroughly only
with your help and co-operation, and this you can most
effectively render by filling in the forms available on all
returning troopships, by means of which you can inform
the Department of your wishes and by placing yourself
in communication with the Department immediately upon
your discharge.
The'purpose of this pamphlet is to give you a general
idea of the facilities provided on your behalf and by means
of which it is sought to secure your re-establishment in
civil life upon the expiration of the splendid service you
have rendered in your military capacity.
Minister for Repatriation.


AIMS OF THE DEPARTMENT.
One of the questions that many a soldier upon the con-
clusion of his military service will ask himself, is “ What
am I going to do when I get out of khaki ? ” Having
finished his job on the other side of the world, he will be
speculating upon what the future may hold for him when he
is back home again in Australia. The man who returns
fit and well, and with a billet awaiting him will perhaps
suffer no misgivings, but he who has no certain job to go to
upon his discharge, or who, because of some war injury,
will be unable to resume his former occupation, may regard
the situation with some anxiety. It is primarily for such a
man that this pamphlet has been prepared.
The problem of finding employment, or, if necessary,
a new vocation, for members of the A.I.F. who may require
assistance, has not been left to them to solve. Its dis-
entanglement has been undertaken by the Commonwealth
Government, and a solution has been arrived at which will
make it possible for every man who has the capacity and
the determination to again pick up the threads of civilian
life. It has created a Department of Repatriation for the
express purpose of giving a fresh start to those who need it.
That Department has formulated and put into operation a
scheme which will enable the soldier, in a great number of
cases, to repair the economic loss which service to his
country has entailed, and which will hasten his social
restoration.
The work of the Department may be classified under
the headings of Employment, Vocational Training, Medical
Attention and General Assistance. A broad indication of
the functions of each of these sections will best enable an
applicant to gain a clear conception of what is being done,
and to ascertain the nature of the assistance available to
him. One point, however, which it is essential to bear in
mind, is that the Department was established by Act of
Parliament, and that its powers are therefore limited by
that Act. The scheme consists of a set of Statutory
Regulations which prescribe the limits of the help that can
be given, and which define the circumstances under which
an applicant is eligible for assistance.


EMPLOYMENT.
The provision of employment ranks perhaps as the
most extensive duty which must be discharged. The
Department undertakes to provide suitable employment
for those who are able to follow their previous or some
similar occupation, and to pay sustenance until such
opportunities are presented.
Although this statement requires little if anything
by way of explanation, there is one point in connection with
it that demands emphasis. It is that when an opportunity
for suitable employment is presented to an applicant he
must, failing some good reason, avail himself of it. Until
that opportunity is presented, however, each applicant is
entitled to sustenance under the following scale ;
(a) A soldier without dependants, a weekly income
(inclusive of pension) of £2 2s.
( b ) A soldier with a wife, a weekly income (inclusive
of their combined pensions) of £2 12s.
(c) A soldier with a wife and one child, a weekly
income (inclusive of their combined pensions) of
£2 15s. 6d.
(d) A soldier with a wife and two children, a weekly
income (inclusive of their combined pensions) of
£2 19s.
(e) A soldier with a wife and three children, a weekly
income (inclusive of their combined pensions) ,
of £3 2s. 6d.
(/) A soldier with a wife and four children, a weekly
income (inclusive of the pensions payable to the
soldier, his wife, and four children) of £3 6s.
A widower with children is entitled to the same susten-
ance allowance as if his wife were living. A soldier who
upon his discharge is not, on account of ill-health, capable
of immediately resuming his former occupation is, also,
during the period of his convalescence, entitled to assistance
under this scale.


VOCATIONAL TRAINING.
If a man is prevented by wounds or illness which are
the result of war service from going back to the kind of
job he was formerly engaged in, the Department takes him-
in hand and finds out what useful branch of industry he
can be trained for. The soldier is consulted upon the choice
of his new calling.
A man who is but slightly incapacitated may be
trained in an ordinary workshop or factory, or he may be
given a short intensive course of instruction at a special
Technical School, 80 of which are now established in differ-
ent parts of the Commonwealth. At present 2195 men are
being trained in these schools, and 619 having completed
the course, have been placed in satisfactory employment.
Should a soldier be placed in a workshop or factory, he is
guaranteed (inclusive of his pension) the minimum wage of
the industry in which he is being trained, but should he
be placed in a technical school he is paid, during his in-
struction, sustenance under the scale quoted in reference to
employment.
Special provision is being made for a soldier whose
incapacity, while permitting him to perform some useful
labour, is so -severe that it will preclude him from ever
entirely earning his own living. He will, if he so desires,
be trained in a National Workshop and afterwards remain in
such institution as a regular employee.
These illustrations indicate the major activities of
Vocational Training Section, and they represent' an educa-
tional task of great magnitude. Other more or less minor
features of the scheme are dealt with under this heading.
Training of apprentices is one of these. An apprentice
whose indentures were interrupted by enlistment, will be
enabled to finish his apprenticeship, and during the com-
pletion of his indentures he will be paid sustenance at a
rate which will bring his income up to the wages of a
journeyman in the particular industry in which he is being
trained.


MEDICAL TREATMENT AND GENERAL ASSISTANCE.
In addition a great number and variety of other
benefits are provided. As in the matter of employment, or
vocational training, these are designed to secure the civil
re-establishment of applicants and to minimise, if not
repair, the economic loss incurred by military service.
Surgical Aids and Medical Treatment are available to the
soldiers whose war injuries necessitate them. A scheme is
now being put into operation whereby medical officers
will be appointed to local areas throughout the Common-
wealth, and every case demanding medical care and atten-
tion will receive it. Should a discharged soldier, owing
to the recurrence at any time of injuries or illness arising
from active service, require hospital or other medical treat-
ment, this will be provided, and he will be paid sustenance
under the scale previously set out. Fares to and from
Hospital and travelling expenses are also paid. A married
soldier incapacitated to the extent of being unable to engage
in his usual employment, or a soldier who prior to enlist-
ment was dependent on a business which he owned and
conducted, may be advanced up to £l5O to purchase a
business, plant, or stock, to enable him to re-establish
himself.
The scheme also provides for relief from onerous
mortgages, educational grants, equipment with tools of
trade, free passages to and from the Commonwealth to
incapacitated soldiers, their wives and children, and other
specified applicants, and grants for furniture.
HOMES FOR MARRIED MEN.
A bill providing for advances to enable men now
married, or who subsequently marry, to acquire homes on
most liberal terms, is now being prepared, and will be pre-
sented to Parliament this Session.
CARE OF THE SERIOUSLY INCAPACITATED.
Soldiers who are so seriously incapacitated that they
are not in a position to provide for themselves, and widows
and orphans, are the special care of the Department. For


the totally and permanently incapacitated a living allow-
ance, on the following scale is paid
Soldier and wife (inclusive of pension) 60/- per week
~ ~ & 1 child ~ ~ 63/6 ~
~ & 2 children ~ ~ 67/
„ &3 ~ „ „ 70/6
)) & 4 ~ ~ ~ 73/
~ ~ &5 ~ or more ~ 77/-
Alternative provision is made for those who are no
longer able to assist themselves, by the establishment of
hostels, where the inmates may spend their days ’midst
pleasant surroundings, and be assured of skilled attention.
Hostels have already been secured in Sydney and Melbourne,
and others will be established in other capital cities. ,
For widows with children a living allowance on the
following scale is provided
Widow with 1 child (inclusive of pension) 51/-per week
~ 2 children ~ ~ 54/6 ~
3 „ ’ „ 58/-
„ 4 „ ~ „ 61/6
~ 5 ~ or more ~ 64/6
Provision is also made for the assistance of dependent
mothers, and of incapacitated dependent fathers of de-
ceased soldiers.
LAND SETTLEMENT.
The Department, in co-operation with the State
Governments, renders assistance to the man who desires
and is qualified to settle upon the land. The State Govern-
ments provide the land on easy terms, and the Department
of Repatriation, through their Lands Departments, ad-
vances up to £5OO for working capital. Approved appli-
cants who lack the necessary experience can obtain the
requisite training before entering into occupation of their
holdings free of cost to them. In addition, where such is
necessary, the Department provides sustenance for a period
of six months during the early and unproductive periods
of their occupation. Such sustenance scale is :
Single men (inclusive of pension) £1 per week
Man and wife ~ . ~ £1 10/- ~
Each Child up to 4 ~ ~ 2/6 ~


Brisbane
. 232 Charlotte-street.
Sydney
Dawes Point.
Melbourne
. Wellington Parade, Jolimont.
Adelaide
45 Currie-street.
Perth
Barrack-street.
Hobart
. A.M.P. Buildings.
TRAVELLING ALLOWANCES.
In certain cases travelling allowances are available to
applicants. Where an applicant has to travel in order to
obtain medical treatment or surgical aids, his fare, and 7s,
6d. per day when travelling by land, and 3s. per day when
travelling by sea, is paid by the Department. Where a
soldier is being sent to employment his fare to his destina-
tion is paid ; and where he is about to enter into occupation
of land or of a business, or has obtained employment in a
particular locality in which he desires to make his home,
the Department will pay such fares and freights as are
necessary for the transference of himself, his family, and a
reasonable amount of household belongings, to the locality.
WHERE TO APPLY.
Every soldier who requires the assistance of the Depart-
ment should make application as early as possible.
Applications should be made personally to the branch
of the Department in 'the capital city of the State in which
applicant, resides. State branches have been established
as under :—-
In the event of a soldier leaving the capital city for his
home in the country before lodging an application, he
should then apply to the nearest Repatriation Local Com-
mittee. These Local Committees have been created in
various parts of the Commonwealth, and the headquarters
of such an organisation is, as a rule, in the principal centre
of each local government area, such as a municipality, shire,
district council, or roads board.
Applicants for land should apply direct to the Soldiers’
Settlement Branch of the Lands Department in the capital
city of the State in which they desire to take up land,
except in the case of South Australia, where the Depart-
ment of Agriculture deals with all applications.
