

AUSTRALIA’S
The Defence
of our Country
is thè Duty
of all.
Published by thè Australian National Defence League (N.S.W. Diyislon),
No. 4, First Floor, Denman Chambers, Phillip St., Sydney. IJoyd O.
Hutchinson, Hon. Secretary, and printed by Patterson & Beck, 11 Shepnerd
Street, Sydney.


Principal Docks in Pacific and
Indian Ocens
(British Empire and U.S.A.)
BRITISH Length Breadth / Depth at Sii!
Singapore—King’s Dock* .. .. 879ft. lOOft. 34ft. (L.W.)
Hong Kong
S J dn«-S«.h.rl,nd v D.cW- w MJt . mt , (H.Wj
Woolwich Dock ... 588ft. ÜBft. 28ft.
Fremantle-Large Government
Dock-Gonstruetion aband-
oned in- 1912 owing £o. bad
foandations • •"
Durban (S. Africa), new ... Us4ft. HOft. 4iffc -
Esgunnaalt (Vancouver), new,
nearing completion IOOOft.
U.S.A.—
Pearl Barbosi - (Hawaii),
Graving Dock (projecr.ed)— . _
Largo Floating Dock
Balboa (Panama Canal)—
Graving Dock IOOOft. HOft. ««,
San Francisco (Hunter’s
' Point). and others* IOOOft. 92-144ft.
(Overall)
Brcmerton, Washington 837ft. 35ft.
Manila (PMlippine Islands) —
Dewey (Floating) iiOOft. lOOft. 35ft,( 18^000- ton
Gnain (Caroline Islands) — _ _
pTojected
*This Dock is not large enpugh to accommodate thè principal British
"Capital” ship»; provision is being nmde for these in thè new Singapore
Naval Base, firat, by means of a large Floating Dock.
tThe Commonwealth Government proposes to submdise constructiou of
a Floating Dock of 20,000-ton lift. It is also proposed to increase length
o i Sutherland Dock.
LLOYD C. HUTCHINSON.


PREFACE
The primary object in publishing this Pamphlet is to mark
thè twentieth anniversary of thè foundation of thè Australian
National Defence League, N.S.W. Division, which was formed
in September, 1905, to advocate thè adoption of Universal (Com-
pulsory) Military or Naval Training as thè basis of thè Citizen
Force Defence System of Australia. The contenta deal with
various aspects of Australian Defence, and, in addition, include a
short history of thè work of thè League, which describes how
Universal Training was brought about and adopted by thè
Federai Parliament.
The Executive Committee of thè League also puts forward
this Pamphlet as a publication of value in thè Federai Election
Campaign, now upon us, in indicating thè needs of Australia
in matters of defence and some of thè improvements which are
required to make our Defence System reasonably sufficient for
thè purpose for which it is designed.
GERALD R. CAMPBELL
President.


CONTENTS
1. Universal Training in Australia.
2. Australian Defence.
:l. Australia and thè Air.
4. The White Australia Policy.
5. Australia and thè Pacific.
6. Dominion Neutrality in a British War,
7. Cadet Training.
8. Military Training Camps.
THE
Australian National Deence Lague
N.S.W DIVISION.
Denman Chambers, No. 4, First Floor,
Phillip Street, Sydney
A non-party Associatici!, thè object o' whìch is to take such measures as
may be necessary to secare —
(a) Universa! compulsory training (Military or Naval) of thè boy-
hood and manhood of Australia for purposes of national defence,
thè military training to be on thè lines of thè Swiss System and
thè nava! training on thè lines of thè British Royal Naval Re-
serve, modified to suit locai cireumstanees.
(b) An adequate and effective System of national defence.
Presidenti
Hoh. Brig.-Genl. G. R. Campbell, V.D. (Retired List).
Vice-Presidents ;
Rt. Hon. S. M. Bruce, P.C., M.C., M.P. Professor Sir T. E. David. K.B.E..
Prof. W. M. MacCallurn, LL.D. P.R.S., &c.
Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes, P.C., M.P. Dr. William Chisholm.
David Fell, Esq. Hon. J. C. Watson.
Executive Committee:
Brig.-Genl. A. T. Anderson, C.M.G. Captain A. W. Jose (Retired List).
Mi-, F. Berman. B.A. Lt.-Col. W. K. S. MacKenzie, D.S.d.
Major-Genl. C, H. Brand, C.B., D.S.O. Major Mari-, D.S.O., M.H.R.
Major C. A. Buchanan. Major J. M. Maughan, D.S.O.
Brig.-Genl. G. R. Campbell, V.D. Mj. V. J. Rundell Miles, M.A.
(Retired List). Mr. A. H. Nathan,
Dr. William Chisholm. Mv - B- F- Parker.
,, -li tt tj • + Rev - C. J. Prescott, D.D.
:Jr. H. E. Harnngton. Maj.-Gen. Sir Chas. Rosenthal.
Professor E, R. Holme, O.B.E. K.C.B., D.S.O., &c„ M.L.A.
Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes, P.C., M.P. Mr. F. A. A. Russell. M.A.
Hon. Secretary :
Mr. Lloyd C. Hutchinson, B.A., LL.B.
Assistant Hon. Secretary:
Mr. J. Dyneley Peli, B.À.
Hon. Treasurer:
Mr. Alan N. Brierley, B.A.
Subscription Rates.
(afe JMembership £10 10 0
Life Membershìp (Lady) 5 5 0
Ordinary Membership (Annual) 1 1 0
Associate Membership (Annual) 0 5 0
Associate (Annual) not less than 0 1 0


Universal Training in Australia
[The object of this Artide, which is condensed frpm a Paper read by
me in 1922 to thè United Service Institution of N.S.W., is to record thè
main faets connected with thè bringing about in Australia of Compulsory
or Universa! Military and Naval Training for as Joint Hon. Sec. (with
Hon. W. M. Hughes, M.P.) of thè Australian National Defence League,
N.S.W. Division, for many years, I had a special opportunity of learning
all that took place in connection with thè movement.
—Gerald R. Campbell, Col. (Hon. Brig.-General), Aust. Mil. Forces,
Moss Vale. Retired List
Prior to Federation in Australia (Jan. Ist, 1901), various individuai
thinkers on military matterà had advocated in Australia some kind of
scheme of Compulsory Military Training as thè basis of thè State’s De-
fence Systems. For example, in S. Australia, in 1895, Col. (now Major
General) J. M. Gordon, C. 8., then O.C. South Australian Mil. Forces, induced
thè Premier (Hon. C. C. Kingston) to provide a Reservé power of compul-
sion in his Defence Bill, but even this was restricted by Parliament to
thè “case of actual invasion or thè immediate prospect thereof declared
“by thè Governor by Proclamation.” Again, in N.S.W., in 1899, Capt. (now
Maj.-General) J. G. Legge, C. 8., made a distinct individuai effort by ad-
vocating thè application of thè broad principles of thè Swiss Military
System (based on compulsory training) to thè Defence System of Australia,
and pointing out that he did not “claim thè suggestions as new: most of
“them bave been put forward of late years in some form or another by able
“and distinguished officers and by many leading statesmen.”
These were purely individuai and isolated efforts, which made no
practical impression at thè time on thè minds of thè polìticians or generai
public of Australia.
After Federation of thè six Australian States had been accomplished
on January Ist, 1901, one of thè early acts of thè Federai Government was
to submit to Parliament a Defence Bill to consolidate thè existing Military
Forces of thè various States. In this Bill, introduced in 1902, there was a
section providing in time of War Compulsory Military Training and Service
for thè whole fit male population of military ages (18-60), but only for
service in Australia. Discussion on thè Bill continued on into 1903, and in
August of that year thè Hon. (now Rt. Hon.) W. M. Hughes, M.P. (then
of thè Federai Labor Party), took thè momentous step of moving ari
amendment to thè section referred to, in order to make thè proposed war
service of some value; thè amendment provided that thè male population
of thè ages, 18/19, 19/20 and 20/21 should be trained, in time of peace,
for 14 days, in Continuous Camp, and for 32 detached parades, in each of
such years. At first he stood alone in support of thè proposai—jeered at
even by members of his own Party—but promptly to his side carne two other
members of his party, Hon. J. C. Watson, his Leader, and Hon. W, G.
Spence; however, no further progress could then be made.
In thè middle of 1905 an attempt was made by Senator de Largle
(W.A.), to get thè System of Compulsory Military Training adopted by
thè Triennial Conference of thè Labor Party as a plank of its platform,
but he failed, as he had failed at thè previous conference in 1902. In thè
Press, thè “Bulletin” (Sydney) continued to advocate thè adoption of thè
system as opportunity offered.
About thè same time—middle of 1905—a copy of thè Journal of thè
National Service League of Great Britain, formed to advocate thè adoption


there of Compulsory Military Training for thè Auxiliary Military Forces,
thè Swiss Military System being put forward as an excellent model,
carne into my hands, and it soon occurred to me to establish a similar
league bere, and augment thè individuai efforts of thè past by concerted
public effort, and propaganda in favor of Compulsory Military and Naval
Training, thè military training to be on Swiss lines, and thè naval training
on those of thè Eoyal Naval Reserve, both modified to suit locai circum-
stances. This was thè germ of thè concerted movement which ultimately
brought about thè enactment by thè Federai Parliament of Universal Train-
ing as thè basis of thè Australian Defence System in place of “voluntary
enlistment,” which, it was felt, was quite unequal to provide thè numbers
and efficiency needed for Australian defence.
At thè outset it was decided that such a movement must be carried
out on non-party lines as far as politicai action was concerned; and this
decision had much to do with its ultimate success. The Federai politicai
position at that time was not a simple one. There was, first, thè Deakin
Party, which was in power, with Hon. A. Deakin, as Prime Minister, Hon.
T. T, Swing, Vice-President of thè Executive Council, and Senator Hon. T.
Playford, Minister for Defence; in direct opposition was thè old Liberal
and Free Trade party, led by Hon. (later Sir) G. H. Reid; there was also
thè Labor Party, led by Hon. J. C. Watson, with Hon. W. M. Hughes as
one of his principal henchmen, which generally supported thè Deakin
Government.
My first step, naturally, was to get in touch with Mr. W. M. Hughes,
as a pronounced advocate of Universal Training, though I had not then
made his acquaintance. He readily agreed to take an active part in thè
formation of thè proposed League. In discussing thè matter, he made two
statements which impressed one with his keenness on thè subjeet. One
was that he didn’t know what would become of our country and people if
thè youth did not get some sort of discipline instilled in them; thè other
was that he was a staunch Imperialist, one who believed in a United
Empire, although he couldn’t say that all thè members of his party held
similar views.
It was then decided to proceed with thè formation of a non-party League
—afterwards named thè “Australian National Defence League. N.S.W,
Division”—to advocate thè adoption of—
(a) Universal Compulsory Training (Military and Naval) of thè
boyhood and manhood of Australia for thè purpose of National
Defence, thè Military Training to be on thè lines of thè Swiss
System, and thè Naval Training on thè lines of thè British
Eoyal Naval Reserve, modified to suit locai circumstances.
(b) An adequate and effective System of National Defence.
In thè nature of things, Naval Service must be mainly under a Regni '>
or Permanent method of voluntary enlistment, and so in this article thè
military side of thè movement is mainly dealt with.
The next step was to seek thè aid of prominent citizens. Sir Normand
MacLaurin, M.L.C., Chancellor of Sydney University, and many leading
men of every profession and calling, who held very diverse views on other
matters, readily agreed to help. The Prime Minister, Hon. A. Deakin, also
gave a generai assent in favor of Universal Training, but his idea, at first,
was that this could be attained almost entirely by Voluntary means, thè
application of Compulsion only being needed to yard in thè few remaining
intractables! However, in 1907, during a visit to England, he became a
strong supportar of thè complete system. At first Hon. (later Sir) G. H.
Reid, M.P., leader of thè Opposition, was in accord, but he soon drew
back, satisfying himself with Compulsory Cadet training; later, however,


he approved of Compulsory Training for those under 21 years of age, and
ultimately he approved of thè extension of such training to later years
as defined by thè 1910 Amending Defence Act after thè visit of Lord
Kitchener. The leader of thè Labor Party, Hon. J. C. Watson, was a tower
o l strength to thè movement all through.
Progress in thè initial arrangement» was so rapid that it was possible
lo hold thè preliminary meeting at thè Australia Hotel on September sth,
ISOS. This was presided over by Sir Normand MacLaurin, and largely
attended by representative citizens of all politicai parties, and thè meeting
unanimously decided, on thè motion of Sir Julian Salomons, K.C., seconded
by Hon. W. M. Hughes, M.P., to proceed with thè formation of thè proposed
League, as a non-party organisation and having as its objects those already
set out above. A committee was appointed with Sir W. P. Manning and
Capt. W. Henderson as Hon. Treasurers, and Mr. W. M, Hughes and
myself as Hon. Joint Secretaries to draw up a constitution and arrange for
thè public launching of thè League at thè Town Hall, Sydney, at an early
date.
The first General Public Meeting to inaugurate thè formation of thè
Australian National Defence League was held at thè Town Hall, Sydney,
early in thè following month (October), thè Lord Mayor being in thè
Chair. The various Resolutions for thè formation of such a League on
non-party lines were carried unanimously after speeches in support from
Sir Normand MacLaurin (thè first President of thè Defence League), Sir
Julian Salomons, K.C. (who became thè second President of thè League),
Hon. T. T. Ewing, M.P., Vfce-President of Executive Council (Deakin Gov-
ernment), Sir William McMillan, Senator J. T. Walker (Reid Party), Hon.
.1. C. Watson, and Hon. W M. Hughes (both of Federai Labor Party), and
W. A. Holman (N.S.W. Labor Party).
The League then settled down to work, and registered itself under
thè N.S.W. Companies Act (‘not for gain’ Sectionß enrolled members
and proceeded with its educative propaganda. The modifications of thè
Swiss Military System, ultimately approved of by thè League, provided
for thè following Compulsory Military Training of adults (in addition to
Cadet Training) :
In Recruit Year < 18/ 19th year of age).—6o days Continuous Camp
Training, or as near thereto as possible, but not less than 42
days, plus 5 detached day parades.
In Seven Subsequent Years.—7 days Continuous Camp Training, plus
5 detached day parades, in each of such years.
In 30th year of age—Reserve Training—4 days Camp.
In addition, up to 40th year of age.—Musketry Course and Inspection
of Arms every year.
Mr. Hughes brought forward again in this year (1905) in thè Federai
Parliament, his Compulsory Training Resolutions already referred to, but
stili failed to pass them.
Towards thè end of thè year, Field Marshal Earl Roberts became
President of thè National Service League ot Great Britain, our prototype.
This proved of great advantage to our Australian effort, for we were now
able to point to that great soldier and patriot as our Leader, and all
through thè Australian League received thè greatest help from thè British
League and its ofiìcers, which contributed greatly to thè early success of
thè movement bere.
Shortly afterwards an attempi was made in Victoria to establish a
Di Vision of thè Defence League there, but though at first tba proposai
was supported by many leading Victorians, including Mr. Deakin, it failed
to make good, owing to thè restriction of its aims to “Voluntary” Uni-
versa! Training, and it so»n passed out of existence.


During 1906 thè membership of thè Defence League grew slowly—
-112 members in September—educative propaganda was kept to thè front,
and in August thè publication of thè Arsi number of its journal, “The
Cali,” took place. Its object was “To awaken Australians to realise that
thè defence of their Country is thè duty of all;” it was published quarterly
and proved a most efficiente means of propaganda, and was carried on for
four years fili July, 1910, and until thè success of thè movement was
reasonably assured by thè passing of thè Amending Defence Act of 1910.
As thè League’s Central Revenues were never large—on thè average, under
£2OO p.a., up to August, 1911—thè publication of “The Cali” was alone
rendered possible by thè strictest economy—no salaries, no rent, all articles
contributed without fee, etc.; many distinguished writers and artists con-
tributed to its colpmns, amongst whom may be mentioned, F.M. Earl
Roberts, Yiscount Milner, and “The Military Correspondent of thè Times”
(Col. a’Court Repington), and Mr. Norman Lindsay, who, amongst othet
contributions, supplied thè striking cover design for “The Cali.”
In this year, too, it was decided to forni Country Branches, and early
in 1907 thè first was formed at Millthorpe. Shortly after, others were
formed in towns of thè Northern Rivers of N.S.W. (mainly due to a tour
by Mr. W. M. Hughes), and at Tamworth, Newcastle, Grange, Bathurst,
Goulburn, Moss Vale, Albury, etc. —19 in all—thè most successful being
that at Tamworth, of which Dr. G. P. Stanley was thè energetic Hon. Sec.
As early as 1906 it became evident that thè propaganda was affecting
thè politicai mind—thè most convincing piece of evidence being thè
despatch by thè Deakin Government of Colonel (later Sir) W. T. Bridges
of thè General Staff, to Europe to report on thè Swiss Military System.
About thè end of this year, or early in 1907, a Fedirai Election took
place, which resulted in thè defeat of thè Minister of Defence, Senator
Playford; in thè necessary reconstruction of thè Deakin Government, thè
Hon. (later Sir) J. T. Ewing, succeeded him as Minister of Defence—a
great gain to our movement, for, from thè outset, Mr. Ewing strongly
supported thè adoption of Compulsory Training as thè basis of thè Aus-
tralian Defence System.
During 1907, both Mr. Deakin and Mr. W. M. Hughes visited England,
and both carne in touch with thè National Service League and Lord
Roberts, its President, from whom they received a hearty welcome ano
opportunity to speak on thè question of Military Training. To our great
satisfaction, Mr. Deakin, in his speech, carne out as a supporter of thè
principle of Compulsory Training as thè best basis of thè Australian De-
fence System; and on his return to Australia he announced in thè Federai
Parliament in December, 1907, that his Ministry had decided to introduce
(his principle into thè Australian Defence System, outlined his proposals in
a very notable speech, and stated that his Minister of Defence would place
thè necessary Bill before Parliament in due course.
This decision of thè Deakin Party and Ministry necessarily called for
Defence policy decisions by thè other politicai parties. So in thè middle
of 1908 we found thè Federai Labor Party at its Brisbane Conference, at
thè instance of its leader, Hon. J. C. Watson, adopting, by a large majority.
Compulsory Military or Naval Training as a Plank of its platform." The
Reid party, as a whole, stili limited itself to its Compulsory Cadet training
only, though individuai members strongly supported thè compulsory pro-
grammo of thè Defence League.
It was not till September of this yea.v (1908) that thè Minister of
Defence (Hon. T. T. Ewing) introduced thè Defence Bill promised by Mr,


Deakin; this Bill provided for Compulsory Training for Citizen Force
adulte (in addition to Compulsory Cadet Training), as follóws:—
I. In Recruit Year, 18/19 year of age.—lnfantry and Cavalry, etc., Com-
pulsory Training, not exceeding 18 working days, in a Recruit
Battalion, etc., or their equivalent.
In next two years.—Similar period (18 days) in each year, but in a
Militia Battalion, etc.
In next five years.—Training, not exceeding 7 working days in
each year.
11. —ln thè case of thè Naval Militia, and thè Artillery and Engineers,
thè training in thè first five years was to he 28 days in each
year, and for last 3 years, 7 days in each year.
No pay was to be given to Privates, except for training in excess
of 18 days.
In thè debates on thè Bill weak points, e.g., insufficiency of training
m Recruit year, were stressed. Nevertheless, to Mr. Deakin’s Ministry
(and his Minister of Defence) belongs thè high honor of being thè first
Australian Government to introduce a Bill embodying thè principio of
Universal or Compulsory Training as thè basis of Australian Defence.
Before thè Bill could be passed a politicai crisis occurred, and towards
thè end of 1908 thè Deakin Government was defeated in Parliament (not
on thè Defence Bill), and a Labor Ministry, under thè Hon. A. Fisher,
succeeded to office, thè Hon. W. M. Hughes being Attorney General. The
new Ministry’s existence was short-lived, for it met with defeat in May,
1909, but not before Mr. Fisher had announced at Gympie a Defence
policy embodying thè principle of Compulsory Training, as follows:
Recruit Year (18/19 year of age).—Compulsory Training for 16
days in Continuous Camp, also 12 Half-day Parades, and 24
Night Parades.
19/20 year. —Similar Compulsory Training period to that in Recruit
year.
20/21 year.—Compulsory Training for 7 days in Continuous Camp,
and similar Half-day and Night Parades to those in Recruit
year.
In thè 21/22nd year and 22/23rd year. —Only Voluntary training was
provided for—7 days each year in Continuous Camp.
Pay for Privates was to be 10/- per week during Camp training in
first two years, and then 12/- per week during Camp in each remaining
year.
A Coalition Ministry of thè Deakin and Reid Parties succeeded to
office on thè defeat of thè' Fisher Ministry in May, 1909—thè leaders being
Mr. Deakin (Premier), and Mr. (later Sir) J. Cook (Minister of Defence),
as Mr. Reid had eased off somewhat in his politicai activities. Mr. Reid,
however, in July, in thè face of thè growing German menace, handsomely
admitted in relation to Defence matters, that after all Mr. Hughes had
been right and he had been wrong in his reading of thè Empire’s dangers.
The Defence proposals of thè Coalition Ministry naturally took on
a “Fusion” complexion, thè Cook party, hitherto in favor only of Compul-
sory Cadet training—i.e., up to 18 years —yielding to an extension of Com-
piile ion up to 20 years of age. The Coalition Government aceordingly
submitted thè following Defence training proposals (omitting Compulsory
Cadet training) to Parliament, and they were ultimately on Decomber
13th, 1909, embodied in an Amending Defence Act:—


Recruit Year, 18/19th year.—Compulsory Training for 16 days (of
which 8 days in Camp), or their equivalent in a Recruit Battalion.
19/20th year.—Similar training to that in Recruit year, but in a
Militia Battalion.
Four Subsequent Years. —Voluntary training for 1G days in each of
these years.
The training of Artillery, Engineers and Naval Militia was pre-
scribed as 25 days yearly, instead of 16 days.
Pay for Privates was; —
2i/- per week in Camp in Recruit Year.
28/- per week in Camp in Second Year.
56/- per week in Camp in each subsequent (Voluntary) training
year.
This was a weaker dose of Compulsory Training for thè Citizen Force
than that of either thè Deakin-Ewing Bill, or thè Fisher Ministry’s pro-
posals; stili something was gained, for thè principle of Compulsory Aduli
training—as well as Cadet training—was accepted, During thè debate on
thè Bill thè Minister of Defence announced that thè Ministry were inviting
Lord Kitchener to visit Australia and report on our Defence System and
thè new Bill’s provisions: so hope sprang up that thè inadequate proposals
of thè Bill would he developed into something really valuable. The New
Zealand Government was also getting to work, and by December, 1909,
its Parliament had passed an Aet providing for Compulsory Training for
thè Citizen Force (as well as for Cadets), as follows:
Recruit Year, 18/19. —14 days Camp training, plus 12 Half-days
(detached parades).
19/20th year.—l4 days Camp training, plus 12 Half-days (detached
parades).
20/21st year.—l4 days Camp training, plus 12 Half-days (detached
parades).
followed by a similar period of Voluntary training in thè Tetri -
torial Force in each of thè three subsequent years, with a pro-
vision for thè application of Compulsion if a sufficient strength
was not achieved under Voluntary enlistment.
Pay for Privates. —21/- per week.
Early in 1910, Lord Kitchener arrived in Australia, inspected thè Mili-
tary Forces in Camp, investigated thè generai military position and thè
terms of thè new (1909) Defence Act, and in March sent in his Report
tothe Government; his Recommendations were*; —
In Recruit year (18/19th). —Compulsory Training as provided for in
New (1909) Defence Act.
19/20th year.—Compulsory Training, as provided for in New (1909)
Defence Act.
In 20/21st year.—Compulsory Training, of fi clear days in Camp
(Monday to Saturday).
♦ Lord Kitchener, in 1910, estìmated thè ni litary requirements of Australia at a Citizen
Force Arniy, in actnal training, of about 107 000 of all ranks, and 12,500 Reserves (training
completed )' —thè development of same to he spi ead over a eeven year training period. To-day
<mr Citizen Force Array, in training, numbt rs about 42.600, including those voluntarily
enlisted, and thè training required is far ina» than that prescribed by thè Defence Act,
and is spread over a 3 year period.-
G.R.C.


In 21/22nd year.—Compulsory Training- of G clear days in Camp
(Monday to Saturday).
In 22/23rd year.—Compulsory Training- of 6 clear days in Camp
(Monday to Saturday).
In 23/24th year.—Compulsory Training- of 6 clear days in Camp
(Monday to Saturday).
In 24/25th year.—Compulsory Training of 6 clear days in Camp
(Monday to Saturday).
In 25/26th year.—Master Parades only.
This moderate extension of Compulsory Training was recommended on
thè assumption that Home Training—short frequent drills near.the soldier’s
home—would he carried out by thè Soldier voluntarily throughout thè year,
This Voluntary Home Training was an essential feature of Lord Kitchener’s
proposals, and if it failed to materialise sufficiently—and it did so fail —
then as thè late Col. Poster, R.E., Director of Military Science, Sydney
University, pointed out, “there is little hope of forming an efflcient
National Force unless thè Compulsory periods were extended.”
Before thè Deakin-Cook Ministry could deai with Lord Kitchener’s
Recommendations, another Federai politicai crisis occurred, which resulted,
after a generai election, in thè return to power of thè Labor Party with
Hon. A. Fisher (Prime Ministeri, Hon. W. M. Hughes (Attorney General),
and Senator Pearce (Minister of Defence). Later in thè year, thè new
Ministry not only gave effect to Lord Kitchener’s proposals, ■ but actualy
increased thè Compulsory Training periods for thè Citizen Force, as follows,
by thè Amending Defence Act (December Ist, 1910): —
In Recruit year (18/19th year), and in each of thè following six
years—up to 24/25th year.
Artillery, Engineers, Naval I Infantry and
Militia. Light Horse. &c.
25 days, of which at least 17 | 16 days, of which
days in Continuous Camp. | at least 8 days in
il Continuous Camp
Total Days, Compulsory Training-—175 days and 112 days respectively.
In thè 25/26th year.—A Muster Parade only.
Pay for Privates.—4/- per training day in Recruit year, and 5/- per
day in subsequent years.
Colonel (now Lieut.-General, Sir) G. M. Kirkpatrick, of Lord
Kitchener’s Staff, who was shortly after appointed Inspector-General of
thè Australian Military Forces, supervised thè new scheme, saw to its
development during its early years. On Julv Ist. 1911, thè training of
thè Senior Cadets (four yearly classes, with a total strength of about
90,000) began. followed on July Ist. 1912, by thè commencement of thè
Compulsory adult training in thè Citizen Force of thè oldest quota of thè
Senior Cadets (now of thè age, 18/19), about 17,000 of them.
The work of thè Defence League was now largely flnished, except
to watch sympathetically thè working of universa! training—thè organisa-
tion, however. remaining intact and ready for further action at any time.
The aims of thè League had not been fully achieved as far as thè trainine
in thè Recruit year was concerned, but so much had been gained that it
was deeided not to press further for thè time being.
As thè Compulsory training proceeded its many advantages, both from
a Civic and Military standpoint, were fully realised by thè community as


a whole, and erstwhile opponents became enthusiastic supporters of thè
new System.
At outbreak of thè Great War (August sth, 1914, in Australia) thè
Australian Citizen Forces consisted of three drafts (July, 1912; July, 1913,
and July, 1914) of Compulsorily Trained Soldiers, plus thè old Voluntarily
enlisted militia, who stili continued their Service. The total strength was
approximately 60,000, of whom about 2,500 were officers; i.e., over 30,000
more than there would bave been had thè old System of Voluntary Enlist-
ment stili continued. The strength in Officers was about 50 per cent,
greater than it would bave been under thè old conditions. Equipment,
Arms, Ammunition, etc., were on a far greater scale than previously, and
some faetories had been established to, turn out further supplies. The
first batch of Cadets from thè new Royal Military College, Duntroon,
recommended by Lord Kitchener, was just about ready to graduate and
forni thè first quota of thè new Staff Corps—and. in fact, did join thè
First Division of thè Australian Imperiai Force.
During thè War thè annual training of thè Citizen Forces—of whom
at least 35,000 served in thè A.I. Force—was either abandoned altogether
or reduced, except in 1918/19, when a really good 3 weeks’ camp training
was carried out, until thè influenza outbreak, early in 1919, put a stop
to it.
After thè Armistice, for some years, thè training was very meagre.
In 1919, Federai politicai parties showed signs of a desire to interfere
with thè Universal Training Scheme of thè Defence Act. The Labor
Party, as it then existed—having lost, over thè Conscription issue in
1916, leaders like thè Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes, Senator Pearce, and Mr.
W. A. Holman—turned back on its tracks and removed Compulsory Mili-
tary Training from'its platform; thè Country or Progressive Party plaf
forni was by no means clear and satisfactory, and even thè National Party
for some time showed signs of favoring a reduction of thè Compulsory
Training Perioda.
Under these circumstances thè Defence League felt thè need for
fresh action, and in its Annual Report for 1919 pointed out thè dangers
to which thè Universal training System was exposed, and urged that,
instead of any reduction, what was really needed, in view of thè war
experience, was a re-arrangement of thè Compulsory Training periods of
thè Defence Act, whereby (without any increase of thè total number of
training days already provided for) thè training period in thè Recruit year
should be largely increased, whilst thè subsequent yearly trainings were
diminished in number, so that thè soldier might go free of training at
an earlier date.
And it was with much satisfaction that thè League found thè Prime
Minister (Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes) in September, 1920, proposing to Parlia-
ment a scheme for thè re-organisation of thè Compulsory Training System,
very much on thè lines suggested by thè Defence League, viz.:—
In Recruit Year, 18/19th year.—7o days Continuous Camp—for all
Arms,
In each of three following years.—l6 days, of which 8 in Continuous
Camp.
In each of three subsequent years.—Muster Parade only.
Total Training Days.—llß days, as against 112, for Infantry, etc.,
and 175 for Artillery, etc., under existing Defence Act.
Unfortunately, though Senator Pearce, in November, 1920, elaborated
these proposals in thè Senate, thè Prime Minister did not appear to bave
been able to carry his party with him, and not only has this exeellent re


organisation not been given eflfect to, but thè training provided for in thè
Defence Act as well as thè personnel to be trained, bave both been largely
reduced, by Government, supported by Parliament, rendering our Defence
System both inefficient and inadequate.
In view of all this, thè Defence League feels that it must once more
actively take up thè role for which it was founded, and appeals to all to
strengthen its membership, so that every eflfort may be made to preserve
Universal Training (preferably improved as suggested), which has proved
of such great value to Australia.
Australian Defence
(By Brig.-General A. T. Anderson, C.M.G.)
Turramurra.
I suppose that every Australian agrees in thè doctrine of a White
Australia, and even thè most thoughtless must sometimes realise with
a feeling of uneasiness thè temptation presented by thè large empty
spaces of his country to foreign Pacific Powers, over-populated and eager
to find some vacant ground into which they can expand.
Australia has a coast line of 12,000 miles, and an area of 3,000,000
square miles; about 49 per cent, of this area is situated within thè tropics,
and only 3 per cent, of thè total population live in this tropical portion.
She has a population of barely 6,000,000, with a density of 1.8 per square
mile; while Japan, to take one instance, has a population of 77 millions
and a density of 370. Even if, as Professor Griffiths Taylor says, an
area of about 1,200,000 miles (i.e., about 40 per cent, of thè whole of
Australia) can be ruled out as a possible region of dose settlement for
men of any race, thè danger remains a serious one; subtract this arid
40 per cent, altogether from our calculations, and thè population has
stili only a density of 3.4 to thè square mile.
Of course, thè best remedy is for Australia to increase her population,
and so remove thè temptation, or at least thè pretext, for invasion by
another Power. But thè process of building up a population, whether
by emigration or by naturai means, is a slow one, and meanwhile thè
country must be defended. Can we, as a matter of fact, say that our
arrangements for defence are adequate?
Australian defence is in thè main a naval problem, and though we
cannot provide and maintain a fleet sufficiently strong to cope with that
of any great Power, we must at least be prepared to protect ourselves
agains invasion or bombardment by thè use of aeroplanes, submarines
and destroyers, and to take some part in thè protection by cruisers of
our sea-borne commerce. Since thè Washington conference we are faced
with an entirely new naval situation; thè reduction of thè British Navy
to a one Power standard, and thè fact that thè Singapore base has not
yet been constructed, make it certain that a considerable time will elapse
after thè outbreak of war before a superior British fleet will be ready
to co-operate effectively in thè naval defence of Australia. During this
period an enemy possessing temporary naval ascendancy might well find
it possible to take offensive action against this country. It follows,
therefore, that a strong land force is also essential.
Let us examine briefly how thè defence of Australia stands at present.


Sirice thè sinking- of thè Australia, thè Australian fleet has no capitai
ship, and it now consists of four light cruisers, eleven destroyers and
a few other craft. The Federai Government has now made provision
l'or thè building of two largo (10,000 ton) light cruisers, and two ocean-
going submarine»; and it is also proposed to construct a seaplane carrier.
The total defence expenditure for this year (excluding submarines and
cruiser building) is ,£4,203,322, or about half a million less than was
expended in thè year immediately preceding thè great war. There is
also a further sum voted of one million pounds to cover thè first year
of thè five years Developmental Programma for increasing arms, arma-
ment, ammunition, ete. There are as yet no naval bases in thè country,
and it is very doubtful if thè chief ports are fumi shed with adequate
artillery defence.
Up to thè present thè Air Force has been a sadly neglected branch,
hut there are hopeful signs of better things to come. A Royal Australian
Air Force station is to be constructed at Richmond, and a scheme has
been approved for thè establishment over a period of five years of an
air force nucleus of 63 machines, with a personnel of about 500 officers
and men. Four amphibian aeroplanes of thè seagull type are to be
provided forthwith, and, if they prove satisfactory, thè number will be
increased duving thè year.
As regards land defence, there is not much room for adverse criticism
—theoretically. The Defence Act lays down that all male inhabitants of
Australia, between thè ages of 18 and 60 years, shall in time of war
be liable to serve in thè Citizen forces, and that all males from 12 to
26 years shall be liable in peace time to undergo military training. By
this Act, brought into law in 1909, thè principle of universal liability
to Defence Force training in time of peace was made law for thè first
time in any Engdish-speaking community. The liability to military
training was prescribed as follows:
(a) From 12 years to 14 years of age. in thè junior cadeta.
(b) From 14 years to 18 years of age, in thè senior cadets.
(c) Proni 18 years to 25 years of age, in thè Citizen forces.
(d) From 25 years to 26 years of age, in the citizen forces.
Provided that, except in imminent danger of war, Service under para.
(d) shall be limited to one registration or one muster parade.
The amount of training prescribed in the Act is not so satisfactory.
It is laid down as follows:
(a) In the junior cadets, 90 hours.
(b) In thè senior cadets, 4 whole day drills, 12 half day drills, and
24 night drills.
(e) in the citizen forces, 16 whole day drills or their equivalent, of
which not less than 8 shall be in camps of military training.
fit will be seen then that but for the period of training, which is
lamentably inadequate, the land defence of Australia leaves little to be
desired —in theory. U nfortunately, it has been decided that the operation
of the universal training law be restricted to the more populous centres
and to certain quotas only.
Junior cadets aro no lunger to be trained at all, while


■Senior cadet training is conflned to lads of 17 (one quota instead of
four), and Citizen training to youths of 18, 19 and 20 (three quotas instead
of seven). The organisation is stili kept up to thè originai scale, on
paper, i.e.:—
60 Battalions Infantry.
23 Regiments Light Morse.
66 Batteries Field Artillery.
and a due proportion of Engineers and Medicai and other Services. Mi
actual fact, however, there has been a disastrous falling off, and thc
conipulsory trained strength in 1925/26 will he only some 45,000 men,
as compared with thè strength of 122,000 in 1921. Another serious blow
has been struck against thè efficiency of thè force by reducing thè annual
period of training from 16 days to 12. The former period was inadequate,
butto attempt to train a soldier in 12 days, of which not more than 8
are spent in camp, is manifestly ridiculous. Small wonder that thè
Inspector-General of thè Military Forces declared in his report for 1922
that with such reduced strength and training “il. is quite out of thè
question to train an army for thè defence of Australia.”
In 1913, When thè population of Australia was about four and a
half millions, thè appropriation by Parliament for military expenditure,
exclusive of thè amounts voted for Works and buildings, was £1,603,880.
In 1925, with a population of six millions, and at a time of far greater
national danger, thè appropriation is only £1,051,816.
It may be of interest bere to compare thè cosi per inhabitant for
defence in Great Britain and Australia at each extreme of thè decade
1913-1923.
1913. —Great Britain, 33/9. Australia, 19/5.
1923. —Great Britain, 51/2. Australia 15/7.
In other words thè cost to thè Citizen of thè m other country increased
by over 50 per cent., while it decreased by about 20 per cent, in thè case
of his Australian cousin.
Such is thè present state of Australian defence, and it is safe to say
that no naval or military expert would consider it adequate in any
branch.
Even with thè two new cruisers which are to be built, our naval
force is far too weak for thè work it will be called upon to perform, and
we bave no naval base on our coast. We bave good cause to be thankful
that thè Singapore base is now to be constructed. This work is intended
for purely defensive purposes, and it is absurd to suggest that it can offer
any provocation to Japan; its importance lies not chiefly in thè Pacific,
but in thè Indian Ocean, through which gocs thè greater part of our trade,
and round which lies about threequarters of thè Empire. From thè
point of view of an Australian, however, thè chief consideration is that
thè project will give a first-class base for thè mairi fleet directly on thè
flank of any possible expedition for thè invasion of his country. This is
true, but at least one similar base on our own coast is necessary before
we can feel any security.
The naval policy, therefore, urged by thè National Defence League
is: (1) Provision of an adequate squadron for Australian waters in peace


time, thè capitai ships being found by arrangement with thè British
Government; (2) provision of a base in Australasia, with a dock cap-
able of docking thè damaged capitai ships, as well as smaller ships, of
such squadron; (3) provision of adequate garrisons and coast defences
to protect our naval base and ports.
As regards air defence, thè Federai Government has now at least
made a beginning, though much stili remains to be done. Our Air Force
must bave, to quote Sir Keith Smith, “single-seater scouts for spotting
purposes, two-seater fighters to attack thè swarms of enemy aeroplanes,
lòng-distance bombers to get thè first blow in upon thè aircraft carriers
and airships, and reconnaissance machines. In addition, we would need
in this country of long distances huge troop-carriers ; and, above all, we
have no airship to accompany thè defending fleet.” The Government
should give every encouragement to commercial aviation, and to thè
establishment of aeroplane works in Australia. A commercial air Ser-
vice would provide an invaluable reserve of airmen and material for thè
expansion of thè fighting forces in time of war.
As has been said, thè Act already provides for an army
of sufficient numerical strength, but although it is stili thè law, its pro-
visions have been so whittled down for reasons of financial stringency
that thè army exists for thè most part on paper only. The remedy is to
enforce thè Act as it now stands, and also greatly to extend thè period
of training. The National Defence League urges a prompt return to thè
full number of training days prescribed by thè Defence Act, but to
concentrate thè training within a small number of years, as proposod by
Mr. W. M. Hughes when Prime Minister in 1920—thè main concentration
(70 days’ camp training) being in thè 18th/19th (Recruit) year, followed
by short trainings in thè three following years.
Let me say in conclusion that thè National Defence League is no
advocate of militarism for thè sake of militarism, as thè Pacifista seem
to believe. We are Pacifists ourselves in thè true sense of thè word, but
we are convinced that thè only way to ensure peace is to be so strong
that no foreign Power will ever be temptcd to attack us. I read thè
other day a pamphlet on defence issued by a Peace Society in Australia.
It is an ingenious example of special pleading, and its author has dis-
torted history in a very diverting manner to suit bis own arguments.
His conclusion is that we should cease to suspect other nations of
harboring sinister designs, and should disami at once. But he deliberately
shirks thè obvious difficulty—ìf, after having followed his advice and
rendered ourselves helpless, we find that some nation has in fact har-
bored these sinister designs against our independence, what are we
to do? I do not wonder that he has shirked this question, for it is one
to which thè Paciflst can give no answer. They must be blinded by
prejudice indeed, and deaf to all thè warnings of history, who, casting
their eyes round thè world as 't is to-day, can deny that thè old proverb
is unhappily as true now as it has always been,
SI VIS PACEM PARA BRLLTTM


Australia and thè Air
(Captain Geoffrey Forrest Hughes, M.C., A.F.C., late Royal Air Force.)
Hunter Street, Sydney.
"We cannot make thè Air Force thè great weapon it must be unless we
have thè backing of thè whole country.”
Air Chief Marshal Sir Hugh Trenchard, G.C.8., D. 5.0., A.D.C., in an
address to thè Cambridge University on 29th Aprii, 1925.
The remarkable development of aviation in thè last ten years has
not only added new problems to war both on land and ai sea, but has
now detìnitely reached thè stage where a new form of warfare with new
problems of its own has been inflicted on thè world —war in thè air. This
does not mean that air war will supersede other forms of war, or that thè
next war will be fought and won in thè air, for in thè long run, to quote
a favorite phrase of Mr. C. G. Grey, Editor of thè “Aeroplane,”—“thè
only thing that wins a war and keeps it won is a soldier with a rifle in
his fist standing on his own fiat feet in thè enemy’s capitai city.”
Before thè war of 1914 air power was untried, and though during
five years of war great air forces were gradually built up on both sides,
thè possibilities and thè problems of war in thè air to-day are vastly
different from those of 1914-1918. From occasionai duels with revolvers
or rifles between two scouting aeroplanes in 1914, air fighting developed
so that in 1918 engagements between squadrons of 20 or 30 aeroplanes
on each side were not uneommon. These squadrons were at best a
number of individuala, without means of proper co-ordination, flying to-
gether into thè combat, and once an engagement became generai
it was stili a case of single combats—each individuai for himself —thè
resulting turmoil being admirably described in war-pilots’ slang as “a
Dog Fight.” Butto-day, with aeroplanes equipped with efficient wireless
telephones, a squadron of eighteen machines can be manoeuvred and
drilled by its leader, with thè precision of an infantry platoon on thè
parade ground, and it is not looking far ahead to picture fleets of aero-
planes manoeuvring in battle under thè orders of a commanding officer.
This is only one phase of war in thè air, taken as an example to
show how war-flying is to-day far ahead of even thè end of thè European
War. "Many other examples could be given, but space must confine this
paper to generai principles and their application to Australia.
On thè 29th Aprii this year, Air Chief Marshal Sir Hugh Trenchard,
G.C.8., D. 5.0., A.D.C., Chief of thè Air Staff, speaking at thè Cambridge
University, said: “The aeroplane to-day is thè most offensive weapon that
has ever been invented. It is a shockingly bad weapon of defence, but
it is thè only defensive weapon against thè aeroplane that has yet been
discovered, and even in these days of great scientiflc improvements and
inventions, I have grave doubts that any other weapon will take its
place for another hundred years, if then.”
There is no doubt that to-day Australia is practically unequipped with
this “most offensive weapon,” and thè extent of Australia’s weakness in
this vital arai of defence can best be realised by a short study, firstly, of
thè problems of air defence and thè organisation and equipment that is
essential to national safety in thè air, and then of our present position.
The organisation of an air force as outlined by Sir Hugh Trenchard
falls under three main divisions:—


(1) A sedioli responsible for defence against aerial invasion.
(2) A section to co-operate with thè Navy; and
(.'i) A section to co-operate with thè Army.
I. Defence against Aerial Invasion.
This section must be capable of defending thè nerve centres of thè
country (capitai cities, ports, railways, telegraphs, factories, etc.) against
hostilc air forces, for thè most efìicient fighting force would be useless
if thè enemy could cripple thè vital Services of thè country and so dis-
organise thè nation itself. This section should consist of three branches:
(a) Defensive aeroplanes, which are normally single-seater fighting
machines, capable of attacking enemy aircraft seeking to invade
thè home territory.
(b) Offensive aeroplanes, which are powerfm bombing machines,
capable of flying long distances and carrying great weight of
bombs. These are needed to attack thè enemy’s aerodromes,
bases, dumps and all his vital Services. In air war thè soundest
of all defences is to attack.
(c) Ground defences at vital points, consisting of anti-aircraft guns
and searchlights.
Z. Co-operation with thè Naval Force.
The work of this section is to assist thè fleet with scouting and obser-
vation of gun lire, to patrol home waters and protect convoys against
submarine attack, and to attack hostile craft with bombs and torpedoes.
For these purposes it needs various types of seaplanes and flying boats—
fast fighting machines for defence against enemy aircraft, large bombing
machines and torpedo planes for attack, deck-flying machines for use on
individuai units of thè fleet, and machines specially equipped for long
sea patrols. In addition, thè naval air arm should bave large seaplane
carrier ships to form mobile bases for its operations, and small
airships, which are of great value for thè protection of convoys. Needless
to say, thè personnel of this hranch must necessarily be trained in
Naval matters.
3. Co-operation with thè Army.
This section has to earry out thè work of spotting for thè artillery,
photography, co-operation with infantry in action, reconnaissance, bomb-
ing, and, of course, defence against enemy aircraft. The organisation
is divided into two groups—one to carry out tactfcal work, thè other
strategica! work, The former group consists of “Corps Squadrons,”
which do thè artillery spotting and infantry co-operation, and thè “tacti-
cal” reconnaissance, photography and bombing immediately connected
with locai operations. The latter group consists of “Army Squadrons,”
some of fighting machines to carry out thè offensive defence necessary
to minimise enemy aircraft activity and to protect thè corps machines
in their work, and others of heavy bombing machines for day and night
raids well back in thè enemy’s territory, and others of fast high-flying
aeroplanes for long strategica! reconnaissance? and photography welì
behind thè enemy lines.
All units must be very mobile and squadrons must be equipped with
travelling workshops, and all thè other ground equipment necessary for
establishing bases from which thè aircraft can operate. With so many
vari ed duties to perfnrm, an air force must be equipped with a great


many different types of aeroplanes, for each branch of its work requires
a special machine—fast single-aeater fighters, heavy bombers, specially
armored machines for low flying in contact with infantry, defensively
armed two-seaters for artillery spotting and reconnaissance, fighting sea-
planes, bombing seaplanes, torpedo carrying seaplanes and many other
specially equipped machines, including amphibians capable of flying and
alighting both on land and water.
The fìrst great problem is thè supply of personnei, including pilota,
observers and gunners, each trained to thè special work of his branch,
mechanics to handle aeroplanes, engines, guns, bombs, wireless and photo-
graphic equipment and all thè other highly technical equipment, staff
olficers, supply and equipment ofììcers, engineer offìcers for repair depots
and so on. The expense involved is such that thè most any country can
afford to maintain is a highly efficient permanent nucleus backed by a
reserve partly trained, but capable of being rapidly brought up to war
efiìciency.
In Australia we undoubtedly bave material second to none from
which to select thè personnei of an air force, but we bave at present only
a very small permanent nucleus, and until quite recently no organised
reserve at all.
After thè war a great number of first-class war-trained pilots and
observers and mechanics carne back to Australia, but, unhappily, thè vast
majority were allowed to drift back to civil life. A comparative handful
were appointed to thè Royal Australian Air Force, and thè rest were
allowed to scatter and lose all touch with thè air. For nearly six years
nothing was done, but now at last steps bave been taken to form a Citizen
Air Force, and a few of thè old war-trained men are attached to two
squadrons maintained by a nucleus of thè permanent force—one in Vic-
toria and one in New South Wales. The R.A.A.F. to-day has about 40
permanent offìcers of all ranks and about 20 offìcers holding short Service
commissions. Of these, about 12 are Stores and equipment offìcers, and
2 are medicai offìcers, so that we bave under 50 generai Service offìcers,
which includes staff and flying offìcers. In addition, there are perhaps 20
offìcers in thè newly-formed Citizen Air Force. This means that our Air
Force and Reserve to-day contains barely suflìcient offìcers for two Ser-
vice squadrons. It is not necessary to point out how hopelessly inadequate
this is even as thè nucleus of an organised air force.
Further steps are now being taken to form yet another reserve by
offering free flying training to university and other young men between
thè ages of 18 and 23, on eondition that they undertake to serve with
thè Air Force and reserve for 8 years. This also is a belated step in thè
right direction, and will undoubtedly meet with a good response, but it is
not enough. Of course, thè politicai answer to all this is that there is no
money to do more, but it is time Australia realised that national safety
is at stake and that money must be found to provide at least reasonable
safeguards.
Our air force should at least bave thè personnei necessary to provide
thè peace-time nucleus of a complete air force, with a reserve of partly
trained personnei suflìcient to bring thè force to a war footing without
undue delay. Behind that reserve there must be yet another reserve of
men, at least qualified as pilots, available as raw material, capable of
being converted into waf pilots in any emergency. A scheme is now on
foot co do this by thè formation of Flying Clubs equipped by thè Govern-
ment with low-powered aeroplanes, in which young men can learn to fly
at little cost. The Sydney and Melbourne sections of thè Australian Aero


Club are endeavoring to carry out this idea, and it is hoped that early
next year there will be active flying clubs in both cities.
In thè air defence of Australia thè problem of personnel is serious
enough, but it is simple in comparison with thè problem of equipment.
This problem has two phases; firstly, thè necessity for keeping equipment
up to date in time of peace, and, secondly, thè replacement of casualties
in war.
The vital equipment of an air force is aeroplanes and engines. With
aeroplanes inferior in performance to those of thè enemy, thè most
gallant pilots and observers are at a disadvantage so enormous that even
thè highest skill may be of no avail. Every day thè design of aeroplanes
and engines is being improved, and thè best fighting aircraft of to-day
are at least thirty per cent, better in performance than thè best machines
in use at thè end of thè war. Fighting machines capable of a top speed
of 120 miles an hour, which was thè best of 1938, would be hopelessly
outclassed by thè best machines of to-day, which, though more heavily
armed, can fly at 160 miles an hour or more. And thè progress in other
types has been no less marked.
In thè face of this we must realise that in Australia to-day, with thè
exception of two or three seaplanes of now obsolescent post war type,
our only equipment consists of what remains of thè British Government’s
gift of 100 aeroplanes of types in service in 1918, which are now quite
obsolete. The Australian Air Force does not possess even one really
modern aeroplano, and our only means of acquiring any modern type
of aeroplane is to purchase it in England or elsewhere, because Australia
itself cannot yet produce one. It is bad enough that our equipment is
out of date, but our position as regards replacements is even worse.
England has an organised aircraft industry capable of producing some
of thè finest aircraft in thè world, but on thè problem of replacements Sir
Hugh Trenchard said ; “In thè event of war, and a war in which this
country is seriously attacked by an air power, thè great problem to be
faced is that in thè fìrst clash of thè opposing forces thè casualties
will be very high and thè question of replacing from reserves will
be very difficult. In fact, they will be almost insuperable, not only for
this nation, but for any other nation. Let me explain. Supposing thè
two forces consisted of—let us take thè figure at somethìng like 100
aeroplanes on eaeh side. Within a month this figure wouid drop to some-
thing like 20 or even 10 aeroplanes, How are thè casualties to be replaced ?
For thè first month you will have your reserves, both pilots and machines,
but beyond that there will be no reserves that I can see—at any rate, none
that are fitto take thè field at once —and thè two opposing armies will
go on fighting each other on thè basis of 20 machines a side, instead of
100, From this you will see that whichever side can re-equip fìrst both
in pilots and machines and get back to thè originai number of 100
machines will probably win thè war.”
If war Comes to Australia, where are we going to replace thè enor-
mous wastage of 80 per cent, of our equipment in thè fìrst month? We
bave not to-day a single factory capable of producing an aeroplane or an
engine. Our only source of supply would be Europe or America. It
would mean months of delay before a single machine could be obtained,
and even then it would almost certainly have to run thè gauntlet of a
blockading navy. Until Australia can build its own aircraft and engines
its position in thè air ,-ls one of grave perii in thè event of war. If war
comes to Australia it .will come from a nation prepared and equipped to
wage war, and thè air will play a vital part. It is useless to discuss
in detail abstract plans of aerini defence when we have not thè means


to defend ourselves. Before Australia can pian its aerial defence it must
have thè weapon to use, and thè first great task is to forge that weapon.
The immediate problema are firstly to organise a reai and complete
air force; secondly, to equip it with modem aircraft; and, thirdly, and
possibly most vital of all, to build up an industry capable of producing
aircraft and engines, which alone will make Australia independent of
external sources of supply.
All these problema can be solved, butto solve them thè nation must
spend money. They can never be solved while governments allow only
niggardly sums for air defence.
Only a few months ago a new Air Force Station was established at
Richmond, and it was necessary for thè aeroplanes to be flown from Point
Cook in Victoria to Richmond. The newspapers were full of thè pitiful
story of most of thè machines delayed and damaged along thè route. Two
or three machines goth through within thè first few days; thè rest either
straggled in later or flnished thè journey ingloriously by train. We cannot
expect much more than this from our air force equipped with obsolete
machines and with inadequate flnancial backing.
The people of Australia must get in touch with thè air, and must
realise that it brings war to towns far from thè firing line, into thè very
homes of non-combatants, and that without sound air defence thè very
heart of thè nation is laid bare to thè sword of thè enemy.
The White Australia Policy
(H. S. Nicholas.)
Phillip Street, Sydney.
The past six years bave been crowded with events hearing on thè
relations of Australia with thè other members of thè British Common-
wealth and with other countries. The Imperiai Conference which fol-
lowed thè end of thè war witnessed a sharp division of opinion between
two groups of Dominions and was followed by thè Washington Conference
and thè substitution of a Pour Power Pact for thè Anglo-Japanese Alliance.
The League of Nations has issued thè Mandates for thè former German
possessions South of thè Equator in thè form desired by Australia, but
not until after repeated protests by thè Japanese delegates and subject
to a reservation of their right to bring forward again their demand
for equality of treatment. The Assembly of thè League has also dìs-
cussed thè famous protocol and approved of an amendment proposed by
Japanese representatives and intended to bring every question of inter-
national relations in one form or another within thè cognisance of thè
International Court.
Within thè Empire thè settlement of Kenya has brought about a
conflict, in which both sides claimed to be in thè right, and of which
thè conclusion has aroused expressions of bitter resentment from certain
of thè Indian leaders. In Great Britain a Labor government has appeared
for thè first time and has reversed thè plans of its predecessors for thè
defence of thè Pacific, only to bave its own plans reversed at thè end of
a short reign. It has been followed by thè réturn of a Conservative
Ministry with a huge majority, which, like other Ministries before, has
found its first serious crisis in internai divisions on thè defence estimates.


What inference should be drawn from these events by those of us
who believe that thè maintenance of thè White Australia policy is of
vital iinportance to thè future yell-being of Australia? It is clear that
thè nations of thè worid aro looking for peace, and that ir many eoun-
tries there is a widely felt desire to reduce thè burden of armaments.
There are sections which believe that pxolonged peace is unattainable
or perhaps uiidesirable, and in some countries they may be strong
enough to direct thè national policy, but thè generai trend of popolar
governi merits is to And a means of settling international disputes other
than by going to war. Dces this furnish a reason for thè Australian
people to believe that they can preserve their White Australia ideals
witnout sacrifìces or without being prepared to defend their country if
need be ? The lesson of events is fairly clear. In thè first place, one
nailon will be more reluetant than ever to come to thè assistance of
another uuless its ovvir vital interests are directly involved. In thè
second place, nations newly rising irto strength and dignity are inclined
to attach more importance than ever to thè attitude of people ovefseas
towards their exiled or emigrant fellow-countrymen. The Kenya settle-
ment affected a very few people, but it was made a test case by thè
people of India. The White Australia policy affects very few Japanese,
for it is so administered as not to interfere with merchants, students or
to arista, but it has been thè subject of protests Urne after time, and
Jiowever carefnlly it has been explained, has been treated as inconsistent
.with thè dottrine of equality among civilised peoples. In almost every
instance thè desire for peace and disarmament is subject to a reservation
of those interests which eaeh nation ccnsiders vital to its honor or its
security. There is no interest which Australia considers more essential
to its security than thè maintenance of thè White Australia policy, and
none which other nations consider nearer to their honor than thè right
of their nationals to be treated on thè same footing as those of other
countries.
The White Australia policy entails two obligations on thè Australian
people. The first is to be able to explain it to thè peoples of other
countries and to thè British people in particular. Some English writers
assure us that thè interests of thè people of Great Britain and of Aus-
tralia are one, as ve believe they are, and that therefore Australia’s
quarrel will always he Great Britain’s, which by no means follows—
others writing with apparent authority declare that thè two countries
bave nothing in common, and that Australia must be prepared to defend
herself. The one thing clear in this divergente is that our policy must
be explained; it may or may not be accepted, but it will not be taken
on trust. The secood obligation is that we must be prepared to defend
ourselves so far as our resourccs will permit. The two obligations are
from one point of view thè same. We cannot expeet to convince other
nations of our belici in a policy unless we are ready to, defend it and
can give proci of our readiness. It is no use asking other people to take
a share in our defence if we also say that it can never be in danger. In
thè early days of thè Australian Kavy and of thè Citizen Forces, readiness
for self-defence; was treated -as a test of self-respect. It should be thè
same to-day. To say that we will adhere to thè White Australia policy
ac all hazards and yet that we will submit to no sacrifices is to make our-
seives ridiculous. W r e issue a chaìlenge and then refuse to put ourselves in
readiness. To cali ourselves a nation and yet not to ftt ourselves for
defence when other nations bave stili their armies and navies is bad
enough, butto cali ourselves a nation with a policy and yet not to bave
an organised defence force is humiliating.


Australia and the Pacific
(Arthur Jose.)
87 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.
The interests of Australia in thè Pacific are concerned chiefly with
defence. Her actual trade with thè Pacific Islands, British and other,
amounts to very little—about one per cent, of her importa originate there,
and less than 1.4 per cent, of her exports bave that destination (consider-
ing Australian-made exports only, thè proportion is about .88 per cent.).
But quite 25 per cent, of her export trade and at least a third of her
import trade pass either across or along thè edge of thè Pacific Ocean, and
vvould need safeguarding in time of war; and among thè non-British island'.
in thè western area—fewer now, no doubt. than they were —lie several ex-
cellent harbours that would provide an enemy with handy bases for an
attaek on thè continent. By calling them “bases” one does not necessarily
imply that such harbours need be seriously fortified, as would bave been
implied in or before 1914. It is highly improbable that any Great Power
would, in view of thè undertaldng entered into at Washington, attempi
now to fortify any harbour within a week’s steaming from Australia; it is
doubtful whether any such harbour was so fortified before thè Washington
treaties were signed. But nowadays fortification is of less importance
than we used to think it, except for thè great permanent bases where
fleets can be refitted and replenished with stores. Oil fuel, and thè im-
menaely wider range of aeroplano and radio work, bave vastly increased
thè vaine to combatants of any harbour that can provide a sheltered
hiding place not too far from thè hostile territory- Consider, for instance,
thè value of thè Marshall Islands lagoons to Admiral von Spee in thè early
days of thè war; consider, too, thè value to thè “Emden” of Diego Garcia,
and to thè “Wolf” of Sunday Island in thè Kermadecs and “Pirate Cove”
in Dutch New Guinea. The point need not be elaborated further.
It must not be forgotten, too, that one group of Pacific islands, and
that a distant one. is of peculiar importance to thè Commonwealth.
Fanning Island, thè halfway house of thè Pacific cable, is a vital link in
our Communications with thè outside world; it and its near neighbours
Washington and Christmas Islands need ampie protection as soon as thè
vaguest suspicion of war troubles thè minds of men.
Having, then, these interests in thè Pacific—a small trading interest,
a narrow but vital interest in thè maintenance of communieation with
America, and a vaguer but far-reaching interest in thè security of our
overseas trade—what is Australia doing to conserve them ? What should
she do? and what can she do? She is doing practically nothieg; partly
through lack of long experienee in world affairs, partly throug’h mere slack-
ness, she is scarcely even trying to minimise her own danger. She can
do, of course, comparatively little; that is made certain by h?r paucity of
pooulation, her diversity of regional interests (what genuine interest has
a Western Australian in Pacific affairs?), and her ever-growing need of
resources anplicablc to internai development. And, because. she can do
comparativelv little, she appears to be sinking back into thè aft’'tude of
forty and fiftv years ago, thè lazy. unintelligent reliance on thè mother
country’s good nature which so nearly left us exposed in 1914 to f he attaek
of von Spee’s cruisers.
Little as it may be. she one-ht to be doing all she can, Not for her
own sake only; she is no isolated dweller in a country bungalow, but thè
occupanti of one wing of a great mansion. And as for depending, unin


telligently or otherwise, on thè good nature of thè Imperiai Government
and those who stand behind it, why should there he any good nature to
depend on ? In other words, what, outside thè interests of Australia (and
New Zealand), are thè interests of thè Empire in thè Pacific ?
Three, mainly; those concerned with trade, territory, and thè main-
tenance of racial purity. This does not mean that thè Empire, as a whole,
thinks so, more especially about racial purity; for a large part of thè
population that in fact provides thè defence of thè Empire, habit in thè
flrst place, and thè importance of Eastern trade in thè second, are thè only
reasons that prevent them from dropping their burden. Now British trade
is very little concerned with thè Pacific. As we saw during thè war—as
thè choice of Singapore, so remote from thè Pacific, for a permanent naval
base indisputably demonstrates—Eastern trade for Britain means thè China
trade, and that can he safeguarded without worrying about thè Pacific at
all. Consequently thè only sure base for our reliance on British help in
guarding thè Pacific for us is a desire among British statesmen to pre-
serve thè integrity of thè Empire; and, candidly speaking, there seems
little reason why anyone else should wish to keep Australia within thè
Empire if she does not show any such desire herself.
It is important to emphasize this point, that practically thè sole reason
for any British interest in thè Pacific is thè existence in that ocean of
Australia and New Zealand. In a despatch of 31st October, 1903, thè then
Secretary of State for thè Colonies wrote:—
The whole of Piji, some 88,000 square miles in thè part of New
Guinea nearest to Australia, almost all thè great chain of thè Solomon
Islands, thè Gilbert and Silice Islands, thè Cook group, and a large
number of scattered islands bave been added to thè Empire during
thè last thirty years. Most of those acquisitions bave been made in
consideration, mainly (sometimes entirely), of thè interests and senti-
ments of Australia and New Zealand.
And as far back as 1875 Lord Carnarvon was writing;—
It would be impossible for a very large proportion of thè tax-
payers of this country (Britain) to understand on what principle they
should bear, while thè colonies immediately concerned should be
exempted from, thè burden of expenditure that may be incurred in
connection with such places.
All that is as true now as it was 22 and 50 years ago—or, at any rate,
as firmly believed by thè Colonial Office and thè men who control or
influente it. Britain is induced to interest herself in thè Pacific by our
trade, not by hers; by our existence and our desires, which she will
assuredly neglect if we do; and by a deraand for thè maintenance of racial
purity bere which we assert without supporting, and in which quite a large
proportion of Britons do not believe. This seems an inseeure basis for
thè continuance of her former good nature.
If, then, we are to hope for a spontaneous and steady support from
thè rest of thè Empire, we must take on ourselves some part of thè burden
that is involved in thè maintenance of British power in thè Pacific. This
means (a) working far more strenuously at our own defences. both land
and sea; (h) making it easy, by thè construction of adequate permanent
bases along our shores, for a strong British squadron to operate in
western Pacific waters; (c) taking over, as Alfred Deakin and Andrew
Fisher long ago proposed, a share of thè polire work and possibly other
administrative work among thè British groups; (d) setting ourselves to
"lak 1 Australia—thè whole continent a great Imperia! base for thè
Pacific, as thè mother country is for thè Atlant’c. self-contained as regards
all thè nesessaries of life and thè material needs of war, and self-defended


from end to end by an adequate and effectively-trained white population.
It will be thè work of years; but every year that does not see it begun
adds two to thè period of its completino.
Dominion Neutrality in a British War
(Professor A. H. CHARTERIS, LL.B., University of Sydney.)
Phillip Street, Sydney.
Fifty years ago, when thè Little England Policy of thè English Liberals
was at its height, there arose in Australia, as a sequel of thè grant of
Responsible Government, and thè withdrawal of Imperiai troops from thè
Colonies, a vigorous, if short-lived, campaign, led by Mr. Gavan Duffy,
of thè Victorian Parliament, for Colonial Federation, combined with an
optional neutrality of thè Australian Colonies in a British War. The latter
point it was proposed to secure by thè grant from thè Crown of treaty-
making powers in order to establish neutrality by direct agreement be-
tween thè Colonies and thè Great Powers in Europe. Mr. Duffy even
succeeded in securing thè appointment of a Royal Commission, to examine
and report upon his proposals. The Commission, which consisted of Con-
servative and Liberal members of thè Victorian Parliament, with thè latter
in slight preponderance, issued its favorable report at thè psychological
moment when thè news of thè Franco-Prussian War had reached Australia,
and when a French squadron was reported to be cruising off her coasts.
The recommendations of thè Commission endorsed thè proposai for optional
contractual neutrality on thè part of thè self-governed Colonies, with
power to them, however, to lend England a helping hand if so disposed,
and pointed out that recognition of their neutrality would not “deprive
them of thè power of aid by thè Mother Country in any just and necessary
line.” To a country practically defenceless as Australia then found her-
self, thè proposai held out an attractive prospect of immunity from attack,
which some of thè locai newspapers were not slow to praise, although thè
“Argus” and thè “Daily Telegraph” condemned it as impracticable. The
Victorian Legislature, however, took little stock of thè proposals (1). Apart
from all other objections thè technical point weighed with Parliamen-
tarians. viz.. that in thè absence of treaty-making power (which thè
Imperiai Parliament was unlikely to concede for thè purpose contemplated)
thè Colonies could only approach thè European States through thè Colonial
and Foreign Offices, which would be certain to pigeon-hole thè Colonial
overtures as soon as made. They might bave added that a neutrality ter-
minable at Colonial option was not worth making a treaty about. In
England thè agitation attracted no attention at all. Those who learned
of it dismissed it as separatisi in tendency, if only because its advocacy
by Mr. Gavan Duffy, who also was suspect for his Irish associations. In
Australia itself thè agitation subsided almost as quickly as it had arisen.
No other Colony moved for thè idea. And thè last flicker of interest in it
died when, ip thè early eighties, renewed interest of thè Australian
Colonies in Pacific affairs, demonstrated that without Imperiai intervention
this interest could not be effectively asserted. The existence of French
penai settlements in New Caledonia, which offended Australian sentiment
as a whole, thè German ambitìons in New Guinea, which offended Queens-
land sentiment, thè German-Spanish Dispute regarding thè Caroline
Tslands and thè generai scramble for thè Islands of thè Pacific—these cut
thè ground away from thè Neutralists and, indeed, created thè demand
(1) Fuller details of thè Victorian agitation will be found in thè
Politicai Science Quarterly, 1922, p. 415. Reference may also
be made to Keith’s “Responsible Government in thè Dominions,”
Voi. 111., p. 1155, where thè relevant paragraphs of thè Re-
eommendations of thè Royal Commission are quoted.


for thè very opposite of their desire—an Australian Monroe Doctrine to
be promulgated via Downing Street. Moreover in thè earlier eightìes it
became known that in thè last Anglo-Russian crisis thè Vladivostock
fleet had received instructions to bombard thè Australian coast towns in
thè event of war.
In our own day thè demand for Dominion Neutrality in a British War
has been revived by people who do not seem to bave thought out thè
implications of neutrality in reference to membership of thè British Em-
pire. The demand draws strength, not merely from thè increase of stature
(if not of status), which thè war brought upon thè Dominions, but also
from thè abortive proposai of Germany on thè outbreak of thè Great
War to exclude thè African Colonies of thè respective belligerents from
thè theatre of war by agreement. Germany offered to maintain her re-
cognition of thè neutrality of thè Belgian Congo as already declared in
virtue of provisions in thè Final Act of thè Treaty of Berlin, 1885, and
to recognise and respect during thè War thè neutrality of all thè African
possessions of thè other Allied Powers on terms of reciprocity. For various
reasons thè proposai was nnacceptable to thè Aìlies, to thè British
Empire, if only because of thè powerful wireless station in German Togo-
land, by which Germany could maintain communication with “The Emden”
and her cruisers stili at large. No sooner was it declined, than Uganda
was invaded by German forces from German East Africa under that
elusive paladin von Lettow.
The quasi-independent status which thè Treaty of Versailles has
secured to thè self-governing Dominions and India, has, no doubt, been
taken into account in certain military commitments which thè British
Empire has since undertaken or proposed. It was safeguarded, for ex-
ample, in thè abortive Anglo-Prench Alliance which was mooted by Mr.
Lloyd George on thè eve of thè Cannes Conference, 1922, as a guarantee
of French security against unprovoked German attack and as facilitating
a final settlement of Reparation and Inter-allied Debts. Conforming
exactly with a provision in thè Anglo-French Alliance of 1919, which
Mr. Hughes countersigned on behalf of Australia, but was never ratified
owing to American repudiation of a similar defensive measure, thè draft
Agreement of 1922 provided in S. 4 that thè Treaty obligation to assist
France should not bind any British Dominion unless and until it had been
approved by thè Dominion concerned. But this very provision contem-
plated thè possibility that—say—Australia might reject thè alliance while
thè rest of thè British Empire accepted it. The result on thè status of
Australia as belligerent or neutral in thè event of thè Empire requiring
to go to thè assistance of France was, of eourse, not specified, but there
can be no doubt that Australia’s continued membership of thè Empire
would bave involved her, at thè very least, in participation in thè state of
war with all its consequences on thè civil side.
In thè Irish Free State Treaty, thè distinction between participation
as a Dominion in a state of war and participation of Irish forces in actual
hostilities is more clearly expressed, as was both possible and desirable
ir. a constitutional agreement with none but incidental International sigm-
fìcance. Thus in thè Irish Free State (Agreement) Act, 1922 (which gives
thè force of law to thè so-called Irish Treaty) Art. 6 provides that until
thè Irish Free State undertakes her own Coastal defence by virtue of an
agreement with thè British Government:—
“thè defence by sea of Great Britain and Ireland shall be undertaken
“by H.M. Imperiai Forces. . . .”
(this provision to be reviewed by a joint conference in five years time).


And by Art, 7, thè Government of thè Irish Free State shall afford
to H.M. Forces. . . .
“(b) In time of war or strained relations with a foreign Power such
“harbor and other facilities as thè British Government may require
“for thè purpose of such defence, as aforesaid.”
On thè other hand, Art. 49 of thè Irish Free State Constitution, which
thè Imperiai Parliament declared (subject to certain conditions) to be
law by virtue of thè Act of that title (Session 2) provides that:—
“Save in thè case of actual invasion, thè Irish Free State. . . .
“shall not be committed to active participation in any way without
“thè assent of thè Oireachtas” (Parliament).
These provisions, it is conceived, merely deciare explicitly in regard
to thè Irish Free State, thè powers actuaily possessed, at present by any
of thè other Self-Governing Dominions concerning thè use of armed forces.
It is perfectly consistent with this view, that thè much debated
guarantee clause (Art. 8) on thè Straits Convention, 1923, draws a distinc-
tion between thè British Empire (which is thè sole contracting British
party and of which a single plenipotentiary, Sir H. Rumford, signed thè
Treaty), and Great Britain as thè part of thè Empire immediately bound
by thè guarantee. The Artide provides:—
“The High Contracting Parties agree as follows. . . . should
“thè freedom of thè navigation of thè Straits or thè security of thè
“demilitarised zones be imperilled by a violation of thè provisions
“relating to freedom of passage or by a surprise attack or some act
“of war, thè High Contracting Parties, and in any case, Prance, Great
“Britain, Italy and Japan, acting in conjunction, will meet such viola-
“tion, attack or other act of war or threat of war, by all thè means
“that thè Council of thè League of Nations may decide for this
“purpose.”
Presumably this means that in thè event of a state of war requiring,
or resulting from, thè intervention of thè four specially named guarantors.
it would legally extend to thè entire territory of each of these High Con-
tracting Parties although thè obligation to take such hostile measures
as thè situation demanded and thè Council authorised would bind only thè
guarantors specially named.
This was ultimately admitted even by thè Canadian Government, which
had declined to submit thè Treaty to Parliament for approvai, on thè
ground that Canada recognised no obligation binding her in honor to co-
operate with Great Britain in this guarantee, since she had not been repre-
sented at thè Lausanne Conference.
There is an important distinction, then, between (a) participation of
Dominions forces in a war in which thè British Empire is a belligerent.
and (b) Dominion participation in a, state of war which applies to thè
Empire (e.g. through hostile attack on any part thereof). Consent of
thè Dominion Parliament would normally be necessary for participation
under (a), while under (b) it would not. Effective neutrality is an
Empire war, such as is desiderated in some Dominions, could only result
from agreement with thè Empire’s opponent. Effected by thè wilì of thè
Dominions alone, it would never amount to more than neutrality on suffer-
ance of thè “enemy." Thus thè implications of thè Smut’s Theory of
Dominion Status;—


“In future thè Dominions have in principle authority and power
“not only in respect of their domestic questions, but also- of their
“international and foreign relations and thè questions of peace or
“war which may affect them. If a war is to affect them, they will
“have to declare it. If a peace is to be made in respect of them,
“they will have to sign it” (2)
are at least as likely (in thè General’s recent phrase) to “take thè heart
out of thè Empire,” as thè proposed Security Pact (which he dreads).
It is not possible to remain atone and thè same time a member of thè
British Empire and neutral while thè Empire is at war. Not only does
a daini to this position destroy a Dominion’s moral ground for expecting
(let alone demanding) Imperiai co-operation in a Dominion war. but even
if it were practicable in war, such “neutrality on sufferance” would be
certain to turn, if thè enemy should win, into most vital participation
on thè Empire’s misfortunes.
If anything more is needed to bring home to thè plain Citizen thè
elementary fact that legally there is no escape frqm Dominion participa-
tion in a state of war, let him be reminded that from thè moment of thè
outbreak any merchantman registered in a Dominion and found at sea
would be liable to captare and condemnation as an enemy vessel at thè
hands of an enemy possessing a navy. No doubt thè enemy might waive
thè right of captare or, for lack of opportunity, be unable to enforce it,
but neither of these alleviations depend on thè will of thè Dominion.
Cadet Training
(Dr. C. J. Prescott.)
Newington College, Stanmore.
I have no sympathy with thè idea that thè training >i boys as cadets
tends to what men cali militarism. Of course, it does not imply that there
is at least a remote possibility that thè boy, when grown to manhood,
may be required to serve as a soldier; but he must be singularly lacking
in intelligence and commonplace information if he does not see that that
may be demanded of him, anyhow. If he is an English boy, he knows
that jast across thè Channel there are other nations with which his
country has fought in thè past; and if he is an Australian he has sense
enough to know that even in thè island continent he is within striking
distance of swarming Asiatic nations. But little of this enters thè head
of thè average cadet.
If everything that may encourage a war-like spirit must be cut
out of his lite, it is surprismg how much will go. British history ano
every other kind of history is full of thè records of wars and battles;
if it has to be admitted that these have taken a disproportionate place
in thè story, it is yet impossible to write history without reference to them.
We cannot read our nation’s literature and its glorioue poetry without
(2) Speech of 3rd December, 1920, quoted in Round Table, March,
1921, 442.


hearing its battle music; thè Bible itself is a record of conflict, of stress
and storni, and some of its finest psalms are war poetry. Whatever
heights of happy pacifismi humanity may reach in years to come, it
cannot forget thè pathway that leads to them, and he would he a strange
boy that could read th© old story without some quickening of thè pulse
and some stimulating emotion.
Nor must it be forgotten that contest and strife are thè very essence
of a boy’s games. No doubt, it would be possible to pian out some sort
of physical training, scientitìcally designed to develop in him every
organ and every muscle of thè body. But it would be thè tamest and
most distasteful training in thè World. Under thè stimulus and excite-
raent of his games, thè normal British boy will put out three times, five
times as much zest and emargy as he would if he went through some
monotonous round of exercìses. Quiet tennis, thè old man’s bowls, rough
football bave this in common, that they all involve rivalry and contention.
Rob them of that spice and mudi of thè ir attractiveness is gone. Many
a soldier moving to battle has been reminded of thè matches he played
as a schoolboy, and found that these have been an unexpected training
for thè stern game of war. But very few schoolboys playing football
are ever led to think that if it is football to-day it may be war to-morrow.
Boxing is a wholesome game for boys. It calls t'or numerous activities
of thè body. It is strenuous, it demands patient endurance, as well as bold
attack, and it puts a fine restraint upon thè temper; yet in its essence
it is a veiled forni of fighting. Scouting has a fascination for thousands
of boys, and girls have responded to thè cali for girl guides, and this is
a recreation suggested by warfare. Rifle-shooting, apart from any use
in warfare, is an excellent sport, and attracts its votaries in large num-
bers. If everything that savours of war and conflict must be cut out of
boys’ lives, it is surprising to see how far logie will carry us.
Yet thè sum total of thè influences of all these things in encouraging
a military spirit is almost negligible. If, indeed, they are deliberately
intended to awaken such a spirit, and are directly used for such an end,
then they may become military stimulants. But with our national
temper there is no reai danger of that.
In favour of cadet training thè physical gains naturally come first.
With our schools constituted as they are, and setting store upon thè
physique of their boys and girls, provision is made for a large number
of them. But many are not thus reached, and cadet training makes
compulsory for all what otherwise would be thè privilegi of a few. At
thè early stages this physical training is naturally by thè most prominent
feature, and to gather into its sweep all thè boys of thè land is to give
thè opportunity for healthy physique to hundreds who otherwise would
miss it. A Commonwealth obligation becomes a Commonwealth bene-
diction. Untold benefits result from thè medicai inspection given to all
children in thè elementary schools. Cadet training carries thè benefit
further stili, for it provides thè means by which thè defeets noticed may
be remedied. A wise nation wishes to consist of able-bodied men and
healthy women; and thè way to secure that is to deal with thè children
first and then thè growing boys. No doubt thousands of children grow
up, especially in thè country, in conditions favourable to robust health.
Yet even there some are missed, and for town children thè oppor-
tunities are by no means so great 1s it not obviously a national gain
to have a System that gives guarantees that none shall lese thè privilege
of it, except those that cannot profit by it? If nothing resulted from
cadet training but thè physical benefits, it would be a national boon
gained at trifling expense.


The second great advantage is thè training in team Work and mutuai
social help. Apart from its physical beneflts, driil is thè method by
which raumbers are brought to act as a unity. fiere again sckool lite
contributo» its lessous. A football team, l'or example, come» to under-
stand that any one player is useless by himself. Everything depends upon
co-operaticu. Fifteen separate units could kick and carry thè ball a
long way, but welded imo compact unity they would carry everything
before them were they not met by a similarly organised unity opposea
to them. So a few brave firemen could do much to put out a Are, but
we should never read of success in confining city fires to one block of
buildirgs were it not that all thè firemen know how to play up to one
another and act as a compact crew. It is thè sane with thè police. A
single staiwart offieer may be a match for a pair of ruffiana and may
resterà some sort of order in a small mob, but it is only drilled and
trained bodies of police that are able to control large erowds.
Common driil, including marching, is one of thè earliest lessons of
this kind of a boy‘s life. Its very essence is order, discipline, obedience to
thè word of command and respect for authority. And there is so little
of this in many young lives, and so rnuch or self-will, lack of restraint,
egotistic self-assertion, defiance of authority, that a System striking at thè
root of these evils is a national gain. This is specially needed in a society
constituted like that of Australia. The assertion of liberty, laudatile in
itself, ean be carried, and is carried, among us, to excess. It is a whole-
some thing that young Australia shonld learn that liberty has its necessary
li alitati o ns.
The third gain is that it is a provision for thè defence of thè iand. A
military spirit, domineering, truculent, oyerweening, bent on aggrandisement
and self-assertion is a very differenti thing from thè cairn determination
to be prepared to delend thè nation’s land and liberties, homes and families
against an enemy from without. Such preparation is of thè nature of an
insurance against risks. Insuring against accident does not cause acci-
dents; insuring against lire does not, except in a few unprincipled cases.
cause fires; insuring against shipwreck does not cause wrecks. Is it not
equally true that insurance against attacks on life and liberty does not
cause such attacks ? Why are our ferry boats provided with lifebelts, our
tali bnildings with fire escapes, our big vessels with bulkheads ? These may
never be of Service, but prudence ordains that they shall be provided.
Would to heaven we could be sure we had no risks to run! But at
presemi thè life of thè nations is not resting on so stable a foundation that
we ean connt upon it as permanent. Yoices come to us from many quarters,
warning that there are roeks ahead. We all hope we may pass them
safoly. Butto leave thè defence of our country to chance is of all unwise
things thè most unwise. And if our hoys have to learn that, in thè last
resort, thè protection of their country must come from its men, it is only
one way of reminding thera that thè price of liberty is unceasing vigilance.
Military Training Camps
(By the Bishop of Goulburn, Rt. Rev. Dr. Radford, Chaplain
14th Infantry Brigade, C.M.F.)
Goulburn.
This caper is intended to vindicate thè value of military training
carnps against thè critieism and suspicion with which they are regarded
in various quarters. It is a transcript from thè experience of chaplaincy
service ir many camps during thè last ten years, and it is written frankly
for thè purpose of steadying and stiffening public opinion in defence of
Ccmpulsory Military Training.


THE BOGEY OF MILITARISM.
There is a great deal of talk in Australia at thè present time agamsl
"militarism.” What is militarism ? Militarism may be defined as a policy
and as a temper. As a policy militarism means what thè world saw in
Prussianism, a nation organised for war, and a constitution in which thè
soldier outweighs thè Citizen. As a temper militarism means exalting
thè glory of war and forgetting its agony,—believing in thè might of big
battalions rather than in thè strength of national character. Militarism as
a policy is a bogey as far as Australia and thè Empire are concerned. The
key-note of what military system we bave is “defence, not defiance,” tu
quote thè motto of thè old English volunteer forces. And there is nothing
in our military system that is inconsistent with a Christian belief in
thè duty of peace and with a whole-hearted advocacy of thè League of
Nations. It is a perfectly consistent position to work for thè estab-
lishment of a League of Nations for thè prevention of war, and at thè
same time to provide for thè defence of your country if thè League should
fail to prevent war. The League of Nations, in spite of a record of
achievements far beyond what its critics realise, is stili on its trial. It
is working for thè reduction of armaments with a view to reducing expen-
diture on non-productive activities, and to reducing thè perils of presump-
tion and provocation, which are fostered by thè existence of great arma-
ments. But it would be not faith, but folly, to make no provision for
national defence. The League may prevent great wars, as it has already
prevented locai wars, between European nations. But it is doubtful
whether it could prevent a great racial war between East and West,
“Put your faith in God, and keep your powder dry,” ran thè old proverb.
Work for thè establishment of Christian idealism among nations, but be
prepared meanwhile for thè perii that may gather and break before thè
new order is established. And this young nation of Australia, with its
rich heritage of racial and imperiai tradition, and its rich promise of
national development and destiny, is deliberately committed, by thè policy
of its governments and thè approvai of thè people, to thè prineiple of
compulsory training for defence. It is thè democratic way. The prò-
tection of all citizens is thè responsibility of all citizens. Universa!
: afety demands universal service.
The purpose of our annual training camps is to train each quota of
young Australian manhood in turn to a basic standard of soldierly know-
ledge and ability, and so to provide thè nucleus of a Citizen army in time
of need. There is nothing militaristic in such a system. Neither is there
in thè war-trained officers who are carrying on, or rather building up,
this system. Any padre who has heard and observed them in mess or
with their men is impressed by their dual character and Outlook. There
is, of course, a permanent staff of whole-time soldiers, as a guarantee of
continuity of tradition and as a repository of experience. But thè over-
whelming majority of thè officers who handle thè young troops are eivi-
Hans who served as soldiers in thè day of national perii, and after a
war-service unsurpassed by professional soldiers returned to civilian life
and work. They would serve as soldiers again if need arose, but they
hate war. They are possessed by a stern conviction of thè necessity of
training in view of thè possibility of war, but they are honestly con-
vinced also of thè value of that very training for all purposes of ali-
round manhood in civil life. There is a sectional group-mind at work
in Australian politics which is busy undermining thè basis of national
defence with a blind prejudiee against anything that trains boys and
men to obey authority. But any padre’s experience in camp proves in
practice. what he has alwavs believed in prineiple, that “obedience is thè
very seal of a gentleman.” It is incredible that thè strict and promnt
obedience domanded hy officers, and followed often immediately by thè


simplest human relationship of older and younger brother or father and
som, eould possibly weaken thè true manly independence of free and equal
citizens. Conversely, thè lads reveal frankly enough that they are proud
of their officers as men who suffered and achieved great things in thè
war, but they show no sign of thè virus of war spirit, or of an incipient
aervility. They show instead unmistakable signs that camp discipline is
helping thera to find themselves as men.
None thè less we shall do well to analyse and answer thè warning
against militarism or rather thè fear of militarism which is being preached
in various quarters. First, there is thè outcry of certa in Labor pia tf orni s
against compulsory military training. This is amazing. The Labor Party
before thè war was proud of its share in instituting compulsory military
training. What has happened to turn Labor against its own principle of
universal rasponsibility for thè defence of country and Commonwealth ?
Can it he that thè men who daim to represent Labor are really opposing
military training because they feel that it is likely to teach lads thè lesson
of discipline and obedience and unity, and so to safeguard them against
thè temptaticn of revolution and anarchy? Then there are thè honest
but misguided paeificists who think that a Christian must never shoulder
a ride even in a righteous cause. These good people are past all argu-
ment, but they are as negligible as they are innoeent. But there are
other citizens who recognise reluctantly (and surely we are all reluctant
to recognise) thè possible necessity of fighting in defence of Australia
and all that Australia stands for, but are anxious about thè moral influence
of camp life upon their hoys. They may he afraid of thè militarist temper,
but chiefly they are afraid of thè bad tene and hahits that their boys may
pick up in assoeiation with other boys freni bad homes and evil environ-
ments.
THE VALUE OF CAMP TRAINING.
New those of us who bave thè duty and privilege of serving as chap-
lains to thè forces are eonvinced that such anxious parents would losc
their anxiety if they eould themselves see what thè camp life was like.
In thè first place, they would find company officers and camp staff all of
one mind on one point, and that is that thè good boy is not dragged down
by thè had, but himself lifts thè ione of thè hut. There is no place where
a manly lad who keeps his face and his tongue clean exerts a stronger
influence than in a camp hut. “You can back thè good home influence
every time,” said a sergeant-major. A good lad may bave an unpleasant
time now and again, hut he Comes out all thè better and stronger, and he
does more good than he knows. The great majority of boys are attracted
muchi more by decent eomrades than by thè other sort.
Then again, even decent and good lads bave lessons to learn which
a military camp teaches in a supreme degree. There is a marked contrast
between thè ragged slouchy walk of thè first day in camp and thè smart
steady swing of thè sane company on thè last parade of thè week. Those
boys were once a crowd shuffling along anyhow; now they are a company
moring like one man, and every lad has found himself in losing himself
in thè company. There is a moral to he heard even in thè cries of thè
spectators at thè boxing tournament; “Go it, B Company.” The lad who
was boxing had eeased to be himself; for thè moment he was B Company.
Each lad that tried at all was trying not for himself, but for his company.
The main impression that would be left on thè mind of a visitor would
be thè all-roundness of thè week’s experience. Here is an average day’s
time-table ; Eeveille at 5, wash and dress, coffee, first parade at 7, chiefly
physical excrcise, breakfast at 8, battalion parade at 9, under thè vigilant
eyes of thè camp commandant, who missed nothing that required criticism


or commendatici!; then company and platoon driil, broken by “smokos”
and varied by physical exercises, sometimes in thè form of games; then
back with thè band into camp for dinner at 1; parade and drill again
from 2 to 4.30 as in thè morning; tea at 5; visiterà permitted and leave
given; canteen open and Y.M.C.A. hut in full blast; free movies, care-
fully chosen, at thè Y.M.C.A. from 7 to 9 or later; news of thè day,
romance, comedy; officers enjoying themselves as well as thè lads. In
thè 1921 camps thè, troops were all paraded in mass at a certain hour
during thè morning or afternoon for a talk about camp discipline from
a padre or a medicai officer. Atone of these parade talks thè camp M.O.
drove home five nails in a row—filth, flies, fingers, food, fever—thè
sequence told its own tale. At another a distinguished A.I.F. medicai
officer told a wonderful story of thè graduai victory over dirt and
disease in an army, with a plain moral for lads at home. Thursday night
was set apart for a boxing tournament; Friday afternoon for a splendidly
organised programma of athletic sports; Saturday night for a concert.
The fact is that thè training of thè defence forces of thè Commonwealth
is being regarded and conducted more and more as a continuation school
for thè lads of Australia. When I was asked to speak to thè whole body
of these young troops, I took thè line that their military training was
intended not merely to make them good soldiers if ever they had to do a
soldier’s work, butto teach them lessons which would make them batter
men and citizens for all purposes of life and work—attention, obedience,
comradeship and loyalty to thè good name of thè big thing of which they
were members—a regiment, a union, a society, a nation. It was in thè
course of a talk with senior officers after this parade that I saw how
broad and sound was thè view that they took of their camp work, viz.,
that a good soldier is a better man all round, and that this work was
putting good stufi: into thè fabric of Australian citizenship. As for thè
view thè lads took, I believe a vote of all ranks would bave resulted in a
solid majority for another week in camp. One lad on sick parade on thè
last day but one asked me, “Please. sir, can’t you get us another week?”
and thè rest of thè squad eehoed his appeal. They knew their officers
had been trying to do them good, and they knew they had had a good
time.
CHAPLAINS IN CAMP.
Public opinion is scarcely alive yet to thè increasingly generous re-
cognition which; is given to religion in our defence System. Even as
recently as 1918 there was something grudgingly reluctant in thè recep-
tion given to chaplains by some camp commandants. They were re-
garded as superfluous, except for church parades, and had to prove by
sheer hard work that they were worth their field allowance. But my
experience in four camps since then has been that commanding officers
are not merely willing, but eager, to make thè most of thè chaplaincies
provided by thè defence system. It migbt perhaps be argued that thè
religious needs of 19-year-olds in camp could be met by giving facilities
for Services to be conducted by visiting clergy on Sunday. But wisely
and hanpily thè defence system is working on thè principio of identifying
ministers of Churches with thè whole pian of training. Brigade staff and
regimental staff alike give facilities for all sorts of service and influence
day by day. The nadre is as welcome in thè officers’ mess as in thè men’s
lines. There is only one further step that I think should be taken, and that
is to carry out more fully thè principio of attaching chaplains permanenti}-
to particuìar brigades. Such permanent attachment would enable a padre
to establish closer personal associatimi with thè staff and traditions of a
brigade, and would make for thè continuity, and therefore thè greater
effectiveness, of his work and influence. I speak from experience, as I
bave been attached for nine years to one brigade, thè old llth, now
thè 14th.


Camp means a gloriously busy time for a chaplain who is preparaci
to put in seven days in and out among some 2,000 young troops from sick
parade at 7 to “lights out’’ at 10, in thè lines or in lìeld hospital, on thè
road or at thè range. In one eamp, for example, there were three of us,
Anglican, Presbyterian and Congregationalist; and “Mac” at thè Y.M.C.A.
was a padre ol all sorts in disguise. We did our best to play thè game
by eaeh other and by thè boys. We met early each morning to pray to-
gether for thè boys, their homes, thè Camp and thè Commonwealth. On
Sunday I had an early Communion at seven. At ten thè other padres had
their church parade at thè Y.M.C.A., while thè Anglican church pabade
was in thè open with thè hand. At night thè Y.M.C.A. gave us a sacred
picture film, “The Star of Bethlehem,” and thè Presbyterian padre and
I took turns to explain thè different parts of thè film. The Commandant
gave thè chaplains every facility for their work, and spoke very strongly
of thè value set by thè military authorities upon thè chaplains’ presence
in camp, especially chaplains of senior standing in their own Church.
“Last week we had thè headmaster of a great public school, and this week
we have a bishop. We take it to mean that thè Churches reeognise thè
importance of this camp training, and we are grateful.” Two Generals
who visited thè Camp spoke to thè same eifect, one of them adding, “We
want this camp work lifted to thè highest level and recognised as a big
thing for Australia.”
Chemical ( Gas ) Warfare
Gerald R. Campbell
(Moss Vale )
It is interesting to note that “supply of Gas Masks for units of Field
Army” is one of thè items mentioned in thè recent Budget speech of thè
Federai Treasurer for which provision is made in thè Defence Estiniates.
Evidently thè Washington Conference Treaty (No. 4), which was intended
to abolish Poison Gas warfare as between thè Signatories to it, is not
considered sufficicntly effective. This Treaty has been ratified by Great
Britain, U.S.A., Italy ami Japan, but not by thè other Signatory, Prance:
it therefore remains ineffeetive, as it does not take eifect until all thè
Signatories bave ratified it. Great Britain has passed an Act (12 and 13,
Geo V.), and Proclamation carrying thè submarine sections of this Treaty
into effect as troni 15th Oct., 1923, hut if there is no generai ratiflcation of it,
as appears to bo thè case, then Great Britain can repeal her Act or
Proclamation, so far as it affects it, at any time she chooses.
In this connection thè atlention of thè reader is called to a recently
published hook, “Callmicus.” a Defence of Chemical Warfare, by T. B. S.
Haitiane, a distinguished Bio-Chemist of Cambridge University. He main-
tains that thè use of Gascs can be made thè least cruel and most effective
of all method.s of fighting, and as he speaks freni personal experience in thè
Great War of thè different niethods, his conclusioni; deserve thè fullest
ctmsidfi'ation. Wliether Gas warfare will be as effective in thè sunshine
and dry rifiniate!, and sandy soils of Australia as in thè heavier, moister,
and dnller atinospheres and clayey soil of Prance and Planders, needs
investigati on—also what facilities we have in our Chemical factorios for
producine gas for use in war-time.


'Jiifc Citiseli Force» cf thè three Dominio uè gf thè Southern Hemispbare «r« aU
on Comjmlsory Pene© Trainine, voltìntary cnìUtment, however. beine pmnìtfed
varyi :% l . indicateli bclow. and compare with one another in tbia way;—
Dominion.
Number® of Oltkenj
Ponili»lion (1925) (n..l includine, Trainine (1925).
* Senior Cadete iu iNot includine*Senior CaUet Trainine.)
Trainine).
Australia—
6.980,000 f 3 guitti
15/19 yé&ià of ago 1
19/20 years of ae<*
i^n f V n r C ™ P l/° r “*
1 in Populea* A: em. , uach ,,f 1 Conswutive ye.r.
1 ;o«o“’„T M™- a ' Tha ' 0ta, . Dr " vid ' d '*>’ to’ the*D.W
country dHtticta. Artliulv T , "C antty - , eUs - mon
Total: About 40.000 A t erSl rtc - ’*>read over 7 y'flr.
under Comp. Train-i
ine and about fi.'jOa
volo utary enlisted. ,
Union of South
Africa.
1.6S0.C0» < Qu.ttas ai—' (Norma! TraiiiTOK Porind .
(approx.l 17/1S ycars of ai:e (Il Norma! inllial Training fuauallr in
15/19 yeaxa of w.c ftrst 12 month») :
19/20 yeara of age 50 iteys contimjoua trainine
20/21 years of ae* («ot exeoedine).
1 G V,*H k , w , . wo 3ub?equent continuou» trainine»:
2a,00f) (npprox.) 50 days in all (not excecdine).
cllowine for v,-asiane. t<*> Non-CbutÌBUOLis training may olao b«
•Every male ì» Unble raquired. up ti* 26 days in all.
to Peace Trainine N.B. —The initial trainin* is ahortened
hetween 21 and 25; by 10 day» in thè rase of those who bava
but he muy enliet rccohred Senior Cadet Training and show
vniuptavlly between stfftisfactorv efllrieney.
17/16 and 20/21 year
! and perforili hi?
Traiabi»; durine thè
fnJiowine 4 yenr.?.-
> li thè author&ed,
1 atrenj.rtb is not oh- 1
taluod in ths«j way,
(ho tleficiency is msiuV-
up by monna of n;
Compulsar? bnllot of !
those of 21 yeara u-ho
bave not tcrved —th«*
. balanre ; u»t requìreU,
bolng sub/cct to u
Trainine In ù Rifle
! Aswociation.
Nevr Zcalaad— i
1,860,000 ; S Quota* of —
For enoh quota in each ot 3
1
(includimi Mn,.ri.)i 18,1» verrà of »ge
consecutive year».
10/20 yeur* of aye
20/21 years of age
Compulsory Trainine,
Tital :
16,000 (approx.)
6 day» Conti nuoua Camp.
G Uulf-day Parades.
12 Orili» of l J /<à-hr. ouch.
Approx. 36 dayn.
Military Training in the Dominions
Comparative Statement.
The training pre&cribed in South Africa is much thè test of thè three for turning ont
a wcll trainati soldier, though thè clasr.ing of thè IT/lSth-yeer-'dd youth there aa a Soldier.
•and not as a Senior Cadet (which te thè predice in Australia and N.Z.) is a aerious
defect. The South African perioda of training approximale fairiy eloscly to thosc pnt
forward bere in 1920 by Mr. W. M. Hughes, when Primo ioni-ter, which thè Defence
League strongly supporta.
It must not he forgotten that in thè test '.ur months elapsed before 25.00 U Australia!)
troops were snfflciently trained to go int-« action against Turkish troops—and time to do
this was only granted us because tbc Armies and Navica of thè Empire and !ts Allles were
holding thè fìeld outside Australia whiist we got ready. In thè next War wc catmot count
apon this advantage—thè fighting may he on our own shores at thè cmtset- -and so we need
to bave our army trained —and a much terger one than 25,000 —before War break* ont.
flt to oppose an early hostile attack bere by highly trained er-emy. troops. and this can’t
he done in twelve days a year for three years !
GERALD R CAMPDELL M.wh VkI*.
