

Australian
Birds and
Flowers
BY NEVILLE CAYLEY
SPINEBILLS AND RED FLOWERED GUM
A “SYDNEY MORNING HERALD” PUBLICATION


Description of Birds on Cover .
SPINEBILLS AND
RED FLOWERED GUM
The Eastern Spinebill (Acanthorhyn-
chus tenuirostris), also called Spine-
billed Honeyeater, Humming-bird and
Cobbler’s Awl, is usually found in pairs,
frequenting alike scrub and heath-lands
and open forest country; it is also a
familiar bird in gardens and is excep-
tionally tame, flitting from flower to
flower, probing each bloom with its
long, spine-like bill. Its call is a succes-
sion of shrill, musical notes. The range
of the species is Eastern Australia, ex-
tending from Cairns in the north to
South Australia, Kangaroo Island, Tas-
mania, and the islands of Bass Strait.
The "Red Flowered Gum” (Eucalyptus
flcifolia) is found in the south-western
districts of Western Australia, mainly
near the coast.
BLUE FAIRY WRENS
AND FUCHSIA HEATH
The Blue Fairy Wren (M alums cya~
vens) , more commonly called Blue
Wren, also Blue Cap, Superb Warbler
and Mormon Wren, is usually found in
pairs or family parties, according to the
season of the year. Its favourite haunts
are thickets on the fringes of scrubs and
the banks of watercourses, and it is also
plentiful in orchards and gardens. The
range of the species extends from
Southern Queensland to Victoria and
South Australia, Kangaroo Island and
Tasmania.
The "Fuchsia Heath” (Epacris longi-
flora), also called Native Fuchsia and
Native Heath, grows in the coastal areas
of New South Wales from Sydney
southwards; also in the east of Victoria.
It is a beautiful plant and responds
readily to cultivation.


BLUE FAIRY WRENS AND FUCHSIA HEATH


VARIEGATED FAIRY WRENS
AND FLANNEL FLOWERS
The Variegated Fairy Wren (M alums
I amber ti) , also called Lambert’s Wren,
is mostly found in pairs or family
parties, frequenting the undergrowth,
heath-lands and thickets on the fringes
of scrubs. It is very local in habits, a
nair keeping to its own territory, and
is a much shyer species than its relative
the Blue Fairy Wren. The range of the
species extends throughout the coastal
districts of Southern Queensland and
New South Wales.
The Flannel Flower (Actinotns hcli-
anthii) grows throughout the Coastal
districts of New South Wales, north-
wards to Queensland, its chief habitat
being the sandstone ridges near the
coastline.


VARIEGATED FAIRY WRENS AND FLANNEL FLOWERS


BLACKCAPS AND
PINK FLOWERED GUM
The Blackcap (M elithreptus lunatus) ,
also called and Lunulated
Floneyeater, is mostly found in small
flocks, is a common bird throughout
the coastal districts, timbered mountain
ranges, and open forest country inland,
it is also numerous in gardens and is
tame and fearless, seen chiefly among
the flowering eucalypt trees, seeking in-
sects, pollen, and nectar. The call-note
is a single piping whistle uttered fre-
quently. Its range extends from Queens-
land to Victoria to Western Australia.
The "Pink Flowered Gum” or Pink
Flowered Marri ( Eucalyptus calophylla ,
var. rosea) , of Australia, is
a very handsome sturdy tree, which
flourishes in cultivation.


BLACKCAPS AND PINK FLOWERED GUM


GOLDEN WHISTLERS AND
COOTAMUNDRA WATTLE
The Golden Whistler (. Vachycephala
pectoralis) , also called Yellow-breasted
Whistler, White-throated Whistler, or
Thickhead and Cut-throat, is usually in
pairs, inhabiting brushes, thick scrub
lands, and open forest areas. It has a
rich, sweet, and varied song and obtains
most of its food among the leaves and
branches of the trees, the food consist-
ing of various kinds of insects and
native seeds and berries. The range of
the species extends from North-eastern
Queensland to Victoria, to Western Aus-
tralia, and Tasmania.
The "Cootamundra Wattle” (Acacia
Baileyana) is cultivated extensively. Its
habitat is the Cootamundra, Wagga and
Temora districts of New South Wales.


GOLDEN WHISTLERS AND COOTAMUNDRA WATTLE


BEARDED HONEYEATERS
AND DWARF APPLE
The Bearded Honeyeater (M eliornis
novce — hollandice) , also called Yellow-
winged and New Holland Honeyeater,
is usually in flocks inhabiting chiefly
heath-lands of the coastal districts; it
also visits the open timbered country
when the eucalypts are in bloom, and is
common in gardens. The call note is
sharp and shrill and when alarmed it
utters harsh chattering notes. Its range
is from Southern Queensland to Vic-
toria, to South-western Australia and
Tasmania.
The "Dwarf Apple” ( Angophora cor di-
folia) is a typical plant of the heath-
lands and sandstone ridges of the
southern coastal districts. It flowers
profusely and is one of the best food
plants for nectar and insect-eating
species of birds.


BEARDED HONEYEATERS AND DWARF APPLE


KING PARRAKEET
The King Parrakeet {Aprosmictussc axil-
laris) is found in Eastern Australia from
Cape York to Victoria, and is usually in
pairs or small flocks inhabiting chiefly
heavily-timbered ranges and brushes. It
is not so active as most parrots, and its
flight is laboured and its call-notes harsh
and loud. It feeds almost entirely on
native seeds, fruits and berries, and m
certain districts does damage to ripening
maize crops.
It nests in a hollow limb or hole in a
tree and lays from three to six white
eggs.


THE KING PARRAKEET


RED-TAILED OR "BANKSIAN"
BLACK COCKATOO
The Red-tailed or "Banksian” Black
Cockatoo (males) (Calyptorhynchus
magni ficus) is found all over Australia
(except Cape York) and King Island.
It is usually in pairs or small flocks,
frequenting alike heavily timbered and
open forest lands, also banksia scrubs.
Its food consists chiefly of seeds of
eucalypts, casuarins, and banksias, and
also large white grubs, the larva: of
longicorn beetles so destructive to our
valuable timber forests.
Usually it is shy and wary and, when
on the wing, its flight is slow and
laboured, and it utters a weak but harsh
and discordant cry. It nests in a hollow
limb or hole in a tree, generally high up
from the ground, and lays two white
eggs.


THE RED-TAILED OR "BANKSIAN" BLACK COCKATOO


PINK COCKATOO
The Pink Cockatoo ( Lophochroa lead-
heateri) is found throughout North-
Western, Western and South Australia
and the interior of Victoria, New South
Wales and Queensland. It is also called
Major Mitchell, Wee Juggler and Lead-
beater’s Cockatoo, and is usually in pairs
or small flocks, frequenting thickly
timbered scrub (mallee chiefly) and arid
lands. It spends much of its time on the
ground feeding on bulbous roots and the
seeds of plants and grasses. When dis-
turbed, it rises with a loud screech,
sometimes alighting on a dead tree, but
mostly on the ground again.
It nests in a hollow limb or hole in a
tree and lays three or four white eggs.


THE PINK COCKATOO


HOODED PARRAKEET
The Hooded Parrakeet (Psephotellus dis-
similis) inhabits the open forest lands
and spinifex country of Northern Terri-
tory, where it is generally observed in
pairs or small flocks feeding on the
ground on grass seeds.
It possesses a singular jarring call-note
and, when disturbed, usually flies to a
nearby tree; its flight is swift and
slightly undulating. It nests in termites’
mounds, usually in the large magnetic
and spire-shaped termitaria. The bird
makes an entrance tunnel, at the end of
which it excavates a nesting-chamber,
and lays from four to six white eggs.


THE HOODED PARRAKEET


JACKY WINTER
The Jacky Winter (M icroeca fascinans) ,
also called Brown Flycatcher, Peter-
Peter, and Post-boy, is mostly seen in
pairs frequenting open forest lands, gar-
dens, orchards and parks. It is a
general favourite owing to its friendly
and fascinating mannerisms, also for its
usefulness in destroying numbers of in-
jurious insects which it procures on the
ground or in the air.
It has a sweet and melodious song and,
in addition, utters a call resembling,
"Peter, peter, peter; pretty, pretty,
pretty,” or "You did, you did, you did.”
The species is distributed throughout
Australia.


JACKY WINTER


WILLIE WAGTAIL
The Willie Wagtail (Rhipidura leuco-
phrys), also called Black-and-white Fan-
tail and Shepherd’s Companion, is
mostly found in pairs frequenting open
forest, being more numerous in the
vicinity of water, and is exceptionally
tame. It is a familiar bird in parks and
gardens where its pleasing call, resem-
bling "Sweet-pretty-little-creature,” is
frequently heard during the day or
night, especially on moonlight nights.
Insects, chiefly flies which it catches on
the ground or in the air, constitute its
food, and it is often observed perched on
the backs or fluttering about the heads
of grazing stock. The species is dis-
tributed over Australia generally, is
accidental to Tasmania, and also occurs
in the Molucca Islands and New Guinea.


WILLIE WAGTAIL


YELLOW ROBIN
The Yellow Robin ( Eopsaltria australis ),
also called Yellow Bob and Yellow-
hammer, is generally found in pairs fre-
quenting open forest lands, and is fairly
common in parks and gardens. It is an
exceptionally friendly bird, often easy to
tame, and will readily take food, such
as meal worms and small pieces of cheese,
from the hand.
It is often called the "Psalmist of the
Dawn,” for it is one of the first birds to
greet the dawn with its pleasing con-
tinuous piping call; its call is also one of
the last heard at dusk, so it not only
pipes "Reveille” but sounds "Lights out”
for its feathered friends.
The range of the species is eastern and
south-eastern Australia.


YELLOW ROBIN


Registered at the General Post Office, Sydney, for
transmission through the post as a book. Wholly
set up and printed in Australia by Alan W. Baker,
of Arthur McQuitty & Co., 67 Regent St., Sydney.
1 938.




