

AUSTRALIA’S
DUTY.
* 4 W H E MUST REINFORCE those
BRAVE SOLDIERS WHO ARE
FIGHTING THE BATTLE OF FREE-
DOM AND JUSTICE, OF NATIONAL
AND NATURAL RIGHTS.”
“ THE CALL IS NOW UPON EVERY
MAN THAT IS CAPABLE.”
ARCHBISHOP KELLY.
The following press reports of some
of the public utterances of His Grace,
Dr. Kelly, Archbishop of Sydney, in
regard to Australia’s part in the War
are reprinted by his kind permission-


AUSTRALIA’S DUTY.
The Call is Mow.
WE must reinforce those brave soldiers who are fighting the battle of
freedom and justice, of national and natural rights. We must now meet
might by might. That was the point to-day and such was the will of
God. lam happy in the experience that old and young amongst us are
encouraging our young men to make themselves ready to go forth to
defend the national rights of the British Empire and her Allies. How-
ever wrong kings and others might have been in the past, now the
Empire, north and south, east and west, was united under the standard
of justice and equality. We are all encouraging our youths to govern
themselves, to go forth and match might against might, and, please
God, to carry their righteousness to victory. We have our soldiers who
will write their names on the honor lists of the nations, and God will
bless them. They are giving up a longer life in this world to gain a
more glorious life in eternity, if they are good Catholic or good Christian
soldiers, going forth to defend their nation and their people, and to
stand for justice .and liberty. These men will be the glory of their
families for generations to come. The call is now upon every man that
is capable, and all who are not capable are called upon to sustain those
at the front, and to pray for them.
27th May, 1915.
True to Our Flags.
LET us be true to our flags. Let ns be true to national honor, and we
need fear no foe. Time would bring us glory and honor, and the nation
would be famous in history to the end of time. I have not forgotten
that lam a soldier of peace. lam here as a subject of the Government
to do my part in discipline. lam here as an Australian citizen—one
working every day for the good of the people. I wish there were peace.
But since we could not get peace without the sword, let all who were able
take the sword, and let them stand, regardless of everything, in the
putting down of tyranny. Already Australia had done honour to
herself among the nations of the world. We had lost thousands, but
we had gained a priceless inheritance. We were now a united people.
Our hearts were with our heroes of the Dardanelles. We had shown
that we could face death in a good cause. Our young men had been
tried, and had not been found wanting. We had more and more to
send who would make the world ring with their praises before this war
was over. And when it was over, it would be recorded in history that,
in a time of need, we were not found wanting.
August sth, 1915.


Differences must be Set Aside.
“ this is a time when we should forget all personal considerations, and
stand together as a nation, for if we prove ourselves strong in arms, we
shall have peace as before, and if we are beaten in the war, others will
come and do as they please, and take away all we trusted in. There
are three conditions precedent to a just war. The first is that it should
be proclaimed by public authority; the second that there should be a just
cause for it, and the third that those who went out to fight should be
actuated by an upright intention. In Australia, our little differences
must be set aside, and, as fellow citizens we must stand shoulder to shoulder.
The more earnestly people went to this war the better, and the stronger
we showed ourselves the better.**
13th August, 1914.
We are Fighting on the Side of Right.
“WHEN two nations came into conflict, the right could never be on
more than one side, and war was never lawful unless it was conducted
in a good cause. Mo one can deny that we are fighting on the side of
right, for we have gone to war in fulfilment of a sacred pledge to preserve
the neutrality of a smaller nation, when a bigger and stronger nation saw
fit to violate its oath. The British nation is standing unflinchingly by
its pledged word, and would continue to do so, no matter at what cost,
because it stood for the principle that might was not right. If that
principle were not preserved,, society would crumble to ruin and sink
into the deepest depths of degradation and iniquity. “
6th January, 1916.
Fighting for Liberty and Justice.
WE are at war, and our troopships are sailing out of our harbours, bound
for the other, side of the world, where the stern, relentless life and death
struggle is raging so fiercely. Far over the sea, many thousands of
miles from the sunny land that gave them birth, our brave Australian
soldiers are battling nobly and heroically in their country’s cause, and
for the defence of right against might.
We are mourning and rejoicing at the same time—mourning for the
loss of our loved ones who have fallen in the battle, and rejoicing in the
knowledge that they have died heroically, sacrificing all in the name of
the land they loved so well.
Our cause is an honest and upright one. We know that we are fighting
for liberty and justice, therefore we must be determined upon victory.
We of the British Empire are all inspired with the single thought
we will never be beaten, we will never submit. We should ever stand
firm in our resolve to uphold the principle that might is not right, and


show that those who take up the sword for might against right would
perish by the sword and fall into the pit that they themselves had digged
for others.
Let it be dealings between man and man or between different sections
of society. Might was not right, and whilst there was a God in heaven,
those who took up the sword unjustly would surely perish by the sword.
6th January, 1916.
A Noble Example.
IF they were in earnest in their desire to help in winning the war, they
must keep on in their efforts. The news which was sent by cablegram
seemed to be more serious every day. The casualty lists showed how
bravely the ex-students of their Catholic schools and colleges were
playing their part at the front. That very day the sad news had been
received of the death of a gallant young Sydney doctor—the son of one
of their most esteemed public men—-Dr. Roger Forrest Hughes. He
was a Captai* in the Army Medical Corps, and Was killed, they were
told, while, on duty dressing the wounds of soldiers who had been struck
down. The brave young Australian had his only brother, a member of
the Royal Flying Corps, at his side when he gave his young life for his
country in a just cause. Such an example—one among many examples—
of patriotism combined with courage should strengthen them in their
resolve to do their duty—to do their very best—so as to help in winning
the war. The young men of their faith had gone to the front from
Australia in hundreds. Priests had gone, too, as military chaplains.
From that College, he was informed, over a hundred young men, ex-pupils
of the Christian Brothers, had gone as volunteers to fight in defence of
their country and their freedom. They recognised that the crisis through
which they were passing was one in which all sections of the community
should be united for the common good. Australia had responded nobly
to the call of duty at a time of national peril. More remained to be
done. Under the blessing of God, Australia would have her full share
in the honors of victory, if, in addition to the bravery of her soldier
sons, she had efficient military leaders and the guidance of those who
were above unworthy motives, and whose sole desire it was to keep the
flag of freedom flying in this fair land.
Ireland is a nation of Soldiers, a nation of Christians, and a nation of
scholars. Take away the children of St. Patrick from the Biitish Empire,
and what would you have in the way of Catholicity, what would you
have in religious Orders, what would you have in the clergy or episcopacy?
God grant we will have efficient leaders who will put aside all petty
partisanship and antagonism, who will put aside secret societies, who will
stand for the country, and the country’s flag, and bring us to the best
that is in us, to gain a glorious victory, and especially for the small
nations. (Prolonged applause.)
16th December, 1916.
Sydney : William Applegate Gullieb, Government Printer.—lol6.
