

Reprinted from the Morning and Evening Press
of Six Australian States
Australia
and
The Pe ace Conference
TWO LETTERS
On
The Right Hon. W. M. HUGHES’ Representation
by
The Hon. Bruce Smith, K.C., M.P.
With Extract from Paris Correspondent
of
“Sydney Morning Herald”
F. H . BOOTH, PRINT, 250 PIT T ST.




Mr. Hughes as Australia's
Representative
Nov, 18, 1918.
Now that the War is practically over, and politicians are at
liberty to speak their mind, freely, I desire to voice my opinion, as
an Australian citizen, and as a member of the Australian Federal
rariiament, that it is unfortunate for our national prestige that, at
the present momentous juncture in the Empire’s history, we should
have been represented in Great Britain by one so wanting in balance
and perspective as Mr. Hughes.
In the midst of all her troubles, whilst carrying on the most
stupendous War in her own history, and in the history of the world
the Mother Country paid her wide-spread Dominions the compli-
ment of inviting to send their most representative man or
men to her councils, in recognition of the vigour and valour that
their soldiers had displayed in the Great War; and although dele-
gates have gone from other dominions, and quietly assisted by
their presence, Mr. Hughes stands out as the only delegate who has
apparently misconceived his mission, exceeded his welcome, and
constituted himself an embarrassment, rather than a help, in the
midst of so much trouble and anxiety.
. The representatives of Canada, of New Zealand, of South
Africa, and Newfoundland, responded to the same invitation, and
with excellent judgment, offered their advice to the Mother Country
m regard to their own Dominions, at such times, and under such
conditions, as would not increase the weighty responsibilities of
tmeat Britain s Ministers, as the helmsmen of the Empire. These
delegates most carefully refrained from diverting the attention of
the British people from a concentrated prosecution of the War, and
only spoke publicly in regard to those aspects of the great trouble
m which their own people were directly concerned.
Evan that part they played in a suitably quiet and considerate
way, sufficient to safeguard their particular dominions interests,
where they might otherwise have been overlooked. Compare
Imeir thoughtful and judicious demeanour in public, with that of
Australia s representative. He has been restlessly moving from
city to city in Great Britain, as a veritable agitator; stirring up the


people's minds, not merely to a more vigorous prosecution of the
War, to which one can make no objection, but in regard to the
fiscal and commercial treatment of Germany by Great Britain, when
the war should come to an end. The inopportuneoess of this
agitation is too obvious to need emphasis. It reminds one of a
man who, when called in by a neighbour, whose house is on fire,
to assist in -quenching the flames; instead of lending a hand, in-
sists on discussing the architecture of a new house to be erected in
place of the one that is burning. Our Empire has been in flames;
her liberties, her people’s lives, and her civilisation, have been
menaced and placed in jeopardy; Mr. Hughes has—Nero-like—
been playing the fiddle of his oratory in regard to Great Britain’s
industrial treatment of Germany, and England’s own fiscal policy,
when the War should be over.
One has only to consider the circumstances for a moment,- to
realise the failure of a guest s duty, and the scant consideration for
his host’s interests, that Mr. Hughes has displayed; for it must be
remembered that he has been Great Britain’s honoured political
guest, provided with generous apartments, special railway accom-
modation, and an entourage worthy of an ambassador; so that any
attempted dictation to the British people by him, in regard to their
domestic politics, would be on a par with open criticism of a host’s
domestic management by a week-end visitor at a country house.
This-is rendered more unfortunate by the fact that ail the other
Dominions, similarly honoured, conscripted their people to serve the
Mother Country in her defence; whilst Australia stands alone, as the
Dominion that recorded a majority against that whole-hearted co-
operation in the War. Australia is on further delicate ground; in-
asmuch as Great Britain purchased her wool, her grain, and her
metals at unprecedented prices, and paid her over two hundred mil-
lions, before she got delivery of the goods, which she need not have
done; and, in addition, she lent her many millions of money; so
that Great Britain might naturally have looked for a less critical
and less disturbing demeanor on the part of her generously-treated
guest, whilst she, herself, was in the throes of so great a struggle.
Admitting that Mr. Hughes did considerable good by his Win-
the-War speeches in England; his other and more aggressive plat-
form performances have quite out-balanced this good effect, and
led to much adverse comment in the Mother Country, and in her
Parliament, that does not, and will not redound, to the reputation
of Australian statesmanship,
Mr. Hughes last want of judgment is perhaps most regret-
table of all, in having attracted the surprised attention of all the
Allies. He has complained aloud, and most prematurely, of his
not being consulted, as Australia s representative, in the granting
of the Armistice. dhe most ordinary dictionary gives a
general definition of an armistice, as merely a brief and temporary
cessation of hostilities—literally a standing still—and the Hague
Peace Conference laid down a more specific definition to the ef


feet that it “suspends military operations by mutual consent/’ II
the time is limited, the hostilities may be resumed at the termination
of the period agreed on; and if the time is not limited, they can be
resumed at any time with fair notice.
.The Armistice is thus purely a military arrangement, not a
political one —hence its being delegated to Marshal Foch, the Gen-
eralissimo of the Allied Forces. It is difficult to understand how
Mr, Hughes could have expected to be consulted in this military
move: he alone out of all the Dominion Delegates. The con-
ditions of the Armistice included the complete disarmament of the
enemy, by land, sea, and air. These-' are purely military, and not
political conditions. If the armistice ceased, then the War would
go on as before ; and no political question could possibly arise until
the enemy was defeated and a Peace Conference appointed, to de-
cide the terms to De imposed upon the conquered country, then to be
convened. Then, and not till then, the political element would
come in at which all the victors would come upon the scene to
deeffie the terms of a permanent Peace. Then, and not till then,
Mr. Hughes may expect to be consulted; and the particular con-
dition, in relation to which Mr. Hughes, as Australia’s Delegate, is
most concerned, will come up for consideration as one of the de-
batable terms. Mr. Lloyd George,: as Prime Minister of the chief
belligerent power, Mr. Balfour, as Foreign Minister, and Mr. Bonar
Law, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, have all given their assur-
ance, in the plainest terms, that Germany’s Colonies will not be
returned to her;, but, even that is a question for the Allies as a
whole, and Great Britain alone, and certainly not for her
Dominions solely, as Mr. Hughes seems to have assumed. It is
tolerably certain that the Allies, as a whole, will be opposed to the
return or these possessions to Germany; but they, the Allies are
the proper authorities to decide. Mr. Hughes should have known
that even Great Britain could not stipulate prematurely for any
single term of the, Peace Conference programme, before Germany
has surrendered unconditionally, or been completely conquered.
Mr. Hughes has cried out, as one British paper properly said, “be-
mre he was hurt; and it is a pity that that gentleman was not
better informed or that he acted so hastily and precipitately as to
constitute himself an obviously disturbing factor. Even when that
question is settled, it by no means follows that Australia alone is
th °f° nCe ; German Colonial Possessions;
for the United States, and New Zealand, and even France and
Japan, are interested; and each of these may have certain of those
possessions allocated to them in the international distribution. Mr
Hughes might have known also that this War means the release of
the enforced constitutional hoop,’ that held the German Empire to-
gethcr; and that the several separate parts, such as Prussia, Bav-
aria, Wurtumberg, Saxony, and other smaller portions, will, as a
consequence, be disintegrated and placed on democratic principles’
so that there is little likelihood of their ever jointly claiming their
former Colonies; for they will be fully occupied over their own


affairs for many generations. Mr. Hughes certainly gave on behalf
o Australia a poor exhibition of statesmanship or statescraft over
this recent plaint, and has made all of us Australians appear ignor-
ant of international procedure; for it will b.e noted that no other
Dominion Representative has joined in its utterance. The “Times”
might well say, with fine irony, that Mr. Hughes’ complaint was
not unanswerable.”
There is another aspect of this unfortunate action by Mr.
Hughes. If we consider the proportion, and perspective of things,
we will readily see that he unduly magnifies Australia’s' claim in
the settlement of the world’s affairs. Great Britain, the United
States, France, Italy, Canada, and New Zealand, readily conscripted
their people in win this War; whereas Australia stood alone
m refusing this whole-hearted contribution of man-power. Great
Britain put seven millions of men in the field, and employed four
or five in tne making of munitions—in all eleven or twelve
millions, out of a population of forty-eight millions, equal to about
one-fourth of her population; whilst Australia failed to make any
munitions at all, and only contributed about one-fifteenth of her
people to fight the War. A calculation of all the populations of the
Allies will show that Australia, even if she could be separately re-
presented, would be entitled to only one-fiftieth part of the voting
power in a Peace Conference;, and, much as desire to see Aus-
tralia s interests cared for; we must “keep our heads,” and observe
the rules of arithmetic !
. Every day affords news of some fresh activity on the part of
Mr.^ Hughes, in the midst of the Mother Country’s great trouble and
anxiety; and I am sure that no thinking mao or woman can fail to
admire the dignified, magnanimous, and eloquent silence, that such
statesmen as Mr. Lloyd George, Mr. Balfour, and Mr. Bonar Law
have maintained, in the face of Mr. Hughes latest regrettable in-
sinuations.
Commonwealth Parliament House,
MELBOURNE,


Mr. Hughes and the League
of Nations
March 22, 1919.
The world in general has-not yet realised that it is on the
eve of one of the greatest events of good fortune yet recorded in
human history. It will not, for a long time, take off its “blinkers,”
so as to be able to form a correct estimate of the splendid prospect
thus opened up in regard to its welfare, by the inauguration of the
League of Nations. We, in Australia, are a long way from the world-
centre, where this peace movement has been .going on; and we are
much inclined to play the part of the ostrich and think that it is
“alright,” leaving it to others to do what is needed.
Mr. Hughes has lapsed into many indiscretions during his un-
restrained sojourn in the old world; but his latest utterance is per-
haps the least discreet of all, in .expressing, on behalf of Australia,
which is a fairly level-headed country, some truly pessimistic opin-
ions in iegard to tors League of Nations. 1 refer 1 to Ins interview,
with a prominent French journal, in which he speaks depreciatingly
of that proposed great Charter.
The people of England, and of Europe, so far, have learned to
take Mr. Hughes witE a fair allowance of “salt,” as an exponent of
the opinions of the people he purports to represent; but there are
many of our own citizens who, being far away, and too busy to
read the text of the document that forms the constitution of that
proposed great corporation, might easily be misled by his obviously
disappointed, if not embittered, comments upon its nature, signi-
ficance, and probable far-reaching effects.
I have carefully watched and studied every step in the evolu-
of this epoch-making document. I have, with equal care,
studied every article in the document itself, having regard to its
necessarily tentative character; and I have no hesitation in saying
that it does' everything that Mr. Hughes says it does not do !
It is a covenant that, instead of being “without substance
and reality,” as Mr, Hughes states, literally teems with those qual-
ities. li constitutes an international Charter, that promises to this
restless world a guarantee for international peace, such as no
historian, ancient or modern, has ever dreamed of: a veritable


Parliament of the World, such as Tennyson looked for in the
realms of poetry.
Mr. Hughes says that this international compact has “changed
nothing.” This, is the most mistaken of all that gentleman’s many
misguided statements regarding it. I have no hesitation in expres-
sing a diametrically opposite opinion, and in saying that it will, in
fact, change the whole face of the world, and convert a number of
scattered, restless, independent, and internationally-irresponsible
peoples into one voluntarily and deliberately-constituted co-opera-
tive body; not formed as the result of numberless vaguely-worded
despatches, phrased so as to afford easy diplomatic escapes, but
in a self-contained, compact; plainly-worded in its provisions, em-
bodied in one single document, and personally entered into, on the
spot, by the world’s representatives, after discussion.
And this document has been signed, for, and on behalf of, the
fourteen greatest nations of the world, with a full knowledge of its
meaning, and, a unanimous condemnation of the “scrap-of-paper”
standard of national morality. Its ultimate universal ratification is,
to my mind, a foregone conclusion.
Far from “changing nothing,” as Mr. Hughes alleges, this re-
markable document has bound fourteen separate nations (com-
prehending over one thousand millions of people—for it includes
cue United States, China, India and Japan, as well as European
countries) to desist from war, from making threats of war, and
from territorial aggression, without prior submission to discussion
and arbitration, and with the authority of the rest; and all fourteen
nations have covenanted to jointly and co-operatively punish which-
ever of them ignores its terms. Is that “changing nothing?”
If it were all to be treated as industrial arbitration has fre-
quently been treated in Australia, this might be said concerning it;
but, when we have over one thousand millions of people, pledging
their national honour to such a charter, we may safely rely upon the
characteristic of common honesty being observed by the dominant
majority of the civilised world. ■
Again, Mr Hughes says that “our relations with our enemies
are unchanged. I ask: ’What particle of truth can be abstracted
from such a sentence? Our enemies are “on the ground”; their
noses are literally being rubbed in the dust of their own Father-
land; and Marshal Foch stands over them, sword in hand, with
the Allied armies at his back, and more available, if necessary, to
force them, to obey the letter as well as the spirit of the civilised
world’s dictates!
The fourteen nations who have signed the charter, with over a
thousand millions at their back,. have approved of this conquering


attitude, and endorsed the verdict, by which “our enemies” will be
handcuffed in their aggressive national activities, restricted. to a
reduced territory, and. called upon to shoulder a mammoth debt,
such as no nation has ever been called upon to liquidate, as a pun-
ishment for its own hellish misconduct. And Mr. Hughes himself
has been engaged in assessing this stupendous incubus of debt; yet
he says, “the. relations are unchanged.’ 8
One almost loses patience in reading this, Mr. Hughes' latest in-
terview. He says: “We are no nearer peace-—the Covenant does
not strengthen the Allies or weaken Germany.” These propos-
itions, in my opinion, are not arguable, and read, to me at least,
as the utterances of a modern Rip Van Winkle, who has slept since
the war began, and even more soundly since the armistice was
signed I
Mr. Hughes has met some quiet but “big” men in Europe—-
men, who “do things”; and it is just possible that he has had his
faculties somewhat “numbed” in the operation. That is the only
feasible explanation olj such views.
No sane man thinks or imagines that the world is on the edge
of the millennium; no one has said so; but, unless Mr. Hughes ex-
pects to reach some such ideal, he has no justification for disap-
pointment, except at the small part he himself has contributed to
this truly monumental scheme; and he certainly has no justification
for expressing views that could only mislead and depress those who
naturally listen to him, as our nominal representative, and think his
opinions of value.
The constitution of the League is only the germ of what it
will be—that every intelligent constitutional student will discern—
but that germ, which is a practical work-a-day agreement, that
everybody can read and understand, and morally appreciate, con-
stitutes in itself a world-compact; an all-nation Charter; the bond of
a thousand millions of people, who knew what their fourteen nat-
ional representatives were doing, by their authority; and the letter
and the spirit, and the deliberate purpose of those who made it,
will satisfy honest men, who trust their fellow-beings, that it is cap-
able) of being developed and elaborated, as time goes on, to meet
all the requirements of the future, into an international Code, that
will constitute the most remarkable and beneficent milestone in
human history.
Commonwealth Parliament House,
MELBOURNE.


Extract from “Sydney Morning HeraldV* Paris Correspondent.
, Sydney, April II, 1919.
“Mr. Hughes’s method of protest—-his most recent method
especially—-takes little account of larger issues. It is intemperate,
and it is petulant. 'The Australian on this side, looking for a
statesmanlike Australian case against the unquestionably broad-
based position of the League of Nations advocates, gets instead
Mr. Hughes’s many prociamations-in-advance of himself as more
concerned with local fiscal considerations than with a League of
Nations, which, for all its beneficence, would have a world-wide
economic incidence—Mr. Hughes’s insistent advocacy of sectional
interests —-Mr. Hughes’s Paris campaign on behalf of Australia at
the Peace Conference—a campaign of personal publicity by grace
of any journalist who could be prevailed upon to write the case
for Mr. Hughes. Now, when all this extraordinary effort to at-
tach a public to Australia by placarding Australia as about to be
mishandled by the Peace Conference issues in an actual Peace Con-
ference decision against Mr. Hughes, we have Mr. Hughes’s latest
effort in publicity'—a “Daily Mail” sensational “stunt,” in any case
after the event and unavailing, and, moreover, dismissed by authori-
tative rebuke as inaccurate, mischievous, and misleading. One
hears little, at this distance, as to the Australian public’s opinion
of all this. One has a cheerful faith, nevertheless, that there is
a large body of that opinion which would have preferred a rep-
resentation of us capable both of surveying the immense field of
world-politics with the vision it needs, and of accepting an adverse
decision-—if so it had to be—not necessarily with meekness, but at
least with dignity. As it is, we have the rather sorry; spectacle of
the Prime Minister of Australia——and at a Peace Conference of
world-range and incalculable possibility—diligently engaged in the
first place, in seeking out such journalists who would be willing
to write up the grievances of Australia, with special reference to
the pugnacity of Mr. Hughes concerning them, and finally falling
back upon the “Daily Mail” for help against a decision of the
Great Powers which seems quite to have ignored this so sustained
and so labourious campaign of publicity. Many of the delegates
to the Peace Conference have claims to advance, and most of the
countries they represent are hoping for territorial advantages they
believe to be their due. If each of these delegates had come to
Paris intent upon full-blast ventilation of his grievances by medium
of a personal Press campaign, the Peace Conference by now would
be broken into fragments. Mr. Hughes alone has pursued this
course. He has been well in the public eye by grace of it. But
it can scarcely be doubted that, as a result of it, his reputation on
this side diminishes rather than grows.”


: . ' ' ; : ■ ;
'■t ** ** S «■ >'| | ( Ipft i& f \ v
