

Aus der
Zeitsclirift ftir Ethnologic.
Heft 6. 1906.
Australian Tribes their Formation and Government. 1 )
By
R. H. Mathews, L. S
A tribe of Australian Aborigines may be described as an aggregation
of a number of families or groups, which may, for convenience of
reference, be termed subtribes, who speak the same tongue and whose
territory is situated within specified geographic limits. These families,
groups, subtribes, or whatever name we may call them by, find it to their
mutual advantage to keep on friendly terms with each other, so that they
may be all the better able to defend themselves against a common foe,
or to make raids upon outsiders. They intermarry one with the other and
attend each others ceremonial gatherings, so that they are imbued with
the bond of comradeship, and are all interested in the general welfare.
Every tribe is distinguished by a general name, which is in most
cases derived from the language spoken by its members, as in the names
of the Gundungurra, Thurrawal, Kumbainggeri 2 ), etc. Frequently the
tribe receives its nomenclature from some peculiarity of its speech. The
Wirraidyuri 3 ), Kamilaroi, Wongaibon, Wailwan and many others are named
after their negative adverb. Wirrai, Kamil, Wongai, Wail, all mean No
in the dialects they represent. Examples are found where the affirmative
adverb gives the title; thus, the Pikumbil tribe and language are named
from Pika, Yes.
The natives of the southwestern portion of Yictoria have a habit of
distinguishing the neighbouring tribes by means of the second personal
pronoun, „thou“, of their respective dialects. For example, the Dhau-
hurtwurru are known as the Ngutuk people, the Bungandity as the
Nguro people, and so on. 4 ) A similar custom is found among the
Wongaibon, Wailwan and other tribes of New South Wales, these people
being distinguished from each other by their different terminations to the
second personal pronoun, singular number, as well as by their negative
adverbs.
The Thagu-wurru, Bun-wurru and Wo'i-wurru tribes of the southern
and central parts of the State of Yictoria are also named after their equi-
valents of the English word for „No“, to which is affixed wurru, signi-
1) Vorgelegt in der Sitzung vom 17. Marz 1906.
2) Mitteilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien, Bd. XXXIII S. 321 —328.
3) Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London, vol. XXXIII, p. 259—283, and vol. XXXIV
p. 284—305.
4) Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. XXXVII, p. 250.


fying „lip“ and hence 1 ) Among the tribes of Gippsland, in
the eastern portion of Victoria, certain dialects are designated by means
of dhang, their word for „talk“ or „speech“, with a qualitative adjective,
thus: Dhang-mak, „great“ or „pleasant“ speech; Dhang-gwai, „rough“
speech, and so on.
Some Yictorian dialects are named after the word tyalii meaning
„tongue" which the people have recognized as the source of speech.
Nunda-tyalli, Buiba-tyalli, Tyat-tyalli, are examples of languages which
have received their names in this way. 2 ) Others are named by the com-
bination of the native words meaning „No“ and „ tongue", as the Yagwa-
tyalli, Bewa-tyalli, and so forth, signifying „the No speakers". 3 ) There
are other tribes again along the Murray river between New South Wales
and Victoria who duplicate the negative adverb for their distinguishing-
name, as Yota-yota, the „No-noes“. 4 )
In speaking of the settlement at Raffles Bay, on Coburg Peninsula,
Mr. G. W. Earl reported that the different tribes there were distinguished
among each other by the term which in the particular dialect of each
local group designates the monosyllable „No“. About Croker Island and
Raffles Bay, the tribe was termed Yaako. The Port Essington tribe
went by the name of Yarlo, the western tribe by that of Iyi, and the
southern tribe by that of Oitbi. 6 ) The practice of naming tribes from
their negative adverb is therefore in vogue in the extreme north and
extreme south of the Australian continent, as well as in some inter-
mediate portions.
The ethnographical limits of the district occupied by a tribe, especially
if its members be numerous, are not very clearly defined, but seem to
overlap or melt into each other. There is generally a narrow strip of
„no man’s land" between them, which is sometimes occupied by one people
and sometimes by the other. The boundaries of smaller tracts of country,
with a lesser population, are not infrequently defined by hills, watercourses,
belts of scrub, stretches of plain, or other remarkable features.
But whatever may be the character of the line of demarcation between
two tribes, it is rigorously respected by both parties. The boundary has
been recognized by their forefathers away back to times out of reach,
and they do not seek to disturb it. The same remarks apply to the
boundaries between any local divisions of a tribe or subtribe.
The area of a tribe’s domain varies with the character of the district
they inhabit, as well as with the numerical strength of the people. In
the well-watered coastal districts of New South Wales, with favourable
climatic conditions, where fish and game are abundant, the hunting grounds
are comparatively small; whilst in the open plains of the interior, where
1) Op. cit., vol. XXXVII, p. 244.
2) Op. cit., p. 250.
3) Aboriginal Tribes of N. S. Wales and Victoria (Sydney 1905), p. 90.
4) Yota-yota Language, Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, vol. XXXVI, p. 1G7—190.
5) Journ. Roy. Geog. Soc., London 1846, vol. XVI, p. 239 —251.


game is not so plentiful and water is often scarce, owing to the scanty
rainfall, the quantity of land required to support a tribe is necessarily
more extensive. For example, the territory of the Thangatti, Dharruk or
Thoorga tribe on the coast of New South Wales, is found to be of small
extent when compared with that of the Wirraidyuri or Kamilaroi people
in the central parts of the State.
The size of a tribe’s territory also depends upon whether the country
is flat and open, or is hilly and thickly wooded. Along the margins of
the tablelands of New England and Manero in New South Wales, the
country is broken into deep gorges and high mountains, sloping away
towards the coast on the eastern side, and towards the sources of the
various affluents of the Murray river on the west. In such wild, moun-
tainous country as this, we find that the natives composing a tribe are
not only comparatively few in number, but their hunting grounds are of
small extent. Their boundaries are defined by precipitous and densely
timbered country, which are more or less difficult of access, and in some
cases practically isolate one tribe from the adjacent people.
In a few instances the only communication between neighbouring-
tribes was through mountain passes or thick jungle. Portions of the
table-land, such as the district about Mount Kosciusko, which are covered
with snow in the winter times, had no regular population. They were
occupied in the summer by the inhabitants of the adjacent country, but
were deserted during the winter.
Upon leaving the coastal districts, as well as the tablelands of the
Dividing Range, and proceeding inland, we enter upon vast stretches of
level country in central and western New South Wales. In this region
we meet with tribes possessing hunting grounds ( of considerable extent.
Here the watercourses and rivers are long distances apart, in consequence
of which the population is but sparsely distributed over it. There being
no natural obstructions, the people could roam through all parts of their
territory with the greatest ease. When the animals and plants ran short
in one locality, or were difficult of collection, there was a general march
to a fresh camping place, perhaps many miles away.
The largest of these inland tribes is the Wirraidyuri. Before their
territory was broken up by the White settlers, it extended from Albury
on the Murray river northerly to Gulargambone on the Castlereagh river,
a distance of nearly 400 miles, whilst the breadth at the widest part, from
Hay to Yass, was about 250 miles. Although the people spread over this
immense area all speak the same language, with some slight modifications,
they cannot properly be called a single tribe, but rather a vast con-
federation. They comprise a number of sub-tribes, or independent groups,
each of which has its recognized hunting grounds in some part of the
tribal territory and is known by a name derived from some local feature
of its district, or other distinguishing nomenclature.
Every subtribe is still further divided into smaller groups, consisting,
for example, of an old man with his wives, his sons and their wives,
and the families of the latter. Perhaps there are also residing with them


a few other near relatives. They usually have their abodes near each
other, but they do not necessarily live at the same camping place. Most
of these people, at any rate all the men and children, were born in that
particular locality, and occupy its forests and streams as a common
hunting ground by virtue of their birthright. I will call such an aggre-
gation of people a „local division". All the married women among them
came from other similar family groups or subtribes in the neighbouring
country, in accordance with social laws described later on.
Each man, woman and child in any native camp, in every part of
the tribe’s domain, has the name of some animal, plant, or other material
object as his or her totem (See Sociology). A number of people be-
longing to the same totem may be distinguished as a „totemic group".
In the Wirraidyuri tribe, where the totem descends from the mothers to
the offspring, the totems are scattered indiscriminately throughout the
tribal territory. A little consideration will therefore make it apparent
that a totemic group would not be coincident with a „local division".
For example, there is an Opossum family of sons and daughters be-
longing to a certain local division which occupies a definite tract of
country- One of the sons, who may be called A, goes into a neighbouring
local division, from which he brings home a wife who is a Magpie. One
of A’s sisters, B, is perhaps given in exchange, and becomes the wife of
a Magpie man in that locality, where she of course remains with her
husband, and produces sons and daughters. B is an Opossum like her
brother, and all her children will be the same. We therefore see that
there is now an Opossum family in each of the two local divisions
mentioned. Other sisters of A might go into different local divisions,
raising families of Opossums, and the Magpie man’s sisters would be
similarly spread about among their neighbours, producing Magpie children
like themselves. A totemic group, with matriarchal descent, could not
have any definite geographic boundaries, because its members are liable
to be scattered about in all directions among the local divisions.
I have endeavoured to supply a short definition of what constitutes a
tribe of Australian blacks. It has been exemplified how a tribe or con-
federacy is separable into subtribes, which are again reducible to lesser
component parts, which I have called „local divisions" and „totemic
groups", until at last the people are dispersed over the land in single
families. In this way the whole tribal territory is occupied, through the
length and breadth of it, much in the way Europeans spread over a
country.
A few words illustrating how the chiefs or headmen „come into
office" may be inserted here, and also a brief outline of how „law and
order" is maintained.
Every local division of a tribe, no matter how few its members, has
a leader, recognized as such by reason of his age, or other special
qualification, to which the name of „headman“ has been given by stockmen,
gold diggers and others, a term which answers the purpose very well,
and has been used by some writers, including myself, on the Australian


blacks. For example, the smallest segregation of a tribe consists, as we
have just seen, of a few families residing in one locality. The oldest
man among them would generally be looked upon as their „head-man“
or ruler. Owing to intermarriages with other similar patriarchal assem-
blages w r ho might occupy adjacent hunting grounds, there would soon be
a group of families, all bound together by the mutual ties of kinship.
If a number of such local divisions, each with its own leader, or
„head-man“, thought fit to coalesce and constitute a subtribe in the
manner already referred to, these several „head-men £C not only retained
their patriarchal position among their own people as before, but by
common consent they practically superintended the affairs of the alliance.
After a while, when several such subtribes visited each other and became
on more friendly terms by marriage, they would realize the wider bonds
of relationship and become transformed, imperceptibly, into one tribe.
Furthermore, when a number of separate tribes, such as have just
been referred to, are bound together by affinity of speech, participate in
identical or similar initiation ceremonies, have the same names for the
divisions of their sociology, and among whom intermarriage is more or
less frequent, they may be designated Communities. And as stated by
me in 1894 *), aggregates of these Communities may be given the name
of Nations.
There was no kingly rule or arbitrary chieftainship, in one acceptation
of these terms, but matters of tribal interest were managed by a sort of
informal council composed of the leading men of each local group. Much
deference was shown to the opinions of these men because of their
superior wisdom and influence, when they met in consultation either by
themselves, or with their fellow tribesmen, but they could not exercise
their authority by any outward display of armed force in the way
Europeans carry out their laws. On such occasions the men are largely
guided by ancient traditions and customs, for the details of which they
have to depend upon the memory of the oldest among them, who are the
repositories of the tribal lore.
From what has been said in describing a „totemic group“ in an
earlier paragraph, it will be understood that the chief man of such a
group might have his „subjects“, as it were, dispersed through several
local divisions. Not only his own special totem, but also those with
which it has intermarried, would naturally receive his care and attention.
The chief of a totem was not necessarily the „ Head-man “ of a local
division; but in consequence of the respect always shown to age, we find
that the oldest man of any given totemic group is usually the recognized
head of it, and would on that account come into prominence at the tribal
conferences on any important matter connected with the totems. If he
were a man of mark he would, by the tacit assent of the people, acquire
authority in other matters, so that the head of a totemic group might
1) „The Kamilaroi Class System", Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. Aust., Queensland,
vol. X, p. 21.


also be the leader of a local division, especially if the members of his
affiliated totems were numerous and powerful.
Again, a man who was supposed to possess certain magical powers,
or a valiant warrior, or a man of fluent speech, might by force of
character, become a „headman“. Or a noted song-maker, if influentially
connected, would sometimes be numbered among the leaders of his tribe.
The position of „Head-man“ is neither hereditary nor elective, and
although great respect is shown to age, yet the oldest man was not
necessarily either the chief of his division, or of his totem. There was
generally some elderly man, possessing special qualifications, either as a
warrior, an orator, a skilful sorcerer, or the like, whom the people looked
up to as their natural leader, in the same way that children recognize
the authority of their father. When the chief dies, the man who is next
in importance naturally fits into his place by common consent.
In some convenient place near the camp, the initiated men congregate
to talk over all such matters as - fall within the scope of their duty as
tribesmen. In the Wirraidyuri and several other tribes, such a place of
assembly is called Ngulubul. The women and children, and the unini-
tiated youths, are not allowed to intrude upon this spot, even if the men
are not there. When any important business is on hand, the chief men
gather informally at the ngulubul and discuss the situation. It is the
oldest men whose voices carry the most weight, because they are better
informed in the traditionary learning. Such an assembly „of old and
experienced men virtually constitutes an aboriginal senate", which ad-
ministers the tribal customs, and maintains law and order.
Young men who have passed through all the grades of the initiation
ceremonies are allowed to be present at these conferences of the elders
at the ngulubul, to sit and listen, but they are not permitted to take
any part in the parleys. When they attain riper years or middle age,
and have become more or less prominent members of their tribe, they
are gradually allowed to participate in these tribal discussions. All of
them are equally interested in enforcing the observance of their laws.
It may seem strange that the younger and more robust members of
the community should render unquestioned obedience to the dicta of their
elders. But the principal source of the authority exercised by the chiefs
„the power behind the throne" is the dread of supernatural punish-
ments. Every blackfellow is taught from his early youth that any de-
parture from the established customs and beliefs of his tribe will invari-
ably bring down upon him some form of disease or even death, by
magical influences. The race is excessively superstitious and their traditions
are held in great veneration. They impute to supernatural agency every
occurrence of which they cannot understand the cause.
The oldest men take the lead at the great ceremonial gatherings
connected with the initiation and other rites. It is generally the senior
member of a totemic group in contiguous portions of the tribal territory,
who despatches messengers asking the people in neighbouring districts
to assemble in his country for the celebration of those rites. He takes


the principal part in all matters connected with his totem and those with
which he is more immediately affiliated. There being no written laws,
the people must depend entirely upon tradition for their rules of action.
The narrow sphere in which a blackfellow moves, leaves his mind
unburdened and free for storing up the legendary lore of his fathers and
other old men. It is impressed upon him by slow and insensible degrees
and is, as it were, „woven into the texture of his life 44 .
While the traditions and customs are faithfully carried out and
obeyed, everything flows on smoothly and peaceably; but immediately any
departure is made from ancient custom, or any tribal law is infringed,
the matter is freely commented upon by every one, and the offender is
taken to task in some form or another. In the English legal code we
distinguish what are termed criminal offences from civil wrongs the
former being against the entire public, whilst the latter are between
private individuals. Even in a blackfellow’s camp it has been found
necessary to make a somewhat similar classification in the administration
of justice.
If a man takes possession of „his neighbour’s wife 44 , or openly has
undue familiarity with her, it will be treated as a „civil 4C or personal
offence. The chief men of the local division will know all the particulars
of the case, because it will have been openly spoken of by the people,
but they will not take any action. At some convenient time, which is
generally at a ceremonial meeting of the people, the offender is liable to
be called to account by the aggrieved husband, and the two men will
fight it out with clubs or spears. Each man may be encouraged and
supported by his relations, but the rest of the assemblage will not inter-
fere. The two belligerants take care not to give a mortal blow, because
they are both well aware of the consequences to themselves at another
time.
Again, a man may be called to account if he does not carry out the
tribal rules of mourning for his relatives. For example, if he has not
sufficiently lamented the decease of his father or his fathers brother, or
one of his paternal nephews, his fathers lineage will bring him to book.
If he has passed lightly over the death of his wife’s brother, or his wife’s
mother’s brother, his wife’s people will take him to task. It may be only
a war of words, or a few weapons may be thrown. Or, if his conduct
has been flagrant, he may be required to submit to an ordeal of spears
by the party making the complaint.
But when a man forms a matrimonial alliance in contravention ot
the tribal laws, it is classed as a crime against the whole community.
All his own friends, as well as those of his wife, rise against him as one
man. They send him a message that he must appear at an appointed
meeting place, and submit to exemplary punishment. The woman would
be beaten in a more or less crual manner, and the man might be killed,
according to the gravity of the offence.
Zeitschrift ftir Et.hnologie. Jahrg. 1906. Heft 6.


R. H. Mathews: Australian Tribes
When a man espouses a woman to whom he has not been „officially“
betrothed, although she be of the proper section and lineage, he is like-
wise liable to be chastised and made to surrender her.
If a man revealed any of the secrets of the Bora or Burbung cere-
monies to a woman or uninitiated person, he was attacked and killed by
his own local division, or by any members of the entire confederacy who
might find him. Their folklore is full of tales of novices being punished
for betraying secrets, or for trying to evade the old men’s authority
during the ceremonies. When I was present at the Bora held at Tall-
wood in Queensland, the old men told me that long ago, so their grand-
fathers had narrated to them, a large Bora was held at what is now
known as Benarba. Some youths who thougth they were very clever,
ran away from the men who had charge of them in the bush, and returned
to the camp of their mothers at the thurrawonga. Some of the best
men of the Kuringal went after them and approached within hearing of
the thurrawonga camp at nightfall. They then swung the mystic
„bullroarer“, and certain of the men who had remained with the women
went over to them. The Kuringal enquired if the youths had come
back, and being answered in the affirmative, they asked the men to lead
them out to where they were then sitting. As soon as the youths were
brought, the Kuringal took them a little distance away and split their
skulls open with their tomahawks. A fire was then made and they were
burnt. Some calcareous formations on the side of a low ridge are shown,
which are said to be the remains of the delinquents.
Other stories relate how women have been the transgressors by
coaxing their sweethearts to tell them something of the proceedings in
the bush, and were chopped to pieces. In other instances women have
been punished by being transformed into stones or rocks, which remain
as monuments of their inquisitiveness.
When any person has caused the death of another, either by open
violence or by magic, a consultation is held among the principal men of
his tribe and a Pirrimbir party is organized to punish the offender. Such
meetings are free from the intrusion of women or the uninitiated.
J 1!M mZMTi 9
