

4


Xj* »




0


*r
-\ 1L=^k
Australian
Bush parables
Maude Ramsden




AUSTRALIAN BUSH PARABLES




*
.


i_/ - . ’« t ♦ / •
p--- ■ |^Kr^,' > 1 e»V * .T 4 *-** rf ■3^^fejr a *
THE UGLY CATERPILLAR


AUSTRALIAN BUSH
PARABLES
MAUDE RAMSDEN
MORGAN & SCOTT L m
(Office of ‘“tChr (Christian”)
12, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS
LONDON E.C. 4




P204
5 DEC
“The works of the Lord are great, sought out of
all them that have pleasure therein.”
Psalm cxi. 2.
“ Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee;
and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee :
Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee ; and
the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee . . .
that the hand of the Lord hath wrought this.”
Job xii. 7, 8, 9.
“So we will even leave the study, and its dearly
treasured books, and come out into the garden,
where the Voice of God is yet audible, and look
and listen together, and learn what He has to
teach us out of His own Handiwork.”
“ Garden Graith.”
“If thou art worn and hard beset
With sorrows, that thou would’st forget,
If thou would’st read a lesson that will keep
Thy heart from fainting, and thy soul from sleep,
Go to the woods and hills ! ”
Longfellow.




. 25
• 33
• 43
• 53
6x
. 6 7
• 77
• 83
. 91
• 99
CONTENTS
I. Spring ...... i
11. Never quit Certainty for Hope . . 7
111. The Rats . . . . . .17
IV. The Oak Leaf . . , . .25
V. The Beetles . . . . -33
VI. The Magpie and the Parrot . . -43
VII. The White Gum Tree . . . -53
VIII. The Log of Wood . . , . 6i
IX. The Bush Fire . . . . .67
X. The Ugly Caterpillar . . . .77
XL The Raindrop . . . . .83
XII. The Red Gum Tree . . . .91
XIII. Life’s Lesson . . . . .99
XIV. The Fantails ..... 109




Australian Bush Parables
SPRING
“Where there’s a will, there’s a way.”
PRING is coming! Spring is com
ing! ” So whispered the Wind,
one bright sunny morning, to every
tree, flower, shrub, bird, and insect
in the huge paddock.
“Can you not hear her footsteps ? ” continued
the Wind. “Do you not feel the warmth her
presence brings ? Come, come, my friends, why
sleep you so long ? Put on your gayest robes, all
you trees and flowers ; sing your sweetest songs,
O birds, small and great, and welcome the coming
Spring.”
“ Are you not a little premature with your
news ? ” asked a Weeping Willow. “ Why, we
have scarcely got over yesterday’s drenching rain ;
and as for feeling warm yet, well, truly I cannot
say I do.”
“ Nevertheless, Spring is on her way,” repeated


the Wind. “ Have I swept over fields and hills,
and not noticed the signs on all sides ? Are not
the magpies busy building, and does not even the
tiniest wild flower begin to lift its head ? Hear
me, O children of the bush : in a few days’ time
Spring will be upon you with all her brightness and
glad joy : now, let us prepare a welcome for her,
and make our paddock one of the gayest that she
has passed through. Let each flower put forth her
brightest colours, let each tree put out its greenest
leaves, and let all the birds of the air greet her
with a song of joy.”
To all this flowery conversation a tiny wild
violet listened intently ; only a few days ago she
had peeped out of the damp earth in order to look
at her surroundings. But after the words of the
Wind her head drooped and she was sad, “ How
can I welcome the Spring,” she moaned, “ seeing
that I am nearly smothered by this great black-
berry bush ? Is it likely Spring will notice a tiny
insignificant little flower like me ? ”
“No, I am afraid there is not much hope for
you,” suddenly spoke out the Blackberry Bush.
“ You need not bother your little head about
trying to greet the glad Spring ; it is sure to be the
larger flowers and shrubs that she will look at. I
really think you might go to sleep again with
safety.”
“ But I do not want to sleep now,” the humble
Violet answered ; “ and why should I not welcome


the Spring, small though I am, just as much as you
or any other shrub or flower does ? If you really
wished to help me in my desire,” continued the
Violet timidly, “ you would not keep stretching
your long branches over me, and so hide me from
the sun’s rays. Could you not manage to lean
over to the other side ? ”
“ I could not comply with your request, Madam,”
replied the Blackberry Bush. “Of all things, I
cannot bear to see a shrub or tree one-sided ; it is
not natural. It is a pity you are so unfortunate
as to be growing close to my embrace.”
“ And it is a still greater pity that I cannot
get away from it,” the tiny Violet said. “ How-
ever, I must make the best of it somehow.”
Not a single word of the conversation between
the Violet and the Blackberry Bush had the Wind
missed. He waited to see if the Blackberry Bush
had any more to say, and as no sound was audible,
he gently whispered to the drooping Violet, “ Lift
your head, sweet flower, and listen to what I am
about to say. You think you are not able to
welcome the Spring because you are small, and
overshadowed by the thorny Bramble, but have
you forgotten your chief charm ? Raise your
head once more, little friend, let every ray of
sunshine into your heart, breathe in all the pure
air you can, then let all your sweet perfume scent
the whole atmosphere and Spring will soon find
you out, depend upon it. Do not forget my words,


and when I herald the beloved Season’s approach,
send forth your sweetness all around,” and the
Wind quietly went on his way, leaving the Violet
with a very gladdened heart. How stupid she
had been, she thought, after the Wind had left
her ; of course she could attract the attention of
Spring by her sweet odour. So she lifted her head
once more and spread out her delicately-veined
blue and white petals much to the surprise of the
Blackberry Bush.
Not many days after, the whole paddock was a
blaze of beauty. Wattles, with their soft, bright
yellow blossoms lining the creek, the gum-tree
blossoms bursting forth from their queer cup-
shaped buds, shrubs of every description bright
and gay, whilst the earth was dotted here and
there with blue stars, and gay-coloured orchids.
Even the Weeping Willow awoke to the occasion
and prettily dressed his branches in palest shade
of green. The birds were singing, trilling and
warbling, as if their little throats would burst.
Everything was ready even to the modest little
Violet, nearly hidden by the Blackberry Bush.
Then the Wind announced that Spring was really
in their midst, and he gently escorted her into
the gorgeous paddock, bringing the various trees,
flowers, shrubs before her notice. As they
neared the Blackberry Bush she was immediately
arrested by the delicious scent in the air, and asked
the Wind whence the sweet smell came. The


Wind told the Violet’s story, which greatly touched
the heart of Spring. “ I did not realise before,”
she said, “ that I had such loyal children, but the
Violet’s welcome outdoes all. I have had the
pleasure of seeing this paddock gaily dressed in
honour of my coming, I have heard with delight
the singing of the birds, but the perfume of this
tiny Violet will remain for ever with me. My
blessing on you, little flower, and may you carry
sweetness wherever you go,” and Spring passed
on with the Wind.
The Violet did not speak, her heart w r as too full
for words. She did not even care to know if the
Bramble had heard the w r ords which Spring had
addressed to her. She was satisfied, for, in that
she had given forth her sweet perfume as her token
of affection, Spring had rewarded her with special
notice and words of cheer, which she would never
forget.




NEVER QUIT CERTAINTY FOR
HOPE
“ Better bear ills we have, than flee to others that we know
not of.”
|HE last echo of the voices of trippers
and sightseers died away in the
distance, but the Waterfall still
thundered on with deafening roar
over the rocks, spreading the spray
on either side and refreshing even the tiniest
flower that grew within its reach. It was truly
a magnificent Waterfall, and well worthy of all
the praise and admiration which it received, day
after day, by those who came to visit it. This
day, however, had been particularly trying to a
small Rock Fern growing close by the Waterfall :
it was more than he could bear to hear the Water-
fall praised to such a degree, and he thought it
quite time the Waterfall was spoken to about it.
So, summoning up his courage and strength —for
it needed both to address such a mighty torrent,
he said :
“ Really, Mr. Waterfall, I wonder that you care


to listen to the empty talk which the people address
to you ; and what saddens me more is to see how it
evidently pleases you, for you seem to delight in
making the most deafening noise whenever these
visitors come. I should have thought they were
beneath your notice, and I must own that I often
grow heartily sick and weary of your ceaseless
roar —in fact, I wish you would dry up for a bit.”
“ A sorry day that would be for you, my small
friend,” answered the Waterfall. “ Why, surely
you realise that all your nourishment comes from
me; and if I dry up, as you say, you would soon
do likewise, and the place would know you no
more. Then as to the praise I receive, I should
be glad if you would tell me how I can help either
people talking of me, or my hearing what is said.
Understand, my friend, that I did not make
myself, and I believe that, with all my blustering
noise, I often am the means of lifting the thoughts
of the people who visit me to the One that made
me.”
“ No doubt, no doubt,” replied the Rock Fern,
“ but if you were a little quieter, there might be
some chance of us ferns having a little notice
taken of us.”
“ Oh, is that the way the land lies ? ” answered
back the Waterfall. “ Now, I should have thought
that that was beneath you too. Don’t be in a
hurry for admiration or you may be dug up and
taken away to live in some tiny backyard in the


city. I have the advantage there certainly, for I
cannot be moved.”
“ Well, I am not sure that I would not prefer a
tiny backyard to this incessant noise, because
even there I would at least be valued and admired.”
“ May that experience never be yours, my young
friend; for, believe me, you would give worlds to
come back to your native soil, and the probabilities
are that you never would.”
This ended the conversation, for darkness crept
in, and the Fern settled down for the night, leaving
the W aterfall to continue its perpetual motion.
Not many days after, a number of people came
to visit the Waterfall, and whilst the usual com-
ments were being passed on its magnificence and
beauty, two children began exploring amongst
the rocks at the side. Whilst rambling about
they chanced to espy the little Rock Fern, and
the next moment they were down on their knees,
trowel in hand, digging away at its tiny roots.
“ Won’t Gwen be pleased when she knows it
has come from the side of the Waterfall ? ” said the
little girl.
“ Let us plant it in a pot and put it on her window-
sill,” answered the boy.
And with many other exclamations of pleasure
the two began to saunter back to their friends.
The Rock Fern longed to speak to the Waterfall
to tell him of his hoped-for change, and to wish
him good-bye, but try as he would he could not


utter a sound, and he felt strangely faint and queer.
However, the Waterfall happened to see him as
the people were leaving, and he called out as the
children were walking away carefully with their
prize :
“ Good-bye, little friend, we may never meet
again, but do not entirely forget your old friend.
Wherever you find yourself, try to bring cheer to
those around you. Don’t worry about admira-
tion. Good-bye, good-bye.”
The party then quickly disappeared amongst
the trees, The little Rock Fern, resting in a
pocket handkerchief carried by the boy, now felt
really ill, and wondered if he were going to die;
but after a tedious journey by train, and a still
more tiring journey in a jolty carriage, he was
quite sure his end had come. He could not
imagine what his new surroundings would be like,
for it was quite dark when the journey was ended,
and, needless to say, the children, tired out, forgot
all about the poor Rock Fern, and he was left in
the carriage all night, more dead than alive. In
the morning, however, the door of the shed opened
and the boy and girl appeared with a flower-pot.
They proceeded to unwrap the poor withered
Rock Fern and plant it in a pot, apparently much
concerned as to whether it would live. They
then carried it indoors, to a small but spotlessly
clean bedroom. On a bed, near the window, lay
a little girl between six and seven years of age.


She was very delicate and fragile ; yet she had
always a bright little smile for every one, especially
those belonging to her. The boy and girl now came
to her bedside and presented her with the tiny
Rock Fern, apologising for its withered appear-
ance, telling her from whence it had come, and
hoping it would live and flourish on her window-
sill. The child’s face lit up with pleasure, and
after thanking them over and over again she lay
with the flower-pot in her hands as if she were
trying to picture the spot where the Rock Fern
had come from. The poor child had lain on her
bed almost all her life, and, oh, how often she
longed to ramble over the fields, paddocks, and
hills, like her brother and sister! Her mother
came in soon after and placed the little plant-pot
on the window-sill, where the child could easily
see it.
For a day or two the Rock Fern remained in a
sort of semi-consciousness, then he began to feel
fresh life in his veins. But as life crept slowly
back, he also realised that there was something
wanting, and gradually it dawned upon him that
he missed the roar of the Waterfall. Oh, if he
could just hear it again for a few moments, if
he could feel the spray on his fronds once more ;
but no, all he could now hear was a baby wailing
in the next room, a dog howling in the yard, and
occasional shrieks from a tame magpie, “ Who
are you ? ” with great emphasis on the “ you ”


nothing musical in any of the sounds as far as he
could make out. Then the last words of the
Waterfall came back to him, “ Try to bring cheer
to those around you ”; and as he thought of the
little fragile child, he made up his mind that, for
her sake, he would live and grow, and thereby
bring what little joy he could to her weary life.
So the days passed by; but as the Rock Fern
flourished and thrived, the sick child seemed to
droop. The patient mother did all she could,
attending to her night and day, but an anxious
look very often came into her face.
One evening, when the children were playing
in the garden, and the baby was asleep in its cot,
the mother sat by the little girl’s bed sewing.
For a long time no word was spoken, then the
child asked that her brother and sister might be
brought to her. They soon came, looking bright
and rosy after their game, and stood near the
bed. The little invalid then told them that she
knew perfectly well that she could not live long
now, that she was going to a brighter and better
home soon, where there would be no more pain,
but now she wanted to ask them a last favour.
Would they, at some time, take the little Rock
Fern back to its native home near the Waterfall ?
It had been a great pleasure to her to watch
every fresh frond springing up, but when she was
gone, she would like her brother and sister to
replant it at the side of the Waterfall. The two


children both gave their promise, and crept out
of the room, tears streaming from their eyes, and
there was no more thought of play that night.
The little Rock Fern had such mingled feelings of
pain and pleasure that he nearly cracked the pot.
Could it be possible that his little girl friend was
really dying, and that she thought of him, a little
insignificant Rock Fern, even to the last. Dare
he hope that once again he would see and hear
the Waterfall —the Waterfall which he had so
despised. No, it was too good to be true ; he
must not allow himself to think about it
at all.
Within the next few days the sick child’s spirit
fled, leaving the household with broken hearts.
The mother placed two or three pieces of the Rock
Fern in the hands of the little girl before they
carried her away, and the plant, feeling very sore
and weary, was left alone. Many weeks went by,
the Rock Fern wondering sometimes if the brother
and sister would ever remember their promise to
the little one, now gone. It was always the
sorrowing mother that came to give it its usual
drink of water. At last, broken-hearted and
tired of waiting for the fulfilment of the promise,
the little plant began to lose its spirit and droop.
Then the mother spoke to the children, saying
she thought they had better go the next fine day
to the Waterfall and carry the little Rock Fern
back with them, as she was afraid if they put it


off any longer it would die. Accordingly, a few
days after, on a bright sunny day, the little party
set off.
This time their precious little burden was well
cared for, and the journey did not seem half so
tiring ; he was also buoyed up with a great joy—
the hope of soon hearing the noise of rushing
waters ! The train journey over, the party pro-
ceeded to walk towards the Waterfall, and the
little Rock Fern listened with the most intense
eagerness to catch the first sound of that mighty
torrent. Yes, he was sure he could hear it now.
Oh, what glorious music it seemed to him! Why
had he ever thought otherwise ?
With the birds’ soprano notes and the deep
bass of the falling water, it sounded now like the
sweetest harmony. Nearer and nearer they drew
until the little party stopped at the foot of the
falls. The brother and sister would not wait a
moment, but went on to the spot where they
remembered having dug up the little Rock Fern,
and after planting it, firmly and well, they re-
turned to the foot of the Waterfall, their eyes full
of tears. The little plant, too, for some time
drooped, and was very sad, especially when he
heard the voices of the retiring children growing
fainter and fainter, and he wondered if he would
ever see or hear them again.
Soon he began to feel the refreshing spray from
the Waterfall, and he lifted his head to take a


good look once more at his old friend. Oh, if
only the Waterfall would condescend to speak to
him, but he doubted whether it had yet noticed
his return! It was not long, however, before the
Waterfall espied him, and even then he could
scarcely believe his eyes.
“ Is it really my little friend the Rock Fern ? ”
he called out, “ Can it possibly be you back
• 0 5?
again :
“Yes, I have actually got back again to my
home,” responded the Fern. “ I wish I could just
tell you what a joy it is to me to hear your voice
again, and to feel the welcome spray all over me.
Oh, my friend, I have had a great lesson taught
me, but I will tell you my story later on. How
good of you to speak to me after all my rude
words to you ! ”
“ Let us not think of it again,” replied the
Waterfall. “ All I know is, that I rejoice to have
you back, but how you managed it is more than
I can tell. If you are not too tired after your
journey, I should like to hear your history, since
you left, I am anxious to know.”
Forthwith the Rock Fern told his story from
start to finish, and the Waterfall was much
affected by it.
“ I must help you to live and thrive, my friend,”
he said, “ for I have no doubt the little girl and
boy will often come to see how you are pro-
gressing.”


And so they did. Every holiday they would
come with a few school companions to visit the
little Rock Fern, and so, in the end, having fully
learnt its lesson, the tiny plant had a special
party of admirers to himself.


11l
THE RATS
“A rolling stone gathers no moss.”
N a large well-stocked country barn,
Mr. and Mrs. Ratto had made a
comfortable home for themselves
and their two children. Mrs. Ratto
was especially happy, hoping that
now as they had been in the barn for some months,
hei husband had at last settled down, and thought
better of his roving habits. For rover he was,
and had been all his life. But one evening after
the children Frisk and Frolic had been put to bed,
Mr. Ratto startled his wife very much by asking
her how soon she could pack up and start on a
journey. For a moment Mrs. Ratto could not
speak, for it was plain to see she was greatly
agitated.
“My dear husband,” at last she broke forth,
I beseech you not to think of moving again.
\Miy, this yvill be the tenth move we have had,
and I assure you that there is still plenty of grain
in this barn for many a week to come : then,


we have not even touched the apples in the loft
yet. Oh, I implore you not to leave ! Think of
the danger we passed through the last time we
travelled.”
“ When you have quite finished, my dear, I
will continue,” said Mr. Ratto in a quiet manner—
too quiet for Mrs. Ratto’s liking. “ This morning
I overheard the farmer and his sons talking of
having the barn cleared out, as they were certain
the place was overrun with rats. Now, I for one
have no desire to take part in their sport, and I
am sure you do not look forward to it either.
Therefore, I have decided this time to take a
sea voyage.”
“ A sea voyage,” squeaked Mrs. Ratto, “ then
I shall die, I know it. Oh, whatever made you
think of the sea, my dear husband ? ”
“ Keep calm, wife, there is nothing to fear
whatever. I met a distant cousin of ours, Mr.
Greymouse, a few hours ago, and he informed me
that he has been at sea for some months now, and
he could not wish for a happier life. He was out
this way sightseeing when I met him, and he begged
me to bring you and the children on board. The boat
sails in three days’ time, and I should like to start
as soon as possible—in fact, to-night if you can.”
All poor Mrs. Ratto could do was to meekly
submit; but she dreaded the thought of another
move, for the last time they were nearly all burnt
alive through the house having caught fire. Well,


there seemed no way out of this fresh trouble,
so in the early hours of the morning Frisk and
Frolic were informed of the proposed journey.
Needless to say, they were delighted to hear the
news, and became so excited that the father had
to reprove them.
At last the moment came when the quartette
squeezed through the well-known hole in the corner
of the barn and took a last look around, and then
started off on their run towards the wharf. They
arrived at their destination late the following
night, famished and tired. All they had had to
eat on the journey consisted of some dripping
which they had found in a tool-shed. The dripping
had evidently been wanted for greasing a saw,
but not a fragment did the rats leave behind them.
Mr. Greymouse met them on the wharf, was
delighted to see them, and told them that had they
put off their journey another twelve hours they
would have missed the boat, as she was timed to
start early next morning.
“ Now, Mrs. Ratto,” he went on to say, “if you
will follow me up this rope you will soon be on
board,” As these words were spoken, Mrs. Ratto
collapsed and declared she was so tired that if
she tried to climb the rope she was sure she would
fall into the water. But Frisk and Frolic both
told her they would help her up, and at last she
was persuaded to try. A few minutes after
they were all on board the huge vessel. Grey-


mouse led the way, quietly and cautiously, to the
large hold, where the odour of apples was delicious.
He found a corner for them amongst some bags of
wheat, and having seen them comfortably settled,
ran to his own quarters. The rats, thoroughly
tired out, soon went off into a sound slumber.
Mrs. Ratto was first awakened by loud shouts
and a deafening noise of machinery : she quickly
awoke her husband and asked what it meant. “Do
you think the boat is sinking ? ” she asked him.
“ My dear wife,” he answered, “ when wall you
stop looking on the gloomy side of things ? The
boat sinking! Of course not. The booming
sound is the working of the propeller, which shows
we are really off. The shouting and coo-eeing
are to friends left on the wharf.”
After this astonishing piece of information, Mrs.
Ratto tried to settle down to another nap, but it
was of no use, the noise of the propeller got on her
nerves, she declared, and she wondered if she would
ever have another wink of sleep throughout the
journey. But in three or four days time the
family of rats became accustomed to the noise of
board-ship life ; they had certainly a wonderful
storehouse of good things to choose from, and by
way of extras they would finish off at night with
nibbling the straps of the children’s shoes, or
helping themselves to some of the tempting sweets
or “ lollies,” as they are termed in Australia,
which friends had supplied on parting.


Mrs. Ratto seemed to have lost her fear, and to
all appearance was enjoying the new mode of
living. And so the days flew by, the passengers
bright and gay having their games and concerts
above, whilst the rats and mice amused them-
selves in the hold below.
But one evening, when all was quiet, or at any
rate as quiet as a boat can be, all on board were
awakened by a terrific crash. Mr. Ratto at once
told his family to remain where they were whilst
he went on a tour of inspection. He was away a
very long time, at least it seemed so to Mrs. Ratto,
and when he did put in an appearance he looked
haggard and ill.
“ What is the matter, dear husband ? ” asked
Mrs. Ratto; “ have we come to our journey’s
end, for I notice the machinery has stopped ? ”
“ Yes,” answered Mr. Ratto, “we have come
to our journey’s end ; the vessel has struck the
rocks, water is pouring in, the passengers are being
taken off in boats, and in a few minutes we shall
all sink or swim.”
At these last words Mrs. Ratto loudly squeaked.
“ Oh, what dreadful news you bring us! ” she
cried. “ Why do you suffer your family to go
through such perils in order to humour your roving
disposition ? Well, if we are to drown, at least
let me have my children with me,” and she called
Frisk and Frolic to her side.
“ There is no thought of drowning at all, my


dear,” Mr. Ratto again said in a calm voice. (It
was this quiet air and manner that often seemed
to upset poor Mrs. Ratto.) “We are no distance
from the shore as far as I can judge,” continued
Mr. Ratto, “ and therefore I do not see why,
instead of wasting time talking here, we do not all
four take to the water at once. Of course, as you
near the shore you must expect a buffeting, for
the breakers are fairly large, but a little determina-
tion will see you safely through, I do not doubt.
Now, are you ready ? If so, follow me.”
“ Could we not manage to get in one of the
boats ? ” eagerly inquired Mrs. Ratto.
“ The boats have all departed by now,” answered
Mr. Ratto. “ And the sooner you follow the
better.”
Arriving on the upper deck, they quickly
scampered to the stern of the vessel, but it seemed
so high above the water that even Mr. Ratto did
not seem to relish the jump. So back they ran
to the lower deck amidships, and finding a hole
cut out at the side, Mr. Ratto called out, “ Don’t
stop to think, just follow me and jump and we will
all meet again, never fear.” With these words
he bounded forward, there was a faint splash heard,
and Mrs. Ratto, Frisk and Frolic knew he was in
the water. Mrs. Ratto hesitated about following,
but Frisk and Frolic urged her forward, as they
were sure the boat was settling down in the water.
So she made another effort and leaped out into the


sea, followed by the two young rats. Not a sign
of Mr. Ratto anywhere, but these three determined
to keep close together if they possibly could. On
and on they swam and soon they found they were
nearing one of the boats when, to Mrs. Ratto’s
joy, she felt a rope dangling. In an instant all
three had the rope in their teeth, and were being
towed along. It was a dark night fortunately for
them but not for the poor passengers, who seemed
much upset. The roar of the breakers was now
heard and Mrs. Ratto told Frisk and Frolic to try
their best to get into the boat unobserved, as they
might be dashed to pieces with the waves. So
they all somehow managed to creep into the boat,
and though the waves washed over them frequently
the boatload of passengers and rats were eventually
brought safely to land. A sigh of thankfulness
came from poor Mrs. Ratto when she found she
was once more safe on land. She wondered if her
husband was alive, but knew it was out of the
question to search for him yet. She heard the
passengers relating their experiences to people on
shore, and very soon the voices died away in the
distance ; the passengers had been taken to various
homes and cottages for food and warmth, and the
three rats were left to themselves on the shore.
At the first glimpse of daylight they started the
search for Mr. Ratto, and soon they found him
lying on the rocks, insensible, but not dead. They
managed to bring him to a dry spot on the beach,


and slowly, very slowly, he regained consciousness.
Mrs. Ratto forgot all his faults and failings and did
all she could for him, bringing him pieces of apple,
bread, etc., which she and the young rats had
picked up on the shore. He at last spoke and told
them how he had, at the end of his swim, got
amongst some terrible breakers, and he really
thought his last moment had come.
“ But now, dear wife,” he went on to say, “ I
must own I have been very selfish in bringing you
and the children into such danger, and as my life
is spared to me once more, I will settle down with
you all, and we will live comfortably together.
Let us go and reconnoitre and see if we can make
a home again.”
They roamed about the beach and at last came
upon an old deserted fisherman’s hut. Under the
floor of this they decided to make their home, and
soon had some dry ti-tree with which to line
their nest. By degrees they built a most comfort-
able, warm dwelling-place and here they all lived
on very happily, getting their living on fruit, fish,
and foods which were washed up by the tide, or
occasional visits to a local schoolyard where crusts
innumerable seemed to strew the ground. Mr.
Ratto appeared to have learnt his lesson at last,
for he told his wife he would never think of moving
again—unless she herself expressed the wish.


THE OAK LEAF
“The falling of the leaf is a whisper to the living,”
OOD morning, friend ! ” called out
a Chestnut Tree to his neighbour
the Blue Gum. “ What a beautiful
day we are going to have ! ”
“ Yes, the prospects are good,”
answered the Blue Gum, “ but do you not think
that there was a touch of frost in the air this
morning ? ”
“ Well, to tell the truth, I did,” said the Chest-
nut, “ but hoped that I was mistaken, for it only
shows me that soon, very soon. Winter will be
here, and I shall stand leafless and bare. We
must bow to the laws of Nature, but, oh, it is
well to be you! ”
“ I really am sorry for you,” remarked the Blue
Gum, “ but it is always a great joy to me to watch
you bursting forth into buds again, and there is
always this satisfaction, that life is in you, though
you appear otherwise.”
On the other side of the Blue Gum stood an Oak


Tree, and a very fine leaf on one of its boughs
happened to overhear this conversation, “ Laws
of Nature ! ” “ Life is in you ! ” he repeated,
“ What can they mean ? ” Rather timidly he
asked the Blue Gum if he would kindly explain
what he had been saying to the Chestnut
Tree.
“ Surely you must know, my green friend, that
you and all your companion leaves will fall off
your branches, one by one, as Winter advances,
and the tree will not have one solitary leaf left
to cheer it ! ” answered the Blue Gum.
“ And may I ask what happens to you, please ? ”
said the Oak Leaf.
“ Well, strange to say,” rejoined the Blue Gum,
“we do not lose our leaves at all. I presume it
is peculiar to our country. Anyhow, we remain
green all the year round.”
“ If you can keep your leaves, why cannot the
Oak Tree keep his, seeing he is now living in this
country ? ” asked the Leaf.
“ I am afraid I cannot tell you that, my young
friend,” answered the Blue Gum, “ maybe he is
not quite so strong as we are.”
“ Oh, stuff and nonsense ! ” said the Leaf.
“ Please do not run down our family tree ; why,
are we not noted for our strength, and since you
have made me speak so plainly, I may just as
well tell you candidly, that I do not intend to
forsake my tree, I mean to see the Winter through ;


if your leaves can stay where they are, surely I
can do likewise.”
“ An utter impossibility, I assure you,” said the
Blue Gum. “ I have watched all the English
trees in this orchard for some years and, believe
me, not one leaf has ever succeeded in remaining
on its branch for even half the Winter months.”
“ That is simply because they take it for granted
that they must fall off, as the others all do,”
retorted the Leaf. “It is quite sad to see such
lack of strength of character.”
“ What you term strength of character, I should
call obstinacy,” argued the Blue Gum. “It is
not the slightest use you trying to fight against
Nature, my young friend ; when the time comes
for you to go, go you must, and it would be wiser
to go cheerfully and willingly.”
“ Never ! ” retorted the Leaf, very much nettled
now by the Blue Gum’s words, though they actually
for the moment made the Leaf tremble and shake.
“ Never,” it repeated. “ Here I am, and here I
remain.”
“We shall see what we shall see,” muttered the
Blue Gum.
This ended the dialogue for the present, and
quietness reigned in the orchard, save for the
chirping and twittering of the birds.
It was a large, well-laid-out orchard, situated
amongst the hills, and in it were planted all manner
of ornamental and fruit trees. The day turned


out bright and sunny ; in fact, quite warm, and
the Blue Gum thought he really must have been
mistaken as to the frost. Towards evening,
however, the air felt decidedly crisp and sharp,
and when morning dawned the ground was quite
white. The next day rain set in, and though it
went on for three or four days continuously, it
by no means damped the ardour of the Leaf.
More bright days followed, and, as yet, very few
leaves had fallen in the orchard. But a cold snap
came rather suddenly, and all the trees now felt
that this was the beginning of Winter’s reign.
The defiant Leaf of the Oak Tree watched the
leaves dropping off, one after another as the days
went by and the stormy winds whistled through
and around the orchard.
“ Stupid things ! ” he exclaimed. “ I have no
patience with them, meekly dropping to the Earth
when there is the slightest puff of wind. Have
they no moral courage ? ”
“ Yes, they have, and a good amount, my friend,”
answered the Blue Gum. “ But their work here
is done and they know it, and are quite ready to
go to join their companions. They are making
way for others that will follow. However, I see
it is useless to talk any more to you on the subject.”
And the Blue Gum sighed.
He knew perfectly w r ell that the poor little Leaf
would find out sooner or later how wrong he was
in all his puny thoughts. Winter now set in rapidly,


and the Oak Leaf experienced one or two shocks
to his nervous system when, in the mornings, after
a night’s blustering wind and rain, he saw many
of the trees leafless, and even the Oak had now
very few to boast of.
“ At least I will be faithful to the old tree,” he
murmured, “ I will remain firm, come what may.”
But a day came when the poor misguided Leaf
had strange feelings in his veins. Could it be
possible his heart was getting weak and the
circulation feeble ? he wondered. No, he must
not allow such thoughts, he told himself, and at
once braced himself up. But on that evening a
heavy hailstorm followed, and the poor Leaf’s
heart was breaking to find himself riddled through
and through with the cold stinging pellets, and
that he was the only leaf remaining on the tree.
To the Blue Gum he bitterly bewailed his fate,
and faintly observed : “ Seeing that you have
such cruel storms in your country, no wonder
the leaves prefer to depart beforehand. Why, if
I had not had a good constitution, that hail
have battered me to death.”
The Blue Gum very nearly smiled to think how
this was the first step the Leaf had taken towards
learning his lesson.
“ You will have to undergo many more hail-
storms before the Winter is over, my poor friend,”
he replied.
“ Oh, please, do not pity me,” said the Leaf.


“ I am able to weather the storm, I have no
doubt, only I must confess there is not much
brightness in life just now, and it does seem to me
to be hardly worth while living.” And again one
of those queer trembling fits came over him.
The Blue Gum could see he was slightly agitated,
and forbore speaking further. Night set in, and
a bad night it was. Nothing but rain, rain, rain,
and the morning found the poor Leaf feeling very
sad and depressed. He blamed the hail for it
all, for he was quite sure that was the cause of
his general break up. Now he was such a dis-
reputable Leaf that he thought it brought shame
to his family tree, and —well —perhaps it would
be wiser to depart and join his comrades. He
would think the matter over. Another stormy
wet evening set in, and the Blue Gum, positive
that the unhappy Leaf could not live much
longer, was not surprised when, in weak accents,
the Leaf called to him.
“ Friend, can you hear me ? ”
“ Yes, speak on,” answered the Blue Gum
“ I feel I am going soon, but must tell you
before I leave that I have discovered how mis-
taken I have been. I know now how absurd it is
to fight against Death. Oh, if I had gone before,
I should have had companions to cheer me ! Now
there are none to welcome me, and I shall be alone
and desolate. I have only myself to blame.
Farewell, my friend, and if ever there should happen


to be another Leaf as foolish as I, tell them of me
and my lonely end.”
A sudden mid gust of wind came, and the
Blue Gum instinctively felt that the torn, shattered
Leaf had gone to its last resting-place. On
glancing round in the morning, he caught sight
of him lying under an Almond Tree, which had
lately begun to bud. The Blue Gum told the
story of the Leaf to the Almond Tree, who
listened with great interest. Then, as a favour,
the Blue Gum begged that when the Almond Tree
was out in full bloom, he would scatter tenderly
his pink petals over the fallen Leaf.




RBl
W 6
If
THE BEETLES
“ All that glitters is not gold.”
NUMBER of bright shiny-backed
beetles had collected on the bank of
a rivulet for a talk.
“ What a stale, uninteresting time
we beetles have,” said one. “We
get about so slowly that we have not the oppor-
tunity of seeing the world, like the butterflies,
grasshoppers, and dragonflies.”
“ Tha t is just what I often say to my friend the
Locust,” said another, “ but he says we see quite
as much of the world as we are meant to.”
“ It is very fine for him to talk,” another chirped,
“ but he can fly just where he wants, whereas
we get tired out in no time when we start to fly.”
“ Now do just look here,” said the first speaker
—generally known as Bluewing—“ Is not this a
strange way of seeing the world ? Just look at
that,” and turning towards the stream they saw,
on a broad green leaf, a spider gently floating down
the river.


“ Well that is comical,” said another, “ but I
rather dike the idea ; it is quite unique. He is
evidently going on an exploring expedition.”
“ Let us ask the Stream if he will take us as
passengers,” said Bluewing. “It would be a
journey to be remembered, I am sure ; and just
think of the lovely scenery we shall pass through.”
Forthwith they questioned the Stream, and he,
ever delighted to get new passengers, told them
they need have no fear of embarking. He had
the daintiest little boats in the shape of curled-
up leaves, strips of bark, chips, etc., for them to
sail in. There were always fresh passengers
coming on. They would have no difficulty in
getting on board, as he flowed very slowly just at
that spot. All they had to do was to climb up
the rushes which bent over the river, wait till the
boat came up and then drop on.
“ But suppose we do not care about it when
we are on, can we ever get off again ? ” said
one.
“ Oh, certainly,” replied the Stream, “ there
are landing-places by the hundreds on my banks,
but I doubt if you will want to leave my shining
waters for the land again. However, come and
try for yourselves.”
Then there was a stir amongst the beetles,
conversation having begun again in good earnest.
“ You will never get me on to one of those
boats, if I can help it,” said one. “ It’s sheer


madness, I call it, running into danger with your
eyes open.”
“ Oh, you are going to spoil our bit of fun,”
said Bluewing; “all right, stay where you are,
poor frightened thing. We can easily do without
you, and there are many more ready to go with us.”
“ I think I will wait till to-morrow and say
good-bye to my friends,” said another.
“ Come, come,” said the Stream impatiently,
“ what a long time you beetles are in making up
your minds. To-morrow may be a stormy day
and perhaps raining. You could not choose a
better time than to-day.”
At this moment a cricket hopped by, and seeing
that something unusual was going on, inquired
what the meaning of it was. He was soon in-
formed by the beetle of the proposed journey.
“ Well, I did give you beetles credit for a grain
of sense,” remarked the Cricket, “ but find I
have been mistaken after all. Of all the folly I
have ever listened to, this beats everything.
After you have been on the water three minutes
you will give the world to be once more on the
land, but it is one chance in a hundred that you
will ever get off your boat alive—l have spoken.”
With this, the Cricket went on his way.
“You are surely never thinking of listening to
that old fellow’s croaking,” babbled the Stream.
“ His advice is worth nothing, I assure you; for,
ne\ er having been on a boat in his life, he cannot


speak from experience. Ask those who know
something of life on board the cockroaches,
for instance. All I say in conclusion is—if you
are coming on at all, come now.”
This was quite enough for Bluewing, who was
very keen on taking the trip. “ Come on, follow
the leader, my friends,” he droned as he started
to slowly creep up the rushes. Just as he
reached the end, a splendid large leaf came floating
towards him. When it got just underneath him,
he dropped safely on board, followed by four or
five of his companions.
“ The rest must take the next boat,” said Blue-
wing, as the leaf started to move on. “ Hurrah,
we’re off! ”
The little boat sailed on down the stream. Her
passengers were delighted with the fresh sights
that came into view. Pretty flowers and maiden-
hair fern grew on the banks, weeping willows,
wattle trees covered with rich yellow blossom,
moss-covered bridges all caused fresh excitement
on board.
The first little cloud that marred their happiness
to a certain extent occurred when one of the
beetles said he did not feel very well. As time
went on he really looked so ill, and green, that the
others hoped they would soon come to a landing-
place where he could get off before he grew any
worse. Sad to relate, however, the poor beetle
expired a few minutes before the boat stopped


at the first landing-place, which was in reality a
tree that had fallen across the stream.
The beetles looked about eagerly for fresh
passengers, but strange to say none arrived, and
all they could see was a huge frog, who sat on the
log staring hard at them.
“ Is all well on board ? ” he asked in a deep,
gruff voice; and they, with feelings of sadness
as well as annoyance, had to report “ one
death.”
Scarcely had the body been taken ashore when
the leaf moved on again. This little incident
sobered the beetles very much ; but they tried
their best to seem bright, and persuade themselves
that their companion must have been ill before
starting, and would probably have died in any
case. The next thing that served to unsettle
them happened when their tiny boat stopped for
a few seconds at the side of a little wooden bridge.
A spider, hanging on his fine web, close to the
water, said, “ Oh, you poor dear things, hurry and
get off quickly. There is not a landing-place
for a long way now. The stream gets very wide
farther on, and you will never keep on your boat
when once you pass Farmer Swift’s house. I
implore you to land, for you have no idea what a
rushing torrent you will come into then. I lost
my sister only a few months ago ” But
the Spider could say no more, he was so over-
come.


This little speech so agitated two of the beetles
that, without a word, they carefully crawled on to
the little bridge. They were not a moment too
soon, for a Slight puff of wind sent the boat on its
way again, and thus another opportunity was lost.
There were only three passengers now, and, though
not brave enough to own, the Spider’s words had
greatly unnerved them. They really envied the
two that had left the boat.
Bluewing made up his mind to enjoy himself
in spite of warnings, and made a great effort to
cheer his companions. Suddenly the leaf boat
began to whirl round and round in the water.
Oh, how queer it made them feel, and they could
scarcely keep themselves from falling into the
river—for river we must now call it. What a
rate they seemed to be travelling at. Fields,
trees, bridges, appeared to pass like lightning.
By this time the beetles were terribly frightened,
and implored the Stream to stop.
His only reply was, “ Time and tide wait for
no man. I must hurry on to the mighty ocean.
The nearer I get to it, the more impatient and rest-
less I become. No, I could not think of standing
still for a few insignificant beetles.”
“ And this is the end of all your smooth talk to
us —insignificant beetles, as you call us,” said
Bluewing. “ This is the way you lure your
passengers to destruction —for we now realise
that that is what awaits us.” Turning to his


companions he said, “ Friends, I cannot ask your
forgiveness for bringing you into this danger, but
should we be spared, may we never cease to warn
others of the treacherous river.” The river had
growm so wide now that they did not dare to
fly so great a distance.
Soon Farmer Swift’s cottage, as they surmised,
appeared in sight, and they gazed at one another
in speechless terror. On the bank stood a girl
and a boy with a bucket in his hand. They had
apparently come to draw water from the river,
when the girl’s attention was attracted to the leaf
with the beetles on board. She begged the boy to
try and save them, for they were certain to be
drowned farther dowm at the waterfall. The
lad threw out his bucket with the rope attached,
and very cleverly managed, so that the leaf
floated into it.
The poor beetles thought their last minutes
had come, for they sank down slowly to the bottom
of the bucket. It w T as only for a moment, how-
ever, for the girl soon emptied the contents out on
the ground and placed the half-drowned beetles
under a briar bush. Then having drawn more
water from the river, the tw r o went back to the
cottage.
For many hours the beetles lay in a semi-con-
scious condition.
Bluewing was the first to speak, and told the
other two that he was so thankful to find himself


alive that he intended to keep his word and warn
insects, every opportunity he got, never to listen
to the Stream’s deceitful tales. “ I would now ask
you, my dear friends, to please forgive me for my
share in this dreadful calamity. As time is
precious, let us start straight away on our mission.
We may be insignificant beetles, but, at any rate,
I for one will be glad if I am permitted to be the
means of stopping some before they begin their
downward course.”
It was slow, uphill work, and many long months
passed before they reached the spot from which
they had started.
The first friend they met on their way was
their Spider, who greatly rejoiced to see them alive.
But his heart was still more gladdened when the
beetles told him how, for the future, they intended
warning others who were about to embark on the
glittering but treacherous water.
“You will not meet your last two companions,”
said the Spider, “ for they have crossed the wooden
bridge and are warning other beetles on the opposite
side of the stream. I must not hinder you now,
for I am sure you are wanting to see old friends
farther on.”
So they said good-bye, and the beetles resumed
their journey. At last they arrived at the old
familiar spot where they had held the great dispute
with regard to seeing the world. Truly they had
seen quite enough of the world, and it was indeed


a journey to be remembered, as Bluewing had
remarked.
Old friends locusts, crickets, ladybirds, and
grasshoppers came out to greet them; and how
eagerly they listened to their thrilling, yet awful,
experiences.
Now the three beetles were anxious to know
about the second boatload of passengers. After
making many inquiries amongst their friends, four
beetles came forward and told them how they
had followed down the stream as far as the first
landing-place. On hearing from the frog the
news of the death on board the first boat, they
decided to get off. The others went on, and they
had not heard of them from that day to this ;
they feared the worst now.
Hearing this last account made Bluewing very
sad, but it stirred him up to be more in earnest
than ever in letting others know that “ All that
glitters is not gold.”




THE MAGPIE AND THE PARROT
“We learn something even by our failures.”
I, there, Mag! come up here for a
few minutes,” called out a Laughing
Jackass. “ I can see you have
some exciting news.”
“ I’m not sure that I will,” called
back Mag. “ You always laugh at me when I tell
you anything special.”
“ Come along then, Mag ! I promise you won’t
hear me laugh this time,” said the Jackass.
Whereupon Mag flew up to the branch where
her friend, the Jackass, was perched.
“ Now what’s up ? ” said he.
“ There’s a big row on in the Parrot family,”
said Mag.
“ A row ! Really, Mag, you are getting very
slangy ! ”
“ Well, it’s very expressive, you must own, and
in a case like this it is the best word I can find,”
said Mag. “ I flew down to the creek early this
morning, and above me this was what I heard


from Mr. and Mrs. Greenback and young Green-
back. ‘We are very angry with you indeed.
This is the third time that you have narrowly
escaped being shot dead : if you will insist in
going to Farmer Jones’ orchard and stealing fruit,
what can you expect but to be shot. Surely
there is plenty to eat without going there ? Your
mother and I are tired out with having so con-
stantly to speak to you.’ ‘ And I am just tired
of hearing you speak,’ retorted the young Parrot,
in a most insolent manner, ‘ and what’s more, I
intend to have no more of it. I am leaving to-
morrow with a friend, and we are going miles
from here and will do just what we like.’ Then
there was a scene, I assure you,” said Mag. “ And
the noise was so deafening that I thought it wiser
to come away, but I shall go again soon to find
out what is the upshot of it all.”
“ You are a clever bird,” said the Jackass.
“ How do you manage to hear and find out these
wonderful things ? ”
“ I keep my ears and my eyes open, of course,”
said Mag.
“So do I,” said the Jackass —“ for worms.
Mind you come and tell me the grand finale. Ta,
ta, my friend, I must hunt up my breakfast now,”
and with that Jacky flew a long way off where
he knew he was out of hearing, and then he burst
into an uncontrollable fit of laughter. It was no
good trying to keep it back. If he had stayed


another minute with Mag he knew he would have
offended her very much. The Jackass was known
everywhere for his bright and sunny laugh—in
fact, everything was a huge joke to him.
Meanwhile Mag had quickly flown back to the
scene of the morning’s quarrel.
Mr. Greenback had gone off in disgust, and
Mrs. G. was trying her hardest to persuade her
wilful son to give up the idea of leaving the district.
“ You will never find a prettier, more plentiful
place to live in than this, and you don’t know
what dangers will befall you when you leave us.”
But it was of no use, the bird had quite made
up his mind, and said he would not dream of dis-
appointing his friend now : all was arranged and
they were to start early in the morning on their
travels. The poor mother grieved very much
over her only child leaving her, but evidently the
father thought it was better he should find out for
himself that his path in the future would not be
all roses. Both parents were very grieved that
their child should have spoken so rudely to them;
and next morning the young bird evidently felt
sorry, for he was quite broken down when the
parting time came.
“ Perhaps I shall not be very long away, mother,”
he said. “ Don’t worry or fret about me ; good-
bye, good-bye, keep your pecker up,” and off he
flew to join his mate.
They were both very quiet the first day, but


gradually as new scenes rose before them their
spirits brightened. “ Isn’t it beautiful to do just
as you like,” said the young Parrot, “ and have
no one to dictate to you.” On and on they flew
day after day for nearly a week, just stopping for
the night’s rest and for tempting titbits which
they espied whilst flying.
On the sixth day they came to a huge orchard,
with all manner of trees laden with fruit. This
was too much for the Parrot and his companion,
and down they flew to refresh themselves with
cherries. They were enjoying them thoroughly
and had no thought of danger—all seemed so still
and quiet —when bang ! bang ! w r ent a gun.
When the young Parrot got over his fright he
looked round for his companion, but could see no
sign of him anywhere. He waited for some time
and began to feel rather stiff and tired. What
was the matter with him, he thought. He would
have a fly round and see what had become of his
friend. Alas! he soon found that he could not
fly even a few yards as one of his wings was injured,
and he fluttered helplessly to the ground.
Immediately there was a shout from the large
house in the orchard : “ Oh, father, look, there’s
a young Parrot which cannot fly, do please get
him for me and let me keep him for my very
own.”
A few minutes later there was a fluttering and
screeching, but the end of it was that the Parrot


was caught and conveyed to a large cage where
he moped and pined for two or three days. The
little girl was delighted with her new pet and would
come and talk to him every few minutes; but it
was all double-Dutch to him, and he did not care
now how soon he died. His mate gone, he did not
know where, and he himself confined to this small
space, he was quite sure he could never be happy,
and did not expect ever to see his parents again.
Why had he been such a wilful, foolish bird ! Oh,
if only he had listened to mother when she pleaded
with him the last day he was at home. What
would not he give now to be back amongst the
wattles and wild cherry trees.
A week passed and the Parrot still lived. Indeed
the little girl did her best to make him live, bringing
him dainty morsels to tempt his flagging appetite.
One day when she brought a lovely juicy cherry
it was more than he could resist and he slowly
began to nibble at it. After that he gradually
began to revive, and he had at last to own that he
was getting quite fond of his little mistress.
She began teaching him quite a new language,
which he felt certain he could never learn, but to
his great surprise early one morning he found him-
self saying, “ Pretty Joey, Pretty Joey.” He
seemed to know what it meant too, for he danced
up and down his perch in great glee. This was
the beginning of his vocabulary, and soon he had
quite a long programme to go through. For ten


or twelve months he lived in this fashion, seemingly
perfectly happy, but often there was a far-away
look in his eyes, and if the little girl could have
read his thoughts she would have known how he
longed to see his father and mother once more.
One bright sunny morning, to Joey’s surprise,
the little girl and her father and mother started
off for a day’s picnic, and the house was left very
still and quiet. The cage had been heaped with
cherries and seed for him to eat through the day.
As Joey was pecking away he found the door of
the cage had not been properly fastened. It was
the work of a few minutes to undo it, and very soon
he found himself free. Oh, to get home was his
one thought, and straight away he tried his wings.
But why was it he so soon got tired and had to
rest so often ? At this rate it would take him
quite ten days to get home. However, every day
his wings seemed to grow stronger with use, and
as familiar trees, hedges, creeks, fields, etc., came
into sight his little heart fluttered for joy. Only
a few hours and he would be with his dear parents.
He wondered whether his little mistress would be
very sad at losing him. He really was sorry he
would not see her again, for he had grown quite
fond of her. On the outskirts of the home paddock,
whom should he meet first but Mag, whose breath
was very nearly taken away when she saw him.
He began hastily to ask her all about his father
and mother, whether they were still at the same


place, and would they be glad to see “ Pretty
Joey, pretty Cocky.”
He could have bitten his tongue out when he
found he had spoken these last words, and Mag
took to her wings and flew. Straight to the
Jackass did she go in a very excited state of mind.
“ What do you think ? our friend the Parrot
has returned. I wish you could see him. He has
come back pretty cocky, I can tell you.”
“ More slang, my dear Mag, whatever do you
mean this time ? ”
Forthwith Mag gave a rehearsal of the Parrot’s
words, at which the Jackass laughed loud and
long. When he at last sobered down, Mag was
nowhere to be seen, for she had gone off to see
the reception Pretty Joey got.
The Parrot had already had his first welcome
and the parents were genuinely glad to see their
son and to find how subdued he was. He told
them everything that had happened since he left
his old home, but when he started saying “ Poor
Cocky, good-bye,” his parents were literally scared,
and thought his brain had gone.
The next morning all his old companions came
to see him, but were disgusted to find that he
hardly knew how to eat properly. This time
when “Pretty Joey” came out —though he tried
hard to keep it back—they all set on him, and the
parents had to come to the rescue.
“My dear child,” said the mother, “ I would


dearly love to keep you with me always, but I can
see it only means your death. You have com-
pletely got out of our way of living and speaking,
and as you are so fond of your little mistress, I
can only advise you to return to her again. She
will be longing to have you back, I am sure.”
So with an aching heart, and yet feeling that his
mother was right in all she said, he determined not
to wait any longer, but get back to his little friend.
“I am very glad, dear father and mother, to
have seen you once more, if only to tell you how
sorry I am for the way I spoke to you this time
last year. Good-bye again, my dear parents, I
shall always think lovingly of you,” and with these
last words the Parrot rose in the air and started his
journey back.
“ Poor Cocky, good-bye,” called out naughty
Mag as he disappeared out of sight.
He flew with great determination this time, for
he was sure the little girl would still be on the
look out for him, and he felt quite glad at the
thought of it. When at last the orchard appeared
in sight he slowed down a little, and flying to a
tree not far from the house, commenced his various
song titbits, very much intermingled with “ Pretty
Joey, p —o —or Cocky.”
It was not long before the door in the house was
opened and his little mistress hurried down the
path, imploring her father to bring Joey’s cage.
The father soon appeared with the cage and


joined his little daughter at the foot of the pepper-
mint tree just outside the orchard. Climbing to
the first bough and opening the door of the cage
he called out to the Parrot, “ Come along now
Joey, your little mistress has been crying nearly
every day since you left; come back, pretty Joey,
to your true friend.”
Slowly but with set determination did Joey walk
down the boughs till he reached the cage, when he
hopped quickly in.
Then the father and the little girl, with Joey
safe inside his cage, went back to the house, and
soon he had all manner of good things brought to
him.
His little mistress was in ecstasy at having him
back once more, and the Parrot, delighted at being
safe in his cage again, spent the rest of his days
singing “ Pretty Joey ” and “ Merrily danced
the Quaker’s Wife ” to his heart’s content.




VII
THE WHITE GUM TREE
“ Pride goes before a fall.”
IGHT down in the corner of a large
country garden stood a huge white
gum tree. It could look down on all
the trees for miles around. The
owner of the garden was very proud
of this tree, and would often bring his friends
specially to see it. But, alas, alas ! the tree itself
was a great deal prouder.
“ Look at my noble trunk, my snow-white
branches ; and as for my height, no other tree
comes near me. Oh, those poor little wretched
things down there, I believe they have the audacity
to call themselves trees ; and as for that miserable
little holly bush, I must make it feel small.”
Now in the middle of this holly bush there was
a nest with two young birds in it, and they were
just at the age when they wanted to see a little
more of the world. How they longed to be sitting
up in the boughs of the great white gum tree :
there seemed to be such gay company always in


that tree, and the holly bush was so dreadfully
quiet and dull.
“ Well, my dear children,” the mother and father
used to say, “ in time you will find which tree is
your greatest friend. When the wind howls round
this garden, and the frost and snow come, then
we think you will find out your real home.”
“ But it is quite warm now, mother ! ” these
young birds said, “ and the white gum tree often
asks us if we would not like to mix with better
company —he told us he was having a big party
to-morrow, and invited us to go; so, please
mother, please father, let us go.”
“ Well, we will think about it, dears, and tell
you in the morning,” said the parents.
With that the young birds had to be content.
Father and mother bird did think it over, and
concluded it would be best to let them go and
find out for themselves ; and they were sure they
would in the end forsake the white gum tree for
the holly bush.
Accordingly, it was settled they should accept
the invitation, and, oh, how excited they were,
and what a chattering and twittering went on in
that holly bush early next morning !
Three o’clock was the appointed hour for the
gathering in the gum tree, and, just a minute
before that time, the young birds kissed their
mother and father and off they flew.
“ Hurrah ! my little friends ; then your good


father and mother have actually allowed you to
come ! Well, I hope this will be the beginning of
many a visit from you both,” said the lofty tree.
“You know, this will put you on a better footing
now. You will be able to mix with birds of
splendid families, such as you would never have
met with before, at least not to have been intro-
duced to —in fact, you are already raised to a
higher rank.”
Poor silly little birds ! How their hearts
fluttered with excitement at the very thought!
Soon the visitors arrived ; and what a time they
had —games of all sorts in the great long branches ;
then little parties would gather together for a
chat. How proud the tree was to see so many
assembled in its branches ! There was no doubt
he was the centre of attraction, before any other
tree in the district.
Meanwhile the mother and father bird had
been quite content to fly around the garden and
about the pretty paddocks. They had been in
the nest quite an hour before the young birds
came back. Indeed the sun itself had disappeared
from sight behind the hill.
“You are very late back, my dears,” said the
mother ; “ I don’t like you staying out quite so
late,”
“ Oh, mother, we are sorry, but we have had
such a tremendously good time,” said the elder
bird.


“ Oh dear me,” said the father bird, “listen to
the high-flown language already ! Come now,
your mother and I have been awakened out of
our first sleep, and it is time all young birds were
in bed ; we’ll hear all about it in the morning,
my dears.”
But these young birds did not go to sleep for
a long time, for they were very excited, and many
a little chirrup and twitter did they give, even in
their sleep.
As the great gum tree had hoped, it was the
beginning of many visits from the young birds ;
and as time went on, sad, oh ! sad to relate, one
night they did not go back to the holly bush.
The poor father and mother felt very lonely, and
grieved that their little ones should have thus
deserted them ; but still they hoped to see them
again in the old home some day.
The bright sunny days of summer were noticed
to be getting shorter and shorter, and the sun set
very early in the afternoon. There was no doubt
now, winter’s reign had commenced. The swallows
had disappeared, and the trees in the orchard
had all lost their leaves. The huge gum tree
began to have a little fear that his visitors might
prefer the shelter of a more leafy tree. So he
sent out notices that an address would be given
on a certain night by His Highness. Naturally,
all the birds came to hear what the stately white
gum had to say. It was a long address, and


many of the birds got weary of listening and did
not half understand the big words he used, but
they all understood that he did not want to lose
his gay companions.
“ Just come and have your parties the same as
usual,” he said, “ and bring as many friends as
you like ; my branches are large enough to hold
thousands of you, and, of course, you all know
that a white gum tree does not lose his leaves in
winter ; so again I have the advantage over the
other trees —if you like to call them so —in the
garden. It is not going to be a bad winter, I
am sure ; so sleep in my arms the same as usual,
my dear friends, and whatever you do, never
dream of lowering yourselves, now you have
reached such a high position in social life ! ”
All this and much more he said. And he felt
that, after such a powerful speech, the birds
would feel only too glad to be in such a highly
cultivated tree. After this address they all
talked together in little groups ; and the majority
decided to be true to the noble tree which had
been such a friend to them during all the summer
months, whilst others expressed disapproval of the
disdainful manner in which he had spoken of the
other trees.
At last winter set in in real earnest, not a mild
winter as the white gum had hoped, but very
severe. The birds huddled together closer and
closer as the nights grew colder, and as the chilly


winds whistled through the branches our young
friends longed to be back in the old home once
more. Neither liked to tell the other how they
wished to see mother and father again, and how
they regretted leaving them. Ah, if only they
had not such high aspirations, they would never
have been sitting perched together on this great
tree, dripping with rain and perished with cold !
One very stormy night the cold was evidently
more than the younger one could resist, and he
quietly began to give little twittering cries. The
elder bird, who was quite wide awake—in fact,
little sleep either got now, whispered to his brother
to hop a little lower down the limb, where no one
could hear, and tell him what was the matter.
“ I cannot hold on to this twig any longer,”
said the little fellow, “ I feel I shall fall off soon,
and oh, brother, let us go back to mother and
father ; take me back, take me back ! ”
“ I am longing to go too,” said the elder bird.
“ Come along, it is very dark, but I think we shall
find our way, and it is not far to the holly bush.
Keep close to me, little chap, and won’t it be lovely
to see father and mother again ? ”
Silently they hopped down the great tree. They
had to very be careful, as, now and again, they
would have to give a big hop over two or three
birds nestled together; still they did not seem to
notice them, and at last the twain came to the
first great branch of the gum tree. Somehow


they finally managed to flutter down to the
earth.
A few minutes later, father and mother bird
were awakened by the sound of their young ones
sobbing and crying with joy at having got back.
“ Oh, my children, how I have yearned for you,”
said the mother, “ and now you have at last come
home.”
There was indeed great joy in that holly bush
that night, and though the wind blew violently,
and, in the distance, rumbles of thunder could
be heard, yet the four birds scarcely noticed it.
But the storm got worse and worse, and lightning
flashed every few minutes, and there was many a
loud crack of thunder. The birds, however, were
quite safe and happy. What a paradise their
holly bush seemed after shivering in that great
white gum.
In the morning all the storm had cleared away
and the wind had ceased. The two young birds
peeped out of the holly bush to look at the giant
tree.
“ I have no desire to be back there again,”
said the elder bird.
“Nor have I,” the younger said; “but look,
brother, surely something has happened ! See
how queerly twisted and turned the branches
are; and just look at the trunk, it is split right
through.”
Sure enough, it was only too true. The white


gum had had its day, for, during the night, it had
been struck by lightning, and it was now practi-
cally a dead tree ! The owner of the garden, when
walking round, soon saw what was wrong, and
though very sorry that such an event had occurred,
felt sure that more damage might be done if the
tree were left standing. So he ordered the
gardener to cut it down limb by limb. How sad
it all seemed ! Soon all the birds went to the tree
to see if anything serious had happened.
“ Alas ! my companions,” said the tree in a
weak voice, “my heart is broken ; but I have
learned my lesson, I hope, before the end. I have
been too high-minded and lofty, and have looked
down so on all the other trees. Farewell!
Farewell to you all; and to my young friends
in the holly bush I would say, ‘ Keep lowly-
minded,’ for, if I had followed the advice I am now
giving you, this great calamity would not have
befallen me.”


VIII
THE LOG OF WOOD
“Every cloud has its silver lining.”
!0 this is the end of me ! nothing but
a useless log.” Such were the
words of a Log of Wood as he was
thrown from a woodman’s lorry
into the coal-shed. “ Alas, I little
thought I should end my days here ! What a
terrible come-down for me ! ”
“ My friend, you will still be of service in this
world,” croaked out an empty Kerosene Tin.
“ This is by no means your end.”
“ And pray what will the end be ? ” inquired the
Log of Wood. “I am indeed glad to know’ I shall
not finish my days in a dirty coal-shed.”
“ Well,” continued the Kerosene Tin, “you will
soon be taken into the large house near by, piled
up w'ith other w’ood, small and great, in the fire-
place, a match will be struck and applied, and in
your last moments you will have the joy of know T-
ing you are w’arming and cheering many a heart.”
“ I am indeed glad to hear that,” said the Log
61


of Wood. “You see mine has been a varied
life, and I was thought a great deal of in the old
days. In fact, up to the last month or two I have
been greatly sought after. Therefore you can
imagine I do not take kindly to lying in this
shed.”
“ No, it must indeed be hard for you,” responded
the Kerosene Tin. “I, of course, have never
known anything but a simple life, and have spent
most of my time in grocers’ shops and lately on
the scullery floor. But I have been greatly
cheered by a broken flower-pot informing me
that very often old kerosene tins are cut down
into fancy shapes, painted, and pretty plants
grown in them. Sometimes they are promoted
to the flower-stand in the front of the house ; so
I still live in hope that I shall be used. However,
if you feel inclined, I should much like to hear
where and how you have passed your life.”
“ It will relieve my heart to tell you,” said the
Log of Wood, “ and when I am dust and ashes
you can tell my story to others. I am part of
the trunk of a huge red gum tree which stood on
the bank of a large lagoon. This lagoon was
situated in a very pretty paddock, and I had a
continual stream of visitors. The cows and calves
were continually coming either for a drink or for
a rest in the shade of my branches. Picnic parties
were often held near the lagoon. Birds of all
descriptions lodged with me at night, and in the


winter I was honoured with special visitors in the
shape of wild duck, crane, etc. These happy
days flew on, and I was beginning to think I should
never die. But after a week of very heavy rain
and stormy winds, I was torn up by the roots.
Oh, shall I ever forget it, when two lads came
with their saws and axes and proceeded to chop
me up! I felt it keenly, that 1 should be nothing
but a mere thing of the past. I—who had been
such a friend to others, was evidently no more
thought of than any ordinary tree. So I was
chopped up and sent in trucks to the City—as
they call it—and now I find myself here—forsaken,
forlorn, and forgotten.”
“ Nay,” remarked the Kerosene Tin, “ not for-
gotten. lam sure many of the picnic parties will
remember your most welcome shade. It certainly
does seem strange that you should finally be
brought to this small shed. But there is some
good reason for it, and it must be a comfort to
you to know that even at the end you will be
doing good to others. I think we all need, at some
time in our life, to pause and consider. We are
so apt to think that we are the great attraction,
and very often we require a little humbling in the
shape of a dark room. Forgive me, my friend,
but I am sure you will understand my motive for
speaking thus.”
Before the Log of Wood could reply, the door
of the shed was pushed open and a maid quickly


gathered an armful of wood and chips and left
the shed.
“ Your turn will soon come, my friend,” whis-
pered the Kerosene Tin, “for you are just a con-
venient size, and the girl will be returning for
more. Ah ! here she comes ! ”
Again the door opened and the maid brought
in a Coal Scuttle. As she proceeded to fill it with
coals the Scuttle warmly greeted the Kerosene Tin.
“ You are still here, my friend, I am glad to
see. I should certainly collapse if it were not for
my trips to this shed, where I get a glimpse of
your bright face.”
“ May I ever keep bright,” responded the
Kerosene Tin. “I was feeling afraid that I was
getting rather rusty. Yes, I am still here —my
promotion has not come yet. And I am glad, I
must own, in one way, for we should both miss one
another’s company.”
No time for more. The Coal Scuttle was full,
and once more the maid disappeared.
“You are safe for another day,” whispered the
Kerosene Tin. “It has been an anxious time for
you.”
“ Well, I have learned one thing, even in the
little time I have lodged here,” answered the Log,
“ that whatever circumstances one finds oneself in,
be it only a coal-shed, one can brighten the path
for another.”
So the Log of Wood and Kerosene Tin became


good friends and they talked far into the night,
until a trowel meekly asked them if they would
kindly let him get to sleep for he was very tired,
having had a hard day’s work in the garden. On
hearing this, quietness soon reigned in the coal-
shed.
The following afternoon, however, the Log of
Wood was lifted from his place beside the Kerosene
Tin, into the arms of the maid. He had just time
to call out good-bye to his friend, and soon found
himself in the grate, waiting quietly for the end.
It was too early for the fire to be lighted, and the
Log of Wood looked sadly round the room, thinking,
as he did so, of the old, happy days. It was a
beautiful room, comfortably furnished, with bright
pictures hanging on the walls. But what was it
that made the Log of Wood speechless for a time ?
What caused every drop of gum to stand still in
his knotted veins ? Could it be possible, or was
it a dream ? For straight in front of the fire-
place was an old painting of the old lagoon and
the red gum tree, with his friends the cows grazing
round about. Yet there could be no mistake.
He was looking at his own portrait, and, oh, what
a joy to know that he had been and would still
be remembered! The match could be struck and
applied to the wood at any time now —the sooner
the better—thought the Log.
A few minutes more elapsed, and then the maid
bustled in and lit the fire.


As the flames began to slowly curl and creep
around the wood a sudden thought seemed to
come into the Log’s mind, and he called out
quickly to the Coal Scuttle, “Friend, will you
carry a message for me to the empty Kerosene
Tin in the coal-shed ? ”
“ I wall take your message with pleasure,” re-
turned the Coal Scuttle.
“ I give you my thanks,” answered the Log of
Wood, “ and as my moments are now numbered,
I must waste no time. I should like you to tell
our friend, the Kerosene Tin, how cheered I have
been in my last hours and how happily I am
departing this life. I see now what a mistake I
made in allowing myself to believe that I was
forgotten by my friends. The large picture that
hangs on the opposite wall is a true painting of
me in my natural state and my surroundings.
And so, my friend, I shall still go on living.”
His voice had grown gradually fainter and
fainter, and when the Coal Scuttle looked to see
if he was still there, all that could be seen were
the flames dancing merrily round the Log and
lighting up the picture, on the opposite wall, of
the red gum tree.


IX
THE BUSH FIRE
“ Never put off till to-morrow, what can be done to-day.”
lAT is wrong with the Bell-bird ? ”
called out a Tomtit to his mates.
“ I have never heard him so
solemn and serious as he is this
morning. Just you listen to him
for a moment, for I am quite certain he is either
very ill or he has bad news.”
Whereupon all the birds who had heard the
Tomtit’s words stopped short to catch the sound
of the Bell-bird’s note. Yes ! There was no
doubt about it, there must be something wrong.
Such slow —painfully slow—and sad notes had
never been heard in the fern gullies before. What
did it all mean ?
“ Let us go and find out why we are being
treated to this funeral dirge,” suggested a Robin,
“ for surely there must be a reason for it, and the
sooner we know the better.”
The advice was soon acted upon, and the birds
were seen to collect around the trees where the


Bell-bird had his home. Notwithstanding all
their recent chatter, the birds, one and all, seemed
to be overawed in the Bell-bird’s presence. For a
few moments not a sound was heard except the
water gurgling and splashing over the stones in
the creek below. At last the Robin, summoning
up his courage, as usual, spoke.
“ Mr. Bell-bird, we are all very curious to know
what your melancholy notes mean; we fancy
they are notes of warning. Would you kindly
tell us if this is so ! ”
The Bell-bird then answered: “It is even
so, my friends. I am the bearer of sad news to
you all. How do you like the thought of leaving
this beautiful spot, our glorious fern gullies, our
picturesque reservoir—for leave it we must.”
“ Stuff and nonsense,” called out a bold Butcher-
bird. “ The poor dear has lost his head : leave
the place, indeed ! Why should we leave it ? ”
“ Will you please allow me to continue,” said
the Bell-bird in quiet tones. “ Yesterday evening,
as I was thinking of retiring to rest, a large black
cockatoo swooped down to the tree where I was
sitting and told me to do my best to warn all the
birds of the neighbourhood of the terrible bush
fire which was rapidly sweeping through the
ranges. If this hot wind continues, in a day or two
we must fly for our lives.”
This was indeed distressing news for the birds,
and they looked very crestfallen after the Bell-


bird had spoken ; for it meant a great deal to
them to leave their snug little nests, the beautiful
reservoir, and the surrounding fern gullies. How
could they tear themselves away from the place
where most of them had been born ? At last an
Apostle-bird broke the silence and said :
“ I think we all agree that the Bell-bird’s
warning must be heeded, and we ought to leave
the gullies as soon as possible. Of course, if
later on we hear that the fire has not swept over
this part, and wish to return to our old homes, we
can do so ; but now, it is clearly our duty to be
on the safe side and take to our wings.”
“ There you go,” interrupted the Butcher-bird,
“ preaching again. I am surprised to see you
showing the white feather. I for one will not
dream of leaving the place; just on mere hearsay.
How do we know for certain there is a fire at all;
and if there is, there will be ample time to get away
when we see it.”
“My friend,” answered the Bell-bird once
more, “it is absolute truth I have told you.
The Black Cockatoo was in real earnest, and
through stopping to tell me the news he lost sight
of his companion, and had to continue on his
journey alone. I implore you to leave to-morrow
morning, for it will not be safe to stay long after
that. We have all heard what a dreadful thing
a bush fire is, and how its rate of travelling very
often outdoes the flight of a bird.”


“ You are quite right, Mr. Bell-bird,” spoke out
Cock Robin, “ and I propose that we all meet here
to-morrow morning early and start off together.
Then, when we arrive at our new place of abode,
at least we shall know one another and shall feel
more at home.”
This was not at all to the Butcher-bird’s liking,
and he again spoke out loudly :
“ Are there any amongst us that can show some
spirit in this absurd farce ? Are you all going
to fly away on account of one bird’s bit of
gossip ? Come now, surely there are some brave
enough to stay with me, and we will be here
to welcome our friends back again. I promise
you we shall have a fine time —no notes of
warning to worry us, and no Apostle-birds
preaching at us all day long. Now who is
coming ? ”
A few, and I am glad to say only a few,
hopped on to the log where the Butcher-bird
was perched. Amongst them was a couple of
Sparrows, feeling very elated that now at least
they would have some notice taken of them.
A young Mudlark, too, offered to side with
the Butcher-bird until he was really sure that
there was truth in the Bell-bird’s story. There
certainly was no need for such hot haste, as
far as he could see. So the Butcher-bird flew
off with his companions, in a great spirit of bravado,
whilst the others looked on in pity. For once


the Jackass was quiet, for he seemed to realise
it was no laughing matter.
The next morning all seemed much the same as
usual, but as the moments went by the north
wind began to stir the leaves of the trees, at first
very gently, but about noon the breeze turned to
a blustering hot wind. This kept up all the after-
noon, but towards evening peace and quiet once
more reigned in the gullies. One of the Sparrows
began to feel rather uncomfortable as night came
on, and he flew around hoping to see some of the
birds which had formed the party of yesterday.
But no trace of them could he find. At this he
grew more uneasy and told the Butcher-bird of
his fears.
“ There is no cause to fear,” the Butcher-bird
told him. “ The wind had died down and he
could go to rest without a worry.”
But not long after this conversation the Sparrow
and his mate were quite sure that they smelt
fire. What could they do now with darkness soon
upon them ? A ray of hope seemed to come to
one of them.
“ Let us go this moment and see if the
Mopoke is at home, and, as he can see in the
dark, no doubt he will show us in what direction
to fly.”
So off the Sparrows flew to the old hollow tree
where the Mopoke had his home, but to their
great disappointment they found it desolate —


not a bird of any description in its branches. How
miserable the poor Sparrows now felt! The
intense silence was more than they could bear.
They would have given anything to have heard
the Apostle-bird’s voice, or even the notes of
warning from the Bell-bird. Anything rather
than this awful silence. If only they had paid
attention to those who evidently knew better than
they did, for now they could see, away in the
distance, the tall trees a mass of flame.
The wind had again risen, scattering bits of
burnt leaves, bark, and sparks into the heart of
the fern gullies. How hot the air felt, too ! The
Sparrows were quite aware of their danger now,
and realised that it meant immediate flight, for
by morning the fire would be raging through the
gullies. Far rather would they die of weariness
in flying than be caught in those terrible flames.
Yes, they must be off at once, for the dreadful roar
could now be distinctly heard, and frequently
the gullies would resound with the crash of some
huge falling tree.
Not a moment longer dare the Sparrows remain,
so keeping close together they began their flight,
not knowing whither they were going, their only
object being to keep the fire behind them. They
wondered if the Mudlark and Butcher-bird, or any
of the birds still in the gullies, would see their
danger and follow them. How dreadful it seemed
to be leaving them !


The Sparrows’ one thought now was —would
they be able to outfly the fire, for the darkness
was surely creeping around them. On and on
they flew, until they could scarcely see a few
yards ahead, and then they knew they must
stop, for apart from the darkness they were both
thoroughly tired out.
At the first streak of dawn they continued their
flight, and about midday they felt that they had
left the fire miles behind. But, oh, how weary
they both felt, and still no friendly note from their
former companions could be heard! How they
longed to see them once more !
By this time one of the Sparrows was so ex-
hausted, he declared he could fly no farther, and
all his mate’s entreaties were of no avail. The
poor little bird seemed quite unable to finish the
journey. Suddenly they both started up and
looked at each other. What was that sound which
seemed to put new life and energy into them ?
It was the Bell-bird’s note once more. With
another effort the two Sparrows flew on in the
direction from whence the sound had come.
A few minutes after, to the Bell-bird’s utter
amazement, two weary, worn-out Sparrows fluttered
helplessly down to the ground below the tree on
which the Bell-bird sat.
Immediately he sounded out again his note of
warning, for he could see the Sparrows needed
help. Many birds came flying to find out what


was wrong, for they were beginning to understand
the different tones of the Bell-bird’s note.
The Sparrows gradually revived under their
care, and when able, gave an account of their
terrible experiences and their escape from the
raging fires. Also, how they had left the Mudlark
and Butcher-bird behind with their friends.
They feared there was little hope for any of
them, as, without doubt, the fire was sweeping
onwards to the reservoir when they left. They
were only two little brown Sparrows, but a loud
chorus of welcome was given them by all the birds
of the neighbourhood.
As they retired to rest that night the paddocks
seemed to resound with outbursts of praise on
every side; but none felt so deeply thankful as
the two Sparrows, for they realised how great
their danger had been, and knew they had been
saved just in time.
The next morning the Sparrows inquired what
the scenery and surroundings were like, and whether
any of the birds much regretted leaving the re-
servoir. They were soon told that none wished to
return, for already they had found their new place
of abode so attractive and beautiful.
Truly it was a lovely spot, and though there
were no fern gullies, there was a deep wide river,
with thickly wooded paddocks on either side.
The news of the bush fire was brought to them
some w'eeks after by another flock of Black


Cockatoos. The fire had swept clean over the
fern gullies, and the place was nothing but a scene
of black destruction. What had become of the
Mudlark and Butcher-bird they could not say,
but hoped that even they would have been able
to fly to some place of safety, though perhaps they
had taken a different route. So our bird friends
once more settled to their new life ; and so far they
have not been troubled with any fears, and no
jarring notes are now heard amongst them.




THE UGLY CATERPILLAR
“When night is darkest, dawn is nearest.”
,LL, you are about the ugliest
specimen one could wish to meet
on a day’s march,” rudely re-
marked a small black Ant to a
very ordinary looking Caterpillar,
who was eating away at a leaf as if his life depended
upon it.
“ A truly polite greeting, I must say,” responded
the Caterpillar, still munching away.
“ You might know I have no time for polite-
ness ; we ants do not profess to have blue blood
in our veins, but we know how to work, I assure
you. Now, if you worked like us, your ugliness
would scarcely be noticed. However, I must not
waste my time now,” and on the black Ant hurried.
“ What a rude creature, to be sure,” said the
Caterpillar to himself, “ he certainly has not in
any way cheered a fellow up,” and he started once
more on a new leaf of the young sapling. He had
been eating away solidly for a couple of hours


when a Ladybird passed by on her way down
the twig. On seeing the Caterpillar she stopped
and gasped for breath.
“ Oh dear,” she cried, “ what a fright you have
given me, I had no thought of coming across such
a miserable object.”
“ My dear Madam,” answered the Caterpillar,
“ I really am sorry to have so distressed you, but
I fail to see how I can help being what I am —a
miserable object, as you say.”
“No, no, poor thing,” the Ladybird replied,
“ pray forgive my seeming rudeness. I spoke
hastily. Nevertheless, I feel sorry that any insect
should be —er —so plain. All my relatives are so
very handsome. But no doubt I am causing
you pain, telling you all this. If I have been
rather unladylike, I hope you will pardon me,”
and the beautifully spotted Ladybird slowly and
majestically resumed her walk.
These wayside conversations served to make
the poor little Caterpillar rather despondent, but,
strange to say, his appetite was by no means
affected, for he still steadily munched away at the
juicy leaves. But for all that, the words of both
the Ant and the Ladybird had left a sting.
Was he always to be called names by passers-by ?
Would he never have a kindly word spoken to
him ? Perhaps if he ate more, and grew round
and fat he would not be quite so unsightly, he
thought. At all events, he made up his mind to


continue his feasting whatever was said, and
forthwith he set to work. A day came, however,
when he found that he was not quite so brisk,
and he was afraid he was losing his appetite.
Whatever was wrong, he wondered. As he was
pondering and puzzling over his state of health,
a black Spider alighted on a leaf near by.
“ Hullo, old fellow, you appear to have a fit
of the blues! Are you feeling out of sorts ? You
cannot afford to look dismal, for you are none too
handsome. I suppose you are aware ? ”
“ I am often too painfully reminded of it,”
answered the poor Caterpillar. “ I begin to
wonder if it is worth while living, for I seem to be
only a source of annoyance to all around. A
strange feeling is creeping over me, and I believe
my days are numbered. I am glad to say that,
ugly though I am, I have done no harm to any one,
but I should very much like to know what happens
to a Caterpillar when he dies. Maybe you know,
for you are supposed to be clever, are you not ? ”
“I am clever in my own line,” replied the
Spider. “You are beyond me when you talk of
death ; I know nothing about it, nor do I wish
to know. Farewell, friend, I hope you’ll feel
better when I call again to see you,” and up his
fine silver-like rope mounted the Spider. After
he had disappeared the Caterpillar felt more
wretched than ever, and for a day or two he
remained in a very feeble state. There was no


doubt about it, he had not had a very bright life,
and now he began to trouble as to what would
happen to him in the end. In a fit of utter despair
he rolled himself up into a little ball and fell
quietly to the earth. There he lay hidden in
the green moss, but still feeling utterly sad and
wretched. He was soon aroused by hearing
himself addressed, and on looking around espied
a brown Frog gazing at him.
“ Are you in trouble, friend ? ” he asked, “ for
if you are and care to confide in me, I may be
able to help you.”
The Caterpillar was quite overcome by the kind
words, and for a few moments he could not speak.
At last he turned to the Frog and said, “Thank
you, oh, so much for your words of cheer ; they
are the first I have had all through my life ; but
as to your helping me, I know nothing can be
done, for I feel my last hour or so has come, and
what death means I am anxious to know.”
“ Well, I believe I can comfort you yet,” the
Frog answered. “You say you think your last
hour has come ; nay, my friend, life is starting
for you —not as an ugly Caterpillar, but as a new
creature —namely—a butterfly.”
“ Oh, what do you mean ? ” eagerly asked the
Caterpillar. “Do not, I pray you, buoy me up
with false hopes.”
“ There is absolute truth in what I am about
to tell you,” croaked the Frog. “ Now, listen


calmly and quietly, and I will tell you the future
which lies before you.”
Forthwith he gave, first of all, a little of his
own history : how he had spent all his youthful
days as a tadpole in the old pond, not far away.
“ I, too, was not by any means a thing of beauty,
but I was never persecuted as you were. I and
my companions lived in that pond for some
months, swimming and wriggling about to our
heart’s content, never for one moment thinking
but that we should remain there for ever. But
one after another disappeared from our midst,
and I myself rapidly changed, finding myself the
happy possessor of limbs and toes, and finally
losing my tail. I was no longer a Tadpole, but a
prettily marked Frog, with eyes that work wonders,
I assure you. At this time I seemed to have no
desire to remain in my old home, therefore I
sought the bank, where the beautiful grasses and
rushes waved. As I was basking in the sunshine,
taking in all my new surroundings and in fact
feeling a little dazed, a Dragon-fly passed, I
could not help admiring its gorgeous body and
dazzling wings. He must have heard me utter
an exclamation, for he flew back and alighted on
a Water-lily not far from me.
“ ‘ Well,’ he asked, ‘ don’t you recognise me ? ’
“ ‘ I cannot say that I do,’ I replied, ‘ and what
is more, I do not see how I could, seeing I have
only just left my watery home ; this is my first


peep at the new life, and, oh, how good
it is! ’
“’Yes, it is indeed,’ droned the Dragon-fly;
‘ but tell me truly, do you not know me ? 5
How could I ? ’ again I answered, ‘ for all
my life has been spent in swimming round that
pond.’
That is just where we met, and where we have
both been together, my friend—you as a tadpole,
and I as a grub. We are both certainly more
handsome now than we were in that old pond, do
you not think so ? ’ and the gay Dragon-fly
flitted hither and thither over the water.
“ Now that is my wonderful story, friend, and
I am convinced that you will change very soon
either into a moth or a butterfly. So take heart
once more, and when you eventually appear again
in your new dress, I will be here to welcome you,
and we will talk together of the old days.”


THE RAINDROP
“We learn something from the merest trifle.”
PLASH ! splash ! splash !
The pure sparkling raindrops came
tumbling down into the dirty duck-
pond belonging to the farm. One
little drop happened to alight on a
blade of grass hanging over the pond, and with
a deep sigh it said :
“ Oh, how thankful I am that I did not fall
into that dirty, muddy water ! ”
“ What’s that you are saying ? ” said the Pond
Water. “ Did I hear you saying you were glad
you did not join me ? Ah, you poor little mite, you
little know what you are saying! Mine is the
greatest happiness one could wish to have, that of
giving pleasure to others,”
“ Well, I hope I do that too,” said the Raindrop,
“ but I hardly see where your pleasure comes in.”
“ Just wait and see,” answered the Pond Water.
“ I cannot wait long,” returned the Raindrop,
“ the sun will shine out soon, and will call me back


to the place I came from. Ah, that is where I
like to be; all is so pure and fresh there ! Surely
you must long yourself to be pure and clean again,
don’t you ? ”
“ I am not so sure that I do,” replied the Pond
Water. “ I believe in the dim past I used to live
in the clouds, and I was happy too ; but I have got
so used to being here, that I do not think I should
care now for a higher life. Then my little friends,
the ducklings, would miss me very much. No,
I really am very happy in the state I am in.”
“ But what a dirty state to be in,” said the
Raindrop. “ Oh, how can you bear it, you have
lived in quite a different atmosphere ! ”
“ I wish you would stop talking,” said the Pond
Water ; “ why should you try and unsettle me ?
Besides having daily visits from the ducklings,
I have the bulrushes and water-lilies to think of.
It is no use talking any more, I could not possibly
be spared, so there.”
“ I cannot talk much longer,” said the Raindrop,
“ for already I feel the sun’s ray’s drawing me up
higher, but I do hope some day we will meet
again, not at this muddy duck-pond, but up in
the clouds.”
Quite ignoring the last sentence of the Rain-
drop, the Pond Water remarked, “ Here come
my little friends, and now you shall see what joy
and pleasure I can give to others. Come along,
my beauties ! ”


The ducks and ducklings waddled down to the
pond. Then with a splash and many a quack
they began diving under the water, stirring up the
mud and making the pond thicker and muddier
than ever.
“ See how happy they are,” said the Pond Water;
“ why it’s worth anything to see them.”
“ They are happy, because they have never
experienced anything better —for you it is different,
my friend,” said the Raindrop. “ But I can
linger here no longer; but before I leave you, I
would assure you that I have spoken to you in all
kindness, as I only want you to enjoy what
I ”
But here the Raindrop’s voice could not be
heard. The sun had called it once more into the
clouds, and the Pond Water was left to meditate
on all that had been said.
He had to admit to himself that he was not quite
so happy since his talk with the Raindrop, but he
was quite certain he would be miserable if he lived
always in the clouds. So he quietened his fears,
and when the ducks and ducklings arrived next
morning he gave them a beaming welcome.
And so, as the days went by, the water-lilies
and bulrushes thrived, and the ducks continued
their daily visits, sometimes coming as often as
three times in the day.
But the summer of this year was most trying,
for a great drought hung over the land. Rain


was needed everywhere, cattle and sheep were
dying, crops withering away, and creeks drying
up. Every evening the sun set like a huge ball
of fire, with not a cloud in sight, and the farmers
retired to rest dejected and in despair.
It began to dawn slowly on the Bulrushes and
Water-lilies that there was something seriously
wrong with the Pond Water, and they themselves
were feeling strangely uncomfortable. In a faint
voice the Bulrush questioned the Pond one evening.
“ Why do you keep drawing yourself away
from us ? Surely it cannot be that you are getting
proud and do not wish to mix with us ? Oh, I
do hope you are not getting narrow-minded ! ”
“ I cannot explain all I am going through just
now, my friend ; I certainly have no thought of
pride. I do not know how it is, but there is a
force which is now compelling me to leave earthly
things and rise to heavenly, and I am afraid in a
few days’ time, if these hot winds continue, I
shall be no longer down here,”
“ Oh, come, come ! ” returned the Bulrush,
“ you are getting a little low. Don’t allow this
force, as you call it, to get a hold of you. We
simply could not do without you, for you are the
mainstay of our lives.”
The Water-lilies quite agreed with what the
Bulrush had said, and implored the Pond W ater
to give up the absurd idea of leaving them, “ You
know you are far too dirty now s to think of heaven ! ”


“ That is quite true,” responded the Pond
Water, “ but I must just say if I had to make
myself clean I should never get there, but it is
done for me before I reach the sky.”
At length the Ducks began to notice a difference
in the Pond Water, and they, too, complained.
“ Bother that Raindrop,” they said. “ You
have never really been the same since he was
here talking to you. We wish these pure-souled
things would always keep in their own element.”
“ A sorry day it would be for you Ducks if that
happened,” responded the Pond Water. “ I
myself am composed of nothing more or less than
thousands of these Raindrops, but I have allowed
myself to mix with the dirt and mud down here,
and therefore I do not wonder you have not
recognised my true colours. No, my friends, I
am on the eve of my departure, but I am truly
sorry for your trouble, and hope that more rain-
drops will be sent to cheer your drooping spirits.”
These were the last words of the Pond Water,
for the heat of the last day had been too much
for him, and when the sun rose the following
morning it looked down on an empty, dried-up,
duck-pond with ducks standing disconsolately on
the bank and the Bulrushes and Water-lilies
looking as if they would never hold up their heads
again. Meanwhile the Pond Water had reached
the clouds, and already was beginning to realise
how glad the Raindrop must have been to return


to the clouds again. On seeing a huge white cloud
floating by he addressed it, saying, “At last I
have returned, O Cloud ! after spending many
months in muddy surroundings, and thinking I
could not be happy elsewhere. But I have found
out my mistake after a talk with a Raindrop, and
now I have come to live here always, I hope.”
“ That cannot be,” answered the Cloud. “We
do not always live in the sky, for we have our
work to do down below, but we come up higher
now and then to get refreshed, and we go down
to the earth again with renewed vigour.”
“ And must I really return to the dirty duck-
pond ? ” asked the Pond-Water Cloud. “ Oh, it
is so repulsive to me now, the very thought of it ! ”
“You need not necessarily return to the duck-
pond,” answered the Cloud. “ You may fall miles
away from the spot. You may even drop on to
a Swiss glacier, for all I know. All I can say is,
just be ready to go when and where you are sent,
and go cheerfully, even if it is to a dirty duck-
pond. I might add that there is no need for you
to mix up so much with the mud and clay as you
did before ; keep clear and clean as much as you
can next time. Now I must be on my way, for
rain is needed sadly down below, and already
things are getting unsettled up here. Yes, I feel
sure your duck-pond will again have abundance
of water, for there is every appearance of a good
downfall of rain. Good-bye, my friend ; take


my advice and wherever you find yourself sent,
be it mountain, plain, river, or sea, remember you
are in your right place. Nevertheless, as I said
before, keep clear of the mud below if you possibly
can. Never forget the atmosphere to which you
belong.”




it
XII
THE RED GUM TREE
“A contented mind is a continual feast.”
ERE I am again, my friend,”
whispered the Wind as he rustled
through the leaves of a very large
Red Gum Tree. “ Feeling in want
of a rest after all I have been
going through during the last two or three weeks,
these country fields seemed to suggest peace and
quietness.”
“ And pray what have you been going through,
as you say, these last few weeks ? ” asked the Red
Gum.
“Ah ! how shall I describe it all to you! ”
answered the Wind. “ How can I make you picture
the various scenes I have witnessed! I have
quietly crept into the damp green fern gullies,
have whispered faintly to the tiny maiden-hair
ferns growing on the banks of the creeks. I have
gently rocked the little birds in their nests. I have
gradually awakened many of the beautiful Spring
flowers from their Winter sleep. I have stirred


up the waters of many a lake, making the rushes
on the edge to shiver and tremble. I have swept
through great blazing forests, and, I must confess,
helped to fan the spreading flames. I have rushed
over the snow-capped mountains, breaking down
branches and even trees as I passed; and when
on the sea I have lashed it to a fury, making the
waves dash themselves to foam on the rocks
with deafening roars. And, at last, tired out, I
have come for quiet to these meadows.”
“ Well, you are a strange mixture of good and
evil,” remarked the Red Gum,
“ That is true,” assented the Wind, but it is
my nature, I suppose ; now, after hearing just
a small portion of my travels, surely you must
feel what a very quiet life you lead; do you
not long for a change of scenery ? It would
be dreadful to me to be cooped up between a
few trees and always gazing at the same things
day after day.”
“ But I consider I do see changes,” responded the
Red Gum. “ I watch the Seasons, with their
various tints and colours, come and go. I take
great interest in watching the birds building then-
nests and bringing up their families. Even the
cattle grazing in these fields are my constant
visitors, for my shade is much sought after, and
I enjoy seeing them gather round my trunk for
their afternoon siesta.”
“ And there it all ends,” said the Wind, “ Ah,


my friend, I have often longed for you to see more
life ! ”
“ Well, it is out of the question,” answered the
Red Gum. “lam a fixture here, and really lam
perfectly happy.”
“You are never safe for a moment,” replied
the Wind. “ Such valuable timber as you possess
will not be unnoticed much longer. Perhaps I
may greet you out on the rolling ocean yet; good-
bye for the present,” and the Wind went slowly
on his way.
“ Greet me out on the rolling ocean ! What-
ever can he mean ? Is it possible that I
may be removed from this place into that un-
known region called the Sea?” The Red Gum
thought such a prospect had no fascination for
him. And yet he had often wandered what the
Sea, of which the Wind had spoken, was like.
V\ hat did these “ high foam-crested waves ” look
like, and were they always tossing about and
never still ?
Though the Red Gum would just faintly discern
the outline of the Sea in the distance, it did not
m any way help his imagination. Well, it was all
to no purpose trying in any way to picture the
Sea and its surroundings : he was quite happy
where he was, and had plenty to occupy his mind
in spite of what the Wind had said to the
contrary.
And so time slipped by ; the Wind often paid


him a visit, and many were the wonderful tales
which he brought with him. Gradually, yes,
very gradually, a change came over the Red
Gum.
When this change occurred he could never have
said, but he found himself invariably longing for
different scenes, and at last admitted to himself
that after all his was a lonely, quiet life, especially
as within the last few months he had seen some
of his companions chopped down and taken right
away. Where had they gone to ? And why was
he still left ? when other trees not to be compared
to himself were now perhaps seeing more life.
Alas! little by little the seeds of discontent had
sprouted in the heart of the Red Gum.
It was a dreary, drizzling day in the month of
August, and for a whole week not one tiny ray
of sunlight had penetrated the clouds to brighten
for a moment the rocky beach where the main
portion of our old friend, the Red Gum, now
lay.
For many weeks he had lain (on the shore) with
other companions, listening to the thundering roar
of the ocean waves and altogether feeling very
dejected.
Was this life ? he wondered ; and if that deafen-
ing roar came from the sea, he certainly longed
for the quiet fields. He could see nothing, for he
was right in the centre of the pile of timber


stacked together, and since he had been cut up
into lengths and taken one or two rough journeys
by rail, he had been left in this heap on the sea-
shore. Oh, if only he could breathe fresh air
again, if he could have just a little more space
he would never, no never, grumble again! But
to lie here day after day, feeling thoroughly down
and his spirit damped, was more than he could
bear.
But on this bleak, rocky beach sounds of
life and work began to be heard, and gradually,
one by one, the huge beams were lifted from
the pile and taken from the shore. The Red Gum
beam alone remained. What did this mean, he
wondered ? Where had his companions gone to
once more ? However, his great burden had
been lifted, and he could breathe freely now, and
he determined that, unfavourable as all appear-
ances seemed to be, he would be content now with
his lot, lest a worse thing should happen to him.
He wondered where the Wind was now, and quite
longed to hear his voice again.
But the day came when the Red Gum beam was
taken from its solitary resting-place and carried
to the little pier which had lately been erected,
and to his astonishment saw his old companions
standing in the sea, with the waves washing and
lapping around them. At the far end of this
little pier the Red Gum post was set up, and in due
course of time a large lamp was placed at the top.


But it was not until the light shone forth from the
red lamp, sending its brilliant beams over the vast
waters, that the Red Gum realised what an im-
portant position he was in.
As darkness fell every night over the vast
expanse of water, the Red Gum post felt how
small and insignificant he was ; and yet, by holding
up the lamp above him, he was the means of
warning ships of dangerous rocks and currents,
and thereby saving many precious souls. What a
wonderful privilege was his. When, eventually,
the Wind paid a visit to that lonely spot, the Red
Gum post spoke to him, saying, “ Friend, do you
recognise me ? ”
“ No, I cannot say that I do,” answered the
Wind; “ have we met before ? ”
“We have talked together out in the quiet
country fields,” responded the Red Gum post.
“You spoke to me of a larger and more varied
life, and little by little I grew discontented and
longed for a change of scenery and circumstances,
and my wish has been fulfilled.”
“ Oh, how can I ask you to forgive me for so
unsettling you,” said the Wind, “ for I little
thought that you would end your days in this
dreary spot, I assure you. I had an idea you
would perhaps form part of some ocean steamer,
and thereby see the world, but never dreamed you
would be brought to this dreadful place.”
“ Dreadful place, you say,” echoed the Red


Gum post. “Ah ! No, my friend, it is a magni-
ficent place of honour.
“ When I was first placed on this shore I was
certain that the booming sound of the waves
would drive me cracked, but since I have been
placed on this pier, holding on high my lamp and
sending forth my rays of light, I realise that I am
now of some use in the world, and in nowise do
I blame you for unsettling me in the first place.
Though I often long for those sweetly-scented
fields, though I miss the Magpie’s thrilling warble
and the Wattle-bird’s liquid notes, though I never
see cattle grazing near by, yet, I can truly say,
I am content, nay —happy.
“ When you are in extra strong spirits and you
work the sea into a frenzy, when the waves beat
against this little pier with all their might, then I
also increase my strength, and it is my pride to
behold my light shining out stronger than ever.
“No, instead of blaming you I thank you; and
though my old companions would think I am
much to be pitied, living such a narrow life, please
tell them, when on your travels, that I would
not change places now that I am being of use
in the world.”
“ I will, my friend, I will,” answered the Wind.
“ On first recognising you in this out-of-the-world
place, I felt I had done more harm than good by
telling you of my travels, but hearing now your
view of things and realising what an important


position you are in, I feel content. lam now on
my way to those quiet country fields, so, for the
present, farewell, and may your lamp ever burn
brightly”; and the Wind went on his way with
fresh energy.


XIII
LIFE’S LESSON
HE fleecy snow-white mists were rising
and falling on the mountains ; the
lights and shades were chasing one
another over hill and valley; the
Sun peeped out, now and then, from
his soft downy bed of clouds, and beamed on
everything below, then disappeared suddenly,
leaving all Nature looking gloomy and grey. All
was wrapped in silence, except for an occasional
drip, drip, as the dew trickled down the leaves and
fern fronds and fell amongst the decaying twigs
and moss-covered logs, near the creek. Even the
birds seemed to have disappeared—all was quiet-
ness on the hills and in the gullies.
Suddenly a gust of wind swept over the moun-
tains and through the ranges, swaying the branches
of trees to and fro, bending the rushes, swinging
sarsaparilla and clematis runners backwards and
forwards, and rocking the birds in their dainty
nests. Then, as suddenly as it came, the wind
died away in the distance, and again silence


reigned and everything appeared as before. But
something had happened ! Who would have
noticed a little seed-pod fluttering to the ground
and alighting midst the damp, rotten leaves on
the creek side ? Yet it is the life-history of this
little seed which we purpose to follow.
Many years have passed since that tiny seed
fell into its cold, damp bed. But the sun’s rays
had found him out, had cheered his drooping
spirits, and forced him to burst the shell which
imprisoned him, bringing him out triumphantly
into his new life. What a joyous day that was
for him, how loudly the little creek babbled over
the stones, how gladly and gaily the birds sang
out their notes of praise, and how the sunshine
streamed into the gully, brightening and lighting
up ferns and shrubs which appeared to have made
up their minds to live in the gloom always ! Days
of mist and rain, days of balmy sunshine and
sweet-scented breezes —all had helped in the
making of the great Blackwood Tree which now
stood like a giant in the place where, many years
ago, the little seed-pod fell.
It was far, far above the moss-covered logs,
the stately tree ferns, and the musk trees now;
it would tell them of beauties which they could
never even hope to see —of the ranges beyond,
of wooded hills, of the blue sea in the distance,
and of the wondrous colours in the sky as the sun


sank to rest. What a free, happy, life his was.
No restraint, nothing but to please himself day
and night. As the years had passed, he had sent
forth a branch here and there, and now he had
grown thicker in the trunk than any tree in the
gully, overlooking them all. But, as in human
lives, sad days come, when there are bitter lessons
to be learned, bending and shaping of wills to the
One who made them and claimed them, so with
Nature : the quartz must be crushed, the gold
must go through the fire, the vines must be pruned,
the wheat threshed, all in order that the best may
be brought out. So sad days are drawing near
for the Blackwood Tree.
How little did he heed the footsteps of man, as
he walked through the undergrowth of the gully!
How could he possibly think, but that he was
being admired for his strength and height, as the
man gazed up at him! No !he was not in any
way troubled, and in the days following, things
went on just as usual. But the never-to-be-
forgotten day came, when the axe was laid to the
Blackwood Tree, and the gully resounded with
each ringing blow. Oh, how the tree shivered
and groaned as the stinging cuts went deeper
and deeper into his trunk!
What anguish and suffering he went through
none can tell, and when the final crash came and
he lay humiliated and broken across the creek,
he was dumb with terror.


Was this the end ? For all he now cared he
hoped it was. He could not bear to look up at
the other trees and see them standing. No ! his
day was over, he felt sure, and as he was cut up
into large blocks and rolled away towards a waggon
his heart bled.
Some months have passed by and we must now
follow once more the history of the Blackwood
Tree, or rather, I should say, a portion of it. But
you will ask, “ Surely his life was finished, and
there can be nothing more to tell ? ” Ah, no ! his
natural life is indeed ended, but it is the story of
his inner life which must now be told, and we bid
farewell to the cool fern gullies, the singing of the
birds, and the babbling creek, and venture inside
a workshop ! What a different aspect —nothing
picturesque or inviting here, nothing but tools
and benches, wood and sawdust. One glance
around shows that inside these four walls musical
instruments are made, for there are various pieces,
polished and unpolished, lying about. On the
far end of a table can be seen an unfinished
Violin, and this is part of our friend the
Blackwood Tree. He had gone through painful
processes of cutting and shaping since we
last saw him, but, alas ! his heart was feeling
very sore, and he still harboured bitter thoughts.
Why had he to go through this round of
senseless shaping and polishing ? It was just


adding insult to injury. Why could he not be
left alone ?
One night, feeling particularly sad and sore, after
another day’s rough treatment, he found himself
lying next to a polished oblong box which, during
the night, to his astonishment, spoke to him.
“ My friend, I have watched your progress for
some days now, and it saddens me to see how you
fight against all efforts to be made of use. Have
you once thought to yourself that it would be
better and happier for you to give in and submit ? ”
“ You do indeed surprise me with all you have
said,” answered the weary Violin. “ You talk of
4 use,’ but what further use can I be now, and how
could I be happier to submit, as you say? You
talk in riddles.”
44 Ah ! maybe it is all strange to you,” replied
the Box. 44 I am forgetting that I also, when
first I came into this room, felt as you do. I, too,
was cut about, shaped, and polished, with screws
piercing my sides ; but, after sad days of battling,
I realised I had no strength of my own, and I
submitted to the maker’s hands ; now I am a joy
to all that hear me, for I am what is called a
musical box ! I have just returned here for
another polish up, but for years I have given the
greatest pleasure to an invalid lad, and, oh, won’t
he welcome me back ! I wish you could hear the
sweet tones, but I am powerless to wind myself
up. Now when your days of polishing and making


are over, you are to be placed in the hands of a
famous violinist who is on his way now to visit this
country ; this I have heard from those in this
workshop and who are taking such keen interest
in you. Oh, how I wdsh I could hear your sweet
notes when that master hand guides his bow across
your strings ! Think quietly over all I have said;
let all bitter feelings go, and let your yieldingness
be felt by those who are shaping you, and in the
end your heart will be full of joy and happiness
such as you have never before experienced.”
“ It is indeed kind of you to take this interest
in me,” the unfinished Violin replied. “ I admit
that I am feeling very sore and my heart is hard,
but if I thought there was such happiness before
me I should rejoice. I will ponder over your
words.”
“ Words of wisdom they are, too, friend,” called
out a Music Stool not far off. “I, too, have been
through the painful process you are enduring,
and even now I’m constantly getting sat upon !
But there is a great happiness actually in that, I
assure you, for lam of use to the musician. When
his hands glide over the notes of the grand piano,
the delight of the glorious music which floats
around is beyond words. I am longing to have
my new jacket of polish and to be back once more
in my old place.”
There was silence after this in the workshop
save for the ticking of an eight-day clock hanging


on the wall. The Violin had much to meditate
on, and when morning came and the doors opened
and work started he made up his mind to give
in and see if all that the Musical Box had said
would come to pass. Throughout the day, how-
ever, there were times when all the old feeling of
rebellion came over him.
Gradually, as the days went by and as he yielded,
he found that each day’s handling was more gentle
and that he was beginning to be more shapely.
At last the moment came when he was pronounced
finished—certainly he looked all right—such a
polish, and with beautiful graining to be seen in
the wood, but what about the sweet music which
he had been told of ? Ah ! it was all of no use ;
here he was lying in his new box —very handsome
to look at, no doubt, but nothing more, and again
he mourned for the old days on the creek’s side,
amongst the trees and ferns.
But a time came when the Violin was taken
from the workshop and went through another
process of being fitted up finally and the strings
tried. When the bow was first drawn across
them, the poor Violin shivered and wailed ; more
screwing, fixing, and testing, which to him sounded
anything but musical, and then into his case again.
V as this the end of all he had gone through ? —a
few miserable squeaks and groans—was this the
glorious music they spoke of ? Ugh ! it made


him shudder. But when next the case was opened
the Violin knew he was in a different room alto-
gether. There was a subdued hum of voices,
and he could tell he was in some large building.
He was wondering what was about to happen
when he heard a voice close by saying : “ Hullo,
my friend, I welcome you ; you are now a complete
violin, and soon you will be handed to a great man
and put to the test. I implore you to yield your-
self completely to him ; let him bring out the
greatest sweetness and melody you can possibly
give, and your joy will be intense.”
It was the Music Stool from the workshop
speaking, but he could say no more as he was
moved away before the great Piano, and then the
Violin heard notes of music, real music, for the
first time. After this there was a great noise,
which the Violin thought anything but musical ;
in a few moments he felt himself lifted out of his
case and he was given into the hands of the great
man. Oh, how nervous he now felt —he shook,
he trembled ; what could he do, what sound could
he send forth, save a groan, especially with so
many, many faces watching, and this wonderful
man’s hands on his strings ?
But, ah ! there was something magical in that
touch after all. It was wonderfully tender and
soothing, and as the bow glided over him he was
thrilled to his inmost being ; all the strange faces
were forgotten ; the feeling of nervousness vanished


as the first note sounded ; then the weary days
of shaping and moulding were a thing of the past,
and out of that large hall he flew, the wind catching
up the notes and over the hills and plains he swept
as in a rapturous dream, passing fields of flowers
and blossoms and wattle-covered banks of rivers
and creeks, through the dark valleys of musk and
fern once more, then up, up, up the steep mountains
into the gay sunshine, amongst the clouds for a
moment then into the glorious blue of heaven.
Oh ! what ecstasy of happiness . . . but the
master hand had stopped and the spirit of the
Violin was again back in the hall with that deafen-
ing noise and clamour all around. What did it
mean, and why had he been brought back to this
din when he had been so happy ? But as the
hand which had taken him soaring into heaven’s
heights placed him gently into the case, the Violin
realised he had learned his lesson. All the sawing,
cutting, and polishing, the sordid surroundings
after his picturesque mountain home, all the rebellion
and torture of mind were seen in a different light.
He belonged to another now, and it would be his
pleasure to be used just when and where his master
deemed best.
For the time being he was to lie still and await
the moment when the Master hand would once
more thrill him through and through, and so touch
his heart’s strings that again he would experience
those wondrous heights of joy.




R away in
in one of
two little
XIV
THE F ANT AILS
“ All’s well that ends well! ”
the heart of the ranges,
the lovliest fern gullies,
fantails had built their
nest in a large bracken fern.
It was the prettiest, the tidiest,
and best built nest in the gully, so all the other
birds told them.
They could not have chosen a better place for
their home, for a little stream gurgled just under-
neath, and tall ferns waved above them. To add
to their happiness they had two young birds in
the nest, and both Mr. and Mrs. Fantail w T ere
greatly concerned about their bringing up.
“ It is such a responsibility, I feel,” Mrs. Fantail
remarked to her husband, “ and I’m afraid Fluff,
the eldest, will be hard to manage ; he is so self-
willed.”
“Do not worry, my dear wife,” said Mr.
Fantail, “ they will turn out all right, I have
no fear.”


Time went on, and soon the young birds (whom
we will for the future call Fluff and Floss) began
to fly about, and much enjoyed exploring the fern
gully. Fluff was a very inquisitive bird, and
liked to pry into everything: Floss was meek
and gentle, and would do anything her brother
asked her.
One day Mr. and Mrs. Fantail told the children
they had to leave early the following morning to
go and see a sick relative. “We hope to be back
before the evening, and Fluff, my dear, we do trust
you will look after your little sister and not take
her into any danger. There have been a number
of picnic parties here lately, and I am always
afraid you will let yourselves be seen too much.
So take care, dear children, and keep away especi-
ally from those horrid, cruel boys.”
Fluff and Floss both promised to keep to them-
selves, and next morning the parent birds flew off.
For two or three hours our little friends were quite
content to keep near their home. But when a Tom-
tit flew up to them and said, “ I say, you fantails,
come and join us in a game of hide and seek, will
you ? We just want two more,” it was too much
for Fluff, who soon persuaded Floss it would be
grand fun. So away they flew farther down the
gully to join the tom-tits.
Whilst enjoying the game, two lads, evidently
bent on mischief, rambled up amongst the ferns.
Now, little Floss had found such a splendid hiding-


THE F ANT AILS
place that all the other birds had just begun to
think of giving up the search, when Fluff espied
the boys. Instantly he thought of the possible
danger his sister might be in, and he flew about
everywhere searching for Floss. He called again
and again, but on getting no answer he flew back
to the tom-tits and implored them to go and
search with him. For a long time they flew up
and down the gully, peeping and peering under
every tree fern.
At last there was a peculiar cry from one of the
birds, and when the others flew to him, they found
poor little Floss lying dead on the ground. She
had been killed by a stone from the boys’
catapult.
Fluff was just broken-hearted. “ Oh, what will
my parents say ? My poor little sister, it is all
my fault. Floss, oh ! Floss, wake up and look
at me.”
But Floss would never chirp or twitter amongst
the ferns again. Fluff begged his companions to
leave him alone, which they did. He felt he could
not meet his parents again : he was sure they
would never forgive him. He could not bear
to look into his mother’s face and tell her what
had happened. So he determined to fly far away
and never come back. But it was getting late and
he must go straight away. As he was leaving the
spot where poor Floss lay, a whip-bird’s note
sounded out above him. Immediately he called


to the Whip-bird, told him his great sorrow, and
begged him to tell his dear parents all that had
occurred, and that he did not dare to meet them
again.
“ Well, I am a bad one for you to have chosen
to break the news,” said the Whip-bird. “ I am
noted for being a plain, blunt bird, and very
often my tones cut like the lash of a whip I am
told.”
“Ah ! true ! ” said Fluff, “ but I have heard
other notes from you beside that, and I trust
you will do your best to tell my mother
gently.”
“ W T hy go at all,” said the Whip-bird ; “ surely
your poor mother need not lose both children on
the same day.”
“ I could not bear to meet her,” said Fluff,
“ and my father, I know, will be so angry with
me. No, no, I have not the courage and I deserve
to die alone. Good-bye, good-bye,” and away he
flew.
The Whip-bird, though not at all relishing his
mission, waited about until the parents returned.
At last he managed, bit by bit, to tell them of
the dreadful accident that had befallen their
younger child, and of the flight of the elder.
It was painful to witness the distress of mind
the poor father and mother were in when they
heard the news. Even the Whip-bird could not
bear to see them in such sorrow and flew away.


The next morning many came to sympathise
with Mr. and Mrs. Fantail. Amongst others, the
beetles came and offered to bury their child in
whatever spot they desired.
Mrs. Fantail thanked them and said she would
leave all the arrangements to them.
So at noon that day the beetles carried little
Floss to her last resting-place on the bank of the
stream under the whale-bone ferns, while the Bell-
bird slowly and sadly tolled the funeral dirge from
the musk tree up above.
It was truly a sad time for Mr. and Mrs. Fantail,
and to go back to their empty nest every night
seemed more than they could endure.
“ If only we could have Fluff with us to comfort
us, not a word of reproach should he hear from
us,” moaned the parents. They offered rewards
to any who would find their child and bring him
back to them. But all was of no avail, for week
after week passed and nothing had been seen of
Fluff.
One evening, as Mrs. Fantail was sitting near
the nest, a bright idea struck her, and when her
husband returned she told him she was going to
make a last great effort to find her child, and
would tell him about it if the first part of her
venture proved a success.
Rather a strong wind had been blowing for the
last few days, and Mrs. Fantail thought that if
any one could find her child it would be the wind.


The next morning, feeling very nervous, but
determined to make the attempt, she addressed
the wind. “ Would it be asking too much,
O most powerful Wind, to beseech you to listen
to the words of an insignificant little bird ? ”
“ Oh, dear me, no ! ” blustered the Wind. “ I
will listen with pleasure, but you will not mind if
I go on blowing while you talk.”
Forthwith Mrs. Fantail told him how she had
lost her children, and longed to have her first-born
back again. “ The birds in the gully have searched
for him,” she said, “ but all has been useless, and
you, who travel everywhere, will surely be able
to find my little Fluff. I would be for ever
grateful to you, should you find him, if you
would tell him that we are longing to have him
back.”
“ Dear madam,” replied the Wind, “ yours is
indeed a sad story, and I give you my promise to
search till I find your child and will give him your
message. It may be a -week or ten days before
you hear from me, but do not despair, I will do
my best for you,” and on he swept down
the gully.
Mrs, Fantail gained heart once more at the
Wind’s kind words, and went at once to tell her
husband all he had said and how polite he had
been to her. “ I should never have thought such
a boisterous fellow could answ T er so kindly,” said
Mrs. Fantail, “ but of course I have heard that he


THE FANTAILS
whispers very gently and softly sometimes. As
long as he finds out poor Fluff I shall be happy.”
A week passed, still not a breath of Wind. An-
other week went by, and Mrs. Fantail had to own
she was getting very anxious to hear the Wind
once more. At last she noticed a faint rustling of
leaves in the trees above. Slowly, but gradually
increasing in strength, the Wind appeared once
more.
“ Good news I am bringing for you, Mrs. Fan-
tail,” he murmured, as he gently swayed the
bracken fern to and fro. “ I have had a good
search and have been longer than I expected, but
have been rewarded at last. Your child was
moping in the very thickest tree one could find,
and when I gave him your message, he decided
to come to you at once. I offered to blow
him back, so it will not be long now before you
see your young son again. I am sure there is
no need to ask you to receive him gladly and
without reproof, for he has evidently suffered
much.”
“ Oh, thank you a thousand times,” said Mrs.
Fantail, “ how can I ever repay you ? ”
“ I’m repaid by seeing your happy face, dear
madam,” said the Wind, “ and no doubt you
have heard the saying, ‘ It’s an ill wind that
blows nobody any good ! ’ Good-bye for the
present,” and up the gully he swept with a new
vigour.


Mrs. Fantail, all excitement, flew to tell her
husband and friends of the expected return of
their lost son. How pleased they were to hear
the good news and what a number of birds,
large and small, gathered in the branches near
the Fantails’ nest, ready to welcome the little
wanderer.
Realising that this was the time for a good
laugh, our friend the Jackass soon appeared, with
the Magpie following close behind. What a noise
there was in the fern gully that day, and when at
length the Wind announced that Fluff was just
half a mile away, they set up such a chorus of
sweet music as had never been heard in the ranges
before. The Bell-bird again tolled out his sweet
note, not a funeral dirge this time, but a bright,
joyous welcome.
In the bracken fern below, a few minutes later,
the meeting between the parents and their long-
lost child took place.
Great was the rejoicing on both sides, but the
Jackass kept up such peals of laughter that they
could hardly hear themselves speak, so Fluff was
told to go and have a chat with all his companions.
He was asked to tell them where he had been since
he left, and what he had seen. He had plenty to
tell to his little friends the Tom-tits first, and then
the Whip-bird, and afterwards the Magpie wanted
a large share of news
The evening wore on, and at last they


had to separate and go to their various
homes.
Mr. and Mrs. Fantail’s joy at having their
young son again was beyond description.
Fluff was just as happy as any bird could be,
and as he nestled close to his father and mother
that night, he said to himself, “ After all, there’s
no place like home.”


MORGAN AND SCOTT LTD.
12 PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS
LONDON, K.C.4








r .* * .


- •




3 1508 02085216


