





~ -
i
!




AUSTRALIA
A.D. 2000
Or the Great Referendum.




AUSTRALIA
A.D. 2000
The Great Referendum.
S- G. FIELDING,
Author of
“The Southern Light,” “Down to the Sea in Ships,”
“Thy People, Britain.”
&c., &c.
Wm. Andrews Fro. Co. Ltd.
Castlereagh St.,
Sydney.


“To your question now.
“Which touches on the workman and his work.
“Let there be light and there was light: ’tis so;
“For was, and is, will be, are but is;
“And all creation is one act at once,
“The birth of light; but we that are not all,
‘'As parts, can see but parts, now this, now that,
“And live, perforce, from thought to thought, and make
“One act a phantom of succession; thus
“Our weakness somehow shapes the shadow, Time.”
— Tennyson.
“The only idea which we can form of nature, that is of the
sum of all phenomena, in relation to an Infinite Mind is as one
thought. For God all is one and at once. He is cognizant of
things themselves, and not, as we naturally think and reason, of
our perceptions of them. He sees them as they are and not as we
observe them.”
—Bishop Westcott ,
“ The Gospel of the Resurrection
“Eternal process moving on
From state to state the spirit walks.”
—“ In Mentoriam .”


PREFACE.
The thoughts which I have endeavoured to express
in this little volume were originally embodied in a series
of extempore addresses delivered at St. Matthias’
Church, Paddington, Sydney; which at the time aroused
some interest. Several friends for whose judgment I
have a great respect, have persuaded me that they may
awaken a similar interest regarding the future of Aus-
tralia, amongst the larger audience to which I now
venture to appeal.
It is difficult to remember every source from which
such thoughts may have been suggested, but I desire
specially to acknowledge my indebtedness to Mr, Coul-
son Kernahan’s booklet, “The Child, the Wise man and
the Devil,” for the idea of the Christless World. To a
conversation some years ago with an eminent Scientist,
the late Mr. John Tebbutt, F.R.A.S., about one of
Jean Paul’s magnificent dreams, in which the dreamer
pictures the insignificance of man, compared with the
infinite extent and fulness of the Universe; which in the
opening page of Chapter VI., “A Voyage through Space,
I have freely quoted and adapted. While the idea of the
ultimate annihilation of time and space presented to the
reader in the latter part of the same chapter was sug-
gested by a little anonymous publication entitled, ‘‘The
Stars and the Earth,” that I picked up one day at a
second-hand book stall in Sydney, and of which the late
R. A. Proctor said, ‘‘This is one of the most suggestive
and remarkable books of the present century.”
S. G. FIELDING.
Paddington, Sydney, N.S.W.
All Saints Day, 1917.


Co tbc ADcmorg of
JOHN TEBBUTT, Esq., F.R.A.S.,
OF THH
OBSERVATORY, WINDSOR, N.S.W.
To whom the writer is indebted for many acts of
kindness, and for some of the astronomical
thoughts suggested in its pages,
Cbis little .TGoofc is H)ebicate£>.




CONTENTS.
!hap. Page.
1. Prologue ... 7
2. Australia A.D. 2000 —The Federal Capital ... 8
0. The Federal Parhament—A Strange Debate ... 14
4. The Great Referendum 27
5. A Christless Land 33
0. A Voyage Through Space » 39
7. Epilogue ... 49


AUSTRALIA 2000
OR THE GREAT REFERENDUM.
Chapter I.
PROLOGUE.
Some time ago I read a little book entitled, “The
Child, the Wise Man, and the Devil,” in which the writer
pictures the world without Christ. The resurrection, the
keystone of Christianity had been proved to be mythi-
cal, by the discovery of the actual body of Jesus, in
Palestine, in the rock-hewn sepulchre whither it had been
borne nineteen hundred years before by Joseph of
Arimathaea; the body of Him who had claimed to be
“the resurrection and the life”; and that “death would
have no dominion over Him.”
Remembering the care and skill with which the
Eastern races were accustomed to preserve their dead,
and the ease with which the enemies of the disciples
could have refuted their story by producing the body of
the crucified one, which they would certainly have done
had they been able, I had always looked upon the dis-
appearance of Our Lord’s body as one of the strongest
proofs of His resurrection. But now for a moment I
seemed to see that sacred body, with the nail prints in
His hands and feet and the spear mark in His side,
exposed to view in some great museum like the bodies of
other celebrities who had lived, some a thousand years,
before Jesus of Nazareth trod this earth.
The reading of the booklet made a impression
upon my mind, and suggested to me a dream, concerning
the future of Australia, which was not all a dream;
“For dreams in their development have breath,
“And tears and tortures and the touch of joy,
“And leave a weight upon our waking thoughts.


Chapter 11.
AUSTRALIA, A.D. 2000 : THE FEDERAL CAPITAL.
Methought I stood upon a hill overlooking a City, the
buildings of which were stately and magnificent, worthy
indeed of a great nation. Pinnacles, domes and towers
rising into the clear, sunny air; wide streets and avenues
bordered by spreading trees, spacious parks and beauti-
ful gardens, with the gleam of waters, and the sparkle
of fountains through them, caught my eye. While right
in the centre of the City, towering above all the sur-
rounding buildings rose a great dome, covered with a
bright metal, which flashed back the light of the morning
sun, as though it had been beaten gold. Its summit
was crowned by a figure, the nature of which I could
not distinguish in the distance, but I took it to be of some
religious or symbolic character, though it was certainly
not the cross that I remember to have seen on the summit
of St. Peter’s, at Rome, or of St. Paul’s, London. The
City looked very beautiful guarded by a distant rampart
of green hills which were now steeped in a rich haze of
sunshine. Airships and aeroplanes were arriving and
departing, two huge passenger vessels I noticed floating
in the shimmering haze right above the golden dome,
evidently liners I thought to myself, waiting for the signal
to descend to their anchorage.
As I gazed wondering what city it might be, a
kindly voice at my side said “Good morning, sir; a beau-
tiful day for the opening of Parliament!’’
Turning I saw a man of middle age and benevolent
expression standing beside me, clad in a loose cloak of
some light material, and returning his courteous greet-
ing, I said, “What great city is this beneath us, sir? I
am a stranger here.”
The man looked at me in astonishment for a few
moments, and said, “You must indeed be a stranger not


to know the Capital of the Australian Commonwealth;
that is Canberra, sir.”
“Forgive me for asking what must seem to you an
extraordinary question,” I replied, “but the fact is I
have been away from Australia for many years.”
A big airship bound from Cape Town to New Zea-
land met with an accident this morning and was driven
down out of her course, and had to land her passengers
at one of our stations, may I ask if you belong to her?”
He said with an inquisitive look that made me feel
strangely uncomfortable.
“No,” I replied, “I did not come by airship. May
I ask what is that great building in the centre of the
city? I enquired pointing to the flashing dome beneath
us, anxious to divert his attention from my ignorance,
which I could not myself account for, except for a vague
< uneasy feeling that I was dreaming.
“That,” he replied, “is the Capitol, the Federal
Parliament blouse.”
Has it been long built? It looks quite new,” I
remarked. What a magnificent dome, and what is the
symbol on the top ? ”
“The figure you refer to is that of a Kangaroo,”
he said curtly, as though the question irritated him.
I hat portion you see has only been recently com-
pleted, though the building itself was commenced many
years ago; indeed, I have read that the foundation
stone was laid before the great war of 1917, in
which,” he added, proudly, “my grandfather fought,
was honored by King and Commonwealth, 'and on
. his return home was elected and served for many
>ears as a member of the House of Representatives.
Would you care to see the Parliament House, and hear
some of our legislators speak; I have an order that will
admit us both; there will be a very important and inter-
esting debate to-day on a measure that is being brought
forward by the Prime Minister himself, who represents
the materialistic party in the State; it is, of course,
directed against the Christians, and if carried, wall prob-


ably mean our banishment. I don’t know what party
you belong to,” he added, suddenly turning to me with
an enquiring look.
“I am a Christian,” I hastened to reply, “that is,
I have always believed in the Christian creed, though
I am afraid that I have not been a very regular Church
attendant.”
Again my companion cast a sharp glance at me,
adding, “Then I can speak freely.”
“One moment,” I interrupted, “I do not quite
understand what you mean by the materialistic party,
is that a political or a religious party, I remember hearing
about the National and Labor parties,” I added
cautiously.
“You must be older than you look,” he returned
with a smile, “for they have all gone long ago; let me
see, the National party was formed at the time of the
Great War, and held office for some years after peace
had been declared. The Laborites and Socialists then
united, against them, and for a short time held office,
but they have all disappeared, and have been succeeded
by the two great parties now in existence, the Material-
istic and the Spiritualistic, or as they are sometimes
called the Anti-Christian and the Christian.”
“What a surprising change from the old political
system,” 1 observed.
“Not so surprising when you come to think of it,”
my companion replied. “You see, after the war,
when peace was firmly established, the whole energy
of the Commonwealth was directed to the develop-
ment of its material resources, wealth was more equally
distributed, and extreme poverty became almost a thing
of the past; people had more time to consider the
origin and meaning of life itself, and as there can be
only two fundamental theories of life, the materialistic
and the spiritualistic, the old parties such as Nationalists,
Laborites, arid Socialists, which were created by passing
social and political needs and emergencies, gradually
lost their power to rally followers; and disappeared like


bubbles on the surface of the great national stream, and
men and women have since been ranging themselves
under one or other of the parties now in existence, the
materialistic, which is endeavouring to secularise a 1! our
institutions, or the spiritualistic, sometimes called the
Christian, which is making a brave, though I am afraid
ineffectual effort to retain the religious element in our
national life.”
“But cannot these two parties work side by side
for the good of the Commonwealth?” I enquired.
“No, for they are of necessity opposed to each
other. Some of the Materialists are reasonable enough
and are disposed to be tolerant in their views, but others
are animated by a bitter hatred against not only Chris-
tianity, but all forms of religion, which they regard as
pernicious superstitions.”
“But, why?” I’enquired, puzzled to understand what
the motives of such an antipathy could be.
“The objection of the Materialist to Christianity,”
he explained, “is that the civilization founded upon it,
has not really made the world better, but that it has
diverted a large amount of wealth and human energy
from the development of its material resources, and
so stood in the path of man’s real advancement, and
further, the Materialists assert that it is impossible to
carry out the teaching and precepts of the founder of
Christianity in our business, social and national relation-
ships.”
“But,” I ventured to say, “has Christianity ever
been really tried from a national or international point
of view?”
“It has not,” replied my companion, “but unfor-
tunately the mass of the people are quite unable to
foresee the results of the rejection of Christian ethics
and ideals, and have formed the Materialistic party,
placing them in an overwhelming majority. In addition
to this-, the Christian party is so split up and divided
by petty contentions and jealousies, that I am afraid
their case is hopeless. To-day the measure I have


referred to is to be submitted to the Federal Parliament,
for the purpose of abolishing Christianity, resuming all
Church properties, and should it be considered expedient
banishing Christians from the land as undesirable
citizens.”
“Dear me!” 1 exclaimed with surprise and conster-
nation; “You astonish me! I can scarcely believe this
to be possible in a free and enlightened country like
Australia, such an act if passed, would be as unjust
and intolerant as the edicts issued by the old Roman
Emperors against Christianity during the fust three
centuries. I can understand a Czar, or some autocratic
government issuing such a decree, but a free democracy
like Australia passing such a law! Impossible!”
“Quite so, but you forget,” continued my friend,
smiling and shrugging his 'shoulders, “that in a demo-
cratic country the majority must rule., and that all the
powers of government must eventually be wielded by
the people either directly or through their representa-
tives, for the attainment of popular wishes. It is all
right so long as your majority is just and fair in the
making and administration of laws, but such a demo-
cracy may become as cruel, merciless, vindictive and
tyrannical as any of your ancient kings and emperors.”
“Yes,” he continued, after a short pause, “minor-
ities have their rights, but when a great and united
majority becomes unjust and oppressive, the condition
of the minority may be infinitely worse than it would be
under an autocracy that is more or less guided by the
ethical principles of Christianity.
“It seems strange,” I remarked, “that the Chris-
tians did not unite years ago to meet a common enemy;
they must have, foreseen the result of the Materialistic
tendency of the twentieth century, and the drift of their
national life.”
“They could not, or would not see their danger,”
replied by companion, “here and there a preacher warned
them of what was coming, but he was like a voice crying
in the wilderness, to which few gave heed; but,’’ he
12
AUSTRALIA A.D. 2000.


added, “Will you not accompany me to the Parliament
House and listen yourself to the debate, which to-day
is to decide whether the Commonwealth will be domin-
ated by a Christian or a Materialistic civilization. I have
an order that will admit us both, some of our represen-
tatives are still Christians, though I am sorry to say they
are dwindling every year. Men whose ambition is to
acquire and to maintain power will, I am afraid, always
alh r themselves to what they believe to be the popular
side; I suppose this has ever been so, and the Mater-
ialists are certainly in the majority at the present time."
I thanked him, and signifying my assent, he led
me down the eminence on which we had been standing
into a beautiful avenue bordered by shady trees. Here
and there it was ornamented with the statues of eminent
soldiers and statesmen. We walked on until we reached
a great splashing fountain in front of the magnificent
building my guide had pointed out to me as the State
House.
An usher met us at the door and on my companion
producing his order for admission, we were conducted
to a seat in one of the galleries, under the great dome,
almost overlooking the speakers chair, from whenjce
we could both see and hear all that was going on. The
building was richly decorated, and gave me the appear-
ance of vastness and stability.
Some formal business was being transacted when
w-e entered, which, having been disposed of, one of the
members on the right of the Speaker rose up. By this
time the galleries had filled and every eye was directed
toward the man standing on the floor of the House. My
guide touched me on the arm, and w r hispered—“That is
the Prime Minister.”


Chapter 111.
THE FEDERAL PARLIAMENT: A STRANGE DEBATE.
He began by saying that it was never a pleasant
task to attack a religion hoary with age, especially if it
happened to be a system to which some good and earnest
people still clung, thinking it to be the only means
by which the world could be saved from its sorrows and
sufferings; but he and his party were there to carry out
the wishes of those who had placed them in power.
“It is a well known fact,” he continued, “that for
years past —indeed, for the last hundred years, the
people of this Commonwealth had clamored and said,
‘We will not have this system to reign over us,’ Chris-
tianity not only makes too many demands upon our time,
our pleasures, our ease and our money, but it stands in
the way of the material advancement of the nation. Why
should we, living in a free democratic country like Aus-
tralia submit to this when our philosophers, scientists,
and other wise men have told us that the legend of Jesus
the Nazarene, His miraculous birth, resurrection and
ascension, are all mythical? True, our fathers believed
such things, but that is no reason why we should —this
is an age of reason and we have outgrown their childish
superstitions. This Jesus, if He ever lived at all, was
only a man like ourselves, and though He and His fol-
lowers claimed to possess great supernatural powers, we
now know that they , must have been either deceived or
deceivers. For too long the world has looked forward
to the visitation of some external supernatural agency
for the solution of its problems, and the salvation of the
race, but the conviction has been forced upon us that
man, if he is ever to be saved, must save himself.
“It may be asked why should we desire to interfere
with the religious beliefs of those who differ from us?


I reply, that the State must of necessity take into con-
sideration the changed opinions of the large majority
of its citizens, when the Christian Church ruled in this
and in *the older lands of Europe, laws were passed
inflicting serious penalties upon all who differed from
her creeds and dogmas, and so long as the large
majority held such views it was desirable that this should
be done, for it is impossible for the governing body to
control the conduct of individuals in a State unless that
body reflects the opinions of the majority governed, but
now that a Materialistic creed has become almost
universal throughout the land, it is manifestly desirable
that this change should be reflected by a legislative
enactment.
“But,” he continued, “Our chief objection to Chris-
tianity is that it stands in the path of the nation’s
advancement, it has not really made the world better,
or happier, I believe with our Christian friends that the
salvation of the world is essential to the happiness of
the race, but I do not think this can ever be attained by
what they call spiritual means, but it may be attained by
what is called physiological action, and it is just here
that we are bound to come in conflict with the
Christian Church. To give one instance of what I
mean, for centuries past the Church has considered
the question of marriage and the relation of the sexes
as sacred ground on which the State must not dare
to intrude, but the time has arrived for us to con-
sider the question of marriage and the continuity of
the race as one of the gravest and most important pro-
blems confronting the Commonwealth at the present time,
a problem that must not be left either to the unregulated
impulses of the average man and woman, or to the
clergy of a Church, who probably have little or no know-
ledge of the physiological facts of life, and about which
they have no more right to dogmatise than on questions
of Federal finance, or some other branch of political
economy? He concluded by saying he was afraid that
it would be hopeless to endeavour to effect a compromise
with the Christian party, as he knew that it would mean
15
OR THE GREAT REFERENDUM.


a sacrifice on their part of principles, which, he under-
stood, they held to be sacred and inviolable. But the
Government was there, not only to carry out the wishes
of the electors they represented, but also to legislate
for the welfare and happiness of future generations.”
Several speakers followed, some of them opposing,
others in favour of the Prime Minister. “Why,” asked
one member of the Opposition, ‘‘should such an extreme
measure as this be thought necessary, what evil had the
Christians ever done? Were they not noted for their acts
of charity and benevolence, had they not in ages past
built and maintained hospitals and asylums, schools and
colleges, long before Governments had ever thought of
taking over the control of such institutions. It would
be an act of base injustice to deprive them of the
Churches wherein their forefathers had worshipped for
man}' generations, an act that would bring down—if it
were carried out —a just retribution on the people of
this Commonwealth. The Honorable Member had
spoken of what he calls the failure of Christianity to
make the State better and happier; but when has Chris-
tianity ever been really tried from a national point of
view. Let the Government make an honest and serious
attempt to carry out the ethics of Christianity and all,
or nearlv all our present social and political evils will
vanish like mist before the sunrise. It is not true to
say that Christian ethics are impracticable in our busi-
ness, social and political life, though it would be quite
true to say that they are difficult to practise on
account of the selfishness and ambitions of our average
citizens, but there is not a member of this House that
does not believe in his own heart that if the laws of
Christ were obeyed the people of this State and Com-
monwealth would be infinitely better and happier than
they are to-day. The Honorable the Premier has spoken
about the necessity of carrying out the will of the people,
but if that will has become debased and degraded, as
he, the speaker, believed it had, it was the duty of the
members of this House to resist it to the utmost of their
power, instead of cowardly yielding to a desire to frame


laws that must ultimately bring suffering and disaster
upon the land.”
Others followed, some of them making savage
attacks upon Christianity because its precepts interfered
with their pleasures and appetites, others while recognis-
ing the good that Christianity had done in the past
considered its ideals old-fashioned and impracticable,
and, as the Premier had pointed out, some such legis-
lative enactment was necessary to reflect the changed
views of the last hundred years. “Most of the
Churches,” they said, “were empty, or almost so, and it
seemed a pity that such valuable properties should be
permitted to remain unused when they might be resumed
for State or Federal purposes.”
At last a speaker arose on whom, judging from his
reception, the Christian party depended to champion
their cause. He began in a clear, penetrating voice to
combat the arguments of the Materialistic party bv saying
“that they would be perfectly sound if man were only
an animal with no higher care incumbent upon him than
the preservation of his animal life, the pursuit of pleasure,
and the development of the material resources of the
country in which he lived. The Prime Minister and his
supporters have assumed,” he continued, “that man
belongs to this world alone, that he is a creature of a
day. The Government seemed to be animated by the
old Epicurean Spirit, ‘Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow
we die,’ the eating and drinking may be gross and
sensual as suggested by some honorable members, or it
may be refined and elevating as advocated by others,
but in the end it is the same; the policy of the Govern-
ment is that of creatures bounded by this earth life
alone.”
Loud cries of “Order, order,” from various parts
of the House, and one member, who rose to a point of
order, asked the Speaker, “If the Hon. Member was
justified in calling the Prime Minister and his followers
‘Creatures,’ was it Christian" to do so?”
The Speaker directed the. withdrawal of the offen-
sive word, which was readily complied with, the Hon.
17
OR THE GREAT REFERENDUM.


Member protesting that he had no intention of giving
offence by its use. Proceeding, he said, “Either the
Materialistic view of life as advocated so strongly by
the Government party was true or false; if it is false as
I believe it to be, problems present themselves for solu-
tion concerning which the Prime Minister and his party
have taken no account whatever. I am not concerned
to defend one of the fundamental doctrines of the Chris-
tian religion, the immortality of the soul, for this is
neither the time or place for such a task. Christianity
can take care of itself, it is eternal, it is part of the
nature of things, it is the outflow and expression of the
Being of God. It may seem to die as it did two thousand
years ago when they put its founder to death upon the
Cross, but He rose again and those ideals of life His
crucifiers thought they had destroyed for ever changed
the whole current of human life and thought and formed
part of the civilization of modern Europe. If mere might
and numbers could have destroyed it, Christianity would
have perished in its infancy. Arrayed against that
infant church were the might of the Roman Empire, and
all the powers and forces of evil within it, but in less
than three hundred years Christianity had conquered that
old heathen world. The mystic philosophy of the east,
the subtle intellect of Greece, the mighty power of Rome
even the barbarian hordes of Northern Europe, all yielded
to the conquering power of the Cross.
“A religion that could awaken a response in so widely
different mental and moral types of character, as the
Jew, the Greek,,the Roman, the Barbarian, the bond and
the free, must possess a spiritual power and vitality
incomparably greater than anything that has come into
the world before or since, and to my mind can only be
accounted for in the belief that it is Divine. Whence this
amazing victory, if Christianity is only what some Hon.
Members have declared it to be, a mere shallow super-
stition, to be demolished by an Act of Parliament.
“If Christianity is so irrational and feeble as asserted
by Hon. Member, why was it not swept out of Europe,
by the hordes of Islam in the first flush of their conquests,


or by the great Turkish Sultans of the fifteenth and six-
teenth centuries? How is it that it did not sink beneath
the accumulated weight of the corruption that invited
the Reformation four hundred years ago? It was
threatened with utter extinction at the time of the
first French revolution, when atheism played upon a
darkened stage its strange and fearful tragedy.
“According to the theories expressed by Hon.
Members it ought to have been crushed out of being one
hundred years ago, when Germany and Austria openly
repudiated Christian ethics, violated their solemn obliga-
tions, and plunged Europe into the greatest Avar the
world has ever seen. But out of each great crisis, that
at the time threatened the very existence of the Church,
she has risen from the grave and passed through the
gate of death stronger and freer for the tragic experience.
“And so will it be again, in spite of the Monistic
philosophy and the materialistic tendencies that darken
the earth to-day. Ihe instinct of immortality is just as
strong in the hearts of some of us as it has ever been,
and I for one can never think that the power that has
created that instinct mocks and deceives us by creating
a longing and an aspiration He has neither the power nor
intention of gratifying. To me it is unthinkable that the
highest motive for action we are conscious of is a mere
delusion of the senses; that the noblest incentive to
virtue is a lie; that beings possessing infinite capacities
and possibilities of progression, such, as I believe we
possess, have been brought into being to be destroyed
after a few short years of existence. Impossible! un-
less life itself is a lie and the world is built upon rotten-
ness. No, sir, we are not afraid of the future of Chris-
tianity, but we are afraid of the future of this State and
Commonwealth if such a measure as that introduced by
the Prime Minister becomes law. The country has
become corrupted by materialistic principles which, like
cancerous growths, are eating the true life out of the
nation. The history of the past makes us familiar with
the effects of those pernicious principles in other races
and nations; as in the histories of ancient Greece and
19
OR THE GREAT REFERENDUM.


Rome, and some of the modern States of Europe, especi-
ally that of Germany in the last century. I believe,
sir, that the future liberty and prosperity of the
Commonwealth are bound up with the welfare of Chris-
tianity and that if you lose one you lose the others. It
is true, too true, that the country has become materialis-
tic in its opinions, that the worship of Almighty God is
almost universally ignored throughout the land, that the
very word Christian has become a byword and reproach,
and once again, as in Apostolic days, we have become
the Tilth and off-scouring of the world.’ ”
Cries of “Order, order.’’ “It is all very well for
Honorable Members to cry ‘Order, order,’ but I would
entreat them, if they have a spark of true manhood left
in their being, tp pause before voting for this infamous,
proposal.” (Uproar and renewed cries of “Chair,
chair.’’)
“I would appeal. Mr. Speaker, to the Hon. Members
of this House, and I bekeve that I am perfectly in order
in doing so, to pause before ratifying and confirming the
apostacy of a faithless and degenerate race by a formal
legislative enactment that will, I believe, mean the moral
enslavement of our children for generations to come.
But,” he added, “of what avail for me to appeal
to those who have already lost their faith in God,
the Universal Father, and therefore must sooner or
later lose their faith in that universal Brotherhood
about which some talk so glibly. The worship of
God has gone out, but has the worship of Mam-
mon that has come in made the country better,
happier, or even more prosperous? ‘Thou shall have
none other gods but Me,’ was the command given to
Israel of old, but the Australians have set up other gods
in their hearts, such as the money they toil and slave for,
that they cheat and swindle for, or the loathsome plea-
sures for which they defile their bodies, poison their
blood, and sell their souls; that is when they have souls
to sell.” (Renewed cries of “Order.”) “Do Honorable
Members seriously think for a moment that the social and
political problems confronting the Commonwealth at the


present time are going to be solved by such an enact-
ment as that before this House? Do they not know that
tire Kingdom of Heaven always has been and always
must be within, and that no mere change of political
or social environment can ever bring peace and happi-
ness to any nation or individual?
“Behold thy gods, Australia! which ye say brought
thee over from the land of England and out of the house
of bondage, but they are gods which will ultimately
enslave you in a bondage worse than that endured by
Israel of old, by the slaves of ancient Egypt, of Greece,
Rome, modern Europe, or America.
“I speak strongly, Mr. Speaker, because I believe
if this bill is passed it will, ultimately bring about the
end of our national existence.”. (Cries of “Rot,” “non-
sense,” and a voice: “What is the fellow talking about?”)
“I say it will bring about the end of our national exist-
ence, because it tends to defeat the very object for
which man was created.” (Loud laughter; a voice:
“What do you know about it? We are all evolutionists
now!” )
“I am reminded by the interruption of the hon. mem-
ber that the Prime Minister made use of a remarkable
expression in the course of his speech to which I would
like to draw attention. He said :— ‘ We can on longer
look to any outward supernatural agency for the
salvation of the race, man must save himself, if he
is ever to be saved.’ Unconsciously, in these words,
the Hon. Member bears witness to the fundamental
doctrine of Christianity, viz., that the very same
human nature that has violated eternal law, and
wandered into the far country of self-will and lawless-
ness, must of its own free will return to God, the Centre
of its being. God cannot • return for him; He must
become man, and carry our nature back to Himself,
the perfection from which it has sprung. And the utmost
progress of evolution in human life, whether it be
individual, social, or political, can only be to approach
more and more closely to the Christian ideal. Some
21
OR THE GREAT REFERENDUM.


Hon. Members have referred to the weakness and imper-
fection of the Christian Church, as though they expected
a Divine institution to be perfect from the beginning,
and that it must not be subject to any change of con-
struction internally or externally. Yet these men,” he
continued derisively, “call themselves evolutionists. Do
they not know, have they not heard that all evolution
pre-supposes a perfect type, and therefore progress
toward that type must of necessity be imperfect. If
there is a law of evolution, about which there has been
so much glib and shallow talk, that is, an advance from
lower to higher types, from the incomplete to the com-
plete, there_ must of necessity be a highest form which,
when reached, includes all the lower preceding imperfect
types, and thus including, unites and transcends them
all. Now, what we Christians believe is that this highest
possible type of life exists potentially in every human
being, and possibly even in lower forms of life, but actu-
ally and perfectly it exists only in Jesus the Christ. In
God’s sight, i.e., as a Divine conception, everything is
essentially and eternally perfect, but as finite beings we
can only apprehend that Divine perfection partially and
by degrees, for we can only see an infinitesimal part of
the perfect whole, and that through a glass darkly. But it
seems to me, sir, that the motive power of evolution is
not, and cannot be, some blind chance, mechanical
necessity, or unconscious natural selection, but must be
the ultimate perfection of that human personality which
we are partially conscious of in this probationary stage of
existence; otherwise evolution as I understand it, as a
definite progress towards a definite and perfect end,
becomes absurd—impossible. I am glad, Mr. Speaker,
that the interruption of the Hon. Member on my left has
given me the opportunity of replying to the shallow
assertion of some of our materialistic friends, that the
doctrine of evolution has undermined Christianity and
shown it to be but the superstitious survival of some
early savage form of religion. Why, even Paul, a
preacher of the first century, distinctly taught this so-
called modern doctrine of evolution, when he declared


that the creature itself would ultimately be delivered from
the bondage of corruption, and that he knew that the
whole creation was groaning and travailling in pain,
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of the
body.* It is impossible to read this and many other
similar passages from our sacred writings and not feel
conscious that the authors clearly discerned this great
natural law, long before it broke upon the modern
world.
“I say in all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, that such a
bill means war. (Renewed laughter.) I do not mean
civil war, nor war with some rival State, but, what is
infinitely worse, war with the nature of things, war with
God, war against the Almighty power that rules the
universe, whether Hon. Members know it or not, or
believe it or not; therefore a war which will bring about
some great national calamity, the extent of which no
words can express, and no human mind can grasp.”
The member resumed his seat amidst loud laughter
from some and ironical cheers from others, one member
from the Government benches calling out in a loud voice,
“A-men ”
But, in spite of the outward levity manifested, the
speech produced a visible effect upon the House, and
had the vote been taken at once it is doubtful how it
would have gone, many members, though strong
Materialists, being opposed to the Government inter-
fering with religious convictions by any legislative
enactment.
One of the Ministers, quick to realise the position,
at once stood up to move an amendment. He began by
saying that “neither the Prime Minister or his party
had the slightest personal antipathy towards the Chris-
tian religion, but it was manifest to every intelligent
member and citizen that for the last fifty, yea, he might
say almost for the last hundred years, Christianity had
been unable to satisfy the new requirements that had
* Romans viii., 18-19.
23
OK THE GREAT REFERENDUM.


been springing U p on every side, or to adapt itself to the
changed conditions of human life, and unless the
Government, by some such enactment as that before the
House at the present time, boldly faced the position, they
were in danger of drifting into an intellectual and moral
chaos that must ultimately bring disaster upon the
country. Even while we are debating these matters,” he
continued, “there are hundreds of keen witted scientists
and wise men working out these problems, and kindred
subjects in psychology and physiology, and it is the duty
of the legislature to avail itself of the knowledge and
discoveries of such men and women so as to bring the
political structure of the Commonwealth up to the stan-
dard of the collective intelligence of its citizens. What
was one of the causes of the great world war in the
twentieth century? Was it not that the political and
religious world at that time was in an extraordinary
degree behind the average intelligence of the people?
Kings and priests, statesmen and politicians, religious
and political leaders were drawn not from the best
intelligences of the communities they represented, but
often from the least instructed citizens. These pushing,
ambitious, short-sighted types of men occupied the seats
of the mighty, and consequently plunged the world into
that disastrous conflict, from which we have scarcely
yet recovered. This is a matter of history we would do
well to remember at the present time. Mr. Speaker, the
voice of the majority must always prevail, and it is a
well-known fact that the Christians have become such
a small minority in the land that their votes are not worth
considering. If we refuse to pass this measure, we
shall be turned out of office at the coming elections.
This, though a relief to ourselves, would be a great
calamity to the country at the present time, seeing that
we have so much useful legislation to pass concerning
the welfare of the Commonwealth. Therefore, Mr.
Speaker, I beg to move an amendment, which I venture
to think the Prime Minister and this House will accept:
‘That a Referendum be taken, so that the voice of the
whole people may be heard on this important question/
24
AUSTRALIA A.D. 2000.


and the responsibility of the measure becoming law shall
then rest upon them, and not upon ourselves.”
And methought the amendment was accepted by the
Prime Minister and carried by a large majority.
The scene I had just witnessed reminded me of one
that had occurred two thousand years before, when
Jesus of Nazareth stood before the Roman Governor,
and Pilate said unto Him, “Art thou a king then?”
And Jesus answered, ‘‘Thou sayest that I am a king, to
this end was I born and for this cause came I into the
world.” Arrayed against Him was the power of Rome
and that of a fanatical priesthood. It was then, as now,
a struggle between right and might, light and darkness,
but the horror of it all was that might seemed to triumph
and right to go under. Never in the history of the world
was there a stronger and more determined combination
of religious and political parties directed against the one
personality than that which was directed against Jesus
of Nazareth at that time. Pharisees and Sadducees,.
Herodians and Romans, all uniting to silence and destroy
Him, and the ideals of life which He represented.
Materially they succeeded, for they nailed Him to
the Cross, where He hung, apparently powerless to save
either Himself or the world He had come to redeem.
Then I remembered His resurrection and ascension.
That He rose again from the dead, ascended up on high,
led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men on the
first Whit Sunday. Would He do so again ? Or had the
rushing mighty wind of the spiritual life that changed
the whole current of human life and thought 2,000 years
ago blown itself out, and would it never again be felt in
a world over which the mists and fogs of materialism
had settled like a pall.
******
And it came to pass that the voice of the people was
heard throughout the land in the referendum submitted
to them, and by an overwhelming majority they decided
in favour of the Prime Minister and his supporters “that


Christianity should be abolished, and no longer recog-
nized as a religion in the Commonwealth, inasmuch as it
had become a source of weakness to the State, and stood
in the path of its material advancement.”
And the wise men of the land who had been placed
by the Government over the State schools, colleges, and
Universities for the instruction of the young, and the
guidance of the people, proclaimed in their lessons,
lectures, and publications, that the religion of Jesus was
only a myth, like unto the ancient myths of Egypt,
Assyria, Greece and Rome, asserting that the Govern-
ment did not err in suppressing the remnant of the
strange superstition, which at one time had dominated
more than half the world, but that they had acted wisely
and boldly in the cause of freedom and justice by sub-
mitting such a question to the decision of the people.
The Press also almost unanimously supported the
Government policy, one influential newspaper in a lead-
ing article saying, “Now that the people of the Common-
wealth have been officially freed from the superstitions
of the past, the vast amount of money and energy which
have been wasted for centuries upon religious objects will
be set free for the development of the true interests of
the nation and its great material resources, and we can
now look confidently forward to the speedy fulfillment of
the motto of our great Commonwealth, ‘Advance
Australia.’ ”
And I looked, and behold the walls of many of the
churches were broken down, others were converted into
public buildings, the Cross was trampled upon, and the
properties of the Christians were confiscated. For the
rulers said: “These great properties were given by the
people many years ago for religious uses, and as they
are no longer required for what was originally intended,
it is but just that by the will of the people they should
be resumed, and devoted henceforth to secular pur-
poses.”


Chapter IV-
THE GREAT REFERENDUM.
And the majority of the people were glad that the
great change looked forward to for so many years had
at last come, an act of Parliament had released them
from all the restraints of religion, and the superstitions
of the past. “We shall now be free,” they said, “from
the religious hatreds and distrusts that have been the
cause of so much social, political, and international
warfare. Free also from the waste of wealth and energy
that has for so long opposed the onward march of the
race.”
And the rulers were glad, for the confiscation of
Churches and Church lands brought much money into the
State treasury; and the Christians were also glad, for
although the new decree caused many more to fall away
from the ancient faith, their common sorrows and fears,
their trials and persecutions, drew them together as
brothers and sisters, and they forgot all their old differ-
ences and suspicions, and lived as the Christians lived
in the early days when the light of the Church first broke
upon the world in the pure white wonder of Its dawn.
And the people marvelled and said, “What strange
people these Christians are. See how they love one
another.”
And some of them spake unto the Christian leaders,
they still called Bishops, or Fathers in God, and said:
“What is the secret of your peace and happiness?” and
they answered and said: “We have no secret except it
be the grace, i.e., the beautiful charm of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the love of God, the Eternal Father, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost.” But the words sounded
strange and meaningless to those who asked. And it
came to pass that the presence of the Christians in the
Commonwealth and the manner of their lives began to
trouble the people; even their kindly words and sympa-
thetic actions some resented. Others grew angry at
27
OR THE GREAT REFERENDUM.


the obstinacy that, in spite of the new knowledge that
had come into the world, still clung to an ancient super-
stition, until at last they begged the remnant of Chris-
tians left amongst them to depart, and form a community
of their own in some distant land.
To this the Christians were not averse; indeed they
were glad, for they were anxious to frame a constitution
of their own, on the communistic lines laid down by the
Apostolic teachers of their religion, and this could only
be done by separating themselves from the materialistic
Commonwealth in which they lived.
• So it came to pass that the remnant that was left
gathered their possessions together, and departed from
Australia in great ships, some of which sailed through
the air, and others over the ocean, until they came to a
group of beautiful islands in the Southern Seas that had
been assigned to them by the Federal Government. And
there they formed the first Christian Communistic
Settlement the world had ever known. There they
settled in peace and security to await the return of their
Lord to rule over the whole earth, there it was that the
Kingdom of Heaven first began on earth.
I would like to' describe that community as I saw it
in my visioin, but may not do so now, for I am more
concerned with what happened in Australia when the
last leaven of the Christian society was removed from the
land.
******
And it came to pass that Clod gave the people of
Australia up to their hearts’ desires; and God spake and
said, “It must be even as they wish, not even My power
can control the freedom of will wherewith I have gifted
them. They have rejected Christ, therefore Christ shall
be taken from them,” and the gr'eat name of Jesus, and
all that Christianity stands for, was slowly blotted out
from the life of the people, even as the devastating
drought sometimes wipes out every vestige of verdure
from the land.
******


Methought I stood upon a hill watching the sun set
on the verge of a great plain; masses of storm clouds had
gathered in the west, the edges of which were scattered
into ragged and flaming streaks stretching far up toward
the zenith as though the gigantic claws of formless
beings threatened the land with destruction. For a few
minutes the sun looked out between the rolling, twisting
vapours on the edge of the horizon, like an angry blood-
shot eye, then suddenly disappeared. Ghostly, flicker-
ing shadows crept slowly over the grey plain like the
shadows of death sometimes flicker over the ashen face
of a dying man; then the great cloud moved slowly
upward, until it covered the whole firmament, and all
the land was dark.
Below me, wrapped in formless vapours, the mid-
night plain stretched. Suddenly from the black canopy
overhead the lightning darted swift and terrible, followed
by a crash that seemed to split the earth asunder; arid
when the quivering flash ran along the edge of the
cloud, and broke over the plain in a thousand flaming
lances, I saw in a moment all the wounded and stricken
in life’s battle, since the day when Christ had left the
land, and behold they were very many. There lay
the sick and suffering, the whdow and orphan, the
despairing and sin-bound, for in spite of the decree
of the rulers, and the wisdom of scientists and philo-
sophers, sin and suffering, pain and death, and the fear
of such things, had increased in the land, and the land
also was filled with violence and strife, civil war and
anarchy, for it w r as found impossible to carry on a
system of government built up entirely on self-interest.
True for a few' years after the proclamation, the material
progress of the Commonwealth was immense. The
wonderful scientific discoveries of the age, and marvel-
lous mechanical inventions, and labour-saving appliances
produced a degree of ease and comfort unknown to
former ages. But a civilization without any kind of
morality to hold it together could not last, and soon
began to bend and break under the strain of the con-


tending factions that were tearing it to pieces. So great
at times were the sufferings of men and women that they
gnawed their tongues with pain, and blasphemed the
God of Heaven. And many became like unto wild beasts
in their savage lusts and , cruelties. For Christ had
vanished from the land, and with the disappearance of
that sublime figure all the love and pity and kindly
sympathy that His teaching had generated in the hearts
of men and women for two thousand years disappeared
also, and left the country a God-forsaken ante-room of
Hell.
Once more in my dream I stood looking down upon
a great city. It was not the inland city of a former
vision, but one built upon the shores of a beautiful
harbour, spanned in the narrower parts by gigantic but
graceful bridges, over which rushed with incredible
swiftness electric carriages. Below, the waters were
crowded with vessels of all shapes and sizes, while above
floated great airships, among which aeroplanes darted
with bewildering velocity.
My guide led me to a great building, which I easily
recognised as a hospital. A sick woman lay there dying
in great pain, but the pain of her mind exceeded the pain
of her body, for her feet had wandered far from the paths
of righteousness and peace. Every now and then she
glanced around with a scared and frightened look, as
though expecting some unwelcome visitor. In a parox-
ism of pain she cried aloud for help. One of the nurses
came swiftly to her bedside, and enquired if she needed
anything.
“Oh, nurse,” she moaned, “send me, I pray you,
one of the public teachers that I may speak unto him
before I die.” The nurse at once touched an electric
button and spoke a few words through a tube, and
presently a teacher came. For since the Christian
clergy had left the land, an order of Teachers had been
formed by the Government, and one of the duties
imposed upon them by the State was to attend the sick
and dying. And the woman, though in great pain, her


breath coming in short quick gasps, spake unto him and
said, “Is it true, O Teacher, that there is no Christ, and
that the faith of the people who lived many years ago
in this land is false?”
And the teacher made answer and said, “It is true,
woman, that the myth' of Christianity has gone from
amongst us, like all other of the world , s religions, if
that is what } 7 ou mean.” And the woman turned her
dying eyes upon him and said, “I would ask a favour of
you.”
“Yes,” he replied, “what can I do for you?”
“There is a book, O Teacher, that my grand-
mother possessed, and in her great sicknes's a Chris-
tian priest came and read from it unto her. This
gave her so much comfort that the terror of death
departed and she died in peace. O Teacher, for some
reason I fear to die, and I would see this book, and pray
you to read from it unto me that I too may die in peace,
for my eyes are dim and my head is weary with this
great pain that racks me.”
And the man frowned, and said, “I have been
asked for this book before. I am afraid that it
will take many generations for superstition to die
out of the land. It is the Bible you speak of.
Know then that the Christians took with them most of
their sacred books when they departed from the Com-
monwealth, and the remnant were burnt, lest the people
should revert to their old superstitions. There is, I
believe, but one copy left, and that is kept m the great
library of the Commonwealth, and I may not get it.”
And the woman spoke and said, “Then my last hope
is dead; you have slain it with those words.”
At this the Teacher turned to the nurse and in an
angry voice said, “Why have you allowed this woman to
live? Why send for me that I should be troubled with
her foolish talk and questions, as though I had nothing
else to do? You ought to'have sense enough to know
that this is a case where the euthanasia ought to have


been given hours ago. If this occurs again I shall report
you to the Medical Superintendent.”
And the nurse answered and said, “I am not to
blame. The doctor delayed his coming, and 1 was afraid
to administer the drug myself; it is against the rules.
Besides, the woman craved piteously to see you.”
And the woman, hearing the sound of their voices,
raised herself up and with great pain and effort cried out
in a loud and despairing tone, “No! no! not that; I will
not take it.”
“My good woman,” said the leacher, “you must
take what we are about to give you, it’s good for you.
“No! no! lam not good. Can you not give me some-
thing in place of the faith that has been destroyed? ”
“Calm yourself, and listen to me.”
“I—want something, some—one —in place of —the
Christ —you —have taken —from us.” She uttered the
words in short, sharp, painful gasps.
“Woman,” returned the Teacher, “don’t ask for
what is impossible. It is my duty to attend to you, but
neither I nor anyone else can give you anything in place
of the Christian faith that is dead and has gone from
this land for ever.”
And the woman stared at him with wild wide open
eyes, and said, with the death rattle in her throat, “You
lie, sir; He lives; I know it—l feel it; He is not dead!”
She sank back upon the pillow, her eyes closed. I
thought that her spirit had fled, but a few moments later
she raised herself up again, her face transfigured with
the glory of another life, and said in a clear voice, “I
see Him, but net nigh. Lord Jesus, forgive them, they
know not what they do.”
It seemed as though the wish in her heart to see the
Christ was reflected at that last moment upon her face,
for she died with a smile upon her lips, and her face
shone as if it had been the face of an angel.
AUSTRALIA A.D. 2000.


Chapter V.
A jCHRISTLESS LAND.
Once again my dream was changed, and I saw
another picture of the Christles's land.
It was Sunday, a beautiful spring morning. The
sun shone brightly, the grass was green in the well-kept
parks. Shrubs and trees had burst into leaf and
blossom. Fleecy clouds drove slowly over the deep blue
Australian sky. There was greenness, beauty and
sunshine everywhere. 1 saw a pretty little girl playing
in a garden adjoining a stately house. A woman,
evidently her mother, came out of the house and called
to the child. “Come, my dear,” she said; “hurry up and
get dressed quickly, or you will be late for the picnic.
The big airship will be in presently. Dad and I are both
ready, and if you are a good girl we will take you to the
Picture Theatre on our return to-night. lam so glad it
is a fine Sunday.”
“Mum,” said the little girl, as she rushed up to her
mother, “why do you call it Sunday?”
“Dear me, child, what a strange question to ask.
Why, because it is a holiday, of course.”
“But what’s a holiday, Mum?”
‘ n A holiday, dear, is a day when there is no work
done. Dad has not to go to his office, or to Parliament
House, to make laws for little girls to 'obey. Now do
you understand?”
“No, Mum. Grannie says that years and years ago.
when she was a little girl like me, they used to worship
God on Sunday, and not go to offices or to picnics.
What’s that, Mother?”
“What’s what, my dear?”
“Worshipping God?”


“O dear child, you do ask such strange questions.
Grannie must not be putting foolish notions in your head,
or Dad will be very angry.”
“Rut why should he be angry, Mum; and you haven’t
told me what holiday means.”
“Well, my dear, it simply means holy day. Years
and years ago, long before I can remember, Sunday used
to be kept as a holy or sacred day, and people went to
church and said prayers to a God they thought lived
somewhere above the bright blue sky, instead of going
to picnics and enjoying themselves. When Granny was
quite a little girl like you she used to go to church. Now,
which would you rather do?”
“But who is God, Mother; where does He live?”
“Child, you must not be stupid, or I shall be angry
with you. There is no God, at least your father says so,
and he is a Member of Parliament and ought to know,
for a few years ago they passed a law that there was no
God, so it must be right.”
“But, Mum, you haven’t told me about Sunday
yet?”
Oh, my dear, you make my head ache- Ask your
father when he takes you out to-day.”
“Mum> Grannie showed me a picture in a book of
Jesus, and she said He used to be God when she was a
little girl. He was carrying a little lamb, and looked so
kind and gentle.”
“Did she show you anything else, dear?”
“Yes, Mum, another picture where Jesus was nailed
to a big piece of black wood by His hands and feet, and
the blood was trickling down from His hands and feet.
What did they do that for, Mum?”
“I don’t know, child.”
“Granny says after they killed Him, He came up out
of the grave again and lots of people saw Him; is that
really true, Mother?”
“No child; your father and many wise men say it is
not true; people only fancied it.”


“Then I’m so sorry, Mum.”
“Why are you sorry, dear?”
’Cos I would like to see Him, and if you was to die,
Mum, would I have no muvver and never see you no
more?”
“Hush, child; you must not talk silly nonsense.”
“Well, if I was to die, Mum, would you have no little
girl, an’ would you an’ Dad be sorry?”
“Of course, we would, child. Whatever has put
all this silly nonsense into your head this morning.
Listen, that is the whistle of the big excursion airship
coming in at the Centennial Park Station. Run quick
and get ready. Here’s your father coming.”
When the woman related to her husband the con-
versation she had with her little girl, the father shook
his head and said:
“I am afraid that the old superstitition we worked
so hard to stamp out will come back again some day.”
“Do you think so?”
“Well, it has a strange persistence about'it. If I
were not a materialist I would be inclined to say that this
persistence was a sign of its reality. I must speak to
your mother.”
* * *
* * *
Again my dream was changed, and I saw a number
of things, at first blurred and indistinct as through a
driving mist. Gradually they became clearer, and
behold a great airship floating over the city. A multi-
tude of people were gazing up at it, their faces white
with terror and anxiety. Evidently an accident had
occurred, a collision I imagined, for flames were bursting
out of the after-part of the swaying vessel, and the
steering gear had become unmanageable. The airship
was crowded with passengers, many of whom had
ventured out on the gallery of the car to see what had
happened.
35
OR THE GREAT REFERENDUM.


Suddenly the great vessel lurched partly over, tilting
the car. Several people were thrown overboard, and as
they fell to the ground were dashed to pieces; others
clung to ropes and stanchions on the outside of the car.
So sudden was the accident that there seemed to be no
time to release the life-saving apparatus with which
every airship is furnished. As I looked I-saw the great
fabric come swaying and rolling toward the earth.
Fortunately it fell in the midst of the park, the fore-part
athwart some great trees, while the after-part lay in a
crumpled and smoking mass upon the ground. A
multitude of people rushed to the scene of the accident.
Officials, whom I took to be policemen, directed the
rescue of the survivors. I saw the forms of men and
women lifted from the smoking wreckage, some already
dead, others were more or less injured, while a few'
escaped scathless. Among the latter I noticed the
parents of the little girl of my dream, but the child
herself was evidently severely injured, and was tenderly
borne to a waiting ambulance, followed by the anxious
and terrified parents.
******
I saw them later, sitting speechless with grief by
the bedside of their only child. Ihe physician had come
and gone, but had given them no hope whatever. The
child was fearfully injured, and could only live a few'
hours. Indeed, the doctor strongly advised the
immediate administration cf the usual anaesthetic on
such occasions, but the father would not hear of it, at
least for a while, for the child held his hand and was.
trying to speak. She seemed in great agony. I could
see the white coverlet rise and fall as she panted out her
little life. Great round beads stood upon the waxen
brow, and the short quick gasps for breath indicated that
the end was very near- The little hand, already cold and
clammy, tightened in the father’s grasp, and her lips
moved as though she desired to say something. The
man bent down his head, straining his ear to catch the
w'hispered sound.
36
AUSTRALIA A.D. 2000.


What is it, darling?’’ he asked, with a suppressed
note of agony in his voice. “Dad is here with you.
What can he do to help his little girl?”
“Dad,” she gasped, “ I can see the man—in the
picture.”
“What picture, dear?”
The one Grannie showed—me. Jesus carrying
the lamb. He’s waving for me, but it’s getting dark,
Daddie. I can’t see Him now. Don’t let go my—hand.”
It took the child a long time to say this. The words
were so broken and disconnected that only an anxious
and loving listener could hear them or, hearing, under-
stand.
“W 7 hen will the light come,'Daddy?’
“It will come directly, dear.”
The man started as he uttered the last words as
though he had been stung. For he remembered that he
was one of the Federal Members who had strongly urged
the people at the great Referendum to vote for the
abolition of Christianity. Inadvertently he had spoken
tbe truth: “the light was coming.” The grasp of the
tiny hand relaxed. “Dad! Dad!” the child murmured,
and with a long, shuddering sigh the little innocent soul
flitted away. Die light that never shone on land or sea
had come-
Ihe man was' childless. But she was at last free
from the pain that even the doctors’ skill could not
alleviate. Her little limbs had been twisted and the
bones broken, and her body scorched and bruised, but
now every trace of pain had passed from the sleeping
face. A smile hovered around the lips as though she
said, “I know all now, and there is nothing to fear,
nothing to worry about.” •
As the man gazed on the face of his dead child, he
muttered, “The old superstition back again,” and
thought vaguely of Jesus as the Lover of little children.
Then, starting to his feet, he laughed harshly, for he
remembered what he himself had so often told the


people, that Christianity must be either a deception or a
delusion. Suddenly he stooped down and kissed the
cold brow. “Dead—dead,” he muttered. Then a great
despair came upon him which drove him from the
chamber of death out into the darkness of the night,
away from the haunts of men—to the cell of the lunatic,
and at last to the grave of the suicide.
******
And the darkness deepened over the face of the
land. And I heard a voice from heaven which said,
“Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; even so
saith the Spirit, for they rest from their labours.’’
And far away in a distant isle in the southern seas
methought I heard the sound, as it were, of voices
singing:—
“Far, far away, like bells at evening pealing,
The voice of Jesus sounds o’er land and sea,
And laden souls, by thousands meekly stealing,
Kind Shepherd, turn their weary steps to Thee.
Angels of Jesus, Angels of Light,
Singing to welcome the pilgrims of the night.’’
And again I heard a choral chant: —
“Through the tender mercy of our Cod, whereby the
day spring from on high hath visited us; to give light to
them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death;
and to guide our feet into the way of peace.’’
“Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now, and
ever shall be, world without end. Amen.’’


Chapter VI.
A VOYAGE THROUGH SPACE-
After this I looked and, behold, a door was opened
in heaven, and One sat upon a throne like unto the
Son of Man. And out of the throne proceeded lightnings
and thunderings and voices, and methought they were
signs of the infinite power of Him who sat upon the
throne as judge and law-giver throughout the whole
Universe, and that He is the just avenger of all the
wrongs that have ever been committed or shall ever be
committed upon the earth. And before the throne there
was a sea of glass like unto crystal. And over the sea
there passed a great multitude, a never ending stream
of human beings; for the sea was the sea of life itself,
and of mortal existence. A sea that looked dark and
mysterious to the race of men upon the earth, but to
Him that sat on the throne it was clear as the flashing
crystal. And passing across the sea of life I saw the
woman and the child of my dream, and they were clad
in shining robes. And He that sat upon the throne
said, “Behold I make all things new! You are set free
from your sins,” He added, adciressing the woman, “for
I Myself have borne the shame and the sorrow of them.”
And the woman said, “Yea, Lord, but I am still
unable to forget the past.”
And the Lord pointed her to a rainbow that was
round about the throne, a symbol of hope and forgive-
ness, and smiling said, “If I am able and willing to for-
give and to forget, may you not do so likewise? Here
the sin of the past is gone, as though it had never been.”
And methought a great peace came over the face of the
woman, and her strained and agonised look passed for
ever away. >


And He took the little child in His arms, and said,
“Suffer the little children to come unto Me, and forbid
them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.”
And I knew then that the faith of Jesus could never
really die, though I was afraid lest it might never again
return to the earth, and the thought thereof troubled me
greatly.
And He that'sat upon the throne said, “Is this the
thought that troubles you? Let not your heart be
troubled. Ye believe in God, believe also in Me. In
My Father’s house are many mansions. The earth on
which I lived and died and rose again is one of the least
of them, a mere speck in infinite space. Would you
behold a part of the glory of My Father’s house?”
“Lord, if I may,” I humbly replied.
*“Then to the Angels .which stood round about the
throne He said, “Take him, strip him of Ins robes of
flesh, cleanse his vision, and put a new breath into his
nostrils; arm him with sail broad wings: for flight. Only
touch not with any change his human heart —the heart
that weeps and trembles.”
“It was done, and with a mighty Angel for my guide,
I stood ready for my infinite voyage- And from the
terraces of heaven, without sound or farewell, at once
we wheeled away into endless space. Sometimes with
the solemn flight of Angel wing we fled through Sarrahs
of darkness, through wildernesses of death that divided
the worlds of life. Sometimes we swept over frontiers
that were quickening under prophetic motions towards
a life not yet realised. Then from a distance that is
counted only in heaven light began to dawn upon us
through a shapeless, sleepy film. With unutterable
swiftness the light swept towards us, and by unutterable
pace we towards the light. In a moment the rushing of
planets was upon us, in a moment the blazing of suns
was around us. Then came eternities of twilight that
*These extracts I have adapted from one of Jean Paul
Richter’s dreams.


revealed, but were not revealed. To the right hand and
to the left towered mighty constellations ghostly from
infinitude. Depth was swallowed up in height insur-
mountable, height was swallowed up in depth unfathom-
able. Suddenly as we rode from infinite 'to infinite,
suddenly as we tilted over abyssmal worlds, a mighty
cry arose—that systems more, mysterious, worlds more
billowy, other heights, and other depths—were dawning,
were nearing, were at hand.
“Oh, Angel!” I cried, “Stop! I can go no further,
my spirit acheth with this infinity. Insufferable is the
glory of our Father’s house. Let me lie down in the
grave and hide me from the persecutions of the infinite;
for end I see there is none.” And from a multitude of
invisible beings that surrounded us there issued a great
choral chant, “End there is none, end there is none.”
And throwing up his glorious hand to heaven the Angel
said, “End there is none to the Universe of God. Lo!
also THERE IS NO BEGINNING.”
“Is this the sorrow that fills your heart?” he asked.
“It is the loneliness of creation, the solitude of these
infinite wastes that causes me to shudder and weep,” 1
replied. “The full world is great, but this awful vacancy
is greater.”*
He smiled and said, “In the sight of God there is no
vacancy- Even now, O child of man, let thy quickened
eye behold and thy beating heart embrace the depths
of life which ■ surround thee.”
1 hen he prayed and said, “Lord, open his eyes that
he may see. Let there be light!”
And immediately my eyes were opened, and a sea
of light and life filled all the spaces, which a moment
before had seemed desolate arrd unoccupied. There was
a rush of innumerable wings. Beings, of indescribable
beauty, of wondrous shapes and forms, of a glory
unspeakable, flashed past my raptured sight. Some
*These extracts I have adapted from one of Jean Paul
Richter’s dreams.


were like ministering spirits bent on missions of mercy
and love, others swept past us like mighty hosts in battle
array, swift, beautiful, and terrible as armies with
banners.
“They go,” said my guide in answer to my wonder-
ing look, “to fight against the powers of darkness.”
‘‘Seest thou,” he continued, “far away on the infinite
horizon, floating through those galaxies of shining worlds
and blazing suns a tiny luminous haze.”
“Yea,” my Lord,” I replied, “I see it.”
“Knowest thou what that luminous speck is?” he
enquired.
“Is it the earth from which I came?” I ventured to
ask. “Yet, no,” I added, “it would be, dark, would it
not?”
“It is the earth,” he replied, “and it is lumionus
by reason of the immense distance we are from it. You
are now looking at the earth as it was millions of years
ago, shortly after it had broken away from the sun, a
whirling mass of nebulous gas. See you not the central
globe of light round which it is revolving?”
“I see,” I replied, “but I cannot understand.”
“Then let me explain. You remember when you
were upon the earth that you often looked up to these
infinite spaces and wondered if the Great Architect of
the Llniverse had called these myriads of worlds into
existence merely for the purpose of leaving them desolate
and unoccupied.”
“I remember.”
“Now you know that there is no part of infinite
space that is not occupied by some type of intelligent
being, and that the Everlasting God has ordained and
constituted the services of Angels and men in a wonder-
ful order.”
I bowed in acknowledgment of the truth of what
he said.
“You have often while on earth seen the sun rise
and set, and you know that the sun is, as mortals
42
AUSTRALIA A.D. 2000.


reckon, - about ninety-three millions of miles from the
earth, and that light travels at the rate of two hundred
thousand miles in a second, i-e., it takes about eight and
a half minutes for it to travel from the sun to the earth,
therefore the sun had risen eight and a half minutes
before it became visible to you. In other words, you
saw the sun as it was eight and a half minutes ago.
You also know that it takes the light from the nearest
fixed star three and a half years to reach the earth, from
the star mortals call Vega twelve years, from the stars
mortals speak of as the 12th magnitude it takes four
thousand years for light to travel to the earth. Do you
understand?” he asked gently.
It is quite clear,” I responded.
“From where we are now,” he continued, “as
mortals reckon time, it has taken the ray of light you
see from yonder earth millions of years to travel, so that
you actually see your old home as it was millions of
years ago, by virtue of the cleansed and increased power
of vision conferred upon you by the Most High. Even
as a mortal on earth you knew that such powers of
vision and transmission through space were possible,
though they came not within the circle of your earthly
experience.”
“Quite true,” I replied, as the wonderful truth
began to break upon me.
“Then let us move towards the earth,” he said.
Like a flash we sped toward the distant luminous
haze in the far distance, and at once it began to change,
first into a molten globe, then into a fiery ball. Suddenly
a crust of slag formed upon its surface. This I saw
broken and shattered again and again by what I
knew to be the heaving ocean of fire beneath, until
at last it set permanently and received upon its
bare and blistered surface a great rain or mist
thrown down from the atmosphere surrounding it,
which at first the molten globe sent steaming back
into space; then, as it cooled, allowed to remain
upon its surface, a universal boiling, bubbling ocean.


44 AUSTRALIA A.D. 2000.
As the surface further cooled there appeared to be great
earthquake throes, and suddenly dry land appeared
above the heaving waters. Thus as we swept with
lightning flash toward the earth did the wonderful drama
of creation unfold itself before our very eyes.
Then came the wonder and mystery of life, without
shock or break in the Divine purpose. How it came I
could not tell. I only knew that the Author and Giver
of Life had willed it. Here we paused for a few moments
in our flight to watch the gradually ascending forms of
life evolving from lower to higher types. Suddenly
there came what seemed to be a break; in a moment
mental evolution succeeded organic, though it was
impossible to discern where the one ended and the other
began. But the effect was there in a new creation, a
new type- Mail stood out supreme, alone, a personality,
a spiritual ego. And the spirit of God strove within
him, for God had breathed into him the breath of life,
and man had become a living soul.
my
picl
tha
Tn
Now in my vision methought I saw the race, not as
a conglomeration of individuals, but, as it were, one
man, and he fought against the Divine Spirit that stirred
within him, with a strange desire to re-live sometimes
a part and sometimes the entire history of his lower
organic life from vegetable to man; a desire which I
could not at the time understand; neither could I under-
stand why he was compelled to carry the burden of the
past with him in his upward progression. But I felt that
the reason must be a good one, and I should understand
it hereafter.
And now we witnessed the swift processions of
human history. Occasionally my guide would pause in
order to draw my attention to some incident of special
interest or importance, such as the deluge in the time
of Noah, when a large part of the earth was again
covered with water. The call of Abraham, when I could
distinctly see the caravan of the great chieftain leaving
ancient Ur of the Chaldees, and journeying westward
to found a new race and a new kingdom in another land.


I hen in quick succession there passed before us the
ancient civilizations of Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia,
Phoenicia, Carthage, Greece, and Rome, with all their
wealth and splendour, their wars and tumults, cruelties
and atrocities, their wrongs and tyrannies, the clashing
of armies, the sacking of cities and villages, the
slaughter of women and children. Whenever I wished
to examine more closely some special event of history,
my guide would pause sc as to allow the details of the
picture to pass before my eyes. He explained to me
that by the vibrations of sound, light, and thought, the
I inverse retained all the pictures of the past in an
indestructible and incorruptible record, not unlike the
cinematograph and phonograph mortals used on earth,
so that a clear and infallible register of every incident
not only in the history of the race, but in the life of every
individual, was thus preserved eternally. And this
applied not only to actions, but to words and thoughts;
in fact, he added, the velocity of thought vibrations is
infinitely stronger than the vibrations of either sound,
light, or electricitv. This, he continued, is the meaning
of the words, “There is nothing covered that shall not
be revealed; and hid that shall not be known.” Or
“The Lord will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
hearts.” Or “Another book was opened, which is the
book of life; and the dead were judged out of the things
written in the books.”
“I wish you now,” he added, “to gaze for a short
time upon the greatest event of history, for which the
past has been a preparation, and towards which the
whole creation is still moving. What is it that specially
arrests your attention and troubles you most in this
story of creation and the progress of the human race?”
“The awful struggle that seems to be go ng on,”
I replied; “the vast tremendous effort throughout the
whole creation to live, to grow, to evolve into some
higher tvpe, not only in every plant mid flower,
every insect, bird and beast, hut with regard to


man himself, nature seems to be ‘red in tooth and
claw’ ? Is it the law of nature, and is it only pos-
sible to attain final rest and perfection by this
dreadful struggle and anguish? Is it God’s purpose?
Could He not have made things different? Forgive me
for asking such questions, but I feel as though I had
passed through it all myself.”
“You have,” he replied; “every individual man is a
microcosm; that is, he passes through the history and
sum in miniature of the whole story of creation; but
would you have had the All Father to grant you perfect
happiness, and the wonderful powers you now possess,
without any effort or struggle on your part, and without
any regard to your character or conduct? You know
that there is something in the nature of things that
makes this impossible.”
“I would not,” I replied, “now that I have had a
glimpse of the true meaning of things. What you say
is perfectly just- Still I would like to know why labour
and sorrow, and what men call evil, should have been
permitted by an Almighty and an All Loving Father?”
“You are quite justified in asking the question,” he
replied, “but you can at least understand that less
happiness on the whole would have been the result* of
creation on the lines you indicate. Even with your present
powers you can only see a part, a mere fringe of life
and of Our Father’s creat.ion; could you see the whole
you would know that His plan is perfect. \ou must not
judge the whole by a part. Side by side with this
struggle for existence which has always troubled the
children of men, there has been going on another
struggle, infinitely stronger and more powerful, what one
of your mortal writers has ’called ‘the struggle for the
life of others,’ a Divine force, which, on our journey back
to the earth, you will perceive is destined to replace the
lower struggle, and build up what will eventually be a
perfect superstructure on the very foundations which
the first struggle has laid. Love is really the supreme
and dominant force throughout creation, not hate or
46
AUSTRALIA A.D. 2000.


strife as mortals sometimes imagine, and this love is not
a mere after-thought of God, following what has been
called the fall of man, but it came on earth with the
first cell of life that moved and palpitated on its surface.
For love, or the struggle for others, belongs to the very
nature of things; it is bound up in the constitution of the
Universe. There could have been no creation, no life,
without love; a lonely God could not love, He must have
some being on whom to bestow His affection. Behold
now!” he continued, “what happens as we approach still
closer to the earth, for that may solve the difficulty that
perplexes you.”
And as I looked, behold a new life appeared, like
unto the life of man and yet diffeient. A new man, a
second Adam. God, the Spirit of the Universe, had
entered the limitations of humanity that He might feel
with and for His human children, yea that He might
live and die for them. For it was at this point in our
journey through space that we saw the Saviour of man-
kind appear on the earth, performing His wonderful
miracles and carrying out His mission of mercy and
love.
“Look now,” said my guide. And behold I saw the
Cross upon Calvarv under a darkened heaven, and there-
on in agony and blood the Son of Man.
“Listen,” he continued. Then we heard the mock-
ery and laughter of His torturers rise to His dying ears.
“He saved others,” they shouted; “Himself He cannot
save,” and His voice in reply came clear and dis-
tinct, though weak and faint through suffering: “Father,
forgive them, they know not what they do.”
“See you that sight, hoar you those words?” my
companion asked.
“Yea,” I replied, humbled and subdued-
“Greater love hath no man than this,” he continued,
“that a man lay down His life for His friends —or for his
enemies,” he added. “Now do you understand the
meaning of the struggle that you have witnessed and
that has troubled your heart?”


“I am content to know that He who created, suffers
with us and for us,'’ I replied.
“You were troubled at the thought of the Lord of
Life and Love leaving* the world even for a time; you
know now that He has not left it. God so loved the
world that He gave His only begotten Son that whoso-
ever believeth on Him should not perish, but have ever-
lasting life.”
“Yea,” I replied, “but the world after all is but a
speck in the infinitude of space?”
specs. 11l LUC llllllULllUC ox Sjxcxvoi
“Have you not yet learnt that to Him there is
nothing great or small, and neither time or space; have
you not already seen the events of a thousand years
concentrated into a few seconds of what mortals cal!
time, and have you not learnt that time is not necessary
to the occurrence of events?”
“But what 'of those who don’t believe, and who can
not and will not understand? ” I asked.
“Many,” he replied, “hear indeed, but understand
not; see indeed, but perceive not. Ihe dark shadow of
materialism has enveloped the earth many times since
He died upon the Cross, but it has only hidden God
from man, and not man from God; and however far man
may wander from the Divine Father, he can never drift
utterly beyond His tender influence, His love and care.
Even if man never attempted to seek God, God would
be eternally seeking him, and the suffering and pain on
earth, which causes you so much perplexity, is partly
the result of His relentless search, for ‘He goeth after
that which is lost UNTIL He find it.
48
AUSTRALIA A.D. 2000.


Chapter VII.
EPILOGUE.
What will Australia be like one hundred years hence?
I he continent, no doubt, will still retain its geographical
position and configuration, unless some natural cata-
clysm occurs to disturb or destroy it, but what will be
the conditions of life on its surface, are they likely to
be better or worse than they are at present? The future
of Australia depends upon the character and conduct of
those living to-day. I am treating this as a religious
rather than as a social or political question, because
religion, after all, must be admitted to be what Mr. Bell
Wright calls “one of the great things of life,” if indeed
it is not the greatest.
Religion means character and conduct, and conduct,
says Matthew Arnold, “is three-fourths of life.” To the
races which inherit Western civilization religion and
Christianity are identical; therefore it is clear that all
the great social, political, and international questions
which are agitating this the present time must
finally be resolved into the one great problem of the
truth of Christianity, i.e., of the truth or falsehood of
those ideals of life and conduct taught by Jesus Christ,
which conquered the Roman Empire in the first three
centuries, and which have been struggling for the
supremacy of European and American civilization ever
since. We have now, I believe, arrived at a critical period
in the history of the race, when the ideals for which
Christianity stands will either become supreme in the
life of the nations, or through the aggressive advance
of materialism become lost to the world for generations
to come, which would mean a horrible reversion to the
ethics of the jungle and forest.
Material possessions are important, but they are not
necessary for the continuity or even prosperity of a race or


nation; indeed, it is quite possible for a race to continue
to exist without any material territory whatever, as in
the case of the Jewish race. The outer organism of that H
nation was destroyed 1900 years ago, but the soul of
the nation still lives- Titus and his legions could not
destroy’that, and notwithstanding that he has no visible
country, the Jew to-day is one of the strongest and fittest
men on earth, i.e., the soul of the nation lives, just as
the spirit of a man lives, though death may have dis-
solved the material particles of his body.
an
There is one thing that alone can make and keep a
nation great, and that is what has been called “a love
of invisible ideas.” And there is one thing that makes
and keeps it base, and must ultimately lead to its death
and destruction, and that is “a love of the visible, the
transient, the mere material.” It is a common mistake
to suppose that a politician is prevented from being
successful in his career by his love of the invisible idea
of honour or truth, but it is an absolute fact that his ft
love of politics is kept from becoming base and sordid
by his love of the invisible honour, for the things which
are seen are temporal, that is unreal, evanescent, but
the things which are not seen are eternal, lasting, and
Veal. But when a man loves wealth or power or plea-
sure, to the exclusion of all higher affections, then I \
sooner or later honour and truth and every. beautiful
invisible idea dies within him. He may have gained wealth
and power, yea, the whole world; but his soul, that is,
his true life, is lost, and becomes dead and damned
within him. Such a man knows that he is no longer a
man, that his true manhood has died long before his
fellow men cast the crumbling dust of his corrupting
body into a dishonoured grave. n i
As with the individual, so with the nation. Just as
an individual, especially if he be a public man, commands
our admiration and respect for his high ideals and noble
achievements, so does a nation win the smile of God
and the gratitude of mankind for great national ideals
and achievements, and just as an individual of corrupt


and vicious life must ultimately meet with the contempt
and abhorrence of all good people, so must a corrupt
and tyrannical nation finally meet with the contempt and
condemnation of the world. Further, as the physical
organism is not the real man, but is constantly changing
with the changing years, so that the very food we eat
and the air we breathe go to restore the waste of
tissue—waste and renewal being the basis of physical
life—so the nation is not a mere aggregate of individuals,
or even'a series of generations, but an organic whole
animated by a national soul or ideal. So long as that
soul or ideal is lofty and noble, i.e., worthy to live, the
nation lives; but if it becomes base and unworthy, it
sooner or later becomes impossible for the governing
body to control the conduct of individuals, and the
community either falls to pieces or becomes a prey to
the stronger or more united nations that may surround
it. In other words, when a nation despises faith in the
unseen, and ridicules the love of invisible ideas, and the
pursuit of wealth and pleasure becomes the dominant
passions of a national life, that nation, unless it repent,
is doomed. It must die.
What about Australia? What are the dominant
characteristics of Australian life at the present time?
Are they the love of “invisible ideas,” faith in the
unseen, a love for and a faith in honour, justice, freedom
and righteousness, qualities which we believe to be
eternal in the individual or nation, because they are the
outflow and expression of the life of God Himself ? What
is the drift of the national life in Australia at the- present
day? If you throw a twig or a leaf into a stream you
can tell at once the tendency of the current; it may not be
moving very fast at present, but there can be no doubt
as to the direction in which it is setting.
In what direction is the national life of Australia
setting to-day? Towards higher and nobler ideals, as
regards our commercial, political, and religious life, or
towards base and ignoble ends; is our national life
becoming more and more altruistic, or materialistic a


mere struggle for wealth and power?, I know that in the
struggle with material forces, inevitable to the develop-
ment of a young country, what are known as Christian
ideals are in danger of being forgotten or ignored.' But
this need not be so- Material progress, national wealth
and power are not necessarily arrested or even retarded
by a national faith in the unseen and eternal; quite other-
wise. Real, lasting wealth and power are increased by
such a faith. But the best lover of Australia must be
struck with the fact that the inner and spiritual life of
the Commonwealth has not kept pace with its outward
material advancement; but our internal strifes, political
and religious, combined with a national worldliness, and
an inordinate love of pleasure, are slowly but surely
eating, like cancerous growths, the true life out of the
nation. The fact is, as a nation we have lost our faith
in God, we no longer believe in an Eternal personal power
working for righteousness. Life has become purposeless
and we are therefore face to face with what the old
Hebrew prophet would have called a great national
apostasy.
But human life must have a purpose; that it should
have no plan or design, and that we are the vic-
tims of some blind chance or insane necessity is
unbelievable and unthinkable. It is equally certain that
the purpose of life must be a moral or righteous one,
and that we cannot be the sport of some malevolent
being.
Clearly the plan and purpose of God is to build up
the lives and characters of men and women, so that they
may be first of all willing, then—when by struggle and
effort they have devised a more or less perfect system
of government —able to live in just and loving relation
to one another, in the home, the parish, city, state, and
nation, dwelling together in unity and co-operation, in
sympathy, and mutual helpfulness, and thus be fitted to
become members of a ’ still higher and more perfect
society or civilization in the life beyond this life. But
modern life, with its love of ease and pleasure, wealth


and power, has tended to make the ideals of men and
women mean and sordid, and their ambitions paltry and
worthless; our great hope is that the present war will
change this and awaken us from the shadows and shows
of life, so that the trivial and unimportant will be seen
in their proper perspective, and the great facts and
realities of existence at last stand out in bold relief,
even though it be against the red glare of battle.
Already, like a great searchlight, it is beginning to reveal
heroic and Christ-like elements where we least expected
them, and convincing some, at least, of our statesmen
that there is something better than the triumph of
party, and richer than the spoils of office.
On December 20th a Referendum will place before
the citizens of this Commonwealth two great alterna-
tives, the one a call to further effort, and devotion
on behalf of the Empire to which we belong, and the
brave lads who are fighting for us at the front. To vote
“Yes” may mean to some self-sacrifice, —the way of
the Cross, —that dark path of pain along which the
Martyr feet of all great souls must tread. But the
other alternative means the abandonment of the prin-
ciples of love and self-sacrifice which we believe to be
the very foundations of our Christian civilization. If for
love of ease and pleasure, or a selfish fear of suffering,
we choose the latter alternative, then by the law of
analogy made clear to us in the history of other races and
nations we pronounce the sentence of decline, possibly
of'doom upon our national life. It may or may not mean
the loss of territory or material possessions, but it will
certainly mean the loss of that which is infinitely more
precious, our honour in the sight of the nations.
It is as true to-day as it was 1900 years ago,—
“Whosoever will save his life shall lose it, 1 and whosoever
will lose his life for Christ’s sake shall find it.
Oh,'ye wise men and women of Australia, who say,
“It will be fair weather to-day, for the sky is red; or it
will be foul weather because the sky is black and lower-
ing?” Ye can discern the face of the. sky, but can ye


not discern the signs of the times? Have we become
so blinded by our social, political, and religious strife
and contentions that we cannot see the drift of the age,
and whither the rushing current is carrying us, so
deafened by the clash and clangour of our own disputes
that we cannot hear the distant boom of the waters that
break over the falls?
Is this a time for cruel domestic strife, when the
nations of the earth that for years have cast envious
eyes upon our land are gathering in battle array, and
only await the weakening or withdrawal of the British
fleet to come thundering at our gates? “Therefore
hear now this, O foolish people, which have eyes and see
not, which have ears and hear not. Fear ye not me,
saith the Lord. Behold I will bring a nation upon you
from far off; it is a mighty nation, it is an ancient nation,
a nation whose language thou knowest not, neither
understandest what they say. And they shall eat up
thy harvest and thy bread, which thy sons and thy
daughters should eat; they shall eat up thy flocks and
thy herds; they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig trees;
they shall impoverish thy fenced cities wherein thou
trusted with the sword.
“Nevertheless in those days, saith the Lord, I will
not make a full end with you. And it shall come to
pass, when ye shall say, wherefore doeth the Lord our
God all these things unto us? Then shalt thou answer
them: Like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange
gods in your land, so shall ye serve strangers in a land
that is not yours.”*
But we have not utterly forsaken the Lord our God,
though as a nation we have wandered far from Him.
We thought that we could live without Him and without
His love, but we cannot, for “in Him we live and move
and have our being.” Let us turn again to that blessed
Face that wept over doomed Jerusalem, to that great
*Jer. v. 15-20.


Heart that bled and broke on Calvary, for none who turn
to Him can turn in vain.
0 Australia! Australia! how often would He have
gathered thy children together, to heal all your sorrows
and hush your strife, by the power of His precepts and
the love of His cross, even as a hen gathereth her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Yet we are
thy people, and thine inheritance, whom thou hast
redeemed by the mighty power and thy stretched out
arm.”


Mercantile Mutual Fire
Insurance Co. Limited.
Directors :
A. E. JAQUES (Chairman),
BERNARD McBRIDE,
C. C. GALE,
J. M. ATKINSON and
THEODORE J. MARKS.
KELSO KING,
Manager.
Mercantile Mutual Chambers
The Profits are retained in the State, and divided
between Policyholders and Shareholders every year.
The Policies cover all losses by Bush Fires, Lightning,
and Gas Explosion, in addition to the ordinary risk
by Fire.
Accident Insurance transacted in any of the following
Branches:—
Personal Accident and Sickness.
Employers’ Liability and Workmen’s Compensation.
Plate Glass Insured.
Live Stock Insurance and Burglary Insurance.
Motor Car Insurance. Boiler Explosion Insurance
Agricultural Insurance and damage to Crops by
Hailstone.
The Mercantile Mutual has divided with Policyholders in
Thirty-four Years £460,913 and increases each year.
The Capital is £250,000 fully subscribed ; the Funds
exceed £246,000 ; and the Shareholders Reserved
Liability, £125,000.
Head Office: MERCANTILE MUTUAL CHAMBERS,
120 PITT STREET, SYDNEY. Opposite General Post Off
Opposite General Post Office.
