

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Australian Proposals for
Legislation lor the Control of
Restrictive Trade Practices
and Monopolies
1. A table of the basic forms of practices which have
come directly under the notice of the Common-
wealth Government.
2. A table of practices which have been reported by the
Tariff Board and by other official bodies of inquiry.
3. A bibliography.


TABLES OF TRADE PRACTICES.
INTRODUCTION.
Some question has been raised as to the need for any legislation
of any kind dealing with restrictive trade practices. Broadly
speaking, restrictive trade practices are practices which destroy
or reduce freedom of action and distort the competitive pattern
of our system of free enterprise.
There are some who assert that there are no such practices—
certainly none which are harmful to the public. Others admit
that there are such practices and that at least some of them are
harmful and undesirable, but say that these are so few that they
need no curbing at all, or at any rate not by a law directed gener-
ally against harmful restrictive practices.
There are yet others who say that there are so many of these
practices, and that they have become so basic to the continued
growth and stability of business, that it is dangerous to attempt
to regulate them at all.
I have, therefore, had compiled a table of practices (Table I.)
which have come directly under my notice and a table of practices
(Table II.) which have been reported by the Tariff Board and by
other official bodies of inquiry. I have stated the basic form of
the practices in Table 1., though variants and combinations of them
are to be found and have come under notice. Table I. is not a table
of all the examples of these practices which have been brought to
my attention, but merely a statement of their elemental forms.
Thus a single item in the table may, and many do, cover many
instances in a widespread number of industries.
The tables indicate some, but not all, of the possible harmful
consequences of these practices. For the sake of convenience,
I have included a short bibliography. This includes reports of
the investigation of others into the extent of restrictive practices
in Australia.
I have not attempted to assign the practices to any particular
one or more of the categories set out in Mr. Freeth’s speech in
the House. The categories are there expressed in very general
terms, and have yet to be refined in precise definition for the
purpose of legislation. A consequence of not assigning the
practices to particular categories is, of course, that no indication
is given as to which of the practices will be registrable and liable
to examination to determine whether they are contrary to the
public interest, and which, without any such inquiry, will be
prohibited in all circumstances.


I want to make it perfectly clear that the inclusion of a practice
in the tables is not to be taken as necessarily indicating any view
or opinion on my part that such a practice is inevitably harmful
to the public. It is included because its nature is
restrictive of free enterprise and such that it may
be detrimental to the working of our free enterprise economy. A
few of the practices may, because of special elements included in
them, have to be prohibited in all circumstances. But in the case
of most practices, the question whether or not they are detrimental
must depend on the particular circumstances in which they
operate. It is for that reason that the Government’s proposals do
not, with relatively few exceptions, condemn these practices out-
right, but provide an investigatory system of control by which the
particular circumstances of a practice will be examined to ensure
that only those restrictive practices which are harmful to the
public are prohibited. Nothing short of such an examination
can identify the unnecessary and harmful practices and prevent
their proliferation. I have not attempted to list the possible
benefits which may flow from the practices in particular circum-
stances. Therefore, my indication of possible detrimental effects
of the practices must not be taken to deny that in some circum-
stances the practices may be beneficial to the public.
Finally, I want to make clear that the table is, in no sense,
an exhaustive one. It merely endeavours to bring under notice
some practices which are typical of those being engaged in in
Australia.
GARFIELD BARWICK
A tt ornery-General.


TABLE I: PRACTICES WHICH HAVE COME DIRECTLY UNDER THE NOTICE OF THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL.
Practice
Possible detriment to the public interest
1. The carrying out of agreements between the principal manu-
facturers of a product that —
(a) they will supply only those resellers whose stocks of
that product are manufactured exclusively or pre-
dominantly by parties to the agreement,
(b) they will fix an agreed price for their product, and will
fix different discounts for different classes of resellers
and users of the product (“ ‘ A ’ class resellers ”,
“ ‘ B ’ class resellers ”, “ retailers ”, “ Government
Departments ”, “ builders ”, &c.),
(c) the class to which a particular reseller should be allocated,
and the discount he should be allowed, will be related
to his turnover —but final decision as to the class to
which he is to be allocated will remain in the discre-
tion of the manufacturers, or in the discretion of a
trade association of the favoured resellers, and
{d) they will refuse to supply, or will supply only at reduced
discount, any reseller who cuts the manufacturers’
fixed retail price in an effort to improve turnover.
Competition from manufacturers outside the agreement, and the
opportunity for new manufacturers to commence or to build up
businesses, is reduced by the tying up of the normal reseller
outlets.
In tying up the normal reseller outlets so that those outlets cannot
buy from overseas manufacturers, the manufacturers within the
agreement are giving themselves the benefit, in effect, of a self-
assessed customs duty.
The possibility of price competition is excluded —both as between
the manufacturers and as between the resellers of their product.
The agreed price may be fixed by reference to the costs of the least
efficient manufacturer.
The exclusion of the possibility of price competition removes the
incentive for the manufacturer or reseller to pass on to the con-
sumer the benefit of economies achieved in the manufacturing or
reselling process. Where the consumer, himself, is a manufac-
turer who requires the product for the manufacture of another
product, the costs of production are increased.
The operation of the system of graduated discounts, being in the
uncontrolled discretion of the manufacturers or of the favoured
resellers, may be used to protect the resellers who receive the
more favourable discounts from competition from resellers in the
lower discount categories, and to prevent the latter from building
up their businesses. Some would-be resellers may even be
prevented from starting in business.
6768/62.-2


Practice.
Possible detriment to tbe public interest.
2. The carrying out of agreements between a trade association
Competition from manufacturers outside the agreement, and the
of the principal manufacturers of a product and a trade association
opportunity for new manufacturers to commence or to build up
of the principal resellers or users of that product (each of the trade
businesses, is reduced by the tying up of the principal reseller
associations having restrictions on admission to membership)
and user outlets.
that —
In tying up the principal reseller and user outlets so that those
outlets cannot buy from overseas manufacturers, the manufac-
(a) members of the manufacturers’ trade association will
turers within the agreement are giving themselves the benefit,
supply, or will grant preferential discount, only to
in effect, of a self-assessed customs duty.
members of the trade association of resellers or users,
Competition from resellers and users outside the agreement, and
(, b ) members of the trade association of resellers or users
the opportunity for new resellers and users to commence or to
will buy only from members of the manufacturers’
build up businesses, is reduced by the tying up of the principal
trade association, and
sources of supply.
(c) members of the manufacturers’ trade association will not
The possibility of price competition between resellers of a manu-
sell, or will sell only at reduced discount, to members
facturer’s product is excluded.
of the trade association of resellers who cut the
The manufacturer’s fixed retail price may be fixed by reference to
manufacturers’ fixed retail price in an effort to
the costs of the least efficient reseller.
improve turnover.
The exclusion of the possibility of price competition between
resellers removes the incentive for a reseller to pass on to the
consumer the benefit of economies achieved in the reselling
process. Where the consumer, himself, is a manufacturer who
requires the product for the manufacture of another product,
the costs of production are increased.
3. The carrying out of agreements between the principal
Competition from suppliers outside the agreement, and the oppdr-
suppliers of a particular service that they will supply only persons
tunity for new suppliers to commence or to build up businesses,
who observe a policy of dealing exclusively with those suppliers.
is reduced by the tying up of the majority of users, who feel that
they cannot afford to put themselves in a position of not being
1 able to deal with the principal suppliers.


Practice.
Possible detriment to the public interest.
4. The carrying out of agreements between manufacturers of
a product to limit the life, or the quality, of their product.
The incentive to improve the quality of the product is destroyed.
An agreement of this kind, like any other agreement to eliminate
competition between the parties, enables the parties to reap
higher financial returns, over a period, than they would have
reaped in the absence of the restrictive agreement. These higher
financial returns, however, would be at the expense of the con-
suming public.
5. The carrying out of agreements between manufacturers to
refrain from supplying the customers of each other (i.e. to divide
the market).
The incentive to improve the quality of the product is reduced.
Competition in any form between the parties to the agreement is
excluded.
Customers are denied the benefit of choice of brands, and the
benefit of price competition.
6. The supplying of a product by a price fixed
by agreement between the manufacturers.
The possibility of price competition between the manufacturers is
excluded.
The agreed price may be fixed by reference to the costs of the
least efficient manufacturer.
The exclusion of the possibility of price competition removes the
incentive for the manufacturer to pass on to the consumer the
benefit of economies achieved in the manufacturing process.
Where the consumer, himself, is a manufacturer who requires
the product for the manufacture of another product, the costs
of production are increased.


Practice.
Passible detriment te the public interest.
7. The reselling of a product at a price fixed by agreement
between the resellers.
The possibility of price competition between the resellers is excluded.
The agreed price may be fixed by reference to the costs of the least
efficient reseller.
The exclusion of the possibility of price competition between
resellers removes the incentive for a reseller to pass on to the
consumer the benefit of economies achieved in the reselling
process. Where the consumer, himself, is a manufacturer who
requires the product for the manufacture of another product,
the costs of production are increased.
8. The reselling of a product at a price fixed by agreement
between the resellers and the manufacturer of the product.
As for 7, above.
9. A concerted refusal by resellers of a product to buy from a
manufacturer unless he withholds supplies from a reseller who is
offering competitive prices or terms to the consumer.
As for 7, above.
10. Tenders submitted to public authorities and showing
evidence either of price agreement between the tenderers or of
agreement to divide up between the tenderers the successive
contracts in respect of which tenders have been invited. Tenders
of this kind have been consistently submitted to public authorities,
both Commonwealth and State, in respect of a very wide range of
commodities.
Where tenders are based on an agreement as to price, there is no
competition in that respect. If an agreement is more than a
mere standing agreement as to price, and goes so far as to involve
collusion, then there is, in effect, a fraud committed on the
person to whom the tender is submitted.


Practice.
Possible detriment to the public interest.
H. The carrying out of agreements between resellers of a
product (usually the members of a resellers’ trade associa ion
having restrictions on admission to membership) to require the
manufacturer (or manufacturers) from whom they buy that product
to observe a policy of selling only to them, or of giving preferential
discounts only to them. Restrictions on admission to membership
of the association often take the form of requiring the reseller
seeking admission to the association to have a certain minimum
(but substantial) turnover.
By tying up the only source, or the major sources, of supply of
the product, the resellers in the trade association suppress com-
petition from resellers outside the agreement, limit the oppor-
tunity for new resellers to commence or to build up businesses
and reduce the freedom of choice of the consumer.
A reseller outside the trade association may be forced either to
go out of the business of reselling that product (or be prevented
from entering the business) or may seek to import from outside
Australia supplies which could have been manufactured in
Australia.
Where membership of a reseller’s trade association depends on
having a certain minimum turnover, and supplies are available
only to members of the association, a non-member of the
association is prevented from getting any turnover, and thus
from qualifying for membership. In these circumstances the
restrictive practice may be self-perpetuating.
12. The observance by all resellers of a product throughout
Australia of the resale price fixed by the manufacturer of the
product.
Where there are only a few manufacturers of the product, and each,
in fixing his resale prices, follows the prices of the other, there is
a likelihood of price uniformity for all brands of that product,
at all levels of distribution throughout Australia.
The possibility of price competition between resellers of a
manufacturer’s product is excluded.


Practice.
iltMrinient in the public interest.
The manufacturer’s fixed resale price may be fixed by reference to
the costs of the least efficient reseller.
The exclusion of the possibility of price competition between
resellers removes the incentive for a reseller to pass on to the
consumer the benefit of economies achieved in the reselling
process. Where the consumer, himself, is a manufacturer who
requires the product for the manufacture of another product,
the costs of production are increased.
13. The supply by the manufacturer of a product on the
condition that the reseller handles no one else’s brand of that
product, or that the reseller handles no other Australian brand
of that product.
A powerful manufacturer can suppress competition from less
powerful manufacturers, and reduce the opportunity for new
manufacturers to commence or to build up businesses, by tying
up the principal reseller outlets.
Competing manufacturers, if able to set up their own distribution
outlets, may be involved in expenditure representing a wastage
of national assets.
Resellers are forced to carry only the one brand, and thus limit
the selection they can offer their customers.
Resellers who are afraid' of putting themselves in a position of not
being able to deal with the large manufacturer may be prevented
from buying from the cheapest supplier, or may be prevented,
in times when the large manufacturer is unable to meet the
demand for the product, from buying supplies in Australia,
even though other Australian manufacturers may be ready,
willing and able to supply.


Practice.
Possible detriment to the public interest.
Where the exclusive dealing requirement excludes overseas, as well
as Australian manufacturers, the powerful manufacturer, in
tying up the principal reseller outlets so that those outlets cannot
buy from overseas manufacturers, is giving himself the benefit,
in effect, of a self-assessed customs duty.
14. The supply by the manufacturer of a product on the
condition that the reseller takes all his requirements of that product
from that manufacturer, or on the condition that the reseller
purchases a minimum quantity of that product from that
manufacturer.
In so far as resellers are inhibited from getting their supplies from
other manufacturers— As in 13, above.
15. The supply by tire manufacturer of a product on the
condition that the reseller takes other products of that manu-
facturer —sometimes the manufacturer’s “ full line ” of products —
whether the reseller wants the other products or not; or the supply
by the manufacturer on the condition that the reseller buys other
products from other designated manufacturers.
In so far as resellers are inhibited from getting their supplies from
other manufacturers —As in 13, above.
Agreements under which a reseller is required to buy supplies he
does not want in order to get supplies he does want tend to distort
the market by creating an artificial demand.
16. The exacting of disproportionate discounts from manufac-
turers by a powerful reseller.
Weaker resellers are forced out of business by the unfair use of the
buying power of the powerful reseller.
17. The combining of powerful sellers to undercut a competing
seller in the locality where the 'competing seller operates, or in
the line of business upon which]the competing- seller depends.
This practice, if carried on for a sufficient time, could drive the
competing seller out of business.


Practice.
Possible detriment 10 the public interest.
18. The taking over or the buying out of all the existing
businesses in an industry, sometimes after the adoption of
exclusionary tactics, e.g., the tying up of the available reseller
outlets for the product concerned.
All domestic competition is excluded, and the incentive to develop
new methods and resources, and to pass on to the consumer
the benefit of economies achieved in production, is weakened.
Where the consumer, himself, is a manufacturer who requires
the product for the manufacture of another product, the costs
of production are increased.
TABLE II; PRACTICES REPORTED BY THE TARIFF BOARD AND OTHER OFFICIAL BODIES OF INQUIRY.
Practice.
Possible detriment to the public interest.
19. A Report on certain aspects of the Timber Industry by
Mr. Justice Richards, of the Industrial Commission of New South
Wales (1st July, 1955) indicated that a number of trade associations
had been formed or reorganized with a view to dividing the timber
industry into three main types of operator-
fa) the timber importer,
{b) the timber merchant, and
(c) the box and case manufacturer.
See 1 and 2 above.


Practice.
Possible Jeinmern to the public interest.
Trade associations, representing each type of operator, by
agreements that the members of one association would deal only
with members of the other association, and by price fixing agree-
ments, secured control over the supply and price of all imported
timber.
In the case of some associations, quotas were fixed of timber
products to be sold or manufactured by members, thus eliminating
competition as to market shares as well as price. Strict compliance
with the rules or internal agreements and decisions of the respective
associations was enforced by stringent penal provisions. Members
of associations sold at a higher price to non-members than to
members.
The Report states that the four principal associations were
welded by a joint agreement into one huge combination under the
direction of a joint committee.
20. An Honorary Royal Commission on Restrictive Trade
Practices and Legislation reported to the Parliament of Western
Australia, in 1958, that there were 111 known trade associations


Practice.
PllhhllllC Ucu iiin:
il U; Uk: public miorchi,
in Western Australia, the majority of which carried on restrictive
practices of one kind or another. The Commission’s Report
states (at page 13) —
“ Evidence clearly showed that there exists, in Western
Australia, an increasing tendency to form trade asso-
ciations for the purpose of—
(a) Mutual self help to members.
(b) Channelling of distribution through its members.
(c) Collective agreement as to price fixation and the
enforcement thereof.
{d) Level or collusive tendering ”,
As to {b), the Report states —
“ Channelling of distribution as undertaken through trade
associations could, perhaps, come under two headings —
(i) ensuring or endeavouring to ensure that only
those persons within the association are eligible
to distribute certain commodities combined
with severe restrictions of membership of the
association, and
(ii) refusal to supply unless there is a certainty of
price maintenance which is enforced by ‘ stop
orders penalties or investigations
See 2 and 1 1 above.


Practice.
Possible detriment to the public interest.
“ Evidence also disclosed where manufacturers had supplied
See 9, above.
non-association members but when representations
were made to them by the association concerned, the
manufacturer then ceased to supply the non-association
members. This is borne out by reference to minute
books ”
As to (c), the Report states (at page 14) —
“ Evidence tendered and extracts from minute books show
See 6 and 7, above.
clearly that many associations have made strenuous
efforts to enforce prices agreed upon by members.
It was revealed that in some trades suspected offending
members were subject to examination of their books
by tribunals and in quite a number of instances the
offender had to either submit to a fine or make a dona-
tion to the association funds ranging from £25 to £100
or pay into the association funds the profits of the
transaction
And at page 13—
“ Evidence disclosed that members of an association agreed
See 9. above.
to impose economic sanctions against one firm in an
endeavour to force that firm to become a member of
an association, because its prices were far below those
of its competitors. The association’s members further
agreed: ‘ That should the firm join the association, the
first action necessary would be to achieve uniformity in
prices ’


. .
- • — ■ L-J—---
Possible Uerriment 10 Hie public imerexf.
As to ( d ) the Report states (at page 15} —
“ We came across several instances of what is usually
known, we understand, as level or collusive tendering
See 10, above
“ The following list provided by Mr, G. W. Fruin, Comp-
troller of Stores, Western Australian Government
Railways, indicates a number of articles which are non-
competitive as to price whenever tenders are called: —
(Forty-six separate items are listed)-
" Whenever it was possible to do so, disciplinary action
was taken by some associations against any member
who committed a breach of prices in respect of
tendering. The Commission became aware of a
number of instances where a member who tendered a
price below that agreed to by the association was
required to pay the profit of the transaction into the
association's funds ”,
21. The Tariff Board Report on Electrical Filament Lamps
(10th September, 1958) indicated that manufacturers of filament
lamps agreed on prices for their lamps.
See 6, above


Practice.
Possible detriment to the public interest.
22. The Tariff Board Report on Products of Copper and Other
Products (20th November, 1959) indicated that very little price
competition existed between local manufacturers of semi-finished
copper and copper alloy products and cables and wires.
See 6. above.
23. Collusive bidding at Australian wool auctions (“ wool pies”)
was found to exist by Mr. Justice Cook, of the Industrial
Commission of New South Wales, in his Report concerning the
Trade in Wool (18th November, 1959),
Mr. Justice Cook concluded that “ wool pies ” were a negation of
the basic principles of a free auction system, that their inherent
purpose was to enable wool to be bought somewhat more cheaply
than otherwise, that they resulted in some portion of the wool
clip being sold for less than would otherwise be paid for it, and
that, overall, the disadvantages of the pie system were not offset
by the advantages. It follows from these conclusions that out
overseas balances with the countries to which our wool is exported
could be adversely affected.
24. The Tariff Board, in its Report on Timber (20th December,
1960) stated that price stabilization schemes existed in the Australian
timber industry, under which, amongst other things —
(a) wholesale prices were fixed by a timbermillers’ association,
(b) retail prices were fixed by a timber merchants’ association,
and
(c) members of the millers’ association dealt only with
members .of the merchants’ association.
See 2, 6, 7 and 15, above.
The Tariff Board suggested, in its Timber Report, that the price
fixing operated by the plywood manufacturers imposed unneces-
sary costs on large users by preventing them from negotiating
more favourable prices.


Practice.
Possible detriment to tlte public interest.
The Board also reported that a body consisting of manufacturers
of plywood employed recognized distribution outlets, restricting
the right of these distributors to handle imported products, and
forcing them to take a certain percentage of second grade qualities
when first grade quality was required and vice versa, and fixed
prices, discounts and conditions of sale for the members’ product.
The Board considered that the plywood industry had attempted
to solve its problems by restrictive trading practices.
References to practices in this industry were also made by the
Tariff Board in its annual Report for 1960-61.
25. The Tariff Board Report on Refined Petroleum Products
(23rd June, 1961) indicated that the oil companies maintain a
common pricing policy.
See 6, above.
26. The Tariff Board, in its Report on Ceramic Tiles and Tile
Blanks (27th October, 1961) criticized arrangements in the Australian
tile industry whereby practically all tiles, both local and imported,
were distributed through State tile merchants’ associations. Prices
for tiles were fixed by agreement between the merchants and the
manufacturers. For a certain kind of imported tiles, these prices
represented a profit margin of 122 per cent, on landed cost.
See 2 and 8, above.


Practice.
Possible detriment to the public interest.
27. The Tariff Board, in its Report on Vacuum Cleaners and
Floor Polishers (27th October, 1961) pointed out that the retail
price of some Australian vacuum cleaners represented a profit
of 113 per cent, on the cost of manufacture.
The Board said there was a tendency for competition in the
industry to be limited to high “ trade-in ” allowances and
distribution margins.
See 8, above.
The Tariff Board considered that the high retail prices of vacuum
cleaners were harmful not only to consumers but also to
manufacturers, in that they had the effect of restricting sales
volume.
28. The Tariff Board, in its Annual Report for 1961-62, referred
to claims that manufacturers were requiring merchants to discontinue
the handling of imported goods. The Report also referred to
evidence of the existence of uniform price lists under which
Australian and imported goods were retailed at the same price,
irrespective of into-store cost. The Board said that under some
of these arrangements, distributors, wholesalers and retailers
operated fixed discount margins bearing little relationship to the
cost of distribution and selling.
See 1 and 8, above.
Manufacturers, by requiring merchants to deal exclusively with
them, at the expense of the imported article, were, in effect,
giving themselves the benefit of a customs duty. The Tariff
Board considered that the practices referred to in its Report
tended to inflate retail prices, reduce incentive for efficiency and
deny consumers the opportunity of purchasing goods at
competitive prices.
29. The Tariff Board Report on Nitrogenous Fertilizers (6th
March, 1962) indicated that a company called Nitrogen Fertilizers
Pty. Ltd. acted as sole distributor for the three manufacturers of
sulphate of ammonia.
See 1 and 2, above.
The company fixed the price at which the product was to be sold
by wholesalers, and refused to supply other than “ established
distributors ”.


Frawiics.
Possible detriment to tbe publie interest
30. The Tariff Board Report on Pneumatic Rubber Tyres and
Tubes (30th March, 1962) stated that Australian industry
representatives gave evidence of a common pricing policy established
by the manufacturers. References to practices in this industry
had been made by the Tariff Board in a previous Report dated
7th December, 1955.
See 6. above.
the Tariff' Board found that some of the increased imports in
recent yea is have been partly a result of Australian distributors
adhering to price policies which encoutaged the purchase of
imported tyres and tubes by organizations using fleets of motor
vehicles.
31. The Tariff Board Report on Conveyor and Transmission
Belts and Belting (28th June, 1962) stated that Australian belting
manufacturers acknowledged that local prices of these goods were
based on a common list with discounts to distributors and users
according to an agreed schedule.
Sec 1, above.
Electricity authorities told the Board that, as a result of level
tendering by belting manufacturers, under which they were being
asked a price which would be profitable to the least efficient
producer, they had directed more of their purchasing abroad
than would otherwise have been the case.
32. The precise number of trade associations existing in Australia
would be difficult to ascertain, but investigations such as those
conducted by the Western Australian Royal Commission whose
report is referred to above, and by some of the writers whose
publications are listed in the bibliography hereunder, indicate that
there are between 500 and 600. The indications are that, of these,
the members of a majority have agreements to eliminate or reduce
competition in some form —usually competition between the parties
as to price or as to markets —or agreements whereby the distribution
of a product is confined to association members.
The possible detriment of particular practices engaged in by trade
associations has been mentioned above. The increasing number
of these associations is a pointer to the increasing tendency for
these practices to be engaged in in Australia.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.
For the sake of convenience, and without endorsing everything that is said
in the publications listed, I refer the reader interested in what economists and
lawyers have said about restrictive practices in Australia, to the following
publications. The list is not, of course, intended to be in any way exhaustive.
“ Restrictive Practices and Monopolies in Australia ” by Professor
A. Hunter {“ Economic Record ”, March, 1961).
“ The Structure of the Australian Economy ” by Professor P. H. Karmel
and M. Brunt (Cheshire, 1962).
“ Collusive Tendering and Public Authorities ” by Professor A. Hunter
and D. Simons (“Australian Quarterly”, March, 1963).
“ Legal Aspects of the Control of Monopolies, Mergers and Restrictive
Trade Practices in Australia” by Professor J. E. Richardson ((1962)
35 Australian Law Journal, p. 423).
“ The Control of Monopolies and Restrictive Business Practices in
Australia ” by Professor J. E. Richardson (Adelaide Law Review,
June, 1962).
“ The Control of Monopoly—New South Wales ” by D. J. Stalley
(University of Queensland Law Journal, December, 1959).
“Australian Company Mergers 1946-1959” by J. A. Bushnell
(Melbourne University Press, 1961).
“ Company Takeovers ” (Current Affairs Bulletin, Vol. 25, No. 12,
April, 1960).
“ The Case for Restrictive Practices and Monopoly Legislation ” by
Professor H. R. Edwards (“ Australian Quarterly ”, June, 1963).
“ The Economics of Australian Industry ” edited by Professor A. Hunter
(Melbourne University Press, 1963).
“ Competition and Anti-Monopolies Legislation ” by C. P. Harris and
A. L. Lougheed (“Australian Accountant”, June, 1963).
“ Monopoly Control and the Public Interest —A Survey of the Proposed
Legislation on Restrictive Trade Practices ” by C. P. Harris and
A. L. Lougheed (“ Australian Accountant ”, July, 1963).
“ Australia: An Anti-trust law or a Monopolies and Restrictive Practices
Act?” by R. B. Stevens (3 Melbourne University Law Review,
May, 1961).
“ Legislating for Restrictive Trade Practices ” (Current Affairs Bulletin
Vol. 32, No. 2. June, 1963).
By Authority: A, J. A rthur, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
