



- - Of/
A PLEA FOR //
A Return to, Study of, and Fresh and Insistent
Emphasis on the Unmutllated Word of God
as the only Absolute Authority for the
Churches of our Land, and for all Men.
In a moment of disappointment, when I
had gone to the public sanctuary seeking
food and spiritual refreshment, and had in-
stead been compelled to listen to what, to
my mind, was a belittling of the Word of
God, and of that revelation which He had
made to men, I, with chafed and grieved
spirit, took upon me to write a letter to the
Editor of one of our Christian papers, hoping
to reach the Christian community, and de-
siring thus to stir some up to a search into
the fundamentals of our revealed and his-
toric faith. “My letter was refused publica-
tion, and instead I was asked to meet a
number of Christian friends and bring be-
fore them some of the thoughts which were
in iny mind at that time. It was but a
substitute for what I proposed, but since
it was laid upon me by others, I acquiesced.
Since the paper was read I have been re-
quested to print it, and that is my only ex-
cuse for thus bringing it before the public.
By way of introduction, therefore, may I
say how very distasteful controversy is to
my spirit; and if it he thought that 1 am
simply desirous of finding fault and enter-
ing the. lists against those who differ from
me, I firmly, but sincerely, deny that such
is my purpose. I simply thought that if
we as Christians could give time to examin-
ing our foundations and looking ilito our
history perhaps good might come to
Jill. Assuring my readers of my sincere
appreciation, and 4 love for every true be-


liever in the Lord Jesus Christ, even when
that believer may differ very fundamentally
from me in his view of Christian doctrine,
I ask your kind charity while I try to bring
before you some things which to me are the
marrow of my Christian Faith.
To-day, it is only the foolish who say in
their heart that there is no God. It always
has been the fool who has said it. The
spiritual origin of the Universe is, to my
mind, one of those matters which is fixed
beyond all cavil. Let others dispute it if
they will, for me, it is as fixed as my own
being, and as far as I am concerned, men
are as much at liberty to question the one
as the other.
The Universe is the product of the Eter-
nal Spirit, Who has shaped it after His
own mind and plan. In that plan we find
ourselves, belonging to one great family,
the human race. We ask ourselves whence
came we, and blindly grope after Him Who
made us, and cry, Where art Thou? But
never in the whole history of our race have
we found any who have testified with a
testimony that , would bear examination,
“Here He is, we by searching have found
Him out.” But on the contrary, when such
cries have been heeded, we have found
the cruelest monsters that the world knows,
or imagination conceives, put forward as
counterfeits for the One Whom we know,
not by our own finding, but in an altogether
different way, to be transcendent Holy
Love. This point for those who have read
anything of the gods of Egypt, of India, or
of Aztec civilisation, needs no elaboration
on my part. Man by searching, notwith-
standing the many and marvellous things
which he has discovered, never of himself
found out God. God the Ineffable Love,
Who in love, formed man for Himself, that


He might in return be loved back again by
the creature whom He had formed in love,
made him after His own likeness and image,
and how far above every other product of
His wisdom and power man is, few of us
have truly realised. What the unspanned
chasm between the intelligent, thinking,
talking, reasoning, worshipping being man
is, and the next below him, is immeasurable.
To this being, made after His own likeness,
God revealed Himself, and when he forgot
the revelation, He came again and again and
revealed Himself more and more fully. And
when man could not find Him, He came
near and made Himself known. Ever since
man tried to hide from God, so long has
God been following him, and crying “Where
art thou?” all with the one intent, even
as then, that He might communicate Him-
self to man, as He promised to do through
the seed of the woman, at that time.
Thus it comes about, that man, who is a
religious animal, has an external revelation
from the Author of his being, and according
to that, he knows with unmistakable surety,
that if he is to be in harmony with that
Author, then he must conform his ways and
life thereto. This is still further borne out
by the fact that conscience is not alone an
infallible guide for men. Conscience, like
the Sun for the mariner, needs to he cor-
rected. It can only be corrected by the
revelation of God.
Without that revelation there is no “moral
standard.’’ And men. who would belittle the
authority of the Word of God, little realise
that they are destroying the very founda-
tions of morality on which the fabric of our
Christian Civilisation rests. To realise this
one only heeds to live for a while, in a
heathen land, where there is no standard
but the low ethics of the general mind of


the people, or that derived from some human
rushlight, which God in His mercy has
caused to flourish, and which from utilitarian
reasons has been accepted as a standard —
Whence comes the sanctity of marriage, if
not from revelation? Whence the sanctity
of human life, if not from the same source,
or the inviolability of virtue, or the worthi-
ness of honesty, and the rightness of truth?
The utilitarian may raise some standard for
a time, but such standards are not lasting,
and have for some, authority, only so long
as they can be enforced. It is revelation in-
structing the conscience, and re-enforcing
the will, that alone makes any sure founda-
tion for the moral virtues, and if there be
any who would lower the authority of the
Scriptures, I beg of you before you say one
word or do one thing in that direction, think
what the condition of the world would be to-
day, if there were no external revelation
from God, and if there had never been one.
Sodom itself would be out-Sodomed a thou-
sand times, and we and our families would
be the actors in the terrible drama. We
owe all we have and are to-day to revelation.
Those of you who have made a study of
“natural” as opposed to “revealed” religion,
cannot but be struck by the powerlessness
of the former to meet the needs of the race,
and your hearts must have been stirred, as
you have considered the benign mercy and
leve of the Eternal, Who out of His own
heart, knowing all that was in man and his
limitations, making it impossible for him
otherwise to know Him, yet out of the
shadows and infinitudes in which He dwelt,
nevertheless drew near, and made Himself
known. Natural Religion is one phenome-
non, but Revealed Religion is quite another.
With the former, men could grope along and
fall, and try and endeavour to find out the


right way, and seek to settle the three great
mysteries of existence, Where do I come
from? Why am I here? Whither am I going?
But neither an Aristotle, a Plato, nor a
Socrates, could give the answer. And these
gi'eat mysteries are still troubling the human
mind to-day, and in every clime, and under
every condition, these problems still cause
distracting thought, and without revelation
never could be answered. But it is just here
that God reveals what the human spirit most
longs to know, and “Whence we come,” and
“Why we are here,” and “Whither we are
going” is made plain and clear, and when
the revelation is accepted, men’s minds are
set at rest, but only then.
The record of that revelation is contained
in the Word of God, the Holy Scriptures of
our Faith. By the “Word of God” as used
here, is understood, that means by which
God, conceived of, as external to man, com-
municates to man, man being such as he is,
with all his instincts and intuitions, His own
thought, in such a form, that such com-
munication is available, not only to the in-
dividual, but also to the race, so that no
scripture is of private interpretation. It
is not claimed, that apart from the written
word, there is not, nor ever has been, any
other communication ever made. But it is
claimed that, outside of this written word,
there is no communication from God to man
which is authoritative for all. This com-
munication was made, through holy men of
old, who spoke as they were moved by the
Spirit of God, so that they were able to say
“we spoke unto you the Word of God” and
“ye received it not as the word of man,
but as it is in truth, the Word of God” and
in writing at another time is able to write
about “all scripture given by inspiration of
God and profitable, etc.” The Authorised,


the Marginal reading of the Revised, Moffat,
Weymouth, etc., being the correct transla-
tions. Moreover, the “record” of that revela-
tion was also made by holy men of old,
who also wrote as they were moved by the
Spirit of God, so that all scripture is thus
given by inspiration of God, and the record
of the past revelation, made under the guid-
ance of The Spirit of God, The Third Person
in the Godhead, becomes the present and
continuous authoritative revelation of to-
day; and since it is the communication of
the Mind of God to humanity, for it originat-
ed with The Spirit of God, it is right to
speak of it as The Word of God . It is not
an audible word that we speak of, but that
means, by which God communicates His
thoughts and mind to men; Sometimes it
may be by the history, or by the fact re-
corded; by parable or by poetry; by picture
or by portrait; it may be by definitely utter-
ed word of command, exhortation, rebuke or
promise; by song or exposure of sin; but
whatever be the method used, it is always
the communication of the mind of God to
humanity, and as such it is rightly termed,
even as it was by Christ Himself and con-
sistently throughout the Book itself “The
Word of God” and so it is, that it is written,
that “God having of old time SPOKEN unto
the fathers in the prophets by divers por-
tions and in divers manners, hath at the
end of these days SPOKEN unto us in
a Son, through Whom also He made the
worlds.”
If then the Bible admittedly contains the
authoritative record from The Spirit Him-
self, of the revelations which God made to
men, at divers times and in sundry ways in
days gone by, inbreathed by Himself, it
is evident, that it thus becomes, what it
now is. the present authoritative revelation


for this age. The God-breathed record of
past progressive revelations, all culminating
in Jesus Christ Himself the Incarnate Word,
makes the fullest, revelation which God
would make to men to-day, and it and it
alone, is thus the only authoritative revela-
tion, to which it is possible for men in their
dealings one with another to appeal, and
from being the “only” authoritative revela-
tion,” it thus becomes the only “absolute
authority” for all men, in their relation with
one another, and with God; for if need be
from God Himself, we are able to appeal,
to what He says, and to that, and it is
written reverently, even He will bow, for He
cannot deny Himself. “Hath He said and
shall He not do it, or hath He spoken and
shall He not make it good.” This does not
mean that rvhen we have the Bible in our
hands, we have all that God wants us to
have in our lives, but it does mean that
when men accept the revelation there made,
and let it into their lives, making it thus
their very own by appropriation, then they
have the full revelation which God wants
them to have, as far as He has revealed Him-
self, for they then have the Christ, Who
being in them as “Life,” lives His life, re-
veals His thoughts and acts through them,
so that they can say with the Apostle, “It
is no longer I, but Christ Who liveth in
me,” and when that is done in its fullest
way, then God is satisfied and man ennobled
to the highest possible.
By “unmutilated” we mean that revela-
tion as it came, God-breathed, from the
Spirit through the holy men, who spake
and wrote as they were moved by Him.
If then it be granted, as it must be, that
man is a religious animal, and that as has
been said above, there are two kinds of re-
ligion, one “Natural,” the other “Revealed,”


and that the latter comes to us only through
the Bible, for it is only through the Bible
that Christ is mediated, and that whilst
the former is altogether useless for us of the
Christian Faith, yet the latter meets every
need that we have; surely it would be worse
than folly for us to try to pull down the
archives, in which the revelation is housed.
But this is the tendency of the day, and
men are too prone, either from a false sense
of what scholarship demands, or because
they must like the Athenians of old, have
some new thing, being inexperienced in the
Word of Truth, and not knowing that hav-
ing tasted old wine no man straightway de-
sireth new, for he saith “the old is better,”
or as is too often the case, from sheer
unbelief, not only to pull down the archives,
but to seek to scatter the parchments to
the four winds of heaven.
This brings me to another important mat-
ter. The Faith which we profess is an his-
toric faith. And this, I assert, with all my
might. But when we have said that, we
have only said half the truth, and some-
times a half-truth is a full lie. Our Faith
is. not “only” an historic faith. It is a fact of
experience as well. And here is where the
churches of to-day are to my mind and ac-
cording to my experience of them, weak in-
deed. Rest assured I speak of “experience"
in its fullest and freest flights. I have no
shibboleth here. But if there be no experi-
ence of Christ, there is no church. There
may be a social club. But if there has
been no enlightenment, and no experience
of the incomparable majesty and grace of
the Living Christ, if there has been no
sight of Him by once blind eyes, there is
no Christian Communion in its deepest and
truest sense. Was it not this very fact of
which we read at the first mention of the


Christian Church? Was not this experience
the rock on which Christ said He would build
His Church and the gates of Hell should not
prevail against it? Christ was there, Peter
was there; There was faith in Peter’s heart,
and flesh and blood did not reveal Christ
but God, at first external to Peter altogether,
did, and He made the apocalypse which re-
moved the veil which was before Peter’s
eyes, and then and then only, when Peter
received the revelation, and knew the ex-
perience, so that he w-as able to confess it,
could Christ build His Church; and wher-
ever there is a man or woman with this
experience, even though that one as far as
having the revelation is concerned be alone
in the heart of Africa if you will, there
Christ can build His Church; but nowhere
else, for whatever else there be, be it
scholarship, knowledge of the historic faith
or even of the historic Christ, without the
apocalypse which comes not from flesh and
blood, there can be no church. Accept it,
brethren in the Lord, no amount of pro-
fession, no amount of morality, no amount
of culture, no heavenly nor beatific vision,
can make up for or take the place of, that
revelation which the Father by The Spirit
makes to the heart of any and of all who
are to be in that immortal company which
elsewhere is spoken of as the bride of Christ,
the Church of the Firstborn for which He
gave Himself.
This is hut another way of saying what
scripture in reference to this revealed re-
ligion says so plainly elsewhere, “The na-
tural man receiveth not the things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them for they are
spiritually discerned.” And “the preaching
of the cross is to them that perish foolish-
ness, but unto us which are saved it is the


power of God.” This is the reason why the
cross is so often eliminated from modern
preaching; men who know not its power,
deem it foolishness, they have never had
that apocalypse which has shown its neces-
sity, and its value, and so they leave it out,
lest it should offend, as it does those who
are perishing. True it is, that “eye hath not
seen nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man the things which God
hath prepared for those who love Him. —
But God hath revealed them unto us by His
Spirit,”
Given then, that though this faith which
was once for all delivered to the saints can-
not be apprehended by the natural man, but
that it can be, and is, revealed to some by
God, and that what that revelation is is
recorded in the scripture, we now need to
ask why, if God reveals Himself thus, do
we need any record at all? Why does not
God without the Scriptures make Himself
known to us? To that I answer, “Who art
thou that repliest against God”? It pleases
God so to do. He spoke to men in the be-
ginning by and through epiphanies. He
spoke to men as they wandered further and
further from Him, by chosen servants, and
He did so because He chose to do so. He
might have taken any other course, but it
pleased Him to take the one He did. More-
over He did so for the sake of order. Have
you any quarrel with Him for so doing?
Language was the medium of God’s com-
munications to men, and He pleased that
men should know His mind through the
medium of other men in our own mode of
conveying thought. The truths which He
would communicate were so important, and
that all men might know them, He caused a
record thereof to be written, which record
He inspired, and this written record is no


other, as we have seen above, than the
Word of God, before which at one time men
trembled, but which now with increasing
arrogance and impiety they mock at and
mutilate. Through this word God was
pleased in old time to reveal himself to
men by the mouths of the prophets, but in
these last times hath spoken unto us by
His Son, by whom also He made the worlds.
This is His supreme revelation, “He that
hath seen me hath seen the Father. No
man knoweth the Father save the Son and
he to whom the Son willeth to reveal Him.”
The supreme attainment of life is to know
God. God has been working for this end
for our good. Christ is the transcendent
expression of that work of the Most High.
Is Christ historic? Of course He is, and
our faith, as I suggested above, is founded
on an historic person, Jesus of Nazareth, the
Christ of God, who was crucified after liv-
ing the only perfect life ever lived on this
planet, and put to death for no other reason
than that our fellow men, our common
humanity, loved darkness rather than light
because their deeds were evil. The world
has ever been opposed to God, and it is for
that reason that we are taught in that re-
velation, to love not the world, nor the
things of the world, but rather to fight
against it, '‘Not only mark you Paul’s world
of wicked men and wicked things, but the
world of things seem and temporal as op-
posed to those in the region of things un-
seen and eternal, for it is worldliness, and
not wickedness, that is the standing tempta-
tion of those who have the right to call
themselves Christian men.” Since He is his-
toric where is his history to be found? Will
anyone truthfully aver, that as far as his
mind is concerned, he will be satisfied with-
out any true, historic record, since the liv-


ing church is its own best record, and the
indisputable evidence of the fact of Christ?
I trow not, and if he would, no enemy of
the gospel would, and so we have a record
of the Christ in the records of the church,
but nowhere else. The historic references
to Jesus of Nazareth outside the pages of
Scripture are most meagre. Yet there are
men who are credulous enough, to throw
over the only historic records w r e have, and
because they are not after their fancy, and
do not satisfy their unbelieving intellects,
construct, from their own minds, a Christ
whom they would have us believe is also
historic, but who is about as true to fact
as are the heroes and heroines of Tenny-
son’s Knights of the Round Table in his
•‘ldylls of the King.” Take for instance
the fact of Christ’s birth. Certain men re-
ject the New Test, account of this, and
pose as scholars in the doing so. It is simple
dishonesty. The Virgin birth of Christ has
absolutely nothing to do with Scholarship.
Scholarship will never settle that question,
only faith will do so, unbelief (in regard to
this matter) will reject it, and faith will ac-
cept it. The only thing that Scholarship
will do in this case is to make it harder
for the scholar to reject the plain statement
of the word, for he knows, what an unlearn-
ed man does not, that every time the in-
carnation is spoken of in relation to the birth
there is something in the original, which, so
to speak, pulls him up, and the fact is stated
in a different way to that which he would
have expected. Ke can only get over the
obstacle of admitting that scripture states
it, by autocratically rejecting those pas-
sages in which it occurs, not because there
is anything in the “documents,” which
causes this rejection, there is absolutely
nothing, but because the statements made


do not meet with his approval; in other
words, he descends from being a scholar,
and becomes a literary dilettante and cuts
out a part because it offends his fastidious
taste. No, no, this is not a matter of
scholarship, it is a matter of rejecting what
the wisodm of man deems foolishness and
impossible. But “with God all things are
possible.” And if God did become Incarnate,
as we know He did, then He could have
chosen this mode, and according to “the
unimpeachable records” He did choose this
way for His final and unique revelation.
Moreover, the stupendous condescension and
magnitude of this revelation wherein God
becomes man, “demands,” if there is to be
harmony in the whole, that there be some-
thing more than an ordinary birth, if God
is to come in the flesh; for human genera-
tion supposes human frailty, and the
transmission of human tendency to sin; and
no man ever did, or could, conceive anything
so chaste and becoming, so full of moral
grandeur, that it satisfies the most exalted
demands, of virtue and of God, as the facts
reoorded in His sure Word. If we reject
the Incarnation, we reject the truth, that
God was manifest in the flesh, and we are
not Christian, for that is the one test which
stands out, and the rejection of it is the
mark of antichrist.
But if we accept the glorious fact, that
God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto Himself, if we accept the Incarnation,
this is the greatest and most stupendous
claim anywhere made in the whole Word of
God, and accepting that, not, mind you, just
the belief in the Virgin liirth, but the truth,
that God was manifest in the flesh and dwelt
among us, then surely every other test of
faith must sink into insignificance.


If God was really manifest in the flesh, and
we believe it, surely it makes no great
demand on our faith to believe that, that
same God could prepare, and have a fish
ready to take in one of His servants, who
was refusing to go and make the revelation
which He desired, to a people in a strange
city, upon whom judgment was soon to fall,
if they repented not. If I believe that God
prepared Himself a body in which to re-
veal Himself, it is a very little thing for
me to believe, that in the sea He once
prepared a great fish to receive His servant,
who was in disobedience, fleeing from Him,
because unwilling to make the revelation,
which He the God of Love desired, and with
which message He had sent him, and the
hearing of which, later on, saved the city.
Moreover, suppose we do deny it, where
do we get to? Is Jonah only mentioned
in the Book of Jonah? Not at all. Then
we must take out that Book first and then
find. any other cases where the story is
accredited as historic, and take them out,
too, for if it is not God’s truth, then any
book that treats it as such must be mis-
taken, and it, too, must go. Luke and Mat-
thew, both accredit the story, if that story
be false then these two writers are misled
in this instance, and may be misled in other
instances. In other words they are unre-
liable. Therefore they must go. But then
Jesus Christ speaks of Jonah, and He
speaks in such a way that there is no mis-
take as to His attitude. He so evidently be-
lieves the story, that in speaking of an
event yet future, He says of it, that “just
as” that is, that as true as it was that
Jonah was three days and nights in the belly
of the sea-monster, so shall the Son of Man
be three days and three nights in the heart
of the earth. Now was Christ in reality or


only allegorically three days and three
nights in the heart of the earth? He was,
as we all know, actually and really so, and
as one was, so was the other; Christ af-
firmed. Then if the story be untrue as we
have it, and Christ accredited it, where are
we logically and honestly led? Either He
was mistaken and accepted the usual ideas
current, and if so, then He may have been
mistaken about other things much more
vital, and I cannot rely absolutely upon Him
to guide me for He may have misunder-
stood some very important truths, and if
this be so, then I-Ie was not God manifest
in the flesh, but this is absurd, for we be-
gan there, and while we are Christian men
we cannot depart from there, so we are led
into an absurdity, and must retrace our
steps and admit that Christ neither mis-
understood, nor yet allowed a falsehood to
go forth, with His imprimatur upon it, and
that He has not forfeited our respect as a
teacher, nor our confidence as our Guide;
as God manifest in the flesh, He put His seal
to something, which, though to the natural
man dlflicult of belief, yet is abundantly at-
tested by the Word itself and by Him.
And so it is, with almost the whole of
the Book of Truth. One part is dependent
upon another, we cannot let go one without
letting go more, and the whole stands or
falls together; being a whole, made up of
parts as the body is of its members, so that
just as some parts of the body are more
important than others, yet all are necessary
to form the complete body, so is it with
the Scriptures; and as the life remains in
the body when an arm or a leg or an ear
or some other part of the body is taken
away, so, too, Scripture has its vital and less
vital parts; and for those who have made
a study of the formation of the New Testa-


ment Canon the truth is borne home to the
mind with ever-increasing insistency, that
behind all the selections which were made
to complete it, there was an over-mastering
and guiding mind which was not of man, but
of God. In those first centuries of our
Faith certain books gradually began to
emerge, and discussions took place, and
controversies arose in the Christian Church
as to which books were canonical, and
which were not. And in the days before
the Church had received the patronage of
the world, fierce persecutions raged and the
malevolence of the Church’s foes knew
where to strike, and we find that Diocletian
makes his supreme attack on the Scriptures,
and rather than give them up, men and
women went to the death, confirming what
we read in Revelation “beheaded for the
testimony of Jesus and the Word of God.”
Do you think they would do this for records
which were other than the Word of God?
Do you suppose for a moment that they did
not know wliat was the accredited Word of
God, or do you think that now after some
nineteen centuries, unable to speak the
language, and knowing almost nothing of
their ways and doings, we are in a better
position to judge as to which books are
canonical and which are not, than they
were? Have we, do you think, any docu-
ments which were not available to them?
Not one. They had access to many more
sources of information than we have, they
were prepared to give their lives, and many
of them did so, rather than give up their
Scriptures; they were the people of the
places and the records were not foreign to
them; and yet some men to-day have the
audacity to claim, in the name of scholar-
ship, that certain books or passages should
he deleted from those records, for which


the early Christians would die. This for
no other reason than that in their judgment
they ought not to be there. It is the most
monsrous claim that sane men can make;
it is not scholarship, but unbelief, which is
cursing the Church, and blighting the fair
fame of those records which are at once
the glory and power of her life. Think for
a moment of the cry which Deissman’s
splendid book, “Light on the Ancient East,”
made when it came out, but was there a
fact there which was not known to the men
who studied and examined and argued over
the acceptance or otherwise of the books
during the first three centuries or so? Every
new and again we get some sidelight on
some abstruse matter or hidden meaning,
but where do we get it from? The way
some talk would make the unlearned believe
that it was a discovery altogether unknown
to those of the early Christian Church.
There is no light of this kind coming to us
except it be from the light of the days of
the Augustan period of. Ancient Literature.
Of course they live before us, but they lived
far more vividly before those who examined
our historic records in the beginning.
Over the inner North door of St. Paul’s
Cathedral there is a slab, on which is en-
graven the name of Christopher Wren,
and on it is written in Latin “Si monumen-
t.um requiris circumspice” (if thou art seek-
ing his monument, look around). So with
this accepted canon of Holy Scripture.
There is a monument to its veracity and
vitality, it is no dead thing, hut a living
organism, an organic unity, and when I see
and hear men mutilating it I must cry
“Hands off!” That monument is found in
the Catholic Church. It is a long cry from
that Upper Room where they were gathered
for fear of the Jews, to the far-flung battle


line of Missions to-day. It is a long way
from that exclusive Jewish Sect, to the
Church to-day, scattered over the wide
world, to say nothing of that great host that
has crossed the flood of whom it can be
said these all died in faith; but wdience
came to them that knowledge without which
their faith would have been impossible? It
came to them through the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testaments. These are the
monuments of the work of those scriptures
so pitilessly assailed by unbelief to-day.
Look around you and if these records and
this revelation be unworthy of our absolute
trust, whence comes it, that they have ac-
complished so much? And why is it that
the truth, which men think they have when
they belittle them, does not succeed in doing
anything which is even worthy to be com-
pared with these mighty works of The
Spirit of God through the Scriptures.
When Robert Morrison, the first Pro-
testant Chinese missionary of modern times,
went to China, the men who sent him forth
commissioned him above everything else to
translate the Scriptures, and recorded this
minute: “Mr. Morrison will make the trans-
lation of the Holy Scriptures into Chinese
the first and grand object of his attention,”
and this he did from beginning to end.
And when there was no liberty for us
as a nation to read the Word in our own
tongue, the light went on till as a people
we got it, and then and only then did our
National greatness begin. Wherever we
have sent men from our Christian Churches
it has always been with the same instruc-
tions, “Give them the Word of God.” Has
it failed? Never. Has ever any other book
taken its place? Never. Has it proved
equal to the task committed to it? Always.
Wherever God's Word has gone there the


entrance of that Word has given light. When
part has been given, have missionaries said,
“I don’t think we will give them any more
of it. they have had enough”? Never in
our Protestant history. The thing is un-
thinkable. How it is then that if this Book
is so full of such grotesque stories as Jonah
being swallowed by a great fish, and others
just as strange and untrue, ‘‘as some would
have us believe,” yet these very hooks going
amongst these varied peoples, yet cause
them to speak the truth and to clearly and
minutely distinguish between what is true
and what is false? 'Strange hallucination!!
How can a clean thing come from an un-
clean? And still the great Christian com-
munity persists and continues to translate
this Book into all the tongues that it can
possibly find translators and money for, till
to-day parts of it are found in some five
hundred different dialects. But these are
untutored peoples, you say, then listen to
Professor Max Muller, of Oxford, the great-
est philologist of our time, in a letter written
in 1905, “How shall I describe to you what
I found in the New Testament? I had not
read it for many years, and was prejudiced
against it. The light which struck Paul with
blindness on his way to Damascus was not
more strange than that which fell on me
when I suddenly discovered the fulfilment
of all my hopes. ... If this is not
divine, I understand nothing at all. In all
my studies of the ancient times, I have
always felt the want of something, and it
was not until I knew Our Lord that all was
clear to me.”
Yet with all these facts men are found who
feel that when they get into the pulpit (I am
not dealing with what they do in their study)
it is incumbent upon them to deny this and
that, and tell people, inter alia, that the


first chapter of Genesis is not literal truth,
and then wonder why some who have had
their eyes opened to see, so that they know
that flesh and blood hath not revealed it
unto them, should walk out of their churches
and they be left lamenting their own bar-
renness and inability to build up the work
committed to their charge. If the first chap-
ter of Genesis is not literal truth, what is it?
It is so easy to say what a thing is not. But
does denial ever accomplish anything? Look
at this much-maligned chapter and let us
be honest. If it is not literal truth, is it
truth at all? But read it through. In the
beginning God created the heaven and the
earth. Is that literal truth? Did God create
the heaven and the earth, or did it, without
a Creator, just come to be? Or does anyone
to-day claim that matter is eternal? If God
did not make it, who did? Won’t our friends
tell us, for no one else can. Why, without
God, they can’t even tell us of the origin
of a pebble, how then can they tell of the
Universe? iNay, nay, I prefer to believe that
it is literal truth, and this same statement
is borne out by other parts of Scripture, so
that if God did not create the heaven and
the earth, then not only has Genesis to go,
but many another scripture as well. Either
that statement is “literal truth” or it is a
“literal lie.” Do not read into it what is not
there, and then say so-and-so is not true.
Science to-day is almost agreed that ma-
terial had a “spiritual” beginning, and that
Spirit is God. And all things are as they
are because God so ordered it. It is far too
much for me to go into all the details of
the First chapter of Genesis, but we might
do well to remind ourselves that the Hon.
W. E. Gladstone once affirmed that he re-
garded this chapter as the grand foundation
of the entire fabric of Holy Scripture, and


•wrote that “the order of Creation as recorded
in this First chapter of Genesis has been so
affirmed in our time by Natural Science that
it may be taken as a demonstrated conclu-
sion and as an established fact.” And when
we remember that the order in which the
events of these seven periods might have
been given, might have varied so as to be
given in more than five thousand different
ways, it seems to me, if any man dare to
rush in with a statement that it is not literal
truth, then he is indeed rushing where
angels fear to tread, and if he comes crash-
ing to the ground, then he must not be sur-
prised if he finds it hard. Take it again,
seven events may be taken in order in over
five thousand different ways. They are
taken in this First chapter in just one way,
more than four thousand nine hundred and
ninety-nine remain. Natural Science was a
subject absolutely unknown to the time of
its composition, and yet thousands of years
afterwards, when Natural Science comes
into being and reaches some definite con-
clusions, then this order put down so long
ago, is found to be in accord with that
which this new and exact science affirms.
Who told that writer the order? Where did
be get his information from? Some of you
know quite well the controversy which went
on over this very matter between Huxley
and Gladstone, and how finally it was de-
cided to appoint a judge between them, both
sides to put forward their facts, the famous
scientist, and the great statesman and
Christian. They appointed Charles Dana as
judge, and Dana gave his decision in favour
of Gladstone, that to all intents and pur-
poses the order of Genesis creation story
was the same as that of science. But we
are told that no one believes to-day that
this is literal truth. Whether some men


believe it or not, we expect men to keep
within the mark, and I assure any who might
incline to make such a rash statement as
that, that at least it Would be speaking fool-
ishly, for there are thousands and thousands
of the very finest Christians to-day who do
believe that the First chapter of Genesis is
literal truth, and the disheartening thing to
them, sitting in their pews, is to have their
minister snatching from their hands the only
weapon with which they are able to meet
the unbelief around them. For the informa-
tion of any who may not know, let me
quote from the scholarly and magnetic Dr.
Horton, beloved and honoured minister of
Hampstead Heath. He writes: "Indeed the
opening chapter of Genesis is gaining
recognition as so surprising an epitome
of the creation story which modern geology
has read in the rocks, that there seems
no possibility of explaining it, from any
knowledge which existed at the time it was
written. It is the common Semetic version
of creation which is found in the clay tab-
lets of Babylonia; but it is that account
. . . brought into an amazing conformity
with the discoveries of science. How was
that epitome written centuries before
science had read the rocks, and by laborious
and patient study determined the process
and order of creation? Science goes near to
proving that the account of the creation in
Genesis (I: 1 to II: 3) must have been a
revelation communicated supernaturally to
an inspired prophet.” And he goes on to
refer the reader to a little book entitled
“God’s Week of Creation Work” (Nesbit &
Co., 2/6). Lyell, in his “Principles of
Geology,” says, “But in whatever direction
we pursue our researches, whether in time
or space, we discover everywhere the clear
proofs of a creative intelligence and of His


foresight, wisdom, and power.” Which then
are we to believe, the statements of the
Word of God, to which many leading men
of thought reverently affix their names, or
those who dissent and make statements that
“no one now believes it as literal truth”?
For my own part I prefer to accept it as
it stands, and am not ashamed in this to
stand beside Gladstone, Horton, and Lyell.
Let us have our own convictions, seeing to it
that they arc well founded, but let us be
careful that we do not forget that there
are more people than ourselves in the world,
and that because we think a certain thought,
it does not necessarily follow that everyone
else does, too. Last century produced but
few more massive intellects or robust souls
than the late Dr. Dale, of Birmingham.
When he was selected to preach the ser-
mon at the opening of Mansfield College,
Oxford, he chose for his text, “Contend ear-
nestly for the Faith which was once for all
delivered to the saints.” And in view of
some of our evidently false ideas, some of
the things he said might be well worth con-
sidering. At a recent meeting three speakers
referred to the Christian heritage of
“Liberty” (that is the cry of the anarchist);
one only was careful to make it plain that
that liberty is only in Christ. Our heritage
is not simple liberty, it is only liberty, con-
sistent with being a “bond-slave” of Jesus
Christ, and liberty of any other order is
only license and disorder. As Dr. Dale on
another occasion pointed out, “Men are not
free to think as they like, and so many of
our younger men in their earlier days of
speculation run amok on these very lines;
they think they are free to think as they like
about everything under the sun, the Chris-
tian Faith included. But we are not, if we
are to be considered thinkers at all we are


bound to think according to facts. “Free-
dom of intellect cannot change the facts, it
can only interpret them, and wherever facts
are known speculative intellect is under
limitations and restraints. We are only ab-
solutely free, when we are absolutely ignor-
ant.” “I deny that any man has a right to
think as he pleases either about religion or
any other subject of speculation and en-
quiry.” He must conform his thinking to
the facts. The great facts of our religion
are found in our historic records. “It is
part of the very substance of the Gospel that
the knowledge of God as He has revealed
Himself in Christ, and the knowledge of His
Eternal Kingdom is given to those, and to
those only, who have received the super-
natural life and the illumination of the
Holy Spirit.” And again, “To take the New
Testament alone ... it deals with that
Divine order which is revealed only to those
who are in Christ, and with sorrows, fears,
conflicts, hopes, joy and triumphs which are
unknown, except to those who have received
the life of God.” These are the facts and
we must conform our thinking to them.
Again he writes, “Who can tell what is
meant by Christ being the propitiation for the
sins of the world except the man who has
been filled with desolation and dread by the
discovery of his guilt, and who knows the
wonder and the joy, the large freedom, the
buoyancy of spirit, the glad and secure trust
in God which come from the consciousness
that he has received the divine forgiveness
through Christ?” In that same sermon, speak-
ing of the Christian minister, he says, “He
will maintain spiritual fellowship with the
living as well as with the dead, with the
simple and unlearned as well as with
scholars, he will remember that to the meek
God teaches His way. But if He Himself


has no direct knowledge of eternal things,
he will be unable to use wisely the know-
ledge of other men. He has to give an
intellectual account of the Faith once for
all delivered to the saints. He will there-
fore attribute supreme value to that central
substance of Christian truth which has been
the life and strength of Christian men in
all generations. The spirit of intellectual
adventure will not be uncontrolled. He
will not imagine that after nineteen cen-
turies of Christian history the saints have
yet to learn the first principles of Christ.
Believing that light has come to himself he
will also believe that it came to devout
men of past generations.” “It is our duty
to keep an open mind to the discoveries of
theologians and scholars; but this does not
mean that we should consent to regard all
the articles of the Christian Faith as open
questions. The facts we know, and under
God we have to assert and defend them
We are willing, if necessary, to re-
vise definitions; we can accept no definition
which obscures the divine glory of the Lord
Jesus Christ, Son of God, Son of Man, Crea-
tor, Brother, Lord, Redeemer of the human
race. We are prepared to discuss theories
of the Atonement; but can accept no theory
which would dislodge our hearts from their
sure confidence in Christ, in Whom we have
redemption through His blood, even the re-
mission of sins according to the riches of
God’s Grace. We are not irrevocably com-
mitted to any theory of what theologians
have called the depravity or corruption of
human nature; but any theory which dees
not explicitly and fully acknowledge the
awful reality of sin, and maintain that only
in the power of supernatural life can man
escape from spiritual ruin is for us an im-
possible theory; we know the facts are


against it.” In another sermon, ‘‘Your min-
ister has not to receive a revelation from
tine new age in which we are living: he has
a revelation to deliver to it, a revelation
from God, a revelation which is at once old
and new. He must insist on the true nature of
sin as a crime deserving punishment—not
merely a disease requiring to be cured; as
an offence needing pardon, not mereiy a
calamity like blindness needing pity.” These
are the facts according to which we are to
adjust our thoughts; and whence come they?
From the sacred Scripture, from those re-
cords which we embody in our constitution
when we make the statement of our faith
to include belief in “the divine inspiration
of Holy Scripture in the Old and New Tes-
taments and its supreme authority as the
rule of faith and practice.” And which is
substantially the teaching of all the Pro-
testant Churches. If that be so, then let us
see to it that we cease from our vain specu-
lations and conform our thinking to the
facts in such a way that we do not, when
standing before our fellow men with the
message of God to declare to them, snatch
away from them the only tangible means
there is by which the tacts which are to
guide their thinking can be ascertained. The
argument which I have so far tried to pre-
sent is this: The Universe in which we live
has had a spiritual origin, the spiritual
originator was God, from God came man,
made capable of understanding spiritual
phenomena, and Him Who caused man to
be To man so originated, God Who had
made him with religious instincts, revealed
Himself, not fully at first, but according to
His own plan and purpose with ever-increas-
ing clearness. The authoritative record of that
revelation is found in the Scriptures and no-
where else. I ask you to note that I say


“authoritative record,” for none admits more
readily than I do that God in His gracious
condescension to men has revealed Himself
to thousands of our fellows in various ways,
and they have left a record of those revela-
tions. But their record is not authoritative,
and no experience of any other man which
goes outside the Scriptures has any auth-
ority for me in my quest for God. It may
be helpful, stimulating, guiding, but it is
not authoritative. When the revelation made
thus to individuals is found on examination
to he in accord with the authoritative record,
then it has for me not the authority of the
man who received it, hut the authority of the
Word which confirmed its possibility and its
reasonableness. It has pleased God then to
give to men an authoritative record of His
revelation, and that record is the Holy Scrip-
ture. For a moment let us ask: Why do we
accept the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments as divinely inspired and as the
supreme authority for all matters of faith
and conduct? Remember, we do. If they are
not something unique and altogether on a
plane by themselves above everything else,
then they cannot be the “supreme authority.”
There is according to our showing as hon-
ourable Christian men no other authority
above them or on a level with them, they
are “supreme.” And if they are not, then
we have no reason for our existence as a
Christian Church. But if we lay claim to
be in any sense such, then we must at least
admit and acknowledge the Scriptures of the
Old Testament as authoritative, for that was
taught us by the Founder of our Faith, and
if we are going hack on Him, then we cannot
claim to be Christian. Read the record of
His life and see how He referred to Old
Testament Scripture. See on what a pin-
nacle He always placed it. Note how He


used it for Himself. Appealed to it. Pleaded
its truth. Taught it and argued from it, and
always in a way which said, when Old Testa-
ment Scripture has spoken, there is nothing
more for you to say. That is the last word
that is Anal. This too, at times, as from
just one letter, e.g., “Said I not, ye are gods,
and the scripture cannot be broken,” drawing
His own argument from just the plural form,
and so elsewhere. He proves the truth of
the “resurrection” as taught in the Old Tes-
tament from the tense of the verb. Did He
not say, “The Scripture must be fulfilled.”
And the most remarkable thing to my mind,
is the way He seems to have set Himself to
put His imprimatur on those very passages
which we in our wisdom, which beside His
is such utter folly, find it hardest to believe,
e.g., Creation, Flood, and the Ark, Destruc-
tion of Sodom and Lot’s Wife, Jonah, Daniel
as a prophet, and numerous others. If the
Scriptures of the Old Testament are not
according to the teaching of Christ, to Whom
we owe our Christian Faith, an authoritative
and unimpeachable record of the revelation
of God up to the time of His appearing on
the earth, then tell us what the teaching of
Christ is and was? Of course it is far more
than that, but He taught that or He taught
nothing. And our Protestant denominations
are right when into their Acts of Incorpora-
tion they put an article on the Divine in-
spiration of Holy Scripture, and its supreme
authority as the rule of faith and practice.
And the man who says that we do not now
believe the Bible as it stands, or who says
that parts of it are untrue, is false to his
denomination, and is not honest when he
claims to be true to the Faith once for all
delivered to the saints.
And if the Old Testament, as Principal
Cave has shown so ably in his hook on the


question, is inspired; and we accept it on the
authority of Christ, it can also be shown
that the New Testament is also. But the
fact that we insert the truth in our Incor-
poration Acts is evidence that as such we
accept it; or else as such we are dishonest.
And I prefer to accredit our denominations
with honesty and faith rather than with dis-
honesty and unbelief.
The marvellous way in which the various
contending and conflicting factions of the
early Church of the first three centuries
came without collaboration each to admit
to the Canon exactly the same books as the
others did and as we still do to-day is, if not
proof, at least the very strongest evidence
possible to the open mind, that they were
animated by one Spirit and led along the
pathway of truth, in including the books
they did and in excluding the rest; and the
Christian Church has never since that day
had any desire to alter that collection nor
to question its validity. Holy men of God
spake and wrote as they were moved by the
Spirit of God, and that same Spirit saw to it
that when the authoritative record was need-
ed of the fuller revelation which was made
in Christ, that that record should be accord-
ing to His mind, and as the tree is known
by its fruit, we too can see wherever that
record is taken and translated into the lan-
guage of the people it soon becomes trans-
lated into the lives of some, and they become
in all lands the best and most potent proof
of its inspiration and authority. Let us then
once again put the Bible in its right place,
let us teach what it says, not what we think.
Let us declare the God of the Bible and not
an ideal of our own conception; let us de-
pict Him as revealed in all His attributes,
as Love, Holiness, Light, Truth, Angry with
the wicked every day, a Consuming Fire,


Redeemer, Friend, Father and Saviour. Let
us revive lost truths, such as the ruin of
man, his spiritual death, his need of regen-
eration; the power of prayer to accomplish
things, the efficacy of the atoning blood of
Christ, the Personality of The Spirit, the
guilt of sin, the Deity of the Son of God,
the promised Return, and Judgment, for all
out of Christ.
Let us go further and urge all our young
people to find out what is in the Bible, let
us urge fathers to reinstate it at family
prayers, and In daily life, let us give time
to studying it and comparing scripture with
scripture, let us accept its truths as revealed
therein, notwithstanding that they may seem
strange to our minds. Let us believe God,
though every man be proved a liar. And
we shall find a new era for our Churches.
When men bow before such truths as are
found there and before Him Who is the
Word Incarnate so wondrously revealed
there, then will lives begin to be altered and
men will ask, not what shall “I” do, but
what does “God” want me to do, and turning
to that Word which now has authority for
him will find that no longer does he belong
to himself, but to God, and that he is there-
fore as a bond-slave with the spirit of a
child, to live for Him Who loved him and
gave Himself for him.
Above all sliall not we who are ministers
see to it that we preach it and not so much
about it ; that we in no way travesty it nor
give ourselves to the explaining of it away,
but let us say: This is the commandment of
God, and though some things may be as
Peter admitted Paul’s to be, hard to be un-
derstood, shall not we, remembering our
own limitations and our own insignificance
in the presence of the Most High, urge men
to bring their lives into line with what we


And there, and set the example by letting
men see that in very truth we do believe that
revelation and show that we are beginning
to be wise by our fear of the Lord.
Lest any should object to the starting
pcint, from which I set out, viz., that there is
any lack of, the study of, and insistent em-
phasis on, the unmutilated Word of God as
the only absolute authority, may I be per-
mitted (without necessarily endorsing every
word either in this or the following quota-
tion) to give an extract from an article on
Dr. Campbell Morgan in the “Melbourne
Argus,” January 20, 1917, when it was be-
lieved he was coming to occupy the Collins-
street pulpit, as evidencing the mature pro-
nouncement of one of the greatest of our
Australian dailies on this most important
matter:
“First and foremost and all the time he
is a user and teacher of the Bible. Mel-
bourne church-goers may be reminded of
the like extraordinary facility in using the
Bible displayed by the late Rev. A. M.
Henderson in the same Collins-street
church. Mr. Henderson could easily
preach for nearly an hour, and used often
to do so, yet his crowded audience would
listen -with attentive and unflagging en-
joyment to his long Bible discourses. He
seemed never to use a note, but he had
the Bible at his fingers’ ends, and his
whole sermon seemed to be one continual
quoting and interweaving of Bible texts
Dr. Morgan, we understand, has a similar
facility and achieves his success by this
means.
“It is remarkable that at the beginning
of the twentieth century the most perma
nent success at preaching with a continu
ous congregation should he attained by an
almost slavish fidelity to Scripture. For


centuries able and earnest men have been
trying to find out what and how to preach.
Some have tried to exploit literature;
others have used politics, others have
worked at the treasures of art; history,
biography, sociology, archaeology, econo-
mics, have all been heard from the pulpit;
revivalism, evangelism, emotionalism, de-
votionalism, sacramentalism, and ecclesi-
asticism have all been tried; higher critic-
ism, historic criticism, literary criticism,
along with heaps of mere wordy criticism,
have had their day. And last of all there
has been the pulpit use of the wonders
of science and the speculations of philoso-
phy. . . . But the few men who do
achieve a continuous success with a per-
manent audience seem to be the men who
can use Scripture in an almost magical
way. After all, very few preachers really
use Scripture much. The text is a mere
episode in their discourse. Either the
man in the pulpit does not try to preach
at all—which is quite a common way of
preaching—or he gives his hearers some-
thing more than Scripture. The hearer
sometimes wonders whether the preacher
really knows much Scripture, so little does
he refer to it or show acquaintance with
it. If we may be allowed to use the
analogy which Matthew Arnold loved and
is said to have cribbed from Swift, the
ordinary preacher is like the spider spin-
ning a web from out his own inside, while
the true preacher is like the bee making
sweetness and light out of the honey he
finds in Scripture. The strange thing then
is this magic of Scripture. The man who is
most capable in using Scripture is the man
who can hold most of the people and for
the longest time. The others may have


the ever-changing crowd, but this man’s
audience remains and grows.”
After speaking of the various ideas cur-
rent, about the world, and the Church in
relation to it, the article continues:
“Well let us suppose these two cries
put together into one complaint, the pre-
sent futility, and future reform, of the
Church, coupled with the real impossi-
bility of good pulpit work under present-
day conditions; then perhaps it may be
possible that this new-old way of preach-
ing may solve the problem; perhaps the
magic of Scripture honestly tried once
again may strengthen the Church and
freshen the preacher. For there seems to
be a certain quite extraordinary power in
the simple use of Scripture —not so much
in thoughts and words and theories about
Scripture, but just in Scripture itself. . .
Most preachers have not found this out.
They have substituted for Scripture itself
some dogma or theory which they have
obtained partly, it is true, from Scripture,
but chiefly from their own insides. And
the new thought men are just as bad as
the old thought men in this respect. Each
drops the hulk of Scripture out of his
reckoning.”
And lest it should be objected that this is
simply a tirade by a secular newspaper out
of all sympathy with the work which the
pulpit is doing, let me further give extracts
from an article which appeared as recently
as March 5 in the “Australian Baptist,”
where it is evident that the management
cf that paper, who copy it from another
Christian paper (“The Advocate,” of New
York) deemed the matter contained therein
to be of such importance that it should be
brought before their denomination, thus evi-
dencing that the thought of the important


daily is echoed to at least. a very large
extent by two widely divergent and import-
ant Christian papers in two different coun-
tries. It is entitled “To my Preacher”:
“I attend public worship both morning
and evening. Whatever you preach, and
however, I shall be there as a matter of
principle and privilege. That is a duty I
owe to you, to Christ, and to the com-
munity. ... I cannot attend any other
church but yours, for it is also mine. For
better, for worse, you have me for that
hour. . . .
“You will agree with me there is a
great deal of poor preaching. In fact, it
is a wonder to me that people attend
church as well as they do. The loyalty of
the dear saints who go Sunday after Sun-
day all their lifetime, who almost never
hear a sermon such as the preacher ought
to give, is as noble as it is pathetic. What
then is the common fault of sermons?
First, their sameness. . . Second, they
are common-place. . . . Third, they are
tame. They have no clarion message, no
lighting up with heavenly fire, no invigor
ating challenge to the conscience. Fourth,
they are timid. The preacher is afraid of
his gospel, or of his hearers, or of his popu-
larity. He stands not as a fearless pro-
phet of God. . . . Fifth, they are un-
iuforming.
“Your sermons show that you are not an
earnest student of the Bible. That is an
inexcusable fault. To that you are called.
If you are not an expert in the
Bible, or at least if you do not toil day
and night to make yourself an expert, you
are cheating your people and should be
ashamed to look them in the face. . .
Then I am misled by contrary voices, and
your sermons give me no light. . .


you are silent. Either you do not know
where the truth is on these and other
questions or you do not take the trouble
to find out, and in either case you are un-
worthy cf your position. Your thin and
vanishing sermons . . . need blood and
substance, and they would find them if
you would give two hours a day to the
study of the Bible, two to the study of
Christian doctrine, and two to the study of
Christian history.”
But someone may object, “The day has
gone past when it is possible to traject any
authority over the human mind and impose
upon it any standard to which it must bow.”
“Truth,” you say, is the only authority which
the human mind knows. Well said! and I
agree with you. But let us be sure that we
“all” admit it. There is one standard then,
and one authority about which all men of
intellect are agreed, that is, “Truth.” Pilate
asked long ago, “What is truth?” Others
asked the same question. Without external
revelation will anyone dare to even attempt
the answer? Leave revelation alone and
give an answer which satisfies the human
reason, if you can. But you cannot. And
since you cannot, who can? Let us turn to
Him Whom we recognise as Head. Hear
what He says, “I am the Truth.” Do you
deny it? If so, you are no Christian what-
ever else you may be. Who is this that
says this stupendous word? Jesus of Naza-
reth. Is He alive? Yes. May I see and
speak with Him No. How then may I find
out about Him and come to know Him? He
reveals Himself, through the Scriptures, to
any who seek Him in faith. Only through
the Scriptures? Yes, for when it is through
living people, it is through them, using in
some way the Scripture revelation. Note
then this revelation is to-day through the


Scriptures only. Then if to know Him is
the greatest “knowledge” that can come to
the human soul, how important it is that
the medium through which that knowledge
comes should be not only in mens’ hands,
but in their minds and hearts. We cannot
communicate that “knowledge,” the only
thing we as ministers can do is to place in
their way the medium through which it may
come, and do all we can to arouse them to
seek it for themselves. Hence there is noth-
ing a Christian minister can better do than
communicate the Scriptures to men, knowing
that the entrance of God’s Word giveth light,
and that when in faith it is received, Christ
is received, and when Christ is received all
things become new, and old things pass
away. We admit that “Truth” is the only
authority which the human mind knows, and
claim that when the Word is received it
“possesses a self-evidencing light, and power
for manifesting its own divine original” and
truth. We also know that there are many
matters of earthly origin about which it is
impossible for us to discover for ourselves
the truth, and the mind is forced to rest in
the revelation of another, and rely on the
credibility of its informant. I know a man
who had no name, but who was anxious to
know of whom he was born. He could not
do it, to this day he does not know. He
has to be satisfied with conjecture, but did
he positively know it could only be on the
testimony of another that his mind would
rest in truth, though doubtless when once
so received it might perhaps be possible by
personal or other evidence to verify the fact
in such a way as would constitute sufficient
proof to satisfy the mind that quite apart
from the first testimony it now grasped
truth; and so it is with these phenomena
of spiritual verities, there must first be an


rxternal revelation, then when that is re
reived, but never before, the mind grasps
die truth, and when that is grasped it veri
tes itself to the mind, which then has such
mternal proof that nothing can possibly
shake it from its sure conviction, not even
the casting of doubt on the reliability of the
first informant, though nothing could ever
convince the mind that in the information
given and now verified the informant was
false. These phenomena do no emanate
from us, but from God, and it has pleased
Him to make a revelation of Himself in
regard to us, and them. Let us reverently
bow before Him and acknowledge that that
Word is truth. One of the most remarkable
facts of modern unbelief is the way the vari-
ous false cults which arise on every hand
claim for their justification, and often as
their “raison d’etre,” certain revelations, e.g.
Mormonism, Christian Science, Swedenbor-
gianism, Seventh Day Adventism, Spiritism,
and so on. They do this to set aside
the one given once for all. And it
is just this very thing that intellec-
tualism is doing, under another and
more specious plea on behalf of the freedom
of the intellect. But let us remember that
God has revealed “all things necessary to
life and godliness,” and the man who wants
to add to, take from, or alter these, suggests
that what he has is unsatisfactory. Inspired
by the Spirit of God the great Apostle to the
Gentiles exclaims, “There are some that
would pervert the Gospel of Christ, but though
we or an angel from heaven should preach
unto you any gospel other than that which
we preached unto you, let him be anathema.
As we have said before, so say I now again, if
any man preach unto you any other gospel
than that which ye received, let him be an
athema,” and woe to the man who dares to


alter it according to his own intellectual
fancy.
And now, if in what I have written I may
seem to have been unkind and to have
missed that Spirit of Christ without which
we are none of His, let me in love and sin-
cerity assure my readers that in this paper
I have no particular individual in mind, and
whilst I recognise my own liability to erior
even as others, I have written this, not
to bring railing accusation against any, but
because I know with a certitude that no
amount of denial will shake, that both in
my own and in other communions, not only
in the Ministry, but amongst the Church
members, the Word of God has been largely
dethroned, and there is a sad departure from
the Faith once for all delivered to the
saints. Instead there is being substituted
something of man’s own manufacture, in
place of God’s unique revelation, and just
as when examined under the microscope
the manufactured article is revealed as
clumsy, coarse, and ugly, while the product
of God, by growth in nature, is an astound-
ing revelation of the marvellous perfection
of even the most insignificant and minute
work of His fingers, so, too, is the manufac-
tured article of man’s intellect when com-
pared with the dazzling brilliancy of the
flowers of God, which bloom and blossom in
the sacred Word, and perfume the whole
atmosphere with the very aroma of God
Himself.
If we then have an authoritative revela-
tion from God, shall we not insist and per-
sist, and never desist, till we have done
all within our power to make men believe
that we at least are confident of it, and have
one consuming desire, that others shall
come to the same knowledge, assured that
thus and thus only, will there come into


their lives the satisfying of the one supreme
necessity which God saw, and for which in
His love He gave His only begotten and
well-beloved Son that men might have.
For ever, O Lord, Thy Word is settled In
Heaven.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, hut my
words shall not pass away.


Set up and Printed in Australia by
T. E Colkbrook, General Letterpress Pointer,
Parramatta Road, Annandale.
3 1508 01110173


JRißsionarg and gtbk College,
SYDNEY
Pbinoipal-REV. C. BENSON BARNETT.
BADMINTON ROAD, CROYDON, N-8-W.
- Board of Reference.— Revs H. S. Begbiej
Canon Bellingham, M.A.; F. Binns, N. J. Cooks,
M.A ; R J. If, McGowan, C J. Tinsley, Messrs.
W Clark Chambers, O. W. Cowley, Dr. J. Feitd
Deck, W. H. Dibley, W. H R. Grant, W. Gillan-
ders, 8.A,; Dr. T. Porter, T. Wills Pulsfard, Dr.
D. Wallace, A. B. Wilson. ' i 1
Object.— To stimulate interest in, and. to
train young people in the knowledge of the Word
of God, for Christian service at home or abroad.
Open tor Residence (Men only), or for
Bible Study by Correspondence.
, ‘ Methods—Study of the Bible as the Word-,
of the living God. Training in practical work-
Speaking indoors and out, Supply of Church
Services.
“Cbaboks.—There are no fees, but, where
I>* -:ible, a nominal charge of 10/- is made for
i '-erd. Otherwise by arrangement.
yfa recommend Bible Study by Correspond-
ence. Courses on “ Truths which Every Christian
ought to Know,” “Bible Content,” “Four Gos-
pels,” “ Foundation Faots,” “ The Lord’s Re-
turn,” “Dispensations! Truths,” “The Holy
Spirit,” etc., frdm 10/- per course, or free, by
arrangement. -
'■ This is distinctly A Bible Institute, on the
principle of Moody’s, and the 8.T.1. Glasgow,
and is open to all sincere believers. , •,
Write to the Principal To-dat
