









AUTHENTIC NARRATIVE
OF THE RECENT
LOSS
OF HIS MAJESTY’S SHIP
CRESCENT,
JOHN TEMPLE,
Captain,
Which struck about Ten o'clock at Night, December 5, 1808 f
Off the Coast of Jutland,
NEAR ROBSNOUGIIT,
WHEN UPWARDS OF TWO HUNDRED PEOPLE,
The Captain, Officers, Seamen, Women, Sec. perished,
As communicated by
Lieut. John Weaver, of the Royal Marines,
One of the Officers who was fortunately saved.
ALSO,
THE SHIPWRECK AND ADVENTURES
OF
CAPTAIN NATHANIEL URING,
In the beginning of November, 1711.
LONDON:
Printed fur THOMAS TEGG, in, Cheapsidc*
PRICE ONLY SIXPENCE




THE
L O SS
OF
THE CRESCENT.
The loss of his Majesty’s Ship, Crescent, was ascertained ia
London soon after the melancholy disaster happened, by means
of a letter received at Portsmouth from Mr. Thomas Mason,
late clerk of the Crescent, of which the following is an ex-
tract.
“ On the sth instant, (December,) we struck on the coast of
Jutland, near Robsnoughl, and were completely wrecked, with
the loss of 220 people. The survivors, sixty in number, word
saved; the major part on a raft, the remainder in the jolly-
boat. Our situation was truly dreadful, even worse than at the
old ship’s (Anson) loss. We have been removed from Robsnought
to this place, (Aalborg,) in waggons, about 32 miles. We have
as yet been treated very well—expect soon to be released
The circumstances, however, attending the lamented loss of
this vessel were not faithfully detailed till lately, when they
were communicated by Lieutenant John Weaver, one of the
officers who was fortunately saved; whose account is as follows.
“ Sailed from Yarmouth, on the 29th November, 1808, and
at day-light of the sth December, saw Norway, from the deck,
(wind S. by W. and S.S.W.;) the pilots then steered S.E. by E.
At one o’clock on the sth, sounded in 25 fathoms, off the coast
▲ 2


of Jutland, near Robsnought; pilots continued their course
F..S.E. and at two sounded in 18 fathoms; at three, 13 fa-
thoms.
“ By order of the pilots the topsails were close reefed, courses
hauled up, and the ship hove-to with her head to the south-
ward ; (at this time the weather was remarkably thick;) shortly
after, the land was reported to be seen on the lee-bow to the
captain and pilots; the latter replied, they knew’ where the ship
was, and that she would drift with safety ; she dropped sudden-
ly into S, 7, (>, P, and then 10 fathoms; continued in the latter
depth till eight at night.
“ The pilots were asked by Captain Temple, if they wished
any alterations to be made ? They replied, no alterations were
requisite, and that the ship should continue on the same tack
till the next morning; unfortunately she struck about 10 o’clock
at night, the sth December.
“ A boat was immediately lowered down to sound ; the cur-
rent was setting to the eastward, at the rate of three knots an
hour: we then furled sails; soon after, the current taking her
on the larboard-bow, the sails were loosed, with expectation of
getting off, but it only hove her round in a worse condition, if
possible, than before ; the sails were again furled, and the boats
all out, with the exception of the jolly-boat, and an anchor and
'cable got into the launch ;. but from the rapidity of the current
the boats could not possibly tow her up, (the sea running very
highland therefore tailed in what was most essentially requisite
.for the safety of the ship, as well as the deliverance of those on
board ; the boats, with their crews, were driven by the force of
the'eurrent to leeward, and in the course of an hour we lost
sight of them among the breakers.
“The wind had shifted to N.W. (direct on shore;) the swell
increased, and the ship striking very hard, the bower anchor was
let go, and the nn n employed in lightening the ship, heaving the
gtins ovdrboard, and endeavouring to keep the water under by
pimipingfnll to no purpose; the water increased to the hatches,
and the cdble parted, w hich was our only hope.
“ At this time it was thought absolutely necessary to cut
away the masts, which was the means of casing the ship very
much. Inconsequence of the officers and men being fourteen
hourd'exerting themselves, during which time the weather was
Bad, we were aim fist exhausted with fatigdc, and were ordered
by the Captain to take some refreshment.


“ Having regaled ourselves for about twenty minutes, I went
to the Captain, and asked him to allow me to destroy the sig-
nals—he ordered the servant to give them to me, and 1 accor-
dingly burnt them.
“ All hands were then employed in constructing a raft, which
was made on the booms by the different spars ; nothing could
exceed the exertions of every individual on such a trying occa-
sion ; every order was put in execution with the coolness and,
judgement peculiar to British seamen ; every one was supplied
with a small line, for the purpose of lashing themselves to tire
raft; at two o’clock, P.M. the raft, or otherwise the forlorn
hope, was launched from the booms; it had but a very indif-
ferent appearance, having only four casks in each corner; more
could not be obtained ; three of those were soon washed away..
“ Tire raft was ordered to be manned by the sick and part
of the larboard watch, (not an able seaman was on it,) and given
to my charge. A small sail was thrown to us, but unfortu-
nately it tel! near the aftermost part, not a man would venture
to hand it forward, as they were almost perished with cold, be-
ing frequently up to their waists in water.
“ For twenty minutes previous to our leaving the ship, I un-
lashed myself, went aft, and with difficulty handed the sail for-
ward with a boat oar to Messrs. Mason and Lavender, midship-
men, whose exertions in assisting in holding up the sail were
of the greatest service; we were frequently washed off the raft,
and every sea threatened our destruction.
“ Notwithstanding our perilous situation, the officers and
men on hoard gave us three clus rs,.which was returned by the
survivors on the raft, although we were two miles and a half
from the Danish shore, with little hopes of reaching it; one ma-
rine perished before we left the side of the ship, and a serjeanl
and corporal shared the same fate, with several others,
“ By the assistance of Divine Providence, myself,.Messrs.
Mason and Lavender, midshipmen, with about twenty marines
and seamen, reached the shore, nearly lifeless; another raft was
attempted to be made, but proved ineffectual,.the sea making a.
complete breach over, the quarter deck; the jolly-boat was
then launched, and; manned by Mr.. Williamson, master ;
Messrs. Monro and'. Hoghton,. midshipmen, and Mr. Walker,
boatswain, with.fourteen men. Dreadful was the sight at the
jolly-boat leaving the ship ; numbers jumped overboard, and en.,
deavoured to get into the boat;: those that were in were obliged
extricate the hands of the others, in order toprevent the boa
a 3


from being too full, as she was then within eight inches of the
water’s edge; every seamen in the boat felt for their melancholy
situation ; deplorable indeed it was to think that no assistance
could be afforded, but that of wishing a happy deliverance to
their unfortunate shipmates. The jolly boat with her crew
reached the shore shortly after the ship broke up, and two hun-
dred and twenty souls perished.”
JOHN WEAVER,
First Lieutenant, Royal Marinos.
The officers saved were John Weaver, Lieutenant Royal
Marines; Mr. Williamson, Master; Messrs. Munro, Mason,
Hoghton, and Lavender, midshipmen; and Mr. Walker, boat-
swain.—Total of officers saved is seven.
The marines saved were 146. John Smith, 2d.; 148. John
Smith, 3d.; 155. Walter Russell; 171. Daniel Goud; 173.
John Joy; 154. Joseph Sigley; 155. John Colquhoun.—The
total of seamen and marines saved is fifty-five. Seamen’s names
saved are not known.
The officers lost were John Temple, captain; Messrs Kir-
wan, Maclean, and Stokes, lieutenants; Mr. Snodie, lieutenant
R. M.; Mr. Roife, surgeon; Mr. Hosier, purser; Mr. Bran-
thwaite, passenger ; Messrs. Wallace, Willis, Hacker, Spurgen,
O’Donnell, Hoghton, jun. Wythe, Knight, and Hanson, mid-
shipmen ; Mr. Williams, gunner; Mr. Colter, carpenter; two
pilots, six women, and one child.
Total-Officers, Seamen, Marines, Women, &c, lost, £2O.


SHIPWRECK AND ADVENTURES
OF
CAPT. NATHANIEL URING ,
In the beginning of November, 1711.
E set sail, (says our author) from Jamaica, in company
with another sloop, belonging to the ?arne owner, in order to
load logwood and sarsepcrila on the cast of New Spain, and
had agreed to rendezvous at Truxilo, if we lost company; we
touched at Blewfields, where we watered, and proceeded on our
voyage. I being then unacquainted in those seas, had a pilot
sent on board'.by the owner, and I was directed to.keep com*
pany with the other sloop commanded by Captain Gill, who
was reckoned a good pilot in that part of the world.
After we had sailed about a week from Jamaica, having
little wind, we saw the coast of the Muschetos; and at the same
time the wind began to freshen, with a small drislingrain. The
wind soon after shifting from the N.E, to the N. and N. by W,
and blowing hard, we tacked and stood to the eastward; the
wind increasing to a storm, obliged us to haul down our main-
sail and jib, and lay by under our fore-sail. Night coming
on, we lost sight of our consort, and made several false fires, but
was not answered, so that I gave over the hopes of seeing her
any more.
About nine or ten of the clock at night, there being a very
great sea raised by the wind, our bowsprit gave way, and fell


under the lee bow, we endeavoured to save it, but ihe sea run-
ning so high we could not, and being afraid it would stave a
bole in the bow of the vessel, were obliged to cut it away; and
while some men were cutting away the bowsprit, others were
carrying the horse forward for a stay, in order to secure the
mast, and then reefed the fore-sail, and set ii ; but the storm
continuing, we were soon obliged to haul it down again. About
eleven o’clock at night, vve suddenly saw the water look very-
white, which made me afraid that we were upon some shoal,
and immediately hove the lead, and found fourteen fathom wa-
ter ; vve kept heaving it, expecting every moment to be a-shorc.
We set the fore-sail again. E enquired of my pilot, in relation
to the depth of water, but found he knew nothing of the matter.
We hove the lead several times in the space of a quarter of an
hour, and had almost the same water, it shoaling very little,
which gave me hopes that we were not in so much dang( r as 1
before feared. The wind easing a little, wc double-reefed our
main-sail and set it, and hauled down the fore-sail, which kept
the sloop’s head more to the wind. In about an hour the wa-
ter shoaled to thirteen fathom, and so to twelve, and then eleven ;
and about three o’clock we had but ten, and quickly after nine
fathom, which made me afraid we should, be drove on shore! be-
fore day-light. The storm continuing, and the wind blowing
rightupon it, by this time had drove us into less than seven fa-
thom water ; vve then set the fore-sail to try if the vessel would,
bear it;, or must soon have been driven ashore. We made
hard shift to carry it, and gathered again off the land into eight
fathom.
We now deepened our water till about ten o’clock, when we
were again got into nine fathom ; but the land trenching more
to the east ward,, wc soon began to shoal our water again to eight
fathom, and so to seven. My pilot seeing a remarkable tuft of
trees, said he knew the land; and as we went further to the
eastward, he grew more confirmed in it; but 1 having consulted
my draught, it laid down a great many rocks and shoals there-
abouts, which gave me little hopes; but standing to the east-
ward, we still raised the land, and the pilot said positively he
knew that it was Cape Gracia de Dios; to the eastward of
which round that cape, he said was-very good and safe anchor-
ing, as the wind then was, where he had been several times; and
further said that we should weather the cape in five fathom wa--
ter. I was glad to hear that he was so positive he knew the
land, and- in weathering the cape wc had no more than five fa


thorn water, which confirmed me that he was right in his judge-
ment ; as soon as wc deepened the water, the pilot said it was
time to bear away; we did so, but soon shoaled the water again,
and the pilot was afraid he was mistaken, and then said he was
right again ; but we soon found the pilot had deceived us, for
we struck upon a shoal of rocks, and gave but few thumps be-
fore the main-mast jumped out of the step, and forfear the foot
of the mast should force out the sloop’s bow and sink her imme-
diately, wc made haste to cut it away; but having but one
axe, had hard work to do it, as we had also in cutting away
the vessel’s gunhill, in order to launch the canoe overboard.
“ The mast being gone, we could have no assistance of tack-
les, and found it very difficult to launch her into the sea, she
being very heavy ; but being apprehensive of the sloop’s beating
in pieces upon the shoal, every one out-did themselves, and at
last, with much ado, got her into the water, by which time it
was near night; and being at least two leagues from the shore,
we made haste to leave the sloop that we might reach it before
it was dark, and only took with us one piece of beef, our small
arms, a little gun-powder, some small shot, an axe, and an iron
pot, and then put for the shore, which we did not roach till near
eight o’clock at night; when we came near it, we saw the break
of the sea so high, and at such a distance from it, wc were very
much afraid of the canoe’s oversetting, before we should be able
to get thither: but there being no way to save our lives, but
through that danger, we were obliged to put for it, let the con-
sequence be what it would. It being moon-light, we watched a
favourable opportunity of a smooth sea, and immediately
rowed for the shore, the sea breaking over us several times
before we came to it, and by the providence of God we happily
landed.
As soon as we were all out of the canoe, we hauled her up
Upon the beach, and then cliff avoured to go back from the wa-
ter-side into the woods, which we saw at some distance, in order
to get fire, being, both cold and wet. and sadly fatigued ; hut
when we attempted to go towards the woods, came quickly
into a morass, and were up to the mid-leg, and sometimes up to
the knees in mud and water; and what made it the more trou-
blesome, it was full of long cutting glass intermixed with briars,
which very much incommoded us, and tore our legs in seve-
ral places. After We had gone near a mile in this miserable
way, we came to the dry land, and went into the edge of the
of the woods, where, by the help of a pistol and some gun


powder, we made a fire, and dried our deaths; and then we cut
down some small trees, with which, and the branches of others,
we set up a little hut to shelter us from the rain, in which we de-
signed to rest and refresh ourselves, after two days and a night’s
fatigue. We laid down in our hnt, but found it was impossible
to sleep, there being millions of muschetoes, and other biting
flies about us; so that neither mouth, nose, eyes, nor any part
of us, was free from them; and wherever they could come at
our skin, they bit and stung us most intolerably.
As soon as it was day, we went to the water-side to look for
the sloop, but not seeing her, concluded she was beat in pieces
upon the ledge of rocks where we left her. Having but one
piece of beef, about six pounds, which we brought from on
board the sloop, and no bread for our whole company, being
sixteen in number, we began to think of looking out to sec what
we could get to subsist on ; and therefore I sent the people dif-
ferent ways, to hunt, and see whether they could discover any
inhabitants. In about four hours some of them returned with
a bunch of green plantains, which they had found growing in an
old deserted plantation, where they saw sweet cassave ; this dis-
covery came very seasonable to our relief; as soon as we found
bread-kind, we boiled our beef, and refreshed ourselves.
The following day 1 distributed amongst the people some
small arms, powder and shot, which indeed I had directed to be
put into the canoe when we left the sloop, in order to kill such
creatures as probably we might find in that country, to prevent
our being starved, it we found no inhabitants The men being
thus provided, I ordered them to go different ways to hunt,
and observe if they saw any paths in the woods by which we
might find some of the natives, concluding we were not far dis-
tant from the people, by reason of the little deserted plantation,
where were the remains of a little hut or Indian cabin. I also
took my gun and went a different way ; and espying a tyger cat
upon a tree, 1 fired, but missed her, which if 1 had had the good
fortune to have killed, would have been sufficient to have made
us a plentiful meal. Having hunted several hours in the woods,
and meeting with nothing worth shooting, I returned; and some
of our people came back soon after with several large fishing
hawks which they had killed ; and notwithstanding they were
very tough and fishy, we eat them very heartily.
The next day, being the third after our being cast away, the
people went out again to sec what they cduld kill, and some of
them soon, returned with more hawks, which we were dressing


■when others btough t with them a large piece of a cow. Wien I
saw the beef, I enquired how they came by if; they told me they
found it single in the woods, and shot it, believing it to be wild;
but soon after seeing three more which appeared to be tame,
they found their mistake. I was very sorry the people were
*o rash, being apprehensive of the ill consequences that might
attend it.
By the time we had dined upon the beef, a native of the
country came to us, who spoke broken English, by whom we
understood, that about sixteen or eighteen miles farther to the
southward, there were inhabitants, and that a vessel lay sunk
near the shore a few miles from us, without any mast or people
in her, which we judged to be our sloop. He told me also that
some of our people had killed a cow belonging to Captain Hob-
by, ene of the chief men on that side of the country; and said
he would be much displeased when he heard of it. i told him
I was very sorry for it, but that the seamen had killed it by mis*
take, believing it to be wild. 1 was glad to hear we were near
inhabitants, and that the sloop was driven so near the shore,
from whence we hoped to get some provisions.
The weather proving more moderate, and the sea pretty well
down, we launched the canoe; and while some of the men row-
ed her along shore, others walked by land, and so continued till
it grew night, and then hauled the canoe on shore, and turned
her bottom up. Part of us took up our lodging under her, and
part upon the sandy beaoh; but those under the canoe soon
quitted their lodging, by reason the flies would not suffer them
to sleep, chusing to lie in the open air, where the wind blew
most of them away. In the night two of our men left us, and
carried with them my fowling-piece and a musquet, with good
part of our powder and shot.
In the morning we launched our canoe, and pursued our
journey as before. About noon we saw our vessel sunk near
shore; we went on board, but found every thing gone out of
her. I ordered the canoe to Black River, where she was con-
ducted by an Indian; and went myself to the Indian habitations,
where I found most of them very happy; some of them were so
drunk they could not speak. We had the good luck to find
one or two sober, who shewed us where they had laid some of
our provisions, which our people went immediately to dress, be-
ing all very hungry. Black River running up near the Indian
habitations within the land, our people brought up the canoe;
the sober Indians were very courteous, and gave us some of our


rom and sugar, with which we made some punch, and cheered
our spirits; they also let us know where the) - had hid some of
our rum, from whence we took a small cask, and put into our
canoe.
The next day Captain Hobby came to us, and behaved very
civilly, though he made a heavy complaint for the loss of his
cow. I assured him our people had not killed it, if they had
not believed it had been wild ; at which he seemed better satis-
fied, and was very friendly, seeming sorry for our misfortune.
In four or five days we fitted our canoe as well as we could,
in which we fixed a smalt fire hearth to dress our provisions,
having put into her as much provisions and w ater as we could
go safely to sea with. Taking with me light of my people, we
put to sea, intending for Truxilo, which was the place appointed
for our rendezvous, and where we expected to find our consort.
Captain Hobby lending us another canoe to carry the rest of
our men, we rowed round the Cape where we were cast away,
which we then knew went by the name of the False Cape;
which makes me believe some other people had been deceived
in it as well as my pilot, who had given it that name. When
we were past the Cape, we stood down along the shore with
our sails; and at night we let go our graplin, and lay till morn-
ing for fear of passing our consort, which we hoped to see
upon the coast. As soon as it was light, we weighed, and
pursued our voyage, keeping as near the shore as we could with
safety, by reason we designed to call at Plantain River, to en-
quire whether they had seen her pass by. At night we anchor-
ed again. Wc boiled the pot every day; our food was flour
and water boiled like hasty pudding, with some little bits of
beef to give it a relish, instead of butter and salt. In prosecu-
tion of this voyage in the canoe, 1 found it very troublesome
and fatiguing ; for having no rudder, it was very hard work to
steer her with a paddle, for which I had occasion to use my
whole strength. Being at that work most part of the day, I
was heartily tired before night; and scorching in the sun all
day in the latitude of 16 degrees, added to our pain. But the
fatigue of the night was still worse than the day ; for the canoe
being very leaky, it was impossible for me to sleep in her bot-
tom, where the water washed continually from side to side; I
therefore laid one of the paddles across the canoe’s gunhill, to
keep my legs out of the water, and one of the seats or thouts I
placed under the lower part of my back, with my shoulders on
the stern sheets: in this manner I slumbered, and got now and
then a short sleep.


Three or four days and nights passed in this , manner, till wc
discovered the huts on the point of Plantain River, where wc
saw the English flag hoisted. As soon as we opened the river,
we put in for it, but found the water so shallow, and a great sea
beating on the shore, it was with great difficulty we got in with-
out being overset or filled with water. As soon as we arrived
in the river, we were welcomed a-shore by_ the white men which
resided at that place ; we told them our story, and enquired if
they had seen any vessel lately on that coast; they said they
had not, but commiserated our condition, and gave us such fresh
provision as they had.
After we had refreshed ourselves, and cheered our spirits, we
set about fixing a rudder to our canoe, which we completed that
night. When it was bed-time, I asked one of the inhabitants to
shew me where I should lodge; which being conducted to, I
went to sleep; and though I found it hard enough for my sore
bones, I slept very heartily, being the first tolerable night’s rest
1 had got .since our being cast away.
Having lost good part of our powder and shot by our two
deserters, when we were going to Black River, I let the white
men know of our necessity, who supplied us with some more;
and having staid only one night at this place, in the morning we
took our leave, and pursued our voyage for Truxilo. We left
Plantain River, and steered along shore for Cape Comerone,
passed by it, and after several days and nights being at sea with
our usual fare, we came in sight of the port of Truxilo, but
found no vessel there, which gave me additional trouble and
anxiety. We put our canoe's head to the eastward, in order to
return to Plantain River; but had not rowed above five or six
miles, (being now obliged to row against the wind,) before the
sky began to lour, grow cloudy and thicken a-pace to the north-
ward, which threatened an approaching storm. It being then
about four or five o’clock in the afternoon, I thought it high
time to provide for our safety before night, by putting the canoe
a shore, or into some river ; but there being a very great sea,
cither was very dangerous ; and to keep the sea in a storm was
still worse; and so of two evils I chose the”lesser. Seeing the
opening of a river, we endeavoured to get in; but the sett ran
so high at the mouth of it, it filled our canoes, and threw us
ashore on the west side. With a good deal of labour we freed
her, and put her into the river. It being now night wc anchor-
ed in the middle of the stream, in hopes'of being free from flies.
The night proving very stormy, we thought ourselves very
£


happy we had got into so good an harbour, hi the morning we
rowed about two miles up the river; and observing a little ridge
«f land standing above the rest, we landed there, and soon af-
ter pitched our tent with our canoe’s sails; we cut down
branches of the cohonc trees, to lay at the bottom of it, to ship
upon, and keep us from the wet ground. Ihe weather conti-
nued very stormy, and in the night there fell such a prodigious
deal of rain, that it occasioned a continual rivulet to run through
our tent; and wc lay in water, though it was placed on the
highest ground; being also very much pestered with muscho-
toes, and other stinging flics, which would not suffer us to
sleep.
In the morning the rain ceased, and it grew fair weather,
though the wind continued to blow hard. Wc began to look
about us to see what wo could meet with for the mouth, and
went on the other side of the river in order to hunt. We saw
a large guanoe on the bough of a tree, which one of our people
endeavoured to take with his hand, but he escaped into the ri-
ver, and so wc lost a creature which would have given us all a
good meal. Wc had not gone far into the woods, before we
saw a company of large black monkeys, of which we killed se-
veral, and then returned to our tent Our people thought
these monkeys excellent victuals, and eat them very greedi-
ly, though for my own part, I was several days before I could
prevail with myself to taste them, they looked so like young
children broiled. But it was not long before I got over the
prejudice, and cat them as heartily as any of our men. The
flesh of a monkey has something of the taste of ill-fed porlr, and
are about the bigness "of a full grown hare.
After two or three days being in the river, wc rowed up seve-
ral miles, to see if wc could discover the signs of any inhabi-
tants, or a more convenient place to pitch our tent ; but found
the whole country flat and morassy, and not the least sign of
any people. The weather continued bad for eight or ten days,
it often raining very hard : and being still plagued with flies, we
were obliged to quit the woods, and go to the sea-side, into the
■breeze, to get rid of them ; but found we had not changed
much for the better, for the sand flics there were almost as trou-
blesome as the muschetoes in the woods.
In a day or two after we changed our quarters, one of our
people took a hicatce asleep upon a log of wood in the river, as
it was sunning itself, on which we feasted plentifully. ' It is an
amphibious creature, and like what is called a tortoise or land


turtle. In two or three days after we removed to the sea-side>
1 was seized with a violent pain in my right thigh ; it swelled
extremely, and looked very red, insomuch that 1 could neither
stand nor go; what with the excessive pain in my thigh, and
the biting and stinging of muschetoes and sand flies, I had no rest
either by night or day, my hands being always employed in
beating otf the flies from my face. Our powder and shot being
all spent, except a little reserved to make a lire, we lived chiefly
upon cabbage, which grew there in great numbers, some of the
trees to fifty or sixty feet high, their circumference being about
four or five feet. The cabbage is close, very white, short, and
well tasted, and I thought sweeter and belter than our English
cabbage. In this river we frequently saw numbers of large alli-
gators, and it was f.sual for eight or ten of them together to
come ashore upon a point of sand near the river’s mouth, in the
middle of the day, to sun themselves. Our provisions growing
short before I was lame, I endeavoured to shoot some of them
for food, but had not the good fortune to kill any.
When we had been here ten or twelve days, the weather was
grown pretty tolerable, but there was still a great sea beat upon
the shore, when the seamen took it in their heads to go to sea
in the canoe, in order to go to Plantain fiivcr; and notwith-
standing my lameness and earnest entreaties to the contrary, 1
could.not prevail with them to stay a day or two till I was bet-
ter, in which time the sea might have fallen, and we should not
run half the risque in going out of the river, as at this time. I
made shift to crawl to the canoe, and placid myself in the stern
sheets, and with the help of my boatswain, undertook so steer her.
It is commonly observed, that the sea breaks upon the shore in
three or five seas quickly succeeding each other, and then a
small intermission, when it is most proper to put from the shore.
Being come to the river’s mouth, as soon as the great seas were
over, we rowed out; but our canoe being heavy, we were not
able to get without the breakers before the great seas approach-
ed us, at which time wc were a good distance from the shore,
between the breakers, and seeing our danger, I encouraged the
people to row briskly over them ; but the sea rose so high, and
broke so terribly, they were all alarmed and confounded; the
sea broke in upon us, and the canoe being filled half full, cant-
ed her broadside to it'for w ant of their pulling with their oars
as they ought to have done, 1 perceiving our danger, and ano-
ther sea ready to break in upon us, with the help of my boat-
swain 1 taraed the canoe’s head to the shore ; and the very mo-
b 2


ment we had so done, the sea broke over us from end to end,
filled the canoe, and forced her swiftly towards the shore : the
seamen sitting still prevented her oversetting; one sea following
close upon the back of another, quickly drove us on shore on
the west side of the river ; happy it was for us that the canoe’s
stern was to the sea when it reached us, or otherwise she must
have been turned bottom up ; and being in the current, which
ran strong out of the river, would have drove us to sea, where
we iad no chance of saving our lives. We hauled up the ca-
noe, and freed her, and with a good deal of labour and pains,
put her again ipto the river. When the seamen were got in-
to safety, they swore the most bitter oaths, that they would not
go to see in the canoe any more, but would travel by land to
Plantain River.
‘They communicated to me their intention, and desired what
provisions were left might be equally shared. I then represen-
ted to them the lame condition I was in, and that it w as impossible
for me to travel by land, since they saw I could hardly stand;
and conjured them not to leave me in such sad distress, where I
must inevitably perish, being incapable of helping myself. I
desired they would stay but two or thrqe days, in which time
my leg might possibly grow' better, or the sea would be smooth-
er, so that we might be able to proceed without much danger ;
and also represented to them the very great hazards and difficul-
ties which would attend their going by land, the many large ri-
vers that were between us and Plantain River, besides the fa-
tigue of travelling, and the risque they ran of the wild beasts de-
vouring them, in which that country abounded ; but allT said
could uot divert them from their present purpose.
Having however fatigued themselves, they returned for the pre-
sent to theii former quarters. Here we remained three or fou r days,
it being tolerable fair weather; and the sea being much smoother,
I proposed to put to sea ; but the seamen refused, and swore they
would not go in her any more. I talked smartly to them, anjl
declared that if but one man would go with me, I would leave
them. My boy and two men consented to go, and wc sot out
accordingly about eight o’clock in the morning, and in about
three hours we reached the mouth of the river of great Romain ;
to which place several of the people (growing into better tem-
per,) went with us, and assisted us to make our bark logs. We
found scattered upon the banks of the river several bamboo
trees, which we got together, and cut them info proper lengths,
and fastened them to each other to make bark logs, in order to


get over the river. We had a fishing line, which was divided
between us; myself and the boy one half, and the two men had
the other half, each bark log carrying two persons. We left the
axe with the rest of the people, who returned to the canoe, and
we set forward with our two bark logs; we paddled up close
by the side of the river, keeping as much out of the current as
possible, intending to go a good way up it before we endea-
voured to cross it, that we might be in no danger of driving out
of the river’s mouth. Wc kept paddling till half an hour past
six o'clock at night; and seeing a fine green spot, clear of bush-
es close to the river’s side, wc landed there, and took up our
abode that night; butjust ns wo were stepping ashore, several
large alligators flounced from thence into the water close by us,,
at which we were very much startled, finding this place con-
venient for us, we made fast our bark logs, and then made a
fire to prevent the tygers or alligators from disturbing us. Be-
ing tired, we soon fell asleep round the fire; for the fatigue of
the dav had made us forget the danger of the night. Wc had
provided a pistol, and a little gun-powder in a calabash, which
was close waxed up, to prevent its being damaged with water,
with which we made a fire when we thought it necessary, in
the morning as soon as it was light, we mounted our bark logs,
and continued paddling up the river; but the stream was so ra-
pid that we went up but slowly, and sometimes were not able
to bear up against it. We endeavoured to haul up by the
branches of the trees which hung over the river, but they being
tender twigs, afforded but little assistance. When I came with--
in my depth, I waded, and pushed the bark log before mo, but
was soon out of foot-hold, and then mounted the bark log again,
and worked with our paddles, and yet made but little riddance,,
finding it very hard to strive against the stream. We often, saw-,
large alligators leap from among the bushes into the water, just
by us; notwithstanding which I was obliged to run the risque
of-being seized by them, there being often a.necessity, to wade,,
or wc could not force the bark log against the stream.. At last,.
with great toil and danger, in six or seven .hours, wegot three or ■
four miles up the river, till wc came the length, of an island
which lard near a quarter part over; it; but was hard, put:
to it to get thither, the island dividing the stream of the river,
and redoubling its force, so that it was with great difficulty
we reached it. When we had surmounted the difficulty,,
we rested awhile, and then paddled about half a mile •
farther, up the side of the island, and believing ourselves so fair
is. a.


up that we might safely venture to cross if, we put over and hap-
pily reached the other side about a mile above the river’s mouth,
then drove down the current till we came to a convenient place
near its entrance,’where we landed about three o’clock in the
afternoon. The weather being extremely hot, and having no
wind, and only my shirt on, and that leaving my thighs very
often bare, the heat of the sun scorching them, made me fre-
quently throw water on them to keep them cool, not thinking of
the consequence;- but soon after we landed 1 found them ex-
tremely sore, ’very red, and blistered in several places, which
grew very painful. We unlashed our bark logs for the sake of
our line, eat a little morsel of bread with about an ounce of raw
salt beef, and filled upwith the lihipid stream. Being thus re-
freshed, we set forward, and travelled eight or ten miles that
night; before it grew dark we made a fire near the sea-side in
order to take up our lodging, but having had no water since we
parted from the river of Remain, we were almost famished, and
teady to die with thirst; having found some cocoa plumb trees,
where we took up our quarters, we.searched them very narrow-
ly fof fruit, and found two or three plumbs, which moistened my
mouth, and gave me great relief. In a little time after, by dig-
ging in the sand, we found fresh water, with which we satisfied
our thirst.
As soon as it was day, we pursued our journey, and about ten.
o’clock in the morning, we came to a river with a very deep and
rapid stream, but not above a quarter so broad as that we had
already passed. Finding bamboos scattered over tire point of
the river, we gathered them together, and began to make our
bark logs. In about three hours we completed them, and pul
over the river,which we fpund less trouble in passing than we ex-
pected, by reason half the breadth of iton thefarthest side proved
to be shoal water, and not above mid-leg deep, which we found
little inconvenience in wading through. When we were over,
and had taken our line from the bark logs, it being about two
o’clock in the afternoon, we set down by the river-side to dinner.
When we had eat as much as we could afford, and washed it
down with large draughts of water, we proceeded on our jour-
ney ; but found it very troublesome travelling on dry and loose
land, besides the inconvenience of bad shoes. We attempted
several limes to travel through the woods, but found the under-
wood so thick, and the ground morassy, there was no passing
that way, and were obliged to keep by the sea side. We waded
over several rivers, some up to our knees, others to our middle,


and others up to our chin. One of the men could swim, and
he used to try first whether the rivers were fordable, which, if
he found, we forded over; and if not we made our bark - logs,
and went over upon them. We travelled about eight or ten
miles after we were over Limehouse River, (for so that river was
called where we dined,) and it being near night, we made a fire
according to custom, and rested till morning; we then went for-
ward, fording over many rivers in our way. About noon we
came to a head-land that jutted into the sea, which put a stop
to ongoing by the sea-side, the rocks being very high and steep,
and the sea beating violently against them : we chose to go back
into the woods, where we found it less troublesome, with an in-
tent to go through the country till «c should get on the other
side of the head-land, and accordingly marched up the hills for
that purpose, having with great difficulty travelled up and down
several, where we were obliged to haul ourselves up from tree
to tree, and slide down again on the other side, easing ourselves
down the branches to prevent our falling. Having wandered
several hours in this manner, and being in hopes we had passed
the head-land, and withal beginning to be apprehensive we
should not be able to get out of the woods before night, there be-
ing more danger of wild beasts, and much more unwholesome
slcepng than at the sea-side ; we therefore thought it absolutely
necessary to recover it before it was dark; and having descen-
ded between two hills into a deep narrow valley, we found a
fine rivulet, which was very seasonable to quench our thirst,
I concluded this rivutet led to the sea, and therefore follow-
ed the stream; but it having many turnings and windings, we
went several miles before we came to it, and to our great morti-
fication, found ourselves still on the same side, and not far from
the place where we entered the woods. The sun being set, we
gathered wood and made a fire, where we continued till the
morning, and then attempted to get over the hill, but found it
impossible to force a way through the penguins, briars, and other
prickly plants which grew there. We retired, after tearing our
cloaths, and losing some of our flesh, and then took a very des-
perate resolution to climb over the cragged part of the rocks,
which was very steep and high, and extremely dangerous to pass;
winch we went over by stepping from one hole in the sides of the
rocks to another, and from one crag to another, holding by the
ragged part of it with one. hand, and our spare cloaths with the
other, and by the assistance of Providence we got all well over.
We now went on cheerfully, believing the worst of our journey


was over; and in about an hour after, by the soa-sido, I found',
a cocoa nut; I soon opened it, and saw it full of milk, which
I drank with great pleasure, and divided the nut among the
other people. After we had travelled about ten miles, we came
to another point of rocks, but this wc got over without much
difficulty. When wc had gone about six long miles farther, it
growing night, we made our lire according to custom, and in
the morning wc proceeded on our journey, fording over many ri-
vers ; it was showery weather, and being but thin cloathed, 1 was
often wet to the skin, but soon dried again by the wind and sun..
About nine o’clock in the morning, we came to a low flat point
of land, which, by the sea beating continually upon it, had wash-
ed away tke earth from the-roots of the trees which had grown
there, and were lying scattered very thick all over the point..
Having got over this troublesome place, we went in expectation,
every moment of coming to some habitation; We went on se-
veral miles further, blit found no sign of inhabitants ; and hav-
ing made an end of our little provisions the day before, we be-
gan to be quite out of heart, and apprehensive of starving, having
nothing with us that could by any means provide for our sub-
sistence. Wc came to a large lake or lagoon of water, which
had a communication with the sea, the stream of which I ob-
served ran out of the sea into the lagoon.. On'.' of our men.
forded it, and went on the other si tie to see what he could dis-
cover; and in about two hours, returned with the joyful news-
of having discovered the print of a man's foot, which gave us.
hopes we were not far from the inhabitants With much ado,
wc forded over the mouth of the lagoon, and continued on our
journey till we came to another deep and rapid river, which,
there was no passing without bark logs; we fill to our old'
work of gathering bam boes, and such dry wood as we could
get to make them ; but they being scarce, we could not gather
so many together that night as we wanted.. We made a fire
upon the point of the river, where we look up our lodging; se-
veral showers of rain incommoded us very much, and had almost
put out our fire, and wc grew faint and weak for want of suste-
nance ; however, about nine o’clock the next morning we finish-
ed our bark logs, and put over the river. When we landed, wc
dried our deaths, that we might travel the lighter, which had
been our custom in our whole journey, they being wet in passing,
the rivers; and we were continually pestered with muschctoes
and sand flies, and more so whenever we sat or lay down. We.
proceeded along the shore, and had not gone above half a mile


before We discovered a path which led into the woods, the sight
of which gave us all inexpressible joy ; we followed it,'and in
about half a mile further we saw a hut, and soon after, to our
great comfort, a white man appeared. He asked us who we
were, and whence we came; we related to him our misfortunes,
he pitied our condition, and asked where the captain was; he
was told that I was the person, and my name ; he said he knew
me when I commanded a packet-boat to Jamaica, and what his
cottage afforded I should be.vcry welcome to. He soon provi-
ded us with something to cat, w'hich we had great need of.
This person’s name was Luke Haughton, whose family consisted
of two women and an Indian boy of above fifteen years of age ;
the boy was his slave, as was one of the women, who used to
sleep with him and dress his provisions, whom he kept as his
wife; the other woman was slave to a white man, who was ab-
sent, A little distance from Luke Haughton’s, there lived an-
other white man, who had also two slaves, an Indian man and
woman. I told Haughton where we had left the rest of our
company, and would have hired him and the other white man
to have fetched them up in their oanoe, and for their trouble I
promised them our canoe, iron pot, and small arms ; but they
would not undertake so dangerous a voyage on any account;
and these people had like to have paid dear for their indiscre-
tion, for if it had not been for a Jamaica sloop, who by great ac-
cident passed by that coast, and seeing a smoak on the shore,
and knowing there were no inhabitants near that place, suppo-
sed they were people in distress; it being fair weather and
smooth water at the same time, they sent their canoe thither
and took them on board, when they were almost starved, the pi-
lot having had his reward for undertaking what he was inca-
pable of, he being starved to death. 'I he seamen would have
shot him long before 1 left them, if I had not prevented them.
My padron’s habitation was near Cape Comerone, which is the
western part of the muschcto coast that is inhabited. He lived
in the same manner as the natives; when he wanted provisions,
he went a hunting, and always brought home something to cat,
sometimes warree or deer, and at oth r times cornsos, sjuams, or
monkeys, though he would seldom kill corrisos or quara-, (not
thinking them worth a shot,) if he could either kill warree,
deer, or monkeys. When he returned, we had as much boiled
as would serve the .family, and the rest was barbecued to keep
it from stinking, not being provided with salt enough'for. that
purpose; nor would salt preserve it so well.


When I had been at my padrone’s between two and three
months, and heartily tired with this manner of life, one morning,
about two o’clock, I heard a sudden noise of the tiring of a gun
at sea ; and imaginihg it to be from our consort sloop, which I
supposed was returning again to Jamaica, and believing the cap-
tain had heard of our misfortune, he had made it his business
to call here; and as Plantain River was the most convenient
place for anchoring, I imagined he had fired a gun to give us no-
tice of his passing by for that place. Upon hearing this, I im-
mediately got up, telling my padrone my thoughts, and my in-
tention to goto Plantain River: He endeavoured to persuade
me to stay till day-light, to see if any vessel was in sight or not;
and told me probably it might be some old tree that was fallen
down, which made that noise we heard. I said that I imagined
it to be the Captain Gill, and was resolved to go for Plantain
River, where 1 hoped to find him. Having nfhde my best com-
pliments to ray padrone for all his favours, I took my leave, and
set out about break of day, in hopes as it grew lighter, to have
seen the sloop 1 expected ; but no vessel appearing in sight, I
walked briskly along the shore till I arrived at the Indian plan-
tation, our neighbours, which was directly in my way. There
being beyond them a very broad river which I must pass, 1 de-
sired of the Indians to let one of the young men put me over ;
which was immediately granted, and one of them gave me a
roasted plantain, which was all the provision I had for my jour-
ney. Going down the branch which led to the main river, find-
ing it fresh water, 1 eat my plantain while 1 had drink, being
apprehensive 1 should not meet with any more until my arrival
at Plantain River. When I landed on the other side I pursued
ray journey, and was in hopes, as I rounded the cape, to have
discovered the sloop; but to my great mortification 1 saw no
vessel. 1 began to think the noise I had heard was occasi-
oned by the fall of an old tree, as tny padrone had suggested ;
but considering Plantain River was a more likely place for ves-
sels to come to than the capo, I chose to proceed, and tra-
velled briskly on. The weather was extremely hot, which
made me very thirsty ; but not being able to find any fresh wa-
ter, I made what haste I could in order to reach Plantain
River before night; and abi Ut four o’clock I saw the huts there.
By the time I got thither I was very faint, and almost ready to
die with thirst, being extremely fatigued, having travelled twen-
ty miles upon the sa,nd in the scorching sun without a drop of
water. The inhabitants gave me such refreshments as their


huts afforded, though not sufficient to allay my appetite. When
I had rested, and was a little refreshed, I prevailed with one of
the people to put me over the river, where most of the white
p-ople had their habitations. 1 told them my reasons for co-
ming thither; they said I should be welcome to such as they
had, till I could get an opportunity of embarking for Jamaica.
people informed me, that several of the white men and
Indians were gone to Sandy Bay, which is beyond Cape Grace
de Dios, were the chiefs and greatest body of Muscheto Indi-
ans have their habitations, in order to concert measures to enter
upon an expedition against the wild Indians, for so they call
those who do not live under the Spanish government, but have
fled from their cruelty, and taken up their abode in some ob-
scure place in the woods.
When I had been at Plantain River about ten days, we saw
a sloop stand in for the shore, which came to an anchor off the
river's mouth : she hoisted English colours, and sent their canoe
for the shore, but was overset in the breakers, and all the peo-
ple put a swimming for their lives; however, they came all well
onshore. We gathered up the oars, and hauled up the canoe;
and I soon learned from the people that their sloop was laden
with logwood, came from the bay of Honduras, and was boUnd
to Jamaica, but that they had been looking for that island so
long, till all their provisions were spent, and could not find it;
and in standing to the southward they saw the land, and made
it to bo Plantain River, which some of them had been at before,
and were come hither in hopes of being supplied with provi-
sions. I was exceeding glad to hear they were bound for Ja-
maica, having now great hopes of getting thither again; for
though I fared tolerably well for provisions, I had little pleasure
in my company, who were a rude unpolished crew, and I was
heartily tired with this Indian manner of living. A white man
that sometimes used to reside at the place, was part owner of the
sloop, but was then gone to Sandy Bay, in order to goon an ex-
pedition against the wild Indians before-mentioned; and the
person Vho had the care of his affairs, having some provisions
of his, concluded to put on board the sloop a barrel of beef
and one of flour, and send them forward tor Jamaica. 1
was very willing to make use of this opportunity <>f a passage.;
but considering the master of the sloop was incapable of naviga-
ting her, I consulted with the person.who supplied the provi-
sions, in relation to the conducting the vessel: observing to him,
that they in the sloop had lost themselves, and by great acci


dent were come thither, or must all hare perished by the igno-
rance of the master, and told him, if the master of the sloop
would leave the direction te me, I would venture to go in her,
but if not, I had rather wait till another opportunity, fot I was
apprehensive of being put into the same condition they had so
lately been in.
He thought this a very reasohable request for the safety of the
vessel, as well as those on board, and accordingly, the master of
the sloop having consented to lea'vc the direction of her to our
hero, by this means he returned to Jamaica.
n«uuMr, HiftMr ( 9KU)fk| Law,
