

AUTHORITY:
EARTHLY AND HEAVENLY.
A SERMON
PREACHED BEFORE THE VOLUNTEERS AT THE
WERRIBEE CAMP,
ON SUNDAY, 31st MARCH,
BY THE
REV. W. HENDERSON,
OF BALLAARAT.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED AT THE GENERAL PRINTING OFFICE,
72 COLLINS STREET EAST.




14 ' S'-T/
A SERMON.
Mark xii. 17. —Render to Caesar the things that arc
Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.
to 6%
These words were spoken by the Lord to the
Jews when they had asked him, on one occasion,
a silly, captious question about paying tribute
to the Roman authorities. It was a foreign
sovereign who was ruling over them, and they
did not like just it. They thought that
when the Messiah came, he was to have nothing-
better in the world to do than to break that Roman
yoke, and to restore the Kingdom of his father
David. They did not know, or they had quite for-
gotten what their prophets had intimated to
them, that, when the Messiah came, He was to
discover to them the secret of a very much higher
Fatherhood, that He was to come as something in-
finitely better than a mere son of David. That He
was to come as son of God, that He was to set up,
not the Kingdom of David, but the Kingdom of
God. And therefore, when our Lord came among
them, instead of allowing Him in all things to put
them right, they wcie evermore trying to put Him
in the wrong. He was not the sort of Christ they
wanted. He was not saying anything about break
mg the power of the Caesars. He was not saying a
single word of a Jewish army or of a Jewish


sovereignty. They did not see that, by putting
them as a nation under the power of the Caesars,
God had been showing them that that was the only
thing that was good for them at that time, that they
had grown so lawless and disobedient, that it re-
quired the iron power of Rome to teach them obedience
and right living again. They were not able to rule
themselves any longer. There was not patriotism of
the true and genuine sort enough in them to enable
them to work out the purposes of their national being
and life. The old healthy, holy national spirit had died
out of them, it could no longer keep them together.
And now they were only wanting another Kingdom of
David. They were not at all satisfied when it was only
a Kingdom of God that was offered them instead.
And because they would not take what God had
offered them, they could not get what they wanted
either. They could not be right without receiving that
which had come to them, without acknowledging
that God was their true King, that lie who had
come among them was just God manifested in the
flesh for the purpose of taking the command of them.
They would not have him for their King. They
said “we will not have this man to reign over us.” He
is a mistake altogether—is not at all the sort of man
to suit our purpose or to further our views. He is
putting us wrong, is driving us out of our own
notions and beliefs, is telling us things quite different
from what we had been taught to believe. And it is
not possible for us to be in the wrong ; it is He who
must be in the wrong.
That was their way— a very foolish and a very
sinful way, as we all confess it now to have been.
Are we after 1800 years very much wiser than they 1
For Jesus Christ is seeking to put us, in all things


right just as certainly as He was doing that with the
Jews. Are we letting him do that ? Are we not
often found rebelling against His words as they did 1
Are we not often saying these words of His cannot
put us right, we must put them right, take them, if
we take them at all, with this or that limitation, with
this or that explanation, without receiving them as
they stand, as a declaration of God’s will to us 1 Are
we taking His words as the principles to guide our
lives, to tell us how we are to live, what we are to be
or what we are to do, or are we taking principles and
notions of our own, setting these up as the Pharisees
in Jewry did with their’s, and taking just as much
or as little of the Lord’s words as we can properly square
with these ? A very great deal indeed depends on
the sort of answer we can give to such questions as
these.
But let us attend meanwhile to the grand principle
laid down in our text, a principle which is in-
tended to be a guide to us as members of a society,
as belonging to a nation. It was meant first of all to
set the Pharisees and the Herodians right in their
political views, but it is just as able to do the same
good office for us still. The Lord was not content
with barely answering the question that had been
asked Him about tribute. Those who asked Him
that question were quite wrong at a point very much
deeper down than that. The Lord accordingly
takes them back to that point, sets them right there,
so far as they will just allow themselves to be set
right, and then leaves them to apply the principle laid
down to the case which they had started, for them-
selves. “ Render unto Caesar the things that belong
to him —to God the things that belong to Him.”
That is Christ’s law —a law binding also upon us,-


a law which we, by our presence here at this moment,
are virtually acknowledging as binding upon us. Our
present encampment in these otherwise lonely places
testifies of our loyal and true hearted devotion to an
earthly sovereign whom we truly love ; our uniting
together now in this sacred service testifies to our de-
votion to another sovereign who is not of the earth, but
of Heaven, whom also we love and obey. If these two
things are not true of us, why else are we here to-
day 1 Why are we in this place at all if it is not to
show that we are ready to give the best we have, —
our very life itself if that should ever be necessary,
in the service of that sovereign,—the best, thank
God, of all the sovereigns that are now reigning on
the earth, so far as I know, whom God has set over
us 1 And why are we here worshipping that God who
alone can make us what we ought to be, and give us
patience and courage and all nobleness of heart as
well as faith in His Son and forgiveness of our sins
and eternal life, if it is not to shew that we are His,
that He too is our King with a sovereign’s right to
dispose of us and of our lives according to His own
will, to guide and to rule over us, so that we shall be
able to bring our lives to something like victory at
last ? If these two loyal feelings,—of devotion to
our Queen, of devotion to the living God, are not in
us at this moment, then our presence here is nothing
better than a hypocrisy and a lie. Our encampment
here on these plains is a rendering unto Caesar—unto
that Supreme ruler who is so much better beloved, so
much worthier of our love than any Roman Caesar
ever was ; —is a rendering unto Caesar the things that
are Caesars, our suspending of all other work on this
holy day to worship our Heavenly Father is a render-
ing unto God the things that are God’s.


We are therefore to consider these two things :
1. Our obligation as belonging to an earthly King-
dom, and 2. Our duty as belonging to an heavenly
one. 1. Render unto Caesar, Caesar’s own things. We
have an earthly sovereign set over us in God’s good
providence. One whom we are bound to reverence
and obey, as being in all earthly things invested with
authority from God to rule over us in righteousness
and in truth. Our Queen represents to us all that is
best and noblest in our national character and life—
our British freedom which is so much better a thing
than aught else of the same sort now existing on the
face of the earth ; —our true hearted sense of obe-
dience and good order: the whole of what the British
nation has by God’s good guidance become. The
supreme authorities that have had the ruling of us
have been able to bring us on in a course not merely
of prosperity but of well being and of well doing as a
nation, which is altogether surprising to all other
nations. We owe the high position we occupy, the
noble privileges we enjoy as British subjects, under
God, to the better rule under which we have been
placed. And if other nations are only now struggling
for their nascent liberties, if they are still only in the
agonies, the birth throes that are we trust to herald
in some better and blesseder thing, seeming some-
times as if they had come to the birth and had no
strength in them to endure those final pains in which
freedom is to be borne —if this is the case in other
are all secured to us in such a way as that no man
lands and with other peoples, while now our freedoms
can ever take them from us, we are just to remember
that, so far as human means are concerned, this only
depends on the fact that we have been better governed
and better guided. To us our sovereign is the re-


presentative of that happier and Godlier rule. And
if every Caesar has rights which his subject are to re-
cognise, and duties which are due to Him, how
much more is this the case, when the authority which
is over us is of such a sort as to secure us in the enjoy-
ment of blessings and privileges such as no other
nation enjoys. We have got more from our Caesar
than others have got from theirs ; and therefore we
have the more to render. Every new freedom we
possess involves also a new duty which we are to do.
Because as a nation we have higher and nobler pri-
vileges, therefore ought our patriotism and our loyalty,
our self-devotion to the sovereign, loved of God and
of men, who is over us, to be all the greater. That,
my friends, is what I am here to lay down to you as
a Christian duty,—a thing which is required of you,
not by your fellow man alone, by notions of expediency
or by thoughts of selfishness, but as the very com -
mand of God. If I have learned anything of Christ
at all, I am sure that it is His will that we should be
good citizens and patriots, that we should be ready for
any sacrifice, even the highest possible for us here, in
order that the honour of our Queen and the good of
our country may be maintained. In ourselves un-
fortunately there are apt to be selfish and cowardly
feelings enough that would keep us back from any-
thing that might be dangerous in this direction.
When duty grows into danger, and the path of right-
doing is looking as if it would become perilous, when
to be good citizens and leal hearted subjects begins
to involve a certain amount of self-sacrifice or self-
denial, we might be inclined rather to keep to the
safer side of things. But I believe that God is
evermore putting better and loftier and more
courageous thoughts into our heads, more brave and


unselfish feelings into our hearts. lam very sure that
it is just because God has been doing that, even
though it may have been unconsciously to ourselves,
that we are here to-day. Because we have been
feeling that God Almighty has been giving us many
a lofty privilege which we will not allow any man
whatever to take from us, which we would die sooner
than let them be taken from us, because we stand
here, free born men and free born Christians, ready to
fight or to die if need be for the freedoms temporal
and spiritual that are ours ; because death is a much
more preferable thing to the surrender of anything
noble or good, therefore we are here, standing be-
neath God’s Heaven, fearing God and having no
other fear whatever, fearing God and honouring the
Queen. As British men, we are free, let whoever
else be slaves. It would take, I fancy, a shrewder
man than any that now exists on the face of this
earth, to make slaves of us. If our religion is not
teaching us to prize and to hold all the good that we
possess as belonging to the English nation, if it is not
teaching us endurance and courage, and manly for-
titude, it is a poor and beggarly sort of religion that
is not much worth the keeping.
The very fact that we belong to a Kingdom, that
we are subject to one invested with Supreme
authority, is meant to enforce upon us the great
lesson which God is teaching us always, that we are
not our own, that we have no right to live as if we
were. Here to-day we learn a-new what the Gospel
of Christ is ever teaching us, that we belong to one
another, that we are bound up in one another, that
we are members of a society, a Kingdom, and that as
such we have one interest to serve and one purpose
to pursue. We understand, I hope we are more and


more coming to understand, what is meant by our
belonging to a 'Kingdom, what God is seeking to
teach us by that fact. We, I think, under British
rule, enjoying our British liberties are in a better
position for understanding that, than any other
nation that ever has been as that is now, under the
sun. We have every day something occurring in our
li /es to teach us how much we owe to the Govern-
ment under which we live, how many of our Caesars
things we have received, how much therefore we
ought to render back again. And, let me tell you,
the sentiments we entertain towards our sovereign,
are not the least or meanest things about us. If we
are not right in that particular, if we
are very cold or indifferent in reference
to all such matters, if we have come to imagine that
it is not a matter of the slightest consequence what
sort of feelings we entertain towards the Supreme
authority whom God has set over us, I don’t see, for
my share, how we can possibly be right in anything
else. If we are not rendering unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar’s, we are in a very bad position
for rendering unto God the things that are God’s.
Now, there are many good and religious people who
never seem to realize this. They accept the govern-
ment under which they live as a thing they can’t
help. It may be right or it may be wrong : that is
no business of theirs. Certainly the giving honour
unto the sovereign—the rendering of Caesar’s things
to Caesar, does not form any distinguishing part of
their religion. Now I have just to tell you that if
your religion has taught you that you have only to
do with yourselves, that as religious men you have
nothing to do with others whose interests God has
bound up with your own, —nothing to do with


the affairs oi the commonwealth, it is altogether
a bad, which I have not the slightest hesitation
in calling a damnable sort of religion. If you
will take my poor word for it, you will believe
that it is God Himself who is seeking to make you
better citizens and better subjects—who is fitting you
for all that is high, and devoted, and excellent, as
members of an earthly kingdom, who has prepared
the way for you, and taught yon among other things
to put on that uniform which is the badge of your
patriotism,—that without His help and His teaching,
that same uniform would have been lying now in
merchant’s stores or clothier’s shops, and you would
have been quite careless and indifferent about the
uses it might be put to. Well: God, as I believe,
has been teaching and guiding us in this matter.
He is constantly teaching us better to understand and
more earnestly to maintain all national privileges
whatever. He is putting it into our hearts to re-
member that we belong to a kingdom, that we have
one here upon the earth’whom many of us may never
see, but whom we are bound to honor with all our
hearts and souls, whom if we do not honor, it will be
the worse for us. Such thoughts, coming from God,
make us in every respect and in every relation better
than we could have been without them. For the
more we come to realise the important fact that we
belong to a kingdom which, by God’s grace, has come
from small beginnings to be what it now is among the
nations of the earth, the more shall we be raised out
of all our poor and narrow selfishness, and be made
to feel that we do not belong to ourselves, that we
are owing a debt to others as well as to Him
who is the king of our nation, as He is of
all nations, that we have never paid the


non-payment of which must necessarily bring
us into the most serious condemnation. We be-
long to a nation whom God has chosen and
been good to above all others, and its wel-
fare is our welfare, and all its interests are our
interests, its life and its happiness, its trials and its
shortcomings are also ours. God is helping us, if we
would only allow Him tor help us more and more to
realize that as a truth to which we do well to take
heed. He has helped us who are here present to-day
to realize it in a way in which we had not realized it
before. We have been brought to take a special
oath of faithful service to our Queen, to defend her
and her throne against all enemies and opposers
whatsoever who may prove dangerous to the same.
We have devoted ourselves —I am thankful that in
all this I can speak to you as one of yourselves, to
the obedience of our sovereign in any way in which
she may need our services within this portion of
the British dominions. We have, in this way,
obeyed the word of the Lord, and rendered to Caesar
the things that are Caesars. We have felt that in
these trying and critical times, when no man knoweth
what each year or month may bring forth in the re-
volutionizing of the affairs of the world, when thrones
are tottering, and many of the world’s crowns are
worth very little more than barely what the gold-
smith would give for them, and when, of course, that
nation to which we belong, standing as it does among
all others as the bulwark of freedom, a rock amid
the stormy waters, with all the tempest-driven billows
surging savagely against her, is not at all free from
the prevailing danger ; —we have felt that it was our
duty to stand forth as men ready to run every risk
in testifying our allegiance to her whose subjects we


are, to declare that there is no peril from which we
will shrink, if God lays it on us, in defence of our
sovereign, and of our national privileges and our
national liberties. I do trust that not one single
soul of us regards that solemn oath, by which we
have bound ourselves, as nothing better than a piece
of harmless child’s play, of which nothing more is to
be made, out of which no further good is to come ;
as rather a foolish and unmeaning sort of game at
which it was rather pleasant than not to play,
seeing, meanwhile, the danger was so far away from
us • —that to all of us that oath of allegiance was
something else more solemn and more terrible than
a rash and hasty vow, —a promise which we have
neither the purpose nor the prospect of paying. I
do trust that in what we are doing, or in what we
are going to do in this place, as well as in all our
previous drilling, and parading, and what-not, we
have had and are having something higher, manful-
ler, nobler in our thoughts than the bare feeling
that tb is makes an agreeable pastime, that playing at
guns and bayonets is quite as pleasant and exciting
as playing at anything else. I trust we have
felt, all of us, whatever the result may be,
whether we may ever have any more serious
and more sanguinary use to make of guns or
swords or bayonets than at present or no, that here
actually was something to make us feel more entirely
one as a community than ever we felt before ; that
this movement has been a fresh token to us, not
altogether unneeded, that British hearts, on whatever
side of the globe, are beating in one way, that the
nation to which we belong, however widely spread,
has, nevertheless, one life and one purpose to serve
by its life in God's world, and that our sovereign has


a right to do with us, and with our time and our
lives, if it should come to that, what is best for the
interests of that grand and glorious empire of which
we form a part. We surely have and can have no
wish for war, however ready we may be to meet it—
no wish for any war that should ever reach these
shores. But should the worst come, and hoarse, hos-
tile guns startle us out of our present peaceful life,
—should the hour of danger, which to all of us
ought to be the hour of stern and resolute duty, ever
strike, we should be ready, at whatever cost and
sacrifice to ourselves, against all enemies and opposers
whatsoever, to defend the throne of her who, “by
God’s grace,” rules over us, and all those interests
which she as our sovereign represents. I trust none
of you suppose that I am travelling beyond my pro-
vince as a minister of peace and preacher of God’s
good news in speaking words like these. I tell you
honestly that if there had been anything about my
office to hinder me from speaking words like these, I
certainly should have been somewhere else than here
today. I have learned Christ in a different spirit
than to suppose that His gospel is to make us worse
citizens or worse fighting men than we would have
been without it. I believe lam only speaking now
in the spirit of Him who uttered the words of our
text. I have not so learned Christ as to be able to
suppose that He does not mean us to be valiant and
courageous in any good work we have to do. Though
He has taught us to follow peace with all men, He
certainly would not have come down out of heaven
to teach us to be cowards, to be always careful of
our own poor skins, of our own poor souls, or any
of our own narrow selfish interests whatever, as the
principal concern, whatever dangers jmight be coming


on. We did not need Him to teach us any
such lesson. The devil is ever near enoiigh
to teach us that. Christ, as the true man, the
Leader and Saviour of men, helps us to unlearn
that devil’s lesson. Meanwhile, let us lay this to
heart; —God has been investing a great share—the
principal share—of the interests and prosperity of
His own eternal kingdom of peace and goodwill in
the English nation. Other people, an Emperor of
the French or whosoever else, may be trying to
destroy or to take away what is of God in our English
liberties and privileges. If we are not ready to de-
fend these to the last drop of our blood, there is
something very much wrong with us. We are not
true men in that case, but untrue—untrue first of all
to God ; untrue to that constitution under which
God has placed us. We are not in that case rendering
Caesar’s things to Caesar ; we are not likely to render
the things of God to God.
11. But then in the second place, we have still
something higher left for us to do. We are not only
members of an earthly kingdom ; our baptism and a
number of other things about us declare that we be-
long also to a kingdom of heaven. We have not
only a temporal sovereign, whom we are to love and
obey ; we have an eternal King also, whose we are
and whom we are bound to serve. And I hope the
practical way in which we have been called upon to
shew our allegiance to the Queen who reigns over us
—evermore may God bless her—has been helping to
teach us also something of the obedince owed by us
to that King who is our Father also, who is in heaven.
As in earthly things we have been learning that we
are not our own, just because we belong to a kingdom
that is of the earth, so I trust we have come to see


that in a higher sense we are also not our own, be-
cause we belong to a heavenly kingdom. In the
things of God also we are soldiers, fighting under the
banner of another higher than we, a Captain of Sal-
vation, who is leading us on through often stormy
warfare, through trial and self-denial, in the face of
fierce and angry foes, to victory and the eternal
crown. We are not here to do our own poor battle
of life at our own hands, in our own strength, or at
our own cost. We have sworn allegiance in all
spiritual matters to One who has a right to our
faithfullest, warmest service. We march onward as
He bids us, whoever may stand in the way. We
take what fare by the way He provides for us. We
are His, altogether, and for ever ?lis—bodies, souls,
and spirits of us. We very often dont know what in
the world to do with ourselves or our lives while we
are in the world; we are sure that He does. We
are ever ready to go wrong ; if we trust and if we
obey Him, we know that He is taking care always to
bring us right. He is giving us strength for all the
conflict, courage and patience for all that we may
have to undergo. He is m all respects dealing ten-
derly and considerately with us, laying nothing on us
that we are not able to bear. On our side, we owe
faithful, true-hearted obedience to Him who is taking
such thought of us. We are to render to Him the
things that are His. We are not to think we are
our own, that we have any right to dispose of
ourselves, of what we are or of what we have, without
taking His will into consideration. We have no
business to think of ourselves at all save in con-
nection with the end and purpose for which we have
been sent by God into the world. Let Him do with
us as it pleases Him ; if it be right for Him, it


cannot but be right for us. We are sure that He is
leading us right—that He cannot possibly lead us
wrong. We are sure that if we had the guiding of
ourselves, we should be putting ourselves often terribly
in the wrong. Our Captain has made the plan of the
whole campaign, has it all down before Him ; He
knows all the ins and outs of it thoroughly. We
know nothing of the sort—get only small and im-
perfect glimpses of the great plan now and then.
All that is not our business—we dont need to
trouble ourselves the least about that. We
only need to trust our Commander, to have perfect
confidence that He is ordering all things for us, that
He has fitted- us out for our share in the grand war-
fare with all that is evil or devilish, that He has
given us strength, or is giving it to us, to fight against
any devil or number of devils whatever that may
come in our way.
We are to render unto God the things that are
His. All that we have belongs to Him. All the
good that we enjoy comes from Him. And in
giving up everything that we have unto Him, who is
our Father in Heaven, in devoting ourselves unto
Him and His service, we are only rendering His own
back to Him again. We are always tempted to keep
it to ourselves. It is the great lie which the Devil
is always telling us, that what we have belongs all to
ourselves. We are to do with it what we like. We
are to make the best bargain for ourselves that we
can. We are to try and get the best price we can
from the world, or from some other merchant, for all
that is good, or that we may make good, about us.
And many carry just the same spirit into religion.
They would not be religious at all, unless they were
quite sure about the wages they are to get for that.


They think they are to make more in that way than
they could in any other. They are to make a good
thing out of this world by their virtue or their piety,
by their faith, or repentance, or whatever else,
and they are to make far more out of the world to
come. They are willing to give themselves up to
God only because they imagine God is giving them
a better price for themselves than any one else can
do. He is sure to give them more happiness
and, perhaps, quite as much wealth here in
the world as they would get by following the
world itself : and he is sure to give them
far more when they have got done with this world
altogether. The price that God and the world offer
for them may be very nearly the same here, —on the
whole, God is offering them just a little more than
the world. But then He throws into the bargain an
eternal life, an immortal glory, which the world
cannot give. On the whole, God’s' bargain is a great
deal better than the world’s bargain. That is the
sort of form in which the religion of this time is
mainly thrown, which I regard on the whole as about
the most unfortunate thing that could have happened
to the time. I don’t see how very much nobleness or
much godliness or much true and hearty trust in the
Son of God, or much self-denial, or self-sacrifice can
be possible on any such terms. Self-sacrifice in fact,
is excluded from the very beginning on any such
hypothesis. It is not self-sacrifice that is the great
thing aimed at by such people, but only self-salvation.
They are not rendering to God God’s own things.
They are only making use of the Christian religion,
which was never intended for any such purpose in
order to save what they regard as their own things
for themselves. This is not Christ’s way. We arc


to render and to surrender what is about us to God
as things that belong to Him and not to us We are
required in the course of our lives, to render up a
great number of things that are more or less dear to
us. Perhaps we may have but a very dim concep-
tion of who it is that is requiring such surrenders at
our hands. But they go and we can’t help it. Loss,
and sacrifice, and surrender, seem to be in fact the
law of our lives. We are apt to murmur at it as
an unjust law, or to fall helpless under it, as if it
were only some stern and awful necessity that was
crushing the heart out of us, and bruising us down to
the very earth We need to know that it is a Father
in Heaven that is dealing with us thus, and that He
is taking nothing from us that is not His own. He
sent us naked into the world at first :—if we have
made anything out of the world since, it is because
He, in some way or other, has been bestowing it upon
us. It is only when we are able to look upon the
trials of life, to look down into all the darkness of life,
to look in some measure through the darkness, and
to see a good, an unerring will, —the will of a
Heavenly Father behind it all, guiding us and
keeping us right, teaching us what to do and
how to suffer, keeping loving hands round us
even when we are in our deepest and darkest woes,
only then that we shall know what our life truly
means, and what lessons it is meant to teach us.
When we know that the Supreme will to which all
things are subject is a father’s will regulated by
’ ifinite love as well as by perfect righteousness,
then we shall be able to face life’s heaviest duties,
and to shoulder life’s heaviest burdens, and to
brook life’s saddest sorrows, for behind them
all we shall be able to discern the beatings of


an infinitely loving heart ; they will testify to
us of an infinite sympathy which is around us,
which is supporting and cheering and animating us
at all times, in all circumstances. And
then too we shall know what it is to give back
the things of God to Him from whom they came.
We shall feel that we are His, that all we have and
are belong to Him, that all our faith and our good
deeds are nothing more than rendering His own to
Himself again. We shall take His will as the thing
that is evermore putting us right whatever else may
be putting us wrong. It is He who gives us courage
to do everything brave and valiant ; if we ever do
such a thing, we are just giving Him back His own.
It is He who puts it into our hearts to believe in
Him whom He has sent; any acts of faith that we
may ever exercise is only honoring Him by that
which He has given us. It is He who puts it into
our souls to do any act of charity or brotherly
kindness; if any poor brother should ever be bene-
fitted by what we do, we ought to know that it is
not of ourselves, that our good or charitable deed is
only another evidence that God’s grace has not been
taken from us.
We are God’s servants —God’s soldiers, not our own
but His. W e are bound in all things to seek not to
please ourselves, but to please Him. We are to carry
the principle that animates the soldier, the principle
of an entire obedience into the sort of religion which
we exercise and profess. Let His wall be done in us
and by us whatever else be left undone, what-
ever else may be unattained.—Even so. Amen.
When the soldier has sworn his solemn sacra-
mental oath, —w 7 hen he has given himself to the
service of his sovereign and his country, he culti-


vates no longer any will of his own. Self-will is a
thing that will not do in presence of that nobler prin-
ciple of obedience which now animates him. His life
and all that he has have been sworn away in that one
ennobling action of renunciation, and it is not by his
own will that the business of his life is to be ordered
anymore, but by the will of another. And when
gloomy and trying times come on, and the clear
ring of the war-trumpet with no uncertain sound,
summons him to the battle-field, and he takes his
life in his right hand, knowing that the chances are
too terribly against him, that it will be taken out of
that soon, it is with the stern sense that now he must
think nothing of himself, of his own ease or safety,
—that he must give up all that is dear to him, —life
itself, if that be necessary, in that cause he has
made his own. He may know little of the cause of
quarrel. There may be diplomatic or other ques-
tions involved in it of which he knows nothing.
That is not his concern ; he cannot trouble himself
about these. But as the battle surges and roars
around him, and as the smoke and the din of hoarse
guns vomiting murder, and death rise thick and
thicker on the diseased air, and the groan of agony
that cannot be kept down rises from one or another
fallen comrade, it is his to await only such com-
mands as may be given him, and to bide any conse-
quences without flinching or complaint. Whether he
is to remain running deadly risk of being shot down
where he stands, or whether he has to join the furious
charge and to rush over ground slippery and damp
with human gore, with the bullets whistling their
fierce music around him, to drive back the oppos-
ing foe, he waits only for another will than his own
to guide him. The strong sense of duty is powerful


in him. He can hear that voice meanwhile and no
other. Self and self-will must be silent within him
the while. And even so, my friends, we too, if our
Christianity is anything at all, are God’s lighting
men in the world. Whatever dangers may threaten,
or whatever fears may vex us ; however many or
fierce our spiritual foes may be, and God knows they
are not few nor weak; however hard may be the
duty, however sore the fight, still we are to remem-
ber that we are not our own, —that we have nothing
more to do with the command of ourselves, —that we
have given that up to another as a thing we cannot at
all manage aright, that we are following One who can
manage all things aright for us. Not our will any
more, but the Father’s be done. For it is no tyrant’s
will to which we are subject; our life is no affair of
coercion or compression. It is not the will of One
who does not care for us which we are to do, —who
does not mind the least what becomes of us if only
His own pleasure be done. No. A thousand times
no. It is a Father who is over us, who is ruling us,
and ruling the world with all the care and affection
that any loving father on earth could show—nay,
with infinitely more than that, —with far more
power, at the same time, to help and save us.
That Father is asking us, no doubt, to do His will
not our own. But at the same time He lets us know
that He is thinking about us., providing what is best
for us, showing us what is to conduce most to our
well-being, caring for us in all things so unspeakably
more than we can for ourselves. We can safely
leave ourselves in His hands, sure that all will be
well with us there. What He does for us,
He does out of pure and hearty love ; what
we do for Him ought to be done only out of Jove as


well. In His army all are to be volunteers serving
Him, not of constraint, but willingly, not for the sake
of any gain whatever, but of a ready mind. Render
therefore to God the things that are God’s. He asks
of us nothing, as I said already, but what is
His own. If He bids us believe that He has
revealed Himself in His Son, that He is in His
Son, now reconciling us and the 'world to Himself;
if He tell us as a thing we are to believe that His
Son has given His life for us, has died that
we might have eternal life ; if He thus asks our
faith, it is only because He has first given
us His truth to believe. This is His commandment,
that we should believe in Him whom He has sent.
We owe Him that. We shall not be right if we do
not pay Him that debt which we owe Him. And if He
asks us further for the obedience of our lives that we
offer ourselves, bodies, souls, and spirits to Him,
He is still asking only His own. He has given us
our lives at the first. He has redeemed our lives
when they were under the power of death
and sin. He is sending His Spirit now to make
our lives better and to form our characters anew, —to
put better thoughts in our minds and nobler desires
into our hearts, and to teach us to do better, and
nobler, and more valiant deeds. Let our lives, there-
fore, be what He wants them to become, what He
is seeking to make them —lives of faith and of god-
liness, of self-denial, and of entire obedience. Let
us remember, that as Christian men we have been
raised from the dead along with Him, who on that
glorious Easter morn, eighteen centuries since, burst
the bonds of the grave, and made eternal life the
common property of all Christian men, and so let us
evermore seek those things that arc above, whore He


6 quo
F(Ol£B a.
t v
3 1508 01400800 2
General Printinn Office, 72, Collins-street Kant, Melbourne.
sitteth a. the right hand of God. In all things, at
all times, let us render unto God the things that
are God’s. It will never be right with us till
we have learnt to do that.
