

p !2 0 i £ - P 2> S 4
AUTOBIOGRAPHY
WILLIAM EGLINTON
1941
WEST CROYDON
SOUTH AUSTRALIA


K. W. Si B. F. J. BOWEN
6 FELICIA ST.
MT. GAMBLER 5290


AUTOBIOGRAPHY
WILLIAM EGLINTON
19 4]
WEST CROYDON
SOUTH AUSTRALIA




N fP 1 <Sf* bhyto/x
/S-. 9.
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF
WILLIAM EGLINTON
Such a narrative as I set out to write has to me one
objectionable feature, that is, it is mainly about mysell.
and as I do not claim to he a writer, 1 am unable to
prevent this; consequently, if at any time there seems
to be an undue emphasis on the personal note. 1 hope
to be excused.
1 am writing this with the firm intention of telling
the plain, unvarnished truth, though 1 will say right
now that the dates in the following narrative will not be
exact, as having no records of any description to refer
to. I have only memory to rely iq>on in the recording
of the facts therein.
I was l)orn on 2nd August, 18/4, at borreston, a
small hamlet two miles from Gumeracha, my ancestors
on my father’s side having migrated from Rutherglen
( pronounced Ruglen) in Scotland, somewhere about
1848. My great-grandmother, grandfather, grandmother
and father intended going to Sydney, but the ship, a
small sailing vessel named Hermondsay, was wrecked
between Melbourne and Sydney and the passengers and
crew landed at a whaling station called Twofold Hay.
There were no lives lost, but my people, having lived
there for a while and evidently having had enough of
the sea. made their way back to Melbourne, where they
met a sister of my grandmother, a Airs. Summeis,
who, with her husband and family, had sailed after
my people and were then waiting in Melbourne for
other branches of the family to at rive, which thev
eventually did.
After a conference they decided to go to South Aus-
tralia, which colony was holding out enticing baits for


immigrants to settle there. Those who decided to take
up land in the country were offered very liberal
terms and were also given a town acre in
the City. The following families, Eglintons, Sum-
mers, Ross’s and Forrests—tire first three named being
sisters and the last a brother—came overland from
Melbourne in bullock waggons, which journey took
them four months (the writer, a son of one of these
pioneers, about ninety years after took four hours to
do the same journey).
My people took up farming at Forreston, and a
house, called “ Burn Head,” was built by my grand-
father, which house house still stands and is occupied
by a family. The Forrests went in for a vineyard,
the Summers went further North, and the Ross’s went
in for blacksmithing in Gumeracha, but did not stay
long, for they went back to New South Wales and took
up land there, were very successful and all died very
wealthy men. They were not very long settled at
Forreston when my great-grandmother died and was
buried at Mount Crawford in a churchyard, which is
at the present time in a deplorable state; in fact, there
is a pinetree growing right through the roof of the
church. About 1870 my father married Louisa Rad-
ford and had two children—my sister. Marion Forrest
(now Mrs. A. H. Conybeare, of Gladstone Parade,
Linfield, N.S.W.) and myself.
1 do not remember my mother, as she died when I
was fifteen months old and is now peacefully sleeping
in the Gumeracha cemetery. My grandmother took
me and reared me, and no mother could have done
more for me than she did, and I still have her picture
hanging in my room. I cannot say the same of my
grandfather, who was one of the hardest hearted men
I have ever met. My father remarried and took over
the Forreston Post Office, which was also a general
store, but about 1879 he sold out and bought an hotel
at Terowie, where he was very successful. He also


purchased a large amount of properly, chiefly farming
and grazing land, and had a large sheep station at
Wonna, where 1 was sent wool picking for three
seasons. I did not care for the work, for it was very
dirty and greasy, and I thought 1 would never be clean
again. In Terowie the rest of the family were horn;
the first died in infancy, the following survive: Mrs.
11. Page, Nelson Street, Gordon, N.S.W.; James.
Rosslyn Park ; Henry Ernest, Magill; and Edward,
of Welland.
I was sent to school soon after arriving in Terowie.
It was not long after the railway reached Terowie and
we children were allowed to have a half-holiday to see
the first train arrive; none of us having previously
seen a train, we were so impatient and excited that we
walked nearly to Varcowie, six miles away, and as it
was passing we tried to keep pace with it. We were
a sorry lot when we arrived hack at the township, for
we were all exhausted and conveyances had to he sent
to pick us all up.
1 have kept in touch with several of those I>oys and
girls and we have been friends all these years. When-
ever we meet there is always someone who will bring
hack memories of that eventful day. I liked school very
much and was very eager to learn. I was not what
you would call brilliant, but I never failed in an
examination. There were not the restrictions in those
days as far as compulsory education was concerned, as
there are now. I lost much schooling through my
father and grandfather being very hard taskmasters,
for which the rest of our family can vouch.
There was much fun for us children when the out-
back farmers had a brain wave and in the off seasons
sent their children to school; their ages ranged from
about eights years to boys just budding into manhood.
Now, some of these boys began sprouting whiskers
and, as razors were unknown to them, we had great


fun teasing them, but always from a safe distance.
Later on the education laws tightened up and the Gov-
ernment began to build more schools in the back blocks.
After the opening up of the railway, Terowie was
put on the map with a vengeance; blocks of land in the
main streets went soaring up in price from ten to
twenty pounds per foot, but at the present time you could
buy these same blocks with improvements all for about
as many shillings. The coming of the train to Terowie,
instead of doing good, did it harm in the long run.
Two more modern hotels were built and the town
boomed for a while, but many families were ruined
when the bubble burst. The reason for this was that
they thought Terowie would be the terminus and the
junction for the Port Pirie line in the then near future,
but the Government changed their minds and made the
junction at Peterborough. Terowie is still the break
of gauge, which fact keeps the town in existence.
Soon after the Teetupla gold diggings opened up and
my father and grandfather, who had both previously
been to the Ballarat diggings, from which they returned
poorer, thought that, as they had had experience, they
would strike it rich. Certainly they came back with a
little gold in a lx>ttle, but it eventually leaked out that
they had bought it on the surface. The Teetupla
mine soon petered out, but miners more optimistic than
others hung on for years after, just making a bare
living. When the Broken Hill mine first opened up
it gave Terowie a temporary lioost, as three of the
original shareholders lived in or near Terowie. While
reading the life of Sir Sydney Kidman recently, I found
the author, lan L. Idries, was a little astray in relating
that Sir Sydney held an eighth share of the original
syndicate, for that is not so, and in his book he says
very little about Terowie. I knew Sir Sydney—who
was just Syd. Kidman then—very well, as he made our
place his headquarters, and he and his brother and my


father had many an argument over cattle deals. They
were rivals in the cattle trade, hut friendly rivals for
all that. Here is the truth of that eighth share. A
man named Mcliride, or a similar name, came to ray
father and wanted a bullock team for his eighth share
and offered it to different ones, Kidman included; he
was not long in finding a buyer—McCulloch, I think
the name was —and, although he got a commission out
of the deal, had he held it himself he would have made
in a very short time, about £500,000. Phis deal was
public gossip for many years after.
As I have previously remarked, my father and grand-
father were very hard taskmasters, and after reviewing
my life in mv young days, 1 have come to the conclu-
sion that they were both very unnatural men. Although
I don’t claim to have l>een a plaster saint, 1 was no
worse than the average Ik)v. I was never allowed out
to play with other boys, and when 1 did manage to
get out, 1 made up for lost time and got into mischief
more times than 1 care to remember, the worst of it
being that I seldom seemed to get away with it. I
was generally caught, and if one of my guardians did
not hear of it, then the other would ; then “ whack oh.”
When I was about ten years old I had to get up early
in the morning, saddle the horse, with the help of my
grandmother, then go out to the farm and water and
feed the stock. My father used to buy the cattle that
were transhipped from the narrow to the broad gauge
and which were hurt or too poor to travel to the Ade-
laide market, for a mere song. Then it was my duty
to drive them to the farm, where they would be well
fed, and when they were ready for market it was my
work to round them up and bring them in again, and
he would either sell them locally or ship them to
Adelaide.
After 1 came back from the farm 1 used to go and
get the cow I would have been made to milk her,


hut I was too cunning for that; 1 could never learn to
milk. Then I would go and attend the bar while my
grandfather had his breakfast, then off 1 would go to
school, eating my breakfast as 1 went.
One morning, as I was going to to the farm. 1 saw
what I thought was a river, al>out a mile away, and,
sure enough, it was a stream flowing towards a dry lake
that was never known to have water in it before. It
was Idled a few hours afterwards, so 1 raced back and
woke up mv father, and we then harnessed up the
horses and drove out to the lake. We were the first
ones out there and ! got the credit for being the first
one to see it. It was also the first time in history my
father was proud of me. We used to say years after-
wards it was his son who discovered it. When it was
(died it was surveyed, and found to be nearly two miles
across in places, and six miles round, the depth averag-
ing six feet. There was no rain within miles of the
town, but what really happened was that there had been
a tremendous water spout about twelve miles away.
It did a lot of damage, carrying everything before it.
For several years a regatta was held on it annually
and each proved verv successful, as swimmers came
from all over the place to compete. The lake was a
sportsman’s paradise, as it teemed with duck. teal, etc.,
and 1 do not think at that time there were close seasons.
A short time afterwards fish began to appear, but
wherever they came from remains a mystery to this
day. Thev were a sort of perch, and people used to
catch them with a rod and line just for the sport, as
they were not an edible fish, the flesh being stringy and
full of small bones you could hardly see. After a few
years it gradually subsided and became as salt as the
sea.
1 visited it four years ago; it had rained a few days
previously, and filled up a few potholes, but 1 did not


stay long, as the stench was unbearable. Incidentally,
my eldest son was with me at that time.
I went to school very seldom. Things l>ecame very
bad, dry seasons being the chief cause, and we had to
travel with the cattle to different places for feed, camp-
ing for a few days, and then moving somewhere else.
My father used to be a kind of advance agent; he
would locate some good feed, then come back and take
us along to where it was. This went on for months,
then the rains came along and saved a lot of the work.
1 had as my companion a half caste; it was only his
colour that was against him, as fine a chap as ever I
had anything to do with. Me would not let me do any
hard work if he could help it.
1 met with a slight accident at this time. Horses
that are used to cattle do not have to be made to do
the right thing, they do it instinctively. I must have
been half asleep riding along, when suddenly one
of the bullocks broke away from the mob and dashed
into the scrub and, before I could recover, the horse
took after it. We did not go far, as my horse ran
under a tree and a branch caught me and knocked me
off. I had a few bruises, but soon got over it. 1
can’t remember when I first rode a horse, but boys at
that time were all good riders. Although a fair rider,
many a time I was thrown, but seldom was I hurt, and
only felt stiff for a few days.
A man well known in the North in those days was a
rough rider named Mick Fenton, who made a good
living breaking in horses and giving exhibitions in the
different towns. One day he was putting on a turn in
our home town and a horse he was riding must have
been a fair outlaw, as he could do nothing with it. It
took several men to hold it while he got on; then it
started to buck and soon had him off. Of course, the
crowd chaffed him and my father said, “ Why, I have
a bov not yet in his teens who can do better than that.”


They soon found me and my own father put me on the
horse, which had already thrown the finest hitckjump
rider in the colony. I was no sooner on than I was
off. and my father was so disgusted that he did not
speak to me for days, for which T did not care. He
told me years afterwards he tried to make a rider out
of me, hut he had no luck, as 1 was not cut out to be
a first-class horseman, and he must have thought I had
forgotten that little incident.
As my school days were drawing to a close and I
had already gained my compulsory certificate, 1 must
mention this, in case 1 forget later on.
A “ Hack-to-Terowie ” celebration was held four
years ago and, of course, we had to go back to school,
and of those who attended the school fifty years pre-
viously there were forty turned up out of the ninety
that were on the roll half a century ago.
There were two families named Mitchell who
attended school when I did. They were the families
of two brothers, one family comprising six hoys and
one girl, and the other six girls and one hoy. The
first mentioned had all passed away, but the latter all
attended back to school, having come from different
parts of the State.
J still have in my possession a phrenologist’s chart
that states in one part that if 1 was not treated properly
I would leave home at a very early age. Well, less
than seven years after, this came to pass. This is how
it happened. One night in the hotel a stockman, who
was up against it for cash, tried to sell a riding crop
made of greenhide. and the work that was put into the
plaiting must have taken a long time to make. As he
could not find a buyer, someone suggested he should
raffle it. I cadged sixpence off niv grandmother, went
in for the raffle, and was fortunate enough to win it.
When mv grandfather heard of mv winning it he took


it away from me and hung it up in the bar,, saying it
was too good for me to play with. I took exception
to this and appealed to my father who, I believe, was
for the first time in history going to take my part, but
my grandfather, seeing things going against him,
accused me of pinching the sixpence out of the till. I
asked him how he knew I pinched it, and the old
scoundrel said he had seen me do it. I may have been
guilty of going to the till other times, but this time
I was innocent.
I brought my grandmother to prove my statement,
but .they would not listen to her and my grandfather
turned' to me and said, “ There it is and there it is
going to say, and if you touch it look out for yourself,
as that whip belongs to the house.” As I knew that
the whip was my property I was determined to get it
somehow, so the first time I went riding I took the whip
and when I returned I put it back in its place, and no
one knew but myself. This happened several times,
but the hour of reckoning was not far off. One night
after my usual trip to the farm, I met my grandfather
in the passage; he said, “ Hello, William.” He always
called me William when he was in a bad mood; when
everything was in order he called me Bill. “ Where
have you been? ” I replied, “ Out to the farm.” He
knew I had been out there all right. “ Have a good
trip?” “Yes,” I said. “The mare play up?” he
said. “ No,” I replied. “ You ought to carry a whip
in case she did play up.” I should have woke up then
and bolted, but foolishly I thought I could bluff it out.
I had the whip stowed under my jumper and down
the leg of my pants. He made a grab and, of course,
located the whip, with which he started to lash me.
I ran into the first bedroom 1 came to and got under
the bed, but it was of no avail, as I might just as well
have stayed in the open and taken the punishment. I
had to come out eventually, and he kept on till I started
screaming.


Then 1113- grandmother came and tried to stop him.
hut he turned round on her with the whip and she ran
for my father. lie did stop him, but when he heard
my grandfather’s version of the affair he also started
on me with the whip. My grandmother said, “ What
are you thrashing him for; don’t yorj think he has had
enough?" He said “ lie got thrashed for taking the
whip. lam dealing with him for telling lies about
it." Whatever He I told about it I have never been
able to fathom, and those who read this might be
sceptical and say this part is a little too far-fetched, but
1 will say right now that it is God’s honest truth. I
had not vet turned thirteen years of age when this
happened.
Another thing that hurt me was that, as they were
leaving the room my dog must have got in the way,
and one of those brutes kicked her. This dog was
always with me and very much attached to me, for
wherever I was, she was never very far away, although
it was inconvienient at times, as she often put the show
away. This is how I came to own her. A man stay-
ing overnight at our place was travelling through with
cattle and was surprised to find during the night that
she had given birth to two pups. As he did not want her
to travel he told me that if f looked after her and the
pups, when be came back in a few weeks he would give
me one. Those weeks turned into months before he
returned and claimed the dog, and by this time we had
only one of the pups left, which was by then nearly a
full grown dog. 1 forget now what became of the
other pup.
About six months after the dog came back again and
she must have travelled a long way, as she was nothing
but skin and bone and footsore. I soon got her in
good condition again and there was no one more pleased
at her return than I. Her late owner never came
back to claim her again. I had trained her never to


follow me to school, but she was always waiting for
me at the school door when I came out; she would
not he waiting long, as she timed it to a nicety to be
there when we were let out.
After the rough treatment 1 had received I decided
to clear out. Our neighbours, Mr. and Mrs. Elliott,
came over ami took me to their place for the night.
They were for informing the police, but my grand-
mother was strongly against this, and I told them I
never could go back and live the life I had led. They
agreed with me in this and helped me to get away; my
grandmother gave me what little money she had and
Mr. Elliott smuggled me out of the town and took me
to Yarcowie. where I caught the train to Adelaide.
1 had no set programme of what I intended to do;
all I was anxious for was to get away from a hell that
some boys might have called home.
When 1 reached Adelaide I was absolutely lost, but,
fortunately, my grandmother had given me the address
of my mother’s brother, named Radford, and, as he
was in the police force, it did not take me long to find
him. I there met for the first time my grandfather,
on my mother’s side. He turned out to be a very
decent old chap, and he and 1 became very firm friends.
He was at an advanced age when 1 first met him, but
he lived for many a long year, dying at the age of one
hundred years and nine months. My uncle was a
kind man, but very strict. He said to me, “ Now, you
have to go and look for work; you are not going to
hang round doing nothing.” So I looked in the paper
for boys wanted, and there was one that caught my eye,
so off I went and when I got there I was surprised to
see so many boys after the same job.
I was a real country lad, and lacking the cheek of
the other boys, I was timid and nervous and hung back,
afraid to go near the others. The job was for an


office 1)0}- in a sharebrokers’ office, namely, Roach
Brothers. The senior Mr. Roach came out and looked
us over and selected me and told me to come into the
office, and the first words he said to me were, “ You
are from the country, are you not?” 1 got a bit
windy and thought he knew about me, but I was wrong.
I thought that, as he knew nothing about me. what a
clever man he was to know 1 was from the country,
but 1 got to know soon after that it was quite easy.
I was with them for about twelve months, when my
uncle was moved to Kadina and 1 had to look for
other lodgings. 1 was receiving ten shillings a week
and my aunt was satisfied with the nine shillings I
gave her; I kept the other shilling myself, which
amount seemed enough for me at that time.
My grandmother was very good to me and she always
seemed to know what clothes or boots I required, but
after my uncle left 1 found 1 could not live on ten
shillings a week, so I hunted round and received fifteen
shillings in another office. 1 was sorry to leave Roach
Brothers, as they were real gentlemen.
1 was living in a restaurant in blind ley Street at that
time, but found out it took all my earnings to keep me,
so I found cheaper lodgings with people named Goble,
where there were six other young fellows, three sons
and the other three boarders. When Mrs. Goble asked
me my name and I told her, she said that would not do,
as one of her sons and two of the other boarders were
also called William, and that she would have to give
me the name of Ted. Well, that name has stuck to me
ever since.
A short time after this the firm 1 worked for, Hock-
ing Brothers, closed down and things were not looking
too bright and 1 was out of work, but only for a few
days, as I got a job with a Mr. Thomas, who was an
agent for some interstate firm. 1 used to bring a
horse and buggy from a livery stable, take it to his


hold, then he would drive to his different clients and
I would mind the horse while he interviewed them.
It was a very lazv life with nothing else to do hut read
hooks. Mr. Thomas was also interested in a Christie
Minstrel Show that was showing in Garner's Rooms,
now the Majestic, and he styled himself the only
whistling ventriloquist in the world. lie was also an
interlocutor, which I will explaili for the benefit of
readers. In the old minstrel shows the performers
would sit in a semi-circle facing an interlocutcr, who
would anounce them in turn. At each end would be
a comedian, generally with cork-blackened face, both of
whom would engage in a wordy battle with the inter-
locutor, humorous and otherwise. The original builder
and owner of Garner's Room was a Mr. White, a
grandson of whom was best man at my wedding. When
the show was over and it went farther on, 1 got an-
other job with a Mr. Men/., a watchmaker and jew r eller
in King William Street, my work l>eing to sit in the
window cleaning clocks, in full view of the passers-by.
which job did not appeal to me, so after lunch I did not
return.
1 then worked for J. Longwell, hairdresser and
tobacconist, in Rundle Street, and this job lasted until
1 received my first week’s wages, when 1 cleared out.
1 w r as out of work again and things were very bad,
hundreds of boys being in the same plight as myself.
It was useless looking for work, as the great ’ninety
strike was looming in the distance, and it was not long
before its presence was felt. Things w r ent from bad
to worse; I could not get anything permanent and used
to go dowai to Victoria Park racecourse and earn a few r
shillings riding horses at their work.
1 earned a few shillings by catching gold fish in the
Torrens and selling them to fishshops for the fish ponds
they used to have in their windows, but the supply


soon became greater than the demand, and 1 had to look
around for something else.
I corresponded regularly with my grandmother and
my sisters; they used to send a stamped envelope and
paj>er each time they wrote. I did not tell them I
was out of work, hut I used to give them a gentle hint
about a new pair of boots or other wearing apparel
f needed, but the money they sent had to go to pay for
board, as my landlady would not allow me to get in
arrears. 1 soon became very shabby, at one time
having to borrow a coat in which to apply for a job,
which f did not get. I received five shillings once for
taking some racehorses down to Morphettville; I had
to lead them all the way and, to make matters worse,
instead of putting my fare away. I lost all my earnings
with the books and had to walk home. I have lost
more later, so I used to buy a return ticket to be on the
safe side.
A short time after this I heard of a job out at the
Payneham tramsheds, which job I was lucky enough to
get. I was employed as general stable hand and it
was a very dirty and tedious job, for which I received
fifteen shillings for a start, and long afterwards,
seventeen shillings and sixpence. I began to recover
financially and was able to pay some of my back debts.
At this time my grandfather died. lie fell down
(he cellar steps and was knocked unconscious, and while
in this condition he was bitten by a red-backed spider
and never recovered, although he lingered on for a long
time. My father and 1 had made up our differences
just prior to this time. 1 had not seen him for nearly
three years, and when he was in Adelaide, which was
very frequent, he always used to come to see me, and
if he had a spare night he would take me to the theatre.
He used to say to me, “ Of course, when grandfather
dies you will come to the funeral.” I said, “ I don’t


know; I will have to have a new suit.” So he promised
that if I’d come he’d pay my fare and buy me a suit,
which promise he kept, the suit costing fifteen shillings
and fitting where it touched. I attended the funeral
and when I returned to work I was put on driving a
tramcar. It was a small car, which used to travel down
the avenues at St. Peters picking up passengers for
the main tram.
It required very little driving, as the horse knew his
work, and all I had to do was to put on the brake while
the passengers got on and then take it off again. I
used to collect the fares and then give the passengers a
pass for the main tram. By that time I was receiving
one pound per week; it was an easy job.
Shortly after my grandmother came down with Mrs.
Elliott, our old friend, and tried to persuade me to
learn a trade, and after a long time I gave in. My
grandmother promised to pay my board until such
time as I could earn enough; she kept to her word and
I was apprenticed to the Ways and Works, Glanville,
which was run by the Railways. My wages for the
first year were six shillings per week, and as it took a
fortnight’s wages every three months to pay for my
fare, and. as I had started to smoke, I could not see
my way clear to make ends meet, so I had to seek other
means to supplement my meagre earnings.
1 got a job selling fruit at the Theatre Royal, which
brought in a few shillings extra, but our boss, who
had the right to sell the fruit, was a little Jew, and
the number of little tricks he employed to beat us for
our commission was remarkable; we always were
short in our returns.
One night I saw him after he had counted the fruit
in my mate’s basket take one out again, thus making
him sixpence short, and as we had always had our
suspicions about him and knew we were being cheated.


we were very sore about it, so we set to work and gave
him a thrashing, which meant the end for us. The
boy I mentioned is now a “ big ncrise ” in the motor
world.
I was not finished with the theatre yet, for I obtained
employment as cloakroom attendant upstairs in the
dress circle, which job turned out trumps, as I received
five shillings a week and tips, and saw all the plays, and
while 1 was there the great French actress, Sarah
Bernhardt, who was the greatest actress in the world
at that time, came to Adelaide. She turned out to be
frost after all, and every seat in the stalls and dress
circle was sold by auction, several seats bringing ten
pounds for the season, which lasted, as far as I remem-
ber, about seven nights. She gave a different play
every night and programmes cost a shilling each. One
had to follow the performances very closely, for these
programmes were translated from French to English,
and after something was spoken in French one had to
refer to the programme to ascertain its meaning. By
that time what was said next would be missed. The
patrons stuck to it the first night or two, but spent the
other nights in the saloon lounge; it was the Theatre
Royal Hotel at that time. I could not grumble, as I
used to sell the books on commission and did well with
tips; but 1 now began to feel the strain of late nights,
and having to rise so early in the morning, began to
tell on me, so I had to give up one or the other and, as
1 had the wind up al>out breaking my indentures, I
gave up the theatre.
I was then receiving nine shillings per week and, as
I could not spend much. 1 had a few pounds in the
bank.
I joined the Oddfellows Lodge about this time and
have now l>een a member for over fifty years.
1 then became interested in sport. I will take swim-
ming first. I had learnt to swim prior to going to


work at Glanville and, as the workshops arc right on
the wharf, I had every opportunity for improving my-
self. I became a fairly good swimmer and thought
1 would go in for races at the city baths. I found out
that swimming in fresh water was different from swim-
ming in salt water. Out of nine or ten races the best
I ever did one night was to come third. I also played
cricket about this time, and was a fairly good batsman,
this being the only reason 1 was in the team, but 1
don’t remember ever having made a big score. I was
no bowler and 1 was always placed in the field where
there was not much work to do. Now, 1 come to foot-
ball. 1 played in a team which turned out the finest
footballer, in my opinion, there ever was—the late
Bunny Oaly; and his brother, Boss, who was also in
our team, held the goal kicking record in league foot-
ball for many years. Their sons also played league
football later on. In those days there were no grade
teams; a player was picked straight from the park
lands. I tried hard for selection in the league, but
1 can now see that 1 was never cut out to be a first-
class footballer. I had a try at baseball and with a
little influence I was picked to play for Goodwood,
which team is still playing in A ” grade. That was
the first and only time I played, as I turned out to be
a dud.
The following years 1 cannot remember much to
write about; things later on took a turn for the worse,
and many were out of work, owing to bad seasons.
The Government at that time opened up village
settlements along various places on or near the Murray
River. There were several men in the plumbers’ shop
who left to go to those settlements and those that did
not go were all put off, with the exception of myself.
I became dissatisfied, as I was not learning anything
and wanted to leave and Iry for something else, but


my employers would not let me leave, nor would they
transfer me to another branch in the Railways.
I decided then to clear out altogether, and, thinking
I would like to see the world, I signed on as cabin boy
on a small sailing ship called the “ Myrtle Holme.” I
was to receive five shillings a week and it took about
ten or twelve weeks to reach England. 1 would l»e
all right, as she was delayed here for al>out four months.
I began to cool down. I was still working at Glanville
and the novelty of seeing the world wore off, hut a
fellow-boarder, whose room mate I had been for years,
came to my rescue and took my place.
It was the turning jx)int in his life, for soon after
arriving in England he migrated to Canada and started
wheat growing in Manitoba and is at the present time
a very wealthy man, while bis brother, who in later
years became one of my l)est customers, is now an hotel
keeper in Port Adelaide.
There was a steamer named the “ Governor Mus-
grave,” which used to visit all the lighthouses with pro-
visions, etc., and when in Port she used to be tied at
the Glanville wharf. When the captain wanted any
extra hands he used to pick them out of the workshops.
I had several trips and enjoyed them very much; there
was plenty of work to do, but it was like a holiday to
me. A nephew of one of my shipmates is working
for our firm at the present time.
Every year when my annual leave arrived I either
had a pass to Melbourne or Sydney and did not miss
any chances, one of my trips being as far as Hourke
in N.S.W. One had to travel over the Zig Zag rail-
way, which was at that time considered one of the
great engineering feats of the world. It was
demolished soon after as experts declared it was unsafe
to travel on. Another of my trips took me to Lith-
gow, a big coal mining town in the Blue Mountains,


and. as there was a strike on, my friend, W. Filscll.
of Thebarton, and I were taken for black-legs and
nearly got into trouble, but as soon as we could explain
who we were it was all right, but Filsell got a black
eye out of it.
My father, having let the Terowie Hotel, lived in
retirement at Medindie, but. always having led an active
life, did not like the idea of being idle, so he then took
over the Jetty Hotel at the Semaphore and I joined
him there. It suited lx»th of us. as it was nearer my
work and I was of great assistance to him in my spare
time. It was at this time I lost my grandmother.
She often said she would like to live to see me finish
my time, but it was not to be. she died as she lived.
She was in good health when I left for work in the
morning; they sent for me about midday, but I was
too late; she was dead when I arrived. She had
expressed a wish to the lady with whom I boarded for
many years that she would like to be buried in Terowie.
and her wishes were carried out. I just had time to
catch the train and make arrangements, arriving in
Terowie the same night; the next day she was laid
to rest in the Terowie cemetery.
After her death things did not seem the same. My
father became discontented and when the West Aus-
tralian Gold Fields started he was anxious to go, as he
had the gold fever badly. He went over to try his
luck, but was not successful. Ile had left my sister in
charge of the hotel and, as she only had my assistance
at night time and and week-ends, it became too much
for us. The rest of the family were going to school
at the time, so we had to send for him. He came
back, but was very unsettled; he wanted to go back
and get into business, but, as he had a young family,
he was handicapped and, as the Jetty Hotel was too
big for me to manage, he had to look for something
smaller.


lie had to wait until J finished my apprenticeship,
which was not long, then he took over the Aral) Steed
Hotel in Mutt Street in my name and left again for
the West. I had to apply in the usual way for a
licence; it was adjourned for a few days, and it did
not look like being granted, but eventually 1 was suc-
cessful. In granting it to me they created a new
record, as 1 was the youngest publican that had up to
that |>eriod, ever held a licence. 1 believe to this day
I still hold that record.
My elder sister then left to join my father in the
West and there was I. left with the great responsibility
of running the hotel successfully, which I did, as the
|H)lice records will show'; 1 never had a conviction
against me or a black mark of any description, and in
addition, 1 had to bring up a young family, my younger
sister was six years niv junior and had just left school.
My brothers were then all attending school and 1 was
not twenty-two years of age. I did all this with the
help of two paid servants, who were very trustworthy.
Hotel hours in those days were from 6 a.m. till 11
p.m., and 1 was very lucky if I got to bed at twelve,
and I had to be up again to open the bar at six next
morning. Fortunately. 1 had good health and a strong
constitution.
My father took over an hotel in Coolgardic, which
was at that time the centre of the gold rush, and
shortly afterwards Kalgoorlie opened up and soon
became a very busy town. When it was decided to
have a railway to Kalgoorlie my father bought a block
of ground, and where he thought the terminus would
be he decided to erect an hotel, but had it nearly com-
pleted when the railway w'as extended along about
another mile. He was so disgusted that he sacrificed
what was already done and came hack to Adelaide, thus
losing a great deal of money in that venture, but he did
not sav vcrv much alxmt it.


As there was not enough for the two of us at the
Arab Steed, he left me settled there, split up the family,
and took over the Maid and Magpie Hotel, conditions
then becoming a lot easier for me, as my sister would
come over from the Maid and Magpie to relieve me,
so giving me more time to myself.
One holiday three of my friends and I decided to
take our young ladies for a picnic to Relair; we had
not proceeded far when we met with what might have
been a bad accident in turning a corner too sharply
on a downhill grade. The cab and horses capsized;
some of us thrown clear, hut the others were tangled
up in the wrecked cab. It was a marvellous escape, as
there was no one seriously injured. We were taken
to a house nearby, and those that were hurt had their
wounds dressed and we finished the picnic where we
had the accident . but I don’t think it w'as very enjoyable.
I married my young lady afterwards and we have
many a laugh over it now.
The lease of the hotel having expired, I found that
soon I would cease to become a full-blown publican,
and although we tried hard to have the lease renewed
we had no luck. Several of the breweries tried to
buy the freehold, and each one promised me the lease,
as 1 had increased the business since I had been in
charge, but the owner wanted to take it over himself,
which he did. I was sorry to leave, as I had made
many friends and still have several of them to this
dav.
I then went to the Maid and Magpie for my father
was finding it a little too much for him, as he had only
my two sisters to help him. I soon settled down to
my job. I had more time ofif than I had previously,
and made the best of it. A man behind the bar comes
in contact with all sorts of people; it is surprising
how many are out to l>eat the publican, and it is sttr-


prising the tricks they get up to get a drink
on the cheap. You learn, as you think, all their
tricks, hut as soon as you think you know them, along
they come with a new one.
Here are some of my experiences. A well-dressed
man came in and called for two pints; when he was
served he looked along the shelves and said, “ I think
I will have a Johnny Walker,” and walked out with
the two pints. Naturally, I expected him hack and
poured out the whisky. 1 was a little busy at the
time and as he seemed a long time, 1 went outside and
there were the two empty i)Ots on the window sill. 1
was lucky to get the pots back, but as they had the
brand of the hotel on them they were not much good
to him. I came hack smiling and waited for the next
one to come along. I had not long to wait. One
night, when everyone was at dinner, I was siting in
the bar reading, there being no customers at that time
in the bar. In came a fellow with a furtive look
around the bar; he came up to me smiling and
my suspicions were aroused at once, as he called for a
shandy, which surprised me, as he looked to me more
like a pinky drinker. I served him and he put down a
half-sovereign, and when 1 gave him the change he
was looking around at the pictures on the wall. He
looked sort of surprised when he saw the change and
said. “ What was that I gave you? ” 1 told him and
lie said, “ Are you sure ? " To prove it to him I took
it out of the till and said, “There >ou are; are you
satisfied now?” As I laid it on the counter he said
he was not, as he did not intend to change ; t, because
he had plenty of silver. He pulled out a handful, took
a threej)ence out of his hand, and put it with the
change I had given him, pushed it along to my half-
sovereign, and said, “ Give me a pound for the lot.”
1 flicked my half-sovereign away and then I woke up
what the change trick was, I got wild and


was after his blood when he grablxM his change and
was off outside, and 1 could not see him for smoke.
That trick is still practised on the unwary to this day.
I now began to put on weight at an alarming rate;
whatever the cause was I could never find out, for 1
was a very moderate drinker behind the bar. I drank
more when 1 was off duty. 1 was advised, when 1
had put over three stones on to my normal weight, to
leave the hotel business and look out for something
else.
1 applied for and was successful in obtaining a posi-
tion in the department in which 1 served my time.
They had by this time left Glanville and removed to
Adelaide. My work took me over a large area; from
Adelaide to Terowie on one line, to Morgan on an-
other, and to Murray Bridge on yet another. 1 was
engaged mostly on repair work, as 1 was away through
the week and only home week-ends. 1 was not of
much assistance to them at home, and as it was too
much for my father, he sold out and went to Sydney,
where he took over an hotel.
1 then went to live with the same people 1 had lived
with years previously. 1 began to lose weight as
rapidly as 1 had gained it and was soon back to normal.
My father, having had enough of Sydney, returned
and took over the Terowie Hotel again, which he kept
for several years until my sister and brothers married,
when he became dissatisfied and bought a farm adjoin-
ing that I have previously mentioned. He had gambled
a great deal on the share market with disastrous
results, not being able to do anything right, and so lost
a small fortune. He then sold the farms and all his
property at Terowie and came to Adelaide to live,
where he died on 27th June, 1929, at the age of eight}'-
six, and was laid to rest in the Payneham cemetery.
On 27th February, 1900, I married Catherine, second
daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs. Bentley, of Mar-


garet Terrace, Rosewater, and went to live at Ann
Street, Stepney, in a nice little cottage, paying seven
shillings and sixpence a week. 1 expect the rent for
that cottage is over a pound per week at the present
time. We intended going to Sydney for our honey-
moon, but on arriving at Melbourne we learned that
the bubonic plague was raging in Sydney. Shortly
after my return I was in a very bad accident, which
happened where the parcels offices are now situated at
the Adelaide Railway Station.
The old locomotive works, prior to being moved to
Islington, had to he pulled down to make room for the
new railway station, and I was sent to take down an
old gas lamp which was fixed to one of the end walls.
I was on a ladder halfway up on the wall when the
accident happened. The principals, which were the
largest and heaviest that I have ever seen—and the
measurements of which I have forgotten —were being
taken down and it took sixty men to carry them out
of the building on to a spare block of ground some-
where near where the checr-up hut now stands. The
job was about half finished when something happened
and they all collapsed in a few seconds, taking part of
the two end walls with them, and if 1 had been on the
inside instead of the outside, there was nothing that
would have saved me, for these walls were built of
stone and were about thirty inches through. For-
tunately, the gang of sixty men were on their way back
at the time, and there were only fourteen men left on
the job. There was one man killed instantly; one died
a few months afterwards through injuries; ten were
taken to the hospital, and a few were treated for minor
bruises and allowed to go home. Those who were
permanently injured received a pension for life. I
was one of the fortunate three that didn’t get a scratch,
although I received a severe shock, as I thought the
whole gang was underneath, and one could not see or


do anything for a few minutes on account of the dense
clouds of dust. My wife’s cousin was one of those
permanently injured.
On 21st November of the same year my eldest son,
James, hereafter called Jim, was born. Before I was
married my work was in or around Adelaide, and I
was very seldom away over night. In February, 1901,
my eldest sister married A. 11. Coneyhearc and went
to live at Second Avenue, St. Peters. At that time
I went to Broken Hill to see if I could better myself,
hut I struck one of the worst days that town had ever
e\j)erienced. I arrived about eight o’clock in the
morning, hut at eight o’clock at night 1 was gladly on
mv wav home again. There were several happenings
worthy of note during that year. Queen Victoria
died and was buried in State; there were very severe
cyclonic storms all over the State, and near Wasleys
a man with a team of six horses waiting at a railway
crossing were all struck by lightning.
In February, P. 102, 1 Iniught two blocks of ground
at West Croydon and they were sold by auction for
9/. per foot. We intended to build, so moved to Kil-
kenny to be as near as possible to the Imilding, as 1
had plenty of work to do. The contract price was one
hundred and ninety-eight pounds, and I had to do the
ironwork and painting. There was no water laid on,
the nearest water main being at Croydon, nearly half a
mile away, so 1 had to dig a well before proceeding
with the jol). It was hard work after I had done my
day’s work, drawing the water up in buckets to fill a
tank to keep the masons and plasterers going next day.
As I was the first in build in West Croydon and
moved in in Julv. I became the pioneer of West Croy-
don. Shortly after, the Boer War having just finished,
conditions got worse and many men were thrown out
of work; I was one of those unfortunates, for, in
November the same vear. I with others was retrenched.


and as 1 was not used to the trade outside, 1 found it
difficult to procure anything to do, and was forced to
lake on any kind of work that I could get. I dug
several wells, and one of them is still in use in Herbert
Road, West Croydon. 1 then bought a paper round
and a horse and carl, and this was, the worst job 1
ever had, for in those days the tracks —one could not
call them roads —were awful, as I had to travel on
the Port Road. In summer it was all dust and in
winter mud and slush and full of pot holes. I had
bad luck with the horses 1 bought and could not get
one to suit me, until at last 1 bought the old grev mare,
which 1 had for many years. It is still a standing
joke about me and my old grev mare.
On Bth March. 190.1, my second son, Alfred Bentley,
was born. He is now known as Alf., and he also has
a record that can never be taken from him, as he was
the first child born in West Croydon. I worked the
paper round for over twelve months and then sold it,
receiving forty pounds more than I paid for it, as I had
increased the number of customers considerably. 1
was able to square things a bit and balance th e budget.
Next I met an old friend, E. R. McCarthy, who had
worked in the Railways with me, and we went into
partnership with the intention of touring the country
as travelling tradesmen. My partner was a coach
trimmer by trade and a gifted artist; some of his pic-
tures still hang on the walls at home. We bought
a light van and in our spare time painted it and did
it up generally. We had to look for work to get some
spare cash to stock it, and there were several jobs we
did, one in particular being the banqueting room at the
Norwood Town Hall; the decoration we did is still
standing and looks as fresh as when we first painted
it.
1 was my partner’s labourer when it was his trade,
and vice versa. We worked well together, but as


there was no chance of getting ahead, owing to the
keen competition, we reverted to our original plan. We
started on our journey reaching Mallala on the first
night, and established ourselves in that town. We
could not go wrong, there l>eing plenty of work, and
the butcher started us off by having a new sign and, of
course, several others soon followed suit. We painted
several houses, the hotel included. Our van was kept
in a prominent place in the town, with our advertise-
ments painted on the sides, something after this
fashion; our names painted on the top. Plumbers and
Ironworkers, Coacb Trimmers, Sign writers. Painters
and General House Repairs. lam sorry 1 did not have
a photograph taken for future records.
As we were batching, that took up much of our time.
In the night time 1 would cut from iron or tin, gener-
ally kerosene tins, artists’ palettes or plaques; Me.
would then paint a landscape, or birds and animals,
and on week-ends, when the farmers came in for their
week-end shopping, we would sell them at a very good
profit. We went out to several farms to repair their
traps and this saved them from the inconvenience of
having to send them to Adelaide. It did not cost us
much to live, as they used to feed us when we were
on the job. Mv brother, Ted, who was on holidays,
joined us on several of these trips. Eventually, how-
ever, I became homesick and we dissolved partnership.
Me. secured another partner, bought another horse,
and got as far as Manoora. Being a widower, he later
remarried and settled down in that town, where he
was in business for many years.
After 1 returned home, I erected a sign, which
remained a landmark for many years, as our house
was the only one between Croydon and Kilkenny. I
started roofing houses and, as there was generally a
tank wanted, I used to make them in my spare time
on the lawn at the back of our house with my good


wife holding the dolly and assisting me generally. I
went on like this for alwut two years, when my younger
son, William, was born on 11th May, 1907. On that
day 1 started to build my first workshop, which took
months to build, as 1 had to earn money in the mean-
time to pay for material and could work on it only in
my spare time. W hen completed, its measurements were
30 ft. by 16 ft., and two of the lx>ys who were with me
in the original shop are still with me, namely, Rube
Edwards and Hill Davey. When we made a tank
or anything, we had to carry it outside before we could
start on another, but we worked in that shop for five
years, w hen 1 built on to it another shop, measuring
70 ft. h\ 30 ft. 1 then started buying machines, and
had secured three and was nearly buying another when
the Great War started. Hill Davey enlisted and, as
galvanised iron was unprocurable, the shop was prac-
tically closed down, and we just had to mark time until
conditions improved.
In 1915 I started a movement concerning a new
railway station at West Croydon. 1 interviewed
several residents and, having decided upon a conveni-
ent night for a meeting at my house, I was the only one
present. ■ loiter I called another one; but 1 waited
until eight thirty, then 1 sent the boys around and got
two of them to turn up. but the only result was that
we told a few yarns, had a drink, and that was that.
However, I persevered and even made myself a
nuisance with my neighbours. This was told to me
afterwards. I was walking down the street and saw
three of them talking, but as soon as they saw me they
jxirted, one of them saying to the others, “ Here comes
that fellow with a bee in his bonnet alxmt a railway
station.” At last I got a few interested, and at a
meeting it was moved that T take a petition around and
try to get signatures. It took me all night to get one,
although i think I obtained about eight one night.
They would not sign it and told me there was no chance.


as the war was on, one resident refusing )>ecause he
had built in the district on account of it being nice and
quiet, and he said it would spoil it if we had a station,
although I noticed that on the day it was opened he was
almost the first to travel.. When another meeting
became due 1 was disappointed with my results and,
as the others would not take it around, we got a
stranger in the district and paid him for his work. He
was more successful than I and soon had it filled,
and as time went on the residents become more inter-
ested and 1 found our house too small, so we had to
adjourn to the workshop. The final meeting we held
was a public one, and there were over eighty persons
present. Twelve of us were appointed to wait on the
Railways Commissioner and our request was granted
and the station was opened on 24th December, 1915.
We intended to hold a social to commemorate the
opening, but Christmas being so near, we had to post-
I>one it. We held a concert, social and dance on 15th
January the following year, but, as there was no public
hall available in the district, vve had to hold it in our
workshop. We had it cleaned out, made a stage, and
borrowed the scenery from the Hindmarsh Town
Hall; it was a huge success. The members of the
Woodville District Council all came, also members of
the district. The artists at the concert included my
old friend and partner, Me., who put on a good turn
as a lightning sketch artist, and during the evening
my wife and self were presented with the first ticket
issued, in a nice frame with appropriate inscription.
A flashlight photograph of the gathering was taken
also and presented to us in due course, and they are
both hanging up in our dining-room at the present time.
Several other functions were held in the shop after-
wards in aid of the Red Cross, and it was also used
as a meeting place for the local football club.
In 1919, when we were out motoring with my friend,
J. Hutchinson, my wife and her sister, while going


ii]) Willunga llill, something went wrong with the
steering gear and we crashed through a fence and the
car turned over several times and finished up at the
bottom of the hill. My friend was killed outright and
my wife was seriously injured hy being pinned under-
neath the car, which took several men to lift. My
sister-in-law was also injured, but I escaped without a
scratch. Until the war was over we jogged along
quietly, there being nothing doing in the shop as the
raw material was still hard to get, but when supplies
got a little easier I bought another machine and had
the electric power installed; prior to that we worked
the guillotine by hand, which caused plenty of fun.
The buying of this machine was a good investment,
as it made guttering eight times the rate of the machines
that were in use in various firms in Adelaide. f
began to capture the trade, and as time went on I
realised that it was a good policy to have the latest,
and I have adopted that policy right through my busi-
ness career, and 1 can now claim to have the most
up-to-date plant of its kind in the Commonwealth. I
don’t claim to have more machines than other firms,
only machines that are used by a galvanised sheet
metal worker.
My wife and 1 now began to take holidays, as I had
men trustworthy enough to leave in charge of the
business; prior to this it was an effort for both of us
to be away at the same time. At first we did the gulf
trip, then the Murray trip, and were in the first person-
ally conducted trip to Mt. Buffalo; the Mt. Gambler
personally conducted tour, also the Jenolan Caves on
23rd July, 1926, followed.
Jim then married Clarice, second daughter of Mr.
and Mrs. Sowden, and they built a house in Rosetta
Street, West Croydon, and had four daughters:
Aileen, Ixtrn 24th March, 1929; Jean, born 28th Feb-
ruary, 1932; Janice Marjorie, born 12th July, 1938;


and Marion Catharine, born 21st March, 1940. In
1928 I opened a branch business at Port Lincoln, built
an up-to-date shop, installed machinery and Jim
managed that part of the business and is still in charge.
On 6th February, 1928, Alf married Dorothy, eldest
daughter of Mr. and Mrs. j. Wing, and they have one
son, Gary, born Bth November, 1931; and they now
reside at Blanford Street, West Croydon.
Things were going along splendidly when the depres-
sion came along, and I, with thousands of other busi-
ness men, felt it very keenly, my wages sheet was
somewhere about one hundred pounds a week, dwind-
ling down to between three and four pounds, but I
managed to get through. After a few years the busi-
ness gradually improved; nearly all of my old hands
returned and my old customers came back, and eventu-
ally we got back to normal again.
On 28th December, 1935, Bill married Thelma Cor-
dellia, youngest daughter of the late Mr, and Mrs. Hy.
Clarkson. They have one son, James, born Bth Octo-
ber, 1938, and now reside in Rosetta Street, West
Croydon, in the house that Jim first built when he was
married.
On 22nd December, 1935, I took the boys into the
business with me and formed it into a private company,
now known as W. Eglinton Ltd.
I then had a look round the other States, and on
one of my trips, while travelling through Tasmania,
I decided to stay at Hobart, but could not get accom-
modation, as the wool sales were on and the buyers
came from England and the Continent. As Hobart
is only a small city, it was taxed to its limit with visitors
attending these sales. I travelled up and down looking
for accommodation, with no results. At last I grew
desperate and went to the police station and stated my
case. They were as helpless as I, although the ser-
geant in charge very kindly offered me one of the


cells to sleep in, but 1 did not like the idea, as it would
have been the first time 1 slept in a police cell. At
last a constable came in and told me of a place that
could put me up, an hotel that had just changed hands,
hut by a mistake I was put in another man’s room.
Me came in long after I was asleep. It was moon-
light and, being very cold, I bad the bedclothes well
over me. lie thought I was a woman in his I>ed and
got his three friends to come in before he woke me
up, but when they saw who it was they walked out and
the one whose bed 1 was in said he would get fixed up
somewhere else. I had breakfast with them next
morning and they turned out to be very decent chaps.
They little knew what a fright they had given me. J
did not stay in Hobart long, as it was very cold, there
being snow on Mount Wellington all the time I was
there. 1 caught a boat for Sydney and had a very
rough trip.
In 1935 1 flew over to Melbourne to see the Cup and.
as 1 had never seen a Melbourne Cup it was a novelty
in more senses than one. We left Parafield on the
Monday morning, reaching Melbourne about 11 a.m.,
and as we had made no arrangements for accommo-
dation, we had great difficulty in getting in anywhere.
Finally, however, we got portable beds in the servants’
dining-room at the Federal Hotel, but we had to I**
out next morning at 6 o’clock.
It was a very cold morning and we walked as far as
Parliament House, then caught a cable tram back to
our hotel, then an electric tram from Spencer Street to
Flinders Street station and electric train to Flemington,
a motor car to Fssendon, aeroplane to Parafield, motor
car to Adelaide, then steam train home.
We came over the hills in the dark and, being Guy
Fawkes night, all the bonfires were lit—it w r as a fine
sight. We landed at Parafield with the help of a
motor car lights. I finished up by playing bridge at


a friend’s house on the terrace, although my wife
wanted to give me a ride in the wheelbarrow to finish
up with, and I am sorry now I did not accept, but I
was glad to hit the cot and call it a day. I had two
shillings each way on the winner, but for the last five
years have not had a bet.
In October, 1937, I went to Broken Hill with a
delegation of business men and at the station we were
met by business men of Broken Hill, We had a very
enjoyable time and were taken by the manager of the
North Mine down as far as the 2,000-ft. level, which
was a great experience for us all.
We had been increasing our business, buying more
machines and extending our workshop, until it became
a large and modern factory. My first shop occupied
an area of 480 square feet; the present building covers
an area of 16,277 square feet. With the help and
co-operation of our engineer, Mr. Furse, we patented
a ventilator and called it a syphonator, and it has proved
such a wonderful success that all the leading architects
recommend it in their specifications. We claim to
have manufactured the largest sheet metal job in the
Commonwealth, comprising over 30 tons of galvanised
iron, and it was on show at our premises, and we have
photos and records for those who are interested.
When touring the eastern States recently I threw out a
challenge in each State I was in, but up to now there
has been no one to dispute our claim. The last trip
to Sydney was my twenty-fourth visit to that city.
On 26th March, 1940, we suffered a sad bereave-
ment in the loss of Jim’s wife, Clarice, at the age of
thirty-eight years. She left a husband and four daugh-
ters to mourn her passing. We have one daughter,
Janice, staying with us at the present time.
This narrative was completed on Ist December, 1940;
and in conclusion I would like to add that I 'have
enjoyed comparatively good health throughout my life,


and can still do a good day’s work. I still have all
my teeth and can truthfully say I have never had
toothache. I have teen a smoker all my life and,
although J am not a total abstainer, I can say
that my boys have never seen me the worse for drink.
Since the formation of Eglinton Ltd. (which incor-
corporates my own sons), the business has continued to
grow and in February, 1941, we held a picture show on
the premises in conjunction with Lysaghts. Over 400
people were present.
THE ADVERTISER PRINTING OFFICII
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA


31508023314752


