

■mvF f
Bio
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
sir
BY CHARLES BOHHEY
(Pop Private Circulation Only)
I was born on the 31st of October 1813, and lived for the first
twelve years of my life at Sandon, a little village near Stafford
in the valley of the Trent, of which my father - the Rev. Geo. Bonney
was vicar. My mother was the youngest daughter of the Reverend
John Knight - vicar of the adjoining parish of Millwich.
I was the youngest of the family, and, living in a quiet
village, four miles from any market town, I had no companions of my
own age, and my chaldhood was spent in comparative solitude. The
quietude of the village was only disturbed by the occasional passing
of a stage Coach or travelling carriage; Sandon being situated on
the main road between Liverpool and London.
At an early age I developed a taste for'mechanical employment
and acquired some skill in doing ordinary repairs about the house, and
at the turning lathe at which I used to work before I was ten years
of age. 'This taste, which I inherited from my father, who was a skilled
mechanic, has remained with me through life, mechanical employment
having boon one of the chief resources of my leisure time* Of my
father’s family I know but little, his father was a clergy~man
in London. I remember hearing when a boy, that, having to preach
before the Court just after the reconciliation of George 11. with
the Prince of Wales, my grand-father unfortunately commenced the
service with ! 'I will arise'' etc., and thereby gave great offence
to the Court.
My father was educated at the Charterhouse and was' a fellow
of Jesus College, Cambridge. I do not knov/ how many brothers and
sisters he had, he was the youngest of the family, and, at the
period of my earliest recollection he was the only member of the
family left with the exception of a sister, the widow of Dr. Revinson,
a physician of some celebrity in London at one time. Two of my
father’s nephews were in the Church and both became archdeacons -
Thomas Bonney and Henry Kaye Bonney, the latter was the author of a
Life of Jeremy Taylor and some other works. One of my father f s
brothers - John Augustus Bonney is mentioned in Buckle’s History
of Civilisation (Vol I. P. 488) as having been subjected to the
vindictive persecutions carried on in the reign of George 111. to
suppress free discussion. I am in possession of the medal which
was struck in commemoration of the acquittal of my uncle who was
tried for high treason with Horne Took© and others in 1794-. The
Jury brought in a verdict of - Not Guilty in opposition to the
summing up of the judge. This is said to have been the first
instance of a jury referring to take the dictum of a judge, and
forms an era in the history of the liberty of the press.
My father was born in the year 1760 the same year that


George 111 came to the throne, and died at the ago of sixty-six in
1826, thus two generations have extended over a period of a
hundred and thirty years during which a greater advance has boon mads
in the arts and Sciences and in the social and political condition of
the civilised world than has uver been witnessed during a similar
period of t imo.
When George 111 came to the throne the masses had scarcely
emerged from serfdom, political rights were denied them, the House
of Commons being the mere nominees of the aristocracy; they were
denied the right of meeting to discuss their grievances and coiild
not form trade associations, the punishments for offences against
property were marked by Draconian severity, the death penalty being
inflicted for the most trifling crimes. Many of the discoveries
and inventions which now contribute so much to the comfort and
convenience of every day life, wore then unknown. I am old enough
to remember the time when there were no railways and when gas and
steam-boats were only just coming into use; Electricity was only
known as a philosophical toy#
I had just attained the ago of thirteen when my father died, and
our home was broken up# This was my first sorrow, the parting from
the old home left a deep impression upon me which time has failed to
efface. After leaving Sandon 1 went to reside with my brother
Thomas, who was a clergyman and had recently been elected head
master of a Grammar School at Rugety - ten miles from London#
I remained there for seven years, when, having received an appoint-
ment as clerk to Judge Burton in Sydney, I loft England on the
sth. of August 1834. in a vessel called the John Craig#
The monotony of a long sea voyage was relieved by touching at
the Capo for provisions. The old Dutch town (with its wide streets
having rows of troes planted down the middle, its white houses and
the colored people about the streets, most of whom, wore slaves)
presented a novel aspect. It seems strange that so groat a blot
on civilisation, as slavery is now admitted to he, should have *
existed within the memory of persons now living. The Act for its
Abolition was passed the same year that I left England, hut had
not come into operation when I was at the Cape.
We arrived in Sydney on the 12th. of December, the voyage
having occupied more than eighteen weeks. Though comparatively
a small town to what it is now, Sydney had oven then groat aspirations
and the inhabitants used to boast of the great town that it would
become and oven contemplated the construction of railways into the
interior; I have often thought, that with this idoa as to tho future
greatness of tho Metropolis, it is not creditable to tho public men
of that day that so little care was taken to lay out tho city in a
manner that would have rendered it worthv of the position it now holds
After remaining eighteen months in Sydney I accompanied my
friend, the late C. H* Ehden, to his station on tho Hurray where
Alhury now stands, a distance of four hundred miles from Sydney.
His was my first experience of bush life.


On the journey we had a good deal of talk shout the then new
settlement of Port Phillip which was exciting some attention in
Sydney in consequence of some Tasmanian settlors having taken stock
over there and claimed a right to the land as first occupiers*
The Sydney Government had sent a police magistrate there about the
time we left Sydney -- July 1836.
Mr* Ebden expressed a desire to send sheep overland to the new
settlement and asked me if I would undertake to explore a‘road across
the intervening country* I eagerly embraced the proposal, and,
before I had been a week at the station, I found myself at the head
of an exploring'party consisting of two of the Station hands, and
myself# I selected as my crossing place the point whore Albury now
stands• X thought then that I was the first to cross the River at
that point, but the name of Hamilton Hume was afterwards found cut
upon a tree there, showing that he had crossed the river at the
same point on his celebrated journey to Port Phillip some years
previously. I took a direct South West course across the ranges
and struck the Ovens some few miles above the Point where the main
road now crosses it* The 'winter of 1836 had been excessively v/et
and the river being then bank high I Y/as unable to cross it.
Following the river down in the hope of finding a place whore I could
effect my object I came upon a newly made dray-track going in the
direction of the Murray. I knew at once that it was the track of
Major Mitchell*s exploring party, and, as I had given up all expect-
ation of being able to cross the Ovens in its flooded state, I
hastened after Major Mitchell*s party in the hope of overtaking it
and gaining some information about the country between the Ovens
and Port Phillip* The track led me to a point on the Murray now
called How Long, twenty miles below the station from which I had
started* The party had crossed the river and proceeded on their
journey, and, as I could not cross without the assistance of a
boat, I had to return to the Station* As shearing time was coming
on I could not renew my attempt to cross the country for some Y/eeks*
But on the 25th» December I again made start, having with mo this
time a bullock dray and a good supply of provisions*
I proceeded by the same route as before to Mitchell T s crossing
place over the Ovens, and then followed his track for several days#
when, finding it taking me too much to the westward, I took a more
southerly course until I struck the Goulburn* Here I halted until
as previously arranged Mr. Ebden following my track, joined me*
Leaving the dray encamped on the Goulburn, Mr* Ebden and I set our
in search of the Port Phillip settlement w r hich we reached on the
third day, having made nearly a straight course, being guided for the
last few miles by a dray track which y/o came upon*
It v/as about the 7th January 1837 when y/o arrived at the
Settlement Y/hich then consisted of a few huts with one newly erected
weatherboard store, conspicuous by its fresh coat of paint amongst
the ruder habitations hj which it v/as surrounded* Mr* Ebden
determined to bring a large number of his sheep over to the Port
Phillip country, and I undertook to conduct the party*


Bat wishing to return to Sydney, before fulfilling this engagement
I went across to Launceston there being very seldom- any direct
communication between Port Phillip and. Sydney at that time. I had to
wait at Launceston three weeks before I could, get a passage to Sydney
there being so little trade between any of the Australian Ports•
On landing from the vessel at Launceston and going in search of an
hotel, thinking I was an utter stranger in the place, to my astonishment
I mot a gentleman whom I had known in Sydney, and who afterwards
resided in South Australia - the late Samuel Smart. He very kindly
took me to an Hotel and paid me great attention during my stay in
Launceston.
On this occasion I first met the late Captain Hart who was
then commander of a vessel loading with sheep for South Australia.
During my stay Sir John Franklin, who had recently been appointed
Governor of Tasmania, paid his first visit to Launceston and was
most enthusiastically received. The former Governor - Colonel
Arthur, having boon very unpopular, this public demonstration seemed
to me to be intended to mark by contrast the different feeling with
which the two Governors were regarded*
I got a passage to Sydney in a small schooner and proceeded
again to Mr. Ebden ! s station, and, in the month of March, started with
ten thousand sheep for the Port Phillip district, these were the
first sheep taken across to the Hew Settlement*
Having crossed the Goulburn the sheep were halted on some open
country where Mr. Ebden first intended to place them, and, as we
were in want of provisions, I had to proceed to the settlement with
two drays for the purpose of bringing up supplies*
The day before my intended departure, I received intelligence
that there was a party with cattle about a day*s journey behind me,
under the leadership of the Late George Hamilton - afterwards so well
known in South Australia, and that there were two bushrangers
hovering about the party who would probably attempt to rob either that
party or mine* In company with one of Mr* Hamilton ! s overseers I
spent an afternoon in searching the country round about in the
endeavour to find the bushrangers, but, not succeeding, I had to
start the next morning with the drays for the settlement*
On this journey I made the track which afterwards became known
as the Sydney Road, and I also discovered at the same time the fertile
district, named afterwards ** Kilmore, where I formed a sheep station.
On my return from the settlement the first news that greeted me
was that the two bushrangers, accompanied by one of Mr. Hamilton ! s men
had visited my camp and induced six of my men to abscond with them*
The story of these bushrangers has been so well related by George
Hamilton, in a little brochure which ho printed some years ago, that
I only need refer to that portion of it in which I was more immediately
concerned; I heard nothing of the absconders for some weeks, when


ono day, returning to my camp in the evening after "being out on tlio
Run, I learned that two of the absconders, named - Dignum and
Commerford, had visited the camp during my absence and taken away
■with them as much provisions etc, as thoy could carry; amongst other
things a favorite little gun which had boon made especially for
my father when, from the growing infirmities of ago, ho was unable
to carry his double barrelled fowling piece. Whilst the bushrangers
wore robbing the camp, the hut keepers asked them what had become of
the other seven men who wont away with them, to which they replied
in an evasive manner, that they did not know*
After the robbery they proceeded along the overland track towards
the Murray, and the next heard of them was, that on arriving at the
Murray, Commerford gave himself up to the police then stationed there,
and confessed that he and Dignum had murdered their seven companions
in the District of Portland Bay to which they had gone after absconding
and burnt their bodies. They were then taken to Sydney and Commerford
was afterwards sent round to Melbourne in order that he might be taken
to the spot where the crime was committed, and point out any traces
that might remain of the bodies of the murdered men. Ho was sent
in charge of two mounted troopers and a foot constable; and seme charred
remains of the victims having been found, they were on the return
journey when Commerford, Whilst the two troopers were a short distance
away preparing to encamp, seized the constable’s musket and shot him
dead. Commerford escaped pursuit and the next heard of him was that
he was making his way across to my station to attack me, but, calling
at a hut on the way, the men at the hut knowing who he was, and hoping
to gain some reward for themselves seized him# chained him to a dray
and took him to Port Phillip* He was then taken to Sydney and tried
and hanged for the murder of the constable. His companion, Dignum
remained in goal, but as the only witness of the crime was now dead,
he could not be tried for the murder, but a charge of horse stealing
was preferred against him and, on being convicted of this crime, he
was transported to Norfolk Island for life.
Dignum was an old hand and, according to his own account, had
been guilty of all sorts of crimes, and had served sentences in almost
all the penal establishments. Commerford was a good looking young
fellow and passed himself off as a native of the colony, but in reality
he was an escapee from a prison ship that was wrecked two or three
years before near Jervis’s Bay. What the motive of these men was
in murdering their companions was never satisfactorily explained -
their own account of it was that the other seven being Englishmen,
intended to murder the two who wore Irish, and the latter thought
they would be beforehand with them and attack them whilst they 'were
asleep.
It is still more difficult to account for Commerford ! s conduct
in giving himself up to the police, in the first instance, and then
committing the crime which led to his execution. He seems to have
acted on impulse and this was exemplified by his having on ono occasion
borrowed a brace of pistols from mo to protect himself, as he said
from the blacks, and having within a day or two of his absconding,
returned the pistols without my having asked for them.


The sheep I had brought over, with the exception of two flocks that
I had taken charge of, were removed to Mount Macedon and with these
two flocks, shortly after the robbery of my camp, I moved to Filmore
There I remained with them till the end of year 1337. Being the
fartherest out station from, the Port Phillip Settlement, and there
being no other station within a distance of nearly twenty miles, I
found the difficulty of managing the sheep so great in consequence of
the trouble I had in getting men that I gave up the station .and took
the sheep to Mount Macedon.
At this time Mr. Joseph Hawdon was fitting out a p rty to take
cattle overland to South Australia and, stopping at my station, asked
mo to join the expedition. I eagerly embraced the opportunity of
gratifying rny love of exploring new country and joined his party at
Mitchell ! s crossing place over the Goulburn. We started on the
26th of January 1838, and followed down the left bank of the Goulburn.
The course we determined to take v/as to follow down the Goulburn
to the point where Mitchell, on his homeward journey in 1836, had turned
off in the direction of Portland Bay, and to follow his track until we
came to the first of'several rivers which he had described as flowing
to the westward, and, v/hich he assumed, would unite their streams and
join the Murray some distance to the westward. We hoped by this course
to avoid much of the bad travelling country which, according to
Sturt f s account, the Murray flowed through below the junction of the
Murrumbidgee• Mitchell had described the junction of the Goulburn
with the Murray as being several days journey to the westward of the
point where he turned to the south west; and therefore he supposed
that he had been travelling for some days on the banks of the Goulburn.
Accordingly wo supposed that the Goulburn would take us in a
North’west direction to the point where Mitchell loft it; but we found
it kopt trending more and more to the North, until, to our astonishment
wo came to its junction with a large river which we immediately recog-
nised as the Murray. We did not know what to make of it at first -
hero we were a'hundred miles to the eastward of Mitchell l s junction of
the two rivers, and of which he had given an elaborate description.
The only conclusion v/e could come to was that Mitchell had made some
mistake, and we then proceeded along the banks of the Murray in a
westerly direction.
Arriving at the point where Mitchell left the river, we followed
his track across an extensive plain. Some fifteen miles from the
river v/as a conical Hill which Mitchell named Mount Hope, and from
the summit of which he had seen in the distance a line of gun trees
apparently marking the course of another river flowing to the westward.
February 3rd. Mr. Hawdon and I ascended Mount Hope from whence we saw
the line of gum trees described by Mitchell - but, instead of extending
to the westward, it wan quite apparent that they were running in a
northerly direction and would ultimately join the Murray not far from
the point whore wo left it.
February 4th. On arriving at the rivor, which Mitchell named the
6


Yarrayne, we found it dried up to an insignificant chain of water
holes, he were bitterly disappointed at this result and consulted
together as to 'whether we should go on to one of the other rivers
which Mitchell described as having crossed farther on, or go back and
follow the course of the Murray to our destination. I strongly advised
that we should, adopt the latter course and place no more reliance on
Mitchell T s description of the country* This’we did and wo followed
the Yarrayne to its junction with the Murray, on February 11th and
there found Mitchell 1 s track cross!ng it about a day l s journoy from
where he turned south west* Following down the course of the Murray -
we came at length to Mitchell *s supposed junction of the G-oulburn.
Then the mistake ho had fallen'into was explained. The river, flowing
through extensive reedy swamps, had formed two channels that ho had
mistaken for the junction of the Goulburn.
We came in due course to the junction of the Murrumbidgee, and
from thence on the loth Feb. travelled through a country of exceedingly
sterile character consisting of red sandy soil thickly covered with
pines•
This description of country was met with at intervals, separated
in some instances by extensive plains, until we left the river to cross
the ranges to Adelaide.
It was somewhere about the junction of the Murrumbidgee that we
first established friendly relations with the natives. Up to this
time they had generally avoided us, ■ but from this point the tribes
used to assemble to see us pass, and send forward messengers to toll
the next tribe of our approach. Once only wore wo in danger of coming
into collision with them,. It was my work to load the drays (while
Mr. Hawdon looked after the stock men) .and sometimes ride ahead to
see what country there was before us. On this occasion I had directed
the bullock drivers to go round the edge of a lagoon whilst I rode
on to examine the country ahead.
It seems that a tribe of natives, who were near the drays when I
left them, went along the bank of the river to see the drays pass at
the other‘ond of the lagoon. The men mistook this for a hostile
manoeuvre, and on my return I found the two parties drawn up in battle
array - the men with their guns ready to fire - said the natives with
their spears poised for action. The men hastily explained the situation
in answer to my inquiry as to what was the matter but, from, my knowledge
of the customs of the natives, I knew the men were mistaken as to the
intended attack and I told them to put their guns down and then rode
up to the natives and made a well known sign to them to lower their
spears. They immediately obeyed the sign and we passed on in peace.
Many collisions with the natives have no doubt occurred through similar
misunderstandings.
We continued to travel along the left bank of the Murray until,
thinking we had passed the junction of the Darling, and seeing a good
fording place, v;e determined to cross to the other side of the river.


We were mistaken as to our having passed the junction of the Darling
and, after travelling some few miles, found we had to cross that
river, (March Ist.) hut it was then nearly dry and gave us no trouble.
The natives often assembled in considerable numbers but were
perfectly peaceable and caused no annoyance ~ messengers being sent on
from tribe to tribe to give notice of our approach.
One morning soon after starting, we came to a bond in the river
where it turned south and continued in that direction, as marked by the
lofty gums on its banks as far as the eye could reach* from this
bend a broad well beaten native path went off in a North West direction*
Hitherto we had always followed these paths and found that they
saved us a great deal of travelling by cutting off the bonds of the
river. On this occasion wo hesitated as to following the native path
as it seemed to be going so far away from the river, but wo eventually
decided to follow it* Wo travelled on till the afternoon and no sign
of the river gums appearing on the horizon - Mr* Hawdon rode ahead.
It was getting late when he returned and reported that he could see
the river, and he wanted to turn off in the direction we
had seen the gums running, but I pointed out that the river was
evidently so far away that we could not roach it that night, and
advised that we should keep to tho native path, now that wo had
followed it so far, as it was sure to load us to the water sooner or
later* We went on and came upon a fine large lake which Mr* Hawdon
named after me.
The next morning, after travelling a few miles still following a
native path, we came upon a bend of the river coming from the south*
A party who followed us, not liking to venture away from the river,
were said to have taken nearly a week in getting round this great
bend.
Shortly after this adventure we fell in with two natives who gave
us to understand by signs that they belonged to a tribe some distance
down the river and wanted to accompany us. This they were allowed to
do, and they made themselves very useful as guides. My difficulty
in conducting the drays was to know when to keep to the river flats
and when to take to high land which was hero two or three hundred
foot above tho level of tho river, and the soil, being of a loose
sandy nature, afforded very bad. travelling ground. The flats wore
firmer, but sometimes our course would bo suddenly impeded by high
cliffs formed by tho river flowing against tho bank, and I might have
to retrace my steps a mile or two before I could get on the high land;
but from'the time I took the native guides, no difficulty of this kind
occurred.
I was amazed at the intelligence they displayed, before they had
been half a day with us they know as well as we did where a dray could
go and where it could not go; although they had never soon white men
before they never once made a mistake as to when we could keep the
flats and when we must take the high land.


These natives -were well known in Adelaide afterwards, and a
drawing of one of thorn - Tinhorn.y - is given in n Eyre ! s Australia 1 '
On reaching the North West bend, (Mch. 19th) the Mount Lofty
ranges cane in view some twenty or thirty miles to the westward#
Prom this point the river runs in a southerly direction and we foll-
owed its course for three or four days before making an attempt to
cross the dense mallee scrub which lies between the river and the
ranges# After a hard day * s work we got through the scrub and reached
the open country at the foot of the range, just at dark, and wore
fortunate enough to find water in one of the gullies.
The steep slopes of the range being impassable for bullock teams
at the point where we struck it, we travelled south for several days
and then found a pass which took us a little to the North of Mount'
Barker. Prom the top of Mount Barker we could see Lake Alexandria
a long way to the southward. As the map we had with us showed the
lake as being on a parallel with Adelaide we thought we were too far
to the North, and kept bearing away to the South in our passage
through the Mount Lofty range and came out at Noarlunga './here we found
the tent of a kangaroo hunter, (April 2nd.) who told us that we wore
twenty miles south of Adelaide. Had it not been for this error in
the map, we should have made a direct course to' Adelaide-.. Adelaide
was then a collection of rude huts with a few more substantial build-
ings in course of erection.
The people were surprised and delighted at the arrival of a herd
of cattle overland. Up to this time they had been living almost
exclusively on Kangaroo flesh#
X remained but three or four weeks in Adelaide, having arranged
with Mr. Hawdon to bring another herd of cattle over for him, and
opon up a direct communication with Melbourne instead of following
the tortuous course of the river Murray.
I loft Adelaide in a cutter of twenty six tons,- called the
!? Wator-Witch n , this being the only vessel available at that time#
We had a smooth passage to Cape Otway, but were there caught in a
gale; the little vessel, however weathered the storm and we got
safely into Port Phillip. I was the only person on board who had
ever been in to Port Phillip before, and, as there was no proper
chart on board, I had to act as pilot#
On arriving at Melbourne I found the N.S.M. revenue cutter
‘'Prince George 5f about to take prisoners and witnesses for the Supreme
Court sittings at Sydney. I was subpoenaed as a witness in the
case of Lignum, and Commerf ord, and proceeded to Sydney with the other
Uitnesses #
I was detained in Sydney for some weeks awaiting the trial, but
was never called upon to appear as a witness. I spent some portion
of the time in the Camden District; this was * during the great drought
of 1838. It was in the middle of the Winter, and the nights were
bitterly cold, and the days bright and sunny; the paddocks were as


brown and bare as the middle of the road*
I then went to Howlong on the river Murray, a station at that
time belonging to Mr Hawdon* Hero I had to wait some time for the
mustering of the cattle, and it was not until February 1839 that I
was ready to start on my second journey to South Australia*
Whilst waiting at Howlong, I looked after the carrying of the
first overland mail from Sydney to Melbourne - a service which Mr.
Hawdon had undertaken to perform* The carrying of the mail was atten-
ded with considerable risk on account of the hostility of the natives
who had committed many murders, and it was owing to the courage and
determination of the men selected by Mr. Hawdon to perform this
service, that it was successfully carried out.
The cattle were at last collected at Hughes T creek near the
G-oulburn, and I made a final start from thence about the twenty
sixth of February, taking a direct course to the Grampians in the
Portland Bay district. I had about three hundred head of cattle
several horses besides those required for the management of the
stock and two bullock drays (February). There were ten Europeans
and two Native boys in the party. The country at that time was
unoccupied along the route we took, until we came to the Grampians.
We then struck the Wannon and, in following down its course to the
Glenolg, wo came upon one of Messrs. Hontyhs stations where I was
strongly advised not to continue my journey as Captain Hart had come
from Adelaide to Portland Bay three months before to take a herd, of
cattle by the same route that I intended to go, but having spent
several days in examining the country, accompanied by a notorious
bushranger who had escaped the police, and travelled along the coast
from Portland Bay to Adelaide, Captain Hart pronounced the country
impassable for stock, and had taken Mitchell's track to the Murray
and followed the route which Hawdon and I had opened the previous
year. However as the object of the expedition which I was conducting
would have been frustrated if I had turned aside, I was bound to pro-
ceed, and, after spending a day in examining the country ahead,
I plunged into what was then considered an impassable desert.
Though the country was very much dried up from the long continued
drought, which had then prevailed, I managed to obtain water every
day on some of the extensive swamps that lie to the westward of the
Glenolg. As I approached nearer the coast I came upon a lake which
I named - Lake Hawdon; Mount Muirhead and Mount Benson were also named
by me after two of my stockmen, he then'came out upon the Coast
at Lacepede Bay. Here my troubles began, we found water in a swamp at
a depth of a few inches but all our attempts to water the cattle by
digging trenches wore fruitless. The weather was excessively hot
and the cattle, when brought up to the water, would rush into the
trenches and, in a few minutes, destroy the work of hours. Wo
persevered for throo days in these unavailing efforts to water the
cattle when a cool change with slight rains setting in, I determined
to push on. Following along the flat which runs parallel with the
coast from Lacepede Bay, we got on very well for three days whilst the
weather remained cool, finding drinking water for ourselves and the
working cattle every night by digging wells, the cattle having only


the moisture on the grass from the rain and dew to relieve their
thirst. On the fourth day the weather set in hot* In the middle
of the day we came upon a water course in which there was a hole
of water as salt as brine. Here we had to halt on account of the
heat; we found brackish water for ourselves by digging, but all our
efforts to get fresh water for the cattle by following the water
course inland, were unavailing* The flat along which we had been
travelling had now become a shallow salt water lake*
It never occurred to us to search for fresh water between our camp
and the salt water ti-trees which’fringed the lake had we done so
we should have discovered a fresh-water spring and. have thus avoided
the difficulties we afterwards encountered. The position we were in
Yiras now serious; I knew by observations taken that we wore thirty
or forty miles from Lake Alexandrine* But there was nothing for it
but to push on, and towards evening we made a start*
he were travelling over a sandy desert, and after going a few miles
the working bullocks knocked up* Calling the men around me I told
them the course I intended to adopt -- it was to push on with the
cattle accompanied by the’stockmen and two native boys and endeavour
to reach Lake Alexandrine* I directed the rest of the party to
return to the salt creek and remain there till I came back*
As soon as the cool of the evening set in we started on with the
cattle taking with us a small keg of water and a few; provisions* We
travelled all that night, but had to halt when the heat of the day began;
we crawled on at intervals during the day, and had soon exhausted our
small supply of water* We got on better during the cool of the night
but when the sun rose we were very much exhausted and the cattle could
scarcely be got to move; we were all too weak to use a stock-whip
and had to make frequent halts. About the middle of the day one
of the men gave in, and was'allowed to Mount one of the few horses
capable of carrying a rider, but he soon became too weak to sit on
the horse, and we had to halt. I then determined as a last resource
to kill a calf and use the blood to assuage our thirst. This was done,
and though the drinking of the blood did not allay the pain of thirst
to any extent it restored our strength very much. We then lay down
to sleep. One man of the party refused to drink the blood saying'
l? I have been in many a scrape before this and have got through it,
and I dare say I shall get through this I '. About twelve o*clock I
awoke and found to my surprise that the cattle were moving off, I
went to one of the stock-men and told him the cattle were on the move.
Ho asked mo which direction they were going? I said they were going
in the direction I was steering. '’Then let them go”, ho replied '’there
is not a man of the party able to head them”. yI followed his advice
and lay down again for a couple of hours, and then got up and roused
all hands, and collecting the horses together, we followed the tracks
of the cattle which had all gone ahead with the exception of a few
stragglers. A little before daylight we came up with the cattle
halted near some she-oaks* I knew by the she-oaks that wo were coming
to a change of country. As soon as it was daylight I climbed a tree
and to my great jcy, saw the water of Lake Alexandrina in the distance*
and the smoko of a native fire on a timbered ridge a few miles away.


I mountod the strongest horse we had, and rode off towards the
natives t smoko, hoping to find water there* I had. to cross an
extensive reedy flat and coming to a slight hollo?/, saw water
glistening amongst the reeds. I quickly got off my horse to taste
the water'which I found to my great delight was drinkable though a
little brackish. Pilling an India rubber bag I had with me I
rode back to the man as soon as I could. Whilst 1 was away they
had discovered a native well and were engaged in making damper with
some flour we had brought with us. Our troubles were thus ended*
the Cattle though they had evidently smelt the water when they had
started off from the place where we had halted the night before a
distance of about nine miles, had, curiously enough halted when they
were very close to it, for we were much nearer to the water of the
lake than I supposed when I climbed the tree, the high reeds bound-
ing the shore making the water appear more distant than it really was•
The cattle were driven to the water where they remained all day,
one of them died from drinking too much, but the rest drov/ off to
feed at night and soon recovered from the effects of what they had
gone through*. One horse and two or three head of cattle were lost
in the desert. The following day we removed our camp to where I had
seen the Native T s smoke, and where, as I expected I found a good well
of fresh water.
The next day I went back to bring on the rest of the party and
had to camp one night in the desert. When I came up'with the party
the following afternoon I found them much alarmed at, what they con-
sidered my long absence, and they wore preparing to follow our tracks
the next day.
Having brought them on to our camp at the lake, wo halted a day
or two to recruit the cattle. The water we had come upon proved to
be an extensive lake connected with the main body of Lake Alexandrina
by a narrow channel and was afterwards named by Colonel G-awler, Lake
Albert. I had taken a course which led me some miles away from'
the coast, because Captain Sturt had described Lake Alexandrina,
in a map accompanying his narrative of his voyage down the Murray as
extending a long way to the eastward from the point where the river
joins it, and, as the water was said to be salt in the southern part
of the lake, I was afraid of being embayed in a country where I could
get no fresh water if I kept near the coast, but, on continuing our
journey in a due north direction, after crossing a timbered ridge, we
just skirted the lake and afterwards came upon the junction of the
river a distance of about fifteen miles from our former camp
thus showing that Captain Sturt was mistaken as to the lake extending
to the eastward of the junction.
Colonel Gawler, who took much interest in everything that
related to the exploration of the Colony, was much surprised at my
account of the eastern shore of the Lake differing so much from Capt.
Sturt*s map and Mr* Fallen an Officer then attached to the Survey
Dept, was sent to make a survey of the whole of the Lake.


The river, at its junction with the lake, being very wide and
bordered on both'sides by reedy swamps, was impassable for cattle,
and I had to travel throe days up the river before I could find the
place at which I could attempt to cross it. At one point where the
river swept across the swamp and approached the outer bank I swam
across it to see if there was a landing place for cattle on the
other side, but did not succeed in finding one. Whilst exploring
amongst the reeds I found myself getting benumbed with cold and
had to plunge into the water at once. When about half way across
the river I almost lost the is.se of my arms and legs and Called to
the men to send one of the black boys to my assistance. One of the
stockmen and one of the black boys immediately plunged into the river
and swam along side of me, but I managed to reach the shore without
their help. I had to crouch over a fire and drink hot tea before the
circulation was restored.
The river here was about two hundred yards wide. At last wo came
to a place where the river swept under a high bank on the eastern
side, and finding, on examining the opposite bank that it was somewhat
firmer than I had previously found it, I determined to attempt a
crossing. One ‘of the drays Y/as so made that its body could be "convert
ed into a punt, and, with the help of this, we crossed our camp
equipage, and it materially assisted us in getting the cattle
across the river. They were brought up in mobs of about fifty
and, being driven under the high bank, were forced into the river.
Some of the mobs gave us no trouble - one would take the lead and
swim right across the rest following; hut sometimes they gave trouble
and one rnoh especially began to lJ ring s? in the middle of the river ~
that is to swim in a ring one after the other. All our efforts to
break the ring were for a long time unsuccessful and I was afraid
the whole mob would have been drowned. At last I jumped out of the
punt and, by twisting the tails of some of them made them shoot
ahead and break the ring. It was dangerous operation, sometimes
I Yrould see a crowd of heads bearing down upon me and would have to
put out my hand and let them push me out of the way. At length they
got to‘the hank on the same side that they went in, and were safely
landed. The next day they were again brought up to the bank and one
of them plunged at once into the river and sv/am right across, the
rest following.. One horse and one of the cattle were drowned in
crossing. Having crossed the river - the journey may now be said
to have'terminated. I found a run for the cattle at what is now
called - Gumeracha, a fertile spot which up to that time was unknown
to the settlers.
The journey from Hanty f s station to the Lake Y/as accomplished in
nineteen days being about one fourth of the time occupied by Cap.
Hart 1 s party in following Mitchell ! s track to the Murray and thence
taking the river route to South Australia.
As soon as the news reached Melbourne that I had succeeded in
getting through parties were quickly organised to take over sheep and
cattle and the shipping of sheep from Melbourne and Tasmania ceased.
13


Mr* Hawdon and Mr. Mundy (afterwards colonial Sect, in South Aust*
followed on my track driving a tandem as soon as they hoard of my
arrival in South Australia. Cattle and sheep wore quickly poured
into the Colony by the now route. At Mr. Hawdon f s urgent request
though much against my own inclination X remained in Adelaide to
sell the cattle and sheep which he continued to send over*
Mr. E. J. Eyre, whose name was afterwards so well known in connection
with the exploration of the interior, was then in Adelaide engaged
in the same occupation as myself and we entered into partnership
and this connection continued until he started on his memorable
exploring expedition.
Lieut, (how Sir George) Grey arrived from Western Australia
about the end of the year 1839, and took an active part in sending
out Eyre f s expedition, forming one of the committee with which I
became associated.
A commercial crisis was setting in, and the business with which
Eyre and I wore associated, was wound up when ho set out on his
exploring expedition. I determined to return to Melbourne, but
before doing so I wanted to see the district south of Adelaide and
drove with a horse and spring cart to Encounter'Bay accompanied by
a black boy whom I had brought over land with me. Whilst in the
neighbourhood of Encounter Bay I received a message from Col. Gawler
requesting me to accompany an expedition which was being despatched
under Major O’Halloran to punish a coast tribe of natives who had
murdered the whole of the crew and the passengers of a schooner called
the "Maria” which had recently been wrecked near the point where I
came.upon the coast of Lacepede Bay, since named "Maria Creek", there
being a salt water inlet there, at which some of the remales of the
wreck were found. I complied with the request and joined the exped-
ition. Overlanders, as we who had come across from the other Colonies
were called, were supposed to know all about bush travelling, and
Major o*Halloran frequently sought my advice and assistance when any
difficulties occurred. The first occasion on which my services were
required was the crossing of the horses at the'Mouth of the Murray
which was accomplished without accident. An account of this expedit-
ion has often been given. The crow and passengei’s of the "Maria"
including women and children numbering altogether twenty six, were
all murdered, and some remains of the bodies, dresses etc. wore found
b3r us at different points of the sand hills between the mouth of the
Murray and Maria Crook. The expedition was divided into two
parties, a mounted party on the sand hills, and a boat party following
the direction of the Coorong, and acting in concert with the land
party.
After scouring the sand hills for some miles wo sighted the
native fires just at dusk and halted for the night. The next morning
we were astir at break of day, and soon came up to the native encamp-
ment. The natives fled in all directions, and I followed two of them.
Being on a very powerful horse I outstripped all other pursuers and
came up with the two natives just as they were taking to the water of
the Coorong. Hesitating as to firing upon them, I looked round and
saw Major o T Halloran just behind me, he called out "Dismount, take
steady aim. Fire."
14


I obeyed orders, but the natives were some distance away by that
time, and I could not tell whether the shot tok effect* Before I
could fire a second shot several policemen came up and commenced
firing. The natives succeeded in reaching an Island in the Coorong
and Mr. Tolmer afterwards swam across to the Island and found the
natives wounded, but they are said to have recovered from their
wounds.' he succeeded in capturing about forty natives, and two of
their numbers were pointed out by their companions as the murderers*
A sort of court martial was constituted, and these two me a were
declared to be guilty of the murders, and were hanged in the presence
of their tribe. This summary method of punishing the native criminals
though not strictly logal, had a most beneficial effect on this
tribe of natives who, though very numerous, never committed another
out rage 021 the white s»
The expedition on its return was met by Col* Gawler, and we had
a very pleasant journey back to the Goolwa where we arrived on a
Saturday* Being desirous of returning to Adelaide, and thinking
Col* Gawler would not like my starting on Sunday, I left the same
afternoon, and thus missed witnessing an interesting event. -
The next morning being very calm and the sea unusually smooth
Col. Gawler merging his Sabbatarian views in his desire to prove
the practicability of the navigation of the Murray mouth, allowed
Mr. Pullen to make an attempt to take a boat out to sea# he
succeeded in doing so and returned'in safety. This was the first
time the Murray mouth had been successfully navigated. A previous
attempt had been made by the captain of a Whaler, but the boat
was upset and the captain and crew were drowned* Sir John Jeffcott
the first judge of South Australia accompanied the party and was
also drowned* Accompanied by a gentleman who, like myself,
wanted to go’to Melbourne, I made the journey overland* We called at
Portland Bay, and then went on to Port Fairy, and from thence to
Geelong* With the exception of the settlements of Portland Bay and
Port Fairy, the country'was still unsettled until we came within two
days journey of Geelong, and we had to carry provisions on a pack-
horse. Having entered into an arrangement with Mr* Ebden to take
a share in his cattle run on the Murray, and undertake its management,
I took up my abode on the run in May 1841. This was the period of
a severe commercial crisis throughout the Colonies, and in twelve
months there had been so groat a depreciation in the value of live
stock that cattle were almost unsaleable at any price#
Just at this time I received an offer from Sir Goorgo Grey
who had come but as Governor of South Australia to take the office
of Commissioner of Crown Lands in that Colony. Seeing little prospect
of any improvement taking place in sqtiatting affairs I accepted the
offer and returned to South Australia about the end of May 1842#
Up to this time no attempt had been made to regulate the occupation
of the Crown Lands in South Australia* A great difficulty had been
created in regard to this matter by the South Australian Commissioners
having given certain rights of pasturage to land purchasers* A little
consideration would have shown them the impracticability of their
scheme* The pasture lands must have been surveyed before they could
have been assigned to the different claimants, involving a very cons-
iderable expense, and then perhaps they might have been wanted


immediately afterwards for sale. Successive governors had evaded
the difficulty by doing nothing in the matter, but the land purchasers
had become clamorous for their rights, and the squatters were asking
that something might be done to settle disputedhoundaries. Sir
George _Grey found it necessary to take some action in the matter,
and offered me the position of Commissioner of Crown Lands as before
stated.
On taking office I occupied myself for some time by going among
the land purchasers, and trying to get from them some suggestions as
to the best mode of carrying out the spirit of the regulations; but
I soon found it was a hopeless task to try to get from those most , if /
interested in the question'any practical suggestion each looked only
to his own particular case, and wanted to have assigned to him the
extent of pasturage to which ho was entitled by the regulations with-
out ensidoring how his neighbours, who had equal rights with himself,
were going to fare. I was thus thrown on my own resources, and the
scheme I propounded was to give the land purchasers a right of common
of pasture on any unsold lands within three miles of their respective
holdings. This compromise was accepted by the land purchasers with
little or no complaint, and remained in force for some years until
district councils were formed and the control of the unsold lands
passed into their hands.
My next duty was to define the boundaries of the squatters l runs
Licenses wore granted for the occupation of the runs as in the ad-
joining Colonies, and an assessment was charged on the sheep and cattle
depastured, this system continued in operation for several years.
In 1847, the system was changed in New South Wales‘under the authority
of orders in Council issued by the Home Government, by'which leases
of fourteen years were substituted for annual licences. These orders
in council were placed in my hands, and I was requested to report as
to whether they wore applicable to South Australia* I reported against
their adoption on several grounds, hut chiefly because they gave the
squatter a right of renewal of the lease for an indefinite period,
and I proposed other regulations which were adopted by the Home
authorities, hut a new clause was introduced which was afterwards
made use of to obtain for the squatters a renewal of their leases.
In the year 1855, the introduction of responsible Government was
first mooted, and the question excited much attention amongst the
Colonists. An election was coming on, and I was asked, to become
a candidate for the District of East Torrens. I accepted the invit-
ation, but, as a strong opinion was expressed against a Government
Officer being a'member of Parliament, I withdrew from the contest.
Before doing so, however I published my views as to the form of
Government I then advocated - I proposed that there should he a
single chamber, all members to be elected excepting certain execut-
ive officers who were to be nominated by the Governor. Sir Richard
Macdonald, who was then Governor of South Australia, published, almost
at the same time as my proposal appeared, his views on the subject
which were nearly identical with mine* The popular opinion however*
was strongly in favour of responsible Government which was finally


adopted in' the form in which it now exists in all the Australian Col*-
onies. I cannot but think that if the change from the autocratic
rule of former times to the pure democracy of the present Government
had been more gradual, and the American model had been more nearly
followed, some of the’worst features developed by our Colonial
Consitutions would have been avoided.
The new*constitution came into force early in 1857, and as the office
which I held, that of Commissioner of Crown Lands, was made a minis-
terial ’ office, I had to become a candidate for a seat in the Assembly
and having been returned unopposed for the district of East Torrens,
in which I then resided, I took office in the first ministry under
responsible Government. The Ministry wore out-voted, and resigned
towards the close of the year. Shortly before the ministry went out
of office I had given notice that I intended to resign on account of
the different views we held as to borrowing money for Public works
I held very decided views as to the impolicy of incurring a national
Debt, and, as I stood alone in this view, it was necessary that I
should separate from my colleagues; but the Ministry fell immediately
after I had. announced my intention to resign. I have never altered my
views in respect to the borrowing of money, and. I am of opinion that
if the land Revenue had been judiciously applied, and the persons who
were benefited by public works had been made to contribute a fair share
of the cost, all necessary public works could have been carried out
without the burden of a Public Debt. Whilst I held a seat in the
House I assisted in carrying the Torrens Act in which I took great
interest, and one clause of which the Insurance Clause, was introduced
at my suggestion. Another measure which I helped to carry was the
complete severance of Church and State by the abolition of the Office
of Colonial Chaplain.
'Early in 1858, I resigned, my seat in the House and in the month
of April of that year I went to England.
Shortly after my arrival in London a company was formed called
f, The Great Northern Copper Mining Company of South Australia” for the
purpose of working some mineral discoveries north of Port Augusta
which were then supposed to be of great value. As I had heard a great
deal of these discoveries before leaving the Colony, and had visited
the locality and had seen specimens of the ore discovered, I was
induced to take shares in the Cmpany, and I became a director.
Matters not having proceeded very satisfactorily in the working
of the mines I was requested by my fellow directors to visit the Colony
and make a report on what was being done there.
1 loft England in the month of May, 1860, and returned in Novem-
ber of the same year, I found that mining had boon commenced on a
very rich lode on one of the Company’s properties, but the lode very
quickly fell off, and it became necessary to undertake expensive
mining operations to tost the value of the lode to greater depth.
My follow directors afterwards urged me to go out to the Colony again
as their manager. This I consented to do, and I loft England about the
end of October 1861. The working of the mines proved a failure.
17


The great lode, from which so much was expected ran out, and the
operations on other properties taken up by the Company proved also to
be failures, and the Company was wound up after working for two or
three years*
Whilst residing in England in 1859 intelligence was received that
the South Australian Government were attempting to impose an assessment
on Stock in addition to the rent reserved in the pasturage leases
I had limited the duration of the lease to fourteen years absolutely
the squatter having no claim for componsation for improvements, and
I had merged the assessment in the payment for rent. But the Home
Authorities introduced a clause providing that the lessee should
not bo exempt from the payment of any assessment which might be
afterwards imposed for local purposes* I understood this to mean
that the squatters should bo liable to contribute their share towards
the cost of establishing Municipal institutions, should such bo intro-
duced into the squatting districts; but some years after the leases
were granted, the Government of the day, being in want of funds, chose
to interpret this clause as giving them 5. general power to impose an
assessment on stock in addition to the rent of the run# This’ attempt
to exact an additional payment from the squatters naturally aroused
great opposition on their part and with a view of compromising the
matter, the government offered to grant a renewal of the leases at
the end of the first term if the squatters would withdraw their
opposition to the imposition of an assessment. The squatters eagerly
embraced this proposal, the ommission of the right of renewal, granted
by the Hew South Males leases, having always been considered a great
grievance by the South Australian Squatters. By this act a series
of complications were introduced into the squatting question which
have endured up to the present time. The care which I had taken
to prevent the squatters from acquiring a monopoly of the pastoral
lands was thus frustrated. The trouble began when the first leases
expired. The act granting a renewal had provided for an increased
rent to be fixed by the Government. The effect of this clause
seems to have been overlooked by the squatters when the Act was passed.
The Government might have fixed the rent so high as‘to render the
nominal concession of a renewal of the lease worthless. When the
leases were about to expire. I was asked to undertake the valuation
of the runs; but, knowing that the squatters expected to get the
renewal of their leases at a slight increase on their former payments
whilst according to my view they ought to pay the full value of the
land, I declined to have anything to do with the matter, and Mr*
Goyder undertook the task of valuation. lie acted upon the same prin-
ciple that X should have done, and. if he did not assess the runs at
their full value he proposed a considerable increase in their former
payments. This excited a tremendous commotion, and two parties were
formed - the squatters and their fpoinds opposing, while"the general
public were supporting, Goyder*s valuations. Whilst this agitation
was going on, an election took place for six members of the legislative
council, and, at a public meeting held in Adelaide to hear the opinion
of candidates, the support of Goyder l s'valuations, was made a test
question, I was present at the meeting, but left before the proceedings
closed. The next morning I was met by one of the supporters' of Goyder's


valuations, and told that aft or I left I had been proposed as a fit
and proper person to represent that party* I replied that I had
no intention of becoming a candidate for election; but I was urged so
strongly"to allow myself to be nominated that I at last consented to
stand, and was elected second on the pole, all six members being
supporters of valuations which were eventually carried with
some modifications. Soon after this matter was settled I resigned
my seat in the legislative council and accepted employment under the
Government in connection with the valuation of improvements on runs*
Whilst a. member of the legislative council I was appointed a member
of the Commission to inquire.and report on the losses sustained by
the squatters in consequence of'a long drought which had prevailed over
the Northern interior* In 1869, I was asked to undertake the manage-
ment of Railways. Up to that time the Government had entrusted the
management of the goods traffic to a contractor who performed all
the work in connection with the receiving and forwarding goods,
and collecting the revenue, a portion of which be retained in pay-
ment for the services rendered* But the system worked so unsatis-
factorily that it was found necessary to terminate the contract, and
I was asked to inaugurate a new system.
I had not intended to enter government service again, but I had
a fancy for work in connection with railways, and after some hesit-
ation I consented to accept the office. The chief feature of the
System which I introduced was the letting of’trucks to persons desirous
of sending goods by rail at so much per mile, the hirer of the truck
to load and unload the goods. The Railway Dept* thus merely did the
haulage* The system worked well, hut there was a feeling on the part
of the public that the carriers, into whose hands most of the traffic
fell, received too much from the public for their services, and the
hiring of trucks was stopped after I left the department. At the
close of 1870, in consequence of the severe commercial depression
which then prevailed, the government, for the sake of economy,
determined to combine the offices of Engineer in Chief and Manager
of Railways, and I'was offered the position of Inspector of Lands
taken up on Credit, which office I unfortunately accepted. The
duties of the office in the first place were exceedingly light, but
in consequence of the unwise legislation, subsequently adopted, the
system became very complicated. Auction sales combined'with credit
induced selectors to offer more than the land was worth, and the
occurrence of a bad season gave the selectors an excuse for appealing
to the Government for concessions which were granted from time to time
until complications had been introduced into the system which rendered
my duties exceedingly difficult to perform, and about the year 1879
my health had so far given way that I'had to apply for twelve months
leave of absence at" the end of which period I resigned office and
thus terminated my connection with the Civil Service.
On obtaining leave of absence I went to Sydney as one of the South
Australian Commissioners to the Sydney Exhibition of 1879, and arrived
there on the 16th. of September the day before the opening.
In November I went a trip to New Zealand, calling at all the ports
on the eastern coast down as far as Dunedin*


Prom thence I went by land to Lake Waukatip, and returned by the
same route.
In the middle of January I left Sydney and returned to South
Australia. My health was much improved by each sea voyage, but
after a' few weeks I found the symptoms, from which I suffered,
return -it was a sort of nervous affliction I had which is very
difficult to describe. This affliction continued for some years, but
gradually wore off.
November. 1880* I finally left South Australia, and took up my
residence for a time in Melbourne. I was nominated by the South
Australian Government as one of the Commissioners to the Melbourne
Exhibition of 1880. Being nominated, by Sir Herbert Sandford the
British Commissioner * as a juryman in the Dept, of Mining and
Metallurgy I was elected chairman of that jury which occupied my
attention very closely for nearly six months. For these services I
received a medal and a letter of thanks from H.R.H. the Prince of Wales
After residing another twelve months in Melbourne I moved to
Sydney arriving there at the beginning of April 1882, whore I have
since resided.
20
