

AWFUL CONFESSION
Of GREEN ACRE to the MURDER of Hannah Brown.
JAIMES ©KEEMAGKE.
iAKAH ©ALE.
41 Indeed, when ene has been recollecting the proper fruits of a future state of rewards and punishments, nothing, methinks, can give so sensible an apprehension of the latter,
or representation of it to the mind, as observing, that after the many disregarded checks, admonitions, and warnings which people meet with in the ways of vice, and folly, and extra-
vagance—warnings from their very nature; from the examples of wise and virtuous men ; after these have been long despised, scorned, ridiculed—after the chief bad consequences, tem-
poral consequences of their follies, have been delayed for a while; at length they break in irresistibly, like an armed force; repentance is too late to relieve, and can serve only to aggra-
vate their distress ; the case is become desperate; and peverty and sickness, remorse and anguish, infamy and death, the effects of their own doings, overwhelm them beyond the possi-
bility of remedy or escape.”
The above extract from the works of Dr. Butler, Bishop of Oxford, was quoted by The Recorder in his pathetic address to Greenacre, while passing sentence.
nrms remarkable Trial commenced Monday,
April 10, 1837, at the Central Criminal
Court, before The Chief Justice Tyndall, Mr.
Justice Coleridge, and Mr. Justice Colt mao.
Mr. Adolphus, Mr. Clarkson, and Mr. Bodkin
were counsel for the prosecution.
Mr. Price and Mr. Payne for the prisoners.
Mr. Adolphus opened the case, and in address-
ing the Jury, gave a comprehensive detail of the
principal features of this extraordinary affair.—
in the course of the learned gentleman's argument
he expatiated forcibly on the Confession of Green-
acre—
Samuel Pegler was the first witness called ; but
jt is unnecessary to give a lengthened detail of
his, or the other ’witness’s evidence, they being
snhutantially the same as was given at the Police
Office. He proved the finding of the body.
Jamas Page stated that on Thursday the 2d February he
was eutting osiers in Cold Harbour Lane, he found a sack
containing two legs of a human being.
H. Edmonds said he saw Gale in the garden of Green-
acre’s house on the morning of Christmas eve ; he knew her
twelve months before that, as Mrs. Greenacre.
Thomas Chissold, of Pilt-street, Camberwell, stated that
he moved a large box and other things about a week after
Christmas, from Greenacre’s house. Gale was present, and
she said in conversation that Greenacre had done for him-
self. He moved them in a truck, Gale and Greenacre fol-
lowing it, but on the other side of the way. He stopped at
the Elephant and Castle, and left the trunk and things with
Greenacre. Saw no more of the pi isoners.
Evan Davis said be had seen the woman’s head at the
Workhouse, and he believed it to be that of Hannah Brown.
This witness, as well as Catherine Glass, Mrs. Davis and
Elizabeth Corney, declared that Hannah Brown was a re-
markable sober and abstemious person.
Inspector Feltham of the Police gave the particulars of
the apprehension of the prisoners in bed, at No. 1, St. Al-
ban’s-street, Kenniugton Road, &c.
Matthias Ralfe, lock-keeper of the Ben Johnson Lock,
Regent’s Canal, deposed that on the 6th of January last he
found the head of a female in the Canal, which he wrapped
up in a cloth, and took to the bone-house. It appeared to
have had violent blow struck on the fore-head. One of the
<eye« were knocked out. The left jaw-bone was broken.
The head was subsequently taken to Paddington Work
house, where it was preserved in spirits.
The proceedings uf the day being ended—
The Chief Justice saiti thp Jury could not be allowed
go home; but every accommodation would be afforded
them.
The Court rose at eight o’clock, and adjourned
till the ftext morning at ten o’clock.
SECOND DATs TRIAL.
The Judges entered the court at ten o’clock,
Mr. Birtwistle, a surgeon, said he had examined the
bead, and that the blow on the eye was done daring life ;
and on being shewn a saw, said he had applied the saw to
the neck, and it fitted exactly.
Mr. Qirdwood, surgeon, deposed that the wounds around
the eye were inflicted during life.
Dr. Hunter Lane gave it as his opinion, that the deceased
met with a sudden death ; and said (here was no ajjpear-
ance of tea in the stomach of the deceased.
Mr. Adolphus then said—My Lord, this is the ease for
the prosecution.
Mr. Price then rose to address the Jury, which he did at
great length.
The Lord Chief Justice summed up, which occupied two
hours and a half. When the Jury retired to their chamber,
and remained absent a quarter of an hour, when they ca-
tered the Court, and returned the following Verdict:
James. Greenacre —GUILTY.
Sarah GaIe—GUILTY.
The prisoners did not appear to be much surprised on
hearing the verdict.
The trial occupied altogether exactly twenty-one hours
and a half.
CONFESSION
OF GREENACRE,
TO THE SHERIFFS,
In his Cell in Newgate, on Thursday, April 13, 1837
After the able snd affecting address of the Recorder, the
convict Greenacre appeared very depressed, and shortly
after being removed to his cell, he begged an interview
with the sheriffs, when they immediately proceeded to the
cell. On Greenacre seeing them, he said that matters hav-
ing now arrived at the worst, it might be well for him to
acknowledge the statements he had made were untrue —
that he had a quarrel with the unfoitunate victim on the
24th of December last about the property, when the de-
ceased using bad language to him for deceiving her, so
exasperated him, that he took up a piece of wood resemb-
ling the roller of a jack-towel, which at the time was lying
near him, and struck her violently over the right eye
which blow inflicted the injury that has b?en so ably de-
scribed by the surgeons. The blow instantly stunned her,
but he prevented her falling to the ground by seizing hold-
of the chair. He then placed a pail, which was standing in
the room, by the side of her, and holding her neck over ft,
he, with a common table knife, cut her throat, and held her
in that position until the blood had ceased to flow. He then
sat himself down for a short time for the purpose of reflect-
ing what he was to do with the body. Various modes sug-
gested themselves to his mind, but at length (within an
hour after he had committed the horrid deed) he determined
on the dismemberment in the revolting manner so often de-
scribed. After dissevering the head and limbs from the
trunk, he put the former in a bag, and placing it under his
arm, and proceeded to the house of Mr. Davis, in Bartholo-
mew-close, when he informed them of the quarrel with Mrs.
Brown, and that the marriage was put off. After leaving
their house, which was about eleven o’clock, he proceeded
on to Stepney, when, taking the head out of the bag. he
threw it into the Regent’s Canal, not far from the spot,
(Ben Jonson’s Lock) where it was on the 6th of January
discovered. He then stated that he threw the contents of
the pail down the privy at No. 6, Carpenter’s Place.
The Sheriffs then questioned him as to the time and man-
ner in which he disposed of the remaining portions of the
remaining portions of the nody of the unfortunate woman,
but he became suddenly very taciturn, merely declaring, in
the most solemn manner, that Gale had not the slighest
knowledge of the murder until after he %vas apprehended.
Judgment of Death on Greenacre.
On the 12th. the Recorder (after an application by Mr.
Payne for an arrest of judgment) proceeded to pass the sent-
ence of the court on Greenacre and Gale.
Greenacre, at this impressive time,maintained his wonted
firmness, still firmly grasping the irod-rod upon which a
lamp is placed.
1 he court was hushed to stillness, and the auditory sat in
earnest attention.
On Greenacre being asked why the Court should not pass
sentence on him to die, according to law? said, “ that it
was quite contrary to reason or common seme that he should
have meditated the death of a human being.” And he again
declared that Gale was as innocent of the offence as any
person present. %
The Recorder then addressed the wretched prisoner, and
in concluded by passing the following awful judgment of
Court: —“ It only remains forme to pronounce the awful
sentence of the law ; which is, that you, James Greenacre,
betaken to the goal from whence you came to a place of
execution, and there hanged by the neck until you are
dead ; and that your body be buried within the precincts of
the prison. May the God of all grace have mercy on your
sonl !
The Sentence on Sarah Gale,
Was, that she transported for the term of her natural life.
(Greenaere’s Autograph.)
THE
Edgeware Road Tragedy!
’J’O these few lines which I impart, good people lend an ear.
I’m sure ’twill rend each feeling heart, and draw the
pitying tear.
The victim of this horrid crime, her name was Hannahßtown
Whose murder for a length of time was rumour’d thro’ the
town.
James Greenacre a courting came, soliciting her hand,
She did agree his wife to be —he then put up the bands ;
But when he found out his mistake,no wealth she had in store
He did resolve revenge to take —his courtship then was o’er.
At lea one ev’ning as they sat, he ask’d her to explain.
She said no money she had got; he then did her disdain.
When he with violence from her chair threw her on t be floor,
The deed was done,her glass was run, she fell to rise no more.
He with a saw cut off each limb, as you have heard it said,
And the monster, full of sin, did sever off her head.
To a separate place each part he took —what fiend of deadly
spite!
And then foul conscience pierc’d his soul with anguish day
and night.
In Edgeware Road the body was found as we have heard tell,
The head also down Mile End Road, in the Regent’s Canal.
The legs were found at Brixton —O monster of disgrace!
Whose hearden’d heart could take each part thus to a
separate place.
When at the bar he did appear, upon his trial day,
His cnuncellors tried, but could not hide, nor chase his
guilt away.
He now is tried and cast, and sentence past —sincere may
he repent.
And Sarah Gale from Newgate jail to New South Wales is
Smeelon, Printer, 74, Tooley Street.
