





TEMPLE HILL CUT-OUT CHEFGG CHINA
The cut-outs of Temple Hill are an adaptation of figures
of animals, plants, insects, dragons, etc*, cut by the women of
Shantung for unknown generations* These they have cut out
and pasted on their windows or walls at the China New Year
time* We have “Christianized” Chinese cutouts by using their
skill to cut out Wisemen and camels* or the Shepherds on the
hills of Bethlehem for our Christmas cards*
The first step in making cutouts is the preparing of the
stencil pattern* A first pattern is cut from a drawing by a
skillful cutter who has a good deal of artistic sense* This
oattern is then placed on a thin sheet of paper which is laid on a
3oard* All is sprinkled with water and the pattern pressed
down carefully* This is held upside ddwn over a little lamp
which has a wick of paper and no chimney* It soon smokes
the pattern black, but when it is dry and peeled off there re-
mains a white stencil underneath* This stencil is sewed down to
ten thicknesses of colored paper and with sharp little iron scis-
sors and tiny knives of various shapes, the cutter in about half
an hour has cut out the design, making ten at a time*
The designs are separated and pasted on a card, which is
the most difficult process of all* After inspection to see if any
parts are left loose, the work is finished, and hundreds of place
cards, boxes of note paper, correspondence cards, children's note
paper, and Christmas cards, are made each week.
Made by the Self-help Dept*
Women's Bible School
Presbyterian Mission*




入仙
THE EIGHT IMMORTALS
Either singly or in groups the Eight Immortals of the
Taoist religion are very popular subjects of representation
in Chinese art. They are symbolic of happiness and the
number eight has become lucky from this association.
Three of the sages were historical characters, Chungdi
Ch’uan, Chang Kuo and Lu Tung-pin the other five are
mythological. The legend of the “Eight Immortals” dates
back to the twelfth or thirteenth century if not earlier. They
include persons of all ages and classes and are usually listed
in the order in which they became Immortals.
There is a well known legend of their expedition to
behold the wonders of the sea. In order to show their
many talents, each used his own charateristic belongings as
a means of travel over the sea. Li Tielvkuai threw is his
iron crutch and on it rode the waves. Chung-li Ch’uan
used his feather fan, Chang Kuo his paper mule, Lu
his sword, Han Hsing Tzu his flower basket. Ho Hsien Ku
her lotus flower, Lan Tsahho her rimsical instrument, and
Ts’ao Kuo'chiu his court tablets. Popular pictures often
show these as being changed into various sea monsters. The
Dragon King coveted the musical instrument and tried to
steal it but the Eight Immortals soon defeated him and
continued their adventures. k


李 鐡 拐
LI T'IEH-KUAI
Li T’ieh-kuai is always shown with his iron cmlcn
(Tieh'kuai) and his gourd of magic medicines. He is said to
hcvc been tail and dignified and to have devoted himself to
the study of the Taoist religion.
Lao Tzu decended from Heaven in order to instruct
him in the wisdom of the gods. While his soul went on
a journey with Lao tzu he left his body in the care of a
disciple, with orders to cremate it if he did not return on
the seventh day. Unfortunately the disciple was called away
by his mothe'r illness, so he cremated the body on the sixth
day, and the returning soul found only a heap of ashes, A
beggar had just died of hunger nearby so the wandering
spirit entered that body. When he found the condition
of his new body, lame of leg, big of eye, black face ano
dishevelled hair, he wished to leave it. but Lao Tzu advised
against it.
During his travels on earth he would hang his gourd
on the wall at night and jump into it, coming forth in the
morning. He often returned to earth and tried to bring
about the transmigration of others.




鍾 離 權
CHUNG-LI CH'UAN
Chung-li Ch uan was born during the Han dynasty
(221 B.C. —221 A. D.) in Shensi near the ancient capital of
Hsi-an Fu. In his old age he became a hermit and lived
near P'ing-yang Fu.
One day while he was meditating, the wail of his
house broke open showing a jade casket. This contained
the secret of becoming an Immortal. During a great famine
he changed pewter and copper into silver by means of some
mysterious drug. He gave the treasure to the poor thus
saving many lives.
After he had followed the instruction contained in the
jade casket for some time he was bom away by a celestial stork
to the regions of the Immortals. He has reappeared on earth
several times as a messenger of the gods. Early in the ninth
century A. D. he returned to instruct Lu Tung'pin in the
* f ’ A. I ’
science or immortality.
He is usually shown holding his feather fan, or the
peach of immortality.




藍 釆 何
LAN TSAI-HO
Lan T sai-ho, whom some legands claim to be a wo-
man and others a youth, is the strolling singer of the Im-
mortals. Usually she plays a flute or pair of cymbals. While
on eat th she wandered around clad in a torn blue gown
fastened by a wooden belt three inches wide, and with one
foot shoeless. In summer she wore a wadded garment; in
winter she slept on the snow. She earned her living by
singing in the sleets. marking the time with a wand three
feet Song,
Her doggerel songs denounced the delusive pleasures
of this life. Gifts of money that she received wer€ givfen
by her to the poor.
She disappeared from Feng-Yang Fu in Anhui on a
cloud, leaving her shoe, robe, and belt on earth.
She is usually painted as a young person of about
sixteen years of age, bearing a basket of fruit.




張 果
CHANG KUO
Chang Kuo, or Chang Kuo Lao (old), as he is often
called, lived as a hermit near Ping-yang Fu in Shansi early
in the eighth century. Frequently invited to court, he
persistently refused to go. When finally persuaded to leave
its retreat he fell dead by the Temple or the )ea!ous Woman.
After his body was known to have decayed he was seen,
alive and well, riding on a white mule which carried him
thousands of miles a day. When the day’s journey was
finished Vie folded the mule like a sheet of paper and put it
away in his wallet. In the morning Vie had only to spurt
water on the packet and the animal again regained its normal
size. He is often painted seated on the mule, facing its tail,
carrying a phoenix feather or a peach, the sign of immortality.
He was famed for his wonderful feats of magic, such
as rendering himself invisible, drinking cups of poison with
no had effect, and destroying birds and flowers by merely
pointing toward them. He refused to marry an imperial
princess, and declined other honors conferred upon him.
*
He is associated in the popular mmd with happy
marriages and the granting of offspring.




何 山 姑
HO HSIEN KU
Ho Hsien Km is usually pictured as a beautiful maiden
holding either a magic lotus flower, the symbol of generosity,
or the peach of immortality; or playing upon some musical
instrument.
In a dream she saw a spirit who ordered her to powder
and eat one of the stones from the “Mother of Pearl" mountain
where she lived. By doing this she acquired both agility
and immortality. She also vowed herself to a life of virgin
nity* Her days she spent floating over the mountains collect*
ing food which she brought to her mother each evening*
She soon found that she had no further need for food for
herself.
Enroute to visit the Empress she suddenly disappeared
from view and joined the ranks of the Immortals. She is
said to have been seen fifty years later, about A. D. 750, at
two different places floating upon clouds of many colors near
the city of Canton.




呂 洞 賓
LU TUNG-PIN
Lu Tung-pm came of an official family and was still
unmarried at the advanced age of twenty. When on a journey
to Lu Shan he met the fire dragon who presented him with
a magic sword which made it possible for him to hide him-
self at will in the heavens.
During a visit to the capital in Shansi he met Chung-
li ChTian who taught him the mysteries of alchemy and the
elixir of life. Lu Tung-pm was eager to help in con-
verting humanity to the true doctrine, but was required first
to successful overcome ten temptations. Thereupon he was
given supernatural powers and magic weapons which he used
for more than four hundred years to rid the world of various
evils and monsters.
One stoiy says that he went about on earth as an
oil seller, intending to give immortality to all who did not
ask for an extra amount. During a whole year he met but
one person, an old lady, who did not ask for more than
was due her. Seeing a well in her courtyard, he threw a
few grains of rice into it. The water miraculously turned
to wine and the old lady became very wealthy from the
sale of it.
Another legend says that he was at an inn and while
heating a jug of rice-wine fell asleep and dreamed that great
good fortune had come to him which lasted more than fifty
years before he was exiled and his family exterminated.
Grief stricken at such loneliness, he sighed and awoke to
find the rice wine not yet hot. It is to this legend that
the frequent allusions in Chinese literature in the phrase
“Rice-wine dream'* refer.
As he was a skillful fencer, he is always represented
with his ‘'Devil-slaying saber" and his fly-whisk or "Cloud-
sweeper" symbolic of his ability to fly at will through the
air and to walk on the clouds of Heaven.




韓 湘 子
HAN HSIANG TZU
The education of Han Hsiang Tzu was entrusted to
his uncle Han Yn, the great statesman, philospher and poet
of the T'ang dynesty. While still a youth, Han Hsiang Tzu
greatly surpassed his instructor in wisdom and in his ability
to perform wonderful feats. Once he caused a plant to grow
from a little earth in a flowerpot. The leaves of the plant
bore in letters of gold a verse which told of the future exile
of the uncle Han Yu. All this came about as predicted, and
a later prophecy was fulfilled when the uncle was restored
to his former rank.
Two accounts are given of his becoming an Immortal.
As a disciple of Lu Tung-pm he was carried up into the
supernatural peach tree of the genii but fell from its branches
and was transformed to a state of immortality during the
fall. The other says that he was killed by the fall and then
underwent the change to the state of immortality.
He is usually depicted with a bouquet of flowers or a
basket of the peaches of immortality.




曹 國 舅
TSAO KUO-CHIU
1 # sao Kuo-chm who lived in the eleventh century was
the brother of the Empress and is usually pictured carrying the
tablet of admission to court. Disgraced by the notorious
havior of his younger brother, he hid in the mountains where
he clothed himself with plants and lived the life of a hermit.
When found by Chung4i Ch\ian and Lu Tung'pmg
he said ‘1 am engaged in studying the Way". In answer to
their questions as to what way, he pointed to the sky. "Where
is the sky?" they asked him and he pointed to his heart*
The two Immortals smiled and said: "The heart is the
sky and the sky is the way; you understand the origin of
things". Then they gave him directions enabling him to
attain perfection and in a few days he was able to take his
place among the Perfect Ones.
He was elected to immortality, according to one legend,
by the other sages who inhabited seven of the eight grottos
of the Upper Spheres and wished to see the last one also im
habited. They chose him because "his disposition was that
of a genie".








