

BACK TO HILLSTON WEEK
Monday, 21st September, 1931
TO
Saturday, 26th September, 1931
Souvenir
NOTES ON HILLSTON
FROM 1848
COMMITTEE:
President —Mr. J. R. Teague; Hon. Secs.—Messrs. J.
G. Rose & W. J. Storey; Committee—Messrs. S. J.
Gordon, T. Macfarlane, F. H. Harvey, R. Latham,
R. H. Regan, L. T. Hurely, A. C. Magnus,
Rev. Dr. Cummins.
“Spectator” Print. Hillston.


BACK TO HILLSTON WEEK
Monday, 21st September, 1931
TO
Saturday, 26th September, 1931
SOUVEN PROGRAM
OF
CELEBRATIONS
COMMITTEE ;
President—Mr. J. R. Teague; Hon. Secs. —Messrs. J.
G. Rose & W. J. Storey; Committee—Messrs. S. J.
Gordon, T. Macfarlane, F. H. Harvey. R. Latham,
R. H. Regan, L. T. Hurely, A. C. Magnus. Rev. Dr.
Cummins.


FOREWORD
N presenting this Souvenir Programme of the Back
to Hillston Week Celebrations, we desire to acknowledge
with thanks the assistance given by many of the older
residents in its compilation.
It is but natural that many facts of Interest have been
omitted, and doubtless some errors have crept in, but we
have endeavored to be as accurate as possible in the short
space of time available.
Hillston, like many other out-back towns, has had its
share of unfavorable seasons, but, despite these set-backs,
has steadily and consistently made progress, until to-day
the town and district are classed among the foremost along
the fertile Lachlan River.
The Publishers.
A. C. Magnus
J. R. Teague


PROGRAMME
TUESDAY, 22nd SEPTEMBER
2 p.m.—Race Meeting-Hospital Benefit, on the Hillston
Racecourse,
8 p.m. —Conversazione at Anthony s Casino.
8.30 p.m.—Official Welcome to the Visitors.
WEDNESDAY, Z3rd SEPTEMBER
First Day of Hillston Jubilee Show.
8 p.m. —Show Ball in the Globe Theatre.
THURSDAY, 24th SEPTEMBER
10.30 a.m.—Grand Procession through Streets.
Second Day of Hillston Jubilee Show.
8 p.m. —P. &. A. Association Smoke Social.
FRIDAY, 25th SEPTEMBER
10.30 am.—Past Pupils will visit Schools.
2 p.m.—Race Meeting—Hospital Benefit, on the Hillstcn
Racecourse.
8 p.m. —Old Time Dance, Anthony’s Casino.


THE BEGINNING OF HILLSTON
JN attempting to trace something
of the history of Hillston one is
handicapped by the lack of written
records. It is only here and there
that w 7 e come across some mention
of our town, so “prettily situated on
the Lachlan River,” as Moore’s Al-
manac used to have it. Mostly these
records are in the files of Government
offices, and it was not until the eighties
that a newspaper was published at
Hillston. Pressure of time has made
it impossible to verify our facts, and
necessarily we have had to deal with
our subject in a general manner.
However, these brief notes may be of
great assistance to some who may take
up the pleasing task at some future
date when Hillston is important enough
to warrant some systematic research
into history. In this rapid and cursory
survey of the years it has seemed
convenient and logical to split up the
matter to be dealt with into three
periods. To 1879 seems to be our first
period, then to 1902 as our second, and
lastly from the long drought of that
year to date.
Surveyor General John Oxley, who
every school child knows as one of
Australia’s foremost explorers, on his
exploration of the Lachlan River,
passed the spot where Hillston now
s'ands on the 29th June. 1817, naming
the plauis on the North side of the
river “Holdsworthy Plains’’ and on the
South side “Harrington Plains.” It
-will be remembered that he continued
on his journey to a little past Booligal,
to be foiled in his further exploration
by the thick and impenetrable reed
beds. Some years passed with the
aboriginals in undisturbed possession,
until we learn of the selection by
William Hovell of Bellingcrambil Run
No. 70 in the Lachlan Pastoral District
and the Gazette notification of the 27th
September, 1848, is as follows: —
“Estimated area —48,000 acres, esti-
mated grazing capabilities, 1,200
cattle. The hut stands about 20
miles West from Mount Rothera-
gundarer (now spelt Bootheragan-
dra), this being the Westernmost
termination of the Urile ridge on
range of hills, lying aboilt 15 miles
South of the Lachlan River: on the
West by Brown and Thompson’s
unnamed run; and on the South by
unoccupied land: The hut and yards
s*and opposite to those of Dr. Ram-
say’s lower station, which is in the
Wellington district.”
You will be surprised to learn that
the station hut occupied a position in
the bend of the river where 'Mr. W. J.
Mitchell now has his dairy farm, and
is shown on maps of the Bellingeram-
bil Reserve as late as 1868.
Naturally there was no town or even
a village in existence at this early date
but the mail was taken partly by coach
and partly by horse from Hay to
Condobolin. Cattle roamed the im-
mense runs, and aboriginals swarmed
in the district, but according to S : r
itch ell. who made an extensive
exrdoration in the district in the year
1856. they were a very poor type, whidh
n-onld perhaps account for the fact
that the advance of civilisation has
g


proved a death warrant to these true
Australians so that a few of their des-
cendants are to be found in reserves
at Carowra and Euabalong.
In the early fifties it is highly pro-
bable that there was some sort of a
small settlement at Hillston, which
a a; then known as “Daisy Plains.
Hjw and where this name originated
is shrouded in mystery, as is also the
reason for a change to the name of
“Redbank.” However, old records tell
of a race meeting held in 1854, and,
according to reports, the proceedings
were in the best pioneer spirit, which,
on this occasion, was apparently a
potent brand of rum. The following is
an extract from reminiscences appear-
ing in the Hillston “News” of the 24th
March, 1883: —
“The old man told me that horse
racing was the principal amusement
in Redbank, as Daisy Hill was called
afterwards. T remember,’ said he,
‘the first race ever held here. The
grandstand was erected under a
remains of the old grandstand un-
derneath, outside the bounds of the
beautiful shady Wilga tree, which
can be seen to this day with the
present racecourse. This first race
was held in the year 1854, and I
assure you the time was a lively one.
Rum flowed like water, and Jerribong
Mickey, the blackfcllow, fought
Booligal Jackie for two hours, when
there were two gins killed, and Jer-
ribong was crippled for life. But
withal, they were happy days, those.
None of your modern civilisation,
conducted by robbers, hypocrites
and deceivers, of whom the more I
think the more I feel inclined to
write them off tire face of the earth.
Good neighbors lived about here in
those days, who were always ready-
to give a helping hand when required
Well, the races commenced with the
Maiden Plate, and four horses star-
ted —Happy Jack, owned by Mr.
Hill; Billy Button, owned by Mr. T.
J. Grace; Flyer, owned by Mr. Bow-
man; and a horse called Dick the
Devil.”
It is interesting to speculate on the
reason why our forefathers selected
the present site for the establishment
of a settlement, but probably, apart
from the natural advantages common
to many other spots on the river, it
was a matter of hazard as to where the
place should be.
Some time early in the sixties the
first hotel was established by William
Ward Hill. Hill was a stockman on
a station over the river, and, finding
no employment when he returned from
a droving trip to Adelaide with horses,
he built and established the Redbank
Hotel, which stood where Tattersall's
now is. About this time Moss estab-
lished a store adjoining the hotel, and
James Harvey Pearson and James
Brissenden were also in business. The
Royal Mail Hotel was built, and Mel-
bourne interests began to see in Red-
bank business possibilities. Sheep
were gradually displacing the cattle,
and fienpes were appearing on the
hitherto limitless runs. The country
further West was being taken up, and
despite the fevered spirit of those
years, occasioned by the discovery of
gold by Hargreaves in 1851, there was
a steady and solid progress made in
exploiting the country in the only tan-
gible and beneficial way possible. Al-
though Hillston had its share of rushes
in connection with the mines at Gil-
gunnia, Mount Hope and elsewhere,
the district has always been a pastoral
and agricultural one.
From 1865 to 1868 Licensed Surveyor
Robert P. Jones measured up portions


of the land around Redbank, which
then stood in an area called Bellinge-
rambil Reserve, and grants were is-
sued to Pearson and Brisseden, who
were, therefore, the earliest of our
permanent settlers.
In 1869 on the first day of July, our
first Post Office was established under
tli charge of Mr. Moss. The Hillston
Post Office was preceded in the dist-
rict by one at “Walanthery,” establis-
hed in 1863 and in charge of Mr. James
Mann. This was not closed until the
15th January, 1869, in consequence of
the opening of the Hillston Post Office.
It is at this stage of our develop-
ment that the town name was changed
to Hillston. We have with us, still,
Mr. Jervis Storrier, who, with a won-
derful and accurate memory, can re-
late interesting stories of the sixties
and earlier. He claims to have sug-
gested the name by which our town
is now known. According to our
“oldest inhabitant'' a few of the pro-
gressive spirits in our budding town
foregathered in the parlour of the
Redbank Hotel in the year 1868, and,
being already convinced of the ulti-
mate importance of the town, decided
to agitate for the establishment of a
Post Office. Application was therefore
made to the State authorities who re-
plied pointing out that as there was
another “Redbank” in New South
Wales a new name must be found.
Accordingly, our little embroyo Pro-
gress Association convened another
meeting in the same congenial sur-
roundings as before, and a solution to
the problem was sought. “Pearson-
ville” w r as suggested, but was not ac-
ceptable to our friends. Mr. Storrier
then suggested, “Why not call if 'Hill-
ston,’ in honor of the man who estab-
lished the first hotel here?” The sug-
gestion found universal approval, with
the result that “Redbank, T which was
once ‘‘Daisy Hill,” became known as
it now is.
A definite stage in the development
of the town had now been reached.
From a start in the early fifties the
pioneers had brought us to an estab-
lished village which showed every sign
of increasing in size and importance.
It was now a mail centre, hotels and
stores were increasing in number, and
the story of further development up
to 1879 is that of the normal growth
of any country village. Streets were
formed, houses built, land taken up,
and the surrounding country was
carrying more stock. An era of pros-
perity was inaugurated which had a
most marked effect on the next period
of our history—from 1879 to the great
drought of 1902.
These early years before 1879 are
Pioneer years, and the settlement of
the district proceeded along those
peaceful and solid lines which have
happily been one of the main charac-
teristics of the history of Australia’s
settlement. The district was solely
confined to raising sheep and cattle,
but in 1866 Mr. J. Storrier grew a
little wheat, and Mr. Pearson sowed
oats on his "Rosehiil” property across
the river. There were several stations
operating by this time. M r . Joseph
Smith owned “Roto,” of which Hill of
“Redbank Hotel’ fame was at one
time head stockman. Mr. Robert
Kennedy pioneered “Roto Station” in
the days when wool was carted to
Echuca. “Willandra” was in- full
swing at this time, and Mr.'Storrier
remembers rafting the station wOH
across the flooded Lachlan in 1867’
And so we finish with a period in our
history which in some respects would
probably be more interesting than any
otiher, hut, unfortuatcly, lade of mate-
rial and records preclude us from
delving further into it.


HILLSTON from 1879 to 1902.
HE year 1879 can be regarded
illfr as ie beginning of a new era
• in the life of Hillston. The
early days when it was a ques-
tion whether the village would
ever amount to anything were ended.
There had been a steady gain in pros-
perity for some years, and money was
being spent freely in the improvement
of the various stations. Hillston was
steadily growing in size, and we ob-
serve a definite spirit of citizenship
which came into active operation on
the 4th October, 1878, when a general
meeting of the residents w r as held and
a Progress Committee formed to give
effect to the resolutions passed at that
meeting. So far as we can gather,
this is the first effective Progress
Association in Hillston’s history. An
energetic and wide Association has a
tremendous effect on a town’s deve-
lopment, but it is often unfortunate
that people do not realise the immense
amount of good accomplished. They
share willingly in the fruits of the
labor of their more public spirited
townsmen without realising that they
should help in the fight to progress.
Our first Association was fully alive
to this, and accomplished great things
with the whole hearted support of the
residents, but when that support was
lost by lack of interest the Association
lapsed.
As a result of their efforts a local
Land Office was established by gazette
notification on the 30th Tidy, 1880, and
an area excluded from the Hay Land
District. Mr. Benjamin Sutherland
Lcvick came from Forbes, and he
opened our office on the 20th August,
1880. At this time also an agitation
was coumenced for the building of a
railway to Hillston, and efforts in this
direction never entirely lapsed until
the object was consummated when our
first train arrived from Sydney on the
18th June, 1923.
A great number of buildings were
erected in the early eighties. The
present Post Office was completed in-
-1883 and took over the telegraph office
which had been connected to Booligal,
in 1879. The new building was in-
charge of Mr. W. S. Bellamy, and he
despatched from his office that year
2889 telegrams.
As early as the 28th August, 1873, a
Police Court was held in Hillston, but
at that time there was no court build-
ing, and the Magistrate was accom-
modated in a room at the Royal Mail
Hotel. Our first Clerk of Petty Ses-
sions and Police Magistrate was Mr.
Chas. O’Neill, who was appointed on
the Ist June, 1878, but in all probability
the present Court House was not com-
pleted until 1883. In these days the
Magistrate was resident at Hillston,
and so continued until 1916, when the
Magistrate at Hay took up duty here
by visiting once a month. On the 29th
May, 1885, His Honor Judge Back-
house initiated the first Quarter Ses-
sions. when the first case was Regina
v Dreakow. The case was one of as-
sault. and the accused was found
guilty and sentenced to imprisonment
until the rising of the Court. The last
Quarter Sessions were held »n the


27th August, 1909 by His Honor Judge
Rogers, when cases of forging and
uttering and sheep stealing were dealt
with. It is said that the reason for
the discontinuance of the Judges
visits was that he was badly bogged
for a night on the Carrathool —Hillston
road, which was sufficient to satisfy
any man (at least in His Honor’s
opinion) that he was a fool who would
come to such an outlandish place.
Anyway, it was a most difficult place
to secure a conviction when the jury
knew the accused.
The District Court was held in
Hillston before the Quarter Sessions
by His Honor Judge Murray, and
probably commenced in about 1882,
and as many as sixteen cases were
listed and heard at the quarterly sit-
tings. Three solicitors at one time
upheld the honor of the legal profes-
sion, and many long and severe legal
battles engrossed the townspeople of
those days.
The civic spirit of the Hiltslonites
came again to the fore in 1880 and
1881 when funds were collected for the
erection of a public hospital. Messrs.
R. W. Stewart and R. Read were en-
ergetic members of the committee to
collect funds, and in 1882 the present
Hospital buildings were erected and
opened for the reception of patients.
This effort on the part of the town
is one that will always be rem ben 1
Hillston, after all. is a lonely outp'*st
in the middle West, and must always
be a centre for a tremendous area
between Cobar and Griffith in which
there is only one place with a properly
attended Hospital. Patients came for
a hundred miles or more to take ad-
vantage of the facilities offered, and
the “back country” should he very
grateful to these pioneers who huilt
so well. The Hospital was not only
erected by means of voluntary sub-
scription, but was maintained for many
years solely by voluntary subscription
and patients’ fees. In one sense it is
rather a pity that in these days the
Government has, to a great extent,
taken over the financing of hospitals,
and the incentive for voluntary effort
has been greatly nullified. It must
always be a source of pride and satis-
faction to anyone with some civic
pride in him to he able to say that he
is a resident of a town that maintains
its own general hospital.
For some time ministers of various
denominations had visited Hillston,
and it was felt that permanent places
of worship should he huik so that
regular services could be held. '1 he
Church of England was first huilt. and
canty in the eighties money was col-
lected to erect the Roman Catholic
Church. As an instance of the re-
markable prosperity in the town at
this time, we arc told that a bazaar
lasting a week returned £6OO to the
funds, and eventually the Church was
opened free of debt. School facilities
were also available at the beginning
of the eighties, hut we have no record
of the actual opening. The Presby-
terian Church was erected in 1890.
Another instance of the wealth of
the town at his time is seen in the
published programmes of the frequent
race meetings. There were dozens of
hotels scattered about the district and
( v ry one of them seems to have con-
oftener. Prize lists aggregating in
ducted a race meeting annually or
value £6OO without sweepstakes attrac-
ted entrants from far and wide. Ihe
spirit of sport had a wonderful hold
in the district, and competitive events
of all kinds always attracted large


crowds. Dancing was most popular,
and one cannot help thinking that we
are degenerate in these days when out-
dances are over about 2 a.in., and we
proceed t o our homes in fast and com-
fortable motor cars. In the eighties
one danced strenuously until 5 a.m.,
harnessed the horses for a long drive
home in the dawning day in order to
begin a long day’s work, untrammeled
by the restriction of union bosses.
One is given seriously to think, if it
is not a fact, that the “bad old days”
were not the best after all.
We have already referred to .our
first Progress Association, which, un-
fortunately, appears to have lapsed
for a year or two after accomplishing
marvels. The Association was the
means of hav.ng Hillston made a se-
parate police district and separate land
district; it was also mainly instrumen-
tal in having built the Post Office, the
Court House, bridges over the Lachlan,
Merrowie and Willandra Creeks, and
in the establishment of a Hillston
Town Common, and many other im-
provements throughout the district.
A new Progress Association was for-
med on the 25th January. 1883. which
renewed the activities of its prede-
cessor.
The eighties were indeed memorable
years for Hillston, and we can regard
this decade as probably the most im-
portant period in the history of the
development of Hillston. In Decem-
ber, 1888, the Hillston Municipal Coun-
cil was incorporated, taking over from
the Carrathool Shire Council, and
adding further importance to the town.
The Australian Joint Stock Bank was
established in Hillston about 18 7( un-
der the managership of the late R.
W. Stewart, but was compelled to close
its doors, in common with many of the
other banks, in 1893. Naturally, this
was a severe blow to our town, and
much hardship was occasioned. A new
Company was formed, and the Austra-
lian Bank of Commerce Ltd. took over
the old Bank and its liabilities, which
it has gradually discharged. Naturally
this Bank has played a large part in
the financial affairs of the town and
has a big connection with local farmers.
It has now been amalgamated with
the Bank of New South Wales, whicli
opened here in 1926 and is now in
charge of Mr. C. W. Harris. Un'il
the establishment of a branch of the
Commercial Bank of Aus ralia here-
in July. 1925, the Australian Joint
Stock Bank and its successor suffered
no competition except for a short in-
terlude when the London Chartered
Bank commenced business in the brick
cottage adjoining the garage of Wil-
son & Mackic Ltd. The Government
Savmgs Bank of N~v- South Wales
and the Commonwealth Bank have had
agencies at Hillston for some years.
As we have already recorded, a
wave of prosperity made the eighties
most important 3'ears for Hillston. A
brewery and flour mill were established
in Hillston and shared in the proceeds
of the mining boom in Mount Hope,
and Gilgunnia. New residents began
to arrive in the town, and from this
time on we can go to many of our
local residents for an account of these
early years. The first Pastoral and
Agricultural Show was held in 1881,
and from all accounts this and the
succeeding Shows were better than
any this century has seen. One can-
not help thinking that the importance
of the horse and the absence of rapid
travelling facilities to the cities and
bigger towns accounted for this to a
large degree. Station owners naturally
bred good stock for their own use and


often kept blood stallions and mares
instead of maintaining a Ford “stud
as is the case these days.
Residents of the district were neces-
sarily forced to look to their local
town to supply interest and amuse-
ment, and accordingly they supported
town activities in a manner which
could give no occasion for the oft-
heard modern complaint that our sta-
tion owners give over the management
of their stations to managers for the
doubtful and expensive pleasure of
living in a city. Naturally, the poor
manager is not encouraged to waste
time or money in a district from which
the owner desires to derive the fullest
possible income for spending in the
city. The evil result of this policy is
being brought home in a most un-
pleasant manner; however, it is pos-
sible that the next few years will see
the station owner transferring his
home from “Scott’s*' or “The Exchange
Hotel” to return to his almost for-
gotten business of sheep raising.
To return to our subject, we note
that the steady progress of the town
continued until the late nineties, when
our dread enemy, “King Drought,”
began to make his heavy and blight-
ing hand felt. The bank smash of 1893
bad its effect on the district, and hel-
ped to destroy the reserves that had
been built up. Encouraged by a suc-
cession of fair to good years, stations
were stocked to capacity. A year of
comparative drought did not d'seourage
tlm optimists, and they ate in‘o them
reserves for agistment and fodder in
the fond hope that next year would
be a good one. The nineteenth cen-
tury was drawing to its close, and
Queen Victoria's reign had been a
great and glorious one, encouraging
every British subject in his optimistic
opinion of himself as the salt of the
earth. The Zulu and Boer War came,
and in common with the rest of New
South Wales, Hillston district contri-
buted its quota of volunteers. Every-
one was full of hope and confidence
for the new century, and little heed
was taken of the ominous portents
prophesying the reign of “King
Drought,” and then, almost before
we realised it, he was upon us. The
drought of "02 is legend amongst us.
Great stations were laid bare and their
owners ruined; the banks, hard hit
by the insistent demands for help,
were forced to refuse aid to a great
extent, and ruination stared the coun-
try in the face.
In May of that year the Western
Lands Commissioners toured the dist-
rict to the accompaniment of tremen-
dous dust storms. They were told
that newly dropped lambs were being
killed to give the ewes a chance, and
hand feeding was the order of the day.
Application was made to the Minister
for Lands to grant a general exemp-
tion from residence conditions to sett-
lers who were forced off their land by
the drought, and very liberal conditions
were given. Flour at the local mills
was, however, only i7/10/- a ton in
May. and the full effect of the drought
was not felt until later in the year.
In July a two day Show was held, and
according to all accounts was quite
success, but it was impossible to hold
out much longer.
The ’BB drought was short, sharp
p.nd severe, and enormous were the
losses in stock, but when the drought
passed the country speedily recovered
as the edible shrubs still remained
alive. Tim *O2 drourdit. however, vrp.s
preceded by fairly dry years, and the
result was that practically all edible


shrubs died and the great wide plains
were bare. As a further result, dust
storms of frightful severity swept the
country filling in tanks and covering
houses and fences. One station in the
Ivanhoe district was abandoned, and
it is alleged that upon the owner’s re-
turn with his party in 'O3 he was not
able to locate the house. A huge series
of sandhills covered the spot on which
he imagined stood the house, and it
was while ploughing over one of these
bills that he was seen to disappear,
having fallen down a chimney, the top
of which was lightly covered with
sand.
Even in May the grass and water
was almost done, and scrub cutting
was going on everywhere, but the
hardest scrubs were dying, and great
patches of pine and yarran were the
same. Even to this day thre are huge
patches of dead pine and yarran whHi
have never seen an axe but are dead
from the great drought.
Willandra Station had 14,000 sheep
left in May, which were being fed on
wheat and chaff. A stack of 100 tons
of hay sold for £SOO. the purchaser to
take delivery. The Lachlan ceased to
run, and was dry for miles. Emus
coming to the few remaining tanks
containing water drank so much that
they were unable to get up. An emu.
of course, always sits down to drink,
which it does by darting its head for-
ward through the water.
Business in the town was at a stand-
still. but the storekeepers managed to
weather the storm.
The results of the ’O2 drought are
only too vivid in the minds of our
citizens to need dilating upon here.
Suffice it to say that a new beginning"
had to be made. Many were ruined,
and the hardy old p'oncer spirit was
tested to he utmost. Hillston and
district suffered severely, and the
splendid progress in the last century
was stayed. Thus ends the second
period in our history, a period which
commenced in a blaze of prosperity
and progress and concluded in a nat-
ional dVr ter which h-v 1 such a devas-
tating effect on this wonderful land of
ours. ,
There was nothing left but to make
a fresh start, and the severity of he
blow, so far as this district was con-
cerned, can be understood from the
fact that for the next twenty year?
Hillston was litt l e more than an mi-
progressive country village.


HILLSTON FROM THE ‘02 DROUGHT
©MCE again the wonderful recu-
perative powers of the district
came to the rescue to heal the
destruction of the terrible 1-
drought. Business people and
station owners took careful stock ot
their position and with all due opti
mism began the climb to prosperity.
Naturally, the recovery was gradual,
and new faces often appeared in the
place of those who succumbed to the
financial stress. Slowly but surely the
town and district began to assume a
normal appearance, and, with the re-
covery of the feed, sheep m larger
numbers spread over the hitherto bare
paddocks. Confidence in ourselves and
the capabilities of the district had
pulled us through.
The twelve years before the Great
War were not marked by any very
outstanding event. The district was
again enjoying a fair measure of pros-
perity. and reviving interest m the
progress of the town was making itself
manifest. The agitation for a railway
was renewed with vigor, and many
improvements in 'travelling facilities
were sought and obtained. It would
almost appear, however, that the town
was conserving its energies for the
extraordinary demands, financial and
otherwise, to be made during the Great
War.
In fact, the people of Hillston suf-
fered from a curious kind of apathy
in civic matters. Hillston seemed to
have reached the peak of its develop-
ment just before the ’O2 drought and
little progress was made thereafter,
in fact, one might say that the town
was gradually slipping back. The War
made its tremendous demands on the
patriotism of the district, and we can
regard our record in this direction
with pride. Over 250 men volunteered
from the immediate district, and in the
seventh War Lon Hillston subscribed
£33.620, which was twice the allotted
quota. Returned men have no hesi-
tation in saying ‘hat their parcels
from Hillston were by far the best 01
any sent, and the various patriotic
appeals met with unqualified support.
Tremendous sums of money were sub-
scribed, and no effort was spared tc
make every done‘ion to am fund a
record for Hillston. We believe that
the town can challenge any other town
of a comparable size in Australia and
be sure of winning so far as the Wai
effort was concerned.
It is curious to think that a quarter
of a century should go by with such
little visible effect on our town. In
these twenty-five years, which saw so
manv wonderful inventions and dis-
coveries, which altered the whole
course of world affairs, nothing hap-
pened in or to Hillston. The motor
car. aeroplane,- cin -matograph, electric
light, and hosts of other new and pro-
gressive adjuncts to civilisation were
all late in coming to Hillston. It seems
that the War effort left us exhausted,
and the six years after the War were
dull and dead ones so far as Hillston
was concerned. Our town Councillors
allowed roads to fall into a state of
disrepair, and the amount of civic en-
thusiasm is shown by the fact that on y
twenty-one voters recorded their pre-
ferences at the Municipal elections nj
1924. An outside stimulus was needed
to wake up the town, and in due time


it arrived in the construction of the
railway from Griffith. It was com-
pleted in 1922, but two years or more
passed before the effect of a railway
connection began to make itself felt
in the affairs of the town.
The railway in itself was an impor-
tant enough step in the direction of
progress, but the outstanding feature
of the years that followed was the
alienation of tremendous areas of
Crown Lands in the district. This
alienation was a natural corollary of
the railway. A great influx of new
settlers soon began to stir Hillston up,
and when it becomes necessary to
write the history of the future years
it will probably be found convenient
to commence a new era with the com-
ing of the railway. Hillston began to
realise that something must be done
in the town with the advent of the
railway, and the first signs of a revival
were coincident with the completion of
the line. The public buildings w r ere
painted and renovated, Tattersall’s
Hotel was enlarged, and some shops
and other buildings were completed.
A cinematograph was installed in the
old Royal Mail Hall and the first pro-
gramme was shown on 2nd September,
1922. Articles and letters in the
“Spectator” demonstrate the fact that
the people wanted something done to
make the town more attractive. Our
civic fathers were urged to get to
get to work on the roads and foot-
paths, and a lighting scheme was dis-
cussed. Unfortunately, nothing was
done for some years, and the old town
remained to all external appearances
as dead and alive as it had for the past
twenty years, except for the spasmodic
first effort already mentioned.
Huge areas of Crown Lands were
now made available for selection, and
from 1922 on new settlers were arriv-
ing in scores. Naturally, these facts
would have a great influence. A mild
land boom in the district during the
years 1925 and 1926 resulted in farmers
from the rich Victorian wheat areas
paying some high prices for the farms
and a good number of our canny old
pioneers were not averse to accepting
the prices offered. Naturally, with so
much money around, Hillston began
to assume a busier appearance, and
the influx of new citizens with their
fresh ideas brought many changes.
Everyone became filled with the same
optimism that inspired these new-
comers, and the old town took on a
fresh lease of life.
The years 1928 and 1929 saw Hillston
making tremendous strides, which
were only equalled once before in our
history—we refer to the previous era
of prosperity in the early eighties.
Over £4,000 was spent on the roads
and footpaths in the Municipality,
much to the horror and astonishment
of some of our old-timers. We think
that even these people will now admit
that the results have more than justi-
fied the expense. At the end of 1929
an up-to-date and efficient lighting
system was installed, and the visitor
to our town who arrives at night lime
cannot fail to be impressed by the
number and brilliance of our street
illuminations, which are exceptionally
good for such a comparatively small
town. The Electric Light Company
supplies the current during the whole
twenty-four hours, and is extremely
< ffie’ent in this service.
Without fear of boasting, we can
say that we have possibly the finest
hotels on the Southern line for accom-
modation. service and furnishing.
Commercial travellers, who arc, or


should be, connoisseurs on this sub-
ject tell us so, and the Licensing
Board confirms it. Mr. Geo. Dibbs
and his good wife extended the Royal
Mad premises, adding a handsome row
of shops and a new wing of bedrooms
replete with every convenience, and
Mrs R Purvis erected a splendid two
storey building in 1929 to take the
place of the old Club House Hotel.
The Bank of New South Wales com-
pleted their premises, and they are
undoubtedly one of the finest pieces
of architecture in the town. Messrs.
Cordate Bros, also have a very fine
block of shops, erected in 1929. I hen
Messrs. Parker and Mozzini added to
the appearance of the main street b\
completing two handsome blocks of
shops. Numerous cottages sprang up
in different quarters of the town, and
for a time it was difficult to rent a
place in which to live.
Having regard to the fact that the
last decent season was in 1926.
followed by the drought years of 1927.
1928, 1929 and 1930. the progress of
Hillston has been extraordinary. Our
farmers are in debt to the Rural In-
dustries Branch and Banks, and arc
having difficulty in pulling through
these difficult times, but somehow we
carry on as optimistically as possible.
On top of the drought comes the fi-
nancial depression which places further
limits on the almost exhausted credits,
hut the district has reserve potentia-
lities which surprise the newcomer,
and none of us doubt for one moment
that our success will crown our efforts.
The Hillston—Roto railway was
completed early this year and is al-
ready proving its value to the travel-
ling public and station owners by the
great number of stock transported over
its length of twenty-nine miles. Pas-
sengers are availing themselves of the
through service auu as many as eigitj
have been carrier on the one train or
stations on the B.oken Hill line. It is
regrettable, however, that the Govern-
ment has not made provision for the
resumption of the large holdings m the
vicinity of the ra hvay for closer set-
tlement. As r.n example, we have
Willandra, which, with its subsidiary
stations, comprises almost half a mi -
Hon acres. How much more value to
the town and district would this tre-
mendous area be if it was occupied by
even as few as thirty smaller men,
buying their stores at Hillston, attend-
ing and supporting its civic activities
and in the aggregate carrying more
sheep.
It is opportune here to mention in
passing that a change is making itsclt
felt in the district. Until a few years
ago the wheatgrowers, by reason o
their number and importance, did not
dominate the feelings and spirit of
the district. The graziers were more
numerous and wealthy, and accord-
ingly the sheep man ruled the town,
representing as hr- did the main source
of income, and the old order remained
unchanged. Gradually, however, the
wheat farmer is assuming predomin-
ance by virtue of his numbers, and
whether for good or ill remains yet
to be seen. We are slightly more con-
cerned now with the problems of the
wheat farmer now that we have so
much at stake in this industry. The
long series of droughts, followed by
the severe financial depression, have
crippled the farmer more than anyone
and his gallant struggle in face of
these adversities deserves a rich re-
ward. In saying that the dominance
of the wheat farmer and small man is
probable in the future we do not want
to lose sight of the fact thkt the coun


1918
1919
1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
816
try round Hillston is admirably adap-
ted to carry sheep and the sheep will
always be an important item. There
are 7,772,815 acres in the Hillston Pas-
tures Protection District across the
river, and in 1930 there were 760,733
sheep, 0,882 cattle and 1827 horses on
this land. This year there would pro-
bably be a quarter of a million more
sheep in the district without taking in-
to account the Hay Pastures Protection
District, which comprises all the coun-
try on the South side of the river.
The general impression is that our
V.heat farmers must pay more atten-
tion to sheep, and in the future we
w:.!l almost certainly find the flocks on
the South side of the river increasing
in number and size and the wheat
areas decreasing. Unfortunately, our
rainfall sometimes fails to come at the
right time and then the crop hastily
sown on a large area of ill-prepared
land fails. The tendency is to smaller
and better worked crop areas coupled
with more sheep.
We append hereto a list of the
number of Homestead Farms taken
up in the years from 1918 to 1931 :
i his list does not include holdings
of other tenures, and when one rea-
lises that these farms average about
1,7G0 acres each it is obvious that an
enormous area of country has Been
settled in the last few years. These
farmers who came on their blocks so
recently had to meet tremendous ex-
pense in clearing and improvements
and have not been rewarded by any-
thing like a decent result. The marvel
is that they are still here and willing
to carry on, and such spirit must suc-
ceed in the end.
While on this subject it would be
impossible not to mention the firm of
Nall, Jackson & Co., Ltd., which was
established in 1889. The business has
been variously known as “Villa and
Rossi,*' “Villa, Rossi and Nall,” “J.
T. Jackson,” and “Nall, Jackson &
C 0.,” but Mr. Thos. Macfarlanc has
directed its fortunes since 1907. He
was subsequently joined by Mr. J. G.
Rose in 1924. The Company has
branches at 'Merriwagga and Gool-
gowi, and almost every farmer in the
district is on its books. With the ad-
vent of closer settlement this firm be-
gan to finance the farmers by allow-
ing credits for stores and farming re-
quirements of all kinds. The manner
in which this Company has stuck to
the farmer is in no small measure
responsible for the fact that many of
them are still in possession of their
farms, and one may say that it was
only on account of the continuance of
bad seasons that the financing of the
farmers has now fallen to the lot of
the Rural Industries Branch.
There is still a tremendous fu'uro
ahead of our town, and when the world
wide depression ends we can look for-
ward to another boost to HiPston for


we are confident that we will see Hill'
ston in a decade or so double in size,
to become in the end one of the most
prosperous and progressive towns in
the State.
However, the townspeople and dist-
rict residents must realise that we can-
not sit hack and allow things to drift.
The climate is wonderful, the soil for
sheep raising and wheat growing is
unrivalled, hut nothing will result un-
less every resident of the town and
district is constantly alive to every
opportunity to boost and improve con-
ditions. Live and trade in your home
town, by your own efforts make sure
that every function, civic activity and
charity is a success. Everything thax
concerns the district has a vital inte-
rest to you heause you live in it and
must succeed or fail with it. We have
every reason to he proud and opti-
mistic of our future provided we leave
nothing undone to assist and improve
our abundant natural resources.


HILLSTON—1931
§HE stranger to Hiilston could
scarcely be blamed for saying
that we have a very beautiful
and fertile district around our
town. The grass and herbage
is luxuriant in its growth, the wheat
crops have assumed that rich green
color which is so restful to the eyt.
and if the price of grain was higher
our farmers would be talking of new
cars after harvest. It is even more
remarkable when one remembers that
we have had droughts for the last
three years, accompanied by the usual
scries of weekly dust storms when the
burnt and bare plains were swept by
raging red clouds of choking dust.
The sheep men are happy in the know-
ledge of an abundance of feed for
many months, and the ewes seem to
realise that it is up to them to do
their best, arid so we find extraordin-
arily good lambings, even up to 100%.
The flood waters arc all around, and
the roads have only just been opened
up for traffic. A few weeks ago one
would be pardoned for imagining that
Australia’s mysterious inland sea had
been deposited at Hiilston. However,
the good done will far outweigh the
bad, and the visitor to Hiilston will
find that he has something to. see in
and around the town.
Our visitor, entering the town by
way of High Street, is immediately
struck by the evidence of civic pride
and progress demonstrated by the well
kept garden plots in the centre of the
road. His car runs smoothly over the
even road, which is bordered on each
side by concreted kerbs and gutters
and asphalt paths, until he has made
his selection from the three hotels
that the town supports. These hotels.
Club House, Royal Mail and Tatter-1
sail's, are substantial brick buildings
of two storeys, and arc a sign of the
stability of the town and district.
Our visitor having made his selection,
and no matter where he stops we can
guarantee him first class accommoda-
tion and the best of food, naturally
looks for a good garage. Well, there
arc three of them —Wilson & Mackie
Ltd., Martin & Co., and McCleary’s—
to supply all his motor and engineer-
ing needs.
Now for a stroll round the business
part of the town. There is the modern
establishment of Messrs. Corda c>
Bros., where the wants of the inner
man are supplied in pleasant surround-
ings equalled by the gemaKty of the
proprietors. They also supply fruit,
confectionery and meals in competition
with two other shops run by Mrs.
McCombe and Mr. Hunt respectively.
All our vegetables are grown locally,
and some fruit, which is a testimony
to the fertility of the soil in the mar-
ket gardens of Messrs. Hunt. Anthony.
Ash and Ah Way.
The Bank of New South Wales, the
Australian Bank of Commerce Ltd.,
and the Commercial Bank of Austra-
lia Ltd., are housed in commodious
brick structures, and are under the
managepent of Messrs. Harris. Dog-
gett and Hurley rcsnectivelv. The
general stores of the town and dist-
rict are Nall. Jackson & Co. Ltd., and
Lillvman’s. whose shoos are replete
with every local necessity at reasonable
prices. There is no need whatever to


leave the town for anything that you
may require. Both stores are up-to-
date, and are assets to the community.
Then there are two butchers, Regan
& Son and Webb Bros., who cater for
the public, w'hile the “staff of life’' is
supplied by Mrs. Jewell and Mr. Coom-
ber. Both bakers are adepts at making
pastry and small goods.
Not the least of the town's attrac-
tions is the electric light, which is
available during the full twenty-four
hours. The current is generated on
the spot, under the supervision of Mr.
F. H. Harvey for the Hillslon Electric
Supply Coy. Ltd., and, with the ice
works, are conveniences much appre-
ciated by the residents. Electrical in ■
stallations arc carried out by Mr. C.
L. Knibb.
Messrs. Ranken & Knechtli, Wilson
& Mackic, Ltd., and A. Rasmussen are
the local stock and station agents, and
at present they are kept busy with
sheep and cattle consignments from
the railway station. The stock yards
are modern and commodious and are
lit by electric light. The stationmas-
tcr, Mr. H. Golden, is one of the best
known citizens. He has been with us
for some years now, and we would be
sorry to lose such an efficient and
courteous officer.
The Vacuum Oil Co. Ltd. has lately
installed a depot beside the railway
line, which is now in charge of Mr. L.
Flood. The need for such a depot was
very pressing on account of tlm great
number of tractors in the district re-
quiring fuel.
Mr. Mathews, assisted by Mr. Tud-
denham and staff, presides over the
postal business, and, Hillston being
the centre for a large number of small
settlements, they arc kept busy. Hill-
ston is a centre for tremendous lengths
of private telephone lines, one to
“Yathong” of seventy-five miles being
the longest in the State.
The local Hospital, in charge of
Matron Stead, caters for an extensive
district, while the Country Women’s
Association has a commodious mater-
nity home. The latter hospital was
the first established by any branch of
the Country Women’s Association, and
Hillslon has every reason to be proud
and grateful for the energy and busi-
ness ability of the local ladies who
established it.
)•
Hillston boasts three Churches, An-
glican, Roman Catholic and Presby-
terian, now in charge of Revs. Reilly,
Dr. Cummins and Eippcr respectively.
At the second there is a Convent un-
der the control of the Sisters of St.
Joseph. The Public School, erected
in 1925, is pleasantly situated, being
almost surrounded by trees, and the
number and variety of these is a very
pleasant surprise for our visitor. The
Police Station and Court House in
Molcsworth Street, arc of brick, and
include the local Land and Clerk of
Petty Sessions offices. Hillston is
very proud of its new Showground
and Racecourse, which has been cha-
racterised by visiting stewards as the
best laid out course outside Sydney.
When evening falls, our visitor will
wander to the “talkies” at the Globe
Theatre, under the management of
( aptain Leeds, who has lately made
his home in Hillston. Perhaps he will
also hear the Town Band discoursing
bright music under the baton of Mr.
J. Robertson. The “minnic” golfer
can indulge his vice, while the kivgh's
of the cue are also able to d'splay


their prowess with the permission and
remuneration of either Messrs. Risbej
or Fox.
The professional members of the
community are mentioned near the end
as our visitor likes to keep clear of
them as long as possible. Mr. A. C.
Magnus represents the legal frater-
nity, Dr. Brake the medical, and Mr.
A. Reuss the dental. In league with
the second mentioned is the cheimst,
Mr. H. L. Vining, while Mr. L. R. L.
McGinty. the local L.P.S., C.1..A. and
general official “Pooh-Bah issues
summonses at the request of the first
mentioned as well as for Sergeant G.
F. Levett. in charge of our Police
force.
HiTston is fortunate in having, a
Park area across the river shaded by
a wealth of magnificent gums—a fav-
orite picnic spot in the summer time
when the various bathing pools, so
convenient and safely situated, arc
crowded by happy citizens.
Last, but not least, is the War Me-
morial, the lawns of which arc kept in
order by a public spirited citizen, Mr.
Ranken.
To sum up, Hillston, with its hinter-
land, has great possibilities. Not very
long ago, practically no wheat was
grown here, sheep and cattle being
the chief source of wealth. Our roads
are in a bad slate, due to an abnormal
season, but normally our visitor need
not delay on the way. It is quite a
usual thing to get to Hay, one hund-
red miles away, within three hours
and less, and Sydney can be reached
by car in sixteen hours.
Hillslon is almost exactly due West
of Sydney, anl the normal climate is
very healthy. The dry. Western air
is invigorating, and, while we arc al-
ways sure of some centuries in the
Summer, our Spring and Autumn days
are unrivalled. Unfortunately, our
visitor cannot slop longer an.d compl
ment Mr. or Mrs. “Bung” on the ex-
cellence of the occommodation and the
progressive spirit 01 the town. He
makes his departure with a strong
conviction that he will re-visit Hill-
ston to become acquainted with its
residents.


HILLSTON PERSONALITIES
JERV IS STORRIER. —Naturally we
must give pride of place in any record
of our town to our oldest inhabitant,
who was born on the 16th May, 1841,
and is therefore now in his 91st year.
He was born in Goulburn, and first
saw the Lachlan in 1851 at Wyangala.
He has loaded his bullock team at
Prince’s Bridge in Melbourne and
travelled over the greater part of the
back country of New South Wales,
Queensland and \*ictoria. Mr. Stor-
rier, who is a bachelor, first came to
Hillston in 1865 with his bullock team,
and this town has remained his head-
quarters ever since. He now resides
with a nephew near Hillston, still re-
taining his wonderful memory and
with faculties only slightly impaired
by age. He claims to have suggested
the name of the town, and has seen
it pass through al] its viciss'Urles.
Good luck to Mr. Storricr, and mar
he be spared to us for many years to
come.
FRANK LAlRD.—Perhaps one of
the most popular men who have oeen
in this town. Mr. Laird came to Hill-
ston in 1906 to manage Willandra sta-
tion. and no description of Hillston
would be complete without some re-
ference to this famous stud station of
almost half a million acres. It is ge-
nerally acknowledged tha* Mr Ln}-d
is almost solely rcsoons'blc for he
wonderful record of prize winn’ng
sheep bred at the station, and he con-
tinued to improve the breed until 1928.
when he left the employ of Field and
Vickery, the owners of the station. It
is not, however, for his wonderful
achievements in the breeding of stud
stock that we remember him mainlv.
Mr. Laird was ever an enthusiastic
and capable supporter of every town
activity. One can safely say that no
town charity or support lacked the
ardent and beneficial assistance of Mr.
Laird who was also most ably backed,
by his charming wife and daughters.
May and Hilda. It has been a severe
blow to the town to lose such a pub-
lic spirited family. Mr. Laird now
lives in Sydney, but retains certain
Hillston interests which are managed
by his popular son, Archie.
THOMAS MACFARLANE. —The
Managing Director of Nall Jackson &
Co., Ltd., and Hillston Electric Supply
Coy., Ltd., was born in Glasgow in
1876, from whence he came to Mel-
bourne in 1890. In 1897 Mr. Macfar-
lane came to Hillston and after various
ventures both in Hillston and Shuttle-
ton he finally took over the business
of Nall Jackson & Co. in 1907. He
has a splendid faith in the prospects
of this district, and is interested in
farming and grazing properties. It is
difficult to over estimate his beneficial
influence on the destinies of the dis-
trict. and on acount of the quiet, le-
vel-headed manner in which Mr. Mac-
farlane exercises his Scotch common
sense and undoubted business ability,
his advice is sought and valued by u-
a 11. At one time or other he has held
a position on the committee of every
nnblic activity, and he and his family
arc most respected and very popular.
The whole district owes Mr. Macfar-
lane a debt of gratitude for the man-
ner in which he has assisted the fin-
ancing of the new settlers and the im-
provements in our town.


SAMUEL CHARLES JOSEPH
SOUTHWELL. —Mr. Southwell owns
one of the best properties in the dist-
rict, a few miles from Hillston. He
arrived here with his father from Coo-
tamundra in March, 1881, to take up
Merungle. It was not long before he
took up part of his present holding
and commenced to improve and work
it. 'Mr. Southwell has made a success
of farming and grazing, and he, in
common with older settlers, is a con-
stant reminder to the newer settlers
of the fact that hard work and com-
mon sense will make a Hillston iarm
pay and pay well. Mr. Southwell is a
popular and energetic partisan in town
activities, and his presence on the
various committees is valued. He oc-
cupies the position of Coroner, in suc-
cession to the late R. W. Stewart.
JAMES ALEXANDER KITSON.—
This gentleman was born in April, 1867,
and came from Echuca to Hillston with
his people in 1880. Mr. Kitson owns
“Rivcrnook” and “Monivia” stations,
hut has his residence in the town, of
which he is one of the most respected
citizens. He has since 1900 owned
other stations, viz. : “Merriwa,”
■“Wangaroa ’ and “Crossroads, ’ and
has an extraordinary flair for dealing
hi sheep. His opinion on all station
problems is sought after and valued,
and he ami his good wife have made
hosts of friends in the district. Mr,
Kitson is also a director of Wilson &
Mackie, Ltd., and a staunch supporter
of town activities.
ROBERT WALTER STEWART.—
One of the most distinctive figures in
Hillston for many years was the late
R. W. Stewart. He was born in the
Shoalhaven district, but spent most of
his boyhood days in the vicinity of'
Port Macquarie. He belonged to a
large family, two of whom had dis-
tinguished careers, viz., A. P. Stewart
Esq., late General Manager of the
'Australian Bank of Commerce Ltd.,
and Rev. S. P. Stewart, for fifty years
Minister of the Lower Manning Free
Presbyterian Church. R. W. Stewart
came to Hillston in 1879 as manager
of the Australian Joint Stock Bank.
In 1885 he severed his connection
with the bank, and entered business
as a general Commission Agent. The
business of the town of Hillston was
one of the great interests of his life.
In 1890 he entered the Council and
was Mayor on several occasions and
at the time of his death in 1929. One
of Mr. Stewart’s gifts was that of a
•remarkably retentive and reliable me-
mory, and this and a forceful and able
personality was given unsparingly to
the service of the town. The late Mr.
Stewart dearly loved a battle of wits,
and some good tales are told by old
hands of the contests in which he
played a part.
LOUIS MOZZINI. —The subject of
this sketch was born in Ballarat, Vic-
toria, on the 12th August, 1868, and
came with his father, Caesar Mozzini,
to Hillston in 1881. The family settled
to the North of Hillston on the river,
and engaged in farming. Mr. Moz-
zini believes that his father grew the
first crop of wheat in the district—v
seven acres, put in with the aid of a
single furrow plough and reaped with
a sythe. He was one of the first batch
of scholars to attend Hillston School,
and remembers attending the first
Hillston Show in 1881. After working
at various business places in Hillston,
M>. Mozzini started business as a
hotel-keeper in Mount Hope in 1896,
and later conducted similar businesses
iff* Shuttleton and Nymagce. Re-
turning to Hillston, he purchased the


Club House Hotel iu 1511. Selling' out
in 1922, he, having bought “Rivernook,”
went on the land until 1927, when he
came to live in Hillston in retirement.
Idleness, however, never appealed to
Mr. Mozzini, and two years ago he
bought into the motor business known
as Martin & Co. Mr. Mozzini has
served the town on the Hospital Board
and the Municipal Council which he
entered in 1912 and again in 1928. He
is still a useful and energetic member
of the Council, and is one of the best
known and most highly respected of
Hillston’s townsmen.
ALEXANDER McLEAN.—A great
blow to the district was suffered when
this gentleman died on the 14th May
last, aged seventy years. One can
safely say that no man was better
thought of or admired for his splendid
character and ability. He was the
owner of “Yandembah” station for
many years, and also purchased the
“Crow’s Nest” property recently. Mr.
McLean was a director of the Hillston
Pastures Protection Board for twenty-
five years, and President of the Lach-
lan Picnic Race Club for a great length
of time. There was very little that
Mr. Mcl ean did not know about
sheeh. and his management of his
station was an example for others.
JAMES MURRAY CAMPBELL.—
Mr. Campbell has been* in this district
for many years, having once owned
Coombie. He is now the owner of
Box Creek' and “Marurah" stations.
He had a great deal of time for all
that concerned Hillston and district,
and is widely acknowledged as an aut-
hority on every phase of sheep rais-
ing. Mr. Campbell takes a keen inte-
rest in politics, and is the district rep-
resentative of the Riverina Movement.
GENERAL.—We regret that the
demands on our space preclude us from,
including many other old and impor-
tant names in the district. There are
the Cashmeres Joe, William and Alf r
J. Busch, P. J. Madden, T. Morant,
R. Peters, P. McKenzie, T. Parr, J.
Hutchison, the Storriers, S. Hill. A.
Templeman, W. Peevers. R. Latham,
C. Seton and a host of others, all of
whom are old settlers or residents
respected and successful. They are
men who have pioneered the district
and whose strength of character has
brought them through drought and
depression. There arc such a num-
ber of these early residents that wc
would need a book to do justice to
them all instead of which wc have only
been able to take a few at random.
There arc a number of our early pio-
neers who have passed away; peace
be with them, and may their memory
ever remain with us.


HILLSTON BUSINESS DIRECTORY
AGENTS (Stock & Station, etc.)
Ranken & Knechtli.
Rasmussen, A.
Wilson & Mackie Ltd,
BAKERS
Coomber, A. H.
Jewell, Mrs. R.
BANKS
Bank of New South Wales (with which
is incorporated the Australian
Bank of Commerce Ltd.).
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd.
Commonwealth Bank (Agency).
Government Savings Bank of New
South Wales (Agency).
BILLIARD SALOONS
Fox, T. A.
Risbey, G. H.
BLACKSMITH
Stanford, S. W.
BOOTMAKER
Proudford, R.
BUILDERS & CONTRACTORS
Bacon, W.
Donley, J. J.
Brown, H.
Fitzgerald, G. F.
Gambell, G.
Morgan, Frank
BUTCHERS
Regan & Son
Webb Bros.
CARRIERS
Latham, R. & Son
CHEMIST
Vining, H. L.
DENTIST
Reuss, A. H.
DRAPER
Wigan Bros.
ELECTRIC COMPANY
Hillston Electric Supply Coy. Ltd.
ELECTRICAL & WIRELESS
Knibb, C. L.
FRUITERERS
Cordato Bros. (Real Cafe)
Dibbs, W. M. (Royale Cafe)
Hunt's Fruit Mart
McCombe, Mrs. (Broadway Cafe)
GENERAL STORES
Li Hyman’s
Hillston Cash & Carry Co.
Nall Jackson & Co., Ltd.
HAIRDRESSERS
Angel, W.
Fox, T. A.
Rcay, T.
HOSPITALS
Country Women’s Assn. (Maternity)
Claremont (Private)
District
HOTELS
Club House
Royal Mail
Tattersall’s
MARKET GARDENS
Ash, Cico.
Anthony, S. G.
Ah Way, T.
Grcig, Geo.
Hunt Bros.


TAILORS
Coates, J. W.
Stewart, William
MOTOR GARAGES
Martin & Co.
McCleary, W.
Wilson & Atackie Ltd.
MUSIC SHOPS
Wilson & Mackic Ltd. (Paling’s)
Lillyman’s
NEWSPAPER
“Hillston Spectator,” (J. R. Teague)
PAINTER
Haydon, H.
SADDLER
Messner, C. W.
SHEARING CONTRACTORS
Busch & Lamb
Gordon, S. J.
Gatnbell, G.
Seigel, A.
SKIN & RABBIT BUYERS
Brown & Bacon
Miller, Geo.
SOLICITOR
Cater & Blumcr (A. C. Magnus)
DRESSMAKER
Welding, Miss
THEATRES
Globe Theatre (Talkies)
Strand Theatre
Anthony’s Casino
UNDERTAKER
Wilson, L. D. & Sons
WOOD MERCHANTS
Clarke, W. H.
Edwards, Sam
Ridge, O.
Wilson, J.
SAWMILLER
Brown, G. J. W. & Co.
BUSINESS DIRECTORY CONTINUED


Hillston Associations, Public Activities, &c.
Federal Member : W. W. Killen
State Member : E. A. Buttenshaw
Mayor ; J. R. Teague
Clerk of Petty Sessions and Crown
Land Agent : L. R. L. McGinty
Stationmaster : H. Golden
Bailiff : G. A. Sloan
Schoolmaster : S. J. Dodds
Church of England Minister : Rev.
A. G. Reilly
Roman Catholic Priest ; Rev. Dr.
V. Cummins
Presbyterian Minister ; Rev. A. J.
Eipper
Sergeant of Police ; G. F. Lcvett
Stock Inspector : A. R. McNiven
Postmaster : C. Alathcws
Hillston Pastures Protection Board:
S. S. Smith, President; E. H.
Graham, Secretary
District Hospital : J. G. Rose, Pre-
sident ; S. J. Gordon, Secretary
Pastoral and Agricultural Associa-
tion : T. Morant, President; S.
J. Gordon, Secretary
Riverina Movement : J. Murray
Campbell, Group Representative
Lachlan Picnic Race Club : R. Carr,
President; A. C. Magnus, Sec’y.
Tennis Club : Dr. C. E. Brake, Pre-
sident; R. Nicholls, Secretary.
Town Band : R. H. Regan, Presi-
dent : D. Regan, Secretary
M.U.1.0.0.F. : W. J. Storey, F.S.
Scoutmaster : F. W. Ryan
Golf Club : L. T. Hurley, President;
L. A. Barlow, Secretary.
Farmers and Settlers’ Association :
T. Morant, President
Football Club ; R. A. Graham, Sec.
Cricket Club ; N. C. White, Sec y.
Labour League : H. H. Anderson,
Secretary.
Progress Association : A. C. Magnus
President; H. A. Anderson, Sec’y.
Race Club : R. Carr, President; S.
J. Gordon, Secretary
Mechanic’s Institute : Miss Mackay,
Librarian.
Dramatic Society : Mr. Kncchtli


Club House Hotel
HIGH STREET HILLSTON
NEW & UP-TO-DATE PREMISES
Excellent Cuisine Moderate Tariff
Mrs. R. PURVIS Proprietress
R. J. Latham & Son
FORWARDING AGENCY
GENERAL CARRIERS
HILLSTON
GOODS STORED SHELL DEPOT
P.O. Box 24 ’Phone 45
Nail, Jackson & Co., Ltd.
HILLSTON
1889 1931
Original Founders Messrs. Villa and
Rossi (both living in Sydney)
1889 1895
Succeeded by
The late J. T. Jackson & C. R. Nall
1895 1907
STILL THE LEADING STORE
For All District Requirements
Martin & Co.
HILLSTON MOTOR GARAGE
and
ENGINEERING WORKS
GENERAL MOTORS DEALERS
TYRES ACCESSORIES OILS
’Phone 38 P.O. Box 25
Royal Mail Hotel
HILLSTON
FIRST CLASS ACCOMMODATION
Reg. C.T.A. HOUSE ’Phone &
Only the Best Brands of
LIQUORS, ALES & CIGARS
HILLSTON’S BEST HOTEL
GEO. DIBBS Proprietor
Webb Bros.
FAMILY BUTCHERS
HIGH STREET HILLSTON
PRIME QUALITY MEAT
At Lowest Prices
L ——-
’Phone 72 P.O, Box 70


R. H. Regan & Son
MARBLE ARCH BUTCHERY
HIGH STREET HILLSTON
FOR THE CHOICEST CUTS
The Wise Housewife Shops With Us
Orders Called For
‘The Rye* Dairy
HILLSTON
PURE FRESH MILK DAILY
Drink More Miik foi* Your Health’s
Sake
W. J. MITCHELL Proprietor
APPOINT
The Public Trustee
(Guaranteed by N.S.W. Government)
YOUR ERECUTOR, TRUSTEE,
AGENT or ATTORNEY
E. J. PAYNE Public Trustee
St. James Building., 109 Elizabeth St.
Sydney.
Govt. Savings Bank
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Hillston Branch of the above Bank
IS NOW OPEN
FOR NEW BUSINESS
Local Agent :
Mr L. R. McGINTY, C.P.S. & C.L.A.
Cater & Blumer
(Of Hillston & Griffith)
SOLICITORS
Office : Opp. A.B.C. Ltd.
Commissioners for Affidavits
HILLSTON
Electric Supply Co. Ltd.
(Established 6/12/’29)
24-HOUR SERVICE
150 H.P. AVAILABLE
CONNECT UP !


The Real’ Cafe
HIGH STREET HILLSTON
FRUIT & CONFECTIONERY
Meals at all Hours
Light Refreshments
CORDATO BROS. Proprietors
The ReaF Bakery
HIGH STREET HILLSTON
SELLS THE BEST BREAD
Cakes—Buns —Pastry
Made from tiie Best Ingredients Only
Mrs. R. JEWELL Proprietress
Ac Vc & K, Lillyman
“TH” S'"ELI ING VALUE STORE’’
HIGH STREET HILI STON
HIGH-CLASS GOODS—LOW PRICE
Buy Locally & Patronise the District
The Hillston Pharmacy
A Complete Stock Of
DRUGS, PATENT MEDICINES
TOILET REQUISITES
Always on hand
H. L. VINING, M.P.S. ’Phone 34
A. H. Coomber
BAKER & PASTRYCOOK
HIGH STREET HILLSTON
THE BEST OF BREAD DAILY
Small Goods a Speciality
P.O. Box 26 ’Phone 13
C. L. Knibb
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR
HIGH STREET HILLSTON
Wireless Goods a Speciality
Depot Texas Oil Co. (Australasia) Ltd.
Car & Radio Batteries Recharged


Wilson & Mackie Ltd.
GENERAL MOTOR ENGINEERS
AUTHORISED FORD DEALERS
Good! Work Moderate Rates
AH Accessories Stocked
Talkies 1 Talkies 1
AT
GLOBE THEATRE HILLSTON
UNRIVALLED PROGRAMMES
During Jubilee & Show Week
The Management promises the best
entertainment } r et seen in Hillston
during the festivities.
“Call of the Flesh”—Ramon N ovarro.
“Murder Case”—Laurel and Hardy.
“Resurrection”—John Boles, & Lupe
Velez. “Devil With Women”—Victor
McLaglen. “Dirigible”—Jack Holt &
Ralph Graves. The Latest Supports.
No Extra Charge For Booking
ADULTS 2/1 CHILDREN 6d.
Hillston Ice Works
SUPERIOR QUALITY ICE
MADE IN YOUR OWN TOWN
KEEP YOUR FOODSTUFFS COOL
And Supoprt A Local Industry
HILLSTON
Cash & Carry Company
THE HOME OF BARGAINS
SHOP HERE & SAVE MONEY
Wilson & Mackie Ltd.
STOCK & STATION DEPARTMENT
HIGH STREET HILLSTON
Local Agents for
DALGETY & COY., LTD.
Sales Conducted Weekly
AT THE AUCTION MART
Splendid Views of Hillston For Sale
P.O. Box 40
’Phone 16
E. H. Graham
Representing:
FARMERS & GRAZIERS’ Co-op. Co.
T. ROBINSON Pty., Ltd.
F. W. WILLIAMS Ltd.
Ranken & Knechtli
AUCTIONEERS
STOCK & LAND SALESMEN
HIGH STREET HILLSTON


Signatures


Signatures




