

BACK TO
Terang
AND DISTRICT
FASTER 1950


Foreword
WE TRUST this magazine will bring you
great pleasure, and be of historic
interest to all who are associated with
or interested in this District.
We are confident that our Town and District
are worthy of an attempt to picture its charm
and prosperity, the beauty and fertility of its
fields, and to tell of the warmth and hospitality
of its people, who love it and to whom there is
no place like Home.
In gratitude to the Pioneers who struggled
and built a wise and well-ordered community, and
to those who have given faithful, generous and
public service, to those who planted such glorious
trees and plantations, to all who have contributed
to the common good in this District, we give
thanks. In appreciation and to retain these
fragrant memories of loved ones and strangers,
of noble and kindly deeds, of the helping hand
regardless of class or creed ... we present this
book.
—EDITORIAL COMMITTEE.


HIGH STREET AVENUE (EAST END) AND SOLDIERS’ MEMORIAL


1839 - TERANG - 1950
To recapture all the events of the past 11 1 years would require a volume
far exceeding our thoughts and purses. But in passing we hope to recall
and record many of the kindly and noble actions, some of the high integrity,
spirit, and wise planning of the pioneers and forefathers in the early and
present days of our town and district.
SHORTLY AFTER the settlement of Portland
and Melbourne in 1834, and following the glow-
ing reports of Major Thomas Mitchell in 1836
of the fertility and possibilities of the Western
District, the rush began. Prom Melbourne, Geelong,
Warrnambool, Port Fairy and Portland the lion-
hearted pioneers began to spread, and later to race,
to gain possession of these beckoning pastures, and
here in 1839 were laid the foundations of our Terang
and district. The vast tracts of country which were
taken up in those early years were leased by the
Crown t a the occupier.
The story of the early pioneers in this district
is told elsewhere in this book. Glenormiston was
the first land taken up in the district, by Frederick
Taylor on behalf of Messrs McKlllop and Smith, in
the year 1839. On the 4th January, 1840, this
property was acquired by Niel Black & Co. Donald
McNicol, an employee of Niel Black, pioneered
Terang in 1840 and he built a hut on the east bank
of the lake in the same year. The lake then was a
beautiful sheet of water having a maximum depth
of 21 feet and stretching almost from the Dixie
road ter the Warrnambool road. Surrounded by trees,
ti tree and ferns, it was difficult to glimpse the
water, so dense was the timber. Many aborigines
were about, and their mia mias dotted the lake
banks. A beautiful setting for a town of the future.
Many are the stories of the pioneers’ struggles
to keep these large holdings against the depreda-
tions erf stock by natives, of drought, and of
depression. Supplies were brought in by bullock
team from Geelong, and as the journey took two
weeks some of the difficulties of transport are not
hard to imagine.
In an effort to make the district self-supporting,
a change in the way of life comes —a change from
the pastoral to the agricultural. For twenty years
the pioneers had tended herds, constructed homes,
excavated dams to catch the precious water, put
up fences, cleared the land; and although the face
of the country-side was changing slightly, the
number of the population underwent little change.
Realising the necessity for having the country
surveyed, the Government undertook a good deal
of this work in these parts at that time. The
survey parties usually consisted of six men, com-
prising bullock driver, a cook and tent-keeper, with
four men for axe and chain work. In 1855 Terang
was surveyed and the first sale of township allot-
ments took place in the same year. Some of the
land was now cleared sufficiently to grow crops,
potatoes, oats and wheat, and although not regarded
as a wheat area, a flour mill at Terang (situated
where Mr Alf Hayden now resides in Camperdown
road) and others in the neighboring towns of
Camperdown and Mortlake, indicate the success of
this venture. With these days of cultivation, more
labor was required, and so the township developed.
Carriers and carpenters came, blacksmiths were
required, there were stores to provide, roads to be
made, churches for worship, schools for children,
hotels for the travellers and the thirsty . . .
and a new era in the life of Terang was here.
The growth of the town is best illustrated by the
fact that in 1857 there were four houses in Terang
and 25 years later there were 600 people residing
in the town area.
We are apt to think the homes and buildings
of those days were primitive, but the accompany-
ing picture of the first Terang Presbyterian Church
built in 1868, and the fact that many of the houses
constructed at that time still stand without a
BUILT IN 1868


great deal of alteration, show that those early
tradesmen knew how to build strongly and well.
There are many evidences that the pioneers planned
that we might enjoy the fruits —the plantations op
the farms, the avenue in High Street, some of the
trees in the park, all of which we are justly proud
of and which make this district a joy to behold —and
which also make one pause and wonder how the
people of 70-80 years time will regard our present
tree planting.
No record of those days would be complete
without reference to Peter Carmichael, who from
11th October, 1859, when he was appointed teacher
of the Terang National School, remalnded here
until his promotion in 1884. Many of the older
generation give thanks to his teaching and character
building. These were the days of the Cobb & Co.
coaches, with the bright red coach and the four
beautiful horses —what a sight they made, but
wasn’t the ride rough!
The sporting activities as disclosed by the
“Express” from 1888 onwards reveal that people
were taking more interest in sport and that they
were able to devote more time to it than in the
earlier days.
The railway line reached Terang in 1887, and
it was in 1889 that the schoolmasters of the district
arranged the first State School excursion picnic.
This was the start of the schools’ big excursions
—a treat looked forward to from year to year.
Some say those were some of the best of the
“good old days." Keen was the disappointment
experienced if one did not gain a coveted seat in
the first of the five special trains that ran on
those occasions.
Do you recall those splendid sports meetings
conducted by the Friendly Societies? There have
been some wonderful runners here, among them
being Bill Moloney, Ike Overend and the Northeasts,
and those meetings on the recreation ground com-
pare favorably with many a gathering today.
We come now to the third
phase in our district’s life —the
unlocking of the large estates. The
first subdivisional sale in the dis-
trict was that of Glenormiston in
1889. Other large sales were soon
to follow —Keilambete and Mount
Noorat, the big properties being
divided into more profitable farms.
With the cream separators and the
Butter Factory in 1895, the dairying
industry was in charge of the dis-
trict and the days of the pioneers
had passed.
In the town, concern was being
expressed about the waters of the
lake teceding, and much thought
was given the suggestion of sink-
ing an artesian bore as a means of
filling the lake.
With the settlement of a larger
country population came the cor-
responding progress and importance
of the town. The new Public Hall
became a landmark and increased the civic pride
of the community. The citizens still being very
tree-minded, further avenues were added, one
generous resident contributing £5O towards the
avenue of silver poplars along the Camperdown
road. Amenities were coming into our town life,
the first motor cars were occasionally seen, Terang
had the electric light. Many farmers who had
purchased their farms in the subdivisional sales
of 15 years previously were gradually making
headway. Trufood of Australia Ltd. was established
in 1911, and this factory has been of outstanding
benefit to the farming community and a great asset
to the towns of Terang and Noorat, Superphos-
phate was coming into use and soon was to
revolutionise the value of land in the South Ecklin,
Dixie and forest country.
Then came the dark days of 1914 with World
War I, days of suspense for news that might mean
heartbreak and sorrow. Days, too, of activity on
the home front; the days of the processions to raise
funds for patriotic purposes; busy days with the
Red Cross. 1918 came with victory and peace at
last. 1919 were the great days of overflowing
crowds and hearts to welcome sons and daughters
home. Some say these were the grandest days in
our district’s history. Very soon dread was with
us again and the influenza epidemic gripped the
district. Many were the kindly hands that nursed
and helped through that dark period.
After many meetings and much discussion the
type of a fitting memorial to our soldiers was
undecided till the advent of this simple letter:
“If agreeable to the residents of Terang and
district, we would esteem it a privilege, as a
token of esteem to the men who have fought
for us, to be allowed to erect on a site which
we consider suitable a permanent memorial
in the form of a monument or obelisk on
which shall be inscribed the names of all the
district men who went to the front.”
(Signed) W. K. MACKINNON.
J. C. MACKINNON.
S. G. BLACK.
The beauty of the granite monument is a fitting
“BANYULE TIDDLEWINKS 26th” (see Page 65).
tribute and a reminder of what we owe to the
past.
For the next few years, 1921 onwards, world
shortages and good seasons here saw our export


WHERE WELCOME HOME AWAITS HOMECOMERS— THE RAILWAY STATION
trade .expanding; the price of butter and wool
soared! so too did the price of land. District
farms changed hands at higher and still higher
prices. Terang prospered, new houses were erected
and better roads were made. The Higher Elemen-
tary School in 1924 marked a further step in the
life of the communty. With the completion of
Johnstone Court buildings in 1929 the shopping
centre improved still further and the beauty of
our main street increased.
1930-33: Well do we remember those days of
depression and the dole, days when home building
was almost stationary, anxious days for most of
the community. Little progress in the town can
be accounted for in that period.
1937: The dairying industry and the community
were on the upgrade again—new motor cars, most
farms connected with electricity, and Terang con-
nected with the Otway water scheme. Windmills
and tanks in discard in the town, to be eagerly
bought up in the country. Overnight came an
interest in lawns and gardens, and the beauty of
the town was enhanced considerably.
In 1938 we were again blessed with a rich and
abundant season, but alas, how apathetic were a
great number to the danger of grass fires. In the
summer of 1939 we learnt painfully and severely
the devastation of grass fires and the necessity of
organisation and equipment to combat this menace.
There were thousands of acres burnt and at least
twelve houses lost in this immediate district that
year—it might easily have been worse.
1939 and World War 11, and again the men and
women of the district were away on distant fields
serving their country with valor and distinction.
The demand of the munition machine and of war
production centred in the cities reduced our popu-
lation, a loss that has not yet been repaired. On
the home front we have a record of generosity
and service, of Red Cross and Comforts Fund work
that compares more than favorably with most
d ; stricts, and one of which we are justly proud.
Our Flax Mill, too, made a valuable contribution
to the nation’s war effort. One of the most
touching of all stories connected with our district
comes at this time. The Japs were drawing close
on Port Moresby. Our troops on the Kokoda trail
were putting up a magnificent fight, enduring
hardship, ram, putrid mud and opposing a shrewd,
cunning enemy flushed with victories. One of our
parties, losing their way, were cut off from ouf
lines. Continually hunted by the Jap., day and
night, our losses mounted, disease and exhaustion
took toll. When it seemed the last hours had
come, a party of Americans came to the relief and
rescue. Hours of carrying the sick and wounded,
aiding the halt and the lame, and then in answer
to them prayers—an ambulance. Can you picture
the district man’s feelings as he lay there in that
ambulance, reading the inscription on it: “Pre-
sented bv the Citizens of Terang and District.”
And then at a very high price Victory came,
and the day that we had long waited for —of
peace and full production—we. hoped were just
around the corner.
In 1947 the picturesqueness of the countryside
received a check when many of the valuable shade
trees mysteriously died.
Although may not realise it at present,
there has been tremendous progress in the district
oyer the last three years. The Sold’er Settlement
at Boorcan has brought 30 proven men and their
families to make their livelihood and add their
contribution to the district. The Housing Com-
mission, by the erection of 33 houses in Terang,
has enabled many to obtain homes that otherwise
may. have been denied t a them for years. The
purchase of the magnificent Glenormiston home-
stead and property by the Government of Victoria
for an Agricultural College will mean much to this
community and to the State. We trust the many
“new Australians” that are now making their home
with us will fit happily into this district.
And so with high hope we come to 1950. We
pay homage to the pioneers and those who followed
labored well to transform this community and
land into a bounteous, prosperous place, a lovely
district, a place we love and where our thoughts
will ever turn.


Terang Important Part of Shire of Hampden
"JERANG’S local governing body is the Shire of
Hampden, which came into existence on the
?th July, 1857. The first meeting was held at the
Darlington Inn, Darlington, on that day and a body
that was named the Hampden and Heytesbury Roads
Board was constituted.
Members elected at that meeting were: Messrs
William Anderson, John L. Currie, Peter McArthur,
Daniel Curdie, Adolphus Clarke, Benjamin Dowling,
John Walls and John McFarlane. John L. Currie
was elected chairman.
The Parishes of Terang and Glenormiston were
not at that time part of the district governed by
the Roads Board, but were annexed in November
1862,
The Shire of Hampden was proclaimed a shire
on the 31st December, 1863, but was redefined on
the 31st May, 1895, when part of the then East and
West Ridings were severed to create the Shire of
Heytesbury. Dr. Daniel Curdie was the first presi-
dent of the Shire proclaimed in 1863.
Progress of Terang and district may be judged
from the following figures:
Terang Township
Year No. of Municipal Capital Approx.
Ratepayers Value Population
1869 75 £1,443 200
1960 737 £650,000 2,350
West Riding—Shire of Hampden
1869 220 £25,653 700
1950 1,190 £2,968,920 4,305
The Black family of Glenormiston has figured
prominently in Terang and Shire history as coun-
Cillers, Crs. Niel, A. J. and S. G. Black having
been members of the Hampden Shire Council
in its earlier history, followed conspicuously by Crs.
J. Bradshaw, E. J. Kelly, A. W. Noel, lan Black and
James Murnane.
The present councillors representing the Terang
district, or West Riding of the Shire, are Crs. W.
MacGregor Troup, P. G. Cole and William Holmes
Jnr. Cr. Troup is the Shire President.
The foresight of the early councillors is seen
in their establishing the Terang civic allotment in
the centre of the town, perhaps one day the site of
a Town Hall.
BABY HEALTH CENTRE: Baby Health Centre
service was established in Terang in the year 1924.
The late Sister Macartney was the first sister, and
for some years she and her successors carried out
their duties under difficulty in a room in the
Mechanics’ Institute. The Council had a modern
Centre building erected in High Street in 1939 at
a cost of £ll5B.
SWIMMING POOL; It is proposed to construct
a swimming pool in the Terang Park, on a site
adjacent to the tennis courts, at a total cost of
approximately £B5OO. A grant of £4500 towards the
cost of the pool has been made by the State Govern-
ment, and the construction is to be carried out by
the Hampden Shire Council. The Council will
contribute £2500 towards the works. The project
includes the construction in reinforced concrete of
a pool, and the provision of a modern filtration
plant and dressing rooms.
TERANG BABY HEALTH CENTRE


BABY HEALTH CENTRE
pOLLOWING REPRESENTATION from the Health
Department, the Shire of Hampden decided in
1924 to establish Baby Health Centre work within
the Shire, The inaugural meeting in Terang was
held on 29th October, 1924, and on 24th November
the Centre opened in the Mechanics’ ante-room.
The Mechanics’ Committee generously granted the
free use of the room until the present Baby Health
Centre building was officially opened on 14th
August, 1939.
From the outset the Centre was open on Mon-
day and Wednesday afternoons, while the Sister
visited the homes on Friday. Centre attendances
during the first year were 586, there being 99
individual babies, while in 1949 there were 1643
attendances, the number of individual babies being
209.
Splendid work has been done by the Sisters
in charge, the permanent ones having -been Sisters
Macartney (4 years), Lockhart (6 years), Reeves
(9i years), Campbell (1 year) and Ditty (3J years).
On Centre days voluntary helpers have given valu-
able help. Members of the Committee have co-
operated in various ways. The Shire attends to
the financial side of the work, thus relieving the
Committee of responsibility in that direction.
The Centre is an integral part of the com-
munity. Mothers are most appreciative of the
regular help given by the Sister.
TERANG YOUTH CENTRE
JN APRIL, 1946, tenders were called for the
occupying of the Terang Drill Hall, and, with
a view to establishing a Youth Club, the Progress
Association was asked to endeavor to procure the
hall for this purpose.
A committee of seven adults was formed at a
well-attended initial meeting and, thanks to- the
co-operation of instructors, evening classes in
woodwork, photography, ticket writing, radio and
electricity and engineering were soon organised.
The spasmodic attendance of the “pupils" caused
this seemingly worthwhile venture to be abandoned,
and for the next two years efforts were transferred
to the lighter and less profitable activities of youth.
Separate gymnasiums for boys, young men and
girls, a ballroom dancing class, table tennis, bad-
minton and basketball were all very popular, and
a weekly attendance of more than 200 justified the
effort entailed.
As is usual with this type of work, the era
of interest passed and attendances became so spas-
modic that the organisers and Instructors, who had
all done an excellent job, gradually lost interest
also. At the present time, a table tennis club which
meets every Monday night, is all that remains.
However, a fresh move is now being made to
re-commence this community work, and it is to be
hoped that the effort will be well supported and
the interest sustained. The part which could be
played by parents in taking an active Interest in
the youth activity of their children, and endeavoring
to assure regular attendance, cannot be over-
emphasised.
TERANG AMBULANCE SERVICE
AT a Progress Association meeting in 1943 it was
mentioned that ambulance facilities in Terang
were unsatisfactory. A sub-committee of the Pro-
gress Association was formed to investigate the
possibility of obtaining an emergency ambulance
for Terang, to supplement the one stationed at
Camperdown and owned by the Hampden and Hey-
tesbury Shire Councils for use in those two shires.
The sub-committee reported back to the Pro-
gress Association and suggested calling a public
meeting for the purpose of considering the advis-
ability of purchasing an ambulance for Terang and
district. This meeting- was held at the Mechanics'
Hail on September 14th, 1943. After much dis-
cussion it was decided that an ambulance be
purchased for Terang and district and that an
appeal be launched forthwith to obtain funds for
the purchasing and equipping of such ambulance.
It was also agreed at this meeting that a committee
be formed, embracing all districts in the vicinity
of Terang, to obtain funds towards the purchase
of the ambulance.
The next meeting was held on October Ist,
1943, when all delegates reported that the people
of Terang and district were in favor of an ambu-
lance and would contribute to it. It was decided
at this meeting that the appeal be closed on October
22nd and that a public meeting be held on that date.
When the public meeting was held, the amount
of £Bll/8/- had been received, with further promises
of £l4O. It was also reported at this meeting that
agreement had been reached with the Victorian
Civil Ambulance Service {Country Division) for a
Ford chassis to be purchased locally and this was
duly carried out. For the sum of £550 the Service
placed an ambulance car (valued at £675) at the
disposal of Terang and district, its headquarters
being at Terang. The sum of £5O per annum is
paid into the replacement account under the control
of the Country Division of the Victorian Civil
Ambulance Service, so that when a new ambulance
is required there are sufficient funds to purchase one.
Terang’s ambulance was handed over on April
30, 1945. It has travelled a total of 18,000 miles,
and the farthest trip has been to Nhill and
return.


TERANG MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE & FREE LIBRARY
No history of Terang and district would be complete without prominence
being given to the Terang Mechanics’ Institute and to those men who have
and are controlling its affairs.
■pHE PROPERTY consists of wooden buildings
known as the Committee and Lodge rooms,
and public Reading Room, and the stately and large
brick Public Hall, the Temperance Hall and the
Members’ Library.
The foundation stone of the Temperance Hail
was laid on 23rd December, 1885, by John Thomson,
and the building completed at Easter 1886. It cost
£l6OO and replaced the original wooden hall which
had served well but was proving too small for the
growing community. However, the new Temperance
Hall had to be enlarged in the year 1901 by extending
the stage back some 12 feet where previously there
had been a Committee and dressing room.
The brick building known as the Members’
Reading Room or Library was erected in 1898, the
contract price being £389/7/0. The popularity the
Library enjoys is indicated by the fact that the
receipts from it during 1949 were £325/13/5, and
the, community has the benefit of one of the best
country Libraries in Victoria. The Lodge Rooms
had been erected some years prior to the erection
of the Library.
In 1908 the plans for the new Hall were
commenced. The services of Pritsch Bros., archi-
tects, were secured and the tender of Mr Luff,
of Melbourne, at £3200, was accepted in August
1909. The necessary finance being arranged, the
Hall was completed in 1910 and officially opened by
Mr C. A, Brown (president of the Committee) on
sth July, 1910.
To keep in step with the times and community,
additions and improvements have been made regu-
larly through the years. In 1924 the tender of
£lOl2/15/0 of Mr Jas. Macqueen, of Terang, was
accepted for the construction of the balcony. Better
and more luxurious chairs were purchased—s 29 at
32/- each —also a sound machine at a cost of over
£622 to replace the “silent” pictures, and internal
heating plant installed.
Over £lOOO spent on re-decorations, painting and
repairs in 1949 gives an indication of the work and
cost that the Committee feels your comfort and
convenience warrant in maintaining this splendid
group of buildings.
The success of this institution is attributed to
the Committee who over the years have managed
its affairs. Nine members, three of whom retire
every year, are drawn from a cross section of the
community and these men give their time, experi-
ence, energy and service to the community without
fee or payment, other than the knowledge of a
service well done to their fellow citizens.


ELECTRICITY SUPPLY TO TERANG AND DISTRICT
Shearing at Wooriwyrite, showing the handpiece
operated from individual ¼ h.p. electric motor (top
left corner). Inset: A double-ended blade grinder.
poR ALL who come “back to Terang” during 1950
after an absence of many years, there will be
a feeling that “there is no place like home.”
This will not prevent their enjoyment of the
modern amenities which have gradually raised the
standard of living and efficiency in the district.
Homes are equipped very often with ranges
operated by electricity, with refrigerators and wash-
ing machines and hot water systems. The old
kerosene lamp has given w T ay to more adequate
lighting.
Even the cows of the district enjoy the modern
touch; electric light and hot water and no hand-
milking make their owners easier to get on with.
Where the butter factories of three decades ago
were engine driven, efficient modern drives are
common.
The Hampden Shire Council conducted a small
power stafon at Terang from March 1909, and this
had given good service, the original installation being
rapidly augmented with an extra set. During the
year ended 30th September, 1923, the station had
sold 78,839 units of electricity for a total of £3439,
representing an average cost to the user of 10.47 d.
per unit. Under these circumstances, however,
supply to the surrounding district was impracticable
because of the need for high voltage lines at an
appreciable capital cost.
It is interesting to record that three members
of the power station staff w r ere later to become
district officers in charge with the State Electricity
Commiss'on —Mr J. S. Smyth was to be responsible
for the Terang district of the large South Western
Branch until his retirement in 1948, and Mr N. R.
Paynter was eventually to- take charge of the
neighboring Camperdown district, whilst Mr W.
Green found his way to Port Fairy district.
THE STATE-WIDE SYSTEM
On the 4th March, 1924, supply to Terang was
given from the newly-erected transmission line from
Geelcng. This work had been carried out by the
State Electricity' Comm-ission of Victoria, and
ensured a more abundant supply of cheaper elec-
tricity. In fact, the year ended 30th June, 1949,
saw the provision of 1,267,958 units to Terang for
a total of £9724, at an average cost to the user of
1.84 d. per unit. The quarter of a century had seen
a sixteenfold increase in the use of electricity in
Terang district, with a drop in average price to
less than one-fifth.
GROWTH
Not only had the town of Terang increased its
usage of electricity, but the outlying rural areas
saw construction gangs at work erecting high
voltage lines, sub-stations and law voltage lines to
supply farms and houses and townships. The first
rural supply was to Darlington road, Kolora. By
1938 the lines had reached Willaura, Penshurst and
Lismore.
The following year saw Carranballac on supply.
Some of these new centres were associated with
the adjacent district; the two former power station
members were again joined in the teamwork of
service. Smaller rural groups then began to receive
supply.
Although a natural retardation of effort was
occasioned by the war years, nevertheless the carry-
ing out of extensions proceeded for food production
purposes.
POST WAR DEVELOPMENT
The apparently- insatiable demand for more and
more electricity from old and new applicants re-
quired a firm approach. The transmission line
required to be improved. The old 44,000 volt lines
were changed to 66,000 volt service. A new sub-
station was erected at Terang. Work continues
on main 22,000 volt copper lines to give an aug-
mented supply and to enable new consumers to be
connected. From Terang a three-phase line was
run to Timboon, and country folk and the new
Consolidated School received a preliminary supply,
later to be extended.
The backbone was laid for supply to farming
areas to the south of Terang. Difficulties common
to all were met in this post-war period of shortages
of construction resources, but action proceeded.
Amongst the new applicants for electricity in
Terang district were the former servicemen now on
Marida Yallock Soldier Settlement estates. Some


are already on supply, and for others construction
work is in progress both in the Terang district and
its neighboring district.
It is 1950 and the tradition continues. Terang
and district people have contributed by their great
productive effort to the wealth of a young nation.
They have a sound history of electricity service,
much of which has been given by individuals who
themselves are part of the district, aided by- the
general electrical resources of Victoria.
The electrical system, built up in past years,
is being strengthened and adapted to meet increased
needs of existing and future consumers. New
extensions of electricity supply have been planned
on a far-reaching scale, involving expenditure of
millions of pounds throughout Victoria. Construc-
tion work in extending these new lines has already-
proceeded actively in Terang and district, although
hampered in the same way as the building of
homes and farms, shops and factories, churches and
schools and hospitals, which have all experienced
the post-war shortages of construction resources.
As the world emerges from this immediate post-
war period of shortages, and the wheels of produc-
tion yield construction resources, the new extensions
of electricity supply now in progress will thereby
be enabled to progress at a greater rate, so that
modern amenities and rising living standards may
be provided in response to the demand created
within a large district noted for its primary pro-
duction.
On the shearing board at Mt. Fyans Station.
Electrically operated shearing machines.
DAIRY FARMING IN TERANG DISTRICT
(By H. L. FOSKEY, D.D.A., Dairy Supervisor)
"pERANG AND DISTRICT’S main source of revenue
is from dairying. The district is a portion ol
the most favorable area for dairying in Victoria;
with an assured rainfall, excellent volcanic soils
and several large and efficient milk-processing fac-
tories: Glenormiston Butter Factory, Trufood,
Nestles and Kraft. Cream from the district goes
Modern Milking Shed on Mr Ware’s
Farm at Framlingham.
to Birregurra, Weerite, Derrlnallum and Grasmere
Butter Factories. At Glenormiston Butter Factory
is an experimental continuous butter-making
machine which, if successful, will add to the effi-
ciency of this already efficient factory, whose list
of prizes bears testimony to the quality of the
factory’s Intake.
During the last few years dairying practices
have improved, both in the paddock and in the
milking shed. This improvement is partly due to
the visit and the films of Dr. Petersen, and recom-
mendations from the Department of Agriculture.
With the Victorian Government purchasing
Glenormiston House as an Agricultural College for
dairying, the future farmers of the district, and
their fathers, will have an opportunity of learning
modern dairy- farming technique.
Situated in the district are several stud herds,
with Jerseys predominating, followed by Ayrshirea
and Shorthorns. Discussions on the merits of each
respective herd are as endless as the old argument
between “Our Harbor” and the Yarra.
Close to Terang is Marida Yallock Soldier
Settlement Estate comprising many fortunate
young men who, by their patriotism in defending
their country, have been allotted portion of that
country for the purpose of dairy farming.
As to dairy building construction, the farmer,
realising that he spends several hours in his shed
each day-, seeks more comfort than hitherto. Thus
dairy- buildings similar to the accompanying photo
are being erected —built of reinforced concrete or
concrete bricks, with piping balls and concrete
floors, yards, approaches and exits.
The labor problem and material shortages have
been prevalent of late; but, with the arrival of
many excellent migrants to the farms and the
material lag being overcome, and with certain
markets for their pxoducts, the dairy farmers of
this district have an assured future.


TERANG POST OFFICE
JHE OFFICIAL RECORDS of postal activities in
Terang show that in 1862 mails to Terang were
despatched from Camperdo*w r n to Terang twice
weekly. In 1864 three mails weekly were received
at Terang, being conveyed by Cobb & Co’s, coach
on its tri-weekly through run from Camperdown
to Warrnambool, Dennington, Killarney and Belfast.
It might be mentioned here that today Terang
receives three mails daily from Melbourne and
despatches mails to Melbourne twice daily.
In 1867 money order facilities were established,
and during that year 60 orders were issued and 14
paid. 1868 is the first year in which any mention
of the postmistress is made in the old records. The
name of the postmistress at that time was Mrs
A. Anderson, and her salary was £5O per annum.
In November, 1871, Terang was connected to
the telegraph system by a branch line from Cam-
perdown, 134 messages were despatched the firs!
year, bringing in a revenue of £7/5/11. Up to this
time the Terang Post Office was conducted on a
contract basis, but in 1872 it was given official
status. The first official postmistress was Mrs L.
E. Kinahan, who received a salary of £BO per annum.
Savings Bank facilities were established in the
same year, Post Offices at that time being agencies
of the Victorian State Savings Bank, The first
year’s business consisted of 5 accounts opened, 1
closed, 9 deposits, totalling £5O/19/11; and 3 with-
drawals, totalling £27/10/0. The staff was increased
in the following year to 2 by the employment of
a “messenger” in addition to the postmistress.
In 1885 official premises were purchased and
altered to suit departmental requirements.
The present Post Office building was erected in
1902, and in 1904 the town clock was placed in the
tower. Hanging on the wall in the Post Office today
is a framed “List of Subscribers to the Town
Clock,” with the following extract from a report in
the Metropolitan Press:
“Terang is the first town in the Commonwealth to
purchase (under the Postal Act) its own town
clock, and to provide, at its own cost, a suitable
clock chamber in the local Post Office tower. Honor
to these patriotic citizens.” (Melbourne “Age” and
“Argus” of 12/2/1904).
Executive Committee Secretaries
Norman Dowling. E. L. Backhouse.
John Bennett. M.A., L.L.B.
F. J. Brett. Melville C. Calder.
Today the Terang Post Office staff numbers
17, and an engineering and technical staff of 15
also has its headquarters here. There are 600
telephone subscribers within a radius of 10 miles.
In addition to mail exchanges with Melbourne,
Terang exchanges mails twice daily with most of
the important Western District towns, and daily
with 10 district offices, and 110 private mail bags
are received and despatched daily.


Terang Progress Association Plays Important Role
JN the “Terang Express” of November 19, 1889
appeared a notice convening a meeting of
residents of the town and district for the purpose
of forming a Progress Association. The first presi-
dent was Mr H. Coy, and other old identities whe
attended the meeting were Messrs Forbes, Kinsman
Scown, Head, Graham, Elliott and Horne.
Since the inauguration of the Progress Asso-
ciation its members have, during the intervening
years, met regularly and brought forward matters
which they regarded as being of importance to the
progress of the town and district. Some of the
ideas put forward were too idealistic and had to bo
shelved, but on the whole, the work of the Asso-
ciation has been productive, of much good towards
the beautification and amenities of the town and
district.
One of the most outstanding successes achieved
by the Association was the planting of the double
row of trees in High Street and Camperdown Road,
and the subsequent fencing in of the avenue in High
Street, between the Co-operative Society corner and
the State Savings Bank, the installation of a water
supply and the laying out of lawns and gardens.
The oversight of the avenue was, until quite
recently, the responsibility of the Association, but
this has no*w been accepted by the Shire of
Hampden, with Mr Fred Carter in charge. The
beautification of the avenue has been favorably
commented upon by visitors.
Except in a few isolated cases the meetings of
the Association have been attended by a few regular
stalwarts, who have had the interests of the town
at heart, but endeavors are being made to attract
greater numbers to the meetings.
As a forum for the expression of opinion on
matters relating to the progress of Terang and
district, the Association has done a worthwhile job
over the years and, by medium of publicity in the
‘Terang Express,” and by continued correspondence
with and deputations to the Hampden Shire Council,
has been the means of effecting considerable
improvements.
The Association has at all times striven to
obtain for Terang and district the amenities and
improvements to which it is entitled and hopes that
the sewerage scheme which was blue printed some
years ago, will soon be functioning, and that it
will not be long before the swimming pool is estab-
lished in the Public Park
The present executive of the Association consists
of Mr D. E. Trickett (president), Mr R. Purser Jnr.
(secretary) and Mr N. J. Malcolm (treasurer).
The Association meets on the fourth Tuesday
in each month and, with the co-operation of resi-
dents, hopes to achieve much for the progress of
the town and district in the years that lie ahead.
HIGH STREET AVENUE, SHOWING MEMORIAL BANDSTAND


TERANG PUBLIC PARK
JN THEIR centrally situated Public Park, the
citizens of Terang and district have an area
capable of being developed into one of the best
parks in the State.
Already much developmental work has been
done; and, on ideal sites, the Bowling Green, Croquet
Green, Golf Course, Public Tennis Courts and
Bradman Oval afford facilities for sport. Further
development, however, depends very largely on the
amount of revenue obtainable from the centra]
portion of the reserve. This in turn depends on
the level of the water in the lake.
What records are available covering the last
150 years show that the level of water has fluctuated.
Old files of the “Terang Express” provide reliable
evidence that the lake-bed was dry in 1805, but
that by 1840 the lake was overflowing. John
Thomson is reported as being the first white man
to see the lake overflowing. However, in the latter
half of the century, the level of the water gradually
receded so that, by 1903, one hundred and fifty
feet of piping had to be added to the Shire’s pump-
ing plant.
In 1891 unsuccessful efforts were made to fill
the lake by diverting the town drainage to it. The
Council constructed a large drain from the Cam-
perdown Road terminating near the present High
School plantation. From there the water was piped
underneath the road to the lake, at a point near
the Bradman Oval.
When the lake was full, the residents of the
town enjoyed boating and fishing. Fish had first
been put in by a Mr James Taylor. Eels were
evidently very plentiful, and Mr J. A. McWilliam
reported that in forty years he had never seen a
small eel taken; those caught ranged from three
to six pounds in weight.
In 1904 the Park was re-named Jubilee Park.
The water continued to recede and on August 15,
1905, a correspondent in the “Terang Express” sug-
gested the sinking of an artesian bore to fill the
lake. (The problem facing the present Trustees is
how to drain it). In 1905 there occurred an event
which is still vivid in the memories of older resi-
dents. Many of the willows were burnt, and the
peat was on fire. Smoke and stench occasioned
much discomfort to the townsfolk. Again in 1933
the peat was on Are and the fire lasted for six
months.
In the early thirties, the lake area was com-
pletely dry. In 1937 the Golf Club established an
eighteen-hole course and water was laid on to
nearly all greens. The central area was fenced off
and later graded and sown down. Since 1946,
however, when the rainfall for the year exceeded
fifty-one inches, about twenty-one inches above
the average yearly rainfall, the whole of the central
area has been under water.
Until the area is drained again, revenue will
be lost and further developmental work in the Park
will be impossible.
Presbyterian Church spire silhouetted against
gathering storm clouds over Lake Terang.
(Article and photograph by Mr G. Binns, formerly
of State Savings Bank, Terang).
LAKE TERANG IS BIRD
LOVER’S PARADISE
ALTHOUGH THE FATE of Lake Terang has been
greatly debated, visitors will find this feature
of the town still very much in existence. The fact
that it has declined to the status of a mere swamp
cannot be denied, but this has its compensations.
Perhaps nowhere else will you find such a con-
centration of native wild life—certain it is that
in few, very few, towns have you such variety of
bird life brought to your very door! Quite unper-
turbed by the constant stream of traffic incidental
to one of the State's busiest highways, and the
almost continuous presence of many golfers, in the
breeding season, at the very water’s edge, the water
birds and waders teem. Yet, despite the situation
of the lake —in the very town itself —this is no
sanctuary!
One finds it hard to ignore the presence of our
bird population. At almost any hour of day or night,
cries of plovers, or scolds of swamp hens, may be
heard. Glancing over the area the most obvious
of the birds are, of course, the swans, swamp hens
and shelduck (mountain duck), and at times, ibis
and herons, -which may be regarded as permanent
residents. Birds which come and go according to
seasons, or conditions, are stilts, spoonbills, seagulls,
terns and a variety of ducks.
It is not until the swamp is approached, or
penetrated, that the variety is impressed on one.
In the grasses at the edge you see, or hear, grass
birds and warblers. Swallows and fairy martins
skim over the area. A cruising swamp harrier
works the area, too, exacting his toll of smaller
fry. During summer, you start a flock of small
grey sandpipers—all the way from Siberia and
Japan, where they nest —or snipe get up with a
(Concluded on Page 41)


LAKE TERANG 1905, FROM BRADSHAW’S HILL
GALLANT DISTRICT AIRMAN
fHE Late Wing Commander Vernon Charles Wood.
A.U.C., D.F.C., a son of Mr and Mrs E. G.
Wood, of Kolcra and Noorat, was born in this
district in 1913. He was educated at Terang Higher
Elementary School and Geelong College, for which
school he rowed in the Head of the River race
LATE VERNON WOOD
in 1932. Choosing the Air Force as his career, he
trained at Point Cook and left for England for
service with the R.A.F. in 1935. Making splendid
progress, he reached the rank of Wing Commander,
won the A.P.C. and D.F.C., and was in charge of
the 602 Bomber Squadron. Wing Commander Wood
made the Supreme Sacrifice over the English
Channel on April 17, 1943.
TERANG-DIXIE RURAL
FIRE BRIGADE
THE END OF 1934, The Terang Bush Fire
Brigade was formed with Mr E. Co*ate as
President and Mr Stan Jeffers as Captain.
The idea was to encourage each surrounding
district to form its own rural fire brigade, with
Terang the nerve centre and controlling body.
Early in 1935. the districts ■went ahead end
formed their own brigades, but finding the control
top heavy, they became self-controlled units, with
the exception of Dixie.
Dixie has continued to be linked with Terarro
and today the Terang-Dixie Rural Fire Brigade with
the following officers —President. Mr Jas. Murnane:
Captain {for 10 years) Mr T. Conlon; Vice-
president. Mr P. G. Moloney: Lieutenants, Messrs
S. Baxter, D. Hoare, P. G. Moloney and G. Rendell;
Secretary. Mr M. Kerr —has extensive equipment,
including three power pumps.
DO YOU RECALL?
YOU RECALL when all the water for domestic
purposes had to be carried from the town
pump? Yokes over the shoulders with a bucket
suspended from either end of the yoke was the
usual method of carrying water. Do you recall the
lady who after a fiery family quarrell, decided to
end these flareups for cmce and all. Filling
the buckets with large stones, discarding most of
her clothing and fixing on her yoke, she strode into
the lake. Deeper and deeper was the water, slower
and slower, and colder and colder was the lady. At
about 40 yards from the shore the lady turned, shed
her yoke and her differences with her spouse and,
trudging past the curious crowd, made her way
home to reclothe and reconcile.
A SLIP OF THE TONGUE
QNE of the best-known and beloved cabdrivers
ever in this district was the recipient of a
well-merited presentation. With feeling the response
was being made: “Gentlemen, I value this present
more than all the money I have in the bank, and
that isn’t very much.”


TERANG FIRE BRIGADE MEMBERS, 1950
Front Row (from left): Capt. A. Bailey, Lieut. E. King, Sec. J. Holmes, Foreman A. Gaylard.
Seated: Apparatus Officer S. Grayland, Firemen A. Eailey Jnr., M. O’Neill, C. Carmody, R. Bell, L. Lyons.
Standing: Firemen J. Smith, Su Paton. M. Emeny, W. McLeod, W. Dunstan, L. Kline.
TERANG FIRE BRIGADE
■pTERANG FIRE BRIGADE was founded in March
1902, and attended its first Are on 28th July of
the same year. Throughout the intervening years it
has given the town valued service.
Foundation members and first officers were H.
Cathie (captain). Thos, Green (lieutenant), J. H.
Davies (foreman), Jas. McGuiness (apparatus
officer), John Houston (secretary), P. C. Nielsen,
Sam Johnson, Steve Apsey, F. J. Head, Alex Brown,
G. W. Farrar Jnr., A. E. Wilson, Fred Atkins, Dan
Parker, A. Lean, W. L. Leonard, C. Davey, G,
Farrar Senr. and C. Gogoll.
Terang’s first fire engine was a manual pump
and many of the residents will recall having lent
a helping hand in its operation. With the advent
of a motor pump, the Brigade’s efficiency greatly
increased. In 1935, when a still more modern and
powerful engine was obtained, and 6 inch and 4
inch water mains were laid with the reticulation
of the town, the Brigade’s efficiency was still further
increased.
In 1947, a siren was placed on the tower to
supplement the call of the bell, and this has enabled
distinctive alarms to be given for town or country
fires.
With 37 years service, Capt. A. Bailey is the
oldest of the present-day members, but pressing
him closely is Lieut. E. J. King, with 34 years
service. Other holders of long-service badges are
C. Carmody (15 years), A. Gaylard (15 years), L.
Paton (12 years) and A. Bailey Jnr. (12 years).
NOORAT FIRE LOOK-OUT
THE YEAR 1880, the Noorat Fire
Look-out w T as established, and during the
summer months a man was stationed on the mount
top to keep -watch and report any sign of fire
over a large stretch of country. The whole of the
expense of the look-out was borne by Messrs Black
Bros, until 1935, when other members of the com-
mim'ty. realising w T hat valuable service was being
carried by one family, decided that the expense
should be borne by all landholders who were bene-
fiting from the look-out.
When the look-out was commenced, at the sight
of fire the look-out man would race down the
mountside on horseback and give the alarm. From
past experience, the horses on Mt. Noorat sensed
danger as soon as they saw the men running with
■wet bags, and on such occasions it would be almost
impossible to catch the horses.
Benefiting by experience, the hoisting of a flag
on the pole at the look-out signalled a fire, and this
method is still used, but has been supplemented by
telephone service, so that immediate warning can
be given. At night, the hoisting of a red lantern on
the pole was used, but after the apprehension of
a suspect at Glenormiston, the mysterious fires that
had broken out regularly ceased.
Mr John Ross was the first look-out man, and
Mr Charles Greeves drove the first water-cart, a
two wheeled dray. Other well-known figures who
have carried on this work at the look-out are Mr
Norman McLean, Mr Wm. Clarke, Mr G. Rutter and
Mr C. Macharey, the present officer.


KOLORA RURAL FIRE BRIGADE
JHE FOLLOWING ARTICLE aims to give a brief
outline of the history of the Kolora Rural Fire
Brigade—a brigade of which the Kolora residents
are justifiably proud because of its record.
T T p to 1939 the Kolora Fire Brigade was part
of the Noorat Brigade, but after the disastrous
fires of 1939 which swept this district, resulting in
great havoc and loss, it was decided to break away
from the Noorat Brigade and form a separate
brigade at Kolora.
A very modest start was made and the first
equipment purchased, one tank, was paid for by
public subscription. The first captain of the Brigade
was Mr P. G. Moloney, and Mr F. Whiting was
elected treasurer, a position which he has continu-
ously held with great distinction.
More than 50 knapsacks were next purchased
and in order to encourage landholders to purchase
them, the Kolora Brigade adopted a system of sub-
sidisation. The same method of subsidisation was
adopted with regard to the installation of power
units on private trucks, with the result that at the
present time the Kolora Brigade has power units
installed on no fewer than eight trucks. In 1946
the Brigade was able to purchase a Brigade truck,
which is stationed at Shadwell and is a valuable
addition to Brigade equipment.
During the latter part of 1945, the Kolora Rural
Fire Brigade installed a system of radio communica-
tion, which has been invaluable in fire fighting and
fire prevention. This brigade was the first rural
brigade in the State of Victoria to instal radio to
help in fire fighting. Radio today, however, has
been widely adopted with marked success by many
rural brigades throughout the State. At the moment
the Kolora Brigade has a base station set up at
the Kolora Post Office. This is operated by Mr J.
McKenzie. Two mobile sets have been installed in
trucks owned by Mr E. Holmes and Mr W. M.
Troup. It is hoped in the near future to instal a
third mobile set to further improve the system of
communication and control.
At present Mr H. T. McConnell occupies the
position of president, and the secretary is Mr H. J.
Whelan. The responsible position of captain is
occupied by Cr. W. M. Troup, who has welded the
Brigade into a very efficient fire fighting combina-
tion, with every member of the brigade keenly
realising the need fcrr preparedness during the fire
season. During the past few years the Kolora
Brigade has answered many calls for assistance
outside the boundary of Kolora and has been able
to render valuable service to the community as a
whole.
KEILAMBETE - THE SISTERS
RURAL FIRE BRIGADE
JHE KEILAMBET'E BRIGADE is the parent body,
as it was formed some 14 years ago but, in
1945, The Sisters joined in and the joint group
was formed. This Brigade, with Mr Poster Tunne,
Captain; Mr J. G. Blain, President; and Mr S. M.
Hammond, Secretary and Treasurer, is now an
efficient fire-fighting unit. With 11 equipped vehicles
in the area, the Brigade can give an excellent
account of itself if called upon.
AN EXCELLENT WATER SUPPLY
JERANG’S excellent water supply comes from
Wyelangta, in the Otway Ranges, where the
average annual rainfall is approximately 80 inches.
The water travels a distance of 45 miles by pipeline
to Terang.
Pumps are not used, the water being gravitated
the whole way. It is interesting to note that there
are no storages in the Otways, only two* small
diversion weirs—on the East and West Arkins
Creeks.
TERANG’S WATER STORAGE AT
EWEN’S HILL
The water comes on to Cobden storage basin
and then to Ewen’s Hill reservoir, which hes a
capacity of approximately 150 million gallons. From
here the water is piped to Terang storage ta>°V
which holds 750,000 gallons. This reinforced concrete
basin is 90 feet in diameter and 20 feet deep.
This permanent water supply, which is controlled
by the State Rivers and Water Supply Commission,
was “turned on” in Terang in February, 1939, and
it is significant that there have been no restrictions
since that date.
“CHRISTY”
LJE was a full black aboriginal from South
Australia, having come to Victoria with the
late Frank Clark, of Framlingham, on a return
droving trip.
Although not associated much with Terang,
Christy took part in sports here. 70 or more years
ago, and is remembered today as a champion high
jumper.
He was barely five feet high, but at practically
all the meetings he attended in the Western District
he cleared six feet if required.
T witnessed him do even better than that at
Caramut. when he jumped the six feet, with the
addition of the one inch crossbar he had to gaze
at before making his leap. Being heavily handi-
capped at Caramut, he failed to win with this fine
effort, but was rewarded with more than the prize
money—the result of a collection.
The location of the first sports gathering at
Terang was the then vacant land between where
the present Wheatsheaf Hotel stands and the
premises now occupied by Mr Alan Mills.
“OLD TIMER.”


TERANG HOUSING ESTATE
■pHE Housing Commission has an estate in T'erang
containing 33 houses. It fronts Gray and
Swanston Streets and comprises 19 five-roomed
houses and 14 four-roomed houses. These houses
were built under the Commonwealth-State Housing
Agreement. The purpose of this agreement was
the establishment of rental housing projects in
the several States under State control, but financed
by lean funds by the Commonwealth Government,
such loans to be at interest at current long-term
rates and be repayable in full over a period of
fifty-three years.
An investigation showed that many people were
living under adverse conditions, and the Commission
agreed to build 30 houses in Terang. The present
site was purchased from F. E. Chilton and E. D.
Mackinnon, and the tender for the erection of the
houses was let in October 1947. The successful
contractor was P. J. Hatwell and Sons, of Mentone.
This firm is ane of the Commission's principal
builders in the Western District and, in addition
to the houses at Terang, has also built at Cam-
perdown, Cobden, Colac and Geelong.
The first house was handed over and tenanted
in June 1949, and the whole estate completed
within the next two months.
PORTION OF HOUSING COMMISSION ESTATE IN TERANG —GRAY STREET, WEST END
SOME HISTORICAL NOTES ON THE TERANG RAILWAY
JHE RAILWAYS DEPARTMENT has played an
important part in the development of Terang,
since the first train was run to the town 63 years
ago—April 23, 1887.
The line was opened in the following sections:
Section Date Opened
Geelong to Newport 26/6/1857
(Built by Geelong and Melbourne Railway Co.
Taken over by Victorian Railways on 4/9/1857).
Melbourne to Newport 13/1/1559
Geelong to Colac 25/11/1876.
Colac to Camperdown 2/7/1883
Camperdown to Terang 23/4/1887
Terang to Port Fairy 4/2/1890
Terang to Mortlake 4/2/1890
The following are the principal contracts let in
connection with the railway at Terang:
A contract for the building of the section from
Camperdown to Terang was let on 29/1/85 to
Walla, McAllister and Stansmore for an amount
erf £38,000.
Bloomfield Bros, entered into contract on 6/1/88 to
build the line from Terang to Warrnambool for
£lof,ooo.
G. Rattray erected the telegraph lines from Cam-
perdown to Terang in March 1887.
Carroll Bros, contracted, in May 1887, far water
. supply works at Terang.
In May 1887, F. S. Leonard built the goods sheds
and platform at Terang.
The revenue figures for Terang station for the
first full year of operation, together with the latest
figures, are as follows: — Year ended Year-ended
30/6/88 30/6/49
Outward passengers 10,502 13,319
Outwards revenue—
Passengers £4,647 £6,592
Parcels, etc £740 £643
Goods and livestock . . .. £3,227 £17,915


Offering Residents of Terang & District a Twenty-four Hour Service Each Day is
NORAH COSGRAVE TERANG & DISTRICT COMMUNITY
HOSPITAL
Whose Record of Achievement Reflects the Acceptance by the Local Community of Great
Civic Responsibilities.
JjINCE THAT DAY in May. 1927, when Norah
Cosgrave Terang and District Community
Hospital was conceived with the signing of the
last will and testament of the late Mrs Norah
Cosgrave, until the present time, the story of great
public service has been continually unfolded, not
only by the Institution, since its opening, but also
by the many hundreds of people whose various
contributions have made its establishment, develop-
ment and maintenance possible. Today the Hospital
ranks high with hospitals of comparable size in
Victoria, and of the 34 with a daily average of
under 25 only one treated more patients last year
and only two had a higher daily average.
Subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions,
the late Mrs Cosgrave directed that the residue of
her estate, after the payment of legacies to relatives,
should be applied to the endowment of the Inter-
mediate and Public Sections of a Hospital in Terang.
Following Mrs Cosgrave’s death in January, 1928,
her estate was wound up, leaving £9393 for hospital
LATE NORAH COSGRAVE
purposes. By wise administration and sound
investment the Executors, the late Messrs W. K.
Mackinnon, Joseph Bradshaw and M. T. Doyle, were
able to inform the first public meeting in Terang
(February 6, 1933) to consider the building of a
local hospital, that the Cosgrave money had
increased to £12,800, entirely free of executors’
personal expenses and commission.
With such a flying start, this meeting developed
an enthusiasm that later overcame many obstacles,
including court proceedings to give an interpretation
of the will, before the hospital was opened in
January, 1936. Planned for 14 patients, demands on
accommodation quickly necessitated the utilisation
of balcony space and from a daily average of 10
in the first year, the figure has now risen to 18.
Since 1936, 7520 in-patients have been treated;
1450 babies have been born and there have been
more than 5000 out-patient attendances.
From the initial meeting an organising com-
mittee was formed, public subscriptions solicited, a
building programme decided on and work put into
effect. When the building was completed for
£11,500, all but £lOOO was in hand. Norah
Terang and District Community Hospital stands n
4| acres of land in Austin Avenue, overlooking the
township from the west. The building is principally
of Mount Gambier stone, the front portion
two storeys, the top being designed for sta r f
quarters. Even by present standards the hospital
is modern, the equipment of the best quality, with
methods conforming to latest standards.
The hospital serves an area of 500 square
miles, embracing the districts of Terang, Noorat,
Glenormiston, Kolora, The Sisters, Garvoc, Taroon,
Ecklin, Ayrford, Dixie, Cobrico, Boorcan and Bruck-
nell. About 650 in-patients are treated annually.
This year it will take more than £ll.OOO to run
the Hospital. In the first year of operation the
total cost was £2235. Salaries and wages account
for more than 60% of expenditure.
Linked with the story of the Norah Cosgrave
Terang and District Community Hospital are the
names of people, many now passed on, whose
active practical support will keep their memories
alive wherever there are discussions about Norah
Cosgrave Terang «fe District Community Hospital.
Tbe Hospital was named after the late Mrs Norah
Cosgrave in recognition of her endowment, and this
gesture by those associated with its establishment
will act as a constant reminder of the foresight
and kindly charity of a great citizen. The Trustees
of the Cosgrave Estate, the late Messrs W. K.
Mackinnon, Joseph Bradshaw and M. T. Doyle, were
very active in preliminary negotiations and the
successful launching of the hospital project was, in
a large measure, due to their keen business acumen.
At the meeting in February, 1933, responsibility was
handed to the public of Terang and district, when
the proposal to establish a hospital was approved
and a committee of twelve, with full power to act.
was appointed. Members of this committee were


the late Cr. E. J. Kelly (chairman), the late Messrs
George Bolden (treasurer), W. G. Osburne, H. Caffln,
Geo. Atkins and B. J. Nehill, Messrs M. J. O’Connor,
James Murnane, John Houston, James Scrimgeour,
the late Dr. A. A. Weir, and Dr. L. J. Westacott.
Joint secretaries of this committee were the late
Mr Basil Nehill and Mr J. Scrimgeour. Its activities
included the sponsoring of district committees in
Kolora, Dixie, The Sisters, Garvoc, Noorat and
Heytesbury Settlement; the formation of a Ladies’
Auxiliary; the launching of a Building Appeal;
negotiations with the Charities Board and other
Government instrumentalities on various aspects of
the proposal and the building of the Hospital.
With the discharge of its responsibilities, this
committee made way on October 29, 1935, for the
Hospital Committee of Management, elected by a
poll of contributors. It was fitting that the late
Cr. E. J. Kelly should, be elected first president, as
he had occupied a similar position in the original
committee and had donated the land on which the
hospital is built. Vice-presidents were Mr James
Murnane and Dr. L. J. Westacott; treasurer, Mr R.
S. Young; with, as members, the late Dr. A. A.
Weir, the late Mr G. L. Bolden, the late Mr J. B.
Nehill, the late Mr Geo. Atkins, the late Mr W. G.
Osburne, Mr J. Houston, Mr W. Hansen, Mr M. J.
O’Connor and Mr G. D. Rowley; and as district
representatives, Mr J. B, Farrell (Garvoc), the late
Mr A. S. Noel (Glenormiston), Mr John Kenna (The
Sisters), Mr John Mahony (Kolora), Mr C. Tehan
(Dixie & Ecklin) and Mr P. McKenzie (Noorat).
Mr James Scrimgeour was appointed first secretary
of the Hospital. Initial problems erf this committee
were the equipment of a modern hospital, the
engagement of a matron and nursing staff, as well
as domestic and out-door personnel, and the many
other details associated with the opening of a
hospital. The duties were handled expeditiously
THE HOSPITAL FRONTAGE
and well, with the result that the first patient was
admitted on January 17, 1936.
In 1938 the constitution was amended whereby
the number of committee was reduced from 19 to
15, which is still in effect. Members of the com-
mittee are elected for three years, and the committee
must always include a representative of Noorat,
Glenormiston, Kolora, The Sisters, Garvoc and Dixie.
The present Committee of Management is composed
of Messrs G. D. Rowley (chairman), J. B. Farrell
(Garvoc) and A. J. Welshman (The Sisters) vice-
presidents), Denis Heffernan (treasurer), F. Roddy,
D. Moloney (Kolora), L. M. Keane, D. Madden
(Government nominee), T. Conlon (Dixie), D. E.
Trickett, P. G. Moloney, P McKenzie (Noorat), J.
J. O’Sullivan (Glenormiston), E. W. Gray and Cr.
P. G. Cole. The committee meets monthly to
transact all hospital business in accordance with
the provisions of the Hospital and Charities Act
and the general directions of the Hospitals and
Charities Commission. Finance and House Sub-
committees meet at the hospital twice monthly to
keep in close touch with activities and to be able
to advise the full committee. Chief executive officer
remains the secretary, who is responsible to the
committee. Mr J. Scrimgeour resigned from this
position on account of ill-health in May 1946, and
was succeeded by the present secretary, Mr Kevin
Ryan.
Only three Matrons have acted at the Hospital.
The original appointee, Miss A. Sissons, resigned
in July 1948, and was succeeded by Miss B. C.
Wuchatsch, who in turn was succeeded, in December
1949, by Miss G. P. Willis. With so much dependent
upon the Matron, Norah Cosgrave Terang and
District Community Hospital has been very fortunate
in its selections. In the filling of Staff Nurse
positions, too, a high standard has always been
maintained and generally speaking the hospital has
not been as severely troubled with shortages as
many other institutions. This also
applies with domestics. Of course
the reduction of working hours and
the increase of patients has caused
the staff required to be doubled.
The committee has received in-
estimable assistance from the Ladies’
Auxiliary, whose headquarters are in
Terang but whose active supporters
have always been drawn from all
those areas the Hospital serves. The
auxiliary was launched, with much
enthusiasm, at a meeting of 200
women cm February 21, 1933. Mrs
E. J. Kelly was elected first president,
with Mrs Geo. Atkins and the late
Mrs W. Napthine, vice-presidents,
while Miss M. Bradshaw accepted the
position of honorary secretary and
the late Mrs C. I. McKenzie was
treasurer. The Auxiliary accepted, as
its first task, the raising of money to
equip the new hospital. Since then
its contributions have been outstand-
ing and large sums have been made
available. The Hospital Ball, spon-
sored and organised by the auxiliary,
has long been the outstanding social
function of the year.


The auxiliary interests itself -n
much of the hospital sewing, after-
noons being held each month at the
nurses’ home for this purpose. In all
efforts on behalf of the Hospital the
auxiliary willingly accepts a foremost
role and the committee has long
realised the dependence it places on
the helpful co-operation of the ladies.
At present Mrs L. J. Westacott is
auxiliary president; Mesdames Geo.
Atkins and G. D. Rowley, vice-
presidents; Miss G. Mackenzie, trea-
surer; and Miss L. Paton, honorary
secretary.
For some years the committee
has been concerned with the future.
Bemand for hospitalisation has made
building extensions inevitable. As far
back as 1943 plans were drawn up
to provide for a 34-bed hospital and
the elimination of the use of the
balcony as a ward, as well as a home
to house matron, nursing staff and
domestic staff. Although these plans
were approved and a Building Fund
Appeal launched, pcst-war building
problems have prevented their imple-
mentation. To meet the need for
additional staff accommodation, a
modern home, adjacent to the Hospital, was pur-
chased two years ago and is used by the nursing
staff. However, the continual evidence of the neces-
sity for expanding the hospital’s ward space and
service makes an early commencement of the
extensions inevitable and the committee is taking
stens to gain the approval of the Hospitals and
Charities Commission to proceed with a programme
that will probably cost more than £60,000.
Financially, the Hospital’s position has always
been sound, as the committee, with the solid
backing of the public, has been able to plan wisely
and well. The initial capital expenditure was
contributed locally, without Governmental assistance,
the required £11.500 being raised in three depression
years. The public has been equally generous for
maintenance purposes, and over the years £lO,OOO
in cash has been made available to the committee.
As an advance towards extension costs, more than
£4500 has been donated by the public. Therefore,
in all, this small but generous community has given
its local Hospital £26,000 worth of voluntary support
—a record of which many larger centres would be
proud. With such local backing, the Hospital has
not shared as much in Governmental grants as the
committee feels would be proportionate to the
service the Hospital is rendering, only slightly more
than £3OOO having been received by way of grants,
although £7,500 is held in trust for building purposes.
From the Norah Cosgrave Trust £125 is received
each quarter, while the Hospital shares in charitable
grants made by the Shires of Hampden, Mortlake,
Heytesbury and Warrnambool, and as a beneficiary
under the will of Mr Patrick Brennan. Patients’
fees and Commonwealth Government Hospital Bene-
fits contributions on behalf of patients provide the
balance of income, although since the first years
patients’ fees have represented a diminishing pro-
THE NURSES’ COTTAGE
portion of the total. For instance in 1938-39 patients’
fees accounted for 62% of the income for the year,
in 1948-49 they were reduced to 36%, while in the
same years the cost of keeping a patient in Hos' itnl
increased from 12/3 per day to 27/6 per day. Conse-
quently it is apparent that hospitalisation, particularly
for public and intermediate patients, has not been
affected, as far as patients’ contributions are con-
cerned, by the spiralling costs. The Hospitals and
Charities Commission of Victoria, since its establish-
ment, and the Charities Board before it, established
as a principle, which all hospitals were pleased to
accept, reasonable fees for middle and lower income
groups. In this way much has been done to allay
the fears and financial embarrassments of sickness.
The Hospitals and Charities Commission, consist-
ing of three full time Commissioners, of whom Mr
C. L. McVilly is chairman, is responsible to the State
Government for the maintenance, development and
expansion of hospital services throughout Victoria.
By giving close attention to all that is pro-
gressive in the field of hospital service, the committee
is constantly endeavoring to expand the scope of
service s a that residents of the district the Hospital
serves can always have available to them the
specialised treatment necessary to alleviate suffering
and sickness. In the fulfilment of such a policy the
committee has always enjoyed the loyal co-operation
of the medical profession, all members of the
hospital staff, the Ladies’ Auxiliary and the general
public, as well as the encouragement and assistance
of the Charities Board of Victoria and later of the
Hospital and Charities Commission of Victoria. The
harmonious pursuance of such a policy will permit
the hospital to function in a way that would please
the late Mrs Norah Cosgrave and the other pioneers
of this essential social service unit.


CHURCHES
TERANG PRESBYTERIAN
JU'RMOUNTED by a spire (135 feet high), which
is visible from all points of the compass, the
Thomson Memorial Church, Terang, occupies a
commanding position on a site of just over one
acre at the corner of High Street and Warrnambool
Road.
The church is built in the Gothic style, on a
foundation of bluestone, the super-structure being
of Barrabool Hills stone and the roof of green
slates with a cresting of red tiles. Stained glass,
of a simple and chaste color and design, is used in
all windows. The pulpit is constructed of pink
Oamaru stone and the panelling and seats are
carried out in Rimu wood.
Harmony is provided by an electric pipe organ.
The church was erected through the generosity
of Mrs Henrietta Thomson, the widow of Mr John
Thomson, of Keilambete, the foundation stone being
laid in the presence of a large-gathering on October
12, 1893. Mr Thomson had offered in 1890 to build
the church, but his unexpected death prevented his
plan being carried into effect.
During the past 80 years the ministers in charge
of the Terang Parish have been only six In number,
namely: Rev. Francis Wilson, 1858-1868; Rev.
Samuel Fraser, 1870-1914; Rev. E. M. Baird,
1 914-1928; Rev. John P. Hamilton, 1928-41; Rev.
Henry Clark, 1941-48, the present minister being
Rev. S. J. Higginbotham, who was inducted to
the Church in May, 1949. (Concluded on Page 23)
THE CHURCH OF ALL SAINTS’
QN 18th JULY, 1886, the Rev. Jas. Wagg, of
Mo-rtlake, conducted the first Church of Eng-
land services at Terang, and for many years Terang
remained a portion of the Parish of Mortlake. The
services were at first held monthly, in the old Bible
Christian Church, which is now part of the Masonic
Hall. In 1898 the parishioners erected All Saints’
Church at the southern end of Estcourt Street
(where Mr A. Brittain now lives), overlooking the
Lake, and in 1900 Mr Walter C. Wood was appointed
lay reader. The first resident clergyman was the
Rev, Douglas Johnstone, who succeeded Mr Wood
in 1902.
In 1904 All Saints’ was created a separate
parish, and on 18th July of that year the Rev.
Ernest Lethbridge was inducted as the first incum-
bent. In the same month the church committee
acquired a larger and more centrally situated site
at the corner o-f the Noorat and Camperdown Roads.
Thither the church was removed in the early part
of 1905, and some months later Mr Lethbridge
erected a house on part of the site to serve as a
vicarage. In 1909 a guild room was added to the
church as a wing. In 1918, when the Rev. W. E.
Wood succeeded Mr Lethbridge, the vicarage was
purchased for £9OO, and in 1919 two other rooms
were added to the guild room at a cost of £3OO in
order to complete the parish hall. In October of
that year the Rev. H. Davies was appoined vicar.
He was succeeded in 1920 by the Rev. E. C. W.
Fleischer, who was followed in 1932 by the Rev. B.
A. Ro-well.
On 13th June, 1926, a Church Hall was dedi-
cated at Noorat to serve members of the Anglican
Communion there. Since then successive vicars
have been Revo T. M. Smith (1928), Rev. C. E.
Smith (1931), Rev. W. A. Wilson (1942), Rev. A.
W. Bennett (1944).
It is planned that some day a permanent Church
should take the place of the present wooden, tem-
porary, and so unconsecrated building. A £5O
bequest from Robert Richmond opened this building
fund. Church furnishings that are memorials to
past worshippers will be transferable to their
permanent home when it is available.


THE SALVATION ARMY
pOR 22 YEARS prior to the opening of a Salvation
Army Corps in Terang, “Dad” Wheatley
carried the Flag and sold “War Crys.” A Corps
was officially opened on August 30th and 31st, 1913,
by Brigadier Albiston, assisted by Staff Captains
Renshaw and Simpson, Captain Aik, and the Warr-
nambool Band. The first two Officers-in-Charge
were Cadet-Captain McDonald and Cadet-Lieutenant
Leech. Within four months 25 recruits were
enrolled as soldiers, amongst them being Brother
Alexander Robinson, who still resides at Laang.
T'wo of this number —Jean Boyd and Victor Hallett
(now Senior-Major, and Salvation Army Prison
worker, Melbourne) —were farewelled for the Train-
ing College within two years. Amongst others who
became officers are Sister Flo. Macqueen (now
Mrs Major Theaker, wife of the manager of the
Boys’ Home, Hobart) and Lieutenant Joan Hether-
ington, recently commissioned and appointed to
“Kardinia” Toddlers’ Home, Geelong.
ARMY HALL AND OFFICERS’ QUARTERS,
ESTCOURT STREET
Sister Mrs Macqueen was enrolled as a soldier
by Captain Canty on 29th March, 1914, and is still
taking an active part in Young People’s, Senior,
and Home League work, and is Carps Organist.
The annual Self-Denial Appeal supports Mis-
sionary and Social Work, catering for all classes
and creeds. The First Corps Appeal in 1913 raised
£25; the last in 1949 raised £309/10/0.
For the first nine years, meetings were held in
the Lodge Room of the Temperance Hall, but on
October 14th, 1922, a new Hall was opened in
Estcourt Street by Lieut.-Colonel Arnott; and new
Officers’ Quarters next to the Hall were opened on
March 4th, 1948, by Major D. Southwell.
Every sect’on of the community is catered for
by regular activities, including Evangelistic Meet-
ings, visiting .and helping sick and needy, Women’s
Home League meetings, “Helping Hand” Projects,
and young People’s gatherings. A Youth Group has
been farmed and meets every Thursday evening,
thus providing for the spiritual, physical, mental
and social needs of young people.
Senior Major and Mrs Victor Hallett will be the
special officers who will conduct the Salvation
Army’s “Back To” gatherings during the celebrations
at Easter.
Present officers working in the district are
Capt. Daphne Hateley and Lieut. Marjorie Cant.
ST. THOMAS’ CHURCH
gT. THOMAS’ Roman Catholic Church has an
interesting history. The original bluestone
building was at the western end of High Street,
and when it became too small for the large con-
gregations that gathered to warship there, it was
decided to build a new church on a commanding
site at the head of the lake, provided by the Rev.
Father J. Herbert.
This church, massively built of bluestone, was
erected in 1900, at a cost of £5OOO, the whole of
which was readily subscribed by parishioners. The
foundation stone was laid by the late Bishop Moore
by wham also the church was consecrated.
The Presbytery was built in 1910.
Terang was originally in the Parish of Mortlake,
but in 1909 the Parish of Terang was created. Rev.
Father D. Foley was the first resident parish priest,
and he was raised to the Episcopate in 1916. He
died at Ballarat in 1941.
His successor in 1916 was Very Rev. Dean D.
J. Devane, who ministered in Terang until his death
in 1941. Next parish priest was Monsignor E.
Galligan, new parish priest of Warrnambool.
Terang’s present parish priest is the Very Rev.
Dean M. Mulcahy.
CONVENT OF MERCY, TERANG


METHODIST CHURCH
The first elders were Messrs Peter McNicol,
Peter Carmichael and Donald Mackinnon, the first
secretary and treasurer being Peter Carmichael.
The first Board of Management of the church
in Terang was elected on January 29, 1866, consist-
ing of Messrs D. McWilliam, J. Horne, William
Houston, Peter Carmichael, Niel Black and James
Taylor.
The original Church was a blue stone structure
built on the present site in 1868 and was removed
to make way for the present building.
The manse was originally situated on the Warr-
nambool Road, opposite the Keayang Estate, exactly
one mile from the Post Office. At the end of 1948,
the present manse at the corner of Bolivar and
Pitt Streets was purchased by the congregation,
as it was felt that the old manse was too far
from the church and from the congregation to
enable the minister to do effective work.
The names of those who have been prominent
in the church affairs over the years are too
numerous to mention in full, and it would be unfair
to particularise.
ST. THOMAS’ PRESBYTERY
TERANG METHODIST CHURCH
yHE HISTORY of Methodism in this Circuit is
presumed to date back to 1866. In that year
the Rev. Dr. W. H. Fitchett was sent by the
Wesleyan Methodist Conference to open up a
circuit, with Mortlake as centre. The cause
flourished, in the following year Dr. Fitchett visited
Terang and, to use his own words, “preached the
first Methodist sermon there on a week night.” In
the same year, 1867, the Conference appointed the
Rev. Charles Lancaster to Terang.
But, although Dr. Fitchett preached the first
“Methodist” sermon here, another branch' of
Methodism, the Bible Christian Church, was already
established, and had built the first place of worship
in Terang. That building still stands as part of
the Masonic Hall. In 1902 the various branches “of
Methodism united to form the Methodist Church of
Australasia.
Another interesting point of Methodist history
is that even before Dr. Fitchett reached Mortlake,
services were being held regularly in the farm-
house of Mr Wykes and later in the old Shire Hall
These services date back probably to 1863. In 1866
the first Church was built in Mortlake, which now
is the Sunday School Hall; in 1868 the present
stone building was opened for worship.
After the arrival of the Rev. Charles Lancaster,
arrangements to build a church here were begun.
A Sunday School was commenced in 1867, with Mr
Reuben Bran as superintendent and Mr Fenwick
Talt as secretary. In the following year Mr Thomas
Emeny became superintendent. It is notable that
members of the Emeny family still hold office in
the Church. At a meeting of the Building Com-
mittee, held on 30th January, 1869, a tender of
£305 to build the Church was accepted. The builders
were allowed two months to complete the work.
Members of the first Building Committee were Rev.
C. Lancaster, Messrs Emeny, McMillan, Bright,
Anderson and Tait.
At a meeting in connection with the Church
Anniversary, held on Wednesday, 28th April, 1909,
a scheme was placed before the congregation to
raise a fund for the erection of a new Church.
The present Sunday School Hall at Terang was
given by Mr Wm. Matthews, of Kolora, in 1888.
In the meantime the present Parsonage was built,
the foundation stone having been laid on the 6th
of November, 1902, by Mrs Thomas Montgomery,
of Mortlake, who, together with her husband, did
so much for the Church in this Circuit. Services
were opened at Kolora in 1901.
Prom the year 1876 Terang and Mortlake have
been joined as one Circuit—a minister resided in
each of these two towns until the Mortlake minister
was withdrawn. Terang took Mortlake’s place as
head of the Circuit. The Circuit was served by a
large band of local preachers who travelled far and
wide to preach the Word. Records show that places
as far from Terang as Camperdown, Cobden, Pom-
borneit, Ellerslie and others were formerly connected
with this Circuit. The Methodist Church here, as
elsewhere, owes much of her strength and progress
to her laymen.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH (from Page 21)


The Schools
STATE SCHOOL BUILDING PHOTOGRAPHED BEFORE THE PRESENT BEAUTIFUL GARDEN
WAS LAID OUT
STATE SCHOOL CHILDREN


TERANG STATE SCHOOLS
|N THE EARLY DAYS of the settlement, parents
put up a rough wooden structure in which
elementary education was imparted to their children.
This was burned down about the year 1872, when
a stone building, forming the central part of the
present primary school, was erected at a cost of £3OO,
raised by subscription. Mr Peter Carmichael (M.A.)
was Head Teacher till 1884. He afterwards became
an Inspector of schools. The present primary school
building is a marked contrast to the remarkable
blank-walled nucleus of 1874. It occupies the same
position as the first wooden school, on a knoll over-
looking the lake. In the early nineties the northern
wing and frontal parapet were added to the building
and in 1907 two other class rooms were added on the
south side. In the ’teens of the present century the
building as it stands today was completed.
First and second years of the High School course
were carried out for a few years at the Warrnambool
Road School, until the school became a Higher
Elementary School at the beginning of 1924 with Mr
A. Perry as the Head Teacher. Attendance primary
classes —224 (16 more than in December 1949).
Secondary classes —83 pupils.
Secondary classes were held at the Mechanics’
Institute until 1926, when they returned to the
Primary School buildings. Mr A. R. Ramsay was
Head Teacher at the time.
The new building in Strong Street was officially
ST. THOMAS’ SCHOOL
JN 1906, the congregation of St. Thomas’ Church
decided to establish a Catholic Primary School
in Terang, and in the fallowing year the school was
erected adjoining the convent, at the corner of
Lyons and Bolivar Streets.
Capably taught by the Sisters of Mercy,
hundreds of children have attended the school, and
many scholars have achieved outstanding success
in business and professional spheres.
One hundred and seventy children are now on
the roll of the school.
The convent was erected in 1910, three years
after the building of the school.
opened by Hon. J. Lemmon, M.L.A., cm 17th
December, 1927. Local residents provided £lOOO
towards the cost of this building. From this date
the school has steadily grown until in its last
year as a Higher Elementary School (1949), there
were five bus routes serving the school.
Terang High School came into being on the
31st January, 1950, with Mr J. J. Tyler as the first
Head Master.
The altered status of the school has resulted In
an increased staff making an extension of courses
possible.
Commercial classes have been instituted and
during the next two years these will be extended
to the Intermediate and Leaving stage.
PUPILS OF ST. THOMAS’ SCHOOL


TERANG AND DISTRICT HIGH SCHOOL
SCHOLARS AT THE HIGH SCHOOL PHOTOGRAPHED JUST PRIOR TO THE CHRISTMAS
VACATION, 1949


“ I Remember ” by Alan Marshall
JHE ATTITUDE of the Noorat School to the
Terang School in the days when I was a
pupil at Noorat was, I imagine, that felt by Caesar
towards the Ancient Britons.
Not that we were familiar with Caesar in
Noorat; far from it. As far as I could learn in
that little stone building, he merely existed as a
date—ss B.C.
As for Ancient Britons —to the devil with them;
there was a shanghai fight on at playtime.
But occasionally there escaped from Terang and
came to reside in Noorat, some haunted pupil with
tales to chill the blood and blanch the cheek.
Surrounded by a silent and attentive group of dyed-
in-the-wool Nooratites he would relate that the
teacher in Terang used a sewing machine belt for
a strap and that it wound round your hand like a
snake at every blow. Moreover, this man had eyes
so piercing they froze you in yo* tracks.
And, mind you, this was in the summer time.
A frightening report forsooth. But worse was to
come.
At the Terang School they all pronounced
“found,” as “fowhnd”; “pound,” as “powhnd.”
“Dancing,” they called “darncing.” And, finally,
when reading aloud, they “paused at the commas.”
This was sacrilege. This was Impossible. At
Noorat we stopped at nothing. Punctuation there
was contemptuously disregarded when it came to
reading aloud. Any other method of reading was
definitely sissy.
It was therefore with some trepidation that I
began attending T'erang School.
Sure enough, on the first day, Mr Mylrea, turn-
ing those piercing eyes o-f his upon me, announced
to the class, “Now we will see how this boy can
read. Read the first paragraph on page four,
Marshall,” he commanded.
I read it. At least I started to read it. Aftar
four lines Mr Mylrea’s face betrayed acute suffer-
ing, while the faces of the pupils registered horri-
fied astonishment.
“Sit down,” he barked, then mopped his brow.
It must have been a painful experience for all
there. It was to me.
I attended the Terang School for two years,
riding from Noorat each day on a little white pony
called “Dolly.” Many Terang boys learnt to ride
on her. When you fell off she just turned her head
and looked at you.
What do I remember about the Terang School?
I remember how Keith Coy could stand the
cuts, the happy smile of Les Stewart, Cicely Back-
house reading French, the erect carriage of Norman
McConnell, the grcjfceful walk of Madge McKenzie,
the woebegone expression on the faces of Billy
Harper, Jack Tippett, Bevan Jenkins, “Tart” God-
frey and myself when Mr Japp gave us the cuts
tor spilling ink on his desk.
1 remember Miss Pope in a blue jumper and a
blue skirt, swinging home for lunch (how we loved
her). I remember Ralph Head grabbing snakes by
the tail down by the lake’s edge.
I remember Hugh Bradshaw, Theo Atkins, Inie
Caflin, Ada Carson, Clarice Dunstan, Pearl McCon-
nell, Jack and Vida Middleton, Charlie Clark, Ross
Williams, Les Woods, Bruce McConnell, “Gummy”
Pitts and “Snowy,” Jean Brown, Jack Spence, Len
and Lindsay McConnell, Phyllis Clarke; Les, Alan
and Geo-rge Atkins, Bill, Alf and Johnnie Whiting;
Lindsay and Val Jenkins. They were great school-
mates.
I can hear our voices in the Assembly Room
singing:
“We won’t forget you,
As in this dark December
We sit in schoolrooms that you know so well,
And hear the sounds that you so well remember;
The clo-ck, the scurrying feet, the old school bell.”
In earlier years it was the custom to conduct
a carnival bi-annually to raise funds, but the
programme followed in recent years, with very
satisfactory results, has been the conducting of a
street stall in December and, through the courtesy
of the Mechanics’ Institute Committee, the holding
of a picture night during the month of August.
These two efforts, with the generous support given
by the country districts and various societies, have
given ample funds to continue help to the Institute.
PRESIDENTS
1929- Mrs A. J. Black
1930- Mrs W. G. Osburne
1931- Mrs C. B. Palmer
1932- Mrs A. J. Staughton
1933- Mrs E. J. Kelly
1934- Miss J. Baker
1936- Mrs C. B. Palmer
1937- Mrs C. E. Smith
1938- Mrs A. J. Staughton
1939- Mrs lan Campbell
1940- Miss J. Baker
1941- Mrs E. G. Wood
1943- Miss J. Baker
1944- Mrs A. Bailey
1945- Mrs E. Webb
1949-1950 Mrs A. L. Harper
Others who have served in office are Mrs A.
W. Smith, hon. secretary and treasurer 1941-43;
Miss M. Bradshaw, hon. secretary 1943-48; Mrs R.
Le Couteur, hon. treasurer 1943-49; Miss M.
Scroggie, the present secretary (since 1948), and
Mrs E. Webb, the present treasurer.
Mention must also be made of the work done
by Mrs R. Byrt, of Glenormiston, who has spent
much time in transmitting books into Braille.
BLIND AUXILIARY (Continued from Page 38)


Societies, Banks, Organizations
TERANG & DISTRICT FORMER
RESIDENTS’ ASSOCIATION
QN JULY 27, 1936, the following former residents of
Terang met at Nicholas Buildings to form the
Terang & District Old Boys’ & Girls’ Association
[this was changed to Former Residents’ Associa-
tion on Bth September, 1941]: Messrs A. Morse and
E. Worsley; Mesdames Morse, Snr., Harr (Maud
Morse), Martyn (Nellie Morse); Misses M. North-
east, A. Worsley, N. Worsley, and I'arrant. At
a meeting held on 10th August, 1936, office-bearers
were elected as follows; President: Mr A. J. Morse;
vice-presidents: Mr N. Worsley and Miss M. North-
east: secretary, Mrs Martyn; assistant secretary
and treasurer, Miss A. Worsley; committee, Misses
Shirley Box, Greta Box, K. Clancey, Tarrant, A.
Walsh; Mrs Harr; Messrs L. Rogers, J. Aley, T.
Wheatley, V. Tarrant, Wallace and Charlesworth.
The association still functions and holds a
monthly meeting, also a monthly card night (held
at members’ residences). It endows a cot at the
Terang Community Hospital and uses its funds
“BACK TO TERANG” COMMITTEE 1950
President: Mr R. B. Turner.
Vice-President: Mr T. M. Bradshaw.
Secretary; Mr C. Banks.
Assistant Secretaries; Miss Pat Moloney,
Mr Alan Podger, Mr K. Macqueen.
Treasurer; Mr F. Roddy.
Editorial Committee: Messrs T. M. Bradshaw,
L. J. Gallop, K. McKenzie.
Ladies’ Committee
President: Mrs J. McKenzie.
Vice-President: Mrs F. Roddy.
Secretary; Miss Pat Moloney.
mainly in the interests of charity. The present
office-bearers are: President, Mr E. Boyd; vice-
presidents, Mr J. Boyd and Mrs Davies (nee Chant);
secretary and treasurer, Mr S. Hallett; committee,
Mesdames S. Hallett (Mary Boyd), W. Walker,
Worsley, Millward, Hayden (nee Chant); Messrs
E. Worsley, A. Morse, F. Morse and J. Murnane.
COMBINED COMMITTEES, TERANG CENTENARY CELEBRATIONS, EASTER 1939
Front (from left): A. Carroll, J. McLean, Miss Worsley, Mrs Martyn, Mrs Rogers, W. Wheatley, D. Trickett
(Pres.), Mrs Maskell, Mrs Hayden, Mrs Varcoe, E. Emery, D. Drum, R. McKenzie (Org., in front).
Middle: G. Davis, Mrs Wallace, Mrs McNamara, Mr Chant, E. Worsley, Mr Morse, Mrs Davis, Miss Davis,
H. Hesketh (Sec.), Mrs Bohan, Mrs G. Davis, Mrs H. Rogers.
Back: L. Keane, J. Holmes, &. Rutter, H. Hortle, A. Richards, E. King (at rear), H. Brooke, C. Aley,
J. Morris, S. Varcoe, G. Bolden.


THIS COMMITTEE ORGANISED 1950 CELEBRATIONS
Front Row (from left): Mrs J. McKenzie, Mrs F. Head, Mrs R. Reid, Mrs J. Garvie, P. Roddy (Treas.),
R. Turner (Pres.), C. Banks (Sec.), Mrs L. McCunnie, Mrs C. Densley, Mrs H. Chambers, Miss P. Moloney.
Middle: P. Bohan, Miss N. Head, L. Gallop, A. Podger, K. Macqueen, G. Michell, Mrs Henderson, A. Henderson,
E. King, S. Varcoe.
Back: K. McKenzie, E. Quarrell, E. Gray, T. Bradshaw, G. Chandler, L. Ayres, A. Bailey.
Eleven Years Since Last Celebrations
JT IS just 11 years since the last “Back to Terang”
took place, and on that occasion the centenary
of the town and district was celebrated.
There were approximately 500 former residents
in Terang for the Easter, 1939, festivities, and
they were feted at a continuous round of enter-
tainments.
The success of the “Back To” was due to the
outstanding work oT the Centenary Back to Terang
Committee and the Terang and District Old Boys
and Girls’ Association (now the Former Residents'
Association).
The 300 “old boys and girls” were met by 400
townspeople when they arrived in Terang by special
train on the Good Friday morning, and they were
welcomed by ex-Cr. James Murnane, on behalf of
the Hampden Shire Council; the late Mr E. J.
Kelly, on behalf of the public of Terang and district,
and Mr D. E. Trickett, president of the Centenary
Back to Terang Committee. The welcome was
acknowledged by Mr W. Wheatley (president) and
Mr A. J. Morse (the first and immediate past
president) of the Old Boys and Girls’ Association.
For the next week the visitors were given the
freedom of the town, and there is no doubt that
they enjoyed every minute of their stay here.
Highlights of the festivities were the street
procession, which featured a Cobb & Co. coach,
driven by the late Mr W. J. Moore, of Terang; a
street carnival; Easter Monday sports, which
attracted a very large crowd; “Back to School”
reunions; two concerts and dances. During the
celebrations more than 300 people signed the visitors’
book.
Old-timers who took part in the “back to” were
Mr Peter Dow, 98 years; Mrs Jas. Hardy, 90 years;
Mrs J. Wilkinson, 86 years; Mr P. Henry, 85 years;
Mrs G. Chant, 83 years; Mrs E. King, 81 years; Mrs
Gillies, 87 years; Mrs Bailey, 75 years and Mr T.
Wheatley, 72 years.
A profit of £4OO was made from the “Back To”
and this money was shared by 14 organisations.
Gross receipts totalled £794.


TERANG HAS ACTIVE R.S.S.A.I.L.A.
SUB-BRANCH
JBRANG sub-branch of the Returned Soldiers,
Sailors and Airmen’s Imperial League of Aus-
tralia celebrates its coming-of-age this year, for
it was in 1929 that local “Diggers” of the First
World War joined this nation-wide organisation.
The League’s ideals of service and comrade-
ship have been faithfully upheld throughout the
I'fe of the sub-branch, which has always guarded
the rights of those who have fought for God, King
and Country.
Early in the Second World War, the returned
soldiers of Terang and district rallied to support
their sons who had gone into battle to uphold
Australia's honor. They organised the local branch
of the War Service Comforts Branch, and took an
active part in the many money-raising efforts
launched by the Fund committee. The old
“Diggers,” too, were prominent in the formation of
the Volunteer Defence Corps in this area.
In war or peace the R.S.S.A.I.L.A. is always
active. Now the ex-servicemen of two generations
are moulded into a virile force, seeking fulfilment
of the promises made by a grateful nation during
the stress of the conflict.
Repatriation problems and the needs of soldier
settlers —there are many on holdings in this district
—are but two of the duties readily accepted by
the Terang sub-branch. Its big objective is to raise
money to build a club room—a block of land,
centrally situated, has been purchased for this
purpose.
Since its beginning, the sub-branch has con-
ducted commemoration services on Anzac Day and
Remembrance Day.
The League has had wonderful service from its
presidents—l 7 men have occupied the coveted posi-
tion. First to take the chair was the late Mr H.
R. Hesketh, who guided the destiny of the sub-
branch for two years, from 1929 to 1931. Next
president was the late Mr C. Paton (1931-1933),
who was followed by the late Mr A. J. Gillies
(1933-1935). Others who have held office are: Mr
D. E. Trickett, the late Mr W. G. Davis, Mr Vic.
Stafford, the late Mr T. C. Aley, Mr Vic. Levitt, Mr
A. .1. Eldridge, Mr A. Henderson, Mr S. G. Maskell,
Mr J. Danby, Mr R. B. Turner, Mr L. A. Cowan,
Mr D. Macklnnon, Mr F. R. Roddy and Mr D.
Madden —elected president in January of this year.
He is the first ex-serviceman of the Second World
War to hold this high office in Terang.
The sub-branch has a big membership and has
a large attendance at each monthly meeting, a fact
which is encouraging to the executive officers.
Its Entertainment Committee has been respon-
sible for developing the social side of the League’s
activities. Balls are organised during each year
and have become social highlights. The annual
Christmas Treat for children of ex-servicemen is
one of the sub-branch’s most popular fixtures, and
in recent years it has been held in conjunction with
the Legion of Ex-Servicemen and Women.
Closely associated with the sub-branch is the
R.S.L. Women’s Auxiliary, which makes regular
contributions to the funds from its monthly street
stalls, and which caters for the League’s social
TERANG MOTHERS’ CLUB
CONVENED by Mrs W. Tampion, a meeting was
held on 12th June, 1928, to form a Mothers’
Club in connection with the Terang State School
and the Higher Elementary School. The first
president was Mrs G. Spence; first secretary, Mrs
Somerville; and first treasurer, Mrs D. McLeod.
, The initial money-raising- effort was an “Ameri-
can Fair,” held on 23rd July, 1928, and officially
opened by the late Mr E. J. Kelly. The children of
the State School were given their first “break-up”
picnic in the Recreation Reserve on December 19tb
of the same year.
By July 1929 the attendance at meetings had
increased from 16 to 27.
Hot cocoa and biscuits were first provided for
the children at the State School in August 1929.
This was continued each winter for some years,
the members taking turns to make and serve the
cocoa to the children.
Libraries were established at the State School
and the Higher Elementary School from money
subscribed by the Mothers’ Club. Wood was pur-
chased for both schools, and lockers installed at
the H.E.S.
At the annual meeting in June 1932, Mrs
Spence, w r ho had occupied the position of president
since the formation of the club, did not seek
re-election, and Mrs P. Roddy was appointed. Since
then almost all of the members have at some time
or other held office.
The sterling work of this small band of women
has gone on through the years. Hundreds of pounds
have been raised and every penny spent on improve-
ments and equipment for the two schools, and
amenities for the children. Unfortunately this fad
is not recognised by a large percentage of parents,
who hold the mistaken idea that all these “ extras"
are supplied by the Education Department.
Some years ago it was decided to abandon the
annual fair, and in 1942 the club held its first
children’s fancy-dress ball, which proved a wonder-
ful success and has gained in popularity each year
since. It is the main source of income.
In June 1949, the Club celebrated its 21st birth-
day with a party. Former members were invited to
attend, and Mrs Tampion and Mrs Spence were
given the honor of respectively blowing out the
cardies and cutting the birthday cake.
The club is proud of the fact that some of its
members who jo’ned 20 years ago are still active
workers, although their children have long since
left school.
Present office-bearers are: President, Mrs G. G
Gill; secretary, Mrs J. W. McKenzie; treasurer, Mrs
C. Densleyr
With the raising of the status of the Higher
Elementary School to a High School as from the
beginning of 1950, the club is now the Terang
State School Mothers’ Club only. A separate body
is being formed this year for the High School.
functions during- the year. The ladies’ loyalty is
much appreciated by all returned men.
Executive members of the Auxiliary are as fol-
low: —President, Mrs A. Henderson; vice-presidents,
Mesdames S. G. Maskell and C. Wilkinson; secretary,
Mrs F. Atkins; and treasurer, Mrs C. Densley.
30


COUNTRY WOMEN’S ASSOCIATION, 1950
Front Row (from left): Mesdames H. Chambers, A. Sadler, D. Macdonald, J. Garvie (Treas,)., L. McCunnie
(Pres,), S. Baxter (Sec.), J. Kelly, Riches, E. Gray, C. Walters, C. Palmer.
Middle: Mesdames C. Densley, J. Clifford, Miss McDonough, Mesdames H. Slattery, S. Masked, B. Plttard,
Miss I. Noel, Mesdames S. Skilbeck, L. Carmody, F. Champlin, A. Harper, K. McGregor, J. Russell.
Back: Mesdames J. Waddingham, R. Marwood, D. Blackburn, G. Vanselow, V. McCubbery, R. Kurtze,
K. Hamilton, H. Tabley, G. Chandler.
"pHE COUNTRY WOMEN’S ASSOCIATION in
Victoria was founded 21 years ago. Shortly
afterwards, on 30th July, 1928, a meeting held in
Terang saw the foundation of a branch here.
The first office-bearers were: President, Mrs A. .1.
Black; vice-presidents, Mesdames L. Podger, W.
Napthine, W. G. Osburne and A. S. Fitchett; secre-
tary, Mrs Davy; treasurer, Miss Dennis. Members
of the branch in the first year who still remain
members after 21 years are Mrs C. B. Palmer, Mrs
D. Macdonald, Mrs Tampion and Mrs J. Clifford.
Rest Rooms, in premises rented from Mrs Johnstone,
were carried on and meetings held there for many
years.
The Terang Branch celebrated its 21st birthday
in October 1949, office-bearers at that time being;
President, Mrs L. McCunnie; vice-presidents, Mes-
dames C. B. Palmer, D. Macdonald, J. Kelly and R.
W. Sadler; secretary, Mrs S. J. Baxter, and trea-
surer, Mrs J. Garvie.
Through the intervening years the branch has
done wonderful work in the many varied sides of
Country Women’s work. Through the years the
hospitals at Camperdown and Terang have been
helped. Many needy families have been assisted.
By means of demonstrations, many have been
helped in handicrafts, millinery and dressmaking.
The first demonstration was given by Mrs Beggs,
in July 1929, on glove making.
The branch is very strong now and is working
for rest rooms of its own. New settlers, especially
returned men and their families, were welcomed to
the district. Many of the wives of the settlers have
joined the C.W.A. and are proving an acquisition to
the association. By means of visits to other
branches, half-yearly conferences held in different
centres, and the annual conference in Melbourne,
branch members meet women from all parts of the
State, and from varied occupations, thus broaden-
ing their outlook on life. The Terang branch has
taken part in the life of the town and helped in
all schemes that have improved conditions for
women and children.


TERANG BAND HAS LONG HISTORY
JHKE MOST BANDS in country towns throughout
Australia, Terang Citizens’ Band has had its
difficult times and good times, which seem to come
in cycles.
In its early days, the band used to practice in
an old shed at the back of what is now Johnstone
Court. This was in about the year 1895, and Pro-
fessor Jenkinson was the first bandmaster.
In 1897 the band was promoted to an old
cottage behind Nehill’s Hotel. A little later, Mr
Pairbairn, his committee and helpers, ran a bazaar
to raise enough money to build the first band
room, which was situated in the park, just above
the present bowling green.
In the years that followed the band had as
bandmasters Mr Peter Harrison, Mr Jas Thwaites,
Mr Harry Downs, Mr Arthur Pearce, and as secre-
taries Mr Jas. Rawbon, Mr Fairbawn, Mr C. Fuller
Mr Harold Ford, Clarrie Vivian, Les Davies, Bert
Miles, Bob Graham, Fred Vivian, H. A. Brooke.
Around about the period of the First World
War, Mr Bert Aley did a splendid job as band-
master, carrying on in difficult times, and eventu-
ally handed over to his brother, Clyde, on his return
from the war.
Later, a site was bought in Estcourt Street
and the present Band Hall was built, the stage
being erected from the old band room. Also about
this time the name, Terang Brass Band, was
changed to Terang Citizens’ Band, and a new set
of silver instruments was bought.
At this period of the Band’s history, there was
a host of grand helpers, including a splendid
Women’s Auxiliary. Stalwarts such as the late
Geo. Spence, Mrs G. Spence, the late Mr Geo.
Bolden, Mr Herb. Hortle, Mr Ted Harvey, Mr R.
Deverill and Mrs J. R. Murfett are remembered
for their splendid work for the band.
The supper room was built behind the Band
Hall, and is today being used by the Edna Glove
Factory.
When Mr Clyde Aley took over as bandmaster,
the band went from one success to another, winning
competitions at Portland (twice), Casterton, Warr-
nambool and Camperdown, and had several other
successes in the Western District Group compe-
titions.
Clyde Aley’s untiring and enthusiastic interest
in the band endeared him in the hearts of all who
had the pleasure of knowing him, and there is no
doubt that he carried the band to the peak of its
career. During his long term as bandmaster —
about 30 years—Clyde was fortunate to have the
co-operation as president of Mr Jas. Murnane, who’
was outstanding in this office for 18 years. To
them both can go the credit for the moulding and
the making of Terang Citizens’ Band.
(Concluded on Page 35)
Front Row (from left): A. Murnane, J. Morris, K. Medew, C. Sloane, J. O’Neil, L. Squires, M. Ottosen, M. Webb
Centre: J. Murfett (Drum Major), T. Murfett, E. Northeast, E. Baxter, M. Mumane (Bandmaster), G. Murnane
(Secretary), I. Morris, W. Boydle.
Rear: D. Cook, F. Hyett, H. Bamford, R. Londrigan, J. Kline, S. Grayland, S. Leaney


Terang’s War Service Fund
In the early weeks of the war, when the first branches of the A.C.F. were
being formed, the Terang Returned Soldiers’ League unreservedly endorsed
the view of its State Executive that any such service should be governed by
trusted returned men, and to that end decided to sponsor a local branch of
the ancillary R.S.L. War Service Fund, and requested Cr. Jas. Murnane to
convene a public meeting therefor.
yHE MEETING was duly held, and a new group
of the W.S.F. inaugurated—without enthusiasm.
It had already been made known that the Fund
would be the understanding friend of the forces
(especially those of them on the job with their
wounds, or worse, to come), but so general was the
indifference at the time that only 18 persons
attended that meeting, and some of them were come
to oppose. Even less encouraging was the initial
collection of £3 taken from the street throngs that
first New Year’s Eve of the war, and worse still,
the £2/11/9J painfully extracted from the race-goers
next day. It was certainly a miserable and difficult
start, with absolutely nothing to suggest that,
inside three years, the good people of Terang and
district would be challenging any other community
of comparable numbers to equal their ever swelling
effort. Yet, so it came to pass.
As the weeks lengthened into months and more
and more young men enlisted, so did the need of
awakening public interest in both Red Cross and
Comforts Fund become increasingly urgent, and
with it a widening recognition of the complemen-
tariness of the two bodies. That was probably
what induced their first combined drive, a Gala
Day, which netted £512. But better far than this
was the spread of activity, the competitive help,
that the effort promoted. The Shire Council,
schools, churches, sporting and public bodies and
business establishments all felt impelled to give a
hand—and did.
The formation of sub-groups at The Sisters,
Kolora and Noorat ensured a regular flow of support
from those areas. A central position was found
for the street stall provided by Hampden Shire
Council, and there, in all weathers, some one or
two women stalwarts, often called on at too short
notice, conducted their raffles and sold what goods
they had been able to collect. The stall was also
the distributing and receiving centre for the making
of articles required by headquarters. Every
second week, an average of eleven of the members
of the Fund’s Women’s Auxiliary met to examine,
alter (where necessary), label, measure and bundle
W'hatever completed items had come in since last
meeting.
Another development that helped to establish
the W.S.F. in public favor was its acceptance of
responsibility for seeing that all town and district
enlistees were given a fitting send-off before leaving
for distant parts. At these functions, held at the
Public, St. Thomas’ and Band halls, each service-
man or woman was presented with an embossed
wallet or writing case. Who among us who were
there will forget that first send-off when 32 of
the forces received their presentation, and some
900 well-wishers watched in reverential silence the
impressive ceremony of Passing the Torch from
the old Digger to the new?
All these were operations which took shape in
1940, and were continued with mounting vigor
throughout the subsequent years of war. Every
Monday there was the stall to gather in an accept-
able increase. They were heartening days when
the sub-groups, the C.W.A., the grand folk of Dixie,
Glenormiston or South Ecklin, or the staffs of the
big Arms had it and sought to exceed their previous
returns.' Dances, house parties, competitions, con-
certs, revues, stock auctions, all brought in more
and more for the amenities that were being supplied
the tattered and fatigued at the front, and those
at station or in camp. There were special appeals,
such as the T'in Hat each September and the
Christmas Hamper Nov./Dec. The first quarter
of each year became a period of tremendous
activity for Gala Day, the annual all-out effort
which, in 1943, realised over £7OOO nett for the
three participating funds. A second joint under-
taking with the Red Cross Society was the cater-
ing for the Noorat Show-, a recurring achievement
involving much laborious preparation. From all
these sources, plus individual the W.S.F.
receipts rose from £1134 in 1940 to- £4234, the total
for 1943. And all the while that small team of
women helpers carried on with their work meetings
till eventually they had sent upwards of
14,000 made articles.
The £13,000 that passed through the Comforts
Fund account does not include what was received
for the Presentation Fund, or those other moneys
w-hich resulted mainly from the endeavours of
W.S.F. committeemen, viz: Messerschmitt exhibi-
tion, £5O (in two hours); the Sydney Replacement
Fund, £116; and the A.I.F. Dependents Emergency
Transport Fund. Nor did the committee's interest
in local service personnel stop with arranging
send-c-ffs, for at a later stage, it appointed a com-
munity representative to visit the next of kin of
the killed and wounded, and sought to provide the
welcome home the returning deserved. And
although it had nothing whatever to do with the
Comforts Fund, it was the same men who sponsored
the British Bomb Victims’ Appeal in September
1940 (when £1124 was raised in ten days), and after
that collected and despatched the district’s Bundles
for Britain.
(Continued on next page)


RED CROSS
[)URTNG the two World Wars the Terang and
District Red Cross had a fine record of service.
Activities were carried on from 1914 to 1919, and
from 1939 to the present time. Comforts Fund
wc*rk was included in Red Cross activities during
the first World War. From 1914 to 1919 there is
Ihe record that no expense was incurred in the
running of the branch, that £10,558 went to head-
ncarters, and that 19.010 garments were dispatched
Empire Day efforts in 1917 raised £1386 and in 1918
£3OOO.
Since the re-forming of the branch in 1939,
there has been weekly activity. First Aid and
Home Nursing Classes were arranged. £24,625 went
to headquarters, including £8721 for the Prisoner
of War Fund. In addition, large sums were con-
tributed through the Shire or Lord Mayor’s Fund
for U.N.N.R.A., Food for Britain, Save the Children’s
Fund, etc. The waste collection resulted in 120
tons of paper being sent to Melbourne. Other w r aste
collected and sold included aluminium, rubber and
bottles. Thousands of garments were made, the
greatest number being in 1941, when 9,007 articles
went to headquarters. Fat, second-hand clothing
and food were collected for Britain. Quantities of
new and used magazines were forwarded to head*
quarters.
During the two wars the Jumble Shop .provided
a, regular source of income. Innumerable efforts
were held. Voluntary work and the free use of the
waste depo't, jumble shop and meeting room meant
that very little expense has been incurred in running
the branch during the last £0 years.
The branch has a proud record which was made
possible by the hearty co-operation of a large band
of loyal helpers in Terang and district.
Those whose responsibility it was to direct
end control the affairs of this Group of the Com-
forts Fund will remember with pride and gratitude
the unnamed many who, in one way or another,
contributed to these results. There was the pub-
licity so* freely and constantly given by the local
paper, the cartage of goods and storage of materials,
the moving of the street stall to and from its
accustomed place, the use of premises as a depot,
and many another service which might seem to
have passed unnoticed. There were those who,
year in and year out, never failed to* give what
they could, who never seized upon some ugly,
baseless rumor to discredit the work that was at
all times voluntarily done, and who knew how well
their town was protected against imposition. And
though it were prudent not to mention names, no re-
cord of the work of Terang and District Group of the
War Service Fund would be complete without
reference to the sterling leadership of Presidents
Cohen and Trickett, the unremitting labors of Mrs
S. Maskell and her successors, Mesdames A. Wilson
and Schonfelder, who between them supervised the
making of 14,000 articles of wear, and last but not
least the outstanding organising ability and unselfish
service of Secretary William Jamieson.
It was in recognition of Terang’s “wonderful
support’’ that A.C.F. Headquarters inscribed an
installation at Milne Bay.
THE DADS’ ASSOCIATION
HAS GOOD RECORD
JHE DADS’ ASSOCIATION was constituted during
War 1 and revived again during War 11, and
sub-branches formed throughout Victoria, with a
membership of over 5.000.
At a meeting convened by Mr D. Matheson and
held in January 1 943, it was decided to form a
sub-branch in Terang. It was moved by Mr Wright,
seconded ny Mr Fames, that a branch he formed.
Mr A. J. Hill was elected president, other office-
bearers being: Vice-presidents, Messrs D. Mathe-
son and F Roddy; secretary, Mr R. B. Turner;
treasurer, Mr H. F. Thomas; auditor, Mr A. J.
Findlay; committee, Messrs A. Henderson, S. Varcoe
IT. Chambers, J. T. Slattery, R. Rowley. P. Glennen
and J. Danby. At the first meeting of the newly-
formed branch, 30 members attended and by the end
of the year membership had increased to 55. Mr
Turner, as secretary, worked hard to make the
branch a fmanc ; al success and much credit is due
to him for the work he put into it. In February
1945, Mr Turner resigned from the secretaryship
nnd Mr Les Blain carried on the position and still
holds that office.
The branch has put up a good fight for the
welfare of ex-servicemen and women and are happy
to knew that good results have accrued from their
efforts, judging by the letters of thanks and appre-
ciation they have received from service personnel
The Terang Branch is a member of Group No.
7, which takes in all the Western District sub-
branches, and Mr L. Blain represents the district
on the Group Committee. Past presidents are
Messrs A. J. Hill, F. Roddy, D. Matheson, J
Murnane, R. B. Turner, P. Bohan and H. F. Thomas.
President for 1950 is Mr E. Kline.
AUSTRALIAN LEGION OF
EX-SERVICEMEN & WOMEN
IS ACTIVE IN TERANG
'J'ERANG BRANCH cf the Australian Legion of
Ex-Servicemen and Women was formed at a
meeting of returned personnel frorri the Second
World War, held on 29th March, 1946. Mr L. Ayres
was elected president and Mr M. Irwin hon.
secretary, and by the end of 1946 there were 47
financial members. A Ladies’ Auxiliary was formed
on 81h May, 1946, and this has given the branch
outstanding sunnort. When Mr Irwin resigned the
secretaryship, Mr D. O’Neil carried out the duties
temporarily until the present secretary, Mr D. Bell,
was elected in 1947. President for that year was
Mr K. Macqueen, and there were 63 financial
members. By this time the branch was receiving
assistance from sister organisations and was in a
sound position. In 1948 Mr L. Ayres was again
appointed president, and members numbered 47.
Mr C. Clifford was elected president for 1949, when
there were 57 financial members.
The branch has conducted many successful func-
tions, notably the 1949 fancy dress ball, and 1950
was commenced with a picnic for members and
their families at Warrnambool beach.
WAR SERVICE FUND (from previous page)


TERANG & DISTRICT PIPE BAND
ATTEMPT was made in 1927 to form a Pipe
Band in Terang. It met with only moderate
success and struggled on till it was taken over by
the Terang Caledonian Society in 1930. After a
few years the band re-formed under its own
committee, and forged ahead under the tuition of
Pipe Major J. Blair. At the ‘Hack to Terang”
celebrations in 1939 the band was at its peak, but
rapidly went back during the war years. It has
now been re-formed with the following office-
bearers: President, Mr N. McConnell; vice-president,
Mr J. Boydle: secretary, Mr W. Bramich; assistant
secretary, Mr G. Smith; treasurer, Mr N. Murfett;
committee: Mr and Mrs J. Wallace, Mr and Mrs A.
Henderson, Mr and Mrs J. Twaddle, Mrs G. Smith,
Mrs J. Boydle, Miss Helen McConnell, Miss Lois
Hanlon, Messrs J. Blair, J. Cameron, J. Bramich
and Jock Boydle.
V.S.U. DANCING COMMITTEE
J-JIGHLAND AND NATIONAL DANCING competi-
tions in the district are conducted under the
ni-p'ces of the Terang and Garvoc Victorian
Scottish Union Dancing Committee, which was
formed on August 11, 1948.
President is Mr A. Henderson, other officials
be'ng as fallow: Vice-presidents, Messrs J. Carroll
and R. Kurtze; secretary, Mr E. Ouarrell; assistant
secretary and treasurer, Mr J. Russell; committee
Messrs A. McKay, P. Bradford and L. Blain and
Mesdames E. Quarrell, B. Shaw, P. Bradford and A,
Henderson.
The committee handled £136 in the first year of
Ps activities, this money for the most part being
in conjunction with children’s competitions in and
abound the district. About 50 children are receiving
tuition in national dancing and their keenness is
very encouraging to the committee.
TERANG & DISTRICT CALEDONIAN
SOCIETY
JN 1930 a meeting was convened by Mr Neil
McKenzie, of Austral Park, Coleraine, with the
cooperation of Mr J. Bradshaw and Mr N. McCon-
nell, to- try to form a Caledonian Society in this
district.
The meeting was held on 19th July, 1930, and
was well attended. The Hon. Donald Mackinnon,
then vice-president of the Victorian Scottish Union
presided. After a unanimous decision to form a
Society, the following office-bearers were elected:
Chieftain, Mr W. K. Mackinnon; president, Mr Alex
Mackenzie; hon. secretary, Mr A. G. Robinson;
committee: Messrs K. Macdonald, D. Macdonald, E.
D. Mackinnon, K. Macqueen, N. McConnell, J.
Dougall and D. McLeod.
Highlights in the history of the Society were
the V.S.U. Conference held in Terang in 1933, and
the entertaining of delegation members from Scot-
land in 1935.
During the war years when the Society was
partly in recess, and since then, most of the funds
raised by entertainments have been distributed to
various deserving charities.
Present office-bearers are: Chieftain, Mr .1
Twaddle; president, Mr A. Lyell; vice-presidents,
Messrs R. Mac Kay and J. Cameron; treasurer, Mr
L. Cowan; secretary, Mr N. Murfett; auditors,
Messrs A. J. Macqueen and S. G. Menzies; com-
mittee: Messrs J. Wallace, I. Carson, J. Blain, N.
McConnell, A. Henderson, J. Boydle, S. Templeton,
M. Blain, G. H. Smith; M.C., Mr M. Blain; assist.
M.C., Mr A. Henderson; press representative, Mr N.
McConnell.
During the Second World War, practically the
whole of the bandsmen joined the forces and the
Band went into recess. After the war another
difficult period was experienced. Only a few of the
older bandsmen returned to the district. Mr “Toots”
Brooke initiated a lot of very young boys and
worked hard to train them. However, from this
commencement, eventuated the present Band, once
aga*n struggling, but surely climbing. There is
no doubt that under the skilful leadership of the
present bandmaster, Mr Merv. Murnane, it will
again reach the excellent position it occupied
in pre-war days.
During the past five years, the committee has
concentrated on the financial aspect, and the present
president (Mr E. W. Gray) organised a series of
Talent Quests, and raised sufficient funds to clear
the band of all past responsibilities and place it
in a healthy financial position. Mr Geoff. Murnane.
a most efficient and capable secretary, like his father
and brother, is doing a splendid job for the band.
Bandsmen of former years, who were all good
citizens, rendered a service to their fellowmen
in a tuneful sort of way. If it be true that a
town with a band is a town with a soul, then
all is well with Terang.
MR. A. HENDERSON
President V.S.U. Dancing Committec
TERANG BAND (from Page 32)


FINE PANORAMIC AERIAL PHOTOGRAPH OF TERANG TOWNSHIP


—by courtesy of “The Argus," Melbourne.


THE
ROTARY CLUB
OF TERANG
PROVINCIAL CLUB of the Rotary movement
was formed in Terang on Bth July, 1948. The
branch’s, charter was granted by Rotary Inter-
national on 28th August, 1948, and presented by Past
Governor Horace Holmes on 28th November, of the
same year.
Mr Reg Purser Snr. was the first president of
the Club, which had a membership of 23. At present
the membership is 35, under President Dr. Les.
Westacott. A weekly luncheon is held on Tuesdays,
at 6.15 p.m.
Rotary International is a world-wide organisa-
tion, and early this year comprised 6943 Rotary Clubs
with a total membership of 334,000 Rotarians in more
than 70 Countries.
The objects of Rotary are to encourage and
foster the ideal of service as a basis of worthy
enterprise and, in particular, to encourage and foster
1— The development of acquaintance as an oppor-
tunity for service.
2 High ethical standards in business and pro-
fessions; the recognition of the worthiness of all
useful occupations: and the dignifying by each
Rotarian of his occupation as an opportunity to
serve society.
3 The application of the ideal of service by
every Rotarian to his personal, business and com-
munity life.
4 The advancement of international under-
standing, goodwill, and peace through a world
fellowship of business and professional men united
in the ideal of service.
GIRL GUIDES
QN 28th OCTOBER, 1928, it was decided to
commence Girl Guide activities in Terang.
MBs G. A. Black, who had been appointed District
Commissioner, convened the meeting and it was
largely due to her enthusiasm that a successful
start was made. In Terang, Guides and Brownies
have functioned almost continuously. For a time
there were Brownies and Guides at NooTat and
Rangers in Terang.
The movement owes a debt of gratitude to the
Guiders for their self-sacrificing work in providing
the necessary leadership. Brownies and Guides
have been able to take part in many rallies, camps,
sports etc., some of which were held in Melbourne
and other centres.
Each year an effort has been held. Loyal
support has been given to* the numerous head-
quarters appeals. During the war assistance was
gladly given when there were special appeals.
Garments and food were contributed for Britain.
Books were donated to the Terang Children’s
Library. A fund is being built up for the purchase
of equipment in the children’s -ward when the local
Hospital is enlarged.
In Girl Guiding we are pleased to be part of
one of the worthwhile movements of the day.
TERANG AND DISTRICT AUXILIARY
FOR THE ROYAL VICTORIAN
INSTITUTE FOR THE BLIND
'J'HIS AUXILIARY, which aims at raising funds to
support at least one child at the Royal Yic-
toran Institute for the Blind, where children and
adults are trained in many trades and professions
and enabled to* become self-supporting citizens in
spite of their physical handicap, was established
at a meeting convened by the late Mr H. Van Asche
rn 30th August, 1929, wi.en the chair was occupied
by the late Cr. E. J. Kelly and there were 30 people
present. The late Mrs A. J. Black was elected
president and Rev. J. P. Hamilton hon. secretary
and treasurer. Of the other members of that
original committee, the following are still taking
an active part in the work of the Auxiliary: Mes-
dames M. Palmer, A. Mackenzie, M. Tampion and
E. I. Staughton, and on 29th August, 1950, they will
have completed 21 years of service—a worthy record
indeed.
Throughout the years the public of the town
and district have shown an ever-increasing interest
in the work of the Auxiliary and have given
generously to all efforts to raise funds. The records
show that over the past 21 years a grand total
of £3247/8/- has been forwarded to the Institute
to ass'st them in their good work.
The surrounding districts of Noor.at, Kolora.
Souih Ecklin, Framlingham, The Sisters and Glen-
ormiston all make regular contributions to the
funds, and the Auxiliary endeavors to have at
least one representative from each district on the
Executive Committee, thus maintaining personal
contact with all supporters.
It is difficult to find words to tell of the wonder-
ful work done by many individual members, but
mention must be made of the first president, the
late Mrs A. J. Black, of Mount Noorat, and the
Rev. J. P. Hamilton, who was hon. secretary and
treasurer for about 12 years and who did so* much
for the Auxiliary by organising and establ'shing
things on such a sound basis that the work of
his successors has been made much easier.
LIFE GOVERNORS
1930 Mrs Napthine 1943 Mrs K. McKenzie
Mrs A. J. Black Mrs Webb
1931 Mrs W. G. Osburne Mrs W. Tampion
1932 Mrs C. B. Palmer Mrs J. T. Clarke
1933 Mr N. Palmer 1944 Mrs Le Couteur
Mrs A. B. Clarke Mrs' A. McLean
Mr I. Campbell Miss M. Bradshaw
Mrs A. J. Staughton 1945 Mrs A. Henderson
1934 Mrs E. J. Kelly Mrs A. Lewis
Mrs Alcorn Mechanics’ Com’tee.
1935 Miss J. Baker (Mr J. B. Scott)
Rev. J. P. Hamilton 1946 Mrs S. Lewis
1937 Mr Geo. Bolden Mr A. Bailey
1938 Mrs C. E. Smith 1947 Mechanics’ Com’tee.
Mrs A. W. Smith (Mr G. Coll’e)
1939 Mrs A. Bailey Caledonian Society
Mrs J. Wallace (Mr J. Blain)
1940 Mrs lan Campbell 1948 Mrs F. E. Cafiin
Mrs E. G. Wood Mr N. Murfett
1941 Mrs J. P. Hamilton Mr A. Henderson
1942 Mrs Geo. Rutter (The Sisters)
Mrs A. S. Fitchett 1949 Mrs H. V. Axford
Mrs Alex Mackenzie


Business Houses
HIGH STREET 1888, FROM CO-OP. CORNER
■pHERE HAS BEEN a great change in the Terang
shopping centre since the above photograph
was taken just over 60 years age. Indeed, very few
country centres can boast of a better or more
compact business centre than Terang.
Past fires have contributed their share towards
the modern appearance. With the exception of the
Terang Hotel and Montgomery & Bradshaw’s, all
the buildings on the north side of the central block
have been destroyed by fire in the last 35 years.
Mr J. J. Jackman has carried on his tailoring
business for more than 60 years in Terang, and he
must be the oldest active business person in the
town.
Bright & Hitchcock Pty Ltd. are the oldest of
the drapery houses in the town, their business in
Terang being opened in the year 1904. The present
manager of the branch is Mr E. W. Gray.
Mr N. J. Malcolm, saddler, is associated with
a trade that has played a vital part in the early
history of this and other districts. Purchasing the
business in 1941, Mr Malcolm succeeded H. Seeley,
the late H. Munro, H. S. Tippett and the pioneer
of the business, the late Geo. Napthine.
In a prosperous district as this, garages are well
to the fore as were their predecessors, the coach-
builders. In 1928, Messrs H. Goodall & Son
purchased the business of Messrs Thomas &
O’Mullane, who had built up a great reputation
for the ; r workmanship. In 1903, Messrs Thomas
& O’Mullane won the final Melbourne Show award
for buggies. In 1898. Mr B. H. O’Mullane joined
Mr A. J. Thomas, who was at that time in business
on the north east corner of Baynes and Estcourt
Streets, but after a devastating fire in 1900, they
moved to the present site in High Street.
The other coachbuilding business had a long
association with the town. The late Mr Cole was
a smithy in High Street before the 70’s. Mr John
Hoggart succeeded him in 1873 and, in 1886. the
late Mr E. J. Kelly acquired the business. Mr A.
J. Brookman bought the business in 1896, but the
fire caused his removal to other premises in 1916.
In 1937, Mr A. S. Morrison purchased the premises
for his garage and retreading business.
Prominent in the affairs of the district have been
members of the legal profession. Men of the
calibre of the late Maurice Doyle, c/f Doyle & Kerr,
have advised many residents through uncertain
times. Chairman of many bodies, and prominent
in civic affairs is Mr D. E. Trickett. Veteran legal
advisor is Mr A. S. Fitchett, who has been in
business here since 1901.
Two of our chemists have businesses long-
associated with the district. Mr H. F. Thomas
came in 1915, purchasing his business from Mr P.
Bennett, who had taken over from his father, who
established the pharmacy well aver 60 years ago.
Mr L. M. Keane purchased the business of the late
Mr J. G. Mcllwaine in 1937. Earliest of the
chemists, whose name is still linked with the
district, is the late Mr T. Rigby, who occupied
premises in High Street where the Bank of Aus-
tralasia is now situated.
Oldest of the fruiterers’ establishments is that of
Mr W. J. Jackman, who took over in 1945 from Mf
A. J. Macqueen, who had bought out Mr Cassi-
mento in 1932. In 1930, the Virgona family ceased
to take an active part in the business which they
had purchased from the late Mrs R. Ayres many
years before.
(Continued on Page 41)


TERANG AND DISTRICT CO-OP. SOCIETY
'J’HIS- LARGE and most modern building, situated
on the corner of High and Estcourt Streets,
with an extensive frontage to High Street, is a
glowing tribute to the pioneers and residents of the
Terang district.
It was on this sped that the first place of
business in Terang was set up, when in the year
1858 a Mr Paton built a slab store and opened up
a grocery and produce business, which was later
carried on by Mr R. W. Napthine, who was suc-
ceeded by Mr M. Lang.
Messrs Coy Eros, purchased the business in
1886, and by 1897 had made many alterations and
additions. In 1902 a massive two-storey building
was erected by the Coy brothers, who sold to the
Terang and District Co-operative Society in 1908,
when the business was placed under the manage-
ment of a Board of Directors with Mr Martin
Brennan as chairman and Mr M. Bourke as manager.
In 1909 the late Mr H. S. Caffln was appointed
manager, which position he held until 1934. He
was succeeded by the late Mr F. J. O’Connor.
The present manager, Mr F. Beanham, was
appointed in 1939. Under his leadership the busi-
ness began to greatly expand and despite the war
years, when the Society suffered greatly with stack
shortages and a depleted staff, high figures were
maintained.
A real catastrophe was experienced by the
Society when on the morning of August 21, 1944 1 ,
the whole of the premises and stock were destroyed
by fire.
MONTGOMERY AND BRADSHAW
jyj-R. W. W. JAMIESON, of Maryborough, was the
owner of the first general store on the present
site of Montgomery and Bradshaw’s. In 1863, Mr
Thomas Montgomery joined the staff, and a yeaf
or two later entered into* partnership with a fellow
employee, Mr Anderson, and purchased the business.
The first Post Office in Terang was conducted
by Mrs Stansmore, at the rear of the store, and
later Mrs Anderson became postmistress.
In 1890, Mr Joseph Bradshaw came from Mort-
lake to assume management of the business, and in
1593 entered into partnership.
A branch has been conducted at Noorat since
June, 1921, when the business owned by Mr W. B.
Marshall was iDurchased.
Mr Montgomery died in 1920 and Mr Bradshaw
in 1934.
Many of the employees have had long associa-
t‘on with the firm, those exceeding 50 years are Mr
Thompson Allen (26 years as partner), Mr George
Scarborough and Mr George Emeny. Mr John
McConnell has been an employee for 47 years.
The firm has had 87 years of proud association
with the growth and progress of the district. A
large proportion of the timber used in the district
homes came from M. & B’s. timber yard, for in 1913
the firm had its own sawmill and siding on the
Timbocm railway line, where 20 men were employed.
Throughout the years the firm has endeavored
to give loyal service to the community.
TERANG CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY’S NEW PREMISES
(Concluded on Page 41)


ANOTHER MODERN SHOP IN HIGH STREET
A further great loss to the Society was the
sudden passing of Mr M. Brennan, who had ■ held
the position of Chairman of Directors until his
death on January 24, 1948.
The fact that not one hour’s business was lost
through the fire was high testimony to the courage
of the manager and staff. Business was immediately
transferred to the Society’s branch store at Noorat,
and within a few days the Band Hall, situated in
Estcourt Street, was fitted up and fully stocked
and business was carried on there until the present
new premises were entered on December 15th, 1945.
The Society also conducts a garage on its
premises at the corner of Baynes and Estcourt
Streets, and has a branch store at Noorat.
Over the years Terang has been most fortunate
in the outstanding quality of some of its tradesmen.
Builders of note and ability were Messrs Stamp,
Rogers, Frank Sellick and James Macqueen, while
well-known painters and decorators included Paddy
Clarke, A. R. Clarke and E. Bates. Workmanship
was a credit to them and of advantage to the
district.
And so we have many businesses, which are
old, new and modern, but they have an association
with the past of firms built on solid foundations
of high ethical standards, patience and graciousness,
“whirr,” or a crake flushes, only to drop quickly
into the weeds again.
Black duck, teal (grey and chestnut), blue
winged shovellers and the interesting but rare blue
billed duck, as well as the white-eyed duck, all
visit us. More than forty species frequent the
area. Of these, many breed here —swans, swamp
hens, coots, black duck, blue billed duck, shelduck,
harrier and stilts are only a few found with nests
or young. Gulls and marsh terns appear in the
breeding season, but apparently nest elsewhere.
One particularly interesting, if not unique and
distinctive, feature of our lake is the presence of
the legendary brown bittern during spring and
summer. If you lie in bed, you may hear the
peculiar “boom” of this heron —it calls often during
the daytime, but of course the sound is not then so
noticeable. You think you are hearing the bellow
of a bull, from a distance —it is our own bittern.
It is a compliment to us, that this bird nests here
—during the past three seasons anyway. It was
a feature of the district many years ago, and its
return, after a long absence, certainly adds to the
already considerable lustre earned by Lake Terang
as a bird resort, and a bird lover’s paradise.
that should add greatly to the pleasure and profit
of every-day living.
BUSINESS HOUSES (from Page 39)
BIRD LOVERS’ PARADISE (from Page 13)
CO-OP. SOCIETY (from previous page).


BUSINESS CENTRE, HIGH STREET— NORTH SIDE


THE STATE SAVINGS BANK
OF VICTORIA, TERANG
JHE TERANG BRANCH of the State Savings Bank
was opened on Ist May, 1909, in a building at
the corner of High and Shadforth Streets. This
building, together with 13 adjoining shops, was
destroyed by fire in April 1916. Fortunately the
safes were salvaged from the fire and the Bank’s
records were found to be intact. The branch func-
tioned in temporary premises during rebuilding
operations, which were completed in December 1916.
From its inception the branch made rapid pro-
gress. At the end of the first year’s operations
(June 1910) there were 1,642 depositors with
balances aggregating £44,878 at their credit. This
growth has been steadily maintained throughout
the years. In 1915 there were 2,288 depositors with
balances totalling £85,371. In 1925 the figures had
grown to 2,923 depositors with balances of £134,600.
Twenty years later, in 1945, there were 4,795
depositors, who had £331,236 in their accounts.
Today there are 5,080 depositors with balances
aggregating £453,585, and it should not be long
before the half-million mark is reached.
This remarkable progress is indicative of the
prosperity of Terang and the practice of thrift by
its residents and their appreciation of the facilities
afforded by the Bank. The practice of thrift is
further encouraged by the Bank in the establishment
of school banks at 15 schools in the district, in which
over 500 scholars have by regular savings deposited
£2,053. In addition to the local branch, agencies,
attached to Terang, are established at Caramut and
Garvoc for the convenience of depositors.
The first Branch Manager was Mr A. P. P.
O'Halloran, who subsequently rose to the position
of Chief Inspector of the Bank, from which he
retired in 1947, Mr O’Halloran was succeeded by
Messrs C. E. Brinsden (1910-1912), J. W. Coldwell
(1912-1914), L. V. McPherson (1914-1916), S, O.
Graves (1916-1923), E. C. Wheeler (1923-1925), J.
McN. Den gall (1925-1931), C. V. Marchesi (1931-
1936), V. A. Boswarrick (1936-1939), W. Jamieson
(1939-194'4), K. V. B. Miller (1944-1947), G. Binns
(1947-1949), and the present manager is Mr J. J.
Kierce.
Of these Managers Mr C. E. Brinsden died in
1949 and Mr Coldwell in 1936. Mr Graves retired
from the Bank’s service in 1948 and Mr Wheeler in
1949. The others are still actively engaged in
managerial duties at various branches of the Bank.
The first clerk at the branch, Mr A. D. Miles,
who had previously been on the Bank’s staff at
Camperdown, is now Manager at Hawthorn. Mr
T. Tehan, who was the first local boy to be
appointed to the staff, commenced duty in 1911 but
resigned in 1920 to follow pastoral pursuits.
BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES
the oldest of the Australian Banks,
the Bank of New South Wales is the “baby”
of the family here.
The branch was opened in Terang in 1936, under
the management of Mr (“King”) Cole, in the
premises now occupied by Messrs Little & Owens.
The bank acquired a site adjacent to the other
COMMERCIAL BANKING COMPANY
OF SYDNEY LTD.
JHE BANK OF VICTORIA opened a branch in
Terang in 1897 under the managership of Mr
G. F. S. Rutherford, who was succeeded In 1899 by
Mr D, Grelg, who is now retired and living at
Malvern.
The business was conducted for a time in Mrs
Aley’s buildings and later on moved to a wooden
building on its present site, which was purchased
in 1897, and which previously had been used as a
Post and Telegraph Office.
The present building was completed in 1902.
The Bank of Victoria amalgamated with the
Commercial Banking Company of Sydney Ltd., in
1927.
Many of the Bank officers have played a
prominent part in the life of this community, and
the Bank has made a valuable contribution to the
development of the town and district. Present
manager is Mr E. Gudgeon.
NATIONAL BANK OF AUSTRALASIA LTD.
'J’HB COLONIAL BANK, which amalgamated with
the National Bank in 1919, was the first
financial institution to open a branch in Terang.
The local branch dates back to about 1866, when
its business was conducted in a room at Lang’s
Store, under the management of Mr Conaccher, and
in 1886 moved to its present site on the corner of
High and Estcourt Streets.
The original building on this site consisted of
a single storey, to which was added another storey
in 1902, and in 1929 the bank was replaced by the
present modern building.
It is interesting to note that since 1898 there
have been only six managers—Mr F. J. Brett (1898-
1909), Mr F. Burnet (1909-1920), Mr James Fairley
(1920-1926), Mr J. G. B. Scott (1926-1947), Mr F.
R. Davison (1947-1950). The present manager is
Mr A, G. Baird.
BANK OF AUSTRALASIA
■pHE TERANG BRANCH of the Bank of Australasia
was opened in 1897, and in 1901 the present
two-storey edifice was erected.
First manager was the late Mr A. H. Miles and
he held the position until 1911. He was followed
by the late Mr G. L. Bolden (1911 until his retire-
ment in 1930), the late Mr C. H. Mackinnon
(1930-31), Mr J. C. Hilliard (1931-35), Mr R. S.
Young (1935-38), Mr D. G. Barker (1938-46). and
the present manager, Mr W. A. MacKenzie, who
took charge in 1946.
trading banks and there, in 1939, built its imposing
two-storied brick building. The late Mr Doug. Mc-
Millan was the manager, and he was succeeded by
Mr J. P. Whittaker.
Due to war regulations, the bank closed the
Terang office in 1942, and Mr Whittaker transferred
to Bairnsdale.
Many times in the next four years the bank
generously made the banking chamber available for
Terang's patriotic purposes.


DALGETY & COMPANY LIMITED
JHB PRESENT COMPANY, which holds sales at
Terang, wa.s first introduced to this district
in 1907, having purchased the auctioneering firm of
Howe, Thornton & Palmer. The Terang branch
was managed by the late Claude B. Palmer, and on
the staff were Messrs Donald Horne, George Toyne,
Hurtle Scown, Gilbert Ditty (the present manager),
Eddie Nehill, and at a later date Charles Maurice,
Larry McCunnie (our present second in command),
Ben Carson, H. P. Ince, Alex Mackenzie and Joe.
Clarke.
Extensive sales of stock were made by private
contract throughout the Western District and the
late Mr Palmer established the Darlington and Lis-
more sheep sales, at which up to 50,000 sheep were
yarded in the two-day sales.
Other stock and station agents operating in
Terang at that time (1907) were Young Bros, (under
the control of Mr R. P. Bennett) and Gleeson &
Norris. These two businesses changed hands
several times, the former to R. P. Bennett, Horne
& Palmer and then to McDonald Bros., of Mortlake.
The latter became in turn Norris, Toyne & Scown;
Norris, Toyne & Kenna, and Kenna Bros., and was
finally acquired by McDonald Bros. In 1937 the
business of McDonald Bros., including their Mort-
lake branch, was purchased by Dalgety & Company
Limited. The management at Terang passed from
Mr Donald Horne to Mr Ben Carson, who was
transferred from the Company’s Hamilton office
about 1910. Mr Carson held the position until his
retirement in 1933, when he was replaced by Mr
L. J. Parker, from Geelong office. On Mr Parker's
promotion to an important position with the Com-
pany’s Melbourne office in 1938, Mr G. Ditty, the
present manager, took over.
Up to 2000 head of station cattle are sold at
the Terang Annual Spring Sale, and Terang is
recognised as the best cattle market in the Western
District of Victoria.
“TERANG EXPRESS” HAS LONG RECORD
OF SERVICE TO COMMUNITY
pOR 62 YEARS the “Terang Express” has been
serving the people of Terang and district. It
was founded by Messrs Hogarth and Richmond in
1888, the printing office at that time being on the
south side of High Street. Mr G. W. Osburne
purchased the business in 1891.
Disaster struck in December, 1894, when a fire
destroyed the plant, and premises were then secured
in a galvanised iron building next to the Wheatsheaf
Hotel, where the “Express” was published for six
years.
To the “Express” went the distinction of having
the first one-machine installation of the linotype
in the Commonwealth, and today it has one of the
most extensive printing plants outside of the metro-
politan area.
Mr W. G. Csburne, on the death of his father,
assumed charge of the business in 1900, and built
the present office in Baynes Street. When he died
in 1939, the “Express” became a proprietary com-
pany, and is still functioning as such, Mr Osburne’s
daughter-in-law (Mrs E. E. Osburne) being closely
HOTELS
TERANG HOTEL
Erected in 1859 by Mr James McAdie, the
Terang Hotel was the first hostelry opened in the
town. The late Mr Ben Napthlne owned the hotel
from 1861 to 1865. In 1889, the late Mr W. F.
Nehill purchased the premises and the business, and
the fine t-vvo-storey hotel w T as completed in 1900.
The building has undergone several alterations, a
new residential tying being added in 1941. The
property still remains in the Nehill family, with
Messrs J. Copley and J. Liddle as licensees.
WHEATSHEAF HOTEL
Mr Burstcn built the first Wheatsheaf Hotel in
1862, with Mr W. H. Scown its first licensee. After
being used as a police station for four years, the
hotel re-opened in 1867. The new hotel was built
in 1893, and the photo shows the recent renovations
and modern lines of the building. Mr Charles Smith,
of Melbourne, is the owner, and Mr and Mrs D.
Dow, "mine hosts.”
COMMERCIAL HOTEL
Built by Mr Asche (possibly father of the
renowned Oscar) about 1866, the Commercial Hotel
opened its doors under the management of Mr Thos.
Fowling. For many years this hotel was associated
with the old coaching days as a changing station
for' Cobb & Co’s, coaches. Mrs W. L. Johnstone
and the Tuomey family are remembered for their
association with this business for many years. Mrs
Tuomey is the owner and Mr A. Turner the present
licensee.
BOWMAN’S HOTEL
Youngest of the Terang hotels, the present
building was erected in 1903 by the late Mr R. C,
Bowman. At the time of erection, for a country
hotel, it was outstanding in architectural appear-
ance. The premises are owned by Mrs Slcrey, who
conducted the hotel for many years, and her
daughter, Mrs E. M. Harris, now manages its affairs.
associated with the firm.
Editor of the “Express” from 1898 to 1931 was
Mr H. R. Linn, who still lives in the town, and he
was followed in turn by Messrs H. P. Boulter, A.
Todd and J. J. McLean. Since Mr Osburne’s death
in 1939, Mr Keith McKenzie has been manager and
Mr L. J. Gallop editor. The foreman, Mr J. Knight,
has been employed at the “Express” Office since he
left St. Thomas’ School 40 years ago.


INDUSTRIES
TERANG IS MENTIONED one invariably
thinks of dairying, because that is our principal
industry, followed in importance by sheep and wool,
but there are also several secondary industries in
the tovrn.
TYRE RETREADING
The tyre retreading and recapping business is
quite an old one in Terang, as it was opened in
1927 by Mr A. S. Morrison, first in the old shop
(now removed) next to Starkie’s Butchery, then in
larger premises apposite the Post Office now occu-
pied by A. J. Findlay & Sons. After 15 years
there, Mr Morrison moved to the present site in
Baynes Street.
The process of retreading is an interesting one.
The surface of the old tyre is built up with several
thicknesses of rubber, after which it is placed in a
mould and a pressure of 100 lbs. applied inside so
that it will retain its shape while being “cooked”
for one hour at a steam pressure of 50 lbs.
ICE MANUFACTURE
The Terang Cool Stores were opened in Sep-
tember, 1947, by Mr R. J. Kurtze. As well as being
the ma’n rabbit-receiving centre in the district, the
stores are used for the manufacture of ice and the
storage of fruit, etc. Rabbits are bought from
trappers in the surrounding districts, chilled, and
then sent to Melbourne for export.
The stores have a 30-ton refrigeration capacity
and 60,000 cubic feet of refrigerated space.
GLOVE FACTORY
The Edna Hosiery and Glove Factory, opened
in August 1946, now employs 20 girls. On the
electrically-driven machines woollen gloves are being
made at present, but fabric gloves have been manu-
factured for both men and women.
SAWMILL
The Terang Sawmill commenced operations in
January, 1947, and has been of great assistance to
builders in this district, as well as to the Housing
Commission of Victoria in its projects at Terang
and Camperdown.
Pine and hardwood logs are brought from a
30-mile radius of Terang. The pine timber is sawn
into lengths here and then sent to Melbourne where
it is cut ready to make boxes for the Trufood
factory and butter factories in the Western District.
The hardwood is used principally by builders in
the immediate district.
CABINET-MAKING
Mr Alan Mills, who has been in business in
High Street for a number of years, specialises in
cabinet-making and upholstery in his well-equipped
workshop.
JOINERY
Terang’s newest industry is the Joinery Works,
which was opened in January, 1950, by Mr A, Meade,
of Terang, and Mr W. Macauley, of Melbourne. All
classes of woodwork and furniture are made with
the aid of modern machinery.
Mr T. E. Willey has operated a joinery works
in Terang for the past four years. He carries
out all types of general woodwork, but specialises
in individual pieces of furniture to order.
TERANG FLAX MILL
the Commonwealth Government took over
control of the flax industry in 1940 conse-
quent on the urgent request by the British
Government that flax production in Australia should
be rapidly increased for war purposes, and the
Flax Production Committee was set up to direct
the Government organisation, Terang was one of
the places chosen as a site for a flax mill.
Despite many initial difficulties commonly
experienced by most expanding industries in war
time, the mill was built, . machinery installed and
all necessary equipment procured for the deseeding,
retting and scutching of flax straw for the pro-
duction of urgently required flax fibre. During the
war years the fibre was used chiefly in the manu-
facture of equipment for the Services.
There was a good response to appeals by the
Government to grow this new crop and the mill
was supplied with straw grown in the Terang,
Grassmere, Ballangeich, Ellerslie, Mortlake and
Camperdown districts. The first crop was grown
in 1941, when straw from about 8100 acres was
delivered to the mill. The largest area sown was
just over 1800 acres in 1944. The last crop to be
planted was in 1945.
Mill operations did not finally cease until early
in 1947, after all the straw on hand had been
processed. The mill provided employment for
about 40 persons. The buildings on the site were
eventually purchased by Trufood of Australia Ltd.,
and portion of them are now being re-erected at
the Boorcan railway station.
DRY CLEANING
Terang Is fortunate to have an up-to-date dry
cleaning business, -which is owned by Mr Andy
Minogue, High Street.
POULTRY FARMS
There are several large poultry farms in the
town and district. Mr Frank Smith’s farm at The
Bend is recognised as one of the most modern and
extensive in the State.
' TRICYCLE FACTORY
A new industry which will be functioning later
this year will be Mr F. E. Chilton’s tricycle factory.
This will be built in Baynes Street, and as well as
tricycles, Mr Chilton will manufacture bicycles. He
has made application for two Australian patents for
his tricycles.


NOORAT
NOORAT was named by Major Mitchell
after an ancient aborigine king named Ngoora.
The district was first settled in 1839-1840 by Niel
Black on behalf of his company.
Although mention of the pioneers and of the
Black family is made elsewhere in this edition, no
story of Noorat would be complete without emphasis
on the link between Noorat and the Black family.
Practically all the earliest settlers in the district
came out with Mr Black. These include Messrs
Ellis, Scally, Brennan, Carson, Beechey and Mac-
donald. When opportunity offered these people
took up land on their own account, and by hard
work and aided by this magnificent country, suc-
cess was assured.
With the subdivision of Glenormiston estate in
1889 and Noorat a little later, and the commencement
of the Glenormiston Butter Factory in 1895, the
township and district of Noorat went ahead. There
were two hotels at that time, one owned by Mrs
Culleton, where the present Mount Noorat Hotel
stands, and the other hotel, combined with a store,
owned by Mr Quinn. This hotel was situated in
the paddock south of where the butter factory is
today. One of the highlights of the early days at
Noorat was the race meeting held in Mr Angus
Gillies S-enr’s. paddock. Evidence of the time and
trade were the three blacksmiths in Noorat. Mr
J. B. Smith was the first blacksmith, and then Mr
W. H. Hamilton and Mr R. McLaren. Mr Holes
was the first baker, and the store, built by Mr
Smith, was started by Messrs W. B. Marshall and
George Neale. This business was purchased by
Messrs Montgomery & Bradshaw, of Terang, The
fine Public Hall was erected over 60 years ago, but
was completely destroyed by fire on 25/1/45. Unfor-
tunately, permission cannot be obtained for the
rebuilding of the hall, and so the Scout Hall serves
for all public functions and meetings.
The first church service in Noorat was held in
Mr David Carson’s home, . and the Presbyterians
erected the first church. This wooden building wag
later moved to Glenormiston following the erection
of the beautiful bluestone church, which was built
in 1883. This greatly-admired church was erected
by Mrs Niel Black and her sons as a memorial to
the late Hon. Niel Black. St. Joseph’s Roman
Catholic Church, too, is a beautiful building—
testimony of the people’s inspiration and love.
The first State School teacher at Noorat was
Miss Pye, followed by Mrs Evans (later Mrs James
Carson) and John Winter.
The district’s prominence in sport covers a long
period. Tennis players in Rev. F. W. Rolland;
cricketers in Fleming Bros., P. Young and S. John-
son; rifle shooters such as A. J. Smith; Gun Club
members in Messrs H. Smith, M. Arundell, R. R.
Lewis and J. Murnane, have placed their respective
sports on a high level.
The story of the Noorat A. & P. Society is
told separately, and Noorat is justly proud of
its Show. Indeed, from its association with the
Black family and the famous N.B. cattle, the butter
factory and the beauty of the township, Noorat has
been richly blest by nature and by its people.
AGRICULTURAL & PASTORAL SOCIETY
pROM A CASUAL and somewhat insignificant
beginning in 1932 emerged the Noorat and
District Agricultural and Pastoral Society, which has
become one of the most virile organisations in thr
district.
Because of the enthusiasm displayed by the
committee, success for the first show was assured
before the fixture took place on November 19, 1932,
and a profit of £257 resulted.
The idea of having a district show originated in
a family discussion, but there was little thought
then of how such a fixture would become such an
important annual event.
In its comparative short term of existence the
and P. Society has achieved considerable success
and prestige, and has accomplished much in placing
the district “on the map.” Noorat’s big day—the
third Saturday in November —is a “must” for
Western District show exhibitors and show patrons.
From the outset the committee —many of the
original members are still actively interested —
undertook to stage a show “by the people for the
people,” at a price within the scope of all. While
in some circles its methods have been regarded as
radical, the public’s response justified the Society’s
broadminded policy.
Ideally situated at the foot of Mount Noorat,
the Noorat recreation reserve provides a natural
amphitheatre for the annual exhibitions. Entries
in all sections have always been most satisfactory,
and visiting judges have expressed the opinion that
prize-winners at Noorat need never fear competition
at any other provincial show.
During the years that the Society has been
functioning, it has given an impetus to rural life
in the district by encouraging all breeds of live-
stock, promoting keenness in all phases of agricul-
ture, and giving the public generally a greater
appreciation of what is being done by the man-on-
the-land.
To draw a patronage of upwards of 10,000 into
a township with a normal population of 300 persons
is no mean effort, and is fine recognition of the
efforts of the Society. Noorat is definitely a “people’s
show,” of which no further proof is needed than
the splendid manner in which all who attend, from
the most -discriminating exhibitor to the casual
onlooker, co-operate to make the day a success.
The A. &■ P. Society’s present office-bearers are as
follow: President, Mr I. A. Campbell; vice-presi-
dents, Messrs A. J. Eldridge, J. F. Baker and P. F.
Scally; secretary, Mr Keith W. Hamilton; hon.
treasurer, Mr L. K. Noel; committee, Messrs A. W.
Noel, P. G. Cole, W. M. Troup, A. Clifford, J. F. Scally,
D. Moloney, C. Eldridge, C. Glennen, D. Heffernan, G.
R. Webb, W. Hansen, M. Kavenagh, W. B. Holmes,
M. Scally, S. J. Clarke, P. Glennen, E. Heard, J.
O'Leary, T. Moloney, D. Mackinnon, J. A. Cochrane.
A. W. Lewis, W. Bayne, K. F. Brennan, A. B. Clarke,
V/. Cullen, D. J. Dennis, M. A. Graham, K. Gillies,
J. Heffernan, W. Holmes, E. W. Holmes, P. Lourey,
M. Maclsod, P. McKenzie, H. McKenzie, A. B.
McCrabb, L. F. Munsor, P. O’Keeffe, J. J. O’Sullivan,
A. Sutherland, J. Tehan, A. J. B. Welshman, E. B.
Wood, E. Sandwell, N. B. Palmer and Mrs I. S. Black.


1949 SHOW DAY AT NOORAT —SCENE DURING GRAND PARADE


The Glenormiston Butter & Cheese Factory Co. Ltd.
CHURN ROOM OF ORIGINAL FACTORY SHOWS
EARLY TYPE OF CHURNS
pROM ITS INCEPTION in the year 1895 the
Glenormistan Butter & Cheese Factory Company
Ltd. has been a vital factor in the development of
the dairying industry in this district. The first
meeting to form a butter and cheese factory at
Glenormiston was held on the 12th February, 1895,
and in May of the same year the Company was
registered, the first Directors being Messrs A. J.
Black (chairman), S. G. Black, Thos. Kelly, Donald
Ferguson and William Long Jnr.
The Company commenced operations on the 15th
July, 1895, in a portion of the old bluestone wool
shed at the Glenormiston station owned by Mr S. G.
Black. The supply received on the opening day
was 1000 gallons of whole milk and the price for
butterfat for the month was 7d. per pound. It is
interesting to note that the supply of whole milk
during the peak of the 1949-50 season was in the
vicinity of 37,000 gallons per day.
In 1903 a creamery was opened at Noorat with
a supply of 1800 gallons of whole milk daily, and in
1906 the expansion of the Company necessitated the
building of another creamery at Castlecarey to
service the Glenormiston North area.
With the rapid growth of the Company, the
building at Glenormiston was found to be inade-
quate, so in 1910 the factory was transferred to
up-to-date premises at Noorat, and a creamery was
carried on at the old factory site.
VIEW OF THE ORIGINAL FACTORY AT GLENORMISTON


Its Development Over The Past Fifty-five Years
In June, 1911, Trufood of Australia Ltd.
commenced operations at Glenormiston for
the purpose of manufacturing powdered
skim milk, supplies of raw material being
obtained through the Glenormiston Butter
& Cheese Factory Co. Ltd.
The business of Wood & Co., of Kolora,
was taken over in 1912 and carried on as
a creamery. Two years later the Terang
Cheese & Butter Factory Co. Ltd., which
covered Terang and Ecklin districts, was
also taken over as a creamery. Further
acquisitions to the Company were the busi-
ness of Wood & Co. at The Sisters in
1927 and that of the Mortlake Butter &
Cheese Factory Co. Ltd.
In keeping with the progress of the
Company, the factory buildings at Noorat
were rebuilt in 1924, and in 1936 the busi-
ness was transferred to a new modern
factory adjoining the old one.
The following figures of the Glenormis-
ton Butter & Cheese Factory Co. Ltd.
supply very tangible evidence of the value
of the dairying industry to the district.
From its inception up to the end of
1949 the turnover of the Company was
£11,000,751/14/7. Over 249 million gallons of
whole milk and 54 million pounds of farm-
separated cream were supplied to the Com-
pany during the above period, giving a
butter equivalent of 66,151 tons, and in
recent years a by-product—powdered butter-
milk has been manufactured, providing
additional revenue.
Illustrated at the right is a section of
the “New Way” Continuous Buttermaking
Machine installed at the Glenormiston
Butter & Cheese Factory Co. Ltd. factory
at Noorat, one of four different types pur-
chased by the Australian Dairy Produce
Board for the purpose of determining
whether continuous buttermaking machines
can be applied to Australian conditions.
The “New Way” machine is an Australian
invention and is made in Australia; the
other three are from overseas.
The basic principles of the Australian
process are as follow 7 : Firstly, the whole
milk is separated at the factory into cream
wTth a fat content of 40% and pasteurised
in the normal way. after w 7 hich it is sub-
jected to a second separation by the use
of a special type of separator to a fat con-
tent of 80%. whence it is drawn by vacuum
into a standardising chamber where the
correct composition of the finished product
is determined before passing into the final
stage known as the extruder. It is here
that the change from an oil-in-water type
of emulsion to a water-in-fat emulsion
takes place, producing butter by the appli-
cation of extreme pressure and low tempera-
ture. The finished article can be diverted
into moulding machines for either 1 lb. or
56 lbs. packages.
PRESENT SITE OF THE MODERN FACTORY
AT NOORAT
CONTINUOUS BUTTERMAKING MACHINE


KOLORA
is a native name meaning swampy ground,
and is -well named, as in the early days the
land was wet and marshy, with duck and wild fowl
abounding on the swamps. These duck were a
favorite dish at the aborigine camp situated where
Mr M. O’Sullivan’s farm now stands.
The first land taken up in the district was bj y
Niel Black & Co., closely followed by John Thom-
son. Later on these holdings were purchased in
1559 and 1860 and added to by the pre-emptive
rights granted to these pioneers.
An event which ■ contributed to the early
development of the district was the draining of
the area by the digging of the Winnidad creek or
drain. This work was carried out by Mr Chas.
McDonald and the whole cost, which must have been
considerable, as the drain was in parts over 6 feet
wide and 4 to 5 feet in depth, was borne by the few
landholders along the creek. These were Messrs
Clifford, Charles, Donahoe, Matthews, Grinter, and
the Thomson Estate.
An unfortunate error in the early surveys left
part of Kolora cut off from the main road, except
by long detour. When the hotel was at Kolora
people either had to buy a drink at the hotel or
pay a toll of 6d. before they were allowed to use
the short cut. However, this matter w y as later
overcome and the toll road is now the main highway
to the creamery and to Kolora.
Kolora was possibly the most enterprising of
the districts in the early dairying days, for here the
Fresh Food Co. was established on the site of the
present creamery. Messrs Wood & Co. bought out
the Fresh Pood Co. and continued for some time,
when the Glenormiston Butter & Cheese Factory
purchased their rights. Mr Alex McKenzie came
in 1904 to manage the creamery and continued to
do so until he passed away, a very highly respected
resident of the community. The present manager
of the creamery is Mr McKenzie’s son, Mr John
McKenzie.
Cheese manufacture was well to the fore, and
well-known manufacturers in Clifford Bros., J.
Blain and Noel Bros, found a ready market for
their produce in Geelong and Ballarat, whence the
cheese had to be transported by dray and bullock
waggon.
In step with the development of the district,
the school and church were the centre of education,
fellowship and worship. The first church services
were conducted in the home of Mr C. Grinter.
Later a church to be used by all denominations was
erected by public subscription. The first couple
to be married there were Miss Anne Morrett and
Mr Walter Podger, and the first child to be baptised
at the church was F. W. Grinter. This church
ultimately became the property of the Anglican
Church and was moved to Ballarat. Mr William
Matthew presented a block of land at the corner
of Mortlake-Terang road and he lent the money
for the erection of the Methodist Church. The
ETesbyterians erected a Sunday School, but with
the advent of motor cars the children attended the
Noorat Sunday School and the building w r as trans-
ferred to a site near Timboon.
The first school was erected about the year
1870 on the present site, and was a. large building
of one room with a gallery at one end for the
younger children. Many were the experiences of
the children in going to school in wading through
the swampy ground, and avoiding the camp of
aborigines. The first schoolmaster was Mr Gregory,
and he was followed by the Misses Esther and
Annie Pride and later by Mr Eustice. Other teachers
well remembered are Mr Luke Jones, Mr Worsell,
Miss Gorman and the present headteacher, Mr H.
Whelan.
Evidence of their attachment to the Kolora
district is the fact that so many of the earliest
settlers’ families are still settled there, and no
story of Kolora would be complete without mention
of the Cliffords, Grinters, Moloneys, Podgers, Noels,
Smiths, McConnells, Whitings, Woods, Tom Hickey
and the many others who contributed generously
to the prosperity, happiness and social life of the
community.
KEILAMBETE
"pHE PIONEER of Keilambete was John Thomson.
In the year 1840, John and James Thomson,
searching for pastures, came across the Keilambete
lake. Tasting the water, they were dismayed to find
it salty and were about to depart, but on discovering
the nearby springs they decided to make their home
there. What a far reaching decision on the history
of the district. The old homestead was situated
where Mr Martin Scally lives today.
(Doubtless the lake in those days would be
almost at the top of the banks, for there are many
now who have seen the lake recede hundreds of
yards. The country then was heavily timbered,
and here were seen the largest of the trees in
the district —huge white gums.
The Government opened up portion of the
country known as East Keilambete for selection in
1868. The allotments were only of 80 acres each,
not sufficient to make a living from, but the blocks
were snapped up, being the only land available for
the settlers. To make ends meet, work such as
shearing or clearing on the nearby stations had to
he done in between clearing their own selections.
Among the families that came in at this time were
John Axford, James Shields, William Atkins, M.
Phelan, John Stewart and that great horseman, Mr
Chatfield.
The residents used a small log hut far a school,
and there Mrs John Stewart taught unpaid for two
years. From 1872 onwards, the Government had
oversight of the school and later erected a better
building. Mrs Stewart continued for nearly 30 years
a schoolmistress, being assisted for eight years by
her daughter, the late Mrs Angus McLean. The
school was closed in 1916, and the building is now
part of Mr G. W. Hill’s residence.
Another early landmark of Keilambete was the
Presbyterian Church, but after serving the needs of
the district for many years, the building was moved
to Mortlake Road, Kolora.


NOORAT FROM THE MOUNT, WITH TERANG IN LEFT BACKGROUND


Trufood Company Pioneered Powdered Milk Industry
PORTION OF TRUFOOD FACTORY AT GLENORMISTON
J-JOME of Trufood of Australia Limited, pioneer of
the powdered milk industry in Australia, is
picturesquely situated in open country nestling at
the foot of Mount Noorat, a few miles from Terang.
The factory is away from the traffic of the main
road, and surrounded on every side by those wide-
spreading green pastures whence comes the milk
that it converts into powder. No more ideal condi-
tions could be imagined for the manufacture of an
important food product.
Early in 1909, two gentlemen globe-trotters, who
were directors of Trufood of England (factory at
Wrenbury, England), were going to Sydney by rail.
The train stopped at Euroa and they saw a notice
on the station, “Euroa Butter Factory, C. L. Deßoos,
Manager.”
On their return to England, they were asked,
during a board meeting of Trufood of England, if
there was any chance of selling the Trufood patent
rights for the spray process of drying milk and
which had been purchased by the English Company
from Merrell-Soule Company of Canada for England
and Australia. The travellers said they had not
endeavored to sell them, but they had seen the name
of a butter factory in the railway station of Euroa.
Subsequently they communicated with Mr De
Boos and, after negotiations had taken place, a
syndicate was formed in which Messrs A. J. Black
H. W. Grlmwade, A. S. Bloomfield and Arthiu
Robinson were interested.
A prospectus was drawn up and £50,000 was
subscribed for 50,000 shares of one pound each. A
very large number of the shares were taken up by
the Black family and their friends.
After the purchase of the patent rights, arrange-
ments were made with the English Company tc
send out certain machinery, and Mr Dennis, theii
engineer, came to Australia to erect the plant.
When Mr Dennis returned to England, Mr D. C
Cameron was appointed the first factory manager
at Glenormiston.
The Company then commenced to make a full
cream powder but, unfortunately, the process was
not completely satisfactory and a large amount of
the capital was lost. It then became necessary to
obtain further funds and a debenture of £lO,OOO
was issued. Losses were still made. The directors
then lent the Company a further £5OOO and started
the manufacture of a skim powdered milk. After
several years of hard work the Company commenced
to prosper and £20,000 that had been written off
the capital was restored with the sanction of the
Court.
In 1916 the patent rights expired and an applica-
tion was made to Mr Justice Starke in the High
Court for an extension. This was refused.
On several c-ccasions, visits were made by the
directors to irrigation centres such as Cohuna (Vic.)
and Bega (N.S.W.) with a view of opening another
factory, as business had increased. None of the
districts visited proved entirely satisfactory and no
action was taken.
In 1933, the directors decided to establish an
overseas business and a director visited Ceylon,
Federated Malay States, Hong Kong and Shanghai,
but the prospects of sales in these countries were
small. Later in the year, India was visited and
(Concluded on Page 54)


GLENORMISTON
gETTLED IN 1839 by Mr Frederick Taylor,
Glenormiston was the first district settlement.
This area was originally named Weeraweeroit, then
Strathdownie, and later Mr Black named it Glen-
ormiston.
When purchased by Niel Black on behalf of
the syndicate (Messrs Niel Black, Thomas Steuart
Gladstone, Alex Struthers Finlay and A. Steuart)
from Mr Taylor on January 4, 1840, the Glenormis-
ton property consisted of 43,520 acres and included
the area now known as “Eddington,” right through
to the Dixie Bridge. The homestead was situated
on the farm recently occupied by Mr Thos. Hayden.
Mr Niel Black continued to manage Glenormis-
ton until 1869, when the Company was broken up
and Mr Finlay was allotted Glenormiston. This
occasioned Mr Black moving to Noorat.
Although the late Mr W. Beechey could
remember the occasion when he saw the first rabbit
ever seen in this district, about the year 1880 the
rabbits were so numerous that school boys from
Terang used to come out in drags to take part in
the organised rabbit drives. These were red-letter
days for the boys, and on one occasion at least
1000 rabbits were killed in a drive. Numbers of
men were employed constantly trapping rabbits,
and there must have been millions of the pest sent
to the factory at Camperdown from Glenormiston
and Noorat. There were also large mobs of native
companions, or brolgas, and it was a pretty sight
to see hundreds of these birds gather together and
go through a kind of dance not unlike a blacks'
corroboree. With the closer settlement these birds
have disappeared.
The Land Company of Australia Ltd. bought out
Mr Finlay and subdivided the property, putting it
up for sale in 1889 —the first district subdivisional
sale. Mr S. G. Black secured the homestead pro-
perty. From the time of that sale the district has
gone ahead.
With the commencement of the Glenormiston
Butter Factory, in 1895, in part of the old bluestone
wool shed, Glenormiston still maintained its
position as the leading district. Later a new
butter factory was erected at Noorat, and the Tru-
food Powdered Milk Factory built on the old site.
What an effect this industry and works have had
on the whole district, and the management and
staff have contributed much to the betterment of
the community.
It was in the Glenormiston district that the top
district price of farm lands was obtained. In the
twenties, Mr R. W. McConnell paid £lO5 per acre
for his farm of 80 acres. Although the depression
revealed this and similar prices for farms to be
excessive, there is no gainsaying that this rich
volcanic land at Glenormiston is some of the best
and most valuable in the State. Mainly through
the efforts of the late Mr R. H. Watts and Mr A.
B. Clarke, the public hall was built in 1929.
This fine building, with its jarrah floor, is con-
sidered to- have the best dancing floor in the district.
The purchase of the Glenormiston House pro-
perty by the State Government, for the first
Agricultural College of Animal Husbandry in Vic-
THE SISTERS
■pHB SISTERS W'as pioneered by Messrs Falrie and
Rodgers in the forties, but on these pioneers
moving further to the w'est Mr Niel Black took
over the holding. No doubt the twin hills inspired
Mr Black to call the district The Sisters when ho
secured the grazing rights there to some 15-16,000
acres in the year 1844.
In 1869 Mr T. S. Gladstone (who w'as a cousin
to Mr W. E„ Gladstone, one of England’s greatest
statesmen) took over The Sisters. Mr Gladstone’s
son, Robert Nottingham Gladstone, came out to
take charge of the property, but he was here only
a few weeks when he unfortunately met his death
by accident, and was buried in the Terang Cemetery.
Mr Niel Black resumed the management of the
property and three years later purchased it. The
country at this time was still heavily timbered
and used for grazing, particularly bullocks.
Aborigines were very numerous and dangerous,
and the stock had to be watched all night or they
would disappear before morning. Kangaroos, walla-
bies, opposums, bandicoots and native cats Were
numerous, but no rabbits or foxes —they were to
come later.
Most of the early settlers in the district Were
Scotch folk, who w'ere employed by Mr Black’s
father, but who came out to Australia with Mr Niel
Black. These people included Mr Peter Crawford
and his wife (grandparents of the late Mrs Angus
McLean and Jim Stewart), Peter McArthur, John
Ross, John McEwan, Niel Livingstone and John
Craw'ford.
About 1890 the property carried 15,000 crossbred
sheep and 2000 pure-bred Shorthorn cattle, and
12 men were employed all the year round.
Until 1892, when the school was transferred
from Lara, the children had attended school at Keil-
ambete. This entailed a good number of these
children walking six miles to school, until arrange-
ments were made with John Stewart to transport
the children, up to 22 in number, by horse and
spring cart to the Keilambete school.
The large property remained in the Black family
until 1910, when Mr S. G. Black subdivided it,
erected dwellings and sold it by auction. Today
there are over 50 families making a good living
on the old Sisters station. Aided by closer settle-
ment in 1921-24, the district is now thickly popu-
lated and as most of the land is of high quality
The Sisters is a thriving community.
By the foresight of a Tew older residents and
with the assistance of the soldier settlers, The
Sisters obtained a fine Memorial Hall in 1925, which
was opened by Mr Angus McLean on Ist February,
1926. This hall is now the centre of the district
social functions.
Citizens who contributed much to the district’s
welfare are the late Mr P. A. Tunne, Mr Sam Harris
Snr., Mr .Donald Gillies, Messrs John’ and Angus
McLennan, Mr and the late Mrs Angus McLean,
Mr John Kenna and many others.
toria should prove of great benefit to all dairying
people, particularly those of this district, in years
to come.


GLENORMISTON AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE
QN Ist October, 1949, the Department of Agriculture
made history when it acquired the magnificent
Glenormiston homestead (pictured above) and pro-
perty for the purpose of establishing an Agricultural
College and Research fetation. This is the first
college of its kind in Victoria.
In 1945, a sub-committee of the Terang Post-
war Planning Committee was set up. Representa-
tive of many organisations, it comprised Messrs G.
Crichton (chairman and secretary), A. J. Bldridge,
W. M. Troup, A. P. Freckleton, K. Podger and W.
Holmes Jnr. On Mr Crichton’s transfer from the
district, Mr A- J. Eldridge became chairman, and Mr
K. Brennan (secretary) and Mr D. Mackinnon were
added to the committee. Without the untiring
efforts of this committee, the backing of their
organisations, and solid support the proposal received
throughout the Western District, the scheme may
have been shelved many times. There were so
many political changes and difficulties that all
connected with bringing this idea and necessity to
a reality are worthy of commendation
The Glenormiston House property of 705 acres
was owned by the late S. G. Black, and it contains
within its boundaries the three main types of soil
to be found in the Western District—volcanic stone
and rich loams, running off into plains . On it is
a well-built two-storey bluestone house with more
than 40 rooms, and 10 other dwellings suitable for
staff residences, plus outbuildings and stables. The
house is sewered, served by the S.E.C., and has a
good water supply. The price paid by the Depart-
ment was £45,000 —a bargain.
with the support of Levers Ltd., a very satisfactory
business was built up. At present this has been
extended to the Pacific, South Africa, the Middle
Bast and Ceylon.
In. 1939, an important change in the life of the
Company took place when it commenced once again,
after a great deal of research, to manufacture full
cream powder. The demand for malted milk powder
became evident too at this stage, and today the
Company manufactures 750 to 1000 tons yearly.
Today, Trufood of Australia Limited is an all
Australian Company of approximately 300 share-
holders spread throughout the Commonwealth. It
is the only major industrial organisation operating
in the district.
During the year ending June 30, 1949, the total
payment of £260,836/11/3 was made to suppliers,
and in the same period £69,388/11/3 was paid to
162 employees.
To cope with the increasing development of
the district and the world-wide demand for Trufood
products, the Company has an extensive works
programme in view.
The following are some interesting facts asso-
ciated with the Company.
During the last war very large quantities of
Trufood products were supplied to the British,
American and Australian armies and navies.
The trade name “Trufood” is familiar through-
out the Commonwealth, and under the export brand
“Cowlac,” the Trufood products are becoming
favorably known overseas.
Trufood Milk was taken to the South Pole with
the Sir Douglas Mawson Expedition.
The Company was instrumental in obtaining
electricity supply for the Glenormiston district and
in 1929 welcomed its arrival.
TRUFOOD FACTORY (from Page 52)


SOUTH ECKLIN
RELATIVELY young community, South Ecklin
has progressed greatly in the last 30 years.
Avoided by the early settlers, owing to the mo-re
inviting pastures in the surrounding districts, John
Wilkinson, D. Lawson. Fred Rogers and John
Gubbins were some of the first to make their home
in this locality.
Brucknell and South Ecklin were well in the
news in several deputations to the Minister of
Railways, in 1889, in the hope of having the railway
line run from Terang, This scheme must have been
given more than favorable consideration, for a
survey was made, and some of the survey marks
can still he seen on old tree stumps.
An amazing feature of South Ecklin’s history
w-as the building of tw-o public halls. Although
there was not a. great deal of mo-ney about in the
district 40 years ago. feeling was so high that the
two halls were built. An amusing story is told of
an entertainment booking a hall —most attractive
posters were displayed up in conspicuous places,
even close to the rival hall. When the entertainers
came to the township they were knowingly mis-
directed to- the wrong hall, and started to unpack
their goods and chattels and make ready for the
show. About an hour before the show- was due to
commence, the Committee of the empty hall, realis-
ing that it had been outwitted, made representation
to the entertainers about their breach of contract.
In view- of the position the entertainers decided to
transfer, but by the time they had repacked their
coaches it was discovered that someone had removed
the w-heels from the vehicles and so anchored the
show-. One would have thought a sense of humor
w-ould have prevailed, but there was so much ill-
feeling that there w-as nc show that night. However,
in the last few- years, the residents came together
and agreed to sell one building and have one hall.
Many years ago there was a small butter factory
here, under the management of Mr C. Rodgers and
w-ith Mr Vickers as secretary. The factory secured
first prize for butter at the Islington Exhibition
(London). The factory was sold to the Terang
Rutter Factory and later the Glenormiston Butter
Factory acquired it, and the buildings transferred.
What really started South Ecklin on the way
to prosperity and made it a highly productive dairy-
ing district, w-as the application of superphosphates.
Land that w-as worth £3 to £5 an acre—if you could
obtain a buyer 40 years ago—is now realising £35
an acre. With the coming of bulldozers, unpro-
ductive land is being brought into production very
quickly.
An industry which may have had far-reaching
effects on the economy and life of the w-hole district
was the Ecklin coal mine. It was sponsored by Mr
Barber, of Warrnambool, and £15,000 was spent in
an endeavor to produce from an area that w-as
thought to contain coal, oil and other by-products.
Under the management of Mr Wilson the area was
w-orked for several years, and although tests
revealed the presence of oil —and by-products—they
w-ere not obtainable in payable quantities. It is
understood a trial load of briquettes gave good
results at Trufood. The object w-as abandoned and
GARVOC
JHERE ARB STRONG CLAIMS that Garvoc was
the first district settlement, for in 1838 William
Hamilton and Watson took up a large stretch of
country at Yallock (Garvoc). Even till the 70’s
the Yallock station reached as far as Lake Terang,
but some 68 years ago the station was cut up.
During its history Yallock Station had many well-
know-n owners, including Mr C. B. Fisher, but
perhaps the best known w-as Mr Bolivar Laing,
manager for Mr Brow-n. Portion of the homestead
still stands, and is owned by the Blain family.
Many w-ell-know-n families were linked with the
district's progress after the station was cut up.
The Garvoc Mechanics’ Hall, which was opened
on 30th July. 1889, is the centre of the social side
of life.
The Garvoc district is noted for its dairy herds,
fat cattle, sheep and lambs. The local dairy farmers
established a co-operative butter factory in 1889,
one of the earliest in the State. The well-known
brand of “Black Swan” butter was manufactured
there. Sir Charles Lowe's father was the first
chairman of directors of the factory, which later
amalgamated w-ith the Warrnambool Cheese and
Butter Co., and later still Kraft Walker Co. took
over to make cheese.
G-irvoc residents have always shown a great
interest in sport. The Racing Club is one of the
oldest in the Western District. Many well-known
sporting identities have been associated with this
Club. The Rifle and Golf Clubs w-ere active bodies
in the early days of this century and the Eldridge
family (rifle) and Rev. Mr Carlton (golf) were
enthusiastic office-bearers. Cricket and football
teams have given their supporters many enjoyable
games and a number of premierships.
The saw-mills have played a prominent part in
Garvoc’s life, and renow-ned bullock drivers such
as Messrs W. Baxter, Jimmy Linn and W. E.
Stonehouse were connected with Spears’ mill. What
a pity those days are gone.
Garvoc’s patriotic and charitable appeals are
greatly to its credit. Their Red Cross work under
the secretaryship of A. F. Scullion during World
War I and their efforts associated w-ith Terang Red
Cross in World War II are deserving of praise.
Among those long .associated with the district
are Messrs Bolivar Laing, W. H. Clarke, Joseph
Rlain. W. E. Stonehouse, W. Baxter, John Clark,
FI. Eldridge, John Macdonald and J. B. Farrell.
The Catholic Church is a very old landmark
and plans are ready for a new church and school
to be built.
With the district children having the two
schools, and buses leaving each morning for Terang
and Warrnambool High Schools, theirs is a wonder-
ful heritage.
the plant disposed of by public auction.
The first school was shipped to WarrnambooJ
and then brought by bullock team to the district
by the late J. Arundell and J. Buchanan. Mr
Harkness was the first teacher. Recently, a new
school was built and the old school is used as
temporary residence for the teacher.


BOORCAN
JHE FIRST TRAVELLERS, when pausing at the
good camping spot at Taylor’s Creek, now
known as Mt. Emu Creek, must have often wondered
what the future of Boorean would be. The history
of Boorean is closely linked with that of the
Mackinnon family, and although a township was
surveyed a long time ago, and a great number of
cattle have been trucked from its railway yards,
the township has not been developed.
One of the past landmarks at Boorean was Mr
Selby’s Sportsman’s Arms Hotel. This was situated
just to the right of the roadway in Mr S. Mc-
Lennan’s paddock, about 100 yards from the creek,
and so one can understand why the roadway under
the bridge to Noorat is still sometimes called
Selby’s Lane. There have been race meetings held
on the flat that in later years served so well as
a picnic ground for the Terang folk. Shortly after
the railway line had passed through, and the men
engaged on the bridge construction had departed,
the hotel was burnt down.
THE THREE BRIDGES AT BOORCAN
(Photo by D. McKenzie, R.A.A.F.)
Only a few years ago, the old Boorean Hall
was sold and removed; there are many folk now
who wish that the Hall had been retained.
For many years travellers passing through
Boorean must have been impressed and greatly
envious of three things—the many and well-cared-
for plantations, the abundant grass in the paddocks,
and the fat Shorthorn bullocks in the paddocks of
“Marida Yallock.”
In 1947, the Soldier Settlement Commission
acquired 7754 acres of first-class land at JBoorcan
for settlement. The Commission bought properties
from “Marida Yallock,” 6027 acres; Estate I. S.
Black, 758 acres; and Mr P. G. Cole, 969 acres.
Although there was some disappointment that so
tew local applicants secured these coveted farms, it
is very gratifying to the district to see that all
the new settlers are men of sound farming ex-
perience, with excellent war records.
An area of land has been set aside at Boorean
for the establishment of a municipal abattoirs, and
DIXIE
pENOWNED throughout the district for his singing
and his favorite song, Mr D. S. Walker was
aptly nicknamed “Dixie” Walker, and from him the
district became known as Dixie. Other early settlers
in the district were T. Ayres, D. Lawson, R. W.
Napthine, John McCunnie. H, Richardson, J. Ware,
John Tehan, D. Kelly, Robert Bailey, Francis Gore
and Hughie Bennett.
The country was densely timbered mostly
stringy bark and often settlers would become lost
on their own properties. To reach Terang, the
crossing over Mt. Emu Creek had to be made by
means of logs lying in the creek bed, for it was
not until 3 873 that the first bridge was built;
although there have been some heavy floods in the
intervening years the bridge has withstood the
floodings. Viewing the Elingamite Creek, one recalls
the tragedy when the Rev. John Barnet was drowned
in it, at a spot to the west of where the Creamery
is today.
The school in the early days stood near where
Mr Jack Hammond now lives, but later it was
shifted to its present site. Mr Kelly was the first
teacher and others who have rendered good service
there are Messrs William Tranter, E. Payne and
M. Kerr.
The Creamery was built just on 60 years ago
by the Cobden Butter Factory, and the first manager
was Mr David Hay.
Most residents of the district will recall the
clearing fires that burnt on the hills throughout
the summer months, and it is no surprise to find
that there were’ once two sawmills at Dixie —Mr
Aikman owned one and Scherber Bros, owned the
other.
Dixie Hall, or North Ecklin Mechanics’ Institute
as it was called, was erected in 1897. Mr John
Tehan presented the land, the public subscribing
nearly all the money to finance the building. The
balance of £l4/15/6 was advanced, on loan, by the
Dixie Racing Club. Mr J. Bant was the builder
of the hall, the total cost being £79/8/3. What a
necessity a hall is to any community!
Dixie is the prettiest spot in the district, and
Lake Mumblin adds to its charm. It derives its
name from the aborigines, who. on their journeys
between Framlingham and Elingamite, strictly
avoided the lake, for there the bunyip mumbled;
perhaps it may have been a bittern. So the lake
became known as Mumblin. With fresh water over
100 feet deep, containing perch placed there by
the late John McCunnie, and surrounded by ti-tree,
Lake Mumblin could easily become one of the out-
standing beauty spots of the district.
Perhaps still in association with their song,
Dixie people are a very happy community, working
together with a spirit that very few others are
fortunate enough to share.
the district men are hopeful that a small portion of
land will be made available to them for recreational
purposes. The district children attend the Terang
schools, and are conveyed by a splendid bus service.
As soon as the roads are Improved on the settle-
ment, the bus service should be still better.


District Owes Much To These Men
NIEL BLACK AND FAMILY
BLACK, of Argyleshire, Scotland, was born
on October 16, 1804. On January 4, 1840, he
acquired, on behalf of his company, from Frederick
Taylor, the Glenormistan property of 43,520 acres,
a transaction which has had a far-reaching effect
on a great number of people in this district in
the intervening years.
In 1868, after 29 years of association, Niel Black
& Co. dissolved partnership, Mr Finlay taking
Glenormiston, Mr Gladstone The Sisters, and Niel
Black Mount Noorat. Ultimately. ■Mr Black pur-
chased The Sisters from Mr Gladstone.
NIEL BLACK
Notwithstanding his many pastoral duties, Mr
Black was able to devote considerable time to his
civic and parliamentary duties. He became a
member of the Legislative Assembly in 1859. As
a Hampden Shire councillor he devoted his time
and energies in the interests of the west riding
especially. A leader of the Presbyterian Church,
he gave freely of his talents, and it is in his
memory that his widow and family built the beauti-
ful stone church at Noorat.
Under his guidance a Shorthorn herd was
established in 1841 and, for many years, it consisted
of over 1000 breeding cows, including a stud of more
than 100 specially selected females. The brand of
N.B. was possibly the best known in Australia, and
fat bullocks from Mount Noorat regularly topped
the market each week.
His breed of Lincoln sheep was nearly as
renowned as the bullocks, and so big were they
that the shearers declared that they should be
paid so much per acre and not on the number.
Niel Black passed away on May 15, 1880.
(Concluded overleaf*
JOHN THOMSON OUTSTANDING IDENTITY
JOHN THOMSON was born in Edinburgh in 1807,
and for 19 years he and his brother conducted
a school in Hobart. In 1839, he came tor Victoria
and, in 1840, fired by the desire to pioneer and to
become a landholder, he leased from the Crown
most of the piece of country lying between Mort-
lake and Terang, and extending as far as “Eeyeuk.”
John Thomson made his home cn the bank of
Lake Keilambete, and the stone home now occupied
by Mr M. Scal'y is the original Keilambete home-
stead. Although running sheep on his 25,000 acre
property for the first year or two, it was not long
before Mr Thomson turned his attention to cattle
grazing. His Shorthorn herd of cattle were well
known and brought their owner a rich return.
Wages paid to employees in those days were a mere
pittance, but John Thomson always paid more
than was customary, and to the struggling settlers
who obtained casual employment on the stations
this must have been a desirable place to seek work.
Mr Thomson took an active interest in the
growth of the town and district, and especially in
the Terang Presbyterian Church that was later to
hear his name. On April 9, 1890, Mr Thomson was
accidentally killed in a buggy accident at Noorat.
In accordance with her husband’s plans, Mrs
Thomson built the glorious Thomson Memorial
Church in Terang. Mrs Thomson’s gift out of her
life interest was a deed that has few, if any,
parallels in the district.
JOHN THOMSON


MACKINNONS OF MARIDA YALLOCK
[)ANIEL MACKINNON reached Australia from
Scotland in 1839 and a year later, -with his
uncle, Dr. James Curdle, took up some 30,000 acres
near Cobden.
In 1850 Daniel Mackinnon bought Marida
Vallock, Boorcan, from Stephen Ewing. The property
at that time was heav’ly timbered light country,
hut by clearing and extensive drainage it was
steadily improved until it became one of the best
fattening properties in Victoria.
Daniel Mackinnon undertook many public duties,
as a magistrate and Hampden Shire cc-uncTlor, but
probably he was best known as an active worker
for the Presbvterian Church and an elder of the
Terang church. He died in 1889.
His eldest son, Hon. Donald Mackinnon, M.L.A.,
was a prominent figure for many years in Victorian
public life. He was member for Prahran for twenty
years. He was chairman of the Murray Waters
Commission and later Australian Commissioner in
the United States. He died in 1932.
Marida Tallo-ck was inherited bv the eldest son,
hot its administration remained in the hands of the
second son. William Kinross, who I’ved on the
property throughout his lifetime. He carried on
with great success the improvements begun by his
father; he was a pioneer in topdressing -with super-
phosphate and was regarded as an authority on live
stock and pasture management. He was a coun-
cillor of the Shire of Heytesbury and treasurer of
the Terang Presbyterian Church. William Kinross
died in 1943 and was unmarried.
The third son, James Curdie, known as J.C..
continues his active commercial life and has recently
celebrated his 85th birthday. He retains his connec-
tion with the district as chairman of Trufo-od of
Australia Ltd.
Kenneth John, the fourth son, carries on the
Tintaldra Station, Upper Murray.
On the death of Hon. Donald Mackinnon, Marida
DANIEL MACKINNON
Yallock passed to his eldest son, Donald, and Ewen
Daniel, now M.H.R. for Wannon. On the death of
their uncle, William Kinross, Donald returned from
South America, where he had been a senior executive
in the meat export business for many years. As
well as managing Marida Yallock, Mr Donald Mac-
kinnon is president of the Victorian Liberal and
Country Party and a director of Trufood Ltd., The
second brother, Brice, won his M.C. in Macedonia
and died in France in 1918; he was a subaltern in
the Black Watch. The youngest brother, Kenneth,
ivho is a barrister in London, was a Lieut. Col.
in the Royal Artillery throughout the war.
The members of Mr Black’s family were
Archibald John, Steuart Gladstone and Niel Walter.
Mr A. J. Black, born in 1859, rendered splendid
service as a Hampden Shire councillor, director and
founder of Glenormiston Butter Factory and Trufo-od
Ltd. He was responsible for planting the beautiful
trees on Mount Noorat, Mr Black died in a car
accident at Boorcan, in 1912. Mrs A. J. Black was
well-known and beloved throughout the district,
and many were her generous deeds in Red Cross,
church and charitable circles. Until her death
in 1938, Mrs Black owned a herd of outstanding
stud Jersey cattle.
In 1889, Black Bros, purchased part of the
Glenormiston property in the subdivisional sale, and
the second son, S. G. Black, made it his home.
Born in 1862, Mr S. G. Black, like his brother,
completed his education and took a degree at Cam-
bridge. Mr Black was a valued member of the
Hampden Shire for many years, and he is closely
linked with the community in sharing in the gift
of Terang’s granite war memorial. It _w.as Mr
Black who added the second storey to Glenormiston
House, which is now to be the Agricultural College.
It was in his large bluestone shed that the Glen-
ormiston Butter Factory commenced its operations.
Mr S. G. Black died in 1940.
The youngest son, Niel Walter, built his home
on that part of the property known as “Dalvui,”
and he was journeying to England to be married
when the illfated S.S, Waratah was lost in July, 1908.
On the death of Mr A. J. Black, the property
of Mount Noorat was divided between his son,
the late I. S. Black, and daughter, Miss G. A. Black.
The other two members of the family were Niel
Lament (died 1907, aged 3 years) and Donald
Curdie (killed whilst serving with the R.A.F. in
1918).
Mr I. S. Black, with the assistance of his
manager (Mr A. B. Clarke) founded a stud Ayrshire
herd, which is still being carried on with consider-
able success. Mrs I. S. Black resides at Mount
Noorat with her two children, a daughter and a
son, who bears the name of his great grandfather,
Niel.
The Black family through the generations have
shown much initiative and foresight in the conduct
of their properties, and their record of service to
the community -would be hard to equal.
NIEL BLACK AND FAMILY (from previous page)


Personalities
EARNED FAME WITH PEN
MARSHALL has earned fame as an
Australian author. The son of a Noorat
storekeeper (the late Mr W. B. Marshall), Alan
was educated at the Noorat and Terang schools.
He always wanted to be a writer, and achieved
his initial success when he won 12 short-storey
competitions after going to Melbourne in 1920. He
became the humorist for the Brisbane “Sunday
Mail” and wrote an article a week for that news-
paper for eight years. For the past 12 years he
has been writing an “advice to women" column in
the Sydney weekly, “Woman.”
ALAN MARSHALL
recently travelled through Indo-Chino, Siam, Burma
and the Malay States.
His first book, “These Are My People,” was a
triumph for the young author, and he gained fresh
laurels -with his succeeding books, “Ourselves Writ
Strange,” “Pull Down The Blind” and “How Beau-
tiful Are Thy Feet.”
Another of Alan’s literary gems is in the making,
and all who know him will wish him “good luck”
for the future.
WOULDN’T IT?
it has been raining for a week on end,
and your firewood is wet and sodden, and the
Are will not burn, and your neighbor or near
neighbor has a, lovely big stack of dry inviting wood,
do your fingers ever itch?
One well-known citizen had noticed that each
morning his stack of wood was gradually and
mysteriously disappearing. With ingenuity and an
auger, a plug of gelignite soon nestled Inside a
log at the top of the heap. A couple of days later,
Just at breakfast time, many of the residents of
Mortlake Road were amazed and startled when with
a terrific bang the back of a chimney was blown
out into the street. Fortunately no one was hurt
—except someone’s feelings. After a happening
like that, one changes their rvoodmerchant.
During the last
war he was free-
lance Journalist in-
structor for Army
Education, and gave
lectures to troops.
Although physi-
cally handicapped
since boyhood, Alan
often travels “off
the beaten track” to
obtain first - hand
material for his
books, which have
been acclaimed by
Australian and over-
seas critics.
After the war he
spent nine months in
Arnhem "Land am-
ong the blacks, and
DR. F. M. BURNET
NOTED SCHOLAR
OUTSTANDING among the district’s noted scholars
is Dr. F. M. Burnet. A son of the late Mr
and Mrs F. Burnet, Frank Macfarlane (Mac) was
born at Traralgon. Coming to Terang in 1909, when
his father was appointed manager of the National
Bank, examinations came easily to him. Of a
brilliant family, he was educated at Terang State
School, Geelong College (where he was dux) and
Ormond College. Dr. Burnet completed his M.D.
in 1923 after a brilliant course. Turning his
attention to research work, in which his main sub-
jects have been influenza virus, and “Q” fever
DR. F. M. BURNET
immunity, Dr. Burnet became F.R.S. in 1942.
Other degrees of this and foreign countries have been
deservedly bestowed in recognition of his outstand-
ing work. In 1844 he was appointed to his present
post as Director of Walter and Eliza Hall Institute
of Medical Research, and in 1946, Professor of
Experimental Medicine, University of Melbourne.
In 1947 he w r as awarded the Royal Medal of
the Royal Society, he being the only Australian
ever to win this award.
Sought throughout the world as a lecturer and
advisor, this district is honored by its association
■with Doctor Burnet.


GRANNY KING KNOWS TERANG’S EARLY HISTORY
In a Swanston Street cottage lives a genial and kindly old lady who knows
more about Terang’s “passing parade” than any other living soul. She was
the first white child born in the town, and she now has the honor of being
Terang’s oldest resident. Her name is Mrs Elizabeth King, who was 92
years old last November.
tragedy has touched her life on more
than one occasion, there is no bitterness in
Mrs King’s make-up. Very active, and possessing
all her faculties, she has many cherished memories
of her long life in Terang.
What of her parents, the late Thomas and Ellen
Wheatley? When he first walked into Terang on
Christmas Eve, 1854, with a swag on his back, Mr
Wheatley camped in a sheep-wash hut on the
northern bank of the lake —there were no houses
here, no shops in which to buy food. After resting
for one night he trudged on t a the Yallock station
at Garvoc, where he was given employment by
Bolivar Lalng (manager). It was here that he met
Ellen McLaughlin, his future wife.
After their marriage, Mr and Mrs Wheatley
came to Terang, where Mr Wheatley was employed
by Mr Ainsworth, the surveyor who “planned” the
town. They lived in a tent which was pitched at
the corner of what is now Baynes and Lyons Streets
(opposite St. Thomas' School). It was in this humble
abode that their daughter Elizabeth was born.
Mrs King remembers her parents’ first home—
a two-room house in Baynes Street (site of Mr
Prank O’Connor’s present residence). She recalls
that there was no glass for the windows, which
were covered with kangaroo skins.
Her father carted cheese and other goods by
bullock waggon to Geelong, and she says there was
great rejoicing when, on a return journey, he
brought the first oil lamp for the home. Until then
they had used candles, which Mrs Wheatley made,
and “slush” lamps.
There were no made roads and no water supply
in those days—not even tanks. All drinking water
came from the Terang Lake, and was tipped into
a barrel at the home. Yes, Mrs King can remember
the owner of the town’s first water-cart —Mr Tunne,
who delivered at the door for 1/6 per barrel.
The women —they were hardy stock —took their
washing and tubs to the lake bank each week, and
it was “like a picnic,” says Mrs King.
There were plenty of aborigines in Terang
during Mrs King’s young days—they camped on the
bank of the lake, behind the Presbyterian Church,
and were very friendly. She used to pass their
mia mias when going to school; her teacher was
the celebrated Mr Peter Carmichael. A few of the
well-known blacks were “Old Lily," “Wilmot” and
“Jimmy Brown.”
Mrs King's mind can flash back to the time
when there were droves of kangaroos around the
town, and w'hen horse races were held on a course
in the Grey Street area.
Terang’s first shop! Mrs King says it was a
one-roomed building, on the corner where the Co-
operative Store now stands, the owner being a Mr
Paton. Another early business house (located on
Montgomery and Bradshaw’s block) had a Mr
Stansmc-re as proprietor. The town’s first black-
smith’s shop was on the land now occupied by the
courthouse.
It is an achievement to be able to look back
to- the days when Terang’s only connection with the
outside world was the Cobb and Go. coach, but Mrs
King can go back even further and recall the name
of Mr Sumpter—he lived at the foot of Bradshaw’s
Hill—who pioneered the road passenger service with
a two-horse drag to Geelong, weekly.
The grand old lady r-f Terang also remembers
the big spree held to celebrate the opening of
Terang’s first public hall, and that the town’s first
doctor was named Austin.
There were six boys and s'x girls in Mr and
Mrs Thomas Wheatley's family'. Mrs King (the
eldest) and two twin sisters —aged 83 years—are
the surviving members. Mrs Wheatley died in 1914,
when she was 78 y'ears of age, and Mr Wheatley
passed away in 1917, at the age of 90.
Mrs King was married to Mr John King in 1881,
in Terang’s first house of worship the Bible
Christian Church —by the Rev. Treloar. They had
three children —William (killed in an accident at
the railway station in 1902), Ernest and May (Mrs
J. Ayres). Mrs King’s husband was killed in an acci-
dent in Tasmania soon after the turn of the century.
All present and former residents will wish
"Granny” King (she is affectionately known by that
name to many people) good health in the years to
come, and all will be glad to congratulate her when
she reaches the century.


Terang Trotting Club And Its New Headquarters,
“Dalvui Raceway”
Terang’s newest sporting centre is Dalvui Raceway, headquarters of the local
Trotting Club, whose progress, since revival four years ago, has placed it
among Victoria’s leading light-harness organisations.
pRIOR to the early 1930’s trotting meetings were
regularly conducted at Terang Racecourse, but
with the depression the sport became a dead letter.
In 1945 a successful move was made to re-form
the Club and its prestige was soon established by'
the active part it played in the Statewide rebirth
of trotting.
It soon became apparent that to keep abreast
with modern trends, racing would have to be
transferred to a small track to give patrons the
opportunity of closely watching all phases of the
fast-moving entertainment. Consequently a site,
less than two- miles east of the town, at the corner
of Dalvui Lane and Princes Highway, was selected
tor a half-mile track.
The first race meeting was held in January, 1949,
after hurried improvisations had made the surround-
ings suitable for a race crowd. The track, with its
sweeping turns and roomy stretches, quickly won
the approval of owners and trainers, and support
from all sections snowballed to give a good financial
result from the opening season.
The Committee gave consideration to the Club’s
future and decided, in January of this year, to open
negotiations for the purchase of Dalvui Raceway
from Heffernan Brothers. Upon receipt of an option
of purchase, representations were made to the
Trotting Control Board for financial aid. The Board
readily agreed to advance the purchase price of
£1750 for the 35 acres on easy terms of interest
and repayment.
Now the Committee looks forward, confident in
the knowledge that trotting, under the guidance of
the Trotting Control Board, is rapidly winning wide-
spread popularity. Plans for great improvements at
Dalvui Raceway are being prepared. The track is
continually topdressed to produce an all-weather
racing surface, unsurpassed outside Melbourne. This
season the Club will have five racing days.
Management of the Club’s affairs is in the
hands of a committee of 20, elected by the 115
members. Mr J. B. Farrell (Garvoc) is president,
Messrs L. F. Munsor (Noorat) and J. Heffernan
(Noorat) vice-presidents, Mr F. Beanham (Terang)
treasurer, with Messrs R. Teal (Terang), K. Coleman
(Terang), D. J. O’Grady (Terang), Jos. Arundell
(Glenormiston South), M. J. O’Keeffe (Glenormiston
Nth.), K. O’Bryan (Glenormistc-n South), A. Suther-
land (Glenormiston South), R. A. Clarke (South
Bcklin), John Kenna Jnr. (The Sisters), W. Kenna
(The Sisters), Kevin Ryan (Terang), K. F. Brennan
(Noorat), Martin Heffernan (Terang), Denis Heffer-
nan (Terang), W. Crawley (Terang) and J. J.
Pekin (The Sisters) as other committeemen. Mr
T. Taylor Jnr. (Terang) is the secretary.


TERANG RACING CLUB ACTIVE SINCE 1868
QNE of the oldest organisations in the district is
the Terang Racing Club, which was formed in
1868, at a meeting held in the Commercial Hotel
An application to the Government for a grant of
land was successful, and Terang then had a
permanent racecourse.
Nine years earlier —in 1859 —the first race meet-
ing took place in Terang, on the site now occupied
by the recreation reserve. Records state that it
was a rough and ready track, cut through the scrub.
The “grandstand” was a large gum tree which had
blown down and against which was backed a
bullock dray, the property of Messrs Ayres and
Richardson, owners of the “Keayang” run. “The
fun started early, a beginning being made in the
morning and the end came only when the shades
of night began to* fall,” says a report of one of
these early meetings.
Saddles, bridles and riding whips were given as
trophies. By 1861 the “grandstand” accommodation
had been trebled, there being three bullock drays
on the course. In 1865, a new “course” was opened
in the vicinity of the present railway station, and
it was here that steeplechasing was introduced into
Terang racing. The first such race, jumped over
the genuine log fences, is reputed ta have taken
three-quarters of an hour to complete, and then
only after the leading horse had been blindfolded
and “pushed” over the last fence.
With the formation of the Terang Racing Club
the sport became firmly established in the district.
The traditional New Year’s Day meeting was intro-
duced and has continued ever since, with the
exception of the recent war years, when racing was
banned.
A tremendous amount of hard work and fore-
sight was demanded of the original committeemen,
who had to.carve a track out of the forest of gum
trees and scrub. It is difficult to picture such a
primitive setting when one looks at the fine race-
course of today.
The club continually effected improvements, but
it was not until 1885 that the first grandstand (80
feet long) was erected. Additions were made to the
structure on two occasions, but on the eve of the
new year 1898 the “stand” was destroyed by fire.
Although this was a serious setback to the club,
members set to work and completely remodelled the
course, w r hich became one of the best provincial
tracks in the State. A new racing track of one
and a quarter miles, with a two-furlong “straight,”
was surveyed, and a grandstand, administrative
offices and booths were, constructed. Cost of these
undertakings was approximately £BOOO, the payment
of which was personally guaranteed by the com-
mitteemen. This was convincing proof of the
PORTION OF THE RECORD ATTENDANCE, TERANG RACECOURSE, NEW YEAR’S DAY 1950


FASHIONS IN DRESSING AND VEHICLES, TERANG RACECOURSE, 1870
enthusiasm of the committee of the day, which had
as its president the late Mr C. B. Palmer.
These ideal racing facilities, together with the
liberal stakes offered, have enabled the club to reach
the highest standard in the conduct of its meetings.
Many horses that have been successful at Terang
have gone on to reap premier racing honors of the
State.
While a number of people have figured promin-
ently in the history of racing in this district, no
record would be complete without mention of the
name of Scally, a family which the earliest records
show- played an important part in the growth and
development of the sport. The third generation of
Scallys is still actively associated with the club.
The present club executive comprises the follow-
ing: President, Mr A. W. Noel; vice-president, Mr
J. F. Scally; honorary treasurer, Mr P. Scally; sec-
retary, Mr Keith W. Hamilton; committeemen,
Messrs E. D. Mackinnon, M.H.R., C. Tehan, N. E.
Palmer, J. F. Kenna, L. K. Noel, J. Scroggie, D.
Kelly, M. Taylor and F. Tunne.
TERANG CROQUET CLUB
JHE TERANG CROQUET CLUB was formed on
21st June, 1932, after the Park Trustees had
granted permission for a lawn to be put down next
to the bowling green. Earlier that month, Mes-
dames G. Atkins, E. Coate, C. Guest, C. E. Smith,
W, Tampion and Miss Newton had conferred with
representatives of the Bowling Club, and it was
found that £lOO would be required to establish the
croquet green.
At the Inaugural meeting of the club, Mrs C. E.
Smith was elected president and Mrs B. Coate,
secretary. These ladies, with an enthusiastic com-
mittee, -worked very successfully to finance the
undertaking. Mr and Mrs Coate placed the lawns
at their home at the disposal of the newly-
formed club as temporary greens. Terang Bowling
Club made a donation of £B, and three bowlers
(Messrs Coate, Penny and Thomas) superintended
the formation of the four lawns, which became the
largest croquet green in the district. The official
opening was performed by the Shire President (the
late Cr. E. J. Kelly) in November, 1934.
Through the years the bowlers have continued
to help the Croquet Club in many ways, particu-
Modern buses convey pupils from surrounding
districts to Terang High School.
larly by making available machinery and equipment.
The club now has a membership of 24, and the
ladies are very interested in the sport. They have
reason to be grateful to the foundation members,
some of whom still belong to the club.


Terang—Victorian Country Road Champions 1947-1948
Senior Team: R. Reid, Reg Godfrey, W. Saunders,
D. Macqueen, Dick Godfrey.
JN an historical record of the growth and progress
cf the town of Terang over the years, one of
the sporting bodies worthy of mention is the Terang
Amateur Cycle Club. Formed at a public meeting
on 17th October, 1929, by enthusiastic cycling fans,
it has developed into- one of the foremost amateur
clubs in rural Victoria and is in a healthy state as
regards membership and finances. The first presi-
dent and secretary were Mr R. B. Prowse and Mr
A. Carroll respectively, and the present officers are
Mr Mervyn Squires and Mr C. McSween.
Outstanding success achieved in the pre-war
period was L. Bennett’s victory in the Colac
to Melbourne race in 1938. R. Reid, who is still
competing successfully, represented the Western
District in the Victorian junior championship for
two years in succession.
In post-war years, the club has had outstanding
success and last year was successful in annexing
Junior Team: Eric Godfrey, W. Boydle, H. Beard,
P. Clifford, G, Buchanan.
both the Senior and Junior Country Championship
teams races which are an annual fixture staged in
Melbourne by the V.A.C.U. For the 1949 series the
junior team was once again successful. In addition
the club has held the Peters Shield for the last
two years. This shield is competed for by clubs
in the Western District for the Western District
Teams Championship.
The Annual Open Road Race staged by Terang
club is a very important event in V.A.C.U.
fixtures and is well patronised by riders from all
over Victoria. Run in September each year over
a 50-miles course, it carries a trophy list of £7O.
The club is particularly fortunate in having a
hardworking committee and also an excellent Ladies’
Committee; and, through the generosity of the
citizens of Terang and district, the Committee has
been able to build this club into one of the out-
standing country amateur cycling clubs.
EARLY HISTORY OF TERANG GOLF CLUB
JN THE EARLY DAYS of Torang there was a
large area of vacant land on the south side
of the Recreation Reserve used as a common for
the grazing of the town cows, cf which there was
a good number in those days. That was before the
High School was even thought of, or the pine plan-
tations were planted.
Some of the leading townsmen got together and
formed a Go-lf Club in 1900, putting down nine
greens on that area of land and a few on private
property adjoining. They had to use sand scrapes
as there was no water available. Some of the men
interested were M. T. Doyle, A. J. Black, Dr. Breton,
W. G, Osburne, W. T. Baxter and P. Ingram. Many
others played the ancient game there for a number
of years. Later others joined up. Among them
were R. Hartley, Dr. Weir, A. S. Noel, A. S. Fltchett,
D. McDonald, F. McDonald, W. R. Armstrong, Doug
Armstrong, H. Breton, lan Black, Dr. Scott and A.
A. Brett.
Later the land was required for other purposes
and the Club w r as forced to look for a fresh site.
Eventually a shift was made to property owned by
Mr A. J. Black on the north side of the Noorat
Butter Factory. It was not used for long as the
site was not suitable and the lack of water was a
great drawback. At this stage Mr A. J. Black
offered the Club the use of his private, up-to-date,
beautifully kept links situated in front of Mt. Noorat
House, at a nominal membership fee of- 5/- a year.
The Club was greatly indebted to Mr Black for his
generous offer and enjoyed many years’ play there.
Later, when membership increased, the people
of Terang felt they would like a course closer to
the town where more practice could be had with
not so far to travel. Eventually the racecourse
was decided on and an eighteen hole course was
laid out, but the type of soil and its low-lying
situation, which at times got very wet and could
not be drained properly, did not prove satisfactory,
and so a move was made to the Public Park.


Bowling Club Formed In 1911
A PUBLIC MEETING held on the 12th April,
1911, with the late Mr J. Bradshaw as chairman,
it was decided to form a Bowling Club. Opinion
was divided as to whether the green should be put
down in the Recreation Reserve or in the Public
Park. The latter place was finally chosen.
The first president was the late Mr A. .1.
Staughton and the first secretary and treasurer, Mr
C. B. Maurice. The subscription was 30/- per annum,
and the cost of putting down the green was £l9O/14/3.
The green was officially opened on 7th December,
1911. Mr H. P. Ince won the first championship of
the Club during the 1911-1912 season.
In 1920 the Bowling Club, in conjunction with
the Terang Band, held a bazaar to obtain funds
from which the present pavilion was built.
In 1912 the membership was 4’o and the Club has
grown in membership so that it is now necessary
to put dorvn a new six-rink green to cater for new
members. The preliminary work was carried out by
Mr Sam Coleman, of Warrnambool.
Those who have been prominent in the affairs
of the Club are the late Mr J. Bradshaw, president
five times; the late Mr H. S. Tippett, president
four times; the late Mr Geo. Atkins, president three
times; the late Dr. H. Breton; the late Mr R. Rich-
mond; Mr Geo. Penny and Mr G. Collie, Mr H.
P. Ince and Mr C. E, Maurice have also been
prominent members.
Fgt services rendered to the Club the following
■were made Honorary Life Members: The late Mr
G. L. Bolden, the late Mr G. Atkins, and Mr C. E.
Maurice, Mr Geo. Penney, Mr T. R. Wilckens, Mr C.
V. Marches!.
TERANG BOWLING GREEN - AUSTRALIA DAY TOURNAMENT, 1950
CRIB AND EUCHRE
It is always a bone of contention whether crib
and euchre should be classified as a recreation,
pastime, sport or an obsession. The fact that
these weekly card evenings are maintaining an
average attendance of over 110 players indicates
that quite a number of the residents do like a little
quiet sport.
“BANYULE TIDDLEWINKS 26th,” champion
Victorian cow, is pictured on Page 4. A Jersey,
she is a junior four-year-old and is owned by
the Banyule Stud Pty. Ltd. In the 1941-42 Standard
Herd Test year she produced 935 lbs. butterfat.


TERANG RIFLE CLUB
■J*HE INITIAL MEETING of the Terang Rifle Club
was held in the Mechanics’ Hall on 30th April,
1900, those present being Messrs Rule, Green, Webb,
Treganowan, Robinson, McWilliam, Biggin, Hendry,
Smith, O’Mullane. At a further meeting held 25th
May, 1900, Mr J. L. TVeganowan was elected secre-
tary and Mr T. Rule captain.
It was first intended to build the range at Mt.
Noorat, alongside the range of the Noorat Club,
but after some delay in obtaining target machines,
a more suitable site was offered by Mr M. J.
O’Connor and work was commenced early in 1901,
the range being finished and ready for marksmen
about April. Amongst the early members who were
most active were Geo. Collie, Geo. Fagan, F. J.
Rodgers, H. Rodgers, W. Webb, T, G. Oates, T.
Green, R. Farrar, T. Sinclair, W. Milley, T. Lee.
The club was inactive from 1910 until December
1914, -when a move was made to start it afresh.
At a meeting held 4th May, 1915, Mr T. Green was
appointed captain with Mr C. Paton as secretary
and treasurer, but Mr Paton left on active service
soon after and, at a later meeting in August, Mr
J. Booth was elected secretary with Mr W. A.
Parramore as captain. The club carried on during
the war years under various captains but lapsed
again early in 1920.
On the Ist March, 1923, a meeting was held
with the object of promoting some interest in the
club and to get it on an active footing again.
Headquarters were asking questions and it was
possible the range would be taken from the club. Mr
C. Paton was elected captain with Mr H. R. Hesketh
as temporary secretary. The range was' put into
a state of repair and new members enrolled, and
since that time the club has gone on from strength
to strength. Among active members in the nineteen
twenties were Jas. Eldridge, F. Grayland, J. Watts,
H. Chambers, R. F. Dennis, and Jas. Blain, all of
whom gave sterling service over many years. The
first two are still active members.
During the years just prior to the Second World
War, the club became very strong, winning the
Corangamite Shield in the 1937-38 season. The club
was represented by Capt. A. J. Eldridge, G. Beaton,
Jas. Eldridge, J. Ottosen, L. Bacon, P. Alen, F.
Grayland and W. Sinclair.
Then came war. All ammunition was called
in and the club went into recess again, many
members enlisting for active service. The club was
re-formed again on September 9, 1946, when Messrs
G. Beaton and L. Bacon were re-elected captain and
secretary respectively. The fact that the club was
one of the first country clubs to be re-organised
showed the keenness of the old members to get
going again. Some difficulty was experienced for a
while, as aperture-sights were unprocurable, but
this was overcome gradually and by 1948 the club
was back to pre-war standard, that year winning
both the Corangamite and Camperdown Shields.
Members of the winning teams were Capt. W. Sin-
clair, S. Blain, L. Bacon, N. Baglln, S. Sinclair, Jas.
Eldridge, M. Ottosen and T. Murfett. Terang Rifle
Club has won the Corangamite Shield four times,
in the years 1929, 1931, 1938, 1949. In 1929 it also
won the Camperdown Shield and the Warrnambool
Citizens’ Sheild.
TERANG & DISTRICT CRICKET
ASSOCIATION
■pHB LIFE OF CRICKET in Terang has been
varied, and since being taken under control
by the Terang and District Cricket Association the
sport has progressed Immensely. The game has been
played on the Terang Cricket Ground (which is
known today as the Recreation Reserve) for more
than 60 years. The late W. F. Nehill called the
first meeting for the formation of a club on July
18th, 1889, the first game being played against
Framlingham on January 26th of that year.
Very few members of the early teams are now
residing in Terang. Two of the most noted players
still living here are Messrs Alfred S. Fitchett and
Wm. Maskell, who were both excellent all-rounders.
The present Cricket
Association came into
being when the Terang
and District Junior
Cricket Association
changed its name to
the Terang & District
Association. The ad-
vancement of the Asso-
ciation has been marked
by the splendid leader-
ship of notable citizens,
including the late Dr.
A. A. Weir and the late
Mr 'R. B, Browse. The
present president, Mr
Stan. Maskell, has oc-
cupied that position for
many years.
Over the years the
Association has had
only three secretaries,
the first being Mr Allan
Carroll, who held a long
term, then Mr William
Jackman and, more
recently, for a short
period, Mr Prank Marks.
All three have worked
untiringly to make cric-
ket popular in the town
and district.
In the early days,
T'erang was represented
in the Country Cricket
Week competitions held
ROY HOWARD
former Terang player.
Member of Australian XI,
New Zealand Tour, 1950.
in Melbourne, just as it is today, sometimes by a
full local side and on other occasions grouped with
Corangamlte or Warrnambool Associations.
Clubs that have been members of the Associ-
ation are: Terang, “The Colts,” Fire Brigade,
Presbyterian Church, Methodist Church, C.Y.M.S.,
Garvoc, Panmure, Noorat, Trufood, Glenormiston
North, The Sisters, Kolora, Dixie, Mortlake, Mort-
lake Footballers, Ellerslie, West End, Laang, Terang
Junior Football, Combined Lodges, Terang Foot-
ballers, and High School.
Prahran, Essendon, V.J.C.A., Colts, Hawthorn-
East Melbourne, South Melbourne, Richmond, Coburg
and Kew are the metropolitan teams that have
visited Terang.


TERANG FOOTBALL CLUB
{JNFORTUNATELY, pre-war records of the Club’s
activities are not available, but an old Press
report reveals that a team representing Terang
played a Mortlake team in 1889. Those representing
Terang in that team were Borrack, Crawford, Cock-
well, Chard, Cosgrave, Farrar, Donnelly, Ford, Hood,
Fenton, Hyland, Hands, James, Kidd, Longmare (2),
Napthine and Nehill. Information received from an
old player also reveals that although the design
has been changed slightly, the Club’s colors have
always been red and blue.
Football “families” that will be remembered are
the Nehills (Teddy, Peter and Basil) —the latter m
particular for his outstanding services as leader
and player and, in later years, as honorary coach of
the Club. The Northeasts (Ted father Bill,
Tommy and Roy); the Kavenaghs (Alf and Maurie);
the Sadlers (Percy and Ambrose—“ Brush”); Kennas
(George and Geoff); the Beards (Lindsay, Jack and
Les—“Ponky”); the Maguires (Leo —who later played
for the famous “Tigers” and became one of the
outstanding half-backs in the Melbourne League—
Frank and Paddy); the Davies (Ron, Len and Ivan);
and the Howards (Stan, Harry and “Cracker”).
Prior to the forming of the Hampden League, In
1930, Terang won the premiership of the Western
District League (1929). Led by Percy Sadler and
coached by Basil Nehill, the team defeated Port
Fairy at Mortlake. The Club made history that
year by flying a player (Brian O’Brien) by plane
from N.S.W. to take part in the match. Since the
inauguration of the Hampden League, only two
premierships have been won by the locals. In 1932,
lead by Frank Sheehan, they defeated Cobden at
Camperdown, and in 1934 defeated Mortlake on the
Warrnambaol ground. Led by their captain-coach
Roy Northeast, the team staged one of the most
brilliant finishes ever witnessed in the league to
snatch victory In the last kick of the day.
. World War II forced the Club into recess in
1941. It suffered a great blow early in the war
when its former president, Dr. Stewart Weir, was
killed in action in Greece. Mr Jas. Murnane was
Club President when football activities ceased
shortly after the start of 1941 season.
Football was carried on during the war years
by the “under 18” boys, and many of them gradu-
ated into senior football after the war.
First Club President after hostilities ceased
(1946) was Dr. J. C. Laver, who rendered most
valuable service to the Club until leaving for
Hobart at the end of the 1947 season. He was
succeeded as president by Mr R. A. Eastwood.
Club activities increased further in 1948, when
under the guidance of Constable C. L. Gale, a third
team (for boys under 18 years of age) was formed.
The committee, with Mr Doug Blackburn as
president, is looking forward to season 1950 being
the most successful for many years. Until last
season Terang had the distinction of being the
only team in the Hampden League that had not
missed playing in the finals since the League was
formed in 1930.
With the re-appointment of Mr Les Main as
captain-coach, the players are confident they will
contest the finals this year.
TERANG RECREATION RESERVE
£ARLIEST RECORDS AVAILABLE show that the
first Committee of Management of the Terang
Recreation Reserve were Mr Matt Lang (president)
Dr, C. S. Sutten, Messrs W. F'. Nehill, E. Cuthbert"
E. Swanson and B. J. Kelly (secretary). The
ground, which at the time (1897) consisted of the
inner circle only, was reported to be in a very bad
state and the fence in disrepair. Extra ground
containing almost nine acres, had been granted to
the reserve, but there was no money available for
fencing.
The first move towards raising funds for
improvements was made in 1899, when the Trustees
invited representatives from the interested sporting
bodies to meet them in conference. Tho'se repre-
sented at the conference were the Bazaar Committee
(Messrs Paine, Coy and Harvey), Sports Club
(Messrs Rawbon, C. Vivian, D. Clarke), Bicycle Club
(Messrs Toyne, Bates and Betts), Football Club
(Messrs Neilson and J. R. McDonald), Cricket Club
(Messrs Bowman, Nankervis and A. E. Wilson).
The sum of £153 was made available to the
trustees for the erection of a grandstand and
pavilion. In March, 1900, plans and specifications,
submitted by Messrs Rogers and Stamp, for the
erection of a pavilion were approved by the trustees.
In the same year a tender from Mr John O’Keefe
to fence the reserve at £5/3/0 per chain was accepted
by the trustees, but lack of funds prevented the
carrying, out of both projects. Hie present fence
was erected by Mr Jas. Macqueen in 1904.
The lambertiana trees, which provide such
wonderful shelter on the northern and western
sides of the reserve today, were planted in 1921.
In April, 1922, another public meeting was con-
vened by the trustees for the purpose of raising
more funds for- further improvements to the ground,
and to have the playing area’ Illuminated with
electric light for conducting night events. The
Trustees at this time were Messrs M. J. O’Connor
(president), J. Patterson, R. B. Prowse, J. Rawbon,
J. Ryan, J. T. Clarke and E. F. Harvey (secretary).
As sporting activities in the district increased,
the need for larger and better dressing sheds was
realised by the Trustees and, in 1930, tenders were
invited for the erection of the pavilion which stands
at the ground at present. The successful tenderer
was W. H. Carr & Son, and the building was
completed and officially opened the same year.
With a view to making the reserve one of the
best in the district, the trustees once again sought
the assistance of all sporting bodies in 1946. Suc-
cessful appeals for grants from the Public Works
Department and Hampden Shire Council enabled a
major plan of improvements submitted by the Shire
Engineer to be accepted at a cost of £1937. The
Trustees are hopeful that 1951 will see all works
completed, and that Terang will have a first-class
Recreation Reserve.
A LOST INDUSTRY
An early industry that has been lost and that
would have been a great asset these days, was the
brick making plant at Mackinnon’s Bridge. District
homes built with these bricks are still standing,
notably Mr Martin Scally’s house, which is nearly
100 years old.


Tennis Popular Here Sixty Years Ago
pOR MANY YEARS tennis has been a very popular
sport in this district, and its history goes back
60 years. The Public Tennis Club was formed in
1889, and Mr G. A. Fenton was the first secretary.
The first court was put down in 1890 almost at
the water’s edge of the lake.
Throughout the years the Club took part in
pennant games with much success, as players of
the calibre of the late Dr. A. A. Weir, N. Jackson,
K. Macdonald and Rev. F. Holland placed the game
on a very high standard, with Rev. B. M. Baird
starring as perhaps the best player ever in these
parts.
The Church of England Club was the next one
formed —they conimenced in 1919. About 1924 the
Et. Thomas’ Tennis Club was formed, and in 1932
the Methodist Club.
In September, 19 32, delegates from the four
local clubs decided to form an Inter-club Associa-
tion. Later this was extended to take in the
Mortlake clubs, also clubs from Noorat, Glenormiston
South and Wooriwyrite. The Association was then
renamed Terang and Mortlake District Tennis Asso-
ciation, and comprised 14 teams divided into “A.”
“B” and “C” grades. Competition was extremely
keen and some high-class play w'.as produced.
Among the regular players w r as Dr. lan Mclnnes,
a former international.
This Association functioned continuously and
successfully until 1939, when it was decided, because
of the outbreak of war, to abandon the competition
for one season. However, the one season extended
ta ten, and the Association was not re-formed until
1949, with Mortlake, Terang Public, St. Thomas'
and Methodist tennis clubs.
A SHADY CORNER OF THE PARK
SWIMMING POOL WILL BE GREAT ASSET TO TOWN
IN THE NEXT year or two, won’t you be proud
when your boy can swim—he will be proud
of It, too. This is what is planned—a 33 1/3 yard
concrete pool with white cement tiles, a diving
board and low tower, a modern filtration plant and
dressing rooms; also, fenced off from the deeper
pool, a pool about one foot deep for the toddlers.
The Park Trustees have offered a site, about 50
yards to the north of the public tennis courts.
A grant of £4500 towards the cost of the pool
has been made by the State Government, and the
construction will be carried out by the Hampden
Shire Council, which will contribute £2500 towards
the works. The future of the pool will depend
upon the supply of building materials and upon
the community’s enthusiasm and support.


Programme
FRIDAY, APRIL 7, 1950.
12.49 —Arrival of the special
train; to be met by two Bands.
Addresses of welcome by Presi-
dent of the Back to Terang
Committee and the three West
Riding councillors.
Homecomers to be then driven
to their homes.
Evening—Sacred Concert, with
Band, Public Hall.
SATURDAY, APRIL 8.
Morning—Best Dressed Shop
Competition. Best Garden and
General Appearance.
Afternoon —Mortlake Races (on
Terang Racecourse). Picture
Matinee.
Evening—Pictures at Theatre.
Cards, Band Hall.
50-50 Dance, St. Thomas’ Hall.
Servicemen’s Reunion, Drill Hall.
SUNDAY, APRIL 9.
Dawn Service at the Soldiers’
Memorial.
Morning—Back to Church.
Afternoon-—Band Recital.
Evening—Concert and Com-
munity Singing, Public Hall.
MONDAY, APRIL 10.
Morning—Back to School.
Tree Planting.
Afternoon —Procession 12 noon.
Trotting Meeting, Dalvui Race-
way. Highland Dancing.
Evening—Monster Ball, Public
Hall. Cards, Fire Station.
TUESDAY, APRIL 11.
Morning—lnspect Trufood and
Glenormiston Factories.
Afternoon—FßEE.
Evening—Dance, St. Thomas*
Hall. Cards, Band Hall.
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 12.
Trip to Port Campbell. Inspect
Timboon School.
Evening—Pictures at Theatre.
Old-time Dance, St.Thomas’ Hall
THURSDAY, APRIL 13.
Inspect Town.
DO NOT FAIL TO SIGN THE VISITORS’
BOOK WHILE IN TERANG.
All Sporting- Clubs will offer facilities for
games at their respective Clubs throughout
the whale period.


Milestones
1839 First settlement of district at Glenormiston.
184'0 Late Donald McNicol built first hut on Lake
bank, Terang.
1855 Survey of Terang by Mr Ainsworth.
1857 Erection of first school in Terang. (Four
houses in town area at this time).
1863 Shire of Hampden proclaimed.
1871 Telephone service for Terang.
1886 Temperance Hall built.
1887 Railway line reaches Terang.
1888 Terang Express commences publication.
1889 First district subdlvisional sale, held at
Glenormiston.
Commencement of district schools’ excursion
picnics.
Progress Association formed.
1891 Citizens becoming alarmed at shrinkage of
lake waters.
1895 Glenormiston Butter Factory established.
1900 Terang’s first Golf Club.
1902 Post Office erected.
Terang Fire Brigade founded.
1904 Town Clock placed in tower.
1909 Terang electrical power station in operation.
1910 New Public Hall built.
1911 Trufood factory goes into production.
1916 Fire in High Street destroys 13 buildings,
including State Savings Bank.
1919 Welcome home for district soldiers.
Influenza epidemic sweeps district.
1920 Prince of Wales visits Terang. (2/6/20).
1923 Unveiling of Soldiers’ war memorial by Lieut.
Gen. Sir Harry Chauval.
1924 Terang switches over to State Electricity
Commission scheme.
Establishment of Baby Health Centre at
Mechanics’ Institute.
1930 Caledonian Society formed.
1532 First Noorat Show on 19th November.
1936 Norah Cosgrave Hospital opened.
1939 Terang Centenary. Back to Terang.
Reticulation of Terang by Otway water
scheme.
1940 Disastrous grass fires sweep district.
1941 Opening of Terang Flax Mill.
1943 Branch of Dads’ Association inaugurated.
Terang Ambulance Service instituted.
1946 Welcome home to servicemen of World
War 11.
Legion of Ex-Servicemen and Women forms
branch.
1947 Establishment of Marida Yallock Soldier
Settlement Estate.
1949 Government purchases Glenormiston House
Estate.
1950 High School for Terang and District.
Back to Terang—Easter.


PORTION OF HIGH STREET —SOUTH SIDE


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
'j'HE COMMITTEE wishes to acknowledge with thanks the help and interest it has
received with the publication of this souvenir booklet. It is difficult to list
all who have helped or those w T ho have contributed articles and encouraged the
Editorial Committee, such as the secretaries of organisations who have written about
the history and activity of their Club or Society.
It is regretted that the size of the booklet has precluded many items of interest
and necessitated others being condensed.
Wherever possible, the accuracy of the dates and stories have been checked,
and if time has played some tricks on memory, or if the committee has erred in
some minor details, it hopes that these shortcomings will be overlooked.
The Editorial Committee appreciates the confidence of the “Back to Terang”
Committee in approving of the booklet and sponsoring its publication for the interest
and benefit of all present and former residents of Terang and district.
Special thanks is due to the following:
Victorian Railways Commissioners. State Electricity Commission.
Department of Agriculture. State Housing Commission.
Mr Jim Stewart. Mr A. B. Clarke.
Mr A. P. Atkins. Mr D. Macklnnon. •
Mr R. McAlpine and Hampden Shire Mr B. G. Wood.
Council. Mr P. Grinter.
Staff of “Terang Express.” Mrs R. W. Sadler.
Mr R. E. Boyd (research at Public Mr C. Gore.
Library). Mrs "I. S. Black.
Mr G. Collie. Mr A. Mackenzie.
Mrs C. Holmes. Argus & Australasian Ltd.
Mr W. Tehan. Committee Mechanics’ Institute.
Mr S. Barrand. Mr G. Emeny Snr.
Mr G. Scarborough. Mr B. H. O’Mullane.
Mrs P. L. Norris. Mr R. B. Ronald.
Miss Gwenda McKenzie. Mr J. B. Farrell.
Mr E. W. Doney. F - w - Cheshire Pty. Ltd.
Mr F. Fletcher. Miss W ' Kerr ’
~ „ Mr H. Foskey.
Mr G. Williams. Mr G Binns
Mr W. J. Jamieson. Mr A j E i dri( jg e ,
Mr H. J. Slattery. Mr M M Clarke.
Mr Angus McLean. Trufood of Australia Ltd.
The late Mrs Angus McLean. Glenormlston Butter Factory' Co. Ltd.
Secretaries and interested members of Societies, etc., who furnished the interesting
stories and details of their organisations.
•
Present-day photographs in this booklet are by Sydney Whillans, Photographer,
Terang, with the exception of the two full-page photographs of Noorat, which are by
Ralph Illidge, Warrnambool.
Blocks by Campbell, Wilson Pty. Ltd., Process Engravers, Geelong.
•
The booklet wholly set up, printed and published by
The Terang Express Pty. Ltd., Terang.


