

“BACK TO”
BILL’S GULLY and YANIPY
SOUVENIR
BOOKLET
CELEBRATIONS HELD
NOVEMBER 3, 1937
ONE SHILLING
JOHN COUTTS,
President.
JEAN L. VENABLES.
AVELYN COUTTS, Joint Secs.




Pack to
Pill’s (iully
mtit
IJantpn
MR. JOHN COUTTS
President.
MISS. J. L. VENABLES
MR. AVELYN COUTTS
Joint Secretaries.
(Cclirbratimta
It cl it on
pli’bm'sbau
Ptrfrciulm* 3, 1937


The Origin of the Back to Bill’s Gully
Movement
Many people ask, “How did the name,
“Bill’s Gully,” originate? Those who read
this booklet will discover that this little dis-
trict is rich in history—stories of romance
and adventure, such as filled the lives of the
sturdy pioneers.
Many others may ask, “How did the ‘Back
To’ Movement originate?" Tht* credit is due
to two very well-known personalities.
On the 7th May, 1937, parents and friends
of the scholars of the Miram South School,
were invited to attend a Coronation Celebra-
tion. A particularly fine gathering was ad-
dressed by Cr. 0. Webb. That day everyone
caught a fleeting glimpse of their own child-
hood. The temptation of sitting in a school
room without resorting to boyhood pranks
proved too great for Mr. James Smith, and
Mr. James Thacker, who proved that they
were still boys at heart. It seemed a pity
that there wore so few of the ‘old, familiar
faces’ present to enjoy the memories that
were revived, so, following upon a discussion
of the possibility of organising a re-union
on a bigger scale, Mr. John Coutts was ap-
proached, and a public meeting called.
This was a very representative and well-
attended meeting and it was decided to em-
brace Yanipy with Bill’s Gully, as, in the
earlier days, the two schools were managed
under the part-time system, and one re-union
would have been incomplete without the
other.
An energetic committee has made the
celebration possible, but I feel sure that the
thanks of all must go t« our two friends who
planted the seed that has, grown to maturity.
JEAN L. VENABLES,
Joint Secretary Back-To Bill’s Gully.


Natives’ Hunting Ground
BY F. K. McKENZIE, NHILL.
There was a well-defined reserved area, or
corridor, that existed for named game hunt-
ing, extending- from ‘beyond the 36'th of
parallel on the- north to the South Miram
Scrub, or what is now known as the Little
Desert. Its eastern boundary -extending to
McKenzie Springs, or Bill’s Gully, and the
western boundary to a few miles west of
the boundary line between Victoria and South
Australia. In this corridor all game was
“safe,” including the -emu and lowan. The
territory east and north belonged to the
local sub-chief “Bailarooc’’ (Ballaroolc),
known as “Geordi'-,’’ who was murdered on
Clough’s Ballaroolc Station in 1847, by order
of the Chief of the Albacutyas, and the coun-
cil of sub-chiefs, for a contravention of the
tribal laws. All the territory west of the
Wimmera River to the eastern boundary of
the Tatiara’s tribal territory, was subject tn
the rule of the paramount chief of the Alba-
cutyas “Jackey-by-Jackey. “Yarraman”
wes the last chief of the Nhill sub-tribe and
is buried at the top end- of M&epherson street,
Nhill. “Ye-aringa” a native princess of
Ya-rac Ya-rac, or what is now known as Yar-
rock, was killed at (or close to) the sacred
c.orroboree ground south of Townsend street.
Nhill, in 1863; also for a contravention of
the .native laws. Now, the native sub-chief
who bwrted the Bill’s' Gtilly and McKenzie
Springs hunting grounds, was “Woorroral,”
known to the whites of Mt, Elgin, where ho
was born, as Dick-a-Dick—he was actually
the native tracker who found the Duff child-
ren (Australian Babes in the. wood) on the
Spring Hill run with the late Mr. Janies Me
Cartney, of Nhill, and he was also one of the
members of the native team of cricketers
which was taken to England by the late Mr.
Wills, about 1866 I think. He was last seen
at Mt. Elgin races in 1884. There was an-
other native princess “Bnyeera Anjee,” whose
tribal territory extended all along the springs
(soaks) of the Lawloit Hills, and the hills
running east and west through Kinnr.akatka
and Winiam and Yanipy. These native women
were only created princess by the whites,
nevertheless they were all of royal blood.
Tribal boundaries on the south were the
Mortats and the Binnum Binnum tribes, but
the main branch of the Wimmera natives
were the Albacutyas of Lake Hindmarsh.
There were sacred ceremonial grounds all
through the district, where the sub-tribes
assembled at the full moon and performed
the initiations and corroborees. The sand
hills near the swamps were their ancient:
burial grounds. Wherever a male or female
web born that locality was her or his partic-
ular home, and here she or he returned un-
failingly to die. ' '


Bills Gully and Vicinity
BY FRED. K. McKENZIE, NHILL.
Bill s Gully is on the south east corner
of the old Bunyip run. There was once upon
a time a shepherd’s hut on the crest of
the largest hill, generally occupied by Char-
lie Leverett. There was a fair amount of
water in the g-ully, where the water was
held back by a weir. Directly west, about
two-and-a-half miles, the (Merwyn (should
certainly be Mervin) well, was situated.
There are two Merwyn wells, but the new
one adjoins the Western Highway. The old
well was in the Mervin paddock of Bunyip.
The late Mr. Tom Bruder, the first to select
land (1863) west of the Wimmera River,
called it Merwyn or Merrwyn, so it remains.
The country in the vicinity was lightly tim-
bered with box, bulloak, sheoak. Scrub grew
on “no man’s land” to the south through
which passed the old station road to Moorea
Katkin (Richard Brown Broughton 1850).
It was held by J. B. Broughton until 1882,
when the lease was cancelled.
Story of Bunyip: September 1847, taken
up by Andrew McKinley; May, 1850, Mat-
thew Hamilton Baird and Henry Hodgkinson;
March, 1851, Thomas Bailee and Robert
Hamilton; Nov, 1852, Thomas Waldie and
John Salton; February 1853, W. J. T; Clark;
December, 1853, Heaps and Grice-; January,
ISCS, Lancelot Ryan (station then at its
zenith) ; February, ISOG, Trustee and Agency
Company; January, 1874, (John Brown
Broughton; October, 1882, cancelled and sub-
sequently acquired (homestead purchased
property) by late, Mr. Sanders.
McKenzie’s Springs (Worrall) : Taken up
by James Little, August 1849; January,
1857, James Little junr.; November, 1857,
James (Piccinny) Smith; April, 1861, Eliza-
beth Smith; December, 1862, J. H, Clough
& Co.; August, 1864, George Houston and
John Barter Bennett; April, 1865, Clough &
Boag; March, 1866, L. A. & Agency; May
1867, Henry Miller; February 1878, John
McKenzie; 1883, ■cancelled (lease) and pur-
chased by the late Mr. Joseph McNevin, of
Lawloit. I think the old homestead, or rath-
er, the land on which it was built, is now
owned by Mr. Zellner.
McKenzie Springs was the main centre
of meetings for the young people of the very
early days, and continued to bo right down
the years, until our own family (the McKen-
zie’s) left in 1883. It wasi at “The Springs”
as it was sometimes known, that Misses
Grace and Hilda Ryan, of Bunyip Station,
on their ponies “Tomboy” and “Corea,”
rode to meet the Smith girls of McKenzie’s,
Hilda von Stieglitz, of Lake Hindmarsh, and
the Little girls of Mt. Elgin (Annabelle and
Elizabeth Little), Marion, Mary and Dacia
Smith. There was once upon a time a fine


sawn-pine board homestead at McKenzie
Springs, where the dances were held and
which was attended by the Meagher and Me
Nerin girls from Lawloit, and the Whites
Lily and Jane) and Rosses (Ann, Beryl and
Mary) from Ballarook, but Jack DeMullen,
manager of Drumbanagher, before the ar-
rival of Alan Cameron, had the house, with
its gay dancing rooms, demolished, because
they attracted his boys. Of course, girls were
terribly scarce in those far-off days. It was
to McKenzie Springs that the late Robert,
Hicks, and the lata W. R. Buckley rode in
1881. My slater Jessie (the late Mrs. An-
drew Weir) welcomed the visitors from Mer-
ino. Mr. Hicks, with long, dark grey locks
around hia ears, and dressed in riding mole-
skins, leggins, etc., said in his rich and best
North of Ireland voice, when he had grace-
fully removed hia hat, “Good day to you,
Marm! Is there ’ere a selector hereabouts
named Alick Mclntyre, I dunno?’’ My sister
said there w-as; the travellers were hospitably
entertained, and in the morning my brother
Alick, who hopes to attend the celebrations,
showed Hicks and Buckley the country which
they ultimately pegged on Bunyip.
John Martin selected on Drumbanagher,
Brady at the old well, and Hansen close by.
Others who selected close to Bill’s Gully
were Alick Mclntyre, the Moojes, Creenann-
es, Warners, Sturgeons. They all called for
their mail at Joe MeGerins (he kept a store
and the Lawloit Hotel) ; the original store
and hotel was destroyed by lire in 186fi. You
will observe that the gold escort road which
came down from Scott’s wonlshed in the Tat-
iara, passed close to the Gully. This old
road of 1852 passed east through Tarrock,
Budjik and Bill’s Gully, passed Lawloit on
the south side, crossed the Western Highway
on the crest of the big hill on the range,
passed south of Mt. Elgin, through Kinima-
katka, Winiam, to Firebrace’s Camp on the
Wimmera. The newer track swung north-
east from the south into Nhill, passing- half-
a-mile north of the original homestead, and
thence east to Lochiel, where it crossed the
Wimmera River and on to Nine Creeks
Bridge (Dimboola).
Daniel Morgan, the bushranger, the only
one fortunately, in the West Wimmera, was
born at Campbelltown, N.S.W., in I.SJO, and
was shot at Peechelba Station on Bth April,
1865. He frequently worked on the Lock-
hart (Short’s) Station, and as frequently
stole horses from Lockhart, Tatiara, Bring-
rlbert, and ones from Bunyip and Urum-
banagher. The station owners knew that
Morgan camped at the Gully while escaping
east, down the gold escort line, but they did
not care about disturbing him, as he was well
armed, as well armed went in those days,
and one was likely to get shot. The Bunyip
(old hands' employees knew him as; “Bill
the Spaniard’’—they really thought ire was
a Spaniard, and his camp is known as Bill’s
Gully. I presume the contour of the eastern
hills are the same, but that the 1 bus t where
my brother’s and sister Jessie hunted kan-
garoos, emus, bandycoots and paddy melons
rnd native cats, which were then very com-
mon, has d’ssppeared for ver. I can just re-
member it, that’s all.
Morgan, when camped at Bill’s Gully, was
often visited at night by Leverett and an-
other man named Groggell, or Gregal
(Frank) , but the station owners would not


go near him—“ Better let sleeping- doigs lie.’’
The first mention of Baird of Hodgkinson
(Bunyip) and formerly of Lockhart, is made
by Henry Wade and Edward E, White, who
surveyed the north and south dividing line
between Victoria and. South Australia, under
instructions from Sir George Geppa (Gover-
nor of New- South Wales) and Mr Frederick
Holt Robe, Acting-Governor of South Aus-
tralia, 1847 (Wade) and 1848 (White).
These surveyors mention the timber in this
region being stringey bark, grass tree (which
we know as kangaroo tails), heath (corea),
white gums, acacias, box, and “Cyprus” the
latter being the native pine tree. Lockhar.;
is stated to be in a direct line, 123 miles 68
chains 91 links north from the sea at En-
counter Bay, and the line was marked by a
double row of blazed trees, similar to the
gold escort track.
YANIPY SELECTORS’ HALL, Opened on Christmas Day.
1883. and sold for removal in 1929.


A Few of the Early Selectors
During the month of February, 1878, the
late William Moar and J. H. Waters pegged
820 acres each close to the Yanipy well; at.
tended land board at Horsham, April 20th,
1878, at which their l applications were grant-
ed, The distance travelled was 535 miles
from their old home, Milangv S.A. From
then on: there was a continuous flow of sel-
ectors, either from South Australia or the
Western District of Victori'a, and by 18SS
the pick of the land was all taken up. The
Hicks and Buckley families selected their
holdings in Lawloit, in 1879. All the early
settlers had to cart their wheat to Dimboola
or Custon, S.A. Here are the names of a
few years’ time, their families began to grow
—Moore, Waters, Moar, McDonald, Webb,
McKenzie, Allitt, Wallis, Bell, Vennell, Smith
Coutts, Hill.
LATE DAVID COUTTS
Selected 320 acres of land 1881. Went in
for wheat growing and raising sheep, carted
wool to Dimboola for two seasons, was a
foundation member of Kaniva A. & P.
Society, also one of the first councillors when
Shire of Lawloit was declared a Shire. His
son, George, is a present-day Councillor.


LATE MR. & MRS. J. McDONALD
Selected 320 acres land 1878, went in for
wheat growing. He was one of the first se.
tiers to build a barn in which to store wheat
on the farm, so he could market it when
prices were suitable.
JOHN COUTTS
President Back To Yanipy and Bill’s Gully
Celebrations, November 13, 11)37.
Born on a farm about 15 miles from Ab-
erdeen, Scotland, May Sth, 1872. In 1879
his parents brought the family out to Aus-
tralia, and for three years resided on a farm
at Mount Gambier, S.A, His father selected
320 acres of land at Yanipy in 1881, brought
the family to live there in March 1883. First
only himself and four boys, later mother and
sisters. Since Mr. Coutts left school 1885,
his time has been continuously engaged in
the carrying out of the various operations
required in the conduct of a mixed farm,
viz., wheat, oats and sheep, which, by reason
of improvements, have changed so much dur-
ing the last 54 years.
CR. OLIVER WEBB
A grandson of the late David Coutts
Born in the eai-ly nineties, had all his school-
ing- at Yanipy, took a keen interest in Merino
sheep whenl a school boy. His father was one
of the main exhibitors at the first Kaniva
Shows. Mr, Webb has had great success at
all leading sheep shows, either in Victoris
or South Australia, and at the last Sheep-
breeders’ Show, held in Melbourne, 11)37, he
won the Grand Champion Sheep of the Show.


Education
HOW A GOOD MANY COUNTRY
SCHOOLS WERE BUILT
In the Spring of 1883, a move was made
to see" if the district farmers were willing
to erect a building for a school, and also to
hold Church services. The main movers
were J. H.. Waters, W. Moar, F. Steer, J.
McDonald, D. Coutts, M. McKenzie. Web!)
Brothers, Wallis Brothers, F. Saltmarsh, T
St Clair. After several meetings were held
at William Moar’s place, it was decided to
build a weatherboard building on a site on
the East end of 'W. Moar’s selection, which
was the centre of most of the families—even
then some families had over four miles to
walk. The Government of the dry would not
build a school, but would supply a teacher,
also school furniture, and pay a nominal
rent for use of a building. The building was
erected and opened with a tea meeting, and
sports gathering, on Christmas Day, 1883,
with a concert in the evening. It was
named the Yanipy Selectors’ Hall. The
funds were raised by donations, tea meetings
sports, etc. The school opened with about
30,, scholars and within 12 months increased
to over 50 The following are some of the
first scholars' who attended—Waters (7).
Hoar (4), Coutts (6), Hill (4), Allitt (3),
Gould (5), Perry (4), Smith (6), Crouch
(51, and later McDonald (8), Be flume (7),
Baldock (5), G. Allitt (7), Saltmarsh (3),
Campbell (4), Webb (3), Tink (3), Scroope
(7), Tink (3), and a good many others.
The first school teacher was a Miss Bren-
nan, followed by a young man named Rob-
erts, who, during the dinner hour, taught
us also how to play cricket. Next came Miss
Blair, Miss Cameron, Miss Carew, Miss Money
and several others. I often think what won-
derful courage the lady teachers had, to
eome ; to outback country schools, three years
before the railway line was opened.
EDUCATION AND GENERAL
In 1884 the coach used to go along the
main road, and the Yanipy Post Office, was at
Mr. Rich’s house, now owned by F. Saltmarsh
The coach was scheduled to travel three times
a week from Dimboola to Kaniva.
When the railway was opened 1887 the
mail was brought from Miram Piram and
the first mail boy was James Coutts, who
now resides at Lillimur; and the Yanipy
Post Office in one corner of the hall, with
the school teacher in charge.
Four different religious services were con-
ducted: Methodist, Church of England, Pres-
byterian and Salvation Army, and the ser-
vices were all well attended.
1889 is always remembered as the wettest
season on record, over 31 inches of rain
being recorded, which is far too wet for this
district: low-lying land was flooded and ris-
ing ground got scoured out in deep gutters-
- in the late Spring red rust set in very
badly, and some farmers had no wheat to
sell, and even the ones who had wheat to sell
the price was low, somewhere about 2/- per
bushel, and merino fleece wool was fid to 7d
per lb.


In the early nineties a good many of the
original selectors had to leave their holdings
with the result the school attendance became
less. When seasons got brighter and prices
got better for farm produce, the ones who
held on to their farms, and went in for
mixed farming, wheat and sheep, came out
alright.
The most forward move was made in 1898,
when fallows were better worked, and wheat
was sown through a drill with superphos-
phate, and later top-dressing grass land has
improved the carrying capacity double, es-
pecially on light land.
The Yanipy Selectors’ Hall was sold for
removal in 1929, iand now only a few trees,
a broken-down fence, and a few blocks, re-
main to remind the old scholars of the good
and lean times they went through.
Entertainments
During the winter months of 1884, the
Band of Hope used to hold monthly meetings
which were well attended. The Muar fainilj
used to lend their harmonium, and used to
wheel it to the hall on a wheel barrow, which
was a help to those who knew something
about music.
About 1885 a young! man named Peter
Elder, who came out from Scotland, and
lived with his brother at Bill’s Gully, offered
to teach the young people in the district how
to sing correctly. Needless to say, a good
many were willing to try and improve their
singing. Among the families who attended
one night a week were, Smith, Moar, Waters,
Coutts, Allitt, Langley, and several others,
and at the end of the season they gave a
concert in aid of the hall funds,' and the hall
was overcrowded, so the Hall Committee de-
cided to make the hall larger and also buy
a new organ to help the Church services, and
any concerts that were held.
Sport
Yanipy and Bill’s Gully folk have always
held their own with any clean sport. There
used to be a good cricket team in the
eighties. Some of the early cricketers were
Vennell Brothers, P. J. Smith, J. H. Waters,
C. Gould, P. Steer, Cordner and Rich Broth-
ers, and D. Mclnnis, who used to be called
Stonewaller Mclnnis. Lawloit also had a
good cricket team, some of the players were
Creenaune and Buckley Brothers, J. Bruder,
J. Meagher, J. Martin, Warner Brothers, -T.
Prcssey and several others. The two State
Schools (Yanipy and Lawloit) also had full
teams, of which I was a member, and had
several close matches at both centres. Some
of the junior cricketers at Yanipy were Hill
andi Coutta Brothers, S. J. Moar, Gould boys,
while Lawloit team comprised Perry , and
Leonard Brothers, several Mellingtons 'and
Alf Warner. So we had a Saturday half-
holiday, even in the eighties.


HACK RACES
A good many of the early settlers brought
good racing hacks with them, and several
good oned were bred here, and very eager to
try their speed against one another. The first
races used to be run on the road leading
from the Yanipy, well toi the reserve opposite
the hall. Later (1889) a race track was
cleared on the reserve and a good many
horses began their racing career there. The
fields were good even if the stakes were
small Some of the owners and horses were
Charlie Wallis’ Game, Bob Langley’s Lubra,
J, I-L Waters’ Maude, W. H. Whisson’s Dark-
ie, G. Coutta’ Dollar, W. Stuart’s Lady Grey,
Cordner Bros.’ Blueskin, Ted Clarke’s Lady
Joslyn, A. Crouch’s Commotion, Allit Bros.’
Maude, Jim McCracken also had a good
hurdler called Rippling Wave, but am not
sure whether he raced at Yanipy. W. Ven-
nell’n True Blue. Among other riders who
took part in the early races wore Jack Al-
lit, who used to ride their own mare Maude
also Art. Crouch’s Commotion. Ted Clark was
also a good rider, but was well over the ten
stone. Sid Moar used to ride for H. Whir-son.
Pravel Moar for G. Coutti, but if 'the race
was ten stone up, he would ride himself, and
won several races, including a welter weight
at Kaniva. Charlie .Wallis rode a, great race
on the Nhill course od his horse Game, Later
Billy Carter was a great rider. He used to
ride for his uncle, J. Crouch, and for W. Ven-
nell, and there were several more including a
saddler named Charlie Dawson, who had a
saddler’s shop about where Stephen’s hard-
ware shop is in Kaniva.
During the nineties, kangaroos used to b n
very plentiful in the South Scrub, and ua
there were no fences of any sort we used to
have a large muster mounted on all claseas
of hacks, sometimes as many as 20, under
the direction of Jim Thacker. He kept a
good, well-fed hack, also sveral good dogs,
and if we did not obey his instructions, ha
would give us a good roaring; up, which was
always taken in good part. The/ method was
lo spread out and the two wings to always
keep ahead, with the centre of the party
further behind, and, after the kill, the same
method would be followed, and everyone 01.
the party had his share of the day’s sport,
and I may say that there is no soup made,
better than that made from kangaroo tail.
Jim Thacker used to wear what was then
called a claw hammer coat, which was al-
rig'ht to carry a nose wiper, but no good to
carry your lunch, as the pocket was cross-
ways at the back. Among the ones who took
part were Thacker Brothers, Vennell Broth-
ers, Moar Brothers, two Whissons, a Station
Master from Kaniva named George Brown,
one of the bankers, also a draper named
Gater, who at one hunt had a, fall, and when
the hunting party found him, his face was
scratched with some bushes, and instead of
askiirv him how he felt, asked, him if he had
broken the bottle of whisky he was carrying,
at which he was so disgusted, that bfc went
straight home. Hard hats or boxers, as they
were called, were generally worn by th -
young men in the nineties, and a, good many
were lost in the scrub. Some were found, hut
a good many were never found. T can always
look b?ck with pleasant memories to the
fact that there never was a bad accident.


Cultivation Methods
1888-1937
- The usual method for growing wheat in
1883 was to plough the land either with a
single or double furrow plough, and sow the
seed by hand and harrow afterwards. Al-
though some of the larger farmers had broad-
casters much the same as super is spread
now on grass land. The stump-jump plough
did not become general till 1900, as a good
many thought it was only fit for the mallee,
and even then, one had to walk at the bad.
so as to be able to work the lever to regulate
the depth. About 1902 severalhad the lever
altered to the front with a seat in the middle
which was a big improvement from having
to walk over 16 miles a day, following the
plough. When drills came in first in 1898,
one had to walk, but it was not long before
a platform was fixed at the back to stand on
IMPROVEMENT IN WHEAT YIELDS
In 1907 such glowing reports had been
received about a wheat called Federation,
bred by Mr. Parrer, of New Mouth Wales,
and anyone who tried-it was convinced thar
it was all that was claimed foA it. A short-
strawed, mid-season wheat. Previous to Fed-
eration it took a good crop to yield 24
bushels, but with Federation wheat, 30 bush-
els was quite common. Next came Free Gal-
lipoli, bred at the Werribee Research Farm,
which increased our yields further. However,
the millers raised such a compaint about
its poor milling and baking qualities, and
threatened to impose a dockage, that it was
fortunate another wheat, named Ghurka, was
bred, and gave good yields. But with better
prices now ruling, the noise the millers were
making has died down.
HARVESTING METHODS 1883-1937
The usual method of harvesting wheat in
1883 was with a stripper, pulled by four
horses, and a driver, who rode one of the
back horses. It was cleaned with a hand-
winnower, which, to turn in the( hot sun, was
warm work. Next came the power winnower
worked by a horse on a tread mill. Abou ;
the same time (1903) the harvester came
into general use, followed by the header, now
with a power-driven header and a 12-fee:;
swathe two men can handle 300 bags per day
quite -easily, while 64 years ago, a good day’s
work one man and a boy on a stripper and
two men with a hand-winnower would be
about SO bags per day.
Bill’s Gully Hall
In the year 1912, a public m rating was
called and held in the old school, Lawloit
West, to discuss whether e public hall could
be built, to meet local requirements. The
meeting was well attended by local residents
who decided to go right ahead and call-ten-
ders. One was accepted. The hell was built,
and-opened during the-month of May, 1918,
with John Coutts, President, and Arthur
Whisson Secretary, which position he held
till he left the district to goi to Western Aus-
tralia. Mr. S. Vennell is the present Sec-
retary. Before the hall was built, Church


were held in the school, also Sun-
°l. but the annual anniversary used
d in a straw shed in Mr. W,. Smith's
When the hail was built, skating
Popular, and the hall used to be
crowded with young folk sometimes twice a
week. Later a piano was purchased, also a
kitchen built for comfort, for the women folk
when any social is held.
BILL'S GULLY HALL, Opened in May, 1913.


School
When the early settlers, or pioneers, had
cleared some of the land of the timber, and
were able to growt crops, and in other ways
make a living, they married wives, and in a
trict Inspector, Mr. Cavanagh, at the home
of Mr. W. Smith. Mr. Cavanagh assured
them that if they were prepared to remove
portion of the dwelling house from the La.v-
loit School, and erect it on the land, where
the present Miram South School stands, the
department would supply a teacher. This was
MIRAM SOUTH SCHOOL
few years’ time, their families began to grow
up. The next problem was education. This
became a matter that concerned the parents.
In the year 1900, the parents met the Dis-
not an opportunity to be lost, so the work was
carried out by Messrs J. Vennell, W. Smith.
Jas. Smith, W. Thacker, and W. Perry. The
school was opened in the Spring- of 1900 as


the Lawloit West State School, 5367, with
Mr. Sweet as teacher, and half-time with
Lawloit. Afterwards it became full time.
During the first two or three y. ars, there
were quite a number of teachers in charge,
but later they were allowed (or chose) to
stay for longer periods, the longest term be-
ing 10 years, by Miss. Leith. This teacher
was a tree and garden enthusiast, and the
beauty of the ground with its forest of trees
ami shrubs, is mainly due to her efforts.
During this period the building - became in-
adequate to house the scholars attending and
ho, in 1914, a modern school building was
erected by the Department, this building be-
ing officially opened by the late Mr. Arthu;
Kelly. Miss Leith was responsible, with
the help of others in the raising of a large
amount of money for patriotic purposes dur-
ing the Great War. The name of the school
has been changed to Mirain South so as to
facilitate the delivery of mail.
Church and Bible
School
Scon after the arrive! of the school build-
ing, Chinch services were commenced by the
Church of England , (and also Bible School'
by Mr. Snell, with the help of others. In later
years the school became a Union Sunday
School and the Church of Christ held ser
vices. The names of those who have acted
as Superintendents are Mr. J. P. Ward, Mrs.
A. E. Sanders, Mrs. W. Smith, Mr. A. Whis-
son, Mrs, A. G. Bell, Mr. I. Smith, Mr G,
Lee, and Mr D. Coutts. The school has not
been carried on continuously, there being
two periods when no school was held. The
anniversary services, and also the picnics,
were something that was always looked for-
ward to, and' enjoyed by both young and old.
The gatherings were large and were held
in Mr. W. Smith’s woolshed, prior to the
ejection of the hall. 1
Sheep Dip Company
The Bill’s Gully Sheep Dip Company is
one of the Co-operative Companies that has
been a success. It has been a success in two
ways—financially, as there is a substantial
credit balance on hand at present; and sec-
ondly it has been a big factor in keeping in
check the parasites of sheep. When the dip
was built in 1904, sheep dipping was no'
compulsory, as it now is. The graziers
thought that by dipping their sheep they
could improve their flocks and also the wool.
Mr. E. Laxton was the man who made the
move in arousing the interest of tlu» graziers
in this matter and it proved to be a wise
move on his part. He was .Tie first secretary
with Mr, Saltmarsh as chairman. The clip
mis operated every year with one exception,
that being in 1914 owing to shortage ot
,cater. The number of sheep passing through
in one season ranges from 10,000 to 40, 000.


Tennis Club
The Bill’s Gully Tennis Club began in 1906
with the energetic school teacher, Mr. L. M.
John, as organiser. A meeting was called of
those interested in the formation of a cricket
or tennis club, and tennis won the day. The
first courts were made on the North East
corner of the reserve, North of the school.
These courts had no back stops, so players
had plenty of exercise chasing the balls. Next
season courts were made on the property of
Mr. W. Smith, and the club was successfully
carried onuntil 1915, when it was disbanded
owing to the war. It was revived again in
1920 and has continued on till the present
time. The club has been very successful in
past years in winning the Lawloit Tennis
Association Premiership in the years 1925
A grade, 1926, A and B grades, 1928 A
grade, 1929 A grade. The club was weaken-
ed considerably by the removal of several
families from the district, nevertheless there
has been many enjoyable times spent on the
Gully courts.
BILL’S GULLY DAM.


GROUP OF PAST AND PRESENT DISTRICT RESIDENTS
Photographed at the Back To Kaniva, 1933.


MEDIUM WOOL RAM, Champion and Grand Champion at
the Australian Sheepbreeders' Show, 1937. Bred and owned
by Oliver Webb, of “Fairview ’ Estate, Kaniva.
Mr. J. L. Webb came with his parents, also
one brother and one sister, from Langhorn s
Creek, S.A., in 1878, and all selected land at
Yanipy. These selections, with others, are
still held by them or their descendants. Mr.
Webb was always keenly interested in Merino
sheep, and exhibited sheep at the Kaniva
show practically every year since its incep-
tion, 54 years ago. In 1893 the well-known
stud was founded with ewes and rams from
the Hynam, S.A., stud, and were worked on
these lines until 1902, when sires were pur-
chased from Jas. Gibson, Bellvue, Tasmania.
These sheep were heavy cutters, but were
rather small, wrinkly and their constitutions
were not the best, and the next t>l°°d intro-
duced was from the Lillymur stud in, 1912,
and were bred on these! lines until 1929, and
had the desired effect of producing stock
with better constitutions, large 1 frames and
plainer bodies. In 1918 the stud was taken
over by the present owner, who has shown


the same keenness, and with careful selection
of sires, 1 has brought the] stud up! to th« high
standard that it enjoys today.
From 1929 sires have been purchased from
the famous Merryville stud, N.S.W., and are
still being- used, although this year a ram was
purchased from Chas. Mills, Uardry, N.S.W.,
with a view 1 of still improving the si?e of the
progeny without losing the characteristics
that are apparent with the Fairview sheep..
The most outstanding features being- sheep
with big, plain bodies, and heavy necks, car-
rying a fleece of good staple, wonderful color
and crimp, evenly and densely packed on.
ROLL OF HONOUR
Great War 1914-18.
Miram South & Yanipy Schools.


Original Selectors of Yanipy and Lawloit
J. Bethune
J. Moore
R. J. Moore
J. E. Moore
T. F. Moore
R. Collins
F. Steer
W. A. Golding
R. Webb
J, J. Webb
J. L. Webb
E. Webb
A. Webb
A. McLean
W. D. Moar
M. A. Moar
W. Moar
J. McDonald
M. A. McLean
G. Crouch
H. L. McLean
R. Jones
T. Young
U. Golding
A, McKenzie
D. McKenzie
M. McKenzie
D, Coutts
G. Gould
C. Brqokless
H. A. Meßain
C, Haines
J. Seaby
W. Rossell
T. Wilson
C. H. Laller
J. Johnson
E. Philp
M. Coutts
H. Gardiner
J. .H. Waters
F. Saltmarsh
H. A. Perry
C, H. Sturgeon
G. J. Rich
W. Rich
A. Mclntyre
J. H, Baldwin
A. Hill
A, G. Crouch
T. Hewton
M. Bateson
A. Rich
H. Waters
A. M. Hill
T. St. Clair
W. Bateson
C. Rideout
E. Bateson
W. Vennell
G. Vennell
J.Wyatt
J. H, Ward
0. Edwards
G. W. Nuzum
J. Allitt
J, C. Wallis
A. R. M. Wallis
J. Smith
W. Davis
John Vennell
C. Hutchinson
D. Campbell
W. J. McLouley
J. J. Meagher
H. Baldock
M. Bell
G. Bell
A. Allitt
Rideout
R? Harper
J. Eastwell
G. Shone
F. D. Hansen
A. Buckley
R. D. Buckley
J. Buckley
W. Malthome
J. Hicks
R. Hicks
M. Hicks
W. Hicks
H. Schmidt
C. Schmidt
J, B, Harrison
G. W. McCormack
H. Doyle
G. Jenkinson
J. J. Mahoney
C. Honeyman
J. T, Martin
C. Martin
J. Rawlings
W. C. Davies
B. Creenaune
J. Warner
H. Brady
J. Pavey
R. W. Rowley
iT. Kain
I J. H, Perry
! J. J. Pressey
J. McNevin
T. Warner
G. Bell junr.
T. Bruder
A. W. McCracken
IT. McGowan
'J. McCracken
!C. Matthews
iW. Williamson
H. W. Franks
T. Creenaune
F. Mellington
F, P. Seymour
W. Thacker
S. Martin
M. Mclntyre
J. Harr
J. D. Oattermole
!-l. Berry
D. Stokes
M. G. Holmes
;A. J. Williams
