

Official
Souvenir
“Back to Braidwood"
week
Proceeds in aid of Public Hospital, Braidwood
November 22nd
to 29th, 1925


THE RENDEZVOUS OF TOURISTS
AND TRAVELLERS”
THE
ROYAL HOTEL
TT
BRAIDWOOD
Mrs. WORTHINGTON - - - PROPRIETRESS
Member of the C.T.A. & N.R.M.A.
TELEPHONE: BRAIDWOOD 88
A MOST COMMODIOUS & CONVENIENT HOTEL


“Back to Braidwood”
Celebrations
22nd November
to
29th November
1925
Proceeds in aid of Braidwood Hospital
Printed by Sid Madden, 132 George Street West, Sydney, and published by The Direct
Publicity Co mpany, under the auspices of the “Back to Braidwood” Executive
Com mittee.


CENTRAL STORES
■H • ■■
F. H. DOWELL
ffijfpl
GENERAL MERCHANTS
BR AID W OOD
‘A Good Reputation is Better than a Girdle of Gold, sai d the
Philosopher. And the CENTRAL STORES is a case in point that
proves the maxim. Its Good Reputation has been faithfully won
and carefully maintained.
Large Stocks of
DRAPERY MERCERY CLOTHING BOOTS &
SHOES MILLINERY UNDERCLOTHING
FURNITURE BEDDING Etc.
We Shall Appreciate a Visit.
YOU WILL BE WELL CATERED FOR AT THE
ANTHONY HORDERN'S OF BRAIDWOOD.
Telephone 24.


Foreword
In compiling this history, in
which every care has been
taken to record only authentic
facts, I wish to acknowledge
the great assistance received
from Aubrey Mowle, Esq.;
Captain Watson, of the His •
torical Society; Hon. P. Lough-
lin, Minister for Lands; Messrs.
J. Perkins, M.L.A. ; H. L.
Mater; J. O’Neill; H. Mcßae;
E. Bunn and T. C. Musgrave,
for the loan of files of early
newspapers and records; J. S.
Maiden, who kindly allowed
the history he had previously
written of Braidwood, to be
used as a reference, and many
others.
Agnes Hogg.


Commercial Hotel
o>V
BRAIDWOOD
M
Ki
II I
im
Ofe»*
mmmmm
THE OLD ESTABLISHED HOTEL WITH A GOOD
REPUTATION
Mrs. M. A. O’BRIEN - - - PROPRIETRESS
l
t
i
t
(
1
Old and New Friends are invited to pay a visit to the above Hotel
during the “Back to Braidwood” Celebration, where a hearty
welcome awaits you.
♦


List of the “Back to Braidwood”
Executive Committee
Patrons:
R. J. C. Maddrell, Esq., R. G. Hassall, Esq., W. D. Gordon, Esq.
President:
W. H. L. Chapman, Esq.
Honorary Historian:
Miss Agnes Hogg.
Honorary Treasurer:
D. H. Cowper, Esq.
Honorary Secretary:
C. W. Dobson, Esq,
Committee:
Rev. H. F. A.
Champion
Rev. Thomas Vaughan
Mr. G. C. Maddrell
Mr. Edward Bunn
Mr. F. H. Dowell
Mr. R. T. Hassall
Mr. R. J. Maddrell, Jr.
Mr. William Roberts
Mr. J. J. Feehan
Mr. W. R. McDowall
Mr. P. N. Byrne
Mr. L. J. Hickey
Mr. W. B. Henville
Mr. C. J. Roberts
Mr. T. A. Pass
Mr. James Higgins
Mr. C. H. Brooks
Mr. W. J. Maher
Mr. John Naughton
Mr. Robert Keyte
Mr. T. M. Royds
Mr. D. M. O’Connell
Mr. W. U. Alley
Mr. John Coffey
Mr. M. Anderson, Jr.
Mr. J. F. Hyland
Mr. C. S. Byrne
Mr. A. E. Bassing-
thwaighte
Mr. A. R. Hill
Mr. J. E. O’Neill
Mr. P. C. Maddrell
Mr. H. C. Maddrell
Mr. P. R. King
Mr. M. J. McNamara
Mr. R. L. Macdonald
Mr. T. H. Griggs
Dr. H. W. Cuthbert
Mrs. W. H. L.
Chapman
Mrs. R. L. Macdonald
Mrs. E. N. Mutton
Mrs. W. Scott
Mrs. W. R. McDowall
Mrs. H. E. Roberts
Mrs. M. R. O’Brien
Mrs. F. Worthington
Mrs. M. Anderson
Mrs. J. E. Hyland
Mrs. T. Doolan
Miss J. B. Hogg
Miss E. Mackellar
Miss E. Kennedy


Old Pioneers and Identities
THE LATE CAPT. J. COGHILL.
W. J. BUNN.
LATE HUGH WALLACE,
One of the early pioneers, who
lived at Nithsdale.
Mr. R. CRAIG,
The first Secretary of the Braidwood Pas
-roral, Agricultural and Horticultural
Associaton.


Early Explorers and Surveyors
When the road over the Blue Mountains was
.opened in 1813, and stock-owners busily engaged
in removing their flocks and herds to the Bathurst
Plains, efforts were concentrated upon the dis-
covery of a road from Sydney to Jervis Bay.
Hamilton Hume, with his brother, John Kennedy
Hume and an aboriginal boy, set out from Appin
and explored the country now known as Picton,
Mittagong, Berrima, Bowral and Bong Bong, in
1814. The following year he went over the route,
and again in 1816 with Dr. Charles Throsby.
Though only nineteen years of age at the time,
Hume was recognised as a leading expert in bush-
craft, and his valuable knowledge and services
were always cheerfully given when called upon.
For these reasons, he was specially asked by
Governor Macquarie to accompany Surveyor
Meehan in the effort to reach Jervis Bay. The rest
of the party consisted of Dr. Charles Throsby, his
friend, Geo. Grimes, Joseph Wild, a free man, six
servants and two natives, with two carts carrying
provisions and camp equipment.
The expedition left the Liverpool District, in
March 1818, crossing the Nepean at Mr. Hassall »
farm, and travelled along what is now practically,
the Main Southern Road, till the hopelessness of
crossing the deep ravines near the Shoalhaven
River, turned them in a north-westerly direction,
towards what is now Tallong Station. Near Mar-
ulan they went south, and again had a view of
the Shoalhaven gorges, just below the junction
of the Bungonia Creek. Finding it impracticable
to effect a passage any farther, the party agreed
to divide, for the purpose of more successfully
carrying on the work of exploration.
Dr. Throsby took the carts, his own three men,
with his friend, Mr. Grimes, and the two natives,
in order to try out the original plans, but in this
he was not successful. Surveyor Meehan, with
Hume and the other four men, leading three
horses with loads on their backs, travelled to the
south-west, in the hope of heading the river. The
journey was continued in a direction approximate-
ly S.S.W ~ and on the 3rd April, 1818, Lake Bath-
urst was discovered. Meehan spent the next day
in making a survey of the lake, and for this pur-
pose went right round it, and named it in honour
of Earl Bathurst, then Secretary of State for the
Colonies. Q n the second day, they left the lake
proceeded in a north-westerly direction, and
'discovered the Goulburn Plains, called after Henry
Coulburn, of State for the
Colonies, then deciding to go home, passed within
a few miles of the site of Goulburn, through the
same districts, though not- exactly along the same
track as on their outward journey. From various
fitters, it is known that Charles Throsby, Wjilliam
Macarthur and Hamilt on Hume went on an expedi-
K>n to the Goulburn district, during the end of
arch, 1820, and travelled as far as the Breadal-
oane Plains.
In August, 1820, Charles Throsby was engaged
in opening up a road from Bong Bong, across the
Wollondilly, to the Cookbundoon, and having a
ready power of gaining the confidence of the
natives, learned from them of a large lake situated
to the south-west of Lake Bathurst. He fitted out
Josh Wild, and two of the road party, and directed
him to find the lake. This Wild succeeded in doing
on the 19th August, 1820, arriving hack at the
road camp eight days later.
On Monday, 1 6th October, Governor Macquarie
set out in his carriage, from Parramatta, on a
tour of inspection to the newly-discovered country,
and after seven days’ journey, arrived at Lake
Bathurst. Two days were spent in shooting, as
game abounded, and examining the country, when
a move was made to Lake George. When every-
thing was in readiness, word was brought that
Commissioner Bigge, and Surveyor General Oxley,
were about to arrive from their journey from
Bathurst, across the Campbell and Abercrombie
Rivers. This caused delay for another day, and
on the Friday the whole party started for Lake
George, as a track was found where the carts
could easily travel. They reached the lake and
camped on a very pretty plain near a fresh water
creek (the water of the lake is brackish) on the
eastern shore. An extract from Macquarie’s jour-
nal reads as follows: “We sat down to dinner
to-day (28th October, 1820) at half past 5, and
after dinner we drank a bumper toast to the future
settlers of the shores of Lake George, which name
t have given to this grand and magnificent sheet
of water, in honour of his present majesty.”
In a report to the Governor, dated 10th May,
1821, of another visit to Lake George, when he
reached what is now Federal Territory, Charles
Throsby says: “When I set out, it was my inten-
tion to have looked into the country to the east-
ward of Lake George, towards Jervis Bay, on my
return homewards, but being too far westward by
the course of the waters, wet weather and other
circumstances, I was obliged to desist from that
attempt at present, but propose making a tour
in that direction about September next, when the
days will be longer, and the weather more pleas-
ant.” Apparently, two expeditions were made
about the end of November, 1821, with a view of
approaching Jervis Bay from the westward after
heading the Shoalhaven gorges, Dr. Charles
Throsby, in company with Mr. Wm. Kearns, set
out on the arduous journey on the 23rd, and
succeeded in sighting Jervis Bay. He was of the
decided opinion that a good road could be cut
from Sydney to that harbour, and reported the
land to be extremely rich, and that all lagoons
and rivers at that season of the year were fordable.
Hume left Appin, accompanied by two natives
on the 1 7th November, and “accomplished the
desirable and great object.” It seems likely that
the Shoalhaven River was crossed both by Throsby


SITE OF RYRIE PARK, 1865.
OLD RAILWAY HOTEL.


and Hume SOMEWHERE NEAR THE OALLEN
CROSSING; but in the absence of a journal, there
is nothing to show that either actually descended
to Jervis Bay. Hume reported that he could, with-
out much trouble or difficulty, cause a good road
,to be cut right on to Bateman s Bay through fertile
country easy of access.
The Clyde River was discovered by Lieut. Robert
Johnston on the Ist December, 1821. Hume was
persuaded by Alexander Berry to accompany him
to the Shoalhaven District, and finishing their
work there, they set out on an exploring expedi-
tion. They reached the Clyde and followed it
to its upper waters, then branched off inland,
evidently on the same track used by the Murrum-
bidgee natives, over the Currockbilly Range, on
their journeys to and from the coast, UNTIL THEY
WERE CLOSE TO THE SITE OF BRAIDWOOD.
Having added this much to the map, Berry and
Hume retraced their steps and returned to Sydney,
it now being late in the year 1822.
In consequence of the discovery of the Clyde
River, Messrs. Kearns, Marsh and Packer set out
on the 30th January, 1822, with a native and pack
horses, and arrived at the spot where Governor
Macquarie had camped near Lake George in Octo-
ber, 1820. They then travelled to the Molonglo
and Queanbeyan Rivers, in the locality visited by
Throsby the previous April. After following the
Queanbeyan a few miles they turned easterly,
crossing the Gourock or Main Range, as it is
locally termed, and on the Bth FEBRUARY,
CROSSED THE SHOALHAVEN RIVER AND
CAMPED EITHER ON THE JEMBAICUMBENE OR
JILLAMATONG CREEK. The distances quoted
have since been found inaccurate, consequently,
the position is not known exactly. They were later
informed that the native name of the locality
where they camped was “Kimly.” The men re-
ported that the country was thinly wooded, and
in their opinion equally as good as that in the
forest part of the County of Argyle, with very rich
grass upon it, and abounded in kangaroos and
emus. The only signs of the natives were several
'fires to the eastward at a short distance. The next
■day was wet, which prevented travelling, and the
journey was resumed on the 10th February, when
Monga was reached. The horses were left there,
end the men climbed the Clyde Mountain, where
they obtained a fine view of the sea, a bay, which
rightly supposed was Bateman s Bay, and the
Pigeon House, a landmark for all the explorers on
Tif . coast ' They did not enter the Coast District.
1 heir journal states: “Owing to the great num-
ber of native fires we perceived in every direction,
a nd our party being small, we thought it most
prudent not to approach the sea coast any nearer,
therefore returned, well knowing that the
natives in this quarter are very hostile. At 4 p.m.
V e halted for the night at our old station. The
country we passed through this day was very rich
°rest land and well-watered. It was good land,
even until we ascended about two-thirds of the hill.
° ur opinion, this would make a very good place
° r a settlement, on account of the land being
very good and within so short a distance from
P e Bay. They returned to Sydney through
oungonia.
Surveyor William Harper visited the locality of
°nga, probably from Bungonia, in about 1821
° r 1822, but the exact date is not recorded. There
no date m the Field Book, but the cover is
noted “about 1821,“ though this note is not in
Harper’s handwriting. He saw the ocean and the
Pigeon House, but whether he came as far west
as the town is not indicated.
Under instructions from Surveyor Oxley, and
later, Sir Thomas Mitchell, the district was opened
up by survey, and from 1824, Surveyors Harper,
Hoddle and Knapp (father of Mrs. Maddrell, of
Bedervale), carried out feature surveys of con-
siderable extent.
In 1828, Surveyor Robert Hoddle surveyed into
portions most of the land around the site of the
town, for which grants were later issued, and he
from then on till about 1836 made many measure-
ments in the vicinity.
The first land grant in the Braidwood district
was for 42,467 acres (west of the town) to the
Trustees of the Clergy and School Estate, on the
3rd February, 1829, which area was later sub-
divided into small portions and sold about 18 72.
The grant to Dr. Wilson is mentioned elsewhere.
On the north of Wilsons property, Duncan
Mackellar, Senr., purchased 1120 acres for which
he paid £2BO. The deed was signed on 6th June,
1836. Adjoining, was Duncan Mackellar’s grant
of 10th May, 1837, for 2000 acres at a quit rent
of £l6/13/4 from Ist January, 1833, being granted
by order, dated 16th June, 1825. These two pro-
perties formed the original Strathallan Estate.
Captain John Coghill purchased 5,600 acres on
the south of Wilson’s grant for £1,400, under
permission granted by Sir Ralph Darling, on 1 Bth
January, 182 7, the deed for which was issued on
the 23rd August, 1838. The survey executed by
Surveyor Hoddle in 1828, showed, besides the pre-
viously mentioned grants, the position of the land
grants promised to Captain Wetherell of 2,560
acres, James Ryrie 2,560 acres, George Bunn 2,560
acres, Francis Dixon 2,000 acres (a 4,000 acres
purchase by him having been cancelled in 183 7 for
non-payment), McVitie 2,000 acres (which was
cancelled in 1832) and also Captain Coghills
2,560 acres grant and 4,000 acres purchase.
The design and survey of the town, following
a petition from intending purchasers, was car-
ried out by Surveyor J. Farmer in 1839, and the
notification of the Governors approval of the
township appeared in the Government Gazette of
24th April, 1839. The Colonial Secretary, in con-
nection therewith, advised the Surveyor-General
that the minimum price at the sale would be £2
per acre. The original design was amended on
representations from the Deputy Surveyor-General
with the concurrence of Dr, Wilson to include a
recreation reserve opposite the Court House. The
former wrote “that as considerable expense had
been incurred by Dr, Wilson in the erection of a
handsome building for a Court House, the appear-
ance of the town would be much improved if an
area were left about the building that would serve
as a place of recreation for the inhabitants. The
amended plan was approved by the Executive
Council on 4th October, 1839, and the first sale
of allotments w*thm the town was held on the
9th July, 1840. Most of them were sold, and in
the year following, the purchases of several hay-
ing forfeited their deposits, these were again
offered, and readily disposed of, and the remainder
in 1842. The letter, addressed to the Honorable
The Colonial Secretary, - on 18th October, 1838,
asking that His Excellency the Governor may be
pleased to cause the township to be surveyed, was


PHONE 46
E. N. Mutton
The Cut-Price
STOREKEEPER and DIRECT IMPORTER
Sole Agents for
J: B. STETSON’S
Famous
FELT HATS
for
Gents
The Leading House tar
GENERAL HOUSEHOLD DRAPERY
FLOOR COVERINGS & LINOLEUM
MILLINERY DRESS GOODS
The Speciality House for Fashionable
MERCERY, SHIRTS
FELT HATS - Etc
“ROVERT” SHOES for LADIES, BOOTS & SHOES for GENTS.
WALL PAPERS in NEWEST DESIGNS at LOWEST PRICES.
AGENT for METTERS “BEACONLIGHT," “DOVER,” “ROYAL’
and “IMPROVED” STOVES.
SOLE AGENTS for
J. O. ANDERSON & CO. LTD., TENNIS &
ALL SPORTING REQUISITES.
Mutton’s First for
Everything
Agents for
MARSHALL
BOOTS
and
SHOES
for
MEN


signed by Andrew Badgery, James Coutts, Patrick
Colliding, William Bennison, David Williams, J. L.
Wallace, Alfred Watts, William Watts, James
Liddell, Thomas Cowper, John Burke Josh, Linde
Jones, James Dunn, A. W. Kinlay, Samuel Raw-
son, Charles Townshend, Charles Walker, Joseph
Dalbs and John Lambie.
On the I Ith March, 1839, at Goulburn, Mr. J.
Larmer reported that in conformity with instruc-
tions from the Surveyor-General, he had surveyed
the reserve for the Village of Braidwood, also the
buildings and fences erected thereon by Dr. V?ilson.
The town, an exception to most country towns,
is splendidly laid out, with broad straight streets,
named in almost every instance after the land-
holder. Wallace Street, called after the Hon. Hugh
Wallace (who took his seat in the Legislative Coun-
cil, 16th August, 1866, and grandfather of Mr.
Mackellar, of Exeter Farm) is the main street now,
but Ryrie Street, named after Mr. James Ryrie of
Arnprior, was the chief thoroughfare then, with
crossings over the Flood and Jillamatong Creeks,
convicts in 'the latter. Dr. Francis Lascelles Wal-
lace is responsible for Lascelles Street; Coghill
Street, in honour of Captain Coghill, of Bedervale;
Duncan and Mackellar Streets, after Captain Dun-
can Mackellar of Strathallan and afterwards Ginga-
mona; Wilson and Elrington Streets after Dr. Wil-
son and Major Elrington, Monkittee Street from the
native name of Dr. Wilson’s farm, and Solus Street
on account of its isolated position across the creek.
The only means of communication then was through
Bungonia and Marulan to Sydney and bullock
drays, which usually occupied six weeks on the
journey, the chief mode of transit for passengers
and goods. To gain a shorter and quicker route,
a road to Jervis Bay was contemplated. Dr. Wil-
son, in 1840, induced the Government to put a
road gang of Government men upon the mountain
part of it, in one place the road was cut through
solid rocks, and he, with the help of Colonel
Mackenzie of Nerriga (then called Nariga) who
had a grant of land there, completed the portion
to Braidwood with their own men, tools and
material.
This then became the main road and was used
extensively till the gold rush to the district in the
roaring fifties, demanded a shorter route, and
the road from Nelligen to the Government Turn on
the Clyde Mountain, was made by convicts. Colin
Greaves, a surveyor from New Zealand, made the
road, by contract, to the town.
The post office was established in 183 7, in
charge of Mr. J. Chaing (grandfather of
Mrs. Hill, Bombay Road), in a small house
opposite the old mill in Mackellar Street,
and the mails were carried from Marulan
and Jervis Bay, and afterwards from Goulburn,
when the old stage coaches came into use, with
changing stations at Mana and Boro. Mr. James
Malone was among the first of the mail contrac-
tors, and he, his sons or his grandsons, have almost
continuously had a share in carrying the mails in
the district. Mr. Owen Malone was the first to
drive a mail coach to Moringa, his conveyance
was known as a “Spider.” Previously to that, it
was carried on pack-horses. Nelligen was the port
for the whole of the Monaro Districts, as far as
Kiandra and Braidwood, the large distributing
centre for the mails. Those for Monaro and beyond
were taken to Queanbeyan, over a direct route
across the Gourock Range. This road should be
open to traffic again, as it Is the shortest way to
the coast from Canberra, and would be used
largely.
In 1859, an agitation was set afoot to have the
electric telegraph established, but it was many
years before that came to pass. The papers in
the fifties published telegrams eight days after
they were lodged in the office in Sydney,
THE DONCASTER INN, ESTABLISHED 1837.
It was the centre of social life in the town, and meetings, balls, weddings and mostly all
celebrations were held there when Mrs. Maria Badgery and Mrs. Darke were the hostesses.


THE COMMERCIAL HOTEL ABOUT 1868.
An old identity "One Legend Dick," may he seen at the head of the horses.
THE GAOL, 1868.


The Aboriginals
Before becoming debased by contact with
Europeans, and acquiring a taste for strong drink,
the aboriginals of the Braidwood tribes were a
very intelligent, trustworthy people, grateful and
responsive to kindly treatment.
Their wonderful eyesight and accurate aim
made them splendid hunters, but their nomadic
habi'ts, and great instinctive love of the bush, with
its free life, made every attempt to domesticate
them, futile. The gins might stay for a few months
in the settlers homes, where they made fairly
good maids, particularly in out-door work, but
eventually the spell of the bush would become too
strong, and off they wuld go without a moment s
notice. This had an injurious effect upon their
health, for the rough exposed life in the camp,
after a period of good food, warm beds and regu-
lation clothing, rendered them very susceptible to
lung trouble, which usually culminated in an early
death. Both boys and gins made excellent stock-
men, but as farm-hands, domestics, and shepherds,
they were not quite a decided success.
The gunyahs, or shelters, were very primitive
affairs, merely a hole about eight feet long, sup-
ported on two forked sticks, about four or five feet
high, with branches sloped from the ground
to the pole, sufficient in number to shut
out the wind, on one side at least. If procurable
sheets of stringy bark were used instead of the
bushes, the “Lord of the Manor,” with his dogs,
often as many as eight, occupied the cosiest corner,
the gins and picaninnies making the best of what
was left. A small fire was kept alight in front, with
four long sticks placed with the ends in the fire,
as these burnt they were pushed up and so kept
the fire alight.
The game, which was plentiful, supplied the
food, kangaroos, wallabies, opossums, wild ducks,
with various other birds, eels, snakes, and even
the wily goanna. The great boogong moth, wood-
grubs, especially those in old banksia trees, and
wild honey were considered delicacies.
The men hunted while the women attended to
the cooking, a very simple matter, the animal,
opossum usually, was just skinned, and baked in
its entirety in the hot coals. When ready, it was
laid on a small sheet of bark, newly cut from a
tree, the master sitting down to it on the ground,
his gin and picaninnies seated behind him. He
tore the food in pieces with his fingers and threw
the bones with the tit-bits removed, over his
shoulder to the family, who, in turn, passed them
on to the waiting dogs. No worry of washing up
dishes and pots there.
The skins of kangaroos, wallabies and opossums
made very pliable by being stretched and pulled
over the limb of a tree, and rubbed with a stone,
provided the clothing for winter weather, while a
girdle of stringy bark did duty for the summer.
When in full regalia for a corrobboree or battle,
the faces, bodies and limbs of the men were fan-
tastically patterned with white and yellow pipe
clay, which gave them a most fearsome and awe-
inspiring appearance.
When the Government realised, to some extent,
its responsibility and duty to the natives, a supply
of blankets was issued annually at the Court
Ho use by the police on the 24th May, Queen Vic-
toria s birthday. There was a great mustering that
day, which has gradually dwindled in number till
tor more than twenty years, not one of the old
tribe remained. The young vigorous blacks went
to the coast, where there was a better living to
be made, and only old gins remained, who gradu-
ally succumbed to the loneliness, drink and disease.
Like children, the aboriginals were easily
pleased, but had strict laws in regard to the bound-
aries of their tribal territories, which were de-
fined by the mountain ranges and large water-
courses, and the extent estimated by the amount of
game and capacity for carrying it. Poaching was
prohibited, and the offender severely dealt with
if caught. This, with the stealing of brides from
neighbouring tribes, was mainly the cause of the
tribal wars. Otherwise, they lived on very friendly
terms, visiting each other for several weeks Tor
corrobborees and hunting. The coast tribes came
here for kangaroo, wallaby and opossum skins,
the fur being of a better and more lasting
quality than that of the coast, while our blacks
returned the visit, evidently for a diet of fish,
oysters and the tender leaves of the cabbage-tree
palms. The Murrumbidgee natives passed through
the district on their way to and from the coast,
while with the Monaro tribes, friendly relations
existed also, till the white man conceived the
sporting (save the mark) idea of stirring up strife
amongst them and provoking them to battle.
Gilbert’s Creek was the chosen battlefield and many
hundreds were killed there, the white man look-
ing on from a safe distance,
Wh en a youth reached maturity, he was initiated
with great ceremony and secrecy by the old men
into the traditions, mystic rites and beliefs of the
tribe, away in the fastnesses of the Currochbilly
Range, where women were rigidly excluded, owing
to their supposed inferiority. One of his front
teeth was knocked out with a stone during the
process. Out west, this ceremony was termed
“Boro.” Mr. Eugene Rudder, in the “Sydney
Mail,” writes: “Although their (the aboriginals)
language is split up into many dialects, there is
sufficient uniformity to distinguish the race as one
right through Australia, so very probably, Boro
was the scene of these sacred rites, until the main
road passed along there compelling the natives to
seek a more secluded spot. The principles of
their religion were so carefully guarded, that very
little is known, other than they had a belief in a
good and a bad spirit, and when travelling or
hunting in the vicinity of the high thickly wooded
ranges, would change camp every night, even if
it were only a few yards away, to escape the atten-
tions of the bad spirit.
The tribes must have been fairly large, for in
the battles and corrobborees at Meroo, Gilbert’s
Creek, Jembaicumbene. Araluen and elsewhere, as


Where To Stay Whilst in ARALUEN.
MK
..'■fHßx _
i ARAM U A RMSHoniSlr-'* :
; t' tu Pftopi
*
MU
pM£i
ll
HMHP
W*
I ACCOMMODATION OF THE BEST
; ALL LIQUORS TRUE TO LABEL. ’Phone No. 2
A. Barnett
CHEMIST
BR Al D WOOD
Excellent Assortment of the Best Brands of Perfumery
& Toilet Soaps, Manicure Sets, Xylonite Ware, Brushware
etc. Always in Stock.
Agent for Kodak Supplies
All Prescriptions Faithfully and Accurately Dispensed
PHONE
28


many as five hundred or more warriors would take
part, as late as the forties.
The weapons were stone axes, spears, boomer-
angs and wommerahs, the last a club cut from a
small sapling with numerous roots, pared close to
the butt a very effective means of offence.
At Charleyong, there is a flat stone which was
used by all the tribes to shape and sharpen their
exes, many of which in various stages of prepara-
tion have been found near by.
The weak and afflicted blindness was very
common were treated with care and respect, and
sent on ahead with an escort before camp was
moved. When employed by the settlers, the pay
consisted of flour, tobacco, black sugar and blacker
tea, and unfortunately rum was sometimes given
them.
SIR WATKIN.
A Tracker, mentioned in “Robbery
Under Arms.”
When death took place the corpse was tied
encased in two sheets of bark, and buried
In a sitting position, with his weapons. The body
w as sometimes placed in an ant bed or hollow
tree. In the case of a great chief, the corpse was
placed on a platform in a very high tree in the
depths of the thickest forest. At the funeral, the
widow with other women followed at a respectful
distance, crying and wailing most mournfully, her
friends joining in chorus. Her head was plastered
with pipe clay, and as she cried she gashed herself
with sharp stones on the head and body, making
the blood flow freely. Covered with blood and
pipe clay, she was a ghastly sight. Sometimes the
mourning and wailing at the graveside was con-
tinued for three days.
Their power of suffering great pain with sur-
prising fortitude was exemplified by the black
tracker, Sir Watkin, who with the police, was in
pursuit of bushrangers, and was so badly wounded
in the arm that it had to be amputated. He sub-
mitted to the operation without the help of an
anaesthetic with never a flinch or a murmur. Sir
Watkin is mentioned in “Robbery under Arms.”
The last king of the Braidwood tribe was Billy,
a very old man, who proudly wore a large brass
crescent suspended from his neck by a piece of
string, with an inscription to the effect that he
was duly recognised by the Government as Billy,
King of the Braidwood Tribe. He died in the
Goulburn Hospital somewhere about 1873, when
returning home from Sydney, where he had gone
to attend the Ra-ndwick Races.' In those days, the
aboriginals were given a free pass on the trains
and to all race courses.
The very last of her tribe was poor Nellie, wife
of Billy, a kindly, most intelligent person, who
died in Araluen about 1900. She saw the pass-
ing away of all her people, among the last her
own daughter, Mary Ann, who died of consump-
tion in the hospital. The poor soul had suc-
cumbed to the drinking habit (who would blame
her?), and was constantly before the Court for
being drunk and disorderly. The magistrate tired
of committing her to gaol, and at last ordered
her to be banished from Braidwood. Poor Nel-
lie’s cries echoed for many days in the ears of
those who heard her, as she ran down Ryrie
Street and along the Araluen Road, grief-stricken,
friendless and alone, to die within three days of a
broken heart.
Some of the men became very clever trackers
and wonderful horsemen, among them Jacky
Bond, who lived for many years with Constable
Matthews at Emu Flat, now called Oranmier.
Mrs. Matthews, it may be remembered, made a
wonderful muff, tippet (a stole) and cuffs of the
feathers of rosella parrots, a work of infinite
patience, and presented them to Queen Victoria,
who was most graciously pleased to accept them,
and afterwards placed them in the British Museum.
When uniforms were issued to the trackers, Jacky
made a gallant figure. it is reported that the day
he first appeared in uniform he swaggered up to
one of the hotels at Major's Creek, about 8 p.m.,
saying, “Shut up! Shut up! or I’ll import you and
take your likeness from you.” the hotels were
then opened till eleven o'clock.
Many of the euphonious names of the
aborigines have been retained, though some of
them are corrupted, as Colomba, now Colombo,
and Bomba (which means big)—Bombay. The
presence of so many Indian officers may account
for these two, but there is no excuse for Ginga-
mona being Jinglemoney. Monga. properly
Mungya. means plenty fern; Coobiga—a little hill
under a big hill; Jillamatong—one hill; Euradux
wild turkey plenty: Durran Durra a messen-
ger; Wibigilla—a long, low Kill, being some of
them.


Recognised as Braidwood’s Leading Storekeeper.
James Higgins
General Merchant
i AGENT FOR INTERNATIONAL HARVESTERS.
Large and Varied Stocks of
DRAPERY
GROCERIES
TIMBER
DAIRYING MACHINERY
CLOTHING
BOOTS & SHOES
PRODUCE
FURNITURE, Etc.
HOW TO MAKE KA |“ A T BY PURCHASING
BOTH ENDS IYI I . . FROM . .
KAIN BROS.
WHOLESALE & RETAIL BUTCHERS,
WALLACE STREET BRAIDWOOD.
FAMILIES
WAITED
ON FOR
ORDERS.
NOTHING BUT FIRST QUALITY MEAT & SMALL GOODS
SUPPLIED.
PHONE: 72
m


Dr. Thomas Braidwood Wilson
Dr. Thomas Braidwood Wilson, though not
actually the first to receive a grant of land in
this district, is the outstanding personality among
the pioneers. He was born in Lanarkshire, Scot-
land, on the 30th April, 1 792, and named after
the famous Dr. Thomas Braidwood, who in I 760
founded an institution for the deaf and dumb, and
a home for foundlings, near Edinburgh, the first
of their kind in the world.
Dr. Wilson was appointed Surgeon in the Royal
Navy on the 17th August, 1815, and came first to
Australia in May, 1822, as Surgeon Superintend-
ent on the ship “Richmond” from London, with
137 male prisoners on board, who were landed in
Hobart Town in good health. “The Sydney Ga-
DR. THOMAS BRAIDWOOD
WILSON.
zctte, dated Friday, 24tK May, 1822, Has the
following paragraph: “The Surgeon Superintend-
ent of the transport ship “Richmond” is T. B.
■Wilson, M.D., R.N. This gentleman had the hap-
piness of attending His Majesty, George the
Fourth, to the sister Kingdom, Ireland, and from
thence to Hanover, at which place he left the
Royal retinue. Dr. Wilson confirms all the ac-
counts relative to the general delight and en-
thusiastic affection that His Majesty profusely
experienced from every rank and class of subject
in his foreign dominions.”
Dr. Wilson made eight trips to this country
and was given a grant of land in Tasmania, which
J* e afterwards exchanged for one in this district.
Fl® is described as a splendid, fine, upstanding
*^ a n, most generous, just, and kind-hearted, well-
hked and highly respected alike by his employees
a nd colonists in general. Something of the bene-
ficent spirit of Dr. Braidwood must have been
transmitted to his namesake, for an extract from
“The Sydney Gazette,” dated 22nd July, 1824,
says: “The Surgeon Superintendent of the ‘Prince
Regent’ is Dr. Wilson, R.N. This is the second
trip this gentleman has made to the Colony. It
comes within our knowledge that Dr. Wilson has
not only anxiously attended to the bodies of the
unfortunate exiles committed to his care, but also
studied by every possible means to enlighten and
improve the nobler part the mind. To the last-
ing fame of Dr. Wilson, be it recorded, that sev-
eral men, not only now can read, but actually
write all owing to the establishment of schools
on board at the instance of the Doctor. That
this is an example worthy of imitation none will
attempt to controvert.” Then “The Hobart Town
Courier” (Saturday, sth February, 1831), writes:
“Dr. Wilson, R.N., Surgeon and Superintendent
of the ‘John,’ has, we are happy to announce,
done the Colony the kindness of introducing
to it what has so long been a desiratum amongst
us, namely, an excellent hive of bees. They have
come out in the most healthy and vigorous state,
and we doubt not will thrive and multiply through-
out the island, the climate and indigenous plants
of which (singular enough though they cannot
boast our honey-bee) are nevertheless so admir-
ably adapted to the nature of that most useful
and interesting animal. Dr. Wilson has also been
so mindful as to bring several specimens of the
moss rose, the lilac, the laurel, lauristinus, and
other plants and shrubs characteristic of England,
but hitherto unknown in the Colonies.” Later
the same paper, dated 16th May, 1834, remarks:
“Dr. Wilson must be much gratified with the un-
common, and we may say, providential success
that has attended his introduction of the working
bee into these Australasian regions, which, though
introduced many years ago by Mr. Kermode, and
attempted, we believe, on one or two other occa-
sions by other individuals, has always failed. Not
onlv is Van Diemen’s Land stocked from the orig-
inal hive brought by Dr. Wilson, but New South
Wales, and latterly Swan River, has been success-
fully planted from the same source with this
valuable insect.” For this, and the general in-
terest he had taken in the welfare of the island,
Dr. Wilson received a presentation and testi-
monial from the colonists of Tasmania in July,
1832. He had successfully established the Eng-
lish partridge and pheasant in excellent and
healthy condition in the Colony, and on every
voyage to and from England made a practice of
interchanging the natural resources of each place,
to the benefit of both. On one occasion he con-
veyed a beautiful pair of Cape Barren geese to
London and presented them to their Majesties,
King William IV. and Queen Adelaide, “who were
pleased to set a very high value upon them, and
graciously accept them. No bird of the kind had
ever been seen by their Majesties before, except
one at Frogmore, which had survived only a short
time, some years before.” When on the convict


Parents
7
SEND YOUR ORDER WITH THE CHILDREN. YOU WILL
GET THE SERVICE & QUALITY AS IF YOU CAME YOUR-
SELF.
F. LE MAITRE
WHOLESALE & RETAIL FAMILY BUTCHER,
BRAIDWOOD.
S Quality Right! Service Right!! Prices Right!!! j
Meet & Chandon
Drv Imperial Champagne
" The Vine of Fi ance "
SUNNYVALE AUSTRALIAN V/INES
ROYAL GEORGE - - - LINCOLN’S OLD G VAT
and SIR WALTER SCOTTS OLD LIQUER WHISKIES
LAYEAYETTE & HAUTVILLE BRANDIES (Hospital Special)
“FLOR IMPERIAL" CIGARS
“The Proofs in the Puffing”
Sole Distributors:- FESQ, CASSON & CO. Wine and Spirit Merchants
332-336 Pitt Street. Svdnev - - - Phone Citv 7607


ship, “Moffatt,” where he had the care of 400
prisoners, a large proportion of them useful farm-
ing men, and who, though so large and unprece-
dented a number, conducted themselves most
quietly and orderly during the long voyage, Dr.
Wilson carefully tended a large collection of fine
plants, and when within three days of their des-
tination, heavy gales overtook them and washed
the whole consignment of plants and trees over-
board. This incident gives some insight of the
difficulty of importing plants and animals in those
days, to Australia; but whatever the obstacles to
be overcome, Dr. Wilson never wavered in his
determination to benefit mankind to the best of
his ability. Braidwood is indeed fortunate in hav-
ing such a man among its pioneers, and may his
example prove an incentive to the succeeding
generations.
An extract from “The Sydney Gazette,” dated
22nd February, 1826, is of interest: “On Satur-
day last arrived the ship ‘Mangles,’ Captain Cog-
hill (afterwards owner of the Bedervale Estate),
from Ireland, with 189 male prisoners in good
health; Surgeon Superintendent, Dr. Wilson, R.N.
Dr. Wilson, in his usual obliging manner, very
handsomely has furnished us with the latest Euro-
pean journals. We are sorry to perceive that
Captain Parry and his heroic companions have
failed in the third attempt to make the North-
West passage.”
Dr. Wilson’s primary grant of 2,500 acres was
issued in 1833 in virtue of an order dated 20th
September, 182 7, which cancelled a previous
order of 25th April, 1826, for 2,000 acres. This
land is situated on the eastern boundary of the
town, between the Mongarlowe and Clyde Roads,
and was named “Braidwood Farm,” the Quit rent
being £2l/6/8 per annum, commencing from Ist
January, 1835, by which date the grantee had to
clear 150 acres or make permanent improvements
to the value of £426/13/4. Dr. Wilson later pur-
chased for £l6O the 640 acres to the east of his
-grant, the deed for which was executed on the
15th January, 1839. He received seven other
grants from January, 1835, to 1839, and his Braid-
wood Estate comprised 12,305 acres. A large,
roomy cottage with servants’ quarters, stables and
barns, was erected, and here Dr. Wilson took up
his residence and dispensed open-handed hospi-
tality. This, unfortunately, was burnt down, in-
cendiarism being suspected about 1838. After-
"wards he lived in a brick cottage, just beside the
one-mile post on the Mongarlowe Road. The
trees—Scotch firs, oaks and elms-—he planted
there, are all that is left to mark the spot. A
beautiful mansion was in the course of erection
on the hill, between the cottage and what is now
"the Chinaman’s garden, and had reached the sec-
ond story, when unfortunately Dr. Wilson died.
The building was demolished and the material
carted away to erect a house on another property,
Pnd the only evidence of it being there is the deep
space formerly occupied by the commodious
cellars.
A garden laid out in terraces facing the north
■and east was to be made from the mansion to the
orchard. An expert gardener named Aberdeen
was brought from Scotland to plant the orchard,
and to this day some of the apple and pear trees
*re in. bearing. The beautiful hawthorn avenue
18 a great feature of the orchard, and the gard-
eners cottage, - now* the residence of Mr. Harry
Grigg, is the oldest occupied building in the dis-
trict. When Mr. James Malone, and afterwards
his son, Mr. Martin Malone, lived there, the fav-
orite walk and picnic spot was to “The Gardens,”
where a very choice variety of fruit might be pur-
chased for a small sum of money. The creek
below the avenue, with its lovely old willow trees,
is another beauty spot.
Dr. Wilson built a large windmill of brick on
a hill across the road beside his cottage, but it
was never completed, “The Sydney Morning
Herald,” dated 11th January, 1843, states? —-
“By the ‘Sophia Jane’ steamer, just returned from
her usual monthly trip to South Huskisson (Jer-
vis Bay), we learn that the road from the Bay
THE WINDMILL.
Erected by Dr. Wilson, but never completed. It was
struck by lighting in 1835.
to Ne rriga, and the interior, has been consider-
ably improved since the last accounts, and that
several dray-loads of wool, weighing 3,6001b5.
each, have lately been brought down, of the pres-
ent year’s clip. The ‘Sophia Jane* has on board
fifty bales, part of Colonel Mackenzie’s and Dr.
Wilsons wool of the season. ...” The
“Sophia Jane” took down a pair of large grinding


Emblem of Satisfaction
THE BR Al D WOOD GARAGE
We Stock and Sell only the BeSl of Everything a Motorist Needs
W. SCOTT
MOTOR ENGINEER
Agent for
BEAN, CHEVROLET and CADILLAC CARS,
and CHEVROLET ONE-TON TRUCKS.
All Repairs entrusted to us have our 26
Years’ Experience in Motor Engineering.
Bring your Electrical Problems to Us.
GOODYEAR TYRES
DELCO ELECTRIC
LIGHT PLANTS
Agent for
MICHELIN TYRES
ASSOCIATED RADIO
CO.’S RADIO SETS
DUNLOP TYRES
THE AUTOMATIC
AUTO-SAN
DISINFECTOR
District Agent for the World Famous
BUICK CARS
WE RE
ANY MAKE OF BATTERY
PHONE:
Braidwood
26


stones and iron-work for an extensive mill to be
erected on Dr. Wilson's estate at Braidwood,
which was forwarded by the return drays and
would reach their destination in about four days,
the distance being about seventy-two miles. These
were intended for the windmill, but were never
placed there, and the mill itself was razed to the
ground in 1901 by dynamite. The walls were
three feet thick and grouted from top to bottom,
and would have endured for all time. The de-
struction of this unique, historic and imposing
landmark was a distinct loss to the district, as it
was one of the very few erected outside of Sydney
in the whole of Australia.
Dr. Wilson was instrumental in inducing many
immigrants of sterling worth and good farming
experience to take up residence in the district.
Among them may be noted the Mcßae, Ross,
Burke, Malone and McDowall families, many of
whose descendants are still here, to the fifth
generation.
Mrs. Wilson died at Braidwood on the 29th
January, 1838; her death was preceded by that of
her infant son, Thomas Braidwood, on the 23rd
September, 183 7, aged five months. After the-
infant s death, Dr. Wilson built the vault on the
hill that bea rs his name.
Dr. Wilson had two other children, one son.
James, who married Jane, eldest daughter of John
Turner, of Umberra, on the Murrumbidgee, and
one daughter, Mary, who married Stewart Mar-
joribanks Mowle, of Yarralumla and Canberra,,
who in later years was Usher of the Black Rod of
the Legislative Council from Ist August, 1883, to
31st January, 1905. Their son is Aubrey M. P.
Mowle, Esq., of “St. Asaph,” Burradoo.
It was with sincere regret and deep sense of
personal loss that the inhabitants of the town and
district learned of the unexpected death of Dr.
Wilson on the I Ith November, 1843, in the midst
of his plans for the benefit of his people and the
generations succeeding them. His remains were
placed in the vault beside those of his wife and
child, where a large concourse of people had
gathered to do reverence and pay the last respects-
to one of Australia’s greatest pioneers, and bene-
factor and friend to .most of those present.
SOUTHERN END OK WALLACE STREET, 1870.
NORTH END OF WALLACE STREET, 1870.




Mean
Monthly
Rainfall
(100
points—1 inch) —
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apl.
May June
280
257
238
212
201 241
July
Aug.
Sept,
Oct.
Nov. Dec.
Total
227
183
187
225
210 262
2723
Mean Maximum
Temperature
(Fahr.) —
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apl.
May June
80.1
79.9
73.8
67.4
59.4 55.3
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov. Dec.
Avge.
33.7
56.4
62.3
68.1
74.9 78.6
67.5
Mean Minimum
Temperature
(FaKr.
)
—
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apl.
May
June
53.2
54.6
49.6
43.8
37.4
32.9
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Avge.
32.1
32.8
38.2
42.1
46.3
50.6
42.8
Extreme
Maximum Temperature (Fahr.) —
Jan.
Feb. Mar.
Apl.
May
June
104,0
103.0 93.0
89.0
79.0
70.0
July
Aug. Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
High t
65.0
78.0 83.9
93.0
96.0
101.0
1 04.0
Extreme
Minimum Temperature (FaKr.)
Jan.
Feb. Mar.
Apl.
May June
30.0
33.0 30.0
22.0
19.0 18.0
July
Aug. Sept.
Oct.
Nov. Dec. Lowest
16.0
17.0 20.0
23.0
25.0 30,0 16.0
BRAIDWOOD
The native name of Braidwood is Wigwigly,
which means plenty of fur. The town occupies
a most picturesque position on a hill, with a creek
on either side, and Jillamatong, a solitary moun-
tain, standing sentinel to the south-west, the
landmark of the district. Low ranges of hills sur-
round the town, once covered in wattle trees,
with the blue distances of the Currockbilly and
Buddawang Mountains to the east, and the Gourock
Range, with its stately Palerang Peak (4134 feet
high), and innumerable foothills to the west.
Gorgeous sunsets, reaching a climax in the winter
months, may be witnessed throughout the year,
with these mountains and Jillamatong standing
clear-cut in the background. The sunrises are
equally beautiful, though there is not the same
enthusiasm displayed over them; but a visit to
Old Baldy or the Clyde Mountain to see the sun
rise is well worth the effort of early rising and
the climb..
Perhaps in the near future, some enterprising
person will erect accommodation huts on the dif-
ferent points of vantage, to enable tourists and
others to view the perfect scenery that lies within
easy access all over the district, and which only
needs to be seen to be appreciated. With judicious
advertising, Braidwood could be made one of the
best tourist resorts and sanatoriums in the State,
for the climate is another great asset, as the fol-
lowing table will show—a record of 47 years
supplied by the Meteorological Bureau: —
The altitude of Braidwood is given as 3,157
feet in the late Mr. H. C. Russell's publication,
"Results of Rain. River and Evaporation Observa-
tions made in New South Wales during 1900,
and in the N.S. Wales Statistical Register of
Meteorologv for 1923-24, but the latest surveyor s
returns make it 2,150 feet—rather a wide dif-
ference, which calls for some explanation. What-
ever the altitude, the climate is good. If in sum-
mer the days are rather hot, the nights are always
cool, with the exception of three or four during
February, and the cold in winter is so invigorating
and exhilarating, that walking, out-door occupa-
tions and sport are a positive delight, though at
times the westerly winds blowing off snow-clad
mountains are rather unpleasant, making the fire-
side with good blazing logs all the more comfort-
able by force of contrast. Spring, and especially
autumn, are always beautiful seasons in Braid-
wood..
Steps were taken in 1872 to have the town
incorporated, and an alignment was made in 1873
by Surveyor Park, but it was not till the 24th
March, 1891, that the Municipality of Braidwood
was proclaimed. The first election was held in
the Institute on 1 Ith June, when the late Mr. J.
Musgrave officiated as returning officer. The fol-
lowing were elected aldermen:—J. W. Bunn, James
McDonald, E. Francis, A. J. McDonald, W. A.
Kershaw, W. A. Isely, R. J. C. Maddrell, R. M..
Higgins, and J. T. Murphy. Mr. J. W. Bu nn was.
the first Mayor, and Mr. H. A. Cobb the first
Council Clerk. The first Works Committee: Aid.
E, Francis, A. J. McDonald, W. A. Isely. Finance
Committee: Aid. R. J. C. Maddrell, J. McDonald,.
R. M. Higgins. List of Mayors: J, W. Bunn,
1891-3; W. J. Chapman, 1894; R. M. Higgins,
1895-6; W. J. Chapman, 1897; A. Ross, 1898;
R. M. Higgins, 1899-1903; P. P. Maher. 1904-5;
R. M. Higgins, 1906-8; W. J. Olivey, 1908-10; J.
Higgins, 1910-12; I. E. Grenenger, 1913-5; P..
Coffey, 1915-6; J. Stoyles, 1917; T. W. Draper.
1917; J. J. Donnelly, 1918-21; and M. Anderson,
1922-25—at present in office. Mr. C. Green was
appointed Council Clerk 14th August, 1911, and
has held the position till the present time.
The area of the Municipality is 5,760 acres (9“
square miles), with 31 miles of road, of which
seven are gazetted main roads.
At the census of 1856, the population of the
town was 507 persons. That of the Registration
District was 3.045. The earliest record of the
population of the town was for 1851, namely,.
212 persons. No particulars are available with
regard to early vital statistics, but during the year
ended 31st December, 185 7, in the Registration
District, 85 males and 86 females were born, 32
marriages were celebrated, and 2 1 males and eight
females died. As information respecting the ex-
tent of the Registration District in 185 7 is not
available, comparable population figures cannot
be quoted in regard to the latest census. The
population of the Municipality at the census taken
on 3rd April. 1921, was 528 males and 514
females.
The first Parliament under Responsible Gov-
ernment was opened on 22nd May, 1856, when
Braidwood was represented by Dr. Andrew Aid-
corn. The electorate was then called St. Vincent,
but was changed to Braidwood before the second
election on 20th June. 1859, and retained till
1904, when it was merged into that of Quean*
beyan, and later of Goulburn.


’Phone 98
Established 8 years
A. J. KAIN
FRUITERER, CONFECTIONER,
TOBACCONIST & STATIONER.
GENERAL COMMISSION AGENT.
Large Stocks of Soft Drinks & All Leading Brands of Chocolates.
FOR A GOOD SHAVE YOU ARE RECOMMENDED TO TRY
M. ANDERSON
HAIRDRESSER & TOBACCONIST.
DEALER IN CYCLES & MOTOR CYCLES.
REPAIRS A SPECIALITY.
’Phone Braidwood 51.
ALL OLD FRIENDS ARE CORDIALLY INVITED TO
PAY A CALL ON OUR GENIAL FRIEND—
J. J. FEEHAN
(Late Proprietor of the Court House Hotel)
AUCTIONEER,
BRAIDWOOD.
Telephone No. 1


A great campaign was fought at the second
election, when Mr. G. B. Simpson and Mr. F. A.
Cooper contested the seat. Strong partisanship
prevailed, and after a severe struggle, Mr. F. A.
Cooper was elected in June, *59. He was suc-
ceeded in turn by Merion Marshall Moriarty in
1860, Henry J. B. Milford in February, 1864,
Joshua Frey Josephson, who was Solicitor-General
in the Robertson Ministry from December, 1864,
till he resigned his seat in September, 1 869. An
election was held the same month, when Michael
William Kelly was returned. Parliament was dis-
solved in the following November, and stirring
scenes were witnessed at the election in Decem-
ber throughout the district; party feeling ran high,
particularly in Araluen, when the diggers who
were supporters of Kelly stood in a line across
the valley with their picks and shovels, and pre-
vented the Greville men from reaching the polling
booth. Mr. J. W. Bunn, who was the Returning
Officer and Chief Magistrate at the time, had
quietly drafted a strong body of troopers into the
district, as rumours were afloat that force would
be used, if necessary, to secure the return of the
miners’ nominee. The presence of these men
caused the election to pass off without further
excitement, other than a parade of the diggers,
5,000 strong, with their picks and shovels, through
the street. Mr. Kelly, a quiet, gentlemanly man,
and a thorough contrast to his turbulent sup-
porters, took his seat in Parliament, but later was
declared not duly elected, and Mr. Edward Greville
became Member in October, 18 70, and retained
the position till November, 1880, when he was
succeeded by the Hon. Alexander Ryrie, who re-
presented the district till June, 1891, when Mr.—
now Sir Austin—Chapman gained the seat, and
held it till June, 1901, when he entered the Fed-
eral Parliament as a Member of the House of
Representatives for Eden-Monaro. His brother,
Albert Edward Chapman, succeeded him as Mem-
ber for Braidwood till 1904, when the electorate
was re-divided and Braidwood joined to Quean-
beyan. Mr. Greville and Mr. Ryrie were appointed
to the Legislative Council and took their seats,
there in August, 1892.
Colonel, now Brigadier-General, Sir Granville
Ryrie, represented the new electorate till he re-
signed in February, 1910, to become a Member of
the House of Representatives in the Federal
Pari lament.
Sir Austin Chapman has been the sole Member
for the Eden-Monaro electorate in the Federal
Parliament since its inception, and has several
times held office as Minsiter of Customs, Post-
master General, and Minister of Defence, in the
different Ministries. It is through his interest
mainly that the building of Canberra, the Federal
city, has reached its present stage, and perhaps his
ambition may be realised, if Parliament meets
there after the election in November, as he has
been working strenuously to have the Federal
Government installed there during the present
year.
Sir Henry Parkes, when Premier of N.S. Wales,
at the request of Mr. Alexander Ryrie, then Mem-
ber of the Legislative Assembly for the district,
turned the first sod, at Braidwood, on the Llewel-
lyn Estate for a railway from Tarago to Braid-
wood, about the year 1888. The line still re-
mains unconstructed, and all hope of ever having
a railway is evidently abandoned. Large motor
lorries, owned by Messrs. Taylor and Byrnes, and
Nomchong Bros., are employed in the transit
of goods to and from Tarago and Goulburn, while
horse-teams do the bulk of the work on the Nelli-
gen side. A lorry may leave Braidwood in the
morning with a freight of tons to Goulburn,.
unload, and load again with goods to the same
weight, and arrive back in the evening of the
same day—a contrast to the old days, when a
dray carrying 1 ton 12 cwts. took ten days to
reach the nearest port, Jervis Bay, and return.
It was considered very smart work if the trip-
occupied eight days.
VIEW OF BRAIDWOOD FROM WILSON’S HILL.


ARALUEN VALLEY.
Taken from same point of view as Gurner’s famous picture.
GOLD DREDGE IN ARALUEN.


The Discovery of Gold
The Rev. W. B. Clarke, who had received a
gratuity from the Government for finding gold near
Bathurst, visited this district and regarded it as
a likely gold field, but Hargreaves, the recognised
first discoverer of gold in Australia in 1851, had
a rather poor opinion of it.
Early in 1852, two men, whose names have not
been obtained, travelled along the Dena River from
the coast looking for gold. They reached Araluen,
and though they had carefully searched, could
find no trace of the precious metal, and decided
to break camp and go back. That night, one of
them had a vivid dream of finding gold near an
old stumpy tree beside the camp, and was so im-
pressed that he dug round the tree and found the
gold exactly as he had dreamed. Soon after, a
shepherd, in the employ of Dr. Bell, struck his
foot against a tussock of grass and unearthed a
piece of quartz with a fine streak of gold in it at
Bank (now the Council Chambers) and the-
Oriental, the managers Messrs. Gregson and Hep-
burn. These banks bought the bulk of the gold,
but the storekeepers also bought and advertised
the price at £3/14/- per oz. From one small mine:
as much as 30oz. would be bought in a week.
Much gold was sent away privately, but the amount
sent by the banks was published, and the “Dis-
patch” of December, *5B and January, ’59, gives
the Escort returns as follows; 1671 ozs. 9 dwts.
10 grs., 1540 ozs., 9 dwts., 6 grs., with a packet
of £272, and returned with £3OOO, 1903 ozs. 18
dwts., with £167 in notes; 1681 ozs. 9 dwts. 1 gr„
with £1424 in notes and specie. The goldfields
gave a great impetus to farming, especially wheat
growing. A poor sheep was readily sold for 16/-
The road to Nelligen was filled with traffic of all
descriptions, and there were four hotels at Monga.
alone. One of them called the Sugar Loaf Inn was.
GREAT CENTRE OF COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY DURING THE TIME OF
GOLD DIGGINGS.
Bell s Paddock. Then began the rush. The dis-
trict proved to be exceptionally rich, and at the
height of the gold yield, produced as much as all
the other fields in Australia together. Araluen,
Bell's Creek, Major’s Creek, Jembaicumbene,
Motigarlowe (Little River) Bombay, Warri, Meroo,
Warrumbucca and other places were animated
centres of feverish energy. Chinese in thousands
flocked to the district, as many as 500 coming in
a week, the greater number going to Jembaicum-
bene and Little River. At one time, tbere were
8000 of them on the gold fields, and over 300
licenses granted in a week.
Mr. Wm. Essington King was appointed Gold-
field’s Warden, and had a very busy time. The
Gold Escort, a waggon driven by a policeman, and
accompanied by mounted troopers, all heavily
armed, took the gold to Goulburn each fortnight.
There were two banks, the Australian Joint Stock
kept by Thomas Rogers on the site of Mr. Hugh.
Mcßae’s residence. He also had the Toll Bar,
for which he paid a yearly rent of £3O. It was
a splendid source of revenue till the railway was
opened to Goulburn, and diverted the traffic. The
rates of pay were a penny for a foot-passenger
and two-pence for each horse and wheel of a
vehicle. There are still traces of the toll-bar to
be seen. Three other hotels were on the Clyde
Road between the town and Monga, one, the Blue
Bell Inn, is still remembered by the creek bearing
that name. Every road leading into the town had
a hotel on the corner, some of them with very
quaint names. The present Albion hotel was
once “The Cottage of Content,” the old “Railway
Inn” was “The Pig and Whistle.” and another in
Mackellar Street, “The Dog and Stile.” Mackellar
Street was the business centre then. Teams, laden
with wheat, came from Queanbeyan, Yass and


COCKE R 1 LL’S
Mai-.
THE OLDEST
ESTABLISHED
HOTEL IN THE
BRAIDWOOD
DISTRICT
BRAIDWOOD
All the Leading Citizens
and Visitors make it
their Home.
Situated in the Heart
of the Town.
It has always been recognised as the best
Hotel in Braidwood.
The Commercial Travellers’ and Tourists’ House
All Conveniences Hot & Cold Water Baths Electric Light
SIX GOOD LOCK-UP GARAGES FIRST-CLASS STABLING
ALL LIQUORS ABSOLUTELY TRUE TO LABEL.
HARRY COCKERILL,
PROPRIETOR.


Monaro to the mills. The men, on receiving their
cheques, went straight to the stores and turned
the whole amount into goods. Three mills were
kept busy then, they were built by D. F. Coghill,
Hendricks and Jacobs, and Rodd Bros., in the order
given. Rodd Bros.’ mill is now the freezing works,
and the large stone one of Hendricks and Jacobs,
in Mackellar Street, was not in use for many years.
Mrs. J, Helman s father was the miller in Mr. Cog-
hill's mill and lived at Mona, which was a small
cottage then. Mr. John Jeffrey’s father put the
machinery and mill stones into position in the
mill.
One of the chief events in the history of Braid"
wood was the drought of ’3B and ’39, when
the Shoalhaven River ceased running and was Just
a chain of pools. A day in November, ’3B, was
set apart as a ’’Day of Humiliation.” The drought
broke in the following June, though rain had fallen
previously. Dr. Wilson and Captain Coghill
turned their cattle out into the mountains, aa the
ground was absolutely bare on the ordinary runs.
Dr. Wilson had red and black Scotch cattle, with
huge horns. Many of them stayed in the moun-
tains, and their progeny proved sport in later
years for hunters, the last of them being shot about
38 years ago.
The flood of ’6O was most disastrous to pro-
perty, and many lives were lost. The diggings were
in full swing and many of the men lost their all.
Two families, the Bennisons and the Burkes, had
narrow escapes from drowning and were rescued
from the roofs of their houses, at Little River
(Mongarlowe).
The last flood, 1923, was even higher, and much
property destroyed. Many of the men on the land
lost heavily through sheep and fencing being swept
away. Warri bridge was covered to a depth of
over four feet.


The Strength Builder BREAD.
BREAD MAKES BONE, BODY & MUSCLE. GOOD WHOLE-
SOME LOAVES BAKED IN HYGIENIC BAKEHOUSE, AND
MADE FROM FINEST FLOUR—WHAT BETTER STRENGTH
BUILDER COULD YOU DESIRE?
Braidwood Bakery
BAKERS & PASTRYCOOKS.
SMALL GOODS A SPECIALITY.
Bread Delivered to All Parts of the District Daily.
P. J. SPAIN Telephone 32
Don’t Forget to Visit ARALUEN and Call on Our Genial Friend—
J. LOWE
WHO CONDUCTS THE
LEADING BOARDING HOUSE OF ARALUEN.
—H —►
FOR A QUIET HOLIDAY AMIDST BEAUTIFUL SCENERY
THERE'S NOTHING BETTER THAN ARALUEN.
The Popular Identity of ARALUEN
invites you to Visit Him during the “Back to Braidwood” Celebrations
Donald McTavish
General Storekeeper
ARALUEN
TELEPHONE
No. 6


The Staple Industries
DAIRYING.
From a stockowner s point of view, this dis-
trict, on account of its situation and altitude and
the blessing of a good rainfall, is amongst the safest
localities in the State, for although the winters
are regarded as severe, they are compensated by
the moderate summer and freedom from insect pests
which are so troublesome in the warmer climates.
The principal industries are wool growing, graz-
ing and dairying. Although the district is not gen-
erally recognised as suitable for sheep raising, it
is regarded as an ideal locality for wool growing,
and noted for its heavy carrying capacity, being
permanently watered, mostly with creeks and
springs, which makes it most suitable for the rais-
ing and fattening of cattle, which business has
been successfully carried on from the time of the
first settlement.
Mr, J. M. Hyndes, 8.A., of Reidsdale, who came
to Braidwood in 1912, and revived the cheese indus-
try, was attracted to the district by the conditions—
Mr. JOHN HYNDES
The pioneer of the Cheese In-
dustry in the Braidwood District;
also member of the Shire Council.
a cooT, safe climate and sweet sound pastur es—
particularly suitable to the production of cheddar
cheese.
He had gained experience when managing an
estate for Mr. Richard Binnie in the north, having
previously won the Diploma and Dairy Certificate
at the Hawkesbury College and had been for some
time Assistant Dairy Instructor there. He com-
menced dairying at Reidsdale, buying milk from
the surrounding farmers, and made excellent cheo«e
from the start, and during the years of the war
exported more than any other factory in the
State, always topped the market, and with
Bodalla elicited special commendation.
Dairying gained in popularity in the district and
herds improved. Jerseys and Ayrshires were tried
by the dairymen, but gradually the milking Short-
horn was reverted to. There are some splendid
milking shorthorn herds in the district, difficult to
heat anywhere, notably those of Messrs. M. Lyons,
J. M. Hyndes, Terence Kennedy, T. Galligan and
Flanagan Bros. Each of these men spared no ex-
pense in bringing stud cattle from the famous
Darbalara Estate, the best herds of Warden Bros.,
Milton and the State Farms. There are four pro-
prietary and four co-operative cheese factories in
the district. The Farringdon Factory of concrete
was described by Mr. J. G. McMillan, a former
cheese expert, as the finest of its kind in the State
Braidwood cheese is now very popular in Sussex
Street, the grocers finding it so even in quality.
Mr. Hyndes has taken up temporary residence at
Reidsdale, and is experimenting in the production
of a fancy cheese, A brick cheese has been pro-
duced of such excellent quality that its success
is assured.
AGRICULTURAL.
Though the land is mostly used for grazing,
th ere is an area suitable for wheat, oats and maize.
Potatoes are successfully grown, especially near
the ranges, equal to the best Crookwell. The
statistical returns of the agricultural produce for
the year 185/ will surprise some of the people
on the land, as to what was raised then. Acres
under cultivation: Wheat, 1 154; maize, I 7|; bar-
ley, 1242; potatoes, 186; sown grasses, ly; gardens
and orchards, 25. Total acres under cultivation,
22522. Bushels produced: Wheat, 27753; maize
220; barley, 2738; oats, 15,323; potatoes, 735
tons; barley hay 20 tons; oaten hay, 906 tons.
Beautiful fruit is produced all over the district,
especially in Araluen, Major’s Creek and Nerrrga
have a great reputation for fine apples. The or-
chards are very carefully tended, and only the
best varieties grown. At the Annual Show, the
apricots and peaches in “A" Riding are as fine
as those grown anywhere, and the apples and
pears equalled only by those of “B” and **C
Ridings. Oranges and all citrus fruits do well
in Araluen. The orchardists command a good
market for their fruit, and each year are extend-
ing their orchards.
The rabbit is a source of revenue. In one day
28 tons of frozen rabbits left the local freezing
works, consigned to the London market, where
they realised the highest price. One firm sent
away 1 2 tons of skins in four months, and another
averaged 14,000 skins a week. Wire netting and
digging out are gradually reducing the supply.
Fox skins are fairly plentiful and bring a high
price, as the fur is thick and long during the
winter months.
The eucalyptus industry is steadily growing, for
the two special kinds of trees yielding the best
oil—the broad-leaved and the narrow-leaved
peppermint—is found throughout the district in
abundance.


Established 45 Years
Phone 257
M. NOMCHONG
General Storekeeper
BRAIDWOOD
We Have a WELL-SELECTED STOCK of GROCERIES, PATENT
MEDICINES, CUTLERY, CROCKERY, GLASSWARE, HARD-
WARE. IRONMONGERY, PAINTS, BUILDING MATERIALS,
FENCING WIRES & NETTING, FURNITURE, BEDS & BEDDING.
LOCAL AGENTS FOR BUZAQOTTS GATES & FENCING, MET-
TER’S STOVES, PUMPS & WINDMILLS, DOMO SEPARATORS.
NOMCHONG BROS.
MOTOR CARRIERS
BRAIDWOOD
WE CONTRACT TO DO ALL CLASSES OF CARRYING.
“None Too Large nor Too Small.”
FURNITURE REMOVAL A SPECIALTY. WE PACK & REMOVE
FURNITURE FROM HOUSE TO HOUSE TO ANY PART OF THE
STATE.
AGENTS FOR WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC LIGHT & POWER
PLANT ARMSTRONG SIDDELEY, DE DION BOUTON,
CITROEN. JEWET & PAIGE MOTOR CARS.
A Demonstration Freely Given.


THE TIMBER INDUSTRY.
Beautiful forests lie within easy access of the
town along the ranges, and though for over 70
years, sawmills have been busy, valuable timber
is still plentful with a new forest in the process
of growing up. Among them are the hardwood
timbers.
Eucalyptus Amygdaline, “White-top Messmate”—
This timber is very useful for all kinds of
carpentry work, also suitable for palings,
rails, shingles and in-drying will not twist.
These trees usually grow very tall, many of
them over 400 feet high.
Eucalyptus Obliqua, “Woolly-top Messmate”
A very useful tree for general purposes. It
grows very tall and straight. These trees are
being grown very successfully in India.
Eucalyptus Fraxinoides, “White-Mountan Ash”
A very light durable timber, excellent for
aeroplane building.
Eucalyptus Sieberiana, “Mountain Ash”
A very hard durable wood for general pur-
poses, always grows on high ridges.
Eucalyptus Capitellata, “Stringy Bark”
Is a most useful timber for splitting, and much
used for posts, rails, sleepers, etc., being very
tough and durable. The bark is valuable for
roofing sheds.
Eucalyptus Goniocalyx, “Mountain Gum.”
A very strong heavy timber, most suitable
for bridge building, railway sleepers and boat
building. The leaves yield a valuable oil.
Eucalyptus Melliodora, “Yellow Box”
This timber is hard, durable and close-
grained, when dry will last for years in water
and underground. Suitable for bridge build-
ing, piles and sleepers.
Eucalyptus Rostrata, “Red Gum”—
This timber gets its name on account of the*
color of the wood. Is valuable for its strength
and durability, suitable for posts to be put
in damp ground and for piles.
Eucalyptus Maidenii, “Blue Gum”-,
A useful timber for posts, rails and all wheel
wrighting requirements. Has very pretty blue
leaves, hence the name.
Eucalyptus Viminals, “Manna Gum”—
Not so durable as the wood of many of the
other eucalyptus, but is very suitable for pal-
ings, shingles, rails, etc. They always grow
on flats and have pretty white straight barrels..
The leaves yield a high class oil.
Manna exudes from the leaves, which accounts
for the name. Among the soft woods are Acacia
Melanoxylon, “Blackwood,” considered by many
people to be the best timber in Australia. It ia.
used for furniture, railway carriages and boat-
building.
Doryfora-Sassafras is fragrant, but disagreeable
to all kinds of vermin, the timber is soft and weak,,
yet very suitable for the inside lining of houses.
The leaves yield a very useful oil.
Narrow-leaved peppermints are fairly plentiful.
Over four hundred people are engaged in the
work of extracting the oil, which bids fair to become
one of the greatest industries here, as the supply
can always meet the demand. England, Holland,
Germany and Japan are the biggest buyers, and
use the oil in the manufacture of scents and soaps.
A Sydney firm is successful in making Menthol from
it, considerably cheaper than that made by Japan*
and the mines use a great quantity in the flota-
tion process. After the oil is extracted, the residue
makes excellent manure, particularly for vegetable
gardens.
Wool is the staple product of the district for the
last few years.
BANK OF N.S.W., 1870.


BRAIDWOOD MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, 1895.
Front Row. Ald. (now Sir Austin) Chapman, W. Kershaw, R. M. Higgins (Mayor),
Mr. W. J. Bunn, J. McDonald.
Back Row.—Ald. D. S. Lindsay, Henry Alex. Ross, Geo. Taylor, W. J. Bundock,
Donald Campbell.
PRESENT MUNICIPAL COUNCIL.
Front Row. Aids. R. L. Whitfield, J. Grigg, M. Anderson (Mayor), G. Fisher, H.
Bensley.
Back Row.—Aids. A. J. Kain, F. Tfrench, Mr. C. Green (Town Clerk).


The Tallaganda Shire
When Local Government came into force, a
temporary council was formed in June, 1906, con-
sisting of Messrs. R. G. Hassall (Chairman), T. U.
Alley, J. H. Byrne, R. Kennedy and P. Roberts,
with Mr. j. Chapman as Clerk. In the follow-
ing December. 1906, Messrs. R. G. Hassall (Chair-
man), T. U. Alley, J. H. Byrne, J. E. Mackellar,
E. A. Maddrell and P. Roberts. Cr. Hassall was
appointed President, and in January, 1907, Mr. B.
Millard was appointed to the dual position of Shire
Clerk and Engineer. The following have occupied
the position of President since 1907:—Cr. R. G.
Hassall, 1911; Cr. J. H. Byrne, 1912; Cr. P.
Roberts. 1914; Cr. P. Roberts, 1917; L. Chapman,
1920, till the present time.
The present council consists of Cr. L. Chapman,
President; Crs. J. F. Hyland, N. Byrne, P. R, King,
J. M. Hyndes, and J. H. Byrne, with Mr. P. B.
Taylor as Shire Clerk.
M. W. L. CHAPMAN.
President of “Back to Braidwood”
Week. President of P. and A.
Society. President of Tallaganda
Shire Council. Member of Race
Club Committee.
Mr. J. H. BYRNE.
Member of the Tallaganda Shire Council
also Member of the P. P. Board
Mr. P. R. KING.
Member of the Tallagands Shire Council


THE OLD HOSPITAL.
PUBLIC HOSPITAL.


Public Hospital
The Braidwood Benevolent Society looked after
the sick and infirm prior to 1839, when the hos-
pital was established in a cottage on the site of
the residence of Mr. E. Morris in Elrington Street,
and afterwards moved to a house in Cowper Street.
The funds were supplied from police fines in
Braidwood and Araluen, unclaimed poundage fees,
-subscriptions and donations from the public, and
a subsidy from the Government.
In 1859, the Benevolent Society amalgamated
with the Braidwood Hospital with two committees,
one for bulding, and the other for the relxe f of the
sick. There was no president, the chairman being
elected at each meeting. Messrs. A. L. Vider, E.
Smith, J. Gurney, J. W. Bunn and W. Booth com-
prised the Building Committee, and the Revs.
O’Brien, W. Kelynack, J. Allen, A. S. Pennycuik
and Messrs. Booth, Gregson, Smith, Gurney and
Vider, that of the Committee of Relief. Mr. R.
Maddrell was the Treasurer, and evidently the
difficulty of securing a suitable secretary was as
great as nowadays. Amongst other business, the
Committee arranged a Dietary Scale for the
patients.
In 1860. the present site was secured, and a
two-storied brick building erected. A board room
occupied one side of the hall on the ground floor,
and the wardsman and his wife lived in the other.
"Upstairs were two well-lighted ward* with door*
opening on to a narrow balcony. After being in
use for more than thirty years, the building wai
considered unsafe, and in 1893 tKe upper storey
was removed and tbe whole building remodelled.
Tbe hospital is now in tbe band of a most cap-
able lady, Matron Creagan, whose worth and work
will be appreciated for many years to come, for
in all her schemes for the welfare of the hospital,
the future is regarded as carefully as the present.
Under her care, the hospital has become one of
the best equipped and comfortable Institutions in
tbe State. There is at all times a comfortable,
"home-like atmosphere in the wards, and the patients
are full of praise of the care and attention they
receive not only fiom matron, but tbe sister and
probationer who comprise the staff. Visitors art
always made welcome, even though they may go
on other than the regular visiting days.
The garden is a very pleasant addition to the
hospital, and is entirely the work of the matron.
When the roses and shrubs are more advanced, it
will be a beauty spot.
Tbe President of the Hospital is Mr. W. D.
Gordon, of Manar, who recently made a present of
tbe adjoining block of land to the institution. The
Mr. W. D. GORDON.
President of the Hospital
Committee, and member of
P.P. Board.
Vice-Presidents are Messrs., the Rev. H. F. A.
Champion and J. E. O'Neill; the Treasurer, Mr.
A. W. Kingsbury; the Secretary, Mr. J, J. Barrett;
and the Committee, Messrs. M. Lynch, A, R. Hill,
W. L. Moore, R. J. C. Maddrell, Junr., P. C. Mad-
drell, D. H. Cowper and C. W. Dobson.
The operating theatre is above the average of
those seen in most country hospitals, and has been
a boon to many people who otherwise would have
had to take the journey to Goulburn to be re-
lieved.


HIGHEST QUALITY CHEESE CAN BE PURCHASED DIRECT
FROM THE MANUFACTURER—
A. E. Brown
CHEESE & SMALL GOODS MANUFACTURER,
BRAIDWOOD.
Pork Chops Suckling' Pigs Small Goods.
Malones De Luxe Service
Tarago, Braidtoood and Araluen Daily.
Cars For Hire—Day and Night
All kinds of Repairs done. Turning & Fitting
OILS, TYRES AND PETROL STOCKED. FREE AIR SERVICE
H. MALONE, Proprietor. Telephone 40
Agent for Studebaker, Hudson and Essex Cars
All Work Carefully Undertaken. Estimates Free
N. Stewart
Builder and Contractor
Cowper Street,
Goulburn. Distance no object


The P. A. & H. Association
This Association was formed in 1875, and this
year the Jubilee Show was held, though it was
not the fiftieth show, as on several occasions the
Annual Show was abandoned on account of bad
■seasons, and one year continuous rain caused a
lapse.
Mr. T. Stewart, of Farringdon, was the first
President, and Mr. R. Craig the first Secretary.
The office -bearers elected at the second annual
meeting, held at the Doncaster Hotel on 1 6th De-
cember, 1876, were:—President, R. Maddrell,
Esq.; Vice-Presidents, J. Wallace, Esq., and W. F.
Gordon, Esq.; Treasurer, H. P. Wilson, Esq.;
Secretary, Mr. J. Musgrave; Committee, Messrs.
T. J. Roberts, P. Stewart, G. Grenville, R. Geelan,
P. Roberts, C. Roberts, R._ Hassall, R. J. C. Mad-
drell, T. Hogg, J. Kingsland, C. E. Dransfield, Jas.
O’Brien, Dr. Llewellyn, G. Bassingthwaighte, and
W. McDowall. The prize-money paid away
amounted to £47/3/-, almost all going to the
Horse and Cattle Sections. The Prize Schedule
in the early days consisted of one large sheet, and
was brought out in its present form about 1895.
This year the prize-money in the various sections
amounted to £5OO. At first the show was held
in the racecourse, when the exhibits were staged
on a table and short narrow benches in a shelter
roofed with bushes, erected for the occasion, The
horses were paraded between the pavilion (?)
and grandstand, and instead of money the prize?
were medals of good design and quality.
The present Show-ground was acquired in 1883
and the pavilion erected in 1 884. Good cattle-
yards and a sheep pavilion were built in 1905.
The Committee, in 1907. purchased 21 acres ad-
joining the Show-ground, and now have an area
of 45 acres for show purposes.
The following are the Presidents who have held
office of the Association:—T. Stewart, 1875; R.
Maddrell, 1876-1887; E. M. Royds, 1888-1892; W.
J. Chapman, 1893; Austin Chapman, 1894; J. H.
Byrne, 1895-1902; R. G. Hassall, 1903-1913; J.
Roberts, 1914-1923; L. Chapman, 1924-1925.
R. Craig was Secretary in 1875; J. Mus-
grave, 1876-1880; G. F. Taylor, 1881-1903;
L. Chapman, 1904-1920; H. L. Hill, 1921; S.
Ford, 1922; and R. L. Irwin, 1923-1925. The
Show is the greatest event of the year, appealing
to all classes of the community, and has steadily
progressed in the matter of prize-money and ex-
hibits, especially in the last few years, under the
capable management of Mr. R. L. Irwin, and com-
pares most favourably with those of larger and
more populated districts.
Ploughing Match 1839
FROM NEWSPAPER REPORTS.
On the tenth instant, our district presented a
most animated scene, the different settlers flock-
ing in their holiday garb to our flourishing town-
ship—some to witness, others contend for the dif-
ferent prizes offered for competition to the best
ploughmen. A cultivation paddock of Dr. Wil-
son’s having been fixed upon by the judges as the
most appropriate place for the exhibition, he,
with his usual liberality, immediately placed it at
their disposal. During the time occupied by them
in marking the ground and fixing the positions
for the competitors, the contending parties were
engaged in discussing the merits of the different
ploughs and laying no trifling wagers as to the
probable results. It may be stated here that the
plough which attracted most attention was one
sent from Van Dieman’s Land for the express pur-
pose, by a brother of our worthy Doctor. The
weather continued beautifully fine, and the genial
warmth tended to keep up the excitement, which
continued unabated during the entire day, with-
out the slightest aid from those exciting agents,
which are usually had recourse to on such occa-
sions. At the close of the day’s amusement the
different parties adjourned to the Doncaster Inn,
where they were greeted with a hearty caid mile
fault hea, and an excellent dcjcicne, when the fol-
lowing prizes were awarded to the undermentoned
individuals for their superior ability:—
Horse Teams—
Ploughmen: Masters; Prizes:
James Haggs A. Badgery Ist
David May T. B. Wilson 2nd
James M'Guffy . . . .H. Wallace 3rd
James Malone T. B, Wilson 4th
Bullock Teams. (Unfortunately, the names of
the ploughmen arc indistinguishable.)
T. B. Wilson Ist
Captain Grant .... 2nd
T. B. Wilson 3rd
H. Wallace 4th
On Thursday, 28th May, 1840, the inhabitants
of this district assembled in Dr. Wilson’s paddock
had an opportunity of witnessing as well-contested
a ploughing match as any person then present
ever witnessed in his native land. The turf has
its pleasures as well as its usefulness in improving
the breed of that noble animal, the horse, and those
who countenance it deserve their meed of praise;
but, in our opinion, far greater praise is due to
gentlemen associating for the laudable purpose of
Improving the agriculture of the country, such as
this, which needs every exertion.
The land having been surveyed and marked
into half-acre allotments on the previous day, at
1 1 o’clock in the forenoon nine teams were at


Established 1 6 years
- ’Phones 62 &. 4.
W. H. Whittaker
STOCK & STATION AGENT,
BRAIDWOOD.
! ALL SALES ATTENDED |
1 Try the NEW STORE for All Your
Requirements in
DRAPERY, BOOTS & SHOES,
FANCY GOODS & MILLINERY
Miss Nellie King
Braidwood
’Phone 79 Pay Us a Visit.
FOR UP-TO-DATE ACCOMMODATION & FIRST-CASS MEALS AT
ALL HOURS YOU ARE INVITED TO PAY A VISIT TO
M. COFFEY
BRAIDWOOD
Telephone No. 2.


Horse Teams:
.Ploughmen:
Masters:
Prizes:
"William Fagg
Mr. A. Badgery
1 st —£6
Thomas Pearce
Mr. D. Coghill
2nd—£5
Bullock Teams:
Ploughmen:
Masters:
Prizes:
James Gay
Mr. David Coghill
1 st —£5
Thomas Johnson
Mr. William Wallace
2nd—£ 4
John Prior
Dr. Wilson
3rd —£3
iheir stations, having drawn lots for the choice
.of the ground. Three gentlemen were elected
umpires, who (from the very superior ploughing,
with scarce an exception) had no easy task to
perform in adjudging the prize. After a strict
examination of the well-turned furrows, as to their
depth and direct lines, the prizes were adjudged
as follows:
Dr. Wilson’s horse teams, being employed on an-
other farm, some 30 miles distant, did not arrive
in time to be entered.
The beaten teams received £2 each.
Mr. Andrew Badgery’s horse-team was the ad-
miration of all present, being drawn by a Suffolk
Punch of superlative symmetry (lately imported
by him) and by his beautiful draught mare. It
was the general opinion that Abraham Clark, Dr.
Wilson’s ploughmen, would receive the first bul-
lock team prize, as his ploughing was very supe-
rior, in addition to which he had finished his half-
.acre in one hour thirt}’--five minutes, nearly an
hour before the first horse-team, but in conse-
quence of a few of his last furrows appearing
shallow, one of the umpires measures the depth
and insisted upon the prize being awarded other-
wise. On delivering the prizes, Dr. Wilson ad-
dressed a numerous concourse of servants from
the different stations in the neighbourhood, as
well as those about to receive the prizes. He
highly complimented them on their orderly, good
conduct in general throughout the district, and
exhorted them to receive the rewards of merit
and good conduct, rather than those which neces-
sarily follow rapine and bloodshed. After this the
gentlemen left the stubbles and returned to Dr.
Wilson’s hospitable cottage, where an excellent
dinner awaited them. Bacchus in various hues
went in swift revolutions round the board, but his
courage failed him on the Doctor producing the
real “mountain dew,” so bright and of such
flavour, as to indicate that it was never polluted
by the eye of a gauger. This soul-cheering spirit
caused such toasts and sentiments, such harmony
and good humour to prevail until a late hour
as from wine could never be expected. All parted
highly pleased, and fully resolved on having a
ploughing match on a more extensive scale next
season.
These contests in all probability took place at
Packwood, which for many years was called “The
Ploughing Ground,” and this, coupled with the
fact that Dr. Wilson rented the property, is fairly
conclusive proof that they were held there.
MR. LE MAITRE’S SHOP, THEN OWNED BY THE LATE D. C. ROSS.


Mr. THOMAS McDOWALL.
Mr. EDWARD BUNN.
Mr. M. J. QUILTY.
MAJOR W. U. ALLEY.


The Pastoral Protection Board
In 1866, when scab in sheep was prevalent, the
Government passed a bill called the ’’Diseases in
Sheep Act.” Under it each distrct elected annually
five directors, the qualification being that they
must be the owners of at least 500 sheep. It is
not certain whether the Braidwood District was
then included with that of Goulburn; but when in
1878 the “Pastures and Stock Protection Act”
was passed, the district comprising Braidwood,
Broulee and the whole coast as far as Bulli, was
proclaimed. Two Boards were in existence in
January, 1883, the Diseases in Sheep Act Board,
of which the late W. F. Gordon was Chairman,
-and the Pastures and Stock Protection Board, over
which the late Mr. Robert Maddrell presided, and
Mr. H. L. Mater was appointed Stock Inspector.
The Board, under the Diseases in Sheep Act,
only dealt with scab, and as that disease had then
been eradicated, there was really nothing for it
to do. The five directors under that act were
also part of the Pastures and Stock Protection
Board, and three extra members were elected,
bringing the number to eight. Their work was
to collect assessments and pay out the money in
bonuses for scalps of noxious animals, £ I being
paid for a dingo’s, 6d. for a kangaroo’s, and 3d.
for a wallaby’s.
Under the Diseases in Sheep Act, the Treasury
collected about 10/- assessment from all owners
of more than 500 sheep on every 1000 sheep, and
out of the fund thus created, Stock Inspectors re-
ceived their salaries.
In 1902, the present Act cam» r into force, when
Mr. W. F- Gordon was the first Chairman. In
1924, the Queanbeyan District was added to the
Braidwood District, which now embraces the area
from Wandandian to Moruya on the coast, Moruya
to Gundaroo on the west, Gundaroo via Lake
George to Boro, Nerriga and Sassafras to Wan-
dandian.
The present Board consists of Messrs. Hassall
(Chairman), W. D. Gordon, Thos. McDowall, P.
R. King, W. U. Alley, E. Bunn, J. H. Byrne and
M. J. Quilty. Mr. Mater retired in 1924, when his
place was filled by Mr. Neville, and Mr. Sinclair
has held the position of Secretary since 1916.
Mr. R. G. HASSALL,
Chairman of P.P. Board.
R. A. F. SINCLAIR,
Secretary of the Pastures’
Protection Board.


THE OLD COURT HOUSE.
Left to right.—J. Larmer, J.P., District Surveyor; J. W. Orridge, Superintendent of
Police; Dr. S. M. Moreton; Mr. H. P. Wilson, Manager Oriental Bank; Mr. R. Scarvell,
Solicitor: Master Clemenger. R. Clemenger, C.P.S.; Hemsley, Solicitor; Sergeant
Smith, last figure not known.
PRESENT COURT HOUSE.


Famous Sons of the District
Many of the natives of Braidwood have gained
positions in the State, and in some cases beyond
it, with credit and distinction to themselves and
the old district. Chief among them may be men-
tioned Mr. James Fraser, who received part of
his education at the local public school, and has
risen to be the Chief Commissioner of Railways,
and by reliable authorities is credited with being
the most capable of those who have occupied that
exalted office. The extension of the railways and
works in connection with them, during his term
of office, has given him greater scope for exer-
cising his powers of administration.
Mr. Patrick , arrell was born in Braidwood and
lived with his parents in Mackellar Street. He
left the district when 16 years of age, and spent
some years in Queensland, afterwards travelling
through the other States. He eventually left for
America, where he studied medicine and became a
specialist in Chicago, holding Edinburgh and Vienna
degrees. During his early career, he was Surgeon
in the American Army, and saw considerable ser-
vice first in Mexico, then in the Boxer War in
China, and afterwards in the Phillipines, where he
was the first American officer to land at Cavitte
Manilla). After peace was concluded, he, with
Judge Taft and five others, was appointed to a
commission to deal with the administration of the
Phillipines and eventually was offered the Governor-
ship of that newly acquired territory, which on
account of the climate, he did not accept. When
the Americans joined in the World s War, he
went with his division to France. Both of his
sons also saw service there, as well as Kis son-in-
law. TKe eldest son left with the rank of Captain.
Dr. Farrell is now practising his profession as a
specialist in eye diseases, and is regarded one of
the foremost medical men in Chicago.
Another specialist, this time on brain diseases,
was Dr. James Flashman, whose father was for
many years librarian in the Institute. He com-
menced his education at the local public school,
and in his University career and afterwards showed
such promise of becoming an authority on the
“Diseases of the Brain,” that he was encouraged
to pursue his studies in England and on the Con-
tinent. Even there he was acknowledged as a
leading specialist, but the Great War brought hia
work to an untimely end. He died in London,
not of wounds, but lung trouble, contracted by
exposure on the battle fields of France and Belgium,
Mr. George Ross, son of the late Kenneth Ross,
is one of the boys who has done credit to him-
self and the old school, for he has risen to a fore-
most place in the Department of Agriculture, and
his friends in the old home town hope to see
him soon in the position of Under-Secretary of hia
Department.
Mr. Justice Rich is also a native of Braidwood.
His father, Canon Rich, was Gold-field’s Chaplain
when the diggings in Araluen and the whole dis-
trict were at the height of their glory.
Mr. John Musgrave, now head of the Custom’s
Department in Adelaide, was born and educated
here, and in the same category, the Lord Mayor,
Alderman P. Stokes and his cousin, Miss Cecilia
Walsh, the Lady Mayoress, as well as the Hon,
P. J. Loughlin, Minister for Lands, may be included.
Space and time do not permit of more being
mentioned.
THE BARRACKS.
Sergeant Duffy and Constable Deasey in the foreground.


ORIGINAL BUILDING OF THE POST OFFICE BEFORE ADDITIONS WERE MADE.
POST OFFICE.
Mail Coaches waiting for the Araluen, Major’s Creek, Nelligen, Mongarlowe, and
Farringdon Mail Bags.


Our Heroes
The call for volunteers during the Great Euro-
pean War found the district not lacking in milit-
ary enthusiasm and loyalty to the Mother country.
In addition to 2 75 who joined the Australian Army,
and travelled to the seat of war, a considerable
number offered themselves, but were rejected on
medical grounds, while many refrained from en-
listing because their private circumstances con-
flicted with their sense of duty to their country.
Along with this small army of volunteers, which
included officers, captains, lieutenants and ser-
geants, as well as privates, went seven of our young
women as nurses, making a total of 282 who were
engaged in active military service. Of these, 45
gave their lives for the great cause. Several de-
corations were won, including four Military Medals
and one Distinguished Conduct Medal.
The Red Cross Branch responded to the Nation's
call in the same spirit, and their efforts were
untiring in helping to provide comforts for the
boys at the front and assisting any movement for
the raising of funds for patriotic purposes.
The branch was formed in August, 1914, Mrs.
Mackellar being elected first President. The
choice proved so popular that she continued as
president until the branch disbanded in 1921. To
her tact and organsing ability, the great work
done by the branch was made possible.
A branch of the War Chest was also formed in
connection with which Mrs. Harris formed and sup-
erintended a class for knitting socks from which
over 1000 pairs of socks were sent to the front,
as well as large sums of money.
The district did not forget the noble men and
women who offered their services abroad, and a
beautiful monument has been erected in their
memory. Standing, as it does, in the most con-
spicuous part *of Wallace Street, on the brow of
the hill in front of the Court House and com-
manding a view of three of the main entrances
to the town, the “Braidwood District Soldiers' Mem-
orial” is something to be proud of. Erected by
the citizens of the town and district, it was un-
veiled by tjie Hon. Sir Austin Chapman, on sth
June, 1922. So enthusiastic was the response to
the appeal for funds to erect this Memorial, that
after all expenses in connection with its erection
were met, a surplus of £2OO was left over. This
sum was placed at interest in the bank for the
purpose of aiding returned soldiers in need of
assistance, and in the recent disastrous flood,
such assistance was given to several of the
sufferers.
Mr. J. J. Donnelly’s name must be mentioned in
connection with the erection of the monument. He
was Mayor of the town at that time, and it was
mainly due to his untirng energy that the work
was expedited.
A beautiful Roll of Honour has also been placed
in the Braidwood Public School, and on it are in-
scribed the names of 76 gallant men and five nurses
—all old pupils of the school —who volunteered
for active service and returned to their native town,
and of 1 7 other old school boys who paid the great
sacrifice for their country. Braidwood School is
proud of its volunteers.
SOLDIERS’ MEMORIAL.


FIRST FLOUR MILL ERECTED IN BRAIDWOOD.
VIEW OF WALLACE STREET—SOUTHERN END.


The Literary Institute
A petition, addressed to William Essington King,
Esq., Police Magistrate and Gold-field’s Warden,
requesting him to call a meeting to establish a
Subscription Library in tbe town of Braidwood,
29th October, 185 7, was signed by James Allen
Robert Maddrell, E. F. Codrington, M.D., Joseph
Taylor, Henry Cobb, James Brown, J. W. Bunn,
William Pass, Thomas Heath, John Gurney, George
Grey, Edward Smith, Isaac Archibald, Thomas
Hogg, A. C. Bell, Thomas Draper and John Hen-
dricks. In compliance with the requisition, a meet-
ing was held in the “Doncaster Inn“ on 9th Novem-
ber, when the proposal that it was extremely de-
sirable to establish a Subscription Library was car-
ried, and a provisional committee formed with Mr.
John Gurney as Secretary. Two rooms were en-
gaged on the site of Mrs. Harvey’s shop, at the rent
of 6/- per week, with Mr. Murphy as librarian, to
be paid according to the state of the funds. One
room was used as the library and the other was the
reading and discussion room. Several changes
were made in the effort to find suitable rooms, and
in 1859 the Institute was located in a room in
Wilson Street over the “Dispatch” office, when
the yearly meeting was held. The expenditure
'was £l3B/11/-; Receipts, £157/5/-; Credit,
-■£lB/14/-. Lectures were delivered by Mr. Pat-
terson on “History,” Dr. Kelynack on “The Rus-
sian War,” and Mr. Sinclair gave two, “Wit and
Humour,” and “Life and Writings of Hugh Miller”
through the year. Debates had been conducted
with considerable spirit, 203 volumes were in the
library, Arts and Sciences, 44 vols.; Biography,
3 vols.; History, 11 vols.; Poetry, etc., 12 vols.;
Miscellaneous, 36 vols.; Works of Fiction, 84 vols.;
Voyages and Travels, 12 vols.
The President was C. W. Fell, Esq.; Vice-
Presidents, Dr. Moreing, J.P., and Mr. F. Sinclair;
Treasurer, J. W. Bunn, Esq., J.P.; Secretary, Mr.
Matthews; Librarian, Mr. J. F. Codrington; Com-
mittee, Messrs. Richardson, Smith, Wallis, Gurney,
Darke, Hogg, Codrington, Pass, Gardener, Blatch-
ford, Larmer and Booth. In 1869 the present
Institute was built. The reading room has since
been used for billiards, and a small room across
the hall, with the library behind it, is utilized for
that purpose now. Electric light has recently
been installed.
Tbe present Committee of the Institute is Mr,
R. J. C. Maddrell, Junr., President; Messrs. R. L.
Irwin and Jobn Grigg, Vice-Presidents; Mr. J. E.
O’Neill, Treasurer; Mr. C. W. Dobson, Secretary;
and Messrs. J. J. Feehan, P. C. Maddrell, A. W.
Kingsbury, M. J. Coffey, and C. H. Husband.
THE LITERARY INSTITUTE.


VIEW OF WALLACE STREET.
VIEW OF WALLACE STREET.


The Friendly Societies
G.U.0.0.F.
The Grand United Order of Oddfellows.—Some
■of the early records of this Society are not avail-
able, but the “Dispatch” gives the date of the
foundation of the local lodge as 1856, for the third
anniversary was celebrated on 7th March, 1859,
by a public ball and supper at Mrs. Badgery’s
Doncaster Hotel, when the single tickets were 15/-
and the double £l/5/-, and dancing commenced
at “half past seven o’clock.” The advertisement
waT signed by Chas. Watson, N.G.
The Annual and Half-yearly Meetings are held
in the Oddfellow’s Hall. The District Council,
which is elected annually, consists of seven mem-
bers, the District Master, Deputy D. Master, three
Trustees, Treasurer and Secretary. Delegates
from the various branches attend the Annual Meet-
ings. The Braidwood District consists of nine
branches, Young Australia, Braidwood; Rose of
Australia, Major’s Creek; United Miners, Araluen;
-Sons of Friendship, Moruya; Star of Peace, Bodalla;
Loyal Star of Milton, Milton; Bateman’s Bay
Branch, Nelligen Branch and Mogo Branch.
The Widows’ and Orphans’ Fund was founded
in 1869, with an annual subscription of 4/-, after-
wards increased to 4/4; but in 1921 the Registrar
•of Friendly Societies reduced the fees for the pre-
sent members to 9d. annually. There are 357
subscribers to this fund which, with first-class
securities, amounts to £9,110/11/-, The Registrar
has been approached lately to permit an increase
•of funeral donations. This highly satisfactory state
of affairs is due to the foresight and excellent basis
laid by the late W. Kershaw, W. Blnmore, E. Webb
and those associated with them.
The “Rose of Australia” Branch was founded
on 25th May, 1863 at Major’s Creek, when 16
members were initiated, one of whom, Mr. Walter
J. Lewis, is still living and a resident of Sydney.
He is 83 years of age, and would never draw
his clearance. Shortly after the lodge was formed,
no funds were available to meet sick calls, when
these members paid 10/- each and vowed always
to remain members of the lodge. There are now
92 members, 88 adults and 4 juveniles, with a
management and medical fund of £264/3/1 I at
30th June, 1925. There are 28 members in the
Hospital Fund, who pay 2/6 annually, which en-
titles them to £l per week for‘26 weeks, while a
patient in any hospital in the Commonwealth, or
if they pay 5/- annually they are entitled to
£l/15/- per week. There is also the Widows’ and
Orphans’ Fund, which consists of 58 members,
who now pay 9d. annually, and are entitled to £1
per year up to 30 years* membership for Funeral
Donations.
MASONIC LODGE.
The Masonic “Lodge of Truth” was founded on
20th March, 1860, under the English constitution,
the number being 881. The first Master was Wor.
Bro. P. Galway, and the Secretary, Bro. John Ardill.
Prominent in the foundation of the lodge was Bro.
R. Dransfield, On the 13th January, 1879, the
lodge became affiliated with the New South Wales
constitution, being then No. 18 on the register,
but on the formation of the W.G.L. of N.S. Wales
became 26, The present Secretary is Bro. J. Grigg,
P.M.
MASONIC HALL.


FIRST ANGLICAN CHURCH BUILT IN BRAIDWOOD.
With the Police Paddock and Wilson’s Hill in the back-ground. A picnic party and
Australian Light Horse are in the Police Paddock.
ST. ANDREWS CHURCH OF ENGLAND.


Ecclesiastical
CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
Prior to the building of the Churches, services
were held in the Court House for many years,
the different denominations arranging amongst
themselves the times of the particular services.
The first church erected was the old St. An-
drew’s Anglican Church in 1854, on a site to the
rear of the tennis-courts. It had a beautiful
avenue of elm trees with gates opening into Wil-
son and Ebrington Streets. It was a pretty little
building, with a gallery across the western end,
and was built when Canon Allen, who came in
1843, was in charge of the parish. The contrac-
tor was Wm. Holder. The first baptism recorded
is that of John Borden Yeates, July, 1843, from
Jinglemoney; and the contracting parties in one
of the first marriages celebrated were Samuel
Beales and Mary Kelly, in August, 1843, both of
Araluen. People came to be married and children
were brought for baptism from the coast and
CANON ALLEN
The first Vicar of the Anglican
Church (St. Andrews’).
Maneroo, as the Monaro District was then called.
The child of Stewart and Janet Ryrie was christ-
ened in April, 1846, and the occupation of the
father was given as “a Maneroo settler.” The
Lord Bishop of Australia (Bishop Broughton)
visited the parish in 1847.
The new church is a handsome structure, occu-
pying a commanding position in Elrington Street.
The design is fifteenth century Gothic, carried out
with a nave and two aisles, and is constructed of
hammer-dressed local granite, the tracery being
carried out in freestone. Mr. W. Isely was the
contractor.
The foundation-stone was laid by the Bishop of
Goulburn in 1881. The substantial foundation is.
built of granite blocks, the largest of which weighs
five tons; but for some years the work of building
remained in abeyance, till the Rev. J. S. Dobson
became incumbent of the parish. He applied him-
self diligently to the task of completing the church,,
warmly supported by the late Mr, Robert Mad-
drell, who contributed money, time and energy
in promoting and managing the business part of
the work.
Dr. Linton, the Bishop of Riverina, performed
the opening and dedication services in June, 1892.
when a great gathering of clergy and parishioners
with their friends were present. Crowded con-
gregations filled the church at all the services that
day, the seating accommodation being taxed to
its utmost capacity. The tower, a fine finish to-
the building, was added some years later, Mr.
Maddrell defraying the whole cost. The interior
of the church is very beautiful, with many fine
memorials of the pioneer families, and a Litany
desk in memory of Sergeant William Spicer, who
fell in the Great War. The present rector is the
Rev. H. F. A. Champion, whose large parish in-
cludes Araluen and extends from Krawaree to>
Nerriga.
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH.
The fine church of St. Bede’s is built of large
blocks of granite, quarried locally, and was;
erected in 1856, when Father Edward, afterwards.
Dean O’Brien, was Parish Priest. The contractor
was Richard Hannaford, father of the Devon Farm
family, who, in building the church, incidentally
raised a memorial to himself, for there are few
buildings to compare with it for strength, dura-
bility and good workmanship. It is a handsome
building of Gothic design, standing in a promi-
nent position on an eminence in Wallace Street.
A broad flight of granite steps, in the stone wall
surmounted by an iron railway, leads to the
church from the street. The interior is as beauti-
ful as the exterior, with fine stained-glass windows,
two of them memorials to the parents of Sir Aus-
tin and Lady Chapman. The church has lately
been thoroughly renovated and electric light in-
stalled. A gallery occupies the western end, in
the hall of which is a rose window of stained glass,
the money to defray the cost being left by Arch-
deacon D’Arcy, whose last resting place in the
church grounds is marked by a marble Celtic
cross. The bell is one of the finest and most
historical in Australia, and should be regarded as:
a great possession not only by St. Bede s people,
but the public of Braidwood generally. It has a
fine tone and on clear mornings may be heard at
a distance of ten miles or more from the church.
The ‘‘Dublin Review,” in 1921 printed the un~


ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH.
CONVENT.


published letters of Cardinal Wiseman to Cardinal
Newman, in which he says, when writing from
Leyton, 25th March, 1862: “I was asked the other
day for an inscription for a bell for Sydney, in
honor of Venerable Bede, so this morning before
breakfast 1 wrote the following:—
“Quod ferrs pulsante, sacrum reboabis ahenum,
Sol übi nicte latet nuntia adesse diem,
Dum geis insculptum Bedae Venerabilis nomen,
Quos orbis partit jungat amor patrius.”
The free translation of which is; Before yet the
sun comes forth from the caverns of the n ight,
thou shall announce the advent of the coming
day. Dedicated to Venerable Bede. May the
glory of his name resound on distant shores, where
those from native hearths are still bound to us by
kinship’s ties.
The bell weighs 32 cwts. and hangs in a strong
belfry at the back of the church.
The first baptism recorded is that of Amelia,
daughter of John and Mary Jones, of Araluen, in
August, 1852, and the first marriage was that of
William Holder and Catherine Archer, of Braid-
DEAN O’BRIEN.
By whose energy and influence,
St. Bedes’ R.C. Church was built.
wood, the witnesses being Margaret Maher and
Edward Hogan. Dean O’Brien, the first resident
priest in Braidwood, was educated at St. Patrick’s
College, Carlow, Ireland, and promoted to the
priesthood in 1851. He landed in Sydney on I oth
July, and arrived in Braidwood on the 30th July,
1852. He not only is responsible for the building
of St. Bede s Church, but those at Reidsdale,
Major s Creek, and Krawarree. His brother.
Father John, succeeded him and was followed by
Dean White in 1869, in whose time the Presby-
tery was built, and opened by Archbishop Vaughan,
in 1875.
Father Vaughan, the present Priest, has been
stationed here for ten years, and was educated at
All Hallows’ College, Dublin, and entered the:
priesthood in 1905.
METHODIST CHURCH.
The Wesleyan, now called Methodist, Church'
In Duncan Street was built in 1856, and one of
those responsible for its erection was the late
Mr. W. Pass, father of Mrs. J. H. Byrne, of Niths-
dale, and grandfather of Mr. T. Pass. The first
minister in charge was the Rev. D. Kelynack, who«
was succeeded by the Rev. Hans Mack, father of
the authoresses, Louise and Amy Mack. The only
member of the family born here is Hans Hamilton,
Who is practising his profession as a doctor in
London.
A large congregation filled the church till the
passing of the goldfields caused a rapid decline of
the population. Until quite recently, services,
were held only once a month, when the minister
from Queanbeyan occupied the pulpit. At the
present time the charge is in the care of a student,
Mr. Thomas, a returned soldier. Holder and
Clowry built this church.
Many old residents will remember a small Bap-
tist Chapel in Duncan Street, where Mr. William;
Sutherland conducted services for many years.
There is no trace of it now; nor the home where-
Mrs. Sutherland lived for so many years.
The Rev. Canon Rich was the goldfield's Chap-
lain and lived in Athol Cottage, where his son,.
Mr. Justice Rich, was born.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.
A site for the Presbyterian Church was granted!
by the Government in Wallace Street, but the
trustees preferred a more retired position. Mr.
Hugh Wallace, of Nithsdale, presented the land,
and he and his family were amongst those con-
cerned in the erection of the church at the corner
of Duncan and Monkittee Streets in 1862. Like
most Presbyterian churches, the building is per-
fectly plain, but is high with large windows. The
first minister was the Rev. Seaborn.
Good old Scottish families filled the kirk in the-
early days the Wallaces, Ryries, Rosses, Mcßaes,
Steeles, Frasers, McDonalds, Tullochs, Bruces, Car-
gills, McKenzies, Grants, Andersons, Laings, Mc-
Gregors, Mdnnes, Aldcorns, Forsyths, Hoggs,
McLeods, with the Craigs, Macreadys, Burkes, and
Dunns from Ireland; but like the Flowers of the
Forest,” they have ‘‘a’ faded and gone,” with the-
merest number left, to “carry on,” with true-
Scottish grit, under the leadership of the Home-
Missionary, Mr. R. Mackie, a returned soldier.


METHODIST CHURCH.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH.


The Schools
The Braidwood Public School is one of the
oldest in the State, having come into operation
under the National Board of Education on the 7th
August, 1 849, in a slab building, situated in Wil-
son Street, exactly opposite to the present school.
Up to the end of May, 1849, the only schools
under the control of the National Board were at
Kempsey, Botany Bay, Hinton and Dunmore, with
a total attendance of about 250. By the end of
that year, however, a number of new schools came
into operation.
Prior to the opening of the Braidwood School,
under the National Board, a school was conducted
privately by Mr. James Sproul from Ist May,
1849, and there were 35 pupils in attendance.
The National School was applied for on the
1 ! th July, 1849 by a committee comprising Messrs.
Coghill, Robert Maddrell, P. Goulding and W.
Sutherland (Secretary). These gentlemen guar-
anteed the sum of £2O towards the rent of a
building and £4O annually towards a teacher’s
salary, and Mr. Sproul was recommended z.s
appearing to have been subscribed by the resi-
dents. The school site was subsequently enlarged
by the addition of two roods, granted by the
Government in 1870, and one acre resumed in
1912.
During I 869, it became necessary to divide the
school into two departments, and Miss Mary A.
Perry was appointed as the first mistress in charge
of the girls. The enrolment of the pupils for that
year was 179.
Mr. Isaac Archibald, Mr. Matthews, and Mr..
William Brayne followed in turn, and in 1869 Mr.
Chas. Clarke was headmaster. The school was
under the supervision of a Local Board, consisting
of Messrs. Robert Maddrell, John Fraser (father
of the Chief Commissioner of Railways), James
Flashman, and Thomas Hogg. At the end of each
year, the Board examined the pupils, presented
prizes, and feasted the school. The class-room
was decorated for the occasion, and the parents
were present in force. Mr. Bateson succeeded Mr.
Clarke, and during his term the Boys’ and Girls’
PUBLIC SCHOOL.
teacher. The National Board granted the establish-
ment of the school under these conditions, and it
came into operation in rented premises, on the
date already mentioned, with Mr. Sproule in
charge. The attendance was about 40. Mr.
Sproul’s position as teacher was occupied by Mr.
William Burt some time in 1851.
In 1850, the Government granted one acre of
land for the purpose for a permanent school build-
ing, and the National Board offered £l2O towards
the erection. The building (that part now occu-
pied by the infants and the adjoining room) was
completed in 1854, when Mr. Burt was still in
charge, and the cost was £lBO, the amount of £6O
Schools were made into one department, and the
present teachers’ residence built in 1877. In those
days, fees were paid—9d. per week for the eldest
child in a family, and 6d. for each of the others.
Every child brought 6d. at the beginning of the
winter to pay for the necessary firewood.
In 1880 State aid was withdrawn from the De-
nominational Schools, and the National School be-
came the Public School. Mr. Peter Wallace, the
teacher from the Roman Catholic School, was ap-
pointed to the Public School as master, and sup-
plied the State with many teachers from among
Kis scholars. He was succeeded by Messrs, J. Cole
(father of Professor Cole, of the Teachers’ Col-


Mr. ROBERT J. C. MADDRELL.
One of Braidwood’s First Aldermen
The late ROBERT MADDRELL.
ROAD ON THE CYLDE MOUNTAIN.
SK owing Beautiful Scenery.


lege), A. J. Kilgour, LL.B., now Headmaster of
the Fort Street Boys' High School; Chas. Blumer,
8.A., late of Goulburn High School; W. Black,
now Inspector; A. E. Hall, 8.A.; Albert Page; E.
Arnold, 8.A., now Headmaster of the High School
at Tamworth; B. Spear; J. Frank, in whose time
100 per cent, of the pupils passed the Q.C.
examination; and J. O’Neill, 8.A., the present
Headmaster. The present enrolment is 155 pupils.
For several years now the successful candidates
for admission to High School were compelled to
leave home, and attend the High Schools in Syd-
ney and Goulburn, but Mr. O'Neill has estab-
lished secondary classes, with 2 7 pupils in the
first, second and third years, six of them sitting
for the Intermediate Examination in November.
In the coming examination for admission to High
School, the School will supply 20 candidates.
In 1910 the Braidwood School exchanged flags
with that of Braidwood (Scotland). Dr. Olivey
carried the flag from here to Scotland, and in
writing, commented on the fact of Braidwood
(Scotland) being close to the Clyde River. The
Lands Office records that Braidwood (Scotland)
is the birth-place of Dr. Wilson.
The Church of England School was held in the
present Sunday School, part of the building being
the master’s residence. Here Mr. Likely, Mr. J.
D. Robinson and Mr. Apsley, in turn, taught the
rising generation.
Before the erection of St. Bede’s Church, a long
building made of slabs, with a bark roof, on the
site of the Presbytery, comprised the chapel, school
aod residence of the teacher. Mr. James South-
well opened the school on 29 th January-
-1859, with an attendance of 30 boys and 30
girls. An examination was conducted in April by
the Rev. E. O’Brien, in the presence of patrons
and friends, when the following distinguished
themselves most in Catechism:—Luke Malone,
Denis McGrath, Martin Malone, Michael Richard-
son, and Richard Smith. They also gained high-
est marks in the other subjects. The successful
juniors were Richard Malone, John Malone,
Cunningham, and Michael Malone, while the girls
who distinguished themselves were Margaret Mc-
Coll, Mary Ann Stafford, Bridget Malone, Eliza-
beth and B. Brennan, and Mary Anne McKenny.
In St. Bede's Denominational School, Mr. and
Mrs. Cahlan, Mr. and Miss Finnigan, Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Wallace, and Mr. Morrissey were teachers
in turn. While Mr. Wallace was in charge a com-
modious weatherboard building was erected on the
corner of Wallace of Lascelles Streets, which was
afterwards removed to the convent property,
where it did duty till the completion of the present
modern two-storied building— a testimony to the
energy and perseverance of Father Vaughan.
From the “Mother House,” Sydney, five Sisters
of the order of “The Good Samaritan,” accom-
panied by the Mother General, arrived in Braid-
wood in the year 1879.
The Convent was situated opposite to the
Church. Dean White, the priest then in charge,
and the people, in large numbers, warmly wel-
comed the Sisters to their new home. School
opened the following week. Not long were the
Sisters to pursue the even tenor of their way
for after six months’ residence, fire reduced their
Convent to ashes. Fortunately, men from all
parts were in town, attracted by a special Court
case. With great will and vigor they fought the:
flames and succeeded in saving the school-hall and
the children’s dormitory. Sister M. Walburga (a
descendant of the great Wicklow Chief, Michael
Dwyer) rushed into the flames and rescued the
tabernacle in which were reserved the Blessed
Sacrament and the Sacred Vessels. Dean White
very kindly vacated the presbytery and for six
weeks the Nuns took up their abode there. Buck-
land's house was next rented, and here the Nuns,
remained till the end of the year, when the Don-
caster Hotel, with its forty rooms, was purchased.
Five Nuns and a maid were the sole occupants
of this commodious building. Laughingly they
boasted of their suite of rooms. In 1907 the old
land-mark disappeared and the present comfort-
able convent was erected on the spot. It was-
blessed and opened by His Eminence Cardinal
Moran. The Sisters carry on the work of teach-
ing, visiting the sick and sorrow-laden, and the
afflicted. In the Braidwood people, they have
found loyal, warm-hearted staunch supporters,
who are ever ready to respond to any appeal from
the Sisters.
In the Musical and State examinations their
pupils have held their own. They are represented
in the Public Service, the Junior and Senior Uni-
versity exams., and in the Bursary List. In the
local show quite a number of prizes come the
way of the pupils in painting, plain and fancy
needlework, and penmanship. Not a few of the
pupils have chosen the cloister as their home.
They are using their talents in ministering to the
poor, the aged and infirm, as well as imparting a
sound religious and secular education to those
confided to their care. Among these may be
mentioned Miss Annie Daly, of Jembaicumbene,
who became Mother General of her order, in St.
Vincent’s Convent, Pott’s Point, and her sister,
who is Mother Superior of the Convent at Lewis-
ham. Miss O’Neill and Miss O'Brien, also of
Jembaicumbene, are Mothers Superior of the Con-
vents at Port Fairy, Victoria, and Balmain respec-
tively. Miss Maher, of Reidsdale, is the Mother
Provincial of Queensland, and her cousin the
Mother Superior of the Rozelle Convent.
Private schools were kept at different times and
various places by Mrs. Pennycuik, Mrs. Nunn,
Mrs. Perry, Mrs. Sinclair, Miss Garnett, Mrs. Grif-
fin, Miss Nelson, Miss Pyman, and Miss Whittaker.
The Inspectors of the district also rose to lead-
ing places, Mr. Maynard and Mr. Dawson be-
coming Chief Inspectors, and Mr. Lasker at first
Inspector of High Schools, and now Deputy Chief
Inspector of Primary Schools. When Mr. Inspec-
tor Black w?s in charge of the school, his boys
were successful in securing high passes in the
University and Civil Service examinations, and
to-day occupy high positions in the State and Gov-
ernment service.
A rather quaint record was published in 1859,
under the heading of: “Annual Return of Live
Stock and Private Schools in the County Murray
and County St. Vincent,” and whether by accident
or design the schools were placed first:—
Braidwood (Mr. James Southwell) —30 boys and
30 girls; Reidsdale (Mrs. O’Donoghue)—2s boys
and 20 girls; Mongarlowe (Mrs. Davis) 20 boys
and 15 girls.
The live-stock totalled 3,309 horses, 19,270'
horned cattle, 1,225 pigs, and 36,600 sheep.


Fire Brigade
The Fire Brigade was established in 1899, when
the following officers were elected at a public
meeting: Captain, Mr. H. I. Mater; Secretary,
Mr. Julius Vider; Treasurer, Mr. R. M. Higgins;
Hon. Medical Officer, Dr. Read. The First Lieut-
enant, W. Campbell; Second Lieutenant, W. H.
Campbell; and W. H. Williams, Engine Keeper,
were elected by the members.
Through Mr. Austin Chapman, then State Mem-
ber for the district, the brigade received several
cash grants from the Government, also a Manual
Fire Engine. With private subscriptions and
Government grants, the equipment was gradually
purchased. Captain Mater designed, and a Sydney
firm manufactured, a reel capable of carrying
1000 feet of hose.
The Fire Station was erected and a well sunk
in the grounds.
When the new Court House was built, the
Government erected the 8000 gallon tanks, and
pipes were laid in Wallace Street to Duncan Street,
at the expense of the Brigade.
Having completed the work of successfully estab-
lishing the Fire Brigade, Captain Mater resigned
his position in 1903, leaving a balance of about
£96 to the credit of the Brigade.
Captain Williams succeeded Mr. Mater, and
Captain Anderson has been in charge since 1911.
The present equipment consists of a Turbine
Motor Engine, Manual Engine, Hose Reel and 1800
feet of hose.
The Brigade was taken over by the Board of Fire
Commissioners, Sydney, in January, 1910, under
whose supervision the District Officer visits the
brigade for inspection twice a year.
The present members are: M. Anderson
(Captain), and Firemen B. Musgrave, W. Whit-
field, G. Fisher, T. Bond, W. Gourlay, G. Wiggins,
R. Doherty, H. Bugg and John Sullivan.
THE MEMBERS OF THE FIRST VOLUNTEER FIRE BRIGADE.
FOUNDED IN BRAIDWOOD DURING THE YEAR 1899.
Top Row—W. Williams (Engine Keeper), J. Vider (Hon. Sec.), M. O'Connell,
F. Sullivan, H. Parnell.
Middle Row.—W. H. Campbell (Ist Officer), R. M. Higgins (Hon. Treas.),
H. L- Mater (Captn.), Dr. Read (Hon. Med. Officer), H. Campbell
(2nd Officer) .
Front Row.—T. Sullivan, D. Grady, J. Stoyles, L. Dietz


Horse Racing
The first account of a race meeting in Braid-
wood dates back to 1840. The following is a
clipping taken from a Sydney paper—“ The
Chronicle, June, 1840—under the heading of
Country News (Braidwood) :
On the I 7th instant, the long-talked of match
between Sir James, the property of Dr. Wilson,
•and Mr. Burnell’s Improver, late the property of
Mr. O’Brien, came off on the above course for
£lOO a-side, two and a half miles. Whisker, the
property of Dr, Bell, and formerly of Mr. Lawson,
was withdrawn, in consequence of his being out
of order, and sufficient time not having been al-
lowed to bring him into racing condition. At an
early hour visitors began to arrive from all parts
of the country; so great was the anxiety to wit-
ness the above race that persons eighty miles dis-
tant made their appearance. At I o’clock Sir
James, ridden by Mr. Larmer (blue jacket and
cap) and Improver, late Camerton, ridden by
Mr. Andre wßadgery (plaid jacket and cap) were
led to the post; and although Sir James’ coat had
not that silky and racing appearance of his com-
petitor, and although heavy bets were offered
.and freely accepted against Kim, still, there were
persons who were convinced that his speed and
bottom were good, and had hopes of his success.
“At the word ‘away,’ Sir James took the lead.
Improver slightly swerved, but at the end of half-
a-mile overtook Sir James, and in attempting to
pass him, encroached upon the furrow and was
immediately called upon to return, but declined
to do so. Away they went, at a rattling pace,
and for two miles so close and severe was the
struggle for the lead that it was not possible to
determine which was first; at the brow, at a short
distance from the winning post, the rush was des-
perate, when Improver passed it first by less than
Lalf-a-neck, but as Improver had encroached upon
the furrow, it remains undecided. It was acknow-
ledged by the numerous company present that a
better contested or more beautiful race was never
witnessed in the Colony.
“The next race was for a sweepstakes of £lO
•each, and as soon as the rider of Sir James had
•recovered his fatigue, the undermentioned horses
•were brought to the course;—Mr. Larmer’s Emi-
grant, blue jacket and cap; Mr. Thompson’s Nus-
seeb, puice jacket and cap; Mr. Mowle’s Medora.
green jacket and cap; Mr. Haddon’s Deacon, plaid
jacket and cap. At the start, Deacon led off
gallantly until he reached his master’s marquee,
where he became unmanageable, made a rush at
a haystack, and having been severely strained,
his rider was unable to bring him back to the
course, and relinquished the race. Emigrant now
made his appearance, closely followed by Nus-
seeb and Medora. Medora, although ridden by
one of the prettiest and best jockeys (Mr, S. M.
’Mowle, afterwards Usher of the Black Rod) in
the country, showed symptoms of distress and fell
<off. Nusseeb then challenged Emigrant, and now
came the tug-of-war; they were neck and neck
until they reached the brow near the winning-
post, where Emigrant’s rider gave him a lift and
-won by about half a length.
“After this several hack races were run, and
at the close of the day about forty of the com-
pany retired to the hospitable residence of Dr.
Wilson, where a sumptuous dinner was provided.
At ten o’clock dancing commenced and was kept
up till a late hour, when the company separated,
highly delighted with the day’s amusement.”
In 1841 and 1842 the racing carnival extended
over three days, one of them being devoted to
a fox hunt, horses and hounds being specially
brought to Australia for the purpose, and evi-
dently foxes also. Mr. T. M. Royds, grandfather
of the present owner of Durham Hall, was killed
at the early age of 27, while hunting. He was
one of those who imported horses and hounds
from England. The foxes were not so successful
then as now in establishing themselves in the dis-
trict. Taken from the “Chronicle,” June, 1841:
“The members of the Braidwood hunt anticipated
the amusements of the raceground on Wednes-
day, 22nd June, when a large field of the lovers
of sport in the district assembled. After a severe
run of upwards of seven miles, in the course of
which a good deal of stiff country was got over,
reynard was run into by this promising young
pack, whose discipline and good order are solely
attributable to the exertions of the master of the
hunt, who showed by his own example the style
in which the dangers of the bush are to be en-
countered in chase. There were three races on
the opening day of this meeting, the first for the
Braidwood Purse, of 50 sovereigns, which was
won by Mr. Keighran’s Napoleon, with Mr. A.
Badgery’s Phantom second and Mr. Rievely s Rob
Roy third. In the maiden plate of twenty-two
sovereigns, Mr. Hill’s Grey Middleton, Mr. Bad-
gery’s Lady Morgan, Mr. Thompson’s Sir James,
and Mr. Bennison’s Kate entered the lists. Kate
went off with the lead at a slashing pace, but
was soon challenged by Lady Morgan, the other
two lying well up; in coming round, Grey Middle-
ton took up the running and won by a length.
In the second heat, the grey took the lead at
starting point and kept it, winning easily. The
third race was a hack race of ten sovereigns, en-
trance added, and was won after an exceedingly
pretty and well-contested effort by Mr. Hill’s
Jacky Morgan.
“On the second day the course presented a
most pleasing scene, the fair occupants of the
numerous vehicles of the previous day having de-
serted their carriages for the more exciting
pleasures of the saddle. A party of fourteen in-
dividuals, principally ladies, composed the cor-
tege of one of the leading residents. The events
that day were the Ladies’ Purse, of fifty sovereigns,
Napoleon winning; the Hurdle Race, of twenty-
five sovereigns, entrance added, gentlemen riders,
was won by Mr. A. Badgery's Bolivar, with Mr.
A. Badgery in the saddle. Mr. Rievely’s Rob Roy
won the first heat and was leading in well for the
second when he bolted inside the course, owing
to the noise occasioned by the cheers of his
friends.”


The account of the race meeting in 1842 is
taken from a newspaper report:—
‘’First Day, May 23, The amusements of this
day commenced with a private match in deciding
a long-pending challenge as to the relative racing
powers of the Broulee and Braidwood horses, Sir
James and Fisherman, the former the property of
Mr. Edward Thompson, the latter the property of
Mr. Foster, of Broulee. At eleven o’clock the
horses were brought to the post. Sir James, rid-
den by Mr. J. Badgery; Fisherman ridden by
owner, weight, 11 stone; distance, 2f miles; heats.
Both horses being well-known for their lasting
powers, went off at racing speed, Fisherman lead-
ing, Sir James keeping well up—at no time could
either gain on the other; but on passing the dis-
tance post a desperate struggle took place, which
terminated in a dead-heat. Second heat: Mr. An-
drew Badgery took the place of his brother, with
the disadvantage of carrying seventeen pounds
extra, and a beautiful race ensued, both horses
keeping side by side until the last quarter of a
mile, when Sir James moved in advance, winning
by from one and a half to two lengths. Third
Heat: Fisherman, ridden by Mr. Flannigan, led
off at a tremendous pace, but the absence of his
usual fare during the last week’s training now
told, Sir James winning by about ten lengths.
Second Race—Braidwood Purse: First Prize, fifty
guineas, for which seven horses started, Mr. James
Badgery’s Lady Morgan coming first, Mr. P.
Goulding’s Wait-a-While second, and Mr. G. Riley’s
Scourge third. Second Race—Maiden Plate, £25,
won by Mr. W. Balcombe’s Xantippe. Third
Race Hack Stakes, of £10; entrance of £1 each
added. Seven horses competed. Mr. H. Lee’s
Jacky Morgan coming first, with Mr. A. Badgery’s
Tom Tight second, and Mr. Balcombe’s Baldy
third.
“Second Day, 24th May. In consequence of
the swerving off the course the previous day, a
difference of opinion existed respecting the racing
qualities of Rory O’More and Xantippe, which led
to a private match, £25 a-side, when the mare
proved herself a clipper, Rory close on her flank.
After the disposal of this race, about seventy
horsemen repaired to Colombo, where Reynard
was uncovered, who, on looking round and finding
himself in a somewhat novel position, took to his
heels in gallant style. Having given him fifteen
minutes’ law, the pack was laid on, who, after a
chase of five miles, picked the sly one up, when a
scramble ensued for the brush, which was carried
off by Mr. Andrew Badgery. Some few parties
got unhorsed in the early part of the chase; but,
fortunately, no serious accident occurred.
“Thursday, 25th May.—First Race: Ladies*
Purse, £5O, won by Mr. P. Goulding s Wait-a-
W/hile, with Mr. J. Badgery’s Lady Morgan sec-
ond, and Mr. Riley's Scourge third. Hurdle Race,
for £25, with a sweepstakes of £5/5/- added—
-2-J miles; 1 1 stone; six leaps over 3-feet Binch
hurdles—Mr. G. Riley’s Slasher, Mr. A. Badgery’s
Bolivar. Of this race, anything like description
must fall short of its merits; both horses came
out in rare condition—both owners confident of
success. The first leap was taken in good style,
going at racing pace; both horses refused the
second leap, but on being brought to again,
bounded over: after which they mutually chal-
lenged each other, clearing the hurdles together.
After taking the last leap- in the race home a des-
perate struggle ensued, when Slasher won by a
head. Match for £lO a-side, between Dr, Bell’s
Vivian and Mr. E. Thompson’s Sim James —Won
easily by Vivian. Beaten Stakes, £ls—Mr.
Ward’s Comet won this race, closely followed in
both heats by Mr. Balcombe’s Baldy. Last race—
Hurdle Race (a sweepstakes of £2), with £lO
added from the funds; catch weights; heats, once
round; hurdles, 3 feet 8 inches:—Won by Mr..
Balcombe’s Guy Fawkes. The course was in ex-
cellent order, owing to the total absence of rain
for the last three weeks, the weather being de-
lightfully fine, partaking more of the character
of mid-summer than the incipient stage of winter.
The sobriety, good order and regularity drew
forth the marked commendation of strangers —of
whom there was a good number—not one indi-
vidual out of some hundreds being drunk during
the week. The oldest sporting characters stated
that although they had witnessed first-rate racing,
and had raced horses in the Mother Country dur-
ing the course of their experience, they never be-
held such keen competition, or races so well con-
tested throughout not one race being won by
more than a length.’’
Among the first pioneers was Mr. William Henry
Roberts, who took up land at Jembaicumbene and’
called his place Exeter Farm. Here he went in
extensively for horse-breeding, as India was then
an open market for horses suitable for the army.
He married Ann, the daughter of James Badgery,
who owned Rob Roy, the horse that won the first
cup ever raced for in N.S. Wales, in 1619, on the
Hyde Park racecourse. Some of the finest horses
known in Australian sport were bred at Exeter
Farm and Durham Hall, two of them—Archer and
Tim Whiffler—winning the Melbourne Cup.
Racing has always been a popular sport in
Braidwood, and meetings were regularly held’
from those already mentioned till the present
time, now under the auspices of the “Braidwood
Turf Club,’’ the President of which is Mr. R. G-
Hassall; Vice-Presidents, Messrs. L. Chapman, A.
E. Brown, P. C. Maddrell; Treasurer, Mr. D. H..
Cowper; Secretary, Mr. T. C. Musgrave; Clerk
of Scales, Mr. R. L. Macdonald: Timekeeper, Mr.
P. B. Taylor; arid the Committete, Messrs. P. R.
King, H. O. Maddrell, J. J. Feehan, R. L. Mac-
donald. G. C. Maddrell. T. M. Royds, R. T. Has-
sall, C. S. Byrne, P. B. Taylor. F. Webb, Kings-
bury, and C. C. Cockerill. In May. 1901, the
Government resumed the present course and
placed it in the hands of a trust, consisting of
Messrs. R. G. Hassall, W. J. Chapman, George
Doolan. and T. C. Musgrave. The Race Club paid
£2OO, being one-third share of the resumption
cost. At the last Annual Races the prize-money
amounted to £3OO, and at the end of last year
the credit balance was £359/13/4.


TYPICAL PIONEERS OF THE DISTRICT.
A brief outline of the family of Mr. Ralph Hush
who came to the district in 1839, is given as fairly
typical of the class of free settlers who arrived
in the colony at that time. Interesting matter re-
garding other families could be written, but space
does not permit, and there is only room for one.
Mr. Hush and his wife took up land at Marlow,
calling their place “Eastfield,” after the old home
in England. They had two sons, Ralph and Joseph
who brought their wives with them in the early
forties. Ralph Hush, Junr., selected Spring Grove
and was very successful with sheep there. The
country was then in a very wild state, with numer-
ous blacks roaming about the district. There
were no fences in those days, and shepherds had
to be employed to mind the sheep, and at night,
though the flocks were put into the folds, a guard
had to be kept to ward off the dingoes which were
so plentiful and bold that they killed the dogs on
the verandah of the house, and took the sheep
right before their guardians.
Ralph Hush had six sons, George Hush now liv-
ing in the original homestead is the only one
living. He is in his 83rd year. He and his wife
still lead an active life and have just celebrated
their diamond wedding. They have a family of
three sons and five daughters all living with
numerous grandchildren and great grandchildren.
Mr. GEORGE HUSH.
One of Braidwood’s oldest and highly
respected natives. Age 83
There are four generations of the Hush family at
Eastfield. In the early days they had to go to
Sydney for their provisions by bullock team taking
down their wool and bringing back a supply of
goods to last them a year. They put in their
crop with a hoe and had to grind their wheat with
a hand mill. George Hush often speaks of the
time he had to grind the wheat to get sufficient
flour to make a damper before breakfast.
Many stories are told of landowners flogging
their convict servants in the old days. No one was
flogged except by order of the magistrate, though
that unfortunately occurred only too often. In-
stances are recorded where men were cruelly lashed
for losing sheep, which then were counted of
greater value than the men. There were no
fences, the land often covered in thick scrub and
dingoes were continually on the prowl waiting for
a chance to seize a sheep; but no excuse was
taken, and the man received his punishment. One
poor fellow was put on bread and water for two
days for objecting to the overseer putting a number
of fowls in his hut during a storm. Prisoners
were brought from the Manaro, Queanbeyan and
Yass Districts on one side, and the coast on the
other for trial and punishment, which was usually
the lash, so that Braidwood gained an ugly
notoriety which is scarcely deserved from the num-
ber of punishments meted out to these poor unfor-
tunates.
THE RIFLE CLUB.
During the Russian War scare in 1883, public
meetings were called and after considerable cor-
respondence, the Government granted permission
for a local Infantry Corps to be formed. The
Company was a purely volunteer corps and known
as “A” Company of the First Volunteer Reserve
Regiment.
The members (about 60) first enrolled, elected
their own officers, when Mr. John Wallace became
Captain, Mr. W. Gracie First Lieutenant, and Mr.
H. L. Mater, Second Lieutenant.
At the beginning, parades were held nightly
under Staff-Sergeant Gibson, until the men gained
a certain amount of efficiency, and then took place
weekly. The uniforms were green, similar to those
of the Rifle Brigades of England.
In time, Mr. Mater became Captain and formed
a Rifle Club in connection with the Company, which
competed for many prizes presented by the resi-
dents of the district, and attended the annual camps
for training then held at National Park, attaining
to the honorable position of being leading company
to the battalion. This company formed the nucleus
of the present Rifle Club.
The Rifle Club has produced many excellent
rifllemen, chief among them being Mr. F. Le Maitre,
the oldest member at the present time, who has
won many prizes ancT"trpoKies at Interstate com-
petitions, and has had the high honor of being
chosen to represent the Commonwealth at Bisley.
A highly coveted prize, bearing his name, is com-
peted for annually at Liverpool.
Mr. Le Maitre and Mr. R. Sinclair have had the
distinction of winning the King's Badge, a great
triumph, especially as they not only had to compete
with the Commonwealth clubs, but on one occasion
with those of the Empire. Mr. H. L. Mater, con-
secutively, won the Crown Badge, awarded for best
shot in the Musketry Annual Course, for seven
years.
Mr. Le Maitre has acted as coach for the local
Commonwealth team, . and it is due to him that
there are so many promising young riflemen in
the club, who will one day render a good account
of themselves and their instructor.


Commercial
Commercial Hotel, Braidwood, is conducted by
Mrs. M. A. O’Brien, a highly respected and well-
known identity of this town and district. The
hotel has been recently renovated and is now re-
plete with all modern conveniences. Visitors and
old Braidwoodites are cordially invited to pay a
visit on Mrs. O’Brien, who will be pleased to greet
and give them a hearty welcome during the Braid-
wood Celebration.
Cockerill’s Albion Hotel is the oldest hotel in
the Braidwood district. Under the management
of its genial proprietor, Harry Cockerill, a wel-
come awaits commercial and tourists alike. Mr.
Cockerill is well-known to the various commer-
cials, having spent a number of years on the
road himself. Of late, we regret to say, Mr. Cock-
erill has been in indifferent health, and the man-
agement of the hotel has fallen upon his son Syd.,
who is a veritable chip off the old block.
The Royal Hotel. Braidwood, is one of the most
up-to-date hotels in the district. Under the cap-
able management of the popular proprietress, Mrs.
Worthington, motorists and tourists are assured
of a homely welcome and every comfort. Mrs.
Worthington is a member of the C.T.A. and
N.R.M.A., and thoroughly understands the needs
of travellers and visitors. The cuisine is of the
best, and all liquors are guaranteed true to label.
Some 25 years ago the licensee of this hotel was
the present Sir Austin Chapman.
F. H. Dowell is recognised as one of the leading
storekeepers in Braidwood, and carries large
stocks of drapery, mercery, clothing, boots and
shoes, furniture, bedding, etc. Since taking over
from Mr. Gracie, the business has prospered under
the able guidance of Mr. F. H. Dowell. Histocks
comprise high-grade lines only, and he is noted
for honest values.
Scott’s Braidwood Garage is owned by W.
Scott, who has a modern plant and employs only
experts. Mr. Scott is a motor engineer of twenty-
six years’ experience, and his up-to-date plant
caters for any kind of repairs, both mechanical
and electrical. From a small garage this business
has grown to be the largest and most popular in
the district. The best of work is turned out,
satisfaction guaranteed, and an honest square deal
—hence Mr. Scott’s success.
Mutton's are General Merchants and Importers,
their principal lines being clothing, furnishings,
boots and shoes, fancy goods, etc. Founded in
June, 1913, this store has made great strides under
the capable management of the proprietor, Mr.
E. N. Mutton. The firm are sole Braidwood
agents for J. O. Anderson’s Tennis, Cricket, Foot-
ball and Golf requirements; also J. B. Stetson’s
felt hats for men. Other lines are Metters* “Beam-
light,” “Royal,” “Dover,” and “Improved” stoves-
Mr. S. L. Turnbull is the proprietor of the
Araluen Arms Hotel, and is well-known to Ara-
luen and Braidwood residents alike. All visitors
to Braidwood during the festivities are asked to
pay him a visit, where a hearty welcome awaits
them.
Barnett’s Pharmacy is situated in the main:
street, near the Bank of New South Wales. Mr.
Barnett is well-known in Braidwood, having been
established some twenty years. Prescriptions are
accurately dispensed, and large stocks of perfum-
ery, toilet goods, xylonite ware, etc. are always,
in .stock.
The firm of James Higgins, General Store-
keepers, is recognised as the oldest business of its
kind in the Braidwood district. All lines are car-
ried, also timber and produce. Mr. Higgins is
also agent for the International Harvesters,
Kain Bros., of Braidwood, are Wholesale and 1
Retail Butchers, and stock nothing but the primesl
of meat. You can send your children for your
requirements, as they will receive the same atten-
tion and quality of meat as if you came yourself.
Families waited on for orders* Kain Bros.* estab-
lishment is hygienic and all meats are freshly
killed and sold at reasonable prices, which are-
equitable to both seller and purchaser.
F. Le Maitre is a Wholesale and Retail Butcher,
and is noted for his high-class meat. He solicits;
your patronage and guarantees good service in
return. His prices are reasonable, and he is pre-
pared to wait on families for orders.
H. Malone, car proprietor, of Braidwood, is
well-known for his car service and employs -'only
the best of experienced drivers. Tourists and
travellers are advised to make all enquiries re
travelling through the booking office of the Albion
Hotel.
Braidwood Bakery is run by Mr. P. J. Spain,
who is the proprietor. The Braidwood Bakery is;
noted for its salubrious bread and pastry, and
readers are invited to inspect the hygienic and
modern bakehouse. Bread is delivered to all
parts of the district daily. Mr. Spain also sells
smallgoods that are manufactured from the high-
est quality ingredients.
J. Lowe conducts the leading boarding house
of Araluen, and tourists and travellers are assured
of every comfort. The scenery that surrounds
Mr. Lowe’s establishment is recognised as one of
the most beautiful in Australia, and is adjacent
to the Araluen Valley, the noted spot for scenery
hunters.
Donald McTavish, of Araluen, is a General
Storekeeper, and carries large stocks of the towns-
people’s requirements. He is out to give service
to his customers, and only charges reasonable-
prices for his goods.


First-Class Printing
wnen ordering your
Printing that the main
feature is QUALITY—not
price ?
Your name, business and
address, if printed in a
first-class manner on best-
quality paper, is absolutely
the best advertisement that
any business house could
wish for.
To obtain First-Class
Printing it is necessary to
place your orders in the
hands of a Printer who has
a modern plant and who
specialises in Commercial,
Art and Color Printing.
For your next printing
order we invite you to
write us for quotations.
SID MADDEN
“ Printing is an Art—Ve are Artists”
ou ever considered
PRINTER
GEORGE STREET WEST
Tel. MW-1748
SYDNEY
A. E. Brown is renowned for manufacturing
high quality cheese, and readers of this souvenir
are advised to support the local manufacturer by
purchasing his products. He also sells choice pork
chops, suckling pigs and smallgoods, which are of
the highest quality.
Mr. J. J. Feehan is a well-known Braidwood
identity, having been proprietor of the Court
House Hotel for ten years. He is now in business
as an Auctioneer, and all old friends are invited
to pay him a visit.
A. J. Kain, of Braidwood, is a Commission
Agent, also a Fruiterer, Confectioner, Tobacconist
and Stationer. He has been established about
eight years and has a large circle of clients, who
speak of him in flattering terms.
Mr. M. Anderson is the leading Hairdresser and
Tobacconist in Braidwood, and in connection with
this business runs a cycle and motor-cycle depart-
ment. Mr. Anderson's business was established
some twenty years ago. He is Mayor of Braid-
wood, and has been captain of the Fire Brigade
for the last ten years.
W. H. Whittaker is an Auctioneer, Stock and
Station Agent, and is well-known to Braidwood
residents, having been established sixteen years.
On application, he will furnish stock and property
lists. His telephone numbers are 62 and 4.
Miss Nellie King has a Drapery and Fancy Goods
business in Braidwood. Although practically a
new-comer to the district, she has built up a
sound business by giving honest values.
M. Coffey is the proprietor of Braidwood Board-
ing House. Visitors to the town during the fes-
tivities are assured of every home comfort under
the personal supervision of Mrs. Coffey.
NEWSPAPERS.
The Press.—The first paper published in Braid-
wood was “The Dispatch,” in 1855, then
owned by Mr. J. W. Bunn, who afterwards dis-
posed of it to Mr. J. Musgrave. The editor was
Mr. J. Cosgrove, uncle of Miss Cosgrove of El-
rington Street. The proprietor and editor of the
Dispatch," now is Mr. T. C. Musgrave, who also
owns and edits “The Review,” which was estab-
lished in 1905.
The first daily paper published outside of Syd-
ney was the Braidwood “Daily News,“ owned by
Mr. C. J. Watson and edited by Mr. W. H. Braine,
m 1859. This gentleman was, for many years,
editor and owner of the "Bega Gazette.” HU
family still retain their interest in Braidwood. An-
other paper printed in the days of the gold boom
was The Observer, * conducted and owned by Mr.
Wainwright.
