

Cftr Hftrctto.
B A L B ’ S
Celebrated Opera, in 4 Acts,
S AT ANELL A;
Or, THE POWER OF LOVE.
AS PEIifOKMIiD BY
SIMONSEN’S
English & Gorqic Opera Company.
JWdOoutnc:
Wm. Marshall <& Co , Printers, “Tiif Lorgnette” Office,
! 8 90.


SATANELLA.
(BALM.)
ACT I. —8c kn e I. — Falace amt gardens of Count Rnptr
Chorus and Dance.
Donor of this lordly fete,
Liberal of heart and hand,
Nobly born and truly great,
Monarchs less than you command,
Their’s a sceptre but in part.
Yours the empire of the heart.
Ever welcom'd with a smile.
Treason thee can ne’er beguile.
Eup Thanks, thanks, my friends, your loves I dearly prize,
Your homage keep for radiant beauty’s eyes;
I too am subject here; behold your queen,
The love crown’d mistress of this festive scene.
Whose smile lends lustre to tne light of morn,
Whom every grace of nature doth adorn ;
Her glance more potent than a monarch’s frown,
Like willing slaves, all hearts to her bow down.
Hor A mere coquette to honour thus, for shame!
Eup Look in her face, and you will cease to blame.
Hor What gaze you upon a basilisk ? oh, no!
You conquer only when you fly that foe.
Stel to Eup
This forest fete doth all enchantment seem,
V\ ild and fantastic—beauteous as a dream !
Eup A waking dream that comes desire to bless
Of vision’d joys here all the wealth possess;
Stel Life’s golden hours shoul I e’ er wing their way
Depart in joys, or usher in delight.
Eup Be life the memory of one happy day ;
We ba ish from our thoughts the coming night;
Come let us stray thro’ all the festive scene,
Inspect your realms, and count your slaves, my queen.
Chorus Liberal of heart and hand
Mo archs less than he command ;
Their’s sceptre but in part,
H s the empire of the heart.
Hor Who would ever have believed that my worthy
pupil. Count Rupert, would permit himself to be led like a
simpleton by the nose and by a coquette ? What a world it
would be if the opposite sex could be only kept, at a respect-
able distance. What, to them at once ? my sensitive organs
will never be able to endure their irritating influence long.
May I enquire why I am thus addressed—why thus singled
out among so numerous a throng!
Lei Surely, good Master Hortensius, you can hardly


forget Dame Bertha, and Delia, Count Rupert's foster
sister? We have deemed it our duty to .-come and offer
these poor but earnest tokens of gratitude to our kind
benefactor on the occasion of his fete.
Hor Gratitude in one of the feminine gender ? iropos: ible!
or at any rate incomprehensible; but as you are now here,
no doubt you would like to present him your slight offering
in propria personae; with all my heart, if you can only
single him fr ni among the crowd of lords, ladies, fops and
fools by whom the misguided youth is surrounded, included
that special object of my aversion, the Princess Stella, as
she styles herself, his intended bride.
Lei His bride! The dream of my childhood, then, is over.
Hor His wife—yes; and a pretty wife she’ll make him.
Mammon and not Cupid, is the God she worships.
Enter Count Rupert.
Rup My revered friend pedagogue, bestir yourself, and
help me to search for the bouquet of our dear Princess.
Eh, what charming little rustic Venus is this ?
Del Has your lordship, then, entirely forgotten Delia ?
Rup What, Delia, my charming little foster- sister.
Del Who has ventured on this occasion to remember the
day on which, in her childhood, she was ever wont to make
an offering to her dear foster-brother.
Rup A thousand thanks, dear friends; believe me, I
dearly prize your simple offering. What a beautiful girl
she has grown ! And not married yet ? why the young
tenants on my estate must be devoid ox all sense and feeling.
Ber Not so your Highness. Delia has no lack of sighing
swains around her, and there is one especially whose ad-
dresses I sincerely wish she would encourage.
Rup And what may be the name of this most discrimi-
nating rustic ?
Ber Karl Hoffmann, nephew to one of your landlord’s
intendents ; the one who has charge of the ruins of the old
castle on th - Brokenberg.
Rup The castle on the Brokenberg ? I had forgotten
that I possessed such an edifice.
Hor Oh, there’s small tear of your ever making away
with that part of your estate, as you have done with the
rest; no one would have it at a gift: why, ’twas in a turret
of that very castle, a turret which, bye the bye, is still
standing that one of your misguided ancestors, Count
Hildenbrand, sold himself to the Prince of Darkness for a
stipulated sum in ready money. It has ever since gone by
the terrible appellation of the Demon’s Tower—nomen
horrendum, as we may say in the classics,
Hup And does the nephew of this aforesaid inteudant of
this Demon Towerof mine, find favour in my dear Delia’s eyes?
Ber on the contrary, your lordship: I grieve to say that
in spite of our remonstrance, the unkind girl most ob-
stinately refuses to listen to the poor boy’s suit.
Rup The obdurate little coquette. Well now, do you


know I sympathise deeply with the ill-used Karl, and will
try my influence in his behalf. Do you, Hortensius, see that
our worthy Dame here be duly cared for.
Hor A pretty occupation for a proiessor of the classics,
purveyor of refreshments to an elderly member of , the
opposite sex. What a fearful misapplication of learning and
accomplishments ? This way, my good lady—sequendrum est
mihi, as we say in the classics.
Eup Come now, Delia, we are alone ; place confidence in
me, the companion and playmate of your infancy; confess
your real motives for behaving so cruelly to this luckless
swain of yours.
Lei I cannot my lord. Question me no further, I entreat.
Eup Aha, that downcast look, that heaving heart, reveal
the secret in spite of yourself. Come, his name, my senti-
mental wild flower, his name.
Del His name none will ever know.
Rup That’s provoking, for I was just considering what
would be the most fitting souvenir for my dear foster-sister
on her wedding day.
Del Many thanks, my kind benefactor, but that day will
never dawn for me.
Rup Worse and worse. May I not, at least, hope for a
solution of this strange enigma.
Del 'Tis easily solved, my lord.
SONG.
Delia Our hearts are not our own to give,
I hey yield without a sign,
Nor in our keeping seem to live,
When once love says, there mine.
I vain w ould reason rebel voice,
The tyrant’s overthrow;
Did fate accord the power of choice,
‘Twould with our fond hearts go.
I knew not that I’d lost my heart.
Till it, securely won,
Love begg’d so piteously a park
I sought and found I’d none,
lint o’er the theft I now rejoice,
Such bliss from thence doth flow,
Did heaven accord the power of choice,
Twould with my fond heart go.
Eup Charmingly reasoned, dear Delia; pray accept in
return this ring ; wear it in memory of our childhood’s happy
days. And let this brother's kiss attest the sincerity of the
donor. Knter Stella.
Stel So, Count, yon left me under the pretext of seeking
for my bouquet.
Rup What a monstrously unlucky ending to such a
charming tete-a-tete. Delia, my dear child, rejoin our good
mother awhile, we shall meet again ere long.
Del What a haughty, scornful glance ! How spiteful these
great folks are to be sure. And she is to be his future bride —
Alas, alas .'


Stel So, Count Bupert, yon have sought my hand in
marriage solely that I might be a witness to your pastoral
intrigues.
Rup Nay, my dear Stella, surely you will pardon this
seeming inconsistency, when I inform you that the peasant
girl who h»s just left us is my foster-sister.
Stel Your foster-sister, indeed. Bit it matters uot; such
inconsiderate behaviour on the eve of our nuptials is an insult
to the princely house from which I have descended. Have a
care, my lord, ’tis Sicilian blood that flows in my veins.
Rup Are these threats, Stella?
Stel Threats are needless to those who are certain of
revenge.
Lei My lords, I pray you judge between
This haughty man and woman’s heart.
Long honor’d as his fancy’s queen,
He claims the right at will to part.
And for another me forsake, '
And still a slave of me would make ;
In justice, lords, I claim to be,
1 love coquettish well as he.
Rup Go, false one, go.
Stel I’ll not ask leave.
When it shall please me I’ll depart,
Rup Be that then, now. I’ll never grieve
To lose so light, so false a heart
Hor ’For heaven, I truly do believe
I’ll die of joy should they but part.
Stel The dice, the tables : Signors let us play,
All sorrows are forgotten in Hie game.
Rup That’s true ; come, let us play,
Hor Oh, grief ; oh, shame?
Rup (playing) A thousand crowns.
Player (casting dice) I take it sir.
Rup I’ve lost. Two more.
Stel The game is yours, and mine the cos
Rup Ten thousand crow ns, who dares ?
Players We take, we take.
Rup Tis true, Signors, for I have lost the stake
Alike in play and love a loser, I
Stel For twenty thousand dar’st the venture try ;
Rup Thy minion, Fortune, risks a dangerous game :
A large sum, twenty thousand crowns.
Hor Beware!
Lose that, lose all.
Lei Oh, in thy fathei s name,
Stay thou no more.
Rup To win is still to dare ;
And fortune owes me for her frowns one smile.
’Tis her turn another to beguile.
I've lost thyheart—the twentythousand crowns 1 e mine
Stel Your pardon, Signor, neither can be thine.
Yours only is the cost: I've won and you have lost.
Rup As you surmised, I’ve risked—lost al l .


Hor And at the bottom can no further fall.
Rup Now, Signors, my revenge ; once more let’s play.
Hor Nought left, what would yon stake, your honor ?
Rup Nay,
My father’s house, lands, vassals, still remain?
One cast for each, the stake to lose or gain.
Play The house is mine.
Rup But not the lands.
Another player Oh, no ;
For I’ve won them.
Rup My vassals with them go,
Or win them all back.
Play You’ve lost.
Hor Oh shame 1
Lei Oh, woe!
Rup So fortunate, you’re sure of Stella’s heart;
While wealth rema'ns, she’ll never from thee part.
Stel The Count insults me ; must I hear the shame ?
Players No ; we’ll avenge thee, or atonement claim.
Rup Come one, come all; I dare the unequal strife,
You’ve reft of land and gold, now take my life.
Concerted Piece.
Rup Of life I have no care,
My friends have turned to foes,
Abandoned to despair
I would the world oppose.
Your swords and flashing eyes,
Do but provoke my rage,
Which fate itself defies,
And would but warfare rage.
Stel Of him take ye no care,
His friends have turned to foes,
Abandf ned to despair,
Shall all the world oppose.
His taunts and scornful'eyes,
Do but provoke my rage.
Since he your wrath defies,
With him but warfare wage.
Players Of him we take no care, &c.
Lei Oh dearest friend ; oh, noble brother, pray
Be calm—be soothed.
Hor He heeds not what you say.
He's ruined now, not w orth a single sou,
And with a tutor what has he to do ?
Rap Of life I have no ca e &c.
Stel Of him take we no care, &c.
Chorus Of him take we no care, Ac.
Scene II. —Old hall in ihe Demon's Tower.
Enter Kakl.
Karl Oil, yes, that’s thunder and rain too. I’m glad Leila
and Dame Bertha went home before the storm began. I didn’t
get back too soon myself; for strange to say, a messenger
from Count Rupert has been over to say that he intends
dassing the night here- -here of all places in the world, where


they say the bargain was struck with the demon page as the
old picture in the library represents Now if Lelia were
only here, I could stay here all night -I shouldn’t mind it at
all; in fact, I should rather prefer it than otherwise. Dear
Lelia, how fond I am of that girl, to be sure.
Song.
Oh, would she but name the day
On which I shall call her mine ;
Or would I could hear her say,
Sweetheart. I am only thine.
But she when her wiles have led
Me her consent to pray,
Cries, with a toss of her head,
Never shall be the day.
Oh, would I could hear her say,
Him for husband will I take ;
Lore him honor, and obey,
Tho’ certain the last to break.
And could I but one k’ss gain,
I’d ne’er heed her saying nay,
One victor o’er her disdain,
I’d soon make her name the day.
Rup What ho I lights here.
Karl The Count’s voice, I declare. Coming your Highness
Scene lll. —The Demon's Ton er.
Enter Count Rupert and Hortensius.
Hor I declare the rain’s coming in at the crown of my
hat, and running out at the toes of my boots.
Rup Well, this last remaining tenement of mine is about
as dingy abode as I ever >et foot in Eh. what mysterious
piece of tapestry is this ?
Karl Please your honorable lordship's worship it’s sup-
posed to represent your noble lordship’s most illustrious and
respectable ancestor as he appeared in the very identical act
of disposing of himse f to the d-e-vil, saving your lordship’s
presence, and that young gentleman in a page's dress, is
supposed to be the individual in question.
Rnp I must confess, a most interesting family relic ; we’ll
dive further into its artistic merits on some future occasion ;
but in the meantime, as our journey has somewhat sharpened
our appetite, serve up without any delay the most sumptuous
repast this delicate ancestral abode of mine can afford.
Kar Immediately your noble lordship’s Grace. I suppose
all that means whatever you have in the larder. I’m not at
all clear in my mind as to whether we hace anything there.
Hor Fortune, indeed, is a fickle jade : to think now that
this cobwebby old tower is all that remains of two castles and
three lakes, six forests, and a regal palace. My excellent,
though somewhat hairbrained pupil, what on earth could
induce you to risk the last of your territorial domains on the
hazard of the die, and what’s worse, lose it in that fright-
ful and unexpected manner.
Rup. Yes, that’s the most aggravating part of the matter;


but Stella’s heartless -■onduut has so heated my brain, that
’pon my life, I think I would have played for you, my reverend
preceptor, if they would only have accepted the stake.
Hor. Honored by the distinction, Irreverens juvenis‘ as
we say in the classics.
Eup. What have we here, books ? My ancestors appears
to have been of a literary turn. A treatise on Alchemy ;
infallible method of making gold, by Jove, just what I want.
“ In order to make gold, provide yourself with a considerable
quantity of silver ” —Aye, there’s the rub ; where am I to get
it? “ To make silver,” —Gad, the very thing ; come, come, my
ancestors have more learning than I gave them credit for.
“To make silver lirst take some gold.” Pshaw, I see I shall
never thrive ou alchemy.
Hor. Shades of the classics, what have we here ?
Rup. As X live, a work of magic —a good subject in my
present mood. “ A treatise on Demons.” Capital, the very
thing. “ Demons are of both sexes ; your he devil is the more
cruel, while your she devil is the more perfidious.” Faith,
these subterranean devils appear to resemble our terrestrial
ones uncommonly. “ The King of the Demon world is named
Arimanes and may be evoked by uttering the following words;
Miniam ! Manasses ! Eurothas ! care being taken to extend
the hands meanwhile towards the East. By Jupiter a chance
that must not be neglected, I shall certainly make Master
Arimanes acquaintance forthwith.
Hor. No, no, no, don’t; only suppose the individual was
really to come
Rup. Come, of course he’ll come; he would’nt be so
ungentlemanly as to refuse when so pressingly invited.
Hor. Horrible; only fancy spending, an evening in the
society of Old Nick.
Rup. And a very pleasant fellow, no doubt; not half so
black as he’s painted ; besides, see here, those who supplicate
the fiend become his slaves ; but those who command him
remain his master. Here goes then—Miriam.
Hor. Don’t—or I cry murder.
Rup. Miriam, Manasses, Eurothas.
Hor. Monstrum horrendum infoame ingens, as we say in
the classics. He’s coming ; can’t you hear the wheels of his
fiery chariot dashing along ? Here he is. I’ll leave you to
the tete-a-tete. Two’s company ; three’s none.
Rup. Fiend, devil appear. I call thee. I command thee
Ari. What daring mortal has pronounced my name ? Who
seeks with me to share my throne of fame.
How’s this, the master of the potent spell,
That Satan’s presence can all times compel,
More feeble than the Pythoness of old,
Lies senseless, prostrate, dares not me behold,
His folly would ray power control, defy.
Yet helpless now, doth at my mercy lie.
Since he has dared to brave,
He shall become my slave.
Demon that task be thine ;


Ensnare, and make him mine.
Sat Command, and I obey.
Ari Mark well this man, I say.
Sat. Young—handsome —pry thee spare.
Ari, To question, do not dare ;
My will is to ensnare.
All woman in thy heart,
With woman’s presence part
In form be thou a page ;
As such with him engage.
Since he has dared to brave, &e.
Bup. What am I? what has happened ?
Sat. Nothing unusual. You summoned me, and here lam
Rup. I summoned you ray interesting little friend. Pray
who are you ?
Sat. A strange question that of yours considering all the
trouble you took to call me.
Bup. The book of magic. But no, surely, you do not
mean to say, my young stranger, that you are—
Sat. In propria persona;, and at your service.
Bup. Ha, ha, ha. And so my young whipper, snapper,
you really pretend to assure me that you are the gentleman
in black.
Sat. The identical from—
Blip. You astonish me; you do indeed. Human nature
has formed a very different opinion of you ; and would with
difficulty be convinced that you are half as nice a fellow as
you appear.
iSat. Appearances are oft deceptive, both above and below
however, on longer acquaintance, you’ll be better able to judge
my character ; and I’ve no doubt, that in the long run you’ll
find me a devilish good little fellow.
Bup. Hovilish I’ve no doubt. Good, however, time will
prove.
Sat. Nothing like the present, Master, command, I obey
Bup. Command, yes but what!
gat. Let me see, the most urgent article require d for the
moment, I seould say by the state of your lordship’s appetite
is supper.
Rup. Gad, so it is you are a devilish clever little fellow
Supper be it then, but how and where ?
Sat. Here.
Rup. Amazement ! Exquisite, upon my word, and by
Jove, no smell of btimstone about it either.
Hor. I wonder if Old Nick has flown away with my un r or.
tunate pupil, or carried him off with a flash of blue lightning ’
for my part I never should have had the courage again to cross
the threshold of these ill-omened precincts, had it not been for
a certain savoury odour which seemed to issue from that direc-
tion, and which sooth to say, is most attractive to my olfactory
organs. Where can my worthy pupil be all this time ? “Mira
bile dictu I ” “ raagis mirabile visu I ”as we say in classics ;
why there he is discussing his supper, and auch a supper !


Rup. Ah, my worthy preceptor, is that you ? Come now,
tose no time ; to supper ere the viands get cold.
Hor. Astonishment ! a feast for the eyes of an epicure, and
his stomach to boot ; unluckily. I’ve a great failing that way.
Gad ! I’ll make a sumptuous feast for once in my life, or the
devil take me.
Sat. So he will. Hor. He, who ?
Rup. Why the gentleman you just named. Ha, ha ! I've
taken him into my service.
Hor. “ Hand credendum,’’as we say in the classscs.
Verily my teeth are chattering together with such violence,
as to considerably endanger the tip of my tongue.
Rup Take a chair, most reverend Master Tutor, sit down
make yourself at home.
Hor'. Hor. What, sit down to supper with Old Nick.
Never, diabolee exorcise te.
Rup. Most erudite of pedagogues, here’s to your health
and prosperity.
Hor. I feel as if the fiery claws of that little grinning imp
has singed the very marrow in my bones.
Rup. ’Pon my life, this infernal page of mine is a devilish
good-looking fellow ; there’s a strange unaccountable fascin-
ation in his smile that charms in spite of n self. Now should
I ever chance to come across a girl with a face like that.
Hor. She would win your heart.
Rup. My heart, nay, my soul I
Hor Nonsense. How could a pupil of mine, well versed
in humanities, and carefully taught, and affectionately flogged
from his earliest years be led away by such an idea 1 What,
fall in love with a succubus. a female fiend. Only think of her
in her natural state, before her infernal toilette is made. Her
tail twisted up, and her horns pared—shocking.
Rup. You judge our young friend wrongly, my sapient
tutor ; when better acquainted. I'm certain you'll be insep-
arable friends.
Hor. “ Quod est demonstrandum,'’as we say in the classics.
Rup. Come, fill your bumper to the brim with this potent
juice of fair Champagne ; and while we pledge a toast to our
supernatural little friend here.
Hor. I drink to the foul fiend’s health —never. I—l
refuse the toast, but drink the wine.
Song.
Rup. When fortune frowns and friends forsake
And faith in love is dead ;
When man has nothing left to stake,
To hope nor yet to dread,
One goddike pleasure doth remain,
To drink at some knave’s cost,
Let life’s last song have for refrain
The glorious vintage of Champagne,
Rup. My honored tutor, why not join in the refrain?
Asleep ! What wisdom, snoring, wide folly’s left awake.


When one by one fade all the beams,
That lighted morning’s path ;
So dull the world around us se ms,
At life itself were wrath.
Ne\v vigor then would we regain
Let’s drink at some knave’s cost,
The glorious vintage of Champagne.
Worth all the joys we’ve lost.
Let life’s last song. &c.
Rup. Why what’s become of that peculiar looking page of
mine ; has he vanished through the keyhole or up the chimney
I wonder ? What sounds are those P earth sure has no such
harmony ; they seem to shed a strange intoxication over my
brain ; my limbs appear to shrink beneath me, and mysteribus
slumbers overcomes my senses. I— I—
RECITATIVE*
Sat. Myself once more, the page I cease to play ;
All woman now, my soul resumes her sway.
Though conscious love his wakeful heart denies,
In dreamful visions let me charm his eyes.
One blissful moment in my true form seen
By love enthroned, his fancy worshipped Queen.
There's a power whose sway Source of joy and woe,
Angel souls adore, Foiler of stern hate :
And the lost obey. Lord of high and Iow r ,
Weeping evermore. Woman calls thee fate
Doubtful mortals prize, Fierceness owns thy spell.
Smiles from it above. Vulture thou and dove.
Bliss that never dies. Language cannot tell
Such thy power, oh love ! Half thy power —oh love
Hup. Vanished ! and twas no dream. Wnat enchanting
vision was it that stood before me? Was it perdition’s self ?
1 must again behold it. Wake man—wake.
Hor Eh, what ! no Mr. Devil —no no. I’ve eaten your
supper, but 1 disavow' any further connection with you. Bless
my soul, my dear young pupil, what are you in search of ?
Rup An angel, a female of surpassing loveliness.
Hor A female and an angel. Incongruous.
Rup Had you but heard the silver tones of the melodious
voice, and the heavenly strains with which it was accom-
panied. Oh, man, ’twas rapture. I would give my existence
to hear them once again :
ATT II. —Satanella.
RECITATIVE,
Ah me, how wretched is the doom’d one’s fate,
Her soul all loves, her service giv’u to hate,
That longs to warm, but this doth still ensnare
And pity only greater makes despair.
Ah ! could I but this heart enslave,
His Jove as empire gain,


The fiend’s dread wrath I’d risk and brave,
A future all of pain.
But prescient only of its woe,
My heart doth hope resign.
He loves another, and I know
He never cafi be mine.
Lost one, accept thy doom,
Live grief no further room
Since love to thee deuies
The only gift you prize.
And Stella charms his heart,
Let truth from thee depart.
And urge no piteous care
Between him and despair ;
No—no—the fiends’ true slave.
To tempt and not to save,
Be now my direful task,
Since love I must not ask,
And grief is all my gain ;
I’d wake up fierce disdain,
And trampling on the pain.
Here all the fiend shall reign.
Enter Count Riti’ert.
Sat. My noble master, I trust, is satisfied with the humble
endeavours of his devoted slave.
Rup. Satisfied—-how could I be otherwise ? Thanks to
thy agency, am I not richer than ever ? My entire fortune
has returned to me, and my friends—
Sat. Have imitated your fortune.
Rup. But come, say now, what dost thou expect for these
mysterious services? —some usurious interest, I’ll wager.
Sat. Your lordship, indeed, wrongs his humble slave by
thus mistaking him for an ordinary money lender. His coins
are more precious than the worshipped mammon of this
covetous world.
Rup And they are -
Sat. Mortals.
Rup. Mortals, indeed. So then, you’ve an eye upon me?
Sat. I have.
Rup. And you really hope some day to have me in that
infernal web of yours?
Sat I do.
Hup Well, now that you’ve placed me on my guard, if 1
succumb to your diabolical influence the fault is mine alone.
But now, leave me, for I would be alone with my thoughts.
Sat. That, indeed, would be impossible ; for lam ever in
the very midst of them.
Rup. Indeed, and pray what read you there?
Sat. Vague melancholy-—strange agitation—mysterious
emotion. Dare I but reveal to him the truth, the passion
that consumes my heart ? No ; to breathe it were to lose
him for ever.
Rup. He is right; for each night a vision, a form of sur-
passing loveliness, glides around my couch, and whispers in


my ear sweet accents of love.
Bali.au.
An angel form, in dreams beheld,
Still charms my fancy’s wakeful eyes,
And morning’s light has not dispell’d
The radiance of his lovely gttise.
Still hovering near, on buoyant wings,
It bends on me its beauteous gaze,
And in mine ear it sweet voice rings
This wildest of all lovelorn lays—
“ Beloved by thee, myself to know,
I’d welcome give eternal woe.”
Her beaming eyes were like in hue
The azure deeps of ambient air.
Her smile might hope and love renew
Within the blank breast of despair.
And hovering o’er, on buoyant wings,
She bent on me a wistful gaze ;
Still in mine ear her sweet voice rings
The wildest of all lovelorn lays—etc.
Scene II. —Sen Coast. Enter Bakaohio and Pikates
Chorus. Bovers, rulers of the sea,
Wilder than the wild waves we ;
Merry men in storm and fight,
Hanger's true name is delight.
Bra. My brave companions, prone with me to dare,
Alike each peril and each prize to share,
Boon friends at festal—l rothers in the strife,
No lot more joyous than the pirate’s life
Chorus. Rovers, rulers of the sea, etc.
Bovers o’er the wild sea wave,
Storm and battle but excite,
Ever ready both to brave,
Danger brings us fierce delight.
When the winds have gone to sleep,
And heaven mirror'd seems more fair,
On the bosom of the deep
Mirthful we the feast prepare.
Hovering round a hosti'e shore,
Smiling we on fortune wait,
Laugh we when the b: eakers roar,
Cowards only fear their fate.
With some late won prize in hand.
Careless of the world’s disdain,
Anchoring near some friendly strand,
Wine from w assail bowls we drain.
Bra. Now then, comrades, let us turn our Hying visit to these
shores to the best possible advantage, and keep a sharp look-out
for all prizes that may happen to cross our path in the shape of
a petticoat. Ha ! whom have we here? a youthful bumpkin.
He may perchanceplacens on the track of thegamewe seekfor.
Enter Kar.
Kar. No, it’s all over, there’s not the faintest shadow of a
chance left. What bare treachei y, after faithfully promising


to intercede with Lelia in my behalf, now to be on the very
eve of marrying her himself, all because the forward minx
confessed that she, loved and had alwaysloved him. Hemust
believe, he says because she confessed it unconsciously, and
all along of a hat which made women speak the truth,
whether they liked it or not. A likely story that; but I’ll be
revenged, horribly revenged. I’ll do a deed, the very men-
tion of which shall harrow their souls
Bra Blow then your brains out.
1st Pir Or out your throat.
Kar Eh ! —ah ! —yes ' Well, my good unknown friends, I
almost think I should prefer a quieter method of extermina-
tion.
Bra Oh ! I see you prefer a more exalted mode of exit;
join cur band, and ’twill sooner or later follow, as a natural
cons quence.
Kar Join your band. O, I see, turn pirate So I will I’ll
become a salt water burglar, and come back some fine day
or other and utterly annihilate this treacherous Count
Rupert burn his castle to ashes, and carry off his wife.
Bra. So you shall my young Hercules. Comrades, our
new companion invites you all to the nearest cantina to
celebrate the most auspicious era of his existence when he
joined our jovial crew ; and now my young hero, bless your
lucky stars for the company you’ve fallen into; for now, if
your life is to be short, ’tis sure to be a merry one.
Scene III ■ — Lilia’» Cottage.
Recitative.
Ah, me! too human thou
Sad heart of mine
Since not des\:air
Can make thee love resign
With woman’s weakness
Woman’s pride still keep ;
Breath sighs unheard—
O’er anguish unseen weep.
Ballad.
Let not the world disdaining,
Know grief was all thy gaining,
But ever uncomplaining
In silence sad heart go.
No longer love believing.
Or o’er his falsehood grieving,
Thyself with dreams deceiving,
Increase sad heart thy woe.
Let not the world disdaining,
Know grief was all thygaining,
But ever uncomplaining.
In silence sad heart go.
Still on thy rival smiling.
His heart from thee beguiling
No wrath thy love defiling,
In silence sad heart go.
To fate thyself resigning.
As ne’er to love inclining.
In silence ever pining
Conceal, oh heart, thy woe.
Let not the world disdaining.
Know grief was all thy gaining
But ever uncomplaining.
In silence sad heart go.
Ste lam glad to see Master page, you have attended
my bidding.
Sat lam too proud *hat your highness condescends to
test my humble zeal; what can this woman seek ?it matters
not —I have little to fear from her rivalry
Ste I have determined that you shall bear a missive to


master that I could not well confide to his preceptor,
Hortensius. Count Rupert, doubtless ere this, has repented
his inconsiderate conduct towards me; therefore, tell him
from me, that I—on my side—after due reflection, consent
to overlook the affront offered to my house and lineage, and
am willing to forgive him.
Sat Such a message, now, fair lady, would but degrade
your noble self, and prove of no avail.
Ste What mean you ?
Sat I mean that within the hour another will be the
bride of Count Rupert,
Ste Another—’tis false -it cannot be. Who then is my
rival
Stat Behold her!
Ste Malediction ! that peasant girl again ! But it shall
never be ; were Ito invoke the furies. I will prevent this.
Know you no means.
Sat None Even the devil himself can’t always h»ve his
own way.
Bracachio and several pirates enter, supporting Karl, who
is very tipsy.
Bra Ha, ha ! our young volunteer is evidently unaccus-
tomed to strong potations. Here, take him to the boat.
Stand up, man.
Ste What men are these ?
Sat Oh, a band of honest rogues; only unlike the rest of
mankind, they make no disguise about their calling ; they
are purveyors of beauty to the Pasha’s harems in the East.
Ste Corsairs ! their arrival is indeed most opportune.
Bra Well, it’s very aggravating to have to put to sea
without so much as a single prize in the petticoat line how -
ever, it can’t be helped; better luck next time. So, on board
lads.
Ste A word with you.
Bra Ah, ah !By Neptune, here’s material for a Sultaness
and no mistake,
fte See you this purse of gold; and wouldyouhave it yours?
Bra Will a fish swim ? What's to be done to earn it ?
We salt water bravoes seldom stick at trities,
Ste A young girl is to be carried off.
Bra Quite in our line of business.
S.it By Lucifer, that notion is quite in our line. However,
Eve’s daughters have nearly always been a match for us.
i-te Yonder dwells your prey. In an hour hence let her
be far out at sea; that is what I demand of you. Hut see—
she comes.
Sat Well decidedly, of us two this worthy princess is the
greater devil.
Enter Lelia in bridal dress.
Lei Yes, dear mother; Igo but to offer up a prayer in
the shrine of our holy chapel. A prayer of thanksgiving
for the unlooked-for happiness that bounteous fate seems to
have in store for me.


Ste ’Tis she.
Bra * Tis well Sorry to dislurb you my young rosebud, in
your holy vocation, but I’ve something to whisper to you.
Lei To me; I know you not.
Bra Then by St. Boremio, you’ll soon have the pleasure of
ray acquaintance.
Lei Help—mother! Karl ! Heaven be praised ; at least I
am not without a defender.
Bra Indev d ! Well, then, I should advise your heroic
defender— if he values his ears—to mind his own business, and
obey the orders tint are given to him. On board with her.
Lei Surely, Karl, you cannot, you will not be so base as to
see them tear me from you.
Kar Eh ! Lelia ! 'Pear you from me, my charmer, never ;
you 11 always be with me, never leave me. It's no use I’m
rock You wouldn’t even look at me with fair means; I'll see
what foul will do. On board with her.
Ste ’Tis well; here is the promised reward.
Sat How much has yonder lady given you for carrying off
this young girl ?
Bra Behold !
Well, then, here is double the amount to carry off the
lady herself.
\ra Done. Ha ! ha ! A bargain after my own heart. The
biter bit I ha ! ha ! Gad, this makes a rare day’s work of it.
The rustic maiden is safe in the boat, I see. Now then, lads,
off with this grand lady.
Ste Wretches, urhand me—help ! Heavens ; who could
have expected this.
Bra Aye ! but in this world there are things that one does,
and others, that one don’t- expect, some we must take as they
come On board with her.
Sa: Freed from those that stood -between me and his heart.
I may now hope to gain that love for which I willingly would
seek perdition ;to be his bride—his alone I see the gulf that
yawns before me; yet the temptation is too great; I cannot
withstand it. Come what may, lam resolved to brave the
worst.
CHORUS OF MEN,
Smile, oh heaven, upon the day.
Blessings only let it bring,
Joys that will not fade away,
Bloomful ever like the spring.
bridesmaid's chorus and dance.
To Hymen’s love crowned altar now.
The village maids repair,
To twine around a virgin brow,
Earth s fairest flowers less fair.
Rup The priest now robed doth in the chapel wait,
Hor He seeks with buoyant step and heart elate,
His beauteous bride, as modest as she’s fair ;
Your voices raise, and bless the happy pair.
Rup In bridal robes behold arrayed


My heart’s choice here, my village maid ;
Her matchless form—her beauteous face ;
Put dearer still the modest grace,
That virgins all—a heavenly power,
And mine for ever from this hour.
Come dearest and resign
Thy heart to sacred love;
The hour that mikes you mine,
Hear n smiles on from above.
Sat Ah, me ! I tremble should mischance betray.
For love’s dear sake I still can mercy pray ;
This love profound, of which alone I live,
Kind Heav'n may pardon ; he, perchance, forgive.
Rup Conre dearest and resign, &c
('horns To Hymen’s love-crowned altar now,
The white-robed maids repair,
To twine around a virgin brow,
A snow wreath far less fair.
Rup Why trembles thus thy hand, sweet love, in mine r
Dismiss thy fears, to joy thy heart resign.
Chorus In the thunders that now roll
Something dread the father fears;
There’s a shadow on his soul,
’Tis the voice of Heav’n he hears.
She is dead—she is dead,
To her heart the bolt has sped :
Death’s dark shadow on his soul,
Just where all the father's fears,
In the thunders that now roll,
’Tis the voice of heaven be hears.
Rup Phe is not dead—let me behold her face.
What horrors here ? the false page in her place I
Oho. The demon.
Rup Lelia -where?
Chn. The demon—who -despair.
Hor My lord, the pirates setting out to sea,
A captive maiden bears with them.
Rup ’Tis she.
Solo Up and arm, ye every brave,
Chase the robbers o’er the wave ;
Sons of rapine and of shame,
Mrife and plunder, ravage, flame.
Snatch from them my beauteous bride,
Chorus Oh/ should further wrong betide,
Life, a grief too great to bear,
He would madden with despair,
*rm,arm! and o’er the sea.
We‘ll die or set her free.
AGT 111.
Scene I. —A Cavern. Arimanes. Satanella,
Chorus Upward from this nether world,
Thro’ the deeps of endless apace,
Meteor-like volcano hurled,


Or a comet seeking place.
Slave, before thy king appear,
Ami thy doom in terror hear.
Recitative and Duet.
Ari Though the angry bolt has sped,
And in seeming thou ait dead,
By the power I hold o'er thee,
Endless, like the misery
From thy fatal pa sion bred
Lost one, this dread summons hear—
Rise, before thy judge appear-
Sat Master, pardon.
Ari Wherefore pray
Pardon, since you disobey *'
Gifted within an angel’s form,
Voice to guile, and smiles to charm,
Magic power unrestrained
Hast for me one slave obtained 1
Sat Tenfold deepen all my woe,
I can only answer—no.
A.ri That sha 1 be my answer, slave,
Mercy ever should'st thou crave,
Sal Unrequited love my shame,
Pilv I may surely claim ;
Add not anger to my woe
Pardon me, dread master,
Ari No.
Sal 'Tis enough to love in vain,
Vhat can give me deeper pain
Some compassion yield my woe
Pardon pity—master,
Ari _ No.
Sat So imperious love’s tierce sway,
Baffles it e’en thy control ;
Humbly let me pardon prav ;
Life is anguisn to niv soul.
Add not anger to my woe—
Pardon pity-master,
Ari No.
Sat Pardon-pity.
Ari No, no, no.
Plead no more this girlish dame,
Demon only thou in name :
Beauteous thou shall be no more,
Woman-like, love's loss deplore :
Demon, since thou cans! not hate.
Tenfold mourn and curse thy Lite,
Sat Hold—hold, I’ll not accept this doom ;
My spirit shall its strength resume,
No more as woman weep or sigh,
But, demon-like, all grief deny
One trial more my faith to prove
Til trample on this earthly love.


By thy sceptre I swear
Love from hence to resign :
And his soul to ensnare.
Or his homage make thine.
Ari By my sceptre you swear
Love from hence to resign,
His proud soul to ensnare,
And his homage make mine.
So be it then : I grant thy pray’r,
His homage win, his soul ensnare,
In thirty days expect me here.
By my sceptre you swear
Love from hence to resign,
Sat By thy sceptre I swear
Love horn hence to resign.
Scene 11. - Bazaar and Shvw Mark'd,
Chorus and Dance.
Merry Tunis, ope thy mart,
Send the prizes rich and rare,
Though of East and West the heart.
Not Stamboul can thee compare.
Amber jewels if you prize.
Choose from out the Corsair’s store.
Loose your heart to beauty’s eyes,
You can buy what you adore.
Maids are here of every kind :
This the Corsair s chiefest caie.
And your choice you're sure to find,
Be she black, or brown or fair,
To your gold we’ll naught deny.
Do not trust the prize to chance.
Make your choice before you buy,
While the lovely Almees dance.
Bra Who beauty seeks should hither turn his eyes,
And matchless own the Pirate’s lovely prize.
Rup Joy ! rapture ! Delia, idol of my heart !
Lei My best beloved, Heaven grant no more to part !
Bra Away ! This slave is mine by right of arms.
Lei Oh Heaven, 'tis true 1
Bra If she your fancy charms.
Soon as the market opens you can buy
Rup At any price !
Hor Don't run her up to high.
Rup Droop not, my Delia, I shall purchase thee.
Bra Who bids the highest needs the owner be.
Mob The Vizier comes.
Hor If he should choose to buy,
With his long purse your's cannot hope to vie.
Chorus. —Merry Tunis, &c.
Bra A fair Circassian, with that golden hair
Most prized of all.
Hor The old man seems to stare
Kar No wonder with such golden locks in view :


I call them carrots of most ticrv hue.
Bra A Georgian of the loveliest mind and mould.
Hor A piece of dough into a mortal rolled.
Kar The Vizier dosen’t seem to think her nice,
Bra Cheap at two thousand,
Hor Dear at any price :
I woukln 1 have her at a gift.
Bra A Nubian, see
Hor A sable Venus,
Kar Venus, mercy me.
A blackamoor,
Hor Of perfect color—make.
Kar You’d best become a negro for her sake.
Bra Extremes are neighbours ; hither turn your eyes
And by mere contrast, matchless own this prize.
He bids a thousand sequins
Rup Then I name
Two thousand and as mine my Telia claim.
Bra Not yet, the Vizier doubles, and bids four.
Rup Six thousand, then ; I burn till all is o'er.
Bra The Vizier twenty, sooner than revoke.
My fortune’s made at but a single stroke.
Lei Oh, woe is me
Rup Nay, Telia, do not fear ;
I’ll thirty thousand give.
Hor That’s very dear.
Rup Be silent, slave, mere dross I count the gold ;
My I elia's all to me.
Hor Be not too bold ;
The coffer’s empty.
Kup empty :
Hor Yes, you're sold,
As well as she, if he should bid once more.
Bra The Vizier names a hundred thousand,
Hor All is o’er.
Rup Oh, heaven, despair, my blood begins to chill,
Bold, happy thought, I can outbid him still,
My gallant bark be thine —will that suffice ?
Bra Than his last offer tis a higher price.
Kup Then Lelia’s mine
Bra Not so ; these jewels see
He proffers now a double gain must be,
Sat I’ll temp him now, ’neath passion’s sway
He's sure to prove an easy piey.
Quintet te.
Rup Oh, woe despair,
My Lelia's lost,
My heart’s sole care
By fortune crossed ;
To save her yet
Should heaven deny
Life one regret,
E’en let me die.
Hor & Kar Oh, woe. despair,
His true love lost.
His heart’s sole care
By fortune crossed ;
To save her yet
Should heaven deny,
Life all regret,
E’en let him d'C


LeJ Oh, woe, despair;
To love now lost,
My heart's sole care,
By fortune crossed ;
To be his yet.
Should heaven deny.
Life one regret,
E’en let me die.
Bra O. fortune rare,
Worth all the cost of toil ,
and care,
And rude crossed
I’ll ne'er regret,
That foes decry,
Sincefortune yet
Bids me defy.
Sat His life despair
Were Lelia lost,
His heart s one care
Then fortune crossed,
To win her yet,
He'd heaven defy,
Hence, hence, regret,
E en let him tile.
Bra Mine be the gold, and yours the sla^e.
Rup Despair ! dark clouds above me roll;
Oh, might I but my Lelia save,
I'd hazard more than my life—my soul.
Sat A bargain, tlien, your soul shall buy the maid.
Rup My demon page, in strange garb array’d F
Sat Sign but this pact, and I'll the maid restore.
Hup ’Tis done—Love triumphs—every terror o’er
Sat Your slave I'm now, hereafter you are mine.
Song —Satan kto a.
Sultana Zulema, with houris might vie
Loved lived in the light of her radiant dark eye,
Her lips seemed to promise all heaven in a kiss.
You might die on her bosom, and think death a bliss;
Her smile the bright morning made still brighter beam,
Her voice was that music of which poets dream ;
Each movement revealed of her form some new grace,
And the world you forget when you looked in her face.
The Sultan ne'er knew the extent of his sway,
So countless the slaves that knelt down to obey ;
Rings fied from his frown, nations trembled before,
To win but his smile, Pashas stooped to adore.
But though ail the world n his fetters seem'd bound,
Yet still in his harem one rebel he found;
Zulema, who dared all his anger to brave,
And earth's greatest king was the proud beauty’s slave.
Sal Would’st thou win me—charm my heart—
Proffer neither gems nor gold ;
Woo me fondly—else depart,
Love is never bought nor sold
Could'sl thou purchase beauty's smile,
Love she'd richer make with tears :
All lliy having were but guile,
Worth, not wealth tier choice endcais.
No rival shares a throne with me,
Would’st win my smiles, and rule my heart,
This purchased maid you must set fice,
And with her lover let depart.
Rup An angel thou,
Sat No thanks but speed away,
Remember we shall meet on reckoning day.


Old man, thyself deceiving,
Deceiving, deceiving,
Thou think'st that I must grieving,
Let the unconqnered go.
Kut Lo ! thy heart enslaving,
Knslaving, enslaving.
Myself, thy Queen I knov
The bargain made --now breaking,
At once without leave taking.
Vour choice for me forsaking,
In thraldom you must go.
My glance thy love inspiring,
No other now admiring,
My smiles alone desiring,
Roth slave and fool I know.
ACT ! V.
.Sr km-; I. -The Jh-mou's Tomr.
Skkknadk.
Haste, lovers, haste, the soft moonbeams
Shed radiance o'er land ami sea ;
And promised joys of blissful dreams,
Should twice blcss'd in love's bridal be.
Knp Ves. at length the hour is at hand when 1 may call
thee min<*.
s<>N(;
No prize can fate on man bestow
Like love in woman's breast;
A light that brightest shines in woe.
And blessing then is blest.
Oh, make but mine one faithful heart
All other realms above,
Life varied joys, set all apart.
And leave me only love.
Though I would fain ennobled he.
And win an honored name.
Thy heart's true love is more to me,
Than all the wieaths of fame.
If glory, hke the mountain snow,
To shine must freeze above,
Let me still live, where falls below
The soft warm light of love.
Enter Lku a and Houtknsh s.
Kup Why, dear Lelia, that shadow o'er your brow
Lei Heed it not, dear Rupert, if my mind misgives me ; a
strange foreboding tells me that onr trials are not yet ended ;
at times your brow, to is o’ercast; some secret sorrow seems
busy at your heart.
Kup Calm thy fears, my Leila ! who now could wrest time
from these arms ?
Hor Of a surety, no one ! unless, indeed, that little imp of
darkness should take it into his head to—


Rup Peace ! Recall not that dread being.
Lei Again the dark clouds lower on thy brow ; dearest
Rupert, what means this emotion ?
Rup ’tisnothing,love. What would you, good Hortensius.
Hor I have hastened hither,” cito pede,” as we say in ihe
classics. to announce that the preparations at tire chapel are
complete ; the villagers are assembled, and eagerly await the
arrival of the thrice happy pair.
Rup Haste,then, my Lelia; no stately bridal garb need'st
thou, a simple wreath, the emblem of thy own virgin purity
will be the fittest ornament.
Lei Farewell, then, dearest, for afew brief moments; then
to return.
Rup Never to leave me more. Would that the ceremony
were already pei formed ; spite of myself, Lelia’s fears find an
echo in my own breast. A vague anxiety overcomes me.
flor Anxiety, very likely, ’tis a never failing matrimonial
concomitant; but, for my part,after the wondrous adventures
I have undergone, “ per mare et terrain,” as we say in the
classics ; after having been fished up by pirates, exposed for
sale at half price, and ransomed at asinine valuation; tear can
never again find a receptacle in this manly breast.
Kup The very thought of that mystic being to whom you
just now alluded.
Hor I—l—l did I allude to him? well, do you know, I
almost think I—l—l—should feel a species of tremor that's
to say, a slight degree of perturbation, if ever again I chanced
to come across that diabolical little emanation from pointing
downwards, (flock strikes.) Midnight-midnight! what a
very uncomfortable timeof night, to be sure, whatever you do,
dear master, don’t mention that little imp of satan any move ;
because you know talk of the devil and oh o—o—oh
Rup Heavens, what can this portend ?
Hor There, didn't I—l -tell you ?
Kup Dread shadow, speak! thy mission here unfold
Sat Canst not surmise 't In me thy fate behold.
Rup Great heavens —the fiend!
Sat Less harshly thou didst name
When I thy love redeemed from bonds and shame •
Kut fiend or angel, now thy soul I claim.
Kup My soul ?---no—no.
Sat Look on this pact, I pray
And, if thou canst, thy signature gainsay ;
For thirty days, love, freedom I made thine ;
They've lapsed away, and now thy soul is mine.
Lelia enters.
Lei The altar's decked, why linger here, my love,
Our friends, impatient, wait for us above.
Sat More pressing friends are waiting him below,
To other nuptials bonds.
Lei My Rupert,no:
My lover, my betrothed, my husband, he.
Sat Call what you please, his soul belongs to me.


Lift not to heaven your voice,
It frowning turns away,
While all the fiends rejoice,
And clamour for their prey;
For earthly passions’ sake
Thou didst this contract sign
Must vengeance now o’ertake,
Despair thy fate and mine.
Rup
I dare not lift my voice,
Heaven frowning turns away
While all the fiends rejoice
And clamour for their prey.
For Love and Lelia’s sake
That contract did I sign ;
Must vengeance now o'ertakc,
Eternal grief be mine.
Lei
Though all the fiends rejoice,
And clamour for their prey,
To heaven I’ll lift my voice,
And pardon, pity, pray,
For love and Lelia’s sake
He did that contract sign,
Let not thy wrath o’ertake,
To mercy hearen incline.
Silt TKIO.
Rup How have I wronged thee, say ?
Sat ...He does not know.
Insensate heart, true source of all my woe.
Rup What have 1 done, and how provoked thy hate V
Sat Taught me to love, and trebly curse my fate.
Rup and Lei. Taught thee to love ?
Sat Taught me to love I
Ah, dost not see that I adore
With more than woman’s fond desire ?
Grief’s fountains, ever flooded o ? er,
Cannot extinguish here love’s fire.
Immortal as the spirit life
That for my sake would human be,
Now ever doomed to mourn and strife,
Between despair and love for thee.
Lei Thou lovest him then ?
Sat With love so wild and strange
It might a demon to an angel change.
Rup I spurn thy love, and answer back with hate
Sat That word has (pienched remorse, now take thy fate,
Lift not to heaven thy voice, etc.
Lei Though all the fiends rejoice,
Rup I dare not raise my voice.
Lei Some grace accord.
Sat Oh, yes, I’ll lead the way,
Where he the forfeit of this bond must pay.
Lei Spare Rupert then, and me as victim take ;
I am content to perish for his sake.
Rup No—never.
Sat No, my fate shall be his fate.
Hup. Heaven shall defend.
Sat. Heaven holds thee in its hate
This contract makes thee to the fiend a slave.
Lei Let me, to, perish, since I cannot slave.
Sat Hold, hold !
Oh, tenderness sublime
If thou’rt without a crime.
Would heaven for him resign,
Thy love surpasses mine.


Rup Oh tenderness sublime,
Her heart, without a crime,
Would heaven for me resign,
Ami share the sad fate mine.
Lei My heart, in love sublime,
Would pardon her in crime ;
If he must heaven resign.
Let his sad fate be mine,
Rup She weeps. Has then compassion touched her breast.
Sat Weep thou no more, witli him for ever bless’d.
Rup Dost thou relent '! that grace conies from above.
Sat Ah, would it might; but no, the cause is love.
Rup & Lei Hastthou, indeed, the power, and canst thou save?
Sat The bond which made thee to the fiend a slave
Was price of freedom, for a term to me ;
When ’tis consumed thou shalt again he free.
Lei & Rup And thou ?
Sat My mortal form shall pass away
As it expires ; my spirit then resumes
'The fiend’s dread shape, and suffer tenfold doom.
Rup No, im. Hold, hold !
Great heaven ! accord my heartfelt prayer —
The sacrifice be mine alone ;
These dear ones further anguish spare,
And let my death the past atone.
Rup & L-l No, no, to heaven for pardon pray.
Sat I dare not, but forgiving me, you may
Hence to the chapel, and for mercy pray.
Lei This sacred rosary may help to save ;
With faith in heaven thou may’st the demons brave.
Rup & Lei Let’s haste away
Heaven’s mercy pray.
Fear not to die,
’Twill ne’er deny,
Sat Hence —hence—away,
And mercy pray,
For love’s sake I
Now will to die.
What joy is this ?
A gleam of 'bliss.
And I dare hope
With fiends to cope.
Heaven hears me pray
Turns not away,
But lifts above
My heart’s pure love.
Demons Vengeance, vengeance, thrice accursed !
Tenfold torture let her feel,
Anger into madness nurs'd,
New born agonies reveal I
Since the slave has dared betray,
Furies, lash her night and day.
Ari Demon slave, thy shape resume,
Writhe beneath the curse of doom.
Sat Heaven have mercy, list above ;
Save me from my true heart’s love.
THK JiN i>.
Wm. Marshall & Co., Printers, “The Lorgnette” Office, Melbourne.
