

BALFOUR
and
Pat. O’BRIEN:
An Argumental Debate.
By
P. F. COLLINS,
Melbourne!
Melbourne:
H. W. MILLS & CO., PRINTERS, RUSSELL STREET.
1890.




BALFOUR
and
Pat. O’BRIEN:
An Argumental Debate.
By
P. F. COLLINS,
MELBOURNE.




Balfour and Pat O’Brien.
INTRODUCTION.
|W|LTHOUGH thousands of miles divide Irishmen from
P|p the land of their birth—that land of patriots and
matryrs, of long-suffering and sorrow—still their
hearts and minds travel back in dreams to the glorious
scenes of their youthful days. There is not an Irishman
to be found in any part of the universe who is not watch-
ing with keen interest the doings and movements of the
enemy in that sainted green isle to-day. For centuries
she has suffered the storms of bloodshed and persecution,
and, notwithstanding the progress of civilization, still we
find persecution prolonged by the ruthless enemies of our
race. Then how long, oh God ! is the chain of tyranny
to hang heavily around the necks of our noble race ? A
race who fought and won the battles of their persecutors
on many a well-fought field. Still, notwithstanding the
sacrifice of Irish blood in defence of England’s cause,
Irishmen are looked upon by the tyrants of the day as
African slaves.
Those few verses of argumental debate between Pat
O’Brien and the tyrannical Balfour is, of course, fiction,
which I hope the reader will find interesting. I have
also added a few verses to this little book, written by me
for the Newcastle Morning Herald , on the day previous


to the arrival of Mr. Johin Dillon, M.P., in Newcastle
In those few lines mentiom is made of the name of the
brave John Mandeville, wlho sacrificed his life in a prison
cell for no crime but thatt of advocating the immortal
rights of Irish nationality. The words spoken by the
never-to-be-forgotten Emimett, from the Green-street
dock, “ The man dies, butt his memory lives,” will apply
to the departed John Mandeville. He is dead, but his
memory lives in the hearts of all true Irishmen. Let
every Irishman who reads; those few lines fervently pray
to the Lord of Hosts, who; delivered the Israelites out of
the land of bondage, to break the tyrant’s chain, and put
an end for ever to the misery and tribulation existing in
Ireland to-day, and I myself do most fervently pray for
the welfare of my native land, and may the clouds of
darkness which have hung over the sweet land for ages
fade away like the mornimg dew.
u Gon Svavk Ireland.”


PAT. O'BRIEN:
“ Fellow countrymen, come listen to me,
If you love freedom and liberty ;
Banish for ever that brainless fool,
A Balfour, and his Coercion School.
He is now Chief Secretary to this lovely Isle,
And a disgrace to rank and file.
Inspired by malice to the height of fury
He has deprived the land of trial by jury.”
BALFOUR:
“ The Irish race I have ever hated,
Hence over the land I have predominated ;
I have shed their blood to cool them down,
Right in the streets of Mitchellstown.”
P.
“Yes ! you have pounced upon us, you infamous loon
Just like a tiger, or fierce baboon;
You have cast a gloom all over the nation,
By bloodshed, eviction, and conflagration.”
B.
“There is Gladstone also—“ Grand Old Man,”
I will mar his play as well as I can ;
Let him not think that I’m such a fool
As to grant to Ireland, so called, Home Rule.”
P.
“You confiscator! what do you mean?
Our innocent women, you vent your spleen ;
You have tyrannized us without fear of God,
And ruled the country with an iron rod.”
B.
“ Pat! keep your temper, be calm and cool,
It was Salisbury passed Coercion Rule,
And by his aid, whilst I reign
I will crush the League and your Campaign.”


P.
“ The old and feeble, you have their curse,
The orphans also, infinitely worse ; j
You have sent us to gaol for shouting “Boo!”
It is a fitting honour conferred on you.”
B.
“It is an honour, Pat, I cannot see,
Befitting to a man like me ;
So please draw near and hear your fate—
All Irishmen I will exterminate.”
P.
“ Then do your worst, you avaricious man,
Exterminate me if you can ;
So throw off your coat and contest with Pat,
You tyrannising Aristocrat.”
B.
“No, no ! Pat, that I never can,
For I am not a fighting man ;
To contest with you I cannot see,
For I am far above your low degree.”
P.
“ That insult I will not take from you,'
I, a decendant of Brian Boru ;
Put up you hands, don’t hesitate,
You venomous, poisonous reprobate.”
B.
“ Let Englishmen know I am the nation’s friend,
If they will listen and comprehend ;
You would “cut the painter,” that I ween,
If you had a Parliament in College Green.”
P
“Notwithstanding your stumbling blocks,
We will achieve Home Rule, you cunning fox !
On our ancient towers we will yet behold
Our Father’s Ensign of Green and Gold.


B.
“Not so, Pat, you will never see
Your native land a nation free ;
So cease agitation and give arguing o’er,
You will find no mercy in A. Balfour.”
P.
“Your mercy, Arthur, I do not crave,
Not from such a tyrant knave ;
Think’st you because we are poor,
That your threats and tortures we will endure.”
B. .
“ I would advise you, Pat, as a friend,
Your speech and manners had better mend ;
Else I will give you foreign sense,
If you give me more of your impertinence.”
P.
“If you advise me, Arthur, “as a friend,”
To such I will not condescend ;
I look upon you, whil’st I pay my rent,
With hatred, scorn, and contempt.”
B.
“ I will treat you again as before,
And march you off to Tullamore,
Where they will neatly cut your hair,
Be the weather foul or fair.”
P.
“ I defy you, Arthur, and you threats,
And police also, your canny pets ;
I care not for your cattish claw, »
Or the ruthless tyrants of the law.”
B.
“You conspirator ! do not provoke,
Or I will rise a cloud of smoke ;
I will place my soldiers on every hill,
Determined your country’s blood to spill.”


P.
“Is that your game ? You fiendish clown !
To send your soldiers to mow us down;
You can send them now, as your wish
Is impure, corrupting and heathenish.”
B.
‘‘That is my game. Beware in time!
And steer your course to some foreign clime ;
Leave the land, ’ere it is too late—
I would advise you, Pat, to emigrate.”
P.
“ I will not leave my native land,
To wander on a foreign strand ;
Not for you will I cross the sea,
To obey your orders, given ruthlessly.”
B.
‘‘You peace disturber! just hold your prate,
Or deeds of violence I will perpetrate ;
I will destroy your land’s best sons
With bayonets and fire-spitting guns.”
P.
“Verily, Arthur, I have no fears
For your threats of violence, or your sneers ;
For your deeds on earth you shall groan,
When the fiery demon gets his own.”
B.
“ Into this world I never came
To be consigned to any fiery flame ;
So you I will torture and agonize,
And shed your blood as a sacrifice.”
P.
“You inhuman monster, reflect and pause!
'Ere you violate God’s holy laws ;
By your Coercion you have nought achieved,
But the curses of those you left bereaved.”


B.
“ Pat O’Brien, I cannot see
How their curses could injure me ;
Although their fathers are among the slain,
I look upon them with proud disdain.”
P.
“ By all rank herbs and poisoned weeds,
How you glory in inhuman deeds!
I call you nought but a nation’s tool,
Cease tyrannizing! Give us Home Rule.”
B.
“By all that earth holds dear to me,
By all the fishes in the sea ;
By the sun and by the moon,
I shall never grant you such a boon! ’’
P.
“By my brave ancestors! you shall see
That we are determined to be free ;
Leave the land, or I will end your strife,
Do not torment our future life.”
[Seizes Balfour by the throat.
B.
“ Oh! Pat. O’Brien, let go my throat,
And I will swear by a solemn oath,
That I will resign and leave this shore,
And never coerce the land no more.”
Erin.
“Oh! Patsy, darlint. Gra-ma-chree,
You have gained a glorious victory;
Your name and fame will ever shine,
Three hearty cheers for Pat. O’Brien.


Lines of Welcome to Mr J Dillon, M.D.
Written by P. F. Collins, for “ The Newcastle Morning
Herald ,” on the day previous to the Arrival of
Mr. Dillon at Newcastle.
Welcome! Dillon, brave and true,
Deasy, Esmonde, welcome too!
To this sunny land of ours,
Golden land of fruit and flowers.
Tell us all of Erin’s woes,
Cruel evictions, brutal blows ;
Tell us of the Crowbar Gang,
And of Balfour’s poisoned fang.
Tell us of Coercion Rule,
Of Rowdy Roche, Balfourian tool;
Tell us of the brave O’Brien,
Pale and worn, in prison lying.
Tell us then of Mitchellstown,
Patriot men like dogs shot down ;
Remind us of John Mandeville’s fate,
Who died within a prison gate.
Tell us all of Donegal,
Of smoky hut and muddy wall;
Men oppressed and forced to feed
On rear shell-fish and rank seaweed.
Now then Erin’s sons, Awake!
Make poor Ireland’s land-grabbers quake ;
Balfour also (ruthless villain),
Gon Save Ireland!
and JOHN DILLON! !


tenant's
A heartrending eviction one day took place
In the County of Donegal,
The houses fired, the flames rose high
And the roofs commenced to fall.
As the crackling fire with fury raged
It was painful to behold,
And hear the cries' of children,
Of the feeble and the old.
A grey haired man gazed on his home
Enveloped in flames of fire,
And by his side there stood his son
And thus addressed his sire—
“Oh, father dear, do not lament,
To sorrow do not give way,
For I will revenge this foul deed
Ere the dawn of the coming day.”
“ My son, my son,” the old man cried,
“ Remember the hangman’s rope;
Be calm and cool, do nothing rash
You are now our only hope.
The God above, the Lord of Hosts,
To Him I kneel and pray,
Him alone can revenge our loss
On the great tribunal day.”
“ Father,” cried the youthful son,
“ In this land I cannot stay
To witness scenes of fire and blood
As I witnessed them to-day.
So, father dear, hear me out,
To Australia I will go,
And seek my fortune in that land
Far from this scene of woe.”


The father answered “ be it so,
My son, I will not detain,
Although God knows it will break our hearts
And cause us grief and pain.”
‘‘ Console yourself, now father dear,
Do not shed such tears
For I will return to my native land
In the course of a few years.”
The morning came to bid farewell
To friends he loved so dear,
But of the fate awaiting him
The reader yet shall hear.
His blood felt cold, his limbs grew weak,
There was sorrow in his face,
As he gave his dear old parents
A long, loving, last embrace.
He landed safe in Morton Bay
In August eighty-two,
And travelled over one hundred miles
In search of work to do.
At last he found employment
On a station near Lismore,
Where he laboured late and early
Until eighteen eighty-four.
One morning he sought the overseer
These words to him did say,
Write out my cheque, pay me off,
To-morrow I am going away.
For young men are leaving Brisbane
In hundreds I am told,
And going away to Kimberley
In search of hidden gold.
He set out next morning
Just by the break of day,
And to the shipping office
He went without delay.
His heart within him leapt with joy
As others joined him there,
And from Brisbane straight to Normanton
He paid his passage fare.


He started off for Kimberley
And travelled night and day,
The thoughts of fortune and of home
Consoled him on the way ;
He reached his destination,
But alas, what met him there,
It was bitter disappointment,
Sorrow and despair.
He retraced his steps to Normanton
Upon the following day,
But as night came on he missed the track
And got lost upon the way.
For days he wandered up and down,
Not knowing where to go,
Grief was heavy at his heart,
And tears commenced to flow.
“ Would to God,” this young man cried,
“ That I never left my home,
To die of hunger in this land
Where the idle savage roam.”
He spread his blanket beneath a tree,
Saying here I am going to die ;
Too late, alas, there came at last
Two young men passing by.
“ Water,” gasped the dying man,
“ Oh, bring water I implore,
My tongue is swelled within my head,
My limbs are stiff and sore.”
They pressed the water to his lips
In hopes his life to save,
But it was the last he ever drank,
On this side of the grave.
With a faint voice he spoke these words,
“ Would you be so kind
As to put your hand into my breast,
And a letter there you will find ;
Inform my parents in Donegal
That my days on earth are done,
That never more will they behold
Their dear and loving son.”


His frame shook, his pale lips moved,
He cried out in despair,
“Receive my soul in heaven,
Lord, God, hear my prayer.”
His broad chest heaved, his eyes grew dim,
The young men knelt to pray,
And ere they arose his sacred soul
From earth had past away.
Thev buried him deep beneath a tree
That grows on rising ground,
He will arise one day from beneath the clay
When Michael’s trumpet sounds.
Then let us pray to God on high
Who died for our souls to save,
That no tyrant’s hand ever disturb
Young John O’Donnell’s grave.


Irelands's Patriot Martyrs
lleace to thy slumbers, Immortal hero of 1803. He'
■jpg who sacrificed his precious life for the cause he
4* loved and cherished. He who would dispute every
inch of ground, ’ere the enemy should set foot on the
land he so dearly loved. For loving that land he was
tried, condemned, and executed by order of the mon-
strous Judge Norbury, whose name can be only mentioned
through a mist of blood that hangs over Green Street
Court. That extreme love of country forced him across
the ocean to seek the aid of Foreign Powers, in order to
deliver his country from the chains of bondage, and take
her place among the nations of the earth. Although
eighty-seven years have passed away sincd the execu-
tioner’s axe severed the head from his body, yet his
memory is fresh and green in the hearts of all true
Irishmen and Irishwomen, and will flourish to the end of
time. Let us then pray and hope that the day is not far
distant when the glorious hopes of his life shall be fully
realised, and a fitting monument raised on high in
commemoration of his life and death. You are dead, but
not forgotten. Peace to your shade, Robert Emmett.
Peace to your slumbers, Woolftone, Lord Edward, Orr,.
and Russell, who bravely died for your country’s cause.
Look down from on high on your unhappy country,,
still groaning beneath the tyrant’s iron heel.
Peace to your slumbers, Allan, Larkin, and O’Brien,
who sacrificed your lives on the Manchester Scaffold, far
from the home of your fathers and loving friends. You,
who so nobly rescued Deasy and the gallant Colonel'
Kelly from the tortures of an English dungeon. Your
names shall never be forgotten, and your dying prayers-
will be repeated until the end of time. Sleep on ! Allan,
Larkin, and O’Brien. Although your bodies lie deep in.
English soil, your spirits live in Ireland to-day.


Last of all: Peace to your slumber, John Mandeville,
who died a victim to the monstrous Balfourian Coercion
Rule, and left a loving wife to mourn his loss in the
bloom of youth. Thus, by the death of John Mandeville,
one more glorious name is added to the long, long list of
Erin’s Martyrs.
Irishmen ! While the memory of those departed heroes
of your country remains fresh in your minds, it will ever
inspire you to aid your country as far as circumstances
will allow ; and, suffice it to say, the Irishmen of Australia
have nobly aided the cause of Ireland in the past. They
have fully demonstrated to the world that an Irishman
loves his country next to his God.
Let us then honour the memory of those departed
Martyrs by aiding the cause of our country until victory
is achieved—
“ They are dead ; but their spirit lives, and unconquered.
They died for that cause—that seemingly lost cause.”
But a cause, that shall yet be won. Unhappy Ireland!
May she ever have such men as those ever ready to follow
in their footsteps, and lack nothing of their undying
spirit. Hoping, then, that Ireland will vet be happy,
prosperous, and free. When her present tyrants go
down for ever into the limbo of oblivion, and all
that will remain to show that they once lived will be the
memory of their heartrending earthly deeds.
P. F. COLLINS.


Th e Great Strike
■'WfOU Working Men of Melbourne,
sMs) Once more I say, Unite
And show those wealthy tyrants
That you are determined to fight.
Tell those men that you mean to win
On Labour’s battle-field,
Or sacrifice all earthly things
And die before you yield.
Some of you men once left your home
And crossed the angry waves,
And found a home in this sunny land
Where Britons shan’t be slaves.
We must be free as men should be,
Our just rights to maintain,
Then sound the labour war cry
Over continent and main.
Your fathers in the days of old
As all of you well know,
Were slaves beneath those wealthy lords.
Who neither plough nor sow.
They live by you poor working men,
On the fruits of your hard toil.
Be firm, then ; do not give in,
Prove faithful and be loyal.
The rich man lives in a marble hall,
With luxuries all around,
Your daughters serve him at his board
And mends his lady’s gown.
Each night at nine he drinks his wine
And smacks his lips with glee,.
Whilst the working man for ever lives
In want and misery.


On Eight Hour Day demonstrate
That you are. determined to be free,
That the state of things that now exist
Shall no longer be.
Then lift your banner up on high
And march in grand array ;
No matter what Colonel Price
Or Duncan Gillies may say.
Then celebrate both one and all
This glorious Eight Hour Day,
In defiance of those who would shoot you down
If they had but their own way;
They may say “Fire low, and lay them out! ”
But mark well what I say,
Retaliate and pay them back
On the next election day.




