

Myer
Sketch Book
Used by
GALLERY and
UNIVERSITY
STUDENTS
Will take Ink and Pencil
ARTISTS’ DEPT.
GLte Myer Emporium Ltd.
Melbourne


BARONOVA
David Lichine, noted choreo-
grapher and dancer. Amongst
the ballets created by him are The
Prodigal Son, which had its world
premiere in Sydney during last
season; Protee, Graduation Ball.
Tatiana Riabouchinska in the
Florentine scene in Paganini. She
has thrilled audiences all over the
world by her exquisite dancing.


Grace and Beauty of the Ballet are in the Legend of Swan Lake
QUEEN OF THE SWANS
AND HER
EARTHLY LOVER
After half a century the old Petipa ballet "Swan Lake" is still danced to Tschaikowsky's music. The three-act ballet has been compressed to a single act. which tells how
the prince and his friends, out hunting, find a flock of swans, who show themselves as bewitched maidens. In spite of her warning, the prince tries to follow the queen of the
swans, but the evil genius strikes him dead. Vera Nemchinova and Michael Panaieff (right) ore shown here. The parts are also danced by Tamara Toumanova and Paul Petroff.


Pas de Deux.
UPPER LEFT : Vera Nelidova and Borislav Runanine in a spirited
pas de deux from Aurora 's Wedding Upper right: Sono Osato
with Alexandra Denisova, as they appear in Protee. Lower left
is an excerpt from The Blue Danube, with David Lichine and Olga
Morosova; and lower right, Borislav Runanine and Tamara
Grigorieva dancing together in a scene from Jeux d’Enfants


The Camera s Eye Sees Both Sides of the Curtain at the Ballet
FLORESTAN DANCES
WITH HIS
CHARMING SISTERS
The camera catches the final pose of the
famous pas de trois in "Aurora's Wedding,"
danced by Leskova, Panaieff, and Nelidova.
WAITING FOR THE
CURTAIN TO
RISE ON "PAGANINI"
(Left) Grigorieva dances as Guile but looks
pensive. (Centre) Two Divine Spirits, Svetlova
and Denisova. (Right) Osato jokes with Rostoff.
A PEEP IN THE
DRESSING-
ROOM-MIRROR
Even in the dressing-room with
her grease - paint, Tamara
Toumanova makes a lovely picture.


Last Night's
Bachstage
Pictures
Top left: Vera Nemtehi-
nova, who was the
Queen of the Swans in
"The Swan Lake," apply-
ing a finishing touch
with a powder puff while
waiting for her call.
Above: Tamara Grigorieva,
one of the Maids of
Honor in "Pavane," re-
moving her make up, and
bottom left: Olga Moro-
sova, the street dancer,
in "The Blue Danube,"
snapped at the entrance
to her dressing room.
ARTIST SEEKS INSPIRATION AT BALLET STUDIO
DARYL LINDSAY, Melbourne artist— one of the famous Lindsay family— at work sketching at the ballet studio of M. Edouard Boro-
vansky in Melbourne. M. Borovansky is a member of the Col. de Basil Ballet Company now appearing in Melbourne


New Dancers In Russian Ballet
Next Week
Panl Petroff and Lubov Tchernicheva in the ballet "Francesca da Rimini,"
which will be # given its Melbourne premiere at His Majesty's on Monday.
For those whose experience of Ballet goes back to
the golden days of Diaghileff, next week’s programme
of Colonel de Basil’s Russian Ballet at His Majesty’s
will hold two extremely interesting experiences—the
appearance of two Diaghileff ballerinas for the first
time on the Melbourne stage.
Madame vera nemt-
chinova will dance
the leading role in
“Swan Lake,” and Madame
Lubov Tchernicheva that of Fran-
cesca in Lichine’s “Francesca da
Rimini.”
Nemtchinova is a famous ex-
ponent of the Princess in “Swan
Lake,” one of the great roles in the
repertoire of classical ballet.
Last season, we saw an extremely
popular young dancer in this part—
Irina Baronova, who is also famous
in it. It will be interesting to com-
pare them. One of the most
fascinating experiences Ballet gives
is the opportunity to compare indi-
vidual interpretations of famous
roles.
Nemtchinova. from all reports,
gives an outstanding performance
in the part. A great classical sty-
list, she brings mature experience to
the dancing of it, and should pro-
vide Melbourne with something
unique in Terpsichorean art.
Tchernicheva’s name was asso-
ciated in recent years with the roles
of Zobeide in “Scheherazade” and
the Georgian Queen in “Thamar.” In
“Francesca da Rimini” she takes the
part of the young Francesca, whose
love for Paolo brings down on them
the wrath and vengeance of the ugly
Malatesta.
Tchernicheva created this role, and
has danced it ever since. She gives
a remarkable and moving perform-
ance as the tragic lover.
TN addition to “Francesca da
I Rimini,” another ballet will
A be seen here for the first
time on Monday Lifar’s
“Pavane,” a stately miniature which
a Velasquez picture come to
Lifar’s re-scoring of “Beau Dan-
ube,” under the title of “The Blue
e n t ' GUrth bal jet
next week. This ballet was sadly
missed last season. One of the most
popular during the first de Basil
season, it is sure of a great wel-
comp
FIRST PERFORMANCE
OF LICHINE BALLET
F I A I CESCA DA the new Liehine ballet, given its
? r rr e the Colonel W - De Basil Company at
His Majesty s last night, is more substantial fare than the aver-
age ballet sensation piece.
LICHINE undoubtedly has
been strongly influenced by
Fantastique, buf
Francesca Da Rimini is . better
knit than the older work and its
grim story clearly defined.
There is little pure dancing in it
for any of the principals, but the
groupings are excellent. The Tchai-
kovsky music fits the ballet well and.
incidentally, was well played bv the
orchestra under Dorati’s baton
m^ C^ 1 L niChev < a J danced Francesca, a
utmo? nf C tu ated V S etroff made
f the u nfor tunate Paolo and
Rostoff was adequately diabolical as
the villanous Malatesta. dUOllcai as
Swan Lake, which opened the pro-
gramme, was distinguished by the
fna Pe Np a rmV 0f the Dla ghileff bailer-
ihn- emt chmova. Melbourne prob- |
has seen more polished technical
performances of the role of thl qi?een
but few so utterly lovely. d ’ j
Nemtchinova is a magnificent
mime. Her facial expressions told
the.whole sad fairy story of the
princess turned swan. Effectively
partnered by Panaieff, hers was
the matured performance of a
great dancer.
A rousing presentation of Le
of* Been ll eu ' a Lifar-edited version
nil anube ii made an admirable
curtain piece, a sparkling pas deux
chinsk? 1 ri 6 Hl d s ; sarJ and Riabou-
tSr , (the daughter) was probablv
the most perfect pure dancing of the
programme. K
Borovansky made more than am
m re P reviousl y has oi
the role of the strong man and
Morosovfi was given the fullest’scope
by the amended choreography to dis-
street dancS“ and charm as tht
»?Tm;c h d c a oSg qu S
was the other ballet. Max Gober-
man conducted the orchestra in this
great verve in Le Danube
NEW BALLET’S
SUCCESS
Rich Offering
By GEOFFREY HUTTON
With two new ballets and several
new dancers, this week’s programme
of the De Basil Ballet Company at
His Majesty’s proved as great a
drawcard as the first night. It is
a rich pffering, full of contrasts,
which will delight the balletomane
and the casual theatregoer alike.
For both groups the premiere of
i Lichine’s “Francesca da Rimini” is prob-
ably the highlight of the evening. Based
| on Dante’s story of the tragic love of Paolo
and Francesca, this sweeping pageant
shows the narrative ballet at its boldest.
With only one interlude of pure dancing,
Lichine has moulded his mimed drama so
boldly and patterned it so richly that the
final catastrophe has terrifying force.
The effect of this ballet can be seen in
its wealth of genuine characters, not mere
•stencils. The experienced Tchernicheva
raises the action to a high level as Fran-
cesca ; Petroff matches her as the lover
Paolo, and Borovansky makes the evil
hunchback, Girolamo, unforgettable.
Osato and Jasinsky provide a beautiful
! miniature in the vision scene.
: This ballet can be criticised for the vio-
lence and obscurity of the opening pas-
! sages, but it is a full-blooded work, ad-
mirably mounted by Oliver Messel, and
well matches by Tchaikovsky’s heavily
scored tone poem.
j Beside it, “Pavane,” a Lifar arrange-
i ment of an earlier Massine work, is a
shadow of a ballet — a stately and formal
i Spanish dance offset by the disturbing
counter-theme of a cringing and pathetic
beggar. Slight in form, it is a significant
episode, and Lazowsky’s beggar is a
haunting figure.
Vera Nemchinova dances “Swan Lake”
with detail and finesse, although they
hardly compensate for Baronova’s regal
assurance. Lichine also makes his bow
in “The Blue Danube,” a welcome revival,
which brings the house down as it always
did. Riabouchinska, Morosova, Volkova,
Lazowsky, Borovansky and the others do
it with great speed and obvious enjoy-
ment.
All in all, it is a splendid programme,
but where is Toumanova?
FRANCESCA
Premiere of the
Lichine Ballet j
Whatever Colonel de Basil’s j
Ballet does it does well. ' Once
more, at His Majesty’s Theatre
last evening, a brilliant audience
applauded the second programme
in a season which holds greater
promise as it extends.
It was the oldsters night, too, for to
Nemtchinova and Tchernicheva, two of
Diaghileff’s ballerinas, the team of ex-
quisite fledglings formed the back-
ground in a thrilling dance parade.
First came Nemtchinova, whose
fame as an actress in Firebird pre-
ceded her, dancing here in Swan Lake
with a verve in solo work which was
distngushed by a mystcal melan-
choly, compensating fully, perhaps,
for the lack of passionate yearning in
the pas de deux. The artist demon-
strated her virtuosity in a great finale.
Set in Korovine’s colorful decor, this
Swan Lake varied interestingly in its
flood-lit presentation from that pre-
sented in the soft tones of Schervac-
hidze. Panaieff danced his solo with
virile grace.
Francesca da Ramini, in Lichine’s
and Henry Clifford’s theatrical cho-
reography, and the decor of Olver
Messel, whose artistic work is familiar
in London, had a distinctly Russian
stamp in its dwarfs and rather violent
statement of the first part. Had
Lichine the feeling for this classic
love story ? Doubt on this point was
set at rest in the second part, at any
rate, where Tchernicheva (Fran-
cesca), swathed in soft raiment,
mimed with Petroff (Paolo) the ecs-
tasy of passion in an heroic setting.
Here the dancing of a poetic chorus,
introduced delightfully by Leontieva
and rhythmically by Jasinsky and
I Osato, was executed in superb group-
ing and line. The tragedy of the
lovers followed swiftly in the climax
to Tschaikowsky’s expressive suite.
Francesca da Ramini not only proves
Lichine’s strong and garish sense of
theatre; it suggests also a modern
conception of classic tragedy which
stimulates thought. Rostoff mimed
the husband, Gianciotti the Lame, in
frustrated emotion. Of Tcherni-
cheva’s poise and beauty of line and
spiritual suggestion one could wax
lyrical.
Pavane, the Lifar gem ol courtly
coquetry to the stately music of Gab-
riel, Faure was danced charmingly by
Grigorieva, with Lazovsky m creative
mood as the Dwarf.
The programme concluded spiritedly
with Lifar s version of The Blue Dan-
ube, which the ballet master himself
produced before the left Sydney for
France. Of all the ballets offered last
evening, this excelled in dancing
tempo and spirit. Johann Strauss’s
waltz was given gaiety, snap and the
humor of varying social expression.
Morosova lived the Street Dancer in
complete abandon. Riabouchinska and
Lichine matched in a combination of
whirling grace and masterly punctua-
tion the meeting of Lady and Hussar,
while Volkova’s spinning solo and
Lazorsky’s Dandy smacked of the fun
of the fair. Borovansky ’s athletic!
dance represented a coup de theatre.
Antal Dorati conducted the Tschai-
kowsky music with sympathetic tact
and feeling. Max Gobermann treated
the French dance soothingly, and rose
to the exhilirating occasion in the
Strauss waltz arrangement.
The programme will continue for six
nights and two matinees.


BALLET A LA
MASSINE
Les Presages and
Cimarosiana
Nina Verchinina, instinct of
Massine’s choreographic inter-
pretation of the Tschaikowsky
Fifth Symphony, introduced her-
self in the role of Action (which
she has made famous) in a mag-
j nificie?it production of Les Pre-
sages at His Majesty’s Theatre
last evening.
This third programme of Colonel de
Basil’s company was also notable for
the presentation for the first time here
of Massine’s suite de danses in the
Polish manner, Cimarosiana.
Les Presages (Destiny) received from
Verchinina, a real artist in dynamic
plasticity and symphonic understand-
ing, that impetus which developed in
the solemnity of great music to a great
finale in the stirring counterpoint oi
the fourth movement. For the first
time here this dominating role was
' given its true significance. Antal Dorati
responded with an inspired tone and
tempo, and the corps de ballet was
galvanised into a unity of great danc-
ing.
To the lovely music of the second
movement, Toumanova, partnered by
Paul Petroff (Lichine has not yet
danced this pas de deux in Austra-
lia), brought to her role of Passion
purity of line and sensuous expression
until Fate (danced mockingly and in-
cisively by Boris Belsky) changed the
mood and tempo of the symbolism.
Riabouchinka danced with verve in her
faultless technique the passing spirit
of Frivolity, and the Hero (Paul Pet-
roff, in fine and rhythmic elevation)
was joined by the principals and the
chorus of Destinies in the stirring cli-
max. Not in any other ballet do we
see such harmony in great dancing as
in Les Presages, with Andre Mas-
son’s decor.
Cimarosiana, in the light and gav
18th century music of Cimarosa, which
was the bizarre and colorful opening
ballet, calls for a more finished pro-
duction. Tatiana Stepanova made
her debut delightfully in the pas
de trois, while the true gaiety of this
superb pastiche was expressed in the
pas de six. For sheer virtuosiity in de-
liberate cadenza, however, the Taran-
telle of Osato and Lazovsky, the pas
de trois in which Morosova danced
spiritedly with Jasinsky and Petroff,
and the brilliant exhibition of Riabou-
chinska (with Panieff in esoteric dis-
guise) distinguished Cimarosiana.
Protee, Lichine ’s stylised ballet to
the Debussy score, was danced exqui-
sitely by Jasinsky, Osato, Moulin, Svet-
lova, Sobinova and Bounina, and this
programme (rather exacting for the
company) concluded with the fierce
Fokine-Borodine Polovteien dances
from Prince Igor. Grigorieva. Lazovsky
and Nelidova danced the key roles with
truly violent impact.
Antal Dorati conducted all four bal-
lets with complete acceptance, Haydn
Beck leading the orchestra and Adrian
Bednall playing the harp solo in the
Debussy Danses Sacree et Profane.
The current programme will be con-
tinued for five more nights and two
matinees. Commencing next Monday
night, Graduation Ball will be intro-
duced to Melbourne, with Le Coq d’Or,
and a supporting ballet will be an-
nounced later.
The Greatest Ballet Success on Record
NIGHTLY at 8
MATS. SAT and WED., at 3.
J. C. Williamson Theatres present
COL. W. de BASIL’S
BALLET
LAST TWO NIGHTS and MATINEE
(TO-MORROW) of the Popular Successes
“CIMAROSIANA”
Ballet Divertissement.
“LES PRESAGES”
"Protee” and “Prince Igor."
COMMENCING NEXT MONDAY
(For 6 Nights and 3 Matinees)
“LE COQ D OR”
Music by Rimsky-Korsakoff
“GRADUATION BALE”
(First Performance in Melbourne)
Music by Johann Strauss. With support-
ing Ballet, “Sylphides.”
Plans at Allan’s 6 Days Ahead. 3/ Tickets
on Sale Daily from 9 a.m. All Seats
Bookable.
“Francesca”
At
The Ballet
Lichine s “Francesca da Rimini,"
new to Melbourne, is the central item
in the Well-balanced second pro-
gramme of Colonel de Basil s Rus-
sian Ballet, which began at His
Majesty's Theatre last night.
THE story of Francesca and her
fatal passion for Paolo, the
young and handsome brother
of her husband, the sinister Mala-
testa, is one of the classics in the
world's literature of love. Lichine
has utilised the dramatic material of the
lovely and tragic tale with striking effect.
The opening scene sets the keynote of
the piece with its convincing picture of the
brutal atmosphere of Malatesta’s medieval
court. A lovely interlude, in which the
lovers see a vision of Lancelot and
Guinevere, follows.
Into this scene of idyllic contrast surges
the jealous Malatesta. Its atmosphere over-
charged with the electric currents of con-
flicting passions, it finally explodes in the
frenzied combat which ends m the lovers’
death— a climax which has few rivals for
dramatic intensity in the repertoire of the
ballet.
* * * * .
LUBOV TCHERNICHEVA, mak-
ing her Melbourne debut, gave
a most moving performance as
Francesca. Petroff is at his best as
Paolo. His dancing as the frenzied
and thwarted lover in the opening
scene was particularly good. Rostoff’s
Malatesta is another finely rounded portrait
by a great actor. As Lancelot and Guine-
vere, Osato and Jasinsky dance with
polished grace in the idyllic episode.
Oliver Messel's decor and costumes, in-
spired by the Italian Renaissance, especially
the lovely Botticelli -like costumes of the
second scene, contribute much to the suc-
cess of “Francesca,” which rightly received
an ovation last night.
The programme opens with “Swan Lake,”
with Nemtchinova making her Melbourne
debut as the Queen and Panaieff as the
Prince. Nemtchinova may lack something
of the sparkle of the younger dancers, but
they can all learn something from the
classical beauty of her style and its
rounded maturity, and from the meaning
she gives the role by careful miming and
gesture. Panaieff looks the Prince more
than any dancer we have seen here and
dances with an appropriate restraint and
purity of style.
It is a pity the decor is so bad. It sug-
gests a sunset in the Rockies and is quite
incongruous.
Lifar’s “Pavane” and his re-scoring of
one of the favorites of an earlier season
under the title of “The Blue Danube” are
the remaining ballets on this programme.
“Pavane” is a graceful miniature, a sort of
tableau vivant inspired by Velasquez. It
has no great interest from the dancing
point of view, although it has considerable
charm. Grigorieva, Zarova, Ivangine and
Skibine gracefully recreate the atmosphere
of the Spanish Court in Philip the Fourth's
day, with Lazovsky as a comic foil.
Faure’s music, to which it is danced, is
extremely beautiful, although much of its
beauty unfortunately eludes the orchestra.
“The Blue Danube” is done in the lively,
high spirits it demands. Lichine’s and
Riabouchinska’s pas de deux was easilv the
best thing in it last night. Anna Volkova
gave a brilliant display in the solo at the
end and Lazovsky ’s King of the Dandies has
all the fine precision of his work. Moro-
sova has the right personality for the role
of the coquettish Street Dancer, but music
and dancer were not always together last
night.
Antal Dorati and Max Goberman shared
the musical honors. —8.8.
MELBOURNE BALLET LOVERS
ENTHRALLED
"Les Presages" A First Favorite
By BASIL BURDETT
“Les Presages,” Massine’s dramatic ballet on the theme of
Man’s struggle with Destiny, danced to Tchaikovsky’s Fifth
Symphony, is still a first favorite with Melbourne ballet-lovers,
judging from the enthusiastic reception of its revival at His
Majesty’s Theatre last night.
Chief item in the third weekly pro-
gramme of Colonel de Basil’s Russian
Ballet season, an excellent perform-
ance was the occasion of the Melbourne
debut of Nina Verchinina. Her inter-
pretation of the role of Action, which
she created, is striking in its combina-
tion of energy and joyousness.
To strong and beautifully marked
rhythms she adds an emotion of de-
light in movement in a conception of
the part which differs considerably
from other versions we have seen.
Toumanova possesses naturally the
intensity of temperament appropriate
to the role of Passion, and is quite
equal to the demands of its alternat-
ing moods of abandon, despair and
tenderness.
NEED FOR RESTRAINT
But her performance would be more
convincing if gesture were sometimes
more restrained. It tends to mechani-
cal exaggeration at times and then
lacks meaning. The part, one feels, is
being acted rather than lived. Tou-
manova has all the qualities for a
really great interpretation of this role.
Peroff, her partner, dances with the
right restraint of style and feeling.
Riabouchinska repeats her last sea-
son’s success as Frivolity, in which she
is the very embodiment of airy grace.
A newcomer is Boris Belsky in the part
of Fate. He has the makings of the
role, but he has not yet developed it.
He is not sinister enough and he makes
little of moments like the exit in Part
two, which Woizikovsky used to make
so breathless and exciting.
“Cimarosiana,” an early Massine bal-
let, new however to Melbourne, opens
the programme. A gay and efferves-
cent trifle, it is a divertissement num-
ber with a series of set pieces, inno-
cent oi story. The most attractive of
them are the gay Tarantella danced
A*.
with such spirit and grace by Osato
and Lazovsky, who combine perfectly,
and the no less spirited Pas de Trois,
performed with joyous abandon by
Morosova, Jasinsky and Petroff.
FLAWLESS DANCING
Riabouchinska has another chance to
demonstrate the exquisite lightness of
her style in the final Pas de Deux with
Panaieff, and the opening Pas de Trois
reveals a young male dancer of beauti-
ful precision and purity of style in
Nicolas Ivangine. He has little to do
in this number with Stepanova and
Obidenna, but that little is flawlessly
done.
Lichine’s “Protee” and “Prince Igor”
are the remaining ballets. “Protee” re-
mains one of the most perfect small
ballets in the repertoire, but we have
seen it much better danced than it
was last night. Changes in the cast
were mainly responsible probably.
The new team still has to attain the
perfection of ensemble of the old.
Jasinsky is the god; Osato, as exquisite-
ly graceful as ever, Sobinova, Moulin,
Svetlova and Bounina, the latter replac-
ing Denisova with credit in a difficult
part, are the Maidens.
“Igor” was very well done; the climax
and finale particularly so — a really ex-
citing finish. Lazovsky is a model of
precision as the Warrior. Nelidova
gives an energetic performance as the
primitive Polovtsien Girl and Grigo-
rieva a lovely and graceful rendering
of the part of the alluring Persian
Slave.
The programme will be continued
for five more nights and matinees on
Wednesday and Saturday.
Beginning on Monday night, a new
programme will be presented when
“Graduation Ball” will be introduced
; to Melbourne. “Le Coq D’Or” and a
Supporting ballet also be featured.
An interesting feature of the perform-
ance was Verchinina’s Melbourne debut as
Action, the part which she created in the
ballet. Less portentous than Grigorieva,
she danced the part with a brittle energy
derived mainly from her superbly con-
trolled arms.
By contrast, the premiere “Cimaro-
siana” is a light opera-ballet divertisse-
ment in a baroque Italian setting. It has
animation, though little substance, and
its highlight is a merry tarantella, danced
by Lazovsky and Osato.
Jasinsky has developed the firmness
needed for the god in “Protee,” and this
perfect little ballet retains its cool Greek
clarity of line.
A fiery though rather slipshod “Prince
Igor” makes a good nightcap.
This programme will run for the rest of
the week.
“PRESAGES” A
FAVOURITE
Slight \ew Ballet
By Geoffrey Hutton
Since it was first produced here
nrnLhfT ag \;‘ Les Presa ges” has
prohabiy been the favourite ballet
of Melbourne audiences. Last
mght s production at His Majesty’s
confirmed its popularity, and gave
a wealth of interesting compari-
sons with earlier renderings.
No ionger depending upon the novelty
angUlar line and masse d
groupings, this experimental work has
won its permanent place by its
foTe Str it ng h h fl ° f design and Carnatic
tiousiy 4oto” th deci aU !,M
weight of confused literary symbolism but
SWTS choruses sweep UreSJVre-*
on to his triumph over Fatf>
triamph over conservatism.
J his is a broad enough work to tak-p
many personal variations of stvle
gave man m ° St f individual of dancers,'
hJFHK
OualS w H JaZ P e^Lt°r n ast th to e £g£
Petroff 1 hT«! bUt unea rthly Frivolity.
Km t, alrea - y « made a nam e here as
ancp H fii?i’ nf Justified it with a perform-
full of vigour and force. Belskv’s
ate was strong and competent.
STRENGTH IN BALLET
David Lichine surprised the audience
at His Majesty’s last night by dancing
the god in his own ballet, “Protee,” for
the first time this season. His severely
controlled strength and Olympian gravity
made an impressive contrast to the be-
seeching gestures of the nymphs. The
whole performance has gained in firmness
and clarity.
“Prince Igor” lost none of its energy
with Andahazy as the warrior, but the
sparkle of Lazovsky and Riabouchinska
were missed in “Cimarosiana.”
The highlight of the evening was a
strong and brilliant performance of “Les
Presages,” in which Verchinina gave edge
to the first movement, and Toumanova
and Petroff elevated the second to a
level which we have seldom seen.- —
G.W.H.


Work And
Life
Are One
How many of those who
watch the Ballet from the com-
fort of the stalls and dress
circle realise the hard facts of
a dancer's life behind the
scenes, the endless work and
preparation, the constant, un-
remitting quest of perfection
which go into the performances
of the'r favorite “Sylphides” or
“Aurora”? This article lifts
the curtain on an average day
in a dancer's life.
LIFE begins for the dancer at nine-
thirty in the morning—in the class-
room. It does not matter what has
happened the night before. A party may
have kept a sylphide out until the early
hours. It may have, but it mostly doesn’t,
for dancers generally are wise people, and the
vision of getting up in the morning for nine-
thirty class is always before them. But whether
they have been wise or otherwise, life still
begins inexorably at that hour.
Dancers go back to school for an hour’s
lesson each day. However good they are, they
cannot afford to forego the practice tha makes
perfect, and the criticism of a good teacher to
correct the faults which can so easily arise in
their highly conventionalised art.
So you will see very few absentees if you
go along to Borovansky’s studio at nine-thirty
any morning. There is Nemtchinova, whose
career as a ballerina goes back to Diaghileff
days. Lichine is there, and Riabouchinska. So
are Jasinsky and Lazovsky, Grigorieva, Danisova
and Osato. The fair-haired Verchinina is there,
too, and her sister, Olga Morosova, who in private
life is Madame de Basil.
Practise costumes are various, both in style
and color, but most favor the long black woollen
tights, to which the girls add a little piquant
apron, coquettishly frilled, at the waist.
From the ballerina, whose appearance on the
stage each evening is the signal for a storm
of applause, to the youngest recruit—all are
there. The Ballet is a true democracy.
MR OBOUKOFF is waiting for them,
a trim figure in black trousers and
white shirt, cane in hand. He is
busy thinking up exercises, difficult series
of steps which will test the best of them.
They start with a spell of bar work,
exercises which soon cause even bodies as fit
as these to perspire freely on a hot morning,
and call into play the towels tucked into the rail
beside them.
Floor work follows. Ten or a dozen of them
form up at a time. Mr Oboukoff knits his brow.
He sketches the series of movements to be per-
formed.
Then at a signal the piano starts. The teacher
calls the steps. Plie. Preparation en dehors.
Attitude. Porte de bras. So it goes, ending
perhaps with an arabesque plie. French is the
language of the dance. But Mr Oboukoff does
not limit himself to this tongue. He counts in
Russian, sometimes in French and English. The
company is international, although the great ma-
jority now is Russian.
The cane comes into play. A tap here and «
there corrects a faulty line of leg or arm.
“Merci, mesdames,” says Mr Oboukoff. “Mon-
8y...
Basil
Burdett
...In The
Ballet ...
sieurs, s’il vous plait.” An old world courtesy
combines with authority in this schoolroom.
An hour of this and the company disperses.
But not to play Dear me, no. The day has
only just begun. The next item on the pro
gramme is rehearsal.
Something is always being rehearsed. It may
be a ballet which is actually on the programme
and which is being polished up, or another work
in the repertoire which is undergoing “nettoyage”
—“cleaning”—to use Colonel de Basil’s apt phrase.
OR it may be a new work, like Ver-
chinina’s new ballet, which is being
“mounted” on a group of girls.
Have you ever seen a movie being shot?
Ever watched the endless repetition of one
little scene until the producer is satisfied?
That will give you some idea of the rehearsal of
a new ballet, except that you must multiply it
infinitely to have any exact notion of the amount
of work which goes into the ballet.
First the movements are worked out, done
over and over again. Then they are done to the
music. The piano may start and stop a dozen,
twenty, thirty times, before the choreographer
is satisfied with the fragment which is being
Another drawing by Hodgkinson of a dancer loosen-
ing up at the bar for the day's work.
rehearsed, before it is done completely to the
music without stopping.
Elsewhere—in an adjoining room or at the
theatre—a ballet down for production in the next
programme is being rehearsed under the watchful
ev*s of Mr Grigorieff, or under those of Lichine,
It it happens to be one of his ballets. Every
Dallet, however often it has been done, however
well it may be known, is rehearsed before it is
put into a programme, although it may have been
done only a week or so ago.
At one comes lunch. Some dancers go home
or to a restaurant. Others may have a sandwich
in their dressing rooms and snatch a rest before
the afternoon’s rehearsal. The afternoon, like
the morning, is filled with work—rehearsal or
matinee. Understudies watch the ballerinas they
may be called upon to replace some day at matinee
or even at evening performance, following their
every movement at one side of the stage—Terpsi-
chorean shadows.
EVEN if one is not dancing there is
always something to do—tights to be
darned, toe-shoes to be stitched
against the wear and tear of work on
points.
At five they are free until the evening
performance. But this does not mean eight
o’clock. There may be an elaborate make-up to
do. Most of them are in the theatre by seven.
Some are there before. A nervous ballerina—■
and most of the best ones are—may arrive a
couple of hours before the show begins, although
she may not be dancing until the second ballet.
And time never hangs heavily on a dancer’s
hands. Go into the wings any night before the
ballet and you will see them practising there in
the shadows or on the stage, if it is clear, doing
pirouettes and turns and entrechats.
Truly a dancer’s life is his work, and his work
is never done.
The evening’s performance may mean three
ballets for most of the company. The end of
the long day, when the last curtain falls, will
find them tired, ready to drop perhaps. But
you will seldom see them anything but animated,
all the same. The theatre makes heavy demands,
but its compensations are great, and if you have
dancing in your blood, as most of these young '
people have, it will all seem not only worth
while, but inevitable.
IF the people out front have been ap-
preciative, doubly worth while. The
dancer is not born who does not respond
to the stimulus of enthusiastic applause.
And so to bed, after supper, which is
very probably cooked by themselves and
eaten to the accompaniment of a chatter of
talk, 95 per cent, of which will be about the
performance or at least about dancing and ballet
affairs. The dancer, like most artists, is happiest
when talking shop.
Tomorrow is another day, and it too will
begin at nine-thirty, unless it is Sunday But
somehow the theatre, with all its rigors, contains
the secret of perpetual renewal.
Terpsichore is a hard mistress, but over her
true devotees she exercises a fascination which,
only a true vocation can exercise; and what
else is a vocation but a way. of life in which life
and work are so closely woven as to be inex-
tricable?
Most of us live our lives in watertight com-’
partments. Work is one thing, the rest of life"
another, devoted mostly to trying to forget work.
Not so the dancer.
In this most of us should envy the dancer.
I envy them also that corporate life which is
theirs, that sense of belonging to one big familv,
however much its harmony may be disturbed at
times by feuds and scandals, as all families are
for that matter, big or small.
It is a hard life, the dancer's, but I think'
few of Colonel de Basil’s company would give,
it up without a struggle. For most it would be
like giving up life itself. True artists, they have
dedicated themselves to their chosen muse with
a thoroughness which all the arts demand, but
which, in their case, seems more complete. I
never see them on the stage without remem-
bering the long hours of rehearsal that have
gone into the ballet they are dancing and render-
ing silent homage to their devotion.


Graduation Ball
Delights
After a programme which
proved rather heavy in its ar-
rangement, the fourth selection
of Colonel de Basil’s Ballet at
His Majesty’s Theatre last even-
ing revealed superb ballet in an
almost faultless balance.
Sooner or later the superlative pro-
duction of Les Sylphides was due. The
performance last night was well-nigh
perfect. Riaboucninska, the very em-
bodiment in whimsy and grace of the
sylph; Toumanova, light in elevation
and softening her pose and rhythm
to a beautiful line; Petroff, a master
in partnership and leaping solo con-
trol; Volkova, lightly expressing an
ethereal mood, and the corps de ballet
as smoothly symmetrical as a field of
waving corn ! What else could one
ask ?
Pokine, whose Sylphides recalls Pav-
lova’s first triumph in Paris, was then
represented in his gorgeous Coq d’Or.
which was magnificent in the contrast
provided by the humor of Rostoff
(King Dodon), the Boyards and Nurse
(Zarova), and the other-worldness, in
mystic lighting and mimetic gravity,
of the finale, where the Astrologer
(Algeranoff at his best) shocks the
King and Queen (who thought him
dead) into realising that there are
more things in heaven and earth than
are dreamt of in man’s philosophy.
As the Golden Cockerel, Riabouchin-
ska danced her most dramatic role
with the feeling of a Rostand. Con-
siderable interest was aroused by the
interpretation of the Queen of She-
makhan, by Morosova. In a brittle
style, which Pokine favored, the balle-
rina disturbed Dodon’s sleep m fickle
expression, and danced in the tent
scene with a roguish coquetry and
swift gaiety that increased with the
King’s senile pantomime.
But she was restless at such a mo-
ment as when the Visions (headed by
Osato, Jasinsky and Petroff) dance,
when, in fact, repose would have been
a virtue. The audience enjoyed the
bold strokes in the Fokine-Schervac-
hidze-Karinska canvas, and the Tche-
repnine adaptation of the Rimsky-
Korsakofl music both sootned and pro-
voked the attentive ear.
Graduation Ball, in Lichine’s design
and Antal Dorati’s arrangement of the
unfamiliar Strauss medley, concluded
the night in accents of sheer delight.
Girls, mischievously curious at the
prospect of an invasion of cadets,
danced in a fever of audacity and ex-
pectancy when the kettledrum sounded
and in marched the General
(Schwezoff) with the boys, shy
and ludicrous in a text-book dis-
cipline. As the General flirts
with the Head Mistress (Ruanine),
the chandelier gleams down on a set
of divertissements which recall Aurora
in their fascinating variety. Grioff as
the Drummer; Stepanova and Panaieff
in a lovely pas de deux; Leskova, the
tomboy, in mimetic humor; Moulin (a
vision of quicksilver) with Denisova in
a brilliant fouette competition, and
Svetlova. Lineva and Azrova in aca-
demic pantomime. Finally, Riabou-
chinska and Lichine, in Perpetuum
Mobile, danced with a circus flair in
gay costumes, introducing a finale to
a ballet rather lengthy in its detail,
but rounded off in splendid unity.
Lichine’s stress on the elders’ flirtation
is the only blemish in a gay and origi-
nal ballet.
Antal Dorati conducted all three bal-
lets, the orchestra doing its part ad-
mirably, except for a lapse in Gradua-
tion Ball
GAY TIMES IN
VIENNA
Lively Ballet
By GEOFFREY HUTTON
First world premiere of the Aus-
tralian season, Lichine’s new ballet,
“Graduation Ball,” had an up-
roarious welcome at His Majesty’s
last night. This headlong piece
of fun will probably be one of the
popular successes of the season It
has broad humour, high spirits,
effect solos, and, above all else,
speed.
Set in a rococo ballroom of aristocratic
Vienna, this hearty romp between teams
of u.usled schoolgirls and cadets is a
broad burlesque on the gilt and plush
splendours and Benois’s period piece.
Lichine makes old Vienna enjoy itself
like modern Harlem, and even the head
mistress and the general forget to chape-
ron their charges and flirt together.
The story is little more than a back-
ground to a series of lively divertisse-
ments, showing some of the wealth of
young talent in the company. Denisova
and Moulin reel off dizzying fouettes,
Orloff is firm and vigorous. Leskova lively,
and irrepressible. Lichine has kept the
hot-pace demonstration piece for himself
and Riabouchinska, but Schwezoff. as the
decrepit gallant, and Runanine as the
ogling spinster, press them close.
Dorati’s neat arrangement from Strauss
suggests comparison with “Le Beau
Danube,” but this is broader comedy
without Massine’s delicate period sense.
Lichine can polish it more without sacri-
ficing its gaiety, but as it is, it will send
audiences home happily to bed.
With its sumptuous, if overcrowded
music, decor, and dance-mime, “Le Coq
d’Or” brings back many individual
beauties —Petroff, Jasinsky, and Osato in
their miniatures, and Riabouchinska’s
cockerel. Rostoff. Ladre, and Lazovsky
add the rustic humour, and Alger an off
points the moral as neatly as ever. Moro-
sova looks exotic and tempting as the
Queen of Shemakhan, but she has not
yet captured Baronova’s subtle skill in
this exacting Oriental role.
An unusually fine “Les Sylphides”
show's Toumanova at her smoothest and
most expressive. Petroff’s dancing in the
waltzes and the solo mazurka could hardly
be bettered.
BRILLIANT SUCCESS OF
"GRADUATION BALL"
New comedy ballet, danced to the music of
Johann Strauss, now delighting all Mel-
bourne.
BOOKING NOTICE.
A section of stalls available for booking on
jj - I ? l(vrn * n » each performance at 6/, in
addition to other reserved sections. 3/
tickets at Allan s daily from 9 a.m. AH
seats bookable.
NIGHTLY at 8
Matinees: Sat. and Wed. at 2
J. C. Williamson Theatres present
COL. W. de BASIL'S
BALLET
PROGRAMME MAGNIFICENT
(For 2 More Nights and Saturday Matinee.)
“LE COQ D OR”
“GRADUATION BALL”
“SYLPHIDES”
COMMENCING NEXT MONDAY
(For 6 Nights and 2 Matinees.)
“GOOD HUMORED LADIES”
“SYMPHONIE FANTASTIQUE”
With Supporting Ballets.
Plans at Allan’s 6 Days Ahead.
BALLET IN A SEMINARY
Graduation Ball New Favorite
By Thorold Waters
PLENTY of good ore remains to be mined for ballet in the
music of the genius Johann Strauss, and some of it made
excellent entertainment in the slight story and divertissement
Graduation Ball, seen last night at His Majesty's. Its idea
is quite unlike Beau Danube.
Antal Dorati, who conducted his
own orchestration of the Strauss
measures, has not hesitated to vivify
them with stirring trombones and
modern devices, sometimes with a
quickening of tempos. In a pompous
interior setting in old Vienna David
Lichine the choreographer brings to-
gether the hoyden girls of a seminary
and the temporarily shy cadets of a
military academy, much fun result-
ing.
Lichine the dancer heads the cadets
and his humor is a lively match for
that of Riabouchinska, who can
always put girlishness into her face
without becoming merely inane. In
the divertissement the two make a
feature of a Perpetuum Mobile in
which he imitates a circus ring-
master.
Others who added much to this bal-
let’s vivacity were the very young Ta-
tiana Stepanova, disclosing graceful
promise and expressiveness as a Syl-
phide dancing, for some unexplained
reason, with a kilted Scotchman
(Michel Panaieff); Tatiana Leskova,
whose eccentric impromptu was ex-
cellent in character; and Genevieve
Moulin and Alexandra Denisova,
whose fouettes in a step competition
seemed inexhaustible. Moulin pos-
sesses a very individual style in this
kind of dancing.
Known the world over as author
of Borzoi, Igor Schwezoff appeared
as a flirtatious old general, a. good
vignette, and Nicolas Orloflf’s
Drummer provided another fea-
ture. Graduation Ball should be
popular.
Le Coq d’Or, with former favorites
headed by Riabouchinska, and Olga
Morosova a dainty Queen of Shema-
khan, but far less inscrutable than
Baronova’s, made another of the new
programme. Les Sylphides opened it.
Ballerina Hopes for Fame
as Choreographer
VERCHININA TALKS OF HER WORK
Petite and dainty, with long golden hair, Nina Verchinina, a
member of the Covent Garden Ballet, one day hopes to
win fame as a choreographer.
At present she is working on a new ballet in three parts, set to music by Bach,
which she chose with Antal Dorati, conductor of the ballet orchestra.
, It is hoped to be able to present the ballet during the latter part of the
Melbourne season.
Her new work is not a classical ballet,
as it introduces the plastic style, but it
is founded on the classical school.
Discussing her work, Madame Ver-
chinina said that it was possible either to
choose the subject first, then find the
music, or to fit the ballet to chosen music.
When interviewed, Madame Verchinina
had just finished a hard day’s work on her
ballet, and had been trying out the steps
with music from the phonograph. She
explained that it was necessary to have
the steps as nearly complete as possible
before rehearsals, otherwise members of
the ballet became overtired attempting
different steps.
Construction, or architecture, must first
be decided in writing a ballet. Groupings
have to be studied, and the relation of j
one group to another —all before the j
actual stens are decided.
The method of recording the steps looks
like shorthand writing.
Madame Verchinina, however, believes
that in the ballet of the present day, in
which every part of the body is important,
moving pictures of sections and groups is
the most satisfactory method of recording
a ballet. This, she said, had been tried
by the present company and was very
successful.
Madame Verchinina has done about five
years of research into the creative part of
ballet, and this, she says, interests her
most.
Some days she works for hours on end,
not stopping for meals, while often she is
up until 3 or 4 in the morning.
Sometimes, she said, inspiration came
in a flash, but at other times it was neces-
sary to search for hours for just the right
step.
Exhibition Of
Ballet Drawings
“J AM very glad to open this
exhibition of the brilliant work
by this young artist,” said Colonel
W. de Basil when he opened the
exhibition of ballet drawings by
Roy Hodgkinson in the foyer of
His Majesty’s Theatre yesterday
afternoon.
"This artist’s work strikes me as very
vital, and in it he has caught some-
thing of the line and color of the bal-
let,” said Mr. Basil Burdett when intro-
ducing Colonel de Basil, who was accom-
panied by Mr. Alexandre Philippoff.
Others of the Colonel de Basil Ballet
Company interested in the drawings of
themselves and fellow-members of the
company hanging on the walls included
Tamara Toumanova who was accom-
panied by her mother, Madame Touma-
nova—Nine Verchinina, Sono Osato, and
Olga Philippolf.


NEW BALLET’S GRACEFUL
GROTESQUES
ACTION PICTURE BY STAGE LIGHTING
MEMBERS OF THE RUSSIAN BALLET, photographed by ordinary stage
lighting at His Majesty’s Theatre, Melbourne, during the production of Les
Presages.
A VIVID IMPRESSION OF TAMARA TOUMANOVA. One
of the ballet drawings in the Roy Hodgkinson exhibition to
be opened by Colonel de Basil in the foyer of His Majesty’s
Theatre this afternoon.
Cimarosiana Well Received
By THOROLD WATERS
i J \SRISKLY baroque and effervescing is the divertissement Cimar-
osiana. added last night to the round of new offerings by
Colonel W. de Basil’s Ballet Company at His Majesty’s Theatre.
The music of the eighteenth century Italian master which has
| been put to choreography by Massine is almost entirely allegro
in character , with brief slackenings of pace by way of relief.
■THIS ballet, which was cordially re-
ceived, has for decor a massive
i domed structure and a steep hill in a
;city, with soldiery, blackamoors and
j others posed as human background
! for conventional steps unconvention -
j ally danced. Tatiana Riabouchinska
figures in a sort of harlequinade garb,|
with witty verve, companioned •
cleverly by Michel Panaieff. In the
finale for all she provides a pro-
longed and amazingly light example
of the fouctte.
A tarantelle with Sono Osato and
Yura Lazovsky as partners, one flame-
costumed and the other in a darker
red, makes another graceful gro-i
tesque, and a further feature is a pas’
de trois by Olga Morosova, Roman
Jasinsky and Paul Petroff.
Antal Dorati conducted all the per-
formances last night, his orchestra,
expressing itself with strength and
! poignancy in Les Presages. Nina Ver-
shinina, who was the first to per-
sonate Action in the London produc-
tion, combines to a remarkable and
powerful degree the two forces of
joyous and then stern virility.
The whole cast was superb, Tou-
manova’s representation of Pas-
sion and Paul Petroff’s of The
Hero being intense and marked
by very fine adagio lifts.
Riabouchinska was again a limner
Frivolity and Boris Belsky a light vet
impressive Fate.
Protee, with Roman Jasinsky. &
signal success in the name role, and
Prince Igor, in which Vera Nelidova
made an insinuating Polovtsian girl,
were the other ballets.
High Spirited
Comedy
In New Ballet
By Basil Burdett
The romantic “Les Sylphides,”
the colorful splendor of “Le Coq
d’Or” and the gay comedy of
Lichine s new ballet, “Graduation
Ball,” blend ;n this week s admir-
ably composed programme of
Colonel de Basil’s Russian Ballet
at His Majesty’s Theatre.
“Graduation Ball,” danced to gay
tunes by Johann Strauss, beautifullv
orchestrated by Antel Dorati, repeated
its Sydney success last night. A
sprightly comedy, it is played in a
mood of animated high spirits
throughout, with the exception of the
romantic interlude of “La Sylphide”
and the Scotsman.”
The frail. Dut quite adequate “story”
of a Viennese girls’ school and its an-
nual ball for the cadets of the mili-
tary academy gives Lichine excellent
opportunities, both for characterisa -
tion and for the creation of a varied
series of divertissement numbers He
has made the most of them, and the
result is a ballet which may well be-
come as popular a favorite as “The
Blue Danube.”
It has a genuine schoolgirl com-
plexion The company enters into the
fun with real zest and individual gifts
for comedy of a high order are revealed
with each successive number
Outstanding among them are Ria-
bouchmska’s and Leskova’s junior girls
—delightfully amusing characterisa-
tions, both of them.
Rich Comic Gifts
Riabouchinska, who acts as compere
later dances a gay circus number with
Lichin6, who also reveals rich comic
gifts as the leader of the junior cadets
This number replaces the “Perpetuum
Mobile” dance of the original Sydnev
production. Actually it is not an im-
provement. The business with the
champagne bottle, particularly, is too
obvious, and, frankly, a little cheap.
But I am glad to see that the ten-
dency to comic exaggeration noticed
in the Sydney performances has dis-
appeared. The result is better in every
way. Errors of taste are all too easy
in a ballet of this kind.
Igor Schwezoff and Borislav Ruanine
create two highly diverting figures in
the old General and the Headmistress.
Svetlova, Lineva and Azrova provide
a droll interlude in the “Nathematics
and Natural History Lesson.”
But all is not broad comedy by any
means. Apart from the “Sylphide and
the Scotsman,” which provides a wel-
come contrast and points the general
mood of high spirits, and is charmingly
danced by Stepanova and Panaieff,
Denisoca and Moulin are responsible
for a lovely interlude of pure dancing
in the “Competition” number, and
Orloff for some excellent work in the
exacting role of the Drummer.
The corps be dallet, which is ex-
j cellent, contributes much to the suc-
| cess of this varied, amusing and very
delightful ballet and Benois’ scenery
and costumes are exactly right.
Well-Chosen Foil
The colorful “Le Coq d’Or’’ the
perfect fairy tale and an old favorite
here—is a well-chosen foil for both
“Sylphides,” which precedes it, and
“Graduation Ball,” which follows. Last
night’s performance could have been
better in detail, but individual dancing
was often of a high order.
Riabouchinska’s Cockerell has lost
nothing of its truly bird-like light-
ness and brilliance since the last season.
Rostoff’s old King Dodon is in every
way a superb comic figure. Algeran-
off’s Astrologer could hardly be more
sly and sinister. Lazovskv and Ismailoff
dance with distinction as the Princes,
and Ladre is good as the comic Com-
mander-in-Chief. in which role Boro-
vansky made such a success last season.
Other newcomers are Morosova and
Zarova. Morosova has the difficult
and ungrateful task of following Baro-
nova in a part that ballerina created
and made very much her own, that
of the Queen of Shemakhan. It would
be difficult to imagine anything harder,
unless it were dancing the role of
the Cockerell p f ter Riabouchinska.
It is more difficult for Morosova, be-
cause her gifts are definitely for ‘light
comedy, to which her sprightly per-
sonality is admirably suited. She is un-
happily cast in the role of the mock-
ing and coquettish Queen, and she is
frankly, on last night’s showing, un-
equal to its more exacting technical
demands. Zarova has not yet realised
the comic possibilities of the part of
the Nurse.
Last night’s was an excellent per-
formance of “Les Sylphides”—one of
the best this season, and notable for
the restraint and smoothness of Tou-
manova’s dancing.
Antal Dorati deserves special mention
for his handling of the orchestra in
a programme which taxes all its re-
sources.
CASTS RESHUFFLED
IN TWO BALLETS
BY BASIL BURDETT
Few changes were made in the mid-
week reshuffle of roles in the Russian
Ballet at His Majesty’s last night, but
they were important ones.
Marina Svetlova, replacing Touma-
nova in “Les Sylphides,” gives a per-
formance which is immature and
rather lacking in character at the
mcment, but which has grace, the
charm of youthful freshness and a
promising hint of style. Anna Leon-
tieva, an accomplished young dancer,
did the Valse very nicely, and Roman
Jasmsky did the male role in h'is fin-
ished style.
The only other change was in “Le
Coq d’Or,” Grigorieva replacing Moro-
sova in the difficult role of the Queen
of Shemakhan. In temperament and
style Grigorieva is suited to this part,
and technically she is well equipped for
it.
She gave a graceful performance,
but one needing development. It re-
quires much more definite touches of
character than it was given last night.
In its smoothness and elegance it was
admirable.
I should like to see Grigorieva alter-
nate this, role with Osato, who seems
to me particularly well suited for the
part. I


LOST STRAUSS WALTZES IN NEW BALLET
, Graduation Ball is a Happy Viennese
<*,» j) (( Trifle With a Hint of Flirtation
"Graduation Ball," the first world premiere of the
Australian ballet season, is the product of many talents.
Antal Dorati, the conductor, discovered some neglected
manuscripts of Johann Strauss in Vienna shortly before
the Nazis marched in. Using these and some known
works he has arranged the musical score.
The idea of the ballet was worked out in collabora-
tion with Alexandre Benois (first author of
"Petrouchka"), who has designed the decor and
costumes, and David Lichine, who created the choreo-
graphy.
The setting is the annual ball given by a fashionable
Viennese girls school to the graduates of a military
academy. Everything is very decorous until the General
in charge of the cadets so far forgets himself as to
flirt with the head mistress. From then on it becomes
a real party.
Ballerina in New
Role Scores
Notable Success
I O replacements in major
roles gave last night’s ballet
at His Majesty s Theatre an ad-
ditional spice of interest.
Tamara Grigorieva, as the
Queen of Shemakha® in Fokine’s
Coq d’Or, scored! a most notable
sweeps. Her performance of a
uimcult role had qualities of diff-
nity y -whimsicality and impeccable
Riabouchinska was again incom-
parable as the Golden Cockerel.
In pas seule sequences of Les Syl-
phides.. Marina Svetlova replaced
Toumanova. Her technique was in-
theidSnild exc , el]e f it - She captured
the subtle spirit of Chopin’s music
and welded it with skill to Fokine’s
choreography. b
The final waltz with Jasinsky was
exquisitely subdued, a memorable
ci eation of fluid movement
SSSMI *~\o well a
1 NEW DANCERS IN
BALLET
Where is Toumanova?
By GEOFFREY HUTTON
I An improved performance of “Le
Coq d’Or” was given at His
Majesty’s last night, when Grigo-
rieva danced the exacting role of
ithe Queen of Shemakhan. This
was the most important of the mid-
week changes of cast.
Both technically and temperamentally
Gi igoi ieva seems better suited to this part
than Morosova.
Partnered by Jasinsky, Svetlova dances
Aith agreeable softness of line in “Lcs
Sylphides," but again there is no place
m the programme for Toumanova.
Audiences took it for granted last season
toad; they would see both leading
ballerinas, and there seems no good reason
not have the same
P 1 iv uege this season.
Lichine’s merry “Graduation Bail” is
settnng m nicely, although the show piece,
Dance, is still being altered,
and is still unsatisfactory.


MEMBERS OF THE BALLET company now perform-
ing in Melbourne do a great amount of their rehears-
ing in Elizabeth St. studio of M. Edouard Borovansky
TATIANA LESKOVA mends her shoes in between
whiles. Mending ballet shoes occupies a large part
of spare time of women artists, as they wear quickly.
DANCERS WAITING their turn watch the principals.
They are, from rear, Nina Golovina, Ludmila Lvova
and Natasha Sobinova, with Genevieve Moulin at rear.
TATIANA RIABOUCHINSKA peers over David Lichine's shoulder at
overseas news, while waiting for rehearsal to begin. Studio, specially
built for ballet, is occupied by members every morning and afternoon.


La Symphonie Fantastique
CONTINUED success of the Ballet at His
Majesty's Theatre focuses attention on the
fact that, while pure music and the
drama of the spoken word languish in Mel-
bourne, wordless drama to music, the art of danc-
ing and mime in quintessence, is holding its place
in the interest and affection of theatregoers. On
Monday another symphonic ballet, La Symphonie
Fantastique (Massine-Berlioz) should remind us
that music can be enriched in its appeal when in-
terpreted by fine dancing and artistic mime.
IC) AVL.OVA and Genee laid the
A foundation of ballet as an abso-
lute art in Australia, and three visits
of modern ballet companies since
November, 1936, have consolidated
that foundation.
Whether or not the crescendo
of blatant sound in modern
entertainment has deafened us.
ballet to-day has gripped theatre-
goers as no other form of
stage entertainment has done. Its
quality is expressed in that element
of silence in which poets and com-
posers have fashioned great things.
Only the rediscovery of an art form
which was apparently in danger of
being lost could explain the intense
interest maintained in ballet in such
critical days as those through which
we are passing.
Here and there ballet has been
absurdly glorified by esoteric coteries.
Among strange creatures it has be-
come an object of senseless venera-
tion—a mumbo-jumbo—and the
heavy pungency of aesthetic incense
still assails the nostrils where those
creatures foregather. But the
mumbo-jumbo and the frankincense
and myrrh are but relics of a phase
of decadence in the history and
development of the art.
In its modern revival and adapta-
tion ballet is appreciated by those
who know not its literature, as well
as those who do. New forms of
expression and a judicious pruning
of the stock of traditional dance
forms are making ballet something
more than a shrine at which the
exotic and erotic few pirouette.
Amazing stories are told around
the theatre of disagreement and
temperamental storms, yet night
after night performances are given
that would seem to deny these back-
stage disturbances. Just as every
team of athletes, cricketers, foot-
ballers on tour disagree, physical
artists in the dance do likewise.
Physical expression begets egotism.
But with a conflict of theories and
ideals, waging side by side with
physical antagonism, the members
of a ballet company occupy a place
on their own.- For that reason,
perhaps, their tiffs and differences
clear the atmosphere, and rising
superior to them, dancers emerge in
a strengthened esprit de corps.
NEW BALLET PROGRAMME
Lichine’s Inspired Blue Bird
By Thorold Waters
BETWEEN inspiration and even the most refined culture there
is a difference, and this was what happens when David Lichine
dances in the Blue Bird episodes of Le Mariage d’Aurore His
contribution to last night’s performance at His Majesty’s was
superb in every bodily inflexion; out of the strong came
forth sweetness, light and beauty. He flew, and his succession
of entre-chats was just a minor elegance.
Genevieve Moulin, promoted to
partnership with the famous Lichine,
shared an ovation for her lissome
grace and air of delight. There was
finesse in her steps and daintiness in
her flights.
Symphonie Fantastique, presented
by Colonel de Basil’s Company for the
first time in this season, brought Ta-
mara Toumanova to the front as The
Beloved, and she scored a triumphant
reception in company with Paul Pet-
roff as the Musician.
Her greatest dancing was seen in the I
witches Sabbath of the fifth movement' 1
the febrile music of Berlioz at this stage
having found no better interpreter in j
Melbourne.
i In the opening movement Toumanova
nad not quite found herself There was
less continuity of motion, a certain
amount ot wandering into position.
Petroff’s conception of the obsessed
young Musician was sincere, unexagger-
ated, well acted. In the Pastoral scene
Nina Verchininas wonderful flexibility
of body commanded attention, in the
ballroom Sono Osato’s grace was con-
spicuous, and Paul Belsky was once more
the characterful gaoler in the fourth !
movement.
Scarlatti’s music in The Good Humored
j Ladies, and the stronger meat of the
j other ballets, was very ably conducted by 1
; Max Goberman. The comedy in Mas-
I sine’s presentation of Scarlatti's pieces
worked up to a boisterous fugal climax,
and Olga Morosova made no end of a
romp of Mariucca the maid
TOUMANOVA
Massine's Beloved
Wifch
Last night’s ballet had a-
piquant surprise for Melbourne
in the best performance it has
seen of the Massine-Berlioz work
La Symphonie Fantastique, and
with a dynamic witch in Tamara
Toumanova, who might well be
regarded hereafter as Massine’s
Beloved Witch.
Serge Grigorieff, the producer,
achieved a chef d’oeuvre by the mag-
nificent line of the ensemble in the
opening movement, in the contrapun-
tally sustained gaiety of the dance-
room, in the classic purity of
the pastorale (third movement)
and the clear-cut conflict in
mass and sectional action oi
the stirring finale. With her beautiful
and expressive arm movements as the
ecstatic Beloved, Toumanova suggested
poetry sublime. But it was as the
Witch that the ballerina emerged as
the most exciting figure in mime and
angular pas that has haunted His Ma-
jesty’s stage. With the struggle be-
tween good and evil for the body as
well as the soul of the Musician inten-
sified, Toumanova danced with the
witches in an artistic frenzy which
roused the audience to an ovation.
Toumanova in this ballet is a sensa-
tion.
Other fine and revealing features- In
this singularly impressive work were
the plastic artistry of Verchinina in
an exquisite vision with Jasinsky, ana
the intelligent, original mime of Pet-
roff in the approach to delirium.
The Good Humored Ladies, to Scar-
latti’s music, was danced in charming
and jesting ensemble, with Morosova,
swiftly performing an amazing vari-
ety of steps in the mocking mood of
Constanza’s Maid; Grigorieva, beauti-
ful in her stately solo; Razoumova
miming impishly as Felicita, and La-
zovsky, nimble as the grotesque waiter, j
Niccolo It would be better if the Gol-
doni comedy were not introduced cold;
it i» such a gem of humor in the unity
of a clever conception. Perhaps Max
Goberman, who conducted all ballets I
wiai musicianly skill, could rouse us
ir_ some provocative overture.
Finally was staged Aurora’s Wed-
ding. Lichine in the Blue Bird dances
with mercurial Moulin, Denisova Vol-
kova and Razoumova doing the varia-l
tions, Nelidova prominent among the
Seven Ladies, and Lazorsky brilliant
with the Ivans.
Taken as a whole, the Fantastic
Symphony programme is a complete
contrast to any previous selection.
RICH SYMPHONY’S
SUCCESS
T oumanova Scores
By GEOFFREY HUTTON
Richest of all the works in the de Basil
Ballet Company's repertoire, “Symphonie
Fantastique” i s heart and soul of the
new programme at His Majesty’s. The
ovation which followed the final curtain
was for a great work, and for a great
performance by Toumanova, who danced
the role which Massine created for her.
In the past there has been a tendency
to regard this ballet as rather confused
and long, in spite of its many beauties
By emphasising the dramatic and emo-
tional theme which lies quite clearly in
Berlioz’s programme Toumanova ‘and
Petroff gave it a force and coherence
which it has never quite achieved before
Petroff’s reading of the musician is
strong and effective. Verchinina brought
her finely controlled plastic line to the
pastoral scene, and there was much good
dancing in the five long movements
Osato in the ball scene, Borovansky aifd
Jasinsky as the shepherds, Belsky as the
gaoler, and Andahazy leading the mon-
sters.
The wit and polish of Massine’s Italian
I comedy “The Good-humoured Ladies”
; still make it a delightful work, although
they have shone more brightly in other
performances.
The surprise of “Aurora’s Wedding” is
Lichine’s appearance as the Blue Bird.
Although he has not been dancing classi-
cal parts in Melbourne, Lichine showed
his line, elevation, and control in this
exacting part. It suits Jasinsky’s light-
ness better, but Lichine’s performance is
full of interest.
FIFTH GALA PROGRAMME
CHARMS HUGE AUDIENCE
THREE LARGE SCALE BALLETS
Owing to the extraordinary interest in this
programme, patrons are advised to make
reservations early.
BOOKING NOTICE.
A section. of stalls available for booking on
the morning of each performance at 6', in
addition to other reserved sections. 3/ tickets
at Allan’s daily from 9 a.m. All seats book-
HimuiHin
Evemngs at 8: Mats. Wed. and
Sat. at 2.
J. C. Williamson Theatres present
Col. W. de Basils BALLET
ANOTHER PROGRAMME TRIUMPH
(For 5 mote Ni S hts and 2 Matinees.)
“GOOD HUMOURED LADIES”
“SYMPHONIE FANTASTIQUE”
“AURORA’S WEDDING”
COMMENCING NEXT MONDAY
_ 5 Nights and 2 Matinees):
complete Presentation Stravinsky’s Brilliant
“FIREBIRD”
Also “GRADUATION BALL”
And Supporting Ballets.
Plans at Allan’s 6 days ahead.
Prices plus tax.
FKEE LIST SUSPENDED.
Toumanova Is
Brilliant
In New Ballet
By Basil Burdett
“Symphonie Fantastique” and
“Good Humored Ladies,” both
presented for the first time this
season last night, and a revival of
“Aurora’s Wedding” make up this
week’s programme of Colonel de Basil’s
Russian Ballet at His Majesty's
Theatre.
The success of the evening last night
was “Symphonie Fantastique,” in many
ways the best of Massine's symphonic
ballets, and that success was very
largely due to Toumanova.
The role of the Beloved, which she
created in the original production, fits
her like a glove as, of course, it
should, since it was made for her. Mas-
sine has taken her temperamental
measure so exactly that she is able to
give complete expression to her own
highly personal style and still remain
completely within the picture.
Contrast Impressive
Her performance is in every way a
beautiful and a satisfying one, par-
ticularly impressive in the contrast she
secures, without exaggeration, between
the softness and yearning tenderness
of the early movements and the de-
monic abandon of the last where, in
the Walpurgis-Night finale, she un-
dergoes the metamornhosis of Beloved
into Witch. This is Toumanova at her
best.
Petroff is the Musician. He has de-
veloped the part and given it much
more depth and meaning since we
saw him in it last season. Belsky gives
a splendidly vigorous performance as
the Jailer in the fourth movement
surely the most effective scene in any
modern ballet and all the other
principals and the corps de ballet, on
whom terrific demands are made right
through this highly dynamic piece,
contribute to one of the major artistic
successes of the season.
The programme onens with “Good
Humored Ladies.” Last night’s per-
formance lacked the sparkle this gay
little 18th century comedy demands.
Both music and dancing seemed to
dree, although individual performances
were often good, even excellent. It was
a cas“ of, the parts being better than
the whole.
Perfect Placing
Grigorieva’s Constanza was certainly
the essence of 18th century grace.
Morosova has a part exactly suited to
her sprightly temperament as the gay
and frivolous Mariuccia and Ladre’s
ancient Luca is a first-rfte characteri-
sation which it would be difficult tc
imagine better done.
Lazovsky is perfectly placed as Nic-
colo and Orloff’s lightness and superb
elevation gave the part of Battista new
charm and meaning. Orloff can act,
too. Here is a demi-caractere dancer
of real promise.
Nelidova. Leskova, Razoumova, Obi-
denna, Petroff, Rostoff and others were
all in their various ways good. In fact,
it is difficult to account for what was,
on the whole, a dull performance.
The chief interest of “Aurora” was
the appearance of Lichine in “Blue
Bird.” with Moulin. Lichine’s tre-
mendous personality always gives in-
terest to anything he does, but “Blue
Bird” is not a part that lives by per-
sonality alone, and there was not too
much more last night. Technically, it
was a perfunctory performance for a
dancer of Lichine’s reputation.
Moulin gave another display of the
youthful brilliance which impressed
when she danced the part for the first
time earlier in the season, and Deni-
sova, partnered by Petroff, again sug-
gested that she may become, in the
fulness of time, a brilliant Aurora. It
was a good average performance.
Max Goberman conducted all three
ballets in the absence of Antal Dorati.
NEW WORK TO MUSIC
BY SCHUMANN
Igor Schwezoff. famous as the author
of "Borzoi.” the prize autobiography
published some years ago. in which he
told the story of his life in Russia and
his escape into China, is to make a new
ballet for the de Basil company.
Schwezoff. who had a dancing school
in London before coming to Australia
lor the present ballet season, is not a
newcomer to choreography, although
this will be the first of his works to
enter the de Basil repertoire.
Symphonic in character, its theme
will be man’s progress towards an ideal
beyond worldly things. It will be
danced to Schumann’s “Symphonic
Studies,” which will be scored for
orchestra for the occasion.
Schwezoff has had the idea for this
ballet for some time and he hopes to
begin rehearsals this week. Whether
it will be given in Australia during this
season is problematical. If so, it will
give an Australian artist a big oppor-
tunity in designing decor and costumes
for it.


BALLET HOLDS ITS PLACE
Among the artists from the Covent Garden ballet company who gave their
services at the French Red Cross evening ot Grong Grong, Toorak last night
were Ladre, Olgo Morosova, and Lasovsky, who performed a Polish dance.
Here they are caught in a happy moment.
SPECTACULAR BALLET EXERCISES were practised in the Fitzroy Gardens yesterday by members
Col. W. de Basil’s Covent Garden Ballet. Here is Genevieve Moulin making an acrobatic leap above Tatiana
Leskowa.


FIRE-BIRD IS
ENCHANTING
Ballet Success
When three years and a half
ago Jascha Horenstein intro-
duced us to the weird and won-
derful L’Oiseau de Feu (The Fire
Bird) score of Stravinsky, the
music marked an event in ballet.
Last night, at His Majesty’s,
music and dance were combined
enchantingly to lift The Fire
Bird into the first four big suc-
cesses of the current season.
Toumanova’s mystical Bird was an
imaginative conception, a fledgling in
some strange nether world of folklore,
which, fearful of human touch, took
on the wings of human emotion wnen
confronted with the power which its
feather talisman could exert when pos-
sessed by Prince Ivan. In the pas
de deux with Petroff (the Prince) the
ballerina was a fluttering figure of un-
earthly beauty, and her dance and
mime with Kostchei (David Lichine)
towards the climax of the second scene
proved her virtuosity in thrillingly
dramatic danse du theatre. One of the
most charming effects ln this Fokine
ballet is the adagio dance, barefooted,
of the princesses, led by Tsarevna- (the
beautiful Grigorieva); matched in con-
trast by the crashing harmony which
ushers in the norde of hobgoblins to
the sinister beat of Kostchei. In the
brilliant pauses which punctuate this
riot of gratesque movement, the pro-
duction on this occasion was most
significant.
Antal Dorati shared happily in the
demonstration accorded principals and
corps de ballet. It was a fine tribute
to a very notable performance.
Riabouchinska was back again in
elfin beauty as the Serving-maid and
goddess, with Jasinsky as the ideal
Shepherd and divinity in The Gods
Go A-begging. An atmosphere of
Elizabethan rusticity, in gorgeous
blues and greens, was created in Sir
Thomas Beecham’s sympathetic ar-
rangement of Handel’s airs. Jasin-
’sky’s solo dance was superb, but Ria-
bouchinska’s simplicity was sublime.
A faster performance of Graduation
Ball won general acceptance, and in-
teresting variations in Riabouchinska’s
role of Compere and added touches
in the Perpetuum Mobile Circus pas
de deux, with David Lichine, the
choregrapher, enhanced the appeal.
Leskova, however, supplemented her
roguish mime as Miss Audacity by
dancing with unusual grace and pre-
cision. Taken as a whole, it was the
best performance we have seen.
This programme, which was con-
ducted by Dorati, will be related un-
til Saturday, excluding Anzac day
(Thursday).
COLOUR AT THE
BALLET
“Firebird” Revived
By GEOFFREY HUTTON
After exactly 30 years Fokine’s
“Firebird” came to life once again
at His Majesty’s last night, with
Toumanova as the magic bird. Still
the best balletic treatment from
the fruitful field of Russian folk-
lore, this rich but economical work
fully deserved its warm welcome.
The obvious comparison is “Le Coq
dOr,” but in the tale of Ivan and the
flame-winged bird, both Fokine and his
artist, Goncharova, have worked with
greater conciseness and subtlety, suggest-
ing the opulent splendours of Asiatic
imagination without sacrificing the line
of the ballet.
Although Fokine created the role of the
firebird for a more fragile ballerina of the
Pavlova type, Toumanova’s performance
in this exacting role had such superb dar-
ing and brilliance that it brought the
audience to its feet. Petroff dances
the prince with the right touch of
sly humour. With Lichine as the
evil Kostchei. and Grigorieva as the
Tsarevna, the cast is one of the strongest
of the season.
“The Gods Go A-begging” is a wel-
come revival for its fine musical score (an
arrangement from Handel), and for the
■solos which show off Riabouchinska and
Jasincky so effectively.
"Graduation Ball” is still going strong
and sending audiences home happy.
DIVERSIFIED REPERTOIRE THRILLS!
Enormous Success of
SIXTH GALA PROGRAMME
THREE LARGE-SCALE BALLETS
A section of stalls available for booking on
the morning of each performance at 6/» in
addition to other reserved sections. 3/ tickets
at Allan’s daily from 9 a.m. All seats book-
able.
Evenings, at 8; Mats., Wed. and Sat., at 2.
No Performance Thursday (Anzac Day)
J. C. Williamson Theatres present
Col. W. de Basil’s BALLET
TO-NIGHT AT 8.
(for 4 more Nights and 2 Matinees):
“THE GODS GO A-BEGGING”
“FIREBIRD”
Also “GRADUATION BALL”
Commencing Next Monday, April 29 <3
nights and matinee), “Swan Lake.” “Fran-
cesca da Rimini” (final), “Faune,” “Blue
Danube.”
Commencing Thursday, May 2 (3 Nights
and Matinee), "Swan Lake,” “Paganini”
(final), “Faune,” “Blue Danube.”
Plans at Allan's 6 days ahead. Prices
Plus Tax.
Special Announcement
On May 9, in the presence of Lady Dugan,
the Lady Mayoress (Mrs. A. W. Coles), A
GALA MATINEE of Col. W. de Basil’s
Ballet (by arr ngcment with J. C. William-
son Theatres) in aid of the
ROYAL MELBOURNE
HOSPITAL
and CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL
Programme:—
“SWAN LAKE.” “DIVERTISSEMENTS”
(first performance in Melbourne), and
“GRADUATION BALL.”
Preferential Booking closes next Friday at
noon at Allan’s Box Office for Dress Circle
and Stalls (Special Reserves), at £2/2/-
and £1/1/-. Ordinary booking opens next
Monday, April 29. Prices: £2/2/-; £1/1/-.
10/6, 7/6, and 5/-. No tax.
Book Early for This Unique Event.
MANY CURTAIN CALLS
FOR STRAVINSKY'S FIRE-BIRD
By Thorold Waters
OISEAU DE FEU, which, of course, is modernism’s most perfect
combination of musical and choreographic fancy and decor, was haded
with such delight at His Majesty’s last night that Tamara Toumanova,
Paul Petroff, Tamara Grigorieva, and David Lichine had to remain
on the stage while the curtain made nine ascents; as a parting shot they
were haled in front of it for a further bow.
There was great beauty and signifi-
cance in Toumanova’s Fire-Bird. She
gave it classic line and stability, mak-
ing one believe in the magical story
while admiring her accomplished timing
of steps, gestures and adagio rises, and
the fluttering anguish of face and body
when entrapped.
While she may not completely efface
memory of the charm of other Fire-
Birds, Toumanova certainly adds to a
treasured aviary. She had In Paul Pet-
roff a partner of convincing grace and
princeliness, while Grigorieva's Beautiful
Tsarevna made a tall, gainly figure and
Lichine’s Immortal Kostchei was an ogre
who performed rhythmic wonders with
his immense cloak.
Here and there the musical are able
to spot Stravinsky’s indebtedness to
Tschaikowsky in this score, which was
conducted by Antal Dorati with a con-
summate ability and power to evolve
atmosphere.
The big ballet was preceded by The
Gods Go a-Begging and followed by the
new very popular Graduation Ball. The
pastoral ballet which Sir Thomas Bee-
cham has shaped so well from Handel’s
music had as its two divinities in humble
guise Tatiana Riabouchinska, even bet-
ter than of yore in her simple characteri-
sation and capital tempos, and Roman
Jasinsky, whose accenting of his big
allegro dance was as perfect a bit of art
as even Colonel de Basil’s company can
show.
Members of the Covent Garden Russian Ballet company in the procession
round the Syrian Orthodox Church, East Melbourne, where they celebrated
the Russian Easter on Saturday at midnight. In the picture are Tamara
Toumanova and her mother, and other members of the ballet. After the
service members gathered for supper at Navarettis, at the instance of
Colonel W. de Basil, when Russian dishes were specially served.
Tamara Toumanova, one of the ballerinas of Colonel W. de Basil’s
Ballet Company, standing beside Loudon Sainthill’s portrait of her in
Symphonie Fantastique at the Exhibition of Art for Theatre and
Ballet—which was brought to Australia by Mr. H. Tatlock Miller under
the auspices of the British Council—in the Exhibition Gallery at Myer’s.
BALLET DANCERS
CELEBRATE
RUSSIAN EASTER
®^ ores candles and wax tapers
lit the darkness outside St. Nicholas
Syrian Orthodox Church on Satur-
day night, when the whole Russian
ballet company celebrated the Rus-
sian Easter Mass.
Hurriedly washing off grease-paint and
changing from ballet costumes after the
th« n vl g p ? r f orn V* nce - the dancers went to
the church by char-a-banc, and Joined in
serv£ emn procession and the long choral
i the de Basil company in-
cludes dancers from most countries old
Russian customs are still respected wher-
ET rtr u Vels aJte them - After the candles
burned down and the service is
ended, communicants embrace each other
fw s“® on both cheeks to signify that
l^months 6 * ay Wrongs done ln th « last
n 7° complete the celebration, there is
break the period of Lent. Al-
., 2 u Sh dancers cannot fast too rigorously,
the whole company was entertained to a
gTand supper by Colonel de Basil.
BALLET CELEBRATES Russian Easter.
Colonel de Basil and his wife being
blessed by the Archimandrite of St.
Nicholas Syrian Orthodox Church,
East Melbourne, when the whole of the
Covent Garden Ballet celebrated the
Russian Easter after Saturday night's
performance.


BALLET RUSSE
Nijinsky's Faune
With an orchestra of thirty-six and
a corps de ballet which seems gradu-
ally to be developing to a point that
represents ecstacy in a sentient har-
mony and counterpoint, the Ballet
Russe of Colonel de Basil repeated its
final performance of Francesca da
Ramini and Swan Lake at His
Majesty’s last evening. The Nijinsky-
Debussy ballet, l’Apres-midi d’un
Faune, was introduced, and Blue
Danube confirmed its popular grip.
Nijinsky’s ballet, with Lichine danc-
ing the Faune, was a stylised concep-
tion of the Grecian theme, clear-cut,
less human and sensual than the Lifar
interpretation in Sydney, but it won
enthusiastic acceptance. Wozikowsky’s
Faune of 1936 was hard and athletic
fiy comparison. Lichine presented the
satyr complete, his attitude lacking,
however, the subtle suggestion of man
in the requisite lapses of brief inspira-
tion. Grigorieva as the Nymph, with
the other nymphs, achieved an
austerity, which the fine music accen-
tuated.
Francesca da Ramini was given in a
performance instinct with the dreams
and longings of romantic line and
musically captivating accompaniment
of the second part. Lichine’s choreo-
graphy is strong theatrically, and often
deeply imaginative in the lovely
Tchaikovsky score. Tchernicheva and
Petroff danced and mimed in poetic'
unison.
Swan Lake was seen in Toumanova ’s
best performance. One never tires of 1
this exquisite abstraction, which throbs)
with feeling. Petroff ’s solo was bril-’
liant.
Finally came Blue Danube, in Lifar V
crisply joyous arrangement. Morosova.
Riabouchinska, Lichine, Ladre (re-
placing Borovansky expertly as the
Athlete), Leskova and Lazorsky danc-
ing the sprightly Strauss waltzes.
Antal Dorati was in top form, with a
responsive orchestra.
Alberto Alonso and Alexandra Denisova, of the Covent Garden Ballet com-
pany, photographed after their wedding yesterday. Also in the picture are
Serge L. Grigorieff and his wife, Tchernichova, Mlle. Olga Morosova, Lorand
Andahazy, Robert Belsky, and Miss Jean Hunter.
REVIVAL OF THE
“FAUNE”
By GEOFFREY HUTTON
Although danced in Melbourne before,
Nijinsky’s famous experiment, “L’apres-
midi d’un Faune,” was strange —and
rather bewildering — to many at His
Majesty’s, where it was introduced last
night.
In spite of the attacks made upon it
since it was first performed in Paris, this
brief ballet, with its severely stylised
movements, lias survived for 30 years.
The detached symbolism of its angular
movements, paraphrasing the theme of
Debussy’s tone poem, has curious force.
No better performance could have been
asked than Lichine’s. Unlike some
dancers, he made no attempt to bowdler-
ise the leering faun, and gave the work
its whole content. Grigorieva made a
statuesque nymph.
The success of “Francesca da Rimini”
earlier in the season has earned a re-
vival for this grand dramatic ballet.
Tchernicheva and Petroff repeated their
strong and restrained miming, and Alger-
anoff gave a genuinely sinister touch to
Girolamo, although he has not brought
the part to quite Borovansky’s pitch.
“Swan Lake” found Toumanova in
superb form, and she shared an ovation
with Petroff, who never danced better.
A lively “Beau Danube” rounds off the
programme.
BOOK TO-DAY
At Allan's for the great matinee at His
Majesty’s Theatre next Thursday, and help
build the new Melbourne Hospital, also aid
the Children’s Hospital.
Stalls available this morning at 10/6 and 7/6,
in addition to other reserved prices. Mag-
nificent programme includes “Swanlake,”
“Divertissements,” “Graduation Ball.”
Final performances will be given this week
of the dramatic success "Paganini” (for 3
nights and Saturday matinee).
A Section of Stalls Available for Booking on
the morning of each performance at 6/, In
addition to other reserved sections. 3/
tickets at Allan’s daily from 9 a.m. All
seats bookable.
lIIBIUiaiM
Evenings at 8; Mats., Sat. and Wed., at 2.
J. C. Williamson Theatres Present
Col. W. de Basil’s BALLET
COMMENCING TO-NIGHT
(For 3 Nights and Sat. Mat.)
“SWANLAKE”
“PAGANINI”
“FAUNE”
“THE BLUE DANUBE”
COMMENCING NEXT MONDAY, MAY 6
(for 6 nights and 2 mats.),
“PETROUCHKA”
with "PAPILLONS.” “SPECTRE DE EA
ROSE,” and “GRADUATION BALE.”
Plans at Allan's. Booking Opens 6 Days
Ahead. Prices Plus Tax.
TRAGIC FORCE IN FRANCESCA BALLET
By ThoroM Waters
\\ ITH its high dramatic tension and medieval sense, the faint
reminders of Botticelli’s manner in the visions of the second
scene, and its crowd activities, Francesca da Rimini stirred the
audience at His Majesty 's last night on its reinstatement as the
centre spectacle of Colonel de Basil’s Ballet.
jJW *s:
l?srii »is
jIVp! !*“
tipil * |al
sjjSSg.S* sg£
v t &-s -S s a
la^l|S| s r
» « oi t: s g ft a
* >,.0-“ ft &« £
£ > h'lh 3 W & # <
o «£, 73 gOo-iS
'O?SS *0 b T 3 5P |h
V* 33 |2pp 5 assn
°l s ßa 4 m sis.
■!!?§. ill?* :a|J<i
|s aS s Sss- h°Xn
1 111
i: t-I L! 8 !^!splpl
* £ 5f J»S •° oi2_»4!fi«! ” id b s
§-« *8 | g o;tJ44^ CT 3&S« «# a-
So 47g £<£!oo 4.fl3rg--^ai
11, «* J§ t co 2fli?°^o^ijS?§g
I § , "xiVaas®- 2a *i
ts ii last-S»s!=lssssI a 5t-S»s!=ls5ss3 s
ll« i = l! a^t £ «P s sss
gi£ jS « ss6c«“
"* JuW i^n6'liSaiSHO«.S4jMS
a€s»» S.^Jsg.Sg
COVENT GARDEN BALLET COUPLE after their marriage today. M.
Alberto Alonso with his bride, Mdlle. Alexandra Denisova, leaving the
Government Statist’s office with Colonel de Basil (right).
Many Cables, Then A Wedding
There were kisses for both
bride and bridegroom at the
wedding at the Government
Statist’s Office, Queen Street,
Mile. Denisova is a 17-year-old
Canadian girl, and her husband is
a Cuban.
Because of her youth, Mile. Deni-
sova haa to obtain the consent of
her parents for her wedding, and
cables have been flying back and
forth between Canada and Victoria
for a week.
Her parents wanted her to marry
in America, and said so.
Mile. Denisova cabled back that
she wanted to be married now.
Her parents cabled “America.”
Mile. Denisova cabled “Australia,”
and back came a message from her
parents: “Consent. Love and Bless-
ings.”
The bride arrived at the Titles
Office today in a black coat trimmed
with dyed squirrel fur, and her little
black hat was also trimmed with
fur- She was presented with a bou-
quet of tuberoses and autumn leaves
as she arrived, by Morosova, the wife
of Colonel de Basil.
Witnesses to the wedding were
Col. de Basil, Serge L. Grigorieff
(Regisseur-General of the company),
and Alexandre Philloppoff (executive
manager), and Tchernicheva, the
wife of Grigoriefl.
Smiles . . . Tears
A little difficulty with the legal
phraseology of the wedding service
caused the bridegroom to burst out
laughing, together with the small
audience of witnesses, and the bride
smiled happily all through the cere-
mony until, just at the end, when she
shed a few tears.
Miss Jean Hunt, a Canadian girl,
was bridesmaid, and supporting the
bridegroom was Lorand Andahazy.
After the wedding the bride and
bridegroom drove straight to His
Majesty’s to rehearse for ballets in
which they will dance leading role
tonight—Denisova as the chief but-
terfly in “Papillons” and Alonso as
the blackamoor in “Petrouchka.”
Col. de Basil will give a party for
the bride and bridegroom at the
Windsor after tonight’s performance.


ONE OF FINEST BALLETS
FOKINE CREATED ---
By BASIL BURDETT
“Petrouchka’’ is the principal item on this week's programme
of Colonel de Basil’s Russian Ballet at His Majesty’s Theatre. The
supporting ballets are “Papillons,’’ “Spectre de la Rose' and
“Graduation Ball.” /
“Petrouchka,” the tragic tale of
Russia’s puppet-Pierrot, goes back to
1911 and . the early days of Diaghileff.
But it remains one of the finest ballets
Fokine ever created. Few ballets are
so effective. None has a piece of
theatre to beat the dramatic moment
in the last act where the Moor’s vic-
tim rises from his sawdust and re-
appears before the startled Magician.
The current production of this mas-
terpiece is a little lacking in life, par-
ticularly in the crowd scenes, which
are such an important part of it and
which miss the real sparkle and ani-
mation of at least one previous version
seen here. It badly needs overhauling
and some close attention to minor
roles, which are tending to fade out
altogether.
NOT ALWAYS BRILLIANT
The principals are all sound, if not
always brilliant. Toumanova s Dancer
is excellent, precise and finished and
really doll-like in character. Yet, some-
how it is not an ideal part for her. Her
personality seems cramped by it.
Lazovsky’s Petrouchka is an ex-
tremely fine and interesting perform-
ance, and a very moving one, although
his interpretation seems to me to em-
phasise the pathetic side of the char-
acter at the expense of the puppet— in
other words to be too human.
The beautiful precision and finish of
Lazovsky’s style, so well adapted to the
rendering of the wire-strung doll, is
largely lost in this very soft conception
of the part.
Alonso’s Blackamoor has improved
enormously. It is now much more
rhythmic in character and captures
much of the naive brilliance of the
dark-skinned puppet-lover.
Pierrots are popular in this pro-
gramme. It begins with ’‘Papillons,”
another butterfly-catching incident in
the life of the tragi-comic lover of
“Carnaval.”
This ballet is a later work of Fokine s
than “Carnaval,” by several years. But
it lacks altogether the earlier work’s
sparkle and gaiety. It is a banal and
: unimaginative piece, childishly trans-
parent in ideas, for which there seems
to exist no adequate reason for revival
while so many interesting works in
the repertoire remain unperformed.
Denisova is charming and finished in
the principal role. Volkova is an ani- j
mated support, and Panaieff appro- !
priately woeful as Pierrot. But they
cannot persuade us that this ballet
ought not to be allowed to disappear
quietly from the repertoire.
“Le Spectre de la Rose” was an ex-
cellent performance. Riabouchinska —
airy lightness itself as the dreaming
girl — and Petroff, whose fine elevation \
is marked in this part, give this minia-
ture its full romantic flavor.
Antal Dorati and Max Goberman s
shared the conducting honors. Dorothy s
Mendoza playing the difficult piano
part in "Petrouchka.” L
BRILLIANCE IN
“PETROUCHKA”
By GEOFFREY HUTTON
Still pre-eminent in dramatic ballet,
Fokine’s old masterpiece, “Petrouchka,”
was brought to life again at His Majesty’s
last night.
Ballets from the old repertoire inevit-
ably vary as they pass from hand to hand.
Certain passages in “Petrouchka” have be-
come blurred or ill-balanced in earlier per-
formances. but this company has found a
cast which gives clarity and force to every
detail of a subtle work. No performance
quite as satisfying has been seen here.
In Lazowsky’s hands the tragic puppet
Petrouchka gains genuine pathos in his
struggle toward humanity. Toumanova
brings a magic touch to the Doll. Rigidly
mechanical to her finger-tips, she yet sug-
gests vanity and fickleness— a brilliant
piece of controlled mime. Alonso com-
pletes the triangle with a rich performance
as the Moor.
Petroff shows to great effect in “Le
Spectra de la Rose,” a work created to dis-
play the male dancer’s elevation. Ria-
bouchinska is the girl. Denisova dances
with charming freshness in “Papillons.” a
fragile ghost of “Carnival,” and “Gradua-
tion Ball” ends the evening again.
PETROUCHKA
Lozovsky's Success
in Ballet
Lighter and gayer in its opening
than the last Petrouchka danced in
Melbourne in 1938, the Fokine-Stravin-
sky ballet, which never fails to stir
an audience, was the staple of the
new programme at His Majesty’s The-
atre last evening.
This Petrouchka, notable for the
nervous brilliancy of Lazovsky in the
role of the puppet, was also of a
greater pattern in its quilted texture
than the previous production, sug-
gesting Woizikowsky ; s in its color and
variety and the supernatural impact
of the finale. To present a puppet
jealous and in love is conventional
make-believe, but to depict a puppet
who dies of love and sends a shudder
through the frivolous multitude is
something in the realm of great art.
Stronger in the second scene than
in the finale, which can be magnificent
in a sustained, slower tempo, Lazov-
sky’s Petrouchka proved a fine, excit-
ing interpretation. The dancer de-
rived artistic support from Toumanova
and Alonso, as the puppet danseur
and Blackamoor in vital dancing and
mimetic action, though the latter
stamped a faulty beat in the begin-
ning.
Changing forms of street lighting be-
fore the reopening of the Charlatan's
show offered vivid contrast in market-
place and revelry, and the wuld move-
ment that followed the fall of snow
combined with Dorati’s direction of the
Stravinsky music to strike terror into
a receptive and alert audience. Ladre
mimed the Charlatan, and Dorothy
Mendoza played the piano score w r ell.
With Petrouchka was given the
Fokine-Schumann trifle Papillons, with
its pretty, fragile grace, and abrupt
note of tragedy; Spectre de la Rose
and Graduation Ball.
Denisova danced the First Girl with
ecstatic grace, Panareff’s Pierrot de-
lighting the house, and Volkova was
elusive and swift in the role of the
Second Girl.
Most charming work of the evening
was undoubtedly the Fokine Le Spectre
de la Rose, to Weber’s Invitation to
the Waltz, conducted by Goberman.
Petroff as the Spirit achieved amazing
grace and rhythm in elevation, and his
exultant waltz with Riabouchinska dis-
closed a superb collaboration.
Riabouchinska and Leskova, Lichine
and Orloff, Denisova and Moulin,
Schwezoff and Stephanova danced in
the increasingly popular Lichine ballet,
Graduation Ball.
PETROUCHKA BALLET HIGHLIGHT
HIGHLIGHTS of the new bal-
let programme at His
Majesty’s this week is Pet-
roiichka, in which Stravinsky
music, Benois scenery
Fokine choreography are ap- \
plied to a story which could not
be told so well in any other way.
Last night the carnival crowd and
the old magician and his animated
puppets danced with exciting vitality.
Tamara Toumanova got a tremen-
dous ovation as The Dancer, giving
an admirable portrayal of the silly,
shallow puppet mind. Yura Lazov-
sky scored as the ill-treated Petrou-
chka— the most difficult puppet part
—and Alberto Alonso was equally suc-
cessful as the frenzied Blackamoor.
In Le Spectre de la Rose, Fokine’s
interpretation of The Invitation to
The Valse by Weber, Tatiana Ria-
bouchinska danced sensitively and
gave the right suggestion of the
dreamy rapture of a young girl with
the spirit of the rose given to her at
her first ball. Paul Petroff danced
brilliantly as the Spirit of the Rose.
In Papillons, a pretty, romantic
ballet to Schumann music, Michel
Panaieff mimed the love-lorn pierrot
effectively, and Alexandra Denisova
and Ahna Volkova danced the solo
parts with butterfly grace.
The well-balanced programme
ended with the popular Graduation
Ball, with Tatiana Riabouchinska,
David Lichine, Borislav Runanine and
Igor Schwezoff in the leading parts.
Colonel W. de Basil, of the Covent
Garden Ballet, will be the guest of
honor at a meeting of the Conserva-
torium Old Students’ Association on
Friday night. Misses Nancy Pirnitee?
and Fanny Kolm, the Viennese
dancers, will also give a demonstra-
tion of movement to music.
M. Alberto Alonso and his
bride (Mile. Alexandre Deni-
sova), of the Ballet Company,
leaving the Government Sta-
tist’s office after their mar-
riage yesterday morning.
YEHUDI MENUHIN
Two Gala TOWN HALL CONCERTS
Sat., June 1, & Thurs., June 6.
Applications tor balcony and body of the
Hall at 13 , plus tax (tot. 16/8), and 12/6,
plus tax (tGtal 14/) now being: received by
the Booking Manager, c/o Comedy Theatre.
Applications must be in writing, accompanied
by remittance and stamped addressed enve-
lope.
Brilliant .Success of Stravinsky’s
"PETROUCHKA"
MATINEE TO-DAY AT 2.
Children Half Price.
Seats available in stalls on the morning
of each performance at 6 , in addition to other
reserved sections. 3 tickets at Allan’s daily
from !) a.in. All seats bookable.
mamma
Evenings at 8; Mats. To-day and Sat., at 2.
.1. C. Williamson Theatres Present
Col. W. de Basil’s BALLET
TO-NIGHT AT 8.
(for 4 More Nights and 2 Mats.).
PETROUCHKA,” with “PAPILLONS”
‘SPECTRE DE DA ROSE.’’ and
•GRADUATION BADE.”
COMMENCING NEXT MONDAY, MAY 13
“CINDERELLA,” “CARNAVAL,” “ICARE”
(first performance in Melbourne),
“THAMAR.”
Plans at Allan’s. Booking Opens 6 Days
Ahead. Prices Plus Tax.
TO-MORROW (THURSDAY).
In the presence of Her Excellency. Lady Gowrie,
Ladv Dugan, and the lady Mayoress (Mrs.
A. W. Coles).
BALLET MATINEE
In Aid of the
ROYAL MELBOURNE HOSPITAL
AND CHILDREN S HOSPITAL
Spectacular Programme Includes
FOURTEEN DIVERTISSEMENTS
“SWANLAKE” and “GRADUATION BALL.”
100 SEATS
in reserved stalls available for Booking To-day.
10 6 and 7/6
- In Addition to Special Reserves.
5 Tickets (if any) at Doors ONLY.
All Gallery Seats Have Been Sold.
Jhallet fDancers
‘zMarry
A wedding of interest to ballet lov-
ers took place at the Government
Statist’s office, Queen-street, yester-
day morning, when Mile. Alexandre
Denisova, of Col. de Basil’s ballet
company, was married to M. Alberto
Alonso, of the same company. The
bride, whose real name is Patricia
Denis Myer, is a Canadian by birth,
and her husband is a Cuban.
The bride, who is only seventeen
years old, arrived for the ceremony
yesterday morning looking most at-
tractive in a black wool coat finished
with a squirrel collar, and a small
tricorne hat.
Another member of the company
and a Canadian, too, Mile. Kira
Bounina, attended the bride, and her
beige coat was worn with a brown felt
hat trimmed with matching ribbons.
The best man, M. Lorand Andahazy,
and the groomsman, M. Boris Belsky,.
are also members of the company.
Among those who attended were
Col. de Basil and his wife, who is
Mile Olga Morosova; the regisseur-
general of the company (M. Serge
Grigorieff) and his wife, who is Mlie
Lubov Tchernicheva; Mr. A. Philipofl
und Miss Olga Philpoff.
Directly after the ceremony the
bride and bridegroom attended a re-
hearsal at His Majesty’s Theatre,
where in the evening Mme Alonso ap-
peared as the leading butterfly in
Papillons and M. Alonso as the Moor
in Petroushka.


BALLET ROMANCE
TWO MEMBERS of the Russian
ballet, pretty Alexandra Denisova, a
17-years-old Canadian, and Alberto
Alonso, a Cuban, were married yes-
terday. Above; Leaving the Gov-
ernment Statist’s office. Right:
Rehearsing an hour later. After
last night’s performance Col. de
Basil gave them a party at the
Windsor.
Top: Miss Jennie Brenan and Colonel de Basil, and, above, Riabouchinska and
David Lichine at the party given by Miss Brenan at the Embassy yesterday so
that a number of her [?]might meet Colonel and Madame de Basil and the
leading ballet members. Before the party M. Lichine gave a lesson to Miss
Brenan's ballet class in the presence of Colonel and Madame de Basil.
“ICARE” WINS 20
CURTAINS
It was more than novelty that
won the ovation of the season for
Lifar’s percussion ballet “Icare” at
His Majesty’s last night. Plain
Greek severity of dancing, rein-
forced by thuds and crashes of
cymbals and drums, resulted in
more than 20 curtain calls.
For all its apparent modernity, this
ballet is a return to the clear classical
idiom with an insistent emphasis on
elevation. Even the story is based on
flight. Lack of melody is incidental; it
merely demonstrates that the dance need
not take its lead from music. Having
set its own rhythms, the ballet could
take a little melody without harm.
Lifar could hardly realise his own
creation more completely than -Jasinsky,
whose representation of the flight of birds
was perfect dance mime. The miming of
Rostoff and the gymnastic dancing of
Greek youths and maiden gave him ad-
mirable support. A few childish .touches
of realism in stage mechanics alone
marred the effect. Max Goberman
handles his percussion with masterly con-
centration, but the scoring of rhythms
need not be so explosive. The Melbourne
artist Sidney Nolan has designed a neutral
backcloth and some excellent costumes.
Revival of Fokine's exotic ’’Thamar’'
is justified by the icy intensity of Tcher-
nicheva's miming of the sadistic queen.
Ably partnered by Petroff. she raises this
ballet aboce mere sensationalism.
In spite of Riabouchinska s lively
Columbine, “Carnaval” is a little tame.
For all his personality, Lichine has hardly
the precision and quicksilver lightness of
Harlequin. “Cendrillon” should hold its
popularity with the younger generation.
TO-NIGHT
"CINDERELLA"
FIRST GREAT MATINEE,
WEDNESDAY, AT 2.
CHILDREN HALF-PRICE.
Book early for this spectacular programme,
which Includes the first performance In Mel-
bourne of "ICARE,” legend in 1 act, with
unique accompaniment (percussion instru-
ments only).
Seats available in stalls on the morning
of each performance at 6/, in addition to
other reserved sections, 3/ tickets at Allan’s
daily from 9 a.m. All seats bookable.
Eveninss at S. M:n> Wed. «...) Sat. •
3. C. Williamson Theatres Present
Col. W. de Basil’s BALLET
TO-NIGHT AT 8.
(For 6 Nights and 2 Matinees).
“CINDERELLA.” “CARNAVAL,”
“ICARE”
(First Performance in Melbourne),
“TIIAMAR.”
(For the matinees next Wednesday and Sat-
urday "The Blue Danube” will be substituted
in place of "THAMAR.”)
COMMENCING NEXT MONDAY, MAY 20,
“PAVILLGN” (first time in Australia),
"SCHEHERAZADE,” "CHOREARTILM.” and
supporting balled.
Plans at Allan’s.
Booking Opens 6 Days Ahead. Prices Plus Tax.
BALLET PROGRAMME
CHANGED
Fine Icare Performance
INTEREST in the new ballet pro-
x gramme presented at His Majesty’s
Theatre last night centred in Icare,
seen for the first time in Melbourne.
This ballet is Serge Lifar’s interpre-
tation of the Greek legend of a young
man with wings attached with wax,
who flies so high that the sun's rays
melt the wax. Roman Jasinsky
danced the name part with an amaz-
ing suggestion of flight.
In Thamar, which is in the lurid
melodrama class, Lubov Tchernicheva
and Paul Petroff danced effectively.
In Carnival Tatiana Riabouchin-
ska Was an enchanting Columbine
and David Lichine wove mischievous
dance patterns as Harlequin. In
Cendrillon Riabouchinska was an ex-
quisite Cinderella and H. Algeranoff
and Marian Ladre contributed expert
portraits as the Ugly Sisters.
THE BALLET
Icare is Challenging
With Thamar as its purple
and tragic background, the pro-
gramme of ballet at His
Majesty’s Theatre last evening
had sparkle and romantic stuff
in it. And Icare was so challeng-
ing as to be a theatrical sensa-
tion.
Carnaval, always a popular curtain-
raiser, was danced in the rather loose
orchestration of Schumann with
piquant grace and unity. Riabouchin-
ska, as the loveliest Columbine, was
helped in her loveliness by Lichine as
Harlequin. Verchinina, too, as Chia-
rina, was dancing mercurially on her
toes as if to confess her classical be-
ginning; while Borovansky as Pierrot,
Osato as Estrella, Volkova and Pa-
naieff joined exuberantly in the revels.
The music last night lacked cohesion.
But Icare, in its all-pervading
rhythmic denial of music in the
theme of flight, shocked the audience
into wide-awake recognition of its ex-
citing trend. Icare may well prove
a sensation, but it was Jasinsky ’s ex-
pressive dancing in his most promin-
ent role this season that brought down
last night’s house. Lifar shocked the
intelligence, while Jasinsky achieved
a triumph, and was brought back in
what must be a record in curtain
calls. Artificial in its finale, Icare
was staged arrestingly in costumes
beautiful, yet austere by Sidney Nolan,
of Melbourne. Among the dancers
were Morosavo, Denisova. Moulin,
Osato. and the Grecian youths, while
Rostoff mimed the part of Dedalus.
Antal Dorati, who became a proud
father on Sunday, conducted both
Tamar and Cendrillon. The former re-
vealed the Balakireff music in a fine
performance for the first time here,
and Tchernicheva indicated what a
tragedienne can make of the cruel and
voluptuous Queen of Georgia, with
Petroff strong as the immolated tra-
veller. We saw Thamar thus for the
first time, while recalling the indiffer-
ent production of 1936.
Cendrillon, rich in the magnificent
decor of Gontcharova and the brilliant
ballet score of d’Erlanger, should be
better in its second performance. But
Riabouchinka, particularly in the ball-
room scene, was inspiring to behold.
How is it that this ballerina fascinates
in everything she does ? Her matu-
rity in mime matched perfectly vir-
tuoso dancing of superb execution.
Algeranoff and Ladre as the Sisters
and Grigorieva as the Fairy, were de-
lightful, and Bounina as the Cat
danced every step with precision.
At the matinees on Wednesday and
. Saturday, Blue Danube will replace
Thamar in this skilful selection o’
ballets.
Ballet Dancers to Visit
University
The University Fine Arts Society, in
co-operation with the Melbourne Uni-
versity Union, will entertain Colonel
de Basil and members of the Russian
Ballet Co. to-day. The visit, which
was arranged by Mr. Desmond Connor,
the University Union Theatre manager,
recalls a similar visit last year, when
Mr. Arnold Haskell accompanied Mme.
Tamara Gregorieva and Mile. Anna
Volkova and Sono Orato, on which oc-
casion Mme. Gregorieva planted a tree,
now growing up well. The visitors will
be entertained at luncheon in the
Union House, at which Mr. J. D. C.
Vledley, the vice-chancellor, and Pro-
essor G. W. Paton, chairman of the
mion board, will be present.
BALLET CHANGE
After four performances “Cendrillon”
was withdrawn from the programme of
the De Basil ballet at His Majesty’s
last night. For the rest of the week
“Coq d’Qr” will be substituted. “Icare,”
“Thamar,” and “Carnaval” will be con-
tinued. Next week “Choreartium” and
“Scheherazade” will be revived, and
“Pavilion” will have its Australian
premiere.
Mr. Frank S. Tait, managing director
of J. C. Williamson Theatres, said yester-
day that final negotiations had been made
between his company and Colonel De
Basil* for the rest of the Australian tour
of the ballet. The company will be at
Melbourne until June 4, Adelaide from
June 6 to June 22, Brisbane June 26 to
July 12, and a short farewell season will
be given at Sydney from July 13 before
the company leaves for America.


Ballet Dancer
Married
At St. Paul’s
Miss Betty Lorraine Cuff (Vera
Nelidova, of the Col. de Basil Ballet
Company) and Mr. Angus Hunter
Tweddle were married yesterday at
St. Paul’s Cathedral.
Bishop Booth, of Geelong, officiated
at the side chapel of the Cathedral.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and
Mrs. Herbert W. Cuff, of Surrey, Eng-
land, and the bridegroom the son of
Mr. and Mrs. J. T. Tweddle, of Han-
worth, St. George’s rd., Toorak.
Plans for the wedding were kept quiet.
The bride’s colleagues in the ballet fare-
welled her after the performance on
Wednesday night. Only immediate re-
latives attended the ceremony yester-
day.
Mile. Nelidova and Mr. Tweddle met
in Melbourne when she was here with
the Covent Garden Russian Ballet Com-
pany in 1938. She is one of the most
distinguished English ballet dancers, and
w r as a member of the Marie Rambert
ballet company, the first permanent Eng-
lish company. She has now left Col.
de Basil’s company.
For her wedding, the bride wore an
ensemble of pervenche blue, the coat cut
on princess lines, with touches of black
astrachan on the hem and shoulders.
Her little black cap was trimmed with
braid, and she wore a spray of slipper
orchids.
Mr. and Mrs. Angus Tweddle photographed after their wedding yesterday
at St. Paul's Cathedral. The bride was Mile. Vera Nelidova, of the Col.
de Basil Ballet Company.
At the At Home given by Misses Jennie and Eileen Brenan at The
Embassy yesterday afternoon in honor of Colonel W. de Basil and
members of his Ballet Company. From left to right are David
Lichine, Olga Morosova, Tamara Toumonova, Colonel de Basil, Tatiana
Riabouchinska, Paul Petroff and Miss Jennie Brenan.
LETTERS FROM OVERSEAS for
Melbourne’s ballerina, Lydia Couprina,
better known locally as Phihda Cooper .
BALLET
DANCERS
ENTERTAINED
r ['*HERE was a happily informal
atmosphere about the At Home
the Misses Jennie and Eileen
Brenan gave at The Embassy late
yesterday afternoon to meet Colonel
W. de Basil and some of the read-
ing members of his Ballet Company,
Before the party Colonel de Basil and
>me members of the company watched
upils of the hostesses work in a class
(nder the direction of David Liehine,
hen the work of some of the students
reatly impressed Colonel de Basil.
Before the class some of the girls pre-
sented charming posies to Colonel de
Basil’s wife, Olga Morosova —who was
all in black, save for a touch of white
at the neck and a posy of violets pinned
in a lapel of her coat, while round her
shoulders she wore a fox fur—Tatiana
Riabouchinska, Tamara Toumanova,
Vera Nemtchinova, Nina Verchinina and
Lubov Tchernicheva.


NEW BALLETS
Superb Music
and Dancing
Performances of three ballets for the
first time this season, including the
Australian premiere of the Lichine-
Borodine le Pavilion, marked the tenth
week of a notable season at His Ma-
jesty’s Theatre.
Le Pavilion, David Lichine’s third
work—Francesca was his fourth —
achieved popular success. Continuous
action in choreography, meticulously
dictated by the romantic Borodine
music, introduced Toumanova in wist-
ful grace, her solo, and that of
Jasinsky and Leskova, and the pas de
trois, marking, with the exquisite
movement of the corps de ballet at the
finish, a work of excellent arrange-
ment. Cecil Beaton’s costumes
were gorgeous, and the scene
by Benois artistic to a degree.
Scheherazade brought many curtain-
calls. They were well deserved, for
we have not seen a better perform-
ance of the Fokine work, and the
dramatic music of Rimsky-Korsakoff
was given fine expression under the
baton of Antal Dorati. Andahazy,
sensationally agile, if not subtle in
physical mime, as the Favorite Slave;
Grigorieva, voluptuous in beauty; Ros-
toff, tall and impressive as Schariar,
with Ladre as the Eunuch, and Osato,
Stephanova and Lvova, sinuous as the
odalisques, were fitting characters in
the magnificent decor of Bakst.
But the chef-d’ceuvre of the evening
was Massine’s symphonic work,
Choreartium, danced with visual
strength to the profoundly moving
Fourth Symphony of Brahms. The
slow second movement, with Verchi-
nina dancing in subjective abstrac-
tion, the very spirit of the music in
inspiringly plastic interpretation was
as poetry in the dance. Expressive
also in its divergent forms was the
third movement, while Toumanova.
Lichine, Morosova and Petroff, with a
male corps in brilliant symmetry and
control, linked up the first and fourth
movements in superb theme and coun-
terpoint. Max Gobernan conducted
the symphony in a notable produc-
tion.
TRIUMPH FOR
TOUMANOVA
By GEOFFREY HUTTON
With the first Australian premiere
of the seasorfiand two long-awaited
revivals, this week’s programme of
the De Basil Ballet at His Majesty’s
shows what a wealth of material
the company’s repertoire still holds.
It is the last full-week programme
and one of the strongest of the
season.
Success rests very largely with
Toumanova, who dances two roles in
widely differing styles, and gives to each
the utmost in technique and feeling.
Lichine’s “Pavilion” would be a very slen-
der concoction in the romantic tradition
if she were not present to give, it warmth
and dignity as the one woman amid a
host of fluttering sprites.
First produced in London four years
ago, this little ballet has been largely
recast. The sequence is thin, but Lichine
has scored a beautiful solo for
Toumanova, and the classical idiom of
the fairies’ dances has some original
touches. Leskova should be effective as
the chief spirit when she is used to the
role, and Jasinsky dances smoothly as the
poet.
A revival of “Choreartium” was essen-
tial to the many admirers of the sym-
phonic works. Danced by the strongest
cast of any ballet this season, Massine’s
masterpiece of pure dance received a
great welcome. Toumanova’s passionate
precision and Lichine’s stormy energy
dominate the work, but there is fine
dancing from Lazowsky, Petroff, Jasinsky,
Osato, Volkova, and others. Verchinina’s
plastic style finds its best expression yet
in the slow movement.
A fine “Scheherazade” is dominated by
Grigorieva and Andahazy, who are bring-
ing this old ballet back to a high level
of dramatic force.
New Ballet
Bn Monday
Another ballet new to Aus-
tralia will be performed by
Colonel de Basil's Ballet Com-
pany next Monday "Le
Pavilion," by David Lichine.
r |X)UMANOVA will dance the main
role.
The story of this ballet, which is
by Boris Kochno, a collaborator of
Diaghileff’s at one time, centres
around a midnight rendezvous in a
garden pavilion between a poet and
a young lady. Spirits bewitch the
poet and make him forget his tryst,
but in the end he returns to console
the girl.
This ballet was produced first some
years ago. In recent weeks Lichine
has made considerable alterations to
it.
Although there is no actual defini-
tion of place, the poet, in Lichine’s
imagination, is Spanish.
The music is by Borodine and has
been orchestrated by Antal Dorati,
chief conductor of Colonel de Basil’s
Ballet Company. The scenery and
costumes are by the English designer,
Cecil Beaton.
The presentation of “Choreartium,”
danced to the Fourth Symphony of
Brahms, will afford an opportunity
of seeing Nina Verchinina in another
role created by her, that of the
leader in the second movement.
Another ballet in the programme
will be “Scheherazade,” and it is to
be hoped Melbourne will be given the
interesting experience Sydney had,
for one night at least, of seeing
Tchernicheva play the Favorite to
her husband’s Shah. Madame Tcher-
nicheva in private life is Madame
Serge Grigorieff, wife of the Regis-
seur-General of the company.
Ballet To Race F rom
Stage To Train >
Travelling in a special
train, with four tons of
scenery and properties
and more than a ton of cos-
tumes, the Russian Ballet will leave
for Adelaide at one minute past mid-
night tomorrow morning about an
hour after the final curtain of their
farewell performance at His Majesty’s
tonight.
At midnight, too, workmen will take
over His Majesty’s stage to prepare a
skating rink for the return season of
the ice revue “Switzerland,” which will
open on Saturday.
The Ballet train will take more than
100 dancers, company executives, mem-
bers of the orchestra and wardrobe and
stage staffs to Adelaide.
break of war. Anna Volkova has two
brothers fighting with the French Army.
After today the company will see
Melbourne again only in transit after
the end of the Adelaide season on
June 22.
They will travel by train to Brisbane
to open there on June 26. A short return
season in Sydney will follow a fort-
night later, before the company sails
for its autumn season in America.
Whirlwind Packing
The “luggage” which will go on the
I train with the compairy will be sets,
i costumes, shoes and wigs used in to-,
night’s programme, and hurriedly
packed by the stage and wardrobe;
staffs and dressers as each ballet ends.
Members of the company are sorry
to leave Melbourne after their season
of 12 weeks less a day, the longest in
one city in ballet history.
ffhe invasion of Scandinavia, the
Netherlands and France grimly
shadowed recent weeks for many of the
dancers. More than 20 Russian and
French members of the company have
parents in Paris.
Relatives In Danger
Olga Morosova (Madame de Basil)
and her sister, Nina Verchinina, who
are the daughters of emigre Russians,
have been worried about their parents
on the French Riviera. Yura Lazovsky,
a Pole, has heard no news of his father
i and brothers in Poland since the out-
Spencer Shier photo
A scene from the Mathematics and History Lesson in Graduation Ball,
which will be one of the ballets presented by Colonel W. de Basil’s Ballet
Company at the matinee at His Majesty’s Theatre tomorrow to aid the
Children’s and Royal Melbourne Hospitals. Only about 100 seats are
still available for the matinee, a few of them £2/2/- ones, and some
at £1/1/- and 10/6, which may be reserved at Allan’s, Collins Street.
In the picture are, from left to right, Marina Svetlova, Helene Lineva
(Alison Lee, an Australian girl), and Maria Azrova.
“PRESAGES” REVIVED
Melbourne’s fondness for “Les
Presages” was again demonstrated last
night when a revival brought a large
house to His Majesty’s and received a
great welcome. It is the main work in
the strongest programme of the week.
Toumanova’s strong dramatic sense and
Petroff’s force and elevation as the Hero
made a deep impression. Petroff’s part-
nering was also impeccable. Verchinina’s
Action and Riabouchinska’s Frivolity are
the other highlights of the performance.
Algeranoff’s Fate can take more strength,
but it is firm and competent.
Jasinsky repeats his individual triumph
in Lifar’s percussion ballet “Icare,” which
is well worth a revival. Riabouchinska
also dances through “Les Sylphides” with
Stepanova and Panaieff, and “Blue
Danube” with Lichine, Morosova,
Lazovsky, and Borovansky as the Strong
Man.
The programme will be repeated twice
to-day, and “Aurora’s Wedding,”
“Graduation Ball” and “Coq d’Or” will be
given for the two final performances next
week.—G.W.H.


They Danced For Our Delight —
❖
♦
i
*
♦ vH
QJ
M
H
C
By Gwenda Carney
THE ballet with all its charm,
beauty and romance will fade
from Melbourne soon, but
the memory of it will remain. The
third and most memorable season
of Russian ballet will be brought
to a close on Tuesday night.
Credit is due to Colonel de Basil for form-
ing this magnificent company and carrying on
the traditions of the ballet. From Europe
he brought every dancer he could lay hands
on, and then welded them into one united
body.
Unfortunately we did not have the plea-
sure of seeing Lifar dancing. But two of his
ballets were produced here, Icare and
Pavane. Icare was definitely one of the
highlights of the season. This ballet has
tried to prove that dancing can stand alone
and not be dominated by the music. In a
way it is an answer to Massine’s symphonic
ballets, in which the music towers over the
dancing.
Jasinsky scored a well-earned triumph in
the role of Icarus. This role showed to great
advantage his brilliant dancing ability and
very graceful style. The decor for this
ballet was designed by a young Melbourne
man, Sidney Nolan. The costumes are excel-
TATIANA RIABOUCHINSKA, who has never failed to rouse ballet
audiences to a high pitch of enthusiasm, is seen here dancing
in Graduation Ball. This popular ballet of Lichine’s,
invented to little-known Strauss melodies, will conclude the
programme on Monday night, following Aurora’s Wedding and Coq
d’Or, and on the last night, Tuesday, Graduation Ball will open the
programme, with Aurora’s Wedding taking the final curtain. Colonel
de Basil’s company, which will not return to His Majesty’s, will begin
its season in Adelaide on Saturday next.
lent, but the scenery could have been more
in tone with the atmosphere of the ballet.
Pavane, a delicate miniature, was over-
looked. In this ballet Lifar has caught the
atmosphere of the music perfectly, and has
succeeded in creating an artistic masterpiece
worthy of any connoisseur’s scrap-book.
We must also congratulate and say a sad
farewell to:
Toumanova: In the beginning of the sea-
son in Aurora’s Wedding and Sylphides she
was slightly disappointing, but later in Sym-
phonic Pantastique. Fire-bird and Petrouchka
she proved without doubt that she is a
great artist. The role of the Beloved fitted
her nervous, emotional temperament per-
fectly. Her technique is effortless and super-
lative, and I am only sorry that she did not
dance the Queen in Coq d’Or. It requires
not only a good technique, but also an ac-
complished actress to give this role its full
value.
Verchinina: A very different artist from
any we have hitherto seen. In her classicism
Duncanism, and so-called Central European
styles have met. showing that a classical
grounding is needed to give lightness, ease
of movement and steel-like precision so
essential in any type of dancing. You rea-
lise her importance when you have seen
her roles in Presages and Chioreartium done
by others.
Her Action in Presages was the most ex-
citing pieces of dancing in the whole season.
She had hopes of producing her first, ballet
here in Melbourne, but, unfortunately, with
so many new productions scheduled, she was
not able to fit in enough rehearsals. The
ballet was to be to the music of Bach,
especially compiled by Dorati.
Riabouchinska: Words are inadequate to
express the superb artistry of this ballerina;
she just dances. In Graduation Ball her
spontaneous natural gaiety was the highlight
of the ballet.
Nemtchinova: An older ballerina, has given
unique performances. She is a great classical
dancer —simple and dignified in her move-
ments and with a maturity that is rare
among dancers today.
Lichine: Much praise is deserved by
Lichine for creating Graduation Ball —the
most popular ballet of the season. So full
of life and gaiety, it is just what is needed
to brighten us up in these black days.
And Not Forgetting —
Jasinsky and Lazovsky: Both these artists
have maintained a very high standard, and
have given brilliant performances. They are
both entirely different, Jasinsky essentially a
classical dancer and Lazovsky a character
dancer who was unforgettable in the role
of Petrouchka.
Special bouquets are deserved by Rostoff
for his magnificent miming in Paganini and.
for young Leskova for her delightful dancing
in her difficult role in Graduation Ball, and
as the bad pupil in Scuola di Ballo.
And last, but not least. Antal Dorati and
Max Goberman for the comparatively high
standard of the orchestra. A great deal of
the work this season has fallen upon Max
Goberman, while Dorati has been conducting
elsewhere, and although this is the first
time he has conducted ballet he has shown
that he is a first-rate conductor. It is a
pity that we could not hear him with a
larger orchestra playing some of the little-
known works which he performs in New
York with his own Sinfonietta orchestra.


NIJINSKY'S STRANGE
DRAWINGS
AND MME. NIJINSKY.
MME. NIJINSKY, wife of the most famous
of all the Russian dancers, VASLA V
NIJINSKY, is the author of the biography
of him, published by Gollancz. Nijinsky has
been ill for several years, and spends some of
his time drawing. On this page we reproduce
some examples of his work. The line drawings
and some of the other pictures were made
before he was taken ill, and illustrate how he
used the circle in drawing as he used to do in
dancing, and in his system of the human
movements (stenochoregraphy), which is ex-
plained by Mme. Nijinsky in her book. The
two centre drawings were done since his
illness. He has, mads over a hatred. Mo st of them are in America, where Mme. Nijinsky hai an exhibition two year, ago. She is hoping
to arrange one in London, for the benefit of Nijinsky, some time in January or February.


CHANCE IN
BALLET
Ballet girls for
performances to
be given by
Misses Jennie and
Eileen Brenan at
the King’s
Theatre on Fri-
day and Satur-
day nights in aid
of Blarney and
Air Force Houses
and the Queen
Victoria and St.
Vincent’s Hos-
pitals
<>>]iiiiiiiiiiiiaiiiiiiiiiiii[]iiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiifiiiiiic]iiiii]iiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiii[]ifiiiiiiiiiic»:«
Ballet Performance
Roy Currie, the 13-years-old principal of the Jennie Brenan ballet perform-
ance to be staged at th e King's Theatre on October 18 and 19, to aid Blarney
and Air Force Houses, and the Queen Victoria and St. Vincent's Hospitals. With
her is Charles Boyd, one of the soloists in the production.
JACK CATO
ROY CURRIE, a 13 year
old pupil of The Jennie
Brenan school of Dancing
who won The Royal Aca-
demy of dancing scholar-
ship last year, has been
selected by Colonel de
Basil to join his Company
fo r the remainder of the
Australian tour as a
student member. She
will receive lessons each
day from their Ballet
Master and if she does
well, Colonel de Basil
will make her a member
of his Company.
Patriotic Ballets , Singing
And Parades For
Crowd At Princess Theatre
17V a fascinating kaleidoscojye of color , music and movement,
the Cavalcade of Empire Pageant at the Princess Theatre
has brought together an array of talent such as is rarely
assembled in one entertainment. Apart frtnn worthy
causes ” and patriotic sentiment it can be highly commendeu
from a purely entertainment point of view.
Much of it will linger long
in the memory, particularly
the lovely old English airs
which we have heard so
often, but probably never
before in such beautiful and
appropriate settings.
The selection of music is one of the ;
chief reasons for success. Even Sir
Thomas Beecham couldn’t quibble [
about the quality although they are
all familiar and popular airs.
Cherry Ripe. Believe Me If All
Those Endearing Young Charms, thej
Kerry Dances. Drake’s Drum, I've a
Whip at the Mast, Drink To Me Only,
An English Rose, are some of the
'haunting refrains which had added
charm by their association with ap-
propriate native stage settings and
| historic episodes.
Beautiful Ballets
INTERMINGLED are many beauti-
-1 ful and enlivening ballets. In
fact, it is hardly exaggerating to say
I that the entertainment is a satisfying
evening’s ballet in itself.
There are lively tap dances, a gaj
Morris dance, an Irish jig, Scottish
reel. English minuet, skating ballet.
Maori Poi dance and an ambitious
mew Australian bushland ballet
: Much has been written about an
Australian ballet company and those
who claim that the material and the
{talent are available are not exagger-
i ating.
The whole range, from tradition?
folk dances to the new and modern
bush ballet, has been covered and the
standard throughout is . such that
only the hypercritical would wish to
draw distinctions 'between the bril-
liant work of our own hardworking
and enthusiastic members of the local
[dancing schools and that of visiting
j companies.
Thrilling Parades
' - |''HROUGH these lovely units of
movement and color is woven a
parade of great men and historic
episodes that make up the history of
Britain and the Empire. These aro
deftly contrived and neatly executed.
Of modern affairs, there is a real
thrill in the Caledonian Pipe Band’s
[ascent to the stage from the audi-
torium and the march of soldiers,
I sailors and airmen in the finale.
The production was flawless and
[the timing was smooth and uninter-
rupted. The costumes were lavish
[and sumptuous and the University
Orchestra, under Hector Crawford,
j showed great skill in the highly intri-
cate and specialised job of accom-
panying stage singing and dancing.
In rehearsing and co-ordinating the
work of her 600 odd performers, Miss
Mina Shelley, the producer, has
shown skill.


BALLET NIGHT
AT PRINCESS
By Thorold Waters
]Y£ANY influences of the dance
could be sampled in the Night
of Ballet given at the Princess
Theatre last night under direc-
tion of the National Theatre
Movement, for Red Cross and
Comforts Funds.
The range was from classic Swan Lake,
in which Roy Currie’s good adagios and
pirouettes were linked with very flexible
and graceful work by Charles Boyd, to a
valorous experiment in expressing Bach's
Prelude and Fugue in B flat.
In this, the choreography of Dorothy
Gladstone, after dealing with the Prelude
in a straightforward story, divided the
fugal voices among three groups of dan-
cers. ' The title Counter-rhythm applied
;to their activities and not to the con-
| trapuntal music. The idea can be ex-
| tended.
An original divertissement presented
by Jennie Brenan, The Tartans, was a
signal success, with Phyllis Kennedy,
Charles Boyd and Gerald McErlean
dancing it humorously. The Gossips was
another good thing in witty vein.
Autumn Leaves, presented by the Boro-
vansky school, expands an idea already
exploited elsewhere. Steady postures of
human statuary made the most admir-
: able feature of Greek Dances, and Egyp-
tian Pattern, devised by Jean Alexander,
was picturesque. Expressionist dancing
was presented by Joyce Lodge.
Night of Ballet
By GEOFFREY HUTTON
Some very promising dancing was seen
in the course of a long and varied pro-
gramme at the Princess last night, when
the National Theatre gave its annual
“Night of Ballet.” It was a further
proof that Australians can and will dance
if they have the opportunity.
The breadth, movement, and finish of
“Autumn Leaves” by the Borovansky
Academy was particularly impressive, and
to many of the audience it was probably
a surprise. In this original work Boro-
vansky has given a reminder of the old
Pavlova ballet to music of Chopin. Rachel
Cameron danced the lead with technique
and assurance, and a large supporting
team of dancers showed unfailing grace
and musical feeling. Rachel Cameron
and Dorothy Stevenson also danced de-
lightful divertissements.
Three dances from “Swan Lake” were
repeated by Jennie Brenan’s pupils from
their recent programme, and a witty
Scottish divertissement “The Tartans ”
In Charles Boyd the school has a fine
male dancer, virile and technically ac-
complished. Roy Currie and Phyllis Ken-
nedy are also dancers of great promise.
Other dances ranged from the Egyp-
tians and the Greeks to the ultra-
moderns. They were not all of the same
standard, and some fell far short of the
best work.
Traditional and modern ballets were
presented, and were enthusiastically
received by a large audience. The
pupils of Miss Jennie Brenan showed
delightful technique in their perform-
ance of excerpts from Swan Lake and
again in the original divertissement,
The Tartans. Edouard Borovansky
danced the role of the poet in Autumn
Leaves, a ballet to Chopin music, for
which he wrote the choreography.
With Rachel Cameron dancing as the
wind-blown chrysanthemum, and S.
Bousloff as the north wind, with
excellent support, the ballet proved
one of the highlights of the perform-
ance. Members of the Dorothy Glad-
stone academy, the Conservatorium
dancers and the members of the school
of modem expressive dancing, under
the direction of Joyce Lodge, con-
tributed to the programme.
Shown with Helen Gilbert in one of the spectacular scenes from "Florian,”
now at the St. James, Irina Baronova, star of the Melbourne season of the
Monte Carlo Ballet Russe, makes a brilliant first screen appearance.
Famous Dancer Returns
As Film Star
LATEST glamorous figure
to flash across the Holly-
wood horizon is Irina
Baronova, who will be re-
membered for her unprecedented
success as principal dancer in the last
Melbourne ballet season.
She plays her first screen role as
the beautiful “Trina” temperamental
ballerina in “Florian,” the new re-
lease at the St. James.
Baronova was dancing at Covent
Garden when Director Winfield
Sheehan, about to start “Florian.”
persuaded her by cablegram to rush
to America by Clipper plane, and
join the cast. On her last night in
London she was given an ovation
that lasted 35 minutes.
Miss Baronova was born in St.
Petersburg, and was a year old when
the revolution swept Russia, and her
family were forced to flee. Living in
Rumania, Baronova received her first
dancing lessons from her mother.
When she was seven the family
moved to Paris, and her real ballet
training began under Olga Preobra-
jenska, famous prima ballerina 'of
the Russian opera. Four years later
Miss Baronova was selected for the
Russian ballet company at Monte
Carlo by producer Colonel W. de
Basil.
Robert Young and Helen Gilbert
head the cast of “Florian,” and
Reginald Owen and Charles Coburn
provide the lighter moments.
BARONOVA IN
FLORIAN
Latest glamorous figure to flash
across the cinema horizon is Irina
Baronova, principal dancer of tha
Ballet Russe, and hailed throughout
the world as not a beautiful ballerina
but as the successor to Pavlova. She
plays her first screen role as
Trina, sweetheart of an archduke,
in Florian, which is due at the State
Theatre shortly.
It was while appearing with the
Ballet Russe that Mme. Baronova
was first seen by Winfield Sheehan,
screen producer. He considered her
ideal for his purposes. She was
dancing in Covent Garden, London,
when the war broke out and has-
tened the theatre’s closure. Sheehan,
about to start Florian, persuaded her
by cablegram to travel to America
by Clipper, fly on to Hollywood and
join the cast. On her last night in
London she was given an ovation
that lasted 35 minutes.
Irina Baronova was born in old
St. Petersburg. Living in Bucharest,
Roumania, she received her first
dancing lessons from her mother.
Then, when she was seven, her
family moved to Paris, and her real
ballet training began under Olga
Preobrajenska, famous prima bal-
lerina of the Russian opera. Four
years later Mme. Baronova was
selected for the Russian Ballet com-
pany at Monte Carlo.


WE WILL HAVE BALLET
M. Borovanskys Company
SIXTY dancers from many Australian schools,
members of the Australian Ballet Co., directed
by Edouard Borovansky, will give their first per-
formance in a programme of new ballets at the
Comedy Theatre on Monday and Tuesday next. In-
spired by the talents of Mr. Borovansky and his wife,
Zenia Borovansky, the company should command
the support of all ballet lovers who are sincerely in-
terested in our own creative efforts in the art of bal-
let, apart from reliance on borrowed standards as
represented brilliantly in the periodical visits of dis-
tingushed troupes of traditional Russian origin.
Mr. Borovan-
sky needs no
introduction to
the public. A
principal male
dancer in Rus-
sian ballet for
15 years, he was
for some time
choreograph e r
and ballet mas-
ter to the
Prague State
Theatre. He re-
mained in Mel-,
bourne after
Victor Dandre’s
tour with Ba-
ronova, Ria-
bouch i n s k a,
Dolin and Lich-
ine in 1938.
The pro-
gramme will
consist of four
original works.
EDOUARD
BOROVANSKY
“Pas Classique” will open the pro-
gramme in accordance with tradi-
tion. It is a purely classical ballet,
In one act without subject,
arranged by Madame Borovansky to
music by Tschaikowsky.
The first act presents the young
girl Pepita and her lover Jose. They
are disturbed by Esteband’s sere-
naders and Pepita’s father who bar-
gains with them as to who shall
marry his daughter. A village holi-
day opens the second act, and Jose’s
suit is pressed amid the festivities.
Vltava (Czech river) is the second
symphonic poem of the cycle My
Country, by the Czech composer B.
Smetana. With this river is bound
up all the history and tradition of
the Czech nation.
The music begins with the sound
of little streams which flow together
to form the river. Along the river’s
course we get short glimpses of life
in the country through which it
flows; first young huntsmen, then
the dance of village youth. Night
falls, and at moonrise fairies of the
river disport themselves on the water,
and recall the spirit of Czech war-
riors. Presently the river reaches the
St. John rapids, through which it
vanishes in foam. The river, now
broad and swift, washes past Vyseh-
rad, a mediaeval citadel, and flows
on into Prague.
Mr. Borovansky, himself a Czech,
has endeavored to express the spirit
of the young Czechoslovakia in plas-
tic ballet.
Autumn Leaves: The poetry of
Chopin’s music provided the late
Anna Pavlova with the inspiration
for Autumn Leaves.
The prologue to the ballet takes us
to a lovely garden of the romantic
period of last century. We see
leaves driven by the cold autumn
wind, and among them is discovered
a late chrysanthemum. In this flower
the poet sees the soul of a woman
torn by the hardness and struggle
of life, and tenderly admires her.
Again the wind comes and tears the
flower from his grasp, awakening
him from his phantasy. But he re-
members sadly that it was only a
flower.
Among the sixty dancers are twelve
male performers, drawn from various
Australian centres. Dorothy Steven-
son is an Australian who has danced
in ballet at Covent Garden. Rachel
Cameron appeared recently in Au-
tumn Leaves at the Princess
Theatre.
Miss Laurel Martyn is a soloist in the
Borovansky Australian Ballet Company
which will present a programme of
ballet at the Comedy Theatre on
December 9 and 10.
Miss Dorothy Stevenson (front right) rehearsing pupils of the Borovansky
School of Ballet for their performance at a concert to be given at the Melba
Hall on August 31, in aid of Red Cross and Comforts Fund. Others in the
picture are Rachel Cameron, Edna Busse, Jonet Wilkie, and Margaret
Richards.
DANCERS
MAKE OWN
COSTUMES
Some feminine members of the Boro-
vansky Australian Ballet Company, which
will give its first performances at the
Comedy Theatre on December 9 and 10,
in the presence of the Governor (Sir
Winston Dugan) and Lady Dugan, have
proved that they are just as skilful with
the needle as the toe shoe.
In the intervals of practice they
got together, under the leadership
of Madame Borovansky, and cut out
hand-painted and made up more
than 100 costumes to be used in the
performance.
Some have never tried their hand
at dressmaking before, but the re-
sults are splendid. M. Borovansky
says that the finish and neatness of
their work is more than equal to
the costumes made for the Russian
ballet.
Forty peasant costumes have been
hand-painted in water color, in a
bewildering variety of designs.
These have been sketched and
colored first of all by M. Borovan-
sky, and are all taken from his
memories of Spanish costumes, of
which he knows a great deal, hav-
ing spent a few months in Spain
every year for the past few years.
The motifs include series of bril-
liant stripes, diamonds, whorls and
squares, and each dress is individu-
ally patterned.
The result is a brilliant galaxy of
bold color, and the frocks are cor-
rect to the last detail.
★
HOURS of patient volun-
tary work have been
put into the costumes.
Those for the men are equally
well done.
In addition, dresses for ‘'Poeme
Symphonique” have been hand-
painted in a spirit medium, which
needs much care, as the slightest
error means that the coloring is
spoilt.
These are all done in yellow, green,
and blue. Miss Edna Busse, who is
a solo dancer with the company,
has been M. Borovansky’s chief
assistant with the wt>rk.
The material is cut out, pinned
down on sheets of paper and then
painted: when it dries the costumes
are made up.
Some of them are fashioned after
designs by William Constable.
The enthusiasm of the workers is
a good augury for the success of
this first season by an Australian
ballet company.
M. Borovansky. who has been a
soloist in the Russian ballet for the
past 15 years, and who was ap-
pointed choreographer and ballet
master to the Prague State Theatre,
and his wife, Xenia Borovansky,
who was associated with Pavlova for
several years, are very satisfied with
the progress made by Australian
dancers.


Nimble-footed Australians Form Ballet
By Colin Fraser
N'EXT week Australia’s first
ballet company will make
its first deferential bow to
the Australian public in Mel-
bourne.
No doubt the Australian public will receive
its offering—four little ballets devised about
music known to most people who listen to
the classical hour on the radio—quite calmly;
and will contrast a little regretfully the
imperfections of the performance with the
hyper-professional slickness of the big com-
panies that have toured the Commonwealth
during the past few years.
But for all that, the modest first night
will be a milestone in Australian stage his-
tory. The little ballets have been devised, step
by step, sequence by sequence, in a shabby
school for dancers in a Melbourne street, by
a choreographer who smokes endless cigar-
ettes and draws his inspiration from volatile
Melbourne air and memories of ballet’s
grand days when peace was gracious.
The dancers whom his temperament, sar-
casm, good humor, black despair and sheer,
stubborn insistence drive on are Australians
from every walk of life.
It is true Australians have devised ballets
to be danced by Australians before this —but
Edouard Borovansky’s ballet company is, for
Australia at least, something novel and sig-
nificant.
It is no trippety-jump, flap-fairy affair to
stun the local yokels and swell with pride
fond mothers’ hearts. It is an honest-to-good-
ness ballet company in the Russian tradition
—professional, laborious, sweaty and some-
times a little cruel. It has room only for
dancers who are willing to work 18 hours a
day if need be to approach but one appreci-
able step nearer perfection, and the creation
of something artistically worth while.
It may, or it may not, succeed, but its
formation marks the birth of major interpre-
tative art in Australia.
The people who compose this company are
amusing and rather unusual folk. They are
all cranks. Ballet would not exist at all if
there were not ballet cranks. Of all the
professions in the world, the profession of
the ballet dancer is the hardest worked and
the worst paid.
The thumbnail biographies of a few of the
company will tell you more about the spirit
of this first Australian ballet company than
a yard of analytical discourse.
Dorothy Stevenson is the daughter of a
Bishop the Right Rev. Henry Webster
Stevenson. M.A., Th. Soc. She began her
career turning somersaults in the Bishop’s
garden, persuaded him to send her to London,
danced at Covent Garden, and is a soloist in
the new company. The Bishop approves.
He reads books about the ballet.
Laurel Martyn, of Brisbane, one of the
company’s headliners, was to have studied
archaeology. Her parents let her choose
between the University and a trip to Eng-
land,
“I chose England,” says Laurel. “I can
always do the archaeology when my arches
go,” In England she won a scholarship,
became a member of the Vic.-Wells ballet,
did film and television work and succeeded
in Paris.
Young man with a grievance is Michael
Wilson, whose family strongly disapproves
his attending rehearsals. His sister thinks
it is sissy. An accountant in the daytime,
Wilson began dancing after he had read a
book about Nijinsky,
To pay for- dancing lessons, Jonet Wilkie,
a New Zealander, has been a waitress in a
small Melbourne cafe, typist, secretary and
radio player. The war brought her back
from England where she had been studying.
She has difficulties in getting money from
New Zealand, and has to keep working to
support herself.
Hardest working member of the company
is Edna Busse, of Melbourne, soloist at 19.
Her day starts at about 10 o’clock in the
morning and ends around 11 p.m. Between
dances she sits in a corner, sewing, cutting
and painting the company’s Costumes.
Mixing arithmetic with ballet, Connie Lun,
13, baby of the company, arrives for rehearsal
as soon as she finishes her homework. She
is a pupil at Korowa Girls’ School. Her
father is an Australian-born Chinese and
her mother is Scottish,
Also working under difficulties, Noel Neville,
an engineer, has his rehearsals at all hours
so that he can work back at the munitions
factory at Maribyrnong.
Although none of these enthusiasts has
done the traditional flit from home to do
ballet, one or two still face stiff opposition
to attend rehearsals
Chief object of Borovansky’s sarcasm is
tall, thin, fair-haired Eric Clapham, pianist at
rehearsals, who will conduct the orchestra
for next week’s performances.
In the middle of an intricate dance Boro-
vansky will call, “Stop, stop, stop, stop, stop!”
Then turning to Clapham—
“You know, you will make a very good
conductor—on a tram,” Clapham grins with
disarming geniality
From Hastings, New Zealand, he has given
up several jobs, including one as a master at
Geelong Grammar School, to play for the
ballet. Borovansky will only have enthusi-
asts, and he has a soft spot for Clapham.
Business force behind the company is
Roger Racine, managing director another
young man, He is 23. As a pupil of
Borovansky’s he has been disillusioned by
the number of people who said they would
form an Australian company and did nothing
about it,
One night the pupil walked into the
teacher’s office and said: “What do you say
if we form a company?”
The teacher said: “That is a fine idea. I
hoped to do it later, but if we can do it now,
all right.”
The pupil floated the Borovansky Aus-
tralian Ballet Company Pty. Ltd., within two
weeks.
Good luck to it.
WARM WELCOME
FOR BALLET
By GEOFFREY HUTTON
A full house gave an enthusiastic wel- !
come to the first performance of the
Borovansky Australian Ballet Company at
the Comedy last night. Even those who
went out of patriotism or mere curiosity
came away convinced that a balle of our
own is no longer a daydream.
The company has a surprising number
of soloists with well-developed technique,
and a developing sense of the stage.
It has youth, energy, and enthusiasm in
abundance. And it has a choreographer
who can construct a pregramme of ballet
with a real knowledge of the theatre.
M. Borovansky is at his best as choreo-
grapher in “Vltava,” a ballet of his own
country, Czechoslovakia, to music of
Smetana. Using the free modem idiom of
the symphonic ballets, he has constructed
a deeply impressive series of mass move-
ments, centring around the symbolic
figure of the river. Laurel Martyn’s
dancing of this part is one of the best
things of the evening.
Dorothy Stevenson dances and mimes j
brilliantly in the comic Spanish ballet!
“L’Amour Ridicule,” in which she is part-!
nered by the fine character dancer Bous-
loff, with Borovansky in one of his bur-,
lesque roles.
“Autumn Leaves” and “Pas Classique”
(Tschaikowsky) show other ballerinas of
the future —Rachel Cameron and Edna
Busse—who have both improved steadily.
Anne Mackintosh and Corrie Lodders are
also full of promise.
The performance will be repeated to-
night.
BALLET
Borovansky Australian Ballet Company
Presents 4 Ballets.
“Autumn Leaves,’’ WAmour Ridicule,"
“Vltava-Symphonic Poem,” • “Pas Classique.”
COMEDY THEATRE, DEC. 9, 10
Vice-Regal Patronage Gala Premiere
Allan’s, 6/6, 5/6, 3/S, 2/6 (plus
maining Seats in Theatre Boo'-


SCHOOLS
for the
BALLET . .
THE STUDENT watches her-
self in the mirror to see
that faults do not creep into
her work. Edna Busse
at the Borovansky Academy.
DOROTHY STEVENSON, one of
the best of Melbourne's young
dancers, in a Spanish ballet being
rehearsed by M. Borovansky.
ATTRACTIVE YOUNG DANCERS of the
Jennie Brenan school in rehearsal for their
performance at the King's. They are Rita
Stafford, Shirley Freeman, Betty Med-
dings, Lorna Deague, and Lucille Leber.
EDNA BUSSE, Rachel Cameron, and Vera
Grist, in the Australian bush ballet, which
was danced at the "Cavalcade of Empire."
JOAN BURNETT, brilliant
young English dancer en-
gaged by Jennie Brenan, is
principal dancer in charity
performances at the King's.
ANOTHER GROUPING by the three dancers in the
picture above. The freedom and softness of the arms
shows the influence of good classical teaching.


ERIC LANDERER
Marina svetlova, who has
been dancing leading solo
roles in Les Sylphides and Paganini,
is not yet 18. Her technique in
classical grace and lightness has
been widely and favorably com-
mented on during the present sea-
son at His Majesty’s.
Born in France on May 3, 1922, the
daughter of Colonel Hartmann, of the
old Imperial army of Russia, Marina
Yvette Svetlova studied in Paris with
Trevilova, end recently worked at the
school of Ksovsky, who trained Vera
Zorina. Balanchine’s wife, who is now
in films. During the past three years in
Paris Svetlova has won the Inter-
national Competition of Dance.
Three Lives has Andrea Leeds
OF necessity, most actors and act-
resses lead a double life, but
Andrea Leeds has had the distinction
of being called upon to lead a triple
life. Engaged by Samuel Goldwyn for
a leading role in Melody of Youth, she
was already amply occupied, when she
was chosen to star with Gary Cooper
in another Goldwyn production The
Real Glory. And before the cameras
had finished shooting one film she
was rehearsing the other.
That accounted for two lives. The
other life, or what was left of it, was
her own.
* * * *
Revolution in Spain
Eric Landerer.
Eric lan-
DE R E R.
Czechoslovakian
pianist, who
came with the
Ballet for the
solo work in Pa-
ganini, played
a concerto, with
Georg Snee-
voight directing
the orchestra,
in the Sydney
Town Hall last
evening. He
will play the
Liszt Concerto No. .1 in E flat major
in Melbourne on Tuesday, April 9.
Travelling in Spain during the 1934
revolution Mr. Landerer found him-
self “broke” in Barcelona. However,
he was engaged by the famous cellist
Casals for several orchestral concerts,
playing Tchaikowsky, Brahms .and
Bach concertos. An electricity strike
cancelled his concert in Bilbao. Not-
withstanding ms troubles, he found
consolation in the indignation of two
elderly ladies, who complained that
the tourist agency had not warned
them that there would be a revolu-
tion.
SVETLOVA.
Painting Ballet Cloths
WHILE Colonel de Basil and the
judges, B. J. Waterhouse, Will
Ashton (director of the National Gal-
lery, Sydney), Sydney Ure Smith and
Basil Burdett, .are preparing to judge
the sketches of artists in original de-
cor, Loudon Sain thill, a young Austra-
lian fresh from London, is busy paint-
ing cloths and gouache work on danc-
ing subjects.
Mr. Sainthill and Mr. H. Tatlock
Miller brought 500 exhibits of art for;
theatre and ballet to Australia, after
a successful exhibition at the Redfern
Gallery, Bond-street. The exhibition
will open, probably in the lower Town
Hall, in a fortnight. Meanwhile, Mr.
Sainthill has sold out his own work m
Sydney, where he painted scenery for;
Lifar’s Icare, and is doing scenes forj
Nina Verchinina’s unnamed plastic |
ballet to Bath’s music. I
News of the ballet coming in letters
and American newspapers generally reads,
“All’s well.” The company followed Mas-
sine’s group, its only serious rivals, in
New York, and in spite of some anxiety
both seasons have been commercially suc-
cessful. Baronova has rejoined the De
Basil company, so the three ballerinas
who put it on its feet are reunited.
Fokine is supervising his own ballets, and
so are Balanchine and Nijinska. High-,
lights of the season, according to Ameri-
can critics, are the premiere of “Paga-
nini,” consistently brilliant dancing by
Toumanova, and a great all-round im-
provement in the Fokine classics.
Lazowsky’s character-dancing has also
impressed the critics as highly promising.
I C. WILLIAMSON
J * Theatres also hopes to
complete arrangements for
the presentation of the Jooss
Ballet Company in this country.
There is a possibility that this
organisation may be here in March.
Tn his “Dancing Round the World,”
Arnold Haskell says that Kurt Jooss
“is undoubtedly one of the major
figures in dancing, a man with a
very definite aesthetic and • pro-
gramme of his own.”
Jooss, he points out, made his
name in one work, “The Green
Table.” an inspiration that attacked
with extraordinary directness a sub-
ject the ballet had always avoided—
political satire.
While declaring that without this
ballet it-is difficult to imagine how
the company could enjoy success.
Mr Haskell says that this statement
is unfair, in many ways, to the work
that has been accomplished. “The
Impressions of a Big City,” he de-
scribes as an admirable piece of
reportage, vivid and always dra-
matic. “The Mirror,” the sequel to
“The Green Table,” he calls an extra-
ordinarily fine piece of reporting.
While it never reaches the brilliant
satire of the first tableau of “The
Green Table,” it is altogether richer
in pattern, and its magnificent
climax, with its inspiring message of
hope, is one of the finest things that
Jooss has achieved.
Mr Haskell declares that the
general level of the Jooss Company
is excellent, and the discipline excels
anything seen in ballet today. His
dancers are precise, rhythmic and
musical to a rare degree, partly be-
cause they are severely limited.


“ Grand Jete ” Movement Of A Grand Jete, common enough in ballet
dances, i s too fast for human eye to capture anything
but a flèting impression. Only 1/100, 000th second flash of speedray could cap-
ture the highspot in such detail. Movement, from “Florestan and His Sister."
Caught in Leap Sono Osato And Yura Skibine are caught by the speedray at
height of leap. This movement, extremely difficult, was developed
by dancers themselves ... Colonel de Basil's company now has repertoire of 40 ballets.
Of these, 10 were new to Americans. Company made first visit to New York in 1933.
Suspended Animation "It's All Done By Wires," a sceptic
might say, marvelling at detail of ex-
pression, body line and costume in this back cabriole, which comes into
“Aurora’s Wedding.” Dancers are Roman Jasinsky, Genevieve Moulin.
Exuberance Marina Svetlova, 16, newcomer to Ballet
Russe, executes gliding leap over Michel
Panaieff in "Florestan and His Sister." Marina was moving at
a very high speed, but appears to be as immobile as Michel.




Two of the principals in Ballet Russe, Michel Panaieff and Tamara Toumanova are “frozen” in this movement of “Aurora’s Wedding.”








beautiful photographs on these pages are of “Les Sylphides,” which
will be one of the first ballets to be presented in Melbourne by the Monte
Carlo Russian Ballet, members of which have now arrived in Australia.
The delicate charm of Michael Fokine’s setting to Chopin’s music has
endeared “Les Sylphides” to lovers of ballet ever since its first presen-
tation early in the century. Fokine —who also composed “The Dying
Swan” for Anna Pavlova —is really the founder of the modern ballet.
After the French Revolution, the ballet died out of Western Europe,
and was kept alive only in the schools of St. Petersburgh and Moscow,
but by the end of the nineteenth century this Russian ballet had become
very conventionalised. Fokine freed it from its conventions and adapted
its technical brilliance to express feelings and emotions, as in “Les
Sylphides.” There is very little plot in this ballet of sylphs dancing in
a wood at night; it is the expression of a mood of romance, rising to
a natural and beautiful climax. The spirit of reverie is released from
Chopin’s music and embodied in the elusive grace of the woodnymphs,
led by Helena Kirsova, who is seen in lovely pose above.


Australia Develops
Its Own Ballet
The ballet in Australia is no longer dependent on
the visits of oversea companies, although these will be
welcome when they come again after the war. The
crowded houses which have greeted the Kirsova Ballet,
on a visit from Sydney, at His Majesty’s Theatre, have
overthrown the old idea that the public will not pat-
ronise an Australian company.
It might be thought a mis-
nomer to call the Kirsova Ballet
“Australian,” when so many of
its members came to this country
in visiting companies only with-
in the past six years. Madame
Kirsova herself is Danish,, and
Shaevsky, Sobishevsky and Kous-
netzova had already formed a
company in Sydney called the
“Polish-Australian Ballet.”
Yet Helene Kirsova’s company,
as distinct from its individual
members, is indigenously Austra-
lian. For, as producer and bal-
let * master, Madame Kirsova is
malting as much use of Austra-
lian talent as she can.
Whatever Australian ballet may
develop into in the future—and,
after such bright beginnings, one
expects'much of it—r-it must have
as its source the great tradition
of Europe. Talent and imagina-
tion, not narrow nationalism,
must be the keys to success.
One fine Australian talent
whom Kirsova has discovered and
brought into the spotlight is
Loudon Sainthill. His scenery
and costumes for the three acts
of “Faust,” in the current pro-
gramme, will stand up to the
most stringent comparison with
work by the great ballet design-
ers overseas.
How telling is the contrast be-
tween the darkly shadowed
church in the third scene and
the pale, delicate animation of
the costumes nearer the audi-
ence! How skilfully Mr Saint-
hill has used the perspective of
receding lines in Act One in or-
der to set the enchanting tableau
of Satana on her couch at a
l seeming remoteness!
I Above all, Mr Sainthill realms
how necessary it is to simplify
and stylise the scenery for
modern ballet. Amid a fanciful
breadth of treatment, certain
small details, which he had em-
phasised for decorative or dra-
matic reasons, stood out with re-
doubled emphasis.
Henry Krips’s music to “Faust”
was interesting because it had
been written specially for two
pianos. In “Les Sylphides,” the
audience had heard how thin
piano-playing can sound as an
accompaniment to a large stage
plp
So, in'“Faust,” Mr Krips had
;et himself to exploit the sonor-
ms and percussive qualities of
he piano hammers to the utmost.
Tie auditorium was filled with
le menacing clatter and rumble
f the music, which had' been
eftly fitted to the mood of the
lovements on the stage.
Tonight. Madame Kirsova will
esent “Faust,” and a new bal-
: called “A Dream and a Fairy
ile.”
Victoria Forth, Strelsa Heckteman
(15-year-old Brisbane dancer),
and Marie Malloy in “Vieux Paris,"
one of the new ballets to be
introduced to Melbourne audiences
by the Kirsova Ballet. The season
opens tonight at His Majesty's.
KIRSOVA BALLET AT
HIS MAJESTY'S
The Kirsova ballet company intro*
duced Melbourne balletomanes to an-
other entirely new ballet on Saturday
night, when A Dream —And a Fairy
Tale was presented with the three-act
ballet Faust, in an all-Australian-
made programme. The new ballet is
set to music by Chopin, and the book
and choreography are by Helene Kir-
sova. Its theme is familiar —a child’s
dream of dolls that come to life, of
fairy tale characters who join them in
their midnight revels —and its treat-
ment, too, is conventional. But it is
lightly charming, and, against Lou-
don Sain thill’s effectively simple de-
cor, the quaintly costumed toys and
spirits weave pleasant patterns of
color and movement. Tamara Tchi-
narova, as the Fairy Queen, dances
with easy brilliance; Strelsa Heckel-
man mimes the role of the Child at-
tractively, and Raisse Kounetzova, as
the Shepherdess, and Valery Shaev-
sky, as the Chimney Sweep, have a
charming pas de deux to present. The
interruption of their joyous dancing
by the jealous Faun (Henry Leger-
ton), and the sudden appearance of .
the Evil Spirit (Edouard Sobishevsky)
dramatically shatter the light-hearted
tenor of the ballet.
Sidney Myer Concert
That music is a solace and an up-
lift was evident in the rapt attention
paid to the playing of the Melbourne
Symphony Orchestra at the Sidney
Myer concert held in the Town Hal)
on Sunday. Professor Heinze con-
ducted. Soldierly heroism is the
keynote of Beethoven’s Egmont over-
ture, and this the players handled
with impetuous verve. Moments of
relief there were, and a dream of
freedom issued into a thrilling and
victorious climax. The 3rd Brahms
Symphony followed similarly noble
themes. The audience heard the in-
volved structure with intelligence and
sympathy, and the effect wag power-
fully persuasive in its nervous energy.
A note of inner serenity in contrast
both rested and spurred attention.
Jeanne Gautier displayed phe-
nomenal virtuosity in Prokofiev’s
violin concerto. Seizing every oppor-
tunity for display without descending
from her high ideal, the artist gave
an amazingly able performance of the
brilliantly spectacular work, and was
rewarded with the enthusiastic ap-
proval of the entire audience. The
Prince Igor Dances, with their rhyth-
mic intensity, splashes of color and
other Russian values, concluded the
very acceptable programme.
Woman ln
Faust Ballet
Kirsova Season
Arrangements are completed for J.
C. Williamson Theatres to present the
Kirsova Ballet Company for a sea-
son in Melbourne, to commence on
Saturday, January 31, at His Ma-
jesty’s Theatre. The programme for
the opening night will consist of Les
Sylphides and Kirsova’s latest crea-
tion Faust, the first three-act bal-
let to be presented in Australia.
Faust has been created by Madame
Kirsova round a theme written by
Heine, and originally intended by him
for ballet, but never before adapted
by a ballet master. In a satirical
mood Heine has made Mephistopheles
a woman, as a criticism of his own
f)eriod when he considered men shal-
ow and weak, and entirely dominated
by women. The scenery and cos-
tumes for this ballet have been de-
signed and executed by the young
Melbourne painter Loudon Sain>
hill, and the music has been specially
written for Madame Kirsova by Henri
Krips.
Besides Faust the three other new
ballets to be presented here will be
Dream and a Fairy Tale (to the music
of Chopin), which depicts a child’s
dream where she is taken to fairy-
land by her dolls who come to life
at her summons; Vieux Paris (to the
music of Offenbach and Strauss) and |
Les Matelots (to the music of Georges
Aurac). The choreography of these
latter three ballets is also by Helene
Kirsova.
The company, which has just con}- i
pleted a successful season in Sydney,
includes the following principals:—
Tamara Tchinarova, Henry Legerton,
Edouard Sobishevsky, Valery Shaev-
sky, Raisse Kousnetzova, Strelsa
Heckelman, Serge Bousloff, Rachel
Cameron. In addition there will be
the usual corps de ballet. The total
company consists of 40 dancers, and
entirely new productions have been
made for the season.
Raisse Kousnetzova in Faust.
BALLET TO-NIGHT
The Kirsova Ballet Company,
which has just concluded a successful
season in Sydney, will open a season
| at His Majesty’s Theatre to-night.
With the exception of Les Sylphides
all the ballets to be presented will be
Australian. The company of 40 in-
cludes the following:—Tamara
Tchinarova, Henry Legerton, Edou-
ard Sobishevsky, Valery Shaevsky,
Raisse Kousnetzova, Strelsa Heckle-
man, Serge Bousloff, Rachel Came-
ron.
Several correspondents have writ-
ten, to point out that the Kirsova
Ballet Company will not be the first
Australian company to appear in Mel-
bourne with all ballets of their
repertoire (with the exception of Les
Sylphides) conceived and produced in
Australia; choreography, decor and
costumes, and that three-act ballets
have been previously produced in Aus-
tralia. In December last the Boro-
vansky Academy presented a pro-
i gramme of original Australian ballet,
| which included the Grieg Concerto
I Ballet of three acts.


MOULDING AN AUSTRALIAN BALLET
“Material Here,” says Kirsova
That Australian girls and boys furnish wonderful material
for the buitding up of an all-Australian ballet is the conclusion
arrived at by Madame Helene Kirsova, the Danish ballerina.
She is giving Melbourne its first opportunity of seeing a ballet
company, largely composed of young Australians, and new pre-
sentations with choreography, decor and some of the music, all
created here. The measure of success already achieved by this
company gives promise of great things when the war is over.
*
Women and The
Home
Conducted by
“Maxine”
Helene kirsova, the
inspiration behind the
very significant advance
in Australian cultural devel-
opment, first 'danced her way into
the hearts of our balletomanes in
1936, and her enterprise is the out-
come of the Danish star’s enthusias-
tic recognition of the rich field of
natural dancing talent which exists
m this country, and only needs culti-
vation.
“Your girls and boys here provide
wonderful ma-
terial to work
with,” she told
me. “Many of
them seem to
have a natural
talent for danc-
ing, and this
combined with
the perfect phy-
sique, which is
another essen-
tial, furnishes
an immedi ate
groundwork up-
o n which t o
build. It is not
hard to mould
their muscles to
meet the de-
mands of ballet dancing. Another
thing in their favor is their intense
enthusiasm and keen artistic per-
ception.”
Among Madame Kirsova’s 60
pupils in Sydney, from which the
present company at His Majesty’s,
Melbourne, is partly drawn, are 20
business girls who practise at night,
and even in the lunch hour at their
offices.
Helene Kirsova’s company had a
six-weeks’ season at the Minerva
Theatre in Sydney, when they per-
formed “Faust” for four weeks on
end, a record for one ballet in Aus-
tralia.
The Melbourne season opened last
Saturday night with “Les Sylphides.”
oanced entirely by Australians, and
"'Faust,” a tliree-act ballet, for which
Helene Kirsova has done the choreo-
graphy and Loudon a
talented young Australian, has de-
signed the decor and costumes; ,
Madame Kirsova will not dance
herself during this season, but ‘on
her slender shoulders falls the full
weight of the production. She is
Helene Kirsova in the principal role
in Carnaval. This was one of her
most popular parts in the 1936-37
ballet season.
manager, ballet mistress and producer.
The determination and driving force
which led her to become a dancer at
the age of 16, when most dancers
have already had years of study be-
hind them, inspires her company. In
addition, she has the tradition of
Russian ballet behind her, and her
standards are those of the finest mas-
ters of. the art. She worked with
Fokine for years and her Les Sylph-
ides is moulded closely on his original
choreography. It was when Fokine
brought the ballet to Copenhagen,
and the young Helene saw Les Sylph-
ides, Igor and Petroushka, that she
determined that she would be a
ballerina and dance the leading roles
in those ballets.- In spite of opposi-
tion from her family, who wished her
to attend the university and become a
teacher of English, she held to her
decision and went immediately to
Paris to study. Later she realised
her ambition and danced all these
roles in all parts of the world.
She joined De Basil’s company at
Monte Carlo and worked with Baro-
nova. Toumanova and Riabouschin-
ska, all of whom have danced in
Australia and are world-famous bal- 1
lerinas.
WARTIME PROBLEMS
T*HE producer of ballets in Australia
1 in wartime has endless difficulties
to contend with, Madame' Kirsova
pointed out. “For instance there is
the problem of materials for cus-
tumes and ballet shoes. We posi-
tively had to tramp all over Sydney
to find materials for the costumes for
‘Faust,’ which even though made by
the wardrobe mistress, who is the
mother of Tamara Tchinarova, prin-
cipal ballerina in ‘Faust,’ with the
assistance of two other mothers of
members of the company, still cost
£8 each.
“We sent to Melbourne and Bris-
bane for materials, and to Perth Tor
tights. These are practically un-
procurable, and the girls make-do
with long stockings cut at the top.
Luckily I had six pairs put away.
“Ballet shoes offer another diffi-
I culty for they must be made from
| pure silk satin. The artificial variety
splits almost at once, and pure silk
satin is hard to come by. Soon we
will have to compromise with linen
or some other material dyed the right
shade.”
Australians are an appreciative
and discriminating audience. They
will not tolerate the mediocre,
Madame Kirsova said. “Once estab-
lished in London as a favorite, you
remain so, no matter if your work
falls off, but in Paris before the
war, and in Australia, the audience
judges by the merit of the work.”
THE DOMESTIC SIDE
r |''o obtain the finest results in ballet
it is necessary for the musical
composer, the choreographer, and the
artist who designs setting and cos-
tumes to work together to create a
perfect whole. Collaboration is every-
thing, she believes.
In private life Helene Kirsova is
Mrs. Erik Fischer, wife of the Danish
Vice-Consul in Sydney, and the
mother of Ole, nearly three years old,
who with his fair hair and dark eyes
takes after his mother. Any time his
charming mother can snatch from
her work is spent with Ole, who
kisses ladies’ hands when introduced,
in true Continental fashion.
Helene Kirsova has only once
faced a microphone, when she took
part in a quiz session and had
questions on ballet hurled at her
in quick succession. “It was a
nervewracking experience for
which I needed all my wits.” she
says.
KIRSOVA BALLET
FOR MELBOURNE
Mr. Frank Tait announces that J.
C. Williamson Theatres have entered
into an arrangement to present the
Kirsova Ballet, which has been ap-
pearing recently in Sydney. The bal-
let will be presented for a season at
His Majesty’s Theatre, Melbourne, to
commence on Saturday, January 31.
The repertoire of the Kirsova Ballet
will include four completely new bal-
lets which have not hitherto been
presented in Melbourne. They are
Faust (music by Henry Krips), Dream
and a Fairy Tale (to music of Cho-
pin), Vieux Paris (to music of Offen-
bach and Strauss), and Les Matelots
(to music of Georges Aurac). The
choreography of these ballets is by
Helene Kirsova. In addition Les Syl-
phides will be presented during the
season. The principals are Tamara
Tchinarova, Henry Legerton, Edouard
Sobishevsky, Valery Shaevsky, Raisse
Kousnetzova, Strelsa, Heckelman,
Serge Bousloff and Rachel Cameron.
KIRSOVA BALLET SCORES IN "FAUST"
The Melbourne premiere of the thrce-act ballet based on Heinrich
Heine’s “Faust.” presented by the Kirsova Company at His Majesty’s
Theatre last Saturday, was a credit to all concerned and an auspicious
beginning in the direction of the establishment of a permanent
Australian ballet.
r [' , HE presentation was largely a per-
sonal triumph for Helene Kir-j
sova, who was responsible for the
arrangement of the Heine theme, and
for the choreography: for the young
Australian Loudon Saint-hill for the
strikingly original decor and cos-
tumes; and for Henry Krips. who
composed the music, and with Marcel
Lorber at the second grand piano
gave it full value within the limita-
tions inevitable without an orchestra.
It is a tribute to the brilliant playing
of the two pianists that the absence
of orchestral background detracted
very little frpm the effective work of
the ballet in “Faust.”. . v t
Dancing honors went primarily to
Raissa Kousnetzova as Mephisto-
phela and Valery Shaevsky 35 Young
Faust, but there was also fine work
by Tamara Tchinarova as Satana
and Edouard Sobishevsky as old Doc-
tor Faust. Strelsa He’ckelman. the
young dancer, made an
effective appearance as Marguerite,
and Henry Legerton and Joyce Mor-
gans were also successful. The young
Australian ballet also made an effec-
tive contribution to the artistic pic-
ture.
“Les Sylphides.” which preceded
“Faust.” was less successful. It might
have been given a more atmospheric
setting, and the musical accompani-
ment suffered from, the afosepce of
, stringed instruments.
Kirsova |
Ballet at His Majesty’s Theatre, com-
mencing on Saturday next.
When this ballet company opens
the public will see, for the first time
Henry Legerton and Rachel Cameron
in Les Sylphides.
in Melbourne, an Australian Ballet
company with all ballets of their re-
pertoire (with the exception of Les
Sylphides) conceived and produced in
Australia; choreography, decor and
costumes. ,
Included in the repertoire will be
four completely new ballets: —Faust,
the choreography of which is by He-
lene Kirsova, with music by Henry
Krips. This three-act ballet is es-
pecially of note as it is the first three-
act ballet to be produced in Australia.
It met with an instantaneous success
when presented in Sydney in the
recent season there. In the opening
programme on Saturday Faust will be
i presented —and also on the same pro-
gramme will be the always popular
Les Sylphides. The company of 40
includes the following: Tamara
Tchinarova, Henry Legerton, Edou-
ard Sobishevsky, Valery Shaevsky,
Raisse Kousnetzova, Strelsa Heckle-
man, Serge Bousloff. Rachel Cameron.
In addition, there is the usual corps
de ballet. Other new ballets to be
presented include Dream and a Fairy
Tale, to the music of Chopin; Vieux
Paris, to the music of Offenbach and
Strauss; Les Matelots, music by
Georges Aurac. The decor and cos-
tumes for all these ballets have been
designed by the young Victorian artist
Loudon Saint Hill.


NEWS OF MONTE
CARLO BALLET
Ballet lovers in Melbourne will no
doubt be interested to learn where
their favourites from the last Aus-
tralian ballet season are at present.
The company which was in Mel-
bourne has split into 3, each work-
ing separately. At the Metropolitan
Opera House in New York on. Octo-
ber 13 "The Magic Swan,” Alexandra
Fedorova’s reconstruction of Pepitas
choreography for the third act of
the ballet “Swan Lake,” was danced.
New York papers say that the piece
de resistance of ”The Magic Swan'
was the pas de deux of the Prince
and Princess, danced by Tamara
Toumanova and Igor Youskevitch,
both of whom have danced in Mel-
bourne.
One paper says, “Toumanova pei-
formed with an athletic brilliance
and knife-edged clarity which were
breath-taking.”
Other dancers known to Melbourne
audiences who appeared on the same
night were Roland Guerard and
Sonia Woicikowska.
KIRSOVA BALLET SEASON
Mr. Frank Tait announces that J.
C Williamson Theatres will present
the Kirsova Ballet, which has re-
cently been appearing with success in
Sydney, at His Majesty’s Theatre,
Melbourne, commencing January 31.
Four entirely new ballets will be pre-
sented—“ Faust” (to music by Henry
Krips), “Dream and a Fairy Tale
(music by Chopin), “Vieux Pans
(music by Offenbach and Strauss),
and “Les Matelots” (music by George
Aurac). Choreography for all these
ballets is by Helene Kirsova.
The principals of Madame Kir-
sova's company (which comprises 40
dancers) are: Tamara Tchina-
rova, Henry Legerton, Edouard Sobi-
shevsky, Valery Shaevsky, Raisse
Kousnetzova, Strelsa Heckelman,
Serge Bousloff, and Rachel Cameron.
| Ballet In 1942?
The dispersal of the original Covent
Garden Ballet in Havana (Cuba) re-
cently is followed by news from Mrs.
Madge Lynch, who is now back in
Sydney, that the company is at pre-
sent in New York.
A letter received by her last mail
from Mr. Grigorieff, junior, indicated
that Colonel de Basil has signed a
contract to play in America between
August 18 last and March 23, 1942,
with Fortune Gallo as impressario.
A Canadian tour this month and
October, under the auspices of the
Aid to Britain Committee, is also in
1 the schedule. Contract tours in
U.S.A, of six months for the years
1942-1943 and 1943-1944 are included.
Mrs. Lynch is inquiring if a visit to
Australia between April and August,
1942, could be arranged.
COBBLERS’ corner.
Members of the Kir-
sova ballet preparing
their shoes yesterday
for the performance
at His Majesty’s
Theatre tonight. Top:
Edward Sobiehewsky
doing a difficult leap
during rehearsal of
Faust—a ballet in
tonight’s programme.


TRAGIC LAST ACT OF
DANCER'S
CAREER...
Page B—The Herald, Saturday, October 13, 1945
By CLIVE
TURNBULL
Nijinsky, greafest of
all male dancers,
now 55 and men-
tally ill, proposes to
dance again as
Petrouchka—to the
alarm and distress
of balletomanes who
fear some grisly and
macabre scene when the aforetime idol, re-
membered in all his grace and beauty, takes
the stage.
NIJINSKY, who is re-
ported to be planning
this comeback in New
York, has become a legend
--a legend with a bitter ending
for, for 25 years, he has had a kind
of zombie-like existence in the
smaller cities of Europe, a living-
dead man suffering from schizo-
phrenia (split personality).
Hope of his recovery and return
were long since given up by his
admirers. On one occasion, at
least, he was reported dead.
« - r
The period of his triumphs is
bohiparatively so long ago al-
though he is only now in middle
age that it is almost surpris-
ing to find him alive at all. The
majority of ballet-goers have
never seen him.
Waslow Nijinsky has had a cur-
ious life. He was born in Kiev in
1890. the son of travelling dancers.
When he was 11 he was admitted
to the Imperial School of Ballet
in St. Petersburg.
'["HE story is told that the direc-
~ tor. Nicholas Legat. asked him
what he could do. Nijinsky im-
mediately leaped to an amazing
height and descended with the
lightness of a rubber ball.
Legat accepted him. In the
years to come Nijinsky became
famous not only as a pure dancer
and mime, but for his extraordin-
ary agility.
In his vast leaps, his admirers
tell us, he seemed to hang sus-
pended in mid-air. In the entre-
chat, the leap in which the legs
are crossed and uncrossed in the
air. he could make the extraordin-
ary number of 10 changes of posi-
tion.
Stunts such as this, however,
were entirely subservient to his
art.
In 1908 Nijinsky graduated from
the ballet school and was ap-
pointed to the Imperial Opera
House. In his first appearance in
a Mozart opera he took the court
by storm.
In 1909 he was taken to Paris
with other Imperial dancers by
Diaghileff. He was the first Rus-
sian male dancer seen in the west,
and Paris fell down and wor-
shipped him.
In St. Petersburg in the follow-
ing year, he fell from Imperial
favor by wearing too daring a
costume. Thereafter came the
years abroad with Diaghileff in the
NIJINSKY as a young man.
Ballets Russe. The history of that
stormy period has been written
many times.
For a time after a breach with
Diaghileff upon his marriage to
a Hungarian, Romola de Pulsky,
Nijinsky formed his own company,
but he had no head for manage-
ment. It was a financial failure.
|
r J’HROUGH all this time, how-
ever. his fame had been grow-
ing. He was one of those people
whose art is so incomparable that
they become legends even for
those who have never seen them.
Every ballet-goer, for instance,
knows that it was Nijinsky who
made memorable the male role
in “Le Spectre de la Rose.”
Based on Gautier’s poem, this is
the famous ballet in which a
young girl dreaming after her first
ball is visited by the spirit of the
rose she wore.
Open those childlike eyes
That masked a dream so light:
1 am the ghost of the rose
You wore at the ball last night.
Other famous roles danced by
Nijinsky were in “Petrouchka,” i
“Carnaval” and “Scheherazade.”
He was not particularly success-
ful as a choreographer, but one
ballet, “L’Apres-midi d’un Faune,”j
survives. (It was very beautifully 1
danced in Melbourne by Lichine).
When the First World War broke
out Nijinsky and his wife were in
Budapest, and as Russians they
were interned. Eventually, how-
ever, they were allowed to go to
America, where they rejoined Diag-
hileff.
In 1919 Nijinsky’s mind gave
way. He was sent to a Swiss
sanatorium. From time to time it
was hopefully reported that his *
condition was improving but. un-
happily. all the reports were with-
out foundation.
His wife remained devoted to
him and as their money ran out,
she worked strenuously, lecturing
and writing, to support him.
In May. 1937, a benefit was or-
ganised at His Majesty’s Theatre,
London, and brought in a con-
siderable sum. Their daughter
Kyra, made her debut as a dancer
in 1933.
In 1937 also an exhibition of
drawings by Nijinsky was held in
London, attracting much attention.
The subjects, terrifying masks and
strange geometrical designs, sug-
gested to many people the unbal-
anced mind of the artist.
With the outbreak of the Second
World War Nijinsky’s fortunes be-
came still worse.
y PEW months ago people seek-
ing him out found him sitting
in a makeshift sidewalk cafe in
Vienna, drenched with rain and
gazing vacantly at the wall.
Nijinsky looked old beyond his
years. He had lost 401 b. in weight
in a few months because of inade-
quate food. He resembled a tired
old man of 70.
“A few matted grey hairs cover-
ed the back of his head,” says one
reporter, “his cheeks were sunken
and the few times he expressed
pleasure four protruding front teeth
enveloped his lower lip.”
He was sitting with his wife and
Dagmar Schmedes. the Danish so-
prano. The rain had prevented his
usual walk.
Two months before the Nijin-
skys had fled from Hungary to
Vienna.
Nijinsky gave no sign of anima-
tion during the conversation ex-
cept once when his attention was
caught by a scribbled drawing: he
NIJINSKY, in the prime of his
career, in the ballet “Festin.”
clapped his hands and cried, “Ar-
tiste ! ”
When his wife discussed attempts
to bring him out of his lethargy in
“proper surroundings” the “god
of the dance,” as Paris knew him.
laughed.
The conversation finished, “his
wife led him into the hotel bv the
right hand. He tripped on a step,
stooped quickly to retrieve the pen-
cil he had dropped and shuffled off
to the stairway.”
It is not surprising that the pro-
posal that this unhappy man
should bepalloweri to take the stage
on which he achieved such glories
has horrified his admirers every-
where.
ROM New York
some days ago
came the an-
nounce ment
that Vaslaw
Nijinski, at the
age of 55, is
to dance again. Behind this an-
nouncement lies one of the
tragic stories of this century.
It is the story of a man who was
predestined to tragedy; a man upon
whom were to fall terrible misfor-
tunes even at the time of his greatest
triumphs.
Nijinski is not a Russian, as many
people have thought, but a Pole in-
ordinately proud of his nationality,
obstinate in maintaining his identity.
It was this insistence in maintaining
his national characteristics that
caused him so much pain, and for a
long time made him most unpopular
at the. Imperial Russian Ballet
School at St. Petersburg.
Nijinski entered the school in 1900.
In company with hundreds of other
children of Old Russia, he filed past
the governors of the school, some of
the greatest dancers and doctors in
the country. There, neither fame nor
heredity could count. Choice might
fall on a son or daughter of the
oldest house in all Russia; it might
equally fall on the offspring of the
simple peasants. There was no favor
and no price on selection to St.
Petersburg’s Imperial Russian Ballet
School.
An ExocHng Test
In that year only fifteen boys and
the same number of girls could be
chosen from all the hundreds who
passed in front of the governors. Un-
erringly the judges detected the
slightest flaw in gait, some tiny phy-
sical disability, which disqualified the
applicant, and of the thirty chosen
only six boys and six girls, after
two years of study, might continue
as students of the world’s most fam-
ous and exacting school of ballet.
Nijinski passed all these exacting
tests. Was there perhaps one of these
judges who guessed that the little
Polish boy standing before him,
whose shyness was painful and whose
thick Polish accent must have
sounded so harsh to the fine Russian
ear, would one day be the world’s
genius of the dance?
Nijinski’s class mates disliked him
from the start. When the final six
were chosen two years later, not one
was his friend. Yet he overcame their
dislike despite the fact that, as the
years passed, their passive antipathy
turned to active spite and later to a
viciousness hardly credible. Then one
of the little class became his friend.
It did not happen in the twinkling
of an eye. It took a long time, and,
such are the vagaries of fate, only
this one friend, Anatole Bourman,
and Vaslaw Nijinski, lived beyond
their t,wenty-ninth year.
Nijinski’s progress through the
school was fantastic. Perhaps the
dislike of his class mates was due to
his easy success. But it was not all
natural talent which made Nijinski
the genius of the dance. His teachers
were the highest exponents of their
art—George Kyasht, Pavel Geurdt,
Nicolai Legat and, for Nijinski, the
greatest of them all, Michail Kon-
stantinovich Obouchov.
An Absolute Triumph
It was Obouchov who arranged Ni-
jinski’s first solo, and that before he
had graduated. Records have it that
the master spent days persuading his
pupil that he was actually good enough
to dance in company with soloists of
Russia’s Imperial Ballet, and par-
ticularly for an anniversary celebra-
tion of Mozart’s Don Juan. Nijinski
scored not just a success, but an ab-
solute triumph. On the strength of
that performance he was acclaimed
the greatest dancer who ever
'lived.
Sometimes it was a hard road he
followed, and his extreme sensitive-
ness made it all the more difficult
for him. Success, too, in one so young,
sometimes turned his head, adding
again to the difficulties in his path.
In addition, although he was ac-
claimed Russia’s premier soloist, he
was still officially only a member of
the Corps de Ballet, and paid a
miserable fifty roubles a month. It
irked him, for he needed money. In
the end he caused himself to be
“fired” from the Imperial Ballet,
and joined Diaghliev’s Ballet Russe.
With Diaghliev’s famous company
he travelled all over Europe. It was
in the spring of 1911, at the age of
21, when he opened his European
career as permanent soloist with
Diaghliev’s company. In 1913 he
married, and produced with his own
company in London.
The war years found him in Aus-
tria, a prisoner of war, but in 1918
he managed to make an exchange,
and was permitted to go to the
United States and South America.
In Buenos Aires the first indications
of serious illness began to show
themselves. He returned post haste to
Europe seeking treatment, without
success. Since 1919 he has remained
in a sanatorium under treatment. At
various times during this war rumors
have been current that Nijinski was
dead, and then, later, confirmation
that he was still alive. It has been
difficult, therefore, to speak of him
in the present tense. One feels a
tendency to say Nijinski was this or
Nijinski was that. True he was the
greatest male dancer of all time and
now, with the news that he is to
dance again, perhaps we shall be
able to say: “Ah—Vaslaw Nijinski
really is the premier soloist of our
time.”


SCREEN GIVES BALLET TO THE PUBLIC
OCTOBER IT. IW2.
Riotous “ s P anish Fiesta” —Rimsky-Korsakoff’s “Capriccio Espagnole”
—is riotous with movement and color. Toumanova, dancer
of virtuosity and passion, Leonide Massine (right) do a brilliant Gipsy dance.
Vivid Russian-born Touman-
ova, a dancer since age
of nine, characterises with
allure and gusto the Gipsy girl.
Famed. “Spanish Fiesta” reveals
another celebrity —Alex-
andra Danilova, called the most fin-
ished classical stylish of present day.
Flirtatious “The Gay Parisian,” music by Offenbach, makes 20 minutes
of frivolity (including a bold can-can routine), flirtatious-
ness (by pretty ballerinas), clowning by Massine. Above: Massine, Mladova.
Beauty Ballerinas, Tamara Toumanova, beloved of Australian ballet-
omanes when here in the flesh, is generally conceded the outstand-
ing beauty. Toumanova, pictured on points in classical tutu, best likes classic
ballets, is also fine character dancer. Her film debut is in “Spanish Fiesta.”


“Baby” Star This Is Milada Mladova. A lovely “baby ballerina” still
in her teens, a pupil of Massine, she is one of cleverest
ballet dancers America has produced. She was born Milada Mraz. She dances
enchantingly as glove seller who flirts with seven gallants in “Gay Parisian.
Dreams In Rehearsal Tights, an unnamed youngster of corps de ballet
sits unconscious of noise and bustle of a movie set —dreaming of
glory as a ballerina, in the most glamorous of man’s make-believe pastimes.
Sparkle Mladova Sparkles. In this and in “Spanish Fiesta” shines
Frederic Franklin, one of new generation’s finest male dancers.
Scene Centre Of Sprightly Tableau, in a Boris Karloff make-up, is Massine.
Dancer, discovered by Diaghileff, he is still nimble-footed. Choreo-
grapher, he is one of ballet's chief creative minds. He created “Gay Parisian.”




