

For Private Circulation
by William Little
Ballaarat. A Retrospect. By Lambda Ballaarat


GOLDEN POINT, 1852.
From an Oil Painting
in Lambda’s possession.


Ballaarat.
A Retrospect.
tdritten by lambba, by Invitation of lpoweit S. Co., proprietors
of “Übe Evening Ecbo,” for tbeir Christmas dumber.
Loved faces crowd in memory’s train,
And smile through all the mist;
The silvery moon yet shines amain
And ’bowered birds of night enchain—
To the old-time zephyr’s evening strain,
To the sigh of the pine I list.
O Ballaarat, thou *City of the South !
I sing of thee fair type of what is true
And firm as ever is the British ‘ yea ’
Or ‘ nay ’ to-day, as ever was the flag
On Ships of oak or steel since the days of old
Trafalgar.
Hence it came to pass by might
Of many, who, alas, are sleeping ’neath
The cypress tree, and others all too few
Who yet remain to tell of olden times—
How the explorers sailed the seas to find
These shores, and how the City rooted was
Above the reef-bound gold and fabulous wash
Away down many a cable length beneath
The life within the populated trees.
It is an oft recital how the news, —
When erst the shepherds saw the virgin gold
A-lying shimmering on fair Nature’s breast,
And how the ignorant aborigines
For trifles gave the precious ore away,—
Found flashing wings to fly from pole to pole
And set alight, in Fatherland, in many
A manly breast, a new-born fire of strong
* “ City ” is a term used to include the Town of Ballaarat and Borough of
Sebastopol, as the boundaries are interwoven to such an extent that strangers
cannot tell where the dividing lines are.


Desire that ceaseless burned until the last
Farewell was sighed. Then sailed the pioneers
Successive weary moons to reach this land
Of sunny skies and visions rare.
With brave
Intent these venturous hoped to fortune find
And soon return to the ingle nook and in
The moon-glow of the old folks’ closing lives
Encircle them with ease : or maybe hoped
To meet again the constant maid of yore,
Whose loving thoughts had ever seaward roamed
By night and day ; or these brave rovers thought
To tell the old school-friends the wonders great
Of the digger’s life—the dangers fought or brushed
Aside with force, atwhiles by love inspired
Of home and beauty.
Gentle reader, it
Is only three score years and nine since blacks
Half clad—the natives of the soil —full-lapt
In ease were stalking emu on these slopes,
Fair hunting grounds where now the fourscore miles
Of metalled streets bespread as though in form
A spider’s web, to reach lush pastures green
Which here accounted are of Nature’s best.
Until that pregnant year a traveller had
Not come to break the brooding silence long
That rested here, where now the City like
A sentinel stands to guard its caverned wealth.
O golden thought of God ! for purpose wise ;
O legacy ! through aeons long enwrapped
In far-down rocks auriferous, overlain
At times a thousand feet twice told and more,
Beneath the native’s mia-mia and the creek
That joyous gossips on its chequered way
Adown the lowlands to the distant shore
Where white-winged ships of swelling sail pass through
The narrow gate-way bearing those afloat
Who eagerly scan the wooded coasts that wave
A welcome to the venturous knights of toil.
The first explorers records made when here
They stood in ’thirty-seven.—They came inflamed
To till responsive soils, or fortune find


In pasturing fleecy flocks and lowing herds ;
Or, later comers in the ampler years—
The youngest of the ’fifties—pitched their tents
Upon this virgin scene of native worth
To win the yellow store and shall I say,
Of good and ill—just as the mingled love
And hate in human breasts have ever side
By side been found in some degree, for weal
Or woe, according as the using or
Abusing of the magic metal be.
2.—YEAR 1837.
In foreign lands I seek in vain
To flee from sorrow’s olden pain,
By creek, o’er sandy waste alone,
Far from the haunts of man I roam ;
But when I rest by the bull-oak tree
My sainted love I plainly see !
Oh, the sigh, the sigh of the bull-oak tree,
How it wakens memories sad to me !
A Bushman travel-stained pursues his way
Through gullies green, o’er plains and silent hills,
Until he stands upon a gentle rise,
In after days called Golden Point when there
The yellow ore hard by the surface lay
Revealed by the explorer’s pick, a foot
Or so beneath the spring-time grass and trees.
As shadows fall the traveller lays his gun
Against the bowery tree, unrolls his ‘ ‘ swag ’ ’
And spreads his blankets ’neath the sheltering clump
Where camps he for the night. He views the hills
In deepening purple swarthed and casts his eyes
Along the woodland range and wealth descries
Deep in the verdant vale. He lists the lilt
Of the creek, and yet his unprophetic soul
Recks not the mighty change that soon will set
The world awondering !
Now the “billy” swings
Athwart the bright fire flame : the traveller fares
On “damper” with an unction born of toil,
And takes his cutty pipe to find his thoughts
And faces in the curling smoke. All this


While yet the westering sun its golden shade
Casts on the yellow wattle trees. The birds
Now softly chant their evening orisons,
And spritely squirrels lightly leap among
The boughs, and squeal with unrestrained delight ;
The simple “joey” peeps from out his high
Outpost and the dingo wakes the echoes hid
In the drowsy hills and dark umbrageous dells.
Yes, Nature is about to change her garb
Of everchanging glistening hues and seek
Her duskier mantle for the night. She wills
To enter her reflecting hour when come
And go the minor voices ; for it is,
Indeed, the receiving and transmitting hour
Of winged love, of faith and fear. At such
A time the past comes loitering near, and fall
The shadows of the “ coming” by the way.
It is the hour when heart to heart sends sighs
And thoughts across the sea ; when love betakes
Its sympathic flight; when pictured are
The jewelled meadows of the dear old land,
Her toiling cities, trouty streams, her aged trees
And happy village greens. These come to-night
To me like charmed endearments long enshrined :
At such an hour the Bushman reads amid
The fire-flame pages of his former days :
They tell of dreamy youth’s unreached desires,
Unfinished castles shining in the air ;
He sees the old folks in the ingle nook
Where longing eyes perceive their boy across
The sea and mark his footsteps with their prayers;
He views the flowers laid on the churchyard grave,
And many a hot and briny tear he sheds.
Such picture-thoughts rush through his unstrung
Awakening strains heard only by that lone [heart
Wanderer as lists he to the talking fire
And feels the favouring influences around.
’Tis then he dwells on visions of the days
Gone by and longs for the friends he loves so well !
As shadows swoon away and lose themselves
In night, the wanderer lays him down to sleep
Beneath the wakeful stars and arborous shade.


3.—THE CITY NOW.
Methinks I’ll now translate the signs all o’er
The City surface spread, the cyphered wealth
Exprest in busy hives of industry,
In mighty engines breathing all their life
Away in bringing to the light of da}'
The reef-wash and the stone gold-shot far ’neath
The sward :
And noted let it be, that were
The miles of shafts and drives, which here invade
The crusted earth placed end to end, they could,
I venture, join the City to the sea,
Full fifty miles away and back again,
Twice told ! How ‘ ‘ plants ”up to the daylight bring
The golden earth, washed once upon a time
From mountain sides and hid in deep broad beds
Overlaid by Nature’s vast volcanic hand.
All this was in the pre-historic days,
In days wherein the rivers sang their way
Through vales umbrageous vocal with their life.
And as I set me to my welcome task —
To paint the surface glories of these days,
Behold I stand amazed ! for when I turn
Me to the Muse for flowing verse and light
Divine, the fickle one departs and leaves
Me cast, as ’twere, upon some soulless shore :
And when I try to picture fittingly
The wood and brick-built triumphs of these days
My vision fades away and all is dull
And dumb ! I ask of her in wonder why ?
I downcast make me this appeal : ‘‘O thou
Offended one, come back, I pray, and say
Why hast thou so forsaken me, for know’st
Thou not, I love thee well ? ’ ’
The Muse slow turns
And opes her candid mind thiswise to me :
‘ ‘ Why be forever giving glory to
The younger City-makers of these days ?
Nay, why applaud them to the upper skies ?
This duty will become their children best,
When testing time of long-past days shall come
To try the new-born doings of to-day !


Had there not been foundations laid both deep
And well in auld lang syne, there would not be
A City famed as this ! In those first days
The rugged paths were cut and smoothed that led
Up to the ‘ now ! ’ All this is certainty
As ever smiling spring succeeds the rains
Of winter as ever seed-pod’s dreams precede
The spring-time flower ! ’ ’
‘ 1 So what may be new-found
In fecund wealthy nature, and the arts
And realms of thought,” the kindly Muse resumes,
“And all that come within the circuit of
Thy life are products rooted in the first
Creating thoughts of God ! And thus it came
To pass, those brave-souled heralds of the race
Of colonizers —save the worthless few,
The lawless reckless few, that hang on the rich
Success of others’ toil —were men instinct
With humanising views of civic rights
And legislative equities —who dreamed
Of empire founded deep in common truth
And sympathies, of beauty good in life
And found in high or low degree.
“Ah, yes,
The founders sowed live pregnant thoughts that bore
Their fine result, like as the sturdy oak,
An acorn once, that in its centuried years
The stormy blast defies, and thus it came
To pass, this City has become both strong
And worthy of respect : So ne’er forget,
In these all too-forgetting days, the sires !
Also their work well done, and inasmuch
We loving dwell upon their sturdy deeds,
The younger life to-day will sweetlier be ! ”
This counsel spoken by the fairy Muse
Thus ended, I at once resolved to leave
This theme prosaic for a friendlier pen
To hymn the structures and the fashions of
The hour and all the phrased expressions found
In the City’s proud objectives.
Thus by my
Good Muse instruct, I joyous backward trace


My steps to the shepherd days, and re-begin
To wake the never-dying ethics found
In social doings in the muted days
Of pastoral infancy, and thence the rush
To this the digger’s new-found field, and tell
The stories of the brave pioneers,
And for a while relive in fancy sweet
The days that never can return.
And thus
There opes to me, as ’twere, a sixth-sense door
So strange, as through it comes the hallowed past
Unfolding secrets to the waiting heart,
Arousing love and joy of human kind :
I list these ghosts in heavenly form and mein
Who come as in the whilom days :
They breathe
Into mine inner ear and stir my sense
Until I feel how T near my heart they lie :
O those dear erstwhile shades, how they appear
To smile on me ! How many sweetliest things
They say! What blotted leaves turned back! What vaults
hong sealed they ope !
Comes one, who in the days
Agone his true observant life had lived,
Quoths he : “ Beware of carnal sense,
Of selfishness that roots in hoarded gain :
Remember that the best of life is more than meat
And drink, than houses, lands, or sordidness
Of any kind ; such grosser things are but
The shadows of the real—the }mt unseen !
Then haste, awake that sleeping golden morn,
Nor cloud the after-glow that rests on them
Who whole-souled lived and loved.”
In musings such,
The Muse and I pierce through the chequered past
Until we reach the year of ’fifty-one,
And there review ONE aspect of those days
And take from the abundant store some flowers, —
Some pearls of fact and fancy scattered round !


4.— THE GOLD DISCOVERY DAYS.
“Oft in the stilly night,
Ere slumber’s chain has bound me,
Fond memory brings the light
Of other days around me :
The smiles, the tears, of boyhood’s 3'ears :
The words of love then spoken.”
Once more methinks I stand on Golden Point
When gold discovered* was in ’fifty-one,—
Where camped the Bushman twice seven years before:
Not now the stillness reigns ; not now, as then,
Far from the station home the shepherd keeps
His flock; no more he waits his rations twice
A year, nor in a lonely silence lives
The intertimes.
All now is hurried haste ;
Prospecting belted diggers peg their eight
Foot claims, the teamsters with their bullock teams
Bustle around, the tents are quickly raised,
The turf or stone fireplaces built: Yea soon
The chatting toilers and the hubbub reign
Supreme.
’Tis night: The Queen of Tight outlines
The hills with silvery sheen, and tents and all
Around are swathed in glittering robes ; camp fires
Dispense their scented wreaths, and leaping flames
Their garishness shed on the magic scene :
The rolling hills and heights are lost in forms
Of night that serve to frame the prospect new.
What antique virgin themes repeated are
By babbling waters of the Yarrowee !
What wavy sounds of concertinas come —
Of small lip-organs too —afloating through
The moonlit tents and trees ! How instinct are
The “ coeyings” waking comradeships afar
And near, or teasing “joeyings” shouted from
Some vantage safe at strangers passing by !
Thus crowded is the witchery hour so sweet
To those who common hardships share; to those
In souls akin ; to those in faith the same :
This is the introvision hour when truth
Stands naked and revealed ; when hidden self
* 25th August, 1851,


AUTHOR’S NOTE.
The above sketch was made by Mr. A. C. MacDonald,
F.R G.S, on 11th October, 1851. He presented it to our worthy
citizen, Mr. James Oddie, J.P., F.R.G.S., who kindly lent it to
me for this occasion.
Lambda.


Projected sees itself in conscious light,
And wise reflections sink into the heart.
Atwhiles the diggers clad in moleskins chat
And smoke or for amusement fire off guns;
Or sit and gaze into the red fire-ash.
’ Tis then the angels come in wakeful dreams ;
The hour winged thoughts outfly and interchange ;
’Tis then the gazing stars their influence lend
To soften life’s much-chequered way, the hour
The toiling digger breathes of hope and talks
Of prospects in the dish ; the last divide;
The matchbox and its golden store ; of claims
Disputed hotly ; likely spots to sink ;
Of ‘ ‘ shicers ’ ’ worked ; and shepherded new plots ;
Or of some bruited new-discovered field :
’ Tis the entrancing hour when letters from
The far-away are read again and yet
Again. The moment ’tis for oft-told tales ;
For songs and deeds to memory dear ; when hearts
Afar are linked to them fast-beating here !
How oft the old songs cheer the workers midst
The stress ! Where is the grey ‘ ‘ old-timer ’ ’ who
Sees not his visions, when he finds his heart’s
Most secret thoughts revealed in such as these ?
The Anchor's Weighed, and how to him she said :
“ Go thou, but let thy constant mind oft think
Of her you leave in tears behind ’ ’ ; Ben Bolt,
That sings of “Alice lying ’neath the stone
In the old Church yard ’ ’ and of the boys who were
Schoolmates then, “ there are only you and I” ;
Tom Bowling, darling of the crew, and who
’Tis said “ Had done his duty here below,
And now he’s gone aloft ” ; My Old Friend John,
‘ ‘ ’ Tis forty years since you and I were young ’ ’ ;
And Cheer, Boys, Cheer, “No more of idle sorrow’’
Or Black Eyed Susan, When her “ William left
She waved her lily hand ” ; Old Folks at Home,
‘ ‘ Who live way down upon the Swanee ribber ’ ’ ;
Or Sally of our Alley ; Lucy Long ;
And other tender lays that cast their spells
And cheered the homesick diggers in their toil.
Now let us join, this pleasant spring-time eve,
The toilers in their restful company,


And cheer ourselves around the night camp-fire,
Or hie us to our comrades’ canvas tent;
And while the constant stars their night-watch keep,
The venturous business of the day has been
Discussed ; and diggers of the better sort
Now catch the rhythm of the hour and lapse
From the prose of daily life’s necessities
To enter cloistered paths to memory green ;
Now comrades closer come and thoughts take flight
To spots afar where sacred visions dwell.
This is the ever favouring mystic hour !
And I —l list a youth with love-light in
His eyes make plaint : ‘‘ My heart this gloaming hour
Is far across the sea ; I seem to view
The far-off home —it all comes back to me !
The long good-bye, the failing words, the warm
Embrace : O, much I have to say that’s true
And tearful of the last good-bye I sighed :
. . farewell, rarest, sweetest, dearest,
Farewell, my own, my own Colleen ;
I’ll ne’er forget our dear old Ireland,
And the Shamrock growing green ! ’ ”
Again, there’s one who broods in silence long :
He thinks he hears the strains of the village choir,
And sees the dear old folks with snow-white locks
Bowed down in the high-backed pew, and wonders if
Perchance he’ll ever see that sacred scene
Once more ; and as he wonders lost in thought he sings
Ring on, ring on, ye Sabbath bells,
Thoughts many now crowd where memory dwells :
Some sweet, some sad, commingle there
Like lappings on a distant shore.
Another voice comes, saying : “ Many friends
I left in sorrow, but my lily maid—
The only flower that in my garden grows—
I promised constancy : I called the stars
To witness vows I swore to keep till I
Returned with fortune won to marry her :
I’ll ne’er forget, by green drest banks and braes,
I spake that saddest word ‘ Farewell.’ “ Wi’ monie
A vow and lock’d embrace,” while sobbings marked
Her sweet pale face : Yes, even the fields and flowers
All seemed confessed to make that parting ne’er
To be forgot:


‘How sweetly bloomed the gay green birk,
How rich the hawthorn’s blossom,
As underneath their fragrant shade
I clasped her to my bosom ! ’ ”
As the moon is floating down
The western sky, a man of winters stands
A-gazing up the glistening heavens and sees
The ’ graven scenes of yore : At length he sighs :
I gaze into the sky
Where cloudland shapes are glimmering :
Veiled forms seem passing by,
Or mutely near me lingering :
O stay with me,
Still school-friends be,
Awake the chords long silent;
Recount the days
Of youth’s sweet maze,
Of dearest ones long absent.
Yea, this the sixth-sense hour must be when shines
A strange far light on unrecorded life
Intangible ! That mighty untamed sense
Unfettered leaps the intervening years,
And of how long the time and distance be
Takes no account. It brings together souls
Akin, how far so’er they be, and makes
Them one compact community.
It is
The reminiscent hour when scenes long past
Room forth the mist; when boyhood’s days and deeds
Repeated are to the inner sight and sense ;
The hour the lonely soul goes wandering
To and fro the earth to find his fellow soul!
And thus and thus again meseems I’ve seen
The loving ghosts of auld lang syne. On these
I dwell to keep the early memories green
And drop a sympathic tear. Now, how few
Of the fathers of those earnest days remain !
And now, how bravely some are ‘ marking time ’
Awaiting God’s command to come to Him
And rest among the lovely and the blest!
POWELL PRINT


BALLARAT, 1907.


