





BALLARAT WEST ELECTIONS.
COLONEL SMITH AT THE ACADEMY
Frorn “ he Fjallarat Ftar ”of February 5, 1886.
Lieutenant-Colonel Smith, M.L.A., ad-
the Academy of Music last night.
both down-stairs and in the
i manv were unable to obtain
sitting room. Amongst the occupants of the
dress circle were a number of ladies, whose
presence at the meeting was remarked upon
by the chairman and by the candidate
in a complimentary manner. As Colonel
Smith entered the hall to take his place on
the platform his appearance was greeted
with applause. The chair was occupied by
the Mayor of the City (Cr Salter), and the
Following gentlemen, amongst others, occu-
pied seats on the platform:—Messrs G. Wil-
liams, P. Normana, Bradbury, Fern, Evans,
Luplau, J. Richards, E. Richards, Ander-
K>n (secretary of the Trades Union), Ronald-
K>n, and Butler.
,The chairman prefixed his opening re-
narks by the words “ ladies and gentle-
nen,” observing that he was pleased to be
■— . »
t was so seldom they took an interest in
tolitical matters. Colonel Smith, too, should
•e exceedingly gratified at seeing them there,
a their presence evidenced an interest
ither in the matter that had brought the
.udience together or in the candidate. He
ad seldom seen such a large gathering at a
olitical meeting in Ballarat. He was
leased that his friend Colonel Smith had
onored him by asking him to preside over
be meeting. It was the duty and should be
be pleasure of every mayor to preside when
sked at such meetings, in order to give
very facility to the ratepayers to hear the
lews of the various candidates who
sir support. In Ballarat it was
the case that candidates were
lowed to express their views without inter-
iption. It was, therefore, scarcely neces-
jjy for him to ask the audience to hear the
mdidate patiently and avoid any interrup-
pn such as would prevent him from ex-
’essing his views. He was very glad to see
ie electors taking such an interest in the
ntest. He only hoped that they would
,f awoniJ giiw
exercise their best judgment, and select the
best men. He then formally introduced the
candidate to the audience.
Colonel Smithy who on coming forward
was received with prolonged cheers, said he
thought his first duty was to express his
obligation and thanks to the ladies who
graced the audience by their presence that
night. (Applause.) It was desirous that
they should take an interest in the political
history of the colony. It was now' 25 years
since the electors of Ballarat first honored
him with their confidence by electing
him to Parliament. From then until now,
though he had retired for a few years of his
own accord, he had been their representa-
tive, having been returned on every occasion
when he asked it. (Applause.) During
that time he had been placed at the head of
the poll eight out of nine times, and on
three occasions when he sought re-election
as a Minister of the Crown he had been re-
turned without opposition. This was a
record such as few public men in Victoria
could boast of. (Renewed applause.) He
was proud to represent the constituency, and
in his place in Parliament he strove to repre-
sent not alone the intelligent working classes,
but also all classes of the community.
The Coalition Government.
When he addressed a public meeting in
Ballarat about 20 months ago, he spoke of
having honestly supported the Coalition Go-
vernment, which was now falling to pieces.
He then told the electors that he had seen
occasion to change his attitude, and j\,t that
declaration there was no dissent. (Ap-
plause. )
The Railway Commissioners.
When a Railway Management Bill provid-
ing for the abolition of political patronage
was introduced by the Hon. Joseph Jones,
then Minister of Railways, the leader of the
Liberal party bitterly opposed it as taking
away the rights and privileges of the people’s
representatives. He (Colonel Smith) said,
when it was proposed to have the railways
managed by Commissioners, that while it
might be advisable to have a Commissioner
from England to teach them, he did not see
* I
' #


the necessity of appointing two others who ous for federation, he gave way, and it w 7 a»
knew nothing about railways. He did not see made competent for three constitutional
what they had to do. There was a man who colonies to form the Council. But while Mr
j uo c* iiuui ty in;
for 20 years had managed the railways to
the entire satisfaction of the colonies—Mr
John Anderson. He (the speaker) pointed
this out in Parliament, and the justice of his
remarks was proved by the fact that in the
next budget provision was made to increase
Mr Anderson’s salary from £9OO to £l4OO a
year. He had a few figures which he would
quote subsequently to show the effect of the
so-called Railway Management Bill and the
so-called Public Servipe Management Bill.
They were condensed from Mr Service’s state-
ment, so that they could be taken as correct.
But before dealing with the figures con-
nected with the Railway Department, he
would draw attention to the fact that they
had lately had three great speeches. The
first was by Mr Service at Castlemaine. He
regarded Mr Service as a strong, able politi-
cian, who knew his way about. (Laughter.)
He ventured to say, however, that the people
would see that w hen Mr Service spoke of
liberal legislation it was carried through on
the lines of the old Conservative party all
throngh. Mr Service had played his cards
very well.
Federation.
Whatever of federation they now had w 7 as
due to Mr Service. He respected him as a
politician, though they had a few shots at
each other in the House. He was certainly
true to his friends, whether they were old or
new. He would tell them subsequently how
'lie had rewarded one of his old friends and
one of his new ones. He would also show
them the sort of thing they had as federa-
tion, which they were asked to bow down to,
and the humiliating position in which Vic-
toria was placed. He had got the informa-
tion that he would give them from that
reliable source, Hayter. He could tell
the members of the Natives’ Asso-
ciation, if there were any there, that he
■was thoroughly alive to the necessity for
federation, but he wanted it on a proper
basis. He did not want to see them landed
in difficulties they could not get themselves
out of subsequently. When the matter was
first mooted, he pointed out that it would be
unfair to allow the smaller colonies to throw
Victoria out in the cold, and it was arranged
that not less than four colonies should be
represented in . the Federal Council. They
then found that South Australia, which had
partly arranged to join in the council, would
notdoso. Knowingthat Mr Service would feel
this keenly, having taken such an interest in
the matter, and that the natives were anxi-
made competent for three constitutional
colonies to form the Council. But while Mr
Service was at the helm, doubtless the inter,
ests of the colony would be well looked after
by the Council, but he left them in the hands
of Mr Griffith. That gentleman was an ex-
ceedingly able man, but another man might
come in, and swamp the colony altogether.
The Federal Council.
Let them see how the Federal Council,
now sitting at Hobart, was constituted. It
was composed, not including Victoria, of
representatives of four colonies—two of
them fully constituted and two mere Crown
colonies. These four colonies had six votes.
Queensland, with a population of 248,000,
had two votes; Tasmania, with 122,000, two
votes; Western Australia, with 30,000, one
vote; and Fiji, with 2000 (white population),
one vote. They had altogether 402,000 in-
habitants, and these were represented by six
votes; while Victoria, with more than,
double the population of the four (900,000)
had only two votes. Where was the
justice in placing Victoria at the mercy
of Queensland, Tasmania, Western Aus-
tralia, and Fiji? This was not federation as
they wanted it. (Applause.) Let them look,
again, at the colonies left out of the federa-
tion. He believed that if fair terms had
been come to between the larger colonies,
the smaller ones must have eventually fallen
in with the movement at once. The popula-
tion of the colonies that had not agreed to
federate was as follows:—New South Wales,
817,000; New 7 Zealand, 517,000; South Aus-
tralia, 293,000; making a total of 1,627,000, as
against 1,302,000 who had agreed to federate.
They could never have true federation until
representatives to the Council were allotted
on a population basis, as was the case with
Parliamentary elections. He had good rea-
son for, in his place in Parliament, pointing
out the danger in which Victoria stood in the
event of the antagonism of the other colonies.
And this was bound to be shown to some
extent. Victoria would naturally protect
her own vinegrowers in preference to those
of South Australia. Again, there had
always been a certain amount of jealousy
between Melbourne and Sydney.
Public Appointments.
When the railway management was
vetsed in the hands of Commisioners, it was
stated that this would have the effect of
abolishing political patronage. What were
the lacts ? The first thing done was to
hand over the smaller appointments to an-
other board, and keep the larger ones in
their own hands. And the smaller boards


proceeded on strange lines. Suppose there for which he had asked must come,
were 30 men wanted, applicants were called to clear the minds of the public
for and balloted for to bring the num- with reference to the appointment. After
bers down to 90 —three times the num- the Railway and Civil Service Boards had
ber wanted. First they had to pass been appointed a return was asked for of the
the doctor, and then an examination appointments Ministers had made. When he
in color-blindness. This latter examination had read this—well, he hadn’t read it, as it
was a most peculiar thing. It was conducted was so voluminous it would take a year to
by a certain Dr Jonassen, who had a relative read (laughter) he found page after page de-
who sold the colors—little worsted balls, voted to appointments made by a Government
One candidate had assured him that he who pretended to abolish political appoint-
passed the examination with flying colors be- ments. So long as these were fair, no politi-
caUse he purchased not one set of these balls, cian could object to them. A Minister, if h,e
but half a dozen. (Laughter.) What the did not adjust appointments properly, was
Liberals wished to insist on was that the more amenable to public opinion than an
appointments should be made fairly irresponsible board. The members of the
by the board. He did not believe board were the same as they were, and had
in a young fellow coming out from the same feelirigs; thev had friends, and
home, and before he had been 24 hours were not likely to foVget them. From this
in the colony finding himself in the Railway return, which covered a period of
Department, board or no board, while the twenty one months, the Government
sons of pioneers were left out in the cold. abolished political patronage by’ making
(Applause.) It might be a selfish feeling, 4550 new appointments and 2348 prO-
but lie preferred to see the sons of his own motions, at a cost of over half a million of
constituents secure appointments before money. Up to the last morning prior to the
those from any part in the world. It was Commissioners commencing duty, Mr Gillies
certainly that the sons of the sturdy was engaged making promotions, and to pay
pioneers who had helped fq build ftp the for these the Commissioners Struck 6d per
colony arid make it what it isshbuld b'e passed day off the platelayers’ wages. This system
over for anyone from England. But this was carried Out all through. In the other
great bdard, .Which kept on piling on the branches of the public service during the
larger salaries—getting a man over from same period 839 new appointments had been
New Zealand to teach his faithCis and grand- made, and 1181 promotions,, thus riiaking a.
fatheyh—hut the platelayers 6d a day total altogether of B^lB'appointments arid
and rbdrit'ed sill the srriMler Salaries to make promotions in a little over 1$ month's; This. ’
up for the increases to the larger ones. Take vva& the Way in which political patronage:
the Allison Smith appointment as an in- was being abolished.
stance. He had passed through some ex-
aminations in New Zealand, and was brought
over here and passed over the heads of men
who had been in the service for 20 years,
and who knew the whole working cf the
railways. He had been passed over the
heads of his seniors and juniors in, the ser-,
vice, whom he was poing to teach. He Jiad
asked in Parliament for a board of enquiry,
to find out who this Mr Allison Smith wp||
where he had come from, and why he lsaa
been appointed. He (the speaker) had been
informed by Mr Gillies that Mr Smith w'as
about to establish a school, in which he
would teach his seniors and the rising chiss
of young Victorians in the Railway Depart-
ment how to perform their duties. Well,
that promise had been given over 12 months
ago, and no school had yet been formed.
(Applause.) Perhaps he had not found a
sufficient number whom he could teach, and
he was afraid that Mr Smith ..would .find
some who would know more than their teach-
er. (Laughter.) But the board of enquiry
The Public Service Commissioners.
When the Public Service Commissioners
took office they occupied 12 months in classi-
fying the work in the several departments.
After a large amount of incubation there
was a small result, but one that completely
disdrganised the service. They commenced
by fqutting down the salaries of the working
bees—reducing the wages of telegraph mes-
sengers,'letter carriers, and telegraph ope-
rators. It would now take a man to reach
the age.of Methusaleh before advancing to a
decentYposition in the service. (Laughter.)
Between the time for which the
above return was furnished, "and that
when the Civil Service Commissioners
assumed control no return could be fur-
nished. Mr Mirams had.’ asked for one, but
had been informed that it was so voluminous
that it could not he prepared before Parlia-
ment closed. He (the speaker) fancied that
tin? resources of. the Government Prinintg
, topurn out a Record
of the appointments then made. . .This was


the abolition'of political patronage. (Laugh- revenue as the Berry Government with the
ter.) He was told that the appointments depression that then existed. Bad harvests
were made according to merit, and on the surely came under the heading of a dispensa-
results of examinations. The Commissioners tion of Rrovidence. During three years the
were supposed to create a great saving, and income of the colony' had increased by soriie-
to effect this they wWrC. given larger thing like £1,600,000. One would think
salaries than officers in Similar- pobi- that a financier like Mr Service would en-
tions were given in any other part of the deavor, when such an opportunity of-
worM. fered, to lighten the burden of taxation.
The PuSLic Expenditure. But, no; as fast as the money came in away
ToW rxiaf: . ij. j. TX7i . j ii • » n
Take the expenditure of last year as
against the previous one, last year being
under the Commissiohers, and what would
they find ? Why, that there had been an
increase in the expenditure J in all depart-
ments. The net increase of expenditure
during the year 1885-0’ over that of 1884-5
was estimated at £352,839,. fully two-thirds
of which, was in departments' that pifedfibed
little or fto revenue’ This return showed
that during tbeUbmMfelohbrs’yeafeof 'Office
- they had placed more butdjeris. on the people
than had ever been' placed dbrihg any,
previous ’ year. l He wotfld ;> giyb ‘‘ the
-figures : in' support 1 of hisD &tatemeh’t, and
he (h'alleiiged'the' iiWts ,Qf any Minister
to disprove them - ; they Wefe 1 furaisfiOdyffem
•MrSendee’s bwnWtatemejit; ‘ln 'theMepbrt-.
- ments which produeetVre.¥hinde' tbibibefeased,
and there Was; therefore, k H , natural ineteafe
in the expenditure. In the Railways, Cus-
toms; and Lands .Departments there Was an
increase, though it would cease in the'latter
in a few months, all the lands of the colony
were gone. Blit that in the departments
which returned' little 1 dt no revenue would
Tnean perrnabent taxation: W T itb reference,
*to this increase, take the three years
of the Berry 1 Government, of which
he was a member. He Would show
that the increase of expenditure Wbs
touch greater under: the Government bv
boards than under that. He preferred to sit
with a straight Conservative Government,
Where he could Sit in front of them and help
to pass their good'measures apd reject their
bad ones, rather than with a mixed ar-
rangement that Wat neither ' this ohe thing
nor the btheh. Under Mr Berry’s Govern-
ment the average yearly increase of expendi-
ture was £150,0t)0: Tinder the Coalition
Government thW-inereasC was £525,000 a
it went. Where had this money gone ? On
to the shoulders of the people. No attempt
had been made; to lighten the burdens of the
people. “ Easy come, easy gcr)” Had been
the policy of the Goyerpipent. ,
The Public Debt.
'They had heard of a most successful loan
just floated, but there was another side to
the 1 Question. :If a spowbaiTWas, felled con-
tinually, vand there n6 ' sun to rrielt it,
it would gradually; gather '! into.’ a very large
r plaSs. TheyTvere paying. 1 inferSst .annually
feri' thteife Jdaiis,' 'and,“the'se Mere ‘increasing,
but the pay-tjay . Would ’ come, For . the
;2Q ;'eiVcfing ' 30th,; JujfeV/ ; 187(5, tlfe
, ptiblic ' debt to , £13,992,552
by borrciyihg. During [ythe’ next, : l’o years
£dd, was. borrowed,‘ ineluding tpe
' lban assented to on the 14th December, 1885.
Why' was 'this £8,050,000 loam puthorised?'
When Mr Bent was Minister of Railways Ife
introduced a infesure that was ■ called the
octopus bill. .No Words that Mr Gillies
could use he , edhsidered too strong to con-
demn the measure. But a change came
about. The'O’Loghlen Ministry went out,
and Mr Gillies Went in. One would think
he would discard the bill lie had so con-
demned. Not a bit of it. Mr Gillies in
Opposition and Mr Gillies in power were two-
different persons. When in Opposition he
condempeu the measure, but when in power
he introduced ' a .bill that out-Heroded
Bent’S,Not oply. did lie include the whole
of Mr Bent’s lihes, but propbsed to expend
£8,000,000 more on other ones. The Go-
vernment, too, had been reckless in other
respects, ’ IJ ‘, . t " !i , ~v i ,'V,
Tin-: Amended Land Act.
They bad, a Land Act that had settled on
the land more people than all the previous
Laud Acts put together. Under this Act-
the Wimmera, Moira, Mandurang, and to the
north-east of Ballarat had been peopled.
Uftdei* it a million acres of land a vear was.
, ' , , wcio 3Dozo,uuu a .uana Acts put togetner. unaer tins Act
year, the increase under the Coalition the 'Wimmera, Moira, Mandurang, and to the
Government being thus ovCr £375,<)60 more north-east of Ballarat had been peopled,
than under the LipePal administration. The Under it a million acres of land a year was
latter 'Government, too, had n6t their lines quietly absorbed. The Act did all that was-
-cast in very pleasant places! The , Derry required, and’it would naturally be thought.
Government had to go through a cycle of that any amendment made to it would be
depression, hiaifaly caused l by a of of a slight “character. ,He (the speaker) had
■bad harvests. Tftey n toight’as‘ 1 Wbll feHarge always b Sen agairiSt Hfe alienation of‘public
“the present Government with the increase of territory, and he hoped the feeling against


it Would increase. He was afraid, however,
that it was too late.' Not satisfied with
doing Well, , the present Minister of Lands
‘ had brought in a bill to alienate 20 millions
of acres of lahd Hjght away. He (the speaker)
asked whether past experience did not prove
that thC people‘ who leased these lands Would
not gather into a party and insist on obtain-
ing the freehold' frir it. Under this Act,
within a few short months, there would not
be an acre of land in the colony worth taking
up that Would be unalienated. No wonder
that the expenses of the Lands Department
increased. He asked the natives what they
were doing when a few in Parliament
were opposing this‘alienation of their patri-
mony. Why .'did'' they Rot hold meetings
to assist the efforts of the few? J . .No'! They
were holding meetings in favor of annexing
New Guinea, and Were letting their own
land go. Those who' had fbrttri'eht to get a
slice of the lahd would do sb, anff Vpy'small
blame to them'. ‘ Whriri'this was gone,’ how-
ever, those' AVlio. hath fidVopp&sfed walMii-
tibn would shame at ifot'having
offeree! opposition. Tfe,:Mr Richardson,, and
dthersdid 'What fhey'efldld li»;preV&it: such
power bCiRd 1 vesfeft'irn the : 'Minister,.'- but
without' aVail'.
1 J Alienation' of Reserves. ‘ •
They had just got a return of the reserves
abolished, ciirtaiied, leased, or sold under
this Act. k What did 'they think had been
done? In England' steps were taken to
reserve sites for bainping, Ac.; and ill, other
parts of the world these reserves were fought
for. Yet Under Mr Tucker 357 of the public
reserves had been either ldased, curtailed,
or sold. (Shame. 1 ) ' Yes; was it not a
shame? With one'exCeptibn, the papers in
the colo’ny had rt'ot' raised a voice against
this wholesale alienation of public lands.
He would be ashamed to go to hiS'grave and
knoW that had helped to abolish a single
acre of public Reserves. And this’that he
was speaking df bad happened under a
Coalition Government upheld by the Argus
and the Ayr.
. The New Coalition.
• Well) he had spoken of the two great
speeches they had' had lately. The third
was from' a! ybuhg man, and' Was brilliant,
glowing, and evert gushing. He believed lie
expressed the opinibir of every native in
saying that'he regretted that Mr Deakih had
allowed “himself to be taken in by MT Gillies.
He regretted it-, at they wanted Mr Deakin
on'the Lib'erafsidA'tb help
* *pHere'W,As ( iibyfer ; ah' instaneb ihfthe
civilised wM iff W liidfpartiesfiScf CbSiles6bd
before going to the country. In only two
cases in England had Coalition Govern-
ments rilled. One was the Government
under Lord North, which lost England the
American colonies; the other was under
Lord Aberdeen, which involved England ui
the Crimean war. This was the first exper-
ience in Victoria, land he felt sure it would
be the last. He could tell his Conservative
friends that he would much rather see them
in power, honestly endeavoring to govern
the country, for he could always endeavor
to support the good measures and oppose
the bad'ones; he would rather see that than
the present hybrid arrangement, which was
‘‘ neither fish, flesh, fowl, nor good red
herring.'”- y .'
Mixing on Private Property Bill.
He would give them a few facts to shade
ddwn Mr Deakin’s picture of the wonderful
•way in whi6li mining had been benefited by
the Minirig on Private Property Bill. Mr
Deakih -Spoke ’ of 70,000 acres being taken,
up, but theSe 70,000 acres-Wefe. taken up be-
fore the :bill was They Were all in
;the -liahdk of ‘CbmpiiriiCS- before that' time.
Furthers ah Other 70,000 acrCShud not been
taken up, bebabsAthet'erins' Were such that
they could not be taken up. Did this-Go-
vernment deserve any credit for this Mining
on Private Property Bill ? That bill was the
same as that introduced when he (the
speaker) was Minister of Mines. It was the
same as Mr Wallace’s bill, which the As-
sembly rejected. At the request of the
Miners’ Association,, again, he had brought
hundreds of cases, in which the labor, cove-
nants were 'shWneful'ly neglected, under
the notice of the Government, but:
no notice was taken. Practically, be-
fore long our credit would be exhausted,,
because o'nr land Was gorie, and the golds,
with it.
A “ SRe-saW” Government.
The coalition that had d.one all this
in three years was quite enough for the
past and for the future in Victoria. (Ap-
plause). The interests of the people of this
country were in danger in all directions
under a Government that played the game
of “ see-saw” as this Government had done..
The two papers in Melbourne were placated.
In some way. Some people said the large-
officials cOtil'd not be appointed unless the
newspaper proprietors appointed them. They
£ot their Cousins, and their uncles and their
aunts appointed. (Laughter). The papers
were on different sides and thus the game of
“ see-saw” Was nicely carried on. Th e Age
CairiC out'one day' and said one thing, any.
nekt? day the AfTyus' Would crime out and say-
it was not quite that, but something else.


Mr Grant died, and the member who w r as These contracts, amounting some of them to
elected in his stead was claimed as a £lB,OOO, had been given away to some per-
Liberal. Another member died and straight- son, or a few persons had been privately
way his successor was claimed, as a Con- apked ; to tender, and he was very sorry to see
lt was “ Ileads I Win, tails Mr Deakin’s name in some of them.
you. lose. ” In either case the : coalition were some further matters he wished to
won. He had heard there was a game
called euchre (laughter), and that in this
game if you had what was known as the
“joker” and the two bowers you had that
game pretty right. (Laughter.) The late
coalition held the “joker” and the two
bowers. It was all the same to them whoever
was returned. That was not an honest
system of Government. If any Liberal voted
at this election for a member who called
himself a Liberal, and would support this
new coalition, he was putting in a wolf in
sheep’s clothing. (Hear, hear.) He did
not wish to say anything of the members
who attended the first caucus. They were
paying a compliment to a retiring chief.
Appointments.
When they saw what Mr Service had been
doing, however, how one staunch old fiiend
is created a sixth judge, and a new found
friend appointed Agent-General, aud other
matters, they could see what was
the- ultimate result : of combinations: of
this kind. (Applause.) , HAhad no objection
to the reward Mr Berry; had'taken. He
was glad to see it, though he. had sat in op-
position tQ him-during the last session. (Ap-
plause, j But be would rutyhefhit were an
reward from a Liberal Government, than-
appear to.be the jrewaud iQr r ;servi{#s he' (ithe
speaker) would not name. (Applause.) He
hoped the Gqpserva,tive% would..,;take ..the:
advice given by Mr Gillies, at Echuca. Mr
Gilljps. bad, finished a four hours’, speech;
by.teiling the electors. Het;tO: elect,;ta*i.
dependent members, because they ieouldi not r
be depended, on. • He Imped they;Would; not.
eleqt anyone; who would support a coalition.
(Applap^c-) He would tell the elector,s of
Ballarat YVest that.,,if they ,did; him tha-
honor of again returning him he would go-in;;,
as an avowed opponent <*f any combination
Govejcnmepfc. : (Applause,) He; f did not/
wish , to.: .yefer ; much further, to? the.
past.,,, ,He 'hoped. lie had. said,, enough
to .convince;i,eveirypne present; O as,*toi! ! the>
bad effects. of; a ■ coalitions , If the Liberals I
could gain ,over. moderate; Cpnseijyatives rail,
the better. : ,;He knew there, were Conserva-
tives,. in this,.constituency, who did,,not took,
with'favor, on the : Coalition Gov.efnfcient.
The speaker said he held: in his. hand some
figures, whioh had .been supplied him by a
firm inthiscity, concerning contracts that had
been let without calling public tenders.
speak upon befor.e he closed.
The National Liberal League.
On Monday night last he was invited
to attend on the platform of the Tem-
perance Hall to iriagurate the National
Liberal League of Victoria, and* Mr
Mirams was kind enough to show to
him the programme before it was pub-
lished. He (Colonel Smith) suggested
that a meeting of a number of the prominent
Liberal members should be called and a
programme drawn up they could all follow.
The programme consisted of 13 planks.
These were the equalisation of taxation and
an absentee tax, retrenchment of public ex-
penditure, maintenance of the Education
Act and the enforcement of the compulsory
clauses, electoral reform, redistribution of
seats upon the basis of population without
increase in the number of members, and the
abolition of plural voting, intercolonial free-
trade based upon protection against .the rest
of the world, protection for women and
children. (Applause.) .isltutf turn ,noa
The Factories Act.
He would mention here something be; »;
wished to say in connection with, the
Factories’ Act passed last session.
Strange to say, Mr Deakin, the Min-
isteh/ gOt all the creidit of the Act, While:
he (the colonel), as chairman of the
Shops Commission, had spent three
yearsk of his flife, collected! all the in-
formation, and forced the thing to be
brought and yet, forsooth, his name ,Was
not mentioned at all. He did the; work and
.gotlna pay..- (Laiigfrter.) id j h,»:! b
i‘ 1 ... ySToDLiLBJj Mel Ls. /d mill
In : reference to the.- woolleh mills, of
■Victoria, and bringing them under, eighij-
boursi system* hei had, ,in conversation
with: a Ballarat ipataagerii asked him
if a i /duty, of : so much;;.va yard .were i
ipufc ion Oloth,'doultl; they!-work their mills,
.more advantageously.‘. He was told that a
:shillingi& yard wouldkeriable--them.to,Work .
iihorter bouts, increase the (production,. and
pay>a profit, ;He had received a-.lettei-from
a director in the Barwon; Wpollen i alsc
stating that by putting on a : shilling a yard
duty* instead of as at present, they, would,
.shut but all shoddy and close - the ;pdrts
against all the;low-priced goods of Germany....
(Applause.) The statistics collected showed
that 940 hands were employed in the nine


Woollen mills in Victoria. The wages paid they had taken the best portions of our Civil
yearly amounted to £54,946, the capital Service Act. They paid their Commissioners
invested to £332,000, and the output of cloth by fees, and no one man could have mojre
manufactured to 1,305,000 yards. If 48 than £lOO in fees. In England, with a popu-
hours were substituted for 56 hours, as at lation of 30,000,000, they gave two Couunis-
present, the yield would be decreased about £l2oo, and here, with 1,000,000
one-fifth. He would read the letter he had people, they had three jCoipipissibners, who
received from Alderman Meakin, of Gee- were paid £l5OO a year,
long Geelong, 29th January—Dear Decentralisation.
Colonel,—l am a director in the Barwon One more point he wished to touch
YVooilen ’ Mill, and was pleased to receive upon, and this was the agitation that
Woollen ’ Mill, and was pleased to receive
the communication sent at your requ'est at
our board meeting on Monday last. Cod
speed your efforts say I! I told Mr Berry
that his going home would smother our
factories, and if a Coalition Administration
continued for another three years, without a
revision of the tariff in our favor, the whole
of the woollen mills throughout the colony
will most certainly close. Your proposition
would put ixs on our legs. It is the flooding
of the colony with German low-class goods
and Yorkshire shoddy that we cannot com-
pete with. In Germany they work from 12
to 14 hours per day, at one-third the wages
paid in Victoria; and in Yorkshire about
two-thirds of the same amount that
we pay here with fuel—say coal—at
from 2s 9d to 3s 6d per ton, while we pay
25s per ton, and firewood in proportion. The
reason of our depression is not on account of
over production, as all the woollen mills in
the colony put together can only produce
one-third of the cloth required for Victoria
alone. lam an old politician and Protec-
tionist, and am confident that if you can
rally the true Liberals and go for no half-
and-half measures, you will most certainly
carry the country with you. (Applause.)
The working men will rally round you, and
your co-Liberals to a man, and Victoria will
then continue to be one of the most pros-
perous countries for the working man,
as protection, and nought else, has
already made her. I am, dear sir,
yours, most respectfully, Henry Meakin,
Alderman G-T.C. To Colonel Smith,
Ballarat.” He thought they would see that
the platform of the league, of maintenance of
protection with the revision of the tariff, was
in the interests of agriculture, manufactures,
and of commerce. (Applause.) The pro-
gramme further included opposition to any
further sale of Crown lands; the legalisation
of the eight hours’ system; the conservation
of and supply of water for irrigation and
other purposes; payment of members to be
a permanent measure; the development of
our minerals, particularly coal and gold;
and the establishment of a board of appeal
for State servants. (Applause.) In Sydney
had sprung up in the colony in
favor of decentralisation. (Applause.)
When he recollected how he had fought year
after year in the Assembly to get small
amounts doled out to his constituency, whije
cpstly palaces were being erected in Mel-
bourne, he read with pleasure of the de-
mand that was now being made by the
country for a fair share of the expenditure.
(Applause.) What they wanted was to
spend the revenue they contributed, to deal
with their own hospitals, their own asylums,
and he hoped at some time their own police,
instead of squandering their money in the
new departments created in Melbouane.
(Applause.) He would first give two or
three items. The salaries and expenses of
the Public Service Board came to £6634; the
expenditure in the Premier’s Department,
including £5OOO for telegrams, came to
£7356; the Railway Commissioners might be
estimated at £8500; the increased cost of
railways in proportion to income, compared
with previous year, £44,500. Then, as to
the Defence Department, concerning which
he (the Colonel) had delivered speeches
innumerable in the House, Col. Sargood
had brought in a bill making a special ap-
propriation of £llO,OOO, and he had pro-
mised that this would cover the whole of the
defence expenditure. Yet they found that
additional votes were made of £83,082,
while the addition of the Minister’s salary of
£l5OO brought the total cost for the year up
to £194,582. (Applause.) The whole country
was adopting now this programme of decen-
tralisation, and he hoped that those who had
property in Ballarat would think of their
own interests. Melbourne had less than
one-third of the population of the colony,
and the country which produced the
gold, and the hides, and the tallow,
and the wool, paid two-thirds of the
taxation, while less than a third of this came
back. (Applause.) The sum of £20,000
could : be found for the Melbourne Univer
sity, another £20,000 for Melbourne museum
and libraries, while when they asked for an
increased vote for the public libraries
of the country, all they got was a


paltry £5OOO for the rest of the Explanations.
country. If they conferred on him the Before he sat down he wanted to
hqnor of re-election he hoped they would tell them his own ' positiop. They
send men with him who would not shiliy- all. knew he had the courage of his
shally, who would not support another coali- opinions. (Applause.) When he differed
tion business, but who would unite to work from a ; Government he opposed them
and obtain something for the country dis- oqly in thp/se measures in which be differed
tricts. (Applause.) This system of dplng from them. lie had had flip courage to
everything in Melbourne had reached such differ from the Government the last year or
an extent that he was informed by trades- two. They had seen the break down of t)ie ■
men that they even sent up tradesmen coalition, and he hoped the Liberals would
to up-country places to drive a few have nothing to do with another. (Applause.)
nails. (Hear, hear.)' Mr Gillies was pretty Having fought for the last two years,
■well-known in Ballarat. (Hear, hear.) and having proved that what he said
and of all places in the colony ' there was was correct, he felt that his only
none he had a greater grudge against than course should be to come before the
Ballarat. (Laughter.) Imagine a Minister electors alone. He did not wish to
of the Crown having been once refused a seat dictate to the constituency who his
for Ballarat West. (Laughter.) From Mr colleagues should be. If they returned his
Gillies’ Government, or from other coalition old colleagues he would work along with
the country would not get fair play. The them, and if they saw fit to change them he
opposition to the concentration of the work- would work as well with his new colleagues,
shops at Newport was known well enough, (Applause.) He asked them not to plump
and yet large contracts for their erection for himself or any one, but to vote for three
lor Jsaaarat vv esc. ijuaugni/er.j rrum air
Gillies’ Government, or from other coalition
the country would not get fair play. The
opposition to the concentration of the work-
shops at Newport was known well enough,
■and yet large contracts for their erection
were let in defiance of the country.
(Voice —“ Who owns the land down
there ? ” Colonel Smith —“ I don’t own any
land there; but I suppose somebody owns
it.”) Another large contract was to be let
on Monday next in connection with those
shops. That was flouting in the face of the
■decentralisation leagues in the colony. If by
any process Mr Gillies could humbug the so-
called Liberals, the decentralisation leagues
might as well close up (hear, hear)
because the country districts would never get
fair play from a Government in which Mr
Gillies was the head. (Applause.)
~— *
men, They knew his sentiments and his
efforts in the past, and if honest and straight-
forward work in their interests counted for
anything, then he had no doubt as to what
would be the return when the ballot-box was
opened. Colonel Smith sat down amid loud
and prolonged applause.
No questions were put to the candidate
owing to a request by Colonel Smith that
they might be put off until another evening.
Three cheers were given for the chairman
and the Colonel, and the meeting then dis-
persed.


