





/T\ajor Z. Banquet
■SSJSs!
THIS pamphlet commends to your notice a recent
Social Event in Melbourne, Victoria, which was
honoured by the press generally as of especial public
importance. The occasion was a Banquet tendered
to a visiting American, Professor William P. Stewart,
who is regarded as the most prominent in his own line of
professional science, and as one of the most talented of
the representatives of the United States that have visited
Australia. The interest that has attended his movements
and centred in all his utterances, and the wide circle of
Australian friends and acquaintances that he has formed,
have suggested a republication in something of a permanent
form of his speech, and the attending features of his reception
in Melbourne, as was done in the “ History of a Banquet ”
for Sydney, copies of which, and other copies of this also,
can be had on application to
H. M. RENNIE,
Manager.
Office of The Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New York.
473 Collins Street, Melbourne.




V/ JvU”' \J f \)/
T*C /-'jC ~*C V
COMPLIMENTS
MAJOR Z. C. RENNIE,
SYDNEY, N.S.W.,
General Manager for Australia
THE MUTUAL LIFE
INSURANCE COMPANY OF NEW YORK,
RICHARD A. McCURDY,
PRESIDENT.




33 -vi
o\?a nci 11 cl'
“MenziES 1 HOTEL," Melbourne, Victoria, Monday,
7.30 p.m., December sth, 1892,
in honour of
Mr. WILLIAM P. STEWART,
Professional Actuary and Instructor of Agents for
JnSURANCE pOMPANY OF EW YORK,
GIVEN BY
MAJOR Z. C. RENNIE,
GENERAL MANAGER FOR AUSTRALIA.
First Annual Convention of Agents, Melbourne,
December 6,7, & 8, 1892.


Officers ot* tbc Company
RICHARD A. McCURDY President
ROBERT A. GRANNISS .... Vice-President
WALTER R. GILLETTE - - - General Manager
ISAAC F. LLOYD 2nd Vice-President
WILLIAM J. EASTON Secretary
FREDERICK SCHROEDER - - - Assistant Secretary
HENRY E. DUNCAN, Jr. - Corresponding Secretary
ARCPHBALD N. WATERHOUSE - - - Auditor
EMORY McCLINTOCK, LL.D., F.T. A. - - Actuary
JOHN TATLOCK, Jr. .... Assistant Actuary
CHARLES B. PERRY - - - 2nd Assistant Actuary
WILLIAM G. DAVIES - General Solicitor
GUSTAVUS S. WINSTON, M.D,
ELIAS J. MARSH, M.D. - r - Medical Directors
GRANVILLE M. WHITE, M.D.
FREDERIC CROMWELL Treasurer
JOHN A. FONDA Assistant Treasurer
WILLIAM W. RICHARDS - Comptroller
WILLIAM P. SANDS Cashier
EDWARD P, HOLDEN - - - Assistant Cashier


Samuel E. Sproulls
Samuel D. Babcock
George S. Coe
Richard A. McCurdy
James C. Holden
Hermann C. von Post
Alexander 11. Rice
Lewis May
Oliver Harriman
Henry W. Smith
Robert Olyphant
George F. Baker
Jos. Thomson
Dudley Olcott
Frederic Cromwell
Julien T. Davies
Robert Sewell
S. Van Rensselaer Cruder
Boarb of trustees.
Charles R. Henderson
George Bliss
Rufus W, Peckham
J. Hobart Herrick
William P. Dixon
Robert A. Granniss
Henry IL Rogers
Jno. W. Auchincloss
Theodore Morford
William Babcock
Stuyvesant Fish
Augustus D. Juilliard
Charles E. Miller
James W. Husted
Walter R. Gillette
James F. Granniss
David C. Robinson


BustraUan Department.
MAJOR Z. C. RENNIE - General Manager
R. L. FAITHFULL, M.D. - - Chief Medical Referee
E. FAIRFAX ROSS, M.D. - - - Medical Referee
Hon. W. H. PIGOTT, M. L.C. - - . Legal Adviser
H. E. RUSSELL .... Supervising Accountant
General Manager’s Staff.
11. M. RENNIE .... Manager for Victoria
ALEX. MacKNIGHT - Manager for New South Wales
W. H. KELYNACK - - Manager for Queensland
B. DENNISON Private Secretary
G. W. PETTIT Assistant Cashier
RICHARD RENNIE Stenographer
G. PORTER Application Clerk
W. A. TOWLER Accountant
P. McROBBIE - - - Accountant
GEORGE G. BAULCH Clerk
EDWIN G. TOUHILL Clerk


Bustralian department— continued.
Building Committee:
MAJOR Z. C. RENNIE, Chairman.
FRANCIS ADAMS, Esq., General Manager of the
Australian Joint Stock Bank.
Hon. CHAS. E. PILCHER, Q.C., M.L.C.
Architect :
JOHN KIRKPATRICK, Esq.
Bank Depositories:
THE AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK.
THE COMMERCIAL BANKING COMPANY OF SYDNEY
THE UNION BANK OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED.
THE COMMERCIAL BANK OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED


3nvitations accepted.
Mr. H. M. ALCOCK, Manufacturer.
Mr. JOHN ARTHUR, Ex-Chairman Stock Exchange of Melbourne
Mr. DAVID ANDERSON, Manager Orient Steam Nav. Co.
Mr. K. V. R. ALBERTSON, Meridan Britannia Company, U.S.A.
Hon. THOS. BENT, M,L.A., Speaker Legislative Assembly.
Mr. R. W. BEST, Member Legislative Assembly.
Mr. C. R. BLACKETT, Government Analytical Chemist.
Mr. WILLIAM BROWN, Solicitor.
Mr. CHARLES BRIGHT, Journalist.
Mr. JAMES BORROWMAN, Trustees and Executors Co. Ltd.
Mr. GEORGE BULLEN, Solicitor.
Mr. MAURICE BRODZKY, Editor and Proprietor 'fable Talk.
Mr. SIDNEY CLEMENTSON, Wool Broker.
Mr. W. J. COLLINS, Mining Engineer.
Mr. G. G. CRESPIN (Greig & Murray Limited).
Dr. M. CRIVELLI, Physician and Surgeon.
Mr. CHAS. A. D’EBRO, Architect.
Mr. EDWARD De VERDON, Q.C., Commissioner of Titles for
Victoria.
Mr. E. J. DIXON, Member Legislative Assembly.
Professor SIDNEY DICKINSON, M.A.
Mr. H. PI. DRYSDALE, Gentleman.
Hon. Dr. W. H. EMBLING, Member Legislative Council.
Professor J. S. ELKINGTON, M.A., LL.B., The University.
Mr. EDWIN C. ELLIOTT, Share Broker.
Mr. EDWARD FANNING, Merchant.
Dr. R. H. FEATHERSTONE, Physician and Surgeon.
Mr. THEODORE FINK, Solicitor.


invitations accepted- Conttnuefc.
Mr. HENRY FOSTER, Member Legislative Assembly.
Mr. H. GUNDERSON, Consul for Norway and Sweden.
Mr. WM. GREENLAW, General Manager Colonial Bank of
Australasia.
Mr. GEORGE GOLLIN, Merchant and Importer.
Mr. G. S. GRIFFITHS, F.G.S., Stock Broker.
Mr. THOS. S. HALL, Capitalist.
Prof. GEORGE B. HALFORD, M.D., The University.
Mr. ALBERT HARRIS, Member Legislative Assembly.
Mr. H. H. HAYTER, C.M.G., Government Statist.
Hon. C. J. HAM, Member Legislative Council.
Mr. H. R. HOGG, Merchant.
Mr. SAMUEL HUGHES, General Commission Merchant.
Mr. WILLIAM lEVERS, Member Legislative Assembly.
Mr. T. R. JAMES, Assistant Secretary Telegraph Department,
Mr. LEWIS KIDDLE, Australasian Mortgage and Agency Co.
Mr. WILLIAM KNOX, Secretary Broken Hill Proprietary Silver
Mining Company.
Mr. C. M. LONGMUIR, General Manager City of Melbourne Bank
Limited.
Mr. S. LEON, Barrister.
Hon. NATHANIEL LEVI, Member Legislative Council.
Dr. F. LLOYD, Surgeon.
Mr. ABRAHAM LOEL, Merchant.
Mr. F. C. MASON, Chairman of Committees, Legislative Assembly,
Prof. D. O. MASSON, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.E., The University.
Mr. W. H. MASTERS, Electrical Engineer.
Dr. 11. C. MAUDSLEY, Physician and Surgeon.
Mr. A. MARKS, Consul for Japan.
Mr. DAVID MILLS, Manager Union Steam Navigation Co.
Mr. A. E. MOORE, Financial Agent.
Mr. GEO. D. MEUDELL, Share Broker,
Mr. 11. 11. MUSSEN, Solicitor.
Mr. J. F. McCARRON, Printer and Publisher.
Mr. SAMUEL McCULLOCH, Solicitor.


Snvftatfons BCCeptC&—ConHnucl>.
Mr. C. McCRACKEN, Brewer.
Mr. JAMES MACDOUGALL, Printer and Publisher.
Mr. JOHN McCUTCHEON, Assistant General Manager Com-
mercial Bank of Australia Limited.
Mr. D. McEACHARN, Merchant.
Mr. JOHN McGEE, Merchant.
Mr. JOHN McWHAE, Chairman of the Stock Exchange of
Melbourne.
Mr. MOTON D. MOSS, Special Superintendent.
Mr. W. E, OLDFIELD, Merchant.
Hon. J. B. PATTERSON, Member Legislative Assembly.
Mr. H. W. PERRIN, Gentleman.
Mr. C. A. PINSCHOF, Consul for Austro-Hungary.
Mr. E. A. POOLMAN, Sugar Refiner.
Hon. JAMES M. PRATT, Member Legislative Council.
Mr. J. SINCLAIR PIRRIE, Manager Austral Otis Engineering Co.
Mr. H. M. RENNIE, Manager for Victoria, Melbourne.
Mr. J. W. ROBERTS, Editor Evening Standard.
Mr. A. B. ROBINSON, Commercial Editor, The Age.
Mr. A. W. ROBERTSON, Managing Director Goldsbrough,
Mort & Co. Limited.
Mr. JOHN ROSS, Secretary Economic Building Society.
Mr. HENRY SHORT, Editor of 7he Leader.
Mr. M. SIMONSEN, Importer,
Hon. L. L. SMITH, Member Legislative Assembly.
Mr. RICHARD SPEIGHT, Ex-Chairman Railway Commissioners
for Victoria.
Mr. O. M, SPENCER, Gentleman.
Hon. S. T. STAUGHTON, Member Legislative Assembly.
Hon. E. STEINFELD, Member Legislative Council.
Mr. FRANK STUART, Member Legislative Assemblv.
Mr. T. W. STANFORD, Capitalist.
Mr. SYDNEY STOTT, Remington Typewriter.
Mr, JOSEPH THOMSON, Share Broker.
Hon. A. L. TUCKER, Member Legislative Assembly.


snvitattons Bcceptefc— continue*.
Me. J. W. TAVERNER, Member Legislative Assembly.
Dr. JAMES P. TEAGUE, Physician.
Mr. F. K. TERRY, Merchant.
Mr. JAMES THOMSON, General Manager Evening Standard.
Mr. HENRY GYLES TURNER, General Manager Commercial
Bank of Australia Limited.
Mr. W. H. THODEY, Insurance and Banking Record, and Com-
mercial Editor of The Argus.
Mr. W. A. TOWLER, Accountant.
Mr. WM. A. TRENWITH, Member Legislative Assembly.
Mr. ALEX. URQUHART, Inspector and General Manager English,
Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank.
Mr. JOHN WAGNER, Capitalist.
Mr. G. H. WALLACE, Consul-General United States.
Mr. W. WARREN, General Manager, E. A. & C. Telegraph Co.
Mr. T. P. WEBB, Master-in-Equity and Commissioner of Patents
for Victoria.
Mr. H. S. WINTER, Solicitor.
Mr. GEORGE WITHERS, Superintendent P. & O. S. N. Co.
Dr. RICHARD YOUL, City Coroner.
Mr. E. L. ZOX, Member Legislative Assembly.


#o up.
<&ntvtCB,
(Re&be®.
Filet of Beef and Olives.
Vegetables.
Punch a la Romaine.
Pheasants a la Perigueux.
Russian Salad.
Asparagus.
Entremets.
Iced Souffle a la Celestine.
Champagne Jelly.
Macaroni au Parmesan.
3
Dessert.
MENZIES’ HOTEL,
J. Smith, Manager.
Caviare. Anchovies.
Oysters on Ice.
Turtle. Consomme of Chicken.
Salmon Trout, Shrimp Sauce.
Filets of Whiting a la Venitienne.
Supreme of Chicken a la Richelieu.
Lamb Cutlets a la Granville.
Pdte de Foie Gras en Aspic.
Orange Water and Passion Fruit Cream.
Melbourne,
sth December,


|%^ i® dlpo^pamme.
i. March - - “Hail Columbia” - - - Lamothe.
2. Overture - - - “Medley”- - - - Balfour.
3. Waltz - “ Reminiscences of America” - - Sara.
4. Selection- “ Echoes of the Street ” - - Gerald.
5. Polka - - “ Faust up to Date ” - - - Little.
6. Gavotte - - “Old and New” - - - Faust.
7. Waltz - - “English Beauties” - - - Balfour.
8. Selection - - - “ Martha ” - - - - Flotow.
9. Graceful Dance “ Fascination ” - - - Lawson.
10. Galop - “Ta-ra-ra Boom-de-ay” - - Meissler.


Toastmaster - - - MAJOR Z. C. RENNIE.
Music by HERR FLOCK.
i. “THE QUEEN.”
Music
“ God Save the Queen.”
2. “OUR GUEST.”
The Honoured Representative of The Mutual Life
Insurance Company of New York.
3. “OUR LEGISLATORS.”
Proposed by Mr. PL Gyles Turner
„ , < Hon. C. J. Ham, M.L.C
Res P° nseb y iMr. R. W. Best, M.L.A,
4. “AUSTRALIA.”
Music - “Maker of Earth and Sea.”
Proposed by Mr. F. C. Mason M.L.A.
Response by Mr. Geo D. Meudell.
5. “OUR AMERICAN COUSINS.”
Music - “The Star Spangled Banner.”
Proposed by Mr. Wm. Greenlaw.
Response by - - Mr, G. H. Wallace, U.S. Consul-General
6. “THE PRESS OF AUSTRALIA.”
Proposed by Mr. Theo. Fink
Response by - - - - - [ Mr. A. B Robinson.
(Mr. Jas. Thomson.


(From “ Table Talk9ih December, 1892.)
(T\ajor Banquet
A REPRESENTATIVE GATHERING.
OR improvements in almost everything that
pertains to the general well-being and comfort
older nations are indebted to the citizens of the
United States. Railway travelling in America
has been brought to the perfection of a fine art, and it is
possible to travel from one end of the Republic to the other
with the same luxurious ease that pertains to a residence in
a first-class hotel. So much scientific ingenuity has been
displayed in the manufacture of agricultural implements
that when the electric plough now talked of is an
accomplished fact, our American cousins expect to reap
crops ten, twenty, or hundred fold above the present average.
It is the same in every department, and the new departure
made by Major Z. C. Rennie, General Manager of Australia
for the Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York, in
inviting over a hundred leading citizens to a princely
banquet, to relate the history of his company from the time
of its inception fifty years ago to its present position of


leading life assurance office of the world, is in keeping with
the national progressive spirit. The association is a
magnificent one, and its representatives entered the city in
a magnificent manner, like the princes of mediaeval times.
They affect no catchpennyadvertisements, and withoutpuffing
or beat of drum they assume the position which is theirs
by right.
The banquet given at Menzies’ Hotel last Monday
evening was in honour of Mr. William P. Stewart, pro-
fessional actuary and instructor of agents for the Mutual
Life of New York, now on a tour through Australia in the
interests of the company. The list of guests invited by Major
Z. C. Rennie, the general manager for" Australia, included
legislators, prominent Government officials, and distinguished
representatives of the professions and financial and commer-
cial interests. Parliament was represented by five members
of the Upper House and fifteen of the Legislative Assembly,
the Hon. C. J. Ham, M.L.C., and Mr. R. W. Best, M.L.A.,
responding for their respective chambers to the toast
“Our Legislators,” proposed by Mr. H. Gyles Turner.
This gentleman, who was the first speaker after Professor
Stewart had responded to the toast of his health in what
may be considered the speech of the evening, is one of the
superior type of colonists. To the financial world he is known
as general manager of the Commercial Bank of Australia,
which, under his wise and energetic control, has advanced
in a quarter of a century to a position of great importance,
ranking with the leading financial institutions of the Southern


hemisphere. His few leisure hours are devoted to literary
pursuits, and he has the reputation of being one of the most
able writers on finance and general subjects in Melbourne.
Another noted financier is Mr. Greenlaw of the Colonial
Bank, who is celebrated for being the oldest bank manager
in Melbourne, having been identified with that institution as
accountant in the early days, subsequently pursuing a highly
honourable career as manager through a long series of years,
witnessing the rise and fall of many associations and
individuals meanwhile. Three other bankers of equally
high reputation were present —Mr, Urquhart, successor to
Sir George Verdon in the management of the English,
Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank, Mr. Longmuir and
Mr. McCutcheon, managers of the City of Melbourne and
Commercial Bank of Australia respectively. There is one
gentleman whose present name has become identified with
Victorian statistics throughout the world, whose services to
the community cannot be over-estimated. The Victoria7i
Year-Book , compiled by Mr. H. H. Hayter, C.M.G.,
Government Statist, is now in its eighteenth year of issue,
and is accepted everywhere as an unimpeachable authority
on Australian statistics. The Melbourne University is
represented by Professors Halford, Elkington and Masson,
while the medical profession has around the table half-a-dozen
leading physicians, Drs. Featherstone, Maudsley, Teague,
Crivelli, and the Hon. Dr. W. H. Enabling, member of the v
Legislative Council. Capitalists whose fortunes are of too
solid a nature to be shaken by the present financial depression*


such as Mr. A. W. Robertson, chairman of Messrs.
Goldsbrough, Mort & Company, Mr. T. W. Stanford, brother
of Mr. Senator Leland Stanford, of the United States, are
among the honoured guests. Mr. A. W. Robertson, who is
a Canadian by birth, is one of the oldest colonists, being
connected with his former partner, Mr. Wagner, also an
invited guest, in railway construction and other public
undertakings in the early history of the colony, carried out
with infinite credit, and placing them both in positions of
wealth and influence. Managers of the largest steamship
companies in the world are present, Mr. George Withers, of
the P. & O. S. N. Company, Mr. David Anderson,
of the Orient S. N. Company, and Mr. David Mills, of the
Union Steam Navigation Company, one of the most
succesful of colonial lines. The Eastern Extension Cable
Telegraph Company has for representative its general
manager for Australasia, Mr. W. Warren. Among eminent
officials in the Civil Service, Mr. T. P. Webb, Master-in-
Equity, Mr. Edward de Verdon, Q.C., Commissioner of
Titles, are noticeable, and four consuls, Mr. G. H. Wallace,
Consul-General for the United States; Mr. A. Marks,
consul for Japan; Mr. Gunderson, consul for Sweden and
Norway, and Mr. C. A. Pinschof, consul for Austro-Hungary,
give a cosmopolitan colour to the proceedings. Of lawyers
there are at least half a dozen, Mr. S. Leon representing the
Bar, and Mr. Theodore Fink, Mr. George Bullen, Mr. H. S.
Winter, Mr. George Brown, Mr. H. Mussen, and Mr. Samuel
McCulloch, the other branch of the profession, now amalga-


mated by recent legislation. The latter gentleman is worthy
of note, as son of the Hon. W. McCulloch, a well-known
figure in Victorian history, member of the Upper House,
head of a large carrying firm, and director of the Cable
Tramway Company of Melbourne. Another guest is
Dr. Youl, who has gained a high reputation through
many years of faithful service as City Coroner. Space will
not permit to individualise the whole of the distinguished
assemblage. Among the legislators, Mr. Mason, M.L.A.,
chairman of committees ; Mr. Frank Stuart and Mr. E. L.
Zox, members for East Melbourne, and the Hon. A. L.
Tucker, member of a former Ministry, and generally repre-
sented as possessing in his large following in the House the
key to the political position, must not be overlooked. The
members of the Upper House invited were the Honourables
C. J. Ham, James Pratt, Dr. W. H. Embling, E. Steinfeld,
and Nathaniel Levi, and, in addition to the members of the
Lower House already mentioned, the Hon. S. J. Staughton
and Hon. J. B. Patterson, ex-Ministers of the Crown, and
Messrs. E. J. Dixon, Henry Foster, Albert Harris, William
levers, Hon. L. L. Smith. J. W. Taverner, and Mr, W. A.
Trenwith, a prominent labour representative. Other pro-
minent citizens who accepted invitations were Messrs. K. V. R.
Alberton, C. R. Blackett, Government Analyst; C. Bright,
T. K. Knowles, James Borrowman, G. G. Crespin, Charles
D’Ebro, Sidney Dickenson, M.A. ; H. H.Drysdale, Edward
Fanning, George Collin, H. R. Hogg, Samuel Hughes,
T. R. James, G.P.0.; Lewis Kiddle, A. Loel, A. E, Moore,


C. McCracken, D. McEachern, John McGee, M. Moss,
W. E. Oldfield, H. W. Perrin, E. A. Poolman, J. S. Pirrie,
John Ross, M. Simonsen, Richard Speight, O. M, Spencer,
Sydney Stott, F. K. Terry, W. A. Towler, J. Stephens.
Of merchants who form the backbone of the community
there are nearly a score. One of these, Mr Sidney Clement'
son, an American wool-buyer, holds a prominent position,
and is doubtless a representative of what may be expected
to constitute an increasing class of influential citizens
when Australian wool is allowed to go in free of
duty to the United States. Mr. H. M. Alcock’s name
has become celebrated throughout the Southern hemi-
sphere and India for the perfection' to which he has
brought the manufacture of billiard tables. The special
timbers adapted for this purpose have been selected and
seasoned by him with such excellent effect that his name is
known everywhere as a specialist in this important work.
Mr. J. F. McCarron, of Messrs. McCarron, Bird & Co., and
Mr. James Macdougall, of Messrs. Sands & McDougall, are
names synonymous with excellent and artistic work in every
branch of the printing business. Silver mining in Australia,
of which the famous Broken Hill mines represent the largest
interests, is appropriately represented by Mr. William Knox,
secretary of the great Proprietary mine, connected with the
fortunes of many leading citizens in the rapid rise and
decline in the value of mining scrip in Melbourne, and with
this branch of business the names of many guests, leading
sharebrokers, are associated, Messrs. Griffiths, F.G.S.,


Joseph Thompson, Geo, D, Meudell, John Arthur,
J. S. Butters, E. C. Elliott, and John McWhae, the honoured
president of the Stock Exchange of Melbourne, Two
important branches of engineering in Australia, the electrical
and mining, only yet at the threshold of their coming
greatness, are represented by Mr. W. G. Collins and
Mr. W, H. Masters respectively. The Press, to whose
important functions the public is indebted for the transcript
of speeches delivered, had also its representatives among
the invited guests, Messrs. A. B. Robinson, commercial
editor of the Age, and Mr. James Thomson, the energetic
manager of the Evening Standard, and representative for
Victoria at the late Colonial and Indian Exhibition, being
set down to reply to the toast of the Press of Australia.
There were also present Mr. T. W, Roberts, editor of the
Evening Standard, Mr, W. H. Thodey, commercial editor
of the Argus and the Insurance and Banking Record, one of
the best financial authorities in Melbourne, Mr. H. Short,
a rising young journalist, editor of the Leader and one of
the vice-presidents of the Journalists’ Institute, and
Mr. H. M. Rennie, son of the host and manager for
Melbourne of the Mutual Life of New York.


(From “ Table Talk,” 9th December, 1892.)
syi?opsis of Speeches
CTTFTER the various viands had been partaken of, and
the coffee and cigars passed round, the host of the
J occasion,
Major Zenas C. Rennie, arose and said :—Gentlemen, —
If this was a banquet in the United States I should have no
need to preface the introduction of the guest of the evening
by any remarks of mine. As it is he has been so prominently
before the people of Australia since his arrival that I think
I only pay you a deserved compliment in introducing as one
whom you already know, at least through the columns of
your newspapers, Professor William P. Stewart, of New
York.
The Professor, on arising, was greeted with a storm of
hearty and prolonged applause, on the subsidence of which
he began his speech, in a clear and musical voice, apparently
from the inspiration of the moment and without the aid of
a single note. His manner was easy and natural, and his
inflection at times incisive and thrilling. At the close of the
banquet, the guests took leave of him with earnest and
sincere expressions of regard, and with the one confession
in common that his speech had been an unexpected treat.
PROFESSOR WILLIAM P. STEWART’S SPEECH.
Major Rennie and Gentlemen, —I read on the roll of
acceptances to-night, the names of men illustrious in the
annals of Australia. I have read many of these beyond the


confines of their own country in annals of the general world,
as contributors to its general thought and exemplars of its
grander wisdom. In such a presence I feel naturally
embarrassed with the part you have assigned me. I feel as
though I stood in an assemblage of the gods, myself the
phenomenon of a mortal merely, dazzled with the glory of
the celestial world. To be singly the guest of such a body,
to feel that one were worthy of such an honour, would be
happiness indeed, but this cannot be mine. I understand
full well the regard you Australians cherish for the great
nation of the Northern Continent —(applause)—and I
instinctively know that it is not with the individual, as such,
but with America that you are here in company—that it is
not with me, but the people of the United States, you sit,
and that in me it is but the American personality you
honour to-night, as it is the genius of American accomplish-
ment, symbolised in the great institution which I represent,
The Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York.
(Applause.)
I regard it as a compliment wholly beyond my deserts
that I have been made the occasion of this event. (No, no!)
I know that I have not the ability commonly assigned me,
and that it can only be your indulgent good nature that will
acquit me now with any show of credit. (Hear, hear.)
I cannot pose as a specimen speaker of my race, or as in
any sense an expression of its nobler personality or greater
worth. But as you must have a Prince of Denmark in
Shakespeare’s “ Hamlet,” I am content to be the play-guest


of this occasion, if you will, the lay-figure merely, on which
the fashion of your honours may be wrought until appro-
priated and reciprocated by your cousins across the sea.
(Applause.)
But in assuming this role , I know that it only in the
generic sense that I have been chosen ; I know it is not of
myself that you desire to hear me speak, but rather of that
great country from which I came, or of that greatest of its
financial achievements, The Mutual Life of New York.
(Hear, hear.)
Of America, then, as first in my heart, let me tell you
that you cannot love us more than we love you. (Applause.)
That you cannot proffer us a tie of sympathy, of encourage-
ment or affection, that we shall not reach out to embrace
with all our hearts. (Applause.) We are children of a
common parent, we are inheritors of a common destiny.
(Applause.) We have been separated by vast distances and
almost voiceless seas. We knew that from the one father
and mother there went forth to the world at large the
brothers and sisters of our American parents, and that
somewhere on the continent of Australia there were cousins
of ours who spoke the same language and chronicled the
same traditions. (Applause.) But we have been separately
forced along the lines of our individual fates, and for years,
seemingly, the lines of our lives were not convergent. Now,
space has been annihilated by the submarine telegraph, and
distance has been mastered by the speed and safety of
scientific navigation. Now we can throb pulses with you in


the selfsame day. Now, we can write you without growing
grey-headed waiting for a reply. Now, we can read of you
almost as reading of the doings of some portion of our own
great people. Between us there is no barrier of caste, there
is no edict of government, there is no contention of right.
(Cheers and applause.)
To be great in Australia is to be honoured in America,
to be creditable in Australia is to be credited in America.
(Hear, hear.) To be sure, we have cast off the rusticity of that
old-time home, and we have become citified in all things.
Yet the children of America are still taught the same old
mother stories, are still dominated with the same old father
proverbs. (Applause.) We still dye the eggs at Easter, and
gather the holly for Christmas —(applause)—and I believe in
my heart that so long as there is the Englishman, or American,
or Australian, this will be so. (Applause.) That so long
as this exists, the world will hear the voice of freedom, and
humanity be taught the hope of eternal life. (Cheers and
applause.)
But here, gentlemen, I must cease for a moment to be
impersonal and speak as the individual. I have been all
over our patrimony of the New World, I have travelled with
the restless instinct of our race, I have read things every-
where from the practical standpoint of the English eye;
I have travelled through other nations, and have listened to
other tongues; I have been to the old homestead—
England, but I have had through it all the one unsatisfied
longing —I have wanted to see our cousins in Australia;


for I felt certain they had a wonderful country to show me,
and that my boy cousins would be generous, and that my
girl cousins would be beautiful. (Cheers and applause.)
This one dream of my life has been realised —not by
contraries, but as in all things literal and true. From the
very first moment of my arrival on your shores I have been
met with smiles of welcome. (Hear, hear). I have been
gladdened with the hospitality of love. (Applause). Not
as the instinctive homage paid to the sublimity of achieve-
ment, but as the everyday warmth of the blood of a common
race, a recurrent joy felt in the consciousness of a mutual
worth. (Applause). I have read of you, I have seen you,
and now in my hereafter world, Australia will never be a
day’s journey from New York. (Cheers and applause.)
As speaking in my second generic personality, I must
say, gentlemen, that I am here as the official representative
of the company whose Australian manager makes us this
tender of esteem. You know him and you know his
company. You are many of you policyholders in that great
corporation, and financially, as well as sentimentally,
interested in all that concerns it. (Hear, hear). lam sure,
therefore, I need proffer no apology for paying it a proper
share of the meed of this occasion, or hesitate in any doubt
as to the acceptability of a brief relation of its merits,
particularly now that it has been made a permanent
institution of your country, and a home company for its
policyholders wherever they may come to dwell the world
round. (Hear, hear).


Fifty years ago a few merchants in the city of New York
conceived the idea of organising themselves into a body of
co-insurers, guaranteeing the heirs and widows of each other
the payment of a specified sum of money in case of death.
This guarantee was to be predicated on a company fund, to
be created by those insured in the form of an equitable and
adequate premium paid annually in advance. The under-
taking was not to be subscribed to as a share property,
or conducted as a stock speculation. It was to be a
mutual affair, a perpetual fraternity of its beneficiaries.
(Applause).
Having matured their plan, these merchants went to the
legislature of their State, and secured for their association a
broad charter of privileges, under the name of “ The Mutual
Life Insurance Company of New York,” the legislators
decreeing in their wisdom that no policy should be issued
until a number had been applied for sufficient to secure the
company the law of average. The projectors were, for their
time, the most prominent men of New York, and so well-
known and so respected that they had only to write to their
correspondents throughout the country to secure at once the
necessary pledges for a start.
In this manner was this great company born, with-
out a dollar of subscribed capital; in this manner has
it been conducted down to the present day, without the
control of a single stockholder; to become, in the half
century of its existence, not only the grandest exponent of
this principle the world can boast, but the grandest financial


institution it has ever known. So much, gentlemen, for the
potency of principle, so much for the accumulative character
of worth. (Applause.)
But I must tell you the social position of the Mutual
Life has always been of the best in the United States. Its
policyholders are of the representative classes of that
country, as they are, in fact, of the world wherever its
membership is sought. Its trustees, under the law of its
organisation, the custodians of the franchise and the
property of the company in the name of its policyholders,
the trustees of to-day are as they have always been, the
representative men of their times, the acknowledged
successes in their respective paths of endeavour. So highly
is the honour of this identity with the great Mutual Life
esteemed, that no man, however exalted his position in
American life might be, would refuse the position if tendered
him. And when you understand that no trustee of the
Mutual Life, as such, receives any manner of salary or
emolument, directly or indirectly, you can see how the
position is regarded by successful men of America, and you
can appreciate the fact that, even in the land of the dollar,
there is the Yankee who loves honour more than he loves
money. (Cheers and applause.)
Definitely speaking, there is a nominal fee paid for each
attendance of a trustee, which is interposed merely as a legal
cut-off to any claim for services which his heirs might set up,
the understanding being that such services shall be gratuitous.
(Applause.)


It is natural that such a board of managers should select
as the officers to discharge the routine functions of the
company those who would be masters in their special lines,
and representatives of the higher order of thought and
moral deportment, and it is not to be wondered at, therefore,
that when an official of this company is publicly entertained,
the invitation to be present is regarded by its recipient as a
marked compliment. Not only is it taken for granted that
it will be a gathering of notables, but that it will receive a
wide publicity because of the company’s enormous clientage
of policyholders, and the public interest that centres in all
it does. (Applause.)
Last year its president, Mr. Robert A. McCurdy, and its
vice-president, Mr. Robert A. Granniss, made a tour of
inspection over the Western and Pacific States of America—
(Hear, hear) and notwithstanding they studied, as
individuals, to avoid public notice, and endeavoured to slip
quietly about, they could not consistently and constantly
refuse that tribute of regard for their company which found
its constant expression in tenders of honour to themselves
as its illustrious heads. (Hear, hear.)
The Mutual Life of New York is more than an affair of
its policyholders in America, it is a financial institution of
such an established character that Americans instinctively
turn to it when they wish for a synonym of undoubted
security and unimpeachable worth. Its presidents were
therefore entertained by more than its policyholders, for
the collective business interests of cities became their hosts.


(Hear, hear.) I merely refer to this incident, gentlemen,
to show you that such an institution cannot travel about
incognito, that the light of the Mutual Life of New York is
never hid under a bushel; even my penny dip you see has
been uncovered. (Laughter and applause.)
But I do not intend to make a lengthy eulogism of this
company. There are some things, however, I must say of
it, which I am sure will be of interest to you, irrespective of
the fact of your being its policyholders. (Hear, hear.)
It is part of the system of this great company to instruct
its agents, to give them scholastic and scientific drills, to
gather them in annual conventions, and have them lectured
as to the plans and requirements of the company, as to their
duty to their clients and to the public, as to their position
in the community at large, and the means by which this
may be asserted. (Applause.) This plan has been in
operation for about seven years. No other company has
such an arm of services, no other company has so far
regarded the value of knowledge, or insomuch dignified the
position of its life agents, or in such fashion endeavoured to
elevate the standard of the agency service. The Mutual
Life Insurance Company of New York has, in its agency
ranks, independent of its office staff, many actuaries, than
whom there are none more talented or practical in the world.
From its agency and office corps State insurance com-
missioners have been made, and presidents and actuaries of
other great corporations. (Hear, hear.)


In any local controversy as to an insurance fact, it is
usually the Mutual Life agent that is appealed to and whose
dictum is the most regarded, because the company’s methods
are of a kind calculated to invest him with dignity and to
instruct him in all he should know. There is never any
complication between the company and its agents, and
rarely a misunderstanding as between one of these and a
policyholder, growing out of any supposed error in act or
statement of a subordinate. (Hear, hear.)
As a matter of economy, therefore, as affecting the
company alone, the instructional system has proved its
advisability, whilst, so far as the best interests of the public
are concerned, the good of it all is beyond computation.
(Applause.)
Now, as to the special position of this company with
respect to insurance plans and the science of life underwriting,
it is to be credited with having originated and perfected the
modern investment phase of life insurance, with having
devised the cash accumulation of profits, and the income
extension equivalent of terminal values, the “life option
endowment ” and the “ consol system.” (Hear, hear),-
You will be interested to know that in consequence of
the remarkable merits of these plans, two agents of this
company completed a transaction with the Havemyer family
of New York, the great sugar refiners, by which a premium
was paid into the company, of five hundred and seventy-eight
thousand dollars in one cheque, a sum of money very much '
larger than the entire year’s receipts of many established


life companies. This is regarded as the most notable event
in the life annals of the world. (Hear, hear).
Since my arrival here I have learned that another
prominent gentleman has paid the Company one hundred
and forty-one thousand dollars for another of these guarantee
bonds, in itself the largest one sum of money ever paid for
any form of life insurance by a single individual in the
world. But the transactions with the Mutual Life of New
York are not confined to the wealthy alone; they range from
the industrious artisan, putting aside his weekly savings, to
the millionaire, in proportion as they have the means and
may avail themselves of the equational advantages of this
great corporation. (Applause).
So much, gentlemen, for the Mutual Life Insurance
Company of New York, its history and its methods ; and
now, if you will still permit me, I will say by way of
conclusion a word or two concerning the life insurance
proposition as it should be regarded by the legislator.
The basis of the life insurance contract is the pledge of
industry, that a part of its current production shall be saved
for a certain number of years, or until a specified bulk sum
has been accumulated. From this you will perceive that a
life office is first a savings bank, over the deposits of which
death is proportionately equated, and the general profits of
the undertaking equitably divided. (Hear, hear.) The
Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York, alone, has
earned for its policyholders, with what has been paid to


them and what is still in hand, over sixty millions of dollars —
(Hear, hear) —besides returning to them or holding to
their credit every dollar they have deposited. (Applause.)
Thus you will see the moneys paid into a life office are not
as sums to be dissipated in expense, or to be eaten up by
the cost of some present benefit. Every fresh contract with
the Mutual Life means an undertaking on the part of some
individual to place himself one day beyond want, if he lives,
or his family beyond immediate want if he dies. It is also
a pledge to the community that he is to the extent of such
savings, yearly increasing the general wealth of his country,
and putting so much of the profits of the hour beyond the
allurements of chance and the disposition to indulgence and
waste. (Hear, hear.) Once committed through the
intelligent and zealous labours of the life agent, the policy-
holder enters the ranks of thrift, as one in the God-inspired
army of all-conquering virtue. (Applause.)
A life office is, therefore, to be regarded as the
embodiment of the noblest aspirations of man, and as the
consecration of so much of his earnings to the future of life,
and to the betterment of the growing generation. (Hear,
hear.) A single glance at this proposition will suffice you
to see that the popularisation of the insurance idea means a
larger individual and national prosperity; means the lessening
of poverty and crime; means a wider intelligence and
purer faith; and that to interpose any obstacle in the way, or
to discourage its beneficiaries by special impositions of the
State, would be like taxing knowledge at the fountain-head,


religion at the altar, and the milk of life as it is expressed
at the mother’s breast. (Applause.)
I have been asked to say a few words concerning the
unity of Australia from the American standpoint. As a
prelude to these, I would say that you are credited in
America with having effected a great ballot reform, with
having actually emancipated the voter from the thraldom of
his political master, and given him the freedom of his
conscience at the ballot-box. (Hear, hear.) In my mind
this is the greatest monument that has ever been raised to
partisan statesmanship, and the country that has produced
such statesmen can be safely trusted to find yet the means of
freeing the politician from his party, ahd so make him the
unequivocal oracle of the diviner will of the people.
(Applause.) In this connection, gentlemen, I would like to
say a word or two on what I regard the duty of the hour —
your political watchword should be “ educate,” for it is at
the ballot-box that armies are now being marshalled.
Against this, as against the citadel of empire, the masterful
spirits of the day lead on their followers. (Hear, hear.) The
missiles employed are as pitiless as were the stones thrown
or the clubs used in the first sanguinary warfare of man for
supremacy. Never sped from the rifle of a “Tommy
Atkins ” a bullet winged for a larger mark than may drop in
the form of a small pellicle of paper from the stub fingers of
some stupid voter. There may be the same committal of
sides, the same unreasoning and undying hate of factions,
the same arrogant assumption of divine right, of heavenly


intervention, of churchly approval; there may be the same
irresponsibility in the ranks, the same selfish aspiration ot
the officer, the same love of conquest in the general, and of
loot in the camp follower. There will be the flag of
possession flung over the outer walls of government, and
there will be the flag of rebellion carried defiantly within
their very portals. Nor is it always bloodless, this warfare
of a myriad wills. Though the dead may not be strewn
upon the field of battle, they will be seen lying on the path-
way of endeavour, up the steep and difficult declivities of
aspiration, in disrupted trades, may be, in stifled industries,
and in annihilated opportunities. (Hear, hear.) For, with
the ballot’s overthrow of the established order of things,
there will be set up, perhaps, the operations of a new
principle—there will be generated the force of a dia-
metrically opposing impulse. (Hear, hear.)
Is it too much to suppose that there are those who
would drop their ballots as stones upon the coffin of liberty,
and that there are political leaders who would use the voter
against his own understanding and desire ? Is it not more
than life that is assailed and defended at the ballot-box to-
day ? Is it not order, as the good and wise would establish
it, or anarchy, as the bad and ignorant would believe ?
(Hear, hear!)
As in the trade of war, so in the trade of politics—the
unit in the aggregation of force is not regarded, the indi-
vidual does not count. It is the officers who may ride to
victory, and it is the untitled many who would force wide


the gates, and bridge the moats with their unreckoned
bodies. But the arbitrament of battle is coming to be
regarded with growing horror by the widening minds of
humanity. And so there will come the day when the
political officer will consider well the effect upon the happi-
ness of the people before he will assume the responsibilities
of leadership and order the rank and file of his party to the
polls. This then is the duty of the hour, to so educate that
the time may come when the voter will hesitate as much to
cast the potency of his vote into the scale with the weight
of others as would the citizen of to-day first consider the
safety of passing life before he drove his carriage across the
street. (Hear, hear!)
Now the few words on federated Australia, and I am
done. It is in unity that all life is seen, and in its broader
association of parts the higher and nobler of its phenomena.
There is no separate existence in the protoplasmic state.
It is in the association of sack with sack, of organ with
organ, of mind with mind, of state with state, of nation with
nation, that the higher organism is wrought. What are the
conveniences of the little town compared with the comfort of
the many such in the larger city ? What is the security of a
single individual compared with the signature of a dozen
such upon a single bond ? What are the resources and the
pledges of a province in comparison to the equated’abilities
of seven such as but one Australia? Alone you can only
be as suspects prowling about each other’s homes at night—
(hear, hear !) —together you can be as friends gathered about


a common fireside. (Applause.) Alone you can only be as
spies in each other’s camp; together you will be as sentinels
upon the watch tower of a common citadel. (Applause.)
Alone you will be as the slaves of ostentation and com-
petitive pride; together you will be as the life of an assured
estate and an unquestioned dignity. (Hear, hear.) Alone
you will always be liable to the vicissitudes of chance;
together you will live the life of a general average. (Hear,
hear.) As a part you can never be equal to the whole,
while as the whole you will always include the part. Shall
it be then as foreign states that you divide Australia —(No,
no) —or shall it be as a nation—the descendant of a common
ancestry —that you will join hands with America and with
England, to maintain the peace and freedom of the world ?
(Yes, yes, and applause.)
I can remember the Dominion of Canada when it existed
only in segregated provinces. I can remember the minds
of the people in these several provinces, circumscribed by
the area of their domains, and mindful of the outside world
only as it concerned the narrow circle of their little affairs.
(Hear, hear.) Since then they have been given a larger
concern, a broader interest —and to-day you will find them
everywhere talking as the people of a nation, instead as the
idiom-bound citizens of a province. (Applause.)
As they have grown in political breadth, so have they
grown in political understanding, in social aspiration, in
mental stature. The Canadian of to-day is as unlike the
Prince Edward Islander, the Nova Scotian, the New


Brunswicker, the Quebecan, the Montrealan, and the
Torontoan of the anti-federation period, as is the American
of to-day in his national homogenity unlike his prototype of
the provinces of long ago, when the Indians called us
“Yengees” in their first attempt at English. So will the
nationalised Australian one day be to the provincialist of
the present hour. (Cheers and applause.)
There was once a talk of secession in the conclave of
the United States, for there were those who would per-
petuate slavery under the folds of a flag that was the symbol
of universal freedom, but with the emancipation of the
slave there were surrendered the banners of secession, and
to-day there is no State in the compact o? the United States
that would not become a rampart of the Union, and sacrifice
its all if necessary to its preservation. So will it be with
United Australia; once a nation, no State will ever wish
itself a province. (Continued applause.)
And now, gentlemen, a few words about myself, and I
will take my seat.
My earliest and instinctive endeavour was that in the
role of an artist. I was in love with nature, and wished to
give proof of my affection by a sincere imitation. My
second aspiration was that to be a poet, and for years I
studied metrical composition with the hope of one day being
able to voice life’s diviner moods ; in the end to become an
interpreter of statistics, the driest expression of mathe-
matics, and to stand in your midst, as I do to-night, the
exponent of their most practical application. But, gentlemen,


I have always been dominated more or less by my
boyish love, and so to-night I feel myself nearer to you, and
more in accord with your mood, as the artist or poet than as
the mere book-writer or the mathematician. (Applause.)
When all is said and done, seek to make money as we
may, I think we all deem those in the end to be the wiser
who have chosen, rather than the role of the ‘‘wizard” ot
Wall Street, the role of him who said—when questioned by
the Recording Angel by which of his many titles he would
be entered on the scroll of heaven —“Write me as the
lover of humanity.” Gentlemen, I love the English
race ; in loving it I think I include nearly all humanity.
(Cheers.) I must say by way of parenthesis that I am
proud of my extraction—my mother was born in the
Dominion of Canada, the daughter of an Englishman,
of many generations of blood; her mother was an American
lady from South Carolina, running four generations back.
My father was a Scotchman, with a Royal plaid. I was
born in the United States. (Cheers.) Is it to be wondered
at that I love Australia ? What are you all if not English-
men and Scotchmen and Irishmen, emigrants near or
remote from those three God-crowned islands of the deep.
(Applause.) But it is not my mission here to-night to
incept a Mutual Admiration Society. I can see that it
matters not how many Australians there may be in a party,
one American will be enough to complete the circuit of the
heart; and I have seen in America that one visiting
Australian was enough to make the occasion for an out-


pouring of good-fellowship for any number of us. (Laughter
and applause).
In America you are getting to be better known. Its
adult life is coming to discard the ideas they got of you
from the novels of the bushranger and gold digger species.
We have come to realise that Australia can teach us a
number of good things ; that while she is younger than we
she has started with a more modern perception of what were
the needs and safeguards of a people claiming individual
liberty. Your founders were men who had realised in the
home country what an expensive thing an election could be
made, and what a pernicious power the ballot might become
when openly to be scanned by the masters who could
compel the voter to do his will. You have set up the
proper safeguard, and it has gone to America. Nearly
all the States there have adopted it, their political parties
patriotically considering that what might defeat them for
to-day would bring them victory with to-morrow.
But, gentlemen, as I have promised myself, as the
by-labour of the next year of my life, to write a book on
Australia, and am studying you up to this end, perhaps you
will be able to get even with me for the long tedium of my
speech to-night by one day realising that you have got me
as Job wished he could have had his enemy, in the vulnerable
position of having written a book. (Laughter, and applause.)
To this end I have endeavoured to meet the more prominent
men of your continent, and am storing up to say concerning
these, what will be, if not the acumen of sound judgment,


at least the sincere tribute of an unobtrusive American
observation to Australian worth. (Applause.)
You attribute to Americans an individual and political
push that you are pleased to believe is peculiar to the people
of the United States; but I say, gentlemen, as disclaiming
any other judgment than that of the individual merely, that
in your city of Melbourne you have manifested a zeal and
push that is unexampled, all things considered; and that
in your character of an infant nation you have created
national property-plants of such breadth of conception, and
of such costliness and nobility of purpose as to excite my
amazement on every hand, and to make me proud of you,
and glad for the human life that is to find all these as but
its first step to the zenith of an Australian world. (Hear,
hear.) Every day in your midst is but intensifying my love for
my race, and rendering clearer that prophetic regard I have
always had for its manifest destiny, which, I believe, is to
make it the warrior will of liberty, the heart-pillow of faith.
(Applause.) I can say this of your country with the strictest
regard to truth, and it has gladdened me extremely, that as
a people you are as yet in no sense criminal; you have no
record of a cruel war, of an oppressed neighbour, or of
stolen rights. (Hear, hear.) You have stood nowhere in
humanity’s sunshine; as a budding nation you are as yet
spotless, and in God’s holy name I pray you to preserve
your country as spotless to the end. (Hear, hear.)
Gentlemen, I think I must have exhausted your patience.
(No, no.) lam extremely grateful to you for the respectful


consideration you have vouchsafed me. I may not have
told you that I am not a born orator; neither one of an
acquired ability; but this you have doubtless discovered
long since. This role of an after-dinner speaker has been
thrust upon me, and this is my only excuse for having
addressed you to-night. Gentlemen, I thank you. (Loud
applause.)
Mr. HENRY GYLES TURNER’S SPEECH.
Mr. H. G. Turner said, —Gentlemen, I have been
honoured by the commands of our esteemed and gallant
host to propose the next toast on the list, which is that of
“Our Legislators.” Now, to all ordinary Australian minds
this is a toast which generally divides itself into two parts.-
We have first of all Her Majesty’s Ministers, and the
Parliament of Victoria. I take it that the departure from
the ordinary routine to-night is partly due to the fact that in
the country of our worthy host the Ministry is a body that
has nothing whatever to do with legislation ; and, further, I
should also say it is an elegant courtesy for an intelligent visitor
to apply to our members of Parliament by addressing them
in connection with their most important function, whether
they deserved it or not. We, who know how very small and
how continually diminishing a portion of their time is
devoted to the deliberate practice of law-making, in com-
parison with the large amount of time which is given to
party rows, to the struggle for place and power and to brilliant
personal recrimination, can measure the magnitude of this
compliment. Seriously, there can be no doubt that there is no
function connected with our cosmopolitan existence that
commands, or should command, a higher regard from us than


the position to which we elevate some of our fellow citizens of
making those laws which shall insure the stability of those
vast interests that make the general welfare of the com-
munity. (Hear, hear.) But I am very much afraid that
many of those gentlemen whom we delight to honour do
not recognise the immense responsibility of the position
into which we thrust them. I fancy that very often they
think, when their election is won and their seat secured, that
their trouble is all over. As a matter of fact, their trouble
ought only then to begin. Many of them are too much in
the habit of colloging with their old friends, dropping into
party politics, and forgetting what they owe to the State. Of
course, it would be unreasonable in a community like ours,
which,' after all, is only in its shirt sleeves as yet, that we
should expect to find a very large proportion of the members
of our Legislature men possessed of those exceptional quali-
fications which are required for the devising and carrying out
of far-seeing and wise legislation. We should probably all be
unanimous in admitting that probably a dozen, peihaps a
score, of our members have those qualifications; but we all
see the difficulties they have to contend with, how they are
frequently thwarted in their very best endeavours, and how,
at the end of the session, there is a perfect hecatomb in
the House, due to the “ massacre of the innocents.” Hence
we all desire earnestly to devise some plan by which
our legislators could have time and opportunity to
legislate in the proper sense of the term. I do not
know whether the doing away with the differential
salaries of Ministers, or even the more drastic methods
adopted in the United States would have this effect,
but something certainly should be done to ensure that
the deliberations of our legislators shall end in something
admittedly for the benefit of the community. We have
recognised lately that there is legislation that is urgently
required, and which is postponed indefinitely because of the
perennial trouble that exists between the “ins and the
“outs.” (Hear, hear.) Like all Englishmen, we like to


grumble and point out faults, but we recognise that the faults
we see are faults of the system, and, collectively, our
Legislatures stands as high in our esteem and regard as that
of any self-governing community in the world. Notwith-
standing all the talk that is indulged in, and the bright light
that is concentrated upon the proceedings through the lenses
of the daily and weekly papers, there has never been an
indication of the presence of political corruption. (Hear.)
I cannot help thinking that some of our legislators who are
here to-night must have felt a little uncomfortable when
they heard of the extremely friendly feelings entertained
towards them by Americans. It is true that Americans do
put a rather stiff duty on our wool, but we more than
reciprocate on everything that comes from America.
(Laughter.) As I said before, our legislators are entitled
to our confidence. They sometimes make mistakes, but
they are influenced by right motives, and- in no case can we
attribute to them that political corruption or personal
self-seeking which we hear often alleged in other countries.
I ask you to drink to “Our Legislators.” (Applause.)
THE HON. C. J. HAM’S SPEECH.
The Hon. C. J. Ham— Mr. Chairman, as you have called
upon me to respond, I will do so in a very few words. I
would first express my feeling that the opening of branches in
these colonies by the great and successful company of which
you are the manager in this Continent is an indication of the
feeling which exists in America towards these colonies. We
anticipate that in the very near future our commercial
relations with America will be very much closer, and more
profitable to both nations. We hope that the wool tax
will be abolished, and that this will lead to increase of
business between the two nations. A good deal has been
said recently about the federation of the English-speaking
people. I think, sir, that that federation is taking place m


our own time in a much more effectual and efficient way
than it possibly could by the aid of parchment and seals. We
study the same literature; our periodicals are published
simultaneously in London and New York, we have the same
thoughts, we worship at the same shrine, and in those great
events which affect either nation, we sympathise one with
the other. (Hear, hear). It will be remembered by many
here present that when the news came of the tragic death of
President Lincoln, what a thrill of horror passed through the
whole community. We had been brought, as it were, into
daily contact with that man, and when he passed away we
felt as though we had lost a brother. Shortly afterwards,
when President Garfield was struck down, as he lingered day
after day and week after week, were there not tens of
thousands in England, Canada, and Australia who, as it were,
watched at the bedside of that great man ? ( Applause). And
when at last he died England’s widowed Queen in sisterly
sympathy mixed her tears with the widow of the President,
and both nations felt that they had lost a great and good
man. (Hear, hear). But I must apologise for digressing.
I desire to return thanks for that branch of the Legislature
with which I have the honour to be connected. Of course
mistakes may have been and probably will yet be made, but
speaking for both Houses, I am sure that they desire to do
that which shall be for the benefit of the whole of this com-
munity, and they are anxious, when the people express their
wishes in a constitutional way, to give effect to those wishes,
(Applause.)
MR. R. W. BEST’S SPEECH.
Mr. R. W. Best, M.P., said,—l am rather surprised to
find that I am the only representative of the Assembly
of Victoria out of the many present to respond to this
important toast which has been commended to us by
Mr. 'Turner, and I must add my embarrassment is increased


by the somewhat dubious tones in which that gentleman
proposed the toast. There is nothing easier than to criticise
and destroy ; the difficulty is to suggest improvement and
to construct. I only claim for the Legislative Assembly of
Victoria that it is the desire of its members to do what is
best in the interests of this great community. My friend
admitted that the Assembly may at least claim for itself
perfect freedom from corruption, and we must, therefore,
thank him for small mercies. We have inherited from the
old land the system of responsible government, a system
which implies party politics, and incidental to party politics
we have those efforts on the part of those who sit on the
Opposition side of the House to remove those who sit on
the Ministerial benches; and, perhaps, it is as well that
it is so, for the Opposition, ready at all times to discover
flaws in the propositions of the GQvernment, cannot
fail to be of great value in that capacity. As a British
community, therefore, I think we have reason to be proud of
our system of government, which is the growth of centuries,
and which has given us the freedom which we now enjoy.
(Applause.) I admit that recently some little public feeling
and dissatisfaction has been exhibited by reason of an
apparent waste of time, and because of such rapid cha,nges
of Government which have taken place in this and adjoining
colonies during the last three or four years. Such an expe-
rience goes to point out that in Kxecutive administration
it is quite possible we might gain valuable lessons from the
experience of Switzerland and the great American Republic;
but, whatever may be the faults of our system, I think I am
entitled to say that the members of our Assembly discharge
their duties to the best of their ability and with the fullest
anxiety to faithfully serve the public, and the fact that such
a large percentage of members are returned again and again
at the triennial elections may be regarded as proof of the
estimation in which they are held by the community. I
have listened with great attention to the brilliant and able
oration of our distinguished guest to-night. (Applause.)


That gentleman comes from a great, mighty, and powerhil
nation ; a nation of colossal triumphs of man over the diffi-
culties of nature; a nation which commands our respect
and the respect of the whole world by reason of its greatness.
We greatly esteem visits of such representative Americans.
We Australians are indeed kinsfolk of his. We admire the
important and enterprising traits which distinguish that
powerful race, and I repeat we are glad to have a gentleman
of such calibre as Professor Stewart with us to-night. He
has unfolded the history of the great institution which he
represents, and which we are pleased to honour, the Mutual
Life Insurance Company of New York. We know of its
areat reputation. We thank Professor Stewart for the state-
ment he has made that the company has come to stay
amongst us. Shakespeare was evidently gifted with pre-
science when he undertook to “make assurance doubly sure
bv taking bond of fate.” I think he must have had some
shares in the company of our friend. We are glad to learn
of the privileges we are likely to gain through the establish-
ment here of such an important institution. We heard with
interest his statement as to the introduction of the Australian
ballot system into the United States, and we thank him for
the handsome acknowledgement he has seen fit to make of it.
Our American cousins teach us one great lesson which
we should lay well to heart. They are a united people,
and know none of the absurd provincial differences which
so disastrously handicap our progress. The several colonies
of Australia are yearly engaged in legislating one against the
other in destroying trade and commerce by hostile tariffs.
We appear to disregard the teachings of history, and ignore
the results of union in the example of that great protagonist
amongst federations —the American Commonwealth. If we
want to develop our full strength to take our proper position
amongst the greater communities of the world, we can only
do so by a perfect freedom of intercourse, by working in
harmony amongst ourselves, and by becoming an Australian
United States.


Mr. Theodore Fink proposed the toast of the “ Press,”
which was acknowledged by Mr. H. Short.
The Hon. Nathaniel Levi, M.L.C., said —Gentlemen,
I have been called upon to propose to you a toast which I
am sure will be responded to with a large amount of gratifi-
cation. Ido not intend to trespass upon your time for more
than a few minutes. My toast is that of our worthy and
esteemed chairman, Major Rennie. lam satisfied that we
must all feel pleased and delighted at the hearty and cordial
reception that has been given to us, and that we appreciate
the able and interesting address that has been made to us
by Professor Stewart. I therefore ask you to drink to the
health of our esteemed worthy chairman, who has enabled
us to listen to one of the most brilliant speeches I ever heard
in the colony.
SPEECH OF MAJOR RENNIE IN RESPONSE TO THE
TOAST OF THE HON. NATHANIEL LEVI, M.L.C.
Gentlemen, —The lateness of the hour, and the recol-
lection of the kindly and eloquent remarks that have already
been made by the distinguished speakers of this evening,
combine to relieve me from the necessity of making any
lengthy speech in response to the honour conferred upon
me by the proposal of my health. I cannot refrain, how-
ever, from expressing my great pleasure at the compliment
that has been paid me by the influential and representative
attendance of this evening—an attendance which I believe
I am justified in attributing, not to my individual merit, but


to an interest in the country of which I am a citizen, and
in the company which I have the honour to represent.
That company, when it sent me to Australia, had designs in
reference to its business here far beyond the tenure of
office, or even the life of myself or of any other individual.
On my departure from New York, now over six years ago,
to assume the management of this new and important field,
President McCurdy said to me : “ Major, you are about to
hoist the flag of the Mutual Life in a part of the world where
important results are anticipated for the company. I want
you to understand, and to make the people of Australia
understand, that wherever that flag has been hoisted, there
it is intended to remain. It has never yet led a retreat,
and it goes to Australia to stay.” It is with no feeling
of self-complacency, but rather with a sense of satisfaction
with the principles that have directed the company wherever
it has been established, that I say that the people of Aus-
tralia who have learned to know the Mutual Life of New
York have come to regard it as in a high and important
sense a local institution. Its beneficent operations have
already brought relief to many stricken families, and the
names that appear upon its policy-registers throughout
Australia indicate the confidence with which its local as well
as its general administration is regarded. The company
itself has shown its appreciation of that confidence and its
belief in the future of these colonies, by investments already
made, and by the consideration of others. It has appro-
priated over a million of dollars for offices in Sydney, and it


is an open secret that this is but the first of its Australian
investments. Wherever the Mutual Life of New York has
thought it worth the while to establish itself, there it has
always bound itself up with the interests of the country in
which it has made a home, and thereby approved its
reputation as a company which is not only of America, but
of the world —whose obligations and benefits alike are
restricted by the bounds of no narrow locality, but are as
widespread and universal as the human relations which it is
designed to protect, as general as the joys it fosters and the
woes it relieves. It would indicate but scanty confidence
in the closest ties of blood and relationship if the Mutual
Life of New York were not received in Australia in the spirit
which it has come. You, gentlemen, and we who stand
among you to-night as citizens of the great Republic on the
other side of the world, are sons of the same great mother-
country ; our blood, although percolating into divergent
channels, owns to a common source ; the ties of language
and commerce unite us; we thrill with the same aspirations,
and look forward to similar destinies. What more natural,
then, that, both on the grounds of sentiment and interest,
such an enterprise as is represented by this company should
come to be regarded as not less Australian than American ?
It is the purpose of every officer of the company to have it
so recognised, and the earnest hope of myself, as of everyone
else connected with it, that it may become by no means the
least of the agencies that shall unite all English-speaking
people in a common and glorious brotherhood. (Applause.)


(From “ Table Talk.
25th November, 1892.)
/T\ajor Z. Q.
(sketch of.)
IN the opening years of Victoria’s golden era, when
Melbourne first gave token of her coming greatness, a
large number of American citizens cast in their lot with
the community, and took a prominent part in its commercial
development. During the fifties, the Fourth of July was
regarded in the light of a local celebration, and the banquet
held in its honour was a notable function. After a time
many of these gentlemen returned to their own land, and
few of their countrymen arrived to take their place, so that
the American colour, which Melbourne had for a season
assumed, was gradually obliterated. Our kinsmen of the
great republic are always welcome, however, and in the
subject of the present sketch we have one who well deserves
a cordial reception. He bears a military title, because he
has performed memorable military work, but his present
mission is altogether of a peaceable character. Major Zenas
Crane Rennie is the general manager for Australia of the
Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York. He was
born at Pittsfield, Massachusetts, and as his father’s birth-
place was Dalton, of the same State, and his grandfather’s,
Catskill, New York, he is an American of the truly native
type. It is something over six years since the Major arrived
in Australia to take charge of the company’s operations,
having been selected from among its representative agents
as the one best qualified to discharge the duties of


so important a position. Long years of service had
gained for him a reputation with the executive for conspicuous
ability and strict business integrity, and their choice has
been amply justified by a rapid extension of business and
corresponding advance in Australian estimation of the
merits of a company, which, according to an article on Life
Assurance in the Edinburgh Review of October, 1890, is
“ one of the largest offices in the world, with twenty-six and
a half millions sterling of funds, now increased to over
thirty-three millions sterling.” Since coming among us, the
Major has thoroughly identified himself with the interests of
Australia, and has won for himself hosts of friends. It is
due to his zeal and the trust reposed in his fidelity and
soundness of judgment that the management of the Mutual
Life have come to regard Australia with great favour, and
to decide upon making the company a permanent institution
of this country. Acting upon his suggestion and advice,
the company has resolved to make a home for itself in each
of the colonies in which he has established its business, and
created for it a constituency of Australian policyholders.
It was the Major who selected the site on the corner of
Martin Place and Pitt Street, fronting the Post Office, in
Sydney, and his genius has inspired the erection thereon
of a magnificent building under the auspices of Australian
talent and Australian administration. So soon as that
undertaking is completed, or possibly at an earlier date, it is
contemplated to erect similar offices in Melbourne.
It must not be supposed that the title “major” was
assumed by Mr. Rennie as a distinguished appellation, or
conferred upon him by the easy courtesy of the public so
common in certain portions of the States. This distinction
was honourably earned in the service of his country, and
appertains to a portion of his career full of romantic
incidents, and creditable to himself as a man and a patriot.
At the beginning of the civil war in America, he was engaged
in mercantile pursuits, but at the first call from the Govern-
ment for defenders of the Union, Major Rennie, although a


Democrat in politics, was so fired with the patriotism of the
hour that he was only restrained by the illness of his beloved
wife from joining the first recruits and going at once to the
front as a soldier in the ranks. As this was impossible, he
devoted his fortune to the service of his country, and at once
commenced to recruit for the Union ranks, a work in which
his great zeal, indomitable energy, and general popularity
were of invaluable assistance. Some details of the methods
he adopted to give effect to this determination supply an
excellent illustration of the characteristics of an American
citizen of the patriotic type. The country needed soldiers.
He could not go at once, but he could get ready to
go, and his plan of getting ready was to prepare others
to go with him. Fired with this resolve, he had large
placards printed at his own expense and posted through the
smaller towns and rural districts, appointed days for public
patriotic gatherings, hired two drummers and a fifer, and
engaged the services of a lawyer who had great talent as an
orator. With these means he roused the latent martial
ardour of the country round about by a series of marches
and meetings held from place to place. In this way recruits
were gradually collected, with the object of forming a
company large enough to be sworn in under the army laws
of the United States Government. Until a sufficient
number had been obtained to pass muster as a company,
every step had to be taken at his own private and personal
expense. By degrees, as men were enlisted and con-
ditionally pledged to serve by signing the enrolment papers,
they were placed by Major Rennie in different boarding
houses under charge of subordinate officers, whom he had
appointed, and there kept at his expense until the full quota
was obtained, when he brought them into camp, and had
them regularly enrolled in the service of the United States.
In this self-imposed duty the Major had no ulterior motive
of self aggrandisement. He expected to go with his own
recruits to the seat of war, and to take his place in the
ranks with them in any battles that might ensue. But,


previous to the acceptance of such bodies of men on the
part of the United States Government, they were required
to choose their officers, and when the election was held,
their enthusiastic leader was not only unanimously elected
captain, but such was the confidence reposed in his judg-
ment and ability by these men that they requested him to
nominate all the subordinate officers, which he did to their
eminent satisfaction. The officers so appointed were duly
commissioned by the Governor of the State, and confirmed
in their rank and position by the United States Government.
It is related by the Major as one of the many romantic
episodes of this period of his career that at a certain crisis
in his undertaking, when he had expended all available
money and had been disappointed in receiving some remit-
tances expected and relied upon, that he found himself in
serious straits as to his immediate necessities. While in
this dilemma he was informed, to his great surprise by his
lawyer companion, that a very patriotic lady, Mrs. Elizabeth
Morewood, who lived in the southern part of Pittsfield, had
commissioned him privately to watch over the circumstances
of Major Rennie, and if he discovered him in any financial
difficulty, or hampered for want of means, to authorise the
Major to draw upon her at sight for any amount he might
require. This generous help of course solved the problem
at once, and in itself is an example of the patriotic fervour
of the women of America at that crisis in the national
fortunes. Mrs. Morewood was afterwards present at the
mustering of the company of which its originator was made
captain, and presented it with a set of colours, naming it the
“ Morewood Guard.” As a pleasant feature of this bit of
war romance it may be added that Mrs. Morewood gave
her name to the major’s eldest son, now in charge of the
office of the Mutual Life in Melbourne.
The new company, in the charge of Captain Rennie,
was assigned to the department of the Gulf under the
command of General Banks, and ordered to Baton Rouge,
Louisiana, in the fall of 1862. There they did picket and


skirmish duty for a time until it was planned to send the
United States gunboats past Port Hudson to invest
Vicksburg, when the brigade was sent forward to draw the
Confederate troops away from the former city. Subsequently
they were engaged in the battle of Plains Store, and later on
at the siege of Port Hudson. Mr. Rennie was placed in
command of the first body of sharp-shooters that was
sent forward to silence the enemy’s guns in their outlying
fortifications, and this service was so successfully rendered
that he was specially commended by the brigade commander.
In the general attack on Port Hudson, however, the Union
forces were repulsed, and very many of them were killed
through their necessarily exposed position in making the
assault, and the secure entrenchments of the enemy.
Shortly after, however, with the fall of Vicksburg, Port
Hudson surrendered, it being so closely invested that it had
no other alternative than surrender or starvation. After
this victory the company was transferred to transports and
taken down the river to Donaldsonville, where another
engagement was fought with the result, in the Major’s own
graphic language, that “we whipped them out there.
Shortly after his company returned to Baton Rouge, and
there did strategic duty until the term of enlistment having
expired they were all put in transports and sent home. _
During this campaign, owing to the heat of the climate
and the marshy character of the land lying about the
Mississippi River, a great deal of sickness was generated.
Indeed in those days that entire district was full ot
malaria, now happily almost extinct. As a consequence
of the unhealthy climate and exposure, and the necessary
deprivations of army life, the Major contracted a malady
which it was feared by his physicians would prove fatal
if he returned again to active service in that part of the
country. He, therefore, accepted an appointment from
the Governor of the State of Rhode Island as “Assistant
State and Allotment Commissioner ” with rank and title ot
Major, which dignity was subsequently confirmed by the


United States War Department. In discharge of the duties
of this position, he travelled through the Union lines as
Disbursing Officer for the troops of Rhode Island, and
until the close of the war remained at his post rendering
fearless and effective service, to the utmost of his ability,
throughout the entire struggle for the preseivation of the
Union. Major Rennie is possessed of a tall commanding
figure, with a grave and courteous demeanour, but evidently
prides himself most in the “ red, white and blue ” button ot
“The Military Order of the Loyal Legion.” His residence
is in Sydney, but he is frequently in Melbourne supervising
the company’s interests here. At the present time the
Major is a guest at Menzies’ Hotel, in company with
Professor W. P. Stewart, professional actuary, and instructor
of agents of the Mutual Life of New York, who is making a
tour of Australia and the world as representative of the com-
pany, and is availing himself of the services of Major
Rennie in forming the acquaintance of our more prominent
citizens with a view to a comprehensive study of Australia.
Both these gentlemen are among the indefatigable workers
of the world, with that touch of genius in their composition
which makes them worthy representatives of a company
which in less than half a century has grown into colossal
proportions, and achieved a world-wide reputation.
THE END.
Sands & McDougall Limited, Printers, Melbourne.




jAPp
B(*>Uo
F'K-35 (o




■
# '
.
•
’ :> *. • ; ■
’
••':>• - ■■•; y v;; :^
■ ' ",
. » V V . • ' „ , •
«c< * *.;• \V ' '
''•’?* *: ‘I
■
'
... rt v ■
•
'
‘
‘ >*W,* . J?$ *.
*; •* ■'-. ’ *.> -V 1* .
■
"... ,.* ' - ‘*' >' $*C. •,' -‘V ‘ ■ /
’*’/ 1 l ,
a * > ■*„*
%*v* r • * *" ■ " ’ vi l<l t -.'■■* '*
., V ' \V> * .’;■’lb' ' ■ :
'
• V*. . ■•’ >>X - ‘V ■ ** :
,•
•
14
■ .>• - ■_\ '-t
'
■ * &,.* •*;
•
* .V.
. '
... w< v*? v > * v* v«% 4 - ■■^4*
*M>‘. v--o ■ • :
'**
;
,
‘V •
•A
• •
t •
- ♦ ‘ V A
* 1 ** . - V-- ; - ■ i
- ‘ /
■ , - * ■ .. . ■
-
’
’
». . H»
' ' *>
4-*:~ ■ ,«t *' ; ; c ,
•
,
■'■ j4>l v >
* % JR-o'--.
*&:
.
-
V* .-O'/** "
>
.
■
t
•;; s v , 4 ■* , • <% -J.
'
‘
AJ«; . <r*jj
£.-• -v :. ■ k-
■ /■ < ■ •. • , X\ *
'
A;.' ' -.-• . V.'“„ .. 4
' V ' *k■ * »»T#..lfe
Ot ,. V *'
. * ' \ .
•
• ■■■"’■' ' “‘Tl
♦ V>'VV>%, *
;-V . •■. : V^
• . T*. .,
..
-
•
,
, * ‘ * ' - .
‘ > -t »'•,'■ \ *
