

I> E, I C IQ a E N CE .
Hr


BAPTISM
4c<lhoni Intcnbctr, ;tnb |]otu to be
EXTRACTS FROM NOTICES AjND LETTERS.
The explanation of the origin of infant baptism is admi-
rable. the reasons unanswerable, the chain of historical proof
complete, and objections shown to be untenable and worth-
less, both as to itself and the mode of administration. We
cannot too strongly recommend it to all our congregations.
Wherever practicable, sessions should have a copy put into
the hands of every adherent.—C'fwu'tia?;, Review.
We have read the little volume with great satisfaction. It
contains a very large amount of information carefully and
skilfully condensed. We should be glad to know that this
manual was circulated by thousands. —Wesleyan Chronicle.
I pronounce it the most satisfying treatise on this ordi-
nance of the Church that I am personally acquainted with.
Your argument from Scripture on the testimony of the Word
of God, in favour both of Infant Baptism and Baptism by
Sprinkling, is stated with remarkable clearness and precision,
and is, I think, quite nnnnswerable. I cannot conceive how
“Reasons for Infant Baptism” could be more effectively set
forth. Kcpially well unfolded is your Scriptural proof as to
“How Baptism is to be Administered.” I am certain your
exposition cannot be gainsayed. Refutation is impossible.
There is no book on the subject so thoroughly adapted to
meet objections, to solve difficulties, and to prevent mistakes.
— Dr. Cairns.
It presents the subject most fully, and in a clear and
forcible manner. I hail it with great pleasure, and predict
for it a wide circulation.— Rev. Josex>h Dare.
I believe that these treatises, composed at the rise of our
Church, will meet the present regard of our people, and con-
tmue text-liooks with their children for future generations.
•— Rev. R. Stitherland.
It is thoroughly exhaustive. I believe it is unrivalled for
comprehensive brevity.— Rev. A. D. Kininmont.
I have read your little book on Baptism with great satis-
faction. I think it a most seasonable production.— Rev. T.
M‘Kenzie Fraser.
I have read a good number of books on the subject of late,
but I have certainly seen none at all equal to yours.—Rea.
J. M‘L. Abernethy.


BAPTISM:
FOR WHOM INTENDED, AND HOWTO BE ADMINISTERED.
A MANUAL
YOUNG ENQUIREES AND CHRISTIAN
PARENTS.
BY THE
REV. JAMES BALLANTYNE.
SECOND EDITION.
ID flboHrne;
ROBERT MACKAY, BOOKSELLER AND .STATIONER,
6C ELIZABETH STREET.
MDCOCI-XIX.


MasoUj Firth and Co,,
Commercial and Ge?ieral Printers,
Flinders Lane IVest.


CHAPTER I.—BAPTISM,
PA»K
1. Its Origin - - - - - - - . .-u
2. Its Symbol - - - - - - - - - - n
3. Its Design . -11
4. Its Formula 12
5. Its Obligations - - - - - - - - -12
6. Its Misrepresentations --13
7. Its Benefits -13
8. Its Subjects -------..-14
CHAPTER lI.—BAPTISM OF INFANTS.
KEASONS.
1. Infants Sharers of the Covenant of Old - - - - 14
2. Infants Baptized in the Jewish Church - - - - 15
3. Infants Members of the Jewish Church - - - - 16
4. Infants have not Lost their Church Privileges - - - 16
5. Infants under substantially the same Economy as of Old 17
6. Infants Capable of Covenant Relations - - - - 18
7. Infants Included in the Economy of Redemption - - 18
8. Infants on the Ground of Analogy to be Baptized - - 19
9. Infants Baptized from the Commencement of the Church
of Christ X 9
10. Infants Welcomed by Christ - 20
11. Infants of Believing Parents nowhere Noticed in the New
Testament as being Baptized on becoming Adults - 21
12. Infants to be Baptized in Accordance with Statements in
the Word of God—
Ist. Isaiah Ixv. 17-23 22
2nd. Matt. xix. 13-15 22
3rd. Matt, xxviii. 19, 20 - 22
4th. Acts ii. 37-39 23
sth. 1 Cor. vii. 14 24
6th. John iii. 5 - - - - . . . -25
6th. John lu. 5 - - - - . . . -25
7th. Gal. iii. 29 25
13. Infants to be Baptized on the Ground of Scripture Facts 26
CHAPTER lII.—BAPTISM OF INFANTS.
TESTIMONY OF HISTORY.
1. Justin Martyr
2. Irenseus - - - .- - -
2. irenseus - - - .- - -
3. Tertullian 28
4. Clemens Alexandrinus 28
5. Origen - ----28
6. Ciprian -29
7. Gregory Nazianzen -29
8. Ambrose oq
o. Ambi’ose 29
9. Chrysostom -29
y, L-iirysostoni 29
10. St. Augustine - -- -- -- -.29
11. Pelaglus
\
i
N
J


12. Celestlus 30
is". Council of Carthage 80
14.’ Waldenses 81
CHAPTER IV.—BAPTISM OF INFANTS.
OBJECTIONS.
1. No Command to Baptize Infants - - - _ - - •32
2. No Esample of an Infant being Baptized in the New
Testament 84
8. JesuaßlessedtheLittleChildren,butdidnotßaptizeThem 85
4. Infant Baptism a Human Invention of the Third Century 86
6. Jesus not Baptized until Thirty Years of Age - - _ - 88
6. Infants cannot Cherish the Feelings that Fit for Baptism 89
7. infant Baptism Meaningless - - - - - - 40
8. infantßaptismanlnterferencewithLibertyof Judgment - 41
9. infant Baptism Refuted by the Terms of the Apostolic
Commission 42
10. Inf ant Baptism Disproved by anafter-Life of Ungodliness 43
CHAPTER V.-BAPTISM : HOW TO BE ADMINISTERED.
EEASONS IN FAVGOB OP SPRINKLING.
1. The Meaning of the Word —(SdTTTio (bapto); ySaTrTt^to
(baptizo) - - - - .46
2. ThelnconvenienceandDiffloultyofßaptismbylmmersion 52
8. The Blessings Represented by Baptism applied, not by
Immersion, but by Sprinkling 54
4. The Meaning of the Ordinance - 55
B. The Conditions attendant on the Multitudes whom John
Baptized 56
6. The Conditions attendant on the Baptism of Jesus - - 59
7. The Conditions attendant on the Baptism of the Three
Thousand 61
8. The Conditions attendant on the Baptism of Paul - - 68
9. The Conditions attendant on the Baptism of the Ethi-
opian Eunuch -64
10. The C inditions attendant on the Baptism of Cornelius - 65
11. The Conditions attendant on the Baptism of the Gaoler
and his House ...-66
12. The Conditions attendant on the Baptism of the House-
hold of Stephanas 67
18. Certain Statements in the Epistles—
Romans vi. 3, 4 67
1 Cor. X. 1, 2 69
1 Peter iii. 20, 21 71
14. The Practice of the Church in all Ages - - - -71
CHAPTER VI.—BAPTISM: HOW TO BE ADMINISTERED.
OBJECTIONS TO SPRINKLING.
1. Sprinkling, Defective Cleansing 74
2. Immersion, the Apostolic Mode 75
3. John Baptized by Immersion 76
4. Jesus can only be Followed as a Pattern in Baptism by
Immersion 78


PREFATOEY WORDS.
To THE General Reader. —The end of
this tractate is not controversy, neither is it
proselytism. It is simply to help in supplying
knowledge and guidance,- especially to young
people in the bosom of those Churches which
hold the views herein set forth. With Baptist
brethren I seek no quarrel. I desire to regard
with charity and Christian esteem those who
hold intelligently and conscientiously other views
than my own. At the same time I feel it to be
quite consistent with this, that I should do what
I can to direct the young in our Churches to what
I believe to be Scriptural views of a divine
ordinance, and to protect them against what,
according to my judgment, is error. This is all I
contemplate.
To THE Inquirer.— l have no wish to bias
you unduly in your judgment. You are free to
think for yourself. There is no faith like an


intelligent faith. Besides, you are responsible to
God for what you believe. My only anxiety is
that you should avoid any hasty conclusion. To
some ardent and impulsive minds there is a sort
of romantic charm in the mere idea of being
publicly dipped. I say so because it has been
confessed to; moreover, it is not unnatural. The
occasion is an exciting one, especially to young
people of strongly emotional nature; hence the
danger of mere feeling taking the precedence of
enlightened conviction. Against this I may be
permitted to utter a warning word. It is well
that the heart should be moved in all matters
pertaining to religion, but at the same time it is
of the highest moment that the judgment should
be convinced as well, for without this there will be
no stability. Feeling, when not based on conviction,
is changeful and evanescent. All I ask of you is
that you make up your mind intelligently. Take
time to consider. Consult the Word of God.
Seek the Holy Spirit’s guidance. Then, whatever
be your decision, you will be able to give a reason
for the hope that is in you.
To THE Christian Parent. —You are invited
to bring your little ones to God in baptism. The
religion of Jesus is considerate and generous in all


its provisions. It does not open the gate of the
kingdom to the believing parent, and then shut it
again upon that parent’s child, so that while the
one is admitted the other is kept out. Estimate
aright the high and sacred privilege. Take
advantage of it.
Bring your child to Jesus in the observance of
the holy ordinance, and bring it early. At no
future time can it be a purer offering. In its
present condition as a moral being it is more
nearly allied to goodness, to'purity, and to heaven
than it is likely to be at any other stage in its
earthly career.
Cherish all becoming feelings at such a time.
The transaction is a solemn one. An immortal
creature, that has just come into our world in all
the affecting helplessness of infancy, given up in
an intelligent dedication unto God, the great
Father of all, who made it; to Christ the Son,
who shed His own blood to save it; and to the
blessed and Holy Spirit, whose influences alone
can meeten it for the home of the good on high—
is not only a deeply-interesting sight, but an act
than which there can be none clothed with a more
sacred awe, or bringing with it more momentous
obligations. In making that offering you engage


to do your best to train that little one for God
and heaven.
hnprove the ordinance hy faithfidly implement-
ing its obligations. Unless you endeavour to do
this, you cannot expect the desired results. And
how is the ordinance to be improved ? In various
ways. Instruct your child with all diligence and
earnestness in the way of life, the truths of God,
and the claims of duty. So soon as it can learn,
teach its infant lips to pray. So soon as it is fit
for going to God’s house, take it thither with you.
Train it to read the Bible and keep holy the
Sabbath.
MaJce your child the subject oj prayer. “The
effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man
availeth much.” And surely that prayer, when
offered up in all-trusting faith for a beloved child,
will not remain unheard.
Set before your child a blameless example.
Without this, teaching will fail. Strive to be
Christ-like in your daily deportment, for this will
do more than anything else to lead your little one
in the footsteps of the Saviour.
Ever look up to God for the blessing. He alone
can crown with efficacy the means you employ for
your child’s salvation. Lean then upon God.


Make His blessing all-important in seeking success
to your endeavours. With that all shall be
well; without it everything else will fail.
To THE Baptized Youth. —In infancy you
were given up to God, and initiated into the
membership of the visible Church. Your parents
being in it, you were naturally taken into it too,
for the promise is to the children as well as to the
parents. But now that you can think for your-
self you are expected to complete the work
which they began. You are affectionately
counselled to confess Christ publicly. Thus you
will accept by your own deed the responsibilities
of Church membership. This then is your duty.
Be entreated to perform it. Let no worldly con-
sideration deter you. And perform it now.
Delay is perilous. Do you say, “I am not fit
for such a solemn step”? Have you pondered
the consequences of such an excuse ? Not fit for
it ! Then is it not to be feared that you are
rejecting Christ ? that you ai’e still in your
sins ? that jmu are in danger of eternal perdi-
tion? Ponder this terrible thought —if not fit to
confess Christ piMicly, can you he fit to die ? My
baptized young friend, be persuaded to escape at
once from this condition. Do you ask me how ?


My answer is, simply by accepting Jesus. Only
believe. Be honest; be earnest in your desire and
endeavour to do so; look up and breathe a
fervent prayer for the Holy Spirit’s help, and your
heart will be opened, and you will welcome
Christ into it, and He will sprinkle you with
blood, and number you among His disciples and
brethren. You will then esteem it the highest
privilege you can enjoy to confess Christ, and take
upon you the obligations of Church membership.


BAPTISM.
Its Origin. —lt is not of man, but of God. Jesus
Christ himself instituted it. We find it in the
apostolical commission, “ Go ye therefore, and teach
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”
Its Symbol. —The symbol of baptism is water,
and the meaning of the symbol is this: as
Avater is a cleansing and purifying agent, even so
the employment of water in baptism represents
the cleansing and purification of the soul through
the blood and Spirit of Christ. The blood of
Christ washes away the legal defilement of sin :
hence justification. The Spirit of Christ takes
away the moral defilement thereof: hence the
soul’s sanctification. Of these the water in baptism
is the emblem : hence baptism is spoken of as
“ a washing with waterand hence, too, such
expressions as these—“Ye are washed,” “the
washing of regeneration,” &c.
Its Design. —lt represents and seals the union
of the soul with Christ. It is the pledge that all
covenant blessings will be bestowed. It is the
visible sign of our engagement to be Christ’s, by
receiving Him in faith, and laying ourselves on


the altar of his service. It is our initiation into
the membership of the visible Church. It is the
badge of our public Christian profession, proclaim-
ing our separation from the world and our union
with all who bear the name of Jesus.
Its Formula. —“ln the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” Three
considerations will bring out the meaning of the
formula. Ist. To be baptized into the name of
any one means to become thereby his disciple,
obedient to his will and law, and the recipient of
his blessing. Thus the Israelites were “ baptized
unto Moses.” 2nd. To be baptized into the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, is to be baptized into the name of a triune
God; made, by the grace of which the water of bap-
tism is the sign, Hisreconciled, believing, loving sub-
ject and servant through faith in Christ Jesus, and
the heir of eternal life. 3rd. The words convey
to us a compendium of God’s teaching in reference
to Himself as one God in three persons. This
is the grand fundamental truth of our religion.
The Father is God invisible ; the Son is God
manifested in flesh; the Holy Spirit is God
influencing man, renewing him in the image of
the Son, and bringing him into filial relations
with the Father.
Its Obligations. —When an adult receives
baptism he thereby comes under all the obligations
of a Christian profession and a Christian life.
He engages to live a Christian. When an infant
receives baptism the parent comes under obliga-
12


the fear that the children would be denied mem-
bership in the Church of Christ. 2nd. It was
solved by the assurance that, in the case of one
parent being a Christian and the other an unbe-
liever, the children should be reckoned not with
the unbelieving but the believing parent—
holy because he or she is holy. 3rd. It implies
that where both parents were believers no doubt
was ever raised as to their fitness for Church
membership. This is taken for granted. Unless
this be admitted, the passage is meaningless.
6th. There is the statement of Christ in John
iii. 5 : “ Except a man be born of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.”
In the Greek, except any one. Any one —who will
venture to say that that refers only to adults %
No language could be more general. Any one
means either young or old, the infant or the sire.
Connect with the other statement of Christ that
the kingdom belongs to infants, and how clearly
it implies the right of infants to baptism.
7th. There is the statement of Paul, that Chris-
tians are “ Abraham’s seed and heirs according to
the promise.” Gal. iii. 29. If this mean any-
thing, it means that the Christian stands just
where the pious Jew of old stood in the covenant.
Their privileges are the same. If the child of the
pious Jew was entitled to the initiatory ordinance
of the Church, the child of the Christian must
be entitled to it as well. That the form of the ordi-
nance has been changed, in no way affects the case.
XII. Children are to he baptized on the ground


of ijlain Scriptural facts. —The facts referred to
are the facts of household baptism. The question
is, when we read of the baptism of a household,
are we warranted in inferring that there were
children in that household ? I think we are. The
idea of a household is a family in which there are
both adults and children.
There are three cases of household baptism
mentioned in the New Testament.
Ist. There is Lydia and her household, Acts xvi.
15. The family were baptized on the faith of Lydia.
The case suggests simply a mother believing, and in
consequence being baptized, and presenting her
children in baptism at the same time. It is to be
noticed that it is distinctly stated that Lydia was
converted —“ Whose heart the Lord opened.”
It is not stated that any others of the household
were converted. The proper inference is that
they were not. No other conclusion, then, is
probable, save that the other members of the
household were children, and were baptized on
the ground of the mother’s faith.
2nd. There is the gaoler and his household
—“ He and all his,” Acts xvi. 33. This might be
better rendered “He and all who were of him”
{rjo-av being understood). And surely the proba-
bility is strong that among those “ who were of
him” there would be children.
3rd. There is the. household of Stephanas, 1 Cor.
i. 16. The probability in this case is the same,
that there were children as well as adults in the
household.


If infant baptism had been unknown, and if
it had been unscriptural, seeing that the com-
monly received idea of a household is a family
composed of both adults and children, may we not
say that it is highly 'probable that in the record
given of household baptisms it would have been dis-
tinctly stated either that there were no infants in
these households or that they were not baptized ?
The balance of probability in favour of house-
holds including children of all ages, and therefore
infants among them, is, according to all the usages
of language, unanswerably strong.
THE TESTIMONY OF HISTORY.
This is of such importance as to warrant a
distinct chapter for its illustration. It will be my
endeavour to show that infant baptism was preva-
lent in the time of the Christian fathers, and is
traceable up to the days of the apostles.
Justin Martyr flourished in the secf>nd century.
He wrote about forty years after the death of the
Apostle John. He speaks of certain persons who
continued uncorrupted until they were sixty or
seventy years old, and of these he says that they
were made disciples to Christ in childhood. That
is, they ivere baptized. This was the only way of
making disciples in childhood.
Irenseus flourished in the second century. He
was Bishop of Lyons about seventy years after
the death of John. He was accustomed in
youth to talk with Polycarp, who was an intimate


companion of John’s. In his declining years he
stated that he remembered Polycarp well, and
how he rehearsed what he had heard John, and
others who had seen Christ, say of Him and of
His miracles and teachings. Irenaeus says, Christ
came to save all persons hy Himself who hy Him
are regenerated to God, infants, and little ones, and.
childreJi, and youth, and elder persons. The term
regenerated was often used by the fathers as de-
scriptive of baptism. It is so used here. Infants,
therefore, according to Irenseus, were baptized.
Tertullian flourished about one hundred years
after the apostles. He advises the delay of
baptism, especially with regard to little children,
on the superstitious idea that baptism necessarily
implied the remission of past guilt, and that sins
committed after baptism were fraught with im-
minent peril. As he was writing against the
common practice, it follows that that practice was
the baptism of infants; and being the general
practice, it must have been instituted long before
his day.
Clemens Alexandrinus flourished towards the
end of the second century. Speaking of engrav-
ings on seal rings, he recommends as a suitable
subject for such, an apostle baptizing infants. The
inference is twofold; —Ist. Clemens believed that
the apostles baptized infants. 2nd. It was the
established practice in his time to baptize inf ads.
Origen flourished in the early part of the tiird
century. He was born eighty-five years after the
death of John. The practice of the apostles nust


have been well known in his day. In learning
Origen was without a rival. He makes two very
distinct and intelligible statements: —Ist. Infants
are baptized. 2nd. For this the Church had
received an order from the apostles.
Cyprian flourished in the middle of the third
century. He presided over a council of sixty-
six bishops held in Carthage in the year 253, at
which the question was considered whether
infants might be baptized before they were eight
days old .? The decision was that no infant ivas
to be denied baptism, though but just born. The
unanimous opinion of a synod such as this may be
considered surely as the general mind and practice
of the Church.
Gregory Nazianzen flourished in the early part
of the fourth century. He counsels parents to
baptize their children, only he would have them
delay it till they were three years of age. His
opinion about delay was altogether unscriptural,
but in nowise impairs the value of the fact that
he believed in infant baptism.
Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, flourished about the
middle of the fourth century. In commenting on
the dividing of the waters of Jordan, he refers to
the infants that have been baptized.
Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople, so famed
for his eloquence, in a homily on baptism expressly
declares infant baptism to be the practice of the
Church —“Abr this reason we baptize infants also.”
St. Augustine, who flourished towards the close
of the same century, says, that he never read of


any one who held that baptism was to be denied
to infants. He also says that infant baptism was
the practice of the whole Church ; and again, no
Christian will call infant baptism useless; and
again, that the baptizing of iufatits was doubtless
delivered by our Lord and His apostles.
Pelagias, whose well-known heresy appeared in
the beginning of the fifth century, in a letter to
Pope Innocent of Rome, complains thus :— Men
sland,er me as if I denied the sacrament of baptism
to infants. He also says, tliat he never heard
even an impious heretic who asserted that infants
are not to be baptized.
Celestius wrote a book, from which St. Augus-
tine quotes, and in which these words occur—
But we acknowledge infants ought to be baptized
for the remission of sins, according to the rule of
the universal Church, and according to the seitence
of the gospel.
A council was held at Carthage in the yea 418
which was composed of two hundred and foirteen
bishops, and w'hich in one of its decrees relatve to
the Pelagian heresy uses these words— Alo we
determine that whosoever does deny that hfants
may be baptized token they come recently fromtheir
mother's womb, &c.
Let the following things be weighed in 'efer-
ence to the above;—
Ist. These fathers were of all men the best
informed on the subject.
2nd. Thej’- were mostly good men, and W)rtliy
of all credence.


3rd. They believed that infant baptism was
the universal practice of the Church from the
days of the Apostles.
4th. The practice of infant baptism could not
have been abolished without being known to
these men.
Thus, then, durinrj the first four hundr'ed years
of the Church of Christ, the lawfulness of infant
never was questioned.
During the next seven hundred years—that is
dmm to the twelfth century—there is no proof from
Church history that the lawfulness of infant bap-
tism was ever denied.
In the begiimning of the twelfth century a
small section of the Waldenses, known as the Petro-
biiissians, the adherents of Peter de Bruis
objected to infant baptism. They were very insicr-
nificant, probably not more than one in forty of
tlie Waldensian body. They objected to infant
baptism on the ground that infants were not
capable of salvation, inasmuch as they were not
able to undergo the self-denial which they believed
necessary to its attainment. They vjere not Baptists
in the modern sense of the term. The great body
of Waldenses held, by infant baptism.
For three hundred years further the practice of
infant baptism continued to be universal in the
Christian Church.
From_ the above historical testimony the fol-
lowing inferences are irresistible ;
Ist. Infant baptism has been handed down from
the times of the apostles.


2nd. The apostles must have received it from
Christ.
3rd. For fifteen hundred years, vrith the insig-
nificant exception referred to, infant baptism was
universally practised.
4tli. The Baptist views are therefore of human
origin, and no higher antiquity than the sixteenth
century.
Keject the above, and what then % As has been
observed by a well known writer, simply this—
According to the Baptist theory, there was no
baptism for 1500 years, nay, there was no Church
of Christ. A more extreme inference still fol-
lows: there is no baptism now. Lost for 1500
years, how has it been restored ? — an unbaptized
person, unless specially commissioned by Christ,
could not introduce baptism. When was there
any one thus commissioned ? In the absence of
an answer on the theory we now speak of, all
the baptism of the present day is handed down
from some one, himself ’ unbaptized. Deplorable
thought, yet inevitable—it is all a nullity.
OBJECTIONS TO INFANT BAPTISM.
Objection I. There is no command in the Bible
to baptize infants.
Answer. Granted ; there is no “ Thus saith
the Lord, Thou shalt baptize thine infant child.”
But, Ist, this objection goes too far. Our Baptist
friends, in preferring it, lay themselves open to the


charge of inconsistency. There is no express com-
mand to admit females to the communion table ;
yet they admit them. Neither is there an express
command to keep the first instead of the seventh
day of the week as the Sabbath ; yet they keep
the first, not the seventh. And so too with other
things. In the view of such conduct their objec-
tion goes for nothing.
2nd. Though there is no Thus saith the Lord,’'
yet is there no lack of direct warrant in the New
Testament for infant Church memhership. We
have already shown this. Jesus Himself says
distinctly that they are fit for the kingdom, and
that all its privileges belong to them. And Peter
tells us that the promise is to the children as well
as to the fathers. This is enough. If they are
fit for the kingdom, if its privileges are theirs,
if they are included in the promise, then baptism
is theirs by inalienable right. Here is warrant
difect enough.
3rd. A command was not needed. The absence
of it, instead of being against, is in favour of
the baptism of infants. The case stands thus :
The New Testament economy is an amplification
of the Old. The Church in its essential features
is the same under both. The Old was the child-
hood of the Church, the New is its maturity.
Children were admitted into the Church under
the Old. In the absence of any distinct prohibi-
tion they are to be admitted into the Neto as well.
Had there been a change there would have been a
notification of it, The absence of this shows that


there was no change. The inference is that now,
as of old, infants are entitled to nieinbership.
The onus ; where it lies. It does not lie with
us to show direct authority from the Neiv Testament
for infant Church membership. It lies ivith our
Baptist friends to show that the privileges of
membership, which infants enjoyed for two thousand
years, have been taken away.
Obj. 11. There ts no example in the New Testa-
ment of the infant of a believer being baptized.
Ans. There are examples of households being
baptized. The probability is so strong as to
amount almost to a certainty that there were
infants in some of these households.
2nd. Records of infant baptism are not to be
expected. New Testament history is a history of
the introduction and progress of the Gospel to
new countries; hence the baptisms of converts
recorded are baptisms of converts from heathenism
to Christianity. It is even so with our mission
Churches in Pagan countries in the present day.
When a baptism is recorded it is the baptism of
a convert. The children of such will be baptized
too. This, however, is not recorded. If infant
baptism had not been a common thing, then we
might have expected some notice to be taken of it.
The fact that it is not specially noticed proves its
commonness.
3rd. If it be a difficulty with the Baptists that
there is no special mention of infants being
baptized, then how shall we explain the fact that
there is no notice made in the New Testament of


any of the children of believers being baptized
when they attained the years of adults.
The onus; where it lies. Inasmvch as, hy all
usage of language, the word conveys
the idea of children as well as adults, it does not
lie with us to show that there were infants in the
households whose baptisms are recorded. It lies
with our Baptist friends to show that there were
none.
Obj. 111. When Jesus ioolc the little children in
His arms, He blessed them, but He did not bap-
tize them. “ Therefore,” says Pengilly, “ I infer
that infant baptism is no part of the will of
Christ, but adverse to it.”
Ans. Ist. This objection tells as much against
the baptism of adults as infants. It would run
thus: —When Jesus made disciples. He did not
baptize them; therefore the baptism of adult believers
“ is no part of the ivill of Christ, hut adverse to
it.”
2nd, Jesus did not baptize at all—neither
adults nor infants.
3rd. When Jesus said of children, “Theirs is
the kingdom of heaven,” He declared that the
privileges of the Church belonged to them.
Baptism was one of these. If Jesus had baptized
any, seeing that He declared infants entitled to
all Church privileges, the inference is natural that
He would have baptized them.
The onus ; where it lies. It does not rest with us
to shoiv that Jesus baptized infants. It rests ivith our
Baptist friends to prove that “ it is no part of the


xoill of Christ that infants should he haptizedl' after
He declared that the privileges of the Church
belonged to them.
Obj. IV. Infant baptism ivas unknown until the
beginning of the third, century after Christ. It is
therefore a “ mere human inventionf and without
any scriptural authority whatever. Thus argues
Pengilly.
Ans. Ist. Pengilly would have put it more cor-
rectly if he had said that we do not find in the
history of the Christian Church a single objection
raised against infant baptism till the beginning of
the third century., and then the objection taken was
not on the grounds on which the Baptists take
it. He quotes from Tertullian (De Baptismo)
as follows .-t —“ The delay of baptism therefore
may be more advantageous, either on account of
the condition, disposition, or age of any person,
especially in reference to little &c.
Observe the clause we have italicised. Tertullian
recommends that for certain reasons the baptism
of little children should be delayed. He does not
say a single word about the baptism of children
being a new thing. On the contrary, he distinctly
recognises its existence. His recommendation pro-
ceeds upon the admission of its being an established
rite in the Christian Church. He did not oppose
it as unknown till then; he simply wanted a change
as to the rule of its administration. In the case
of infants sickly and seemingly about to die, he 1
advised their baptism ; in the case of those which
were strong and likely to see many years, lie i


advised delay till near the close of life. His
reason for this was that he believed sins committed
after baptism to be fraught with more than usual
peril.
2nd. If Tertullian’s testimony be worth any-
thing, it militates as much against adult as infant
baptism. He recommends that young people,
both male and female, married and unmarried —
indeed all who gave promise of length of days—
should delay baptism till late in life, when the
temptations of the flesh were likely to have lost
their power. Under this idea numbers of pro-
fessing Christians postponed their baptism until
they believed that their last sickness had come,
and that they were about to die. Constantine
the Great is named amongst this number.
3rd. Origen, the most famous divine of his
day, and who lived in the third century, states in
the most explicit terms that infant baptism was
the usage of the Church, and that it was enjoined
by the apostles. Here are the words of one of
his commentaries —“ For this cause it was that
the Church received an order from the apostles to
give baptism even to infants.” Words could not
be plainer. If from the apostles, then the
apostles were taught of Christ. Infant baptism is
thus as old as the Church itself.
The onus. It does not lie with us to prove that
infant baptism is as old as the JSew Testament
Church. It lies with those who deny it to show
when, how, and by whom it was introduced. There
should be no difficulty in doing this. Such an


innovation must liave agitated the Church to its
inmost centre, A thousand pens would have
been wielded against it. We know who were the
authors of other great innovations. Let the
record of this be produced.
Obj. V. Jesus ivas not baptized until He had
the age of thirty. Neither should ive till
we arrive at years of maturity.
Ans. I. If this objection be worth anything,
it goes too far for those who prefer it. For it in-
evitably involves the follov/ing :
Ist. That we shoidd be baptized by John. He
has no successor in his mission. His dispensation
was unique, standing alone, mid-way between the
Old and the New, belonging neither to the one
nor the other. With himself it passed away.
2nd. That Christian baptism is identical with
John’s baptism. It is not. Paul found certain
disciples at Ephesus whom he questioned respect-
ing their baptism. They said they were baptized
unto John’s baptism.” Paul told them that that
was merely the baptism of repentance, and that
they ought to believe on Christ. “When they
heard this, they were baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus.”
3rd. That we should take up an official calling.
The baptism by John was Christ’s designation to
His public ministry.
4th. That no one should be baptized save just
at thirty years of age. Twenty-five would not be
the age at which Christ was baptized j neither
would thirty-five; the one would be too young,


the other too old. How preposterous then is this
objection. •
11. The practice of the Baptists destroys
their own objection. They baptize at an earlier
age than thirty.
The onus. It lies vjith our Baptist friends to
shoiv that the baptism of Jesus-at thirty years of
age is represented in the Scriptures as the pattern
of our. baptism ; a, thing they have not done and
cannot do.
Obj. VI. Infants cannot cherish those inward
feelings which should accompany baptism. Ke-
ceiving the word of God, repenting of sin, and
believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, are repre-
sented as being necessary in order to baptism.
Thus we read, “ Repent and be baptized f
‘‘lf thou believest with all thine heart, thou
mayest be baptized“ They that gladly received
the word were baptizedand so on. Infants
cannot receive the word, they cannot repent,
they cannot believe. And this is the objection.
Ans. Ist. In baptizing a child, faith is re-
quired, but that faith is not the faith of the child,
but of the parent. It was because parents were
within the pale of the covenant of old that chil-
dren received the rite of circumcision with its
attendant privileges. And so, under the gospel,
the child of the believing parent receives the
same privilege for the parent’s sake.
2nd. The infant of eight days old not
exercise faith on receiving circumcision. And
yet what does Paul say % In his epistle to the


Romans he expressly declares circumcision to ba
“ a seal of the righteousness of faith.” Sucb too
is baptism. But the infant of eight days could
not cherish faith, and yet by the solemn command
of God it received the seal. The objection there-
fore would be just as strong against infant circum-
cision as against infant baptism. In reality there-
fore it is worthless.
3rd.. A brief question will show the utter
futility of the objection now being considered.
Who are the persons enjoined to repent and believe in
order to baptism ? The reply is, they are adults —■
not infants at all, as our objectors imply. The
question of infant baptism is in nowise touched
by the passages quoted. If we have got an adult
to deal with who has not yet been baptized, we
address to him the very same language. We say,
“Repent of thy sin, turn unto God, believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be bap-
tized.”
Obj. VII. To baptize an infant is meaningless
and useless. What can a babe understand of such
an ordinance ?
Ans. Ist. It can neither be meaningless nor
useless if it be the mind of Christ. This is the
real question. Has it the sanction of Christ 1
We have endeavoured to show that it has. WTien
a man goes further than this, and brings the utility
of God’s appointments to the bar of his own puny
reason, there is no extreme of presumption and
error to which he may not go. He tries to be
wiser than God. Much of the infidelity of


modem times consists just in setting man’s views
above God’s teachings. The Bible itself can be
swept away in this manner.
2nd. There is great meaning and utility too
in the baptism of infants. It is their solemn
dedication to God by an expressive rite. It is
their recognition as belonging to the visible
Church. It is the engagement of the parents to
train them for Christ and heaven. It is one of
the most solemn and touching arguments that can
ever be addressed to them in after years to love God.
These are a few things implied in the rite, and if
there be no utility in these things, we are inclined
to ask what the word means.
3rd. Will those who prefer this objection tell
us what they say to the command of God that
circumcision should be administered to the
Jewish infant when only eight days old. The
Jewish infant could not understand this. If
baptism be meaningless and useless because the
child baptized cannot understand its meaning, cir-
cumcision must for the same reason have been
meaningless as well. To say circumcision was
meaningless would be directly to impugn the
wisdom of God. The conclusion is inevitable
that it must be equally an impeachment of that
wisdom to say, on this ground, that the baptism of
an infant is meaningless.
Obj. VIII. To bring an infant, all unconsciously
to itself, under baptismal obligations, which it is
expected to discharge on arriving at years of dis-
cretion, is an unwarrantable interference with its


liberty of thought, and a pre-judging and pre-
deciding of its creed,
Ans. Any one who will deliberately bring
forward this objection to the baptism of infants
must surely be very badly off for something to say.
Two considerations will suffice to show how truly
flimsy it is.
Ist. One of the grand objects contemplated by
the organisation of the Church is the godly up-
bringing of children. They are to be cared for,
watched over, educated, trained, so that they may
be “ a seed to serve Him.” To overlook this were
something worse than a blunder; it were a sin.
The children are intended to be scholars in
Christ’s school, even from earliest days. The
objection then is an Anti-Church, an Anti-Chris-
tian objection. It assails one of the grandest
ends for which the Church exists.
2nd. This objection strikes at the very root of
all moral training. If it mean anything, it means
that it is wrong to fill the mind of a child with
what is true and good, because by doing this the
child will be unfitted for making an unbiassed de-
cision for itself when it reaches years of discretion.
You must not tell a child not to lie or steal,
because by so doing you prejudice the child in
favour of truth and honesty, and thus hinder it
from making untrammelled inquiry in these
matters wdien it comes of age. Surely this is
trifling.
Obj. IX. The apostolic commission settles the
point. Faith is there represented as going before


baptism. “He that helieveth and is baptized stall
be saved, j he that helieveth not shall be damned.
Ans Ist. The words have no reference to
infants at all. They refer to those who are ca-
pable of believing. They cannot therefore decide
either for or against infant baptism. To make
words an objection to infant baptism, which have
no reference to it whatever, is surely most un-
warrantable.
2nd. The words prove too much for our Bap-
tist friends. If they hold them as referring to
infants, and as excluding infants from baptism
because they cannot believe, then they must hold
them as excluding infants from heaven when they
die, on the same ground. They cannot believe,
they say, therefore they cannot be baptized ; to
be consistent they should add, they cannot believe,
therefore they cannot he saved. There is no escape
from this alternative. , n• i
3rd. The words do not declare that faith must
go before baptism. The Greek word translated
baptized, is (baptistheis). proper
meaning of this is, having been baptized. Any one
who knows the parts of the Greek verb kncnvs
this. The passage, then, reads thus “He that
helieveth, having been baptized, shall be
So then, after all, the passage is just as suitable to
infant baptism as any passage could be.
Obj. X. Multitudes who have received baptism
in infancy have in after life proved themselves to he
bitterly callous about religion, openly ungodly, it may
he avowed rejectors of Christ and His salvation.


Ans, Ist. That all who are baptized in infancy
dp not when they grow up to years of discretion
give themselves to Goc[, that many of them go
far astray, is to the truly Christian mind matter of
deep regret and sorrow. But who shall say that
their baptism will prove finally in vain ? After
long wanderings in folly and sin, the thought of
theii solemn dedication to God in a father’s arms
may, under the Holy Spirit’s power, turn them in
penitence to the feet of Jesus. It has done so in
many a case. It may do so far more frequently
than we suppose.
_ 2nd. It is no valid argument against a divine
institution that there are those who observe it
without profiting thereby. Multitudes hear the
gospel without being made better by it: is the
gospel on this ground to be abolished ? Multi-
tudes attend the house of God, and yet lead
wiciced lives : is the sanctuary on this ground to
be shut up ? Veriljp no. And it is no argument
infant baptism that there are those ivho
receive It, and yet in after life fail to ivalh up to
its obligations.
3rd. The objection, if good, would tell against
adult baptism as well It is an undeniable and
paintul tact that many who have been baptized on
a public profession of their faith in Christ have
thereafter made shipwreck of that profession, and
gone back to the service of the world and the
de-nl. Is adult baptism therefore to be abolished ?
Übj. If infants are admitted into the member-
ship of the visible Church, they are entitled to take


their seats at the communion table as soon as they
are able to go there.
Ans. The inference is not justifiable. The
one thing does not necessarily imply the other.
Ist. A parallel case may be found in the
Jewish Church. A Jewish child of old, though a
Church member by circumcision, loas not entitled
simply on this ground to come to the passover.
Not till he was thirteen years of age and
“worthy,” was he allowed to do it as “a son of
the congregation.”
2nd. The arrangements of civil society supply
a similar illustration. Every child is a citizen.
Its rights as such are recognised. But it does not
follow that simply on that ground the child is
eligible for any office under the State. A variety
of conditions must first be fulfilled. It must be
of age, qualified, properly elected, and so on, ere
it can be clothed with the functions of office.
Yet it is a citizen all the while.
3rd. Another illustration may be drawn from
the language of Paul in reference to a different
matter —“ The heir, as long as he is a child,
differeth nothing from the servant, though he be
lord of all; but is under tutors and governors,
until the time appointed of the father.” Though
Lord of all, he cannot have possession, because he is
a child.
4th. And so too there are conditions which
must be fulfilled by one who has been baptized
in infancy. The Church has a right to be
satisfied as to life, knowledge, moral character, and


other qualifications, before admitting one baptized
in infancy to the Lord's Supper. This stands
alike to reason and Scripture.
BAPTISM; HOW TO BE ADMINIS-
TERED.
Baptism is administered in two ways. The one
is by the sprinkling of water ; the other is by
dipping or plunging in the water. We believe
that sprinkling is the scriptural plan, and that at
the same time it is much simpler, better adapted
for general application, and more edifying in its
nature than immersion. This we think is capable
of proof on the following grounds :
I. The meaning of the ivord. The Baptists
assert that the luord translated “to baptize" is
never used in the Bible in any other sense than to
immerse. Their whole theory is staked on this.
If this can be disproved, their theory falls. Now
two things can easily be shown—lst. Instances
of its use where it may signify the application of
water in some other way than by immersion. 2nd.
Instances in which it cannot possibly signify the
application of water by immersion.
The Greek words in question here are fidiTTw
(bapto) and (baptizo). The former is
used in the Old Testament (the Septuagint Greek),
the latter is used in the New Testament.
BdTTTM (bapto), the rendering of the Hebrew
(tabal), occurs in the Old Testament
fifteen times. Its general meaning is to dip


something (the finger, for instance) in some
liquid, such as water, or blood, or oil—not
for the purpose of immersion, but for the pur-
pose of sprinkling the liquid referred to on some
other object. Let us select two instances of its
use : —lst. An instance in which it may mean
something else than immersion. In 2 Kings
V. 14 we read of Naaman, “ Then went he down
and dipped (e/?a7rTtcraTo baptized) himself seven
times in Jordan, according to the saying of the man
of God.” Now, this may mean something else than
immersion in Jordan. He did it according to the
saying of the man of God. What was that saying!
We find it in the 10th verse—Go and wash in
Jordan seven times.” The general practice in wash-
ing is to apply water partially to the body, not to
plunge the body wholly in water. Besides, Naaman’s
malady was a local one. He expected that the
prophet would strike his hscndi wpon the place."
May we not suppose then that a merely local
washing with water—the washing of the place
affected —was all that was required of him ! 2nd.
An instance in which it cannot possibly signify the
application of water by immersion. In Dan. iv.
33 we read of Nebuchadnezzar, “His body was wet
(ebaphe) with the dew of heaven.” (SaTCTia
(bapto) cannot possibly mean here to immerse. To
say that Nebuchadnezzar was immersed in dew is
simply an absurdity. Ere this could be intelligible,
it would be necessary to suppose that the dew had
first been collected in a tank or pond, and that
then the king had been dipped or plunged in it.


The word unquestionably means in this passage
to sprinkle. His body was sprinkled, or moistened,
or wetted with the dew of heaven.
Having furnished these two classes of instances,
in one of which the word ;Ba7rTw(bapto)??zay signify
the application of water otherwise thonhy immersion,
and in the other of which it cannot possibly mean
the application of water by immersion, we shall now
take an instance illustrative of the general meaning
of the word in the Old Testament, In Leviticus
xiv. 16 we read—“ And the priest shall dip
fidfei (bapsei) his right finger in the oil that is
in his left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with
his finger seven times before the Lord.” Shall
dip means in this place, simply, shall wet the tip
of the finger with the oil, so as to sprinkle the oil
again from it. The idea of the priest immersing
his right finger in the small quantity of oil which
he held in the palm of his left hand is simply
preposterous ; it could not be done. This is the
common usage of the word : to wet the finger or
something else in some liquid, for the purpose of
sprinkling that liquid on another object.
in one or other of its forms, is
to be met with eighty times in the Hew Testament.
As in the case of (bapto), instances of its
use can be given—Ist. Where it may signify the
application of water in some other way than by
immersion ,* and, 2nd, where it cannot possibly
signify the application of water by immersion.
Under class of instances may be ranked
those in which the word is employed to denote


the application of water to persons in baptism,
such as the baptisms performed by John, the bap-
tism of Jesus, the baptisms on the day of Pente-
cost, the baptism of Paul, of the Philippian gaoler,
of the Ethiopian eunuch, and the like. In all these
instances (baptizo) may signify something
else than immersion. There is nothing in the word
itself, and nothing in the circumstances of the
baptisms referred to, to forbid the possibility of
this. It may mean that John baptized by pouring
or sprinkling. It may mean that Jesus, and the
three thousand on the day of Pentecost, and Paul,
and the Philippian gaoler, and others, were all
baptized otherwise than by immersion. Thousands
of men, devout, learned, and honoured by God in
the furtherance of His own work, have, after much
patient study, come to this conclusion. As is
shown elsewhere, not only is it possible that in all
the cases referred to it may mean to sprinkle tvater
on the person, but the probability arising out of
attendant circumstances is strong, almost so strong
as to amount to certainty, that it does describe
baptism, not by immersion, but by sprinkling or
pouring water.
Under the second class of instances may be
enumerated such uses as the following : —lst. In
Mark vii. 4we read of the washing (3aTrTLapov&
(baptismous) of cups and pots, brazen vessels,
and of tables.” Baptism cannot here mean im-
mersion, for the idea of plunging tables—
or couches, as the word may be rendered—is
simply preposterous. The baptism here spoken


of was simply for purifying, and common sense
requires that we understand that they were simply
washed with the hand, the water being poured
upon them. 2nd. In Acts i. swe read—“ For
John truly baptized (ebaptisen) with water, but ye
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many
days hence.” The prophet Joel, foretelling this,
speaks of God as saying, “ I will poitr out my
Spirit.” In the description of the event in Acts
ii. 3-4 we are told that “ There appeared unto
them cloven tongues as of fire, and it sat upon
each of them.” Peter, in his defence as recorded
in Acts xi., says that as he began to speak the
Holy Ghost fell on them, and that then he remem-
bered the word which the Lord spake concerning
J ohn, already quoted from Acts i. 5. Elsewhere
the baptism of the Holy Ghost is set forth in
such language as this: —Descended upon, came
from heaven, and shed forth.
Now surely it were to darken the divine beauty
of the sacred narrative, if not to render it unintel-
ligible, for any one to render such passages thus :
—They were plunged, or dipped, in the Holy Ghost
and in fire. The mind recoils from the lan-
guage. The sign in baptism is water; the thing
signified is the pouring out of the Holy Spirit.
How beautiful the harmony between the two when
the water is sprinkled in baptism ! how great the
incongruity when the person is plunged in the water !
3rd. In 1 Cor. x. 2 we read that the Israelites
were baptized (ebaptisanto) unto Moses in the
cloud and in the sea. This cannot mean immersed


in the sea. In the 14th chap, of Exodus we
read that God divided the waters so that they
became “ a wall unto them on their right hand
and on their left,” and the children of Israel
walked through the midst of the sea wpon the dry
ground. There was therefore no immersion. They
were simply sprinTcled with the spray from the
wall of waters. We read that a strong wind
blew all that night, and nothing more natural than
that it should have lifted the sea-foam and
drenched them with it. As to the baptism in
the cloud, we have reason to believe that when
the cloud passed over them rain fell from it.
The psalmist, in referring to the occurrence
(Psalm Ixxvii. 17) says, ‘‘ The clouds poured
out water.” To speak of being immersed in the
falling rain is surely a misuse of language. Rain
sprinldes.
From the above the following inferences are
clearly deducible :
Ist. “Bapto,” the root of “baptize,” is never em-
ployed in the Bible to designate the ordinance of
Christian baptism. Its only use is in helping to
determine the meaning of “ baptize” by its etymo-
logical bearing. Its general significance is to dip
or moisten anything in some liquid for the purr
pose of sprinkling some other object with it. If
it were used in connexion with the rite of
baptism, as it is not, no word could more appro-
priately describe the act of dipping the hand in
water for the purpose of sprinhling another in
baptism.


2nd. To use the words of the learned and godly
Dr. Owen, “No one instance can be shown, even
in Scripture, in which the word which we render
baptize does necessarily signify either to dip or
plunged
3rd. Numerous instances can be given from
the Bible of the use of the word in which it cannot
possibly be made to mean anything else than to
sprinkle or pour out, without violating established
rules of interpretation, ignoring attendant cir-
cumstances, and outraging common sense.
4th. The words “bapto” and.“baptizo” mean to
tinge, to dye, to wash, to cleanse, to pour, to
wet, as well as to dip or plunge.
sth. The primary meaning of the word “bap-
tize” in the Scriptures is to cleanse, whether
by sprinkling or plunging. The mode of the
cleansing, whether by sprinkling or plunging, is
merely an accident occurring in connexion with
its use.
6th. Then, the assertion of Dr. Carson and
others that the word means to dip, and nothing
but to dip, is totally unsupported by any proof.
11. The inconvenience and difficulty of baptism
by immersion.
Simplicity and suitableness are strikingly
characteristic of all the appointments of the New
Testament Church. In this Ave see the very
wisdom of God. “ Oh, how unlike the complex
works of man !” It may be said that this is not
the question, and that if it can only be shown that
immersion is the Bible way, what we have got to


do is simply to follow it. Granted; but then
this is just the dispute, “ Which is the Bible way?”
And seeing that the Bible does not state the matter
so plainly that there cannot be two opinions about
it, if it be found that, of the two modes of baptizing
that form the ground of dispute, one is more
simple, more convenient, and better adapted for
general use than the other, there is in this a strong
presumptive argument that it is the true one,
the Bible one.
The inconvenience and difficulty referred to will
appear in the following cases ;
Ist. In the case of countries and districts
where the water is so scarce that it can with diffi-
culty be obtained for necessary domestic purposes,
a sufficient supply for frequent immersions would
in many instances only be had after great trouble
and cost, and in numbers of instances could not be
had at all.
2nd. In the case of countries where through-
out almost the entire year the water is frost-bound.
Immersion in such countries is impracticable as a
general rule.
3rd. In the case, even, of countries where water
is abundant, there are lengthened periods of time
during which baptism by immersion would im-
peril the health, if not the life, of both the im-
merser and the immersed.
4th. In the case of those who are labouring
under peculiar maladies, and which would render
immersion almost certain death.
sth. In the case of ministers delicate in health,


frail of body, or aged and feeble, the task of im-
mersing would be more than they could accom-
plish.
6th. In the case of females, even when all pos-
sible prudence is exercised, it is not to be denied
that there are minds whose sense of propriety is
such that they could not witness their immersion
without sustaining a shock to the best feelings of
their nature.
7th. In many other special cases which can
easily be supposed, such as those who are confined
to chambers of sickness, and the like.
In all these cases immersion is difficult, in, some
of them impracticable. In every one of them
sprinkling may he observed with ease and comfort.
What a contrast ! Let any one say which plan is
most like that gospel which is suited to universal
humanity—every human being, in every circum-
stance, and in every clime. Presumptively, then,
sprinkling is the Bible plan.
111. The blessings represented by baptism are
applied, not by immersion, but sprinkling. These
blessings are the infiuences of the Holy Spirit.
How does the Bible represent these blessings as
being imparted to men? Simply, by sprinkling or
pouring. Hote the following :
Ist. The influences, of the Holy Spirit applied
to the heart constitute a baptism. This is the
truest, highest baptism of all. “Ye shall be bap-
tized with the Holy Ghost.”
2nd. In this, the highest sense of all, Jesus
Himself was the great baptizer. John foretold


Him as such. He Himself promised, “I will
send to you the Holy Spirit.”
3rd. In not one solitary instance is this bap-
tism of Christ represented as being an immersion.
4th. In the general language of the Bible this
baptism is represented as being by sprinkling or
affusion.
sth. The following instances may suffice :
Isaiah xxxii. 15—“ Until the Spirit be poured
upon us from on high xliv. 3—“ I will pour
my Spirit upon thy seed.” Joel ii. 28 —“I will
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh.” Isaiah lii.
15 —“ So shall He sprinkle many nations.”
IV. The meaning of the ordinance. It is entirely
spiritual. Water is simply an emblem. In itself
the water is nothing, and possesses no self-efficient
power to save. To attribute saving virtue to the
mere emblem is superstition. Beautifully simple
and striking indeed the emblem is, but it possesses
no inherent power to touch the soul. The one
great point, then, is the application of the emblem.
How it is to be applied is immaterial, for the Bible
has not expressly told us; it is enough if only it he
applied at all; the ordinance will be valid. The
moment that it is applied by proper hands the
meaning of the emblem is shadowed forth. It
may be by sprinkling, it may be by pouring, it
may be by immersion. As the meaning of the
emblem is brought out by sprinkling, it is enough,
and the ordinance is validly performed.
A little incident in the life of Jesus helps to
illustrate this point. On a deeply impressive


occcasion He was about to wash the feet of one
of His disciples. Simon Peter objected, and on
being told by Jesus that unless washed he would
have no 'part in Him, replied, in the fervour of
his impulsive zeal, “Lord, not my feet only,
but also my hands and my head.” To this Jesus
answered, “He that is washed needeth not save
to wash his feet, but is clean every whit ” —the
meaning of which was, that water was an emblem
of purity, and that its application simply to the
feet was enough to convey the full meaning of the
emblem, and answered just as well as though the
entire body had been washed. So too in baptism.
He that is sprinMed needeth not to he immersed,
for the emblem in all the fullness of its meaning
hath heen applied to him.
The circumstances in which multitudes were
baptized hy John. It is to be observed that this
baptism Avas not Christian baptism. We learn from
the Acts of the Apostles, as noticed elsewhere, that
some whom John had baptized were afterwards bap-
tized in the name of the Lord J esus. This is sufficient
to decide the point; but, apart from this, it seems
highly improbable that John baptized otherwise
than by sprinkling or pouring. We read that
“Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region
round about Jordan,” went out to John, “ and were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.”
How many John baptized we cannot definitely
say; it must have been a very great number. Let
us suppose that it amounted only to 50,000
(some have fixed it at as high a figure as fifty


times this number); let us also suppose that he
spent every day in baptizing the people, without
cessation, during the eighteen months of his
ministry there: this would give about 100 per day
during all that time. The result is that, at the
rate of one immersion every five minutes, it would
have been necessary that John should stand in
the water for eight hours every day, without pause,
immersing the people, and that for the space of
eighteen long moyiths. Is the thing to be credited ?
A giant’s strength would have been totally inade-
quate to the task, yet on the theory of immer-
sion we must believe it. Nay, more, we must
believe something far more incredible still, for
the numbers supposed must be far beneath the
reality.
Besides, are we to suppose that all these people
returned to their homes, many of them far distant,
ill their dripping garments, to the imminent
danger of their health—nay, in many instances, of
life itself 1 If not, what then ? Either they must
have been immersed in a condition incompatible
with propriety and decency, or they must have
had changes of raiment with them, neither of
which suppositions is admissible.
In connexion with the ministry of John there
are two points that have been much dwelt upon
by the Baptists. The one is the statement of the
evangelist that he was baptizing “at iEnon, near
to Salim, because there was much, water there”—
in the Greek, “ because there many waters
(vSara ttoXXo) there.” Travellers tell us that it is


a district in which many small streams gush down
from the mountain sides. There are some who
jump at once to the conclusion that they find in
the many waters a proof that John baptized by
immersion. He chose the locality of abundant
water so that he might be enabled thus to bap-
tise, they say. There are three considerations
which, taken together, quite upset this theory.
Ist. Many little streams in a district could never
constitute a valid ground on which to select it as
a suitable place for baptizing by immersion. One
deep stream, such as Jordan for instance, or one
deep pool, would have answered incomparably
better.
2nd. Many little streams, or rivulets, flowing
through a district would constitute a valid
ground for selecting such a spot for the bap-
tism of multitudes by sprinkling or pouring water
on the person. The large numbers who were
assembled would be scattered over the ground.
While they could not be immersed in mere rivu-
lets, they could at any point, and without being
crowded into one spot, be baptized by sprinkling.
It was easy for the prophet to stand on the bank
of any one of the streamlets, and, dipping his hand
into the water, baptize the converts.
3rd. The many streams were required primarily
for drink to the multitudes of men, women, and
children there assembled, as well as for the
animals on which they travelled. The encamp-
ment must have been a very large one. In a dry,
warm climate, where in summer the thermometer


ranged between 80 and 100 degrees, and where
springs of water were rare, it was indispensable
for the comfort of such an encampment that a
locality with many fountains or brooklets should
be chosen as the site. Besides, the water of Jordan
was coloured and turbid, and, until it had stood a
considerable time, totally unfit to drink. A more
appropriate place could not have been fixed upon
in the circumstances. Thus, then, John’s baptiz-
ing at JEnon, because there was much water
there, does not afford the slightest grounds for the
conclusion that he baptized by immersion.
VI. The Baptism of Jesus. —Mark says (i. 9),
Jesus “was baptized of John in Jordan.” He
also says (verse 10) that He came upoutofihQ
water. Matt. iii. 16 describes Jesus in like
manner after baptism going up out of the
water. It is said that in Jordan means imder
Jordan’s waves. It is said, further, that coming
up oiit of the water means coming up from having
been under the water of the stream. That this
does not inevitably follow will appear from such
considerations as these :
Ist. The word etV (eis) rendered in, “in Jordan,”
does not necessarily signify under or even into.
This appears from the following uses of it. In Acts
XXV. 15 it is rendered at. “ When I was at (eis)
Jerusalem.” This cannot mean into or under
Jerusalem. In John xi. 38 it is rendered to.
“ Jesus, therefore, groaning in Himself, cometh
to the grave.” This cannot mean into
the grave. In John xxi. 4it is ren-


dered on. “ Jesus stood on (eis) the shore.” This
cannot mean into or under the shore. And so
on. Why, then, may not one of these meanings
be the proper rendering of it here ? Surely it
is more natural to say at or on the brink of
Jordan. The word is evidently here put for kv
(en), as used in verse sth, and means at, hy, or
urithin the edge of the water. Jesus stood
at or on, or—it may be for greater ease
in lifting the water within the brink of
Jordan. The use of cltto (apo), from, by both
Matt, and Mark, in describing what followed,
seems to set the matter at rest. He came up out
of (apo) the water. Simply from the water. He
went down to it, not under it, and came up from
it, not from under it —that is all. This rendering
is given to the same word in Luke ii. 4.—“ And
Jesus also went up from (apo) Galilee.” Why,
then, may not this be its true meaning when
rendered out of ? We believe it is. Being bap-
tized, Jesus came up from the water.
2nd. If Jesus took off his sandals, and stepped
only a foot or two within the edge of the stream,
so that the water might be lifted the more easily
by the hand of John, and sprinkled upon Him,
the most literal requirement of the words would
be met. Standing at the waters of Jordan, He
was sprinkled with the sprinkling of baptism;
and when it was overj He came out of the water.
3rd. The natural meaning, then, to be put upon
the narrative is, that Jesus went down to the margin
of the stream and ivas sprinkled with its waters,


and that, this being done, Be came up the lank
again.
VII. The baptism of the three thousand on the
day of Pentecost. As had been promised by
Christ, the Holy Spirit was poured out in such
extraordinary measure that, under the power of a
single sermon, three thousand were converted
unto God. And these converts were all baptized,
and that such baptism could not have been by
immersion will appear from the following con-
siderations —
Ist. From the narrative it would appear that
the sermon was preached in some part of the
temple.
2nd. The sermon was commenced at nine
o’clock in the morning.
3rd. From the outline we have of the sermon,
and what we are told about it—viz., that with
many other words did he testify and exhort—
and from what dealing there must have been
with the professed converts, several hours must
have elapsed ere the work of baptizing was com-
menced.
4th. There is no account of the converts having
been taken away from the temple in order to their
being baptized. This would have required to be
done in order to immersion.
sth. There was no stream near Jerusalem so
full of water at that time of the year as would
have sufficed for the immersion of three thousand
within a few hours. It was the hot season, and
Kedron must have been nearly dry. Neither


was there any pool available. Bethesda was in
the hands of the enemies of the new religion, con-
nected as it was with the temple. Siloam was
nearly a mile from where the multitude was
assembled. Even if these had been large enough,
as they probably were not, then— ’
6th. The three thousand could not have been
provided with changes of raiment, for they did
not come together with the intention of being im-
mersed. If immersed, then one of two things
must follow—either they must have been im-
mersed without any clothing whatever, or they
must have continued through the lengthened
services in their dripping raiment. Neither of
these alternatives is credible.
7th. Probably not more than five hours at the
very most would be occupied in baptizing. The
sermon, and the public profession of faith on
the part of such a multitude of candidates for
baptism, could scarcely be got over before one
o’clock. The day with the Jews closed at six,
thus leaving five hours for baptizing. The case
then stands thus : —Three thousand individuals
were baptized by twelve apostles in five hours :
that gives two hundred and fifty to each apostle.
Divide this by five, and we have each apostle
baptizing fifty individuals every hour; or, brought
still lower, one individual in every minute and
one-ffth. And are we to be told that this could
be done by immersion % The man who can
believe this must surely have a wonderful
credulity. It is simply a physical impossibility.


Two considerations are fatal to it:—First, the
time. No man could immerse for even an hour
at the rate of one in one-and-a-fifth minute.
Second, the bodily strength. A giant’s frame
would break down through exhaustion long before
five hours of such work were completed. The
three thousand cannot have been baptized by im-
mersion.
VIII, The baptism of Paul. Stricken, feeble,
and blind through the vision which he had seen on
the way, he lay at Damascus. For three days he
neither ate nor drank. Ananias was sent to him
by Jesus. When he got to the house, he put his
hands on Saul, and said, “ Brother Saul, the Lord,
even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way,
as thou earnest, hath sent me, that thou mightest
receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy
Ghost. And now why tarriest thou ? Arise and
be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on
the name of the Lord ? And immediately there
fell from his eyes as it had been scales, and he
received sight forthwith, and arose, and was
baptized.” Any unbiassed reader will infer from
this plain and simple narrative the following
things—
Ist. That the baptism took place at once.
2nd. That Saul was too feeble and prostrate
to be taken away to some stream or pool, where he
might be immersed. It was not till after his
baptism that he partook of food and was
strengthened.
3rd. That it was performed in the room where


he lay, He arose and was baptized.” Hot a
solitary hint that he went elsewhere to receive
it.
4th. That therefore he was baptized by pouring
or sprinUing. We do not see how any other
conclusion can be reached unless by adding
greatly to the simplicity of the narrative.
sth. In addition let it be observed that the
Greek word literally rendered warrants the infer-
ence that Paul was baptized standing—dvao-ras
(anastas), “ standing up ” he was baptized.
IX. The baptism of the Ethiopian eunuch.
The eunuch was returning from Jerusalem to
Ethiopia. Philip, directed by the Spirit, joined
him. Having preached Jesus to him, on coming
to some water, the eunuch requested to be bap-
tized. Philip consented, they went down to the
water, and he baptized him accordingly. The
advocates of immersion lay great stress on this
case, and hold that the eunuch was baptized
according to their mode. There is nothing in the
narrative which can be regarded as bearing out
their view. It is much more natural to infer
that it waa by sprinkling or pouring. The record
runs thus—“ They went down both into the
water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he
baptized him.” Hotice —
Ist. The water is simply called a certain water.
It might be a river, or a pool, or a fountain ; we
can only conjecture. Grotius, copying after
Eusebius, says that it was a fountain.
2nd. Philip and the eunuch went down to the


margin of it. Our version says into. We have
already shown some of the various meanings of
the Greek particle (eis). Among these is the
frequent one to. That is probably the meaning
here. It is not necessary to suppose that they
went into the water ; it is far more likely that
they went merely to the edge of it.
3rd. Even supposing that they went down into
the water, it does not follow that it was for the
purpose of immersion. The water might be so
extremely shallow at the edge, that it was neces-
sary to go in a step or two in order to lift a
sufficient quantity, the more especially if baptism
was administered by pouring, and inasmuch as no
convenient vessel would be at hand for such a
purpose.
4th. If the word da- (into), according to Baptist
writers, necessarily implies immersion, then it fol-
lows that they were both immersed. They went both
into the water. If there be any proof that the
eunuch was immersed, there is the very same proof
that Philip was.
There is then no 'proof of immersion in this
passage. All that it declares is that they went
down to (eicr) the water, and came {lk in opposition
to eicr) up from it again.
X. The baptism of Cornelius and his hoitse-
hold. Cornelius, a centurion in the Roman army,
and a man of piety, taught in a vision, sent for
the Apostle Peter that he might hear the gospel
from his lips. Peter entered his dwelling, and
made known to the household the way of salva-


tion. “ The Holy Ghost fell ” upon the hearers.
Peter said, “Can any forbid water that these
should not be baptized 1” By his authority they
were baptized accordingly. The probability is
strong that baptism was administered by pour-
ing or sprinkling, and that on the following
grounds—
Ist. Peter had just been speaking of that of
which baptism is merely the emblem—the descent
of the Holy Ghost. The language employed is,
“the Holy Ghost fell” on them; the Holy
Ghost “ was poured out ” on them. It is not
said that they were immersed in the Holy Ghost.
What more natural than that the emblem should
be applied even as that which it signifies. If so,
the water would be made to fall upon, and would
therefore be poured or sprinkled.
2nd. The words, “ Can any man forbid water
that these should not be baptized ?” suggests the
proposal to bring water into the room. Observe,
the language is not, “ Can any man forbid that
these he talcen to the water ?” “ Can any man forbid
ivater to be brought to them is its evident render-
ing. “ Vvill any one be kind enough to bring some
water, that these may be baptized T is its plain
meaning.
3rd. There is not the remotest hint of their
being taken to a river or a pool of water, in order
to their being immersed.
XI. The baptism of the gaoler and his house.
The entire circumstances of this case forbid the
supposition that baptism could be administered


otherwise than by pouring or sprinkling. They
were the following ;
Ist. It was administered in the prison. There
could be no pool or baptistry there for immersing
them.
2nd. It was administered a little after midnight.
The time forbids the supposition that any arrange-
ments could be made for purposes of immersion.
3rd. It was administered at once —seemingly
in haste — straightway.
4th. It was administered in circumstances of
excitement and agitation. It is therefore im-
probable in the highest degree that the baptism
was administered by immersion. The circum-
stances utterly forbid the idea. _ He who would
insist upon it might fancy anything.
XII. 'ihe baptism of the household of Stephanas.
The brief and simple record is— ‘‘ And I baptized
also the household of Stephanas.” We are merely
told of the baptism, that is all. One may say it
was by immersion, another may say it was by
sprinkling j the Word does not say. But cer-
tainly a common-sense inference would be, that
it was highly improbable that there was any
convenience at hand for the immersion of a house-
hold j that there would be for the sprinlding of
them, no one can doubt.
XIII. Certain statements in the epistles, in lohich
some suppose the mode of baptism is referred to.
Romans vi. 3, 4— ‘‘ Know ye not that so many
of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were
baptized into His death ? Therefore we are buried


with Him by baptism into death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory
of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of life.” Colossians ii, 12—“ Buried
with Him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen
with Him through the faith of the operation of
God, who hath raised Him from the dead.”
Ist. The design of the apostle in these passages
is, not to describe the mode of baptism at all, but
simply to set forth the great truth that by our
baptism we are laid under solemn obligations to
become dead to sin and to live a holy life.
2nd. The obligation to lead a holy life arises, not
out of the mode of baptism, hut out of the simple
fact of being baptized. They who are baptized by
sprinkling are just as solemnly laid under the
obligation thereby, as those who are baptized by
immersion.
3rd. The burial spoken of by the apostle is not
an outward burial, a burial under water, but a
moral burial—a burial unto death, death to sin.
If the burial be a physical one, so too must the
resurrection—a resurrection out of the water in
order to walking in newness of life. The language
would thus be incongruous. The resurrection is
spiritual, from the death of sin to the life of
holiness.
4th. There is no proper resemblance between
the burial of Christ and the immersion of a body
underwater. The body of Jesus was not lowered
into a grave dug in the ground, and then covered
with earth; this is our plan, but it is not “as


the manner of the Jews was to bury.” Christ’s
body was Idid in a sepulcJiTe, above the ffround,
hewn out of the rock,, and was not covered with
earth at all The figure then does not answer the
purpose of our Baptist friends.
sth. There is a proper resemblance between the
burial of Christ and the soul’s death to sin. When
Christ was buried, He was dead to the world
around Him i when the soul is buried with Him
into death, it is dead to sin; and so too between
Christ’s resurrection and the moral resurrection
of the soul.
6 th. If we are to understand the burial in a
literal sense, so too also ought we to understand
the other figures. Christians must therefore be
literally planted with Christ, and literally crucified
with Christ, as well as literally buried with Him
in baptism. Surely the whole idea is absurd.^
7th. The true meaning then is this: —“Baptized
into His death” means into the design and object of
His death ; one with Him in the great end which
His death contemplated ; baptized with Him, so
that, as He died to make atonement for sin, and
free men from its guilt and power, we should die
to sin and be made holy. “ Buried with Him by
baptism into death” means that, even as He was
dead and buried in making expiation for sin, so
we by baptism are to be dead —so dead as to be
buried, as it were, to sin. And so too with other
expressions.
1 Cor. X. 1,2 —“ Moreover, brethren, I would
not that ye should be ignorant how that all our


fathers were under the cloud, and all passed
through the sea, and were all baptized unto Moses
in the cloud and in the sea.”
If any inference can be drawn from this pas-
sage in favour of the mode of baptism, that mode
must be sprinlding. The following considerations
will sufficiently explain the words :
into the religion and service of Moses, consecrated
to him as the leader, so as to place themselves
under his guidance, and bind themselves to obey
him. They were thus consecrated passing through
the sea and under the cloud.
2nd. Ihe cloud appeared alternately behind and
before the Israelites—a pillar of cloud by day and
a pillar of-fire by night. This cloud was not a
natural but a miraculous one, and it appeared as
the symbol of the divine presence, guidance, and
defence.
3rd. If, as some suppose, the cloud dropped
rain upon the Israelites, and this was the “bap-
tism unto Moses, ” then it must have been a
sprinkling, not an ivninersion. Rain does not im-
merse ; rain sprinkles.
-Ith. “In the sea” describes their passage
through the Red Sea. The of the sea
stood up like a wall on the right hand and on the
left. The Israelites went through on,dry ground.
If water fell upon them it could only be drops of
foam or spray, blown by the strong wind from
the wall of waters. These drops would sprinkle—
not immerse. The Egyptians were immersed, for


the waters covered them; but this immersion is
nowhere spoken of as a baptism.
If the words of the apostle, then, be in favour
of any mode, it is sprinkling.
1 Peter iii. 20, 21—“ The longsuffering of
God waited in the days of hloah, while the ark
was preparing, wherein a few (that is, eight) souls
were saved by water ; the like figure whereunto
even baptism doth also now save us (not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the
answer of a good conscience toward God), by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ.”
Two remarks on this passage will suffice,
Ist. The meaning is this : —As eight souls were
saved in Noah’s ark by water, even so haptism—
not the mere outward washing of the person, but
the consecration of the soul to God, and its conse-
guent purification —saves us,
2nd. Noah and his family were not saved hy
immersion in the xvaters of the flood. They were
saved hy not being immersed, by being borne by
the ark on the surface of the waters.
There is no countenance to the doctrine of
immersion here.
XIV, The practice of the Church in all ages.
The following points are established beyond all
question :: —
Ist, In the early ages of the Church’s history
baptism was administered by immersion, \>g pour-
ing, and by sprinkling.
2nd. Especially in cases of bodily weakness
baptism by pouring or sprinkling was deemed a


valid observance of the ordinance. Cyprian, the
celebrated Bishop of Carthage, who flourished in
the early part of the third century, in replying to
certain inquiries on the question made by a
country pastor, pronounces baptism by siyrivMing
in the cases referred to as sufficient and valid.
3rd. There is the well-known case of Laurentius,
the Koman martyr of the third century, who was
baptized from a x>itclier of water at the stake
where he was executed. His baptism must have
been by sprinlding.
4th. In the fifth century Gennadius refers to
baptism in the Church in France, as performed
either by wetting with the water or
into it.
sth. In the twelfth century Bonaventura gives
it as his opinion that in all probability pouring
the water in baptism was the practice of the
apostles, and admits that it was the custom of
some of the Churches in his day.
6th. In the thirteenth century the Synod of
Algiers, in discussing matters pertaining to baptism,
spoke of either mode as in common use.
7th. In the fifteenth century the Synod of
Tangier’s makes reference only to pouring.
Bth. To come down to more recent times,
baptism hy sprinkling has become the general
practice of the Church of Christ throughout the
world (the Baptist section of course excepted).
Finally, the questionable tendency of the teach-
ing of immersionists. Many devout and learned
men have held that the tendency of the teaching


referred to is towards superstition. Our Baptist
friends of course will deny this. Yet the follow-
ing considerations should be well weighed :
Ist. An undue importance has been given to
immersion. It has been represented as though it
were the one great indispensable thing in a re-
ligious profession.
2nd. “ Going under the water ” has too often
been spoken of as though it possessed some in-
herent power, whereby a man was sure to be
made a Christian.
3rd. Other modes of baptism have been declared
to be utterly invalid, and those who have practised
them have been denied the Christian fellowship of
the Baptists.
There are many Baptist brethren who do not
yield to any such views as these. But considering
the readiness of the human heart to depend upon
mere external rites, and the prominence given to
immersion in the Baptist Church, it is perhaps
not to be wondered at that not a few simple and
credulous minds should easily drift into a super-
stitious view of what is a mere matter of form,
and almost, if not altogether, place immersion in
the room of Christ. If, with a certain class of
minds, the tendency of the doctrine be in this
direction, then it must be fraught with no little
danger.
Mark, also, that herein appears the Iroader views
and larger charity of those who practice sprink-
ling. It is enough that water is applied either
by sprinlding, or pouring, or immersion. These


have all been practised by different sections of the
Church of Christ, and they admit the validity of
each of them. But our Baptist friends, with a
few exceptions, must have dipping or nothing at
all.
OBJECTIONS TO BAPTISM BY
SPRINKLING.
Obj. I. SprinTcling is defective cleansing. Who
would think of cleaning any foul object by merely
sprinkling a little water on it ?
Ans. Ist. Is immersing any better ? Who
would think of cleansing any foul object by
simply plunging it in water for a moment, and
then taking it out again ?
2nd. Surely our Baptist friends do not mean
to say that in baptism the foulness that gathers
on the human body is to be washed away ? and
yet the objection means nothing if it does not
mean this. But if it mean this it is difficult to
see how the body can be cleansed when it is
immersed clad in a woollen or other garment.
3rd. The quantity of water means nothing, as
it is merely the symbol of the soul’s cleansing.
4th. The principle is settled by God Himself.
Witness such passages of Scripture as these:
“ Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean.''' “ The sprinkling of the blood
of Jesus Christ f that we do know makes the soul
clean. Thus then the extenmal application of water


to a part of the lody may he mficiently emhlematic
of the cleansing of the whole spiritual being.
Obj. 11. iTfiTueTsiou w(xs ili6 apostolic aifid
any departure from it is sinful.
Ans. Ist. It is noivhere stated in tlie Scriptures
that immersion was the. apostolic mode of
baptism.
2nd. It is nowhere stated in Scripture that any
one was baptized by immersion.
3rd. It does not follow that, because men and
women were baptized in streams or fountains,
they were plunged beneath their waters.
4th. Even if immersion were the apostolical
mode, it does not follow that a departure ffoni it
is in every instance necessarily sinful. Baptists
as well as others do not hesitate to depart froin
the mode in which Jesus and His apostles observed
the sacred Supper. The ordinance was observed
by Christ and the twelve at night; the Baptists
observe it at noon. Unleavened bread was used
at its institution; they use common. The fruit
of the vine was used at its institution ; they use
various mannfa/rtured wines. Reclining was the
posture in which it was received by the twelve;
they receive it sitting. Is this departure from the
original mode sinful ? If not in this case, why in
the other ? We cannot see. Will our Baptist
brethren inform us ] . , . r
sth. Further, even in the matter of baptism, the
Baptists do not adhere in all things to apostolic
practice. The apostles did not baptize in
churches. They did not use baptisteries. They


did not envelope the subject in a garment made for
the occasion. _ But the Baptists do these things.
By this objection they prove their own mode to he
invalid.
Obj. HI. A very little water may suffice for
spnnlding ; hut John chose a spot for baptizing
where there was much water. He would not have
done this had li6 not hdptized hy iTyivievsiou,
Ans. Ist. It has been already shown that the
words rendered much water (many waters) literally
mean many springs or rivulets of water. These
vjile affording facilities for sprinkling, could
afford none for immersion.
2nd. It has been already shown that the many
springs or rivulets were required, independently
of baptism, for the comfort alike of man and
beast—the multitudes of the people gathered
together in consequence of John’s preaching, and
the beasts of burden that they had with them.
3rd. Will Baptists tell us, on their theory of
Enon, why it was that John left Jordan near
Bethabara for it ? He had just been baptizing
there. There is far more water in Jordan than at
selection of a locality for baptizing, why did he
leave the more abundant for the less—\\% compara-
tively full flowing river for the insignificant
rivulets—-Jordan for Enon ? The fact is fatal to
the logic.
IV. John’s by immersion implies a
physical impossibility. Hibbard makes a careful
calculation as to the numbers who must have


gone out to John’s baptism, and the period
during which his baptism continued, founded
upon Scripture facts and the state of the Judean
population. The result is, according to him,
that he must have baptized in all 3,000,000
persons. He could not have been engaged
in baptizing more than 227 days. Take note,
then: supposing he was engaged for six
hours daily, he must have immersed 36 every
minute for 6 hours every day without pause, and
that for a period of 227 days, himself all the
while standing in 2or feet of water. Is not
the idea an insult to common sense ? Or even
with the calculation we have given elsewhere,
showing less than one-fifth of the above number,
the thing seems impossible.
V. It is implied in the arguments of the Baptists
on this point that John’s baptism is a model bap -
tism for us. The fact is that John’s baptism was
not Christian baptism at all. The following con-
siderations prove this : —lst. The name — John's
baptism. If it was Christian baptism, why was it
called John’s baptism ? It might just as well
have been called Paul’s baptism. 2nd. It was
not instituted by Christ. John baptized six
months before Christ entered on His public
ministry. It would make Christian baptism exist
before Christianity itself! 3rd. If John’s bap-
tism was Christian baptism, nearly all Judea must
have been Christianized before Jesus began to
preach. 4th. It was not a rite of initiation into
any Church. John himself was connected with


the Jewish Church. sth. It was not administered
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
6th. It was not acknowledged by the apostles.
Paul baptized over again some who had been bap-
tized by John. Could it be shown then, as it
cannot, that John baptized by immersion, this
would be no pattern for us.
Obj. IV. The believer can only follow Jesus
as an example in baptism, by being immersed. So
Pengilly tells us. And hence he bids us see
Christ in Jordan,” ‘‘the Wisdom of God enter-
ing the streams, and bowing beneath them (the
emblem of his future grave),” so that every ob-
jection may be silenced.
Ans. Ist. This objection is already sufficiently
met in the remarks on the baptism of Jesus,
under the sixth head in the chapter on how
baptism should be administered. It is enough
simply to add, that there is not a word in the New
Testament about Jesus having been immersed. He
was baptized in Jordan —thus saith the Scripture.
It nowhere says. He was plunged under Jordan!s
waves. He came up out of the water —thus saith
the Scripture. It nowhere says, He came up
from iinder the water. The Bible says, in Jordan:
The Baptist says, under Jordan. The Bible says,
up out of the water. The Baptist says, up from
under the water. The two things are very
different.
2nd. The baptism of Jesus cannot in all
respects be a pattern for us, for the following
among other reasons Ist. He was not baptized


until He was thirty years of age. There can be
no pattern to the young in this. Are our Baptist
friends prepared to say that devout youth, ought
to delay baptism till they reach the age of thirty ?
2nd. Christ could not be baptized into the name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for that would
be being baptized into His own name ; but
Christians are baptized into Christ's name as well
as into the name of the Father and the Holy
Ghost. 3rd. Christ did not come within the scope
of the meaning of Christian baptism. It could
neither be a sign nor seal to Him in the sense in
which it is to us. As a sign it implies our pollu-
tion through sin ; but Christ knew no sin. As a
sign it shadows forth our cleansing and renewal
by the Spirit of God ; but Christ, having no sin,
needed not to he cleansed or renewed. As a seal it
is the token of God’s covenant faithfulness to us
and our consecration to Him ; but how can it be
applied thus to Christ %
The task contemplated is now finished. If
anything has been written in this tractate that
can justly give offence to Baptist brethren, the
writer deeply regrets it. It was not intended.
He would not speak of their views either flip-
pantly or contemptuously. Wherever such are
held intelligently and charitably, he regards them


with respectful deference. He has merely sought
to set forth what he believes to be the truth.
True Christians in all denominations are still
hreihren in the Lord. May the spirit of love
more widely prevail among us—even though in
minor tilings we differ; and may the time yet
come when even in these things we shall see
-more than we do now—“eye to eye.”
MASON, FIRTH AND CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.
80
F


THE COMMUNION TABLE;
THE GREAT Q U ES T I ON.
EXTRACTS FROM NOTICES AND LETTERS.
The varied topics all bearing on the one subject are
illustrated with a clearness of Scriptural statement, and
applied with an affectionate earnestness of appeal, cal-
culated in an eminent degree at once to convince the
pidgment and impress the heart. The whole work
indeed is rich in evangelical sentiment, in faithful yet
tender dealing wil.h the youthful heart and conscience,
and in deep devotional feeVmg. Christian Revieio.
This little tractate, so modestly put forward, deals
with a question of the deepest importance, and deals
with it in an attractive style and genial spirit. The Age.
A plain, earnest, and affectionate exhibition of the
duty of partaking of the Lord’s Supper, with suitable
directions for the proper and profitable observance of
that duty. We very cordially recommend it to our
readers.— Wesleyan Chronicle.
I have read the tractate with great pleasure. The
appeal is well timed. I hope it will be widely circu-
lated, and be a means in the Lord’s hand of correcting
a prevalent evil, and of promoting the welfare of manv
souls. — Rev. Dr. Cairns.
I regard it as eminently adapted to lead the young to
decision for Christ. It is lucid, forcible, and compre-
hensive. — Rev. Joseph Dare.
The tract will be valued by all evangelical Christians
who desire to maintain the practical sanctity of the
Lord’s Supper. William Rohy Fletcher, AI.A.
For List of Contents, see next page.


Communioit Cabk ;
OR, THE GREAT QUESTION.
A MANUAL rOR YOUNG PEOPLE.
CONTENTS:
I.—The Question—Have you been at the Com-
munion Table? Ip not, why?
ll.—Excuses Considered.
111. The Communion—lts Nature and Objects.
IV. —Preparation for the Table —^Selp-examina-
tion.
V.— Going to the Table -Brief Exercise.
VI. —Thoughts at the Table.
Vll.— Leaving the Table— Dangers.
VIII.— Looking Back— Appropriate Feelings.
IX.— Looking Forward—The Heart, Deportment,
Duty, Work.
By tlio Rev. JAMES BAEEAiSTVIVE.
Price, without Cover, Packages of Twelve Copies, y.
In Caver, 6d.; Packages of Tioelve Copies, 4J.
EOBEET MACKAY, BOOKSELLEE & STATIONEE
66 ELIZABETH STEEET, MELBOUENE.
For Extracts from Notices, dx., see previous page.
