





OUR FIRST CENTURY
1838-1938








BAPTISTS IN VICTORIA
OUR FIRST CENTURY
1838 - 1938
REV. F. J. WILKIN, M.A., D.D
THE BAPTIST UNION OF VICTORIA,
Baptist Church House, 486 Albert Street, East Melbourne, C.2.
1 93 9


Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transmission
through the 'post as a book.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
Jenkin, Buxton & Co. Pty. Ltd., Rialto Press,
497 Collins Street, Melbourne, C.l, 1939.


FOREWORD.
As the first hundred years of Baptist history in Victoria
have passed, it was thought to be not only fitting but
necessary that the task of setting out the achievements of the
past should be undertaken. It was therefore decided that as
part of the Centenary Campaign of the Baptist Union of
Victoria a book should be published concerning Our First
Century. The choice of a competent and devoted historian
was not a difficult matter, as it was realised that our Denomi-
nation was indeed fortunate in having among us Dr. F. J.
Wilkin, M.A., whose personal knowledge of the subject was
very extensive and whose faculties were still more than equal
to the task. The contents of this volume show, both in matter
and in style, that that choice has been fully justified. It is
more than a history, it is a story which glows with life and
colour and human interest.
It was felt, however, that there was one omission of such
importance that a remedy was essential if this book were to
present an adequate picture of our first hundred years. No
Baptist History of Victoria up to date could be complete
without a proper acknowledgment of the life of devotion in
many fields of service of the reverend and learned author,
Dr. Wilkin himself. For that reason the General Secretary
of the Union has written an appreciation on the subject which
will, I am sure, be read with interest and with gratitude.
It is hoped that every Baptist family in this State, and
many beyond the confines of Victoria, will secure a copy of
this Centenary volume. To read what God has wrought in
the past is to be stimulated to be worthy of our great
denominational heritage, and to respond to the challenge
which should ever be present to the minds of all who follow
our Lord Jesus Christ:—“Be ye strong, all ye people of the
land, saith the Lord, and wor\; for I am with you, saith the
Lord of hosts.”
C. H. Book,
President of the Baptist Union of Victoria,
ist October, 1938.




A PERSONAL PREFACE
When the Committee appointed to prepare for the Cen-
tenary Celebrations of the Baptists of Victoria asked me to
compile our history of the past one hundred years, I hesitated
to consent because of my failing powers and my inadequate
information. But after serious consideration it seemed to be
my duty to attempt the task. My training for the Ministry
and my more than 60 years in the Ministry, all in Victoria,
had given me fuller knowledge of our history than others
possessed. I have vivid recollections of many events in our
Denominational work that occurred 70 years ago and have
had many opportunities of becoming acquainted with our
Churches ever since. I can easily recall the early leaders of
our Churches, such as the Revs. E. G. Lewis, Isaac New, Wm.
Poole, David Rees, J. W. Bentley, James Martin, and others.
So I agreed to prepare this Centenary volume.
But now that my task is completed I am far from satisfied.
Hosts of men and women passed before my mind and I could
only mention some of them. Selection seemed invidious, but
my apology must be that I was entrusted with the task of
writing a Baptist History and not a History of Baptists. Still
I have introduced as many details of persons as I could that
the story might having living interest, though I ran the risk
of writing so that our readers would not see the wood for the
trees. Our history generally tells of progress, but our readers
may question if it has been all that it should have been con-
sidering our unique opportunities in this great new southern
land. Still, foundations have been well and truly laid on
which coming generations can build.
I have drawn my information from “The Australian Evan-
gelist,” edited by James Taylor; “The Baptist Magazine,” of
which Isaac New was Editor; “The Victorian Baptist Maga-
zine,” edited by Thomas Ness, Wm. Bryant and W. R. Wade;


“The Victorian Freeman”; “The Southern Baptist”; “The Aus-
tralian Baptist”; and the handbooks of our Union. Besides,
I have been indebted for many details to Miss Wilson, grand-
daughter of Joseph Wilson, pioneer of the South Yarra
Church, Mr. and Mrs. W. Lucas, Mr. A. F. Fullard, Dr. W.
T. Whitley and the Secretaries of our Churches. To all 1
render my sincere thanks.
Though I have made an earnest effort to ensure complete-
ness and accuracy, because of slips of memory and deficient re-
cords, inevitably some slight inaccuracies will be found; for
these I crave indulgence.
And now we face the future. Chastened by the remem-
brance of mistakes and failures, but with a deepened convic-
tion of the Power and Love of God we begin the new cen-
tury full of faith and hope.
F. J. Wilkin.
Canterbury, 1938.


APPRECIATION OF LIFE AND WORK OF
REV. F. J. WILKIN, M.A., D.D.
Readers of this excellent volume of our Baptist History
during the past 100 years will be struck by the very meagre
reference to the work of the Author, Rev. F. J. Wilkin, M.A.,
D.D. Dr. Wilkin has lived almost through the period covered,
having arrived in the colony very early in its history. His
life since 1874 has been closely interwoven with the life and
progress of the Denomination. With the succeeding years
his contribution to the progress of our work has become in-
creasingly fruitful. No one has written his name on the roll
of fame in the annals of Victorian Baptist History more
indelibly than our good friend.
His innate modesty has led him to refrain from making
anything like a true reference to the large and important part
he has played in the making of this history, which he has
recorded. It would be an act of neglect, not to be lightly
forgiven, if this volume was allowed to go out to the world
at large, and not have a further reference to the great work
of Dr. Wilkin.
The General Committee determined that in some measure
there should be a more just recognition of the great work of
one who to-day can be truly designated the “Grand Old
Man” of the Denomination.
Dr. Wilkin was born in Cambridge, England, and came to
the State of Victoria in 1861 with his parents. Finally, his
parents settled in Castlemaine, and there the Doctor was led
to Christ, confessing His name in baptism. There also he
engaged in Christian service and learned to speak of the
Saviour’s love and sacrifice, so that souls were won to Christ
through his ministry. In 1874 he was admitted as a Student
for the Baptist Ministry, and entered for training in the


Congregational College, where he spent three years in
strenuous study.
In 1877 he settled in charge of the work at Eaglehawk,
experiencing much blessing, until in 1880 he was called to
carry on the opening up of the work of God in the Northern
areas where settlement was taking place. The work was truly
pioneering work. The settlers were establishing themselves
on the land, labouring early and late to make good. Trans-
port was poor, living accommodation was also in keeping
with the pioneering stage. For nineteen years Dr. Wilkin
gave his best to the people in service. He shared their
sacrifices, helped them in their difficulties, cheered them in
the battle, comforted them in their trials and sorrows. He
gave himself without stint, counting not the cost, that “he
might by all means save some.” He went everywhere with
the glad Evangel of the Christ, and won the allegiance of
a great company to the Saviour of men. He left the fragrance
of a great Christian life throughout the whole area, and
Churches all over that part of the State bear witness to his
abundant labours in the Lord.
From Kerang he transferred to the suburban pastorate at
Brighton, where he laboured for a period of seven years, and
here also men and women bore testimony to the enrichment
of their lives through his ministry of the word and sacrificial
service.
Dr. Wilkin was clearly marked out for a wider service
than that of ministry to one Church and congregation. He
had been used to the wide horizons, and had always been
seeking conquests of new territory for the Church of Jesus
Christ. The fact was recognised by the Denomination, and
in the work of Home Missions Dr. Wilkin found an oppor-
tunity for a wide and effective ministry. For nineteen years he
superintended the work of Home Mission development in this
State. From 1892-1900 he was part-time Superintendent, and
from 1906-1911 he was full-time Superintendent. If Dr. Wilkin
was asked what he considered his greatest contribution to the


progress of the Baptist Denomination in this State he would
probably state the years when he not only laboured, but also
acted as Superintendent of Home Missions. Home Mission
work lies close to the heart of the good Doctor, and no one has
wrought more nobly in connection therewith. He initiated
work in all parts of the State and spent his strength in the
establishment of new enterprises for the Kingdom of God
in the distant and newly-settled parts of Victoria. No one
will ever be able to think upon the work of Victorian Home
Missions without seeing the name of Dr. Wilkin writ large
thereon.
All through his life Dr. Wilkin has been a student. He
has ever sought the fullest equipment for the work of the
Ministry. Whilst doing pioneering work in the northern
areas, he set his mind on obtaining this equipment, and sat
for and obtained his Master of Arts degree. He bought up
every moment of time to accomplish this task, and his work
on the field was not allowed to suffer in the slightest degree.
When called to undertake the work of Theological Professor
in connection with the Baptist College of Victoria, he deter-
mined to fully equip himself for such an important position.
He therefore sat for and obtained the degree of Bachelor
of Divinity, and finally the higher honour of Doctor of
Divinity at the Melbourne College of Divinity. Only then
did he feel that he was able to worthily discharge his duties
as tutor in Theology. For 26 years he has trained young men
for the ministry of the word, and been the guide of multi-
tudes in the deep things of God. He made the “Living Christ”
live to the men who were under his guidance, so that they
were inspired to go forth to make the good news known to
men and to woo and win them to his Lord and Saviour.
The debt we owe to Dr. Wilkin for his contribution to the
progress of our Denomination is beyond the telling. He will
live through the ministry of the men who have been trained
and taught by him as long as they exercise their ministry for
Jesus Christ.


In 1894-95 Dr. Wilkin was President of the Baptist Union
of Victoria, and in that high office he led the Churches into
greater service for the Master.
He has occupied every office of importance in the life of
the Denomination. Added to the service so generously given
as Home Missioner, Home Mission Superintendent and Pro-
fessor of Theology, he has been Secretary of the Union,
Secretary of the Home Mission Committee, Secretary of the
Advisory Board and Editor of the State paper.
In addition to all this he has found time to contribute
informative, educational and inspiring articles on aspects of
denominational life and thought, also to write innumerable
tracts and booklets on Baptist History, Baptism and the Cults
which have had a wide circulation, not only in our own State,
but also in the Commonwealth. Last, but not least, evidence
of his outstanding ability is this volume of Baptist History,
which will be a permanent monument of his great gifts and
service for his beloved people.
Time would fail us to recite many another piece of service
sacrificially rendered by our distinguished Baptist leader. We
thank God upon every remembrance of him and we give God
thanks for His great gift to our Victorian Churches in the
person of Dr. F. J. Wilkin—the Author our Friend.
G. P. Rees.


THE BAPTIST POSITION IS AXIOMATIC
A pronouncement by Edgar Young Mullins, D.D., LL.D., President
of Louisville (U.S.A.) Baptist Theological Seminary from 1899
till 1928.
Behind our contentions as to baptism and communion and
related topics lie a group of great and elemental principles.
These principles are religious ultimates, nay, they are axioms,
which the instructed religious consciousness of man cannot
repudiate. I sum them up and submit them as a statement
of the basis at once for a new Baptist apologetic and a plat-
form for universal acceptance.
(1) The theological axiom: The holy and loving God has
a right to be Sovereign. Time forbids that I elaborate this
statement in its implications as to the incarnation, and as to
Christianity as the religion of the Divine initiative.
(2) The religious axiom: All men have an equal right to
direct access to God, This principle is fatal to the practice of
infant baptism and to the idea of a human priesthood.
(3) The ecclesiastical axiom: All believers have equal privi-
leges in the Church, Hierarchies and centralised authorities
disappear under the operation of this principle.
(4) The moral axiom: To be responsible man must be free.
This is an elemental truth which cannot receive thorough-
going application save where ecclesiastical bonds of mere
authority are absent.
(5) The social axiom: Love your neighbour as yourself.
This makes the Kingdom of God the goal of the social move-
ment.
(6) The religio-civic axiom: A free Church in a free State,
For this principle Baptists have ever stood. Without it the
future of theology and of the Church is fraught with ex-
treme peril.


These axioms are the predestined goal of man’s religious
thinking. They spring out of Scripture teaching, they meet
a deep response in Christian experience. When understood
they commend themselves as the universal and necessary and
self-evident forms of man’s religious life. They are deep like
the ocean, elastic and free as the life-giving atmosphere which
enswathes the earth, and expansive and comprehensive as the
overarching sky. For them the Baptists stand. Planting our-
selves upon them our position cannot be successfully assailed.


■ ~ • ' • •
1
: ~ ' ' '
COLLINS STREET BAPTIST CHURCH.
Work commenced 1838 ; Church formed 1843.
BAPTIST CHURCH HOUSE.
Originally Albert Street Church.
Church constituted 1850 ; Church established 1859.
Now Union Official Headquarters.


*
i *-'•'' ' ~ ,
BAPTIST COLLEGE OF VICTORIA.
Errol Street, North Melbourne.
CAREY BAPTIST GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
Barkers Road, Kew. Secondary School for Boys.
Principal : H. G. Steele, Esq., M.A., Dip- Ed.


CHAPTER
page
I
THE OLD HOME LAND
Book of Remembrance — Baptists in England
— Non-conformists — Disabilities — Foreign
Missions — The New Connexion of Baptists —
Ministerial Education.
1
II
PAST AND PRESENT
Steamships and Railways — Lighting — Tele-
graphy — Radio Activity — Recent Discoveries.
5
III
THE FOUNDING OF MELBOURNE..
7
The Port Phillip Association — “ The Place
for a Village” — Sir Richard Bourke — Robert
Hoddle — The First Land Sale — Rapid Growth
— The Pioneers.
IV
THE BEGINNINGS OF BAPTIST SERVICES
Thomas Napier — Tent Service in Collins Street,
1838 — J. J. Mouritz — John Lush — School-
room in Little Collins Street — Significance of
Meetings for Worship.
9
V
THE OPENING YEARS
Rev. John Ham — The Mechanics’ Institute —
The First Collins Street Church — Opened
December 1845 — Rev. W. P. Scott — Churches
at Albert Street, Brighton ; South Yarra,
Geelong, Kew — Discovery of Gold — Popula-
tion Increases Fast — Churches on Goldfields —
Separation from New South Wales.
13
VI
EARLY PROBLEMS
Protestant Principles — Doctrinal Differences
— State Aid Refused — Church Sites — Grants
for Schools.
21
VII
THE STORY OF THE CHURCHES ..
(I) The Era of the Pioneers.
25
VIII
STRICT OR PARTICULAR BAPTIST
CHURCHES
Pastors John Turner, Daniel Allen, F. Fullard.
51
IX
THE STORY OF THE CHURCHES ..
(II) The Era of the Goldfields.
57
TABLE OF CONTENTS


CHAPTER
PAGE
X
OUR HOME MISSIONS
Rev. James Martin, B.A. — Formation of
Society —Training Students —Echuca—Rev. G.
Slade — The Kerang District — Other Missions
— Growth of Metropolis — Suburban Churches.
81
XI
THE STORY OF THE CHURCHES ..
(Ill) The Era of Agriculture.
89
XII
THE VICTORIAN BAPTIST FUND ..
Challenge by Anonymous Donor — Dr. Alex.
MacLaren.
105
XIII
THE BAPTIST THEOLOGICAL COLLEGE
Classes by Rev. James Taylor and Others — Dr.
W. T. Whitley — Rev. W. H. Holdsworth, M.A.
— Gift by Mrs. Trestrail.
111
XIV
OUR FOREIGN MISSIONS .. ..
Revs, James Smith and J. C. Page — Society
formed 1865 — Zenana Society — Our First
Missionaries — Federal Action.
115
XV
THE STORY OF THE CHURCHES ..
(IV) The Era of Manufactures.
121
XVI
ASSOCIATIONS AND UNIONS
Freedom of Churches — Association in 1858 —
Reconstituted 1862 — Progress — Federation —
Baptist World Alliance.
147
XVII
INVALUABLE INSTITUTIONS
Sunday Schools — Christian Endeavour —
Baptist Women’s Association — Kindergarten.
155
XVIII
THE STORY OF THE CHURCHES ..
(V) The Era of Suburban Extension.
165
XIX
THE CAREY BAPTIST GRAMMAR SCHOOL
A Felt Need — Rev. L. E. Tranter — School
Opened 1923 — H. G. Steele, M.A., Dip. Ed.,
Principal—Lay cock House —Name and Motto.
183
XX
THE CHALLENGE OF THE FUTURE
APPENDICES.
187
I List of Presidents
192
II Students Trained for the Ministry
194
III Progress through the Years
199
IV Historical Summary
200
V The Story of the Churches
203


Chapter I
THE OLD HOMELAND
“Look unto the Rock whence ye were hewn.”—lsa. li. 1.
This Centenary volume is a Book of Remembrance. We
have reached the dividing line between the first and second
centuries of our history as Baptists in Victoria, and we pause
at the crossing to look back over the way we have come. When
the Hebrew Tribes were encamped on the Plains of Moab on
the eve of their crossing the Jordan to the conquest and oc-
cupation of the Land of Promise, Moses, their great leader,
charged them to remember all the way the Lord had led them
and all that He had done for them. The insistent call of his
farewell addresses was “Remember! Remember!” So we
would recall the past that we may learn lessons from our
successes and failures and be inspired for coming days. In
the spirit of “Old Mortality” we will remove the moss from
some old tombstones and chisel afresh the names of former
leaders to whom we owe so much.
One hundred years ago men and women were beginning to
come in steadily increasing numbers from the old land we still
call Home to this new land in the Southern Seas. Briefly,
we recall the life they left. In this story we confine our atten-
tion to the people called Baptists. In Great Britain one
hundred years ago they numbered 90,000 in a population of
about fifteen millions. They were part of a large number
termed Non-conformists. That title is one of which we are
justly proud. It was given to men who would not conform
to the forms of worship decreed by the State. They affirmed
the sovereignty of Jesus Christ, the supremacy of His word,
and denied the right of any individual or State to dictate to


conscience. Theirs was the ancient watchword —“We must
obey God rather than men.” In derision they were called
Dissenters, but their dissent was not merely negative, it was
the result of their positive assent to the high ideals of the King-
dom of God. In earlier days their forefathers languished in
prisons or died at the stake for the truths they held and they
had entered into the heritage of the martyrs. But one hundred
years ago freedom of religion was slowly gaining ground.
Still, full liberty had not been gained, and Baptists, in common
with other Non-conformists, suffered numerous civic and re-
ligious disabilities. We need not enumerate them now, suffice
to say they made men look longingly to America and then to
this new land where they might find the freedom denied them
in the land they loved. It was not merely the desire for gain
or the spirit of adventure, but the demand for soul liberty
that constrained men to leave the land of their Fathers and
come to an unknown land. We will see presently how this
love of religious liberty determined their conduct when they
established Churches in this land beneath the Southern Cross.
One hundred years ago the era of Modern Missions had
recently dawned. During the eighteenth century the Churches
of Great Britain were frost-bound by a rigid Calvinism. They
rightly asserted the sovereignty of God, but they pressed their
belief to such an extreme that they ignored the freedom of
man. God to them was the Absolute Lord of the Old Testa-
ment and not the all-loving Father revealed by Jesus Christ.
So they hesitated to preach the free grace of God and were op-
posed to all Missions to foreign lands. The reply of Dr. Ry-
land, a Baptist leader in Bristol, to William Carey illuminates
the whole situation. When Carey insisted on the obligation
of Christians to preach to the whole world, Ryland replied:
“Sit down, young man, when the Lord gets ready to convert
the heathen He will do it without your help or mine.” Be-
cause of their belief that Christ had died only for the Elect,
the majority of Baptists were called “Particular.” But the
preaching of Andrew Fuller, of Kettering, gradually modified
extreme Calvinism and prepared the way for the formation


of “The English Baptist Missionary Society” in 1792 and the
subsequent well-known splendid work of William Carey.
The Baptist Society was the first of the great Missionary Socie-
ties of to-day. In 1795 The London Missionary Society was
founded, The Scottish Missionary Society in 1796, The Church
Missionary Society in 1799, The Religious Tract Society in the
same year, The British and Foreign Bible Society in 1804, The
Wesleyan Missionary Society in 1813. Baptists are justified
in thinking of William Carey as the Father of Foreign Mis-
sions.
A little while before Andrew Fuller’s day a Yorkshireman
named Dan Taylor was converted during the Wesleyan Re-
vival. He was urged to become a Methodist preacher, but
his study of the Scriptures convinced him of the duty and
privilege of Believer’s baptism. But because of his beliefs re-
garding the fulness and freeness of the Gospel due to his own
experience, no Particular Baptist would baptize him. Ulti-
mately he was baptized in Lincolnshire and became the leader
of the Baptists in Lincoln, where, in 1770, was formed “The
Assembly of Free Grace General Baptists.” This body became
known as “The New Connexion of General Baptists.” The
Connexion grew with wonderful rapidity, and one hundred
years ago had 12,000 members.
Very little was attempted by either the Particular or General
Baptists in the way of training men for the ministry. Through
Scottish insistence on the need of education, an Academy was
instituted at Bradford that was afterwards transferred to Raw-
don, and another at Stepney, later transferred to Regent’s Park.
It was the fervent evangelism of the Rev. William Steadman
at the Bradford Academy that largely prepared the Revs. Isaac
New, David Rees, W. P. Scott and others, who came to Vic-
toria for their life work. Robert Hall, of Cambridge, the
Prince of Preachers of his time, died in 1831, and very few
Baptist Ministers of his generation were known outside the
Denomination. The great days of Brock, Landels, MacLaren,
Spurgeon and Clifford were in the future and have an abiding
influence in our own time.


These brief notes may possibly give us a sufficient idea of
the Baptist Churches from which the earliest Baptists came to
Australia, and of the beliefs and practices that prepared them
for their work in their new home.
“The Baptist denomination is not an accident, nor an incident,
nor an experiment; it is the normal development and permanent
embodiment of a great Christian principle.
“The essential Baptist principle is this:— An acute and vivid
consciousness of the Sovereignty of Christ, accompanied by a stead-
fast determination to secure its complete and consistent recognition
throughout the world and in all the works and ways of men.
“This, for us, is the master fact of religious experience. It is the
nerve centre of our denominational sensibility. It is the spinal
column of our theology. It is the bed rock of our church polity.
It is the mainspring of our missionary activity. It is the sheet
anchor of our hope. It is the crown of our rejoicing. ‘For to this
end Christ both died and lived again, that he might be Lord both of
the dead and the living.’ From this germinant conception all our
distinctive denominational principles emerge.”
—J. D. Freeman.


Chapter II
PAST AND PRESENT.
“New occasions teach new duties; Time makes ancient good uncouth;
They must upward still and onward, who would keep abreast
of truth.”—J. R. Lowell.
When John Batman crossed from Tasmania to Port Phillip
in May 1835 he came in the “Rebecca,” a little schooner of 30
tons, and because of contrary seas and winds was nine days
in crossing from the Tamar to the Port Phillip Heads. That
fact at once suggests the great changes that the past century
has witnessed, and before we proceed with our history it will
be interesting and helpful to recall in a few sentences the
social conditions of one hundred years ago.
We have mentioned Batman’s voyage across Bass Strait in
a little sailing vessel. Steamships were unknown, though ex-
periments were being made. In 1838 a beginning of steam
transportation was made when the “Sirius,” a steamship of
700 tons, crossed the Atlantic in fifteen days. The early
settlers came to Australia in sailing vessels of 400 to 600 tons,
the voyage taking five to seven months. Now our mag-
nificent liners of 20,000 tons need only one month. It was
in 1825 that George Stephenson ran his primitive locomotive,
the Rocket, in the North of England, on a short journey at
ten miles an hour. In 1837 the first railway was opened from
London to Liverpool, when the journey occupied two days,
passengers staying the night at Birmingham. Now comfort-
able express trains travel at 70 miles an hour.
One hundred years ago streets and houses were not lighted
by gas nor even by kerosene lamps, but by tallow candles.
Paraffin was unknown; evil-smelling sulphur matches were
used; “safeties” belong to a much later date. It was in 1837 that
the first telegraph system was installed between London and a
nearby town. Forty years later the first telephone was in-


vented. It was the middle of the century before electric light-
ing and electric power began to revolutionise lighting and
traction. Letters were carried by stage coaches and postage
was prohibitive to the poor.
It was not till 1847 that Sir James Simpson first used chloro-
form as an anaesthetic; up till then patients endured agony
during operations, and it was twenty years later that Sir Joseph
Lister introduced antiseptic methods in surgery.
Since then marvellous discoveries have been made in radio
activity. In 1894 the Rontgen or X-rays were discovered that
have proved a great boon to sufferers and a great aid to sur-
geons; still later the powers of radium have become known
and wireless has annihilated space. Still later the wonders of
aviation have astonished the world.
There is no need to tell of the marvellous advances in the
printing of all kinds of books and newspapers, in weaving and
countless manufactures, nor of the discoveries made by the
telescope and spectroscope of the number and matter of stars
millions of miles sunk in space, nor of the progress of photo-
graphy, nor of the revelations given by the microscope of the
complex formation of the atom, nor of the myriad wonders
of the universe all unknown to our fathers a century ago. It
is sufficient to remind ourselves that the past century has been
one of the most wonderful in all history. We have got so
accustomed to read about new discoveries, new inventions,
that the sense of wonder is apt to become dulled. That would
be a serious loss. But we should not fail to thank God for
the times in which we live as we enjoy the comforts, con-
veniences and luxuries all unknown when the Port Phillip
settlement began.


Chapter 111
THE FOUNDING OF MELBOURNE
“ The Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of
brooks of water, of fountains and depths, springing forth in
valleys and hills.”
The Colony of New South Wales was established 50 years
before that of Victoria and the Government at Sydney was
averse to an extension of settlement in the far South, but in
1835 a number of influential men at Launceston, Tasmania,
formed an Association to be known as the Port Phillip As-
sociation. One of their number, John Batman, was appointed
manager. So, soon after the Association was formed, with 16
others, including seven Sydney aborigines, he sailed in May
1835 f° r the mainland. One of his first acts after his arrival
was to conclude a purchase from eight aboriginal chiefs of
600,000 acres of land in exchange for a few blankets, knives
and trinkets. Obviously the Sydney Government could not
recognise this purchase. On Bth June Batman came up the
Yarra to the site of Melbourne and wrote the historic words
in his diary:—“ This will be the place for a village.” Of this
site a member of Fawkner’s party in the following year,
describing its beauty, said it was a place “with velvet-like grass,
fine lowlands and lovely knolls; while on the lagoons were
flocks almost innumerable of teal, ducks, geese and swans.”
Migration quickly set in from Tasmania and a year after
Batman landed the population numbered 224! In the follow-
ing year Sir Richard Bourke, Governor of New South Wales,
came to the Port Phillip settlement and named it Melbourne
after the Prime Minister of Great Britain. A few months
later, in June 1837, King William IV died, and his neice, the
Princess Victoria, ascended the throne and her name after a
time was given to the new Colony. With Governor Bourke


came his Surveyor-General, Robert Hoddle, who completed
the survey and made a plan of the future township. On June
i, 1837, standing on a fallen tree trunk, Mr. Hoddle conducted
the first land sale in Melbourne. He sold 100 half-acre lots
in Melbourne and seven in Williamstown at an average cost of
This was the beginning of the city often in recent years
termed Marvellous Melbourne.
It is difficult to visualise the little settlement on the Yarra.
What is now the busy, prosperous Elizabeth Street, with its
splendid many-storied buildings, was then a shallow gully
with a little creek that flowed through a forest of giant gum
trees and golden wattle. On the west side were two hills,
afterwards named Batman’s Hill and Flagstaff Hill, the latter
name being given because when from its summit a ship was
sighted sailing up the bay a flag was hoisted to announce its
coming. On the opposite side the rising ground was simply
termed the Eastern Hill, a name that has continued till to-day.
Sheep and cattle were brought over from Tasmania and wheat
was sown south of the Yarra. Aborigines were numerous, but
except for killing a few sheep occasionally they gave the
settlers little trouble. The township grew steadily, pastoralists
and others coming from Tasmania. By the end of 1838 land
in Melbourne was sold at per acre. Few attempts had
been made at road-making, tree stumps, deep ruts and bogs
marked the line of Collins Street, and a piece of board nailed
to a tree bore the name of Bourke Street.
In our National Gallery is a painting in three sections by
Frederick McCubbin that vividly illustrates the whole situation.
In the first section a settler is seen with his young wife enter-
ing the primeval forest, in the next a tiny lonely grave with
the sorrowing father and mother, and in the third a strong man
clearing the ground, while in the dim background are the
spires and domes of a great city. The painting is eloquent
of loneliness, privation and hard work. The brave hardy
pioneers of Victoria should never be forgotten. “One soweth
and another reapeth. . . . Others have laboured and we
have entered into their labours.”


Chapter IV
THE BEGINNINGS OF BAPTIST SERVICES
“Religion is the great State-building principle; these Colonists could
create a new State because they were already a Church, since
the Church, so at least I hold, is the soul of the State.”—J. R.
Seeley.
The previous chapters have been written to give the neces-
sary background to our story, and we can now begin to re-
count Baptist History. The first Baptist to come to the
Colony of whom we have any record was Mr. Thomas Napier.
His wife came from Hobart in September 1837 to rejoin her
husband. In telling her experiences she said that she was
carried from the boat to the shore, since no jetty had been
built at Sandridge (now Port Melbourne), and w r alked with
the party in single file through the ti-tree and dense scrub to
the new settlement. Mr. Napier’s home in Collins Street,
where the Commercial Bank now stands, was a wattle and
daub dwelling, thatched with rushes, and was one of the most
pretentious in the settlement. To-day a new arrival lands at
a splendid pier, and by a motor car along an asphalt road or
by electric train reaches the city in a few minutes. The con-
trast is extreme, yet the space of 100 years is bridged by three
lives since Mr. Napier’s daughter married Mr. G. P. Barber,
of Warrnambool, and their son, the Rev. Lorraine Barber,
is our honoured Missionary at Faridpur, East Bengal. It is
interesting to note all present-day links with the early days.
Mr. Napier was a Scotch Baptist, who built a house on the
site afterwards occupied by the “Argus” Office. A room in
this house was sometimes used for public worship. At a later
date Mr. Napier removed to North Essendon. He was not
a public speaker, but he aided the early Baptist preachers in
every way possible.


It was in 1838 that Mr. Samuel Crook and Mr. Robert
Reeves, recent arrivals from Sydney, took the first steps to
form a Baptist Congregation. Mr. Crook was a cabinet-maker
and Mr. Reeves an estate agent. No building was available,
but Messrs. Virtue and Miller, storekeepers, lent a tent, which
was set up on the land where Mr. Napier afterwards built his
house. (Incidentally it is of interest to remember that for
the half acre of land Mr. Napier only paid 4s. at a
Government land sale.) The first Baptist Service was held
in that tent in 1838, and was conducted by Mr. Peter Virtue
and Mr. James Wilson. Mr. Virtue was a farmer living a
few miles north of Melbourne; he was a Scotch Baptist, a
good preacher, solemn and dignified in manner. Mr. Wilson
was a teacher of a small school in Bourke Street and was an
English Baptist. So, true to all Baptist tradition, the first
witness was given by two devout laymen. The services were
continued in the tent for some time, the first preachers being
assisted by Major Webb, a retired military officer from India.
This tent service was by no means the first religious service
held in Melbourne. In 1835 Mr. Henry Reed, of Launceston,
preached in Batman’s hut; in April 1836 the Rev. Joseph
Orton, a Wesleyan Minister, came from Tasmania on a brief
visit, returning afterwards in 1840, when he stayed for two
years; and in December 1837 the Rev. James Clow began
work for the Presbyterians, in which he was joined in the
following year by the Rev. James Forbes. The Church of
England and the Independents were also actively engaged in
preaching the gospel.
In July 1840 Mr. John Joseph Mouritz, who had filled the
position of pastor at “Rehoboth,” a Baptist Chapel in Pitt
Street, Sydney, for some time, arrived in Melbourne, and on
his first Sunday preached in Mr. Crook’s furniture shop, built
on the site now occupied by the Melbourne Town Hall. The
shop proved inconvenient for public worship, so the services
were transferred to a room in Bourke Street. In the follow-
ing year Mr. Mouritz removed to Newtown (now Fitzroy)
to start a dairy farm, the services being continued by Mr.


John Lush. Mr. Mouritz was from the North of Ireland,
a Scotch Baptist, had been in the army and had seen some
service in India. He was a man of great energy and a force-
ful preacher. Mr. Lush, who carried on the work in Bourke
Street, was from the West of England, and as a preacher was
much gentler in his manner. About that time a meeting was
held to discuss the formation of a Baptist Church; those pre-
sent included Messrs. John Lush, Robert Kerr, James Wilson,
George Dyer, Thomas Napier, Robert Reeves, J. J. Mouritz,
Dr. W. H. Bailey, and others. These were the principal
pioneer Baptists in Victoria. There is no record of the for-
mation of a Church, but as a result of that meeting it was
decided to hold regular services in a little weatherboard
schoolroom in Little Collins Street, generously lent by the Rev.
James Forbes, Presbyterian Minister of Scots Church, Mr.
Lush and Mr. Dyer preaching alternately.
The population of Newtown growing, Mr. Mouritz added
a large room to his house and resumed Sunday services. These
he continued until his death in 1868. A church was consti-
tuted in 1842 and converts were baptized in the bay at
Emerald Hill (now South Melbourne); subsequently Mr.
Mouritz constructed a baptistery in his own garden, which
was also used by Mr. Lush.
In 1842 the minister of Scots Church required the use of
the schoolroom in Little Collins Street, and at that juncture
the Rev. John Ham arrived in Melbourne from Birmingham,
England, and from that time the Baptist cause began to as-
sume a definite and permanent character.
Here we pause as we try to imagine the beginning of Bap-
tist services in that tent in Collins Street one hundred years
ago. Anyone who has witnessed the upspringing of a town-
ship in a new district can easily imagine the scene; for others
it is difficult. The settlement was growing, new settlers were
constantly coming from Tasmania and Sydney, so that only
four years after Batman landed the population in and around
Melbourne was probably 3000. The first number of “The
Port Phillip Advertiser” appeared in January 1838, consisting


of four sheets of foolscap, all handwritten, though any news
it contained from Great Britain was at least live months old.
The ti-tree and scrub were partially cleared, weatherboard
houses, widely scattered, were taking the place of the wattle
and daub huts, while tents were freely used. The streets were
still unformed; in wet weather the bullock waggons were fre-
quently bogged in Elizabeth Street, and in the other streets the
stumps of great trees remained. In these surroundings we
can see the people gathering for worship, passing occasionally
scantily-clad Aborigines carrying their boomerangs and spears.
The tent was pitched on gently rising ground amid the
eucalyptus trees, the seats were of rough slabs, but in such
primitive conditions a congregation of about 60 persons as-
sembled for worship. That quiet tent service was significant
of much. It was a witness to eternal realities; from that tent
a ladder reached up to heaven, on which angels were ascend-
ing and descending. It was a proof of man’s innate great-
ness, for unless he does violence to his true nature man must
worship, and our Baptist forefathers showed their sense of
dependence on God and their desire for communion with
Him when in the long ago they met for praise and prayer.


Chapter V
THE OPENING YEARS
“So then neither is he that planteth anything, nor he that watereth;
but God giveth the increase.” —I Cor. iii. 7.
The Rev. John Ham arrived in Melbourne from Birmingham
on 13th December, 1842. He left England because of an at-
tack of asthma, intending to go to Sydney, thinking that the
warm climate would suit him, but Messrs. John Lush and
Robert Kerr, hearing of his arrival, interviewed him on board
the ship “Dublin” at Sandridge and urged him to stay in
Melbourne to minister to the Baptist congregation. They ar-
ranged for him to preach on the following Sunday morning
in the Mechanics' Institute, a building in Collins Street, where
the Athenaeum now stands. But Mr. Ham had brought a
letter of introduction to the minister of the Independent
Church, the Rev. William Waterfield, who at once postponed
an anniversary service announced for that day that Mr. Ham
might preach in the evening. Both morning and evening
congregations were large. Mr. Ham consented to preach
for three months at the Mechanics’ Institute, his wife and
family going on to Sydney. He was a pleasing preacher and
speedily became popular. Since the climate proved congenial
and the Baptists were eager for his stay in Melbourne, Mr.
Ham sent to Sydney for his family to rejoin him and began
a very acceptable and useful ministry that continued for five
years. The Collins Street Church was constituted on 20th
July, 1843, of the following fifteen members: —Mrs. Ham,
Thomas Ham, John Lush, Robert Kerr, James Wilson, John
Taylor, Thomas Newman, Mrs. Taylor, John Brewer, Ann
Brewer, Mrs. Sterry, James Mouil, Phoebe Lewis, Mary Evans,
Phoebe Buckman. A month later John Lush and Robert
Kerr were elected as the first deacons of the Church. Within


a year the membership was doubled. Very soon the congre-
gation desired a more suitable building for worship than the
Mechanics’ Institute, and it was decided to build a Church.
An allotment of land in Collins Street was granted by the
Governor of the Colony, His Excellency C. J. La Trobe, in
accord with the custom of the Government, and plans were
prepared for a building to seat 400 persons. Funds were
quickly collected and Mr. Ham exchanged pulpits with the
Rev. John Saunders, Minister of the Bathurst Street Church,
Sydney, for two Sundays, when Mr. Saunders preached in
the Mechanics’ Institute, and during the following week laid
the foundation stone of the new Church. A full account of
the event was printed in “The Port Phillip Herald” of 22nd
May, 1845, from which we quote the following:—“ Yesterday,
at about half-past eleven o’clock, the laying of the foundation
stone of the Baptist Church in Collins Street was performed
in the following manner: The weather was most propitious,
and in allusion to the favourable circumstances the Rev. J.
Saunders opened the proceedings by saying, "Truly with such
a brilliant sky above us the Heavens declare the glory of God
and the firmament sheweth His handiwork; to this great
Being let us on the present occasion address a hymn of praise.’
The Assembly then sang with great solemnity the 117 th
Psalm, ‘From all that dwell below the skies, let the Creator’s
praise arise.’ ” The “Herald” gave an account of Mr. Saunders’
address, which ended with these words: —“In the prospect of
the erection of this Flouse of Prayer, of this place of Christian
worship, and in the full hope that a spiritual Church shall be
found in successive generations in connection with this enter-
prise till the heavens be no more; in this strong faith and
joyous hope I proceed to lay the foundation stone of this first
Baptist Church in Australia Felix.” The account continues:
“Mr. Saunders then proceeded to read a brass plate prepared
by Mr. Ham, the son of the Rev. John Ham, on which were
boldly inscribed these words, “This foundation stone of the
first Baptist Church in Australia Felix was laid on the 21st
day of May, A.D. 1845, by the Rev. John Saunders, pastor of


the first Baptist Church, Sydney. Rev. John Ham, Pastor;
John Lush, Robert Kerr, Deacons; John Gill, Esq., Architect.’ ”
The building was opened on 28th December and the con-
gregation grew steadily. Mr. Ham was greatly esteemed, but
failing health made him anxious to carry out his original inten-
tion and go to Sydney, so he resigned the Pastorate in August
1847 and succeeded Mr. Saunders at Bathurst Street. Mr.
Elam’s eldest son was a noted engraver, and he engraved the
coat of arms for the city of Melbourne and designed the first
postage stamp for Victoria. His younger son, C. J. Ham, be-
came one of Melbourne’s most prominent citizens, and for a
time was mayor of the city, and his grandson, Mr. Wilbur
Ham, K.C., is an honoured barrister to-day. That the hopes
expressed by Mr. Saunders when he laid the foundation stone
of the Collins Street Church have been abundantly realised,
the subsequent history of the Church will clearly prove.
W hen Mr. Ham left Collins Street Mr. Lush was appointed
to act as Pastor. This he did for two years, and as all his
services as before Mr. Ham came were gratuitous, the Church,
at a special meeting, presented him with a Bible and silver
watch as a grateful testimonial of his generous help. The
presentation was made by Mr. Henry Langlands. In October
1849 the Rev. W. P. Scott arrived in Adelaide from England,
and an invitation was sent to him asking him to supply the
Collins Street Church for three months. This was followed
by a further term of twelve months. Then it was found that
his teaching was not in full accord with many members of
the Church, so it was determined by his friends to form
a separate cause. A return was consequently made by them
to the Mechanics’ Institute on 20th October, 1850. Among
the members who were most influential in the new cause were
the Hon. C. Vaughan, Messrs. H. Langlands, T. J. Ham, R.
Lewis, and Thomas Ham. After the services had been held
in the Mechanics’ Institute for two years it was decided to
build a place of worship, and in February 1853 Mr. Langlands,
on behalf of the Church, purchased a site in Albert Street.
Here a Church was opened on 16th October, 1853, the


preachers for the opening day being the Rev. S. Hewlett, of
Geelong, and W. B. Landells. Three years later Mr. Scott
died, and the services were continued by Messrs. T. W.
Jackson and E. G. Lewis till the arrival of the Rev. Isaac New.
Further details of the history of Collins and Albert Street
Churches will be given in a later chapter.
Before the Albert Street Church'was built the Baptists at
Brighton had begun to meet together. This they did, first
at the home of Mr. Brewer at East Brighton, and afterwards
at the residence of Mr. Carter in New Street. In 1851 a
Church was formed, and in July 1853 a building was opened
for public worship on an allotment in Bay Street given by
Mr. J. B. Were. The services were conducted by Mr. Lemon,
assisted by other lay preachers. In July 1857 Mr. John Collins
was appointed Pastor. The Church rapidly increased in
strength, and in 1858 a larger building in front of the earlier
one was opened, when sermons were preached by the Revs.
S. Hewlett, of Geelong, and James Taylor, of Collins Street.
At the same time that the first Church was opened in
Brighton the Baptists at South Yarra were engaged in making
a Church home for themselves and their children. A generous
friend gave them an allotment in Charles Street, Prahran, on
which a weatherboard building was erected. On 18th June,
1854, a Church was constituted by transfers from Collins and
Albert Streets, and in the same year a Sunday School was com-
menced, the Superintendents being Messrs. J. Drewe and H.
Wilkinson. In the following year the Church meetings were
transferred to the house of Mr. Joseph Wilson. In 1855 Mr.
Wilson gave the Church an allotment of land in Chapel Street,
and on 18th October, 1857, a weatherboard Church was opened
for worship, the preachers for the day being the Rev. James
Taylor and Mr. W. G. Sprigg.
From the metropolitan area our attention is drawn to
Geelong, where in 1850 a Particular Baptist Church was
opened under the ministry of' Mr. Saunders Trotman. The
Church met in the Temperance Hall, but on Bth February,
1852, a Church building was opened in Malop Street, with the


Rev. Samuel Hewlett as Pastor. The Church rapidly grew
in numbers, and in 1854 Messrs. G. Board and John Matthews
gave the land in Aberdeen Street, valued at /600, on which a
substantial stone Church was built at a cost of This
building is now used as the Sunday School.
In 1851 the Rev. Joseph Foy, after preaching for several
years in Somersetshire, decided to leave England and come to
Victoria. For a little while he lived in Collingwood, preach-
ing occasionally in exchange with Mr. Lush in the Collins
Street Church or in the Mechanics’ Institute for the Rev. W.
P. Scott. Later he built a house in the midst of the forest
in what is now Wellington Street, Kew, and in that house,
beginning in April 1853, conducted services every Lord’s day
for all living in the neighbourhood. Presently a few Baptists
banded themselves together, among whom were Messrs.
Thomas Merritt and J. S. Denbigh, land was purchased in St.
John’s Parade, and in 1854 a small building was opened for
worship. In 1856 the building was enlarged, a Baptistery
constructed and vestries added. The Church was then duly
constituted, with Mr. Foy as Pastor.
These six were the earliest Baptist Churches in the Colony
of Victoria, but before we trace their history and that of other
Churches two facts of immense importance to Victoria must
be briefly described. It was while the last of these Churches
was being established that the whole Colony received a tre-
mendous impetus for progress by the almost simultaneous dis-
covery of gold in various places. At Clunes, Ballarat, Castle-
maine, Bendigo and other districts gold was found. Im-
mediately there was a great upheaval. All business was dis-
organised. Tradesmen left their workshops, professional men
their offices, sailors deserted their ships, and thousands upon
thousands flocked madly to the gold fields. From England,
America, Europe, China adventurous immigrants poured in,
much larger ships being employed. In 1850 the population
of Victoria was estimated at 76,000, in iB6O at 540,000. Every-
one talked about gold. Crime became rampant and militia
were brought from Tasmania and soldiers from England to
BV 3


check disorders. In the first ten years of the gold era gold
worth was won every year. Melbourne became
deserted and inland towns suddenly became important. The
Churches were unable to cope with the situation, but they did
what was possible, and Baptist Churches were established at
Stawell, Beaufort, Tarnagulla, Ballarat, Castlemaine, Bendigo
and White Hills. At present we need only refer to some
of these. At White Hills, in 1853, half a dozen Baptists met
for worship in a tent; the next year a slab building was erected,
and shortly after a weatherboard building. In 1857 the Rev.
Isaac New visited Bendigo and White Hills, and the Rev.
Ebenezer Henderson became pastor of the Churches at both
places. A Church in Hargreaves Street, Bendigo, was opened
by the Rev. James Taylor on 13th February, 1859. The popu-
lation of Bendigo then was 13,000.
In Ballarat, where the population had risen to 30,000, a
Union Church was started in 1856, having in its membership
Baptists, Congregationalists and Presbyterians. The next year
the Baptists withdrew from the Union Church to start a
separate cause, and in 1858 invited the Rev. William Sutton to
become their pastor. Their first place of worship was in
Yuille Street, but in February iB6O a building since used as
a school hall was opened in Dawson Street, when the Rev.
Isaac New preached morning and evening.
In Castlemaine the mining community numbered 12,000,
when the Rev. James Smith, a Missionary of the Baptist Mis-
sionary Society of England on furlough from Delhi, gathered
the Baptists together, and a building was purchased from
the Free Presbyterians, who had amalgamated with the Estab-
lished Church, which speedily became the centre of vigorous
evangelistic work. The subsequent history of these with other
Churches will be narrated at a later stage.
One other fact in the general history of the Colony calls
for reference. We have seen that the Colony at the first was
denied self-government. The Port Phillip settlement was a
part of New South Wales, and all its administration was de-
termined in Sydney. The Governors of Victoria were Super-


intendents who acted in the interests of New South Wales.
From a very early period protests were made against the
taxation of the Colony without any representation on the
Sydney Government, and frequent complaints were made that
large revenues from Victoria were used in the development of
New South Wales. In 1846 and the following years there was
constant irritation and agitation, and demands were made for
the separation of the Colony from New South Wales. This
was finally granted in 1851 and the Colony was given the title
of Victoria, with the right to elect its own Parliament. All
this produced an unhappy division between Victoria and New
South Wales that has only been overcome during recent years.
The political controversies reacted also upon Church relations.
John Lush. From England to Melbourne in January 1841.
Took leading part in establishment of Collins Street Church. Con-
ducted the services before and after the Rev. J. Ham’s ministry.
H is nephew, Rev. G. P. Lush, prominent in early days. Three
daughters earnest workers in Collins Street Church for many years—
Mrs. T. Taylor, Mrs. J. M. Templeton, Mrs. S. Luke. Mrs.
Aeneas Gunn, authoress of “We of the Never Never,” is his grand-
daughter. The whole family influential in the Denomination.
John Joseph Mouritz. From Sydney July 1840. The first
Baptist Pastor in Melbourne. Inscription on tombstone Melbourne
General Cemetery—“ Minister of the Gospel of Rehoboth Chapel,
Princes Street, Fitzroy. Departed this life 4th June, 1868. Aged
71. By the grace of God I am what I am.” Mr. H. W.
Mortimer, a relative of Mr. Mouritz, took active part in the
establishment of Collins Street Church. Urged Rev. J. Ham to
stay in Melbourne. Died July 1887, aged 90.
David Rees. Born in Wales 1804. Christmas Evans a frequent
visitor at his father’s home. Baptized when 19. When 23 studied
for ministry under Wm. Steadman in Bradford College. Pastor at
Sheffield, Braintree, in Essex. At this town had a class of 100 young
men. To Victoria in 1859. Pastor South Yarra Church. At his
instigation Baptist Association formed. Strongly opposed all Gov-
ernment grants of land or money. Died January 1884. Buried at
St. Kilda. Had great influence in early days of Denomination.
John Collins. Born Hampshire, England. Lay preacher. To
Melbourne 1849. Following Rev. J. Ham, supplied Collins Street.
In 1857 Pastor Brighton Church for four years. Then Deacon


Albert Street. Passed away at home of his daughter—Mrs. Baker
at Elsternwick, 13th August, 1904. A good preacher, loyal to all
Denominational work.
J. W. Bentley. Earnest Sunday School teacher. Prepared for
ministry. Good scholar in Greek and Hebrew. Arrived Victoria
1852. In 1859 Minister of White Hills Church. Then at Kyneton.
In 1865 began work at Brunswick. There for 14 years. Joined
Collins Street as sick visitor. Passed away March 1884.
Martin Luther wrote: —“Baptism is a sign both of death and
resurrection. Being moved by this reason I would have those that
are baptized to be altogether dipped into the water as the word
means and the mystery signifies.”


CHAPTER VI
EARLY PROBLEMS
“There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are
diversities of ministrations, but the same Lord.”—l Cor. xii. 4.
In describing the early history of the Collins Street Church
we had to refer to the fact that doctrinal differences led to
the withdrawal of a number of members who formed the
nucleus of the new cause that ultimately was established at
Albert Street, and in telling of the beginning of the work at
South Yarra we had to mention that the Church early with-
drew from Charles Street because of a divergence in doctrine,
so a few words of explanation are necessary.
Baptists always claim that they stand for liberty of thought,
for the basic principle of Protestantism—the right of private
judgment, that they are bound by no creed and allow perfect
freedom of expression to their ministers. Certainly this is
their ideal, but in practice it is often unrealised. Toleration
often means a demand for liberty for ourselves that is not
granted to others. It was the urge for full liberty of thought
and expression that led to the formation in Holland, in 1611,
by the Rev. John Smyth, of the first modern English Baptist
Church, and that led Roger Williams in 1639 to constitute
the Baptist Church at Providence, Rhode Island, U.S.A. We
have noted that one hundred years ago the Baptists of Great
Britain were in separate camps, the Particular Baptists had no
dealings with the General Baptists, and the New Connexion
General Baptists were more liberal in thought than both parties.
Unhappily these differences of opinion were brought from the
old land to the new and soon raised a problem the Churches
had to solve. When Mr. John Lush preached in Mr. Wilson’s
schoolroom in Bourke Street his teaching was different from
that of Mr. J. J. Mouritz in Newtown. Both were Calvinistic,
but the Calvinism of Mr. Mouritz was of a more stringent
type. Then when Mr. Ham, who belonged to the same school


as Mr. Lush, was succeeded by the Rev. W. P. Scott, a number
of the members deemed that his views regarding the freeness
of salvation were contrary to their accustomed belief. This
led to the withdrawal of Mr. Scott and his friends. At this
distance of time we can scarcely realise the need for separation.
Both parties believed in the sovereignty of God, both believed
that the salvation of man was due to the free grace of God,
and the cause of separation was actually one of emphasis on
the doctrine of election rather than of difference of belief. But
with this were combined views concerning the Second Coming
and Reign of Jesus Christ, some being pre- and some post-
Millennialists. Further, some held that only baptized believers
should partake of the Lord’s Supper, while others held that all
believers should have the privilege. This was further com-
plicated by the question of Church membership, some arguing
for a close and some for an open fellowship.
The dim echoes of these controversies still remain, but we
now see that it is not necessary that all men should agree in
statements of belief. Life is more than doctrine. Salvation
does not consist in intellectual assent to doctrines, but in vital
harmony with Jesus Christ. To-day we emphasise the say-
ings—“ Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty,” and
“Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.” Still
we are not greatly concerned to blame our ancestors for their
differences. They believed intensely; they had the courage of
their conviction. The present-day disregard of the authority
of the Bible and the growing laxity of belief show that in our
dislike to rigid views we have swung too far in the opposite
direction. They dared to differ; we carelessly comply.
Another problem that Baptists early had to face was in
relation to State aid to religion. The Government of New
South Wales, recognising the difficulties of organised religion
in a new land, had enacted what was known as “The Aus-
tralian Churches Temporalities Act.” All Churches were on
the same footing. All could claim generous help from the
Government. In the first place sites of land were granted
free to any Church in any town or district on application,


subject only to a hypothetical payment of a farthing per an-
num, also grants were available up to for the erection
of a Church building provided that the congregation first raised
a similar amount. Besides this a congregation of one hundred
persons was entitled to a grant of £lOO per annum, or a grant
up to £2OO if the congregation was large, towards the
minister’s stipend. All this was decidedly liberal and proved
that the Government was in earnest in the desire that the life
of the community should be dominated by religion. Politic-
ally, it was wise, since it is acknowledged that the existence
of Churches makes for civic and moral order.
Other denominations readily availed themselves of these
generous provisions and obtained Church sites in the city and
nascent towns, and in many cases received grants in aid of
building Churches and for the maintenance of their ministers.
But Baptists, as a rule, were unwilling to accept Church sites
or any aid for buildings or for the minister’s stipend. Long
and animated discussions took place on the question. We can
easily understand their point of view. They had come from
the old land, where the State attempted to coerce the con-
science of men. They remembered St. Bartholomew’s day of
1622, when 2060 ministers left their livings rather than con-
form to the decrees of the State regarding religious worship;
they remembered the Test and Corporation Acts that were
not finally repealed till 1828. To them State aid meant State
control of worship and dictation of belief. But in this new
land it did not imply any such control or interference with
conscience. But the iron had entered their soul too deeply
for them to acknowledge this difference, and many Baptists
to-day think that our pioneers acted unwisely in declining all
State aid. It was their insistent demand for liberty that com-
pelled them to do this. They were determined to be un-
fettered.
At the first Association meeting in Melbourne in 1863 a
strong protest against State aid was made, and again at the
Association meeting in Ballarat in 1865 it was affirmed that
the system of State assistance should be abolished. Soon after


“An Address to the Baptists of Victoria,” signed by ten
ministers, was published, giving reasons against any alliance
with the State or dependence by the Church on Government
aid. In this address they quoted from Lionel Busher’s “Plea
for Liberty of Conscience,” addressed to King James the First
in 1614:—“Christ’s Kingdom is not of this world, therefore
it may not be purchased or defended with the weapons of this
world, but by His Word and Spirit. No other weapons hath
He given to His Church which is His spiritual Kingdom ”
We can sympathise with the contention of our pioneer
ministers, but for many reasons we cannot endorse it. But
by their action Baptists were placed at serious disadvantage as
compared with other Churches. Whereas other Churches ob-
tained valuable sites all through the Colony, Baptists, at much
self-sacrifice, had to buy them.
Similarly when the Melbourne University was established
in 1853 valuable contiguous sites were made available to the
Churches for colleges. In course of time the Church of Eng-
land, the Presbyterians, Methodists and Roman Catholics ap-
plied for the sites allocated to them, and splendid buildings
were erected. About twelve acres still remained, part of
which the Baptists might have had for a college on application.
Time passed, and when inquiry was made as to the possi-
bility of acquiring a site it was found that the offer had lapsed
and that the land had been utilised for University purposes.
Again the unwillingness to accept State aid hindered our
progress.
In 1853 Ae Government made a grant of for the
establishment of Denominational Grammar Schools. Two
years later a further grant of was made for the same
purpose. This was divided in proportion to their numbers
between the Church of England, Presbyterians, Methodists and
Roman Catholics, and sites for Grammar Schools were also
given. But Baptists were too few or too unready to participate
in these educational advantages. “There is a tide in the affairs
of men, which, if taken at the flood, leads on to fortune.”
Several times for different reasons Baptists missed the tide.


Chapter VII
THE STORY OF THE CHURCHES
I—THE ERA OF THE PIONEERS
“He gave Him to be head over all things to the Church, which is
His body, the fulness of Him that filleth all in all.”—Eph. i. 22.
In our brief account of the opening years we gave a few details
concerning the first Baptist Churches founded in Victoria, now
we will summarise the principal facts about them and the
Churches subsequently established. It is obvious that a full
account of each Church is impossible in this history. To tell
the complete story a number of books would be necessary
rather than one. Herein is our difficulty. Hundreds of
names of noble men and gracious women could be mentioned,
but we have space only for a few. If we give the names of
some who were more prominent, we may pass by scores of
earnest, loyal workers who were the mainstay of our Churches.
Our only hope is that the names we give will be regarded as
representative of all. Similarly a wrong impression may be
conveyed when we mention the names of the pastors who
have in succession ministered to a Church. The minister
exists for the Church and not the Church for the minister.
Pastors come and go, but the Church has a constant existence,
upheld by faithful men and women who in different capacities
serve it for 30, 40 or 50 years. If we mention the building of
Churches and the increase of membership, this again would
not be the real history of the Churches. We can only record
visible tangible results; the inner-life of the Churches, their
hopes and fears, triumphs and defeats, joys and sorrows, their
real communion with Christ and one another can never be
fully told. The real Church is spiritual, its life is hid with
Christ in God. The history is not external, formal,


mechanical, but vital. The Church is not an institution, it is
the Body of which Christ is alone the Head. Severally and
collectively Christians are members of that Body. So if we
tell the story of material buildings and of organised Churches,
we are thinking all the time of the Church within the
Churches, of lives redeemed and sanctified by the grace and
Spirit of God.
COLLINS STREET, 1843
Since Baptists have no episcopal system, they have no
Cathedral Church, but for all practical purposes Collins Street
has always been regarded as the Metropolitan or Mother
Church, and right nobly has the Church filled the position.
We have told the story of the Church up to the time of the
removal to Sydney of its first minister, the Rev. John Ham,
and of the withdrawal of the Rev. W. P. Scott and eighteen
members to constitute the Church at Albert Street. This was
in 1850. Following this for several years the Church was
supplied by Messrs. John Lush and John Collins. In 1857
the Rev. James Taylor, from Birmingham, arrived in Mel-
bourne, and was called to the pastorate in which he continued
till 1868. Mr. Taylor was a popular preacher, and a year after
his arrival the Church had to be enlarged. Later the present
Church was completed at an additional cost of While
the enlargement was being made services were held in the
Theatre Royal in Bourke Street for 27 Sundays, which was
always crowded, and in January 1862 the new Church was
opened. By this time the membership numbered 424 and
the Sunday scholars 267. Mr. Taylor for six years edited a
fine fortnightly paper, “The Australian Evangelist,” and
conducted a Preachers’ Class, whose members preached re-
gularly at Chetwynd Street, Hotham, West Melbourne, and
Truganina. For a few months following Mr. Taylor’s retire-
ment, the pulpit was supplied by the Rev. T. Ness. The next
pastor was the Rev. James Martin, 8.A., who came from Not-
tingham in October 1869, recommended to the Church by
Doctors Angus, Brock and Landells. “The Age,” in reporting


his first service, said:—“ The Chapel was crowded, and at the
proper time for the minister’s appearance, the congregation
saw a man of slim build, intellectual face and beaming eyes
step from the vestry door to the pulpit. A calm solemnity
was at once imparted to the devotional part of the service by
the quiet yet earnest manner in which he read the Scriptures
and uttered the words of prayer. In fact, throughout the whole
service his manner was marked by a peculiar combination of
earnestness and power. From this it will be understood that
his power is that of thought, clear, impressive and elevating.”
This impression was sustained and deepened in the course of
years. Mr. Martin was a profound scholar, his exposition
of Scripture exact and thorough, his diction chaste and
his elocution arresting. For eight years he sustained
a most gracious successful ministry. In 1870 a Baptist Church
was organised at Bacchus Marsh; 26 members were trans-
ferred to constitute the Church at West Melbourne, and
in the following year Gospel Halls were opened in Little
Bourke Street east and west. In all the work of the
Denomination Mr. Martin took a leading part, and as told
in other chapters was the principal mover in starting our
Home Mission Society, and was a tutor of our early students.
Suddenly, while on a visit to Tasmania in February 1877 he
was taken ill and very soon passed from earth. He was only
55, and his death was universally mourned. His name has
been perpetuated by his widow, who survived him for 28
years, by his son, Mr. H. S. Martin, LL.B., our Honorary
Legal Adviser for 30 years, and by his grandson, Mr. }.
McDonald Martin, our Adviser to-day.
Soon after Mr. Martin’s death word was sent to Mr. William
McLean, at that time on a business visit to England, to consult
with Dr. Angus as to a successor. Dr. Angus suggested the
Rev. S. Chapman, of Hope Street, Glasgow. Mr. McLean
went at once to Scotland, and when he saw and heard Mr.
Chapman said, “That is the man for Collins Street.” His
judgment was perfectly right. In October of that same year,
1877, Mr. Chapman and his family of eight children arrived


and then began a ministry of 22 years, the longest and in many
respects the greatest that Collins Street has known. Mr. Chap-
man was a great contrast to Mr. Martin, but in no sense con-
tradictory. One was the complement of the other. In ap-
pearance Mr. Chapman was more burly and stalwart. His
speech was not so polished as Mr. Martin’s, and had the strong
accent of Northumbria. In his exposition he did not dwell
on the nice distinctions of exegesis, but was always personal,
incisive and practical. His was a sane reasoned evangelism
to which the Cross was ever central as the utmost revelation
of God, and all sufficient to satisfy the heart and conscience of
men. In 1880 a fine lecture hall was built facing Little Col-
lins Street, and when renovations were in progress at Collins
Street in 1885, again services were held in the Theatre Royal
that were always crowded. At this time the Melbourne “Daily
Telegraph” asked its readers to vote as to which was the
foremost preacher in the city, and the plebiscite easily placed
Mr. Chapman in the first place. The progress of the Church
was continuous. In 1892 Mr. Chapman visited Egypt, Pales-
tine, England, America and China, and was away for thirteen
months, during which time his place was ably filled by the
Rev. Geo. Hill, M.A., who in 1893 returned to Nottingham.
What Mr. Chapman did for the Victorian Baptist Fund is told
in another section of this book. He was the first chairman
of the fund, the chairman for 19 years of the Home Mission
Society, and a whole advisory board in himself, in fact in all
but the name he was the Archbishop of the Denomination. In
1898 the strength of the strong man began to fail, and the
Rev. W. H. Holdsworth, M.A., a recent arrival from England,
was appointed as his assistant. Slowly his weakness increased,
and on 10th September, 1899, he entered into rest. At his re-
quest the Hallelujah Chorus was sung at his funeral service.
In May 1900 Mr. Chapman’s successor, the Rev. S. Pearce
Carey, M.A., from Loughborough, was welcomed. Mr. Carey
is a great grandson of William Carey, of missionary fame, and
grandson of the Rev. Samuel Pearce, after whom he was
named, and whose biography he wrote. Mr. Carey had all


their missionary spirit and during his pastorate paid a visit to
India. His sermons were intensely evangelical, his manner
winsome and persuasive. Like his predecessor he showed
great interest in the Home Mission and visited all the Churches
of the Denomination. There was widespread regret when
after a pastorate of eight years he decided to return to the
homeland. Since then he has written the most complete and
satisfactory life of his great ancestor.
Mr. Carey was speedily followed in 1909 by the Rev. F.
C. Spurr, who had been specially engaged in Evangelistic
Missions for the Baptist Union in England. One outstanding
feature of his Melbourne ministry was his Tuesday evening
Bible School, which proved a great success, the Church being
generally filled with an audience that listened eagerly to the
analysis, with blackboard illustrations, of all the
books of the Bible. Because the Church was so crowded on
Sunday evenings seatholders were given tickets to admit them
before the hour of service. Later on the evening services were
transferred to the spacious Auditorium opposite the Church,
where again the building was thronged. After five years’ suc-
cessful ministry Mr. Spurr returned to England in February
1914, after which he published the book, “Five years under
the Southern Cross.” In the following month the Rev. T. E.
Ruth, from Southport, began his pastorate. The Sunday even-
ing services were continued in the Auditorium with a series
of addresses, having the title “A Mission to the Modern Mind.”
In August the Great War began that for four years shook the
world. Mr. Ruth’s patriotic addresses and his lectures on
Roman Catholicism aroused deep interest and challenged
thoughtful discussion. Collins Street Church became a centre
of social and civic power, and Melbourne was sorry when after
nine years’ ministry Mr. Ruth decided to remove to Sydney.
During the latter part of Mr. Ruth’s pastorate the Rev. A. W.
Bean was assistant minister, till he resigned to become Super-
intendent of the Melbourne City Mission.
The Rev. W. D. Jackson, the youngest minister called to
Collins Street, followed Mr. Ruth, and for ten years exercised


a spiritual ministry, during which many were baptized and
enrolled as members of the Church. As Mr. Jackson had
served in the Great War his ministry was very acceptable to
returned soldiers and to all who had suffered in that awful
cataclysm. Kindly, brotherly, energetic, Mr. Jackson will be
long remembered, and many follow with interest the accounts
of his work at Balham, in England.
He was succeeded in 1936 by the Rev. Reginald Kirby, the
present minister, who has entered upon a great heritage, and
under whose leadership all activities of the Church are prosper-
ing.
Through the growth of the suburban districts, with their
strong Churches, the position of Collins Street in the life of
the Denomination is different from what it was in the days of
its first pastors. It is still the Central Church, and Baptists from
all parts of the State and from other States naturally gravitate
to its services when on a visit to the city. Its whole history
is one of which we are justly proud.
THE GOSPEL HALL
As early as 1866 Mr. W. McLean rented a workshop in
Little Bourke Street from Mr. Alcock, billiard table maker,
for a Sunday School and Gospel services, Mr. R. J. Harvey
being guarantor for the payment of the rent. In 1866 the
Collins Street Church, through its pastor, Rev. James Taylor,
purchased a Chapel in Market Lane (later called Brien’s
Lane) from the Particular Baptists, who had removed to Vic-
toria Parade, and named it the Gospel Hall. Here for nearly
70 years evangelistic work was maintained. Mr. A. M. Shain,
a warm-hearted brotherly man, was for many years Superinten-
dent of the work, and has been followed by men of like
sympathies. All the ministers of Collins Street have fostered
the work. In 1934, through the generous action of Paterson’s
Limited Company a three-storied building in Little Bourke
Street was exchanged for that in Brien’s Lane. When the old
building was demolished the Declaration of Trust was found
under the foundation stone of the Ebenezer Chapel, built in


1857? of which Daniel Allen was pastor and John Juniper,
sen., and John Felix Matthews, deacons.
William McLean. Arrived Melbourne from England 1853,
aged 8. In hardware business for himself 1870. Firm of McLean
Bros, and Rigg 1872. Extensive operations. Branch in W.A.
Baptized by James Taylor 1863. In 1866 began Gospel Hall work
in Little Bourke Street. Superintendent of work for several years.
Began S. School, Hoddle Street. Gave building to Association 1889,
now Abbotsford Church. Deacon Collins Street 1878. One of
first Committee of Home Mission, and Treasurer for some years.
President of Union 1887. Through his agency Victorian Baptist
Fund established, its Treasurer from 1884 till 1893. Passed away
6th February, 1905. Portrait in Board Room unveiled by his
eldest daughter 18th October, 1933. Later tablet placed in Abbots-
ford Church. A fine business man and devout, earnest Christian
worker.
William H. S. Blake. From Portsea, England. Joined Collins
Street 1863. Following year appointed Secretary. Held that office
for 53 years. A life Deacon. One of first Committee of Home
Mission. Organised Home Mission Festivals, Melbourne Town
Hall. Full sympathy Foreign Mission. The right-hand man of
successive Ministers. Gentle, cheerful, dignified. Died 30th Octo-
ber, 1917, aged 89. His memorial card bore the words: “He still
lives, still loves, still serves, still walks with God.”
Henry Meeks. Morris and Meeks, iron merchants. Joined
Collins Street 1861. In James Taylor’s Preachers’ Class. Teacher
Bouverie Street. Deacon Collins Street 1887 till 1922. Chairman
Home Mission Committee 20 years. Chairman Board of V.B.
Fund some years. Hardware Association in 1917 presented Austin
Hospital with operating theatre and surgical laboratory to be called
the Henry Meeks’ Pavilion in his honour. Died August 1922 after
61 years’ active service at Collins Street. A capable business man,
a good judge of men, always watchful of interests of the Denomina-
tion.
Robert J. Harvey. Baptized in Canada 1849. To Melbourne
in 1853. Deacon Collins Street. One of the first Committee of
Home Mission, for 47 years on Committee, and its Treasurer for
14 years. Wholesale tinware manufacturer. Died May 1918,
aged 90,
John M. Templeton. Arrived Victoria 1852, aged 12. School
teacher for 16 years. In 1869 founded National Mutual Life Assur-


ance Association. In 1895 appointed Colonel of Victorian Militia,
Deacon Collins Street. Trustee of V.B. Fund for 20 years. Died
10th June, 1908.
Doctor William Moore. Son of Baptist Minister in Brisbane.
To Melbourne in 1878. Took M.D. M.S. with honours Melbourne
University 1882. House Surgeon Melbourne Hospital 1886. One
of leading surgeons in Victoria. Honorary Consulting Surgeon Mel-
bourne Hospital till death. Private Hospital, “Milton,” Flinders
Lane. For 50 years member of Collins Street. Deacon Collins
Street. Trustee V.B. Fund. President Theological College. Presi-
dent Council Carey Grammar School. Died Bth September, 1927,
aged 68. Skilful, unostentatious, generous, was greatly missed. His
work is carried on by his son Dr. Harold Moore.
Cornelius J. Ham. Son of Rev. John Ham. Member of Legis-
lative Council. Mayor of Melbourne. President of Y.M.C.A.
Deacon Collins Street. President Union 1885. One of the first
Trustees of V.B. Fund. Died sth December, 1909. His son Wilbur
Ham, K.C., one of leading barristers in State.
William Lucas, F.R.G.S. Architect. Born Melbourne 1860.
Baptized in Cheltenham, England, 1878. Transferred to Collins
Street 1883. Continuous membership to date —55 years. Founda-
tion member, Treasurer and Secretary of Preachers’ Society 1889-
1893, with Gospel Hall and S. School work. To South Africa
1893-1915—Professional, Y.M.C.A., Church and Native Mission
work. Returning to Melbourne, Deacon of Collins Street six years.
Space fails to tell of many others of the prominent loyal
members of the Mother Church, among whom were the Hon.
Robert Reid, M.L.C., J. M. Bruce (of Paterson, Laing and
Bruce, father of Stanley M. Bruce, High Commissioner for
the Commonwealth of Australia in England), T. McFarlane,
R. T. Blackwell, Dr. D. S. Mac Coll, P. Rendle, W. J. Moore,
W. J. Mankey, W. G. Sprigg, and a host beside.
ALBERT STREET, 1850
We have already told of the beginnings of the Church at
Albert Street, when the Rev. W. P. Scott and eighteen mem-
bers withdrew from Collins Street and of the building of the
first Church in 1853. This was afterwards the Lecture Hall,
and is now the central part of the Goble Memorial Hall. After


@'f** * #||
Rev. Isaac New,
1862, 1866, 1869-70, 1872-3.
Rev. W. Sutton,
3 865, 1868-9.
Rev. W. C. Running,
1874-5.
Rev. S. Hewlett,
1861.
Rev. ,T. Gregson
1873-4.
Rev. David Rees,
1863, 1868-9.
Rev. E. G. Lewis,
1867-8.
Rev. P. Bailhache,
1876-7.


Rev. John Reid
1877-8.
Rev. E. F. Kingdom.
1881-2.
Rev. A. W. Weed,
1886-7.
Editor “ Southern Baptist.”
Rev. G. P. Lush,
1879-80.
Rev. E. Henderson.
1883-4.
Rev. W. Poole,
1878-9.
Rev. W. Clark,
1882-3.
Secretary of Union.
Rev. E. Harris,
1890-1.
Secretary Home Mission


Mr. Scott’s death services were continued by Messrs. T. W.
Jackson and E. G. Lewis till the arrival of Rev. Isaac New.
Mr. New was born in Sheffield, England, in 1803. As a youth
he served an apprenticeship as a cutler. Then he entered
Horton Theological Academy in 1824, of which the Rev. Wil-
liam Steadman was tutor. At Salisbury for ten years, and at'
Birmingham for another ten years, he enjoyed successful pas-
torates and gained a widespread reputation as a Preacher and
Lecturer. In 1857 the Baptist Missionary Society told him of
the urgent needs of Melbourne, and he decided to leave Eng-
land. At his farewell meeting in Birmingham the chairman
said: Mr. New as a preacher stood second to none in Birming-
ham.” At the age of 54 he arrived in Victoria. The Church
at Albert Street was speedily crowded whenever he preached,
and he was soon famous in the Colony as one of its foremost
preachers. A larger building was necessary, so the present
Church was built at a cost of £ 6OOO, and the opening sermons
on 27th February, 1859, were preached by the Revs. W. B.
Landells, fames Hutchinson (Methodist), and James Taylor.
Later the Church was completed by the front portico with its
Corinthian pillars and towers at an additional cost of over
£ 3OOO. Mr. New entered fully into all the work of the
Association and was in great demand for all special occasions.
Four times he was President of the Association. In many
towns he gave lectures on such subjects as “The Greatness of
Man, The Battle of the Bible,” “The Fall of Jerusalem,” and
“The Contrasts between Christianity and Infidelity.” For
ten years he sustained a great ministry, then failing powers
compelled him to retire in 1868, when he removed to New
Street, Brighton (possibly the Street was named in his
honour). There he was visited by many of his friends, and
calmly awaited the final call, which came suddenly in May
1886, his 84th year. He had previously said, “Tell Mr. Webb-
to preach no funeral sermon for me. Let him depress me as;
much as he likes, and exalt Christ, for He alone is worthy.’”
At the close of New s pastorate the members numbered!
360, with 250 S.S. scholars. Land had been bought and s


building erected in Gold Street, East Collingwood, for a branch
Sunday School, also at Sackville Street. In 1869 the Rev.
Charles Clark became pastor of Albert Street. He was then
in his 32nd year, and had been minister of the historic Broad-
mead Church at Bristol. His sermons were characterised by
vivid word painting and the Church was always crowded. As
a Lecturer Mr. Clark became very popular. The Melbourne
Town Hall, seating 2000, was not large enough when he
lectured on “The Tower of London,” “Westminster Abbey,”
“Christmas Carols,” &c. He had a marvellous memory, and
without using any notes would hold his audiences enthralled
for two hours. It became necessary, because of the crowds,
to transfer the evening services from the Church to the
Theatre Royal. But though crowds were attracted the Church
was not strengthened as by the ministry of Mr. New. After
six years Mr. Clark returned to England and continued as a
popular lecturer. Five times he visited Australia, and when
he was over 60 a newspaper recorded that his voice was as
clear as a bell and his articulation as near to absolute per-
fection as it is possible to be.
Very soon after Mr. Clark’s leaving the Rev. Philip
Bailhache, from England, became pastor. He was an able
preacher and entered heartily into all the work of the De-
nomination. For seven years the Church greatly prospered,
the membership increased to over 400, while in the three Sun-
day Schools the total number of scholars was over 600. In
1882, because of ill-health, Mr. Bailhache visited England for
several months, and on his return was gladly welcomed. Sud-
denly, in September 1884, he decided to join the Anglican
Church, was ordained at St. Peters by the Bishop of Mel-
bourne, and became Incumbent of the Church of England at
Elsternwick. It was very difficult to understand his secession
in the light of his earnest ministry amongst our Churches.
He was followed after a very brief interval by the Rev.
Allan W. Webb, from North Adelaide, with the happiest re-
sults. But changes in the population of East Melbourne began
to seriously affect the Albert Street congregation. Many of


the strongest supporters of the Church moved to more distant
suburbs. After five years’ gracious ministry Mr. Webb ac-
cepted a call to Aberdeen Street, Geelong. In 1891 the Rev.
E. H. Ellis came at the Church’s invitation from London,
but in spite of his able and strenuous efforts the decline of the
congregation continued, and by 1894 the membership had
fallen to 200 and the scholars to less than 100. The Rev. T.
}. Malyon became pastor in 1894, an d was succeeded by the
Revs. W. R. Hiddlestone, Edward Isaac, and A. E. Blackwell.
For some time subsequently services were continued, but
ultimately it was deemed wise that the Church should be dis-
banded; but before this was done the members decided that
they would hand the whole property that had cost ,-£15,000
to the Baptist Union for Denominational purposes. We will
tell later in what way it has been made suitable for the head-
quarters of the Union. The decision to disband the Church
after its history of nearly 80 years was only reached after long
and serious discussion and with great regret. This regret has
been lessened by the splendid use now being made of the pro-
perty.
T. W. Jackson. One of the foundation members of Albert
Street. Frequently conducted its services in the early days. One of
the first Committee of the Home Mission. For 47 years its consistent
helper. Chairman of the Foreign Mission Committee for 13 years.
President of the Union in 1889. One of the first Trustees of the
V.B. Fund. Deputy Postmaster-General. Audit and Public Ser-
vice Commissioner. Enthusiastic for the Normal College. Member
of Baptist College Committee. A thorough Christian gentleman,
courteous in speech, gracious in demeanour, honouring Christ with
his substance, and loyally serving him with all his powers. Passed
away 24th July, 1918, in his 88th year.
W. C. Kernot. Born Rochford, England, 1845. Aged 6 to
Victoria. Early education Grammar School, Geelong. Degree Civil
Engineering, Melbourne University, 1866. Professor of Engineering
1875 till death. Assisted Working Men’s College. Deacon Albert
Street. President of Union 1903. Subject of address: “Can a
Scientist be a Christian?” Passed away suddenly 14th March, 1910,
aged 63. Genial in disposition, simple in his habits, generous in
conduct, with a clear vision of spiritual realities.


J. D. Merson. Secretary to Public Service Commissioner.
Strong advocate of the Victorian Prohibition League. Prepared
statistics annually of consumption of alcohol in Victoria. Died
3rd May, 1932.
W. G. Sprigg. Son of Rev. James Sprigg, of Ipswich, England.
Brother of Sir Gordon Sprigg, LL.D., Premier of Cape Colony, and
of Major Howard Sprigg. Secretary of Melbourne Tramway Com-
pany. Uncle of W. G. Sprigg, Secretary of Y.M.C.A., and of
Collins Street Church. A prominent member of Albert Street and
later of Collins Street.
George Lusty. Born 1846. His parents among founders of
Albert Street. Member of Albert Street 41 years. Thirty-seven
years a Deacon. For 30 years Secretary of the Church. For 25
years business manager of u The Southern Baptist. On Home
Mission and other Committees. Alert, genial, courteous. Died
suddenly 2nd July, 1910. An earnest worker for the Denomination.
Hon. C. Vaughan, M.L.C., Hon. C. }. Jenner, M.L.C., T. J.
Ham, H. Langlands, M.L.A., R. Stone, with many others of
probity and worth wrought nobly for many years for the
Albert Street Church.
BRIGHTON, 1851
The early settlers in Victoria brought sheep and cattle from
Tasmania, and in their search for grazing areas not far from
water they reached the district afterwards named Brighton,
finding water for their sheep in the Elster Creek. In our ac-
count of the opening years we have told of the beginnings of
Baptist work in the district and of the opening of the Church
in Bay Street. We now resume the story. In 1861 twenty-
one of the members were transferred to Collins Street. This
so weakened the Church that services were discontinued and
the Church disbanded in 1864. In 1867, under the guidance
of the Rev. W. Bryant, of George Street, the Church was re-
formed with 17 members, and the Rev. W. A. Whitney was
appointed to the pastorate, in which he continued till 1873.
For one year the Rev. W. B. Garner was pastor, and in 1876
the Rev. H. Coombs was called to lead the Church. For two
years the Church enjoyed a season of rich blessing till Mr.


Coombs left for Brisbane. In 1879 the Rev. H. H. Garrett,
from London, became pastor, but in August 1881 he was killed
in a railway accident at Jolimont. For two years the Rev.
G. P. Lush was pastor, and in January 1886 the Rev. S.
Howard, from Gawler, S.A., entered on a pastorate lasting for
nine years, during which the Church greatly prospered. The
pastors of more recent years have been:—J. E. Harrison 1895,
F. J. Wilkin 1899, R. Williamson 1908, R. Stewards 1917, E.
H. Holloway 1921, H. G. Scholefield 1929, H. S. Smith 1931.
During Mr. Holloway’s pastorate a fine new Church was built
at a cost of ,£2259 and a neat, comfortable Manse, and in Mr.
Smith s pastorate a spacious, well equipped School Hall was
erected at a cost of With good tennis courts the whole
of the Church property is complete.
Among the names of those identified with the Church dur-
ing its first half century the following occur: —F. Brewer, R.
West, S. B. Walcot, H. Chambers, C. Alexander, J. H. Cole,
R. Stone, D. C. Rees, F. Morris, W. Stocker.
EAST BRIGHTON
On 19th February, 1884, during the ministry of the Rev.
G. P. Lush, the Brighton Baptist Church decided to open work
at Tucker Road, East Brighton, now called Bentleigh. Mr. H.
Box presented the land, and the tender of Mr. Stamp, of
Brighton, for the erection of a wooden building 40 ft. by 25
ft. at a cost of £ 150 was accepted. The building was com-
pleted during that year and the property vested in the Baptist
Union Trustees.
Outstanding workers were Mr. H. Box, Mrs. Watt, Mrs.
Grewar, Mr. Chas. Alexander, and Mr. F. Shephard. Rev.
Samuel Chapman, of Collins Street, conducted the first ser-
vice, and Mr. Chambers was the first S.S. Superintendent. The
Church was constituted in 1890 and joined the Baptist Union
in 1896. The building was removed from Tucker Road to the
present site in Vickery Street in 1916 and enlarged in 1924
during the ministry of Rev. W. Jarvis. So many short, and


at times honorary, ministries have been exercised that it is
impossible to secure a complete tabulation.
GEELONG, ABERDEEN STREET, 1852
We have already noted that very early in the history of the
Colony a number of Baptists settled in Geelong, and in 1850
a Particular Baptist Church was formed that met in the Tem-
perance Hall under the ministry of Mr. Saunders Trotman.
The diggings breaking out soon after, most of the members
left the town. On Ist February, 1852, eight persons met in
a store in Little Malop Street and were formed into a Baptist
Church. The following Lord’s Day they met in what was
termed the Baptist Chapel, Yarra Street, when the Rev. Samuel
Hewlett gave them the right hand of fellowship. In the next
year Mr. Hewlett was chosen to be their pastor, the salary to
be a year. Before the year closed this was increased to
£ too, and in the following year to £ 2OO. By that time the
members numbered 50. Two brethren, Messrs. G. Board and
John Matthews, gave an allotment of land in Aberdeen Street,
costing them £ 6OO, and there the first Church, now used as
the Sunday School, was built at a cost of All this tells
of rapid progress, and by the time Mr. Hewlett resigned in
July 1858, 124 persons had been received into fellowship. The
Rev. G. Slade arrived from England that year and supplied
for a short time till he withdrew with fourteen members to
start the cause in Fenwick Street. Two brief pastorates by
the Revs. D. Rees and E. Henderson were followed by the nine
years’ faithful ministry of the Rev. W. B. Landells. During
his pastorate 200 were added to the Church. He resigned on
Bth December, 1870, and two months later passed away, greatly
beloved. Eighteen months’ later the Rev. W. C. Bunning
arrived from Scotland, and the prosperity of the Church con-
tinued. The present Church, costing was opened in
May 1877. For eleven years the pastorate continued, during
which time 450 persons joined the Church fellowship. The
twenty years’ ministries of Landells and Bunning were the royal


days of the Geelong Church. In 1883 Mr. Bunning removed
to West Melbourne, and was succeeded in 1885 by the Rev.
}. S. Harrison, an Evangelist who came to Victoria with the
Rev. E. Isaac for Evangelistic Missions. His ministry was
brief as was that of the Rev. G. D. Cox, and in 1890 the Rev.
A. W. Webb, of Albert Street, was called to the pastorate.
Then ensued a time of rich blessing suddenly ended by Mr.
Webb’s death in June 1902. In that month a great Simul-
taneous Mission was carried on in Victoria in connection with
the visit of Dr. Torrey from America. Mr. Webb was the
Missioner at South Yarra in a great tent. On Monday and
Tuesday evenings he preached, and on Wednesday morning,
as he knelt in prayer, he was called to his reward. “The
Southern Cross” said he was one of the best known, best loved
and most spiritual-minded ministers in Victoria. Since then
the Church has had the following pastors: —Revs. E. Harris,
called to the Church of his boyhood, A. D. Shaw from Queens-
land, W. H. Hinton from New Zealand, E. C. Burleigh from
Tasmania, and now for a second time A. D. Shaw. Alto-
gether the Church has had a great history. Few Churches
have sent forth more labourers for the Kingdom of God.
Among these were the Revs. E. Harris, with his brothers F.
and S. A., E. A. Kirwood, B. Hewison, S. and A. Potter, J.
Robertson for the Ministry. For work in foreign fields, Mr.
and Mrs. Olive Deeath, Misses Gilbert, Fuller, Sherriff, Dow-
ling, and Mrs. and Miss Henry.
Allan W. Webb. Born Warwickshire, England, 1838. When
13 to India. After four years to South Australia. Prepared for
Ministry by Rev. Silas Mead, M.A. First pastorate Alberton.
Then Maitland and Sydney, N.S.W. To Auckland, N.Z. Then
North Adelaide. To Albert Street. In 1890 to Geelong. Passed
away suddenly April 1902. Secretary Foreign Mission Society.
Editor “Southern Baptist.” Widely read, a great preacher and
faithful pastor.
H. F. Richardson. Born Geelong 1854. All life at Aberdeen
Street. Baptized by A. W. Webb 1891. M.L.C. from 1912 to
1934. In Barwon Shire Council for 33 years. In Geelong City


Council from 1884 to 1912. Mayor in 1894. President of Union
1905. Passed away October 1935. An earnest Christian worker,
a tower for righteousness in the city and the State.
R. Purnell. Like Mr, Richardson was all his life at Aberdeen
Street. Deacon. Sunday School teacher till old age. President of
Union 1913. Prominent in the city as business man. In City
Council 1915-1931. Member Legislative Assembly 1917-1920.
Chairman Geelong Harbour Trust. Passed away Ist June, 1937.
A most conscientious, reliable man ready for any good work.
Among the names of men held in honoured remembrance
are Nicholls, Wallace, Andrews, Hitchens, Day, Seeley,
Matthews, Denmead, Potter, with many others of similar
character and worth.
SOUTH YARRA, 1853
A Chapel was built in Charles Street, Prahran, and was
opened as a Baptist Place of Worship on 19th June, 1853, the
opening sermons being preached by Mr. }. Lush and the Rev.
S. Hewlett. Just a year after the Church was formed of eight
members transferred from Collins and Albert Streets. In a
few months the number had increased to 25, when a Sunday
School was formed. The donor of the land in Charles Street,
insisting on the teaching of hyper-Calvinistic doctrines that the
Church could not accept, they withdrew and met in Mr. J.
Wilson’s house. Mr. Wilson gave the Church an allotment
of land in Chapel Street, on which a wooden building was
erected and opened for worship on 18th October, 1857, the
morning service being conducted by the Rev. James Taylor, of
Collins Street, and that in the evening by Mr. W. G. Sprigg,
of Albert Street. In 1859 Mr. Joseph Wilson was chosen
to be pastor. He maintained the work for two years, when
he was followed by the Rev. D. Rees, whose ministry extended
through seven years. In that period the present Church was
built and 65 persons added to the fellowship. After a brief
pastorate by the Rev. A. Claxton from South Australia, the
Church called the Rev. T. C. Davis, who continued as pastor
for four years. In 1875 the Rev. James Wolfenden, just arrived


from England by invitation from the Home Mission Society,
accepted the charge of the Church, and for seven years the
Church prospered, many new members were received and the
Church building was enlarged and improved. After a
pastorate of four years by the Rev. F. Page, the Rev. R. Wil-
liamson, who was called to succeed him, exercised a happy
gracious ministry for five years till May 1891. Since then the
Church has had the following pastors: —T. J. Malyon, J. H.
Pryce, P. W. Cairns, W. J. Eddy, L. E. Tranter, E. A. Kir-
wood, H. J. Hackworthy, R. W. Dobbinson, till the present
pastor, H. Macdonald, who began his ministry in 1932. The
Church is in the midst of a factory and business area, and
has suffered of recent years through the removal of its mem-
bers to the outer suburbs, but Mr. J. Drewe, one of the founda-
tion members, still stands to his post as deacon, to which he
was elected in 1858.
PRAHRAN, 1879
When the majority of the Baptists meeting in Charles Street,
Prahran, removed to Chapel Street, South Yarra, services of
a strictly Calvinistic character were continued in Prahran. We
have no records of these meetings, but in 1878 another cause
was started in Cecil Street, Prahran, and a Church formed in
1879, of which the Rev. J. J. Mackenzie became pastor. Mr.
Mackenzie was born at Lisbon in December 1835, his father
being the medical officer of the British Fleet. He received a
good education and decided to devote his life to the Christian
Ministry. Soon after his arrival in Melbourne he accepted an
invitation to the pastorate of the Church, meeting in a hall in
Cecil Street, and there for 26 years exercised a most gracious
ministry, edifying the Church by his faithful expositions of
Scripture. Possibly few to-day remember the tall venerable
man of benign appearance. After a brief illness he passed
away on 22nd January, 1905, greatly beloved. His daughter
became the wife of the Rev. W. J. Eddy. After Mr.
Mackenzie’s death the services were continued by various
preachers until in 1913, through the influence of the Rev. L.


E. Tranter, the Church was combined with that at South
Yarra.
KEW, 1853
Standing in Wellington Street, in the City of Kew to-day,
in the midst of its beautiful homes, surrounded by lovely
gardens, it is difficult to realise that only 85 years ago Welling-
ton Street was only the name of a road surveyed through the
primeval forest. Here, on a little clearing, the Rev. J. Foy
had built a small weatherboard house. In imagination we
can see the early Colonists coming by tracks through the bush
to that home every Lord’s Day for worship. Possibly a snake
crawled across the track and kangaroos hopped through the
scrub. The geography of the district was still vague, for a
printed report said they met at Gotham, not far from Kew.
This was in 1853. We have already noted that in 1854 a small
wooden building was opened for worship in St. John’s
Parade, of which Mr. Foy was pastor. The Church was duly
constituted on 17th November, 1856. The cause steadily grew,
and though not robust in health Mr. Foy ministered to the
Church for 27 years. Increasing weakness compelled him to
lay down his work, and soon after, on 3rd May, 1879, he
entered into rest. A quiet faithful pioneer. In 1880 the Rev.
H. Marsden became pastor. Large congregations made a new
Church a necessity. Arrangements were made to build a brick
Church in Gotham Road, but before the building was com-
pleted Mr. Marsden, in February 1882, was called to higher
service. The Church was opened in August of that year, the
services being conducted by the Revs. S. Chapman, A. Gosman
(Congregationalist), and P. Bailhache. Before the close of
the year the Rev. James Blackie began a faithful ministry,
which lasted ten years. He was followed by the Rev. J. B.
Gillison, but ill-health compelled him to resign after two
years. Then for nearly six years the Rev. S. Howard, from
Brighton, successfully carried on the work. On his leaving
for Tasmania in 1900 the Rev. W. H. Holdsworth, M.A.,
just returned from England, was chosen as his successor, and


until he was appointed Principal of the Theological College
in 1911 continued the pastorate with the happiest results. The
Sunday School, begun by Mr. J. S. Denbigh in 1856, and of
which he was Superintendent for the first eight years, has
always been an important part of the work at Kew, and in
1905 the original Church was sold for removal and a spacious
brick School Hall built on its site. Since Mr. Holdworth’s
transfer to the College the Church has had the following
pastors:—Revs. Morris Morris, M.Sc., 1912, W. M. Cartwright
1915, E. S. Tuckwell, 8.A., 1920, and J. E. Newnham, M.A.,
1926, till to-day. During Mr. Tuckwell’s Ministry a beautiful
spacious Church was built in Highbury Grove in 1923 at a
cost of The membership has steadily increased during
the years, and to-day 431 names are on the roll, while there
are 316 scholars in the School and 113 members of the En-
deavour Societies. The Church is noted for its evangelistic
fervour, its wholeheartedness and unity. Among the notables
prominent in the work of the Church in the earlier years
were J. S. Denbigh, E. Baines, C. W. Walrond, J. B. and H.
Herbert, F. Varley, F. R. and E. S. Ratten, H. Holmes, A.
Curtis, D. E. Pittock, J. M. Griffiths, }. Ditchburn, and many
others who loyally devoted their time and talents to the
Master's service.
EAST KEW, 1931
The Home Mission Committee, in conjunction with the
Kew Church, arranged for the establishment of a Church in
the midst of the rapidly growing population a mile east of
Highbury Grove. A good brick building was erected in 1931
at a cost of and services begun under the supervision
of the Rev. }. E. Newnham. A Church was constituted with
67 members, most of them transferred from the Kew Church.
The Rev. E. T. Laxton was chosen pastor in 1934, who was
followed by the Rev. W. A. McKay, M.A., in 1937. The
School and the Church are making steady progress. The Kew
Church has shown what a Church can do, and ought to do,
as its members move outwards from the centre.


BENDIGO, 1853
Gold was discovered on the Bendigo Creek at “The Rocks”
(now known as Golden Square) in October 1851, and
thousands rushed to the goldfield. In 1853 a ew Baptists,
among whom were Mr. and Mrs. John Taylor, Mr. and Mrs.
Jones, met for worship in a tent at White Hills. In the fol-
lowing year a slab building was erected, followed by a
weatherboard building in the direction of Epsom at a cost of
ln Sandhurst (now Bendigo) a few Baptists met at
a house in Bridge Street, and in November 1857 the Rev.
Ebenezer Henderson became pastor of the two causes at
White Hills and Sandhurst. The building at White Hills was
removed to Hargreaves Street, Sandhurst, and a smaller one
erected at White Hills on the site of the present Church. A
visitor to the splendid gardens opposite the Mall, in the city
of Bendigo, to-day cannot realise the condition of the town
in the early days. There was not a green tree in any of the
streets, there were no gardens, dust and sand were everywhere.
The building in Hargreaves Street was opened in February
1859 by the Rev. James Taylor and the Church duly con-
stituted. Two of the foundation members, Mrs. Hyett and
Mrs. Eldridge, were present at the Jubilee of the Church in
1909. The Rev. E. Henderson only stayed one year, and the
Rev. C. Smith, who followed him, only 18 months. In 1863
Mr. Thomas Taylor became pastor, and a new Church was
erected in Hargreaves Street at a cost of £1250 on an allot-
ment full of deserted diggers’ holes, bought at public auction
for £ 2O . This building was also opened by the Rev. James
Taylor in February 1864, anc * at that time his son, the pastor
of the Church, was ordained to the ministry. Mr. Taylor was
succeeded by the Rev. F. Hibberd, who after a pastorate of
18 months removed to Sydney. Then the Rev. G. W. Gillings
had a successful ministry for six years, until in 1877, at the
request of the Home Mission Society, he explored the North
as far as Echuca and established the Church there. From
1877 t0 the Rev. John Gregson was pastor, during which


time the congregation increased so much that the Church had
to be enlarged at a cost of £650. For a year after Mr. Greg-
son’s removal to Caulfield, Dr. Thomas Porter was pastor,
when for three months Sunday evening services were held in
the Theatre. He was succeeded by the Rev. W. C. Tayler,
who after two years settled at White Hills. A brief pastorate
by the Rev. E. J. Welch was followed by the gracious ministry
of the Rev. G. A. Weller for six years, C. Stark for four years,
A. E. Blackwell for five years, A. J. Clarke for three years.
During Mr. Clarke’s ministry the Schoolroom beneath the
Church was completed at a cost of and the Jubilee of
the Church celebrated. Since the Jubilee the following have
been pastors of the Church: —Revs. J. Worboys, E. H. Hob-
day, L. E. Tranter, S. E. Dorman, E. H. Holloway, and S.
B. Goble. Scores of names of devoted workers can be re-
corded, among whom were J. R. Hopkins, J. Hyett, F.
Osmond, F. Foot, T. C. Brokenshire, and D. C. Lewis, who
for long periods faithfully served the Church.
WHITE HILLS, 1853
In narrating the story of the Bendigo Church we have told
that the Rev. E. Henderson became joint pastor of Bendigo
and White Hills in 1857. A brick Church at a cost of
was erected in 1864. The Rev. J. Renney was then pastor
and continued till 1866. Mr. Edward Marks (afterwards the
Rev. E. Marks, of Lyme Regis, England) was the contractor
who built the Church, and after the Rev. F. Hibberd left for
Sydney in 1870 became its pastor till 1878. In 1887 the
Church again became associated with the Church at Bendigo
till in 1889, under the Rev. W. C. Tayler for 25 years, the
Church again continued as a separate organisation. During
that time Mr. F. P. Morris, residing at White Hills, conducted
classes for young people for twelve years. In 1913 the
Diamond Jubilee of the Church was celebrated, the Rev. F.
C. Spurr being the preacher for the day, when the names of
some of the founders of the Church were recalled, Taylor,
Jones, Gibbons, Sessions, Hyett, Ratcliff, Barnard, Mallon, and


many others. Of these Mrs. W. H. Every, after 60 years’
membership, passed away in 1936. Of recent years the
Church has been under the oversight of the Home Mission
Committee, and the Revs. W. A. McKay, A. G. Coventry, and
Messrs. V. Edwards and E. R. Phillip have been its pastors.
At the present time the Church is part of a circuit of Bendigo,
White Hills and Eaglehawk, under the supervision of the
Rev. S. B. Goble.
EAGLEHAWK, 1868
The Particular Baptist Church at Eaglehawk was established
in 1868, Pastor Daniel Allen being its first minister, and
Messrs. Cantelo, McGreehan, Washington and Murcott being
among the first members. When Pastor J. W. Bamber re-
signed in 1877 the Church invited the Rev. F. J. Wilkin, on
the conclusion of his college course, to the pastorate, and the
Home Mission Committee only agreed on the condition that
the Church adopt Open Communion and join the Association.
This was cordially agreed to and the Church had a period
of three years’ rapid growth. Mr. Wilkin was followed by
the Revs. Mclntyre, Evans, Hamilton, Seth Jones, Mathews,
Medley and Vaughan. In 1891 the Rev. W. C. Tayler became
joint pastor of White Hills and Eaglehawk, continuing for
25 years, during which time the building was enlarged. Since
that time the Church has been for the most part under the
direction of the Home Mission Committee, and has had as its
pastors F. H. Green, A. M. Drummond, Ivor Hopkins, N.
McDonald, J. Allison, H. R. Tunks, A. G. Baker and T. C.
Crago, and, as we have just seen, now forms part of the
Bendigo circuit, of which the Rev. S. B. Goble is Superin-
tendent.
SOUTH MELBOURNE, 1854
At Emerald Hill (now South Melbourne) a few Baptists
lately arrived from England met together at the home of Mr.
William Neale. Their numbers increased, so that a Chapel
was erected in York Street, and in November 1854 a Church


was regularly constituted with nine members, their leader
being William Ferguson, and with him were associated S. W.
Sedgefield, J. Shaw and W. Minty. After two brief pastorates
by Revs. J. Linsay and J. Crosby the Rev. James Moss was
pastor for three years. The Church proving too small, ser-
vices were held in the Mechanics’ Institute. In 1875 the pre-
sent Church was built in Dorcas Street, costing and
the Rev. William Poole became pastor. During his ministry
of five years many joined the fellowship. Mr. Poole was fol-
lowed in 1881 by the Rev. F. G. Buckingham for ten years,
and in that period the Church reached its highest point. The
members numbered 240 and the scholars 400. Then in the
’nineties, following the collapse of the land boom, the Church
began to decline. The Rev. H. J. Lambert was pastor from
1892 for two years. Then the Revs. H. S. Blackie, T. J.
Malyon and J. F. Jones, all within the next eleven years. The
frequent changes showed that the Church was passing through
critical times. During the following pastorates of the Revs.
J. Robertson, H. E. Hughes, J. P. McCarthy and H. H. Jeffs
the Church somewhat recovered its strength, and in 1924 the
School Hall was built at a cost of The five years’
ministry of the Rev. H. H. Jeffs was followed by that of the
Rev. A. P. Dawson for seven years, in whose time South
Melbourne, Port Melbourne, and Albert Park were formed
into a circuit. The Rev. Adam Clarke, after a brief pastorate,
was followed by the Rev. W. Lowson in 1836. A reunion of
past and present members was held on the occasion of the
80th Anniversary of the Church, when Messrs. Ferguson,
Speckman, Pakes, Newbury, Kemeys, Youl and Gilchrist gave
many reminiscences of former days. Others, such as Messrs.
J. Youl and H. Hirst, had been members for fifty years. The
present Secretary, Mr. F. Youl, has occupied his position for
nearly twenty years. The Church is in the midst of a big
population, is well equipped, and its faithful members long for
the prosperity of earlier days.


PORTLAND, 1854
Eight months before Batman reached Melbourne Edward
Henty landed at Portland from Tasmania. This was on 19th
November, 1834, and in two years there was a thriving settle-
ment around Portland Bay. But it was twenty years after
this, in 1854, before any recorded meeting of Baptists took
place. In 1855 Baptists and Independents met together, with
Mr. H. Huntly as pastor. The Union did not last long, and
in 1859 a Baptist Church was formed with fifteen members
and the Rev. J. Smith as pastor. On 13th May, 1861, a Church,
built of stone in Henty Street, was opened by the Rev. D.
Rees, of South Yarra. From 1864 to 1867 the Rev. H. Guin-
ness was the leader of the Church, and in his time the Church
was enlarged. He was followed by the Rev. J. R. Brennand,
and after him the Rev. W. Tranter for six years. In 1879
the Rev. E. Harris was ordained to the pastorate by the Rev.
S. Chapman, in which he continued for five years. From
1884 to 1887 the Rev. A. Ager was pastor, during which time
the Manse was built in Gawler Street. He was followed by
the Rev. J. R. Cooper, and in 1889 a fine forward movement
was made by the purchase of a very substantial hall for a
Church in Percy Street for The Rev. S. Chapman
preached the opening sermon in March 1895. Two years
later, to the great regret of the people, Mr. Cooper returned to
England. Since then the successive pastors have been: —Revs.
G. Edwards, A. R. Thompson, H. A. Horsfall, H. Boulter,
Ivor Hopkins, W. J. Ding, W. O. Ward, and the present
pastor, W. Cross. It was in Mr. Cooper’s time that Miss Reid
became a Missionary to East Bengal. Among the faithful
workers Mr. H. E. Sampson is prominent, since for fifty
years he was either Secretary or Treasurer, and Mr. W. Frost,
who mortgaged his home that the Church might pay a deposit
on the building in Percy Street. Portland is beautifully
situated, the soil is fertile, and should the bay eventually be-
come the harbour for the Western District the Church should
fill an important place in the community.


' Sr /^\
Rev. H. Coombs,
1892-3.
G. Martin, Esq., M.L.A
1897-8.
Rev. A. Steele,
1900-1.
Rev. E. Isaac,
1896-7.
H. S. Martin, Esq., 8.A., LL.B
1899-1900.
Hon. Legal Advisor.
G. P. Barber, Esq.
1898-4.
Trustee V.B, Fund,
Rev. S. Howard,
1898-9.
Rev. A. Is. Marshall, B.A
1901-2.


/ f| \ / \
m <\ I
Rev. S. P. Carey, M.A.
1901-2, 1903-4.
Trustee V.B. Fund.
Rev. F. E. Harry, M.A.,
1905-6.
Rev. W. J. Eddy,
1911-2.
Hon. H. F. Richardson, M.L.C.,
1904-5.
Minister for Forests, 1924-7.
Rev. A. Gordon. M.A.,
1910-11, 1913-4.
Professor Kernot. M.A., M.C.E.
1902-3.
Dean Engineering Melb. University
C. Carter, Esq.,
1909-10.
E. Purnell, Esq., M.L.A.
1912-3.


GEELONG, FENWICK STREET, 1859
At the request of the Baptist Home Missionary Society of
Great Britain the Rev. G. Slade reached Geelong in 1858
to follow the Rev. S. Hewlett, of Aberdeen Street, but it soon
became evident that his teaching was not sufficiently
Calvinistic to satisfy the membership, so he withdrew with
fourteen members in April 1859, an d an open membership
Church was formed that met in the Temperance Hall. In
1868 a Church was built in Fenwick Street, where Mr. Slade
laboured successfully till he was asked in 1875 to begin Home
Mission work in the Kerang District. On his leaving the
Rev. E. F. Kingdon, from South Australia, became pastor, and
the Church greatly prospered. He was followed by another
pastor from South Australia, the Rev. D. Badger, who was
renowned as a pioneer Home Missionary in the sister State.
Three years later he was succeeded by the Rev. W. J. Eddy
for ten years, when the Rev. G. Wainwright became pastor.
The Rev. T. Vigis after three years followed him, and then the
Rev. A. W. Bean for five years, and the Rev. W. J. Eddy for
a second term of four years. The Rev. R. A. E. Anderton
was pastor from 1916 to 1920, when the Rev. }. P. McCarthy
took up the work. He was then in feeble health, and within
a year was called to higher service. For some time, because
of removals by death and migration to the outer circle of
Geelong the congregations had lessened considerably, and
after supplies for a period it was reluctantly decided to dis-
band the Church and sell the building. This was effected in
1922. Three years later the proceeds of the sale were used
for the erection of a Church in East Geelong at a cost of
which is known as the Fenwick Memorial Church,
and in which is a marble tablet in memory of the Rev. G.
Slade. Here the work was successively carried on by Pastor
A. G. Baker for five years, by the Rev. A. Holland for another
five, and is now in the charge of the Rev. E. Cairns. Con-
sequent on the changes of population Fenwick Street proved


to be much too near to Aberdeen Street, and the new Church
is well placed in a rapidly growing district.
Rev. George Slade. Born 1825 in Hanslope, Buckinghamshire,
England. In 1848 entered Bristol Baptist College. After a pastorate
of six years in Cornwall came to Victoria in 1858. Nineteen years
at Fenwick Street, years at Kerang (see chapter on Home Mis-
sions), four years at Rockhampton, Queensland. Then spent life s
eventide at Moonee Ponds. Passed away 13th April, 1890. Brave,
big-hearted, self-forgetting.
George Martin. Timber merchant. Prominent in civic mat-
ters. Chairman Hospital Committee. Baptized by Rev. G. Slade.
Deacon and S.S. teacher for 46 years. President of Union 1898.
Subject of address—“ The Ministry of Business Men.” Passed away
1921. Among his loyal compeers were Bradley, Chew. W. Purnell,
Dickens, Potter, Wallis and others like-minded.
LOST RECORDS
Early records tell of the formation of a Baptist Church at
Gardiner in December 1865 with ten members, and of the
opening of a Church building in January 1866, the preachers
for the day being Revs. W. Bryant, James Taylor, and Mr.
D. Hamilton.
Also of the building of a Church at Truganina, near Werri-
bee, that was opened in April 1864 by the Revs. W. R. Wade
and James Taylor, and of the formation of a Church in 1868,
of which Mr. Wade became pastor.
Also of a Church being built in Colac by Mr. John Coleman
at his own expense that was opened by the Rev. W. Bryant
in August 1869.
Again of a Chapel opened at Malvern in September 1868
and of Baptisms by the Rev. D. Rees.
But no subsequent records have been preserved. Possibly
through changes of population the services were discontinued
and the buildings otherwise used.


Chapter VIII
PARTICULAR OR STRICT BAPTIST CHURCHES
“Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
sanctification of the Spirit.”—l Peter i. 2.
Hitherto in this history we have confined our attention to the
Baptist Churches belonging to the Association or Union, but
if we are to give a history of all the Baptists of Victoria we
must not omit the story of the Strict or Particular Baptist
Churches. We have already referred to the formation of the
English Baptist Church in Holland by John Smyth, a
Separatist Minister, in 1611. Soon after, thinking that their
stay in Holland seemed to show lack of courage and faith,
the Church was transferred to London. The Church was
Arminian in its theology, and the Churches that were formed
holding the same beliefs were called General Baptists, because
they believed that there was a general or universal atonement
for all men, the Churches holding the Calvinistic doctrine
that the Atonement was only for the Elect were termed
Particular, i.e., that Christ died for a particular number who
where elected to salvation before the creation of the world.
The distinction between General and Particular came very
early. In 1633 a Particular Baptist Church was constituted in
London. By 1644 there were seven Particular Baptist Churches
in England, and 39 belonged to the General Baptists. So
the matter went on, and when Melbourne was founded mem-
bers of both Churches were among the early Colonists. Mr.
J. J. Mouritz, in Fitzroy, was a representative of the Particular
Baptists, and the Rev. John Ham, in Collins Street, of the
General Baptists.
The first Strict or Particular Baptist Church in Melbourne
was organised by Pastor John Turner. The ministers of
Particular Baptist Churches refuse the title Reverend, prefer-
ring the term Pastor, since on their interpretation of verse 9,


“Holy and Reverend is His Name/’ in Psalm cxi, they believed
that the term Reverend should be given only to God. We
may admire their motive while we disagree with their
exegesis. How early Pastor Turner organised the Church
we do not know, but there lies before us as we write “A
Declaration of the Faith and Practice of the Church of Christ
under the pastoral care of John Turner.” This is dated sth
July, 1849. Except for two or three brief clauses the Declara-
tion would be gladly accepted by any of our Baptist Churches
to-day. It is carefully worded and very comprehensive of the
beliefs and government of the Church. In the following year,
1850, a Church was built at the corner of Lonsdale and Stephen
(Exhibition) Streets that was only demolished a few years ago.
This was the second oldest Baptist Church in Victoria, Collins
Street being the first. The Church was called Particular because
of its teachings regarding a limited Atonement, and Strict
because only baptized believers were admitted to the Lord’s
Supper. We have no record of the number of members of
the Church nor of the history of the Pastor, but judging from
“The Declaration” he must have been a man of fine powers
and strong character, and many to-day remember his son, for
many years Secretary of the South Yarra Church, and pro-
minent in our Association as President of the Local Preachers’
Society.
Before any Particular Church was opened in Melbourne one
existed in Launceston, Tasmania, under the charge of Pastor
Henry Dowling. This preacher came from England in 1834,
and died in 1869, in his 89th year. He had travelled and
preached much in the island and was highly esteemed. A
very fine painting of the Baptism of Christ was the work of
his son. In 1845, a young man, Daniel Allen, reached Laun-
ceston, and with thirty others, on one occasion, was baptized
by Pastor Dowling and joined his Church. Three years later
Daniel Allen came to Melbourne, and for a time worshipped
with the Church in Lonsdale Street. In 1853 he went to live
at Preston (then named Irish-town), where soon after a
Church was built. On returning to Melbourne, with a num-


ber who differed from Pastor Turner on the question of the
personality of the Holy Spirit, he left the cause in Lonsdale
Street and formed a new Church, whose meetings were held
in a room in Bourke Street, near the Post Office, belonging to
a bookseller named Charlwood. When, because of increasing
business, the room was no longer available, the Church re-
moved to the Mechanics’ Institute, then to the Protestant Hall,
where they continued for several years with constantly in-
creasing numbers, Mr. Allen serving the Church as Pastor
without any salary. In 1858 a Church, to seat 400 persons,
costing £ I6OO, was built in Market Lane off Bourke Street.
The cause continued to prosper, but the site, proving unsuit-
able for a Church, the building was sold, and a chapel in
Wellington Street, Colling wood, that had been built for a
congregation under Pastor S. Ward, was purchased, where
worship was held until Ebenezer Church was built in Victoria
Parade. The Church in Market Lane was purchased in 1869
by the Rev. James Taylor, and until last year was known as
the Gospel Hall in connection with Collins Street, the name,
Market Lane, being changed later to Brien’s Lane. In 1871
Pastor Allen removed to Sydney, where he succeeded Pastor
McCure at the Church in Castlereagh Street, and where he
maintained a vigorous and successful pastorate for 21 years
till his death in September 1891, in his 68th year. He was a
popular preacher and a noted lecturer on Protestant Prin-
ciples. In reporting his death, “The Daily Telegraph” said:
—“ln the pulpit he was generally admitted to be a very
original, eloquent and heart-searching preacher, and it was
often said that he was never wearisome. He always spoke
extempore, the possession of a marvellous memory being an
invaluable aid to him. His labours were numerous and
reached far beyond his own denomination, proving that he
was not cramped by his own particular Church. By his con-
gregation he was looked upon in the light of a father, and
his cheerful face and kindly voice will be missed very much.”
Returning to an earlier period Pastor John Bunyan McCure,
from Kent, arrived in Melbourne in December 1852, and in a


little time made his home in Geelong. In 1856 Zion Church
was built in Little Ryrie Street, where large congregations
gathered and a prosperous cause established. James Mathews,
father of L. C. Mathews, the present secretary of Aberdeen
Street Church, was one of the members. Five years later Mr.
McCure removed to Sydney, where he constituted the Church
in Castlereagh Street and ministered to it for nine years. He
was followed in Geelong by Pastor S. Day. The Church in
Little Ryrie Street has continued till to-day. A second Church
was established in Saffron Street, Chilwell, about 1872, and
to this Church Pastor F. Fullard ministered from 1875 to
1884. Mr. Fullard came to Australia in 1865. After his stay
in Geelong he was pastor of the Church in Victoria Parade
for twelve years. In 1907 he was called to Castlereagh Street,
Sydney, where he exercised a gracious ministry till he passed
from earth in his 74th year on 3rd November, 1912. His
sons are well known in our Melbourne Churches, and one,
Mr. A. F. Fullard, is prominent in the Victorian Union, and
was its President in 1936. A special number of “The Aus-
tralian Particular Baptist Magazine,” of which Pastor Fullard
had been Editor, gave a full account of his life and ministry
of fifty years, and contained an appreciation from one who
for 35 years knew him intimately, in which the words occur,
“Having been made his confidant, I can truly say he was a
man after God’s own heart. He was a man who could always
keep his own counsel, and if any of his members upset him
they never knew it. He loved all who sat under him, and it
was that charity, that great love for all God’s people, whoever
they might be, that enabled him to take rebuffs in a quiet
spirit. He took it all to a throne of grace.” The Church at
Chilwell was closed for several years, but lately was purchased
by the Aberdeen Street Church and removed to North Shore,
near the Ford motor works, in the centre of a growing popu-
lation, and was officially opened by Mr. A. F. Fullard on the
27th November, 1937. It was very fitting and interesting
that Mr. Fullard should reopen the building in which for nine
years his father had laboured.


In May 1859 a cause was started at Rowe Street, Colling-
wood. Under the leadership of Pastor Strickland the Church
removed to George Street. From this Church in George
Street Pastor J. W. Bamber established a cause in Richmond;
others, led by Pastor Cuttle, joined the Church in Victoria
Parade.
Another Strict Church was formed in Henry Street, Haw-
thorn, by Pastor Perrin. He was succeeded by Pastors S.
Ward, James Hicks, and H. A. Flitton. In 1880 J. Chandler,
from George Street, joined the Church, and under his leader-
ship the Church building was removed to Burwood Road
and enlarged.
In addition to the above a Church was constituted at Eagle-
hawk by Pastor D. Allen in January 1868 with twelve mem-
bers. Soon others were baptized in the White Hills Church,
lent for the occasion. A Church was built in 1869 at a cost
of and Pastor S. Day, from Geelong, took charge of the
work. He was followed by Pastor J. W. Bamber, and in
1877, on the suggestion of the Rev. J. Gregson, of Sandhurst,
the Rev. F. J. Wilkin, on the completion of his college course,
was invited to the pastorate, and six months later the Church
joined the Baptist Association.
Other Churches were formed at Ballarat, Portland, Greens-
borough and Camperdown; the last, so far as we know, is still
in existence, and some little time back was in the charge of
Pastor T. H. Errey. The cause started by Daniel Allen at
Preston continued for some years, and ultimately some of its
members, among whom was Mr. Vincent, instituted the cause
at Coburg.
The foregoing is a very incomplete account of the work
of a number of earnest men and women, who were fully con-
vinced of the authority of the Scriptures, who believed im-
plicitly in the sovereignty of God, but whose conception of
the Church was so restricted that they could not success-
fully appeal to our generation. Still in these days of wide-
spread indifference to the gospel and of moral laxity in civic


and social life we would be better for more of the unflinching
conviction and puritanic sternness of the Particular Baptists of
the past.
“Professor Gwatldn, of Cambridge University, in his Church
history, writes: —‘We have decisive evidence that infant baptism is
no direct institution either of the Lord Himself or of His apostles.
There is no trace of it in the New Testament. Every discussion
of the subject presupposes persons old enough to have faith and
repentance. Immersion was the rule. The whole symbolism of
baptism requires immersion, and so St. Paul explains it/
“When the baptism of infants became a rule, as it did after the
fourth century, there was no small risk of turning the sacrament
into a piece of magic, which works without regard to moral condi-
tions; and the risk was not entirely removed by the use of sponsors
(first found in Tertullian) to connect the infant with the conditions
of adult baptism. There was still a temptation to transfer those
conditions too summarily to the infant, as if the promises annexed
in Scripture to faith and repentance, and to faith and repentance only,
must of necessity belong to innocence. When once we come to this,
we build up the whole theory of Christian life on an assumption we
have no right to make.”


Chapter IX
THE STORY OF THE CHURCHES
lI—THE ERA OF THE GOLDFIELDS
“I will build my Church; and the gates of Hades shall not prevail
against it.”—Matt. xvi. 18.
BALLARAT, 1857
We have already mentioned that a great influx of population
followed the discovery of gold in 1851. In ten years it in-
creased sevenfold. More Churches were urgently needed.
One of the richest goldfields was Ballarat. Soon after 1852
it was estimated that 30,000 persons were in the district. In
1856 the Rev. Alex. Morrison, Minister of the Independent
Church, Collins Street, Melbourne, invited Independents,
Baptists and Presbyterians to meet him in Ballarat to consider
united meetings for worship. This was agreed to, but the
coalition did not last long. In 1857 the Baptists withdrew,
and in the following year Mr. Ebenezer Hooker, a deacon of
Aberdeen Street, Geelong, baptized five persons in Ballarat
and became pastor of the Baptist Community for fifteen
months. They met in Yuille Street, a street named after the
founder of Ballarat. In September 1858 the Rev. Wm. Sutton,
just arrived from England, became pastor. The Church was
Close Communion. Since Mr. Sutton did not approve of this,
he withdrew with fifteen of the members. Land was bought
in Dawson Street and a Church, that is now the School Hall,
was built at a total cost of £ IO2O. The building was opened
for worship on 12th February, iB6O, by the Rev. I. New, of
Albert Street. The Church was constituted on 22nd March
of that year with nineteen members, who all signed a solemn
covenant of unusual precision and comprehensiveness. Three
years later an adjoining allotment of land was purchased and


plans made for the erection of a larger Church. This was
the present fine stone Church opened on 6th November, 1867,
when the Rev. James Taylor preached. The Fellowship had
grown strong; the Church cost with seats for 600.
Unhappily, soon after, doctrinal difference developed, and
27 members withdrew and established a new cause in Camp
Street, of which the Rev. S. Finklestein became pastor. This
offshoot lasted for about ten years, when it was disbanded.
After a successful ministry of eleven years Mr. Sutton resigned
and was followed bv the Rev. A. W. Grant, from Tasmania.
In 1875, after a pastorate of years, Mr. Grant gave up the
work, and in 1876 the Rev. Wm. Clark, also from Tasmania,
entered on a fruitful ministry that continued for nine years.
In that time the property was improved and all debts cleared
off. Mr. Clark was specially gifted as a pastor and for work
in the Sunday School and Christian Endeavour Societies, and
210 persons, including many young people, joined the Church.
The Rev. A. Bird’s gracious ministry of two years followed.
Then in 1889 the Rev. Dr. Thomas Porter became pastor. For
five years the Church greatly prospered, congregations were
large, the Young Men’s Bible Class had a membership of 60,
with their brass band they conducted outdoor services, many
were baptized, and in the five years 200 names were added to
the Church roll. In September 1894 an exchange of pastors
was effected, Dr. Porter going to Petersham, New South
Wales, and the Rev. A. J. Soper coming from Petersham to
Ballarat. The good work continued and the Sunday School
had 420 scholars. After years Mr. Soper was followed by
the Rev. F. E. Harry, a fervid evangelistic preacher, and for
eight years the Church flourished, 205 additions being made
to the fellowship. In 1908 Mr. Harry accepted a call to
Auburn, and the Rev. H. E. Hughes from Unley Park, South
Australia, succeeded him. Two years later the Jubilee of the
Church was celebrated by a series of enthusiastic gatherings.
Since then the Church has been ministered to by the follow-
ing pastors: —Revs. L. Sale-Harrison, J. C. Farquhar, S. A.
McDonald, A. E. Blackwell, H. A. Horsfall, W. P. Hodge,


and P. C. Bennett, who came from Pymble, N.S.W., in 1936.
This historic Church in a progressive city is full of vigour
and hope. Its members honour the memories of such
workers as Messrs. Wallace, W. Bishop, A. E. Ewins, R. Gray,
F. Fricke, A. Stevens, and many others.
George Parker. Member of the Church in 1862. Two years
later chosen Deacon. In 1871 appointed Secretary. Held position
till his death in 1920. S.S. Superintendent 30 years. A most devoted
faithful servant of Christ.
SEBASTOPOL, 1868
Soon after the gold diggings were opened at Ballarat the
alluvial leads were traced to the west, and the Sebastopol
Plateau became famous for the yields of gold. In 1868 a
Baptist Church was formed, with the Rev. W. Tranter as
pastor. As there was a strong Welsh element in the com-
munity the Church became known as the Welsh Baptist
Church, and the Rev. Isaac Williams was chosen as pastor.
The cause flourished until the lessened gold production led
to a loss of population. Some years ago the Church placed
itself under the direction of the Home Mission Committee,
and services were maintained for some time. Eventually the
Church was closed in 1929 and the building sold, the proceeds
being donated to the Ballarat West Church.
BALLARAT, VICTORIA STREET, 1903
A branch of the Dawson Street Church, Ballarat, was opened
in Ballarat East in December 1903 by the Rev. S. P. Carey,
M.A., of Collins Street, and in the following year the Rev.
W. O. Ward was called to the pastorate, in which he con-
tinued for several years, his labours being greatly supported
by Messrs. F. Morris, F. Fricke, J. Ewins, Ainsworth, and
others. In 1908 a W.B. Church was erected in Victoria Street
at a cost of that was greatly improved when a brick
front was added in 1929. The Church was formally con-


stituted in 1909. The successive pastors of the Church have
been:—Revs. S. E. Dorman, P. W. Cairns, A. J. Whitbourn,
H. Boulter, A. W. Cooper, F. A. Feeder, and the present
pastor, J. W. Fisher. Of these the longest pastorate was that
of Mr. Feeder. Mr. R. H. Walker was an enthusiastic Secre-
tary for nine years, and was succeeded by Mr. R. E. Rundell.
A Fadies’ Guild is of great assistance to the Church. A Manse
and School rooms have been added to the Church property.
The Church is well situated and has a definite mission to the
eastern part of the city.
TYFDEN, 1858
The first entry in an old minute book of the Woodside
Church, Tylden, reads: —“Regular services for the worship of
God were commenced by Mr. Smith in the dwelling house of
Mr. Thomas Clowes on the Ist September, 1858.” After
labouring for six months, Mr. Smith was succeeded by the
Rev, Ingram Moody. Mr. Moody was born in England in
1806 and trained for the Baptist Ministry at Stepney College.
Coming to Geelong in 1849 he ministered to a Church in
Fenwick Street for ten years, whence he removed to Tylden
in 1859. Six months after entering on his pastorate a Church
was erected at a cost of on land given by Mr. Clowes.
The Church was Interdenominational. There Mr. Moody
laboured faithfully for 36 years, preaching also at East
Trentham. When his health failed in 1890 the services were
sustained by Mr. F. Partridge and the Rev. J. Downing, of
Kyneton. Mr. Moody died on 9th May, 1895, m his 90th
year. For fifteen years Mr. Partridge carried on the work.
Somewhat later the cause was discontinued, and in 1922 the
building was removed to Altona. The worshippers at this
seaside Church can think of a kindly, reticent man, who for
the greater part of a long life spent himself in extending the
Kingdom of God.


KYNETON, 1860
The first intimation we have of Baptist work in Kyneton is
that services were occasionally conducted in iB6O by the Rev.
I. Moody, of Tylden. Then that a Church building was
opened by the Rev. I. New on 26th May, 1861. Two months
later a local preacher from Cambridge, England, Mr. W.
Wilkin, arrived in Melbourne and was asked by Mr. New to
supply the Church for six months. He was followed by the
Rev. J. W. Bentley in December 1862. The Rev. J. Reid was
pastor from 1866 till 1869, to be succeeded by the Rev. H. S.
Cramer for three years. Then the Rev. J. Gregson ministered
to the Church for five years, and in his time the Church made
such progress that the building had to be enlarged. Some
of the leading workers at that time were Messrs. Dobinson,
Bethell, Daniel, Anderson, Armstrong, Grant and Maxwell.
Mr. Gregson was followed by the Revs. L. B. Brown, A.
Steele, R. Williamson, J. Downing, and J. H. Pryce, and the
Church continued to prosper. Since 1896 the Church has
had ten pastors for brief periods, the longest pastorate being
that of the Rev. F. Clemens, for eight years. About 1870 a
good Manse was built. The town, in the midst of a rich
agricultural district, is very substantial, but our Church has
not maintained the progress of the early days. When the
Church was built in Piper Street it was in the centre of the
population, but the town has grown away from it, and pos-
sibly the location of the Church has hindered its advance.
STAWELL, 1860
Pleasant Creek was the early name of the district now
known as Stawell. Much gold was found there, and the dig-
gings attracted a large population. One of the first grants
of the Baptist Association in 1862 was to assist the cause at
Pleasant Creek. In 1868 the Rev. J. C. McLachlan, from
Tower Hill (Koroit), became pastor of the Church that met
for worship in the Mechanics’ Institute, and the “Argus” of


that date told of an outdoor baptism witnessed by 1000 per-
sons. Obviously the Baptist cause awakened interest. In
1869 a brick Church was erected at a cost of ;£noo, and the
Rev. L. Davies succeeded Mr. McLachlan as pastor, to be
followed by the Revs. J. R. Brennand, W. Dinnis, and H.
Phillips. The Church was known as the Welsh Baptist
Church. In the course of years the building became unsafe
and was closed for worship by order of the Board of Health.
In 1892 the Rev. A. A. Medley was appointed to Stawell by
the Home Mission Committee, and the building, at consider-
able cost, was renovated, Mr. Medley’s work was successful,
and he was followed by the Revs. F. Clemens, A. R. Thomp-
son and A. J. Whitbourn, and the cause steadily prospered,
becoming independent of the Home Mission. Since 1908
there has been a succession of eleven pastors, and the cause is
again under the direction of the Home Mission. A good
Manse has been built adjoining the Church, the Rev. S.
McKittrick, L.Th., is the present pastor, and the prospects of
the Church are good.
ARARAT
This is a good town 130 miles from Melbourne on the rail-
way line to Adelaide and an important railway junction. Very
early occasional Baptist services were held here by the Rev.
McLachlan, from Stawell, and later by the Rev. C. M.
Cherbury, from Beaufort, but it was not till Mr. E. Dash
removed to Ararat from Kerang that regular services were
established. They were inaugurated by a Mission conducted
by the Rev. W. R. Hiddlestone, of Brunswick, in May 1881.
A building at a nominal rental was granted by the town
council, and for two years Mr. Dash sustained the work, with
Jackson’s Creek as an outstation. A Church was formed with
24 members, and in 1883 a building was erected at a cost of
Three years later Mr. Dash removed to Sydney, and
ultimately the Church building was sold. It is regrettable that
in such an important centre our cause was allowed to lapse;


possibly if it had been linked up with Staweli, only nineteen
miles away, it could have been maintained.
CASTLEMAINE, 1861
At first the district was known as the Forest Creek diggings,
and in the midst of the tents and huts a small Church was
erected at Aberdeen Hill and opened for worship in September
1857- hi our account of the opening years we recorded the
fact that the Rev. fames Smith, from India, gathered the
Baptists of Castlemame together, and in 1861 a building was
purchased from the Presbyterians and the Church constituted.
A Sunday School was at once started, the postmaster of the
town, Mr. Francis Freyer, being Superintendent. A memorial
tablet in the Church tells how he lost his life when the ill-
fated “London” went down in the Bay of Biscay in 1866.
Though Mr. Smith was on furlough through enfeebled health
he wrought gratuitously with the true missionary spirit, and
during his first year as pastor 296 persons were received into
fellowship. Mr. Smith returned to India in 1863, and has been
followed by James Ewence, H. S. Cramer, C. M. Cherbury, C.
Pickering, F. Fenwick, W. A. Whitney, E. Vaughan, H. D.
Archer, J. Blaikie, W. O. Ward, F. H. Green, J. R. McCue,
I. W. Hopkins, A. J. Whitbourn, and the present pastor, A. J.
Innocent. During Mr. Ward’s pastorate a good school hall
was built, and at the end of 1937 a fine Manse on an allotment
adjoining the Church. On a lofty hill in Castlemame there
is a tall monument that commemorates the name of O’Hara
Burke, who was Superintendent of Police in the town before
he led his exploring expedition across Australia in iB6O.
Among the earliest workers in the Church were H. Roberts,
fi' - Heley, F. Emery, whose son George was for many years
the Chief Commissioner of Savings Banks in Victoria, J. Nall,
whose grandson, P. C. Nall, laboured so successfully amid the
Garos of India, W. Wilkin, a deacon for fifty years, the father
F- J* and Ruth, known in Home and Foreign Mission
work, with many others. Like all gold mining centres, the


population of Castlemaine has been very fluctuating. The rich
promise of prosperity at the first has not been realised, but
the Church has rendered good service to the community, and
since the town is now prosperous its prospects are good.
MALDON, 1861
Eleven miles from Castlemaine, on the slopes of Mount
Tarrengower, is the little town of Maldon, once a scene of
much mining activity. There in June 1861 a small Chapel
was built and a Church constituted of 24 members, with H.
Morton as pastor. He was followed in 1865 by the Rev. G.
Rickerby, who was succeeded by the Rev. W. Tranter, an able
preacher, uncle of the Rev. L. E. Tranter. In his time a
second Church was opened for the Welsh Baptists, who had
the Rev. David Morgan as their pastor. The two Churches
became united under the pastorate of the Rev. D. Corbet, but
in a little time again separated. After the separation the
second Church was termed the English Baptist Church, of
which the Rev. Thomas Beeson was pastor. He laboured in
the most self-denying fashion and with great acceptance in
the town for 35 years. On his death the Churches again
united under Pastor H. W. Long, who was succeeded in 1930
by Pastor A. G. Baker, and is now ministered to by the Rev.
E. F. Peffer.
NEWSTEAD, 1859
About ten miles from Castlemaine, in another direction, is
the dairying district of Newstead, but in the mining days was
an important centre. There a Church was formed in Novem-
ber 1859 with 17 members, the Rev. I. New preaching three
times on the occasion. A brick Church was shortly after-
wards built and the Rev. T. Taylor settled as pastor. The
cause went steadily on for many years until through the teach-
ings of some free-lance evangelists the Church became hope-


lessly divided on questions of doctrine and polity, with the
result that the Church was disbanded and the building sold.
TARNAGULLA, 1861
At another mining centre noted for the big nuggets which
have been found in the locality, Baptist services were com-
menced very early, and in 1861 a Church was formed by Rev.
S. Wilson, from Kyneton, with ten members. The cause pros-
pered, and in July 1864 a chapel was opened at a cost of
The first pastor was the Rev. H. Morton, who removed from
Maldon, and in 1862 the Rev. W. Tranter succeeded him.
Subsequently the Revs. A. F. Porter and S. Finkelstein main-
tained the pastorate, but, with the collapse of the gold mining,
the population became very small and the Church gradually
ceased to exist.
BEAUFORT, 1864
One other cause in a mining district calls for a passing
notice. In July 1864 Mr. C. M. Cherbury, a Lay Reader of
the Church of England, was baptized at Dawson Street, Bal-
larat, and, full of evangelistic fervour, decided to begin Baptist
services at Beaufort. They were speedily successful. A Church
was organised, and in November 1864 a chapel was opened
for worship. Mr. Cherbury was full of zeal and energy, and
occasionally visited Ararat and held services in the Common
School. He was followed by the Revs. W. C. M. Harvey and
W. Dinnis. The cause declined after Mr. Cherbury left, and
in 1874 its name ceased to appear in the list of Baptist
Churches.
BRUNSWICK, 1862
With the expansion of Melbourne the Albert Street Church
became eager for the extension of the Denomination, and fos-
tered several new causes. One of these was at Brunswick. In
1859 Messrs. George Burton and John Wallis commenced
Sunday Gospel services. With several Independents a Union
Church was instituted, and meetings were held in the Court
House, where Mr. E. G. Lewis preached for 18 months. A


small brick Church was opened in June 1861 on the site of
the present Church. The Union did not last long, possibly
because of the pronounced convictions of Baptists. Though
several Union Churches have been established, none of them
have proved successful. A separation took place in 1862. Mr.
Lewis resigned the pastorate in 1864, and after a few months
was succeeded by the Rev. J. W. Bentley from Kyneton, under
whose ministry the Church made quiet progress for nine years.
When he retired the work was maintained by supplies, among
whom was a young man from South Melbourne, Mr. W. R.
Hiddlestone, who led a small band of singers. He was soon
known as the Singing Evangelist, and speedily the Church
became too small for the congregations. The evening services
were transferred to the Mechanics’ Institute, where crowds
gathered and a gracious revival ensued. Then part of the pre-
sent Church was built, many materials and much labour being
freely given, one condition being that the Church must be
opened free of any debt. A very fruitful ministry of six years
ended in 1882, when the Rev. J. H. Shalberg, from London,
became pastor. During his time a school hall was built on
land adjoining the Church. In 1884 the Rev. E. Isaac, one of
C. H. Spurgeon’s evangelists, succeeded Mr. Shalberg, and for
gj years the Church increased in strength. The Rev. }. Carson
followed for two years, and in April 1897 the Rev. D. }.
Graham, also from Spurgeon’s Pastors’ College, accepted the
call of the Church. He became known as the sympathetic
friend and helper of all in distress, and when he left after
a pastorate of thirteen years it was with general regret. In
November 1910 the Rev. F. W. Norwood left Canterbury for
Brunswick because in its population of 32,000 he saw an
enlarged field of service. In the second year of his ministry
the Jubilee of the Church was celebrated with great rejoicings.
At that time it had a membership of 220, with 530 S.S.
scholars and 115 C.E. members. The total cost of its build-
ings, including a good Manse, has been Mr. Norwood
left for North Adelaide in 1913, and since then the Church
has had as its pastors the Revs. J. Robertson, J. Worboys, W.


M. Cartwright, H. F. Wright. The present pastor, Rev. Eric
Evans, began his ministry in 1932. Ministers come and go,
but loyal deacons and others sustain the cause year after year.
Among these are gladly remembered and honoured, apart from
the foundation members of the Church—Messrs. }. Jenkin,
Jesse Burton, W. Gilbert (Sunday School worker from Mr.
Hiddlestone’s days until now), F. W. Biggs, C. Benson (choir
master for thirty years), G. H. Sampson (secretary for eighteen
years), and many others, with a host of lady helpers such as
Mrs. Frith and Mrs. Jenkin, who is now in her ninety-fifth
year. The Church has had a fine history and is in a splendid
position to continue its ministry of aggressive evangelism.
FITZROY, GEORGE STREET, 1863
After the death of Pastor J. J. Mouritz in 1868, the Church
in Princes Street, Fitzroy, ceased to meet, but meanwhile
Baptist work had been commenced further north as settlement
advanced. As early as 1854 Baptists and Independents met
together for worship in Mr. Hugh Templeton’s school, North
Collingwood. In 1855 a small Church, 30 xSO feet, was built
in George Street. This was a bush track, a street only in name.
In 1861 the services ceased, and the building which stood on
the site of the present State School was bought by the Educa-
tion Department. In this building a Sunday School was started
by the Albert Street Church with fifteen scholars and Mr.
Peter Johnstone as Superintendent. There also Gospel services
were conducted for 2-J years by the Albert Street Christian
Instruction Society. In 1863 a Church was formed of fifteen
members from Collins and Albert Streets. Mr. Thomas
Hamilton, a member of the Rev. James Taylor’s Preachers’
Class, was the pastor. In February 1864 he was ordained to
the ministry, the Revs. W. Poole, I. New and D. Rees conduct-
ing the service. Ihe Church prospered, and in the first year
56 members were added. In 1865 land was purchased in
George Street for £275, but in that year Mr. Hamilton, for
health reasons, removed to the warmer climate of Queensland.
In November the Rev. W. Bryant became pastor, though to


assist the Church he continued in business for some time. In
December 1866 the George Street Church was opened for
worship, built at a cost of over £ 2OOO. The members practised
self-denial, and by February 1870 the debt was cleared off.
The Church prospered; in 1868 there were 100 baptized, mak-
ing the total membership 313. Tracts written by Mr. Bryant
were freely distributed, open air services were regularly held
at four centres, and a branch Church was started in 1867 at
Separation. But Mr. Bryant was in delicate health, and passed
away on 26th March, 1872, in his thirty-third year, greatly
beloved for his goodness and earnest labours. He was fol-
lowed by the Rev. C. M. Cherbury for two years, and then
by the Rev. G. P. Lush for four years, in whose time the school
hall was enlarged. Then ensued the fruitful ministry of Dr.
Thomas Porter for three years, when land was bought for the
senior class rooms. Dr. Porter was followed by the Rev. E.
Harris, who maintained a vigorous ministry for years,
during which time there were many additions to the member-
ship, when land was bought in Yarra Street, Abbotsford,
and a Mission Hall erected for and a new cause opened at
Clifton Hill. The Rev. E. Isaac became pastor in January
1895, and continued the successful work for years. The
Mission Hall was sold and the school enlarged at a cost of
£650. The Rev. A. H. Collins followed for years, and in
September 1905 the Rev. G. J. Mackay, from Devonport, Tas-
mania, carried on the work of aggressive evangelism, when 80
new members joined the fellowship. In 1910 the Rev. W. M.
Cartwright was called to the pastorate, and in 1913 the Jubilee
of the Church was celebrated with much rejoicing. Since then
the Church has had for its pastors the Revs. R. Goodman, J.
C. Farquhar, J. Allison, and since 1930 the Rev. T. P. Trinham.
Because of the removal of many of the members to the outer
suburbs and the growth of factories in the vicinity of the
Church instead of comfortable residences, for some years the
congregations have greatly lessened, and George Street, with
other Churches similarly situated, is a problem for the Union.
The problem is not peculiar to Melbourne. In England and


America men speak of down-town Churches. But since the
population near the Church is greater than in its palmiest days
the thought arises that the Christian Church has failed to
adapt its evangelistic methods to the changed conditions of
to-day. In the days of His flesh, it was the religious classes
that scorned Jesus Christ, whereas the publicans and sinners
gathered round Him, and the common people heard Him
gladly. Possibly in the down-town districts a drastic alteration
of our methods may be necessary. Certainly we have too
readily yielded to the spirit of defeatism.
George Street has given many ministers to our Denomina-
tion. From Mr. Bryant’s preachers’ class T. C. Davis and W.
A. Whitney. In the time of G. P. Lush, C. Boyall and J. Down-
ing went to Spurgeon’s Pastors’ College, and in E. Harris’ time
A. R. Thompson and G. P. Rees entered the Victorian College.
Among its prominent workers have been J. H. Cole, C.
Edgerton, G. Sweetland, D. Watson, W. Spicer, W. R. Ball,
G. A. Green, P. Rendle, E. H. Jenkin, G. Harratt, R. H. Best,
T. Upton, }. Simpson, and a great many more, some of whom
still speak of 'good old George Street’’ with joyous recollec-
tion.
Dr. Thomas Porter. Baptized by J. J. Mouritz in the garden
baptistery, Princes Street, Fitzroy. To U.S.A. Gained Medical
Degree. Returned to Melbourne. Pastor George Street, Bendigo,
Ballarat, then to Petersham, N.S.W. A fervid successful evangelist.
A constant speaker at Conventions for the deepening of the spiritual
life. Believed that on every normal Christian the power of the
Holy Spirit should accompany baptism. Died in Sydney in old age.
DAYLESFORD, 1862
The rich alluvial diggings around Daylesford early attracted
many miners, but no record has been preserved of the begin-
nings of Baptist work amongst them. The first notice we
have is the brief statement that in March 1862 a Church was
formed with 14 members and that besides the work in the
township there were two outside preaching stations. A Church
building was opened in 1863, and the Rev. H. S. Cramer was
the minister. When he left to become pastor of the Castle-


maine Church the services were continued by the students
from the Rev. James Taylor’s preachers’ class. After that the
work remained apparently in abeyance till the Rev. W. J.
Eddy, then pastor of the Maldon Church, proposed that a
circuit should be formed of three Churches —Maldon, Newstead
and Daylesford. The Baptists of Daylesford heartily agreed,
and in 1886 a Church was duly constituted, and the present
brick building erected in Camp Street at a cost of /700.
When Mr. Eddy left the district the circuit plan was aban-
doned, and the Rev. S. T. Pitman, on leaving college, became
pastor of the Daylesford Church. It was an initial mistake,
since the Church was not strong enough to have a minister
for itself alone. A similar mistake has been frequently made.
At one period an attempt was made to link the cause with
the Kyneton Church, but the plan was soon abandoned. For
some years now the cause has been under the care of the
Home Mission Committee.
HAMILTON, 1863
The district of Hamilton is one of the most beautiful in
Victoria, of slightly undulating country with rich volcanic
soil. Naturally it was early occupied by graziers from Port-
land, and has enjoyed constant prosperity. In 1855 Mr. Donald
McNaughton arrived from Regent Place Church, Glasgow,
and, with his friends, started services in the Foresters’ Hall,
Goldsmith Street, in 1863. In January 1867 the Rev. J. C.
McLachlan, of Tower Hill, visited Hamilton, and organised a
Baptist Church. A brick Church at a cost of /,800 was built
in 1868. The Rev. J. E. Brennand was pastor in 1869, followed
by E. J. Henderson in 1871, succeeded by his father, the Rev.
E. Henderson, in 1874, who maintained a successful pastorate
for 17 years. During that time the Church was enlarged and
the Manse built. The membership increased to too persons
and the S.S. scholars to 130. Mrs. Shipley, a present member,
daughter of Mrs. McNaughton, taught in the original kinder-
garten. The names of McDonald, Dash, Filmer and Stuchbery
are prominent in the work of the Church. Mr. Henderson


had been a pastor in Scotland; he arrived in Victoria in 1857,
and because of old age retired from pastoral service in 1890.
He was President of the Union in 1883. He was succeeded
by the Revs. A. Hyde, R. Williamson and C. Pickering. In
Mr. Williamson’s pastorate a branch Church was built at South
Hamilton that was later brought into the town and placed
at the rear of the Church. In 1898 the Church was in a
depressed state, and applied to the Home Mission for help, so
the Rev. E. Dybing was transferred from Warracknabeal to
Hamilton, and ever since the Church has been subsidised by
the Home Mission. There have been frequent changes in the
pastorate, the last three being E. H. Came, A, W. Smith, E.
Roberts-Thompson, followed in 1937 by T. F. Keyte. The
membership is not large, but there is a good Sunday School,
the building has been made very attractive, the Church is
united and anticipates a return to the prosperity of former
days. Mr. A. E. Greed has been secretary for the last 13 years.
Ebenezer E. Henderson. Born Fifeshire, Scotland 1810. To
Victoria 1857. One of first ministers at Bendigo. Then Geelong.
Next to Hinton, N.S.W. Back to Victoria for six years. Pastor at
Warrnambool. Thence to Hamilton for 18 years. Retired in 1892
to Casterton. Died 28th April, 1904, aged 95. A veteran pioneer,
WILLI AMSTOWN, 1868
On nth October, 1868, a Church at Williamstown was con-
stituted by the Rev. D. Rees with 12 members, but this was
not the beginning of Baptist work there. At the first land
sale in Melbourne in June 1837 allotments were sold at Wil-
liamstown, named after King William IV. in the expectation
that it would be the principal seaport for the colony. For six
or seven years before the Church was formed Baptist services
were held first in the home of Mr. Armstrong in Cecil Street
and then in the Presbyterian School Hall conducted by young
men from Collins Street Church. From 1868 to 1883 the
Church had several brief pastorates. In 1883, acting on the
advice of the Rev. S. Chapman, the Rev. }. Downing was
chosen to be pastor. From that time the Church steadily


advanced. The building in Cecil Street was opened for wor-
ship in 1884, and a branch cause was started at Newport.
When Mr. Downing resigned in 1887 the Rev. H. Coombs
became pastor. A happy ministry of seven years was
followed by that of the Rev. W. A. Whitney. This
was a time of rich blessing, ended after eight years by
the pastor’s death. Then for 3! years the Rev. B. Hewison
was pastor, succeeded by the Rev. J. C. Martin for three
years and the Rev. E. Isaac for four years. In 1916
the Rev. E. Dybing accepted the call of the Church, and
in his pastorate the Jubilee of the Church was celebrated.
After four years’ quiet progress the Church had again to
mourn the loss of its pastor by death. Since that time the
Revs. W. A. Cooper and S. B. Goble occupied the position till
the Rev. W. H. Holloway succeeded in 1935. The records of
the Church contain the names of a number of earnest, faithful
men, who strove for the extension of the Saviour’s Kingdom—
Mr. I. Hopkins, deacon and treasurer for many years; Mr. J.
Hutchinson, secretary for 15 years; Mr. J. Sinclair, secretary
for 18 years; Messrs. Rogers, Bradshaw, Ogston and many
others. The Church has had a fine history and its work to-
day is full of promise.
W. A. Whitney. Born London. To Queensland 1865. Then
Melbourne, Studied for Ministry under Rev. T. Ness. Pastor for
six years at Brighton, six years at Warrnambool, 16 years at Castle-
maine. To Williamstown in 1896. Passed away 7th April, 1904.
A loving, faithful pastor. His last words—“l can see the light
shining.”
ST. KILDA, 1864
A Baptist cause was started here in June 1864 by Mr. C.
Cater, from New South Wales, and a Church was opened in
Alma Road in the following year. For four years the Rev.
E, G. Lewis was pastor, when he was followed by the Rev.
W. Dinnis. From 1871 the Rev. G. P. Lush was pastor, fol-
lowed in 1874 by the Rev. W. Jones. In his pastorate a brick
Church to seat 400 was built in Crimea Street at a cost of
£ 2OOO. In 1885 the Rev. W. Clark was transferred from Bal-


larat to St. Kilda, where he remained for seven years, when
he was followed by the Rev. R. Williamson for six years.
During their ministries the Church was very prosperous.
Then, largely through changes in the population, the con-
gregation steadily declined, till in 1916 the Church was closed.
In 1925 the building was sold and the money received was
devoted to the building of the Church at Darling.
Meanwhile a second cause had been commenced at South
St. Kilda. In 1881 services were held in the Town Hall by
Mr. Conibee. A Church was formed principally of members
from Crimea Street. For five years the Rev. G. W. Gillings
maintained a successful ministry, and when he left for mis-
sionary work at Bangalore, India, there was a Church of 117
members, with 250 scholars. Soon after he was followed by
the Rev. }. T. Evans, and since population was rapidly increas-
ing at Balaclava, the Church was removed to a rented building
in Blanche Street. Mr. Evans carried on the work for twenty
years, and in 1907 the Rev. H. R. Stewart became pastor, and
in his days the Church in Pakington Street was built. For
13 years Mr. Stewart ministered to the people, and in his
honour the Church is now known as the Stewart Memorial
Church. After Mr. Stewart removed to Wangaratta the
Church was supplied by the Rev. E. Harris for three years,
and since then the Revs. A. G. Bennett and A. J. Innocent
sustained the pastorate, which has just been assumed by the
Rev. J. J. English, from Launceston.
WARRNAMBOOL, 1864
Warrnambool is one of Victoria’s finest seaside towns, sur-
rounded by rich volcanic soil so suitable for dairying purposes
that the famed Nestles Company established extensive milk-
preserving factories in the neighbourhood. But long before
that Baptists met for fellowship in the home of Mr. Andrew
Griffiths. Mr. Griffiths and also Mrs. Wooles for 54 years
continued in that fellowship. In a little time regular Baptist
services were held in the Temperance Hall, with the Rev. }.
Brennand as pastor. He was succeeded by the Revs, fames


Ewence in 1865 and Ebenezer Henderson in 1868. A stone
Church in Koroit Street was opened in the following year,
the Rev. John Reid being the preacher for the occasion. In
1873 the Rev. W. A. Whitney was called to the pastorate to
be followed after six years by the Rev. C. Pickering. The
Rev. Alex. Steele succeeded him in 1883, in whose day there
were many additions to the membership. Among those bap-
tized by Mr. Steele were two brothers who became prominent
in the Denomination, Messrs. G. P. and C. D. Barber. After
Mr. Steele’s pastorate of twelve years the Rev. F. Boyling,
from South Australia, was minister for four years, followed
by the Revs. P. W. Cairns, E. Dybing, and in 1907 by the Rev.
A. R. Thompson for four years. During his time a fine Manse
was built. The successive pastors since have been Revs. A. E.
Blackwell, S. Harrison, R. Goodman, F. A. Marsh, J. W. Fisher
and now the Rev. H. Boulter. During Mr. Blackwell’s pas-
torate in 1914 the Jubilee of the Church was signalised by
the erection of a fine school hall at a cost of £ 1500. The
Church has always fostered a fine missionary spirit, and has
been influential in the town.
G. P. Barber. Born Norfolk, England. To Queensland 1868.
To “Staywood” sheep station near Warrnambool. Baptized by Rev.
A. Steele 1885. Mrs. Barber, daughter of Thomas Napier, one of
early pioneers. From Warrnambool to “Rosebank,” North Essen-
don. President Union 1893. Sons:—Edwin, Missionary of C.1.M.,
died in China; Norman, medical doctor, died in 1936; Lorraine,
Missionary, Faridpur, India. His motto over the entrance of his
Essendon home: “As for me and my house we will serve the Lord.”
CUDGEE, WOODFORD AND KOROIT
About a dozen miles east from Warrnambool is the rich,
fertile district of Cudgee, and a farmer there, Mr. John Watson,
held services in his house, beginning in 1862. Great interest
was awakened, there were many conversions, and in the
Cudgee Creek, near Mr. Watson’s home, 29 persons within a
few weeks were baptized. The whole district was stirred by
a genuine revival of religion. A Church building was opened


in March 1866, the preacher being the Rev. James Ewence,
of Warrnambool.
At the same time services were commenced at Woodford,
nearer Warrnambool, by the Rev. }. C. McLachlan. A small
store was purchased and made suitable for Church work. The
revival spirit spread, and at the time the Cudgee Church was
opened twenty converts were baptized by the Rev. W. Poole in
the Moyne River and formed into a Church.
Shortly before this, through services conducted by Mr.
McLachlan at Tower Hill, 21 believers were baptized, and a
Church building was opened in January 1865, the preachers
being Mr. John Watson and the Rev. G. Slade. Four years
later a Church was built at Koroit, of which the Rev. E. J.
Henderson became pastor. In 1885 Mr. C. Palmer was
stationed by the Home Mission Committee at Koroit, and
during the pastorate of the Rev. H. D. Archer the Church was
removed to a more central position, and other Churches were
built at Grasmere and Rosebrook. In 1937 the Church at
Cudgee was also removed to a more prominent site. The
names of such leaders as Watson, Grant, Johnstone, McDonald,
McLachlan, Pollock, and others are gratefully remembered in
the whole district.
WEST MELBOURNE, 1866
During the ministry of the Rev. James Taylor, Collins
Street was the centre of much evangelistic activity. At one
period six branch Sunday Schools were in operation and the
members of the Preachers’ Class conducted many Gospel
services. One of the schools was at Chetwynd Street, North
Melbourne, then known as Hotham. There the scholars num-
bered 130, and a Church was formed, of which the Rev. S.
Finkelstein was pastor in 1868 and the Rev. G. P. Lush in
1869. When the school building in Chetwynd Street proved
too small, the work was transferred to the Common School in
Errol Street. As the congregation grew, land was acquired in
Hawke Street, West Melbourne, and a good stone building
erected. This was opened by the Rev. J. Taylor in March
1866. At that time a young evangelist, Walter Douglas,


arrived from London via New Zealand, and was asked to carry
on the work. This he did with great earnestness. A con-
tinuous Mission was maintained from July to November 1866.
So the West Melbourne Church was cradled in evangelism.
Many conversions resulted, and the Sunday School flourished.
In 1870 the Church was formally constituted by the Rev. James
Martin, and became independent of Collins Street. The leaders
of the School were Mr. T. MacFarlane and D. Hamilton, of
Collins Street, and in course of time the scholars numbered
500. The pastors were Revs. W. Garner (1870) and H.
Phillips (1873). In 1882 a Sunday School and preaching
station were opened at West Footscray by earnest young
men from the West Melbourne Church, Ten years
after the Church was opened the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon
was written to regarding a pastor, and at his instiga-
tion the Rev. A. J. Clarke became the minister of
West Melbourne. He was an earnest evangelist, the
congregations increased, and the transept was added to the
building. The following have been the pastors since Mr.
Clarke’s time: —W. C. Running, E. Isaac, E. Harris, H. Clark,
E. L. Watson, F. J. Miles, T. P. Trinham, E. Bungey, S.
Blackney, T. V. Paul and the present pastor, J. Curtis. Among
the leading workers whose names should not be forgotten
were Daniel Hamilton, S.S. Superintendent for many years;
Robert Self, for 52 years deacon and local preacher; R.
Hannaford, for 28 years S.S. Superintendent; A. Matthews,
leader of the Young Men’s Bible Class; D. Locke, deacon for
many years; and T. Mathers, Church Secretary for about 40
years, with their wives and many gracious women. With
such a history and with such pastors and fellow-labourers, it
is no wonder that for many years West Melbourne was one of
the most important in the Denomination, but in the course of
years its surroundings have completely changed. It has ceased
to be a desirable residential district; many of its members
moved away to Footscray, Newmarket, &c., and others have
not yet been received in their place. Possibly in coming years
some at least of the former experiences may be revived.


BELMONT, 1865
The Aberdeen Street Church in Geelong has always been
characterised by a fine missionary spirit, and as a result there
are now seven Baptist Churches within the boundaries of the
city. One of these is at Belmont. As early as 1865 a Sunday
School was started there in the Shire Hall, the first Superin-
tendent being Mr. H. Davies, who was followed by Mr. Robert
Purnell, who led the school from 1893 to 1914. In 1891 a
W.B. Church was built in Mount Pleasant Road, and Sunday
services were begun in 1900 under the supervision of the
Aberdeen Street Church. The cause prospered and a Church
was constituted in 1913 with n members by the Rev. E. Harris.
After several pastorates, aided by the parent Church, the
Church became independent in 1929 and called the Rev. E. C.
Harris, 8.A., who is still its minister. Class rooms and a
Kindergarten Hall have been added to the original building,
and a Manse built on an allotment adjoining the Church. The
membership has increased from n to over 50, and there is a
good Sunday School. The city of Geelong is becoming yearly
more important and prosperous, and with a rapidly increasing
population in Belmont the prospects of the Church are bright.
MARSHALL STREET, GEELONG, 1897
The annual meetings of the Geelong Convention Band
greatly quickened the spiritual life of all the Churches in the
town, and this, combined with the enthusiasm of the C.E.
movement, led to the formation in 1897 of a Young Men’s
Mission Band of 13 members at Fenwick Street Church, of
which the pastor, the Rev. W. J. Eddy, was President. The
Band began Mission Services in a one-time Congregational
Chapel in Marshall Street, the leader being a State School
teacher, Mr. H. W. Potter, recently transferred from Cudgee,
with Mr. E. A. Trotter and W. J. Lloyd as assistants. From
the first the Mission became a means of blessing to the com-
munity, and during 40 years has maintained its spiritual
fervour. A Church was formed in 1915, and every Sunday


evening at the close of the service the members adjourn to the
schoolroom and, standing in a circle with linked hands, pray
definitely for one another and for former members now living
at a distance. Recent pastors have been Revs. J. W. Fisher
and W. Jarvis, the present pastor being the Rev. W. W. Baird.
The membership is not large, but there is a good Sunday
School, and a number of the leading members of our Union
look back with joy to their association with the missionary
enthusiasts and fervid evangelists of the Marshall Street Band.
RUSSELL STREET, GEELONG
A similar Mission to that in Marshall Street was started in
Russell Street, with Mr. E. A. Trotter as leader, but for some
time past it has been felt that the two Missions were too near
each other, and since the population was increasing rapidly in
Newtown, the Church, with the assistance of the Home Mis-
sion Committee, had its building removed to Nicholas Street
in the new district. Under the supervision of Mr. L. E.
Warner, the whole appearance of the building was trans-
formed, so that there is now a very attractive Church, with
sittings for 250, and in 1936 the Rev. A. W. Smith entered on
pastoral service there. The removal has been amply justified
by a threefold increase of the congregations and of the Sunday
School. It is confidently expected that a strong cause will be
steadily built up in Newtown.
MANIFOLD HEIGHTS, GEELONG
In 1914 the Aberdeen Street Church hived off a number of
its workers to establish Mission work in a rising district to
the north-east. A large W.B. building was secured, with seat-
ing accommodation for 300, and regular services and a Sunday
School established. Since then a good Kindergarten Hall
has been built and an adjoining allotment of land bought.
The Church was formed in 1923, and the recent pastors have
been the Revs. D. S. Harvey, J. R. Edmonds, E. H. Came,
followed in 1937 by the Rev. P. E. Evans. There is a school
of 130 scholars and the whole work is full of promise.


RICHMOND, 1868
The Baptist Cause at Richmond was started as a Sunday
School in Lennox Street by teachers from the Albert Street
Church. Then followed Gospel services in the Orderly Room
that led to a W.B. Church being built on Docker’s Hill in 1868.
There was a Church of 21 members, of which the Rev. D.
Fenwick was pastor, with 120 Sunday scholars. The next
pastor was the Rev. E. G. Lewis, and during his pastorate the
present Church was built in Stanley Street at a cost, including
land, of Mr. Lewis preached the opening morning
sermon on 2nd February, 1875, and the Rev. P. Bailhache in
the evening. The Church Secretary was Mr. H. Farmer, the
legal adviser of the Association. In 1877 the Rev. James
Taylor, formerly of Collins Street, was called to the pastorate,
and continued for over 12 years, though at times in very weak
health. He passed away in September 1896, aged 81. The
Rev. J. H. Carter became pastor in 1894, an d was followed by
the Revs. H. Coombs, F. Clemens, and J. W. Thomas. During
recent years the services were supplied chiefly by college
students, and several teachers from the Canterbury Church
carried on the Sunday School. Mr. F. P. Morris has been
chosen as pastor, and all the work of the Church is well
sustained. Rather than incur a heavy debt the front portion
of the Church was not completed, and, speaking at the opening
public meeting, the Rev. James Martin said: “The architect
had made it apparent that it was unfinished, for the members
of the Church would thus be stimulated to finish it.” It is
suggested that this may be attempted very soon.


COMMENTS ON ROM. VI., 3 and 4.
By John Wesley: “In baptism we (through faith) are ingrafted
into Christ, and we draw new spiritual life from this new root,
through His Spirit, who fashions us like unto Him. We are buried
with him—alluding to the ancient manner of baptizing by immersion;
that as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory—Glorious power
of the Father —so we also by the same power should rise again; and as
He lives a new life in heaven so we should walk in newness of life.
This, says the Apostle, our very baptism represents to us.”
By H. A. W. Meyer: “The recipient of baptism, who by his
baptism enters into fellowship with Christ, is necessarily also in the
act of baptism ethically buried with Him, because after baptism he is
spiritually risen with Him. . . . The recipient thus, as Paul
figuratively represented the process, is conscious (1) in the baptism
generally: now I am entering into fellowship with the death of
Christ; (2) in the immersion in particular: now I am being buried
with Christ; (3) and then in the emergence: now I rise to a new
life with Christ.”
Baptism is immersion and immersion only. So affirm Liddell
and Scott, Thayer and all good lexicons.
To say we baptize by immersion is tautology and is tantamount to
saying—we immerse by immersion. To say we baptize by sprink-
ling is absurd.


il
W®& W*\ iHHHF ',,!?*♦♦ * m iH
ii||®K + :.; *. * m -IB
-" ’ •* :> * 4 414 m ■
f ' 3
REV. F. W. BOREHAM. D.D. (McMaster University, Canada).
Famous Preacher and Author.
Minister of Armadale, Victoria, 1916-1928.
Chairman Foreign Mission Committee.


■ & #iiS8S!m8b\
1 * I 1 " ;S : ' ; \
VICTORIAN BAPTIST HOME MISSION
Rev. Jas. Martin, 8.A.,
Minister Collins Street Church.
President of Union 1870-1, 1875-6.
Promoter of Home Mission.
Hey. G. Slade,
President of Union 1871-2.
Pioneer Home Missionary, Kerang,.
1877-81.
VICTORIAN BAPTIST COLLEGE


Chapter X
OUR HOME MISSIONS
Extract from a conversation between Dr. Thomas Guthrie, of
Edinburgh, and J. G. Oncken, of Germany:—Guthrie: “How
many missionaries have you?”—“Seven thousand.” “Beg your
pardon, I asked the number of missionaries.”—“l know, but we
consider every member as a missionary.” Dr. Guthrie said:
“That’s the way to evangelise the world.”
It is universally recognised to-day that a Church proves the
reality of its Christianity by its missionary activities. A self-
centred Church, as a self-centred Christian, is a contradiction
in terms. Further, the character and extent of its missionary
operations will determine the spiritual growth of the Church.
The spirit of Christ is the spirit of Missions. Just before His
ascension the Saviour said to His first disciples: “Ye shall
receive power, the Holy Spirit coming upon you and ye shall
be my witnesses.” The two clauses of the sentence must not
be separated. They are antecedent and consequent. The
endowment of power was not for self-enrichment, but was
the all-necessary qualification for Missionary service. Effective
witness depends on spiritual power.
In accord with this basic principle, our forefathers, when they
formed the Baptist Association in 1862, termed it the Baptist
Association and Home Mission, and declared its objects to be:
“To advance the cause of Jesus by promoting the formation of
Christian Churches, by the sustenance of Evangelists, and by
the temporary assistance of pastors wherever openings of use-
fulness present themselves.” In this they showed the true
Missionary spirit. Their primary purpose was to advance the
cause of Jesus. In all things He was to have the pre-eminence.
At the first the resources of the Association were small, and
they were unable to do much in carrying out their programme,
but eight years after the Association was formed a new impetus


was given to their work. At the Association meetings in
Geelong in November 1870, an address was given by the Rev.
James Martin, 8.A., that was a clarion call to action. Mr.
Martin had been less than two years in the colony, but he had
accurately gauged the whole situation. The title of his address
was “The Baptist Association: What It Is and What It Might
Be.” Of the forty Churches in the Association twelve were
in Melbourne, with a total membership of 1500, and 28 were in
the country, including Geelong, Sandhurst, and Ballarat,
with a membership of only 500. So Mr. Martin pleaded for a
larger vision and more vigorous work. In the course of his
address, he said: “The ambition of our Churches wants arous-
ing. They are too content to be feeble and small, and to some
extent to let others do their work and ‘give them of their oil.’
We have surely been at fault in this respect. I do not know
what our capacities are, but to the measure of our capacity
Christ expects us to work for Him. You may say it matters
little to the colony whether Baptists are many or few. I think
so too. And if we had no higher aim than to spread Baptist
peculiarities I should be one of the first to throw up the work.
But our mission is higher than that. It is not as Christians
to spread Baptist views, but as Baptists to spread Christianity,
and in loving co-operation with all other branches of our
Saviour’s family to do our part to keep this great land for
our Lord and spread from one end to the other the glad
tidings of His redemption.” We are proud to-day that such
a pronouncement was made. The words need constant
iteration. Our aim is not to spread Baptist peculiarities. Our
mission is higher than that. “It is not as Christians to spread
Baptist views, but as Baptists to spread Christianity.” It was
a call to think imperially of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.
The address had an immediate effect. The Churches at
once responded to the challenge, and on 25th July, 1871, a
company of earnest men met in the schoolroom of the Albert
Street Church to consider new measures. The convenors of
the meeting were the Revs. James Martin, of Collins Street,
David Rees, of South Yarra, and Joseph Foy, of Kew. Seventy


men were present, the Revs. Isaac New and Charles Clark
being absent through ill-health. All were of one mind, and
resolved then and there to constitute a Baptist Home Missionary
Society. The purposes of the Society were tersely defined
(1) To establish and sustain Baptist Churches in central towns;
(2) to facilitate the training of young men for the ministry.
That historic meeting should never be forgotten, nor the names
of the first elected Home Mission Committee. They were:
C. }. Ham, R. Reid, T. W. Jackson, }. Collins, E. Baines, W.
H. S. Blake. In their purpose they never wavered, and to
their last days maintained a keen, active interest in all Home
Mission enterprise. They were all men of vision. Melbourne
was only 37 years old, the population of the colony was 750,000.
Apart from the mining centres the country was devoted to
sheep and cattle grazing. But the Home Mission Committee
saw the towns and cities of the future, and they greatly desired
that their foundations should be laid in righteousness.
At first the Society gave attention to the second of their
objects. Before Churches could be established they needed
workers. Since it would take time to train men in the colony
they applied to the Baptist Colleges of England for men.
Only one man could be sent, the Rev. James Wolfenden, who
at once received invitations from three Churches, and decided
to accept that from South Yarra. It was inevitable that men
must be trained in the colony, so arrangements were concluded
with the Independents, one condition being that the Revs.
James Martin and John Reid should be tutors in the joint
college. H. Coombs in 1874, F. J. Wilkin in 1875, C. Hardy,
E. Harris and A. Steele in 1877 were enrolled as the first
students.
Meanwhile a beginning was made to carry out the main
purpose of the Society. In the ’sixties and ’seventies liberal
land laws were enacted, and the big grazing areas were thrown
open for selection. The glamour of the goldfields was fading
and men were eager to settle on the land. So in 1876 the Rev.
G. W. Gillings was appointed by the Home Mission Society
to report on the settlements north of Sandhurst. With a


travelling companion in a little horse-drawn wagonette he
travelled as far as Echuca, calling on the new settlers on the
way. Echuca was a busy, rapidly-rising town, and it was
chosen as the first town for Home Mission work. Meetings
were held in the Town Hall. There was a quick response,
a Church was built to seat 250 persons, and the Rev. F. Shann
was appointed pastor. The opening services of the Church
were conducted by the Rev. Isaac New in November 1877.
This was our first Home Mission Church. While mission
work was in progress in Echuca the Committee asked the Rev.
George Slade if he would leave the Church at Fenwick Street,
Geelong, where he had laboured successfully for 19 years,
and go to the northern plains, and with Kerang as his centre
carry on Home Mission work. It was a serious call. Mr.
Slade was now 52 years of age, and it would be a great wrench
to resign his pastorate and leave the people who loved him.
Finally, he decided, and, leaving his wife and family in Mel-
bourne, Mr. Slade went to Kerang in October 1877 and became
the great pioneer of Baptist Home Mission work in Victoria.
We wish we had space to tell of his splendid service. A well-
read, scholarly man, a good preacher, he left the comforts of
a city home that he might minister to the souls of men in wide
newly-settled areas. A few sentences may convey a faint im-
pression of his work. He went to Echuca by rail, and with
the Rev. I. New constituted the Church there. The following
day he went by coach along a bush track 35 miles to Cohuna.
There he began his mission work. In a letter to the Committee
he wrote: “I started for a tramp round the Barr Creek, visited
14 families.” To do this he must have tramped from daylight
to dark. Next day he walked to Koondrook, 14 miles, and
found 100 men working at the redgum sawmills. The next
day he walked another 14 miles to Kerang. The following
day, Sunday, he preached in the Kerang Hall, a little weather-
board building belonging to the hotel, that subsequently be-
came its billiard room. On Monday he visited in Kerang,
then only a small township of about 20 buildings. On
Tuesday, to quote again from his letter, “the journey from


Kerang to Quambatook was commenced, a nice little walk
of about 40 miles.” Since there was no direct road through
a strip of mallee it was fully 45 miles. Night came when he
was on his journey, and finding no house he slept all night
on the plains under the stars with God. On Wednesday he
reached Quambatook, and was warmly welcomed by Mr.
Gideon Rutherford, an old Geelong friend, the owner of the
Quambatook Sheep Station. There he stayed over Sunday,
preaching at the homestead to a few settlers that were told of
his coming. Mr. Rutherford gave him a horse, saddle and
bridle, and directed him on his way to the Leaghur Sheep
Station, 25 miles to the east via Oak Vale, whence he made his
way back to Kerang. Thus he began his work and thus he
continued for years, travelling incessantly in a wide circle
60 miles in diameter with Kerang as his centre, visiting every
home, preaching whenever there was an opportunity. This
home-loving man gave up his home life for the sake of men.
This big-hearted itinerant became known to all, and by all he
was respected and loved. His self-forgetting labours touched
their lives to nobler issues. He came without any flourish of
trumpets, he quietly left without any public farewell, but his
name is remembered and his work abides.
Mr. Slade was followed by the Rev. F. J. Wilkin in October
iBBo, who for the 19 years in which he lived in Kerang
organised and consolidated the work Mr. Slade had begun.
During that time he had many colleagues, some for a few
months, some for three or four years. Among these were
Charles Palmer, James Magilton, John J. Proctor, and a dozen
young men who successively entered college for ministerial
training. As a result of their united labours there were many
conversions and baptisms, and when through ill-health Mr.
Wilkin was compelled to leave in 1899 there were in the district
21 regular preaching stations, ten Church buildings, and three
Manses. On his leaving, the circuit was divided into three
districts, with Kerang, Koondrook and Barraport as centres
with resident ministers.
Soon after Mr. Wilkin was stationed at Kerang, the Rev. C.


Hardy, one of our finest students, was appointed to begin
work in the rapidly-developing town of Sale, but his strength
gave way, and the work was in abeyance till it was resumed
by the Rev. W. S. Rollings in 1900. In 1882 the Rev. Charles
Pickering, of Warrnambool, was chosen by the Committee to
initiate Mission work in the Goulburn Valley, where, with Mr.
James Pollock, he established preaching stations at Tatura,
Shepparton, and about ten other places. From Shepparton
Mr. Pollock followed the course of settlement to the Oxley
Plains, and speedily he was preaching on Sundays and week
evenings at a dozen Mission stations. The revival of religion
that resulted from his labours is remembered yet. From Oxley
the work was extended to Beechworth and Wangaratta.
In 1890 the Rev. J. Hughes Jones, a fine Welsh preacher,
was asked by the Committee to leave Newmarket and begin
Mission work at Horsham, while Mr. George Lake was sent
to Warracknabeal, and soon Church buildings were erected at
Crymelon, Brentwood and Peppers Plains among a number
of settlers who had come across from South Australia.
Two years later Mr. W. A. Robertson, on the suggestion of
the Rev. S. Chapman, was appointed to Beulah, where till
the time of his death he did memorable work in a big circuit,
including Rainbow and Hopetoun. He literally wore himself
out in his Master’s service. At the same time Mr. J. J. Proctor
pitched his tent in the shade of a myall tree at Sea Lake and
began strenuous evangelistic work in a wide district stretching
from Lake Tyrrell in the north to Nullawil in the south.
In all these districts there were many conversions to God,
followed by out-door baptisms as men and women joyously
avowed their faith. In this way the Home Mission Society
carried out the purpose of 1871 to advance the cause of Jesus.
It has been impossible to record the names of all the mis-
sionaries, their years of faithful service and the results which
will abide to all eternity. Our Bush Mission work had national
value.
Then gradually a change took place in the character of the
work consequent on the development of the metropolis and


the growth of the factory system that called for the employ-
ment of hundreds of workers. The suburbs of Melbourne
began to grow apace, and for a time the Churches were unable
to meet the situation. So the Home Mission Committee per-
force had to cry a halt in country extension work and seek to
establish Churches in areas with rapidly-growing populations
near Melbourne. The Bush Mission of the earlier days gave
place to a Church extension movement. With a change of
venue there came inevitably and almost without notice a
change in the spirit of the work. Instead of being an evan-
gelistic agency to win men and women for Jesus Christ, the
Home Mission became largely an agency for providing Church
homes for Baptists who had moved from old associations to
new unchurched areas. One result was the comparative loss
of the romance of the exploration of new districts and the
establishment of centres for the preaching of the Gospel of
Grace. Possibly, too, the reaction on the spiritual life of our
Churches was not so helpful.
Another result must be noted. For years the work of the
Society was largely directed by a Superintendent who reported
on districts in need of the gospel and visited all the preaching
stations as far as possible. The Revs. F. J. Wilkin, G. J.
Mackay, and W. M. Cartwright were successive Superinten-
dents. With the Mission enterprise mainly confined to
suburban areas such supervision was not so much needed. Still
with all these disadvantages the Home Mission Committee
steadily continued its work, and during the last 37 years has
been the means of establishing 23 Churches in suburban dis-
tricts. The aim of the Committee was to establish at least
one new Church each year, but so far its objective has not
been reached. But when we think of the 23 Church buildings
and the congregations organised it is evident that the Home
Mission has fully justified its existence. A roll call of these
Churches is all that is necessary just now. Details of some
or possibly of all will appear in another chapter. The
Churches are: —1900, Box Hill; 1903, Yarraville; 1905, North-
cote; 1911, Ivanhoe and Fairfield; 1912, Sandringham; 1914,


Essendon; 1919, Westgarth, Sunshine and Preston; 1922, Altona
and Moreland West; 1925, Camberwell; 1926, Darling and
East Ringwood; 1927, Ormond and Preston West; 1930,
Hampton; 1931, East Kew; 1933, Coburg West and Merlyn-
ston; 1934, Glenbervie and Ashburton. Some of these Church
buildings are among the finest and most substantial we have,
and the congregations the most energetic and prosperous in
our Denomination.
It is of more than passing interest to recall the names of the
executive officers of the Society, beginning with those chosen
in 1871 and coming down to the present day. Among its
secretaries have been W. Massey, T. W. Jackson, W. B. New,
E. G. Lewis, H. Chambers, G. P. Lush, E. Harris, C. W.
Walrond, F. J. Wilkin, G. J. Mackay, L. E. Tranter, G. P. Rees.
The Treasurers have held office for longer periods:—R. Kerr,
W. McLean, R. J. Harvey, J. Higgins (for 30 years), }. Shea,
H. H. Moulton, C. H. Spurgeon.
The Chairmen have been: —Rev. S. Chapman (for 20 years),
Mr. H. Meeks (20 years), Rev. J. H. Goble (two years), and
Mr. W. H. G. Ellingworth (since 1921). All these have served
in an honorary capacity and have given the best of their time
and efforts to the furtherance of the Kingdom of God. We
honour them all for their character and work.
This account of the Home Mission would be incomplete
without reference to the splendid work of Mr. L. E. Warner,
the architect of all the Home Mission Churches erected within
the last 15 years. The buildings have all been ornate, of strik-
ing designs and yet erected at low cost. All who have seen
them gladly acknowledge the indebtedness of the Denomina-
tion to Mr. Warner.


Chapter XI
THE STORY OF THE CHURCHES
lII—THE ERA OF AGRICULTURE
‘Christ loved the Church and gave Himself for it.”—Ep. v. 25.
The history of Victoria falls into distinct periods. It began
with the occupation of the land for grazing purposes. From
Tasmania and New South Wales the pioneers brought sheep
and cattle, and great tracts of country were allotted to a few
men. Then followed the fevered rush to the goldfields and
the upspringing of provincial towns. When the excitement
of the gold-digging days died down there arose a demand for
land for agriculture, and the vast grazing areas were divided
amongst thousands who forsook the towns for rural life.
Again the tide turned, the invention of machines and the estab-
lishment of great factories induced young people to leave the
quiet country for the pleasures and comforts of city life. Then
came the years of the Great War, when all life was for a time
disorganised, followed by years of loss and unemployment.
We have told in part the story of our Churches during the
first two periods, and come now to the Agricultural Era. In
our chapter on Home Missions we have outlined the efforts of
the Baptist Association to send missionaries to newly-settled
areas. Many had left towns and the early-settled districts, and
were beginning life under new conditions. They felt the need
of schools and Churches. This was the opportunity that chal-
lenged the Home Mission Society. The first missionaries held
services in the open air or in any building available, in the
homesteads of sheep stations, in woolsheds, farm houses or the
little State Schools that the Education Department always
freely granted for Sunday Services. In the Kerang district
the first regular services were held at four farmers’ houses, in


the “kitchens” at four sawmills, and at a dozen State Schools.
Presently little Churches to seat 100 or 150 persons were built.
The land was given in some cases, or bought at Government
sales for a few pounds, labour and material were frequently
given, so that the financial outlay was small. To tell the whole
story of Home Mission enterprise in country districts would
need much more space than we can give, but we will briefly
narrate some of the principal facts.
ECHUCA, 1876
In the account of our Home Missions the fact was recorded
that in 1876 Baptist services were held in the Town Hall,
Echuca, and that in the following year a Church was opened
by the Rev. Isaac New. A Church was formed, and soon had
a membership of 50 persons. The Rev. F. Shann was pastor.
Unfortunately, the Church had been built on such a small site
that when it was necessary to add vestries it was found that
there was no space available. This was the initial mistake.
Then it was decided to remove the building to a larger site,
but again a mistake was made. An allotment was bought near
the Campaspe River. This meant that there was no approach
to the Church from the west, and twice when the river was
in flood water covered the floor of the Church to a depth of
2 feet. The location was unsuitable; it was on the extreme
west of the town that all the while was extending to the east.
A succession of able men followed Mr. Shann, but the cause
gradually dwindled. Services were held for a time in the State
School in the east and the removal of the Church was dis-
cussed, but the Church was too weak to accept the responsibility
of the cost and the Home Mission was unwilling, so reluctantly
the Church was disbanded. The Rev. J. Worboys at the time
was minister at Fairfield, and under his leadership the Echuca
Church was bought in 1916, and erected as the School Hall at
Fairfield. The closing of the Echuca Church was a grave
mistake, since the township has grown to a place of great
importance, surrounded by orchards and fine grazing areas.
The work began with splendid promise, and yet, because of


mistaken judgments as to the location of the Church building,
came to an inglorious end. The site of the Church is of more
importance than the character of the building. One of the
ministers of the Echuca Church was the Rev. D. Badger, the
honoured pioneer Home Missionary of South Australia, who,
after a brief pastorate at Fenwick Street, Geelong, had accepted
a call from the Church at Echuca in 1888. Two years later
on 29th November, 1890, Mr. Badger, while speaking at a
meeting of the Y.W.C.A. on “Christlike Lives,” suddenly fell
to the platform and in a few minutes passed away. The Rev.
A. W. Webb preached a funeral sermon, telling of his associa-
tion with Mr. Badger in South Australia 30 years before.
BACCHUS MARSH, 1876
As early as 1867 th e Baptists of Bacchus March met for
fellowship in the Mechanics’ Institute, and in the following
year a small Church was built in Lerderderg Street on an allot-
ment given by Mr. E. Waters, of the Patents Office. In 1870
a Church was formed as a branch of Collins Street, and when
in the following year the building was destroyed by fire,
Collins Street gave £6O to supplement the insurance. The
services were conducted chiefly by Messrs. G. G. Paterson and
T. G. Pearce. In 1876 the following were granted an honour-
able dismission from Collins Street that they might form
a separate Church at Bacchus Marsh:—Messrs. V. Gregg, W.
T. Lewis, H. Meikle, T. Oliver, S. White, with Messrs. Dickie,
Ferris, Hodgson, Paterson, Pearce, T. White, and Nelson, with
their wives, and Misses B. and R. Gregg, a total of 23
members. The first resident minister was the Rev. W.
Jones, from England, who entered on the pastorate in 1889,
and continued for two years. On his leaving college in 1894,
the Rev. J. C. Martin became pastor, and when he resigned in
1897 the Rev. E. Harris acted as honorary pastor for two years
and arranged supplies for the pulpit. During that period land
was bought in Main Street, and the present Church built at
a cost of the foundation stone being laid by the Rev. S.
Chapman. In 1903 the Rev. G. P. Rees was called to the


pastorate, which he sustained for four years, and in his time
a Manse was built in Main Street. Since that time the fol-
lowing have been pastors of the Churchßevs. P. }. Masters,
S. Whitchurch, W. Cross, W. Jolly, and the present minister,
W. Jarvis, who began his ministry in 1935.
Bacchus Marsh is very fertile country, the Church is well
situated, well appointed, free of all debt, has had a very happy
history, and fills an important place in the community. From
its formation till his death Mr. T. G. Pearce was the principal
worker in the Church, ably supported by Mr. T. Oliver, who
was Secretary of the Church from 1886 till 1921, when he was
followed by Mr. Eb. Pearce, who in turn has been succeeded
by his nephew, Mr. T. H. Pearce. The Werribee Gorge, a
deep cleft in the hills west of Bacchus Marsh, is of deep interest
to tourists and geologists.
KERANG, 1877
The first Church in Kerang was built in 1878 on an allot-
ment of land in Fitzroy Street given by Mr. T. Nicholson, the
opening sermon being preached in November 1878 by the Rev.
J. Gregson, who travelled 60 miles by coach for the occasion.
After nine years this was removed to Tragowel, the j inker
being drawn by a bullock team, and a larger Church built in
its stead. After 50 years this was superseded by a beautiful
brick Church at a cost, including land, of and standing
in the centre of an important progressive town, is evidence
of the strength of the Baptist cause. There are three out-
stations in connection with the Church, Sandhill, Dingwall,
and Macorna, and all the organisations of the Church are
well sustained. Mr. A. G. Adams was Secretary of the Church
for over 30 years. The second Church in the Kerang Mission
district was built at Gannawarra in 1883, and when its
Jubilee was celebrated in 1933, joyous throngs recalled the
story of the years. Two other Churches at Barraport and
Benjeroop, in the same district, built in 1885, have also cele-
brated their Jubilees with much enthusiasm. We cannot
recount the names of the ministers who have laboured in these


districts, and need only add that year after year conversions
and baptisms have resulted from their work. The Rev. T. V.
Paul is the present pastor at Kerang.
LILYDALE, 1880
On 25th January, 1880, Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Wilson, Messrs.
T. and S. Wilson, F. W. Perrin and T. Leach, of Lily dale,
met and decided to form a Baptist Church, with the Rev.
Albert Ager as pastor. The Rechabite Hall was freely granted
for the meetings. On 6th September, 1881, the foundation
stone of a Church building was laid by the Hon. C. J. Ham,
and the Church was opened on 20th April, 1882. In the fol-
lowing year Mr. Ager became pastor of the Church at North
Carlton, and his work was carried on by the Revs. A. Stewart
and J. T. Evans till he resumed the Lily dale pastorate in 1887.
When he resigned in 1890 the services were continued by the
Preachers’ Society and by students from the college when out-
stations were opened at South Wandin and Wonga Park. In
1897 the Church placed itself under the Home Mission, and
Mr. P. J. Masters was given charge of the work until in 1901
the Rev. M. L. Murphy was made joint pastor of Lilydale
and Box Hill. With him were successively associated Messrs.
L. E. Tranter, J. Ballantyne and O. R. Linden, and a station
was opened at Picnic Hill. In 1907 the dual pastorate ended,
and Mr. E. H. Holloway became minister of the Church. His
ministry of seven years was very successful, and the Church
became independent of the Home Mission. He was followed
by the Rev. G. W. Paice for two years till May 1917, when the
Rev. J. J. Proctor was called to the pastorate, in which he con-
tinued till April 1932. During those 15 years the Church made
steady progress, and a School Memorial Hall was opened in
the year he gave up the work. Mr. Proctor has been followed
by the Revs. A. J. Innocent, W. S. Hadden, and the present
pastor, J. R. Edmonds, under whom the work is well main-
tained. In 1931 the Jubilee of the Church was joyously cele-
brated by a week’s meetings. Of the foundation members
Mr. S. Wilson still meets with the Church in fellowship, and


was declared a life member in 1934. It was his father, Mr.
Joseph Wilson, in whose house the South Yarra Church met
for worship in 1855, and who gave the land in Chapel Street
on which the Church was built. Nestling among the hills of
the Dandenong Range, Lilydale has a charming situation, and
is noted as the early home of Madame Melba, the greatest
of Australian singers.
SHEPPARTON, 1882
In the Goulburn Valley, where the Rev. C. Pickering was
stationed by the Home Mission Committee in 1882 in response
to invitations from Messrs. F. Williams, of Tatura, and A.
Long, of Shepparton, a weatherboard Church in Edward
Street, Shepparton, was purchased from another Denomination
that gave place during the pastorate of the Rev. F. Harris to
a substantial brick Church in Fryer Street that is the centre
of aggressive w T ork, of which the Rev. W. S. Hadden, L.Th., is
now leader. Shepparton is the coming capital of the north-
east, the centre of a splendid fruit-growing district, and it is
gratifying to think that the Baptist Church is well founded in
the town. Forty years ago, in addition to the work in Shep-
parton, regular services were held at Tatura, Ardmona, North
Mooroopna, Arcadia, Tallygaroopna, Karramomus, Pine Lodge
and Murchison East. For various reasons they have been
gradually discontinued except at Karramomus, where a Church
was built in 1906. As in other districts, the tendency has been
to concentrate too much on the central Church than evangelise
the whole district. Church organisation takes the place of
missionary enthusiasm. At Karramomus the names are re-
membered of Messrs. Lowry, Gollan and Wilkinson, and
though these early helpers have passed away their children
are members of some of our Churches, affording an illustra-
tion, as in many similar cases, of the benefit the city Churches
derive from work in the country.
PORT CAMPBELL, 1884
One of our smaller Churches that has been very influential
in the life of our Denomination is that at Port Campbell. As


early as 1855 settlement began at this seaside place, Mr. A.
Robertson arriving about 1869, and in his home the first meet-
ings for public worship were held. Soon after a Bible
Christian local preacher named Lovelock, from Ballarat, visited
Port Campbell, and held a series of meetings. A religious
revival occurred when James and Moreland Magilton, Walter
O. Ward, Henry Cairns and others were led to Christ. The
work was followed by a mission conducted by the Rev.
G. W. Gillings, when believers were baptized in the Sherbrook
River. In 1878 the wreck of the “Loch Ard” brought the settle-
ment into public notice. In 1879 a Union Church was built
between Port Campbell and Newfield. The Rev. S. Chapman,
who at times spent his holidays at Port Campbell, preached
at the Union Church. This led to the establishment of a
Baptist Cause, and on 17th December, 1884, a Church was con-
stituted by the Revs. S. Chapman and A. Steele. For nearly
two years services were continued in the Union Church, when
in 1886 the present Church was built on a site given by Mr.
W. A. Robertson, the cost being defrayed principally by the
Collins Street Church. These services have been maintained
until to-day. From that Church the following evangelists went
forth: —R. Robertson, with his brothers James and John; W.
A. Robertson became the leader of Home Mission work at
Beulah and Rainbow; Arthur Robertson continued as pastor
of the Port Campbell Church till his death in 1925 at the age
of 77; James Magilton did unforgettable Home Mission work
at Koondrook till he died in January 1893; W. K. Mclntyre
carried on evangelistic work in the Western District; W. O.
Ward entered the Baptist ministry, and has been pastor of
several Churches; J. R. McCue also entered the ministry, and
has been prominent in the work of the Prohibition movement,
and Moreland Magilton continued the services after Mr. A.
Robertson’s death. So from Port Campbell, which has become
a popular tourist resort, the word of life has been proclaimed
throughout Victoria. In 1931 the Flome Mission Committee
was requested to carry on the cause, and the Rev. S. Watson
became supervisor of Cudgee, Port Campbell, and the Heytes-


bury Forest. The work at the Port has been maintained in
succession by Pastors L. Sharp, E. D. Gill, A. S. Parker, A. K.
Parr, and G. R. Thompson. Recently a Church has been
built at Warre. The Jubilee of the Port Campbell Church was
celebrated in March 1935, when a large delegation journeyed
from Melbourne to conduct the services.
OXLEY, 1885
In response to a request from Messrs. J. and B. Jones and
other Baptists at Meadow Creek, the Home Mission Com-
mittee appointed Mr. J. Pollock to the Oxley district in May
1885. Meetings were held in a bark building, and a revival of
religion stirred the whole district. Mr. Pollock and a band
of young men conducted services at about a dozen places.
Baptisms took place in the Meadow Creek and King River.
A Church was formed with 13 members that rapidly grew
strong. In 1890 a good brick Church was built at a cost of
only /310, since most of the labour was voluntary. In 1902 a
second Church was built at Bobinawarrah and a Manse in
Oxley in 1908. Mr. Pollock, in the most self-denying way,
carried on the work till December 1894. Since then the Church
has had the following pastors: —Revs. R. Robertson, E. A.
Kirwood, H. R. Stewart, F. Reeves, W. F. Nash, H. A.
Townend, T. Nichols, H. W. Long, F. Townend, E. H. Came,
J. W. Lindsay, J. W. Ding, and J. A. Perry, the latter began
his work in 1935. The promise of the early days has not
been fully realised, most of the preaching stations have been
abandoned, and the frequent changes in the pastorate have
militated against the work. The Oxley Plains are noted for
their fertility, and the whole district is prosperous.
BEECHWORTH, 1889
Beechworth was one of the earliest and richest of our gold-
fields. Tales have persisted through the years of the orgies and
extravagances of the miners, who were glutted with gold.
To-day very little gold is found, but the district is noted as
a healthful tourist resort with rugged scenic beauties. Very


# ■ ■ '
: mW< <4 sMirffi&k}, t/'h-M'* ?Mi& 5
f Slip ffj
mb -' ■ j|||# - *■
HH«p IPP MM *v ** M&t* 1 **'' - «:•::-•* •■•
■fiSKf';■ •. :v ; : ../v'v‘- • ■.• ■■ ,■ v,,;v .. .
MM
If" i': : ; • ■' vs '** : ...
REV. SAMUEL CHAPMAN.
Minister of Collins Street Church 1877-99.
President of the Union 1879-80, 1880-1, 1885-86, 1888-89.
President of College.
First Chairman Victorian Baptist Fund Trustees.


FIRST TRUSTEES OF THE VICTORIAN BAPTIST FUND
T. W. Jackson, Esq..
President of Union 1889-90.
Deputy Postmaster-General.
Audit Commissioner for Viet.
W. G. Stephens, Esq., J.P.,
President of Union
1895-6, 1907-8.
J. M. Bruce, Esq.
(Father of Hon. S. M. Bruce, High
Commissioner for Australia in
England).
Colonel J. M. Templeton,
C.M.G., F.1.A.,
Founder National Mutual
Life Assoc, of Aust.
Hon. Robert Reid, M.L.C.
Minister for Customs, Viet.
W. McLean, Esq.,
President of Union 1887-8.
Secured sum of £25,000 from
anonymous donor to found
V.B. Fund.
D, C. Rees, Esq.,
President of Union 1891-2.
Deputy Commissioner of Titles-
Hon. C. J. Ham, M.L.C.,
President of Union 1884-5,.
Mayor of Melbourne.


early Baptists gathered together, and in 1865 we read of a
Baptist Church of Beech worth and Chiltern with 14 members,
of which the Rev. W. Brightwell was pastor. Then records
cease. Possibly as the yield of gold lessened the members of
the Church left for other districts. But when Mr. James
Pollock went to Oxley in 1885 and established a wide circuit,
Beech worth became one of his preaching stations. In 1889 the
Home Mission purchased a Church erected in 1873, and in-
stituted regular service. During the pastorate of Mr. F. Harris
the work was very successful, and, with four out-stations, was
the centre of much spiritual activity. But with a succession of
Home Mission pastors the cause has lost much of its energy
and influence. Like other worked-out goldfields, it has a much
smaller population than at the first; still there are some
thousands of people in the district, and one wonders how
much of the decline in our work is due to changed circum-
stances and how much to the calibre and character of the men
engaged.
BEULAH, 1893
When Beulah was only a small cluster of houses and the
railway was just opened, Mr. W. A. Robertson, of Port Camp-
bell, was chosen by the Home Mission Committee in 1893 to
evangelise the district. This he did with the utmost thorough-
ness. Services were held in the little State School, but soon
a W.B. Church was built and good congregations gathered.
Four out-stations were opened, Mr. Robertson being greatly
assisted by Mr. N. L. Beurle, State School teacher at Kenmare.
After a few weeks’ illness Mr. Robertson passed away on 17th
September, 1901, loved by the whole community. He was
succeeded by the Rev. T. Nichols, and a good brick Church
superseded the W.B. one. The work prospered, and the
Church reported 100 members with a good Sunday School.
The Church was not only self-supporting, but aided the
Foreign Mission. Since Mr. Nichols left there has been a suc-
cession of good workers, but principally through the removal
to the metropolis of Messrs. Gust, Patterson, Lloyd, Guest, and


the removal of other supporters to new districts, the cause
became so small that the Church was disbanded and the
Church and Manse sold. The closing of the Church seemed
unavoidable, but in the light of its early history was a great
disappointment. A new circuit has been formed with Wilkur
South as its centre, that carries on part of the work of the
Beulah district.
HOPETOUN, 1893. TURRIFF, 1913
Forty-five years ago Dr. W. T. Whitley, the Home Mission
Superintendent, and Mr. W. A. Robertson journeyed along
dusty rough bush tracks 40 miles from Warracknabeal to Lake
Corrong township. The surface of the lake was dotted with
wild fowl —pelicans, swans and ducks. The railway was near-
ing completion, and the surrounding country was being
rapidly settled. The travellers decided that Home Mission
work should be started, and announced a Gospel Service for
the following Sunday in the woolshed of the local sheep
station. This was held, the congregation finding seats on
the bales of wool. Later, the services were held in a small
public hall, then a W.B. Church was built. When a popular
Governor of Victoria visited the township it was re-named
Hopetoun in memory of his visit. In the beginning of the
Baptist cause in Hopetoun Messrs. Overal, Gerrish, Poulton,
with their families, were very active. The work prospered,
and in the course of years a substantial limestone Church was
built, costing and a Manse costing The work
was extended to West Hopetoun, where another Church was
built, then to Nypo, and on to Rainbow. Twenty years later
the Home Mission was extended to the north-east to the hamlet
of Turriff. There services were held in a public hall, a small
Church was built at Gama East, and a station opened at
Speed. Mr. Mott, from Galaquil, and Mr. E. Harratt for years
greatly aided the work. There has been a succession of earnest
workers in the Hopetoun and Turriff districts during all the
intervening years, and yet to-day the total Baptist membership
of the two districts is only about 50. Naturally we ask why


our Denomination has not a stronger grip of these extensive,
prosperous wheat-growing areas. Possibly the reply may be
given—because of the too frequent changes in the pastorates,
due in part to the fact that college-trained men feel the attrac-
tion of the metropolis, and are unwilling to live in a country
town 250 or 260 miles from Melbourne, and again because the
Home Mission Committee has perforce filled their places with
young men with little experience of preaching and Church
work. More is needed than earnestness and an ability to give
a ten minutes’ address to an Endeavour meeting to make a suc-
cessful missionary. Our Denomination has not yet been seized
with the importance of Home Mission work. We need more
venture, more faith and love.
WARRACKNABEAL, 1893
In 1890 Baptist work was began by the Home Mission in
the Wimmera district. All the northern part was covered by
the Mallee scrub, the Eucalyptus Dumosa, and neglected by
agriculturists because of the difficulty of clearing the ground,
but when the stump-jump plough and harrow were invented
in South Australia this difficulty was overcome. When
a number of settlers crossed from the Peninsula, S.A.,
and took up land north of Warracknabeal they asked
that Church advantages should be given them. Among
these were the Kings, Halletts, Denyers, Spriggs, and
Sherriffs. So in 1890 Mr. George Lake was appointed
to the district. Soon small Churches were built and
good congregations gathered at Crymelon, Brentwood and
Peppers Plains. In the following year work was begun at
Warracknabeal by the Rev. J. Hughes Jones. For a time ser-
vices were held in the State School. Through ill-health Mr.
Jones was compelled to resign his charge, and the Rev. E.
Dybing became his successor. In 1894 a weatherboard Church
was opened in Woolcott Street. When the Rev. H. Boulter
was minister in Warracknabeal this Church was removed to
Bangerang, and a good brick Church erected in its place.
Under successive pastors the work in the town has been


successfully carried on with Crymelon and Peppers Plains as
associated Churches. Warracknabeal is the principal town in
the great wheat-growing districts of the north-west, and it is
important that the Baptist witness should be maintained in one
of the coming cities of the State. The Rev. F. J. Wood has
been in charge of the work since 1935.
RAINBOW, 1905
From Hopetoun Mr. Robertson made his way on his sturdy
pony to the tiny township of Rainbow, and began services in
a rude wattle and daub hall. The work attracted a number
of helpers, among whom were Messrs. Knott, Sleep, Dart,
Bowden, Thornton and others. In 1905 Mr. J. Dart gave a site
for a Church, and preparations were made for the erection of
a limestone building. Mr. J. Ewart, who had been transferred
from Hopetoun, with a band of willing workers, helped to
quarry the stone, burn the lime, cart the sand and erect the
Church, so that the total cost was only including seats
and an American organ. Rainbow also is a great wheat-grow-
ing centre, and is an important town. A Manse has been
built adjoining the Church, and a succession of pastors have
sustained the work in the town and at several out-stations.
The present pastor is the Rev. A. K. Parr, L.Th., who is fully
seized of the value of this strategic centre.
SALE, 1900
Work was begun in Sale under the auspices of the Home
Mission Society by the Rev. C. Hardy early in 1881, and good
congregations met in a Public Hall. After years Mr.
Hardy’s health failed, and in 1884 the work was suspended.
Land had been bought in Cunningham Street and col-
lected for building purposes. Nothing more was done till the
appointment of the Rev. W. S. Rollings on the conclusion of
his college training. A Church was constituted on Ist March,
1900. Meetings were held in the Manchester Unity Hail.
Among the leading members were Messrs. }. Shankley, F.
Chaffe, J. Downing, F. Osmond, and W. J. West. The cause


grew quickly, the site in Cunningham Street was sold and one
bought in York Street, on which a brick Church was built at
a cost of and opened for worship in August 1901. This
soon proved too small, and was enlarged at an additional cost
°f £,35°- The ministry of Mr. Rollings was very successful,
but after five years he resigned. The succeeding pastors have
been Revs. W. E. Crawford, W. W. Jolly, J. Beasley, H. G.
Dwyer, E. H. Holloway, F. Robinson, R. Robertson, W. Cross,
D. C. Lewis, and the present pastor, T. H. Crago, L.Th., who
began his work in 1935- A fine band of generous women have
greatly aided the Church. At present monthly services that
are much appreciated are broadcast by the local radio station.
The Church is centrally situated, and should have a great future
in Sale, which is a fine town, the virtual capital of East
Gippsland.
WANGARATTA, 1902
Years before Mr. Pollock was appointed to Oxley, Baptists
met for worship in different parts of the district, but in the
early eighties the only reminder of their work was a small
W.B. Church on an enclosure, part of Mr. Diffey’s holding at
East Wangaratta. following the custom in the homeland,
those who died were buried near the Church, and till quite
recently the weather-worn tombstones remained. When Mr.
H. R. Stewart was stationed at Oxley it was decided to estab-
lish Baptist services in Wangaratta, so in 1902 they were com-
menced in a public hall. Interest was aroused, and the Rev.
E. L. Watson, who had just finished his college course, was
placed by the Home Mission Committee in charge of the
work. His warm-hearted evangelism produced speedy results,
and in 1905 the foundation stone of a fine brick Church was
laid by one of the members of the Church, Mr. W. P.
Chalmers. The building, seating 300 persons, was filled at the
evening services, and the membership of the Church steadily
grew. The pastors have been Revs. F. Harris, A. A. Medley,
H. G. Dwyer, H. H. Childs, S. Harrison, P. W. Cairns, A. H.
Brooks, E. T. Laxton, and C. A. Jamieson, who entered on his


pastorate in 1934. The town has rapidly risen in importance,
and is the centre of a splendid agricultural district, but the
Church has not kept pace with the progress of the town. The
building at East Wangaratta was brought into the town, and
now serves as a kindergarten room, and a spacious Manse
adjoining the Church has been purchased. The Church is
centrally situated, and has every equipment for effective service.
TRARALGON, 1903
When the Rev. W. S. Rollings was at Sale, the Railway
Department decided to establish a depot at Traralgon, and as
this involved the transfer of several of his members, Mr.
Rollings urged the Home Mission Committee to begin Mission
work there. This was done, but the only hall available was
of galvanised iron with a cement floor. This soon proved un-
suitable, and a site for a Church was procured in Church Street
and a neat W.B. building erected in 1905 at a cost of
Possibly a mistake was made in not placing an efficient mis-
sionary in charge, a weak start being made, and after a succes-
sion of workers for 25 years the Church is still small. There are
two promising out-stations —Glengarry West and Gormandale.
The Rev. D. H. Wicking has been recently transferred from
Stawell to Traralgon, and since the town is prosperous and
there is a prospect of a big increase of population very soon,
it is expected that the Church will prove of value to the town.
KORUMBURRA, 1894
There was widespread interest in the State when after years
of search it was discovered that seams of coal existed at what
was soon called Coal Creek in South Gippsland. A township
of tents and rude huts soon sprang up and was named Korum-
burra. All the surrounding hills were densely wooded with
straight lofty trees, and the gullies were filled with beautiful
tree ferns. Two Baptists in the township, Messrs. H. Caple
and G. H. Hooper, petitioned the Home Mission Committee
to send a missionary. Services were held in a small shop near
the Railway Station conducted by students sent weekly from


the college. Land was bought in Mine Road, a Church built,
and Mr. James Pollock transferred from Oxley to Korumburra.
In the wet weather the roads were almost impassable, the street
crossings were of the trunks of fern trees laid side by side,
and the butcher and baker delivered their food supplies by
pack horses. Still the cause grew, and soon Mr. Pollock was
preaching at Korumburra, Outtrim, Silkstone and Bena. He
was succeeded by brethren G. B. W. Filmer, H. Boulter and
S. E. Dorman, and through their faithful labours the Church
was firmly established. The coal seams are almost worked out,
the primeval forest has been well nigh cut down, and the
fertile district is now noted for its dairy productions. The
town is prosperous, and the Rev. G. McAdam is now pastor of
the Church.
WONTHAGGI, 1910
When coal was found at Jumbunna, south of Korumburra,
and a township sprang up, a small Baptist Church was
quickly built and regular services held. Still further
south coal seams were opened at Outtrim and a larger
Church was built, and under Messrs. George Wool-
nough and I. H. Hopkins successful Home Mission work
was carried on. Two good preaching stations were estab-
lished at Glen Alvie, where a Church was built, and at
West Creek, to which Mr. Caple had removed. Soon it was
found that larger beds of coal existed at Wonthaggi. The
Home Mission Committee quickly began work in a tent
among the miners with the Rev. J. R. McCue in charge. The
building at Jumbunna, no longer needed there, was hauled
across the hills to the new coalfield. In time this was enlarged,
then placed by the side of a Church bought from the Con-
gregationalists, and ever since work has been carried on at
Wonthaggi. A Manse was built and the following ministers
have laboured in the growing town: —E. R. Thorn, H. G.
Dwyer, S. Whitchurch, A. G. Bennett, H. W. Long, T. V.
Paul, R. A. Haley, T. F. Keyte, and now R. Leith.


“Baptizing them into the Name —the name is one, that of the
Father and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Does that mean the name
of God, and of a man and of an influence, all jumbled up together
in a blasphemous and irrational union? Surely if Father, Son and
Holy Spirit have one name, the name of Divinity, then it is but a
step to say that the three Persons are one God. But there is a great
deal more here than a baptismal formula, for to be baptized into
the Name is but the symbol of being plunged into communion with
this one threefold God of our salvation. The ideal state of the
Christian disciple is that he shall be as a vase dropped into the
Atlantic, encompassed about with God, and filled with Him. We
all ‘live, and move and have our being’ in Him, but some of us have
so wrapped ourselves, if I may venture to use such a figure, in
waterproof covering, that, though we are floating in an ocean of
Divinity, not a drop finds its way in. Cast the covering aside, and
you will be saturated with God, and only in the measure in which
you live and move and have your being in the Name are you
disciples.” —Dr. Alex. Maclaren.


Chapter XII
THE VICTORIAN BAPTIST FUND
‘‘Expect great things from God; attempt great things for God.”—
Wm. Carey.
At the Annual Meeting of the Baptist Association of Victoria
on nth November, 1884, the Chairman, the Hon. C. }. Ham,
M.L.C., spoke of the need there was for a college for the train-
ing of ministers for the Baptist Churches. He said that he had
been to Adelaide to consult the Rev. Silas Mead and other
leaders of the Denomination there as to the possibility of
founding an Intercolonial Baptist College. It had been esti-
mated, he said, that for the purpose a sum of at least 10,000
would be required, and added that he and his brother, T. J.
Ham, were prepared to start the fund with The
members of the Association were surprised and delighted with
the prospect of an Intercolonial Baptist College, But they
received a greater surprise the following day when Mr. William
McLean told that he had previously discussed the question of
the establishment of a Victorian College with a friend, who
inquired what sum would be needed, and then Mr. McLean
made the following announcement: “An anonymous friend,
desiring to promote the consolidation and extension of the
Baptist Denomination in Victoria, is prepared to give the sum
of on condition that an equal sum be raised by the
Denomination within five years, the fund to be devoted to
the following purposes: —(1) The establishment and mainten-
ance of a college for the training of students for the ministry
of the Baptist Churches; (2) a Church Loan and Building
Fund; (3) a Ministers’ Sustentation Fund and a Fund for the
Assistance of Aged Ministers of the Denomination.”
The announcement was received with mingled feelings.
The offer was splendid, but there was considerable doubt as


to the ability of the Churches to comply with the condition
and raise £25,000. On the following morning the Rev. Samuel
Chapman invited all the ministers to meet him in the Bible
Classroom, when he explained the offer, emphasising the
advantage to the Denomination of such a fund. He suggested
that before coming to a decision all should pray for Divine
guidance. He then submitted the following resolutions: —“(1)
That whereas we have heard with pleasure and gratitude of the
munificent offer of by an unnamed donor, condition-
ally upon an equal sum of £25,000 being raised within five
years, to constitute a ‘Consolidated Victorian Baptist Fund,’ it
is hereby resolved that we reverently recognise a call of God
in this offer, and that we solemnly pledge ourselves, in-
dividually and collectively, to do the best we can to secure the
sum of £25,000 for this purpose within the five years named,
and as much sooner as may be possible. (2) That this declara-
tion be signed by all the ministers present, and be issued to the
Churches as an intimation of the joyful sense of responsibility
with which they respond to this bountiful challenge of God’s
loving providence.” This was signed by everyone present, and
then Mr. Chapman asked what sums the ministers themselves
could promise, pointing out that they should show the
Churches an example of self-denial. When the promises were
made it was found that the ministers, though few in number,
had promised to give within five years the sum of £I2OO.
This was reported to the Assembly, which then, with the
utmost seriousness, resolved to accept the offer and pledge
themselves to raise within the five years the sum of £25,000.
A strong committee was appointed to raise the money con-
sisting of the Rev. S. Chapman, Messrs. E. Baines, J. Ballan-
tyne, R. T. Blackwell, J. M. Bruce, H. Chambers, C. J. Ham,
R. }. Harvey, T. W. Jackson, W. C. Kernot, G. Lush, W.
McLean, D. C. Rees, R. Reid, W. G. Stephens, R. Stone, J. M.
Templeton. The Rev. S. Chapman was chairman, J. M. Bruce
and W. McLean treasurers, D. C. Rees and W. G. Stephens
secretaries.
At once the committee began its task and in a very few


weeks announced that the Collins Street Church had promised
to give ,£13,267. From that hour the success of the movement
was assured. All the members of the Committee acted as
collectors, while the Rev. S. Chapman and Mr. W. McLean
visited the Churches as a deputation in the interests of the fund.
Five years had been fixed for the appeal, subscriptions to be
paid annually. As time went on it seemed as if the full amount
could be raised in four years instead of five, and as 1888 would
be the Jubilee of the Baptist Cause in Victoria, dating from
the tent services in 1838, it was decided to ask the Rev. Dr.
Alexander Maclaren, of Manchester, to come to the Jubilee
Celebrations and to signalise them by the completion of the
fund.
All this was done, and on 13th November, 1888, the Mel-
bourne Town Hall was crowded with people eager to see and
hear the world-renowned preacher from Manchester and to
learn if the fund was complete. When Mr. McLean an-
nounced that the total amount to the credit of the fund was
the meeting was filled with joyous enthusiasm. The
Treasurer of the fund, Mr. J. M. Bruce, then read a financial
statement giving details of the contributions from the various
Churches—Collins Street, Albert Street, Kew,
/1002; South Yarra, /760; George Street, Fitzroy, X 543;
Kyneton, Ballarat, Sandhurst, West Mel-
bourne, Brighton, Warrnambool, Crimea
Street, St. Kilda, Geelong, Aberdeen Street,
Hamilton, £292; and 30 other Churches with different sums.
There was not a Church in the Association that had failed
to contribute. It is no wonder that the Doxology was heartily
sung. It was a peak period in Baptist history. Dr. Maclaren
expressed his delight at the splendid result of four years’ self-
denial, and heartily endorsed the purposes of the fund, especi-
ally commending the decision to found a Baptist College, say-
ing that a healthy Church ought to have its pastors reared
within its own domains, and that the Association should work
out a Congregationalism redolent of the soil.
For 50 years the fund has been used for the purposes for


which it was raised. Only the interest earned has been ex-
pended, and the following sums have been distributed: —To
the College, to sustentation, ,£41,606; to aged minis-
ters, 13,414; while the total amount of loans to Churches,
free of interest, has been ,£67,670, or a gross total of ,£171,490.
The capital sum is now ,£84,064. It is evident that the fund
has been of inestimable value to the Denomination, especially
during days of financial stress and depression. The Rev. S.
Chapman was chairman of the fund from its inception in
1884 till his death in 1899, a P er i°d of 15 years. Other trustees
in succession have occupied the position, the present chairman
being Mr. A. F. Fullard. The Denomination owes a great
debt of gratitude to the board of nine trustees who for 50
years have so wisely invested the fund that there has been no
loss, and have administered it year by year in terms of the
Trust.
In his speech when he announced that the ,£25,000 had
been raised, Mr. McLean said: “I consider that this Baptist
fund, notwithstanding the grand success, is only in its in-
cipient stage, is only beginning, and certainly is not completed.
. . . I hope to live to see ,£lOO,OOO as the amount of the
fund before I die.” That hope was not realised, and some
had hoped that in this centennial year that amount might be
reached, but unfortunately the sum of ,£14,525 is required to
wipe out existing debts on Union institutions, so for the present
the fund can only slowly grow, though in the interests of the
College a larger sum is needed.
Since there is some misconception as to the purpose of the
Doctrinal Basis of the V.B. Fund we reprint the following from an
address by the Rev. S. Chapman, Chairman of the Fund:—“ln
immediate connection with the completion of the Victorian Baptist
Fund, there is one matter which will demand your earnest attention.
You will have to decide upon a doctrinal statement which will serve
as a guide in the administration of this and other funds connected
with our denomination. I am glad to have the opportunity of
referring to this matter now, because it has been misunderstood in
some quarters and has been unintentionally misrepresented in some
of the religious journals. I am glad to state, on your behalf, that


we are not engaged in constructing a confession of faith for our
Churches. We do not need such a confession; our fathers deemed
them unnecessary and injurious, and we follow in their steps. What
we are doing is simply this: In order to comply with a legal and
obvious requirement, we are called upon to enumerate a few of the
central truths of our religion.”
As a matter of fact the Doctrinal Basis was not drawn up by the
Committee of the Fund, but was the statement of belief adopted by
the Evangelical Alliance of Great Britain and Europe at a Conference
attended by 800 delegates at Liverpool, England, in 1846, that with
a few additions, Mr. Chapman said, would serve our purpose. When
Mr. D. C. Rees, the legal adviser of the Trust, had explained that
before the Trust could be registered a general statement of Baptist
beliefs was necessary, the Assembly after a long and serious discus-
sion adopted the Doctrinal Basis on the distinct understanding that
it was at no time to be used as a creed or dogmatic confession of the
Baptist Faith.


“The Church is a nation without race, without boundaries, with
no common language or courts of law, without army or fleet. Yet
it is never treated as of no account. States and men may love or
hate, they cannot ignore it. Its bonds of unity, even in outward
discussion, constantly prove it to be tougher than ties of tongue and
kindred; its boundaries are never at any moment settled, and claim
indeed to extend beyond the visible world. Though without arms,
it is always at war; though without codes, courts and police its
moral ideal is in all quarters of the world heroic, and in practice the
heights of moral beauty are its common fruit. For it has a spirit.”
—Eric Milner-White.


Chapter XIII
THE BAPTIST THEOLOGICAL COLLEGE OF
VICTORIA
“1 hey that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for
ever and ever.”—Daniel xii. 3.
From the earliest days of our history it was felt that men
should be especially trained for the work of the Ministry.
Though admitting the right and privilege of every Christian
to preach the Gospel, the Churches recognised that some men
received a special gift of preaching and that such should be
encouraged to develop and use the gift. The Risen Head of
the Church 'gave some to be Apostles, some prophets, some
evangelists, and some pastors and teachers.” The first minis-
ters who came from English colleges were ready to help others.
So the Rev. James Taylor, of Collins Street, had for a number
of years a preachers’ class with a definite and extensive course
of study, and later the Rev William Bryant, of George Street,
had a similar class But the first systematic college work was
due to the Rev. Thomas Ness, who had been a tutor at the
Rev. C. H. Spurgeon’s Pastors’ College. Soon after coming to
Victoria in 1868 he instituted evening classes for ministerial
students at Emerald Hill, in conjunction with the Rev. James
Moss. Soon tutors and students devoted their whole time to
the work. The subjects studied were Latin, Greek, Logic,
Theology, Sacred Geography, English History, English Gram-
mar, and Composition. The first students were T. C. Davis,
G. P. Lush, and W. A. Whitney, whose after-history proved
the satisfactory character of their training. Under the caption
u Our College” a report in the "Baptist Magazine” told of a
meeting at the home of the Hon. C. J. Jenner, M.L.C., at
Heidelberg, when Mr. Ness described the work and prospects


of the College. Unfortunately this effort did not last long, since
through ill-health Mr. Ness was compelled to return to
England.
We have already told of the arrangement made by the Home
Mission Society that college training should be undertaken in
co-operation with the Independents. This plan worked well,
and seven students completed their course between 1873 and
1892. In another chapter we have also told of the raising of
the Victorian Baptist Fund, the primary purpose of which was
“the establishment, support and endowment of an institution
for the training of ministers for the Churches of the Baptist
Association of Victoria.” The fund was completed by Novem-
ber 1888. As soon as possible arrangements were made so
that the Rev. W. T. Whitley, M.A., LL.D., came to Victoria
and was installed as Principal of the Baptist Theological Col-
lege. Dr. Whitley was a man of wide learning, gracious dis-
position, missionary enthusiasm, and in every way qualified
for his high office. The College was definitely started in 1891
with four students —A. E. Blackwell, S. A. Harris, J. C. Martin,
and W. O. Ward. The classes met in the Bible Classroom at
Collins Street. Until 1901 the College continued, with the most
satisfactory results, 21 students during that period being trained
for the ministry. In 1901 Dr. Whitley returned to England,
where he has gained wide renown as a Baptist Historian; and
after his departure for two years the college work was in
abeyance.
Then in 1903 classes were resumed, with the Revs. W. H.
Holdsworth, M.A., A. Gordon, M.A., S. P. Carey, M.A., and
F. J. Wilkin, M.A., as tutors. Beginning in 1908, the Theo-
logical students of New South Wales came to the Victorian
College. This arrangement continued till 1915, during which
time 27 men came from the sister State. The system produced
the happiest results, and was only discontinued because Vic-
toria could not provide sufficient scope for preaching engage-
ments for all the students and because the services of the New
South Wales men were needed by the Churches in their own
State.


In 1911 a change had taken place. The Rev. W. H. Holds-
worth was asked by the College Council to resign the pastorate
of the Church at Kew, and was appointed College Principal.
In this position he has continued until his retirement in
1938 after 35 years’ connection with the College. In 1912 the
Rev. F. }. Wilkin was appointed Professor of Theology and
Bible Knowledge, and in the interests of the College he went
through the course of study prescribed by the Melbourne Col-
lege of Divinity and gained the degree of Doctor of Divinity;
because of increasing physical weakness he resigned his college
work in 1934, but continued with fewer subjects till 1937. The
relations between Principal and Professor and all the students
have been of the happiest character.
While the number of students was small it was possible for
the lectures to be given in the Bible Classroom at Collins
Street, but with increasing numbers other provision was neces-
sary. At this juncture, in 1912, Mrs. E. Trestrail, of the Albert
Park Church, made the magnificent gift to the College of three
two-storied buildings near the corner of Errol Street and
Flemington Road, North Melbourne, valued at These
were easily adapted to college purposes, and since then two
of the buildings have been the College lecture rooms and the
Principal’s residence. The third building has been utilised as
a hostel, where the students have lodged together. The ad-
vantages of a residential College are so great that in 1934 the
College Committee, at a cost of built an additional fine
hostel, so that each student has a study for himself and every
convenience for comfortable living.
From time to time the College curriculum has been im-
proved, and now includes the sixteen subjects decided on by
the Federal Board of Education. Some of these subjects are
especially designed to prepare the students for the examina-
tions conducted annually by the Melbourne College of Divinity,
and already since 1932 ten students have gained the Diploma
of Licentiate of Theology.
Naturally during the course of years, owing to the progress
of science and biblical research, the extent and character of


the College lectures have been somewhat altered, but the aim
of the teachers has always been to prepare the students for a
positive reasoned evangelistic ministry. In this they have
been fairly successful. While ever open to new light, they
have maintained the traditions and doctrines of the Baptists
of the past. The College teaching affirms the absolute
supremacy of Jesus Christ as the final all-sufficient revelation
of God and the centrality of His cross in the redemption of
men.
On the suggestion of Dr. Whitley a Summer School of
Theology was begun that meets in connection with the Annual
Assembly of the Union. The aim of the school is to stimulate
continued study on the part of all who have passed through
the College, and in order to strengthen the faith and deepen
the devotional life of the ministry a “Retreat” has been held
for the last 24 years at Easter time at the quiet seaside resort
of Anglesea. It is well attended, and the four days’ fellowship
in prayer and Bible study have proved of great value.
The names of ministers trained in the College will be found
in an appendix at the end of this volume.
W. T. Whitley, M.A., LL.D., student Rawdon College, Fellow
Theological Senate, England. To Melbourne June 1891. Inaugural
Lecture, Baptist College, 31st July, 1891. Subject: “The Necessity
for Ministerial Training.’’ Principal of College for 11 years. Com-
piled Catalogue of Library. Secretary of Foreign Mission Com-
mittee. Author of “A History of British Baptists,” “Church
Ministry and Sacraments in the New Testament,” &c., &c.
W. H. Holdsworth, M.A. Born Burnley, Lancashire. Fellow
student at Rawdon with W. T. Whitley. Then Edinburgh Uni-
versity. Influenced by Professors Stuart Blackie and Henry Drum-
mond. Pastor Lindley, Huddersfield. To Victoria 1898. Assistant
of Rev. S. Chapman two years. Pastor Kew Church years.
Lecturer College 1903-1911. Principal 1911-1938.
F. J. Wilkin, M.A., D.D. Born Cambridge, England, 1855.
To Victoria 1861. Baptized at Castlemaine by Rev. J. R. Jenkyns
1869. College for ministry 1875. Pastor Eaglehawk 1877-1880.
Kerang Home Mission 1880-1899. Superintendent Home Missions
1892-1911. Professor of Theology and Bible Introduction 1912-
1937. B.D. with honours Melbourne College of Divinity 1917.
Awarded D.D. for thesis on “The Sinlessness of Jesus Christ” 1921.


Chapter XIV
OUR FOREIGN MISSIONS
On his last birthday, David Livingstone, the great Missionary,
when very weak and ill in Africa, wrote in his diary:—“My
birthday My Jesus, my King, my life, my all, I again dedicate
my whole self to Thee.”
We have recorded the fact that in 1792 a Baptist Missionary
Society was started at Kettering in England as a result of the
widened conception of the Sovereign Grace of God, and that
speedily missionary activities of all the Churches became world-
wide. So when Baptists came to Victoria it was with the thrill
caused by the news of William Carey with his compeers in
India and of Adoniram Judson in Burmah. But they were
so occupied with making homes for themselves and establish-
ing Churches in this new land that for a time they were unable
to take any part in world evangelisation. All they could do
at the first was to send occasional contributions to the Baptist
Missionary Society of Great Britain. Then the missionary
spirit was quickened by the coming of the Rev. James Smith
from Delhi on furlough. He became pastor of the Church at
Castlemaine, but in various towns and at the annual meetings
of the Association he urged the needs and claims of the people
of India. Next a missionary friend of his, the Rev. John
Chamberlain Page, the son of an Indian officer, came from
Barisal to Victoria on a visit, arriving in September 1865. He
was a tall, pale, emaciated man, having suffered from small-
pox, but full of love for India and enthusiasm for missions.
Possibly the present writer is the only one now living who
remembers this missionary with his physical weakness and
flaming zeal. On 25th October Mr. Page gave an address in
the Castlemaine Church on Foreign Missions. Great interest
was aroused. Other Churches were eager to hear his story.


In a few days he preached and lectured at six metropolitan
Churches, and on Bth November, 1865, less than two months
after his arrival, a big meeting was held in the Collins Street
Church, at which he urged that Victorian Baptists should
share in the work in Bengal. At that meeting the Baptist
ministers present were the Revs. I. New, D. Rees, }. Moss, J.
Taylor, T. Taylor, W. Poole, and James Smith. The words of
Mr. Page were as a spark to tinder. Without hesitation it was
resolved by the Baptist Association that an Auxiliary of the
English Baptist Missionary Society should be formed. The
Churches and Sunday Schools responded to its appeals, and
various sums were remitted to the Home Society. Mr. W. B.
New, son of the minister of Albert Street, was appointed
treasurer. The Rev. R. Bion, Baptist missionary at Dacca,
about the time of Mr. Page’s visit went to Mymensingh with
several native agents on evangelistic tours. Their work was
successful, and in 1868 several converts were baptized and
formed into a Church. Letters from Mr. Bion were read in
our Churches. Then there arrived in Victoria one who for
many years greatly stimulated interest in Foreign Missions,
the Rev. John Gregson, a missionary from India, who was
chaplain of Havelock’s forces during the Indian Mutiny of
1857. Mr. Gregson became secretary of the Foreign
Mission Society, and when Mr. W. B. New died in 1879 its
treasurer also. Baptists in Victoria should not forget this
gracious scholarly man, who for many years with quiet earnest-
ness was India’s ambassador amongst us.
In 1872 an Auxiliary of the Baptist Zenana Mission of Great
Britain was formed in Melbourne, chiefly through the efforts
of the wife of the minister of Collins Street, Mrs. James
Martin, who was its secretary for many years. In 1884 the
Rev. R. Bion visited Victoria and deepened interest in East
Bengal. The following year the Zenana Auxiliary became
known as the Zenana branch of the Mymensingh Mission, and
a year later was amalgamated with the Society formed in 1865,
and after that the two societies were known as the Victorian
Baptist Foreign Mission in connection with the Baptist Asso-


ciation of Victoria. The Church constituted in Mymensingh
in 1868 made quiet progress from 1883 to 1889 under the
supervision of the Rev. J. Ellison of the English Society. It
was during that period that work begun among the Garos in
1880 made rapid strides.
South Australia, through the advocacy of the Rev. Silas
Mead had established a Mission at Faridpur, a district con-
tiguous to Mymensingh, and when Miss Ellen Arnold from
Faridpur was on furlough, and visited our Victorian Churches,
interest in Foreign Mission work was greatly increased, and
when Miss Arnold returned to India in October 1885 she was
accompanied by our first Victorian missionaries, Misses Marion
Fuller from Geelong, and Ruth Wilkin from Castlemaine.
While preparing for their work they lived at Faridpur, but
when through a generous donor a bungalow was built at
Mymensingh they removed there in 1887. This was the begin-
ning of the fine collection of buildings now seen on our mission
compound. Our two intrepid missionaries kept the Churches
fully informed of their work in the Zenanas, and soon reported
that they had opened a school for girls. This school has
grown with the years, and is one of the finest features of our
Indian service.
Three years after our first missionaries went to India they
were joined by Miss Iris Seymour, and two years later by
Misses Ehrenberg and Bethel, to be followed in 1891 by Miss
E. Chambers and Mr. A. Neville. That is, in six years six
missionaries were commissioned to represent Victoria in the
attempt to win some of the 4,000,000 people of Mymensingh
for Jesus Christ. The work was colossal, the difficulties many
and great, but they went in the name of the Lord of Hosts.
In order to tell the whole story of our missionary enterprise
in East Bengal a book would be needed as big as this volume,
but as our commission is to narrate the history of Baptists in
Victoria it is obvious that only a few salient facts about our
Indian work can be recorded. The bungalow on the mission
compound was superseded by a very substantial mission house
built under the supervision of Mr. A. Neville. Two other


mission houses have since been added, also a boys’ hostel, a
number of buildings in connection with the girls’ school, beside
five houses for the native preachers. Not far from the com-
pound is the Mymensingh Church, and in the centre of the
town the Gospel Hall. The total value of the property is
188,226 rupees. All this gives visible proof of the steady
progress of the Mission.
In addition to the girls’ school, of which Miss Janet Hogben
has been the very efficient principal for several years, the boys’
hostel, established by the Rev. H. J. Sutton, M.A., has had
about 180 pupils since its inception and has attained a high
standard of education and spiritual efficiency.
The work among the Garos initiated by the Rev. R. Bion
was developed to a remarkable extent by the Rev. P. C. and
Mrs. Nall, who from 1900 to 1930 devoted all their powers
to the evangelisation of the eager, warm-hearted people living
on the borders of Mymensingh. An institution for the training
of pastors, evangelists and teachers has been established for the
Garos at Biri Siri, 27 miles north of Mymensingh, where Mr.
Nall was followed in succession by the Revs. P. F. Lanyon, W.
G. Crofts, and V. J. White. There are now approximately
70 Village Mission Schools and 100 Churches in Garo-land
with a membership of 3500 in a Christian community of about
6500. Last year 300 Garos were baptized, and the whole work
provides one of the most gladdening illustrations of missionary
success.
The district of Mymensingh, allotted to the Victorian
Baptists, has a population of upwards of 4,000,000 with an
area of over 6000 square miles. From the inception of the
work the Foreign Mission Committee has sent as many men
and women as its funds would allow. There has been no lack
of volunteers, and though our Victorian Churches contribute
over per year the number of labourers seems very small
compared with the needs of the great harvest field.
For over 40 years the women of our Churches have been
banded together as the Baptist Women’s Missionary Union,
and have quietly and untiringly sought to keep the home fires


burning and maintain the interest of our Churches in our
workers in East Bengal. Year by year they have formed
branches in our various Churches, have collected funds and
kept in touch with the missionaries on the field. When Miss
Hilda McLean was in Melbourne on her first furlough she
s^gg es l e( J that the Junior Endeavourers should support a mis-
sionary to be regarded as their own. The Endeavourers were
captivated by the idea, and under the leadership of Miss Lewis
raised every year for the purpose. Then when Mrs. Dr.
Barber was here on one of her furloughs she proposed the
formation of a Senior Girls’ Missionary Union. This matter
was also taken up enthusiastically, and ever since the Union
has taken an active interest in our Indian work.
In 1913? after several Interstate Conventions had thoroughly
discussed the situation, it was decided that all the Australian
States should join their forces, and ever since sth February,
1913, they have been working under a Federal Board. In the
Federal district there is a population of over 10,000,000, and
the yearly Budget of the Board is To-day openings
for work are more promising than ever before, and with the
possibility of a great mass movement among the 60,000,000
Untouchables of India the call for increased activity and sup-
port is louder and more insistent than at any previous time.
For 20 years the Rev. J. C. Martin was the general secretary of
the Federal Board, and on his retirement in 1934 the Rev.
F. A. Marsh was chosen as his successor. Mr. E. H. Jenkin,
for long the treasurer of the Victorian Committee, has been
treasurer of the Federal Board since December 1922.
We close this all-too-brief summary of our Indian Mission
with a list of the names of the men and women who have
represented Victoria in this great service:—Miss Fuller, 1885;
Miss Wilkin (Mrs. Neville), 1885; Miss Clelland, 1887; Miss
Seymour, 1888; Miss Bethel (Mrs. Lindeman), 1890; Miss
Ehrenberg, 1890; Rev. A. Neville, 1891; Miss Chambers, 1891;
Miss Lamb, 1893; R ev. E. Blackwell, 1895; Rev. P. C. Nall,
1897; Miss Reid, 1898; Miss A. Doery, 1899; Mrs. Nall, 1899;
Miss C. Williams, 1900; Miss Tranter, 1901; Rev. H. J. Sutton,


M.A., 1903; Rev. L. Barber, 1905; Miss H. McLean, 1905;
Mrs. L. Barber, M.8., 8.5., 1908; Miss B. G. Harris, 19x0; Miss
A. Sherrill, 1911; Rev. E. F. Paice, 1912; Miss O. Johnston, 1912;
Miss Gardner, 1913; Miss F. Cox, 1914; Rev. W. L. Salter, 1915;
Miss B. Burleigh, 1915; Miss M. Findlay, 1916; Rev. E. F.
Halkyard, B.Sc., 1919; Mrs. Halkyard, M.A., 1919; Mrs. H. J.
Sutton, 1921; Miss E. Bishop, 8.A., 1922; Miss R. Brindley,
1922; Miss D. Prest, 1924; Miss M. Lord, 1925; Miss V.
Bavington, 1925; Rev. E. E. Watson, 1925; Rev. C. D. Baldwin,
1926; Mrs. E. E. Watson, 1927; Miss K. Perrin, 1928; Miss L.
McGregor, 1928; Mrs. A. E. Smith, 1928.
In addition to the members of our Churches who have gone
to our specific work in East Bengal a number of others have
gone to the Regions Beyond. Among these were Mr. and Mrs.
O. Deeath, from Aberdeen Street to Nyassaland; Mrs. and Miss
Henry, from the same Church to Ceylon; Mr. F. Purdy, from
Ballarat to the New Hebrides; Mr. and Mrs. H. W. Long,
from Maldon to the Zambesi Industrial Mission; Miss Beilin
and Miss Box, to South Africa; Messrs. E. Barber, W. Seaman,
H. Kitchen, and others for the China Inland Mission; Miss R.
Hinton, to the Poona Mission; and the daughters of Dr. D. S.
Mac Coll, one to India, the other to China; two daughters of
Mr. F. Varley, to the Sudan Mission. We are conscious that
the list is incomplete, and only add that the reflex influence of
their missionary spirit is helpful to our Churches.


Chapter XV
THE STORY OF THE CHURCHES
IV—THE ERA OF MANUFACTURES
“The Churches were strengthened in the faith and increased in
number/’—Acts xvi. 5.
We have seen that consequent on the enactment of liberal
laws to ensure closer settlement on the land, a steady flow of
population set in from towns and cities to the wide open
spaces, and in every part of Victoria farms and orchards were
established. But gradually a reaction followed. Life in the
country proved too lonely for many, the financial returns for
the produce of the land were disappointing, the comforts and
social amenities of the metropolis grew more attractive, and
instead of the cry “Back to the Land” there began an exodus
from the country to the capital city. In the course of a few
years three-fifths of the people in Victoria were living in and
around Melbourne. The suburbs in turn gained the status
of cities. The factory system greatly increased, and the
secondary production outweighed the primary. In spite of
all the calls for decentralisation Melbourne grew out of all
proportion to the size of the State. Since we are not writing
an essay on political economy we must not discuss this situation
now. In this chapter we will briefly describe the growth of
our Churches in the factory areas and the inner suburbs.
FOOTSCRAY, 1883
We have noted the spirit of evangelism that characterised
the West Melbourne Church from the first. It was this spirit
that led a number of its young men in 1882 to start a Sunday
School and hold Gospel Mission services in a hall at the corner
of Buckingham Street and the Geelong Road at Footscray.


Among these pioneers of the new cause were Messrs. Luke
Claughton, W. Gallant, D. T. Barnet, and H. Preston, their
leader being Mr. R. Self. The work grew, and on ist May,
1883, a Baptist Church of eighteen members was duly con-
stituted by the Rev. S. Chapman. Soon the Rev. J. A. Soper,
from England, became pastor of the Church, and as the congre-
gations increased services were transferred to the Royal Hall.
When Mr. Soper removed to Petersham, Sydney, another
change was made to the Mechanics’ Institute, where for twelve
months a young student for the ministry, Mr. }. H. Goble,
preached every Sunday. When Mr. Goble also left for Sydney
Mr. D. J. Jones continued the work. As the cause grew under
Mr. Goble’s ministry, a house was purchased in Buckley
Street, and with the partitions removed served as a Church
for three years. When the Blue Ribbon Hall was built in
1887, it was secured for Sunday Services conducted by Mr.
W. J. Liddy, and then by Mr. C. Palmer. In 1890 the present
site in Paisley Street was bought and a Church, now used as
the School Hall, was opened for worship. Soon after Mr.
Palmer resigned to join the Salvation Army, and in August
1891 the Rev. C. Pickering was called to the pastorate. He
removed to another district after two years, and then for two
years students from the College and Lay Preachers sustained
the services. By this time Mr. Goble was back in Melbourne,
and he was asked to accept the position of pastor. He agreed,
and on 3rd March, 1895, began his great life work. For 37
years he spent all his powers in the service of the Church and
the community. Footscray became a city, and with all its
progress the Rev. J. H. Goble was closely identified. Goble
of Footscray was his title. He was the friend and helper of
all, fully trusted and greatly loved. The congregation kept
on growing, and after three years the Church had to be en-
larged so that it could seat 475. In another three years this
proved inadequate, and the present Church, to seat 700, was
erected in 1904 at a cost of /2000. In 1909 a branch cause
was started at Gordon Street, and in succession the following
became assistant pastors of Mr. Goble:—Revs. R. Farrer, J.


Robertson, H. F. Wright, and R. S. Pickup. In addition to
being pastor of a great Church, with a big Sunday School,
Christian Endeavour Societies and other activities, Mr. Goble
was a leader in many Denominational institutions, and when
the Baptists of Australia became federated he was unanimously
chosen as the first President-General of the Commonwealth.
Inevitably his manifold labours wore him out. He would
not rest. He would die in harness. On 31st January, 1932,
the end came; the big heart ceased to beat. The streets of
Footscray were lined with thousands as the funeral procession
passed. A life-size marble statue on a high pedestal on the
Geelong Road, not far from Paisley Street, commemorates the
work of an earnest preacher and faithful pastor. In July
1932 the Rev. H. F. Wright was called to succeed Mr. Goble,
and with a fine band of helpers carries on the work. Among
the many who have been pillars in the Church during its
history the following will be long remembered: —Messrs. D.
T. Barnet (a worker in the Church for thirty years, and for
half of that time its Secretary or Treasurer), H. Preston, W.
Gallant, D. J. Jones (deacon for 48 years), J. H. Hicks (deacon
for 30 years, Secretary for 20 years), J. McKellar, A. Strong-
man, and G. Williams (Sunday School leaders). In a great
industrial centre it is good that we have such a strong Sunday
School and Church witnessing for the Kingdom of God.
Joseph Hunter Goble. Member Albert Park Church 1892.
Port Melbourne, Clarke Street. Pastor Footscray Church for 37
years—lß9s-1932. President of Union 1908. Chairman of Ad-
visory Board many years. First President-General of Baptist Union
of Australia. Chairman at times of Foreign Mission and Home
Mission Committee. Genial, unselfish, hard-working, with a pas-
sion for evangelism. A capable leader of men. Passed away 31st
January, 1932.
GORDON STREET, FOOTSCRAY
Above we have recorded the fact that in 1909 a branch cause
was started in the growing population to the west of Paisley
Street. A Church was built to seat 250 at a cost of The
work was developed by a series of workers, Messrs. S. Dorman,


F. Paice, H. McDonald, and grew in strength under Mr. Goble
and his assistant pastors. A Church was constituted in 1919,
and for about four years, under the pastorate of the Rev. T.
V. Paul, was independent of Paisley Street. Then the Church
was supplied by the students of the College in succession,
Messrs. A. G. Haley, E. M. Kippax, }. H. Watson, and A. W.
Smith. After Mr. Goble’s death it was determined that the
Church should be separate from Paisley Street, and the Rev.
W. W. Baird was called as pastor. The membership is not
large, but there is a good Sunday School of about 200 scholars.
CARLTON NORTH, 1883
A meeting of Baptists was held at the residence of the Rev.
A. Ager in North Carlton in August 1883, when it was decided
to form a Baptist Church to meet for worship in the Carlton
Hall, with Mr. Ager as pastor. The Church had only fifteen
members, but good congregations assembled and a Sunday
School was started. Next year the Church rented the Gospel
Hall in York Street for meetings on three evenings of the
week. Land was purchased at the corner of Canning and
McPherson Streets for £ 6OO. When Mr. Ager resigned as
pastor in 1884 that he might go to Lily dale, the Rev. C. Testro,
of Sale, was chosen as his successor. A Church building was
erected in the following year at a cost, with subsequent addi-
tions, of X 1747* Mr. Testro was succeeded in 1886 by the
Rev. C. Pickering, and during his ministry of five years there
were many additions to the membership. In 1892 the Rev.
W. Clark was called to the pastorate, and for fifteen years the
Church enjoyed quiet prosperity. Mr. Clark was followed
by the Rev. E. Dybing for nine years, and since then the
pastors have been the Revs. E. H. Holloway, A. J. Whitbourn,
W. Cross, and the present pastor, T. P. Trinham. In 1930
a Manse was purchased. The Church honours the memory
of Mr. W. Rankine, one of the first deacons; Evan Rees,
Secretary for 26 years; }. Lord, Secretary for seven years, and
rejoices in the fact that Mr. W. C. Twaits and H. F. Jullien
have been Secretary and Treasurer respectively for the last


fifteen years. The long years of service of Mrs. Evan Rees in
all the Church activities is gladly remembered. When the
Jubilee of the Church was celebrated in 1933 the happy useful
history of the Church was joyously recalled by many former
members.
NEWPORT, 1885
When the Rev. }. Downing was minister at Williamstown
a branch cause was started at Newport in 1885. In that year
a weatherboard Church was built in Newcastle Street, and
services were conducted by Messrs. H. A. Osmond and W. A.
Liddy, with the help of workers from the Williamstown
Church. In 1887 the Church was constituted by the Rev.
H. Coombs, principally of members transferred from Wil-
liamstown. In 1892 the Rev. C. Pickering, of Footscray,
supervised the work. Next the Rev. D. Corbet was appointed
by the Home Mission Society as pastor. From 1896 to 1904
the Rev. W. A. Whitney, of Williamstown, was honorary
pastor. During their College days, students H. Boulter and
A. H. Potter were acting pastors. On the completion of his
course in 1910 the Rev. A. H. Potter became pastor, and in
1914 the W.B. Church was removed from Newcastle Street
and the present brick Church erected on the same site in
Mason Street at a cost of After a successful ministry
of six years Mr. Potter was followed by the Rev. E. R. Thorne
for five years. Since then the Revs. W. W. Jolly, S. T. Earl
and J. B. Allison have ministered to the Church, Mr. Allison
continuing for nine years, during which time the Sunday
School buildings were greatly improved and the Jubilee of
the Church in 1935 celebrated with much enthusiasm. In
1936 the Rev. S. Watson was called from Cudgee to the pas-
torate of the Church. Among the faithful workers the New-
port Church gratefully remembers C. G. Carter, R. H. Drew,
D. Williams, G. H. Budden and many others. These few
bald statements, as in the case of other Churches, fail to recall
the real life of the Church as revealed by conversions, bap-
tisms, meetings for prayer and worship, but past and present


members will read between the lines the story of happy days
of fellowship in the gospel.
ALTONA, 1918
During the pastorate of the Rev. E. R. Thorne, Mr. D.
Williams took part in the religious instruction of the scholars
at the State School at Altona, and Mr. G. A. Loft started a
Sunday School there. The establishment of Baptist services
was undertaken by the Home Mission Society, and in an earlier
chapter we have told of the removal of the historic Church
at Tylden to Altona as its first place of worship, the new site
being given by Mrs. Spencer and Mr. Carr. The building
was subsequently enlarged and class rooms built, and during
the pastorate of the Rev. W. W. Baird, in 1931, the Progress
Hall adjoining the Church was purchased, and under the
direction of Mr. L. E. Warner made into a very attractive
Church. The members now number 90, and the scholars
120. The Rev. J. H. Watson is the present pastor, and the
prospects at this seaside Church are good.
NEWMARKET, 1886
On 6th May, 1886, the Baptists resident in Newmarket met
at the home of Mr. Alfred Mathews to consider ways and
means for the establishment of a Baptist cause in that rapidly
growing community. Before the end of the month land was
purchased in Brighton Street, and on 17th October a Church
was opened for worship. The land and building cost £ 6OO.
The opening services were conducted by the Rev. S. Chapman,
Mr. D. Hamilton, and the Rev. W. C. Bunning. The new
cause was full of enthusiasm. On 2nd December the Rev. W.
C. Bunning, minister of the West Melbourne Church, gave
the right hand of fellowship to 29 persons, who constituted
the Newmarket Church. Good progress had been made in
seven months. A student, Mr. S. Pitman, supplied during the
Christmas vacation of 1886, and in the following March the
Rev. J. Hughes Jones became the first pastor of the Church.
He was a fervid Welsh preacher, and for three years the


Church steadily prospered. When Mr. Jones was commis-
sioned by the Home Mission Society to open a cause at Hor-
sham he was followed at Newmarket in 1890 by the Rev.
F. E. Harry, also from Wales, and of the same temperament.
The Church continued to prosper, but received a setback when,
in 1891, 22 members were transferred to join a new cause at
Ascot Vale. After two years Mr. Harry was followed by the
Rev. Alex. Steele, whose ministry was continued for six years.
In 1902 the Rev. J. H. Pryce entered on a pastorate for five
years, and during that time the present Church was built at a
cost of The pastors since Mr. Pryce resigned have
been the Revs. A. E. Blackwell, S. M. Potter, S. Whitchurch,
A. G. Bennett, T. V. Paul, T. K. Ewen, and the present pastor,
the Rev. H. H. Jeffs. The intervals between recent pastorates
have been filled by College students. Of these Mr. J. W.
Lindsay happily carried on the work from 1935 to 1937, and
in that period the Jubilee of the Church was celebrated. Of
the foundation members only two were present at the Jubilee
services—Mrs. A. Lawrence, daughter of the Rev. George Slade,
and Mr. Gay, with Mrs. Willman and Miss Howarth, who had
been in membership for 48 years. Our story began with the
name of Mr. A. Mathews, and his name will not soon be for-
gotten. For 40 years, first at West Melbourne and then at
Newmarket, he was a leader of the Young Men’s Bible classes,
and scores of young men with loving familiarity spoke of him
as “Dad” Mathews. To men of his character and persistence
our Denomination owes much of its progress and stability.
MURRUMBEENA, 1888
At a time when there were no religious services in the new
district of Murrumbeena, Mr. and Mrs. P. St. Clair Pitt com-
menced evening classes for young people at their home in Emily
Street. Next, afternoon classes were held for younger ones,
and the total number of scholars rose to 60. In the following
year weekly prayer meetings commenced, and in May 1890 a
Baptist Church was duly constituted at Mr. Pitt’s house, the
foundation members being Mr. and Mrs. Pitt, Mr. A. Gallop,


Mr. W. G. Godfrey, Mrs. J. Whitlam, Mr. and Mrs. Pay, Mrs.
H. Pay and Miss Pay. On 29th June the first service was
held in Mr. Pay’s home by the Rev. R. Williamson, of South
Yarra. In October 1891 the services were transferred from
Mr. Pay’s home to the local hall. On 10th April, 1892, the pre-
sent Church building was opened. There was much enthusiasm
since it was the first building for worship built in the district.
Till 1897 the services were conducted chiefly by the Preachers’
Society. In that year the Rev. R. Williamson was chosen as
honorary pastor. In May 1900 the Rev. Donald Mac Lean be-
came pastor of Elsternwick and Murrumbeena and continued
till 1905, when the Preachers’ Society again supplied the ser-
vices. In June 1910 the Rev. G. E. Flale was appointed to the
charge of the work, which he sustained for nearly four years.
Then in September 1914 the Rev. F. Clemens was called
to the pastorate, in which he faithfully laboured till 1922. In
his time the Schoolroom was built and the Church made quiet
progress. The Rev. W. F. Nash followed Mr. Clemens for
two years, and in May 1926 a dual pastorate with the Church
at Darling was arranged with the Rev. S. T. Earl. This
scheme ended in April 1928, and a year later the present pastor,
the Rev. Ivor Hopkins, 8.A., was called by the Church. Mr.
and Mrs. Pitt, who pioneered the work, are lovingly remem-
bered, Mr. Pitt was the first Secretary for eight years, and
Mrs. Pitt was teacher of the Young Ladies’ Bible Class almost
till her death in February 1936. Of the foundation members
Mrs. Whitlam is a non-resident member, and Miss E. Pay is
still a teacher in the Sunday School. The Church is in a good
situation, and it is hoped that a larger building will be erected
by the side of the present Church in the near future.
ABBOTSFORD, 1888
On 22nd March, 1888, Mr. W. McLean called a meeting at
his residence in East Jolimont to discuss the need of a Mission
in the dense population of Abbotsford. He purchased a build-
ing and generously made it available for Gospel services.
The Rev. S. Chapman aided the work. For three years the


Bey. F. C. Spurr,
1913-14.
Trustee V.B. Fund.
D. Mcßorie, Esq.,
1916-17.
Trustee V.B. Fund.
Bey. X. L. Beurle
1919-20.
Bey. E. Dyeing,
1915-16.
Evan Bees, Esq.,
1918-19.
Trustee V.B. Fund.
Geo. H. Doery, Esq., 0.8.E
1914-15.
Trustee Y,B. Fund,
Key. A. 31. Thompson,
1917-18.
Secretary Foreign Mission.
W. H. G. ElEingworth, Esq
1920-21.
Chairman Home Mission


Rev. J. H. Goble,
President Union 1908-9.
President Baptist Union of Australia 1926-9.
Chairman Foreign Mission Board 1922-31.
Rev. J. C. Martin
President Union 1934-5.
Secretary Foreign Mission Board 1914-34


Missioner was the Rev. W. R. Hiddlestone, and then for some
years the services were maintained by voluntary workers,
among whom were Dr. D. S. McColl, F. W. Norwood, T.
E. Varley, and J. Darling. In January 1905 the Rev. E. L.
Watson became pastor, and after 2\ years he was followed
by the Rev. A. Neville, recently returned from India. His
ministry of three years was followed by that of the Rev. S.
E. Dorman for a similar period. After that in succession the
Revs. D. Shaw, E. Bungey and L. Jaggers sustained the pas-
torate. From 1928 till 1936 the services were supplied by
College students Messrs. R. A. Haley, D. C. Lewis, A. W.
Smith, J. H. Watson, J. W. Lindsay, and G. W. Carr. In
February 1937 the Rev. E. H. Came was called as pastor. The
Church was duly constituted in 1905, and recalls the names
of many loyal workers, such as Mr. W. J. Twentyman, choir-
master for x 8 years; W. L. Newnham, Treasurer for thirteen
years; S. Allison, member for fifteen years; Mesdames W.
Hill, Thornton, G. A. Joyce, members for forty years, and
many others. The present Secretary, Mr. S. Farr, has held
the office for over 25 years. During the pastorate of the Rev.
D. Shaw a fine School Hall was built at a cost of £l2OO. The
Church is prospering and meets a real need in the community.
AUBURN, 1888
On 21st July, 1887, sixteen Baptists met in the reading room
of the Hawthorn Town Hall with a view to establishing a
Baptist Church. Mr. Daniel Hamilton was chairman, and
Mr. W. H. Wain convenor of the meeting. It was deemed
advisable to start a Church, and all present agreed to join. On
14th August regular services were commenced in the Town
Hall, and on 14th February, 1888, a Church was duly con-
stituted. Among the foundation members were D. Hamilton,
W. H. Wain, Mr. and Mrs. J. T. Smith, Mr., Mrs. and Miss
Ditchburn. Since population was extending eastwards it
was decided to hold the services at Auburn, though some
doubted the wisdom of going so far from Hawthorn. A
Church had been built at Auburn in 1866 on land held in


Trust for Congregationalists and Baptists. Hitherto it had
been used only by the Congregationalists, but in 1888 it was
placed at the disposal of the Baptists, and in 1921 the original
trust was altered in sole favour of the Baptists. At first most
of the services were conducted by Mr. Hamilton, but on the
removal to Auburn the Rev. A. Bird was called to the pastorate
from Ballarat. Under his gracious ministry the Church
greatly prospered, and when he resigned in 1895 the members
numbered 237, and the S.S. scholars 331. It was largely
owing to Mr. Bird’s advocacy that the C.E. movement rapidly
grew strong in Victoria. The following pastors have suc-
ceeded Mr. Bird: —Revs. J. T. Mateer, J. E. Harrison, F. E.
Harry, W. G. Pope, E. L. Watson, A. D. Shaw, A. W. Bean,
and E. M. Kippax, who entered on his ministry in 1935. The
original building has been enlarged, and in 1930 the front
was greatly improved. The Missionary spirit has always been
strong in the Church, and many to-day remember Miss
Nemmie Medley, who was an enthusiast for Foreign Mis-
sions. This spirit was greatly increased when the Rev. H. J.
Sutton, M.A., went from Auburn to India, and who, during
part of his stay in India from 1915 to 1927, was regarded as
co-pastor of the Auburn Church. In addition to those whose
names have been mentioned the Church honours the memory
of J. T. Press, an enthusiastic temperance worker; Charles
Carter, deacon for many years and a fervid evangelist; C. D.
Aston, Secretary and Treasurer; H. Buchanan, deacon and
lay preacher; E. Doery, S.S. Superintendent; C. H. Spurgeon,
A. F. Fullard, and many others, men and women. Very
joyous enthusiastic gatherings assembled when the Church cele-
brated its Jubilee in September 1937.
HAWTHORN WEST, 1912
When the Church was transferred from Hawthorn to
Auburn in 1888 it was feared that the new site was too far
away for some of its members. This proved to be the case,
so after a time services were resumed at Lower Hawthorn,
supplied principally by the Preachers’ Society, but in 1912,


under the leadership of the Rev. F. E. Harry, then pastor of
the Auburn Church, land was bought and a building erected
in Barton Street, West Hawthorn. A Church was duly con-
stituted in 1915, of which the Rev. W. Paice was the first pastor
for two years, followed after an interval by the Rev, L. H.
Jaggers. Then for a time the services were taken by Mr.
W. J. Beasley and the Preachers’ Society. In 1927 the Rev.
}. S. Harrison accepted the pastorate, and for nine years until
his death in 1936 the Church enjoyed his expositions of Scrip-
ture. During that time good class rooms were added to the
Church, and in August 1928 the Church, hitherto regarded
as a branch of the Auburn Church, was granted full independ-
ence and the property conveyed to its Trustees. After Mr.
Harrison’s death the Rev. J. I. Mudford was chosen as pastor.
During its whole existence the Church has enjoyed happy
fellowship, and the attendance at the Sunday School has been
full of promise.
ALBERT PARK, 1890
In 1886, Mr. James Criss, a member of the Ashfield Church,
New South Wales, came to South Melbourne, and on his
removal soon after to Middle Park held services in his own
home for his neighbours. When numbers increased the ser-
vices were transferred to the State School, and in February
1890 it was decided to form a Baptist Church. This was con-
stituted two months later by the Revs. A. Bird and A. W.
Webb, when thirty members signed a solemn covenant. The
first deacons were J. Criss, R. }. Fargher, A. Parker, F. W.
Barber, R. T. Morton. Soon after it was decided to purchase
a site for a Church in Kerford Road for The pioneers
of the Church had foresight and courage. In the following
year a Church was built by voluntary labour under the super-
vision of Mr. A. Parker, the materials costing This
was opened by the Rev. S. Chapman on 14th June, 1891. On
the same day a Sunday School was started, with Mr. F. W.
Barber as Superintendent. In January 1892, the Rev. H. G.
Blackie, from Tasmania, became the first pastor of the Church,
and that year J. H. Goble (afterwards pastor of Footscray


Church) and his wife were received into the fellowship. The
same year a branch cause was started at Clarke Street Hall,
Port Melbourne. After two years Mr. Blackie resigned. In
1896 Mr. Criss, after ten years’ helpful service, returned to
Sydney. That year the Rev. C. Pickering became pastor, but
left for another sphere after sixteen months. In 1898 letters
of dismissal were granted to thirteen members to form a
Church at Clarke Street, Port Melbourne. Among these were
Mr. (now Rev.) G. Hardcastle and his wife. Because of the
removal of many members from the district congregations had
fallen off and the Sunday services were supplied by the
Preachers’ Society and College students. In 1903 the Rev. C.
Stark was called to the pastorate, and for six years there
ensued a time of revival and prosperity. On 12th October,
1909, the Church, built of wood, was totally destroyed by fire,
when Mrs. E. Trestrail, who gave the College its fine build-
ings, opened her home on Beaconsfield Parade for the Church
services. With the insurance money and a loan from the
V.B. Fund, a new brick Church was built at a cost of £l4lO.
The Rev. A. R. Thompson was chosen as pastor in August
1911, and for seven years exercised a most helpful gracious
ministry, when the Church greatly prospered. In his time
the School Hall was built, costing Brief pastorates by
the Revs. R. Farrer and C. T. Boreham were followed by the
ministry of the Rev. H. A. Townend for three years. In
1929 the Church became part of a circuit including South
Melbourne and Port Melbourne, which has had the following
pastors: —Revs. A. P. Dawson, Adam Clarke, and now W.
Lowson. Mr. C. H. Newbury was Secretary for many years.
The present Secretary, Mr. A. Gilchrist, with his wife, a
daughter of Mr. J. Criss, have been loyal helpers of the Church
for 46 years.
CAMBERWELL, 1890
At a meeting of ten Baptists in the Upper Hawthorn Hall
it was decided to start a Baptist cause in Camberwell, Mr. W.
H. Wain and others from Auburn being the prime movers.
A Sunday School was started and Gospel Services held in the


Hall, with gratifying success. On 29th April, 1891, a Church
was duly constituted. For ten years the Church had no
regular pastor, but services were maintained by visiting
ministers, though principally by the Preachers’ Society. In
September 1901 the Rev. H. H. Jeffs was called to the pas-
torate. A Building Fund had been slowly growing, and in
January 1902 land was bought at the corner of Riversdale
Road and Wills Street for ,£475. In the following year the
memorial stones of the Church were laid by Mrs. W. G.
Stephens and Professor Kernot, and the building erected at
a cost of School buildings have been added since at
a cost of The following constituted the first diaconate:
—Messrs. W. H. Wain, F. E. Blackwell, C. D. Barber, J. Whit-
man, R. Eraser, with Mr. H. Manchester as Secretary. The
Church has had only four pastors:—Revs. H. H. Jeffs, 1901-
1909; N. L. Beurle, 1909-1921; R. Ings, 1921-1934; E. C.
Burleigh, 8.A., 1934, till the present time. The membership
grew steadily and has been well maintained during the years
and stands now at 278. An encouraging feature of the work
of the Church has been its large Sunday School, the highest
number enrolled being in 1908, when 338 were reported.
C. D. Barber. From Queensland to Victoria 1884. To Mel-
bourne 1886. Founded Gordon Institute. During 16 years 2000
boys passed through his hands. One of first Deacons of Camberwell
Church. A great microscopist— wrote booklets on “Some Mysteries
of Fife, A Child Has a Right to be Weil Born.” With lantern
slides illustrated a lecture on “World Building.” Passed away 29th
June, 1902. Said his microscopical studies confirmed his faith
in God.
CLIFTON HILL, 1890
During the pastorate of the Rev. E. Harris at George Street,
Fitzroy, so many of the members in the vicinity of the Church
removed to the higher ground and more open spaces of
Clifton Hill that it was decided to open a branch Church in
that locality. The opening service was held in the Albert
Flail on 18th July, 1890. At a meeting of the George Street
Church on 21st October, of which the Rev. S. Chapman was
chairman, it was determined to form a separate Church at


Clifton Hill. The Church was duly constituted on 26th
November with 42 members, principally from George Street,
and the Rev. H. J. Lambert was chosen as pastor, the services
being continued in the Albert Hall. After a pastorate of two
years Mr. Lambert resigned, and for three years the ministry
was sustained by supplies. Meanwhile funds were collected
for a Church building, and with the assistance of a loan from
the Victorian Baptist Fund, the present Church was built at
a cost of .£1430 and opened for worship on 2nd October,
1895. The Rev. G. M. Macdonald was pastor for two years,
and then the Rev. John Carson began a very successful pas-
torate of ten years, during which time the School buildings
were erected at a cost of jC 1950. He was followed by the Rev.
H. H. Jeffs for five years, and the Rev. G. A. Craike for four
years. In Mr. Craike’s time a Manse was purchased for
The Rev. H. F. Wright was the next minister, and
for nine years he laboured successfully. He was followed by
the Rev. W. H. Hinton for seven years, the present pastor,
the Rev. Adam Clarke, beginning his work in October 1935.
The Church has a fine equipment of buildings, all of which
are free of debt. We have seen that Clifton Hill was started
by members moving outwards from Fitzroy, and now in turn
is facing the same situation as the parent Church, since for
some time there has been a steady drift of its members to out-
lying districts. Mr. Clarke has especial evangelistic gifts, and
the Church is hopeful that the decline is checked and that
in the centre of a great population there will be a recovery
of the early prosperity.
COBURG, 1890
When population was rapidly increasing northwards from
Brunswick, the Brunswick Church arranged for the Rev. G.
Weller, recently arrived from England, to conduct services in
the Coburg Town Hall. Good congregations gathered, among
whom were some who had moved from Preston —Messrs.
Vincent, Ross, Cully and Jackson. Soon it was decided to
establish a permanent cause, and a small brick Church was


built and opened early in 1896. Mr. Weller was a good
preacher and faithful pastor, and the Church was full of regret
when, for health reasons, he accepted a call to Bendigo. For
some time the services were supplied by students from the
College, and by Mr. G. Lake, a former Home Missionary,
and then by the Rev. Donald McLean. After his pastorate of
two years the Rev. H. A. Horsfall was called to the Church.
By this time the building proved too small for the congre-
gations and school, and the present beautiful modern Church
was erected in Sydney Road at a cost, including land, of
Mr. Horsfall’s was a happy, successful ministry of
nine years. He was succeeded by the Revs. F. Robinson and
L. H. Field till the Rev. R. H. Tunks, on the completion of
his College course, became pastor. The cause was steadily
maintained for eight years, when Mr. Tunks resigned, and the
Church invited the present pastor, the Rev. P. F. Lanyon, from
Brisbane, a former Missionary at Biri Siri, India, to become its
leader. Since the Church was built, School buildings have
been added at a cost of that have recently been greatly
improved. The Church has had a good history, and, with
good buildings in the midst of a dense population of 30,000,
has every prospect of years of useful service.
CANTERBURY, 1891
When the Canterbury Church was started there was much
open country of lightly wooded gently sloping hills. Popu-
lation was slowly extending eastwards. On sth February,
1891, a few friends met in the office of Messrs. Beilin and
Duncan to discuss the advisability of starting a Baptist cause.
Two months later a service was held with fifteen persons pre-
sent, and a Sunday School was begun. Events moved quickly.
Land was purchased, and on 20th June the foundation of a
brick Church in Balwyn Road was laid by the Hon. Robert
Reid. The Balwyn and Canterbury Baptist Church was duly
constituted in October by the Rev. E. Harris, consisting of 44
members. On the occasion of the first anniversary of the
Church the Rev. D. J. Graham, from Spurgeon’s Pastors’ Col-


lege, was welcomed as the first pastor, the deacons of the
Church being Messrs. Jacobs, Goode, Smith, Kay and
Henderson. Because of financial difficulties Mr. Graham’s
pastorate closed at the end of the year, and the Rev. A. Bird,
of Auburn, became honorary pastor. In March 1896 the Rev.
H. Coombs was called to the pastorate, and when he left for
South Australia after three years’ ministry Mr. F. W. Norwood,
in 1901, became his successor. At that time Mr. G. H. Doery
was Secretary, and other members of the Diaconate were
Messrs. Duncan, Davis, Curnow, Phair and Press. The con-
gregations steadily increased, and in 1909 the Church building
was extended. In the following year a number of members
were transferred to form the Church at Balwyn. After ten
years’ very happy, successful ministry, during which time Mr.
Norwood completed a course of College training, he resigned
to became pastor of Brunswick Church. The Rev. J. C.
Martin was chosen to succeed Mr. Norwood in 1911, but the
pastorate was brief because of his removal to South Australia,
and in 1914 the Rev. S. Beckingham became his successor.
After a useful evangelistic ministry of four years Mr.
Beckingham accepted a call to New Zealand, and the Rev.
J. Robertson, M.A., who had just returned in 1919 from
France, where he had served as Chaplain to the soldiers, was
welcomed as his successor. At the same time a Manse was
purchased in View Street at a cost of After a vigorous
successful pastorate Mr. Robertson left for Christchurch, New
Zealand, and has been followed by the Rev. W. H. Bain,
M.A., and in 1931 by the Rev. H. G. Scholefield, B.D. In Mr.
Robertson’s time a fine organ was installed at a cost of £930,
and in 1930 splendid School buildings were erected facing
Boronia Street, costing about /3000. The Church has now
all necessary equipment for worship and service, has a mem-
bership of nearly 300, and is one of the most influential in the
Union. Mr. A. Duncan, one of the foundation members, has
been made a life deacon, together with Mr. R. Simpson, and
the Church gratefully recalls the wise leadership of Mr. G. H.
Doery, and the many years of service of Mr. H. Davies as


Treasurer, and of W. Curnow and L. A. Mellor as Secretaries.
While the Churches of the inner suburbs have felt the loss
of their members by removals, Canterbury and other Churches
in the east have been greatly benefited by their coming.
G. H. Doery, 0.8. E. Member Aberdeen Street, Geelong. To
Canterbury. One of founders of Church. Leader Young Men’s
Class. In 1909 Trustee V.B. Fund, its Chairman in 1924. Trea-
surer of Union for many years. President in 1914. On several
Committees of Union. A generous helper of all its activities. Dur-
ing the war gave his home for use of convalescent soldiers. Passed
away sth April, 1924, aged 63. A good man, a sincere and lowly-
minded Christian.
BALWYN, 1917
The name of the Church in Balwyn Road was at first
the Balwyn and Canterbury Church. When population in-
creased at Balwyn the Church opened a preaching station in
the Athenaeum Hall, Balwyn Road, where services were con-
ducted by Messrs. P. Turner and R. Simpson. Land was given
by Mr. A. Duncan in Balwyn Road, afterwards exchanged
for a site in Whitehorse Road. In 1910 a small W.B. Church
was opened for worship, and later rooms for Sunday School
purposes were added. The Rev. W. F. Nash was called as
the first pastor, and in March 1917 38 members were trans-
ferred from the Canterbury Church to form a separate cause.
The deacons of the Church were then Messrs. Smith, Stalker,
A. Simpson, W. Harley, and W. C. Doery. Mr. Nash resigned
in 1918 to become one of the Secretaries of the Y.M.C.A. in
the war area in France. He was followed by the Rev. F,
Green, who after a year’s pastorate was called to his reward.
The Rev. A. H. Potter succeeded, but after years left for
England. Then in 1923 the Rev. H. Boulter was called as
pastor, and for twelve years maintained a gracious fruitful
ministry. During his pastorate preparations were made for
the erection of a brick Church to supersede the W.B. building.
In 1935 the Rev. E. R. Thorne, from South Australia, became
pastor, and on 13th December, 1937, the foundation stone of
the new Church was laid by Mr. G. W. Green amid much
enthusiasm. The Church cost about


MOONEE PONDS, 1892
When a township was first surveyed at Ascot Vale it was
decided that no intoxicating drinks should be sold in the
locality, so it was named Temperance Township. Here, in
March 1888, Mr. Blanchard Slade, son of our Pioneer Mis-
sionary, started a Sunday School. This was adopted by the
newly-established Newmarket Church as a branch school. In
December of the same year Mission Services were started, at
which brief addresses were given by Messrs. B. Slade and A.
W. Sloper, the Rev. G. Slade preaching twice a month. In
October the services were transferred to the Ascot Vale Hall,
and a number of the S.S. scholars decided for Christ and were
baptized at Newmarket. On 10th January, 1892, the Ascot
Vale Church was constituted with 37 members, 25 of these
being transferred from Newmarket. In August of that year a
Church building was erected in Athol Street, and the Sunday
services were supplied by the Lay Preachers’ Society and by
College students. In 1894 a dual pastorate of Newmarket
and Moonee Ponds (as the place was now called) was begun
by the Rev. Alex. Steele; this continued till 1902, and after that
time for four years Mr. Steele ministered to Moonee Ponds
only. Under Mr. Steele’s gracious ministry the Church made
steady progress. In 1906 the Rev. R. Ings, from Rawdon
College, England, entered on a pastorate that, with the hap-
piest results, lasted for fourteen years, when Mr. Ings was ap-
pointed Secretary of the Union. For the six following years
the Rev. H. Macdonald sustained the work, to be followed for
three years by the Rev. N. T. McDonald, son-in-law of Dr. F.
W. Boreham. For a few months Mr. W. A. McKay filled the
position of student pastor till the Rev. Adam Clarke became
pastor in September 193°* During his evangelistic ministry
of sixteen months there were many decisions for Christ, paving
the way ior the present pastorate of the Rev. J. G. Manning
that began in April 1932. Though the Church has suffered
like others during the war period and the commercial depres-
sion, it has made regular and constant progress, and when it


celebrated the Jubilee of the Sunday School in 1938, it reported
a membership of 160, with 240 S.S. scholars. The Church is
united and vigorous and full of hope for coming days. The
building in Athol Street, that cost, with land, nearly
was removed in 1914 to a new site at the corner of Eglinton
and Laura Streets, and in front of it was built a handsome
brick Church costing, with the land, Adjoining this,
in 1935, a fine School Hall was built at a total cost of £ 1760.
Besides this the old site in Athol Street was repurchased and a
splendidly equipped electrically lighted tennis court provided
at a cost of £926. Altogether the Church property is worth
Of the teachers of the school of fifty years ago Mrs.
Sloper and Miss Odlin are still identified with the Church,
and among the names of those honoured by the Church are
Messrs. B. Slade, A. E. Mathews, R. F. Steel, A. B. Carey, W.
G. Jolly, O. Daley, Miss M. Lewis, Organiser of the Junior
Endeavourer’s Missionary Fund, and Miss M. Findlay, Mis-
sionary to India.
ESSENDON, 1890
About the year 1890 the Rev. Hy. Phillips, formerly pastor
of the West Melbourne Church, started a Sunday School and
preaching services in the State School at Essendon. These
were continued till failing health compelled Mr. Phillips to
retire. Then Mr. D. W. Jones, of Footscray, carried on the
work for six months, the meetings being held in Dominey’s
Hall, Mt. Alexander Road, and in 1894 a Church was con-
stituted with eighteen members. Following this for four
years regular Sunday services were maintained by the
Preachers’ Society. In 1897, when Dominey’s Hall was sold,
the Church purchased a property on the opposite side of the
road and had it altered for Church purposes at a cost of
In the next year Mr. J. H. Cole, of Brighton, accepted an
invitation to supply the Church for twelve months. In Febru-
ary 1903 one of the foundation members, Mr. J. F. Gibbons,
entered on the position of honorary pastor. In this he con-
tinued till September 1912, and in the following year the
Church placed itself under the Home Mission Committee and


the Rev. G. P. Rees was commissioned to carry on the work.
As the building was not suitable for Church work land was
purchased in Buckley Street. In 1914 the Church became in-
dependent of the Home Mission and invited Mr. Rees to con-
tinue as pastor. The building in Mt. Alexander Road was
sold and the present Church built in Buckley Street
that cost, with land, This was opened for worship
in October 1915. All this tells of rapid and solid advance.
For nine years Mr. Rees continued in a fruitful ministry till
he removed to Box Hill. He was succeeded by the Rev. R.
Goodman, and in his time land adjoining the Church was
purchased for £ I2OO. After five years’ happy pastoral service
Mr. Goodman was called to Dulwich Hill, N.S.W., and in
1928 the Rev. L. E. Tranter became pastor at Essendon. That
year Mr. and Mrs. A. H. Reid, formerly of Brentwood, pre-
sented the Church with a site for a Manse in Edward Street.
For some time Mr. Tranter’s health had been failing, and on
7th July, 1929, he passed away. That year a Manse was built
costing £goo, and the Rev. F. Robinson became pastor of the
Church. After six years’ faithful service Mr. Robinson fol-
lowed Mr. Goodman to N.S.W. to become pastor of the
Concord Church, and in 1936 the present pastor, Mr. E. T.
Laxton, entered on his ministry. The Church has steadily
grown in strength and has now a membership of 127. In
July 1937 the final payment was made on the land next the
Church, so that with the exception of a small sum owing on
the Manse the whole property is free of debt. In 25 years the
Church has been firmly established and has all needed equip-
ment for aggressive forward work.
ELSTERNWICK, 1894
When there was only a sparse scattered population in the
Caulfield district a Union Church was formed of Baptists and
Independents and a W.B. building erected in Glen Eira Road.
This was opened in January 1859, the preachers being the Revs.
W. B. Landells, of Geelong, and Isaac New, of Albert Street.
In 1863 the Rev. Wm. Poole, from Bristol College, England,


became pastor, and congregations filled the building. Mr.
Poole was followed by the Rev. John Reid, and in 1886 by the
Rev. John Gregson. The Church was prospering and then,
unfortunately, the building was destroyed by fire. Instead of
rebuilding on the old site a substantial brick Church was
erected in Orrong Road. Soon after, through the collapse of
the land boom, a period of severe financial stringency ensued,
and a separation took place between the Baptists and Indepen-
dents. The latter assumed all financial responsibility for the
new building, which they have occupied ever since, and the
Baptist congregation was transferred to the A.N.A. Hall in
Regent Street under Mr. Gregson’s pastorate, when a Church
was constituted in 1894. As the congregations grew the ser-
vices were continued in a larger hall in St. George’s Road.
Mr. Gregson was followed by a Home Missionary, Mr. (after-
wards Rev.) Donald McLean. He was succeeded by the Rev.
A. G. Roth, and in his pastorate the present Church was built
in Glenhuntly Road at a cost, including land, of In
the midst of his work, with every promise of usefulness, Mr.
Roth was called away by death, and was followed by the Revs.
O. R. Linden and R. Robertson. The early vigour of the
Church was not maintained, and the Church was constrained
to appeal to the Union for guidance and help. A special
committee was appointed, and by their advice the Rev. A. R.
Thompson was asked to leave Albert Park and take up the
work at Elsternwick. Very soon the cause revived, congre-
gations increased, and all the activities of the Church pros-
pered. Then suddenly, after a few hours’ illness, the loved
pastor passed away. Since Mr. Thompson’s death the pas-
torate has been maintained by the Revs. S. A. McDonald, F.
J. Wood, and the present pastor, J. B. Allison, who entered on
his work in 1936. At the time of his death Mr. E. A, Pearson
was an active supporter of the Church. The present Secretary
is Mr. H. H. Moulton, and the Treasurer is Mr. B. Thomas.
The Church has had a somewhat chequered history, but has a
fine property in the heart of a big population and anticipates
much future usefulness.


PORT MELBOURNE, 1894
The Baptist cause at Port Melbourne (originally termed
Sandridge) was started in 1894 as a Sunday School in a large
rented hall in Clarke Street, Messrs. J, H. Goble and G. Hard-
castle being among the early teachers. The school grew
rapidly and soon had over 200 scholars. Sunday evening ser-
vices were conducted by the Preachers’ Society. In 1898 the
Rev. S. Chapman constituted the Church with 26 members.
The cause steadily advanced, and soon the Church reported 100
members and 275 S.S. scholars. The time had come for better
provision for worship, so in 1903 the present Church was built
in Ross Street costing and was named the Chapman
Memorial Church in honour of the pastor of Collins Street
and in recognition of his interest in Port Melbourne. Pastor
G. Tudball was then put in charge of the work. In 1908 the
Rev. G. P. Rees was appointed Pastor, and during his ministry
a fine School Hall was built at a cost of Mr. Rees was
followed by the Revs. P. J. Masters, H. McDonald, and E. C.
Harris, B.A. Then gradually both Church and Sunday School
fell off in attendance and the Home Mission was called on for
assistance. The Rev. A. G. Bennett carried on the work for
four years until a circuit was formed, including Port Mel-
bourne, South Melbourne and Albert Park, under the care of
the Rev. A. P. Dawson. Mr. Dawson was succeeded by the
Rev. A. Clarke, and in 1936 the Rev. W. Lowson was called
to the charge. There is a big population at Port Melbourne
with a call for aggressive evangelistic work, and it is hoped
Mr, Lowson will have success similar to that which he enjoyed
at Regent. The Sunday School is still strong, and in this is the
hope for coming days.
ARMADALE, 1898
As so many of the members of Collins Street had made their
homes in the beautiful residential suburbs of Toorak and
Armadale, it was felt that it would be advisable to establish a
Baptist Church in that locality. A meeting of about forty


persons was held at the residence of the Hon. C. J. Ham on
ist July, 1897, and a strong committee was appointed to con-
sider the proposal. At a subsequent meeting it was decided
that a Church should be formed and that the Rev. A. N.
Marshall, 8.A., from Toronto, Canada, should be nominated
as pastor. The names of the members of the committee were:
—Hon. C. }. Ham, Dr. W. T. Whitley, Messrs. R. T. Black-
well, J. Ballantyne, S. George, C. W. Gregory, F. Gresswell,
J. Higgins, H. S. Martin, D. C. Rees, W. G. and W. W.
Stephens. On sth June, 1898, services were commenced in
the Armadale Hall that were largely attended. The Malvern
Church meeting in Glenferrie Road agreed to join in the
new movement. On 13th July a Church was formally con-
stituted by the Rev. S. Chapman with 92 members, and the
Rev. A. N. Marshall was elected as pastor. Mr. W. G. Stephens
generously gave the Church a fine allotment of land in
Kooyong Road, and a tender from Mr. A. Parker was accepted
for the erection of a Church building. The services in the
Armadale Hall were so largely attended that before the build-
ing was opened it was decided to make it larger to seat 600
persons. The cost of the building was It proved
none too large for the congregations that assembled. In the
following year, 1899, Mr. W. G. Stephens added to his previous
gift an adjoining allotment for a Sunday School Hall. This
was built at a cost of £2611, Since then the Gordon Hall
has been added. After a pastorate of three years the Rev. A.
N. Marshall resigned, to the great regret of the congregation.
He was an original and eloquent preacher. The Rev.
Alexander Gordon, M.A., recently from Liverpool, was invited
to supply the pulpit for three months. This led in 1902 to a
unanimous call to the pastorate. Mr. Gordon’s sermons,
preached in a quiet arresting manner, were full of thought, and
calculated to lead to a strong spiritual life. The Church con-
tinued to prosper in every department. By 1914, only 16 years
after the inception of the work, all the fine group of buildings
was entirely free from debt. After a happy successful ministry
of thirteen years Mr. Gordon was elected to the principalship


of the Baptist Theological College of New South Wales.
Though greatly grieved at the thought of losing him, the
Church recognised in his scholarship, spirituality and teaching
ability, Mr. Gordon’s eminent fitness for his new sphere. Early
in the following year, in March 1916, the Rev. F. W. Boreham,
of Hobart, accepted a call to the pastorate. Again the Church
was delighted that so quickly a worthy successor to the pre-
vious pastor had been found. Mr. Boreham’s wide acquaint-
ance with literature, his versatility of Scripture exposition, his
love of everything beautiful, his facility of speech, his win-
someness and charming manner led to constantly increased
congregations and many additions to the membership of the
Church. In 1923 Mr. and Mrs. Boreham visited England,
and in their absence the Rev. W. E. Hurst acceptably acted
as pastor. Again in 1927 Mr. Boreham went to America for
an extensive preaching and lecturing tour, and while there
the McMaster Baptist University of Toronto conferred on him
the degree of Doctor of Divinity, in recognition of his out-
standing qualities as preacher and author. The Armadale
Church rejoiced that their minister was so deservedly
honoured, but their joy was lessened by the fact that Dr.
Boreham would not resume his pastorate on his return. A
notable ministry of twelve years thus ended. The next pastor,
the Rev. Eric Evans, was called from Caversham, New Zea-
land, and for four years the work of the Church was happily
sustained. During this pastorate a fine Manse in Adelaide
Street was purchased for and by this time is almost
free of debt. On the departure of Mr. Evans for Brunswick
the Church called the Rev. D. F. Mitchell, 8.A., from Flinders
Street, Adelaide, and he is upholding all the traditions of the
Church, and every department of the Church is full of vigour
and hope. Beginning as far back as the days of Mr. Gordon, the
Church has had to part with its young people. When they
marry, because no houses are available in the vicinity of the
Church, they are compelled to migrate to newer suburbs. It is
increasingly difficult to find newcomers to take their place.
The Church has had a fine history, with only five pastors,


/ 4 * K
Eev. G. P. Eees,
1921-2.
Sec. Union and Home Mission,
Sec. Bapt. Union of Aust.,
1926-9, 1935-
F. P. Morris, Esq.,
1924-5.
Eev. A. E. Blackwell,
1927-8.
Eev. W. M. Cartwright,
1923-4.
P. W. Steel, Esq.
1926-7.
E. H. Jenkin, Esq.,
1922-3.
Trustee V.B. Fund,
Treasurer Foreign Mission.
Pres. Baptist Union of Aust,
1935-8.
Eev. H. H. Jeffs
1925-6.
E. A. Pearson, Esq,,
1928-9.


Rev. A. I). Shaw,
1029-30.
Rev. J. E. Newnham, M.A., B.I)
1932-3, 1934-5.
President College.
i
Rev. R. Parker,
1936-7.
Secretary Coilege,
Bey. H. Boulter,
1931-2.
A
A. F. Fullard, Esq.,
1935-6.
Trustee V.B. Fund,
Chairman Carey B.G.S. Ccuncii
A. H. Lewis, Esq.,
1980-31.
J. McDonald Martin, Esq,,
1983-4.
Hon. Legal Advisor.
1.
C. H. Look, K.C., LL.B.,
1987-8.
Crown Prosecutor.


all of them unusually able men. Certainly Collins Street felt
the loss when so many of its strongest supporters hived off to
establish the new cause, but the most cordial relations con-
tinued and the Central Church was influential in a wider
sphere. In addition to the names already given of men who
formed the provisional committee, the following names are
held in constant and grateful remembrance: —
W. G. Stephens. From England to Victoria in 1862. Baptized
by James Taylor 1864. Superintendent Bouverie Street S. School.
Deacon Collins Street. President of Union twice, 1895 and 1907.
Trustee V.B. Fund and its Treasurer for seven years. Foundation
member of Armadale and Secretary for 22 years. A generous sup-
porter of all Denominational enterprises. Passed away 1922, greatly
beloved.
R. T. Blackwell. To Melbourne in 1852 (Rev. W. Poole a
fellow-passenger). Joined Collins Street in beginning of James
Taylor’s ministry. Active worker S. School. Lay Preacher,
Organist, Deacon. One of the first Committee of Home Mission.
Foundation member Armadale. Passed away 1901. One of sons —
Rev. A. E. Blackwell.
Herbert Sumner Martin, 8.A., LL.B., son of Rev. James
Martin, B.A. Organist and Choirmaster Collins Street till removal
to Armadale. Secretary and President Theological College. Presi-
dent Union 1900. From 1892 to 1922 Honorary Legal Adviser of
Union. Deacon Armadale. For some years has been debarred from
active service by physical weakness courageously endured.
John Higgins, F.I.A.V. Leader Bible Class Young Men, Collins
Street and Armadale. Treasurer of Home Missions for 30 years.
Through ill-health gave up position in 1919. Elected honorary mem-
ber of the Union. After several years’ weakness died 1929. A quiet,
reliable, efficient worker.
D. C. Rees. Born Swansea, Wales, October 1847. To Victoria
with father, Rev. D. Rees, in 1859. Educated Church of England
Grammar School. Then University. Qualified as barrister. Bap-
tized 1871. Member Collins Street, then Deacon Armadale Church.
In Government service, became Chief Examiner of Titles in Titles
Department. Active in raising V.B. Fund. One of first Trustees
and Secretary of Fund for many years. He also drew up the regula-
tion for the administration of the Fund. On Committee of Denomi-
nation. After a week’s illness died 17th October, 1907. Was greatly
missed.


MALVERN EAST, 1909
At Malvern East a Sunday School, of which Mr. A. Harley
was Superintendent, was opened in the State School. When
it was determined to open a branch cause of Armadale at this
centre Mr. W. G. Stephens, with his usual generosity, gave a
fine corner block of land in Tooronga Road, on which a sub-
stantial brick Church was built in 1910, costing The
Church was in the midst of a growing population. The Rev.
D. J. Graham was the first pastor, and the cause made steady
progress. After six years the Church ceased to be a branch of
the Armadale Church, the separation being signalised by a
united Communion service. For eighteen years Mr. Graham
continued as pastor, during which time the Church made
a good advance. A fine School Hall was built at a cost of
£ 2200. Because of somewhat impaired health Mr. Graham
retired from active pastoral service, though as a Supply he still
helps the Churches. He was succeeded by the Rev. W. P.
Hodge from England, and in 1932 by the present pastor, the
Rev. A. H. Potter, M.A., Dip.Ed. The Church has a mem-
ship of over 100, with about 150 S.S. scholars. It has had a
happy history and is ever ready for aggressive evangelistic
effort.
Dean Stanley speaks of immersion as “the primitive, apostolical
and, till the 13th century, the universal mode of baptism, which is
still retained throughout the Eastern Churches, and which is still in
our own Church as positively enjoined by theory, as it is universally
neglected in practice.”
In another article he writes: —“The change from immersion to
sprinkling has set aside the larger part of the apostolic language
regarding baptism, and has altered the very meaning of the word.”


ASSOCIATIONS AND UNIONS
Chapter XVI
“We are not divided, All one body we; One in Faith and Doctrine,
One in Charity.”
Our survey of the past has clearly shown that Baptists are
thorough-going individualists. They claim that every man is
master of his own soul. They also hold that every man may
have direct access to God. So they reject all Priestism that
claims to be intermediary between man and God. But they
affirm the priesthood of all believers, subject to the eternal
priesthood of Jesus Christ.
Consistently with this assertion of individual freedom, they
claim freedom for their Churches. To them a Baptist Church
is self-contained, independent of other Churches; it elects its
own pastor, enacts its own laws. All its members have equal
rights and privileges; the pastor has no authority save that of
their self-chosen leader.
But this individualism does not connote solitariness. Our
Churches believe in association, only it must be purely volun-
tary. Forced unity is a misnomer. So very early in our
Colonial history a Baptist Association was formed. This was
in April 1858, and consisted of ten Churches. Its first action
was to send to the Baptist Missionary Society of Eng-
land asking that ministers be sent to Victoria. In response the
Rev. David Rees, from Braintree, arrived in July 1859, soon to
be followed by the Revs. R. W. Wade and James Smith. In
that year there were thirteen Churches in the Association,
having a total membership of 492 and 206 Sunday scholars.
But there was little enthusiasm in the Association, and it
ceased holding meetings.
Then, in November 1861, the Rev. D. Rees published a
letter in “The Australian Evangelist,” urging the formation
of an Association. On 28th January, 1862, at a meeting at


Albert Street, an Association was formed and a Constitution
adopted. There were only eight brief clauses in the Con-
stitution, the first two being:—(i) “That this Association shall
be called The Baptist Association and Home Mission of Vic-
toria. (2) That this Association shall be composed of
Churches making an annual collection and of individuals
subscribing not less than 10s. per annum, willing to unite for
the advancement of the cause of the Redeemer in connection
with the Baptist Denomination.” At the first public meeting
of the Association there were seven ministers present, and
in a year the number had increased to eighteen. When the
Home Mission Society was formed in 1871, the words “Home
Mission” were omitted from the title, and it was decided that
all funds, after repaying the working expenses of the Associa-
tion, should be paid to the Home Mission Treasurer.
The progress of the Association can be gathered from the
Story of the Churches. At it grew stronger new clauses were
added to the Constitution. Additions and amendments were
so frequently proposed that “tinkering with the Constitution”
became a byword. In 1876, and again in 1888, the Constitu-
tion was enlarged and finally, in the year 1928, the present
Constitution was adopted. This is a great contrast from the
first one accepted in 1862. That would not fill one page of
the Handbook; the present one fills sixteen pages. It is a
lesson in evolution. Since Baptists have ever regarded Con-
fessions of Faith as contrary to the right of private judgment,
one wonders if the section affirming the Principles and Ideals
of the Baptist Faith should be included, but apart from that
the extensive and elaborate provisions of the Constitution raise
the questions whether the development of the Union has been
on the best lines, whether the appointment of fifteen or six-
teen committees, some of them with 30 or 40 members, is not
out of proportion to the size of the Union. We have ma-
chinery enough for a Union ten times as great. One wonders
if we have not been unwittingly side-tracked; if we have not
sought to become a great organisation at the expense of
spiritual efficiency. We are reminded of the fact that in the


third century the Church became Official and largely lost its
spiritual fervour and prophetic power. At any rate, the sub-
ject deserves serious consideration.
At the first the title chosen was “Association,” but in time
this was deemed inadequate, and in 1892 Parliamentary
sanction was sought and obtained for the substitution of the
title “Union” for “Association” as more fully describing our
character. The word “Union” is expressive. It differs from
unity. It means co-operation and not fusion. It is wholly
wrong to speak of the Baptist Church of Victoria. There is
no such entity. Our Union is the voluntary union of distinct
autonomous Churches. Hence the Union cannot legislate
for the Churches, it can only make recommendations and re-
quests, but our Union is all the more real because it is not
subject to coercion.
To maintain and strengthen the ties with the Homeland
visitors have been occasionally invited, in conjunction with the
other States, to attend our Annual Assemblies. So we have
welcomed, at different times, Dr. Alexander Maclaren, Dr.
John Clifford, Revs. Charles Williams, C. G. Greenhough
M.A., William Cuff, E. G. Gauge, F.R.A.S., Archibald Brown,
W. Y. Fullarton, J. H. Rushbrooke, and P. T. Thomson.
Their visits were occasions of crowded gatherings and inspir-
ing addresses. These, with the coming of the ministers of
Collins Street from England, have emphasised our oneness
with the old Homeland.
Then the formation of the Baptist World Alliance in 1905
made us more conscious of a world-wide brotherhood. De-
legates from Victoria have attended the World Congresses in
London 1905, Philadelphia 1911, Toronto 1928, Berlin 1934,
and plans are being made for a delegation to go to Atlanta,
U.S.A., in 1939. A representative of Australia has been ap-
pointed as a vice-President of the Alliance, the present one
being Mr. A. J. Packer, of N.S.W. The Alliance has an en-
rolled membership of over 11,000,000 and about 8,000,000 S.S.
scholars. In our Union we can feel the heart-throb of the
World Alliance.


In an earlier chapter we mentioned the fact that the separa-
tion of Victoria from New South Wales reacted upon our
Church relations. Though an interchange of State represen-
tatives took place at our Annual Assemblies, there was little
conjoint action on the part of the State Unions. More and
more it was felt that the isolation of the Unions was unwise;
especially after the Federation of the States was accomplished
did a desire for a Baptist Federation increase. The matter
was ventilated in the Denominational papers, various confer-
ences took place, and a Baptist Congress met in Sydney in
September 1908. This was attended by 77 delegates from all
the States, and at enthusiastic meetings resolutions were
passed recommending the establishment of a weekly Baptist
newspaper as the official organ for the Commonwealth, a
uniform Aged and Infirm Ministers’ Fund, and a uniform
Ministerial Standard of Education. Another Congress was
held in Melbourne in 1911. In 1912 the Australian Baptist
Publishing House was established, and for the last 25 years
has issued weekly “The Australian Baptist,” ably edited all
the time by Mr. J. A. Packer. In 1925 a Congress in Adelaide
adopted a Constitution for an Australian Baptist Union, and
in the following year the Federal Union was inaugurated in
Sydney at an enthusiastic series of meetings under the presi-
dency of the Rev. J. H. Goble. Every three years from that
time the Assembly of the Union has met in the States in
succession and the Presidents-General have been the Rev. J.
H. Goble, Mr. Stow-Smith, the Rev. C. J. Tinsley, Mr. E. H.
Jenkin, and now the Rev. Ralph Sayce, Secretary of Queens-
land Union. The Federal Union is on the same basis as
the State Unions. Just as in a State Union the individual
Churches retain their liberty, so in the Federal Union the
States retain their freedom, since the Constitution of the
Federal Union provides that the Union, “except in regard
to matters referred to it by any State Union or Unions, shall
exercise no authority over its constituents.” Baptists are very
thorough in their insistence on liberty of thought and action.
In the early days of the Association all secretarial duties


were undertaken by Ministers, beginning with the Rev. E. G.
Lewis in 1862 and ending with the Rev. E. Harris in 1886.
Then Mr. C. W. Walrond, of Kew, was appointed to the
office, and for twenty years with the utmost efficiency carried
on the work, at the same time being Secretary of the Home
Mission Society. He was exact, painstaking, no mean theo-
logian, and a convinced Denominationalist. He persistently
refused all remuneration for his work, and when his friends
sent him a gift of money as a token of their appreciation in
such a way that he could not return it, he did not use it, and
it was found intact when he died. He was followed by the
Rev. William Clark, a warm-hearted genial soul, for six
years. Up to this time there was no Secretary’s office, the
work being done at the Secretary’s home, no question of an
honorarium being ever raised. Then since the work of the
Union was increasing it was decided that the office of the
Union should be at the Collins Street Lecture Hall, by
arrangement with the Church, and the Rev. J. C. Martin was
appointed in 1912 to give his whole time as Secretary of the
Union, and Home and Foreign Missions. But when he was
made General Secretary of Foreign Missions for Australia the
position of Secretary of the Union was filled by the Rev. F.
}. Wilkin for six years. Then for two years the Rev. R. Ings
was Secretary, and was followed by the Rev. L. E. Tranter
for six years till the appointment in 1928 of the present Secre-
tary, the Rev. G. P. Rees. It was during the secretaryship of
Mr. Tranter that the Union office was transferred to Albert
Street.
When the Albert Street Church was disbanded in 1925 its
members decided to hand over the property to the Union for
Denominational purposes. It was a splendid gift of land and
buildings that originally cost At first it was pro-
posed that the Church should be sold and the proceeds
allocated to various Union funds, but wiser counsels prevailed,
and it was decided to make it the headquarters of all the
Union activities. Alterations at Collins Street, necessitating
the removal of the Union office, precipitated the decision.


After careful consideration a plan generously prepared by
Mr. Monsborough, making it possible to retain the splendid
pillared facade of the building and yet provide offices for the
Union and a large Board Room facing Albert Street, was
adopted. The Churches promptly responded to an appeal for
funds, and the work was done at a cost of Then it
was decided to complete the scheme and the Lecture Hall
(the original Church built in 1859) was enlarged and
renovated to provide a spacious hall for Assembly functions.
A well equipped kitchen and ladies’ lounge were added, with
the result that we have a Church house in every way adapted
for Union purposes and sufficient for many years to come. As
the Hall was completed about the time of the home-going of
the Rev. J. H. Goble, it was appropriately dedicated as “The
Goble Memorial Hall,” and thus perpetuates the name of one
of our greatest leaders. The total cost of all the alterations
and additions was Of this sum about remains
as a debt that it is intended to clear off by the Centennial
Appeal. Then we will have Union headquarters, of which
we are justly proud, free for all time.
For a number of years Mr. H. J. Farmer was the Honorary
Legal Adviser of the Association, then from 1892 to 1922 —
that is for thirty years —Mr. H. Sumner Martin, 8.A., LL.B.,
splendidly served the Union, freely giving all needed legal
assistance to the Union, and since 1922 his nephew, Mr. J.
McDonald Martin, has generously acted in the same way.
For some years ill-health has prevented Mr. Sumner Martin
from taking an active part in the work of the Union, but he
still maintains a warm interest in all its progress.
During the Great War our Denomination proved its loyalty
to the Empire. Young men from all of our Churches volun-
teered for service and went to the front, as many as 50 or 60
from several of our larger Churches. A number of our
ministers also went as Army Chaplains. Inevitably a num-
ber of our finest young men did not return and the Honour
Boards in our Churches record the names of those who died in
Gallipoli or France.


Pastors and
SS.
Continent.
Churches.
Missionaries.
Members.
Scholars.
Europe*
5,394
3,980
676,654
550,531
Asia
4,724
2,007
462,197
203,035
Africa . .
1,758
505
110,763
41,909
America—
North
58,106
43,017
10,414,363
6,937,859
Central and
West Indies
767
537
64,372
51,629
South
674
471
57,801
61,114
Australia and
New Zealand
509
443
40,354
48,186
Totals*
71,932
50,960
11,826,504
7,894,263
Russia.
C. W. Walrond. For 25 years one of the outstanding leaders
of the Baptist Union. In 1883 a member of the Executive. In
1889 Secretary of the Union. Next year Secretary of the Home
Mission. Held both offices till his death. In 1892 made Honorary
Member of the Union. Painstaking, prompt, efficient in all details
of Union administration. Early in March 1906 he wrote: “I am
afraid my days as Secretary are over.” On the 29th of the month
he passed away, greatly missed.
William Clark. From Spurgeon’s Pastors’ College to Perth,
Tasmania. Pastor of Ballarat, Crimea Street St. Kilda, and North
Carlton Churches. Very genial disposition. At home in Sunday
School and C.E. work. Secretary of the Union. Methodical and
painstaking. Deacon Armadale Church. Concluded an address at
public meeting at Armadale by quoting:—
“ I came to Jesus as I was,
Weary and worn and sad;
I found in Him a resting place,
And He has made me glad.”
Then fell unconscious on platform and in a few minutes passed
away. A man greatly beloved.
BAPTIST WORLD STATISTICS
AT CLOSE OF 1937.


There is nothing in Christianity more primitive than the Sacra-
ments, and the Sacraments, wherever they exist, are witnesses to the
connection between the death of Christ and the forgiveness of sins.
From the New Testament point of view, the Sacraments contain
the gospel in brief; they contain it in inseparable connection with the
death of Jesus \ and as long as they hold their place in the Church
the saving significance of that death has a witness which it will not
be easy to dispute. —Dr. James Denney.
It is the aim of Baptists to maintain this witness clearly and con-
sistently.
“What Paul speaks of is being baptized into Christ, and therefore
by consequence into His death and resurrection. The immersion
represents death with Christ, or, to put it as strongly and vividly
as possible, death and burial with Him j the emersion represents
resurrection with Christ, rising from the dead with Him to walk in
newness of life. It is because this is what baptism means and be-
cause all Christians have been baptized, that to live on deliberately
in sin is, for the Christian, an inconceivable, seif-contradictory and
impossible course.” _Dr. James Denney.
Baptists emphasise baptism because it enshrines the heartmost vital
truths of the Christian faith.


Chapter XVII
INVALUABLE ORGANISATIONS
OUR SUNDAY SCHOOLS
“ Bring your children up tenderly with the true Christian training
and advice.” —Eph. vi. 4.
In telling the story of our Churches the work of the Sunday
Schools was only incidentally mentioned at times, but in all
our Churches the teaching of the children has always had an
important place. A Church without a Sunday School has no
future. The importance of moulding young lives while in
their plastic stage has ever been recognised, and investigations
of recent years proving that the majority of conversions occur
in the earliest adolescent years have emphasised that import-
ance. If we have not stressed in this history the work of the
Sunday Schools, it is because we cannot imagine a Church in
which the children are neglected. When the Saviour heard
Peter’s avowal of love He said to him: “Feed my lambs,”
“Tend my sheep.” From the very beginning of our history
and through all the years the number of our Sunday scholars
has been greater than that of our Church members. We
read in very early days of schools such as that at Albert Street
and West Melbourne with 400 scholars, later of the Church
at Footscray with 600, and in recent days of very large schools
at Kew, Northcote and Moreland West, and the number of
self-forgetting earnest teachers has been in proportion. Many
will recall the crowded attendances at the Annual School
Demonstrations in the Melbourne Town Hall, when choruses
illuminated with flowers and banners were sung under the
direction of Mr. G. A. Broadbent and Mr. A. Harley. Of
late years interest has been shown in different directions.
Because of more thorough attempts at education during the
last twenty years the Schools have been graded and lessons


of a different type have been prepared, but it is still true that
the majority of additions to our Churches comes from our
Sunday Schools. The skies will darken for our Churches when
this ceases to be the case.
CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOUR SOCIETIES
“ I can do all things in Christ who strengthens me.”—Phil. iv. 13.
In bridging the gap between the Sunday School and the
Church the Christian Endeavour movement has been of un-
told value. The pledge drawn up by Dr. Francis E. Clark
in 1881 for the young people of his Church in Boston, U.S.A.,
contained in its opening sentence, “Trusting in the Lord Jesus
Christ for strength I promise Him” the affirmation of a per-
sonal relation of the soul to Christ and of simple dependence
on Him. The badge generally worn of the letter E within
the letter C is significant of much. Since the E is encircled
by the C, Christ is given the pre-eminence, and the truths are
emphasised that every Christian should be an Endeavourer,
and that no endeavour is effective apart from Christ. These
truths have been seriously and joyously accepted by thousands
of our young people. When the movement was introduced
to our Churches, principally by the advocacy of the Rev.
Alfred Bird, of Auburn, in 1889, it was speedily seen that it
met a long-felt need. Societies were quickly formed in many
Churches, and by 1893 there were 43 Societies, with a total
membership of 1588, in our Union. After a few years Junior
Societies were added, then later Intermediates, and to-day we
can report 2252 Juniors, 1058 Intermediates, 2110 Full Active
Members, and 50 Seniors, or a total of 5470. It is impossible
to estimate what all this has meant in our history. That a
constant stream of young life, with all its enthusiasm and
hopefuless, should be yearly entering into our Church life is of
untold value. Some deplore the decline in attendance at
our Sunday Schools that has been noticeable for several years,
but when we think of the altered conditions of Society to-day
and of the prevailing low birth-rate we can partly account for


it, and as a cheering offset we think of the thousands of
Endeavourers and of the Scouts, Cubs, Girl Guides and
Brownies, with their high ideals of life in association with our
Churches, and we refuse to be doleful. This is the age of
Youth, and the future of our Denomination depends largely on
our power to make Christ real in their lives.
THE VICTORIAN BAPTIST WOMEN’S ASSOCIATION
“ Help those women which laboured with me in the Gospel.”—
Phil. iv. 3.
So far in our history we have scarcely mentioned the in-
fluence of women in our Churches, but the history will be
very incomplete unless it contains some record of their work.
We leave out the large question of the wonderful uplift that
Jesus Christ has made possible for womanhood, and the con-
trast in the position of women in Pagan and Christian
lands, but we must pay grateful tribute to the gracious self-
denying work of the women of our Churches. Everyone
knows that in all our Lord’s Day meetings for worship, and
at all our Prayer meetings, and in all Sunday School work
women are in the majority. Also everyone knows, though
the fact is not sufficiently acknowledged, that the success of a
Home Missionary or of a minister is often largely due to his
wife. Women are the power behind the throne. When Paul
wrote; “Let the women keep silence in the Churches,” he had
in mind the social conditions of Corinth, and the injunction
does not apply to the changed conditions in Australia to-day.
Some of our Churches copy the custom of the early Church
and appoint deaconesses to visit the sick and guide the younger
women of the Church. The practice could be greatly ex-
tended. Especially since the Great War, when women so
nobly carried on the work in the absence of the men, has the
work of women in our Churches been increased. In telling
the story of our Foreign Mission we have referred briefly to
the constant work of women in the Baptist Women’s Mis-
sionary Union and of the Senior Girls Missionary Union, and
now record the fact that with the cordial endorsement of the


Annual Assembly the Victorian Baptist Women’s Association
was formed in 1924. The first President was Mrs. F. P.
Morris, and the first Secretary Mrs. P. W. Steel. At the end
of the first year the Association reported forty branches, and
now they have a branch in nearly every Church. They have
a carefully prepared Constitution, and the Association has a
recognised place on the programme of every Assembly. The
Association sets itself to aid every Denominational institution,
and by fetes and sales of gifts has raised considerable sums for
the Home Mission, Carey Grammar School, and the Bouverie
Street Kindergarten. They arrange for addresses to their
members on Social Questions and stand solidly behind all Tem-
perance work and Peace movements. Every year they spend
a Quiet Day for the strengthening of the spiritual life. Mrs.
Steel continued her efficient service as Secretary till 1932, when
she was followed by Mrs. J. Downing. The Presidents have
been elected annually, the present President being Mrs. H. D.
Downing, of the Ivanhoe Church. The movement is spread-
ing to other States, and on the 10th September, 1935, the
Inaugural Meeting of the Australian Baptist Women’s As-
sociation was held in Sydney, when its Constitution was
adopted, the headquarters for the time being fixed in Mel-
bourne. The formation of a Women’s Association in Vic-
toria has been fully justified, and the aim of the Association,
as declared in its first report, is to bind together the 3000
women of our Churches in an effort to purify and uplift the
social order. With this aim they move steadily forward.
It is impossible to do justice to the worth and work of the women
of our Church. Besides the wives of ministers and missionaries there
have been very many who have in many ways laboured unselfishly
for the Kingdom of God. We can name only some, but they are
typical of the honourable women, not a few of whom have loyally
served Christ and the Church.
Mrs. James Martin, a true helpmeet of the Rev. J. Martin,
8.A., in Edinburgh, then in Nottingham, England. To Melbourne
1869. Foundress of “The Zenana Missionary Society.’" Deep interest
in all Foreign and Home Mission work. Honoured in all our
Churches. Passed away 11th April, 1905. A wise counsellor and
sympathetic helper of all ministers’ wives.


Mrs. William Lucas (nee Agnes Arnot). Born in Melbourne
1853. Baptized by James Taylor at Collins Street 1866, maintaining
continuous membership till to-day—7l years. Throughout greater
portion engaged in active Church work. “In 1925 made a life
member of the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union in recognition
of her long and distinguished services,” says the centenary volume
of “The Pioneer Women of Victoria.”
Mrs. W. McLean (nee Arnot). Born Scotland. To Melbourne
in 1849. Baptized by James Taylor in 1866. Member Collins
Street till 1905. Then Armadale. Teacher Young Women’s Bible
Classes. In 1887 till death President of the W.C.T.U. A con-
vincing platform speaker. Passed away 14th February, 1923, greatly
missed. Her daughters, Dr. Alice Barber and Miss Hilda McLean,
for many years missionaries in India.
Mrs. J. M. Templeton. Daughter of John Lush. Energetic,
tactful helper of all charitable organisations. Member Collins Street.
Enthusiast in Foreign and Home Missions. Secretary Women’s
Missionary Union. Constant correspondent with missionaries.
Passed away suddenly September 1903.
Miss E. Trickett. Born England 1849. Father Baptist
Minister. To Victoria 1857. Joined Albert Street—member for
74 years. Artist —paintings in Goble Hall. An ardent supporter of
Foreign Missions.
Mrs. Evan Rees, J.P. S.S. teacher and leader of women’s meet-
ings in North Carlton many years, then at Sandringham. Member
W.C.T.U. President of Bouverie Street Committee. Convener of
Ladies’ Luncheon Committee for all Assembly meetings.
THE PENNSTONE REST HOME
“He anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor.”—Luke iv. 18.
In 1916 a District Nurse, Sister Emily Pocknall, appealed
to our Assembly to make it possible for the less fortunate
and sick of our Churches to spend a little time at the seaside.
In response to her appeal two generous donors, Mr. J. Penn
and Mr. F. Stone, purchased a cottage at Frankston and made
it available for the purpose. Every year since it has been
occupied for a few weeks at a time by weary and worn
members of our congregations from the more densely popu-
lated parts of our city and has proved a great boon to them.


It means much to a family that could not otherwise afford
it to be able to take little children out of the heat and dust
of the city to a beautiful healthy cottage by the sea. For
some years Miss J. M. Potter acted as Superintendent of the
Rest Home, named “Pennstone” after its founders, but
latterly the Women’s Association has taken over the manage-
ment of the Home, and Miss Hilda Booth is now the con-
vener of the Home Committee.
THE MINISTERS’ REST HOME
Mr. G. H. Doery was always solicitous for the welfare of
our ministers, and, in accordance with his wish, shortly after
his death Mrs. Doery conveyed to the Union in perpetual
trust a cottage fully furnished at Sassafras as a Rest Home
for Ministers and Home Missionaries. The cottage has an
outlook on a deep and lovely valley, and has been made
available to ministers at a nominal sum just sufficient for
its upkeep. It is a great boon to a tired man to be able for
a little while to leave the busy city and rest in the health-
giving atmosphere of the glorious hills surrounded by
beauteous gardens and luxuriant vegetation. No man can do
his best work when he is jaded, and it is wise for our Churches
to arrange that the minister lays aside his work and rests
a while.
THE BOUVERIE STREET KINDERGARTEN
‘‘lnasmuch as ye did it unto one of these my brethren, even these
least, ye did it unto Me.—Matt. xxv. 40.
Another branch of women’s work calls for definite notice
—the Bouverie Street Kindergarten. Very early in the history
of Collins Street branch Sunday Schools were built in Bouverie
Street, Carlton, and Rowe Street, Collingwood. The school at
Bouverie Street has continued ever since. In 1879 the building
was enlarged at a cost of about About twenty years
ago Miss Mary Lush, of Collins Street, one of the teachers
at Bouverie Street, asked for permission at an Assembly meet-


ing to speak of the work of the school. The district was
changing, and, though scarcely a slum area, had in it many
necessitous families. It was on behalf of their children that
Miss Lush made an appeal. She spoke quietly and convincingly
of the needs of the children. Rarely has an Assembly been
so thrilled as she told of work along kindergarten lines that
was being done. At once the Assembly resolved to share in
the work, and contributions were made towards its mainte-
nance. The work quickly grew, and a larger building adapted
for kindergarten work was needed. Land opposite the
Bouverie Street school was bought and a building erected at
a total cost of /6450, and on the 25th November, 1922, the
building was opened almost free of debt. Miss Lush was
Directress of the work, with Miss Barber and others as assis-
tants. About 150 children were constantly cared for. Mothers’
meetings have been held and social service for the community
gladly and freely rendered. The work has been sustained
largely by our Churches affording an outlet for their sym-
pathies for the needy. The annual cost is about The
objects as set forth in the constitution are: —(1) To create a
“Community Home” for the little children of the district, in
which some of the deficiencies of their homes may be made
good; and in which the physical, mental and spiritual welfare
of each child shall receive careful attention. (2) To work
also for the elder boys and girls, and their parents, so that the
kindergarten shall be a “Social Centre,” from which influences
making for good citizenship, for social purity, and Christian
living shall penetrate to the homes of the district. (3) To
express practically Christ’s ideal of brotherhood and His
enthusiasm for humanity. A clause states that—(3) As a con-
stituent of the Baptist Union of Victoria the kindergarten
shall be under its control. Subject thereto it shall continue to
work in affiliation with the Free Kindergarten Union of
Victoria.
Mrs. W. Moore was the first President of the Committee of
24 ladies, and was followed in 1924 by Mrs. Evan Rees, }. P.,
who is still President, and at every Assembly tells of the


progress and needs of the work. Experts in kindergarten
work and visitors from other States have expressed warmest
appreciation of the buildings and the character of the work.
When through failing strength Miss Lush was compelled to
retire from the work a stained glass window was placed in
the main hall in her honour. During the years there have
been of necessity many changes in the Committee and in
the voluntary helpers, but of this we can be sure, that the
hearts of all glow with joy as they engage in this Christ-like
service.
THE VICTORIAN BAPTIST PREACHERS’ SOCIETY
“How shall they believe in Him, whom they have not heard? And
how shall they hear without a preacher?”—Rom. x. 14.
From the work of the women we turn our attention to the
work of the men. Baptists are strongly averse to a rigid dis-
tinction between clergy and laity. They hold that every
believer in Christ is commissioned to tell the glad tidings
of redeeming love and that everyone who does this is in the
true apostolic succession. So, as we have recorded, true to
the Baptist tradition, the first Baptist services in Victoria were
conducted by men not specifically ordained to the Ministry,
and for many years the early Churches were sustained by
such men. Then young men from the Preachers’ Classes of
James Taylor, William Bryant, and Isaac New every Sunday
preached the gospel at many places. In 1889 a Preachers’
Society was duly formed at Collins Street, and its constitution
was approved by the Council of the Baptist Association. The
first members of the Society were Messrs. A. Suree, C. H.
Goode, T. Upton, C. Carter, W. Rickerby, }. Criss, H.
Chambers, D. Hamilton, W. Rankine, C. Edgerton, R. Stone,
C. W. Walrond, J. Testro, A. Fenwick, J. Collins, }. B. Shep-
herd, and W. Lucas. Mr. D. Hamilton was chosen as Chair-
man, A. Fenwick Secretary, and W. Lucas Treasurer. Of all
these Mr. Lucas is the only surviving member. Preachers’
preparation classes were formed, one conducted by the Rev.


S. Chapman, with Spurgeon’s “Lectures to His Students”
as a text-book, and one by the Rev. A. Bird, with A. A.
Hodge’s “Outlines of Theology” as the book to be studied.
From the date of its formation the members of the Society
were in constant demand as preachers at more than a dozen
Churches. The records show that in twenty years 10,648
services were conducted. Several new causes were started,
and the Rev. S. Chapman stated that but for the Preachers’
Society seven Churches would have been lost to the Denomina-
tion. With varied fluctuations and inevitably many changes
in the lists of preachers, the Society has continued till to-day.
It is of great assistance to our Churches, and conducts from
200 to 300 services a year. The following have been Secretaries
of the Society: —Messrs. A. Fenwick, C. E. Goode, T. Upton,
W. Lucas, J. Turner, D. J. P. Jackson, E. A. Pearson, and
W. C. Harley. One often regrets that the Society has not had
greater prominence in the Union, since it affords a fine oppor-
tunity for developing the talents of our young men and is an
invaluable aid in the establishment of new causes.
THE BAPTIST YOUNG MEN’S UNION
“Quit you like men, be strong.”—l Cor. xvi. 13.
For the last ten years a Young Men’s Camp has been held
at Easter time in the Queen’s Park, Geelong, begun at the
suggestion of Mr. W. H. Doery, who from the first has been
the Camp Marshal. The numbers have increased year by
year till last year about 100 young men were under canvas
for the Easter holidays. The programme includes Bible
studies, sports, social and devotional gatherings. For five years
the Rev. R. W. Dobbinson, now of Launceston, was Camp
Padre, and for the last five years the Rev. B. A. Rogers, of
Shepparton. The Camp fosters a strong spirit of comradeship
among the young men, and their yearly gathering is a joyous
inspiring holiday. By invitation of the Camp Committee a
meeting of 200 young men was held in December 1929, at
which it was decided to form a Baptist Young Men’s Union.


A constitution for the Union was adopted and approved by the
Executive Council of the Union, and the whole movement is
full of promise for the enlistment of young men in active work
for the Kingdom of God.
The latest development of men’s work has been the in-
auguration of a Baptist Men’s Society. This was approved as
a constituent of the Union in 1936, and since then has steadily
gained strength. Its aims are primarily to unite the men of
our Churches that they can help each other spiritually, intel-
lectually and socially. Societies have been formed in connec-
tion with many of our Churches, and at a rally held at Collins
Street in October 1937 fully 500 men were present. Mr. E.
Leeson is President, and is sanguine as to the possibilities of
the Society, and Mr. A. G. Martin is Secretary. For the last
two years the Society has guaranteed the financial support of
an additional student at the Baptist College, and is prepared
to assist in any Denominational movement. The basis of
membership in the Society is wider than that of the Churches,
and it is hoped that the whole manhood of our Congregations
will presently be united in social service for the well-being of
the State. Occasional meetings for the observance of the Lord’s
Supper have been held in different suburbs at 8.30 a.m. on
Sundays, and up to 200 men have been present.
“It is evident from the direct relation of each member of the
Church, and so of the Church as a whole—to Christ as sovereign
and lawgiver—that the government of the Church, so far as regards
the source of authority, is an absolute monarchy. . . . While
Christ is sole King, therefore, the government of the Church, so
far as regards the interpretation and execution of His will by the
body, is an absolute democracy, in which the whole body of mem-
bers is entrusted with the duty and responsibility of carrying out
the laws of Christ as expressed in His word.”
—Dr. A. H. Strong.


Chapter XVIII
THE STORY OF THE CHURCHES
V—THE ERA OF SUBURBAN EXTENSION
“Lengthen thy cords and strengthen thy stakes, for thou shaft spread
abroad on the right hand and on the left.—lsa. liv. 2.
With the growing prosperity of Melbourne, people who had
lived near the business areas moved in ever-increasing numbers
to the more open spaces around the city or to the seaside.
The suburban districts became yearly more important. Many
of the members of our Churches no longer lived near the city
and inner suburban Churches, but in a wide radius from the
metropolis. So, since 1900, about 30 Baptist Churches have
been established around the city and only a few in country
districts. Since this suburban extension work has been so
recent, none of the new Churches can be said to be historic,
and our description of them can be brief.
BOX HILL, 1900
The first suburb that demanded attention of the Home
Mission Committee was Box Hill, a fine residential district of
gently undulating country about 10 miles east of Melbourne.
At the request of a number of residents, Mission Services were
started in April 1900 in a room that formed part of the
Recreation Hall. They met with a speedy response, and a
Church of 29 members was constituted on 18th October, 1901.
Of these foundation members the following are in active
fellowship to-day: —Mr. and Mrs. W. H. G. Ellingworth,
Mesdames J. Ellingworth, Barnett, Husband, and Miss E. J.
Serpell. The Rev. M. L. Murphy, just finishing his College
course, was appointed pastor of the new Church, and his
ministry was characterised by vigour and enthusiasm. In
January of the following year, 1902, a W.B. building was


opened for worship on the site of the present Church. This
had to be enlarged in two years’ time. After seven years’
successful ministry, Mr. Murphy accepted a call to Alberton,
South Australia, whence he removed to the south of England,
where he has filled a prominent position. He was followed
by the Rev. W. E. Crawford for two years and by the Rev. S.
Howard, who supplied for one year. Then the Rev. L. H.
Field carried on the work with happy results for eight years,
including the trying years of the World War. In September
1922 the Rev. G. P. Rees was called from Essendon to Box
Hill, and for five years, till he was appointed Secretary of the
Union, he laboured faithfully. Additional land had been pur-
chased in 1914 contiguous to the Church in Ellingworth
Parade, and in 1924 the original Church was removed to this
site and a handsome substantial brick Church was erected in
Station Street. Mr. Rees was succeeded by the present pastor,
the Rev. R. Farrer. The Church has had a happy, prosperous
history. The land and buildings have cost and its
members number 211, with a similar number of Sunday
scholars. Prominent among the workers during the years
have been Messrs. W. H. G. Ellingworth, R. A. Sutton, F.
Mellor, A. M. Spicer, J. G. Coventry, R. Patterson, and other
loyal supporters. This extension work of the Home Mission
has been abundantly justified. The Church speedily became
independent of any Home Mission support. Last year a
branch Church was erected in Elgar Road, Surrey Hills, in a
fine situation for evangelistic work, and the new cause is full
of promise. In helping others the Box Hill Church is
strengthening itself.
YARRAVILLE, 1903
A district of a very different character, to the west of the
city, next challenged attention. Services were begun in 1903
in a Public Hall at Yarraville under the supervision of the
Footscray Church, and soon a Home Missionary was placed in
charge of the work. Land was purchased by the Home
Mission Committee near the Railway Station, and a W.B.


Church erected in 1904 at a cost, including land, of
Rooms for Sunday School classes were subsequently built that
cost £l5O. The special feature of the work at Yarraville has
been its well-attended Sunday School, that recently reported
an enrolment of 289 scholars. A Church was duly constituted
when the building was erected, and has had a succession of
Home Mission pastors, the present pastor, the Rev. A. G.
Bennett, taking charge four years ago. Though there is a
dense population in the locality, the progress of the Church
has been somewhat slow, but the splendid Sunday School
through the years has made the work well worth while.
NORTHCOTE, 1905
Prompted by Mr. and Mrs. J. Downing and Mrs. F. G.
Smith, and encouraged by the Rev. J. Carson, of Clifton Hill,
Baptist services were commenced at Northcote in the Friendly
Society Hall, Wimble Street, on 9th July, 1905, but since a
number of Baptists resided further north, the services were
transferred in September to the Kimberley Hall in Darebin
Road. The hall was central and large, but comfortless. Still
the congregations increased, and during his College vacation
Mr. H. A. Horsfall took charge of the work. A Church was
duly constituted in May 1906, and steps were speedily taken to
secure a site for a Church building. A good central allotment
was purchased in High Street, and a building erected in 1908,
now at the rear of the present Church in use as a schoolroom.
Two years later a good brick Church to seat 350 persons was
built at a cost, including land, of Five years after
the first services were held in a small hall the Church was
independent of any aid from the Home Mission Committee,
had a membership of 66 and a Sunday School of 212 scholars,
with the Rev. G. J. Mackay as pastor. The progress was very
gratifying. The succession of pastors has been B. Hewison,
1912; F. Robinson, 1919; A. Jolly, 1924; D. McNicol, 1925;
S. E. Dorman, 1928; N. V. Hansen, 1937. In addition to the
Church building a Sunday School has been built at a cost of
/900, and a Manse purchased costing The present


pastor had war experience, and for ten years maintained suc-
cessful work at Brighton, S.A. The Church is in the main
street in the midst of a dense population, and should be very
influential in the community.
REGENT, 1915
The Northcote Church in all its history has possessed the
Home Missionary spirit, and, instead of being self-centred, has
aided extension work in its locality. As early as 1869 Baptist
services were held in the Foresters’ Hall, High Street, Preston,
that were carried on for many years by the Preachers’ Society.
When the leading members of the congregation removed to
Coburg the services were discontinued. Owing to represen-
tations by the Northcote Church, Baptist work was re-com-
menced at Preston in 1915. Four years later a very pretty
W.B. Church was built in High Street, costing Soon
the Rev. S. M. Potter was appointed pastor, and a Church
of 25 members was duly constituted in 1920 by the Rev. N. L.
Beurle. Since Mr. Potter left, the Church has had only two
pastors, the Rev. W. Lowson, who did fine pastoral service
for 12 years, and the Rev. A. E. Blackwell, who entered on his
work in 1935. In Mr. Lowson’s time it was decided that the
Church should be named Regent, since it is not far from the
Railway Station of that name, and school class rooms were
built at a cost of £2OO. One feature of the work of the
Church has been an Annual Convention for the teaching of
the deeper truths of the Christian life that has attracted visitors
from the surrounding Churches. The Church has a member-
ship of 150, with a Sunday School of 250, and is the centre of
earnest evangelistic activities.
PRESTON WEST, 1927
As population was growing rapidly north-west of the
Regent Church, the Northcote Church urged the Home
Mission Committee to begin work in that locality, and some
of its members helped the Committee to secure a building
site in Gilbert Road. Since no hall was available for meetings


a W.B. Church costing ,£1441, including land, was erected in
1927. A good congregation gathered and a Church was con-
stituted in 1928, of which the Rev. D. S. Harvey became pastor.
On his transfer to Westgarth in 1930 the Rev. T. Churchward
Kelly, who was home from India on furlough, was persuaded
to supply the Church for twelve months. The work steadily
gained ground, and in 1931 the Rev. J. R. McCue was appointed
pastor. He continued till 1937, when he resumed his position
as advocate of the Prohibition League. Since the inception of
the cause the population has increased greatly, and the wisdom
of establishing a Church in this popular residential suburb is
unquestioned.
NORTHCOTE EAST, 1929
The Northcote Church again took the initiative by starting
a Sunday School at Northcote East. A building for the purpose
was erected in Victoria Street, and in 1929 the Rev. A. G.
Coventry was entrusted with the work of establishing a Baptist
Church, but in the following year he accepted a call to Fair-
field. Since then the work at Victoria Street, now known as
Thornbury, has been carried on mainly by the College students.
IVANHOE, 1911
In describing the extension work in the Northcote district
we have somewhat outrun our history. With a view to the
establishment of a Baptist Church at Ivanhoe it was arranged
that the Rev. F. C. Spun* should preach in the Ivanhoe Hall
on nth vSeptember, 1911. There was a splendid attendance,
and after the service 30 persons affirmed their readiness to
form a Church, when a committee consisting of the Rev. G.
}. Mackay, Messrs. Smith, Elder, Bethell, Wiltshire, and
Hannah was appointed to take the necessary steps. Regular
services were held in the Ivanhoe Hall. Land was secured at
the corner of Livingstone Street and Waterdale Road, and on
17th December 22 persons were given the right hand of fellow-
ship by the Rev. Wm. Clark, Secretary of the Union. Mr.
Clark spoke on the words “Christ loved the Church,” and the
minute book of the Church says “it was a grand topic from


a grand old man, very much enjoyed.” The first building
of wood was opened on sth October, 1912, by Mr. G. H. Doery.
The first pastor was the Rev. J. E. Newnham, M.A., who
entered on his work on 4th March, 1913, and carried on a most
successful ministry till 30th January, 1922. The cause steadily
prospered, and in May 1918 a fine kindergarten building was
opened by Mr. W. W. Stephens. Mr. Newnham was followed
by the Rev. J. S. A. Worboys, 8.A., for a few months, and
then by the Rev. T. P. Trinham for four years. During his
pastorate the splendid brick Church was opened on 21st
March, 1925, by Mr. J. Bethell, the senior deacon, when the
Rev. W. M. Cartwright preached the dedication sermon. The
building with its furnishings cost over /5000, and was made
complete by a fine pipe organ given by the three Raymond
brothers in memory of their father. At the end of 1934 the
school building was remodelled and enlarged at a cost of
/,75°! with the addition of two class rooms generously given
and furnished by Mr. and Mrs. Holland and Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas in memory of their children. Besides this a spacious
Manse was purchased, and the Church property is now valued
at over 10,000. The Church from the first has relied upon
direct giving, and at the Annual Gift Days large sums have
been handed to the pastor in his vestry, so that, with the
exception of a sum owing on the Manse, the Church is com-
pletely free of debt. When Mr. Trinham resigned in 1927 the
Rev. W. G. Pope became pastor, and for ten years sustained
a happy ministry. On his leaving the Church was supplied
by Dr. F. W. Boreham till the coming in the present year of
the Rev. B. A. Rogers. On the foundation of the wise and
gracious work of the Rev. J. E. Newnham the Church has
built firmly during the past 25 years, and is an illustration
of earnest, united spiritual service for the Kingdom of Christ.
FAIRFIELD, 1911
About the same time as work was begun at Ivanhoe atten-
tion was directed to the needs of Fairfield, and special Mission
Services in 1910 were held in the Public Hall by the Revs. G.


J. Mackay, of Northcote, and H. H. Jeffs, of Clifton Hill.
There was a good response, a Sunday School was started, and
a Church was constituted in 1912 of 16 members, with Mr.
Jeffs as honorary pastor, meetings being held in the State
School. Land was bought in Arthur Street, and it was decided
to attempt to build a Church by voluntary labour in one day.
Careful preparations were made, and on nth October, 1911,
about 100 men, carpenters, plumbers, painters, from all our
Churches laboured from daylight to 10 p.m. in the erection
of the building. A band of ladies in a tent on the ground
supplied meals and refreshments for the toilers. By n p.m.
the floor was scrubbed, seats arranged, and electric light in-
stalled. The next day was a high day, when the building,
seating 250 persons, was crowded at the three services con-
ducted by the Revs. J. C. Martin, F. J. Miles, and H. H. Jeffs.
The building is 45 x 30 feet, and was valued at Since
then a schoolroom has been added, costing /29b. The build-
ing of the Church in one day aroused considerable interest,
and the union of so many workers was a proof of the solidarity
of the Denomination. The Rev. J. Worboys became pastor in
1914, and soon the Church reported a membership of in,
with 250 scholars in the school. The pastors since have been
the Revs. H. G. Scholefield, A. G. Bennett, R. F. Melville, F.
Robinson, A. G. Coventry, E. Cairns, and A. J. Whitbourn,
who entered on his work in 1936. Though the Church has
done, and is doing, good work the promise of the early days
has scarcely been realised. The members of the first Com-
mittee were Messrs. Miller, Penney, Fairclough, Waldron,
Glasborrow, Stephens, and Williamson. The present Secre-
tary is Mr. W. A. Newnham, who has ably filled the position
for fully ten years.
SANDRINGHAM, 1913
The Churches we have just described are north of the city,
and the next Home Mission enterprise was at the seaside to the
south. In December 1913 services were commenced by the
Home Mission Director, the Rev. G. J. Mackay, in the supper


room at the rear of the Town Hall, Sandringham. Congrega-
tions increased, and a Church was constituted on 25th October,
1914, with 17 members. The first deacons were Messrs. J. E.
Anderson, W. Rodd, Wallace Ross, and P. E. Turnbull. In
the beginning of 1915 a Sunday School was started. The
Town Hall was not very suitable for Church purposes, so land
was purchased in Abbott Street and a brick Church erected
in 1921, costing, with land, Soon after the number
of members was almost 100, with as many Sunday School
scholars. Since then class rooms have been added to the
Church, and a good Manse in Bamfield Street purchased.
About the time the Church was built Mr. Evan Rees succeeded
Mr. W. Ross as Secretary, continuing in that office till his
death in 1936. The pastors of the Church have been Revs.
G. }. Mackay, 1920; W. W. Jolly, 1923; F. A. Marsh, 1927;
A. W. Smith, 1935; and S. E. Dorman, 1936. The Church has
had a happy history, and has made quiet, steady progress.
Mr. H. R. Grove is the Secretary to-day.
HAMPTON, 1930
Since several of the members of the Sandringham Church
lived at Hampton, and since many new homes were being
built in that district, the Rev. F. A. Marsh urged the Home
Mission Committee to begin work in that locality. The V.B.
Fund was able to advance a loan of and a handsome
Church, designed by Mr. L. E. Warner, was built in Thomas
Street in 1930. From the first the venture was justified. A
Church was constituted when the building was erected, and
has now a membership of over 60, with 100 Sunday scholars.
As long as he was at Sandringham Mr. Marsh was pastor
of the Hampton Church. Since he left the Rev. E. D. Gill,
B. L.Th., became pastor in 1935, and the cause is full of
promise. In fostering the cause at Hampton the Sandringham
Church gave another illustration of the way in which a Church
can unselfishly extend the Kingdom of God in its own
neighbourhood.


COLLINGWOOD, 1917
When the Rev. C. M. Cherbury removed from Castlemaine
to Melbourne he took charge of the work initiated by the
Albert Street Church in Sackville Street, Collingwood. This
developed in two directions. A home was opened for women
and girls, that is now known as the Pilgrims’ Rest Home, in
connection with the Melbourne City Mission, and a Taber-
nacle in Sackville Street for Church work. This was subse-
quently greatly enlarged so as to seat 1000 persons for the
congregation of the Rev. Alex. Dowie, who claimed the power
to heal all sicknesses and infirmities. On his removal to
America the cause fell into abeyance until in 1909 the Rev. T.
A. Eunson began a Mission of Social Service for the neglected
part of the city. For almost 30 years he has exercised a unique
ministry among the poor. The Council of the City of Colling-
wood has approved of his work, and the Government Railways
carry free of charge gifts of provisions and clothing that he
distributes. A Church was formed in 1917 that last year
reported a resident membership of 62, with a school of 100
scholars. Mr. Eunson’s experience should be an incentive to
our Churches to undertake self-denying work in similar
districts.
WESTGARTH, 1919
In 1918, through the advocacy of the Rev. N. L. Beurle, a
Church Extension Scheme was adopted by the Home Mission
Committee, having as its objective the opening of one new
Church each year for five years. Under this scheme causes
were established at Westgarth and Sunshine. In 1919 a
Church was built at Westgarth costing and the Rev.
S. M. Potter was chosen as pastor. The work quickly
developed, and in two years the Church reported a member-
ship of 53, with a Sunday School of 230. Later a fine kinder-
garten hall was erected and a tennis court formed. The pastors
have been Revs. C. T. Way, G. J. Mackay, F. Robinson, D. S.
Harvey, and A. R. Holland, who began his work in 1935.
The membership has not increased, but the work in the Sunday
School has been well maintained.


SUNSHINE, 1919
During tne war, halls for the use of the chaplains were
built at the Broadmeadows Camp. In 1919 the Home Mission
Committee purchased the hall that had been the headquarters
of Chaplain G. J. Mackay, and had it moved to Sunshine at a
moderate cost. Sunshine was rapidly developing, and the
Rev. G. Tudball was appointed to establish the cause. There
was a small nucleus of Baptists, and a fair Sunday School was
formed, but considering the rapid growth of population in this
busy manufacturing centre, the progress of our work has been
disappointing. After six years Mr. Tudball was succeeded by
Mr. J. Curtis as student pastor, and in 1933 by Mr. H. G.
Brice. Mr. Brice’s work has commended itself to the people
of Sunshine, and last year they built a fine Recreation Hall
for the use of boys at the rear of the Church.
MORELAND WEST, 1922
As population was increasing rapidly to the north-west of
Brunswick, the Revs. J. Worboys, of Brunswick, and H. A.
Horsfall, of Coburg, in conjunction, began services at More-
land West. In 1922 a Church was built by the Home Mission
Committee, and the Rev. J. R. McCue was placed in charge.
There was a quick response, and in 1923 the Church became
independent of financial support. from the Committee. In
1 9 2 7 Rev. W. C. Collard was called to the pastorate, and
for 11 years maintained a most useful and successful work.
The Church building has been enlarged and improved, an
adjoining allotment has been purchased, a tennis court formed,
and all equipment provided for aggressive work. The pro-
perty is worth over £ 2OOO, the Church has a membership of
over 100, and the Sunday School, with 400 scholars, is the
largest at the present time of our metropolitan Churches. This
fine result is largely due to the persistent sympathetic pastoral
service. Mr. Collard has recently accepted the charge of the
Mission Districts of Koondrook and Barham.


EAST CAMBERWELL, 1923
A Committee termed the Eastern Suburbs Church Exten-
sion Committee, of which Mr. W. J. Wenborn was Secretary,
decided that it was advisable to start a Baptist cause at East
Camberwell. On 28th June, 1923, 23 friends met at the home
of Mr. C. }. Lenne, and discussed ways and means. The
Eastern Suburbs Committee, in conjunction with the Home
Mission Committee, purchased a site for a Church in High-
field Road, on which a Church was built at a cost, including
land, of As a loan was not immediately available from
the V.B. Fund, Mr. W. J. Spicer lent free of interest till
the money from the Fund could be granted. The opening
sermon was preached by the Rev. W. M. Cartwright, President
of the Union, on 10th February, 1924, following which he gave
the right hand of fellowship to the members of the new
Church. Mr. H. Manchester was chairman of the local
Committee till the Church was formed, and Mr. C. J. Lenne
has been Secretary since the inception of the work. The
Revs. Roy Heard and J. C. Martin conducted the services for
some weeks, when Mr. Martin continued, his ministry giving
stability to the new cause. In May 1925 the Rev. A. H. Potter
began a pastorate of eight years, during which considerable
progress was made. After years from its commencement
the Church became independent of help from the Home Mis-
sion Committee. Mr. Potter was followed in 1932 by the Rev.
R. Helmore, and all the activities of the Church are well
sustained. Mr. W. J. Spicer added to the assistance he gave
the Church at the first by giving a valuable allotment of land
for a Manse. The venture at East Camberwell was fully
justified, since the Church now has over 100 members, with
150 Sunday School scholars.
ORMOND, 1925
On 2nd June, 1925, the Baptists in the Ormond district met
in the home of Mr. C. Fullard, when 12 members were con-
stituted a Baptist Church. The Rev. S. A. McDonald and


Mr. W. H. G. Ellingworth represented the Union and Home
Mission. For three months the Church met in Mr. Fullard’s
home, and then for 16 months services were held in the Glen
Huntly State School, under the leadership of Mr. A. Drum-
mond. In 1927 land was purchased in Walsh Street, and a
building erected largely by voluntary labour at a cost for land
and building of While the Church was being built
and for the succeeding 12 months Mr. W. H. Holloway was
student pastor. In March 1929 the Rev. E. Bungey became
pastor. The Church steadily prospered, but a year later, while
giving religious instruction in the State School, Mr. Bungey’s
heart failed and he passed away deeply mourned. Then from
January 1932 for years the Rev. W. Cross maintained a
gracious ministry. During that time his wife died, and the
Church contains memorials of Mr. Bungey and Mrs. Cross. On
the transfer of Mr. Cross to Portland in 1935, the Rev. W. H.
Hinton accepted the joint pastorate of Ormond and Bentleigh,
and under his leadership the Church is steadily gaining
strength. Beginning with 12 members there is an enrolment
now of 56, with a Sunday School of 100 scholars. Mr. W.
Youl has been Secretary since the inception of the cause, Mr.
W. H. Ratcliff has been Treasurer and S.S. Superintendent for
eight years, and others, including Messrs. C. Fullard and J.
Lever, have loyally aided the Church. The Church is centrally
situated in a prosperous residential district, and should have
a great future.
COBURG WEST, 1932
When new homes were being built at Coburg West the
Home Mission Committee acquired an allotment of land in
a good position, and having purchased a somewhat large build-
ing at Fisherman’s Bend, with the advice of Mr. L. E. Warner,
divided it, and placed half as a movable Church on the site.
The Rev. W. Collard began Church services and arranged
supplies till he left the district. A Church has been formed,
there is already a large Sunday School, and every prospect of
a strong cause.


DARLING, 1925
In 1925 Mr. A. Harley persuaded the Home Mission Com-
mittee to begin Sunday Services in the State School at Darling.
The attendance was good, a Sunday School was commenced,
and a Church duly constituted. A fine corner allotment of
land near the school was purchased and a Church built in 1927
at a cost of the proceeds of the sale of the Church in
Crimea Street, St. Kilda, meeting part of the outlay. The
Rev. S. T. Earl was pastor for the first three years, followed
by the Revs. H. G. Hackworthy, M.A., B. A. Rogers, R. Ings,
and W. J. Bligh. Mr. Ings was only in the third year of his
pastorate when he suddenly passed away, to the great loss of
the congregation and the whole Denomination.
EAST RINGWOOD, 1925
A site for a Church was given to the Home Mission Com-
mittee at East Ringwood by the Eastern Suburbs Association,
on which the Committee built a Church in 1925 costing
For a time services were maintained by the Preachers’
Society until the Rev. }. J. Proctor was appointed pastor in
1927. A Church was constituted by the Rev. J. C. Martin in
1929 with 23 members. Mr. Proctor was followed by the Rev.
S. Whitchurch, and since he left the services have been carried
on by the Preachers’ Society and College students.
RESERVOIR, 1925
From Regent the Baptist Cause has been extended to the
newly-settled district to the north. Land was purchased in
November 1925, and in the next year the Home Mission Com-
mittee purchased a building at Ascot Vale, and had it removed
to the new site. Services were conducted by the Rev. W.
Lowson, of Regent, and by local preachers. Since Mr.
Lowson’s removal from Regent the work has been maintained
by students from the Melbourne Bible Institute and the Baptist
College.


MERLYNSTON, 1932
Baptist services were begun at Merlynston in 1932, and the
second of the movable Churches was erected there, the services
being under the direction of the Rev. H. R. Tunks, of Coburg.
A Church was formed with 15 members, and the veteran
evangelist, the Rev. R. Robertson, was chosen as pastor. Since
his resignation the Home Mission Committee has appointed
young men to carry on the work.
GLENBERVIE, 1931
About the time Baptist work was begun at Merlynston the
Essendon Church, under the leadership of Mr. G. Lancashire
and members of the Preachers’ Society, initiated services at
Glenbervie, a little distance north of Essendon. The services
were held in a shop in the main street, and were sustained by
the Preachers’ Society, but in 1934 a neat W.B. and fibro-
cement building was erected. The Church was constituted in
the same year. The Sunday School has 100 scholars, and in
this growing important district there is every prospect of a
strong cause.
ASHBURTON, 1930
Since population was rapidly increasing in the fine resi-
dential suburb of Ashburton, services were commenced in 1930
in a Public Hall. As this was not very suitable for Church
work arrangements were made to build a Church in the same
way as that at Fairfield was built. Volunteers were called for
from all our Churches, so that the building might be erected
in one day. Weather prevented the full accomplishment of
the purpose, but a good building, costing was erected
in 1934. Mr. A. E. Gallop, of Armadale Church, was the
promoter of this effort, and he carried on the work till the
Rev. W. J. Eddy took charge in 1935. The Church is steadily
gaining ground and is full of promise.


WEST FOOTSCRAY—GEELONG ROAD, 1934
In *934 Pastor H. G. Brice, of Sunshine, initiated the work
at West Footscray. Meetings were held in the local Progress
Hall for some years. The work was handicapped because the
use of the hall was restricted to Sunday services. A site was
purchased, and in 1937 a neat building was erected, which was
opened by the President, Mr. C. H. Book, K.C., LL.B., on
sth February, 1938. The services are maintained by Pastor
Brice with the aid of the students of the Baptist College.
UPWEY AND SELBY
For many years services have been held with gratifying
results at the Union Churches at Upwey and Belgrave, but in
1931 Mr. J. M. Griffiths generously gave the Baptist Denomin-
ation the Church up to that time known as the Upwey
Union Church. At that time the Rev. S. Beckingham was in
charge of the work in the district. The work has since been
carried on by the Revs. A. D. Shaw and E. H. Holloway in
succession on a Union basis, with preaching stations at Lock-
wood, Belgrave and Selby. In 1932 Messrs. C. T. Alexander
and }. Masked gave the Union a block of land at Selby valued
at £5 OO f° r a Church site, and in the following year Mr.
Masked had a Church building erected on the land valued
at and gave it to the Union. In 1937 the Home
Mission Committee appointed the Rev. G. Hardcastle to
develop the cause in that district. The Union is greatly
indebted to Messrs. Griffiths, Alexander and Masked for these
opportunities to extend the Kingdom of Christ in the eastern
hills.
COLAC, 1908
While the Home Mission Committee was engaged in
suburban extension the cad of provincial tovms was not un-
heeded, Colac is a big prosperous town on the western side
of a beautiful lake. The soil is of volcanic origin, and the
district is famed for its agricultural products, and especially
for its dairying industry. Having learned the names of a


number of Baptists in the town it was decided to begin services
in the Temperance Hall near the Railway Station on 24th
May, 1908. There was a good response, and the Rev. A. A.
Medley was appointed to develop the work. Once a month
ministers from the city visited the town and preached in the
hall. But the building was not central, so land was bought in
the heart of the town and plans prepared for a Church. Since
a building was projected at the same time in Northcote, the
Chairman of the Home Mission Committee, Mr. H. Meeks,
appealed at the Assembly meetings for £6OO for the buildings
at Colac and Northcote. In a very little while was
promised. On Sunday, 26th September, 1909, the Colac
Church was opened by the Rev. J. H. Goble, who preached
three times, baptizing four men at the evening service. Mr.
Coulter, from South Melbourne, was one of the foundation
members, with Mr. C. H. Helmore, who was appointed
Secretary, and has occupied the position till to-day. In about
twelve months the Church had been established. But though
a good start was made the progress of the Church is not com-
mensurate with the growth and importance of the town.
Possibly one reason has been the frequent changes in the
pastorate. Since Mr. Medley was transferred to Wangaratta
in 1912 there have been nine pastors, with intervals when
College students supplied the services. The last three pastors
have been the Revs. J. G. Manning, E. M. Kippax, and N. S.
Draper, who took charge of the work in 1935. When the
Church was built in 1909 it was placed so that the corner site
might be available for a larger building in the future. We
trust this hope will yet be realised and the Colac Church a
power in the town.
BALLARAT—PLEASANT STREET, 1923
When the Rev. S. A. McDonald was pastor of the Dawson
Street Church, Ballarat, the Church decided to form a branch
Church in the growing district to the west. In conjunction
with the Home Mission Committee a brick Church was built
in Pleasant Street costing, with land, £ 1400, and the Rev. R.


Helmore was entrusted with the task of establishing a new
cause. Soon a Sunday School was gathered, with 76 scholars,
and regular services begun. Though the school has prospered,
and has now over 100 scholars, the Church members are few.
The Rev. S. Whitchurch has been pastor since 1935.
ALBURY, 1929
While the suburban extension work was steadily progress-
ing attention was called by the Rev. A. H. Brooks, of Wan-
garatta, to the opportunity for Baptist work at Albury, just
across the Murray in New South Wales. The New South
Wales Union was very sympathetic with the proposal that
Victoria should initiate work there, so the Home Mission Com-
mittee invited the Rev. J. H. Baker to leave Leeton and begin
work in Albury. Services were held in the Town Hall and a
Sunday School started. But the hall was not very suitable
for the work, and a good site for a Church was secured, one
member of the congregation paying half its cost. On 6th
September the foundation stone of a handsome brick Church
was laid, the sum of /' 138 placed on the stone testifying to
the deep interest taken in the work. The building cost, with
land, /2103, and was opened in November 1930 amid much
rejoicing. Under Mr. Baker’s energetic leadership the Church
made rapid progress, and soon reported a membership of 40
persons, with 100 Sunday scholars. In 1936 a very fine
school hall was built through the generous gifts of the mem-
bers of the congregation, so that the Church is now fully
equipped for further aggressive work. In 1937 the New South
Wales Committee called Mr. Baker to the wider sphere in
the Temora district, and he has been succeeded at Albury
by the Rev. J. W. Lindsay. The establishment of the Church
at Albury has been a source of deep gratification to the
Denomination.
MARYBOROUGH, 1936
A paragraph in “The Australian Evangelist” recorded the
fact that in July 1862 Mr. Peter Virtue, son of the Mr. Virtue
who took part in the first Baptist service in Collins Street in


19385 conducted a Baptismal Service in Maryborough, at
which 300 persons were present. No records of any establish-
ment of a Baptist cause have been preserved. Meanwhile
Maryborough has become an important centre as a railway
junction, with a large woollen mill and extensive orchards.
In 1935 the Baptist Midland Association determined to begin
services in the town. A Mission was conducted by the Rev.
A. J. Whitbourn and others with good results. A hall, for-
merly a Methodist Church, was available, and the Rev. A. G.
Coventry was appointed to carry on the work. The results
have been encouraging, 22 persons have been baptized, and
the prospects of establishing a Baptist Church are good.
Stanley Baldwin, when Prime Minister, speaking at a Baptist
celebration, said:—“ What is it for which you stand and what is the
testimony to which you bear witness to the world? I think you
would perhaps say it is this —that you have stood from the earliest
days for the completest independence of the soul. That is to say,
you recognise that wherever or three are gathered together the
Spirit of Christ is amongst them, and they, in the presence of that
Spirit, constitute a Church. It is in personal communion that the
individual receives the light which he needs; and, that being so, you
have no need of a priesthood, no need of specific tests through creeds;
in other words, you proclaim the responsibility and the right of
every man to pray and worship as he chooses.”


Chapter XIX
THE CAREY BAPTIST GRAMMAR SCHOOL
“I have undertaken to make a man of myself first. If I succeed, I
may make something else afterwards. If I do not succeed I
shall not be fit for much anyway.”—Garfield.
In writing of the early problems of our Denomination we
referred to the unwillingness of Baptists to accept any State
aid. Their motive was right, but since the Government grants
did not imply any dictation of belief or control of organisation,
but were designed to foster the best elements of civilisation,
the rejection of all such grants was unwise. In no case was
the unwisdom more evident than in the sphere of education.
While other Communions had valuable sites for Grammar
Schools given to them and considerable sums for their initial
cost the Baptists had no such advantages. As our Churches
grew stronger, the fact that we had no good Denominational
Grammar School was found to be not only a hindrance to
progress, but detrimental to our existence. The most capable
of our young people were necessarily sent to the excellent
Grammar Schools of other Denominations. No other course
was open. The natural result was that strong lasting friend-
ships were formed with their schoolfellows and teachers, so
that in many instances old Church ties were weakened and
gradually dissolved. In time it was realised that the sons and
daughters of the leaders of our Churches were drifting from us
and again and again the suggestion was made that we ought
to have a Grammar School of our own. The situation became
more acute when the clause of our splendid Education Act
that education should be “secular” was interpreted by some
who administered the Act in a sense not intended when the
Act was framed. State education, though not anti-religious,
became non-religious. Since religious influences are the
greatest factors for the development of a strong well-balanced


character the demand for a school with a pronounced Christian
tone became insistent. At the annual meetings of the Asso-
ciation frequent references were made to this demand, and at
the Baptist Congress in Sydney in 1908 the Rev. E. Harris
affirmed that a good Grammar School was urgently called
for. At the Union Assembly in Melbourne in 1910 the Rev.
L. E. Tranter, who had been for some years in Canada, stirred
the Assembly with an account of the rise and progress of
schools, colleges and universities wholly Baptist in the
Dominion, and affirmed that they were leading factors in the
progress of the Denomination. The address made history.
The Assembly unanimously appointed a Committee “to con-
sider the advisability and possibility of establishing a Baptist
Secondary School in Victoria.” A year later a scheme was
proposed, and the Committee was authorised to take steps to
raise for the establishment of a high-class Grammar
School for boys.
Mr. Tranter was made Secretary of the Committee, and on
him principally fell the task of organising the collection of the
sum required. Months of strenuous effort made it plain that
the scheme was possible, and eventually a splendid building,
standing in the midst of 8 acres of ground on the heights
of Kew, was purchased for In February 1923 the
School was opened, having an enrolment of 68 boys, with Mr.
H. G. Steele, M.A., Dip.Ed., as Principal. The School soon
won the confidence of the community, and in the following
year the enrolment was doubled. New classrooms and altera-
tions were necessary, and the Rev. W. M. Cartwright was set
free for six months by his Church at Brunswick that he might
collect an additional ;£ 10,000. Later Mr. Burdett Laycock,
of Camberwell, generously bore the whole cost of over
for the erection of a two-storied dormitory; a fine Preparatory
School was built, the sports oval made complete, so that the
School buildings and grounds cost a total sum of /28,450.
Since then the School Council, through legacies from two lady
friends of the School, has been enabled to erect fine well-
equipped classrooms for the science and mathematical classes,


which are part of a plan prepared by the school architect,
Mr. Harold Tranter, son of its first Secretary, and one of its
first students, that will cost another and make the
School equipment equal to all requirements of coming years.
From its inception the School has gone on steadily, and
has won a high place among the educational institutions of
the State. Mr. Steele has continued as Principal. The first
Vice-Principal, Mr. J. Bills, 8.A., from South Australia, has
been succeeded by the Rev. H. J. Sutton, M.A., and an efficient
staff has been maintained. At the Intermediate Examinations
the School has every year been successful, and a number of
the senior students have gained University degrees. In 1928
the School was recognised as one of the Associated Schools of
Victoria, and at the Combined Sports Meeting of the Associa-
tion has always taken a good place. An Old Boys’ Association
continues the friendships formed during school days, and a
Parents’ Association is ever ready to assist in the development
of the School.
Dr. William Moore, son of a former Baptist Minister in
Queensland, and one of Victoria’s most eminent surgeons,
was the first President of the School Council, and when he
left for an extended visit to England in 1925 he was succeeded
by Mr. A. F. Fullard, son of an early Baptist pastor in Victoria,
and who has for many years been prominent in business
circles in the State. Following Mr. Tranter, Mr. A. Neville,
formerly a Missionary in India, has for the last ten years been
Secretary and Treasurer.
It is generally acknowledged that the School definitely met
a long-felt want, and will increasingly prove through the years
of great value to the Denomination. Its name, “Carey,” is a
constant challenge, reminding the boys of the great Missionary
and Oriental scholar who devoted his life to the uplift of
India. Its motto, “Animo et Fide,” tells how life’s battles can
be won by courage and faith, and its badge, that of an athletic
runner carrying a blazing torch, is a warning against all
physical slackness and an incentive to pass on the light of
knowledge to all in need. In an age of scientific advancement,


when the tendency is to interpret the Universe in terms of
matter and force, and to over-ride the rights of the less for-
tunate, it is wholly good that we have a School with Christian
ideals in which it is ever taught that the spiritual is more
than the material, and that life finds its true inspiration and
climax when lived in the light of eternity. As a protest against
all dwarfed narrow views of life and all selfishness in conduct,
the Carey Grammar School is of value to the Denomination
and the State, and deserves the fullest possible support of all
our Baptist Constituency.
Leonard E. Tranter. Father schoolmaster, brother of Rev.
Wm. Tranter. When aged 18 gave lectures on D. L. Moody to
gain funds for voyage to U.S.A. Attended the Moody Bible Insti-
tute, Springfield. Then Woodstock Baptist College, Canada. Did
very successful Home Mission work at Temora and district, N.S.W.
Pastor Bendigo Church. Secretary of Union. By eloquence and
persistence aroused Denomination to establish Carey Grammar
School. Retired from position as Secretary through ill-health. Pastor
Essendon Church. Passed away suddenly 7th July, 1929. A brave,
eager, devout soul.
Dr. Schaff (Presbyterian) translates the Commentary of Lange
on Matt. 111. 11 as follows:—“I baptize you in water, immersing you
in the element of water. . . . He will entirely immerse you in
the Holy Spirit.” On the same text Dr. Plumptre (Episcopalian)
writes: “As heard and understood at the time, the baptism with
the Holy Ghost would imply that the souls thus baptized would be
plunged, as it were, in that creative and informing Spirit.” And
writing on Acts I. 5 he also says: “Now they were told that their
spirits were to be as fully baptized—that is plunged—into the power
of the Divine Spirit as their bodies had been plunged in the waters
of the Jordan.”


Chapter XX
THE CHALLENGE OF THE FUTURE
“I saw the Holy City, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven
from God, made ready as a bride adorned for her husband.” —
Rev. xxi. 2.
We have been considering the history of the Baptists of Victoria
of the past 100 years, and have companied for hours full of
interest with brave, earnest, devout men and women of strong
convictions and intense loyalty to Jesus Christ, and as we now
face the new century we would fain catch their spirit that we
may carry on their work. We rejoice in the successes they
achieved and gratefully honour their memories. To a host of
unnamed workers we owe a great debt. It is comparatively
easy to see some mistakes and failures by individuals and
Churches in the past, but since we do not know all their cir-
cumstances we would not dwell on them, but rather emphasise
all that they accomplished in spite of many difficulties and
disadvantages.
One hundred years have gone; we stand on the threshold of
a new century. The future challenges us, and demands that we
maintain and improve our inheritance. But the challenge of
the future is only the challenge of the present. Silently, in-
evitably, to-morrow grows out of to-day. What we will be is
determined by what we are. The division of time is only arbi-
trary. So we must not think of far-off future years, but of the
living present. Some affirm that our times are exceptionally
difficult. They stress the fact that spiritual values seem less than
before the Great War, that by the war many illusions were
swept away, that in many cases faith has suffered an eclipse,
that the habit of Church attendance has weakened, that there
is less response to the appeal of the Gospel, and that Sunday
Schools are not what they were. We may admit all that and
much more, and yet greet the future with a cheer.


It can readily be maintained that we are living in the greatest
times the world has ever known. If a man is discouraged and
despondent let him take a dose of history; if he is inclined to
be pessimistic let him take a still bigger dose, and he will soon
come to the conclusion that there has been no previous period
to be compared with advantage to the present. Wider, longer
views dissipate gloom. We recur to what we said in our open-
ing chapter on Past and Present. In all the realms of science,
literature, world discovery, national development, sociology and
ethics vast areas of life have been shot through and through
with lances of light. Spite of all checks and recoils the tide
everywhere is rising. The Kingdom of God is coming, slowly,
but surely coming. The present writer has little or no sym-
pathy with those who belittle and blacken our times. To him
that betokens a failure of faith in God. If we really believe
in God, we believe in the supremacy of goodness and the
ultimate triumph of right. The words of Lowell need frequent
repetition:—
. . . . “History’s pages but record
One death-grapple in the darkness ’twixt old systems and the Word ;
Truth for ever on the scaffold, Wrong for ever on the throne—
Yet that scaffold sways the future and behind the dim unknown
Standeth God, amid the shadows, keeping watch above His own.”
Certainly there are shadows, but they are caused by the
growing light; if they seem deeper it is because the light is
brighter. Certainly these are painful experiences, but they are
the birthpangs of a new and better order. The Master’s voice
sounds above all the surges of the storm, “O ye of little
faith wherefore do you doubt?”
Of course difficulties confront us. The greater the problem,
the more they are, the steeper the ascent, the more arduous
the climb, the grander the ideal the more difficult the attain-
ment. The very difficulties of our days prove their greatness.
But difficulties are only spurs to earnest men. “From the
days of John the Baptist until now the Kingdom of Heaven
suffereth violence, and men of violence take it by force.” So
the present challenges all that is best in us. Its call to us is


“Quit you like men, be strong.” Ours are not the days for
smug complacency or ignoble ease. In Church activities we
are challenged to a fuller consecration of all our powers, to a
higher standard of education for the ministry, for more
business-like methods in the service of our Churches, to more
self-denial for all Missionary enterprises, but above all and in
all and through all to a simpler faith in the Presence and
Power of the Holy Spirit. The work is not ours, but His.
“The new Jerusalem comes down out of heaven from God.”
But it can only come to expectant responsive hearts. So the
challenge of the present is for every Baptist to say with joyous
confidence, “I can do all things in Him who strengthens me,”
and “Thanks be to God who always leads us in the Triumph
of Christ.”
That our faith may show itself in works, that our aspira-
tions may be capitalised in action, the Committee appointed
to prepare for the celebration of the Centenary have made
certain definite proposals and requests. They propose, first,
the inauguration of Special Evangelistic work that 1000 new
members may be enrolled in our membership, and, second,
that within four years we contribute allocated as fol-
lows: to clear off all debts on our different institu-
tions and 15,475 to provide for new work. The Committee
is confident that these proposals are just and feasible, but, they
add, only if all our members share the responsibility. If in
four years, 1884-1888, our members, numbering then 4737, con-
tributed for the Victorian Baptist Fund the sum of
they argue that in the current four years the greater number,
8178, can raise, if they will, the sum of ,£30,000. With one
reminder we close our story: “In all things Christ must have
the pre-eminence.” If our motive is the aggrandisement of
our Denomination we will deservedly fail, but if our motive is
whole-heartedly to extend the Kingdom of our Lord we may
confidently go forward.
“Therefore, as we have around us so great a cloud of wit-
nesses, let us put away every encumbrance and the sin that
clings so close, and let us run patiently the course set before


us, looking to Jesus, the leader and perfecter of the faith,
who for the joy set before Him endured the cross, despising
the shame, and is seated at the right hand of the throne of
God.”
“Baptists have given to the world the only logical expression
of the inner law of the Reformation Movement.
“Baptists have given the most spiritual type of Christianity the
world has ever known.
“Baptists have furnished the most striking exhibition of denomi-
national unity in all history.
“Baptists have given the world the only complete idea of liberty.
“The Baptists have furnished the spiritual analogues or principles
that underlie our civilisation and out of which it grows.”
—Dr. E. Y. Mullins.


ADDENDA.
Since the foregoing pages were written and while the book
was going through the press, the following events occurred:—
The Rev. H. G. Scholefield, 8.D., resigned the pastorate of the
Canterbury Church and is now on a visit to England; the Rev.
W. S. Hadden, L.Th., has become pastor of the Shepparton
Church; the Rev. A. G. Bennett has transferred from Yarra-
ville to Gordon Street; the Rev. D. F. Mitchell, 8.A., and the
Rev. E. D. Gill, 8.A.; have gained the degree of B.D. of the
Melbourne College of Divinity; a substantial beautiful Church
has been opened at Balwyn; the Centenary Committee has re-
ported that already ,£ 10,000 has been given or promised
towards the ,£30,000 desired, and that with a view to con-
versions and an increase of membership united Missions are
in progress.
Finally, the compiler sincerely thanks the printers for their
courtesy and care in the publication of this History of our first
One Hundred Years.


Appendix I
THE HONOUR ROLL OF PRESIDENTS
1862. Rev. Isaac New.
1863. Rev. David Rees.
1864. Rev. S. Hewlett.
1865. Rev. W. Sutton.
1866. Rev. Isaac New.
1867- Rev. E. G. Lewis.
1868- Rev. W. Sutton.
Rev. David Rees.
1869- Rev. Isaac New.
1870- Rev. Jas. Martin, B.A.
1871- Rev. George Slade.
1872- Rev. Isaac New.
1873- Rev. J. Gregson.
1874- Rev. W. C. Bunning.
1875- Rev. Jas. Martin, B.A.
1876- Rev. P. Bailhache.
1877- Rev. John Reid.
1878- Rev. W. Poole.
1879- Rev. S. Chapman.
Rev. G. P. Lush.
1880- Rev. S. Chapman.
1881- Rev. E. F. Kingdom
1882- Rev. W. Clark.
1883- Rev. E. Henderson.
1884- Hon. C. J. Ham.
1885- Rev. S. Chapman.
1886- Rev. A. W. Webb.
1887- Mr. W. McLean.
1888- Rev. S. Chapman.
1889- Mr. T. W. Jackson.
1890- Rev. E. Harris.
1891- Mr. D. C. Rees.
1892- Rev. H. Coombs.
1893- Mr. G. P. Barber.
1894- Rev. F. J. Wilkin,
M.A, D.D.
1895- Mr. W. G. Stephens.
1896- Rev. E. Isaac.
1897- Mr. George Martin.
1898- Rev. S. Howard.
1899- Mr. H. Sumner Martin
B.A, LL.B.
1900- Rev. A. Steele.
1901- Rev. A. N. Marshall,
B.A.
Rev. S. P. Carey, M.A.
1902- Prof. Kernot, M.A,
M.C.E.
1903- Rev. S. P. Carey, M.A,
1904- Mr. H. F. Richardson,
1905- Rev. F. E. Harry.
1906- Rev. W. H. Holds-
worth, M.A.
1907- Mr. W. G. Stephens.
1908- Rev. J. H. Goble.
1909- Mr. C. Carter.
1910- Rev. A. Gordon, M.A.
1911- Rev. W. J. Eddy.
1912- Mr. R. Purnell.
1913- Rev. F. C. Spurr.
Rev. A. Gordon, M.A.
1914- Mr. Geo. H. Doery.
1915- Rev. E. Dybing.
1916- Mr. D. Mcßorie.
1917- Rev. A. R. Thompson.
1918- Mr. Evans Rees.
1919- Rev. N. L. Beurle.
1920- Mr. W. H. G. Elling-
worth.
1921- Rev. G. P. Rees.
1922- Mr. E. H. Jenkin.
1923- Rev. W. M. Cart-
wright.
1924- Mr. F. P. Morris.
1925- Rev. H. H. Jeffs.
1926- Mr. P. W. Steel.
1927- Rev. A. E. Blackwell.
1928- Mr. E. A. Pearson.


1929- Rev. A. D. Shaw.
1930- Mr. A. H. Lewis.
1931- Rev. H. Boulter.
1932- Rev. J. E. Newnham,
M.A.
1933- Mr. J. McDonald
Martin.
1934- Rev. J. C. Martin.
Rev. J. E. Newnham,
M.A.
1935- Mr. A. F. Fullard.
1936- Rev. R. J. T. Farrer.
1937- Mr. C. H. Book.
K.C., LL.B.
193


Entered College from
Left College
Collins-street
1873 H. Coombs
1876 Died 1923
Castlemaine
1874 F. J. Wilkin,
M.A., D.D.
1877
—
Albert-street
1877 C. Hardy, B.A.
1881
Died 1884
Aberdeen-street
1877 E. Harris
1879
Died 1929
West Melbourne
1877 A. Steele
1879
Died 1922
West Melbourne
1886 S. T. Pitman
1888
—
Collins-street
1889 A. A. Medley
1892 Died 1925
(In 1891
the Baptist College of Victoria began work.)
Auburn
1891 A. E. Blackwell
1894
—
West Melbourne
1891 S. A. Harris
1894
Resigned
Collins-street
1891 J. C. Martin
1894
Died 1934
Port Campbell
1891 W. 0. Ward
1894
—
Aberdeen-street
1892 E. A. Kir wood
1894
—
Oxley
1893 W. Kennedy
1895
Died 1919
Pet’sham N.S.W.
1894 G. Edwards
1897
Resigned
N.S.W. Union
1894 C. T. Way
1897
Resigned
Fitzroy
1894 G. P. Rees
1898
Sec. Vic. Union
Fitzroy
1894 A. R. Thompson
1898
Died 1923
Aberdeen-street
1896 B. Hewison
1899
Died 1938
Beechworth
1896 W. S. Rollings
1899
—
Tasmanian Union
1898 G. J. Mackay
1899
Resigned
Ballarat
1898 H. H. Jeffs
1901
—
Terowie, S.A.
1898 P. J. Masters
1901
—
Albert Park
1898 M. L. Murphy
1901
—
Home Mission
1898 E. L. Watson
1901
—
and
1899
1902
—
N.S.W. Union
N.S.W. Union
1899 W. J. Coulson
1899 H. W. Reece
1901
Resigned
Home Mission
1900 W. Griffiths
1901
—
Foreign Mission
1903 H. J. Sutton,
M.A.
1903
Vice-Principal
Carey School
Canterbury
1903 F. W. Norwood,
D.D.
1905
—
Appendix 11.
MINISTERS AND STUDENTS.
Trained under the auspices of the Union.
194


Entered College from
Left College
Ballarat
1904 H. A. Horsfall
1907 —
Foreign Mission
1905 L. Barber
1905 India
Bendigo
1905 M. Morris, M.Sc.
1912 —
Home Mission
1905 H. Boulter
1907 —
Armadale
1905 G. E. Hale, B.A,
1908 Resigned
Auburn
1905 J. S. Beasley
1908 Resigned
Albert Park
1906 O. R. Linden
1909 Died 1934
Brunswick
1907 H. G. Dwyer
1909 Resigned
Bendigo
1907 R. Stacey
Died Jan. 6, 1908
Clifton Hill
1908 F. H. Green
1910 Died 1919
Geelong
1908 A. H. Potter,
M.A., Dip.Ed.
1910 —
Footscray
1908 S. Goble
1912 —
N.S.W. Union
1908 C. E. Marcroft
1910 Died 1923
N.S.W. Union
1908 F. Robinson
1910 —
N.S.W. Union
1908 R. Goodman
1910 —
N.S.W. Union
1908 L. H. daggers
1910 —
Tasmania
1906 R. Farrer
1910 —
N.S.W. Union
1909 H. H. Childs
1911 Resigned
N.S.W. Union
1909 P. Goodman
1911 —
N.S.W. Union
1909 A. J. Parker,B.A.
1911 Resigned
N.S.W. Union
1909 W. P. Phillips
1911 —
Home Mission
1909 S. E. Dorman
1911 —
Clifton Hill
1909 A. Muriel
1914 Resigned
Footscray
1909 E. R. Thome
1911 —
Abbotsford
1910 J. E. Newnham,
M.A.
1913 —
W.A. Union
1909 D. Shaw
1910 Died 1929
Auburn
1910 F. E. Paice
1912 Resigned
Bacchus Marsh
1910 G. W. Paice
1912 —
N.S.W. Union
1910 T. Kelly
1912 India
N.S.W. Union
1910 S. A. McDonald
1912 Sec. Syd. City M.
N.S.W. Union
1910 W. H. Wingfield
1912 —
N.S.W. Union
1910 A. J. Hannah
1912 Died 1914
East Melbourne
1910 C, Urquhart
1912 —
Geelong
1911 E. C. Harris, B.A.
1914 —
Warm am bool
1911 E. Fisher
1914 Resigned
Footscray
1911 H. S. Bunn
1913 Resigned
Lilydale
1911 E. H. Holloway
1913 —
Yarraville
1911 R. Stewards
1913 Died 1937
Home Mission
1911 J. R. McCue
1913 —
N.S.W. Union
1911 A. Driver
1913 —
S.A. Union
1913 J. W. Barrow
1914 —
Tasmanian Union
1912 W. S. Cowling
1914 —
N.S.W. Union
1913 R. W. Dobbinson
1915 —


Entered College from
Left College
Geelong
1913 J. R. Edmonds
1915
—
Home Mission
1913 I. W. Hopkins
1915
—
S.A. Union
1913 H. W. Masters
1914
India
Home Mission
1913 H. Macdonald
1917
—
N.S.W. Union
1913 T. McDougall
1915
Resigned
N.S.W. Union
1913 R. F. Melville
1915
Died 1931
N.S.W. Union
1912 R. S. Pickup
1914
—
N.S.W. Union
1912 J. Baker
1915
—
Collins-street
1914 H. G. Scholefield, 1917
—
B.D.
Abbotsford
1914 D. Payne
1915
Died for Emp.l 916
Bendigo
1914 J. P. McCarthy
1914
Died 1921
N.S.W. Union
1914 H. A. Oubis, B.A. 1915
Resigned
N.S.W. Union
1914 H. G. Hackworthy,
—
M.C., M.A.
N.S.W. Union
1914 J. H. Latimer
Died
1938
N.S.W. Union
1914 P. F. Lanyon
1916
—
N.S.W. Union
1914 R. Maidment
—
Home Mission
1915 W. J. Salter, B.A.
1921
—
New Zealand
1915 W. L. Salter
1915
Resigned
S.A. Union
1915 N. V. Hansen
1921
—
N.S.W. Union
1915 C. C. Wearne
—
N.S.W. Union
1915 G. H. Morling,
Principal N.S.W.
M.A.
Bap. Col.
N.S.W. Union
1915 W. H. Bain, M.A.
Resigned
N.S.W. Union
1915 E. Coleman
Resigned
Collins-street
1916 N. T. McDonald
1919
Resigned
Coburg
1916 H. G. Henderson
1917
Resigned
Home Mission
1917 W. C. Collard
1920
—
Home Mission
1918 F. A. Marsh
1919
Gen. Sec. F.M.
Brunswick
1918 F.Halkyard ,B.Sc. 1921
Resigned
Footscray
1920 R. Helmore
1921
—
Warrnambool
1920 H. A. Townend
1923
Resigned
Home Mission
1920 S. T. Earl
1923
—
West Australia
1921 W. Crofts, B.A.
1923
India
Armadale
1921 T. V. Paul
1923
—
Brunswick
1922 J. Allison
1925
—
Bacchus Marsh
1922 W. Cross
1925
-
Queensland
1922 A. E. Smith
1925
India
Tasmania
1922 E. E. Watson
1925
India
Home Mission
1923 C. Baldwin
1926
India
Queensland
1923 A. H. Brooks
1926
—
Tasmania
1923 E. C. Walsh
1924
—
South Australia
1923 B. A. Rogers
1926
—
Queensland
1924 H. W. Dart
1924
—
196


Entered College from
Left College
Box Hill
1924 A. G. Coventry
1926 —
Home Mission
1924 H. R. Tunks '
1927 —
Kew
1924 J. G. Manning
1928 —
Tasmania
1925 R. H. McHugh
1928 —
Queensland
1925 E. Edwards
1928 —
Brighton
1926 W. H. Holloway
1929 —
1926 E. T. Laxton
1929 —
Tasmania
1926 W. J. Bligh
1929 —
Clifton Hill
1927 A. R. Holland
1930 —
North Carlton
1927 R. Haley
1930 —
South Australia
1927 W. A. McKay,
1930
M.A.
Home Mission
1928 S. Watson
1931 —
Northcote
1928 D. C. Lewis
1931 —
South Australia
1928 W. Johnson
1931 —
Home Mission
1929 J. Curtis, L.Th.
1932 —
Yarraville
1929 A. J. Innocent
1932 —
Tasmania
1929 E. M. Kippax,
1932 —
L.Th.
Abbotsford
1930 A. W. Smith
1932 —
Footscray
1930 J. H. Watson,
1933 —
L.Th.
Brighton
1930 T. H. Crago, L.Th. 1933 —
Ringwood East
1931 E. D. Gill, B.A.,
1934 —
L.Th.
Brunswick
1931 T. F. Keyte,L.Th. 1934 —
Home Mission
1931 W. S. Hadden,
1934 —
L.Th.
Armadale
1932 P. E. Evans,L.Th.1935 —
Tasmania
1932 E. Roberts-Thom-
son, L.Th.
1935 —
Yarraville
1932 E. 0. Knight
1935 —
Tasmania
1933 R. T. Wootton
1936 —
Home Mission
1933 A. K. Parr,L.Th.
1937 —
Collins- street
1933 G. McAdam
1937 —
Home Mission
1934 S. McKittrick,
1938 —
L.Th.
Tasmania
1934 J. Roberts-Thom -
son, L.Th.
1936 —
Home Mission
1934 T. J. Fleming,
1938
L.Th.
—
Home Mission
1935 L. J. Whitbourn
1938
Home Mission
1935 R. Manson
1936 Resigned
South Australia
1935 K. Chat field
1936 ~
Home Mission
1936 G. W. Carr,L.Th.
Home Mission
1936 A. J. Brown


Entered College from
Left College
Home Mission
1936 G. H. Blackburn
Home Mission
1936 L. N. Rawlings
Home Mission
1937 R. C. Potter
Home Mission
1937 S. Westerman
Home Mission
1937 M. A. Thomson
Home Mission
1938 V. Edwards
Home Mission
1938 G. R. Thompson


PROGRESS THROUGH THE YEARS.
Year.
Churches.
Pastors.
Home
Mission-
aries.
Members.
Population
of
Victoria.
s.s.
Scholars.
Christian
Endeavour
ah
Branches.
Church
Buildings.
1838
3,000
Tent
1851
2
2
70
97,489
2
1858
6
6
1,186
496,146
1,663
7
1868
26
21
1,665
671,324
2,678
27
1878
34
24
1
3,061
829,918
4,850
32
1888
44
31
5
4,737
1,079,097
6,199
38
1898
65
31
22
6,053
1,182,281
10,196
171
78
1908
75
36
20
7,003
1,250,449
10,120
3,074
92
1918
84
55
11
7,912
1,437,245
10,867
2,756
101
1928
93
55
16
7,650
1,761,746
11,466
3,657
109
1938
103
79
10
8,178
1,856,939
10,799
3,019
110
The number of Baptists reported by the Census of 1933 was 31,427.
Appendix 111


Appendix IV
HISTORICAL SUMMARY
1834. Edward Henty landed at Portland.
1835. John Batman arrived Port Phillip.
1836. Russell and Hoddle surveyed Settlement.
1837. Sir Richard Bourke named Melbourne.
First Land Sale.
Accession of Queen Victoria.
1838. First Baptist Service in Melbourne.
1840. Arrival of J. J. Mouritz.
1842. John Ham arrives.
1845. Collins Street Church opened.
1850. Particular Baptist Church built Lonsdale Street.
Albert Street Church Built.
1851. Discoveries of Gold.
Brighton Church constituted.
1852. Geelong (Aberdeen Street) Church constituted.
1853. Churches established at Kew, Sandhurst and White Hills.
1854. First Railway to Sandridge opened.
Churches constituted at South Yarra, South Melbourne and
Portland.
1857. Separation of Victoria from New South Wales.
James Taylor arrives.
1858. Ballarat, Geelong (Fenwick Street) Churches established.
Church built at Tylden.
1860. Burke and Wills Expedition.
1861. Churches established at Castlemaine, Kyneton, Maldon-
Newstead and Tarnagulla.
1862. Railway to Sandhurst opened.
Baptist Association of Victoria formed.
Churches constituted at Brunswick, Cudgee, Koroit and
Daylesford.
1863. Fitzroy (George Street) Church formed.
1864. Churches established at St. Kilda, Warrnambool, Hamilton
and Beaufort.
1865. Victorian Baptist Foreign Mission Society formed, Belmont
Church constituted.
1866. Railway opened to Echuca.
Church established at West Melbourne.


1868. Churches constituted at Williamstown, Richmond, Stawell
and Eaglehawk.
1869. Arrival of James Martin, B.A.
1870. Bacchus Marsh Church formed
1871. Home Mission Society of Victoria inaugurated.
1877. George Slade began Home Mission work at Kerang.
Death of James Martin.
Arrival of Samuel Chapman.
1880. Lilydale Church formed.
1882. Churches formed at Footscray and Shepparton.
1883. North Carlton Church constituted.
1884. Port Campbell Church built.
1885. Home Mission Cause started at Oxley.
1886. Churches established at Newport and Newmarket.
Death of Isaac New.
1887. Auburn Church formed.
Mildura Irrigation Settlement founded.
1888. Victorian Baptist Fund completed.
Visit of Dr. Alexander MacLaren.
Churches established at Beechworth, Murrumbeena and
Abbotsford.
1890. Churches formed at Albert Park, Camberwell, Clifton Hill
and Coburg.
1891. Canterbury Church established.
Baptist Theological College opened.
1892. Churches established at Moonee Ponds and Essendon.
1893. Churches formed at Warracknabeal and Hopetoun.
1894. Elsternwick, Port Melbourne and Korumburra Churches
formed.
1896. Death of James Taylor.
1897. Doctors J. Clifford and G. H. Rouse visited Victoria.
1898. Armadale Church constituted.
1899. Death of Samuel Chapman.
1900. Churches established at Box Hill and Sale.
1901. Commonwealth of Australia proclaimed.
Visits of Revs. C. Williams and J. G. Greenhough.
Accession of Edward VII.
1902. Death of A. W. Webb.
Wangaratta and Traralgon Churches formed.
Visit of Rev. W. Cuff.
1903. Church formed at Yarraville.
1905. Northcote and Rainbow Churches constituted.
1906. Visit of Rev. E. G. Gange.
1907. Death of D. C. Rees.
1910. Wonthaggi Church started.
Accession of George V.


1911. Churches constituted at Ivanhoe and Fairfield.
1912. Visit of Rev. Archibald Brown.
Interstate Convention met.
First issue of “The Australian Baptist.”
1913. Church formed at Sandringham.
Federal Board of Foreign Missions constituted.
1914. Outbreak of the Great War.
J. C. Martin appointed General Secretary of Foreign
Mission Board.
1915. Church formed at Regent.
Australian Troops at Gallipoli.
1916. Pennstone Rest Home opened.
1917. Balwyn Church constituted.
1918. Armistice signed.
1919. Churches formed at Westgarth and Sunshine.
1921. Visit of Rev. W. Y. Fullarton.
1922. Bouverie Street Kindergarten built.
Death of W. G. Stephens.
Church formed at West Moreland.
1923. Carey Grammar School opened.
Church constituted at East Camberwell.
Visit of Dr. F. B. Meyer.
1924. Baptist Women’s Association formed.
1925. Churches formed at Ormond, Darling and East Ringwood.
1927. Preston West Church constituted.
1929. Opening of Baptist Church at Canberra.
Baptist Churches built at Albury and Northcote East.
1930. Churches formed at Hampton and Ashburton.
1932. Death of J. H. Goble.
Reconstruction of Albert Street for Baptist Church House.
1936. Accession of Edward VIII.
1937. Accession of George VI.


Appendix V
THE STORY OF THE CHURCHES
I— The Era of the Pioneers.
Collins Street, 1843. Albert Street, 1850. Brighton, 1851
(East Brighton, 1884). Aberdeen Street, 1852. South
Yarra, 1853. Prahran, 1879. Kew, 1853 (East Kew,
1931). Bendigo, 1853. White Hills, 1853 (Eaglehawk,
1868). South Melbourne, 1854. Portland, 1854. Fen-
wick Street, 1859 (lost records). Total, 15.
ll The Era of the Goldfields.
Ballarat, 1857 (Sebastopol, 1868; Ballarat, Victoria
Street, 1903). Tylden, 1858. Kyneton, 1860. Stawell,
1860. Castlemaine, 1861. Maldon, 1861. Newstead,
1859. Tarnagulla, 1861. Beaufort, 1864. Brunswick,
1862. Fitzroy, George Street, 1863. Daylesford, 1862.
Hamilton, 1863. Williamstown, 1868. St. Kilda, 1864.
Warrnambool, 1864. Cudgee, 1862. Woodford, 1862.
Koroit, 1865. West Melbourne, 1866. Belmont, 1865
(Marshall Street, 1897) (Russell Street, Manifold
Heights, 1914). Richmond, 1868. Total, 27.
lII The Era of Agriculture.
Echuca, 1876. Bacchus Marsh, 1876. Kerang, 1877
(Gannawarra, Barraport, Koondrook). Lilydale, 1880.
Shepparton, 1882. Port Campbell, 1884. Oxley, 1885.
Beechworth, 1889. Beulah, 1893. Hopetoun, 1893
(Turriff, 1913). Warracknabeal, 1893. Rainbow, 1905.
Sale, 1900. Wangaratta, 1902. Traralgon, 1903.
Korumburra, 1894. Wonthaggi, 1910. Total, 21.
IV— The Era of Manufactures.
Footscray, 1883 (Gordon Street, 1909). Carlton North,
1883. Newport, 1885 (Altona, 1918). Newmarket, 1886.
Murrumbeena, 1888. Abbotsford, 1888. Auburn, 1888
(Hawthorn West, 1912). Albert Park, 1890. Camber-
well, 1890. Clifton Hill, 1890. Coburg, 1890. Canter-
bury, 1891 (Balwyn, 1917). Moonee Ponds, 1892.
Essendon, 1890. Elsternwick, 1894. Port Melbourne,
1894. Armadale, 1898. Malvern East, 1909.
Total, 22.


Box Hill, 1900. Yarraville, 1903. Northcote, 1905
(Regent, 1915; Preston West, 1927; Northcote East,
1929). Ivanhoe, 1911. Fairfield, 1911. Sandringham,
1913 (Hampton, 1930). Collingwood, 1917. Westgarth,
1919. Sunshine, 1919. Moreland West, 1922. East
Camberwell, 1923. Ormond, 1925. Coburg West, 1932.
Darling, 1925. East Ringwood, 1925. Reservoir, 1925.
Merlynston, 1932. Glenbervie, 1931. Ashburton, 1930.
West Footscray, 1934. Upwey and Selby, 1931. Colac,
1908. Ballarat West, 1923. Albury, 1929. Mary-
borough, 1936. Total, 30.
Grand Total, 115.


INDEX.
A
Abbotsford, 128
Adams, A. G., 92
Ager, A., 48, 124
Albert Park Ch., 131
Albert St. Ch., 15, 32, 151
Albury Ch., 181
Allen, Daniel, 31, 46, 52
Alliance Baptist World, 49, 153
Allison, J., 68, 125, 141
Altona Ch., 61, 126
Anderton, A. E., 49
Ararat Ch., 62
Archer, H. D., 63, 75
Armadale Ch., 142
Ashburton Ch., 178
Association, Baptist, 148
Aston, C. D., 130
Auburn Ch., 129
B
Bacchus Marsh Ch., 27, 91
Badger, D., 49, 91
Bailhache, P., 34
Bain, W. H., 136
Baines, E., 43, 83, 106
Baird, W. W., 78, 124
Baker, A. G., 49, 64
Baker, J. H., 181
Ball, W. R., 69
Ballantyne, J., 106
Ballarat Ch., 15, 57
Ballarat East, 60
Ballarat West, 180
Balwyn Ch., 137
Bamber, J. W., 46, 55
Barber, C. D., 74, 133
Barber, G. P., 9, 74
Barber, F. W., 131
Barber, Lorraine, 9
Barnet, D. T., 122
Barraport Ch., 92
Batman, John, 5, 7
Bean, A. W., 29, 49, 130
Beaufort Ch., 18, 65
Beckingham, S., 136
Beechworth Ch., 96
Beeson, T., 64
Beilin, Miss, 120
Belmont Ch., 77
Bendigo Ch,, 18, 44
Benjeroop Ch., 92
Bennett, A. G., 73, 142
Bennett, P. C., 59
Benson, C., 67
Bentleigh Ch., 37
Bentley, J. W., 20, 61, 66
Best, R. H., 69
Bethel, Miss, 117
Beulah Ch., 97
Beurle, N. L., 97, 133
Biggs, F. W., 67
Bills, J., 185
Bion, R., 116, 118
Bird, A., 58, 130, 156
Blake, W. H. S., 31, 83
Blackie, H. G., 47, 131
Blackney, S., 76
Blackwell, A. E., 35, 45, 59, 74, 168
Blackwell, R. T., 31, 106, 143, 145
Blaikie, J., 42, 63
Board, G., 17
Boreham, F. W., 143
Bourke, Sir Rd., 7
Box Hill Ch., 165
Boy all, C., 67
Boy ling, F., 73
Boulter St. Ch., 48, 74, 99, 137
Bradshaw, H. G., 72
Brennand, J. R., 48, 62, 65, 70, 73
Brewer, F., 16, 37
Brighton Ch., 36
Brokenshire, T. C., 45
Brooks, G. H., 101, 181
Broadbent, G. A., 155
Brown, Archibald, 149
Brown, L. 8., 61
Bruce, J. M., 32, 106
Brunswick Ch., 65
Bryant, W., 36, 67, 111
Buchanan, H., 130
Buckingham, F. C., 47
Bungey, E., 76, 129, 176
Bunning, W. C., 38, 76, 126
Burleigh, E. C., 39, 133
Burton, G., 65


C
Cairns, E., 49
Cairns, P. W., 41, 60, 74, 101
Camberwell Ch., 132
Camberwell E. Ch., 175
Canterbury Ch., 135
Carey Grammar School, 183
Carey, S. P., 28, 112
Carey, Wm., 2, 115
Carlton Ch., 124
Came, E. H., 71, 78, 129
Carter, C., 130
Carter, J. H., 79
Carson, J., 66, 134, 167
Cartwright, W. M., 43, 67, 68, 87
Castlemaine Ch., 18, 63
Centenary Fund, 189
Chambers, H., 37, 106
Chapman, Samuel, 27, 28, 88, 106
Cherbury, C., 62, 65, 173
Christian Endeavour, 156
Clark, Charles, 34, 83
Clark, H., 76
Clark, W., 58, 72, 124, 151, 153
Clarke, A., 47, 132, 134
Clarke, A. J., 45, 76
Claughton, L., 122
Clemens, F., 61, 79, 128
Clifford, John, 3, 149
Clifton Hill Ch., 133
Clowes, T., 60
Coburg Ch., 134
Coburg W. Ch., 176
Colac Ch., 179
Cole, J. H., 37, 139
Collard, W. C., 174
Collingwood Ch., 173
Collins, A. H., 68
Collins, J., 16, 19, 83
Collins St. Ch., 14, 26
Coombs, H., 36, 79, 83, 136
Cooper, J. R., 48
Cooper, W. A., 60, 72
Conibee, J., 73
Corbet, D., 64
Coventry, A. G., 46, 182
Crago, T. H., 101
Craike, G. A., 134
Cramer, H. S., 61, 63, 69
Criss, J., 131
Crofts, W. G., 118
Crook, S., 10
Cross, W., 48, 92, 124, 176
Cudgee Ch., 74
Cuff, W., 149
Curtis, J., 76
D
Darling Ch., 177
Dash, E., 62
Davies, H., 77, 136
Davis, T. C., 40, 69
Dawson, G. P., 47, 132, 142
Daylesford Ch., 69
Denbigh, J. S., 17, 43
Ditchburn, J., 43
Ding, W. J., 48, 96
Dinniss, W., 62, 65
Dobbinson, R. W., 41, 163
Doery, G. H., 136, 137, 160
Dorman, S. E., 45, 102, 123
Douglas, Walter, 75
Dowling, H., 52
Downing, H. D., 158
Downing, J., 60, 61, 71, 125
Downing, J., Mrs., 158
Drewe, J., 16, 41
Duncan, A., 135
Dybing, E., 71, 74, 99, 124
Dwyer, H. G., 101
E
Eaglehawk Ch., 46
Earl, S. T., 125, 177
East Brighton Ch., 37
Echuca, 90
Eddy, W. J., 41, 49, 70
Edgerton, C., 162
Edmonds, J. R., 78, 93
Ehrenberg, Miss, 117
Ellis, Edwin, 35
Ellingworth, W. H. G., 88, 165
Ellison, J., 117
Elsternwick Ch., 140
Emery, F., 63
Essendon Ch., 139
Eunson, T. A., 173
Evans, Eric, 67, 144
Evans, J. T., 73
Every, W. H., 46
Ewence, J., 63, 74
Ewins, A. E., 59
F
Fairfield Ch., 170
Fargher, R. J., 131
Farquhar, J. C., 58, 68
Farmer, H. J., 79, 152
Farr, S., 129
Farrer, R., 122, 166
Fenwick, D., 79
Fenwick, F., 63


Field, L. H., 166
Finkelstein, S., 58, 65, 75
Fisher, J. W., 60, 74
Fitzroy, George St. Ch., 67
Foot, F., 45
Footscray Ch., 121
Footscray W. Ch., 179
Foreign Missions, 115
Foy, J., 17, 42, 82
Frazer, R., 133
Fricke, F., 59
Frith, W., 67
Fryer, F., 63
Fullard, A. F., 54, 108, 130, 185
Fullard, F., 54
Fuller, Andrew, 2
Fuller, A., Miss, 39
Fullerton, W. Y., 149
G
Gallant, W., 122
Gange, E. G., 149
Garnawarra Ch., 92
Gamer, W. 8., 36, 76
Garrett, H. H., 37
Geelong, Aberdeen St. Ch., 17, 38
Geelong, Fenwick St. Ch., 49
Gilbert, W., 67
Gilchrist, A., 132
Gill, E. D., 172
Gillings, G. W., 44, 73, 83, 95
Gillison, J. 8., 42
Glenbervie Ch., 178
Goble, J. H., 88, 122, 142, 150, 152
Goble, S. 8., 45, 72
Goodman, R., 68, 74, 140
Gordon, Alex,, 112, 143
Gordon St. Ch., 123
Gospel Hall, 27, 30
Graham, D. J., 66, 135, 146
Grant, A. W., 58
Green, F, H., 63
Green, Geo., 69
Greenhough, J. G., 149
Gregson, J., 44, 61, 116, 141
Gresswell, F., 143
Griffiths, A., 73
Guinness, H., 48
H
Hackworthy, H. G., 41, 177
Hadden, W. S., 93
Haley, R., 129
Ham, John, 11, 13, 21
Ham, C. J., 15, 32, 83, 93, 105, 143
Ham, T. J., 15, 36
Hamilton Ch., 70
Hamilton, D., 76, 126, 129
Hamilton, T., 67
Hampton Ch., 172
Hannaford, R., 76
Hardy, C., 83, 86, 100
Hardcastle, G., 132, 142
Harley, A., 146, 155, 177
Harley, W., 137
Harratt, G., 69
Harris, E., 39, 48, 68, 76, 83
Harris, E. C., 77, 142
Harris, F., 39, 101
Harrison, J. E., 37, 130
Harrison, J. S., 39, 131
Harvey, D. S., 98, 169
Harvey, R. J., 30, 31, 88, 106
Harvey, W. G. M., 65
Hawthorn W. Ch., 130
Harry, F. E., 58, 127, 130
Heley, C., 63
Helmore, R., 175, 181
Henderson, E., 18, 38, 44, 70, 71
Henderson, E. J., 70, 75
Hewison, 8., 39, 72
Hewlett, S., 16, 38
Hibberd, F., 44, 45
Hicks, J. H., 123
Hiddlestone, W. R., 35, 62, 66
Higgins, J., 88, 143, 145
Hill, G., 28
Hinton, W. H., 39, 134, 176
Hobday, E. H., 45
Hoddle, Robert, 8
Hogben, J., 118
Hodge, W. P., 58, 146
Holdsworth, W., 28, 42, 112, 114
Holland, A. R., 49, 173
Holloway, E. H., 37, 45, 101, 124
Holloway, W. H., 72
Holmes, H., 43
Home Missions, 81, 148
Hooker, E., 57
Hopetoun Ch., 98
Hopkins, J., 72
Hopkins, Ivor, 48, 63, 128
Horsfall, H. A., 48, 58, 135, 167
Howard, S., 37, 42
Hughes, H. E., 47, 58
Hutchinson, J., 172
Huntly, H., 48
1
Ings, R., 133, 138, 151, 177
Innocent, A. J., 63, 73
Isaac, E., 35, 68, 72, 76
Ivanhoe Ch., 169


J
Jackson, D. J. P., 163
Jackson, W. D., 29
Jackson, T. W., 16, 33, 83, 106
daggers, L., 129, 131
Jamieson, C. A., 101
Jarvis, W., 37, 78, 92
Jeffs, H. H., 47, 127, 133
Jenkin, E. H., 69, 119, 150
Jenkin, J., 67
Jenner, C. J., 36, 111
Jolly, W. W., 92, 101, 125
Jones, D. W., 122, 139
Jones, J. F., 47
Jones, J. H., 86, 99, 126
Jones, Seth, 46
Jullien, H. F., 124
K
Kerang Ch., 92
Kernot, W. C., 35, 106
Kerr, R., 13
Kew Ch., 42
Kew East Ch., 43
Keyte, T. F., 71, 103
Kippax, E. M., 124, 130
Kindergarten, 160
Kingdon, E. F., 49
Kirby, R., 30
Kirwood, E. A., 39, 41, 96
Koondrook Ch., 92
Koroit Ch., 75
Korumburra Ch., 102
Kyneton Ch., 61
L
Lake, Geo., 99, 135
Lambert, H. J., 47, 134
Landells, W. 8., 16, 26, 35, 140
Langlands, H., 15, 36
Lanyon, P. F., 118, 135
La Trobe, C. L., 14
Laxton, E. T., 43, 101, 140
Lay cock, 8., 184
Leeder, F. A., 60
Leeson, E., 164
Lewis, E. G., 16, 33, 65, 72, 79, 151
Lewis, D. C., 45, 101, 129
Liddy, W. J., 122, 125
Lily dale Ch., 93
Lindsay, J. W., 129, 181
Locke, D., 76
Loft, G. A., 126
Long, H. W., 64, 96
Lowson, W., 47, 132, 142, 168
Lucas, W., 32
Lucas, Mrs., 159
Luke, S., Mrs., 19
Lush, John, 11, 13, 19
Lush, G. P., 19, 37, 72, 111
Lush, M., Miss, 160
Lusty, G., 36
M
Mackenzie, J. J., 4
Magilton, J., 85, 95
Magilton, M., 95
Maldon Ch., 64
Malvern E. Ch., 146
Malyon, T. J., 35, 41, 47
Manchester, H., 133, 175
Manifold Heights Ch., 78
Manning, J. G., 138, 180
Macks, E., 45
Maryborough Ch., 181
Marsden, H., 42
Marsh, F. A., 74, 119
Marshall, A. N., 143
Marshall St. Ch., 77
Martin, Geo., 50
Martin, James, 26, 76, 82
Martin, Mrs., 158
Martin, H. S., 27, 143, 145, 152
Martin, J. C., 72, 119, 136, 151
Martin, J. McD., 27, 152
Mathers, T., 76
Mathews, G., 76, 126, 139
Matthews, J., 17
Maclaren, Alex., 3, 107, 149
McCarthy, J. P., 47, 49
McColl, D. S., 32, 129
McCue, J. R., 63, 95, 103, 169
McClure, J. 8., 53
McDonald, H., 41, 124, 138, 142
McDonald, S. A., 58, 141
McFarlane, T., 76
Mclntyre, W. K., 46, 95
Mackay, G. J., 68, 87, 167
McKay, W. A., 43, 46, 138
McLachlan, J. C., 61, 70, 75
McLean, Donald, 128, 135, 141
McLean, W., 27, 30, 88, 105, 128
McNaughton, D., 70
Mead, Silas, 105, 117
Medley, A. A., 62, 180
Meeks, H., 31, 88
Melbourne Port Ch., 142
Melbourne S. Ch., 46
Melbourne W. Ch., 75
Mellor, L. A., 136
Merlynston Ch., 178


Merritt, T., 17
Merson, J. D., 36
Miles, F. J., 76
Mitchell, D. F., 144
Monsborough, J., 151
Moody, Ingram, 60
Moonee Ponds Ch., 138
Moore, Wm., Dr., 32, 185
Moore, W. J., 32
Moreland W. Ch., 174
Morris, F. P., 45, 79
Morris, Morris, 43
Moss, Jas., 47, 111
Mortimer, H. W., 19
Mouritz, J. J., 10, 19, 21, 67
Mudford, J. 1., 131
Murrumbeena Ch., 127
Murphy, M. L., 93, 165
N
Nall, Joseph, 63
Nall, P. C., 63, 118
Nash, W. F., 96, 128, 137
Napier, Thos., 9
Ness, Thos., 26, 111
Neville, A., 117, 129, 185
New, Isaac, 3, 18, 33, 57, 64
New, W. 8., 116
New Connexion, 3, 21
Newnham, J. E., 43, 170
Newnham, W. L., 129
Newmarket Ch., 126
Newport Ch., 125
Newstead Ch., 64
Newtown Ch., 78
Nichol, T., 96
Northcote Ch., 167
Norwood, F. W., 66, 129, 136
0
Oncken, J. G., 81
Ormond Ch., 175
Osmond, F., 45
Osmond, H. A., 125
Oxley Ch., 96
P
Packer, J. A., 149
Page, F., 41
Page, J. C., 115
Paice, G. W., 93, 131
Palmer, C., 75, 85, 122
Parker, A., 131, 143
Parker, G., 59
Parr, A. K., 96, 100
Paterson, G. G., 91
Particular Baptist Ch., 2, 21, 51
Partridge, F., 60
Paul, T., 76, 93, 124
Pay, H., 128
Pearce, T. G., 91
Pearson, E. A., 141
Penn, J., 159
Pennstone, 159
Perrin, F. W., 93
Phillips, H., 62, 76, 139
Pickering, C., 63, 71,86, 122, 124
Pickup, R. S., 123
Pitman, S., 70, 126
Pitt, P. St. C., 128
Pollock, J., 86, 96
Poole, Wm., 47, 67, 140
Pope, W. G., 130, 170
Porter, A. F., 65
Porter, Thos., 45, 58, 68, 69
Port Campbell Ch., 94
Portland Ch., 48
Potter, A. H., 39, 137, 146, 175
Potter, S. M., 39, 168, 173
Prahran Ch., 41
Preachers’ Society, 162
Press, J. T., 130
Preston Ch., 168
Preston, H., 122
Proctor, J. J., 85, 93, 177
Pryce, J. H., 41, 61, 127
Purnell, R., 40, 77
R
Rainbow Ch., 100
Rankine, W., 124
Ratten, E. S., 43
Reed, H., 10
Rees, David, 3, 19, 38, 71, 82, 147
Rees, D. C., 37, 106, 143, 145
Rees, Evan, 124
Rees, Mrs. Evan, 125, 159, 161
Rees, G. P., 69, 91, 140, 151, 166
Reeves, R., 10
Reeves, F., 96
Reid, J., 61, 141
Reid, Robert, 32, 83, 106, 135
Regent Ch., 168
Rendle, P., 32, 69
Renney, J., 45
Reservoir Ch., 177
Richardson, H. F., 39
Richmond Ch., 79
Rickerby, G., 64
Ringwood East Ch., 177
Roberts, H., 63


Robertson, A. J., 39, 47, 66, 122, 136
Robertson, R., 95, 101, 141
Robertson, W. A., 86, 95, 97
Robinson, F., 101, 140
Rogers, B. A., 163, 170
Rollings, W. S., 86, 100, 102
Roth, A. G. 141
Rushbrooke, J. PI., 149
Ruth, T. E., 29
Rutherford, G., 85
Ryland, Dr., 2
S
Sale Ch., 100
Sale-Harrison, L., 58
Sampson, G. H., 67
Sampson, H. E., 48
Saunders, J., 14
S andringham Ch., 171
Scholefield, H. G., 37, 136
Scott, W. P., 3, 15, 22
Sebastopol Ch., 59
Selby Ch., 179
Self, R., 76, 122
Seymour, Iris, 117
Shain, A. M., 30
Shalberg, J. H., 66
Shankley, J., 100
Shann, F., 84, 90
Shaw, A. D., 39, 130
Shaw, D., 129
Shea, John, 88
Shepparton Ch., 94
Sherriff, A., 39
Simpson, J., 6, 69
Sinclair, J., 72
Slade, Geo., 49, 50, 84, 138
Smith, A. W., 71, 78, 124
Smith, H. S., 37
Smith, Jas., 18, 63, 115
Smyth, Rev. J., 21, 51
Soper, A. J., 58, 122
South Yarra Ch., 40
Spicer, W., 69, 175
Sprigg, W. G., 16, 32, 36, 40
Spurgeon, C. PL, 38, 88
Spurr, F. C. 29
Stark, C., 45, 132
State Aid, 22, 24, 183
Stawell Ch., 18, 61
St. Kilda Ch., 72
Steedman, Wm., 3, 19
Steel, P. W., 158
Steele, Alex., 61, 74, 127, 138
Steele, H. G., 184
Stephens, W. G., 106, 143, 145, 146
Stephens, W. W., 143
Stewart, H. R., 73, 96, 101
Stone, F., 159
Stone, R., 36, 106
Stowards, R., 37
Strongman, A., 123
Sunday Schools, 155
Sunshine Ch., 174
Sutton, H. J., 118, 130, 185
Sutton, R. A., 166
Sutton, Wm., 18, 57
T
Tarnagulla Ch., 18, 65
Tayler, W. C., 45, 46
Taylor, Dan, 3
Taylor, Jas., 16, 18, 26, 30, 44, 75, 79
Taylor, Thos., 44, 64
Templeton, J. M., 31, 106
Templeton, Mrs., 19, 159
Testro, C., 124
Theological College, 111
Thomas, J. W., 79
Thompson, G. R., 48, 62, 69, 74, 132,
141
Thornbury Ch., 169
Thorne, E. R., 125, 137
Tinsley, C. J., 150
Traralgon Ch., 102
Tranter, L. E., 41, 93, 140, 151, 184
Tranter, Wm., 48, 59, 64
Trestrail, Mrs., 113, 132
Trinham, T. P., 68, 76, 124, 170
Trotter, E. A., 77
Tuckwell, E. S., 43
Tunks, R. H., 135, 178
Turner, John, 51
Turriff Ch., 98
Tylden Ch., 60
U
Union Bapt. of Vic., 149
Upton, T., 69
Upwey Ch., 179
V
Vaughan, C., 15, 36
Vaughan, E., 63
Victorian Bapt. Fund, 105
Vigis, Thos., 49
Virtue, P., 10


W
Wade, R. W., 147
Wain, W. H., 129, 132
Wainwright, Geo., 49
Wallis, J., 65
Walrond, C. W., 43, 151, 153
Ward, W. 0., 48, 59, 63, 95
Warner, L. E., 88
Warracknabeal Ch., 99
Warmambool Ch., 73
Wangaratta Ch., 101
Watson, E. L., 76, 101, 130
Watson, J., 75
Watson, S., 95, 125
Webb, A. W., 34, 39
Welch, E. J., 45
Weller, G. A., 45, 134
Westgarth Ch., 173
Whitboume, A. J., 63, 124
Whitchurch, S., 92, 177, 181
White Hills Ch., 18, 45
Whittey, W. T., 98, 112, 114, 143
Whitney, W. A., 36, 63, 72, 111
Wilkin, F. J., 37, 46, 83, 85, 113
Williams, D., 125
Williams, Roger, 21
Williamson, R, 37, 41, 61, 71, 7 3
Williams town Ch., 71
Wilson, Jas., 10
Wilson, Joseph, 16, 40, 94
Wilson, S., 65
Wolfenden, Jas., 40
Wood, F. J., 100, 141
Woodford Ch., 74
Women’s Association, 157
Wonthaggi Ch., 102
Worboys, Jas., 45, 66, 90, 171
Wright, H. F., 67, 123, 133
Y
Yarraville Ch., 166
Young Men’s Union, 163
Youl, F., 47
Youl, W., 176
Yuille St., 18, 57


I “ —
~~ ■
Date Due NATIONAL
-L/aLC L/UC library of Australia
-y J'L 2014 . I
7 7 f -—
(Mi Qi




