

E>i o
(■CI?
BAPU GANDHI
A. B. PIDDINGTON
{Mr. Justice Piddington)
z
<
o
O
Cl
o>
iL
<








BAPU GANDHI


By the same Author
SPANISH SKETCHES
YOUNG ITALY
THE NEXT STEP




MR. JUSTICE PIDDTNGTON


BAPU GANDHI
A. B. PIDDINGTON
Mr. Justice Piddington
LONDON
WILLIAMS & NORGATE LTD


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
UNWIN BROTHERS LIMITED, LONDON AND WOKING


ILLUSTRATIONS
frontispiece
MR. JUSTICE PIDDINGTON
DR. CORNELIA SORABJI
MISS KATHERINE MAYO
BAPU GANDHI
facing page 16




BAPU GANDHI
“Here is Gandhi speaking to you!”
I turned to see the outstretched hand and
quizzical smile of the Mahatma who had with
a disciple or two come up behind me and was
as amused as a schoolboy to think he had joined
me unawares while I was looking for him to
arrive from the opposite direction.
I had been told by that charming and famous
Indian, Dr. Cornelia Sorabji, that Gandhi’s smile
would captivate me. I cannot say that this was
its effect, for in all that I saw of Gandhi there
was nothing but the easy transparent kindliness
of an ordinary gentleman, English or Indian;
never any effort to impress or captivate, still less
any self-consciousness or pose. Gandhi is a mem-
ber of the English bar —he was called in 1891 —
and is just a plain and sociable man like the rest
of his profession. He rather suffers than rejoices
in the title of Mahatma or Sage given to him
universally in India.
Our meeting was at the Satyagraha Ashram.
The word Ashram —pronounced asaram , the h
being merely a suggestion of separation —means


asylum or retreat or monastery. Satyagraha means
“persistence in seeking Truth,” and one sees in it
the word sati —“true.” In printing Hindustani
words a custom has sprung up of using the letter
a to represent the sound of short u. “Punkah”
for example is printed pankha, and “bungalow”
bangalo. (The broad sound of a as in father is
represented by d.) Thus “sati” is pronounced
“suttee” and the widow who was true to her
lord showed it by being suttee. The custom o*
dying to prove true love was swept out twenty
years before the Royal Proclamation of 1857,
which made India part of the Empire but
promised to conserve all religious customs —a
promise that nowadays proves in many instances
a formidable obstacle to social and hygienic
reforms. “Suttee” was abolished in the days of
John Company by Lord William Cavendish
Bentinck in 1829. This was fortunate, for there
are still Indians who consider that when the
widow or widows were carried in splendid pro-
cession to the funeral pyre, adorned with the
finest robes and flowers, and sometimes uttering
prophecies in the exaltation of approaching death,
this was the one moment of true glory in a
woman’s life.


Gandhi’s name is pronounced with a broad a
as Gahndi, but is printed throughout in the
ordinary English spelling.
The Satyagraha Ashram is at Sabarmati on the
high bank of the river of that name and about four
miles from Ahmedabad, a city of a quarter of a
million people and the most active centre of labour
and unionist activity in India. The road to Sabar-
mati, like all the roads around Ahmedabad, and
like the city itself, provides plenty of playful proof
of the religious customs of the Jains who ruled
here for centuries and with whom the kind treat-
ment of animals was a fundamental cult long
before Englishmen had founded Dogs’ Homes or
the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals. In Ahmedabad it is “Kindness Week”
all the year round. At frequent spots in the city
you see perched on standards what look like
pigeon-houses, but are profusely ornamented with
wood-carving, beautiful even without its gay
plumage of paint. These are the “parabdis” or
feeding-places for birds, to. whom the citizens
bring food every day. Then there are the “pinjra-
pols” or resting-places for animals, in one of
which near the railway station I saw hundreds of
cattle resting and eating hay, just as in the pad-


docks of Flemington, I took the pinjrapol to be
a sort of superior trucking yard or ante-chamber
to the abattoirs, but the Hindus never eat beef and
retain to an inconvenient degree that reverent atti-
tude to the cow which has its basis in her tre-
mendous service to man. Thus in Calcutta I have
seen at the very portals of the majestical Law
Courts (built as a doubled facsimile of the Cloth
Hall at Ypres), Brahmin cows lying comfortably
in the fairway. Not even for the High Court
judges are they disturbed. They stroll about the
streets with more than the assurance of the dairy
cows at Blackheath in earlier days. There, one
morning, that very learned man, the late Chief
Judge in Equity, Mr. Justice A. H. Simpson, was
at work in his garden wearing his oldest clothes
when the local Sergeant passed. The Judge com-
plained of his flowers having been damaged by
straying cattle, and asked- the Sergeant why he
didn’t impound them. The Sergeant, who saw
not a judge but only an untidy and unkempt
householder before him, put his hand kindly on
the questioner’s shoulder and said: “My good
man! If you knew as much about law as I do,
you’d know that we can’t impound in Blackheath,
because it isn’t a municipality!”


In Calcutta the Brahmin cows are so sure of
their immunity that they not only block traffic,
which has to wait for them or go round them, but
on the footpaths they gently but firmly shoulder
you out of their way. To resent this would be like
treading on a soldier-ant’s nest. But the same
consideration is not shown to the water-buffaloes
who drag heavy traffic about. These often have
broken tails where the cruel practice of screwing
them has gone too far.
In her Mother India Miss Katherine Mayo
recounts many instances of cruelty among a people
whose “Light of Asia,” Gautama, expounds the
doctrine, wide as the animal kingdom—
Slay not for pity’s sake and lest ye stay
The meanest creature on its upward way.
But Mother India is all in one colour —black. It
was widely said that the writer was helped in her
work by Dr. Sorabji, the noble gentlewoman who
for years forsook a good practice at the Bar to
labour in many languages for the betterment of
purdah-nishin women —the “sitters” in purdah—
and is the only woman barrister in India, and
probably the only woman anywhere, with a
D.G.L. degree of Oxford, having received it as


a special distinction long before women were
admitted to degrees. I asked Dr. Sorabji about
the rumour, and she denied it completely, but
added that it was no use saying anything about it
in public though it had hurt her greatly among
her Indian friends. She told me that Miss Mayo’s
statements and statistics were authentic but were
presented only from one point of view. “The
facts are all right, but the focus is all wrong.”
This neat epigram is better in form than
Gandhi’s comment that “in India Miss Mayo
saw nothing but the drains, and India is not all
4
drains.”
At any rate, in and around Ahmedabad I saw
none of the cruelty to animals denounced by Miss
Mayo, though there was evidence enough of
cruelty to man in the cripples, so made while
babies that they might earn a living as beggars
—if they survived. One case was almost incredible.
In the Manik Ghauk, the main street, there was a
man whose legs from the waist had been bent up
so that they grew along his back, his feet being
spread, palms up, at the level of his shoulders,
as if in an attitude of supplication. He worked his
way through the mud and filth using his hands
and his buttocks for propulsion, the hands thus


lr
ggaPgPjpp ■■
■SP' ' W . JL
; i rf . &&■ t
--
i
s
■r
F v ;
Bf
HIJ
-
■
1
w
<
#• f
4 f
Mm'
p
#
t/
/ #
■7
1 ' ‘
j | i
| |/Jf
0
0t
,
t ’ / 1
. P
i / /
; hr
P
.
j ‘
m.. ii.
i M
i Hm ...
L ,




becoming huge and sprawling like the paws of a
saurian.
The road to Sabarmati is a pleasant drive, with
monkeys scampering across the road or dashing
up into the trees that line both sides like an
avenue. Parrots flit about or dash towards the
grounds of the handsome bungalows, or of Indian
shrines on a small scale, which are passed from
time to time. When we reached the gate of the
Ashram I was met by two initiates, intellectual-
looking men in spotless white khadi (pronounced
kuddee or more often kudder ). This cotton fabric
has a national import, for to encourage its local
production Gandhi has tried to school his nation
into reviving the cottage industry of hand-spin-
ning and hand-weaving.
It is a singular thing, but I had no sooner
entered the Ashram grounds than I felt myself in
an atmosphere of peace and friendliness very
different from the restless crowding and shoving
of the Indian cities. The garden itself, glowing
with fertility of vegetables and flowers, has every
beauty to offer of order without primness. Little
children, babies in bronze rather, potter about
with tiny watering-pots and show you, with the
laughter of gleaming teeth, their skill in planting
Bapu Gandhi ] [ 1 7 ] B


seedlings and smoothing off with their natty
fingers the circular mounds of soil.
I was first shown the workers making khadi and
also coarse carpets or mats into which plain
patterns in primary colours are allowed to enter.
The spinning-wheel was in full career, and,
instead of the vast revolving drums studded with
bent hooks which are to be seen in the carding-
machines of Ahmedabad’s cotton-mills, there was
hand-carding carried out by striking at the raw
cotton with a light steel-stringed bow which gave
out a curious musical singing swish as it swung to
its work. Here there was plenty of room and light
and air—a marked contrast to the cotton-fluff-
laden atmosphere where the factory workers,
crowded in mills without appreciable ventilation,
push their way about amid the clanging and
clattering of huge and multiple machinery. No
wonder a man of Gandhi’s naturalism feels, as
Ruskin felt, that machinery has defaced the beauty
and healthfulness of labour, though neither Gandhi
nor Ruskin saw the solution-point of the service
that machinery may one day render to labour
itself, by releasing the energy of the worker
from its fierce absorption in material production to
take part in higher forms of human activity.




MISS KATHERINE MAYO
Author of “Mother India”


From the weavery, where every inmate must,
under the rules of the institution, go through a
prescribed cycle of training, I was taken to the
carpentry, where apprentices were learning how
to make spinning-wheels or mend them. The
spinning-wheel is almost Gandhi’s emblem, and
when he reads attacks like Miss Mayo’s on his
people he says very simply, “I go on with my
spinning and speak my message in the whirring
music of the wheel.” He has made it a point of
national loyalty to avoid using imported cloth,
and in Calcutta a month ago 1 he was convicted
and fined eighteenpence for “being concerned” —
the cables did not explain the full depth of his
felony—in a foolish burning of some Manchester
tweeds in a bonfire at Calcutta. I have met some
Manchester men, and am sure they will readily sell
their cloth to India, whether it is used there for
bonfires or for human warmth.
Nor is it likely that the rough austerely white
khadi , or, as it is sometimes called, swadeshi (i.e.
home-made) clothing will ever conquer the
Indian’s intense love of colour in clothing. For
the traveller this is a perennial delight. The dress
of women, even the poorest, has not only a grace
1 Written in June 1929.


and artistry in shape, but, whether it is of cotton
or of silk, a wonderful felicity in the harmonizing
of the most brilliant hues. All through India there
is this racial instinct for capturing the rainbow.
In the south, at Madura, a principal seat of silk
manufacture, the train-stop is enlivened by pedlars
of silk shawls and other pieces, in which the shot
colouring makes a feast of iridescence as the wares
are unfolded. Wine-colour drifts or flakes off into
peacock green or blue, and what looks one moment
like sheer cloth-of-gold, blazing divinely like the
Shekinah of the Ark of the Covenant, becomes,
with a little manoeuvring into folds, a petty sea of
undulating indigo wavelets crested with a sunset
phosphorescence. The sari, or single garment worn
by women, is more often uniform in colour and
is put on in graceful swathes, sometimes being
shaped on the head into a hood, sometimes into a
shallow turban, and sometimes leaving the smooth
hair untouched. It can be arranged in all kinds of
layers or pleats, sometimes leaving the back bare
between waist and shoulders, sometimes the
breasts covered and then nothing till the waist-
line. But the beauty of the sari and the impeccable
modesty with which it is worn make it one of the
noblest of national costumes, and it is not surpris-


ing that, when that high priestess of human grace,
Madame Pavlova, was in Calcutta, she gave
Indian women an earnest warning never to
abandon their native dress for European fashions.
The men, too, in India delight in colour, man
being (according to Charles Kingsley) “vainer
than woman even as peacocks are vainer than
peahens”—though obviously not for the same
reason. It is the prince, not the princess, who
wears the jewels of his principality. Speaking of
ordinary folk, the turban they wear is hand-
somer than any European head-dress, and the
bright shawl slung in folds round the shoulder and
across the chest with a deep hem of some pattern
in chromatic contrast, with a broad belt of some
other colour glittering perhaps with gold or silver
fringing, gives a gaiety to their carriage that
makes a crowd in their gala clothing a feast for
the eye of any artist or any traveller.
It was therefore with something like melancholy
for virtue which is destined to failure that I left
the weaving-room of Gandhi’s institute, feeling
that the campaign for swadeshi could not succeed,
and that a w r rong orientation was being given to a
right ambition —viz., the cult of simplicity and
plain living.


In the garden I met again one of my courteous
guides, who invited me to rest till the time came
for me to see Gandhi, It was then that I asked
what was the proper way to address him. I knew
that he was spoken and written of as Mahatma
Gandhi; I had also heard him called Gandhiji,
the suffix ji being a common way of expressing
great respect, as “Esquire” was fifty years ago.
(You can address a medical man, for example, as
Daktarji as well as Daktar Sahib.) And of course
there remained as possible the English “Mr.
Gandhi.” *
The answer was that I might call him any of
these; so I next asked what he was called by the
adherents in the Ashram? “We call him Bapu,”
was the answer. I said, “I suppose that is a more
reverent form of Bap (which means “Father”)?
“Not exactly,” was the reply. “Well,” I said, “is
it more familiar?” “No,” he said, “it is hard to
explain, but it means something of strong affec-
tion.” He would not have “dear Father” or
“Father dear,” as being too weak and too feminine.
It meant something more, something of love but
also of pride and trust. At last, therefore, I realized
that for Gandhi’s friends Bapu means —Bapu!
1 Gandhi’s full name is Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi.


My companion then took me to a room as
severely monastic and primitive as a prison cell,
but scrupulously clean. The bedstead was of logs
neatly carpentered and solid. There was no
mattress other than webbing, and no bed-clothes.
The Ashram admits visitors as residents, but they
must bring their own bedding. Indeed the Scrip-
tural injunction “Take up thy bed and walk”
is very widely honoured in India. The Indians
themselves are great travellers in their own
country, though it involves a violation of caste rule
to cross the sea. Bapu Gandhi himself had to hold
various councils with representatives of his caste
before he could obtain a crippled sort of dis-
pensation (for the Sheth or chief of the caste
actually excommunicated him) to enable him to
go to South Africa, where he received his first
baptism of fire in fighting for the rights of his
fellow-countrymen within the Empire, and did
great service for humanity in succouring the
British sick and wounded during the Boer War,
when he organized and led an ambulance corps
of eleven hundred Indians. It was this corps that
bore the body of Lord Robert’s son from the
field.
In their travels in India the Indians always


carry their own bedding, and, as the trains have
no bed equipment even where there are sleeping-
berths, you must provide yourself with sheets,
towels, blankets, and, except in winter, mosquito-
nets, to which a valuable addition is a rezai or
quilted cotton eiderdown with a gay cover. The
rezai is thin enough to be an extra coverlet in
cold weather and thick enough to serve as an
under mattress at ordinary times. The Wanderlust
of Indians is extraordinary. On all the principal
lines the third-class carriages are packed in normal
times as transport is with us on peak occasions.
The travellers take with them all their household
gods, pots and pans, sleeping-mats, food, and,
above all, water. Swarming like hordes of gipsies,
they squeeze into the carriages, and lucky is the
early comer who can climb up into the long
luggage racks (as they seem to be) running length-
wise of the carriage, and so have sleeping room.
The others crowd or huddle or twist into any
attitude, and sleep with complete unconsciousness
of discomfort.
A remarkable thing about Indians is their
bodily suppleness. This comes from many causes.
One is that there is no loss of dignity in lying
down or sitting down or squatting down in any


position at any hour of the day. Every man,
woman, and child seems to have by nature the
flexibility which a professional European dancer
acquires by intense practise. On the forecastle of
a steamer you will see a mother with a child or
two arrange the family limbs in any posture on a
pocket-handkerchief allotment and doze off with
all sorts of human and other packing material
wedging them in. Women especially have this
adaptability, which in both sexes is no doubt
fostered by daily labour not confined to a set
position or series of movements as in organized
factory or office work. Especially does the carriage
of burdens on the head contribute to this elasticity.
From the train windows you see women in the
fields with heavy bundles of grain or grass; on
the roads, with bulky packages of household goods
or of village fabrics such as pottery stacked in a
column; on the way from the well or tank with
glorious engraved brass or white metal pots full of
water. All are carried on the head, and this habit,
by throwing forward the bust and strengthening
the neck to a columnar beauty, gives Indian
women the figure and grace of walking caryatides.
Indeed, the fancy often strikes one that, just as
the caryatides of the classic buildings of Greece


support the edifice of religion or of palatial
pleasure, so the Indian woman as she walks is
the support of the Indian home and the Indian
family.
I have mentioned the fact that the travelling
Indian always carries water. The lotah is the
vessel. It is a handsome brass pot carried by a
handle and having a cup or beaker which fits the
top when inverted and is used for drinking when
taken off. The vessel itself may hold a quart
or thereabouts. One striking custom throughout
the country that makes the lotah necessary in
travel is the invariable washing of the teeth and
mouth at least every morning. In the dim dawn,
outside every hut or bungalow and every hovel
in the streets, the Indian plies his toothbrush as
if his life depended on it, and, if he is too poor to
have a toothbrush, uses a pointed stick or a fore-
finger. Another universal rule, infringed only by
the lowest of the low, is that, as a matter of
religious observance, the body is washed from
head to foot once every day. I do not know what
Arhat, or Swami, or Yogi, or Sanu, or other
inspired teacher launched this ritual which 350
millions of people follow, but it must have greatly
contributed to the health of the race in such a


climate as that of India, just as the hygienic
regulations of Moses have given the Jews their
tenacious physique, and as those of Mahomed
have done the same service for Arabs and Moors
and Turks. Moreover, the Indian washes when-
ever he can in, or with, running water. He pours
it over his body and hands and uses neither bath
nor basin. Outside Madras I saw a sheet of
water where clothes were being washed, as usual,
by slapping them on flat stones. At the same
time women were filling their water-pots. I asked
my driver if this was for drinking-water. He
said, “Yes, this is clean water.” It was clean
because it was moving, being part of a sluggish
stream.
In Gandhi’s Ashram, of course, all is truly
hygienic, not merely superficially and ritually
correct. They grow their own vegetables, and
their water comes from wells sunk in the river-
bank, which acts as a filter-bed, as indeed it does
for the whole water-supply of Ahmedabad.
Foreigners are told never to drink unboiled
water in India. An exception is made for soda-
water, which is the only form in which water is
drunk on the trains, many Europeans using it even
for washing the teeth —such is the taboo on mere


“water.” A big bottle of sodawater costs 4d. and
is called “a Bombay.” The theory is that the soda-
water factories, being under European manage-
ment and subject to the possibility, at least, of
municipal control, purify the water they use. Let
us so believe if we can, and so hope in any
event.
In Madras I mentioned to my host, the accom-
plished Chief Justice of the High Court, that I
missed the numerous cases of elephantiasis I had
seen in other parts. He told me that this affliction
was almost obsolete there because the water-supply
installed by Europeans flowed through leaden
pipes. The filaria or thread-like parasite which
causes elephantiasis cannot survive lead treatment
and so perishes in contact with the slight impregna-
tion of the Madras water with lead. This reminded
me of an experiment shown in a chemistry
lecture by Professor John Smith in my student
days.
The Professor’s experiments were not always
successful, but he thoroughly proved his point
one day when he set out to show that water drawn
through leaden pipes would pick up a certain
quantity of lead. “I have here,” he said (holding
it up), “a beaker o’ watter drawn from yon tap


in the wall, and I’ll pour a small quantity of
H 2 S0 4 (i.e. sulphuric acid) into it, and if lead
is present ye’ll see a cloudiness indicating the
presence of sulphate of lead in the solution, the
sulphur and oxygen having combined with the
lead.” He poured in the acid and at once a dense
mass of white precipitate began to sink to the
bottom of the beaker. We applauded vigorously,
and the old man, beaming with pride, took his
spectacles off and, twirling them round, purred
gently, “Yes, the result was entirely gratifying but
a’ may mention that in order to ensure the more
complete success of the experiment I tuk the
precaution of addin’ a little acetate of lead to the
watter before pourin’ in the acid.” This I have
always remembered as an instance of meticulous
scientific technique. To make sure that lead
would be detected in the water, the trained man
of science put it there and then found it.
Professor “Jock” Smith, by the way, was
appointed by the Senate in preference to Huxley,
who was a candidate but could not, in spite of the
persuasions of the Macleays, win the chair. He
retained a strong Scotch accent, and his pro-
nunciation of “watter” brought back to mind the
excellent retort of the famous John Clerk when


arguing a case as to riparian rights before the
House of Lords. Summarizing his case he said,
“The pursuer [i.e. the plaintiff, Clerk’s client]
has always exerceesed his rights ower the watter,
and the watter rins that way, and why shouldna
the pursuer continue to use the watter?” At this
one of the Law Lords said, “Mr. Clerk! Do they
spell water in Scotland with two t’s?” to which
Clerk replied, “Na! ma Lord! We dinna spell
watter with twa t’s, but we spell mainners with
twa n’s!” What a droll apology for shortening
the vowel before one consonant, to explain that
you lengthen it before two!
Even judicial persons would be more judicious
if they allowed imperfect grammar, or spelling,
or pronunciation, to pass without comment, as
did the Full Court in Sydney when the great
Salomons was quoting a case in which a certain
gift for a charity had been construed so as to
carry out the testator’s wishes as nearly as possible,
though they could not be carried out literally.
This is called the doctrine of “cy-pres” (Law
French for id pres or “near here”). Salomons
looked up and said he did not know much about
this “cypress doctrine”—no doubt their Honours
would!


Gandhi himself is over-censorious in one passage
of his Autobiography. He describes delightfully
a lively Indian friend, Narayan Hemchandra,
whom he knew in London and who was “innocent
of grammar” and used “horse” as a verb and
“run” as a noun. I suspect that Hemchandraji
had seen, and Gandhiji had not seen, Dr. W. G.
Grace getting “runs” at Lords, or that he had
been, and Gandhiji had not been, to a London
theatre where a play was having a long “run.”
Eton boys, again, would know quite well what it
is to be “horsed” for a thrashing, while Shake-
speare, almost as if with presentiment of the
miracle of beam transmission (in which the
message is “mounted” on the light-ray), speaks
of a transmitting messenger of news being
horsed
Upon the sightless 1 couriers of the air.
In making this citation I can only hope that
the superstition of actors that it is unlucky to
quote from Macbeth may not prove true, and
that if the Mahatma should ever see these
sentences he will forgive quia multum amavi .
His own greeting, which begins this sketch,
1 Invisible.


was given to me at the foot of a staircase on the
outer wall of the common dining-room (with a
kitchen adjoining) where all the inmates of the
Ashram take the first meal of the day at 10.30 a.m.,
having risen at 4.30 a.m. Shoes and sandals left
behind, we mounted and took our places—in all
about one hundred and fifty of us —in a long
bare hall. Bapu Gandhi sat against the wall on
the left of the door-way, I on the right. I was
asked if I could squat legs akimbo as the others
did, but though I was willing, courtesy spared me,
and I had, as did Gandhi, a low stool. A long
line of the fraternity stretched away from each of
us (the door being in the middle of the wall), and
facing us were two other files, the men being
opposite my half of the hall, the women opposite
that of Gandhi. A prayer was sung in soft beautiful
tones quite different from the shrill and wailing
noises in a minor key which are the feature of
the harsh music of India, and which convince
me that, when Shelley gave a title to the lovely
song “I arise from dreams of thee,” he would
never have called the poem “Lines to an Indian
air” if he had heard the ordinarv Indian tunes
*
that grate on the European ear. Prayer finished,
the meal was served by men and women, who all


take their turn at this and at cooking in the
roomy communal kitchen at the southern end, in
which at the time a big bearded brother was star-
ing round at me, cooking-ladle in hand, in the
very attitude of Vulcan at the Forge in Velasquez’
picture.
The meal was, of course, purely vegetarian.
The Ashram carries the conquest of appetite even
to the length of banning the national drink —tea,
though a whisper reached me that visitors (who
must conform to all rules) sometimes infringe the
order, and occasionally a regular inmate bestows
upon himself a surreptitious dispensation. The
meal was plentiful and varied. The breakfasters
had plates and drinking-vessels before them, a
tray being provided for Gandhi and his guest.
Tomato broth was brought in big pots and ladled
out-; milk also was supplied, and the main solids
were “double-bread” (i.e. wholemeal bread) and
a fruit —called, I think, jamu —with a thick enve-
lope tasting like turnip and a core rather like
passion-fruit. There was also a large flat meal-cake
eaten with ghee or melted butter, the latter being
poured on the centre and then smeared round
with the cleanly fingers. Gandhi ate well, but
did not speak during the meal, being absorbed in
Bapu Gandhi ] [ 33 ] C


a newspaper which brought a stern and thought-
ful look to his face now and then. The men oppo-
site me did not strike me as having anything very
spiritual or happy in their appearance, but
amongst the women there was far more life and
mirth. They chattered, and laughed, and ate,
making in their bright saris and with their
smoothly braided hair a pretty picture. I dis-
covered presently that a good deal of the laughter
was due to a dainty little blossom of about fifteen,
who evidently had a touch of genius about her, for
her companions craned their necks to catch the
crisp little comments or stories or jests, whatever
they were, which this born entertainer was pour-
ing out with all kinds of natural gesticulations
and play of the delicate hands. Presently she
caught me looking at her, and, answering with a
charming half-smile, she brought her hands
together in the respectful salaam used when
thanking, and added a naive little bow like a
young actress applauded during a speech. I could
afford to be gladdened at this scene, when I
reflected that one bright soul at least was being
rescued from the hideous custom of child-marriage
which hangs like a pall over Indian life and
which patriotic Indians are doing their best to


abolish. A fortnight earlier I had been the guest
of a high-caste Brahmin, a son of one of the first
Indians appointed to a High Court Bench. He
had sent for his little daughter of twelve to enter-
tain me in her shy way with a recitation—one of
the forest stories so common in India of a tiger
cheated of its prey. When she had talked a little
and then left us, the father said, with an unforget-
table look of concern and fatalism —“She must be
married soon.”
Bapu Gandhi’s work as a Teacher is doing much
beyond such isolated instances. He has called his
autobiography The Story of my Experiments with
Truth. “Experiences” would have been a happier
word, and was probably what the translator
meant, for Gandhi has never “experimented,”
after Goethe’s fashion, with right and wrong. He
has followed right, as he saw it, from step to step,
and he says very truly that such political influence
as he has is derived from his experiences in
spiritual life. These have led him to abjure every
bodily enjoyment that clogs that aspiration of the
soul to its Maker which Gandhi regards as the
chief thing in life. He describes how in his young
days he was tempted by a friend into eating meat
because, according to a doggerel of Normad’s


sung by schoolboys, this (and not the Bible) was
the secret of England’s greatness.
Behold the mighty Englishman,
He rules the Indian small,
Because being a meat-eater
He is five cubits tall.
But Gandhi gave up meat from a feeling that he was
deceiving his parents. Later he gave up all condi-
ments and all foods that foster the unruly appetite of
sex or in any way make the body the ready instru-
ment of any sort of unworthy impulse. Ultimately
he reached a full belief in Ahimsa, literally ‘‘inno-
cence,” and so “non-violence.” Most remarkable
victory of all in view of his frank confessions as to
earlier life, he took, twenty years ago, the vow of
Brahmacharya —complete renunciation of sex and
even of its desire.
The doctrine of Ahimsa he earnestly instils in
his political teaching, and it is curious that in a
dialogue in “Indian Home Rule” he calmly dis-
cusses an imaginary opponent’s suggestion of
assassination as a political weapon, and, after
pointing out its practical folly, stakes his con-
demnation of it upon the duty of avoiding all
forms of violence because they breed violence.


Quite recently he fasted for thirty days as a
symbolic act of national contrition after an out-
burst of mob-rioting with many deaths in one
Indian city. An army friend, on his way back to
the North-West gate to India where the British
Raj bars the descent of tribes and, perhaps, of
nations upon the ever-tempting prize of India,
told me that he saw Gandhi just after this month’s
fast, and that he seemed “quite an insignificant
little chap,” to which he added “you could pretty
well see through his ribs.” The photograph here
printed was taken, I think, as he was recovering
from this penance, which would have killed most
men nearing sixty, as Gandhi then was. At Sabar-
mati this year he struck me as having the very
essence of serviceable health. Though he is spare
and was in light condition, his eye was bright,
his fine, large, and well-shaped head was poised
in easy strength, and his arms, the only part of his
body uncovered in the winter, had the fine silky
skin of the finished athlete, underneath which was
a sinewy strength and ductility of muscle equal,
one would think, to a good deal of enduring work.
If I had been inclined to regard him as an enemy
to the Empire instead of, in the last analysis (that
of spiritual kinship in governmental ideals), one


of its friends, I should have felt as the Highlander
sergeant did at St. Helena when he saw Napoleon
land from the Bellerophon. “They tellt me he was a
sick mon, but the mon has twenty battles yet in
his belly—damn him!”
As with political violence, so with political self-
government, Gandhi’s work probes to the reality
and heart of things. He is the soul of Indian
Home Rule or Swaraj, but he never flatters his
countrymen into thinking that, as they are, they
would govern better than Britain does. On the
contrary, his work on Home Rule insists on the
truth that swaraj must begin in the personal life
of the individuals of the nation. He spares his
countrymen’s vanity not at all. The day of my
visit I read in an English paper published at
Bombay that one of his co-workers in another
part of India had written to him about the self-
seeking and quarrelling of rivals eager to be dele-
gates to the All-India Congress. There was nothing
to be gained by this except the distinction, yet the
struggle was fierce and ugly. Gandhi’s reply was a
stern rebuke. “If we fight like this over every
small personal advantage while we are shut out of
government, how can we ever hope to shoulder
the tremendously heavy responsibilities and resist


great temptations when our time comes for govern-
ing the whole administration?” He has observed,
no doubt, the fierce candidatures for Govern-
ment posts which are such a feature among
educated Indians, and is probably just as much
alive as any English resident to the fact that
University-educated lads resent continuing to
belong to the humble ranks of trade and especially
of agriculture. Their grievance is, at bottom, not
that there is a British Raj, but that it is impossible
for such numbers as are turned out from the
universities to find places under the British Raj.
Instead of hounding them on to rebel because
they cannot be government servants, Gandhi
practises as well as preaches indifference to all
worldly advancement and wealth. In this he
reproduces the spirit of the East in its loftiest
manifestations, and there may be here a parallel,
not yet completed in fruition, between the atti-
tude of Gandhi and that of the saints and sages
of the Orient when the Roman armies swept
over it —
The East bow’d low before the blast
In patient, deep disdain;
She let the legions thunder past,
Then plunged in thought again.


So well she mused, a morning broke
Across her spirit grey;
A conquering new-born joy awoke,
And fill’d her life with day.
This £ ‘morning” of which Matthew Arnold sings
was the coming of Christianity.
But Gandhi, though perhaps more saint than
statesman, is no mere dreamer. The Mill-hands’
Union in Ahmedabad is the only union with much
industrial influence in India, and it is all Gandhi’s
creation. So, too, his Swadeshi campaign, if it
cannot win through as an economic movement,
refreshes national energy as well as reviving
national feeling. Again, Gandhi has been a success-
ful mediator in industrial troubles. When I saw
him, he had just succeeded with a joint arbitration
in which he and a leading employer settled a strike
at a cotton-mill when it was within an ace of
becoming general, and in the forecourt of a hand-
some building of Ahmedabad I saw that morning
a crowd of men and women ex-strikers who were
being re-enrolled for duty. It seemed to me in
India that the fundamental origin of dissatisfac-
tion with British rule is not anything oppressive or
partial as between two races, but the same econo-
mic cause —the struggle between the Haves and


the Have-nots —-which is found in every modern
population.
The plight of the masses in India is incredible.
There are said to be six million recognized beggars,
the beggar profession being respected because of
its frequent association with the profession of
holiness. India is not a country rich in natural
resources. The staple of plenty, viz. richness of
soil, is not there, and, while productivity of nature
is niggardly, productivity of population is intense.
This is checked by terrible epidemics, against
which the masses, ill-nourished and smitten with
the Indian fatalism inculcated by the Brahmin
doctrine of reincarnation, have no resisting power.
During the influenza visitation of 1918-19 whole
villages (and an Indian village numbers many
thousands) were desolated. The dead lay unburied.
The cold winter synchronized with a high price
of clothing. The recording of deaths ceased after
8J millions had been registered, and the Year
Book gives from twelve to thirteen millions —
twice Australia’s population —as “a conservative
estimate” of the losses in less than two years. In
the inter-censal period 1911-21 the population
was practically stationary, the increase for the
ten years being only 1 . 2 per cent.


The cheapness of human life and therefore of
labour astonishes an Australian. Yet, though the
resident Englishman enjoys abundance of service,
it is not because he is an Englishman, for the
Indian anywhere above the coolie class has just
as great a retinue. On my first visit to India I was
the guest of a High Court Justice, who pointed
out that there were compensations for the climate
and for the toil of British functionaries. Speaking
of his own household, he told me that he had
twenty men-servants, four of whom, dazzling
fellows in scarlet and gold, were provided by the
Government. His children being at school in
England, he lived in a stately house and grounds
fit for, and probably built for, a nabob. He added
that when his wife bought a turkey for Christmas
one of his peons (pronounced puons ) came to him
and said, C T know the very man to be syce (i.e.
groom) for your Lordship’s turkey.” The Judge
thought it unnecessary, but the peon insisted that
the turkey might stray out of the grounds and get
dusty in the streets and need to be brushed, etc.
A special groom for one turkey is a luxury hardly
conceivable, but it shows how over-abundant is
human labour that it could have been suggested.
The social question becomes more and more the


question in India, and of course it is made more
difficult by the divisions of caste. Of the twenty
men-servants just mentioned, fourteen were of
different castes and therefore had to have fourteen
separate messes and fourteen separate methods of
preparing food. Poverty and over-crowding are
rank in all the cities of India and Burma. An
official Report last year of an Enquiry into the
Standard and Cost of Living in Rangoon says:
“It is not unusual in lodging-houses registered in
the Municipal books to find a tenement room
12J X4O feet, occupied by as many as forty or
fifty people.” This would give each tenant a
“home” averaging four feet long by three feet
wide. The diagonal of such a space would be
five feet, so that a very short man could just lie
down if he slept corner to corner. The Report
continues —
The practice is for the room to be taken out by a maistry
(i.e. a labour contractor) at a fixed rent, and, with a view
to making as much profit as possible, he crams it with as
many coolies as it will hold. In some rooms there are two
sets of tenants, one set occupying it during the day and the
other during the night. Families are often found in these
lodging-houses, gunny-bag partitions being erected to secure
a certain amount of privacy. In the dry season the men
usually sleep on the footpaths and pavements and use the


rooms only for cooking food and for storing their belongings
—usually a deal-wood box. But during the rains they crowd
into these lodging-houses until there is hardly an inch of
space left either inside the room or outside on the stairs. . . .
The wages of the unskilled labourer who is
thus housed amount in the larger mills to 30
rupees [-£2 15s. od.) if he works for twenty-five
days in the month. He thus gets is. 3d. per day.
“During the slack season there is no regular pay-
ment of wages to the coolies. .They are given a
rupee (is. 6d.) or two now and then just to keep
them from starving.”
Yet in 1925, 288,000 immigrants came from
India to Rangoon to get a living, 240,000 return-
ing during the same year.
To bring about the deplorable state of human
life in India the British Raj has done nothing.
On the contrary, it has done and is doing much
to abolish it. For one thing, famine has been
banished by irrigation works and railway con-
struction. But when the masses are miserable, the
government, whatever it is, of the country is
blamed. Thus the British Raj is held up to
detestation for causes which are to be found in
century-old customs of caste with its dominants
and its subjects, of land-tenure with its subjection


of the tillers of the soil, of early marriage and
recklessness of procreation, of superstition which
resists hygiene and modern medicine, of tribute
paid to princes and above all to the Brahmin
priesthood, and of obstinacy which clings to
ancient tools. In the fields of India I never saw
a spade or a wheelbarrow, or a steel plough. Nor
is work in the city, except for growing factory
production, any better furnished with modern
implements, which, an English contractor told me,
would not be used if provided. The city popula-
tion, thus impoverished, is also a population of
quick sensibilities and accustomed to giving and
taking with the knife. No wonder they are, as a
leading official described them to me, “very
inflammable —for a short time.”
My conversation with Gandhi was fixed for
three in the afternoon. I found him seated on
the ground with his spinning-wheel before him in
a bright spot of the garden. A few pebbles marked
off this modest throne or audience-hall. Before
him were a couple of youths and a handsome old
Rajput, looking like an old-world Paladin, in rich
turban and costume with a silver-mounted scimi-
tar in his belt. They said little, and Gandhi spoke
to them in even conversational tones without the


slightest air of superiority or teaching ex cathedra.
At one time in the afternoon two women ap-
proached and knelt touching the ground with
their foreheads as an obeisance. They were con-
sulting Gandhi on some personal or family matter,
and the older woman, evidently the mother,
seemed somewhat vexed, or at least disappointed,
at the counsel given them, but the younger woman
never varied in the happy look almost of adoration
with which she regarded her Master. It was such
a scene as might have had its setting in Palestine
2,000 years ago. When they had gone, Gandhi
said, a little wearily: “There is some inconveni-
ence about this Mahatma treatment, but it cannot
be helped.” I recalled this when I read in the
Introduction to his Autobiography: “Often the
title has deeply pained me; and there is not a
moment I can recall when it may be said to have
tickled me.”
Our own talk was purely on labour questions,
and Gandhi listened with close attention to what
I said about the position in Australia and the
universal spread here of industrial arbitration.
His questions were quick and terse, and he was
particularly alert in following the provision made
in New South Wales for a living wage supple-


merited by endowment for children. He explained
how they are only just beginning in India to
bring the public conscience to examine law as it
affects labour. “We have no strong unions here
to make possible the organization of regular
awards between employer and employed, or com-
pulsory arbitration. But our people is intensely
religious, its religion often bordering upon super-
stition. We are trying to work upon employers
from the point of view of religious duty, but this
takes time.”
Our meeting at the time was ended by the
courteous observation, “And you have come all
the way from Calcutta to tell me all this interest-
ing news about the methods of your country?”
To which I could only say, knowing what a vast
concern Gandhi handles, “Mahatma, you are a
great Teacher, and I would not have wasted a
great Teacher’s time if I had not thought there
were some facts from our country worth his
considering.”
I saw Gandhi again the same night, but by a
misunderstanding I arrived when evening prayer
had already begun. I entered the grounds and
found my way, with no one to guide me, by the
light of a series of hurricane-lamps set down at


points in the winding pathway. The scene was
a solemn and yet a homely one. There is no
chapel at Sabarmati; the place of worship had
no walls but a few flowering bushes, no ceiling
but the vault of heaven from which stars strange
to me looked down on a mysterious congregation,
no music but the scarcely audible hum of the city
across the river. Nor were there any seats, except
for women, who were in the front rows. All were
without sandals (which were piled outside the
clearing), and sat shrouded in spectral khadi while
facing Gandhi, who, spectacles on nose, looked at
them in his kindly way and expounded some
scripture which he had just been reading. Then
came questions and comment. Gandhi’s very
voice spoke peace; he answered in quiet tones and
sometimes scored a little with raillery, to judge
by the laughter that followed. The language was
Gujerati and quite beyond me.
When the meeting was over Gandhi joined me.
There was little time except for farewells, for it
was my last night in India and I had to join my
boat at Bombay. Gandhi said, as if after full
reflection in the meantime —“I am greatly struck
by the way the wage question is dealt with in
Australia, and especially with that separate pro-




'


vision for children of which you spoke. I approve
of it thoroughly, and we must see what we can do,
bearing in mind the figures you have given me
about the local requirements in money.” It was
then that he wrote in his Autobiography, with an
adherent holding up a lantern, the inscription here
reproduced below his portrait. Since he wrote
standing with the book held up for him, the
unevenness of the script will be understood.
I asked if I might leave with him a greeting for
his followers. He said “Willingly,” and I repeated
in Hindustani, with the white-robed listeners
crowding upon us, the beatitude from Matthew’s
Gospel: “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they
shall be called the sons of God.” Gandhi made me
repeat it, and then asked what language it was?
I said it was Urdu (Hindustani), from the Bible
Society’s translation. At this he laughed heartily,
as we all did, and he then repeated it to those
around with a change in a word or two and very
different pronunciation. So heard, the sentence
received a murmured tribute of deeply felt and
reverent acceptance. We have so larded over the
simple precepts of this chapter that it has lost the
plain meaning it still has to virgin minds. When I
was studying Hindustani with the help of a Par-
Bapu Gandhi ] [ 49 ] D


see fellow-passenger, I one day brought the Bible
(which is always one of the best aids in learning
any language) to my kind Munshi (teacher). I
read the Beatitudes, and was astonished at the
result. I had expected only correction of my
pronunciation or some remarks about the words
or their forms, or the grammar. To my surprise
all question of the language was forgotten, and
the lady said in hushed and almost awe-stricken
tones, “How beautiful! how wonderful!” over and
over again. The elemental beauty of soul in these
great edicts of our common humanity was some-
thing new, and for the first time my helper heard
the real teaching of a religion whose missionaries
have been in India for more than a century.
With Gandhi I avoided every political question,
except that I told him that Australians as a self-
governing people .had much sympathy with In-
dians in their aim at Dominion status as soon as
they were able to work with it. I added that
from the broad point of view of humanity and
its needs there was an immense value in the group-
ing under one government of the greatest possible
number of consenting people, if only for this
reason. While peoples are separated into wholly
disconnected national entities, any topic of dis-


agreement tends to be fought out to the bitter end
—involving, finally, physical war —as a matter
of patriotic pride. We, for example, have at times
had lively differences with New Zealand, with
the South African Union, and with Canada. Such
differences between countries separated as inde-
pendent nations without any common allegiance
may often be magnified and added to until the
breaking-point is reached, whereas, simultane-
ously with complete local freedom of action, the
common nationhood of members of the British
Commonwealth of Nations secures the adjustment
of such differences by peaceful political action. I
concluded that total separation of India might
easily be a step to international dissension, and
without international peace there can be no
social or other advancement for any race or
country.
To this latter view Gandhi eagerly assented,
saying, “Yes, international peace is indispensable
for every one,” and his own unselfish life, and
that loftiness of soul which makes him master of
his thought and motive in a degree not excelled
by any patriot in any country, give confidence
that the sweetness and humility of his finished
character will lead the millions to whom he is


light as well as leading towards the living waters
of national redemption. If, as Browning wrote—
A nation is but the attempt of many
To rise to the completer life of one,
there is no man in India (in spite of some human
failings of unconscious prejudice towards a race
whose nationals have sometimes treated him
cruelly as well as arrogantly) whom Indians could
better take as their oriflamme. Aspiring to no
mastery but only to service, and ignoring caste
and social and religious severances, his thought
is a slow but sure solvent of disunion and will
ultimately effect the cohesion of All India in free-
dom, action, and progress, as the British Raj has
secured it in obedience to law and civil peace.
In the Ashram none is higher or lower than
another, and no labour is looked on as inferior,
one of the Rules prescribing that each member
in turn shall perform the sanitary service which
is regarded as the province of “Untouchables.”
The Rule speaks of it as “an essential and sacred
service.” It is ranked as Activity No. 2, No. 1 being
worship. With Gandhi, therefore, as with Wesley,
cleanliness is next to godliness.
Gandhi speaks fearlessly against all Indian


institutions that hold the Indian soul in bondage.
The practice of purdah, for example, is losing
some of its ancient rigidity, and yet is regarded
by millions as essential to married happiness for
men and —what is a more subtle yet not less
powerful persuasive—a mark of social dignity for
both sexes. Thus a Calcutta friend of Parsee
origin and therefore immune against the mind-
dominating influence of the Brahmins, told me
that her parents had a mdli (gardener) and his
wife working with them for years. Suddenly the
wife disappeared. The mdli explained that, thanks
to their Honours’ ever-generous treatment of
them in regard to money, his wife could now
afford to go into purdah.
Gandhi’s protest against purdah has biological
truth to back it.
“By seeking to-day,” he says, “to interfere with the free
growth of the womanhood of India we are interfering with
the growth of great, independent-spirited men. What we are
doing to our women and what we are doing to the untouch-
ables recoils upon our own heads with a force a thousand
times multiplied. It partly accounts for our own weakness,
indecision, narrowness, and helplessness. Let us then tear
down the purdah with one mighty effort.”
His followers call him Bapu, as did his little


son when he had brought him out of the delirium
of fever by his treatment and (as Bapu believed)
by his prayers and faith in God. Millions of
Indians speaking different tongues, sprung from
different races, practising different religions, yet
living in one undivided country, look upon him
as the parens patriae —the Bapu of All India.
“Here is Gandhi speaking to you!”




Narcotics in India and South Asia
By H. G. Alexander
“An admirable study of the question of opium and similar
drugs. A better examination of the case we have not read, and
the book may be commended to all who may have occasion or
interest to investigate the Asiatic opium question.”— Times Literary
Supplement.
2r. 6 d. net
The Indian Ferment
A Traveller’s Tale by H. G. Alexander
Introduction by C. F. Andrews
“Lively and illuminating.”— The Christian World.
“A vivid record of the impact upon a trained and sympathetic
mind of Young India’s unsatisfied soul.” — Methodist Recorder.
“High above the common level of books about India.” — Man-
chester Guardian.
ys. 6 d. net
Small Scale Production in India
By W. G. Ramakrishna Avar
An account of the system of “small-holdings” in India and of
the conditions of their workers.
3-y. 6d. net
Oude in 1857
Some Memories of the Indian Mutiny
By Gol. John Bonham, C.B,
“A stark simplicity of style imparts to his story the austere
grandeur of Greek tragedy. One has read many personal narra-
tives of the Mutiny, but none more impressive than this one.”—
Dundee Advertiser.
SJ. net
WILLIAMS & NORGATE LTD., LONDON, W.C.i
