

BARLEY
A Thoroughfare Town
BY
SIR GEORGE FORDHAM
OF ODSEY
(From the Transactions of the East Herts Archaeological Society, Vol. VII.)
HERTFORD
SIMSON & CO. LTD.
1925


SECTION ON THE ROAD FROM LONDON TO NORWICH
AND TO WALSINGHAM
(From John Ogilby’s Britannia, 1675, fol., as reduced in “A Pocket-
Guide to the English Traveller”, 1719, 4.


BARLEY.
A THOROUGHFARE TOWN.
BY SIR GEORGE FORDHAM OF ODSEY.
This characteristic of the locality is a natural consequence of the
configuration of the surface of the country, and, no doubt, the existing
line of road through Barkway and Barley, from the high plateau of
Northern Hertfordshire down on to the plain of the valley of the
Cam and Ouse marks a way which grew into use with the earliest
movements of population and the most primitive traffic.
From comparatively modem records—from the early maps and
road-books—this probability can also be deduced and defended.
The roads from London through Puckeridge, Barkway and Barley
to Cambridge, and through Newmarket to Norwich and to St. Mary of
Walsingham appear in the earliest tables of the highways of England,
as printed in Richard Grafton’s “ Abridgement of the Chronicles of
Englande ”, (London, 1570 and 1572); in “ A litlo treatise ”, by the
same author (London, 1571, 1572, etc.); in his “A brief treatise,”
(London, circa 1573, 1576, etc.), and in Philip More’s “ An Almanack
and Prognostication.” (London, 1571 and 1573).
In “ A Summarie of the Chronicles of England • » • unto this
present yeare of Christ 1575 ”, (London, 1575), by John Stow, of the
three routes, that to Walsingham alone is shown, and this is the case
also with Jean Bernard’s La Guide des Chemins d'Angleterre, printed
in Paris in 1579. Holinshed, in the first edition of “ The Chronicles
of England, Scotlande, and Irelande,” (London, 1577-78), sets out the
Walsingham and Cambridge roads, but not that to Norwich.
This persistence of record in the current publications of the latter
part of the sixteenth century shows, if other evidence were wanting,
that the highway through Barley was well-established at that time.
But, while these are the first printed records relating to the roads
through Barley, there is also ample historical evidence of the continuous
use of this Pilgrim-Way from London and the south to the rich and
celebrated shrine of St. Mary of Walsingham from early historical times.
The chapel of St. Mary is said to have been founded in the time of
Edward the Confessor, and the Priory of Walsingham about the year
1169. In the Victoria County History of Norfolk we are told that, from
the foundation of the sanctuary, pilgrims in a continuous stream found
their way there, and the following particulars of the ways of approach
and of the affluence of the faithful are given : —“ The priory of Walsing-
ham had a special hold on Norfolk, even in places far remote from the


town. The concourse of pilgrims from all parts of England, as well
ns from over the seas, kept Our Lady of Walsingham vividly in mind.
The chief road by which they travelled, which passed by Newmarket,
Brandon, and Fakenham, is still called the Palmer’s way. Those
pilgrims who came from the north passed through Lynn, where the
pilgrims’ chapel, with a beautifully groined roof, still remains ; thence
they passed on by the priories of Flitcham and Coxford. Another
great road led from Yarmouth, through Norwich and Attleborough,
past the hospital of Bee, where thirteen beds for Walsingham pilgrims
were ready every night. At South Acre, West Acre, Hilborough,
Prior’s Thoms, Stanhoe, Caston, and other places, as well as Lynn,
special chapels were provided for the wayside devotions of the zealots
who were wending their way to Walsingham.”
We are justified, therefore, in regarding Barley as, during the latter
part of the middle ages and for nearly a century thereafter, a
Thoroughfare Town on an important and much frequented highway.
Kings and Princes of the Church, the rich and the poor, foreigners
-and natives, from town and country, passed through the town on their
journey north, and returned south again along the same road. We
know, amongst other events, that Henry VII was at Walsingham in
1487, and Henry VIII in 1510, and that Cardinal Wolsey visited the
shrine in 1517, and again in 1520.
That the shrine and the ways leading thereto had great traditional
importance is also shown by the fact that the highway from London
do Walsingham is still retained amongst the principal thoroughfares
of the kingdom until nearly the end of the sixteenth century, that
is to say for sixty years, or so, after the destruction of the shrine and
dissolution of the priory. We find in Jean Bernard’s Guide of 1579,
already referred to, Walsingham described as : “ Vile fort Celebris le
temps passi a raison du pelerinage qu'on souloit Jaire a nostre Dame
dicte nostre Dame de Walsingham .” [A town very celebrated in the
past by reason of the pilgrimage it was customary to make to Our
Lady, called Our Lady of Walsingham.]
The stages on this pilgrim way, from Walsingham to London,
southward, are set out in Grafton’s “ Abridgement,” edition of 1572,
as follows :
From Walsingham to Picknam. ... ... xii m. 1
from Picknam to Brandon Fery. ... xm.
1 These are, of course, the old British miles of 2,220 metres=2,42B’
statute yards. The statute mile of 1760 yards being first introduced
in the measurement of the postal roads of England and Wales a century
later only by John Ogilby. (See the chapter on “ The Old British
Mile ”, in Seebohm’s “ Customary Acres and their Historical Impor-
tance ”, London, 1914. BP-)8 P -)
BARLEY : A THOROUGHFARE TOWN.


Vulgar Computation.
Dimensuration.
London to Waltham.
12
12’0
Waltham to Ware.
08
09’4
Ware to Puckridge.
05
06’0
Puckridg to Barkway.
07
08’0
Parkway to Fowlmere.
06
07’1
Fowlmere to Cambridge.
06
09’3
from Brandon Fery to Newemarket. ... xm.
from Newemarket to Witford bridge. ... xm.
from Witforde Bridge to Barckeway. ... xiim.
from Barckeway to Ware. ... ... xiim.
from Ware to Waltham. ... ... viiim.
from Waltham to London. ... ... xiim.
The Hertfordshire section of this road is shown on John Norden’s
map of the county of 1598, and it is very clearly delineated by John
Seller on his map of Hertfordshire of 1676. It appears on two of the
routes in John Ogilby’s Britannia, (1675 and 1698), on those, namely,
from London to King’s Lynn and from London to Norwich.
For, when Ogilby measured the roads of the kingdom with his
perambulator (or odometer), he found that, although the pilgrim-
way through Barley had been long disused, there remained two well-
settled routes of general traffic passing on the ancient lines of communi-
cation.
During more than a century and a half, thereafter, through various
stages of development, and culminating in the fast mail-coach service,
the traffic passed up and down the present main street of Barley,
and influenced largely the life and prosperity of the place; until
the advent of the railway system was almost as suddenly fatal to wheeled
traffic on the roads as the dissolution of the monasteries had been three
centuries earlier to the passage of the vast number of pilgrims who
frequented the highways leading to centres of devotion.
The text in the Britannia shows the stages from London to Cambridge
thus, with the distances in miles and furlongs, according to the old and
"the new measurements :
Ogilby’s description of the part of this road which more nearly
-concerns us. runs :
“At 35’4 pass thro’ Barkway of 2 F. 1 formerly enjoying a Mt.f on
Fridays, Thence descending and ascending at 37’4 thro’ Barley of
2F. on the left, having an Inn or two at 38’2 go down 2F. Then an
indifferent straight Way for the most part Arable (leaving Haydon —Ch.f
4 F. on the Right) leads at 42’3 to Fowlmere a straggling Village with an
Inn or two 4 F. on the Road.”
I F. = Furlong, f Mt. = Market. J Ch. = Church.
BARLEY : A THOROUGHFARE TOWN,


The plate here printed is a reproduction in facsimile of two strips
from the London to Norwich road, via Newmarket, taken from the
first reduction into pocket form from Ogilby’s original folio plates, as
they appeared in his Britannia. This reduction : “ A Pocket-Guide to
the English Traveller”, (London, 1719, sm. 4°.), is a very exact and
faithful copy of Ogilby’s plates, and one from which a reproduction
can be more conveniently made than from the original.
From these indications it will be seen that Barley has a long history
as a land-mark on a notable highway, and that, though it was never,
apparently, a post-town, where post-horses were provided under the
authority of the Master of the Posts for the public service, it must have
witnessed the passage, first, through many centuries, of the stream of
pilgrims going to and returning from Walsingham, intermixed with
traffic between London and Norwich and Cambridge and the port of
King’s Lynn, after the Reformation, while it must have participated in
the gradual building up, during three centuries more, of general through
traffic, and can thus well claim the appellation of a Thoroughfare Town.
“Travellers by Road in 1826”
(Mogg's Pocket Itinerary).
BARLEY : A THOROUGHFARE TOWN.
