

BARONET OR BUTCHER?
The Trials of the Tichborne Claimant
Edited by Hugh Anderson
Foreword by Michael Roe
RED ROOSTER PRESS
1999




BARONET or BUTCHER?


Arthur Orton


BARONET or BUTCHER?
The Trials of the Tichhorne Claimant
Edited by Hugh Anderson
Foreword by Michael Roe
RED ROOSTER PRESS
1999


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
© Foreword, Michael Roe 1999
ISBN 0 908247 45 1
Typeset by
Rogan’s Typesetting Services Pty. Ltd.
Maryborough, Victoria 3465
Phone: 5461-2993


CONTENTS
Foreword; Michael Roe vii
Tichborne-Orton Chronology x jj
Part 1
The Confessions:
The Story of Arthur Orton j
The Confession and Story of Arthur Orton 7
Part 2
The Comics:
Sir Roger; A Tichborne Ballad 39
Courtship and Marriage of Sir Roger 43
The Yarn of the Claimant 47
The Life of Arthur Orton of Wapping 51
Baronet or Butcher? A Trial at the Bar 55
The Tichborne Trial, as Told to Our Grandchildren 59
Part 3
Ballads and Songs:
Roger, or not Roger 6 3
Tichborne Trial 6 4
Old Jolly Roger is Out on Bail 55
I am the Real Sir Roger 66
A New Alphabet on the Tichborne Trial 57
He’s Right, Sir Roger Tichborne 5g
Tichborne Catechism 69
He’s Jolly Sir Roger Tichborne 70
Success to Sir Roger and Downfall to his Enemies 71
The Claimant’s Defence 72
Bostock on the Sentence of the Claimant in 1874 73
A Plea for Roger 74
Am I the Real Sir Roger 75
Tichborne Doodah 76
The Tichborne Case 77
Release of Roger Tichborne 73
“Fair Play” for Tichborne and Keneally 79
Release of Roger Tichborne g 0
Tichborne Tootle Turn Tay gl
Trial of the Claimant g 2
Have you Seen the Claimant? 33
Trial of the Claimant/The Tichborne Claimant 85
Trial of the Tichborne Claimant for Perjury 86
The Great Tichborne Trial 37


Tichborne! or any Other Man!
Sir Roger Tichborne 90
The Tichborne ABC 91
Waiting for the Verdict 92
The Defence of Sir Roger 93
We’ll not Forget Poor Roger now 94
We’ll not Forget Poor Roger now (2) 95
Tichborne Budget 96
The Release of Sir Roger 97
The Tichborne Belief 98
Might Against Right, or Help for Sir Roger 99
The Great Tichborne Trial! 100
The End of the Great Tichborne Trial 101
The End of the Tichborne Case 102
New Song on the Tichborne Trial 103
Sentence of the Claimant 104
Roger Tichborne 105
Jolly old Sir Roger 106
Trial of the Claimant 107
The Conviction of the Claimant 109
Poor Roger Tichborne’s Lamentation HO
Downfall of the Claimant HI
Downfall of Poor old Roger 112
The End of the Tichborne Trial H 3
Right Man in the Right Place 115
Success to Brave Kenealy 116
Give a Cheer for Brave Kenealy! 117
A New Song of Dr Keneal 119
Resumption of the Tichborne Case 120
Part 4
Music:
The Claimant’s Woes 121
The Tichborne Galop 129
EDITOR’S NOTE
Tichborne ballad broadsides survive in many collections, both in Australia and
overseas, (and often in multiple copies) to a degree that makes reference or
acknowledgment to individual libraries pointless, but there is printed material that
did not find a place in the book.
The main items excluded were the numerous playbills, some real, but mostly
fictional, and newspaper extracts issued as broadsides, such as “Arthur Orton’s
Appeal to the British Public” (London, E. Appleyard, nd.). Other items omitted
include a poem by John Dainty called “Dr Kenealy”; a pretend concert programme,
“Do-the-Boy Hall, Wapping.. ” (London, F. Farrah, nd.); and a broadsheet entitled
“Great Set to Between a Wapping Youth and the Tichborne Pet...” (np.).


FOREWORD
Australia and the Tichborne Case
Although much disputed, the central fact was and is
that the Tichborne Claimant began life in 1834 as Arthur
Orton, the son of a butcher in London’s Wapping. That
history was told in the Confession here published, a
document which (notwithstanding its soon being
recanted by the author) I believe conveyed much
although not the whole truth. However, it is Charles
Orton’s memoir that points towards the family’s first
Australian connexion: Robert of the brood sailed in
1845-6 on the May da (not Mayday) carrying convicts
to Norfolk Island, this being the last heard of him.
Arthur s Austral links, as the Confession informs us,
began with his accepting a job to tend animals consigned
to T.D. Chapman of Hobart. The Claimant was to show
great interest in the turf, consonant with his younger
self s feeling for animals. In 1924 the Illustrated
Tasmanian Mail told that Arthur shared rations with
“Tommy” and “Polly”, the Shetland ponies in his care
to Hobart, so enabling them to survive and found “a
long and for the most part very beautiful line of sons
and daughters and grandchildren who have spread all
over Tasmania and Australia.”
Orton worked for Chapman immediately after arrival
in Hobart in late April 1853, but that soon ceased, which
has its own interest. A successful businessman,
Chapman had been active in the movement against the
continued transportation of convicts. While most anti-
transportationists were sincere in loathing convictism,
the anti-transportation movement had been used by
those colonists anxious to wrest political power from
the British imperium and its local agent, Lieutenant-
Governor W.T. Denison. Chapman belonged in this
context, forecasting his political activism after the grant
of self-government in 1855-6. The Confession says that
Chapman’s ill-fame as an employer was why Orton left
him, but perhaps too the move signified the newcomer
finding himself less comfortable in Chapman’s fine
suburban home than among Hobart’s everyday people,
most of them ex-convict. He moved into the corner of
port-side Hobart which by remarkable serendipity bore
the tag, “Wapping”.
Orton found various butcher-trade jobs in that
bustling milieu. (Later one witness recalled that “In a
large town I would not know him at a 11... [but] Hobart
is like a beehive.”) In 1872 the local Mercury newspaper
reported an account by Joseph Knight, named in the
Confession, of being Arthur’s employer: that the man
could remember such detail after forty years’ hard and
tumultuous living affirmed the mental acuity that was
crucial to him being able to sustain his Tichborne claims
so long. Knight related that he had tried (vainly) to
organise a boxing match between Orton and a local
cabbie, stake-holder being one Matthew Wilks, a
publican who recently had spoken for ex-convicts
against the aspersion of anti-transportationists like T.D.
Chapman. Arthur, it seems, belonged to the half-world
of grog and sport (he went to local horse-racing), a
culture antipathetic to bourgeois moralism and largely
ex-convict in clientele.
At New Year 1854 Hobart’s handsome “New Market”
opened, an occasion for ex-convict sentiment to express
itself in support of Denison against the anti-
transportationists. Orton then was working for one
William Wilson. “Orton was the first man that carried a
Quarter of Beef into the Market it was for Wilson I
am sure and certain,” went another later memory. Soon
Orton had a stall in the market, as tenant of another
butcher. The two quarrelled, going several times into
the Mayor’s Court. Conceivably, victory in these jousts
encouraged in Orton an optimistic litigiousness, which
also helped sustain the later imposture. Another hint of
ambition echoes: “he used to say sometimes, when he
had a drop of lush, Tom, I shall be better off some
day.’” The informant recalled also Arthur’s ability to
drink much without suffering effect, and an oddity of
voice (“as if he had ’bacca or a plum like in his mouth;
he spoke thick”): both traits evident in the Claimant.
That Arthur did not join the Victorian goldrushes early
is odd. When he did cross Bass Strait it was, as the
Confession said, in November 1855. That Orton re-
membered the ship’s name (his passage thereby con-
firmed by contemporary newspapers) further proves the
authenticity of the Confession. Tasmania’s role in
opening Gippsland was almost as important, if much
less celebrated, than that apropos Victoria’s Western
District. John Johnson, Orton’s new employer, had a
major part in this story. He to whom Orton soon
transferred, John Foster, is a still better known figure in
the Tasmanian-Gippsland saga. Then Orton moved into
circles always close to criminality, and sometimes deep


within it. Activists were often Tasmanian ex-convicts,
some of whom Orton had known in Hobart. He went
close to personal implication with crime, including
murder, but still escaped law’s punishment. From 1859,
as I wrote years ago, this quintessential Londoner
followed “a career-line remarkably true to the outback-
worker stereotype; droving, fossicking, mail-running,
even impinging on bush-rangery.” Another latter-day
witness included Orton among Tasmanian ex-convicts
on the goldfields who shared a “villainous look;... we
can always pick those characters out.” The Confession
is revealing in its silences about this period.
It ended in 1864-5 as Orton, now self-called ‘Tom
Castro’, established himself as butcher and husband in
Wagga Wagga, New South Wales. His marriage in early
1865 to Mary Ann Bryant, recent mother of another
man’s child, reportedly prompted gossip, but had
historical meaning too. Mary’s forebears had been in
the colony some fifty years, evidently part of the
convict-sprung working-class, although a brother in-law
was to become mayor of Yass in the 1870 s. Meanwhile,
in mid-1865, Castro launched his Tichborne claim.
Possibly there was much more background than the
Confession suggests. Later, some hypothesised that
Castro ( by this view, Roger Tichborne) had met and
perhaps killed Arthur Orton in Gippsland. I am sure
that did not happen, but accept as a remote possibility
that Roger got to Australia, and was killed by (or at
least with the knowledge of) Castro/Orton, who then
purloined the victim’s papers, which gave him data and
courage enough to respond to Lady Tichborne’s
advertisement; maybe, as elaborated below, one William
Cresswell helped shape these events.
One line of thought suggests that Orton had been
planning the move for years. Henry Kingsley was in
Gippsland in the mid ’fifties, one result being to gather
colour for his famed novel, The Adventures of Geoffry
Hamlyn (1859). It included reference, for example, to
ex-convict desperadoes from Tasmania. Much more
remarkably, in 1861 Kingsley published another novel,
Ravenshoe, which while not set in Australia, presented
a story which prefigured the Tichborne claim in uncanny
detail, even to the protagonist’s name being “Horton”.
The two commentators, Paul de Serville and Patrick
Morgan, who have studied the matter, both suggest that
Kingsley might have had fore-knowledge of the claim.
Did he meet Orton after the latter had stolen Roger
Tichborne’s papers; did Orton take more than a “drop
of lush” on this occasion, and fantasise about making
the claim (although not doing so until spurred by Lady
Tichborne’s advertisements)? Maybe such thinking is
absurd, and Kingsley’s anticipation of the story the result
of it being an archetype of romantic adventure, recurring
throughout various cultures, time after time? That Orton,
certainly a novel-reader, somewhere saw Ravenshoe,
and so derived his ideas, is a more matter-of-fact way
of tying the connexion.
Whatever the truth as to these and many other
conundrums, the Claimant made his way back to Britain,
accompanied by his wife and daughter Agnes (bom early
1866). That Lady Tichborne accepted him as her son
was a mighty boost, but after her death in March 1868
the rest of the family became staunch in opposition.
From early on, lawyers on either side had their agents
in Australia. The identification of the Claimant with
Orton was first made by his own team, seeing it as
compatible with his identity as Roger. The Claimant
knew better, and ever insisted, until the Confession, that
he never had gone to Tasmania. All his supporters have
had to wrestle with this problem and none
successfully, as is best illustrated by a book of 1957,
The Claimant, by Douglas Woodruff, a splendid work
in many respects but askew on this central issue. When
the case first went to court, there was appointed a
“commission” to gather Australian evidence. Its
gleaning was modest, albeit providing some of the data
used in this paper. All the while, there flourished much
gossip and interest among Australians. The issue caused
“a great stir in this place”, a Hobart woman wrote to
Britain; while William Gibbes, the Wagga solicitor who
managed the original claim, bemoaned that by 1870 he
had so found “Tichborne, Tichborne, Tichborne,
everywhere I went, that I hated the very name of the
thing.”
The key question was pondered by the Court of
Common Pleas between May 1871 and March 1872,
ending with the Claimant’s case being abandoned. Then
he was charged with perjury, that case beginning in April
1873, and ending the next February with his sentence
to fourteen years’ gaol. Australian references played a
large part in all these proceedings, as either side strove
to determine the identity issue. Thus J.D. Coleridge,
chief counsel for the Tichborne family in the first case,
spent hours trying to force the Claimant into admitting
a Tasmanian past. Coleridge never succeeded in this,
but if he had known his Australiana he could have found
a vital clue in the Claimant’s earlier depositions; there
“Sir Roger” claimed that at his first landfall in Australia,
Melbourne in July 1854, he had stayed at the Roxburgh
Castle, Elizabeth Street; in fact Melbourne never had
such a pub, but Hobart’s Elizabeth Street did, the
successor building on the site still bearing that name.
In the second case, Australian witnesses identifying
the Claimant as Orton were very important. One was
Mina Jury, an ex-convict who in Hobart had married
the son of a Wapping family, old friends of the Ortons.
Arthur borrowed from the Hobart Jurys, it seems, and
his failure to repay brought Mina’s vengeance. Her
evidence counted a great deal in 1873; two years later
the Claimant’s friends riposted as they revealed her
convict background, that information being fed by an
erstwhile Tasmanian bureaucrat.
Even before the first case, but growing much as it
proceeded, the Tichborne question achieved political
import. Elites of Victorian Britain saw that the Claimant
was an imposter, and denounced all his works. As the


present book shows, very large sections of the common
people went opposite, believing the elites’ opposition
to be inspired by hatred of the Claimant for having
repudiated ruling-class allegiance and style by living
as he had in Australia. To see the situation so was not
altogether absurd. “A man may forget certain things,”
said counsel Coleridge at one point, prior to his crunch
line; “can a man forget being a gentleman?”.
Coleridge’s case rested on the absurd impossibility of a
British baronet marrying such a girl as Mary Ann
Bryant, and becoming a butcher, that archetypal lower-
class trade. The Tichborne issue became one of class,
both in its point of central dispute, and in determining
stances that various people took.
Australia’s place in this scenario went beyond
whether Roger could have lived as did Castro. Many
among the elites presumably saw the Claimant as
confronting their civilisation with Australia’s grotesque,
ex-convict, barbarism, and linking that horror with
incendiary appeals to the masses at home. The record
contains no statement saying exactly this, but the sub-
text is clear. Nowhere was it more evident than in
Alexander Cockbum, chief judge in the second law-
case. He showed himself altogether maladroit in
comprehending references to Australia “to follow
the diggings”, for example, was a phrase beyond him.
The apex came in his mis-hearing “horse-stealers” for
“Australia”! Cockbum had decided long before the case
began that the Claimant was fraudulent, and that showed
in his behaviour on the bench.
Popular support for the Claimant mirrored the elites’
antipathy to him. In an erratic and ill-founded way, his
upholders were protesting against upper-class wealth
and privilege, and the role of the law in upholding them.
For them Australia had a very different image than it
did for the elites. From this perspective Australia was a
place of wonder, adventure, and re-creation. In the early
1870 s authority banned the very word “Australia” from
the popular stage, because of the excitement it might
cause in the Tichborne context. Many commentators
had presented the southern land as a place turned upside-
down, but that notion had particular meaning for the
Claimant’s friends. It explained how slim young Roger
had transformed into a man-mountain, with all his
strangenesses of behaviour and memory. It vested him
with an aura of appealing delight. Crystallising this was
the ultra-fascination many Britons came to have for
those euphonious syllables denoting the town whence
the claim had come. Some ballads reproduced in this
book made that point:
Then to Wagga Wagga Sir Roger went,
On his way to Woolomoloo;
For he had set out with a trusty friend,
To hunt the Kangaroo;
At the Bush Hotel one night they stopp’d,
Some Kangaroo steak to fry;
And on the buxom cook-maid there,
Sir Roger cast his eye.
And again with the bawd that must spice every popular
cause:
When the Jury said I was not Roger,
Oh! how they made me stagger,
The pretty girls they’ll always think
Of poor Roger’s Wagga-Wagga.
A higher-brow imaging of Australia along these lines
had considerable vogue in contemporary Britain: Coral
Lansbury s Arcady in Australia: The Evocation of
Australia in Nineteenth Century English Literature
(1970) best pursues this story, showing how Charles
Reade, Charles Dickens and others presented Austral
nature and society as offering a kind of re-birth. The
Claimant s counsel in the second law case, Edward
Kenealy, often invoked such ideas. “You have all the
Arab independence of the desert,” Kenealy said of
outback Australia; “a beautiful climate, glorious nights
of stars and moonlight such as are never seen in Europe.”
Kenealy and the other Arcadians indeed were helping
pave the way for “The Australian Legend”. In the nine-
volume edition of the criminal trial which Kenealy
published in following years, selling vast numbers, this
theme continued: one illustration is much like the
frontispiece in Russel Ward 's Australian Legend (1958),
its caption “The Wallaby Track”.
“The Australian Legend” gives centrality to bush-
rangers and the popular acclaim they won. Certainly
that is part of our national history, but it is not unique.
Few tropes are more universal than the popular adulation
given to flamboyant, even criminal, figures who evoke
loyalty from the people, and challenge established
modes. Britain’s past had plenty such men, Robin Hood
the epitome. As some contemporaries noted, the
Claimant belonged in this tradition. What interests us
is that he fused it with that of Australian bushrangery.
His correspondence mentioned Daniel Morgan, and as
noted he might have done a tad of bushranging himself.
If so its locus probably was in that same Gippsland then
nurturing young Ned Kelly. Anyway, it was from bush-
Australia Castro came, to challenge the Tichborne
family and Britain’s settled order.
This scenario lurks within the most interesting
account of Australian thinking about the Tichborne saga
in the earlier 1870 s, novelist Anthony Trollope’s:
throughout the colonies generally I found that the
opinion of men and women ran very much in favour
of the Claimant; not in any way because he was
an Australian, for no colonist was fond of him, but
apparently because there was pleasurable
excitement in the idea that the lowest blackguard
that had ever returned home from the wild reckless
life of the Australian bush turn out to be an English
baronet. I discussed the question with an Australian
judge, who is perhaps second in reputation as a
lawyer to no English lawyer out of England, inferior
to very few if any at home and I found him to be
strongly in favour of the butcher. The evidence, in
his mind, was all but conclusive in the butcher’s


favour. Had he heard the case with his wig on, Ido
not doubt but that he would have thought differently.
As it was the romance touched even him.
The judge concerned, Sir Alfred Stephen of New South
Wales, in 1874 repudiated any such opinions, and
otherwise Trollope might have exaggerated Australians’
backing of the Claimant. From Wagga itself had come
in 1871 The Butcher-Baronet; or the Wagga Wagga
Mystery: A New and Original Musical Burletta in Three
Acts , by one Frank Hutchison, which was altogether
scornful, especially of the notion that Mary Ann Bryant
should become a Lady. That is not to say that others felt
different, still less that Australians lost interest in the
story. At Wagga a photographer bedecked a shed with
“T. Castro, Butcher”, and sold authentic-seeming prints.
By 1882 an Australian Reader included Castro’s first
interview with Gibbes among its “memorable historic
events”. The identity issue continued a fascination for
many, obsession for some. Among the latter was a J.D.D.
Jackson who claimed to have known both Roger
Tichborne and Arthur Orton in Launceston in 1855, the
latter’s sister then being licensee of the town’s Royal
Oak. In fact that licence was held by Mary Ann Hedger,
while an Orton sister was Mary Ann Tredgett. From
such a base did fantasies grow. Despite early official
investigation establishing these facts, Jackson told his
tale for decades, in 1885 publishing Sir Roger Tichborne
Revealed! (Sydney). In 1882 another pamphleteer had
claimed that Mary Ann’s mother to have inspired the
imposture, its sole base being that Castro/Orton had met
in Tasmania a survivor from the ship on which Roger
Tichborne had drowned. A further oddity was an essay
(1895) purporting to describe Orton’s life in Tasmania;
it reads authentic, but in fact is more fantastic.
Trollope’s exaggeration of Australian support for the
Claimant might have resulted from himself being
touched by the “romance” of the issue, and certainly
other novelists continuing the tradition of Lansbury’s
Arcadians felt that pull. In the older world Henry
James and George Eliot did so, while the supreme
Australian exemplar was Marcus Clarke. Confused
identity and a prodigal son have their place in For the
Term of His Natural Life (1872/4), which the old canon
rates with Geoffry Hamlyn as major novels of colonial
Australia. Just as Term duly enjoyed notable
representations via stage and film in Australia, so the
Tichborne case inspired not only Frank Huchinson’s
“Burletta”, but an actually-performed Sydney show on
the same lines, while later a film-scenario was prepared
by two notable impressarios of Sydney, James
McMahon and G.L. Merriman.
Only after the conclusion of the court cases did there
develop substance in Australian support for the
Claimant. This centred on the afore-mentioned William
Cresswell, who spent most of the forty years before his
death in 1904 under care as a lunatic in New South
Wales. He and Castro had been mates from around 1860,
and many of the Claimant’s supporters believed him to
be Orton, thus strengthening their hero’s case. Alter-
native voices always suggested that rather Cresswell
was Sir Roger, but that notion long stayed on the
margins. Through very many years efforts continued to
free Cresswell, take him to Britain, and then persuade
the courts to recant.
To detail this saga would be otiose. In the later 1870 s
the key figure was a New South Wales parliamentarian
and publican, Joseph Eckford. Being a supporter of the
master politician in that colony, Henry Parkes, Eckford
almost won the lunatic’s release in 1880, but then
something misfired. Two years later that position altered
as Miss Georgiana Baring, heiress of one of Britain’s
great banking companies, poured money into the
venture. To secure the release, Miss Baring funded travel
to Australia of Charles Orton (who since inspiring the
article re-published here had jumped from one side to
the other, according to payment), and one Daniel Smith.
The latter had long made a career out of fomenting the
pro-Claimant cause, his rhetoric sometimes invoking
physical-force protest. Through 1883-4 Smith became
a notable speaker on Sydney’s Domain, linking the
Tichborne issue with the ferment of radical-popular
politics then brewing in New South Wales. At home
supporters were aghast at the outlawing of a pamphlet
distributed by Smith and arguing for the Claimant/Roger
identity by affirming that their penises totally retracted;
to these folks at home that such could happen “under
the wider and more liberal laws of an almost republican
Colony ... appears too extraordinary and too singular
to admit ordinary interpretation.” In February 1884,
largely through Smith’s work, 10 500 petitioners urged
the NSW parliament to open the case. In May 1884 an
application for release was heard in Sydney, chief
counsel for the plaintiffs being future prime minister,
Edmund Barton. The court ruled against his arguments.
Smith continued active, head of what was almost a
continuing soviet of discontented Sydneysiders meeting
in the Domain through early 1885. Then the Orton -
seekers quarrelled among themselves; Smith submerged,
to be replaced as Baring’s chief agent by Horace Brown,
long a repudiator of the Orton-Claimant identification.
Brown gathered documents with much busyness, one
quaint result being that the obscure Yorkshire newspaper
which Baring used in her cause published scuttlebutt
about various Tasmanian plutocrats who had helped
identify Orton. Others still interested in the possibility
of Cresswell being Orton included two more medium-
rank NSW politicians, J.N. Brunker and Robert Wisdom.
Withal nothing much happened, and when interest
revived in the 1890 s the notion that the lunatic was Sir
Roger had become ascendent among those who sought
his release, and not only them. The most active publicist
for this opinion was a Sydney accountant, E.H.
Priestman, author of The Tichborne Mystery: On the
verge of solution midst the ashes of a dead past. (Sydney,
1899). Parliament listened, and a Royal Commission
studied the matter in 1900. It concluded that the lunatic


truly was Cresswell. During debate a shrewd parliamen-
tarian-lawyer, R.D. Meagher, proposed that Cresswell
was the bastard son of Roger’s father, that he and Orton/
Castro together had killed Roger, and that he was about
to claim the Tichborne heirdom, but then his mind
slipped, and so his mate decided to go it alone. I find
this just credible, as an alternative or supplement to my
earlier hypothesis about Roger’s death in the bush.
Australian scholarly interest in Tichborniana dates
back to the purchase in 1937 by William Dixson of
papers which derived from a son of Edward Kenealy’s;
these are now housed in the Dixson Library, Sydney.
Another collector then active was Rex Nan Kivell,
whose bounty now rests in the National Library of
Australia. Tichborniana appeared in a display of Nan
Kivell s material at the Library in 1998, a consequent
article in the National Library of Australia News
transposing portrait-captions of young Roger and mature
Claimant. Meanwhile, in 1964 a Sydney journalist
published a book concerning a double murder in Sydney,
March 1872, which crime might have arisen from an
attempt to capture Cresswell from detention. Soon after
that began my research, duly underpinning an article
on “Arthur Orton, the Tichborne Case, and Tasmania”
(1971), and a monograph, Kenealy and the Tichborne
Cause: A Study in Mid-Victorian Populism (1974).
These two items strove to show (as this paper echoes)
that exact knowledge of the Australian material clinches
the identification of the Claimant as Orton, and allows
reasonable hypotheses about how the claim came to be
made. However my major concern was to place the
movement supportive of the Claimant in historical
context, as an expression of “populist” styles, which
have a virtually universal span but worked with
particular intensity in Britain around 1870. By
“populist” I meant a style of mass protest against
perceived attempts of the ruling class to demean and
coerce ordinary people. Elites’ use of governmental and
juridical power to this end were particularly abhorred,
seen as the leading edge of wide-reaching conspiracy
among the privileged to maintain their dominance.
While this thrust of populist politics is comprehensible,
and for most of us laudable, populism otherwise is
strange and even repellent. Emotion and absurdity had
much play as populists spent their energies on causes
which were more symptomatic than systemic.
Seemingly, populists wanted to express their rage rather
than to improve their world. Demagogic charlatanism
thus had its opportunity, and often took it. Especially in
denouncing conspiracy, populist discourse took an
obsessive, indeed paranoid note.
Over the past few years some other historians of
Victorian Britain have addressed populism, my work
having a small part in their debate. However historio-
graphical revolution has yet to occur. Thus the Princess
Diana phenomenon bellows for analysis in terms of the
populist model, but to my knowledge there has been no
answer to that call.
Meanwhile de Serville and Morgan made their contri-
butions, glimpsed above. In 1996 there appeared another
Australian book inspired by the case, Claim, by Mat
Schulz. This enjoyable novel is post-modern in style,
and true to that syndrome gives full play to the Tichborne
story s elements of absurdity, confusion, and carnival-
esque. While recognising my work, Schulz proposes a
scenario in support of the claim’s veracity. In terms of
rational truth, his hypothesis is untenable. Claim, while
bigger in scale and aspiration, has the same essential
quality as do the cartoons, comics, and ballads, from
savouring which I have too long delayed my readers.
Riblioeraphical Note: My Tichborne article is in Tas-
manian Historical Research Association. Papers and
Proceedings, volume 18 (1971), pages 115-48. Virtually
every point I make in the text and otherwise unsourced
has its backing there and/or in Kenealy and the
Tichborne Cause. To my shame, when writing those
items I was ignorant of the 1895 essay which purports
to relate Orton’s life in Tasmania, in “The Vet”, Old
Time Echoes of Tasmania. My other “discovery” of new
data is an internet file , The Mrs Thomas Castro Web
Page, which is at http://web.one. net.au/“richard
mills”[end]. Hugh Anderson found the film scenario in
the National Archives of Australia (Canberra) at series
A1336/1, item 3508.
Paul de Serville’s contribution is in his Pounds and
Pedigrees. The Upper Class in Victoria 1850-80 (1991)
and Patrick Morgan’s in “Tales of Old Travel:
Predecessors of David Malouf’s The Conversations at
Curlow Creek”, Australian Literary Studies, volume 18
(1997), pages 174-9; and “The Vandemonian Trail.
Convicts and Bushrangers in Eastern Victoria”, Island,
number 74 (1998), pages 52-62. The article in the
National Library of Australia News is Lisa Wilkinson,
“The Tichborne Connexion”, volume 9, number 4
(1999), pages 19-21. The major British work to address
the case in a populist context is Patrick Joyce, Visions
of the People: Industrial England and the Question of
Class, 1848-1914 (1991).
Michael Roe
May, 1999


TICHBORNE-ORTON CHRONOLOGY
Known events
Roger Charles Doughty Tichborne born on 29 January 1829
Arthur Orton born on 20 March 1834
Roger attends Stony hurst College, 1845-48
Roger a subaltern in 6th Dragoon Guards, 1848-52
Arthur leaves ship Ocean at Valparaiso, June 1849
Arthur sails in Jessie Miller for London, February 1851
In Wapping, 11 June 1851
Arthur sails for Hobart in Middleton, 29 November 1852
Roger sails in La Pauline, Havre to Valparaiso, March 1853
Visits Peru and Chile. Arrives at Rio via Buenos Aires and Montevideo, April 1853
Arthur arrives in Hobart, May 1853
Roger sails on Bella for Kingston, 20 April 1854
Arthur in Gippsland (Boisdale?), August 1855
Dargo, May 1857; Boisdale, July-October 1858; Sale, January 1859
Supposed events (according to Arthur Orton)
Landed at Melbourne, 19 July 1854
Stockman at Boisdale, early 1856
Dargo station, February 1856 to August 1857
Sale, November 1857 to May 1858
Mitchell River, May to September 1858
Omeo diggings, early 1859
Deniliquin and Hay, 1859-61
Wagga Wagga and Boree, September 1862
Nangus and Bendigo, January to June 1863
Tumut, 1863-64
Gundagai, January 1864
Actual events in Claimant's life
Wagga Wagga, c.February 1864
Married to Mary Ann Bryant, January 1865
Lady Tichborne employs Cubitt in Sydney to search for her son, May 1865, and
advertisements appear in August
Claimant writes to Lady Tichborne in January 1866
Dowager Lady Tichborne writes to Claimant, 25 February 1866
Claimant writes again, 24 May 1866
Leaves Wagga Wagga for Sydney, 2 June 1866
Third letter to Lady Tichborne, 23 June 1866
Remarries Mary Ann in Catholic Church at Goulburn, 9 July 1866
Leaves for England on Rakaia, 2 September 1866
Early October Claimant reaches New York then sails in Celia for London
Arrives Tilbury on Christmas Day, visits Wapping and Ford’s Hotel
Stays at Clarendon Hotel, Gravesend, 26 December, and travels incognito to Alresford
Visits Paris, 10-21 January 1867
Bills filed in Chancery, 27 June, and examination takes place on 31 July
Death of Lady Tichborne on 12 March 1868
Claimant travels to Chile, September 1868 to end of January 1869
Claimant settles in London at Harley Lodge, Kensington, March 1869
Case of Tichborne v. Lushington begins, 10 May 1871
Claimant non-suited and arrested at Waterloo Hotel, Jermyn Street
Criminal Trial opens, 23 April 1873
Claimant found guilty, sentenced to 14 years servitude, 28 February 1874
Granted ticket-of-leave, 11 October 1884
Confession of Arthur Orton published, but then repudiated, July 1895
Death of Claimant, 1 April 1898


THE STORY OF ARTHUR ORTON.
CONFESSION BY HIS BROTHER.
Reprinted from Daily Telegraph, 10th March, 1874
WE have received the following communication
from a trustworthy correspondent. It embodies a
statement by Charles Orton, the brother of Arthur Orton,
who signs his name to a recital of facts which clears up
many interesting points in the late trial.
What I wish to do is to make a plain statement of all
that I know, or ever did know, of the bad business which
has just ended so unhappily for my brother Arthur. I
don’t hope, nor I don’t want, to make myself out to be a
martyr, and I don’t pretend that I shall be able to give a
good reason for all my actions in the affair; but I do
hope to make it appear that I am not, by a great many
shades, as black as I have been painted, and that although
I am very much to blame, I was made to do a great deal
—firstly, on account of my being so poor; and secondly,
on account of being drawn, a little at a time as 1 may
say, into a mess which it wasn’t easy to escape out of.
That, however, if you will be so kind as to print my
account, will be for the public to judge of when they
have read it. I will only add, at starting, that it is a true
account, and one which I defy any one mixed up in the
Tichbome trial to contradict.
First of all, perhaps, it may be as well, after the many
wrong statements which have appeared in the
newspapers, to say a few words concerning my brothers
and the family generally. I may mention that my father
was a journeyman butcher, in the service of Mrs Hoad,
who kept a shop just about opposite to where our old
shop was afterwards, and that Mrs Hoad had a niece,
and that she and my father got married, and set up for
themselves at 69, Wapping, in the year 1818.
Thomas was the first boy, and when he grew old
enough he went to help in the shop, and also looked
after the Shetland ponies which father dealt in. Thomas
was just the build of what Arthur grew to be, a very big
man, and just like Arthur in the face. Thomas died about
ten years ago. That was something over a year before
father died when this happened, and mother being dead
six years before that, my sister Margaret (Mrs Tredgett)
took the business, and I was her foreman. This lasted
until things went wrong, and Mrs Tredgett sold the
business in 1866 to Mr Pitt. I was the next son to
Thomas, and then came George.
George began his sea-going career in 1842, and kept
steadily at it, voyaging to and from England until 1856.
Then he sailed for Hong Kong. He settled at Singapore,
and became master of the steam-packet that carries the
mail between Singapore and Bankok. That, I believe, is
his occupation at the present time. George has for a good
many years behaved very handsomely by his two sisters
who were left widows Mrs Tredgett and Mrs Mary
Ann Jury. He allowed them £5 a month between them,
beside sending money to keep the children at school.
He may be doing it still for all I know; but, not being
friendly with my sisters, I can’t say for certain.
William was my next brother, and he was apprenticed
to a grocer. It was William who was known about
Wapping as “Gentleman Orton”. He was a smart-built
young chap. He got into difficulties about betting, and
in 1854 went away to New York. From there he went to
California. From there he shipped for Panama, but
cholera broke out in the vessel, and he and a great many
others on board died of it. Then there was my brother
Robert. Like all the rest, he helped as a boy in the
butcher’s business, and when he was old enough,
being inclined for the sea, as they all were, he was bound
to a Mr Lisle, a shipowner.
His first voyage was in the Mayday, Captain May,
bound with a batch of convicts for Norfolk Island, in
the year 1843. The Mayday was never heard of
afterwards.
Then there was my brother Alfred. He was appren-


ticed to the sea, but, while still a boy, died of fever out
in Calcutta. Of all the eight brothers there are only four
now alive — George, Edmund, Arthur, and myself.
Edmund is the only brother I have not told you about,
and it is more particular that I should speak about him
than the rest, because his name has been very often
mentioned in the course of the trial. Edmund was born
in 1829, and would therefore be five years older than
Arthur. Edmund stayed at the butcher's shop until he
was fifteen, and then, like all the rest, having a taste for
roving and adventures, he took to the sea. He was
apprenticed to Captain John Hall, of Sunderland, in
1847.
In August, 1849, he sailed from Liverpool, in the
Niagara, on a voyage for Valparaiso; but before he went
this voyage, and having been away from home a long
while, he got a fortnight's holiday, and came home. He
had grown a great deal since he was last there, and had
took to wearing gold wires in his ears. Edmund at this
time was quite a man, and between five feet nine and
ten in height. This is how the mistake might have come
about with the witnesses who said that they recollected
that when my brother Arthur came home just about that
time he had earrings in his ears; and it isn't much of a
wonder that they made the blunder, for a very short time
after Edmund had set off for Valparaiso Arthur came
home, and remained at home for two years. Arthur
wasn’t expected home at that time. It was thought by
his friends that he was in the neighbourhood of
Valparaiso. They were anxious about him, because the
last they at that time had heard concerning him was by
means of a letter that was sent to father by a naval officer.
It stated that, being at Valparaiso, he had there met with
a destitute English boy, who told him that his name was
Arthur Orton, and that he had run away from his ship,
being unable any longer to put up with the ill-usage of
the captain. The letter further said that the naval officer
had asked the boy what he meant to do, and he replied
that it was his intention to make his way up the country.
It was agreed that when Edmund got to Valparaiso he
should make inquiries about Arthur.
After a few months there came a letter from Edmund,
to say that he could bear nothing about his brother, and
that he himself had deserted his ship at Valparaiso, as
Arthur had done, and was going up the country too. As
we afterwards heard he made his way to New Mexico,
where he found adventures enough; for there he was
taken prisoner by a hostile tribe, and kept so for nine
months, when they began to trust him a little, and let
him have a gun to go out shooting game for their living.
Edmund took the opportunity of making his escape in
company with a native woman, and finally made his
way to a place called Guymas, where he married a
native, and settled there with his family.
As for my brother Arthur, I can tell you nothing more
concerning his boyhood than has already been made
known in the newspapers. It is quite correct all that they
say about him being a healthy boy before that fire at St.
Andrew's Wharf, when he was six years old, which was
just by our place at Wapping, and when he was so
frightened at being woke out of his sleep to see the
flames that he was at once took with St. Vitus's dance,
and for a long time seemed to have no control over his
features or his limbs. But he never grew thin with it all.
He was a wonderfully thick-set boy, like Thomas was
when he was a lad, and the nickname he had amongst
us was the Fat Boy in Pickwick. He was nearly well,
however, when at the age of fourteen he was apprenticed
to Captain Brooks, of the Ocean.
I will not take up your space by going over the story
of his voyage and of his running away and getting, as
has been shown, to Melipilla, only that I may mention
that at that time, when Edmund absconded from his ship
at Valparaiso, and was so anxious to find Arthur, Arthur
was probably all the time only seventy miles away,
comfortable at Melipilla. Perhaps I may as well state
here, that if my brother was ever severely bitten by a
pony while he was a lad at home with us, I, who was
always at home too, never heard of it. It was equally
news to me when I heard that he had been thrown from
a pony and received a deep cut on the face; likewise
that he ever wore earrings. I may also say, that as regards
the tattoo marks of A. 0., that were said to have once
been on his arm, and afterwards got rid of, I never saw
them, or heard of them. But then they might have been
there without my knowledge, for I was married when
Arthur was a lad at home, and slept away, and only saw
him about in the business. As for the brown mark on
his side, I never saw that either, but it was commonly
known in the family that he had a birth mark. There are
a good many other things that have been said about my
brother at that time; but it will be better perhaps for me
to get on with what I at first promised to do.
At about Christmas time of 1866 I was keeping a
small butcher's shop in Hermitage street. Another man
and myself had the business between us, though it wasn't
such a big business but that one of us might have
managed it easily. Three or four days after that
Christmas-day, my sister, Mrs Robert Jury, came to the
shop and brought a letter for me to read. It was the letter
signed in the name of Stevens, that had been left a day
or two before with Mrs Pardon, to be handed to Mrs
Tredgett. My sister Mary Ann had married Mr Pardon's
brother, so that there was a sort of relationship. My sister
told me, when she brought the letter, that from what she
had been told by one and the other who had seen the
strange gentleman in disguise, that she verily believed
that it must be Arthur himself. I didn't know what to
think about it myself, but I at once recognized the letter
as being in the handwriting of my brother Arthur.
I heard no more about the matter for a week or two,
and then I thought I would go and see my sisters, Mrs
Tredgett and Mrs Robert Jury, and ascertain whether
they had beard anything more about the matter. I found


that they had. They had received two letters, which when
I saw I knew at once to be in the handwriting of my
brother Arthur, who had remained so many years
unheard of. They, too, declared that they knew the
handwriting, although there was no signature to the
letters. I don't recollect all the writing, but I know that
one of the letters asked my sister Mary Ann to be good
enough to go and see a person who lived at Victoria
Cottage, Victoria Park, and find out who the man that
lived there was. This, I may say, was the house where
Mr Pittendreigh and his wife lived.
From what I could make out, Mr Pittendreigh was a
lawyer's clerk, and in an office belonging to some of
the big lawyers engaged in a lawsuit that Arthur had
got mixed up in, and that somebody had writ from
Victoria Cottage to give Arthur a hint of telling him
something to his advantage if it could be done quietly,
and that my brother, not feeling sure but that it might be
a trap, wanted to know who and what the person at
Victoria Cottage was. As well as I remember, my sister
told me that she had been able to manage the affair very
well. There was, it seems, in the window of the house, a
bill of apartments to let at Victoria Cottage, and my
sister made it her business to inquire respecting them,
and that then in quite a natural way came up the question
of references, &c., and so she found out where Mr
Pittendreigh was employed. I ought to have told you
that this letter was addressed from Essex-road, Croydon.
And when we had talked about this letter my sister told
me that Arthur had sent her another with a five-pound
note in it, together with word that so long as she was
careful and kept her own counsel he would send the
like sum every month, to help to keep the two sisters,
who were living together.
Well, I waited, thinking, perhaps, that I might hear
from my brother Arthur. Business at the butcher's shop
was very bad, and I thought that if five-pound notes
was so plentiful he might send me one or two. So,
finding that he didn't take any notice of me, I wrote to
him, getting his address at Croydon from Mrs Tredgett.
I addressed him as Sir Roger Tichborne, and put it to
him in this way. Says I, “I hear that you know where
my brother Arthur is, and that you know him to be a
rich man. Will you kindly send me his address, as I
should like to write to him asking him if he can give me
a little assistance ?” Well, no answer came to this. I was
very hard up at the time, and, after thinking about it,
and of what I had by this time heard as to what it was
my brother was doing, I took advice of my partner as to
why I shouldn't make a move towards getting a little
money out of the matter. I didn't like to go about it for
fear I might injure my sisters, who, I knew, were
receiving their five pounds in a regular manner. But my
partner and me talked it over, and I made up my mind
that I would go and offer myself to the side my brother
was wrongfully setting up against. But I didn't know
quite how to set about it.
I recollected about Victoria Cottage, where the
lawyer's clerk lived, that my sister Mary Ann went to
find out about, but I didn't know which side the lawyers
he worked for were on. So I thought that I would go
and see if I could find out. I went to Victoria Cottage,
and saw the clerk’s wife; but she was as sharp, if not
sharper, than I was, and wouldn’t answer straight out
any question I put to her. When she got out of me that it
was something about Tichborne I had come about, then
she asked me in, and then we talked, and I told her I
thought about giving evidence in favour of the infant
heir, provided that it was made worth my while to do
so. I didn’t say more than that, nor how much I wanted,
or anything. I only said that I had some information to
give which that side might be glad to get. Mrs
Pittendreigh persuaded me not to be too hasty in the
matter. “You leave me your address,” said she, “and I
think it very likely that to-morrow you will be wrote
to.” I didn’t care at first about doing this; but at last I
did. I gave her the address right, but not the name. I put
the name backwards Mr C. Notro, butcher,
Hermitage-street, Wapping. Nothing came of it all next
day, but on the following day there came a letter with
the Croydon postmark. My partner, who knew all about
it, opened it, and brought it over to the house where I
was living. It was not a letter exactly, but an odd scrap
of white paper, on which was wrote these words;— “why
should you injure one that never did harm to you? I
shall send in a day or two what you require. Desist. ”
The last word, “Desist,” was wrote where the
signature should have been, but it didn’t want any
signature for me to be able to identify it as my brother
Arthur's writing. Of course, I can’t be sure that my going
to Victoria Cottage had anything to do with him writing
to me, though I think it must have, because he wrote to
me as Mr C. Notro. Well, the very next morning there
came another letter, likewise with the Croydon
postmark, and with a five-pound note in it, and a scrap
of paper, written on these words: — “I shall allow you
this sum every month at present. ” This was wrote in the
same writing as the one that said “Desist,” and like that
which came to my sister Mary Anne at first to ask her
to go and find out about the people at Victoria Cottage.
It was my brother Arthur’s writing. Amongst ourselves
my sisters and myself, I mean there was never the
shadow of a doubt who it was who was sending us the
money. When we talked about it, and about how he was
getting on quite by ourselves, of course we never
spoke of him but as Arthur, though so many at that time
were beginning to call him Sir Roger Tichborne.
Well, I received my five pounds a month a five-
pound note in an envelope regular from the com-
mencement until the beginning of August in the same
year. Then I got a letter in the same old handwriting,
but without any name at the end. It was to request me to
leave Wapping and its neighbourhood as soon as I
possibly could. It didn't explain why. All that the letter


said was that I was to get out of Wapping immediately,
and at the same time it was mentioned that the money I
was receiving was quite enough for me to live on at
present, and that, if I was careful as to what I was about,
when the “case was over there would be no lack of
money, and if I wanted a thousand or two, why I should
have it.”
At the time I only thought that my brother was afraid
that people might find me out, and make inquiries that
mightn't be good for him but now I can see that there
was something more in it. While I had the butcher's
shop in Hermitage-street, although it mightn't be much,
there was something to be made by it, which would
give me a little independence, but if I was took away
from it and made to depend on the £5 a month for my
living, I should be all the more afraid of doing anything
that might give offence. However, I thought it best to
do as I was asked, and the next day I left my house at
Wapping, and took lodgings in the Kegon-road,
Bermondsey.
As regards the notes I received from my brother, I
took them all, endorsed with my name or with that I
was going by, to the Bank of England, and afterwards
several of them were traced by Inspector Whicher as
having been issued from the Alresford or Croydon Bank
a day or two before they came in my, possession.
I still got my £5 regularly, seeing my sisters
sometimes, but not so often as I used, for Mrs Tredgett
seemed to think that I had no right to put in my claim
for assistance. Near the end of the year, Mrs Tredgett
came to our place and said that the plaintiffs solicitor
wished to see me. By the bye, I should have mentioned
that some time before I had received from my brother
Arthur one of the usual unsigned scraps of paper, telling
me to have nothing to say to a person named Holmes if
he came to me. So I thought it best to write and ask him
if I was to act according to Mrs Tredgett's message,
addressing my letter to Sir Roger Tichborne, as usual,
at Croydon. He wrote back, “Yes; go,” and so I went to
the solicitor's office in Clement’s-lane, Lombard-street.
There was nothing done that day except the making of
an appointment for me to come next day.
When I went next day Mr Holmes was there, and he
brought out a very large photographic likeness, which I
saw at once was my brother’s likeness, although, when
asked, I denied it, he had so much altered. Perhaps I
ought to say that I had seen Arthur some time before. I
felt curious as I had not seen him for so many years,
and so one day when I went to Croydon to cash a£s
cheque on the Croydon Bank he had sent me, I took the
trouble to find out where he lived, and as I was passing
the house I saw Arthur looking out at the door. I knew
him at once, and I nodded. I believe that he knew me,
for I think he nodded back again, but of that I cannot be
sure.
I wasn’t the only one of his relations that went to
Croydon uninvited. His sister, Mrs Captain Jury, did so
just after he went to live there, and the door was opened
by the nursemaid, who had one of the Claimant’s
children in her arms; on which Mrs Captain Jury
exclaimed, “Lor! what a regular little Orton.” Arthur
refused to see her. He said he was ill; but he afterwards
sent a letter to Elizabeth, begging that it might not
happen again. Well, when I saw the photograph that the
solicitor showed me I knew it in an instant, but I also
knew that it wasn’t expected of me to say so; so when
the solicitor said to me, “Do you see any resemblance
between this gentleman and your brother Arthur?” I said
“No.” There was writing on the margin of the
photograph, saying that the undersigned had seen it, and
saw no likeness in it to Arthur Orton. Mrs Tredgett’s
name was signed there, and I signed mine. I did not
hear anything more of him for a matter of two months,
and then I got a message that he wanted to see me again,
and I was made to understand that this time I was to
meet the “Claimant” himself.
I went, knowing of course what was expected of me,
and having made up my mind what I should do. When
I got to plaintiffs solicitor’s office there were two
gentlemen there Captain Angel and Colonel
Lushington. Sitting in another chair was my brother
Arthur, but he did not move when I went in. He just
raised his eyes to my face once, and then he looked
away, and never looked at me again, and never said a
word. “Do you know this gentleman?” I was asked, and
I said “No,” just as I had said concerning the portrait.
Then I came out, and I was asked this time to swear an
affidavit, but I said I would rather not, but that I had no
objection to sign a statement. And I did sign a statement,
making it seem that, for all I knew different, the
gentleman I had seen might be Sir Roger Tichborne or
anybody else.
I did not hear any more, but went on living on the £5
a month, which came pretty regular, until I had been
receiving it about a year. Then the money didn't come
so regular. One day while I was out Mrs Tredgett came
in a hurry, bringing with her a letter, which she read to
my wife, and which she had received from Arthur, and
which desired her to come as soon as she could to our
house, and tell me that things were getting dangerous;
that it had come to his knowledge that our house was
watched by detectives, and that, for fear of accidents, if
I had by me any of the letters he had sent me they had
better be burnt immediately. As it happened I had kept
by me every bit of writing he had ever sent me, ever
since he sent that first letter, asking me why I should
wish to injure one who had never hurt me, and signed
“Desist.” I had all the scraps of writing in a box, and I
did not want to bum them; but Mrs Tredgett said that
they must be burnt for the sake of everybody. Mrs
Tredgett told my wife that Arthur would have written
to me himself, but that he was afraid to, because he
knew that the house was watched. She also said that
Arthur had sent her £5, and that if we burnt the letters


she would leave us £1 out of it. On my wife promising
that the letters should be burnt she left a sovereign. When
I came home my wife told me what had happened, and
she was so frightened that, against my will, I agreed to
what Mrs Tredgett had asked, and the box was brought
out, and the letters were burnt, every one of them.
Before Mrs Tredgett went she told my wife that
Arthur began to be doubtful about me. Next day I wrote
a letter, addressed to Sir Roger Tichborne, saying that
he need not be at all doubtful of me while he acted by
me as he promised, and that if he was afraid to send the
usual money in the usual way, for fear of the name of
Orton being on the envelope, that I would change my
name and call myself Mr Brand, which was my wife's
maiden name. I asked him to send me some money as
soon as he possibly could. I thought that I should have
got a letter by return, with the usual five-pound note,
but, instead of that, in a day or two a railway porter
came with a little parcel, and asked for Mrs Brand. My
landlord opened the door and said no such person was
living there, but I overheard it and said it was for me. It
was two sovereigns and a half wrapped in blotting paper,
in a sort of a pillbox.
Well, after this the money got more and more
uncertain. I didn’t have anything else to live on, and
very often I didn’t know what to do for a few shillings.
What was sent was in small sums—very often in French
money. Many times he would send me a twenty-franc
piece in a letter, which was to last me for the week; and,
as he seldom paid for the registering, I had to pay double
when it came eightpence out of sixteen shillings. I
never made a calculation, but I think I may safely say
that what I all along received from Arthur didn't amount
to more than eighteen shillings a week. But I should
have kept my word with him if lie had kept it up regular.
I didn’t know what was the reason of his treating me so,
and thought that it might be better if I moved, and so I
left Keaton-road and went to live at Melon-ground,
Peckham; but the money did not come any better. Then
I heard about his going to Chili, and then that he had
gone. To speak my mind, I thought that he had gone
away, and never meant to come back any more. I thought
it not unlikely that matters were not going as well with
him as he hoped they would, that he was sick of it, and
that going to Chili was an excuse for getting away
altogether. I don’t put that as an excuse for doing what
I did, but I do say that thinking so made it seem not so
much harm in me going over to the other aide.
I had not received any money for some time, though
I was so hard up that the brokers were in my house to
seize my goods, which was the fact, and may be
remembered in my favour as showing that, in spite of
the bargain that was made between us, that he would
find me in money enough to live on, I was left to get to
such a state of destitution. I wrote, and told him about
the brokers being in my place two letters and
begged him to send me something. Then I heard that he
had really started for Chili, and I wrote to his wife
they had gone to live at Alresford then writing in the
name of Brand, and asking if Sir Roger had left any
message or letter for a person of that name. But I got no
kind of answer to my letter. I waited awhile, and then I
went to see my old partner at Hermitage-street, and we
talked it over, and I at last agreed to put myself in
communication with the other side. I did so, and shortly
afterwards made an affidavit telling the whole truth.
A little time after this the plaintiff’s solicitor came to
see me, and to inquire if what he had heard was true,
and I told him it was, and he went away. Before this,
though, I had a visit from Mrs Tredgett, and she told
me that she had heard it rumoured that I had turned
traitor. After I had made the affidavit, I wrote to Mrs
Tredgett, begging her to consider the matter and make
a clean breast of it, as I had done; but all the answer she
sent back was that I was a cowardly cur, and that was
the last I heard of her.
And this, as far as I am concerned, is the real truth,
and nothing else.
6 March 1864
CHARLES ORTON.


The cleverest jockey of the day.


THE CONFESSION AND STORY OF
ARTHUR ORTON
9 April 1895
MY father had eight sons, and four daughters
Thomas, Charles, George, William, Robert, Alfred,
Edmond, and myself (Arthur). My sisters were named
Elizabeth Ann, Margaret Ann, and Mary Ann. Matilda
died in infancy. Charles, who is now in Sydney, and
Edmond, who is in Quartsberg County, California, and
myself, are the only surviving sons. TVo of my sisters,
I believe, are still living Mrs Elizabeth Jury, widow
of the late Capt. Jury; and Mary Ann, widow of the late
Mrs Tredgett. My brother Thomas married a Miss
Edwards, whose mother kept a greengrocer’s shop in
Liverpool-street, off Shoreditch. My father and brother,
Thomas carried on business together as butchers and
importers of cattle and ponies. In 1843 or 1844 my
brother Thomas opened a shop at 92, Lower East
Smithfield, adjoining Down’s Wharf, where the
Aberdeen steamers then ran. My father having very large
yards close to all these wharfs, the cattle when landed
were sent to my father’s yards for delivery to the
different drovers, who came for them. In the course of
time these wharfingers had yards of their own, which
ruined my father’s delivering business. The New York
liners, too, about this time removed to the St Katherine’s
Docks from the London Docks. As we supplied them,
and 92, Lower East Smithfield being much nearer, my
father and mother, residing there, saved much trouble,
my brother Thomas and some of my sisters remaining
at 69, High-street. The lease of the yards opposite the
dock walls ran out, and my brother Thomas took an old
brewery and converted it into stables, styes, and cattle
yards.
I, with my father and mother, went to reside at 92,
Lower East Smithfield. Being very young at the time,
about 10 years old, for I was born in 1834, on the 20th
March, and afflicted with a touch of the St Vitus’ dance,
I was much humoured, and did not go to school very
much, Mr Knight of Great Hermitage-street, being my
schoolmaster. I spent most of my time on Down’s Wharf,
where there was a splendid jetty called the Dunning.
By the Dunning, which could be shortened or made
longer, steamers could discharge at any time of the tide.
Being acquainted with all the captains of the numerous
vessels that came many of them personal friends of
my father I was always made welcome. At the age
of 14 I was bound apprentice to Capt. George Brooks,
who owned a small brig called the Ocean, only 160
tons registered, but could carry 300 tons.
We left the St Katherine Docks in ballast for Antwerp,
under the command of Capt. John Preston, Capt. Brooks
remaining at home. At Antwerp we loaded the vessel
with Hollands gin for Valparaiso, in Chili. After a long
passage, we arrived at that port. After discharging we
92, Lower East Smithfield.


laid there for many weeks, not being able to get freight,
and the captain trying to sell the ship, which he had
power to do. One day a canoe came alongside with two
men in it. The cook was on shore, and two or three of
the sailors had been putting their jackets out at the yard,
and joined her Majesty’s Navy, being the only one on
board, the other two sailors having gone on shore with
the boat to bring the captain on board.
Knowing there was no certainty as to when they
would be back, I thought I would have a treat; so I
exchanged a half plug of tobacco for a crab. There was
a good fire in the galley, and the kettle was boiling. But
I could not find a saucepan to boil my crab in. Thinking
I should have plenty of time to cook the crab and boil
the kettle again, I put the crab in the kettle. He had not
been there long when the captain came over the side.
He was very impatient for his tea, so I filled it out of the
kettle. About three minutes after he came running up.
“What have you in that kettle?” He looked, caught hold
of me, took me to the side of the ship, got hold of one of
the braces, and with the end of it gave me jip.
Being a good sculler which I learnt playing about
the ships’ boats at Down’s Wharf, I often had to scull
the captain on shore. Next morning I rose at daylight,
got into the boat, and sculled myself on shore. Not being
allowed to make a boat fast to the mole, I asked one of
the numerous boys about to get into the boat and mind
her until I returned. I then made my way down Admiral
Royal. I fell into the hands of some very kind Chilians,
who gave me plenty of food and something to drink.
They also gave me a shake-down at night. I did think
them kind, but, alas, I was young and inexperienced.
They knew I was a runaway. They also knew that the
captain was compelled within 24 hours to report to the
captain of the port, and offer 10 dollars reward. Any
person giving information to the captain of the port’s
men get half.
I was taken on board about six o’clock, and, strange
to say, nobody said a word about it to me. The next day
we commenced to take in cargo for Otther Hithi, one of
the Kanacker Islands, belonging to the French; this being
a most lovely island, with fig trees and oranges growing
down to within 50 yards of the sea, all open and free to
pick up. I walked about half a mile in the broiling sun
along the beach, and then laid down under a fig tree,
and had a feed of them. I eat a great many figs, and then
fall asleep. About 7 o’clock I felt something give me a
sharp prick behind. I opened my eyes. Oh! Two French
soldiers! There was no nonsense about them. They
pointed up the beach, and we all three went together.
When we passed where the Ocean was lying.
I wanted to go on bard again. But, no; the points of
their bayonets guided me to the guard-house, nearly
opposite, where I spent the night not with any
comfort. The next morning a guard saw me safely on
board again. After taking in a cargo of cocoanut oil we
sailed again for Valparaiso. After a few days’ lying in
that harbour I made another attempt to get away. But I
did not seek my kind friends who I had known before,
but made right away for Casa Blanca, where I stayed
the night, next morning continuing my journey to
Millspalia. Arriving there safely, I called on Dr John
Daley, who made me very welcome. The doctor’s wife,
Donna Clara (who gave evidence at the trial, 1873),
and her sister, Senorita Jesus, were then young and very
nice young ladies. They were very kind to me, as was
the doctor himself. I was a great favourite with all the
families in Millspalia.
After staying several months in that Town, I left to
go to Don Ramon Alcada, a Spanish nobleman, who
had a large estate near San Francisco del Monte. Donna
Alcalda was at this time at Santiago capital, so there
was only Don Ramon and myself in the big house. I
was his guest to all intents and purposes. I used to
accompany him to his shooting box, a few miles away.
I had the use of his guns and his horses. I fired a gun for
the first time in my life in his presence at a blackbird
setting on a hedge. This he thought wonderful, and made
me practice every day. Don Ramon was called away to
Santiago, and left me to take care of the house. In about
a month he returned with Donna Alcalda. I did not take
to her; so he took me with him a few days after to
Santiago, and gave me charge of his horses. After
staying about a month at Santiago, we returned to San
Francisco del Monte. Not liking the lady I would not
remain. So Don Ramon made me a present of a very
nice horse, and some cattle being sent to Valparaiso. I
went with them for protection sake. I sold my horse at
Valparaiso for five dollars. Stayed at the Sailor’s Home
in Calls de Cockrane. Shipped as an ordinary seaman
on board the brig Jessie Miller, Capt. Thomas.
After a long passage we arrived at St Katherine’s
Docks. I sent a message to my brother Charles to say
somebody wished to see him on board th q Jessie Miller.
He came, and I accompanied him to 69, High-street,
Wapping, where I joined my father, mother, sisters, and
brothers. This was, I believe, in 1851. I remained at
home assisting my father and eldest brother in their
business. My brother Thomas had, during my absence
abroad, given up 92, Lower East Smithfield. In
November, 1852, my brother sold to the captain of the
barque Middleton two Shetland ponies, he, Capt. Story,
having been commissioned by Mr Chapman, of Hobart
Town, Van Dieman’s Land (now called Hobarton,
Tasmania), the owner of his ship to purchase two ponies
and other animals, ferrets, &c., I being engaged to look
after them, for which I received a passage out and Is.
per month, so as to put me on the ship’s books.
Arriving at Hobarton, after a very long passage, the
ponies were landed, and I took them to Mr Chapman’s
house at Newtown, a short distance out of town. I entered
into an agreement with Mr Chapman as groom, but I
heard such a bad account of him as a master that I did
not join his service. In Hobarton I engaged with a


92, Wapping-street stables.
butcher named Knight, who lived in Murray-street. Of
course, I knew nothing about the slaughtering business,
never having dressed an animal in my life. Mr Knight
used occasionally to kill and dress a few sheep, and
taught me. When I left Mr Knight I lived with Mr
Wilson, who was a regular slaughterman. Living with
Wilson a long while, I became a thorough good butcher
and rider, as we had to receive all cattle landed on the
domain. Leaving Wilson, I engaged with Mr W. Ladds;
left him and went back to Mr Wilson. From his place I
engaged with John Johnson, Esq., of Newburn Park,
Gipp’s Land, Australia (Victoria), and shortly afterwards
left Tasmania in the Eclipse , a schooner belonging to
Mr Johnson, in the cattle trade.
Now I am in Australia, 1855. At Port Albert, a cargo
of cattle was waiting for the ship. The men bring an
extra horse, saddle, and bridle for me to go back with
them. The next morning we started on our way to
Newburn Park station, where we arrived at 8.30 p.m.,
the distance being about 72 miles. Newburn Park,
without doubt, is the most beautiful station in the whole
of Gipp’s Land. After living with Mr Johnson about 12
months, I left and engaged with Mr William Foster, of
Boisdale Station, adjoining Newburn Park. I stayed with
Mr Foster about over four years, part of which time I
had charge of the Dargo Station up in the mountains,
about 80 miles from Boisdale, After leaving Boisdale, I
went to Flooding Creek in the district of Sale.
I there agreed with Mr Clark, of the Royal Hotel,
that if he could arrange to purchase of Mr John Johnson,
Richmond, an imported thoroughbred I would find half
the money; that I would take charge of his stables and
yards free of expense except to keep the horse, and find
myself in board and lodgings, and half the horse’s fees.
It turned out a failure, so I left Flooding Creek and went
to Port Albert and took the steamer for Melbourne. I
only stayed in Melbourne three days. I then went by
coach to Kilmore, about 60 miles from Melbourne, and
walked to the Deddy Creek Diggings. There I engaged
with Mr MacManus, a butcher, and lived with him a
long while. I next went to Bendigo, now called
Sandhurst. I only stayed a few days there, and then went
to Echuca, on the Murray River, and crossed into New
South Wales at Moama.
The next day I took the coach to Deniliquin. There I
met an old acquaintance who I had known in Gipp’s
Land. He had an hotel, and had been doing very well.
He made me very welcome. After staying a week with
him I engaged with his brother, John Burrows, of North
Deniliquin, with whom I lived a long while. Mr John
Burrows, although he carried on a small butchery, did
not concern himself much about it, having a number of
horses, some of them very good ones, by which he won
many a local race. The Edward River divides the
Deniliquin’s north and south. When I left Mr Broows I
crossed the Old Man Plain to Hay, on the Murrumbidgee
River, 84 miles no water. At Hay I lived with Jack
Ward, better known as Paramatta Jack.
After staying with Ward about two years I continued
to travel up the Murrumbidgee until I reached Wagga
Wagga (the native word for Crow Crow). I engaged with
Mr Gomery, mail contractor, and rode the mail between
Hay and Nauzanderer [Narrandera] every day for over
four months, distance over 40 miles. Leaving Mr
Gomery, I went up the Tarcutta Creek and on to the
Tumut. There I entered into partnership with John and
Phil Davis as butchers. It was not a success for me, so I
travelled towards the Murray, at Albury. I did not stay
long there, but returned to Wagga Wagga, entered the
service of Mr Higgins, proprietors of the Australian
Hotel. Mr John Higgins also carried on the butchering
so as to supply his hotel, the largest within 300 square
miles of country. Harry Osborne was manager of the
butchering department, I was the slaughterman. When
I had been there about 12 months Osborne left to open
a shop on his own account on some new diggings. I
was then appointed manager in full charge.
Castro’s shop.


I have been married twice, but twice to the same
woman, once by a Baptist minister and once by a Roman
Catholic. I married my wife twice first by license at
the Baptist minister’s house in Wagga Wagga. My wife
was a Roman Catholic, and so am I, and I subsequently
married her in the Roman Catholic Church at
Goulbourne, in New South Wales. I married Mary Anne
Bryant, daughter of Mrs Payne, who had been married
twice, and who lived at Goulbourne, about half way
between Wagga Wagga and Sydney. Whilst I acted as
slaughterman to Mr Higgins I lived in a little hut across
the creek at Wagga Wagga. Dick Slade and me were on
very friendly terms. Dick was open to do any odd job,
and I used to employ him to assist me in the business.
He lived in North Wagga Wagga. Slade knew me in the
name of Thomas Castro. As long as I can remember
from the time I was a boy until now I never believed in
a man, much less a woman, and never trusted neither. A
slaughterman in Australia is the boss of the shop in the
absence of the master —it is like the foreman of a place.
I was earning from £3 to £4 a week as slaughterman. In
those days I was very smart at my work, and could dress
beasts in the most magnificent manner in 20 minutes. I
have done 8 or 10 in an afternoon. I often went into the
shanties (unlicensed premises) to have a drink during
the day, but I always went with a customer or my master,
but never with the assistants in the shop.
One Sunday Morning Dick Slade returned from
Melbourne, where he had been driving cattle in. When
he came back he called in to see me about 11 o’clock at
my hut. I had just got up and had my breakfast. Dick
knew me in the name of Tom Castro, by which name I
went in Wagga Wagga. The wife was looking after the
dinner, and I was having a pipe after breakfast when
Slade called. He came in and said, “Tom, I’ve brought
you a paper, and there’s such a funny advertisement in
it.” I said, “Is there?” He said “Yes,” and thereupon took
the paper out of his pocket, and, handing it to me,
pointing to a certain page, he said, “Here, read that.” I
read the advertisement, which was in th e Australasian
Times. This was the first time that I had seen the
Australasian paper. The advertisement stated that Sir
James Francis Tichborne was dead, and that Lady
Tichborne had heard that her son Roger was out in
Australia, and the advertisement concluded by asking
him to communicate with her at once. I think the address
given was No. 7, Dorset-Square, London; but I know
the advertisement was signed Henrietta Tichborne.
While I was reading the advertisement an idea
occurred to me that I would have a lark with Slade. I
had always told him and everybody in Wagga Wagga,
and, indeed, in Australia, that I was connected with a
good family, and that I was superior to the position I
was holding. Although I had never said who I was. I
had always led everybody with whom I came in contact
to believe that I was of good family, and that ultimately
I should come into great riches. There was not, however,
a word of truth in this statement, because I was nothing
but a poor man at this time.
Up to this time I had never heard the name of
Tichborne in my life. I didn’t know who he was, what
he was, or where he came from, nor had I ever heard of
his name, or seen him. But I had frequently said to Slade
and others that I was superior to the position I was then
holding, and Dick seemed to tumble to it.
Then Dick said, “Well, you answer the description
of the advertisement.” Out of mere devilment, and with
the object only of having a lark, I put my hand to my
head, and appeared moved in tears. This I only did for
fun, but Dick took it seriously, and said, “You know
something about it, Tom, then,” referring to the
advertisement. I did not say either “Yes” or “No”, but I
gave him a short shake of the head, from which he
seemed to think that I knew something more than I chose
to say. The reason why I pretended to be affected when
Slade showed me the paper was because during the
whole of the time I lived in Australia I had always
represented myself to everybody to be of good family,
and I thought I would just play a joke off on Slade.
As I have already said, I knew no more about the
Tichbomes at this time than a baby unborn. This is borne
out by the evidence given against me at my trial by
McKenzie, a Scotch agent employed by the other side
the prosecution to go out to Chili and other parts
of South America and make inquiries with reference to
statements I had made about travelling in that country,
which he found to tally with Arturo Orton, the Spanish
for Arthur, and not with that of Sir Roger Tichborne.
McKenzie was a very clever fellow, and he was my
greatest stumbling block throughout the whole trial, for
I had the greatest difficulty imaginable to contradict the
evidence which he gave as the result of his inquiries
concerning my movements in South America.
But, to continue what passed between me and Slade
on that Sunday morning: When I saw that Slade
appeared to believe that I knew something about the
advertisement, I thought I was having a fine joke with
him, and laughed in my sleeve. I said to him, “Dick,
you’ll let me have this paper, won’t you?” He said,
“Certainly, Tom.” My wife then came up into the room
in which we were the parlour in the hut but I did
not say anything to her about it. She was an ignorant
woman, and would not have understood it. I asked Slade
to remain to dinner, which he did. I then put the paper
down on the table, and I suppose, as Dick thought I was
upset by reading the advertisement, although I was only
joking, he did not refer to the subject again. We dined
at our usual time one o’clock on Sundays and
about three o’clock Slade left me to go home. Slade
was a married man, but had no family. After Slade had
gone, the missus and me had our usual nap in the
afternoon. My hut was about 10 minutes’ walk from
the shop. About five o’clock on the Sunday afternoon I
went, as usual, to the shop, or rather to the slaughter


house to slaughter the cattle for the following day. I
had a couple of beasts and 10 sheep to slaughter. That
would take me about an hour and a half. I was assisted
by two men, but I never said anything either to them or
anybody else about the advertisement in the Paper.
When I had finished my work I went home to tea, after
which I picked up the Australasian paper which Dick
brought me, and which was the first I had seen, and
read the general news. After I had done reading it, I left
the paper knocking about the hut. I did not see Slade on
the following day the Monday as I think I told
him when he left me on the Sunday that I should have
nothing for him to do on the Monday; but when he called
at the shop on the Tuesday he said to me, “Have you
done with that paper I lent you, Tom?” I said, “Yes,”
and he said, “I’ll probably call for it to-morrow or next
day if I’m passing your way.” He did not call for it on
the Tuesday, but on the Thursday he did call at my hut,
and my missus gave it to him. Nothing was said in the
meanwhile to me by anyone either at the shop or by
anyone I met at the shanties.
Attorney Gibbes.
I don’t believe Slade had said anything to
anybody except Gibbes, the lawyer, to whom he
afterwards took the paper and gave it to him. I
went on with my work as usual, never thinking
any more about the advertisement or anything
else, and I never heard anything more until the
following Sunday morning, when I was leaving
the shop, which is adjacent to the Australasian
Hotel. I met Mr Gibbes, the lawyer, who lived
next door to the shop, as I was locking up the
shop door. Gibbes said to me, “Tom, will you
come into my place; I’ve got something I want
to show you?” I said “What is it?” and he said,
“Come and see.” I walked with him, and went
into his place. I met Mrs Gibbes, his wife, a very
nice lady. Gibbes said to his wife, “Where’s that
paper, my dear?” She produced it, and Gibbes said to
me, “Tom, have you seen this advertisement?” I said,
“I don’t know; what is it?” He then pointed to the
advertisement. I said, “Oh, yes I saw that; Dick Slade
showed it to me.”
Gibbes then said to me, “Do you know anything about
it, Tom?” Thinking I could carry my joke still further, I
said, “What’s that got to do with anybody whether I do
or not?” Gibbes said, “Well, I know you do.” I replied,
“Well, I know I don’t.” Gibbes then said, “You know
something about it,” to which I said, “I don’t know
anything about it. Why don’t you mind your own
business?” Gibbes then said, “I’ve got nothing to drink
in the house, and the shanties aren’t open yet. He said
to his wife, “Give me a drop of that,” pointing to a bottle.
His wife put the bottle from off the sideboard into the
cupboard. Gibbes went to the sideboard, took out the
bottle, which contained spirits of wine, and, pouring
out half a tumbler, diluted it with water and drank it.
That settled him, and I remained with him a good
half hour. In the course of our conversation he said to
me: “This advertisement alludes to you, Tom.” I said
“No, it don’t.” “Well,” he said, “it’s no use your saying
it does not, because I know it does; my wife and me
picked you out from the description in the
advertisement.” I said, “No, it ain’t.” Gibbes then said
to me, “Look here, Tom, if you don’t own to it, I shall
write home and tell your mother where you are and what
you’re doing.” I then pretended to be very annoyed,
and told him to mind his own business. I was only
“carrying on” with Gibbes and Slade I mean joking
about this, and the reason I was annoyed was because I
didn’t want Gibbes to write to a lady I didn’t know,
because I knew I was not the person referred to in the
advertisement. Gibbes knew me as Tom Castro. I knew
Gibbes intimately at the hotel as a customer, because
his house a small one was next to our shop, and
the shop and the hotel was kept by my master, who was
the same proprietor. Jemmy Bluett was the manager of
the hotel, and I was the slaughterman, or foreman of
the butchering business. Gibbes did not ask me whether
I was Sir Roger Tichbome, but he said “My wife and I
are convinced that you are by the description in the
advertisement.”
About six or eight months before this occurred
before Slade showed me the paper I called upon
Gibbes and told him that I owed a few pounds in Wagga
Wagga, and asked him what he would charge me to run
me through the “insolvency court”. There are two courts
in Australia, and the Bankruptcy Court. If a man goes
through the Insolvency Court, he gets his discharge on
condition that he pays his debts whenever he has the
means, but if he goes through the Bankruptcy Court he
is freed from his debts. Gibbes told me that it would
cost me £14.1 said “I haven’t got £l4 in the world.” He
then said, “Well, it could not be done for less.” For the
mere devilment of the thing, and just for a lark, it


occurred to me, and I said, “How would it be if I came
into money afterwards?” Gibbes said, “Why, you’d have
to pay your debts.” Then I said, “I will not go through
the court.”
Gibbes said, “But do you expect any money then,
Tom?” I replied, “Yes; well 1 do some day or other.”
That statement to Gibbes that I expected some money
one day was perfectly untrue. It occurred to me, but
why I don’t know. I merely said it on the spur of the
moment, because it came uppermost, and I said it. I
hadn’t the least idea at that time of getting a penny from
anybody in the world, because if I had or had any
prospect of getting any money. I should have gone
through the court, but as I hadn’t got the £l4, and knew
I was not likely to have it unless I saved it out of my
wages, about £3 10s. a week, which was also very
unlikely.
When Gibbes saw the advertisement, and he and his
wife made up their minds that it referred to me, I have
no doubt the fact that I had some time since told him
that I expected to have money one day, although quite
false, occurred to him, and led him to suppose that I
really should have money at some time. Gibbes said to
me several times on that Sunday, and repeated it when I
went away, “look here, Tom, it’s no use your denying
it, because my wife and I have picked you out from the
description, and we are convinced that you are Sir Roger
Tichbome.” When he said that to me, I said, “Nonsense;
pack of rubbish; it has nothing to do with me.” He
replied, “It’s all very well for you to say no, but it does.”
This interview on the Sunday morning took place in
the parlour of his cottage. Although Gibbes said he was
convinced in his own mind that I was Sir Roger, I never
thought anything of it, because I knew that I was not; in
fact, I never did think anything of it at least up to
The real Sir Roger.
this time. It was all forced on me, and came about by
listening to people who declared that I was Sir Roger.
After leaving Gibbes on the Sunday I went home to
dinner. I might have told my wife that I had called to
see Gibbes, but I did not tell her then or at any other
time what had passed between me and him, nor, in fact,
did I do so at any time. She was too ignorant even to
understand it, if I had. Gibbes kept the matter to himself,
and although he was in the hotel at least a dozen times
a day, he never mentioned it to anybody either in the
bar or the hotel. During the next week I heard nothing
more about this matter, and went about my business
in fact, 1 was too busy to think anything about it. I heard
nothing more of the matter until the following Friday
evening, when I was in the shop parlour making up my
accounts. It was about seven o’clock in the evening,
and Dick Slade happened to come in.
I said, “Dick, you had no right to go and show that
paper to Gibbes, you know.”
Dick replied, “It didn’t matter very much, did it?”
I said, “Yes, it did.”
“Is it anything to do with you, then,” he said.
I said, “Whether it is or not, you had no right to go
and show it to him. I thought you would have kept it to
yourself.”
“Oh,” said Dick, “then it has something to do with
you?”
Still keeping up the joke, I said to Dick, “Never you
mind.”
“Ah,” said Dick to me, “I thought you knew some-
thing about Hampshire.”
I said, “Well, I don’t know very much about it,” and
I didn’t at that time. I had never heard the name before,
and hadn’t the least idea where Hampshire was.
Dick then said to me, “You know where Basingstoke
is, don’t you. That’s where I came from.”
“Oh,” I said, “I didn’t know that.” Nor did 1.1 didn’t
know anything about Basingstoke, or where it was, or
anything about it;
But I then began “to suck his brains” about Hamp-
shire, and I learnt more about it that night than ever I
knew before; in fact, I learnt all about it, for I didn’t
know where Hampshire was till he mentioned it. I heard
that night all about Hampshire; how many miles it was
from Winchester to Basingstoke, and from Basingstoke
to Guildford, and all the other towns around about. I
only did it for devilment, in order to make him believe
that I was somebody of importance, but I never had any
idea in fact it never crossed my mind of making
out that I was Sir Roger, because I didn’t know anything
about him at that time. I learnt more about Hampshire
that night than ever I knew, for I made him tell me all
that he knew about the place.
After we had been talking about Hampshire, I said to
Dick, “I suppose you know the Tichboraes then?”
He replied, “Oh, yes; everybody knows them.”


The reason I said Tichbornes was because that was
the name mentioned in the advertisement, but I didn’t
know anything about them then as to who or what they
were. I came to England because I was compelled to do
so by force of circumstances, or I should never have
come on here. My intention was if I could get any money
to go on to California, and see my brother, who was
living there. I think about this time Slade went at my
suggestion to the Pastorial Hotel and got a bottle of
Hennessy’s brandy, which I paid for, and which we
drank.
After we had had a drink, I still went on pumping
Slade, who was a Hampshire man. I said to him, “Dick,
how far do you call it from Basingstoke to Tichborne
Village?” Dick had previously told me that the village
was named after the family, Tichborne.
Dick replied, “Well, I should think about 15 miles.”
“Well,” I said. “Yes, I suppose it is about that.” I said
this, although I knew no more about it than a baby. I
didn’t know where it was, because I had never been in
Hampshire in my life. Tichborne Village is about 15
miles from Basingstoke via Alresford. I don’t remember
that anything else of importance occurred that night.
Up to this time, the Friday evening, I had not formed
any idea in fact I hadn’t any of what I was going
to do, and it never occurred to me to assert myself as
Sir Roger. I simply carried out my joke, and had a bit of
fun with Slade. On the previous Thursday I was standing
in the street talking to a friend, when I saw Gibbes
coming along. He went into a fruiterer’s and bought an
orange, and on coming out, waited till my friend had
gone. When he had, Gibbes came up to me, and said,
“Now, Tom, when are you going to write home?”
I said, “What do you mean?”
He replied, “Why, it’s no use you denying it any
longer. You know you’re Sir Roger. Why (pointing to
my pipe in my mouth), there are your initials on your
pipe.”
I had carved previously the letters “R.C.T.” on my
pipe just for fun, and nothing more. Gibbes then said
“Look here, Tom, it’s quite time you wrote home to
your mother.” I said, “Why don’t you mind your own
business, and not interfere with mine?” He then said,
“Well, Tom, if you don’t write to your mother at once, I
shall.” I said, “you had better not.” I didn’t think that he
dare do such a thing, but he did write to Lady Tichborne.
I was angry when he said he should write to Lady
Tichborne, because I did not know her from Eve, and I
thought it might get him and me into trouble. He did
write to her, but I did not know that for some weeks
afterwards.
Before he received an answer to his first letter he
wrote a second letter to Lady Tichborne, in which he
enclosed the letter which he persuaded me to write to
her; but I will tell you why I wrote that directly. About
three weeks after Gibbes had seen the advertisement in
the paper and had written to Lady Tichborne, I met him
outside his office and just as I was leaving him he said
to me, “It’s all right, Sir Roger, we shall soon hear from
your mother.”
I said, “Here, that’s enough of that, don’t you call me
by that name again.”
He replied, “All right, I won’t; I suppose you don’t
want anybody here to know.”
I said, “No.”
He said, “Very well, I’ll keep everything quiet then.”
A few days after that 1 met Gibbes again, and he said,
“I’ve written to your mother.”
I said, “You had better mind your own business, or
you’ll get yourself in trouble.” I meant by that that he
would get himself into trouble criminally.
Gibbes replied, “Oh, that will be all right. You leave
that to me. I know who you are, well enough.”
A fortnight after that he said to me, “If we don’t hear
from your mother I should advise you to go to Sydney
and go home to England. I’ll find you the money.”
I said, “Will you?” and he replied “Yes.”
For the first time it crossed my mind when he said
that, as I was hard up at the time, if I could get some
money no matter who from or where, I could get away
from Wagga Wagga, go to Sydney, and take the boat
over to my brother who was then in Panama, and nobody
would know where I had gone or what had become of
me.
Gibbes then asked me to go with him to the Australian
Joint Stock Bank, which I did, as I wanted money badly.
When we got there he introduced me to Mr Cottee, the
general manager. I knew Mr Cottee as the bank manager,
and he knew me as I had a small private account at the
bank, and we served the bank with meat. The firm also
banked there. Gibbes introduced me to Mr Cottee as
Sir Roger Tichborne. Mr Cottee seemed very surprised
when Gibbes said I was Sir Roger. Before this Gibbes
had been frequently urging me to write to Lady
Tichborne, saying, “I would not stay here and lead the
Lady Tichborne.


life that you are doing. I should write to my mother,
and ask her to send me money to enable me to go to
England.” He dwelt so much upon this that at last,
although I knew I was doing wrong in writing to a lady
I didn’t know, I consented to write a letter to Lady
Tichborne.
The reason I wrote the letter was because I was hard
pressed for money at the time, and I thought that if she
was fool enough to send me any money so much the
better. I could then go to Sydney and take the steamer
to Panama where I could join my brother, and nobody
would ever hear anything more of me. The letter I wrote
at Gibbes’ suggestion to Lady Tichborne was something
like this: “Wagga Wagga, Australia, 18—
“My dear Mother, I have no doubt after so many
years that have passed you will have some difficulty in
knowing whether it is me that is writing to you.”
Then I went on to allude to the celebrated Brighton
card case at the Bedford Hotel, Brighton, between
Johnnie and Harry Brome, the champion, and told her
that I had lost £1,500 there in playing cards with them.
This was just an idea that I got into my head, and I said
it although it was perfectly untrue. I knew the Bromes
by name, but had never been to Brighton, much less
had I ever played cards with them. Then I went on to
tell Lady Tichborne that I had a brown mark on my left
side, which I had, and that no doubt she would remember
this, and oddly enough she did. The letter further stated
that I had some other marks. I think I said that I was
coffee marked. I asked her to send me out £3OO to get
home with. I told her I had several preparations to make
before I cared to come home, that my clothes were not
good enough for me to come home in, and that my
wardrobe was not, in fact, fit for a gentleman. I signed
the letter Roger Charles Tichborne.
Going back to the interview with Mr Cottee, Gibbes
said to him in my presence, “This is the gentleman I
was talking to you about, Sir Roger Tichborne. Cottee
looked as me, and said, “Is that so?” I said, “Yes, sir.
He then said to me “You must be a very foolish man to
knock about in the colonies like this instead of going
home.”
I said, “Well, it’s a very jolly life.”
Cottee then said, “Well, what do you want me to do?”
I then said, “Gibbes wants me to go down to Sydney,
and wait there for the answer from my mother, who I
have written to ask to send me some money to go home
with and to give up working, but I said I cannot do that,
as I haven’t got any money.”
Cottee then said, “How much do you want to do that
with?”
I replied, “I suppose about £50,” which he gave me.
I gave him a three months’ bill in return, which Gibbes
accepted. I signed the bill “Roger Charles Tichborne.”
Cottee thereupon gave me £2O in gold and a draft on
the head office in Sydney for £3O. I remember that
because I had a lot of trouble in getting the £3O, the
manager wanting me to sign “Roger Charles Tichborne,
Bart.,” and I had to put “Bart.” in order to get the money.
Nobody but Giddes, Cottee, and myself knew anything
about this. Mr Higgins, my master, had been away in
Sydney for some weeks, and during his absence the
priest, Father Connelly, had spread it about Wagga
Wagga that I had been carrying on a fine old name in
his absence, putting money into my own account at the
bank instead of to that of my master, and thereby doing
him out of large sums. I didn’t like this, so I went and
saw Mrs Higgins, and told her all about it. She said,
“Don’t you take any notice of him, Tom, he is a drunken,
worthless fellow, and he won’t be there (at the Church)
long.”
When my master returned from Sydney, having been
away about seven or eight weeks, he asked me how I
had been getting along, and I told him all right, adding,
“Of course, you have heard that I have been robbing
you?” He said he did not believe it, and when I showed
him the books and the amount of money I had been
taking, he was convinced that it was all lies. I told
Higgins that I should leave him, as they had said I had
been robbing him, but he said I could not do that. I told
him that as I was suspected of robbing him I should
leave his services at once. On the Saturday evening I
asked him to go with me to the bank as I had a particular
reason. He went with me, and I asked Cottee what
balance there was to Higgins’ account, and he replied
£1,336, and £8 to the credit of any private account. This
made Higgins all the more anxious, and I had to explain
that I had come into a bit of money, and that I was going
to England, but I did not tell Higgins that I had assumed
the name of Tichborne.
In order to travel from Wagga Wagga to Sydney I
had to buy a horse and cart. I bought a cart from Mr
Cater, the baker at Wagga Wagga, and I gave £7 for a
beautiful black mare, which I broke into harness. I
prepared myself to leave Wagga Wagga as soon as I
could. On several occasions after I left my situation with
Higgins, Mr Cottee asked me up to the bank, and I used
to spend the evening with him playing cards. Sergeant
Carroll was our chief constable, and on one occasion
he saw me come out of the bank just before 12 o’clock
one night. Cottee had just let me out of the back door,
and shut it quickly after I had left. Carroll walked up
alongside me, and said, “Hollao, Tom! is that you,
Tom?” I said, “Yes.”
He said, “Who let you out of the bank at this hour of
the night?” I said, “Mr Cottee.”
He said, “Mr Cottee let you out at this hour of the
night?” I said, “Yes.”
He said, “Where are you going to so late?”
I said, “Into the Australasian Hotel to have a drink
will you come in and have one?”
We went into the smoking-room, but Carroll left me,
asking me if I should be there when he came back. I
told him that I should and he then went away returning


in a few minutes. He did not tell me, but I guessed that
he had been to the bank to see if my statement was right,
and that all was right at the bank. I learnt this afterwards.
When Carroll came back he joined me in a drink or
two. He knew me as Tom, and I don’t think he was told
certainly not by me that I was Sir Roger. Nobody
in Wagga Wagga asked me whether I was any other
than Tom Castro, or what I was going to England for.
Cater, the baker in Wagga, had retired from business,
and was about to sail for England. He came to say
goodbye to me, and I gave him a letter I had written to
him, but asked him to give me his word that he would
not open it until he was at sea, and he said he would
promise. The letter said, “If you return safe to England
and should be at any time in the neighbourhood of
Tichborne village call and you will meet with an old
friend.” Cater left Wagga Wagga fully three weeks
before I did. He made a lot of money at Wagga Wagga,
about £13,000 or £14,000. I saw him at my trial. He
stayed with me several times when in London. Cater
lost all his money by speculating, and returned to Wagga
Wagga, bought his old business back, and is now living
there. From the time I left my situation till I finally left
Wagga Wagga, none, with the exception of Gibbs and
Cottee, to my knowledge, knew who I was.
I left Wagga Wagga on the 2nd June, 1886, with my
wife and child. We drove in the cart I bought as far as
Berimer, about three-quarters of the distance. We left
Wagga Wagga about 9 o’clock in the morning quietly,
without any fuss or anything like a demonstration of
any kind, and drove on till we came to the Tar Cutter
[Tarcutta] Hotel, about 35 miles from Wagga Wagga,
where we put up for the night. On leaving the Tar Cutter
Hotel we travelled on daily till about 5 o’clock in the
evening, when we put up or rested at the wayside for
the night. We travelled on in this way, camping out at
night until we reached Gouldboume [Goulburn], about
100 miles from Sydney. When we got to Gouldboume
we went to the house of Mr and Mrs Paine, the stepfather
and mother of my wife, where we stayed two or three
days. I left my wife with her parents, and travelled down
to Sydney by myself in the cart. At Berrimer I sold the
horse and cart, and then took the coach on to Picton,
where I took the train to Sydney, arriving at daylight on
the following morning.
I went straight to the Metropolitan Hotel in Pitt-street.
Stephen Butts, the landlord, was the man from whom I
rented some ground in Wagga Wagga. I did not give
my name at first, but waited to see the landlord. I told
him that if any letters (and I was expecting some from
England) came for Sir Roger they were for me. The
following day the papers announced that Sir Roger had
arrived in Sydney, and was staying at the Metropolitan
on his way to England. On this day also a letter was
brought to me from Mr Turville, the Governor of
Sydney’s private secretary. Turville was one of the
executors to the will appointed by Sir James Francis
Tichborne in place of Vincent Gosford, who had
offended him. Roger Tichborne made a will before he
went abroad unknown to his parents. By that will he
left all his property to his brother Alfred, but in the event
of there being no issue it was to go to his second cousin,
Lord Dormer. General Dormer was recently killed in
India whilst tiger hunting. The letter from the
Governor’s private secretary stated that he would be
glad to hear that I had arrived at Sydney, and that he
had been appointed executor in place of Gosford, and
concluded by asking me to call and see him. I appointed
by letter to see him the following day. Although I was
announced in the papers at Sydney as Sir Roger, and
people were beginning to recognise me as such 1 did
not at this time form any idea as to what my future action
should be.
All I wanted was money. I had already got some from
Cottee, and expected £3OO from Lady Tichborne. I was
led on by circumstances and by listening to other people,
who said I was Sir Roger to lead people to believe that
I really was, but my intention was directly I got the
money to leave Sydney and go by boat to California
and join my brother, and that I should die in oblivion,
and that none would ever hear anything about me. My
brother Edmund, whom I had not seen for 15 years was
doing well in California in Quartsburg where he
had a ranche. The day after the notice appeared in the
Sydney papers I had been out for a ride on horseback.
(My weight then was about lOst 81b. I only got fat since
I came to England). Returning and going through the
arch to the back of the hotel I saw a black fellow sitting
outside the bar parlour door.
Bogle.
I knew that Bogle was Sir Edward Doughty
Tichborne’s old black servant. Sir Edward Doughty
Tichborne was in 1826 Mr Edward Tichborne, but Miss
Brownlow, a distant connection, dying in that year, left
him the whole of the property under the proviso that he
took the name of Doughty instead of Tichborne, and
used that name in future, and in 1846, when his elder
brother Sir Henry Tichborne met his death by falling


I his horse in Waterlane, at the back of Tichbome Park,
Edward then became the baronet and went to reside
the village of Tichbome. When I saw this black chap
urmised at once that he was the old black servant
►gle. I knew that he was in Sydney by what Slade told
and I thought it only natural, it being advertised
it Sir Roger was in the town, that he would come and
id him out as he knew him so well. The moment I got
ider the arch I saw Bogle. I dismounted, and walking
. to him, said, “Well, Bogle, who would ever expect
find you here.” “Oh,” he said, “I am very pleased to
e you Sir Roger, Indeed.” Bogle told me that he had
;en several years in Sydney. He had a greengrocer s
lop in the market, and one of his sons kept a barber s
lop, and the other was a musician.
Bogle recognised me at once, and said he had no doubt
i his mind who I was. I sent him into my private room
ith my servant. I didn’t know Bogle from Adam,
ad learnt about the Tichbome family in Burke's
eerage, which I saw at a library at Goulburn, which
nabled me to converse with him about the different
rembers of the family, and to ask how they were when
e last saw them. Even after Bogle had recognised me
s Sir Roger I had no idea as to what I was going to do.
had a long interview with Bogle which subsequently
'Ot into the papers at great length in almost every paper
hroughout the colony. What appeared in the papers was
in account of my interview with Bogle.
Of course, I got a great deal out of Bogle. I was
Dumping him all the time as to the names and habits
md customs of the various members of the family, and,
indeed, every mortal thing about them. Bogle was a slave
lad when Mr Edward was a manager for a large sugar
plantation in Jamaica, and Bogle was a little slave lad
when he brought him to England to wait upon him.
Bogle remained with him to the time of his death, and
always stood behind his chair at meals. Although 1 got
a lot of information out of Bogle, I did not make a note
of anything that he told me, but trusted my memory.
I never made a note of any incident in connection
with this matter in my life; in fact, I wasn t so foolish as
to do so. Bogle thoroughly believed that I was Sir Roger.
He used to converse very freely with me about the
family, giving me the whole history of it, which enabled
me to converse with others. Singularly enough, although
I had never seen Bogle before, he recognised me at once,
believing that I was the young man that went away. He
believed so strongly in me that he wrote to Lady
Tichbome stating that he had met me, and that I really
was Sir Roger. He wrote to several other people to the
same effect in England, and poor Bogle finally lost his
pension of £SO a year. When Mr Turville came to the
hotel he didn’t ask me if I was Sir Roger, but took that
for granted. He asked me about the different members
of the family, and what sort of lady my mother was.
From what Bogle told me, I was able to tell him all
about this, and he went away quite satisfied that I was
Sir Roger. My interview with Turville lasted about a
couple of hours. The second day I was in Sydney I went
to the Australian Joint Stock Bank, and got the draft for
£3O cashed, but he would not cash it without I put ‘ Bart,
at the end of my name, so I had to put it, and that is
what I got in such a row in court over during the trial. In
consequence of the statement in the papers that Sir Roger
was staying at the Metropolitan Hotel, a number of well-
to-do people called to see and congratulate me.
One person more than any other did so, and very
frequently. This was a man named Gilfoyle, who had
been gardener in the service of the family at Tichborne,
and who happened to be living in Sydney at the time,
and knew Sir Roger very well. He came to see me and
recognised me at once as Sir Roger from a conversation
I had with him about the family more than anything
else; but before I left Sydney, the Catholic clergy had
persuaded him to change his opinion. I also saw the
priests at the hotel, but as I would not listen to their
exhortations, they advised Gilfoyle to turn against me,
which he eventually did. Gilfoyle had previously written
to Lady Tichborne stating that he had seen me, and that
he was convinced that I was Sir Roger.
Gibbes came in a few days to finance me further,
which he did. He got Levi and Delissi, merchants of
Sydney, to lend me £600; he got also £3OO off of
Thomson and Giles; and £3OO from a Mrs Wood. She
was the widow of a man who had a large second-hand
furniture shop in Pitt-street. All these people lent me
money, for which I gave them bills upon Drummond
and Co. in London, but I had heard them mentioned,
and that was the only bankers I knew in London, with
the exception of the Bank of England. I gave Gibbes
£3O for his trouble for getting me the money. I remained
in Sydney from June till September 2nd, when I sailed
in the SS. Rakai for Panama. I was living at the
Metropolitan all the time, and was living pretty fast,
going about for pleasure and riding and driving.
About a month after I had been in Sydney I received
an answer to my letter to Lady Tichborne. She didn’t
send me the £3OO I asked for, but told me it would be
very easy for me to raise the money; that I was to go to
any merchant who would give me the money to come
home with. I replied to that letter in rather angry tones,
expressing surprise that she had not sent me the money,
and stating that I should be very happy in the colonies,
and should remain there. In reply to that letter Lady T.
sent the money, but I had left before it arrived. She sent
me a draft on the Union Bank of Australia, paying at
the head office in Sydney.
I made the acquaintance of a good many people in
Sydney, among them that of Sir John Taylor, the
governor’s aide-de-camp. I was frequently invited out
to lunch and dinner, but I always declined as I didn t
care about that sort of thing. Whilst in Sydney I was let
into a secret that the Government of New South Wales
were about to build as new post office facing the


Metropolitan, and that the hotel would have to come
down. The hotel being for sale, I bid for it, and offered
bills in payment of the purchase money. I did not take
possession of the hotel, and was not to do so until the
bills were met. At Butt’s suggestion I gave him a bill
for £7OO for three months, which he got cashed, in return
for which he gave me his bill for £I,OOO for 12 months.
About 10 days before I left Sydney, Gibbes came to see
me off, and I gave him £6O, but he did not negotiate
any more money for me.
I sailed from Sydney in the SS. Rakai on the 2nd
September. I had then about £6OO in gold with me, which
I brought from the Union Bank, and I booked my
passage to Panama as Sir Roger Tichborne and the wife
as Lady Tichborne. Nobody came to see us off, and
there was no demonstration of any kind. The vessel was
bound for Panama, and my intention was when I reached
there to go on to California. I made myself known as
Sir Roger Tichborne to the people on board, amongst
whom were Mr Francis Sullivan, the Minister for
Railways in Victoria. Having met him years previous
at the Bendigo diggings he recognised me. We became
great chums on the passage home. He was alone, and
was making his way to America. There was on board
also Captain Vine Hall, the manager of the Panama New
Zealand Steamboat Company, the company the vessel
belonged to. There were 50 first-class passengers on
board. I told Sullivan during the voyage that I was going
to England to claim my estates I meant, of course,
the Tichborne estates. I asked him to come and see me
when he came to England, and gave him my address at
Tichborne, but he said he did not think that he should
ever be in England again. He was an Irishman. Nothing,
however, of any importance occurred on the voyage
home, and we arrived at Panama after touching at New
Zealand, where we were delayed for two hours owing
to rough weather. In about three weeks’ time from that
we got to Panama.
When we got to Panama I went to the only hotel
well, the only decent one there was there and a lot of
the passengers were staying there. We all agreed before
we left the vessel to live at the hotel together more as a
family, and not to have any strangers amongst us. There
was a lot of the passengers bound for California, and as
soon as their boat came in they went off. I had made up
my mind to go by that boat to California, but I found
that I could not get away from the passengers at the
hotel very well, because I had already told everybody
that I was going to England, so I thought I would wait
and go by the next boat.
By that time I thought I should have got rid of all the
passengers staying at the hotel. But a lot of them stayed
on, however, and I could not get away from them
well, not without exposing myself, and showing them
that I had not been telling the truth, because all along I
had told them that I was going to England to claim my
estates. Running short of money whilst I was in Panama,
I got the Panama and New Zealand Steamboat Company
to lend me £3OO on Butts’ £I,OOO bill. I did this because
I knew that I should get nothing for it or upon it when I
got to England. The bill transaction with Butts was
perfectly bona fide with this exception that I thought
Butts thought he was going to trick me, and that was
why I negotiated the bill at Panama. The result of this
transaction was that Butts was subsequently sued on
the bill, and had to pay. Finding that I could not get
away from the passengers at the hotel without exposing
myself, I thought it would be very silly to do that so I
made up my mind to sail in the SS. Henry Chancy for
New York, which I did thinking that I should be able to
get from there by the overland route to California.
We reached New York in eight days from the start,
and when I arrived there I again fell in with Mr Sullivan
and Mr Jones, the manager for Gordon and Gotch, the
well-known stationers. They never left me, and I found
that it was absolutely impossible for me to get away
from them. I put up at the Clarendon hotel in New York,
and so did Mr Sullivan. In those days the Clarendon
was perhaps the best, if not one of the best, hotels in
New York city. All the way home from Sydney 1 went
in the name of Sir Roger Tichborne and never used any
other name after I left Sydney. While in New York,
where I stayed a month, I got to know aMr Galway, a
provision merchant in New York, who was a friend of
Mr Jones’. Later on Galway lent me on my bill for 700
dollars for three months.
Whilst I was in New York I seized the opportunity to
go to Washington to have a look at the Capitol, and a
thing occurred there which I don’t think would occur in
England. I was shown all over the Capitol, and also
taken into the Chamber of Congress, which interested
me. When I was coming away from the Chamber of
Congress I offered the attendant, who had shown me
all over it and explained everything to me, one dollar,
but he declined it saying that the Government paid him
for the service he had rendered me. When I left
Washington I went on to Baltimore and Philadelphia,
and after visiting both those cities I went back to New
York. A singular thing occurred to the vessel that I went
by. The second passage after I had crossed in the Chancy
that she made she was burnt at sea with some hundreds
of passengers on board. After returning from
Philadelphia to New Jersey and crossing the ferry to
New York, we journeyed in safety.
When I woke up the next morning, and was having
my breakfast, I heard that the SS. Chancy had been burnt
to the water’s edge, and that over 60 persons, and not
several hundreds as I had previously heard, and was
glad to hear was not the case, had either been drowned
or burnt to death. When I got back to New York I again
met Sullivan, and we remained together up to the time
of my leaving New York, on the 10th December, 1866.
I sailed from New York in the SS. Celia. I did not raise
any more money before I left New York, and when I


sailed from there for England I had about £2OO in my
possession. Sullivan and Jones both saw me off from
New York in the Celia. We, that is me and my wife,
sailed in the name of Sir Roger and Lady Tichbome.
Bogle begged and prayed of me to take him to
England with me. I told him I would very willingly do
so, but that I had not sufficient
money. He told his son, the
barber of Balmain, and he lent me
£3OO on my bill, in order that 1
might bring his father and his
younger brother with me. I also
brought home to England with
me Butts’ son, who acted as my
private secretary on the vessel
and after we arrived in England.
My party on board the Celia
consisted of my wife, myself and
child, the nursemaid, young
Butts, and Bogle and his son. We
were 15 days on the voyage
home. The passage was a very
bad one owing to the rough
weather.
We arrived in the Victoria
Docks on the Christmas Day,
1866, about 1 o’clock in the
afternoon. After clearing our
luggage, which was somewhat
numerous, and occupied some
considerable time, I, my wife, child and the nursemaid
chartered a four-wheeled cab, and I told the driver to
drive us to Ford’s Hotel, in Manchester-street.
It was while we were having tea about 3 o’clock, that
old John, the waiter there, and I believe the head waiter,
who was handing round the toast, said to me, “Will you
take toast, Sir Roger?”
I looked at him and said, “Do you know me, then?”
“Of course I do, Sir Roger,” he said. “I remember
when you used to come here with your father as quite a
young lad.”
I then said, “What! are you old John?”
He replied, “Yes, Sir Roger.”
Bogle had told me previously in Sydney all about
old John, and that was why I said to him, “Are you old
John.”
In the course of the conversation over the tea table
old John said, “I have been here 40 years Sir Roger,
and I have never failed to recognise anybody when I
have once seen them at the hotel.”
I then said to old John, “Do you know where my
mother is living, John; is she living at the hotel?”
He said, “Yes, Sir Roger, I can tell you where she is
living. She is not staying at the hotel now. She lives just
round the comer in Blandford-street.”
I then said, “Could you get me her correct address
with the number?”
He said, “Yes, Sir Roger,” and in a short time
afterwards he returned to the room and brought me her
address. After we had had tea I went round to the address
which he had given me in Blandford-street.
When I got back to the hotel about 11 o’clock, I went
to the bar window to ask the number of my bedroom, as
Ford’s Hotel, Manchester-street.
I had not put up there before. I
saw Mr Ford the landlord as I
went in. He said to me, “Won’t
you come in, Sir Roger, and have
a glass of grog with me before
you go up.” I said “Yes,” and
followed him into the bar parlour.
In the course of the conversation
which passed between us, he said
he remembered the time when my
father used to come with me, and
remarked upon the number of
years it was ago, and said what a
number of years it was since Sir
James had stayed at his house.
While we were drinking Mr Ford
told one or two little incidents in
connection with Sir James’
peculiar character and habits and
customs, which, of course, I
readily listened to, and he made
some allusion to the whiteness of
his hair from childbirth. This was
the first time I had ever heard of
Sir James’ white hair from childbirth. This I remember
very well, indeed, because if Bogle had asked me what
was the colour of Sir James’ hair I might have said black
or brown, but I am sure I should never have said it was
white. That is all that passed as far as I can recollect of
any importance. I wished Mr Ford good night, left the
bar parlour, and went up to my bed-room, old John
showing me up to my bed-room.
I went to Paris accompanied by John Holmes and
Joseph Leete. We put up at the Hotel Lille et d’Albion,
kept by a Mr le Bass. Le Bass happened to know Sir
Roger in his schoolboy days. I did not have any
conversation with him, however, that night. The hotel
was a very nice one, but I did not like the male servants
waiting on me, and I sent for le Bass and asked him if
he could not let me have a female servant to wait on
me. He said he had not got one in the house, and I told
him I could not stay there unless he could get me one. I
said I had never been used to male servants, and unless
I could have a female servant to wait upon me should I
leave. He expressed his regret that he had not got one in
the house, but he promised to get me one the next day,
and he did so. In the course of conversation, he said to
me, “If you are Sir Roger, I remember you very well,
indeed, in your younger days.” Of course, I did not
recollect him. He asked me whether I remembered a
certain firm of bankers in Paris, and I said “Oh, yes, I


Mr Ford.
remember them very well, indeed,” but as I had never
been to Paris before of course I did not know anything
about this firm of bankers or anybody else. He also said
that he had known Lady Tichborne and Sir James all
his life. I told him I had just come back from Australia,
and that I had specially come to Paris on purpose to see
Lady Tichborne.
On the morning following my arrival in Paris, Lady
Tichborne sent her Irish male servant Cohen around to
my hotel to inquire if Sir Roger had arrived, and le Bass
told him that he had. About an hour afterwards Lady
Tichborne came around to my hotel to see me. It was
about 10 o’clock in the morning when she called. I got
up to breakfast that morning, but after the meal I became
very ill. The real cause of my illness I cannot thoroughly
explain, but it must have been due to the fact that I was
over excited at the prospect of being confronted with a
lady whom I did not know. I was really taken very ill,
indeed, and I went to my bedroom which adjoined my
private suite of apartments. Feeling very ill I laid down
on the bed in my clothes. Leete came into me, and told
me that Lady Tichborne had arrived. I said, “All right, I
am quite ready to receive her,” but Lady Tichborne
entered the bedroom accompanied by Holmes and Leete.
I was lying on the bed with my face to the wall, and
in that position my back would be to Lady Tichborne.
She was in the room some minutes before I knew she
was there. When she came in I heard Holmes say, “Sir
Roger, your mother is here.” Of course then I turned
over and slid down, my legs resting on the side of the
bed. She looked at me, and then came forward and kissed
me, and said, “Oh, Roger, I am so glad to see you.” She
was full of emotion and seemed very much affected.
Holmes got her a chair, and she sat down alongside of
me, and we conversed together. She could see that I
was really very ill, and she asked me what was the matter
with me. I said I did not know what it was. My head
was as red as a turkey cock’s, and the blood seemed to
be rushing up to my head which she noticed. She was
very kind and attentive to me, and we chatted together
very freely indeed, but I don’t think that the conversation
which passed between us on this occasion was very
important.
She could see that I was really very ill, which was
perfectly true, and she did not therefore bother me with
any business or matters of detail, and as far as I
remember the most important thing that she said to me
on this day was that she would send for a doctor for me.
She then went and sat down at the table by the side of
my bed, and wrote two notes which she despatched by
messenger to the doctors. She then begged me to keep
very quiet, and suggested that I should lie down on the
bed again, which I did. My face would then be towards
her. She sat on a chair by the side of my bed, and
continued to converse with me. When the doctors arrived
they examined me, and ordered me some hot water and
mustard to be brought and put in a bath and told me to
put my feet in it, which 1 did. Two medical men came,
and they both agreed that this should be done, and they
ordered me to keep to bed. Whilst Lady Tichborne was
with me she appeared very affectionate, and she showed
her appreciation of me by kissing me frequently.
I should think she kissed me about every five minutes
on the cheek. They ordered me to bed, and while I was
undressing she went into my private sitting room on
the same floor. When I was in bed she came back into
my bed-room again, and she appeared very much
concerned indeed about my illness. She was very
attentive to me, indeed, and she remained with me the
whole of that day until 10 o’clock at night, she having
her meals in my private sitting-room, in the next room
on the same floor. Lady Tichborne was staying in the
Rue du Matturin. In the course of the day she conversed
with me very freely indeed, and she asked me to tell her
all about my life in Australia and other parts of the world.
She also asked me how I had been getting on, and what
I had been doing. She inquired further whether I had
got the £3OO she sent me out to Sydney, and I told her I
had not as I had left before it arrived. She further told
me that she had been in the habit of allowing Alfred
(Sir Roger’s brother) who was a baby then, £2O a week,
but now that you have come home, of course I shall
allow you the same sum.” She accordingly did so, and
this she continued to do right up to the time of her death.
She also gave Holmes instructions to take a house for
me and my wife at Croydon. She inquired very kindly
after my wife and child. I told her they were both in
London staying with Mrs Holmes during our absence.
She expressed a great desire to see the child. I think on
that day, but, at all events, on the next, I gave her a
short account of my life in Australia, telling her how I
had been getting my living. She gave me £2O before I
left Paris, and she paid all the hotel expenses of Holmes,
Leete, and myself. This was in January, 1867, when I
was in Paris. My arrival in Paris was notified by the


press in Galignani, but I had no interview with any
members of the press.
On the second day of my being in Paris I was a little
better, and was able to go out. I got up in the morning,
and had breakfast with Holmes and Leete, and while
we were having it, Lady Tichborne arrived,
accompanied by Monsieur Chatillon, who had been Sir
Roger’s tutor when a boy in Paris. Lady Tichborne
brought Chatillon to see me in order to see if he could
identify me. He sat down and had breakfast with us, but
as I could not speak French, he conversed with me
through Leete, and he asked me whether I remembered
being at Ponic, in the South of France. I told him that I
did very well indeed. He also asked me whether I
remembered anything occurring there, and I told him
that I did not remember anything of any particular note.
He then asked me if I remembered falling from some
rocks. I said, “Yes, I remember that very well indeed,”
and he then asked me if I had a scar at the back of my
head where my head was cut open.
Chatillon.
I said, “Of course I have,” and by a remarkable
coincidence I had, as a matter of fact, a wound on the
very spot where he looked for it on the back of my head.
I got this scar on the back of my head by being knocked
down by the end of a swinging top-sail sheet that had
been broken in a gale. We were at the time of the accident
off Cape Horn in the brig Ocean. This was the first
voyage I went. The vessel was bound for Valparaiso,
and this accident occurred on the voyage out near Cape
Horn. Chatillon did not seem quite satisfied with this
statement of mine as to the scar on the back of my head,
and he got up from the breakfast table and came over to
where I was sitting on the other side of the table and he
examined my head. After doing so he exclaimed in an
Holmes
excited manner, “No, no; no wound there.” Chatillon
had before this said to Lady Tichborne, who was a
perfect French scholar, that he doubted my identity. He
then went back to his seat and conversed with the party,
which consisted of Holmes, Leete, and myself, and Lady
Tichborne. I persisted that the wound was there, and
Holmes and Leete got up and looked at the back of my
head, and they fancied that they could see the scar there,
but as my hair was very thick at this time they could not
make it out very clearly or plainly. I then told Holmes
to get a pair of scissors and cut the hair close away to
where I pointed. He did so in the presence of all of us,
and after he had cut the hair away the scar was plainly
to be seen. Chatillon then examined my head again, and
after doing so he said no doubt that the wound was there,
but he could not understand how it was that I had got so
enormously big. Before I told Holmes to cut my hair
away, Lady Tichborne felt my head, and said to Chatillon
“Oh, yes, you will find the wound is there.” After the
hair was cut away, and Chatillon had plainly seen the
scar, Lady Tichborne said, “There you are, I told you
the wound was there, and there it is.”
Chatillon continued to converse with me through
Leete, and he asked me what we used to do when we
went out together. I said, I used generally to go down to
the baths and bathe, and I told him that he used to go
into the cafes and play billiards. As Lady Tichborne
was present he did not like my saying this. This was,
however, quite correct, because I had got all this
information from Bogle. Chatillon said to me, “No, no.”
I told Leete to tell him that it was quite true, and that we
were always in the billiard rooms together. Chatillon
then admitted that what I said was quite correct, that he
used to go into the cafes and see them play billiards,
but he did not take any part in the game. The principal
conversation was between Chatillon and Lady


Tichbome. Chatillon had breakfast with us, and
remained about an hour, when he left in a temper. After
Chatillon had left we did not go out that day, and Lady
Tichbome remained with me as before up to 10 o’clock
at night. The conversation of that day turned more
particularly upon Chatillon, who, Lady Tichbome said,
was always a very stubborn man, and she believed that
he was simply holding back for the purpose of getting
some money out of her. I was not surprised in the least
that Chatillon did not recognise me, but that made little
or no difference to me, because I could get anything I
liked out of Lady Tichbome. The day passed in the usual
manner, and we conversed about Chatillon and other
people, which I was able to do with the information
which I had got from Bogle and other people. Lady
Tichbome dined with us on this evening, and left about
10 o’clock at night.
Going back to the interview with Chatillon in Paris, I
think Lady Tichbome wanted him to make an affidavit
as to his conviction of my identity, but he flatly refused
to do anything of the kind. I have never seen Chatillon
before in my life, and he conscientiously refused to
believe that I was Sir Roger. There was a curious incident
which occurred at the trial in the Court of Common
Pleas. I was asked by Mr Coleridge, in cross-
examination, what schools I had attended in France, and
I said that I had never been to a school in France.
Coleridge said, “What, sir; you never went to a school
in France?’ I said, “No.” “Will you swear that?” he said.
“Yes,” I said. I said “No,” because I had heard that I
had never been sent to any school in France.
When the Bishop of Orleans was put into the witness-
box, he was asked if he at one time of life kept a school
in Paris, and he replied that he had. He was then asked
if he remembered a pupil attending his school by the
name of Roger Tichbome, and he replied that he did,
and that he had known Roger Tichbome since he was a
boy. “Then,” said counsel, “he did in fact attend your
school?” “Yes,” was his answer. Well, that made it look
“very blue” for me. When Ballantine rose to cross-
examine his grace, he said, “May I ask your grace how
long Roger Tichbome attended your school?” He said,
“Well, I find upon examination of the books that it was
for six days.” Then said Ballantine, “What age was
Roger Tichbome when he attended your school?” His
grace replied, “To the best of my recollection he would
be between five and six years of age.” Upon this, Lord
Justice Bovill asked Coleridge if he had brought this
witness and five other priests to prove that Roger
Tichbome went to school in France for six days, and
that was when he was between the age of five and six
years. “Yes, my lord,” replied Coleridge. Whereupon
Lord Justice Bovill said, “Well, all I can say is that if I
had been sent to a school in France for such a brief
period, and at so tender an age, I should indeed have
forgotten all about the circumstance, and I do not wonder
that the Claimant has done so.” Turning to Coleridge,
Lord Justice Bovill dais, “Brother Coleridge, I think
you are trying to prove the Claimant’s case for him.”
On the third day I was very much better in health.
Holmes drew the affidavit of lady Tichbome, which was
witnessed by Sir Joseph Oliffe and Dr Shrimpton, the
head physicians in Paris. Sir Joseph Oliffe was the
physician to the British Ambassador. The affidavits were
made and sworn to, and were to the effect that they were
present when Lady Tichbome acknowledged and
recognised me as her son, and they also bore testimony
as to the state of my health, and that they had examined
me. Holmes, Lady Tichbome, and myself then drove to
the Notary Publique, and they sworn the affidavits, Sir
Joseph Oliffe and Dr Shrimpton meeting us there. After
the affidavits had been sworn we went for a drive in the
Tuileries. Lady Tichbome was with me from early
morning till 10 o’clock at night each day during my
stay in Paris. After we had had a drive we returned to
the hotel.
On this day we drove to the photographers. It was a
very cold morning, and it was snowing very hard. We
all had our portraits taken separately, except Lady
Tichbome and myself. We were taken together. After
this business was over we went for a drive, and returned
to the hotel as usual. Then Holmes and Leete went out,
and I was left all the afternoon and evening with Lady
Tichbome alone. Our conversation was general, I used
to ask her about the Nangles. The only sister of Sir James
had married an Irishman named Nangles. The daughter
was named Katherine. There were three daughters. They
were all named or called Kate. They were Kate Nangles,
Kate Greenwood, and Kate Townley. We talked
generally about the family, and she remained to tea and
dinner with me. She asked me whether I remembered
sending my shirts and other clothing home when I was
going to Mexico, and I asked her if she remembered the
spurs and the stirrups, and she said, “No.” I knew all
about these from what Bogle had told me. When I was
living at Essex Lodge, Lady Tichbome went down to
Winchester and sent up a large trunk which contained
the clothes which Roger had sent home from Valparaiso.
All the clothes fitted me except those for which I had
got too stout. Whilst Lady Tichbome was taking the
things out of the box, we came across the stirrups and
spurs, and other things, the bits, &c., which I had spoken
to her about, but which she had no memory of. I said,
“Why, here are the things, mother, which I asked if you
remembered my sending home, and whether you
received them safely.” She then, of course, remembered
them, but until I had reminded her she had quite
forgotten all about them. Everything was intact just as
Roger had sent them home. Nothing particular happened
on the next day, except that Lady Tichbome came to
meals. The conversation was general, and after she went
home at night, I went out with Leete and Holmes to see
a bit of Paris. We went out every night to have a look at
the city. I think it was on the following day that we


went to a Notary Publique and the affidavits were again
sworn to. On the morning of the seventh day we drove
over to Lady Tichbome’s house in the Rue Maturin.
She joined us in the carriage, and we went for a drive in
the Tuileries, and after we returned and went back to
the hotel, and she remained to dinner. That was the only
time that I ever went to her place. I don’t remember
anything of importance occurring on the eighth day. We
spent the day in going for a drive and in dining and
eating and drinking. We spent the ninth day much the
same as the previous one.
On the morning of the tenth day, Leete, Holmes, and
myself left Paris for England, driving in Lady
Tichbome’s brougham to the station. Lady Tichbome
came to see me off. The day before I left Paris she told
me that she had arranged with Holmes to take a house
for me at Croydon, and to get it ready for us to go into.
She gave me £2O before I started. She paid all the debts
connected with the house at Essex Lodge, and also
Wellesley Villa. Lady Tichbome said she would come
over to England as soon as ever she could get her affairs
settled in Paris. She kissed me very affectionately at
the station two or three times before I left, and she never
mentioned Chatillon to me after the last time I saw him.
The reason, I believe, she did this was because she
believed that he was holding back for money. We left
on the tenth day of our visit to Paris, and we came
straight to England. When I got back to London I went
and stayed with Holmes until Essex Lodge was got ready
for us.
Whilst Staying with John Holmes in Sydenham-road,
Croydon, a curious incident occurred. Opposite his
window was a wicket-gate evidently leading to a garden,
and which was a kind of back way through the garden
out into a main road. Every morning and evening I used
to see a gentleman come out of it about 9 o’clock in the
morning and return about 4.30 in the afternoon. I
Mr Burrows.
happened to say one day to Holmes, “I fancy 1 know
that gentleman,” and he looked to me very like
somebody I had known, but still I did not think for the
moment he was the same party because this gentleman
was in a different sphere of life to the person I had
known. When I told Holmes this he said to me, “Why,
that gentleman you see go out every morning at 9
o’clock and return about half-past 4 in the afternoon is
an old barrister, and his name is Burrows.”
I remember the name because I recollected seeing
the name of Burrows upon a document, and I
remembered that that document was drawn by Mr
Burrows, a barrister, who took his instructions from
Roger at the office of Mr Edmund Slaughter in Duchess-
street, Mayfair. Holmes had previously got me a copy
of Roger’s will, and the idea struck me that it might be
the same Mr Burrows that had drawn that will, so I got
Holmes to find out whether that was so or not, and oddly
enough it turned out to be the same person. Seeing this
gentleman going out one morning I crossed over the
road, and said to him, “Good Morning, Mr Burrows.”
He said, “Good morning, sir.” I said, “You don’t
recollect me now, I suppose?” He said, “No; I cannot
say that I ever had the pleasure of meeting you before.
What might your name be?” I said, Roger Tichbome,”
and added, “if you remember in 1871 or 1872 you drew
up my will for me,” and he said, “Indeed, indeed.’ I
said, “Yes, don’t you remember that I used to attend at
Slaughter’s place,” and I told him that I remembered
him very well. He said, “Is that so?” I told him that it
was, and that my name was Sir Roger Tichbome. He
then said, “Oh, dear me, I remember that quite well,
and you are the gentleman that used to come to my office
many years ago.” I told him that I was.
“Dear me,” he said, “I cannot understand what the
dispute is all about.”
I said to him, “I married a woman of low degree, and
that is why the family won’t recognise me.”
Burrows replied, “Well, well, I can quite understand
that there is always something in family affairs, but I
have no doubt you will be able to put everything right.”
I replied I thought that I could, and with that he wished
me good day and we parted. Whenever we met after
that we always chatted about my affairs.
Upon our return from Paris and London, Holmes
caused the information concerning me, together with
my identification by Lady Tichbome, to be published
in all the London papers. Subsequently I had an
injunction against the Morning Post and six other papers
for commenting upon the merits of my case before it
had been tried. I got two convictions, one against the
Times and the other against the Morning Post. The Times
sent me a humble apology.
Holmes set about raising funds for me by trying to
get all the support he could of those who would entertain
it. Holmes succeeded in raising a very large sum of
money for me. Holmes’ bill alone came to £16,000 in


10 months. At this time Holmes only had one clerk. It
never rains but it pours. They wanted his place at the
corner of the Poultry for the Queen Victoria-street
improvements, and Holmes got about £17,000 for a little
bit of an office opposite the Mansion House. Messrs
Fearon, Clabon, and Fearon, solicitors, of Great George-
street, got £IOO,OOO worth of bonds for me. Holmes
succeeded in getting over £IOO,OOO.
I remained with Holmes for a few weeks prior to
taking possession of Essex Lodge, Thornton Heath, with
my wife and child. Holmes had the house furnished very
nicely for me. This he could do because he was not
limited to any figure. I had Bogle and his son living
with me, and a nursemaid, and I engaged a housemaid
and a cook. When Lady Tichborne returned from Paris,
she came straight to Essex Lodge, where she lived with
us up to the time of her death. She brought with her a
French maid, whose principal occupation was to look
after a Newfoundland dog called Bella, after the name
of the ship in which young Roger was drowned; a French
cook, and her groom, Cohen. We all lived there together.
I used to go to London almost every day to Holmes’
office in the Poultry, and I used to lunch in the Poultry.
Where I passed most of my time was at Crockford’s,
opposite White’s Club, in St. James-street. It was there
that I made the acquaintance of the O’Ryan’s, of
Banshard House, Tipperary, Ireland, and a number of
other people. I was known to them as Sir Robert, and
we used to play cards and billiards together. They all
recognised me as Sir Roger, and it was while I used to
mix with them that I got some very useful information
as to the Irish affairs and what occurred in Ireland. Roger
was very friendly with the Misses O’Ryans, and also
with the mother, Mrs Chayter. I met these people at
Crockford’s, and got to hear all about them. The
O’Ryans swore affidavits in my favour.
Shortly afterwards a man called, named Thomas
Carter, who lived with Roger Tichborne when in the
Caribiniers in Ireland. Carter fully recognised me both
by my voice and features, and went to Holmes and made
an affidavit, then asked me to give him some
employment. Knowing what a useful man he would be
to pump about the Army, I engaged him to attend on
me, and make himself useful about the house. Of course,
he knew all Roger Tichborne’s brother officers, and most
of his personal friends. The man was invaluable to me.
Soon after this Lady Tichborne came over to England,
and came to reside with us at Essex Lodge. This was
the first time Lady Tichborne saw my wife and child.
This was a very anxious time for me, my wife being a
very ignorant woman. But Lady Tichborne took to them
very nicely, especially the baby, with whom she became
infatuated. I went to London nearly every day to
Holmes’ office, and obtained a lot of useful information,
both military and civil. Holmes raised funds for me on
my bills, and thus kept me plentifully supplied. Lady
Tichborne also allowed me £2O per week for pocket
money, and paid all the expenses of the establishment.
Essex Lodge.
It was at Essex Lodge that Captain M’Evoy called to
see me. I received him, and, being pretty well up in
military affairs, I had no difficulty in holding a
conversation with him. After an hour’s chat I
accompanied him as far as the railway station at
Croydon, and saw him off to London, not convinced
but very doubtful. Shortly after this Colonel Bott and
Colonel Betty called. I was very ill in bed at the time, in
fact, so ill that I had sent round to Holmes’ house in
Sydenham-road, Croydon, asking him to call before
going to town. He did so, and was sitting at my bedside
when they called. Carter, who had caught sight of them
coming down the road, came into the bed-room saying,
“Colonel Bott and Colonel Betty, sir, are just coming
down the garden.” Holmes went to the window, and
Carter pointed out which was Colonel Bott and which
was Colonel Betty. Carter answered the door. But neither
of the colonels recognising Carter, Colonel Bott gave
Betty’s name and Colonel Betty gave Bott’s name. This
Carter told us when he came up to announce them. Mr
Holmes said he would go down and see them.
When he entered the room both the colonels rose,
exclaiming, “How do you do, Sir Roger. You know me,
don’t you; I’m Capt. Bott,” said Betty; and, “You
remember me, don’t you,” said Capt. Betty, “I’m Capt.
Bott.”
Holmes then said, “I think there is some mistake
gentlemen. I am not Sir Roger Tichborne. I am Sir
Roger’s solicitor, John Holmes.”
The two colonels, of course, apologised.
Holmes then said, “Is there not some mistake,
gentlemen, in your names? For Sir Roger, who is ill in
bed, when he heard the garden gate open looked out of


Guildford Onslow MP.
the window and saw you, and said, ‘Why, it’s two of
my old brother officers, Col. Bott and Col. Betty.’ I
asked him which was Col. Bott and which was Col.
Betty, and he must have made a mistake, for he said
you were Col. Bott, but you have announced yourself
as Col. Betty.”
They then acknowledged that they had exchanged
names to test my memory. They then pressed very hard
to be allowed to see me. But Holmes positively refused.
He said they had evidently called in a hostile manner,
and under false pretences. The two officers gave
evidence against me at the trials. During my
imprisonment Col. Betty, accompanied by Quartermaine
East and Mr Onslow came to visit me. Col. Betty
pretended, although he ha given his evidence against
me, that he could recognise me now. I had the “fat off
me,” and he said he would communicate with the
authorities and tell them so. I did not know that he did.
About this time I left Essex Lodge, and went to reside
at No. 2, Wellesley Villas, Croydon; Lady Tichborne
going to London, and residing at Hamlett’s Hotel,
Manchester-street, Manchester-square.
Soon after this Lady Tichborne and myself were both
subpoenaed to the Law Institution in Chancery-lane to
be examined on our affidavits, before Mr Rupell, a judge
appointed by the Court of Chancery to try whether it
was a bona fide case to be carried to the Court of
Common Pleas for issue. Mr Rupell decided it was. I
had as my counsel on that occasion the late Lord Justice
Hannen, afterwards Lord Justice of Appeal, and the late
Serjeant Ballantine. Against me, Mr Justice Hawkins
and Chapman Barber. The court sat two days. Lady
Tichborne and myself sat facing the judge. I was called
on first, and examined and cross-examined by the
different counsel. In cross-examination Mr Hawkins
could not shake me. At the end of the second day he
gave it up, and being asked by Mr Hannen if they had
any question to ask Lady Tichborne, they said no.
Lady Tichbome’s affidavit went forth undisputed and
could not be disputed afterwards. Holmes was in high
spirits. He asked me that night if I wanted any more
money, and said he could get as much as I wanted now.
I signed some more bills at his office the next morning.
I do not remember who cashed them.
When I was in Paris I weighed 21 stone. When I
married my first wife I weighed lOst. 81b. After marriage
I began to get stout, and I increased so rapidly that I
had to diet myself in order to keep my weight down. I
continued to get immensely fat, notwithstanding the fact
that I seldom ever rode less than 30 miles a day. I was
never a heavy beer drinker, having perhaps not more
than one glass of ale in a month, and I have often been
as much as four and five years without ever tasting beer.
When I left Wagga Wagga I weighed about list., and
while I was in Sydney I increased very rapidly indeed
to 18st., and on the passage home to England I finally
increased to 21st.
I must now go back a little in order to tell you about
the visit I paid to Wapping. On the Christmas night the
day I arrived on these shores, and after I had been round
to Blandford-street, Manchester-square, to try and find
Lady Tichbome’s address, I did not return to Ford’s
Hotel direct, but took a cab and drove to Wapping. When
I got there I was not a little surprised to find that our old
house was closed and billed “To let.” I told the cabman
to drive to the Globe public-house, at the corner of
Globe-street, which he did. I went in and called for a
glass of sherry and a cigar, which the landlady served
me with.
Globe public-house.


I then asked her if she could tell me where the two
Miss Ortons were living. She said, “Oh, there are no
such persons now; they are both married years ago.” I
said, “No matter, do you know where they are to be
found?” She said she did not, but that her daughter, who
only lived three doors away, did, and if I would look
after her bar for her she would run round and get their
address. Being Christmas night all her people were at
church. I promised to do so, so she went and brought
the address back. I then told the cabman to drive to the
address given, which he did. I rung the bell. A maid
came to the door and said the ladies were spending
Christmas in the country with some friends, and would
not be home for three or four days. I then drove back to
Ford’s Hotel, had a glass of whisky with Mr Ford in the
bar parlour, and then went to bed. Poor old Mr Ford, he
remembered me well at least, he thought he did
when I used to go there with Sir James Doughty
Tichborne, so he said.
The next morning I was up early and away, as I
expected there would be a great many call to see their
friend Roger Tichborne. I went first to Blackwall, then
to Gravesend, where I engaged rooms at the Clarendon
Hotel. I wrote to my secretary, young Butts, to bring
my wife, nurse girl, baby, and luggage to Gravesend,
but not to give my address to anyone. They came on the
following day. I sent Butts back to stay with Bogle and
his son at Ford’s, with strict injunctions not to give my
address, but Mr Cullington managed to get it from him.
I had made, in the meantime, the acquaintance of a Mr
Leete, Allsopps’ continental traveller, at the Continental
Hotel, London Bridge. He was playing billiards. I
happened in conversation to say that I had just come
back from Australia. He said he had heard that the heir
to the Tichborne estates had just returned. He said, “I
knew his brother Alfred very well.”
I then put on the “pump,” and got a lot of useful
information from him about the Tichbornes, and
especially about Alfred Tichborne. I told him that I was
Roger Tichborne, that my mother was over in Paris
waiting for me, and she expected me to arrive by the
French boat from New York; that I had written to her to
come over to England at once, and that I was waiting
her arrival. He asked me if I had engaged a solicitor. I
told him I had not, but that Mr Turville, the governor of
New South Wales (Sir John Young’s) private secretary,
had given me the name of one. I showed it to him. He
said, “You be very careful. There was a solicitor of that
name struck off the rolls, and sent to prison the other
day; but should you want a thorough honest lawyer I
can recommend you one, a friend of mine, Mr John
Holmes, a very sharp clever man. Would you like to
meet me at his offices, 2, Poultry, to-morrow at 12, and
I will introduce you to him. You need not engage him.
He is an awfully nice fellow.” I agreed to do so.
The next morning we all met at Holmes’ office, and
I put my case in his hands. He promised to visit me the
next day at Gravesend, which he did. We talked the
matter over all the evening, and the next day he
advertised himself as my solicitor in the newspapers.
Lady Tichborne, hearing that I had arrived in London,
wrote to Norris Brothers, her solicitors, in Bedford-row,
in order to find me, and to instruct them to send me
over to Paris to her at once. Not being able to get my
address, he wrote me a letter, which my secretary at
Ford’s promised to forward the same day. Cullington
having obtained my address came to the hotel at
Gravesend, accompanied by Gosford and Mr Plowden.
I was out for a walk when they called. They saw the
landlord, and told him that he would never get paid his
bill, that I was nothing but an impostor, and tried to get
the landlord to allow them to go into my private room,
where my wife, child, and nurse were, but he would not
do so. I came in about 2 o’clock, the three gentlemen
being in a room downstairs.
Mr Gosford.
I went, or rather was going upstairs when the three
gentlemen cane rushing up after me, calling out, “Sir
Roger, Sir Roger, we want to speak to you.” I took no
notice of them, but called out, “If you gentlemen wish
to see me send your cards up in a proper manner, and I
will see you.” This they would not do. Shortly
afterwards, Mr Holmes came into the hotel, and the
proprietor told him how these three persons had been
carrying on, in consequence of which Holmes went
down and saw them. He explained that he was my
solicitor, and asked them what they meant by such
conduct. They begged that Mr Gosford might be allowed
an interview. Holmes came and saw me, and I agreed to
see him, providing Mr John Holmes was present. Whilst
on the stairs these three gentlemen had addressed each
other by name several times, so that I knew which was
Gosford, which was Plowden, and which was


Cullington. In my conversations with Bogle both in
Sydney and on board the Rakai, I had gleaned a lot of
information about Gosford and Mrs Gosford, so that
when Mr Holmes brought him into my room I had no
difficulty in keeping up the conversation by asking how
so and so was, and so forth. In fact I talked poor old
Gosford into believing that I really was Sir Roger
Tichborne, and he told Mr John Holmes so. After this
Mr Holmes determined to take me over to see Lady
Tichborne. So he wrote to her telling her of the interview
with Mr Vincent Gosford, and that Gosford had told
him that he really recognised me as Roger Tichborne.
This of course, I knew would pave the way, and it did.
Whilst staying at Gravesend, I took a run down to
Alresford, and put up at the Swan Hotel, kept by Edward
Rous. Waiting to make myself acquainted with the
neighbourhood, I put up at the hotel as Mr R. C. Taylor
(“R.C.T.” being on my portmanteau). It was soon known
a stranger was in the village. The next morning I was
coming back to the hotel, after having been out for a
walk, I overheard two men talking. One said to the other,
“There’s Mr and Mrs Marx coming up the street.” I
went into the hotel, and whilst looking out of the
window, Rous, the proprietor, came in, and said, Did
you enjoy your walk, sir?” I said, Oh, yes. Mr and
Mrs Marx were just passing my window on the opposite
side, I, looking out, said to Rous, “Is not that Mr and
Mrs Marx?” He looked out, and said “Yes.” That settled
it in Rous’ idea that I must be the returned Roger
Tichborne, or how could I have known Mr and Mrs
Marx.
The news went round the village like wildfire. I
returned to Gravesend that night, leaving Alresford in
Mr Rous.
Swan Hotel, Alresford.
a great state of excitement. Two days after we left for
Paris. During my stay at Alresford I was received very
kindly, and, of course, acknowledged without any
questions, knowing that I had been recognised by Lady
Tichborne. Rous took it for granted. I stayed two hours
with him on that visit. I also met on that occasion Mr
Bulpett, Roger’s old banker (Bulpett and Hall, Alresford
and Winchester). Mr Bulpett had always ridiculed the
idea that Roger Tichborne was still alive, but hearing
he was coming up Broad-street, Alresford, Iso planned
it to meet him unawares, he turning one corner and I
the other. I stopped when I saw him, and appeared
surprised. He did the same.
Then I walked right up to the man and said, “Mr
Bulpett, how are you?”
“Oh, you naughty man,” he said, taking me by the
hand, “why have you not written to your friends all these
years?”
I simply said, “On account of family quarrels.”
“Come along with me round to the bank, and we will
have a chat.’
I went with him to the bank, and had two hours’
conversation with him, promising to dine that night with
him at six at his private house at Old Alresford. I stayed
with him until the small hours of the morning, when I
returned to the Swan Hotel, kept by Edward Rous, who
was formerly a lawyer’s clerk.
The next day 1 returned to Croydon. Rous and I
became very intimate friends, and his family visited
mine at Croydon. Shortly after this I received an
invitation from Mr Edward Hopkins to go down and
stay a week with himself and Mrs Hopkins. I accepted
the invitation, and spent a very pleasant week with them.
Mrs Hopkins was Mr Marxham Gifford’s sister, then a
Chancery Q.C. I need hardly say that during that week


Mr Hopkins.
I did not lack information about Roger and his private
and family affairs. I also, in my walks with Mr Hopkins,
made myself acquainted with the neighbourhood and
its people who lived there in young Roger’s time, and
incidents that occurred. I also saw and became intimate
with Mr Yates, and his sons, Arthur and Trevor (C.
Arthur Yates, the gentleman jockey), Mr Yates lived at
Bishop Sutton, two and a half miles from Tichborne
park. I now visited Alresford very frequently.
There lived at Tichborne House at that time Colonel
Franklin Lushington, tenant and lessee. The colonel,
when I first arrived, was a great opponent, and
everywhere he went about the neighbourhood among
the gentry made his animosity well known. We, that is
Mr Hopkins and myself, heard what he had been saying
about me. After I had returned from spending a week
with Mr Hopkins, Mr Hopkins being out for a walk early
one morning, met Colonel Lushington.
The colonel, who was a very bluff character, said, “I
say, Hopkins, I hear you have been encouraging that so
and so impostor down here.”
Hopkins replied, “Did you know Roger Tichborne
before he went away?”
“Oh, no, I never saw him in my life.”
“Then, sir,” said Mr Hopkins, “Who do you think
knows best? You who never knew him, or I who knew
him as a child, as a lad, and as a young man? I acted as
his legal adviser from 1849 to 1851 in the settlement of
the estates. I raised the sum of £30,000 for Miss
Doughty’s marriage portion for him; surely I ought to
know him.”
The colonel admitted that if anybody in England
ought to know Roger Tichborne it was himself.
“Do you think, Colonel Lushington, that I would have
an impostor in my house as my guest?”
“Oh, no,” said the colonel, “I never thought such a
thing, but I thought you might be mistaken. How do
you account for his cousins not knowing him? Mrs
Greenwood, Mrs Townley, and others not claiming
him.”
Mr Hopkins said he did not know anything about
those ladies. (I told Mr Hopkins that it was on account
of my marriage.) But that he knew that the gentleman
who had been his guest was no other than Roger
Tichborne.
“You are a magistrate. Do you wish to be convinced
as to whether he is or is not Roger Tichborne?”
“Certainly, I do,” said the colonel.
“Then,” said Mr Hopkins, “if you will come and dine,
any day convenient to yourself, I will invite my friend
down. We will dine together, and I will guarantee to
convince you beyond a doubt that he is Roger Tichborne
and no other.”
The colonel accepted.
A few days afterwards I received a letter from Mr
Hopkins, asking me to dine with him on the following
Thursday, as he wished to see me very particularly. I
arrived there about 4 o’clock, and was introduced to
Colonel Lushington by Mr Hopkins. I had no idea who
I was going to meet. We all went into the drawing-room,
and chatted until dinner time. After we had dined and
the ladies had retired, Mr Hopkins, the colonel, and I
took our seats at the bottom of the table.
After a while Hopkins took from his pocket a letter
saying, “Sir Roger, I have here in my hand a letter which
I wrote to you while you were stationed with your
regiment in Ireland. I want you to tell me how it came
into my possession again.’
The poor old gentleman had forgotten we had talked
over that letter while I was staying the week with him.
I said, “I cannot tell you, Mr Hopkins; I do not
remember.”
“Well, take the letter and look at it.”
“Oh, no,” said the colonel, “that would not be fair.”
“Well, you look at it, colonel.”
Hopkins’ house at Alresford.


The colonel did, and not withstanding that he was
considered the finest scholar in Hampshire he was not
able to read one word in that letter, it was written so
badly. The colonel handed the letter back to Mr Hopkins,
saying, “I don’t think there is much harm in showing
him that.”
I looked at the letter. The only word I could make out
was “Cahir.” Remembering the conversation we had had
together about it, I said, “Oh, yes, Mr Hopkins, I can
tell you how you came by that letter again. You wrote
that letter to me when I was stationed with my regiment
at Cahir, in Ireland. When I opened it I could not read
it. I took it to all my brother officers, and none of them
could read it. I then took it to Captain Sergeant, the
volunteer solicitor at Cahir, but neither he nor his clerks
could read it. I then wrote to you, enclosing your letter
back, asking you to be kind enough to get your clerk to
copy it, and send me back the copy, as I could not read
your letter and could not find a man in Ireland that
could.”
Mr Hopkins then handed the colonel another letter
which the colonel read, and exclaimed, “Marvellous,
marvellous.” Then, addressing me, he said, “Why, sir,
you have repeated verbatim every word you wrote in
that letter so many years ago.”
The colonel then stood up and, extending his hand,
said, “Sir Roger Tichbome, hence forth you can look
on me as a friend. I know I have done you a great deal
of harm in the neighbourhood, but I will see what can
be done to remedy it.” He then invited Mr Hopkins and
myself to lunch with him on the following day at
Tichbome House. We accepted the invitation. The next
day being a very beautiful day, and the distance only
two miles, we walked over. When we arrived at
Tichbome House the colonel and Mrs Lushington were
waiting to receive us in the porch. The colonel took
possession of me, and Mrs Lushington looked after Mr
Hopkins. With his arm through mine, the colonel led
me into the hall.
Having gone a few yards he suddenly stopped, and,
looking round the hall, he said, “by-the bye, do you see
any alterations in the hall since you were here last?”
“I do not,” I said.
“Are the pictures hanging in the same places?”
Looking up at them, I said, “Oh, no; that one of Sir
Benjamin ought to hang there, and that one of Charlie
Tichbome ought to hang there.” And I replaced no less
than 12 large pictures into their original places.
The colonel said, “Why, you seem to know the names
of the pictures. I don’t know how you could do that if
you were not Roger Tichbome.” Then putting his hand
to his head, as if struck by a sudden thought, he said,
“By-the-bye, there was another picture here. The Queen
O f__of_of Sweden, I think.”
I said, “No colonel, you mean the portrait of the Queen
of Bohemia.”
“Yes, yes, you are right. Well now, where did that
hang when you went away?”
I said, pointing to a door, “Just inside that door, over
and above it.”
“Well, well,” said the colonel, “let us go and see it it
hangs there now ”
All four of us, the colonel, Mrs Lushmgton, Mr
Hopkins, and myself entered the drawing room. I turned
up to look over the door at the portrait, when I heard
the colonel say, “Marvellous.” It was his favourite word.
I looked and saw that they were looking at me and Lady
Tichborne, whose portrait hung on the wall behind the
door, life size.
“I never saw such a striking likeness, said the
colonel.
This same portrait the colonel had conveyed to the
Court of Common Pleas, during the trial in that court,
and it was exhibited to the judge and jury.
The colonel then asked me to go with him and took
me outside the front door into the porch.
Then himself and Mrs Lushington stood inside and
said, “Sir Roger Tichborne, we welcome you into your
own house, which we place at your disposal to make
your home whenever you come to Hampshire.” After
lunch, Mr Hopkins and myself returned to Alresford.
You will wonder, no doubt, how I prepared myself to
meet all this, for I never trusted man or woman. The
second time that I went to Alresford and stayed at the
Swan Hotel Rous, who then thought he knew me, and
took all things for granted, asked me one night when
we were having a glass hot together if I would like to
go over and have a look at the old house. He said he
was going over to get some butter from the Home Farm.
He said, “I suppose you knew Mr Noble, the farm
View of Tichborne house.


Mr Noble.
bailiff?” I said, “Oh, yes; but I don’t wish to be
recognised yet.” So we drove over together.
He got his butter, and Noble’s wife came out of their
house, and said, “Rous, who is that you have in your
gig? That’s Mr Tichbome; I would swear to him
anywhere.”
Noble then came over to where the gig was, and, after
looking at me a little, knew me at once.
“How are you, Sir Roger?” said Noble.
“Pretty well, Noble; how are you?”
His wife, seeing him shaking hands with me, came
running over to the gig. “I knew you from the window
of my pantry,” she said. “You must come in, if it is only
for five minutes.”
So to oblige them (myself I mean) I did. We all went
in. After a few minutes, Noble said, “Would you like to
look at the hall. The family are all away?” Of course I
did not mind. So we all went over. Mrs Noble evidently
wanted to show me how clean she kept the house during
the colonel and family’s absence. Of course we went
all over the place. Of course too Noble wanted to show
me how well acquainted he was with the names of all
the pictures. I knew they would not dare to tell anyone
I had been in the house, for their own sakes, and traitor
as Rous was, he could not for his own sake, so they
never got to know. After spending an hour and a half in
the house, we returned to the Swan with our butter. Rous
having been a lawyer’s clerk was a very useful man, so
when I went to a witness I always took him and Tom
Carter with me, Rous to draw out the affidavits and
Carter to get all the information he could; and he never
required to be told to do it. Of course, he was a most
useful man in obtaining military information. After
Carter I had continually with me Sergeant-major James
Marx. He used to travel and lecture at the halls with
me.
One afternoon, when I was coming out of Baxter,
Rose, and Norton’s, in Victoria-street, I met one of the
witnesses who had made an affidavit as to my identity.
He was one of the Carabiniers. He did not know much
of Roger Tichbome, because he only joined the regiment
the year that Tichbome left. He asked me if I recollected
what animal was above the lodge at the bottom of the
road leading from Glengall Park, in Cahir, County
Tipperary. I suppose he put this question to me in order
to see if he could trap me, but he found that he was
mistaken, because I told him I knew perfectly well the
animal that was there, and I told him it was a cat. He
said, “Yes, that is quite right.” I had never been in Ireland
until I went there about six years ago, when I went to
Dublin and to Belfast, but I knew of this incident from
conversations with Carter and others.
Major Norbury, now Colonel, was easily captured at
Malvern; so was Captain, now Colonel, Sherston, down
at Romsey, Hants. Colonel Heywood, whose sister
married Mr Sumner, the son of the Bishop of Winchester,
and curate of Old Alresford. Colonel Heywood came
to see me at the Swan Hotel, Alresford, and recognised
me at once. I had his affidavit drawn out at once, which
he swore to. General Custance I met at Salisbury. I wrote
him a letter saying that I should be at a hotel there on a
certain day, and should be very pleased to see him. He
came, and he recognised me at once. Whilst we were
chatting, Captain Pinkney sent his card up. Of course I
had him up, and he, like Custance, recognised me at
once, and in like manner were the other officers
entrapped. The officers who gave evidence for me were
General Sawyer, General Custance, Colonel Norbury,
Colonel Sherston (stipendiary magistrate), Major
Stillman, Captain Pinkney, Captain Laidlaw, Captain
Cunliffe, and Colonel Heywood.
We all took possession of Essex Lodge at Croydon
in January, 1867, but removed to No. 2, Wellesley Villas
in about July of that year. Lady Tichbome went with
Mr Harkness QC.


us, but in consequence of the insanitary arrangements
of’Wellesley Villas, Lady Tichborne went to stay at
Hewlett’s Hotel, in Manchester-street, Manchester-
square. She used to go about visiting a good deal, and
she came down to Croydon to see me almost every day,
and I frequently called upon her at Hewlett’s Hotel. Lady
Tichborne was then in her 62nd year, and she remained
in her usual good health up to the time of her death.
When she was taken ill, I was over in Boulogne. I went
to Boulogne in order to get out of the way while Lady
Tichborne settled the judgment summons which was
issued against me by Messrs Pete and Harcotte for the
loan of £150.1 was informed that I should be arrested
under that judgment summons, and not wishing to be
arrested sought refuge in Boulonge.
I went over to Boulogne in order to avoid the
execution of the judgment. I went there with the advice
of Lady Tichborne, accompanied by Mr Jarvis Long,
son of Mr Walter Long. When the matter was settled
four or five days after I had left for Boulogne, Lady
Tichborne sent Rous, of the Swan, at Alresford, over to
Boulogne to tell me that the matter had been settled.
Rous also told me to return to England as soon as 1
could, as Lady Tichborne wanted to see me. I was
naturally glad to hear that the judgment summons had
been satisfied, and in company with Mr Jarvis Long
and Rous, we started back that afternoon to England.
Coming across in the boat the steamer broke down, and
we were delayed some two hours, consequently we lost
the train when we arrived at Folkestone, and we had to
remain there until the following morning. Rous got away
by an early train, but we did not start till a later one, m
consequence of which I did not reach Croydon until 10
o’clock the next morning.
When I got to Wellesley Villas, I spoke to Mr Porter,
the landlord of the house, when Joseph, her ladyship’s
groom, opened the door without knocking. This was a
most unusual thing, and I knew at once that something
was wrong, otherwise he would never have dreamt of
coming into the room without knocking. He had my
overcoat in his hand, and he said, “Sir Roger, you are
required in London at once; cab at the door; train starts
in five minutes.” I knew Joseph so well that he would
never have rushed into the room and given me such a
peremptory order unless it was something very urgent.
I said, “Good bye” to Porter, slipped my arm into my
overcoat, and told the cabman to drive and quickly as
he could to the railway station, and that I would give
him an extra shilling. He did so, and I caught the train,
and Joseph passed me just as the train was starting. As
he passed I said to him, “Is my mother ill, Joseph?” He
said “Yes, sir, I believe very ill.” That was all that
passed, and the train then started. As soon as I got to
London Bridge I took a hansom straight away to
Manchester-street. When I got to the hotel I saw
William, the manager. I said to him, “Is my mother
upstairs?” He said, “Yes, sir.”
When I got to the top of the stairs I met Mrs Hewlett,
the proprietor of the hotel. I was making my way into
the drawing-room when she said, “No, here, Sir Roger,
please,” and she showed me into Lady Tichborne s
bedroom. Seeing that she was in bed, and having no
information that she was dead, and not supposing for
one moment that anything so dreadful had happened m
my absence, I went right up to her bed and kissed her
and said, “Axe you ill, mother dear?” but she never
answered me. She was quite dead then, stiff and cold. It
gave me an awful shock at the time, and I told Mrs
Hewlett that she had no business to allow me to go into
the room without giving me some intimation that my
mother had died pending my arrival. Mrs Hewlett
subsequently told me that Lady Tichborne had been dead
about two hours before I got there. I at once wrote to
Norris Brothers, her solicitors, of Bedfordrow, to conie
at once, and told them that my mother was dead. As Mr
Norris turned the corner into Manchester-street he met
Mr Blundell, who said to him, “Norris, is it true? I have
heard that Sir Roger has poisoned Lady Tichborne.
When Norris arrived he told me what Blundell had said
to him. I immediately sat down and wrote to Dr
Lancaster, the coroner, informing him of the allegation
which had been made against me, and instructing him
to hold an inquiry as to the cause of my mother’s death.
That inquiry was in due course held, with the result
that the jury found that Lady Tichborne had died from
fatty degeneration of the heart, and that there was not a
particle of food in the stomach. The absence of food m
the stomach was due to the fact that she was fasting m
accordance with the rites of the Roman Catholic Church.
She could get no indulgence from the priest on account
of her not being absolutely ill. I saw her four days before
her death; that would be either the day or the day before
I started for Boulogne. She was in her usual good health
and spirits, and I bade her goodbye before I went to
Boulogne. When I started for Boulogne she told me it
would only be necessary for me to be away but a very
few days, and that as soon as she had settled the
judgment should would wire and let me know, and 1
could come back at once. On the night before she died
she went to Wellesley Villas, and remained there till 12
o’clock at night expecting me to return, but, of course,
I did not do so, as we lost the train in consequence of
the boat being delayed. She left Croydon that night by
the last train, and her death took place the following
morning.
A somewhat curious incident occurred before she
went down to Croydon. On her way to London Bridge
she called at Norris’ office and asked him if he would
prepare her will in favour of me. Mr. Norris happened
to be very busy that day, and he asked her whether she
would kindly call another day, when he should be happy
to take her instructions for the preparation of her will.
She accordingly left, and went straight on to Croydon.
Lady Tichborne allowed me £2O a week from the time


she met me in Paris down to the time of her death, which
occurred on March, 12, 1868. Lady Tichborne was
everything that was kind and good to me, and if she had
been an angel she could not possibly have done more
for me than she did.
My total liability to the public if I were in a position
to pay is about £600,000. I have paid over $200,000.
The first trial cost £600,000, and the second trial close
upon £200,000. Printed bonds were issued by Messrs.
Pearson, Claybon, and Fearon, of Great George-street,
Westminster, to the extent of £IOO,OOO. Of these £IO,OOO
was issued in bonds, £25,000 worth were deposited with
Mr Jones, proprietor of the Waterloo Hotel. They were
in his safe at the hotel when I was arrested, and I have
never been in the house since. Jones is now dead. His
son is still alive, but I have never troubled any further
about the bonds.
Amongst the large sums of money I had given to me
in order to carry on my trial was a sum of money from
Mr Horace Pitt, afterwards the Earl of Rivers, amounting
in the aggregate to £163,000.1 often asked him to accept
bonds for this amount, and he refused to do so, saying,
“I know, Tichborne, when you get your money you will
pay me, but if you don’t, and my executors get hold of
you, they will worry the life out of you; and if you do
not, then you cannot pay me.” Amongst other large sums
that I have received was SBO,OOO from Mr Guildford
Onslow. His two sisters gave me £30,000 each, and a
Mr Evelyn, from whom the Government rented a large
quantity of property at Woolwich Arsenal, also gave
me a good sum of money, but I cannot say exactly how
much it was, but at all events it was a substantial sum.
During the progress of my first trial I used to receive
by the morning’s post a very large number of letters
from all sorts and conditions of the public. All these
letters contained expressions of sympathy with me in
the great fight I was making for the estate, and each
letter contained either a cheque or a Bank of England
note. The sums of money that I received varied in size,
but most letters contained cheques or notes varying from
£SO to £IOO and £SOO to £I,OOO. A singular feature of
these letters was that most of the money which was in
notes was sent to me unregistered.
My trial lasted 2 years and 18 days. During that time
I was 35 days in the witness-box, 29 days under cross-
examination, during which time I had 11,900 questions
put to me, and the prosecution had to admit at the close
of the trial that out of that number of questions I had
answered 9,300 accurately.
My first trial, which began in the Old Court of
Common Pleas of Westminster, and was a civil action,
was opened May 11,1871.
“What had the Duke of Wellington got to do with
you?”
“He told me to go and see the plaintiff, and tell him
whether he was Roger Tichborne or not.”
“And I suppose you came back and told him that he
was?”
Mr Coleridge.
“Yes, I did.”
“And I suppose that you swear that he is now?”
“Yes, I do; I am on my oath.”
With that Hawkins sat down, but with a look of
disgust on him such as he never wore during the whole
of the trial. Holding up his brief, and turning to
Coleridge, he said, “To supply me with a lot of lies like
this, and to cross-examine a witness upon them.”
Coleridge simply smiled, but said nothing. This is
simply explained by the fact that they had got hold of
the wrong man. Shortly after this incident Hawkins had
an opportunity of retaliating upon Coleridge, for, in
cross-examining me with reference to my visit to Mr
and Mrs Radcliffe and Mrs Townley, who lives at Essex
Lodge, Thornton Heath, somehow or other Coleridge
confused the names, and kept going on asking me
questions, but placing Mrs Townley’s name where Mrs
Radcliffe’s ought to have been, and Mrs Radcliffe’s
name where Mrs Townley’s name ought to have been,
my answer being “No” to every question that he put to
me. When he had finished cross-examining me upon
this point, Coleridge said, “And you swear that this did
not occur?” I said, “I do. If you change the names, and
put Mrs Radcliffe where you have put Mrs Townley
and Mrs Townley where you have put Mrs Radcliffe I
can answer ‘Yes’ to every question you have put to me.”
Hawkins who was seated by Coleridge’s side, held up
his hands as much as to say, “Good gracious, what is he
doing,” and the public roared with laughter.
Another curious incident which I remember very well
occurred at a later period of the trial. A Miss Brain, one
of my witnesses, was formerly governess of Miss Kate
Doughty Tichborne, and knew Roger well. She was a
splendid witness, and when she had given her evidence
in the Court of Common Pleas she used to come and sit
in the court upon one of the extra seats that were erected


for the witnesses. On one occasion, while she was sitting
there tatting, which she did all day long for months,
Andrew Bogle, the black man, who had also given
evidence, went one day and sat on the same seat
alongside of her. Miss Brain had upon her lap a pair of
black kid gloves. Hawkins happened to look round the
court at Miss Brain at the time when the gloves slipped
off her lap. Ballantine was standing by making part of
his opening speech to the jury, when Hawkins observing
that the gloves had fallen off Miss Brain’s lap on to the
floor turned suddenly round to Mr Bowen (late Lord
Justice of Appeal), who was engaged in the case, and
called out in a somewhat excited and loud tone, “Bowen,
Bowen, there is Miss Brain has just dropped a pair of
kids by Boyle.” This observation of Hawkins at once
set the court into a fit of great laughter, the judge and
the counsel roaring, and the usher having considerable
difficulty in suppressing it. Ballantine
appreciating the joke, turned to Hawkins and said, “Well,
that was a nice thing for Miss Brain to do in the middle
of my address,” an observation which naturally
provoked more laughter.
These are a sample of the many jokes that were
perpetrated during my extraordinary long trial. Indeed,
the practical joking which took place between the judges
and the counsel, and the humourous observations of Sir
Alexander Cockburn in the criminal case, kept the court
more like a theatre than a court of justice. I remember
also another humourous incident that occurred. During
the time that Jean Luie was giving his evidence in the
Court of Queen’s Bench, his wife was called by the
Treasury against him. She swore that he was her
husband, Louie Lungem, and when she had given her
evidence and stated that her maiden name was Cockburn
and that the man she lived with was named Hawkins,
he was also called and gave evidence. Sir Alexander
Jean Luie.
Serjeant Ballantine.
Cockburn, thinking to take the rise out of Hawkins,
recalled Luie’s wife into the box, and asked “What did
you say the name of the man with whom you are living?”
She repeated “Hawkins.” Cockburn (who subsequently
became Lord Chief Justice of England), looking ruefully
at Hawkins, raised his hands in such a manner as to
indicate that he was shocked that his learned friend
Hawkins was living with Luie’s wife. Hawkins, who is
a keen wit and thoroughly appreciated the joke, turned
to the witness and said, “One minute please, what did
you say your maiden name was? I am not quite sure
that we all caught it.” The witness replied, “Cockburn,”
followed by great laughter. Hawkins imitated his learned
friend Cockburn, held up his hands in a similar manner
to that which Cockburn had done, as much as to say
that he was also shocked at the admission of the witness.
During the time the trial was on the hearing was
postponed upon one occasion because Ballantine was
engaged in another case, and by the consent of all parties
in my case, this one was allowed to be called. The
plaintiff who was a City stockbroker, and “got up”
elegantly, only as a Cockney can get up, with an evening
dress on, and with a pocket handkerchief on which was
displayed a tremendous diamond fastened to a sort of
safety pin; this diamond was visible to the court. After
Serjeant Parry, who appeared for the plaintiff, had
examined him, Ballantine rose to cross-examine him,
and began in the following way:—
“You are, I believe,” said Ballantine, “a stockbroker
in the City, are you not?”
The witness, who answered very readily and with
considerable emphasis, replied, “I ham.”
“Yes,” said Ballantine, “and a very prettily dressed
ham you are.” This observation of Ballantine’s caused
such a tremendous outburst of laughter that neither the
counsel nor the jury could proceed and further with the
case, which was ultimately settled by arrangement.


To return to the evidence which I gave at the trial. In
connection with my cross-examination by Coleridge in
reference to Stoneyhurst College, he asked me what the
letters “L.S.D.” meant on the facade of the college. I
told him that we scholars used to say it meant pounds,
shillings, and pence. “But what do they mean?” said
Coleridge, somewhat angrily. I replied, “Deus Semper
Laudus.”
“Well,” said Coleridge, “what is the meaning of that?”
I replied, “The laws of God for ever,” whereas I
intended to have said, “Praise God for ever.” Coleridge,
turning to the judges, observed, “It was a very good
guess, indeed.” This was a lapsus linguse, and it was
very curious how I became to make this mistake, because
any kind of Latin is easy to me because speaking Spanish
as fluently as I do, the Latin vulgate comes quite easy
to me. This answer of mine was a mere slip of the tongue.
My first trial ended in my being non-suited at my
own counsel Ballantine’s request, unknown to me and
my attorneys and without my or their knowledge, so
that Coleridge at once applied for a bench warrant. Now,
to most people there would not be anything very
extraordinary in that proceeding, but in reality it was a
great item, because a person who is arrested under a
bench warrant is not entitled to have his witnesses’
expenses paid, but has to bear these expenses himself.
Therefore by departing from the usual course of taking
me as I have been taken before a magistrate to answer
the charge of perjury, which would also have enabled
me to have mentioned or called a few witnesses, the
whole of the expense of the 780 witnesses who were
subsequently subpoenaed and examined would have
been paid by the Treasury. I heard afterwards that the
Treasury had sent a sum of money I don’t know how
much, but I was informed that it was a substantial
amount to me by a Treasury official, but it never
reached me, nor did I know anything of it for many
months after the trial was finished. How I came to hear
of this was by this means. There was in the Treasury
also a young man who also got into trouble, and
afterwards became a fellow prisoner with me in
Portsmouth Gaol, and he told me.
In the course of the trial the counsel for the prose-
cution proposed to read certain letters to which Kenealy
objected. Inglis was the expert in handwriting. He told
the counsel for the other side that all the letters were
really not in my handwriting, but that they were
forgeries, and the other ones had been altered by the
process of tracing. These were the three forged letters
which Coleridge produced in the Court of Common
Peas, and which he asked me if they were in my
handwriting. For the purpose of doing this he took the
trouble to leave the QC.’s benches, and walked over
with them to the witness box to me. I looked at them at
the distance at which he held them away from me, he
not allowing me to have them in my own hands, and
believing them to be in my handwriting I acknowledged
them as such. He dealt with the three letters separately
after he had returned and taken his seat in the Q.C.’s
bench; then rising he said, “My lord, I will read these
letters to the court,” and he commenced to do so. These
letters, if they had been in my own handwriting, were
sufficient to have sent me to Newgate at once.
I did not interrupt Sir John Coleridge whilst he was
reading them, but when he had finished reading them I
said, “Will you allow me to see those letters again. Sir
John, please?” He said, “Certainly not, you have
acknowledged them to be in your handwriting and you
have sworn to them, and that is sufficient.” Ignoring
my counsel, I turned to his lordship, and said, “My lord,
will you order these letters to be handed to me that I
may see them. They cannot be in my handwriting,
although I have acknowledged them, I wish to examine
them minutely; they are forgeries, my lord.” Ballantine
was taken by surprise at my appealing to his lordship
direct. His lordship was also dumbfounded, but looked
at the jury, and the jury were very dubious in their
manner in answering to his lordship’s look, and after
this exchange of looks his lordship said, “Brother
Coleridge, I must order you to hand those letters to the
plaintiff that he may see them.” Coleridge said, “My
lord, he has sworn that they are in his handwriting, what
nor do we want?” “Never mind,” said Bovill, “you let
them be handed to him.” The letters were then handed
to me by Mr Frayling, the tipstaff of the court, and,
after examining them more closely, I turned to the judge
again and said, “My lord, these letters are not in my
handwriting; they do not bear my private mark and my
signature. I never noticed this before, because I could
not see them at the distance at which Sir John Coleridge
held them when he showed them to me.”
Lord Justice Bovill.


Coleridge then jumped up and said, “Oh you have a
private mark, have you?” I said “Yes.” “What is it?”
said he. I said, “Is it likely I shall tell you after you have
produced those forged letters?” This objection of mine
was, however, overruled by the judge, who ordered me
to make known to the court my private mark, which I
was compelled to do. My private mark was made with
the point of the pen, and consisted of a peculiar curl in
the “T” of Tichborne. Then I was cross-examined at
full length as to whether my private mark would be
found on all the cheques I had drawn at my banks. I
said, “No cheque would be paid without that mark was
upon it.” “Where do you bank?” said Coleridge. “At
the London and South-western, Regent-street Branch,
and at Robinson Bros., at Croydon,” I said. “Have you
ever applied for the return of your old cheques?” “No,”
I said, “that would be of no use to me.” In order to find
out whether the cheques which I had drawn bore the
private mark to which I have referred, the other side
sent to the bank and got them to give them the old
cheques which I had drawn, and which had been paid
in. There was not a cheque that was handed to them
which brought any reflection of disgrace upon me, and
they all bore the peculiar private mark in the signature
of Tichborne to which I have referred.
The bench warrant having been granted at the
termination of the first trial, I was arrested the same
evening at the Waterloo Hotel in Jermyn-street and taken
to Newgate, but I was released three weeks afterwards
upon a £IO,OOO bail. My sureties were the Earl of Rivers,
Mr Guildford Onslow, Mr Lament and Dr Attwood, I
entering into my own recognisances in the sum of
£5,000. After my release I continued to reside at my
London house, Harley Lodge, Harley-road, South Ken-
sington. My second trial did not take place until about
17 months after the first. During the interim I did not
trouble much about my forthcoming trial, in fact very
Claimant arrives at Newgate arrested for perjury 1874.
little indeed, and I left it to my solicitors, who were
working the case up. My solicitors were Messrs Walter
and Moogen, of No. 8, Southampton-street, Blooms-
bury.
Subsequently an appeal to the public was made
through the various newspapers to assist me with funds
to carry on my defence. Dr Attwood and Mr Guildford
Onslow, who acted as trustees to the fund, appointed an
ex-Army officer to act as hon. secretary, but the honorary
part of his business consisted in his being paid for his
services. There were also boxes placed in hundreds of
public-houses for the reception of funds for me, and
these boxes when full at the end of the week were taken
to the hon. secretary and emptied by him. When it came
to engaging counsel for my defence I requested Mr
Onslow to go and bring me the balance of the money
that had been subscribed by the public after paying, of
course, all expenses. From what I had heard and from
what I knew in a reliable manner I expected to have got
some 20, 30, or £40,000.
A morning or two afterwards poor Onslow came to
me and said, “There is the balance of the money which
has been collected for your defence,” placing at the same
time £7 15s. on the table. I looked at Earl Rivers and
laughed. Out of the large sums subscribed by the public
for me to enable me to carry on my defence, and
acknowledged in the papers, all the money I received
was £7 15s. Dr Kenealy was suggested to me by Lord
Rivers as my leading counsel, and I concurred in that
view, and I called on Dr Kenealy the next day and briefed
him on my behalf, giving him 1,000 guineas on his brief.
Of course in the second trial, which was a criminal
proceeding, I was not examined. Like the former trial
there were hundreds of jokes cracked, which were never
published in the columns of the newspapers. I remember
a little incident in connection with the examination of
my foot. During the trial a great discussion arose
between the judges and counsel as to the size of my
foot. About two hours was wasted in arguing the point.
I lost my temper, and standing up, addressed the Lord
Chief Justice. I said, “My lord, it is simply shameful
that the time of the court should be wasted in this
manner. One of the jurymen is a master shoemaker;
surely he could measure my foot, and settle the point at
once.”
The Lord Chief Justice rebuked me severely for this,
and said, “How dare you address me, sir, except through
your counsel. If you do so again, I shall commit you for
contempt of court.” A few days after this another
discussion arose as to my height. Two seamen’s
certificates of Arthur Orton described me as being sft.
llin., and 18 years of age, whereas it was a well-known
fact that I was sft. 9in., and that was the height of Roger
Tichborne when he entered the Army. A great deal of
time was also wasted in argument concerning this point,
and, again losing my temper, I rose, and, addressing his
lordship, said, “My lord, why should the time of the


Dr Kenealy QC.
court be wasted in this way. The enlisting sergeant is
outside, why not let him measure my height?” The judge
again rebuked me for addressing him direct, but, oddly
enough, he adopted my suggestion. The enlisting
sergeant was sent for. 1 took off my shoes, and was
measured in the corridor in the presence of all the
counsel with the result that my statement was found to
be correct, and it was subsequently corroborated by the
enlisting sergeant.
The second trial lasted 188 days, occupying 10
months, and resulted in my being convicted upon two
counts, one for swearing that I was Roger Tichborne,
and the other for swearing that I was not Arthur Orton.
After I was found guilty I wanted to speak, but I was
too late. Sentence was pronounced before I had time to
do so. I was sentenced by Justice Mellor to two terms
of penal servitude, which was afterwards amalgamated
by the Lord Chief Justice into one sentence of 14 years’
penal servitude. This was done in order to prevent them
running concurrently.
From the very commencement of the first trial, which
was the civil action, I always entertained the belief that
I should win the action, and consequently should have
gained possession of the Tichborne estates, and I was
very disappointed with the result of that trial when I
heard that I was non-suited. In the second trial also,
which was one for perjury, I thought that I should be
successful. I cherished this belief up to the eve of the
day when the trial finished. On that day I formed the
impression that the jury would not agree. I heard that
several of the jury men were in my favour, and I was
also told that one of them sent a letter to Lord Rivers
stating that if he would give him £IOO he would disagree
with the rest of the jury. The Lord Chief Justice finished
up his summing up of the case on the Saturday morning,
and the jury retired to consider their verdict about half-
past one in the day. They were only absent 20 minutes,
at the expiration of which they returned into court with
a verdict of guilty against me on both counts. The verdict
of the jury took me very much by surprise, as I all along
thought I should win.
Immediately after my conviction, which created great
excitement, I was taken into one of the ante-rooms and
shortly after hurried across the hall into the Lobby of
the House of Commons, where the detectives just had
time to close the door of the Lobby before the immense
crowd broke through, which they subsequently did and
rushed in with the intention of rescuing me. I was then
taken through the House of Commons round to the
House of Lords, where a ’bus was in waiting under the
archway, which was swarming with detectives. I got
into the ’bus, and we drove over the Lambeth Bridge,
then along the Surrey side to Blackfriars Bridge, the
whole of the route being lined with detectives. There
were a good many people about, but nobody seemed to
recognise me, and as it was Saturday afternoon
everybody seemed to be going about their business and
making for home. We then passed along up Ludgate-
hill and then round the Old Bailey to the wicket-door at
Newgate Prison. When we reached Newgate the crows
which had assembled at Westminster had swooped down
and were rushing up the Old Bailey, and I was just got
into the prison before the crowd reached the door. The
pressure of the crowd was so great that the police
omnibus and horses were carried over 20 yards down
the Old Bailey. Mr Guildford Onslow came to see me
that afternoon.
The verdict of guilty had no sad effect upon me; on
the contrary, I looked upon it as one of the greatest reliefs
I had ever felt in my life. The constant anxiety, strain of
the trial, and the constant worry to my mind as to what
I should be asked and as to how I should answer had
been so great for such a very long time that it was quite
a relief to me to hear the jury pronounce a verdict of
guilty.
I remained at Newgate about six weeks. I was not
put in any prison garb for the simple reason that they
had not got any clothes big enough to put me in, and I
had to wait until they could get them made. A Mr Jones
was governor of Newgate at this period. He was very
considerate to me, as, indeed, were all the warders. When
I left Newgate at the expiration of six weeks I was taken
to Pentonville Prison. Before I left I was heavily chained
hands and feet, and in this condition I was placed inside
the “Black Maria.”
When I was placed inside the van a little incident
occurred which caused not only me but the wardens to
smile considerably. Owing to my immense bulk, and
my weight being then about 255 t., the warders found
that they could not possibly squeeze me into one of the
cells of the prison van. Amidst the laughter of the
warders I suggested a remedy for the evil by telling


them that if they would place a chair at the end of the
van I would willingly go with them anywhere they liked.
This they did, and I must say that, on the whole, my
ride to Pentonville, with the exception of a few hard
jerks, occasioned by the unevenness of the London
roads, was not an unpleasant one. While I was in
Newgate they very kindly had a suit of clothes made to
fit me. I need scarcely say they were a brand new suit,
and in them I was removed to Pentonville. I was there
three days only at Pentonville. I was taken there in order
for the authorities to decide where I should be finally
sent to do my probation. Being a Catholic, it was decided
that I should be taken to Millbank Prison.
I was there about nine months and was set to make
flannels, &c., for the prisoners. During the time I was
there I lost 7st. in weight in seven months; for when I
was taken to Millbank I weighed 25st. 41b., and I wasted
away 7st. I was not really ill, but I felt weak from the
loss of weight. I did not find the confinement depressing
to me, but on the contrary it was beneficial because I
occupied my time with my work. During the whole time
that I was in prison I never allowed myself to think of
the past, and consequently I had no worry of mind. I
shut off everything, and I would not allow anything in
connection with the trial to occupy my thoughts for a
moment. I was placed in a large cell, larger than that
given to ordinary prisoners, and it was fitted up on
purpose for me, and my work was given me. I did not
mix with the other prisoners at Millbank, except to go
to church with them. I did not talk with them, because
there was no opportunity. In consequence of losing my
weight I was examined by the prison doctor, and I was
ordered a little boiled mutton every day. When I was
put on infirmary diet my work was taken away from
me. This I felt very much indeed, and at one time I really
felt as if I should go mad if I was not allowed to have
my work. I appealed to the doctor, who ordered my work
to be sent every day, and after that I got on very nicely
indeed.
At the expiration of nine months I left Millbank and
my destination was Dartmoor. I started for Dartmoor at
9 o’clock at night at Paddington Station, arriving at
Plymouth about 3 o’clock in the morning, where I was
put into a waggonette which was in charge of a Captain
Hume, of the Buffs, the deputy-governor of the jail, and
drove to Dartmoor, a distance of 16 miles over the moor,
arriving at 10 o’clock. I was put to what is called public
labour work that is the tailors’ shop. I worked with
the other prisoners, 30 of them, in the same room, and
took daily exercise with them. While I was at Dartmoor,
Michael Davitt was undergoing sentence of 15 years
for treason felony. I never conversed with him, but he
would send me messages sometimes by the other
prisoners. There were also other Fenians there
undergoing imprisonment at the same time. I remained
at Dartmoor about three years, and during that time I
enjoyed fairly good health with the exception of the
wasting away, and just before I completed my term my
weight had dropped to lOst. 61b. During the whole time
I spent at Dartmoor nothing of any moment occurred
with the exception that I cannot say a word in favour of
the treatment I received from the officials, nor indeed
can I speak in terms of approval of the discipline
observed there. They were all a set of brutes, the warders,
most of whom are Cornish miners, being about the
roughest type of men a man can meet with. I was under
punishment three different times for insolence. I then
appealed to the Home Secretary, Sir Richard Cross, for
a magisterial inquiry into my sentences for punishment,
which was granted. Such an inquiry had not been held
for 16 years previously. The inquiry resulted in my
getting back my good conduct marks which I had
forfeited for alleged insolence, and in my being
transferred to Portsmouth.
I was at Portsmouth from Aug. 16,1877, until 1 was
officially discharged on Oct. 20,1884, having completed
10 years 8 months and 2 days’ imprisonment. Whilst at
Portsmouth I was put to carpentering and log cutting,
and was engaged in outdoor work. I liked it very much
better, and it agreed with my health very well indeed. I
regained my health at Portsmouth, and also my weight,
and when I left the prison I weighed 16st. exactly. In
Portsmouth they are old Army and Navy men, and I
received the greatest kindness from one and all of them.
During the whole time I was in prison under them of
course I met with numerous prisoners and had many a
jaw with them. I never made any friend of any prisoner,
and I have not seen anybody since I have come out who
was in prison when I was.
The impression I formed of our prisons in general
was a good one, and it was a great mistake to suppose
that they are the horrible places which they are
represented to be. In the first place the poor fellow who
is picked up in the street who has no home, and
consequently never knows when or where he can get a
meal unless he steals or begs for it, can seldom get a
clean shirt or any of the other comforts of life, whereas
when he knows the public work prison it is no
exaggeration to say that he is introduced into a “palace”
where everything is scruplously clean. There are no
vermin to be seen and no insects. I never saw an insect
the whole 10 years I was in prison.
Provided you do the work you are set to do you have
a good bed to lie on, you have three good meals a day,
which are varied each day. You get mutton twice a week,
beef once, soup (hedge podge) twice a week, pudding
on Thursday, one pound of potatoes, coffee, tea, or gruel
of your choice every day according to your class and
the wish of the prisoner. You get cocoa every evening
and tea in the morning, with a 6oz. loaf with the former
and an Boz. loaf in the morning. You get an Boz. loaf
and a pint of tea every breakfast, a 4oz. loaf, in addition
to a pound of potatoes and 4oz. of meat or soup. You
are supplied with an amount of liquor and vegetables


which are put into the soup, and which really makes it
very “tasty”. On Sundays you get a lOoz. loaf for dinner
and 4oz. of cheese and an Boz. loaf every breakfast,
and a 6oz. loaf for tea. Towards the latter part of my
imprisonment for some seven years extra food was
allowed by the governor to me; 2oz. of bread extra, loz.
of cooked meat three times a week, and a quarter of a
pint of soup extra twice a week, a quarter pound pudding
extra on Thursdays, and loz. of cheese extra on Sunday.
There is no meat served in our prisons on Sunday except
to invalids. Sunday is the worst day in our prisons,
because you only get bread and a slice of cheese every
dinner. I used to attend church twice every Sunday,
which all the prisoners have to do, and prayers every
morning at 8 o’clock.
Every Monday morning the schoolmaster leaves each
prisoner a book to read. You put the book that you have
been reading outside the cell door and he leaves you
one in place of it. On one occasion while at Portsmouth
the schoolmaster, who was a very old fogey about 70
years of age, left me a book in the usual way. In the
course of the day I saw the governor, and I said to him,
“Governor, do not you think I am a little too old to read
‘Jack the Giant Killer?’” He said, “What do you mean?”
I said, “Well, the schoolmaster has left me ‘Jack the
Giant Killer’ for next week’s reading.” “Nonsense,” said
the governor. I said, “No, sir, it is a fact.” “Where is it?”
I said, “Up in my cell.” The governor sent for the book,
and satisfied himself that it was “Jack the Giant Killer,”
with a flaming picture on the front page. He sent for the
schoolmaster, and gave him a good jip; he gave me a
book worth my reading. During the whole time I was in
prison I went by the name of Tom Castro, and I refused
to answer to the name of Orton.
I do not look upon the Bible as most people do
not worth reading because I am very fond of reading
the Bible, and can read it with much interest and always
in preference to a novel.
Although out of place, I may as well mention one or
two incidents of Australian life which I have omitted,
and especially how I came to take the name of Castro. I
retained my own name of Arthur Orton up to the time
that I was on Castlemaine, about 100 miles from
Melbourne on the road to Sandhurst. When I was in
service at M’Mahon’s, at Reedy Creek diggings, as
slaughterman, I ran short of money, and not being able
to walk, I borrowed or rather stole this fellow’s
horse to get up the country. I rode to Castlemaine, about
50 miles, where I sold the horse and took train to
Sandhurst, about 100 miles distant. I sold the horse to a
puddler at Castlemaine. A puddler is a man who puddles
for gold, washing all the mud out and leaving the gold
and stones. I sold the horse to him, and gave the name
of John Paisley, the celebrated bushranger at that time.
I knew Johnny for years. He was a native, and came
from Stratford-on-Avon in Gippsland. After I got to
Sandhurst, and finding my money running short, and
seeing an advertisement in a paper for a bullock driver
being wanted by one Mr Campbell, a Scotch farmer, on
the River Compasseefee [Campaspe]. I applied for the
situation in the name of Tomas Castro. Tomas is Spanish
for Thomas. I don’t know how the name of De Castro
ever came about, as I never used it, but I have signed
the name of Tomas. This was the first time I had changed
my name. Tomas Castro was the name of an officer in
the Chilian Army.
I have now brought this long and exhaustive narrative
to a close, but before I bid adieu to the several million
of readers of The People , by whom my story for the
past six weeks has been read, I should like, in closing,
the whole world to know from me honestly, truly, and
finally, the circumstances which have actuated me to
make this full and complete confession. First and
foremost, I desire to say I am an old man, now going
into my 62nd year, and although what I am now about
to say may not be generally believed, it is nevertheless
the fact and the truth that I wish to clear my conscience
and to relieve the public mind on any doubt that they
may have entertained as to my real identity. My sole
object for making this confession is not for any monetary
consideration, but, as I have already said, solely for the
purpose of easing my mind and to clear up all doubt
that may still exist in the mind of the Tichbome family
as to the death of young Mr Roger Tichbome and as to
my identity. As I have already stated in the columns of
The People six weeks ago, when my life and full
confession was first announced to the world, I am Arthur
Orton, and no other person.
I wish also to take this opportunity of stating in the
columns of The People that my reason for making this
public declaration, and declaring myself in my real
name, that of Arthur Orton, is, as I have already said,
not only to relieve my conscience, but to do what I feel
I ought to do, and what is after all only right and just to
the present members of the Tichbome family, and to
clear up all the mysteries by which my notorious trial
was surrounded. I also desire to make it perfectly clear
to the relatives, husband, and family of Lady Radcliffe
that there never was the slightest foundation for any
suggestion that was either inferred, and I further declare
that my object in making this confession is to relieve
my mind of the great weight that it has now borne for
so many years, and that I may not go to my grave leaving
the world to suppose that I was the rightful heir to the
Tichbome estates from which I was barred by the
injustice of the law.
I hereby honestly and truly swear that I make this
confession of my own free will, and that it has been
published week by week in The People with my
knowledge and entire approval in order to place it
beyond doubt that I am Arthur Orton, and not Roger
Tichbome. I may here say that I have never seen Roger
Tichbome in my life, nor had I when I left Wagga Wagga
the slightest intention of ever claiming the Tichbome


estates. All I was hoping for was to get money. Money
was what I wanted, and money was my game, and if it
had not been that I was feted and made so much of by
the colonists in Sydney, I should have taken the boat
and gone and spent the rest of my days in Panama with
my brother, and I should have died in oblivion. This is
what I really intended to do, but try all I could I could
not get away from those who were infatuated with me
and firmly believed that I was the Real Sir Roger.
Of course I knew perfectly well that I was not, but
they made so much of me, and persisted in addressing
me as Sir Roger, that I really forgot who I was, and by
degrees I began to believe that I really was the rightful
owner of the estates. This may no doubt seem somewhat
incredible, but as it is not impossible for a man, either
by reading or conversing with the world, to work himself
up to such a pitch that he verily believes that either some
rich person is about to die and leave him a large fortune,
or that he will be stricken down by some serious disease
or ailment, why should it not be possible for a man
coming in frequent contact with his fellow beings who
are continually dinging into his ears that he is not himself
but somebody else, to believe them and to forget who
he really is? Imagination, as everybody knows, goes a
very long way, and from experience I know that if a
man sits down quietly for any length of time and dwells
upon one subject, he can either convince himself that
he is not going to be poor all the days of his life, but
that some lucky incident will occur which will lift him
up from his present impecunious position.
Before closing I would like to take this opportunity
of expressing my regret to the heir of the Tichborne
estates and to every member of the Tichborne family
for the great trouble and anxiety that I have for years
caused them. The only explanation that I can give of
the really extraordinary circumstances which actuated
me in prosecuting my claim to the estates is that I was
literally thrown into it by force of circumstances. I may
just say that throughout my entire life I have always
been a good listener, and by listening quietly and
patiently for hours, as I have done together, to statements
which have been made to me by, I suppose, I may say
hundreds of persons, all of whom gave me information
concerning the Tichborne family, I learned such facts
that really induced me to prosecute my claim. The
readers of The People will perhaps better understand
this when I say that when I first decided to start the case
I did so without knowing how it would work out, and to
my great surprise I found that by listening to others, the
story really built itself, and in that way it grew so large
that I really could not get out of it. I further declare that
I should have carried out my intention of going to
California and spending the rest of my days with my
brother if it had not been for the fact that I met Bogle
and Gilfoyle and many other persons in Australia who
knew so much of the Tichborne family, and who really
told me so much about them that at one time my mind
was so thoroughly worked up that I really believed I
was the man they said I was. This leads me to a
somewhat curious incident which occurred during my
second trial. When Captain Angel, who owned a large
vessel called the Glen Owen, was in the witness-box,
he said in answer to Cockburn, “He is Arthur Orton
right enough, but I don’t believe he knows it. I have
conversed with him for hours, but I cannot detect any
instance where he really recognises himself as Orton.”


Sir Roger; A Tichborne ballad
Sir Roger was a youtniul Kiiigui,
A youthful knight with a gallant air,
■\Vho left his stately ancestral halls.
And all for love of a lady fair,
lie sailed away o'er the ocean wide,
He sailed away from his native land,
Until in three weeks he stepped ashore,
And in the port of Rio did stand.
JJc shook the captain by the hand,
Ik said good bye to the male so bold,
Then he wished the cook in his copper was stewed,
And he gave to the sailors a handful of gold.
In fishing and shooting, and manly sport,
He pleasantly passed his lime for weeks ;
"When a letter he wrote to his father to say
That now he now fields of adventure seeks.
Then he bade Uirewell to his new made friends,
And his passage he took in a Yankee brig;
Next daj' he embarked, in the highest glee,
On board of the Bella, of schooner rig.
They left the port with a favouring wind,
But they had not been three days at scr.,
When a storm arose, and the vessel went down,
And left not a vestige of the Bella to see,
Save a boat, bottom upward, that chanced to float,
By a vessel that left the same port was found;
And, as no tidings of Sir Roger were heard,
By all 'twas concluded he must be drowned.
As months passed by and no tidings came,
His friends determined no longer to wait,
So his will was proved and his goods were shared,
And his heir took possession of his estate.


Now, all this lime, though it seems most strange,
Sir iloger was living a pastoral life
'Mid the (locks and herds that he loved so well,
And far removed from envy and strife.
How he escaped from the sinking ship,
And Melbourne reached, there was none to tell;
But he’s in the bush, in,the best of health,
And looking, it seems, remarkably well.
dir linger soon found his cash all gone.
His cash all gone nor could look for more.
For he was then thousands of miles from home.
Nor could he for months replenish his store.
Then like a gallant true hearted knight,
He scorned not to follow a menial trade,
In Wagga-Wagga, he's a butcher now,
And deftly he handles the butcher's blade.
Sir linger then lived a jovial lile,
A jovial life he lived fur years,
Nor minded he aught what people said,
Or what he did as it since appears.
Of Sir Iloger no tidings hi* kindred heard,
For he'd changed his name that he might not disgrace
Those friends at home whom he dearly loved,
And still in his heart held the foremost place.
.Now ured ot roving, lie longed lor home.
He longed lor home where'er he might Ho
And if in the bush Sir linger strayed,
lie carved his initials on every tree.
When his pipe he smoked, he thought of homo.
On its bowl he scratched K. C. 1). T.
Wherever he went, or wherever he stayed.
Those well known initials you'ro sure to sue.


At length to Sir Roger a runover came,
A rumour there came that his father was dead,
When he loaned a horse from a rival trade,
And in haste from Wagga-Wagga he fled.
Now envy, that ever attends the great,
The action called by a baser name,
But its shaft could only at Castro strike,
It could not wound Sir Roger’s fair fame.
He hastened to Sydney, and there by chance,
Ey a fortunate chance one Bogle he met,
"Who d faithfully served in hi* kinsman's house,
And well remembered Sir Roger yet.
He told how at home they believed him dead,
And how his broad acres another possessed;
How his mother believed that her son would return,
l«or till he came back should she ever know rest.
Then without more delay, he chartered a ship,
He chartered a ship of native build,
With the faithful Bogle he then embarked,
And the hold with Australian meat well filled.
A* they sailed, each day, they sat and talked,
Of ail that had happened when he was young,
And Sir Roger listened with greedy ear,
And to every word of old Bogle be clung.
They reached the Nore with a favouring wind,
With a favouring wind up the Thames they sailed,
Until they anchored in Woolwich Reach,
When the steamer Osprey Sir Roger hailed,
To Wapping Old Stain then he made his way,
To visit the scenes of his early youth;
For a lady there lived who in sunnier days
Sir Roger had plighted his fondest troth.


\\ hen lie landed el Wapping he lound all changed,
Changed was the Wapping he d formerly known,
And the lady a youthful maiden he’d left,
Was now to a portly matron grown.
Then he turned away with a heavy heart.
And thought, os he rode in the cab to town,
When he might visit his ancestral home,
Should he by tho tenantry thors be known.
Next mom when at breakfast Sir Roger sal,
Some dear old friends to visit him came,
But they, like himself, had time so changed,
He’d quite forgotten both them and their name.
But his mother—she clasped him in her arms
And shed on his neck a flood of tears,
My son you’re not a bit like Roger,
But yet you’ve got my Roger’s ear*.
He now learnt with ili.-may Unit I*'-' vsi.'i r> i
All his vast cslales by a stranger were owned,
Who refused to believe that Sir Roger lived,
Ami firmly maintained that he must be drowned.
For seven long years did he patiently wait,
In hopes that at length he might justice get;
The trial took place, but with no result,
And he’s not had justice yet.
>.nv an young heirs to large estates,
Take warning by what to Sir Roger befel,
Never roam when young over foreign lands,
Nor ever leave home if your father’s unwell.
Had Sir Roger but followed this simple plan,
He would not have got into such disgrace,
And instead of now lying in Newgate gaol,
He’d be feasting his friends at Tichbome Place.


Courtship and Marriage of Sir Roger
6ir Roger was in early youth,
A gallant son of Mars ;
Though boasting of his rowell’d spurs,
He could not boast of scars ;
Vet soon like other soldiers bold.
He felt love's pointed iart ;
That through his shining breast-plate pierced,
b nltl it pierced his heart.
Uue uay when he from church retujned.
In Canterbury town ;
Where with his gallant troop hs'd been,
lie eyed a ladies' gown ;
He on the wearer smiled so sweet.
Her heart went pit-a-pal;
Ai d whilst his soldiers stood outside,
He in the house did chat.
But soon the gallant Carbineers,
Their quarters had to change ;
And at their head Sir Roger rode.
With feelings new and strange ;
For he was forced alas to leave.
The lady of his lore ;
Yet ere he went, he rashly rowed,*
He'd ever constant prove.
But soldiers oft like other men,
Make vows they never keep ;
And Roger still was in his teens,
Though he in love was deep ;
A letter from his Uncle came,
Inviting him to come ;
And visit him at Tichborne J'ark,
\\ hen Kate from school came home


Now Roger when but yet a boy.
Oft with his cousin played ;
And now that he was grown a man,
His thoughts to her oft strayed;
He quickly asked and leave obtained,
Then down to Hampshire went;
And with the girl a woman now.
His Holiday he spent.
In lichhorne Park beneath the trees.
Like turtle doves they cooed ;
And as their shadows lengthened there,
His cousin Kate he wooed ;
But all too soon Sir Roger found,
Love's sky was overcast;
Those happy moments now enjoyed,
Were all too bright to last.
Sir Edward when he urged his suit,
Refused at once consent;
And finding argument was vain, .
To his Aunt, Sir Roger went;
But Lady Doughty coldly said.
For three years you must wait;
And if that lime your love survives,
You then may marry Kate,
He said good bye to all his friends.
Farewell to Cousin Kate ;
And must we part for ever now,
Is such love's cruel fate ;
A locket with two hearts conjoined.
Round her fair neck he hung ;
A siik embroidered purse she gave,
As to his arm she clung.


A whistle shrill was all she heard.
The train was out of sight ;
Love’s cheering sun no longer shone.
And ail seemed darkest night;
But as the poet sings you know,
'* Men were deceivers ever.
One foot on land and one on sea.
To one thing constant never.”
■I his truth alas ijir Roger proved.
As down the Thames he sail’d ;
For as the vessel Wapping neared,
A waterman he hailed ;
At Wapping a young lady lived,
On whom his thoughts now ran J
For there he’d found another Kate,
Whose name was Mary Ann.
He told her how a scarlet coal,
No l inger he should wear ;
For England he'd resolved to leave,
At least for many a year ;
V hen he returned if she proved true,
He’d make her then his who;
For In her smile was all his joy,
His happiness in life.
Then to Wagga Wagga Sir Roger went.
On his way to Woolomoloo;
For he had set out with a trusty friend,
To hunt the Kangaroo ;
At the Bush Hotel one night they stopp’d.
Some Kangaroo steak to fry ;
And on the buxom cook-maid there,
Sir Roger cast his eye.


For she cooked the steak so very nice,
It was done just to a turn ;
And as the savoury viands smokod,
With love his heart did bum ;
He felt that night as when the train,
Bore him from Kate away;
And he resolved his suit to plead.
At once, without delay.
He said Miss Bryant if you'll be mine,
At once I’ll alter my plan ;
And though I prove false to my Cousin Kate,
I'll be true to Mary Ann ;
She coyly blushed, then at once she said,
Tom Castro I’m yours for life’;
And if that you a good husband prove,
I'll make you a loving wife.
That night the wedding day was fixd,
But no Priest was for miles around ;
When Sir Roger at last by a lucky chance,
A Baptist Minister found ;
Who quickiy united the happy pair,
And his humble blessing gave ;
And Sir Roger's no longer a roving knight.
But a cook- maid's willing slave.
Sir Roger now a man ltd man.
Resolved no more he'd roam ;
So with his wife and infant son.
One day set sail for home ;
His mother said when lie returned.
This is no Arliul Dodger ;
That he's my long lost son I'm sure,
For he's brought u little Roger,


The Yarn of the Claimant
T was in a lone street, that I chanced to meet,
A seedy and gross fat man,
My arm he seized, then he loudly sneezed,*
And thus this queer yarn began :
Oh, I am a knight and a soldier brave,
And a butcher, burley and big,
And a shipwrecked crew, and a stockman too,
And a man up to everything.
Mini li's meerschaum he smoked, and 10 ((range he looked,
In a way that seemed queer to me.
That at once I replied, as the stranger I eyed,
I know not how it can be ;
That you are a knight and a soldier Ware,
And a butcher, hurley and big.
And a shipwrecked crew, and a stockman too,
And n man up to every rig.
In this seedy raiment, you see the Claimant,
Of whom you so oft have read,
Having lost the trial—there’s no denial
That justice from earth has (led.
From my earliest youth I but speak the truth —
I have been the sport of fate,
As you will allow, when my story you know,
It you’ll listen I’ll it relate.
In a foreign land, in a city so grand.
My early years were passed,
With a tutor’s care, and a mother’s prayer—
Oh, joy too great to last.
For I was a knight, a Hampshire knight,
To a vast estate the heir,
And I ought to have been by my tenantry Seen,
And brought up amidst them there.


That I might gain knowledge, to Stoneyhurst college,
A heedless youth, I went,
And in boyish plays, I spent all my days,
Nor my mind to learning bent.
For a mild cigar I preferred by far
To studies Latin or Greek,
And my schoolmates at cricket, or single wicket,
Had not for me long to seek.
A young man grown, in an Irish town,
A* a soldier see me next, .....
With my epaulets bright, my sole delight,
In the ball-room oft perplexed.
Whilst my accent queer, made me the jeer
Of my comrades in the camp,
And a donkey one night, gave me a fright,
When I had put out the lamp.
I must now relate, with my cousin Kale.
How deeply in love I fen. ,
And how I m vain, tried to obtain,
Or e’er be my son-in-law.
Then I left my home, and alone did roam
For month* in a foreign dime ;
And, resigned to my lot, I had almost forgot,
The sorrows of my young prime.
When, alas I one day. I jailed away
In n most unlucky ship ;
Near a coral reef, we came to grief.
And our anchor were forced to slip.


Then he twitched his face, with a queer grimace,
As on him I cast my eye;
You may think me queer, but when oil you hear.
You'll wonder that here am I;
For I am a knight and a soldier brave,
And a butcher, burley and big;
And a shipwrecked crew, and a stockman too.
And a man up to every rig.
Now we were tempest tost, and our vessel we lost.
She went down in a fearful gale;
And, sad to relate, such was the crew's fate,
There is none left to tell the tale.
For me and eight more, with a single oar,
Escaped in a leaky boat•
And all day and night, it taxed all our might.
To keep our frail bark afloat.
As we had no meat, we were forced to eat
Our shipmates one by one.
Until at the last, to appease my fast,
I ate the very last man.—
Then he twitched his face, with a queer grimace,
And this is the reason why
Fm a shipwrecked crew, and a stockman 100,
Aji you heard me just now reply.
When my last meal was done, and hope there seemed none,
A vessel then hove in sight;
I gave a faint cheer, for succour seemed near,
And I should be sared before night
As the vessel neared, they close to me steered,
And I was soon on deck ;
And none ever knew, I had eaten the crew,
Who escaped from the sinking wreck.


When the ship reached port, as money ran short,
A butcher I then became;
In the bush I ranged, for my nature seemed changed,
And I also changed my name.—
Then he twitched his face, with a queer grimace—
I’m a butcher, hurley and big,
What Fra had to endure, 'Us no wonder, sure,
I’m a man up to every rig.
Then after a time, being still in my prime,
As a stockman I engaged;
And I grew so stout, that without a doubt,
At my size all felt amazed.
Then for home I sailed, but alas, I failed,
My title to make clear;
In this seedy raiment, you see the Claimant,
Beside you, standing here.
Though the world is base, you mast pity my case,
For I have been cruelly used ;
And all I've gone through, I am sure now you know,
Your aid it will not be refused ;
For I’m soon to be tried, and it can't be denied,
That money I sorely need;
If your cash you hand out, there can’t be a doubt.
From Newgate I then shall be freed.
For I am a knight, and a soldier brate,
And a butcher, hurley and big;
And a shipwrecked crew, and a stockman too,
And a man up to every rig.
For some men have brains, but money they lack,
And oft those with money want brains;
Why should not the money the brainless possesa,
Reward cue like me for Ids pains I


The Life of Arthur Orton of Wapping
My father was a butcher.
Myself his youngest son.
Was born in High Street, Wapping,
At number Sixty-One.
He dealt in Shetland ponies,
And contracts took for meat,
His name it was Qeorge Orton,
Well known in the High Street
When I was quite a youngster,
I had a dreadful fright;
A neighbouring house caught fire,
And was burned down at night.
“ Oh, sare my boy! ” my mother cried,
“ My boy I’m sure is burned f B
Just then a gallant fireman
On me his bull's-eye turned.
I, who till then, had ever been
A chubby, merry lad,
Now suffered much from sickness, —
St. Vitus’s Dance I had.
In hopes it might my strength restore,
To NetUwell Cross was sent;
I daily on a donkey rode,
By a kind former lent
Each morn, that it might strengthen me,
A lad of my own size,
Would mount a ladder, and from thence
Pour o’er my face and eye*
A stream of water clear and cold,
From out a watering can,,
Which, as it trickled down my back.
Into the tub then ran.


When I returned my father said,
" Why, Arthur, is that you,”
And, in amaze, my mother cried,
»My son I hordly know."
I staid at horse a little white,
Then with Captain Angel went
To Bridport with my mother,
In his ship, the “ Good Intent. ”
Bound prentice, in a merchant ship,
When fourteen I left homo,
And sailed for South America,
Through life I now must roam.
The yoyage which lasted full six weeki,
Quite sickened me of sea.
And I resolyed, when oooe on shore,
Td ne’er a sailor be.
Arrired at Valparaiso,
From the ship I ran away,
And, though the mate ran after me,
I neyer once did stay,
Until I’d trarelled sixty miles,
To Mellapilla got,
Where meeting old Don Castro,—*
With him cast in my lot.
He pitiod my forlorn estate-,
Thoaght m« a handy lad,
Thught me to ride, the lasso throw,
And I called him '* Old Dad."
Two years thus spent, soon passed away,
And I’d quite stout become.
When, growing tired of toying,
I longed once more for home.


My friends at Mellapilla then
Subscribed a purse for me.
I in the “ Jessie Miller " sailed,
And once more was til sea.
When I at Wapping landed,
Straight then for home I mode.
My father wished that I would stay.
And help him in hi* trade.
One morning a young woman came
A pound of steak to buy,
She asked that I would cut it nice,
I did my best to try.
She smiled on 51* *0 sweetly.
Her eyes quite pierced my heart.
Then slyly I gare her a loss,
To ease lore's painful smart
My father, at that instant came,
By chance into the shop,
And gars me on the cars a box.
The steak which made me drop;
I quickly doubled then my fist
And aimed at him a blow,
But lucidly it missed his head.
For which I’m thankful now.
Once more from Wapping I embarked,
And sailed for Hobart Town,
In charge of Shetland ponies
Consigned to one John Brown.
A shop in the New Market,
When I armed, I took,
And “ Arthur Orton, Butcher, 1 *
There dangled from • hook.


At Hobart Town I’d not much business.
So, long I did not stay,
But soon I went to Melbourne,
And to Qippes* Land made my way;
As stockman to Mr. Foster,
Four years with him I stayed,
When leaving for the diggings.
To Oastlemaine I strayed.
Next I to Wagga-Wagga went,
A butcher'* trade there led.
But having got in trouble,
In haste from thence I fled.
I met by chance a Wapping man.
And from him I did hear
No more I should mv father see,
As he d been deaa a year.
Fm living now at OrtonviDo,
And settled there for life,
From Wagga-Wagga mile* away,
And have a model wife.
I've now been married ju*t ton year*.
And here I mean to *tay,
For nothing now will tempt mo
From Orton villa to stray.
Some months’ ago a thousand poufi3T
Were offered if I’d go
To England a* a witneie,
At once I answered no.
I'll never more the ocean cron,
Old England's cliff* to »ee,
Of Bailing ship* and lawyer*
I’ve had enough, d'ye »*e.


Baronet or Butcher? A Trial at the Bar
'J his is (lie Court of Queen's Bench so renowned,
"Where the Tichhorne Claimant cadi day is (bund,
As (lie trial proceeds which shall declare,
He's a Wupping Butcher, or the Tichhorne heir
This is the crowd Palace Yard who throng.
As to Westminster Hall they hurry along;
Jn hopes in the Court they may find a place,
Or at least catch a glimpse of the Claimant’s face.
Tins is the Policeman quite out of breath,
By the folks in the Hall he’s worried to death ;
That hell find them room, they beg and implore,
But the Court is so full it will hold no more.
This is the Lord Chief Justice so bland,
With hia learned brethren on either hand ;
For a “ Trial at Bar ” is this famous case,
And all other trials for it must give place*


Tlie.sc are Hie Ucporlers, whom all must admire,
As they write and write on, and still never tire;
In the Echo, and Standard each night may be read.
Every word that each day in the court has been said J
How each witness looked, they truthfully tell,
Ana how too the Claimant seems hearty and well.
This is the Jury impanelled with care.
For a trial like this, bo momentous is rare ;
Twelve good men and ture, a just verdict they I give,
For which they’ll have honour as long as they live.
these are tne Counsel retained for the Crown,
I All eminent Barristers men of renown;
Such forensic skill to conduct any case,
! But rarely in "Westminster Hall finds a place.
1 ucal .nc uie witnesses lor Ule Crown,
To whom young Sir Roger was very well known ;
On his arm, the tattoo-marks oft met their eye,
That the Claimant’s the man they each one deny,


1 Ins is the Lender who opened the Case
Hilarious Hawkins with sly grimace ;
At his pondeious liricf hoped the .Tudjjc would not h v.i
Having spoke for a week, then at last he sat down.
'Jins is Hie Claimant win. seated in Court,
beems to look on the trial as capital sport;
As notes to his Counsel he hands now ami then,
He seems by his looks the j oiliest of men.
These are the Ortons, win. all liei- .nr,
"heir long lost hr•ther, is seated there;
That he’s Arthur Orton (heir evi.huce proves,
but the Claimant sits still nor a muscle e’er moves.
This is Dr. Kenealy, so learned in the law,
Who each witness Cross-examines in hopes of some flaw.
He is the Claimant s counsel and makes a gallant fight,
For which all must applaud him; May Heaven defend the right


These are the Claimant’s friends who declare,
Despite all that’s been sworn he’s the rightful heir;
“ He's my long lost Roger, ” his Mother said.
And they still beliye her although she’s dead.
This is old Bogle, the White-haired black.
Who ne'er on the Claimant has turned his hack,
Though friends may forsake him, he still will swear,
That he’s the true Roger, the Tichborne heir
1i his is the Jb'oreinuti who at last win rise,
Whilst all in the Court, on him fix their eves,
its he says my Lord, with unlallering voice,
this trial is ended all must rejoice ;
"Fhe Verdict, my Lord, the Jury find,
\*d they wish me to say were all of one mind,
tiring studied the case with the utmost care.
These are the news boys, who each nigui i>>uv,, uawi,
And the special “ Ekker ” and " Standard " call,
“ With a full report of the trial, ” shout.
And quickly each paper they sell no doubt.


The Tichborne Trial, as Told to Our Grandchildren
These are the Documents—all were read
To prove that the claimant long since thought dead
I« still alive—in the box does stand.
And holds his own photograph in his own hand.
These are the Clerks each morning who bring
Huge piles of papers lied neatly with string,
The bag that each bears U so heavy a weight,
Mo wonder not one of the clerks walks straight.
This is the firm of Lawyer* so famed,
Baxter. Bose, Morton k Co. they’re named,
Who so well conducted the Claimant’s rase.
Mo other firm would e'er take their place.
This is the Jury, eleven in all.
Who would not be sorry the sky should fall.
And end at once this protracted cose.
And free them for ever from this vile place.


Thia la the Judge the cue who tried,
ilh hit tolemn face and hii wig to wide.
Who weighed every word each witneaa spoke.
And frowned If he thought he smelt a joke.
Thia la the Uihex with looka ao grave
Who aeea that the people do well behave.
When they came to the coart to confined and tmaO
Where the trial took place at Weatminater HalL
These are the People, one and all.
Who throng to o’erflovring the spacious h&IL
To enter the court in vain thjy try,
Not one in a hundred can ever get nigh.
This ii the Court »o confined and «tnall.
Where the trial took place at Westmmiter IlalL


This is the claimant’s Ghost who each mom
Haunts the court to see how his case gets on,
For though the Judge ha* for year* been dead.
And the Jury hare all from the bo* long fled,
And the Usher hi* sombre robe* has laid by.
And there’s nought in the court but a bluebottle fly
He*nopes some day that the case will end.
And then from hit purgatory he may wr n<L
This is the Cabman. who first brought
In his brand new cab the claimant to court,
The man like his cab has now grown old,
And the horse that drew it was long since sold.
And score* since then that cab that drew,
Hare gone to the knackers for aught I know.
These are the Reporter* who note* did take
Of all that was said till their hands so shake,
"Whilst their finger* a pen could scarcely hold,
But they heeded not that >o their papers sold.
This is the Attorney General who stands.
And speaks for weeks without raising hi* hands.
And he calls the claimant all sorts of names,
Until in a rage Serjeant B. exclaims,
His learned brother must draw it mild.
For ths jury art not to be thus beguiled.


This ii the Defendant in this strange case,
Who now has an innocent child-like face,
But ere it is ended, to manhood grown,
His face will be corered o'er thickly with down.
This is the famous Serjeant B.
Whose eloquent ferrour's a fight to see,
As he pleads the claimant’s case so strong,
la t speech as powerful as it is long
These are the Witnesses all in a row,
Who erery one did the Claimant know,
That he is himself not one of them doubt,
Tho' when they last saw him he wasn't so stout
This is the Claimant, once slender and tall.
Who with his huge presence now fills the hall.
Though all are puzzled, he's grown so stout,
That hs's still the same man his friends nerer
doubt.


Roger, or not Roger,
OR, THE RACE for the TICHBOURNE SWEEPSTAKES.
List you that’s fond of fun,
And I’ll relate some rare sport,
In Westminster that’s going on,
With the big wigs in the Law Court.
It’s a fight L s. d.
And has had a tidy long run,
Whether to he, or not to be,
Sir ; ;oger Charley Tichbourne.
A Law Court is a rummy place,
For a man’s nose into poke, sir.
Is Roger Tichbourne for to be,
A baronet or butcher.
Roger Charley tells them straight,
He is the son of his own mother,
He means to collar the estates.
About which there is so much bother.
He is a butcher they want to say,
Oh, dear ! is rot that shocking,
And sold sheep’s jemmies every day,
In Whitechapel or Wapping.
Folks say ll cv can’t him blame,
HO battle for to fight sir.
And say its a In ruing shame.
To rob him of i.is rights, sir;
And though the lawyers people tay,
Are a set of artful dodgers,
They declare the odds they’d lay,
Of ten to one on Holer's.
In the Court we know full v. oil.
They Uogcr try to handle,
And want to say he cannot teß
An organ from a mangle;
They ask him if he’s fond of soup,
Did he wear lone frocks at home, *ir.
Why not ask him if he cried,
On the day that he was horn, sir.
Now Roger is a clever chap,
Though strange things of him said is,
He is a brick, and no mistake.
And partial to the ladies ;
But to say he is not ajgentleman,
It is a downright folly,
He’ll make a portly Baronet,
He is so plump and jolly.
Such queer things the big wigs ask,
“ And such queer things they want, he
Would want a head three times as long,
Asa costermonger’s donkey ;
To baffle him they are too fast,
Of that you may depend there,
They can’t catch old birds [by chaff.
So Roger says he can’t remember.
Lawyers are a rummy lot,
But that you know full well, sir,
They will swallow the oysters up,
And their clients give'the shells, sir ;
But Roger is a clever chapi
They must mind how they get at him,
For he has got friends, oh ! such a lot,
Coming up to back him.
The Counsel and the Judge may sneer,
And say that Roger’s cranky,
But he is right, that’s pretty clear,
In spite of their hanki panki:
Cook their goose will Ballantine,
Ho will, and no mistake, sir,
And Roger you will find,
Is sure to win the race, sir.
Disley, Printer, 57, High-street, St, Giles


TICHBORNE
TRIAL.
fITKE :—* Champagne Charlie."
Oh We I am so jolly and free,
A regular rollicking Romany ;
Mogep Tiohborne is my name,
If they’ll let me alone ill prove the same
Oh, many a time I’ve been to blame,
lm still the same, I’m here again ;
They say I don’t know my own Chris-
tian name.
But that won’t do for me.
chorus.
Sir Roger Tiohborne m my name
i m nghtmg now for wealth and f aw , e
And those who said I was lost at sea, *
Are rather surprised to hear it’s me.
1 had a icw and left my home.
And then in distant lands did roam ;
I then was snipwroolc’rf on the sea,
Only a few was saved with me ;
I didn’t go down, I wasn’t a flat,
Fished out of that like a drowned rat,
I was as hard to kill as an old tom cat,
And that you all must say.
I went to the diggings and there was
sold,
And finding rubbish instead of gold.
And then Bushranging took my way.
Free and easy I pass’d the day ;
Then I drove horses, upon my word.
With bed and board on the green sward
And every day got as drunk as a lord,
A Rollicking life for me.
When I came home my ©state to claim
My mother she knew me at onct> o.g<vin
Rut lawyers then on me did fall.
And told me 1 wasn’t myself at all;
They examined me well the evidence
snows,
Head and toes, and under my clothes.
The marks on my legs, and the length
of m / nose,
Hu* tu 1 / couldn’t get over me.


Old Jolly Roger
Is out on Bail.
You British, subjects pay attention,
Doodah, doodah,
A few funny things I will mention,
Doodah, doodah, day. |
To please youjall it will not fail,
Doodah, doodah.
We hare got Sir Roger out on hail,
Doodah, doodah, day.
He is released from gaol,
By honourable bail.
With pride he wags his tail,
With his do da diddle up de day.
I will tell you I think he ia the aaan,
And he’ll claim his rights if he can,
He was a very nice gay fellow.
When he sailed away in the ship the Bella
H* kiss'd his cousin once or twice,
Of course it’s naughty, bnt it’s nice,
He was cast away like Robinson Crusoe,
It was not right for lum to do so.
Lets hope like Cambridge he will win, sir
To beat him now vould be a sin, sir.
He fed on hinls, and wkales blubber,
Yet he was known bv hi# own mother.
i
,
1 She kiftsed hi* cradle and Ins napkins,
And always took core 01 Ins papkins,
: It was a good job he was born with aenu
Or be wmdd not haw been here at all.
He is licit Castro, nor yet Arthur Orton.
He Ihe right man is. I j) bet a quartern,
t He h not tattoo’d, the tenth I’ll tell ye.
He’s marked with strawberry on his belly
He returned to England—by his mother
caress’d.
She laid her boy upon her breast,
My Huger no coon* must roam,
Child of misfortune, driven from home.
She swore to her child, the rightful heir.
How flu? knew will make you stare,
, She strip! him of course,she’d not neglect
it,
She found the strawberry where she left it
Like the Shakers let us pray,
That he may win the day,
Sir Roger will tell some tales,
So we’ll conclude with doodah day.
Pisley, Printer, Leadon.


I AM THE
Real Sir Roger
I have got in a mess,
The truth to you 1 will state,
They took poor Wagga Wagga,
And they’ve shoved me into New gate
And there I shall be tried—
Till the sessions I am stopping—
They called me a butcher’s son,
And father sold sheep’s heads at
Wapping.
Oh poor Wagga Wagga,
They’ll ind me an artful dodger.
And I will let them see,
That I shall be Sir Roger.
1 had a mother once,
Unfortunately I lost her.
They swore through burs and walls.
And called me an imposturej.
The cove who questioned mej
Was u very artful dodger,
.Bat I will let them see,*
That 1 will be called Sir Roger,
- The chaps hi gowns and wfg*,
“Were naught but jaw and jabber,
There’s one of them 1 wish
W as sent to Wagga-wagga j
i would uke kin hj the rmso,
And souse him in the river,
Ajul feed tuna seven years
(>a old Orton's bullock s liver.
too London pretty maids.
Do you wont a yotmg man lodger.
Or >\ ill you marry me,
And be the lady ofSir Roger ;
Titchbourne is mv name.
][ have been to Deal and Dovor,
If von saw me in in}’- skin,
You would find me tattooed all over.
I never lived at Wapping,
I was never a coal porter,
My father was not a man
That dealt in fat and trotters;
Why they swore so hard at me.
With their big brains and jagga.
You might hear them firm lower Hill,
a!1 tlie way to Wagya-wagga.
Oh did I not stand it well,
Against the rum old codgers.
But never mind my boys,
I yet shall be Sir Roger :
And when I have a son,
Ue shall be a gentleman of Tichboun
He shall have houses, and tows.
Y«a,tho glorious Sir Hogerp'ichbuiiruc
Oh I did not tboy rail at me,
1 am sure they did hke fury*
I‘cooid swallow all the wigs.
Counsellor*. Judge, and Jury.
Weil I suppose awhile,
la quod I mast be slopping.
And when 1 get discharged.
I'll have'a butcher s sltop at
Disley, Printer, London.


A NEW
ALPHABET
On the Tichborne Trial
Good people all attention, and you shall plainly see ,
The facts of the case in my A B C.
A stands for Arthur Orton, a butcher once at Wrapping
And don’t you be surprised to see, him into courta popping
II stands for Bogle, a darkey, what of that,
He swears ha knew Sir. Roger, before he got so fat,
C stands for Claimant, he knows what he’s about,
And in spite of judge and jury, he’ll see the trial out.
11 stands for Defence fund, they raised in every Town,
To raise the claimant up again, when he was broken down
B stands for Everlasting, B the case it might go on,
To feed the hungry lawyers, When we are dead and gone
F stands for Fairplay, right throughout the nation,
And every man should have it too, no matter what his
station.
0 stands for great meetings, where the claimant made a
show,
Tha lawyers tried to gag him, but found it was no go.
H stands for Hampshire, and the Tichborne tenants there
The fat man is Sir Roger, the people they can swear,
1 stands for Ireland, where the claimant learnt his drill,
He didn’t forget the donkey and swears he never will.
•I stands for Jurymen, ’tis hard for them we own,
Especially the married men, to lesve their wives at home
K stands for Ken*aley, he’s the claimants counsel now
And if they try to humbug him, there ? bound to be a row
1* ston Is for Lord Rivers, a noble hearted fellow,
Who, when his friend was broken down, stood maufully
for Roger.
m st. i ds for Mother, she knew without a doubt,
That the claimant was her son tho’jhe’d got so jolly stout
* stands foo Newgate jail where the claimant danced
about
He broke down all the bedsteads, & then they lei him on
O stands for Onslow, he’s a proper MP.,
And a trnmp to Roger Tichborne, whoever he may be.
** stands for Prison, where Skipworth is confined.
Because he told the wigs the truth and nobly [spoke his
mind.
Q stands for Question, there is one I'd ask you all,
M hen a poor man cries for justice, do they answer to his
call,
R stands for Radcliffe, his cousin says she never will.
Confess she danced the can-can with Roger in the mill.
S stands for Secret packet, shey make such fuss about,
Roger’s con. in she disowned him so he let the secret out.
T stands for Tattoo marks, and Lord Bellew. would you
doubt it,
Thought he’d till a wapping lie while he was about it,
U stands for Unity, may his witnesses together,
Around tin joby claimant stick, like balls of waxjtogether
V stands for Victory, and if Urge- wins the day,
He’s going to dance the can-can with Boville at the
play |
w stands for Whalley, he’s a very knowing codger,"
Ho woolnn’i back ti e claimant, if he wrrc an artfuJ
dodger.|
X stands for Ten, and th' u,di I’m shy of betting,
I’d ui-t the lawyers 10 to 1 he’ll give them all a sweating
\ sti nJs for Young men, attend to what I say,
VS hen you court a pretty cousin, don't }ou run away.
Z stands tor Zanies, in a jury box a snoozing,
To let a jud<je have his own way, is English laws,
abusing.
H. Dishy Piin’er, 57. High Street, Oxford Street.


HE’S RIGHT,
SIR ROGER TICHRORINE.
You all have heard of nobody’s child,
Who travelled the seas and deserts wild,
And on the road his time beguil’d
To find Sinbad the Sailor.
Spring heel’d Jack the wandering Jew,
Captain Cook and Crusoe too.
But you’ll find you’d have enough to do,
To match Sir Roger Tichbourne.
Ikey, Crickey, chancery oh.
Wigs and gowns, and parchment oh,
A thousand pounds for a lawyer, oh.
You’re right Sir Roger Tichbourne.
Now bold Sir Roger is the man.
He’s travell’d the world and seen Japan
He’ll trick the lawyers if he can,
Who wouldn’t to win a fortune.
He’s quite a hero of romance,
He can stick a pig and he can dance,
He’s been to India and to France,
A butcher and a soldier.
His daddy he was of noble race,
He married a wife, or rather her face.
And Roger was born a young scrapegrace,
A wild and naughty rover.
He went to school like other boys,
He hated books, and loved his toys,
If he grew a dunce it was his choice,
Oh jolly Roger Tichbourne.
Now lawyer Col the chatters so,
To puzzle Sir Roger’s brain you know,
But counsellor Bal says it is no go.
He’s fly Sir Roger Tichbourne.
Such funny things they’ve made him say,
When he was young, he was rather gay,
And with his cousin sported away,
Oh naughty Roger Tichbourne.
But Roger is a great man you’ll own,
Tho’ years ago he was skin and bone,
But now he weighs over twenty stone,
Oh; what a duck of a cousin.
‘Tis true he can’t remember the day,
When he was born and breech’d, they say,
Whether his frocks were black or grey,
Poor Roger he can’t remember.
Now the lawyer thought he was very wise
To put him though his exercise,
But he wheel’s about to their great surprise,
Like Falstaff did Sir Roger.
And cunning spies the wigs employ,
To bribe his servants and decoy,
But his mammy declares he was her boy,
The image of his father.
Oh the Prince of Wales the other day,
He went to the court so fine and gay,
With his fair Princess, and people say,
He was thinking of Lady Mordaunt,
Sir Roger looking so jolly and stout.
They try to put his temper out,
That he’s a Tichbourne, who can doubt,
Why, look at his noble figure.
Now this greatest trial of the day
Might last for years, so people say,
And won’t there be the devil to pay.
The hungry sharks of lawyers.
May he put them to the right about,
And like an here see it out,
And all his jolly pals live to shout.
He’s won, Sir Roger Tichbourne.
Disley, Printer, High-street, St. Giles


TICHBORNE
CATECHISM.
Now my friends, for your instruction
«nd amusement, 1 will read my Tich-
borne belief and commandments.
I believe that the stout gentleman,
called the claimant, is thereal Sir Roger,
mnd no flies, in spite of all the slander
that has been used te prove him the
sheep’s bead butcher of Wapping, and
I believe he is ne kia of the Wagga
w«gg« ranger; and I believe hia keep-
ing up hia blessed fat in Newgate, is a
continuing proof tbat all his enemies
would do would not pull it down , and
I believe, sad have no doubt, but that;
he danced the polka ia an old mill, and
with the assistance of the bravaKenealey
he will lick them yet, and this 1 stead-
fastly believe to kelp my good John
Thomas.
New the Tichborne Commandments
commences at used as the beginning.
1. —No Roger you shall have but one,
and he it six and twenty stone.
2. —Tea shall not take his name in
vain, by saying that he ia Orton, the
butcher, for the people know he is
Reger, and no mistake.
3. —Ne mother shall on any account
-indulge in the with to see her child, as
Lady Tichborne did, for by all what’s
his-name’s account, she may be consi-
dered not right in her head.
4. —You mast not pay any visits to
either windmills or water mills, with
either grandmother,great aunt, or cousin
to damee the can canorSpanish fandango,
.. for the miller will not consider it square
to intrude into a spot set aside for hia
own especial use.
5. —Remember that you place no d*,
pendence in any of the wopping tales,,
to try and prove him to be Orton, lest
you might be deceived by hearing wop-
ping lies.
6. —Do not on any account lead too
k w» life, nor indulge in too much
ox tail or pea soup, lest by making your
belly fat, you spoil your figure, and be
called Jack Styles, when you knew it to
Tom Stokes.
7- —Believe not in the importation of
the funny a itnesses. nor the £5OO Judies
far by jingo they would knaw the leg off
an iron pot for less money.
8. —Be not foolish enough to -be tat-
tooed on the belly, back, or paddywack,
nor place too much faith in what my
Squire Blowlow s about it, for any
man is a duffer that steps off with ano-
ther man's wife.
9. —You shall do honour to such men
as Onslow, Skipwortk, and Whalley,
for so help my tater they are perfect
bricks, but confusion to Bobby Lowe
and all who try to cheat old Reger.
10. —You must be sure and shout
long life and jolly g<*d luck to Roger I
give him fair play,.with the people at kii
back and honest Kenedey as his ehami
pioa, he will lick them yet. And mai
his enemies be sent to W*ggt Waggl
in a washing tub and be fct oa buffaty
| hides for the remainder of the> lives.
Disley, Printer, London.


HE’S JOLLY
Sir Roger Tichbourn
All people high and low,
Of every rank and station,
The Tichbourne case you know,
Has made a great sensation.
The Jury got the cramp,
And said the case was cruel,
The Judge he got the blues,
And wish’d it to the devil.
Sir Roger’s back to town.
Looking fat and jolly,
He’s going to win the day,
He is, so help my golly.
They're all come baok to town,
Lawyers* Judge, and Jury,
They’re at it now slap bang.
The case goes on like fury.
The coves in wig and gown,
Are ready all for starting.
And, Would you be surprised,
They’re going to do some spouting.
They’ve all been on the spree,
While bathing in sea water,
And, Would you be surprised.
Was matched against Sir Roger;
The lawyer stood no chance,
He lay just like a tortoise,
And Fichbourne won the race,
as lively as a porpoise.
His pals are on the sea,
Fresh evidence to give, O I
To swear that in the bush,
He was the fat De Castro ;
And Orton too, his pal,*
They’ve let him out of prison,
You know poor chap he stole
a horse, that wasn’t his'n.
Now a cove at Liverpool,
a regular artful dodger,
His fortune for to make.
He offered to Sir Roger,
Twenty pounds a-day,'
For him to show his figure,
Sir Roger knocked him down,
The damned meddling fellow.
Now the fast young swell you know,
They dubb’d him rum old codger,
But he was the ladies man,
They call’d him darling Roger.
He danced the girls to death,
One tried with him the ean can,
She fell quite out of breath,
And smash her lovely chignon.
Now let him have fair play,
He’s Tichbourne, and no other,
Can other people know’ him,
Better than his own mother.
So go it Ballantine,
The claimant he’s no dodger,
| Your bound to win the day,)
For he’s the right Sir Roger.
Disley, Printer, 57, High-street, St. Giles.


SUCCESS TO
SIR ROGER
AND
DOWNFALL OF THIS ENEMIES.
A»—“ Paybaps aba’s onftba Hallway.”
Oh, have you heard the latest news
Fresh from London town.
Where bold Sir Roger Tichborne now
Has done the Lawyers brown T
Altho’ they’ve tried, you can’t deny.
To shove him into gaol,
Now like the Dutchman’s leetle dog.
They’re hanging down their tail.
CHORUS.
Then here’s good luck to Tichborne,
To win he will not fail.
The Lawyers have put off the trial,
And all turned their tale;
That he’s the true Sir Roger
Is as plain as A B C,
And his enemies soon will cry—
With us iPs all U P.
Then perhaps Sir Roger Tichborne
Will make the Lawyers quail.
Perhaps they’ve put the trial off
Because they know they’d fail.
Perhaps they cry oh dear, oh my.
We soon may have a fall.
For perhaps he is Sir Roger,
And the right man after all.
They wanted to keep the Claimant
In Newgate,. I declare.
But the people they were looking on,
And cried we’ll have it fair;
We’ll find him money for his defence.
And help to keep him fat,
And when he’s gave them a licking,
Let them take it out of that.
Oh, what a many names he had.
First one and then the other,
They called him Arthur Orton first.
And then he was his brother.
Says Dublin Pat by this and that,
IPs mighty quare to me,
If he wasn’t made a proper man
They'd call him Biddy M’Ghee.
In every town in England,
Wherever he’s been seen.
The working men in thousands there
Around him they have been;
Perhaps they know he has been done
By Lawyers, might and main,
They’d sooner work an extra hour
Than see him sold again.
Perhaps they’ll try and prove him then
Thomas Castro or another,
Perhaps they’ll want to swear he ia
The Attorney General’s mother;
Perhaps he’d say they cannot speak
The Frenchman, ' Parley too/
Perhaps they’ll swear the tattoo marks
Are all gone up the fine.
There’s many a man in England now
Will very often say—
Here’s good luck to Roger bold.
And may he win the day.
And single girls stick up for him,
Although he’s overgrown,
Perhaps they say we’ll hare some day
A Roger of our own.
1048


The Claimant’s,
DEFENCE.
Air-Perhaps she’s on the Railway.
round me one and all,
And listen to my song,
It is about the Tichborne trial
Carried on so long :
Here and there and everywhere.
It is the talk we say, *,
What will be the Claimants’*fate
Upon the closing day.
CHORUS.
Then perhaps you’ll wait a little while,
Till Roger does commence,
Perhaps yen’ll hear another tale,
When he makes his defence ;
Perhaps he will, perhaps he wont
♦ The Tichborne money get,
Perhaps he’ll prove himself to be
The real Sir Roger yet.
A regular crowd of witnesses
The Prosecution called,
They swear he’s Arthur Orton now,
Who kept a butcher’s stall ;
Lawyers and tailors, soldiers and saiiv*- 8>
Have now done all they can,
Wont he turn the tables ;;;
If he proves himself the man.
Some say that he was tattooed,
Some say that he was not,
And his head was thick and empty
As a forty shilling pot.
They say Roger was bled and blistered,
From his head down to his toes,
He had leeches on his ancles,
And a fish-hook in his nose.
They say the Claimant’s very ill,
Body, and legs, and all,
Perhaps it is a wonder
That he’s got any legs at all ;
Pushed about from pillar to post,
Examined every day.
They’ve nearly turned him inside out
For he couldn’t get away.
If the Claimant’s witnesses can prove.
It’s true what he has said,
What a lark if they should swear.
That Arthur Orton’s dead ;
Perhaps they’ll find another name..
And christen him so quick.
The Shah of Persia’s mother,
Or the brother to old Nick.
I
i Perhaps you very soon will hear
The Tichborne trial’s done,
' Perhaps the people will be glad
To know that Roger’s won ;
* Let the swells think what they will,
) Perhaps you all will say,
) He kept his blooming pecker up,
* He ought to win the day.
H. Snob, Machine and General Printer,
* 177, Union Street, Borough.


THERE IS A FLOWER THAT BLOOMETH.
There are
KIND HEARTS
Everywhere!
Oh, call it not a desert bare,
This beauteous world below,
Nor say no flower of sympathy
For anguish here doth grow;
Affliction may have tried thee,
Thy lot’s been hard to fear,
Yet I speak not so untruly
There are kind hearts everywhere.
Yet I speak not, &c.
This world might be a paradise,
And life made bright with love.
Could each the other strive to serve,
And friendship seek to prove;
Be patient, ever patient,
And joy will be thy share,
So judge not too severely,
There are kind hearts everywhere.
So judge not, &c.
Oh, call it not a mockery,
This beautiful world of ours,
Though full of lovely hopes that bloom
To perish like its flowers;
Though dark clouds gather o’er thee,
Ne’er yield thee to despair,
This life hath its sunshine,
There are kind hearts everywhere.
This life hath, &c.
There is a flower that bloometh.
There is a flower that bloometh,
When Autumn leaves are shed.
With the silent moon it weepeth,
The Spring and Summer fled;
The early frost of Winter,
Scarce one tint hath overcast,
O pluck it o’er it withers,
Tis the memory of the past.
It wafted perfume o’er us,
Of sweet though and regret,
For the true friends gone before us,
Whom none would e’er forget;
Let no heart brave its power,
By guilty thoughts o’ercast,
For then a poison flower,
Is the memory of the past.
BOSTOCK on the Sentence of the
Claimant in 1874.
My friends, another year has passed, a year of grief and woe,
There’s many now are left to mourn for friends that are laid low
Yes, many a one so full of life, who went last New-year’s day,
To wish their friends ‘a happy year,’ now lie beneath the clay.
There’s many gone across the main to plough the raging deep
There’s many sleep beneath the waves and many are left to
weep;
But the days of 18763 we shall see no more,
So I wish you all a happy year in 1874.
Of our true friend Mr. Plimsoll, a word in praise I’ll say,
He is as good a man I think as we’ve had this many a day.
We know he’s trying hard to take a step to save
So many hundred seamen from cold and watery graves.
I think we ought to back him out, and stick to him like men,
For he goes for the working-class, and not ‘the upper ten.’
I hope his name and fame, my friends, will spread from
shore to shore,
He’s the right man in the right place in 1874.
Poor Roger Tichborne, as we know, he has been knocked
about,
But now that he is not the man, I’m sure it is made out;
The Solicitor-General calls him thief, and such a name as
that,
And it has been proved what he said, we must own that’s
a fact.
For such a hardened swindler, I wonder he’d not the sense
To go to school a year or two and leant to speak some French.
Though he’s not the real Sir Roger, they’ve had hard work
I’m sure,
To prove him Arthur Orton in 1874.
One word about his Counsel, Kenealy of renown,
He spoke his mind, and cared not for, the counsel of the
Crown.
Not like the ‘S. 8.,’ the business he did shirk,
I’d like to know the reason he refused to do the work.
Then success to Kenealy, I hope you’ll say the same,
A man we never knew before is getting up his name.
He has tried to do his very best, no counsel could do more,
But he’s not got the Claimant off in 1874.
English hearts did swell that day, with good old English
pride,
When the Duke of Edinburgh won away the Princess for his
bride,
And I’m sure the Princess Mary, with good luck has been
blest,
From the whole of England’s princes, by jove she’s got the best
So the Russian Bear and British Lion together now must lie,
To keep peace with two nations this is a lasting tie.
But her Majesty, as we all know, has got one daughter
more,
I hope she’ll wed an Irishman in 1874.


A Plea for Roger.
What's all the noise and bother about,
’Tis enough to make the people shout,
The man that is the righful heir.
They are trying to give him 7 years,
But will the people stand to this,
Perhaps the Crown will make a miss,
Before the trial is ended.
Now Kenealy will do all ht can,
To prove that he’s the very man,
The rifcht Sir Roger without a doubt.
Although he’s got so joMy stout,
He’ll jog along from day to day,
And make them give the man fair play.
Likewise an honest verdict.
They blanr e him for the wicked lies,
Told by Luie in disguise,
But 1 don't think the claimant knew.
What Luie said was false or true,
Perhaps he did the tale beleive,
For with his own it did agree,
And so the mischief happened
But lady Radcliffe she did swear,
She never kiss’d her cousin, dear,
Nor danc’d the can-can in the mill.
Altho’ she owned that she was ill.
And doctors on her did attend.
To try and mend her Greican bend, ’
Before the lady married.
Now Bogle swore without a fear,
The claiment was his mastet dear,
And not a butcher’s son, so fat,
The finest witness in the case,
For he lost some pounds by what he states,
But oet he would not leave him,
And their’s my noble Lord Bellew,
He did the Captain ( s wife tattoo,
When then the husband was out at the play
He took his darling wife away,
Then turned the lady in the street,
Came into court so very meek.
And told an awfull crammer.
Now Hawkins he will have to jaw,
Spouting away and making law
He’ll find he’s caught a tarter yet
And wish himself safe out of it
For sure enough his kid won’t stand
To square the people of this land,
And settle the real Sir Roger.
But Mrs. Jury she did say
She saw young Orton every day
Also some mark upon him three
When he was bathing in the sea
But what a naughty thing to do
To strip before a lady too
And she a married woman.
Now 1 think the claimant will wiu the day
If the juege and jury give him fair play.
For does he not deserve it too,
After all the trouble he’s gone trough,
The people then will wish him luck,
And prise him for his daring pluck,
And so the base will
Okdey, Printer, 57 High Street, Bloomsbury


AM I THE
Real Sir Roger
I have got in a mess,
The truth to you I will state,
They took poor Wagga Wagga,
They’ve shoved me into Newgate,
And there I shall be tried
Till the sessions I am stopping
They called me a butcher’s son,
And father sold sheep’s heads at
Wapping.
Chorus.
Oh, poor Wagga Wagga,
They’ll find me an artful dodger,
And I will let them see,
That I shall be Sir Roger.
I had a mother once,
Unfortunately I lost her,
They swore through bars and walls,
And called me an imposture;
Thesce who questioned me,
Waa very artful dodger,
But I will let them see,
That I will be called Sir Roger.
The chaps in gowns and wigs,
Were naught but jaw and jabber,
There’s one of them I wish
Was sent to Wagga-wagga;
I would take him by the nose,
And souse him in the river,
And feed him seven years
On old Orton’s bullock’s liver.
You London pretty maids,
Do you want a young man lodger,
Or will you marry me,
And be the lady of Sir Roger;
Tichborne is my name,
I have been to Deal and Dover,
If you saw me in my skin,
You would find me tattooed all over.
I never lived at Wapping,
I never was a coal porter,
My father was not a man
That dealt in fat and trotters;
Why they swore so hard at me,
With their big brains and jagga,
You might hear them from Tower Hill,
All the way to Wagga-wagga.
Oh, did I not stand it well,
Against the rum old codgers,
But never mind, my boys,
I yet shall be Sir Roger;
And when I have a son,
He shall be a gentleman of Tichborne,
He shall have houses, pigs and cows,
The glorious Sir Roger Tichborne.
Oh! did not they rail at me,
I am sure they did like fury,
I could swallow all the wigs,
Counsellors, Judge, and Jury,
Well I suppose awhile,
In quod I must be stopping,
And when I get discharged,
I’ll have a butcher’s shop at Wapping.
W.S. Fortey, Printer, Monmouth Ct., London, W.C.


TIGHBORNE
DOODAH.
AX Ws*ter r -hey are doimr all they can.
Doodah, doodah.
To spinicate the gi <?at fat roan,
Oh, doodah day.
The people 'irowd where every day.
Doodah doodah.
And rush to see the Tichborne play.
Oh, doodan day.
Then cheer up Roger boy
No matter what they say.
I’ll bet my money on the big fat man,
If he only gets fair play.
Now the goverment coves abroad did roam,
As if thev couldn,t get liars at home,
They hired them from Australia.
From France and South America.
They found DeCastro, what a catch '•
He ought to be sent to Colney Hatch,
And the Spanish lady swore'quite pert,
Sh- saw young Orton without his shirt-
And Mrs. Jewry, she was found.
But her story cost Five hundred pounds.
She swore the claimant was Orton quite sliclr
For another 500 she would swear he was Nici*
mi honest lawyer, was Mr. Gibbes,
I But the Frenchmen told some preciousfibs
! While the husband and wife as they often
Thev made a mess about the tattoo.
Plenty of rogues, detectives found,
Who would hang an honest man for a poundf
Arid didn,t they tell some Wapping lies,
Sr. Vitus’s dance and, bullocky size.
They came into court to swear this and; thaSs;
They only knew when a boyso fat,
i The same old yarn was told by a score,
j Till the judge got the hump, and woiddirV
hear any more.
| Now his pretty cousin is going to appear,,
j To round oh the chap she loved so dear,.
] And then we hope Sir Roger will,
| Tell what they did in the old water mill-
! Now mv Lord Bellew T upon my life,
I You know you tattooed the captain’s wife?
I Upon the lady he did dote,
j And did the job for a five-pound-note
; Good luck to Kenealey he : s doing his best.,
j Onslow and Whalley and ail the rest,
j The public wall support him toe,
! With plenty of tin to help him through.
Disley. Printer, London.


THE
DOLLY WARDEN
HATS.
Sko. 30.
OOME, dear, don’t fear, try and cut a shine,
And wear a hat and feathers in the fashionable lino
Lovers you’ll have plenty, of that you may depend,
II you wear the Dolly Varden hat, and do the Orecian bend
Chorus.
Come, dear, don’t fear, have your ringlets curler
If you’re out of fashion, you had better leave the world,
Your sweet and pretty faces will wear a winning smile,
If you get a hat and feather in the Dolly Varden style.
There’s little Polly Puddings chops, don’t she do the grand
With a tiny hat on her head no bigger than your hand.
And this Orecian Bender toddling on her toes,
With a hat like a cookie aheli stuck upon her nose.
Our grandmothers years ago were comfortable souls,
They used to wear a bonnet like a scuttle for the coals,
But bonnets are so altered now by women one and all.
They made them smaller every day till now there’s none
at all.
I know a jolly carpenter, his name is Peter Platt,
He courted a girl with a Dolly Varden Hat,
And while they were a courting he proved so very kind,
He rumbled all the muslin in her panniers behind.
Some of them are rather large, some are rather small.
Some with very wide brims and some with none at all,
I know a girl that wears one, oh ! aint she nice and fat.
Yon could drive adozen donkeys round her Dolly Varden
Miss Jemima Jenkins—what a precious flat.
Pawned her mother’s breeches tor a Dolly Varden hat,
She couldn’t get a chignon, ’tis true 1 do declare.
So she stole a lot of shavings A rolled them in her hair.
Bally now, indeed it’s true is crying in distress.
She was going to a ball but she found an awful mess,
She had just been and found out a nasty tubby cat,
With five-and-forty kittens on her Dolly Varden hat.
If the men want to wear them, the women won’t complain
They’ll do for umbrellas to save them from the rain.
While the soldiers are drilling upon Salisbury flat*,
They ere dreeing ell the Volunteers in Dolly Varden
hate.
THE
TICHBORNE
CASE.
We left the busy hauntsof man,
And from the house did sally,
To have a sentimental talk
Within a pleasant valley.
’Tis twenty years and more ago,
But I can ne’er forget him,
No, ne’er forget that happy spot
W here on that eve 1 met him.
Oh, merrily our talk did flow,
Beside that brimming river.
The hours might come, the hours might go,
We could go on for ever.
We stole by lawns and grassy plots.
We strayed by hazel covers.
And saw the sweet forget-me-nots
Which grew for happier lovers.
1 smiled, I used my every charm,
My glance grew very tender,
1 said, “ My Roger get those flowers,”
He bared his arm so slender,
A nd then I saw those frightful marks
Most plainly written on it,
A heart, an anchor, and a cross
Were all tattoed upon it.
Ah, I can ne’er forget that eve.
Beside the brimming river,
The mem’ry on my heart is fixed
Indelibly fur ever.
Gentlemen of the Jury say= —
Could that huge monster ever
Have gathered me forget-me-nots
Beside the brimming river 7
As well conceive an elephant
Like a young kitten sporting.
As think that hideous mass of flesh
Did sentimental courting.
Surely the question’s proved at oacc
By thinking of that river.
So give your verdict quickly pray,
And don't ye en far evsr.


RELEASE OF ROGER
TICHBORNE.
You Englishmen attend I pray,
To these few lines I have to say,
Although in Newgate gaol I laid,
[ still am Roger Tichborne ;
I stood my ground against the foe.
1 had support from high and low,
And tho’ I’m broken down you know,
I still am Roger Tichborne.
Nothin* 1 care for all the lot,
if all the wealth in the world they’ve got.
They have never proved that 1 am not
The real Sir Roger Tichborne.
So working men to }ou 1 say,
Help me now to win the day,
Tho’ broken down, I’ll not give way,
I still am Roger Tichborne.
I own that I’ve been rather wild.
My poor old mother, meek and mild,
Said, you are my long lost child,
The real Sir Roger Tichborne :
Oh ! had she lived, they would not dare
Against her son to stand and swear.
It was her death, I do declare,
That ruined Roger Tichborne.
The tattoo marks mere all a sham,
Although they did the jury cram.
Two hundred witnesses swear I am,
The real Sir Roger Tichborne.
They say I’ve led a life of shame,
Up to every thievish game,
And Arthur Orton if my name.
And not Sir Roger Tichborne.
But if I am the man they say,
Let them prove it without delay,
They know that I shan’t run away,
Because I’m Roger Tichborne.
Though in Newgate they had me got,
Without a penny —a wretched lot,
If Td stay’d in prison till 1 rot,
I’d have still be«n Roger Tichborne.
The gentlemen who stood bv me,
Were men of honour and high degree.
Mistaken they can never he.
They know I’m Roger Tichborne.
There is some of them who stand so high.
That on their word you mav rely.
They would not tell a direct lie,
To save the estates of Tichborne.
But that won't do for my crafty foes,
They’ll try and convict me 1 suppose,
They took the money, and then the clothes*
Of me, Sir Roger Tichborne.
You Englishmen who love the right,
Fair play’s a jewel in your sight,
Help me now to gain my right,
For 1 am Roger Tichborne.
They locked me up in Newgate gaol,
But yet ray spirits did not fail,
Twill take them all their time to quail,
The English heart of Tichborne.
On working men then 1 rely,
They’ll not refuse to hear my cry
Then 1 live in hopes that 1 shall die,
In mv father’s halls at Tichborne.
Then rally round me if you will,
I'm sure you do not wish me ill,
Help me to get up the hill,
On the road to Tichborne.
Then like a man I’ll stand my trial,
And at their charges only smile,
And there I’ll prove without denial
That Tin Sir Roger Tichborne.
These last words to you I'll say
And say the same on my dying day
Come what will, come what may,
I’m the real Sir Roger Tichborne.
Disley, Printer, High Street, St. Giles.


“FAIR PLAY”
FOR
TICHBORNE AND KENEALY
■TUNE:— Bettav Late Than Never.
Give me the man of honest heart,
I like no two freed dodger,
But ope who nobly speaks his part,
Like Kenealy aid lor Roger:
One honest lawyer’s found at last,
Who’ll ne’er desstl Us sttent,
He knows right watt the eaneeis just,
He standing Rhea gtot
Then say men ssv.
Be yon lew or rim hem,
And have tor flag.
For Kenealy md to fUtorae.
Uponjthat trial where honant men,
Were spurn’d with jeers and laughter,
The witnesses th\o’ well paid then,
> | Will be better paid hereafter.
If Kenealy tried to say a word,
i he bench was in a fury,
How dare he doubt a witness.
Like the famous mother Jewry.
Now when the big-wigs found that he,
To them would not be suineg,
They knocked their wigs together boys,
And swore they’d be his ruin;
We dare not do it publicly,
For fear twould cause a riot.
So we’ll get the Gray’s Inn Benchers*
To do it on the quiet.
Sir Roger bears up like a man,
His spirit never lacking,
When his gets out there is no doubt.
Hell give his foes a whacking;
His mother worried to her grave,
Her son they’d like to settle,
Bit Roger shows the world he’s made*
Of good eld Xnglish metal.
We reed el Meetings being held,
In every Cenntry Town, Sir,
Then don't let London be behind,
Ne’er see a man oast down, dir,
We aak to Justice, and tor to
For lew as well as rich bom,
We’ll never eease, till we relearn,
Sir Roger Doughty Tkhbomt.


RELEASE OF ROGER
TICHBORXE.
You Englishmen attend I pray,
To these few lines I have to say,
Although in Newgate gaol 1 laid,
I still am Roger Tichbornc ;
I stood my ground against the foe.
I had support from high and low,
And tho’ I’m broken down you know,
I still am Roger Tichborne.
Nothin* 1 care for all the lot,
If all the wealth in the world they’ve got,
They have never proved that I am not
The real Sir Roger Tichborne.
So working men to \ou 1 say,
Help me now to win the day,
Tho’ broken down, I’ll not give way,
I still am Roger Tichborne.
I own that I’ve been rather wild.
My poor old mother, meek and mild,
Said, you are my long lost child,
The real Sir Roger Tichborne :
Oh ! had she lived, they would not dare
Against her son to stand and swear.
It was her death, 1 do declare.
That ruined Roger Tichborne.
The tattoo marks were all a sham,
Although they did the jury cram,
Two hundred witnesses swear I am,
The real Sir Roger Tichborne.
They say I’ve led a life of shame,
Up to every thievish game,
And Arthur Orton if ray name.
And not Sir Roger Tichborne.
But if I aw the man they say,
Let them prove it without delay,
They know that I shan’t run away,
Because I’m Roger Tichborne.
Though in Newgate they had me got,
Without a penny —a wretched lot,
If I’d stay’d in prison till I rot,
Td have still betn Roger Tichborne.
The gentlemen who stood bv me,
Were men of honour and high degree.
Mistaken they can never he.
They know I'm Roger Tichbornc.
There is some of them who stand so high.
That on their word you mav rely.
They would not toil a direct lie,
To save the estates of Tichborne.
But that won’t do for my crafty foes,
They’ll try and convict me 1 suppose,
They took the money, and then the clothes,.
Of me, Sir Roger Tichborne.
You Englishmen who love the right,
Fair play’s a jewel in your sight,
Help me now to gain my right,
For 1' am Roger Tichborne.
They locked me up in Newgate gaol,
But yet my spirits did not fail,
Twill take them all their time to quail,
The English heart of Tichborne.
On working men then 1 rely,
They’ll not refuse to hear my cry
Then 1 live in hopes that 1 shall die,
In my father’s halls at Tichborne.
Then rally round me if you will,
Tm sure you do not wish me ill.
Help me to get up the hill,
On the road to Tichborne.
Then like a man I’ll stand my trial,
And at their charges only smile,
And there 1 ’ll prove without denial
That I’m Sir Roger Tichborne.
These last words to you Til say
And say the same on my dying day
Come what will, come what may,
I’m the real Sir Roger Tichborne.
Disley, Printer, High Street, St. Giles.


TICHBORNE
Tootle turn tay
Good peopie I pray now attend,
To these lines 1 have pen’d.
When the trial of Roger will end,
It is a very hard thing for to say.
That he’s Roger Tm sure is a fact.
Though in Newgate him packed,
They failed for bring down his fat,
Tootle turn, tootle turn tay.
Ivenealey’s a clever old codger,
Re sticks back and edge for old Roger
They bully and rail, he’ll never turn tail
Tootle torn, tootle turn tay.
T<s bamboozle Roger about,
Such a crew they found out,
Who would swear thro’ a brick no doubt
Tootle turn, tootle turn tay.
Agaiust jolly Roger came flocking,
Ok ray, how shocking,
Haked out from the back slums of
Wapping,
Tootle turn tootle turn tay,
iNow a judy, a nice one I’m sure.
And told lies by the score,
Tolly Roger to try for to floor,
Tootle turn, tootle turn tay.
And there was the wife stealer, who,
It's a fact, I tell you,
Tie swore he saw Roger’s tattoo,
Tootle turn, tootle turn tay.
iXow the witnesses for the fat man
declare,
That he is Roger, they swear,
They know him by his nose and his hair
Tootle turn, tootle turn tay.
Vnd one of the witnesses did say,
They saw Roger one day,
With a pretty woman.at.play,
■/Tootle Wjfc, tdatfe v tum tay.
I\cw the doctor he said, so help my bob
He was not Orton’s nob,
He knows by the bungling job,
He made on his thico head he said.
A.nd the sncb that made Orton s shoes.
Declares it is true,
They would make of good coffins, two.
Tootle turn, tootle turn tay.
Now Atwell the barber, was there.
Who dress’d Roger’s hair,
And his famous you crazy brought there
And Hawkins got at him the} say.
Says Atwell, here’s some for your hair.
If your nob is not bare.
If not, on your wig put some there,
Tootle turn, tootle turn lay.
Now Bogle the darkey, the cure.
Says, dat’s Roger, I’m sure.
I’ve seen him behind and before,
Tootle turn, tootle turn tay.
Then Bogle shook his woolly nob.
And said, so help me, bob,
Jolly Roger we’ll pull through the job.
Tootle tuna, lootlo turn tay.
Disley, Printer, 57, High-street St. Giles


TRIAL OF THE
CLAMANT.
Ron; -.ld Roger Tielihome now
I, on 1 is trial again,
Thewih cot rest contented,
Tl.cv iiever will refrain !
R:.mi it >iag everything they can,
To >tr;ko the latal blow,
I f r<.cey tan only do il now,
To pii.on he must go.
(HOURS
i b.ey’re doing all they can,
Roor Roger lor to smother,
Tae\ mn>| not, they shall not,
I>v» anything unfair,
\ oii've only heard on** side.
Vmi’ve. got to hear the other
When all their tales u ;ll lanis'o,
Like bubbles in live ;.ir.
Root Roger stands before then:
Like a llrilon every day.
When lawyers call him names,
A word he mustn’t say ;
lie listens to their oiuiller.
Rut fear he does not show,
If he’d been an imposter,
He’d have jack’d up lung ago.
thivernmrnl (ind-llm money.
TheTiehborue ran' to end,
It, lines not trouble them a bit,
However much they spend,
I hcy’re drawing tbeir ex peaces,
r'rom taxes I’ll be bone. I,
So working men will have to pay,
To crush poor Roger down.
I think you’ll say Sir Roger
A clover sort of man,
He’s got an Irish lawyer,
Who’ll do the best he can ;
l>r. Keaucaly will he there
The claimant lor to screen,
And when his Irish blood is up.
He’ll tell them what he means
The lawyers they may chatter,
Aral bluster all they can,
They can’t make many thousand
Relieve he’s not the man.
There was never a man that over
lived
Upon Ureal Rritnm’s shore,
ronhls.aud the test that Roger
has
Kor two long years or more.
Then mav he be successful
And win Ihe day at last,
lie’ll soon I’mge.t the troubles
That will he gone and past ;
The friends that have assisted,
As nobly they have done,
lie'll wish long life and happiness
To each and every one.
d.dm White, Printer, Rose Dare
Scotland Hoad, Liverpool.


HAVE
YOU
SEEN
THE
CLAIMANT?
THE
BIG-
FAT
MAN !
OH ! have you seen the Claimant we hear the
people say.
They call him jolly Roger when they see him, every
• ! da y.l
The judges and the jury &re bound to see it out.
And they grunt and sweet poor devils, with the
lumbago and the gout.
Chorus :
Then have you seen the Claimant, he looks so
jolly stout ?
He is the right Sir Roger, and knows what he’s
about,
Kenealey is a stnnner, and does all he can,
To prove him Roger Tichbourne—the big fat man.
The witnesses for Roger are having now their say.
They swear that he’s not Orton, by dazens, every
day.
And there is Billy Gladstone, he’s not a bad old
codger,
He’s going to pay the witnesses who come to swear
for Roger,
The snob that measured Orton, he was a knowing
card,
He knew him by his wopping feet, that measured
just a yard,
His head was like a pumpkin, for pretty girls to
ponder.
And bis mouth it was a beauty, and reached from
here to yonder.
One witness swore young Orton, he well remem-
bered him.
And naked in the water they together used to swim.
He said that he should know by, and was just
a-going to shout.
When the Judge he was disgusted, and turned the
blackguard out.
Now H&wkins is jolly cunning there’s not the
slighest doubt,
He tries to jaw the witnesses and turn tkem inside
out.
One said he was hungry, as true as I’m a sinner.
So Hawkins had to turn him up and let him have
his dinner.
They are coming from old Ireland to Westminster
we hear,!
And his comrades from the regiment are gbing
to appear,
And his geod old pal, the donkey, is coming too
they say,
Well put the Claimant on his b&ck, and have a
jolly day.
Now theraare witnesses from Hampshire, and coves
that ought to know.
That he’s the right Sir Roger, they knew him years
ago :
And one old girl from Arlesford, who knew his
cousin well,
Swears she saw them doing the can-cin together in
in the mill.
That he’s not Arthur Orton, we may be sure of
of that.
The Claimant he’s a gentleman, altho he s jolly
fat; A
Good lack to Kenealey, you are a clever codger.
And come what may, the people say, he is tbfl
right Sir Roger?


The Serjeant.


TRIAL
OF THE
CLAIMANT.
POOR old Roger Tichborne now.
Is on his trial again.
They will not rest contented.
They never will refrain ;
From doing everything they can.
To strike the fatal blow,
If money can only do it now.
To prison he must eo.
Chorus.
They’re doing all they can.
Poor Roger for to smother.
They must not, they shall not.
Do anything unfair ;
You’ve only beard one side,
' You’ve yet to hear the other,
When all thtir tales will vanish,
Like bubbles in the air.
Poor Roger stands before them,
Lik<e a Briton every day.
When lawyers’ call him names,
A word ne niust’nt say.
He listens to their chatter
But fear he does not know.
If he’d been an impostor,
He’d have jack’d up long ago.
Government finds the money.
The Tichborne case to end,
It does not trouble them a bit.
However much they spend ;
They’re drawing their expenses.
From taxes. I’ll be bound,
So working men will have to pay.
To crush poor Roger down.
I think you’ll say Sir Roger is,
A clever sort of man.
He’s got an Irish lawyer.
Who’ll do the best be can ;
Dr. Kenealy will be there,
The claimant for to screen.
And when his Irish blood gets up.
He 11 tell them what he means.
The lawyers they may chatter.
And bluster all they can.
They can’t many thousand,
Believe he’s not the man ;
There was never a man that ever lived.
Upon Great Britain’s shore.
Could stand and test what Roger has.
For two long years or more.
Then may he be successful.
And win the day at last.
He’ll soon forget the troubles.
That will be gone and past;
The friends that have assisted,
As nobly thev have done,
He’ll wish long life and happiness.
To each and every one.
The Tichborne Claimant.
Aib “ The Minstrel Boy."
■KfflfHE Tichborne Claimant to the court has
4 gone, v
'Midst his counsel seated you will find him.
His trial for perjury is going on,
The public crowd round and behind him,'
My Lord and Gentlemen, Henealy cries,
•Without one thought of payment.
But the prosecution are sure of their prize—
When they speak against the Claimant.
He meekly bears with each mild re-buff,
When he makes a slip of memory,
Auslrtralian Mutton makes him fat and rough.
He wants polishing np with emery.
-It’s queer how a chap so smart and slim.
Should turn-out such a shaver, he
Deserves the Estates and I’d give them to him,
If 1 had my way, for his bravery.


TRIAL OF
THE
Tichborne Claimant,
FOR PERJURY,
COMMENCING ON WEDNESDAY, APRIL 23rd, 1873.
AIR : — Railway.
THE great Tichborne trial is beginnning,
So I ve wrote a new song, to a very old strain
They lawyers ail say that it cannot last long,
1 suppose they’re intending to lay it on strong.
Chorus :
Poor old Sir Roger, jolly old Roger,
His troubles and trials are beginning again.
On Wednesday in April, the twenty third day,
The slippery tongne lawyers began the affray,
That he's Arthur Orton, they say they can show
They might as well done it, a twelve month ago
They ve found out a woman who says she can
prove,
That with the Claimant she once was in love,
All his love speeches she kept in her head,
And a bundle of lelfcrs as big as a bed.
*.At the last Tichborne trial, they tried hard }Ou
*■* know,
To settle £hc Claimant, but found it no go,
They got a mess like a pig in a bog,
The case was as clear as a November fog.
?he lawyeis tell him, he’s aliar and knave,
Vnd that Penal servitude he's sure t<> have,
Ait Ro£er can laugh, as he gives them the lip,
For “There’s may a slip, Twixl the cup and
the lip.”
The lawyers engaged arc th. best in the land,
<J3ut they’re all one side, ns you’ll soon uuder-
stand,
lor Roger’s best friends are obliged to turn tail.
Some have been muzzled, and some sent to jail.
A woman will say the Claaimnnt she knew,
But where in the world has she been hiding to?
We think the love letters, that she says she has
A’ s® 1 *
.After twenty-five years are a sad mouldy lot.
They’re going to transport him. that is if they can
They’re going to prove he’s not the right man.
That’s all very well, but between me and you,
It is One thing to talk, but another to do.
Then keep up your spirits, Sir Roger, we say,
England wont let them, have it all their own wny
You have plenty of friends, now, in evey town,
Who will always stick up for a man, when he’s
down;
So, now that ray song, I have brought to a close
Keep, your eye on the trial, to watch how it goes
Remember there’s many a half atarvin roan, /
Has been robb’d of his rights, in this/fine
Chrisitian land,*
RORY O’MOORE.
Words by Samuel Loteb.
fOUNG Rory O’More courted Kathleen bawn,
He was bold as a hawk, and she soft as he
dawn,
He wished In his heart pretty Kathleen to please
And he thought the best way to do that was to
tease.
Now Kory be aisy’ sweet Kathleen would cry
Reproof on her lip, but a smile in her eye!
With your tricks I don’t know, in throth, what
I’m about; [side out.
Faith you’ve teased till I’ve put on my cloak in-
Oh, jewel, says Rory, that same is the way,
You’ve thrated my heart for this many a day;
And ’tis plnsed that I am, and why not, to be sure,
For ’tis all for good luck, says bold Rory O’More.


THE GREAT
TIGHBORNE
TRIAL.
Good people pay attention
And listen to my song,
The trial of the Claimant,
To prove him right or wrong.
For forgery and perjury
They’ll hang him if' they can,
But the lawyers they will find
That they’re mistaken in the man.
CHORUS.
So cheer up, Roger,
You are a jolly brick.
For if you’re not Sir Roger,
Then you are old Nick.
Keep up your blooming pecker,
You’re sure to win the day,
If the judge and jury see it out,
And let you have fair play.
They popped him into jail,
But he got so jolly stout.
The cell it wouldn’t hold him
So they had to turn him out;
They tried the starving dodge
To make his belly thinner,
When he lived on bread and water.
And whistled for his dinner.
Now that bully of a lawyer,
Who had so much to say,
Was glad to sneak out of the case
In a shabby sort of way;
And Ballantine his counsel,
He didn’t like the job,
So Kenealy backs Sir Roger—
He has a cleAer nob.
They say two hundred witnesses,
The claimant he has got,
And the jury mu»l not shirk it
’Till they have heard the lot;
They must all stick together
And must not run away,
And we’ll give them all a medal
If Sir Roger wins the day.
They say he’s Arthur Orton,
But how can they prove that,
They swear that he’s a butcher
Because he’s jolly fat;
The colour of his napkins
He remembers so we hear.
And the donkey of his regiment
Is going to appear.
Oh, the nurse that rocked his cradle, •
Is a witness for him too.
She can swear that he’s Sir Roger,
By his hoop-de-doo-den-doo;
The judge and the jury,
He’ll put them through their drill.
And he’s going to sing a ditty
All about old Tichborne mill.
Good luck to Mr. Onslow,
And Whalley and the rest,
They’ve stuck up for Sir Roger,
And done their very best;
Poor Skipworth too in prison.
May his spirits never fail.
Because he told the truth.
Why the popped him into gaol.
The lawyers they can turn about.
To prove that blacfc is white,
What a patter and a clatter
To prove that wrong is right;
But if they fool Sir Roger.
He’ll be at them in a crack.
For he’s got the people’s verdict,
And the nation at his back.
1046




TICHBORNE!
OR,
ANY OTHER MAN !
jiHt: —“ The JELelmtl."
OH! what a fuss is going on.
Fight throughout the nation.
The Tichbome trial is taking place,
It will cause a great sensation.
Both here and there and everywhere,
The public they are wishing
To ace Sir Roger gain the daw,
Aad give the wigs a thrashing.
Chorus.
All classes they’re supporting,
x And wondering if he can,
Prove himself the rightful heir,
Or any other man.
In this world some men arc wonders,
And some are great and small.
Bat the moat wonderful man 1 ever saw,
Why Ticbboioe beats them all.
Do Castro, Orton, Tichbome,
We wonder if he can.
Be the right Sir Roger, boys,
Or any other man.
When Roger was a little boy,
A knowing child was he,
He could dacne and prance, the can-can dance.
And the ladies liked you see,
And many a cuddling he has got.
And tickled yoa know how,
I wonder if he wished those days
Would come back to him now.
When Roger grew to be a roan.
He loved the ladies more.
And many a kissing he has bad.
Of sweethearts by the score.
With his pretty cousin be would romp,
Aod often they would play.
Till she began to find herself, I _-
Placed in a funny way.
For years he lived a roving life,
And some say. yes, by pillage.
But he swears he kept a butcher's shop.
To the darkeys in the vjllage.
He sold fried fish and bullock's heart.
Fed on Ice cream and jelly.
For that is how he got to stout *
Around hia back and belly.
Bo then of course, a trial took place.
They’ve examined him through and through,
And now thry swear the real Sir Roger,
Was marked on his do-dum-do.
But no such marks there can be found,
Upon his back and btllv.
So if be is’nt Sir Roger, boys.
Who he is I cannot tell ye.
For years this trials being going on.
Now let’s hope he’ll get fair play.
And if he is Sir Roger, boys.
Let’s hope he’ll wia the day.
And when he gets his money boys.
Let's hope he'll do some good.
And thank the British public round.
For assisting him while they could.
THE OLD
WATER MILL
TJAVE you seen the new Collage, just built by the
And is it aot alia fand heart can desire, [Squire
With Its painted while Oates, that half open doth stand
Where the clustering Boses, seem courting your hand
With a Garden so trim, and yea casual but stay.
To gather In freshness, and bear jhcm away,
Aad oft as I stroll by the Church os tfei hill,
I view the Old Collage, and the Old Water Util.
Yea, there stood Uie Cottage, and the Old Water Hill,
And down that Green moadow, runs a clear water rlB
And welcome we were in the good Olden time.
When the Mill, and the Miller, were both in thierprimo
And aft have I joined in the gay rustic song,
Aa I merrily tread'd lh« green path along.
But now as I stroll, by the Church by on the hill,
1 view but the ruins of both Cottage aod Mill.
Our friends have departed, the Mill has decayed.
And time 1 confess, has some sad changes made.
But time aa we know, like the Mill goeth round.
Hew faces smile kindly, with hearts fall of sound;
Yet, fancy still echo, the merry click clack,
When the Mill and the labour, it never was slack.
In thought as 1 ramble to the Church on the hill.
Do I view the Old Cottage, sod the Old Water Mill.


SIR ROGER
TICHBOUEBE.
You all have heard of nobody's child,
Wao travelled the seas and de»erts wild ;
And on the road hit time beguiled, „
To find Sin bad the sailor.
Spring-beel’d Jack, and the wandering Jew,
Captain Cook, and Crusoe 100.
But you'll find yon have enough id do.
To match Sir Roger Tichbourne.
Chorus.
Ikey, crikey, chancery oh.
Wigs and gowns and parchment ch,
A thousand pounds for a lawyer ob,
You’re Sir Boger Tichbourne.
Now bold Sir Boger is the man,
He’s travelled ;he world, and seen Japan
He’ll trick the lawyers if be can,
Who wouldn’t to win a fonline.
He’s quite a hero of romance.
He eau stick a pig, and he can dance;
He’s been to India, and to France,
• A butcher and a soldier.
His daddy he was of noble rate,
He married a wife, or rather her face ;
And Boger was born a young scapegrace,
- A wild and naughty rover.
He went to achoot like other boys.
He hated books, aud loved bis toys;
If he grew a dunce, it was hia choice.
Oh, jolly Sir Roger Tichbourne.
Now lawyer Col he clatters so.
To puzzle Sir Roger’s brain yon know ;
But counsellor Bal says it is no go.
He’s fly. Sir Roger Tichbourne.
Sncb fuuny things they’ve made him say.
When he was young, he was rather gay,’
And with his cousin sported away,
< Oh, naughty Sir Roger Tichborne.
But Boger is a great man you’ll own,
Th o’ years ago be was akin aud bone,
But now ha weighs over twenty atone, *
Ob, what a duck of a cousin.
'Tis true he can’t remember the day,
When be was bora and breech’d, they say;
Whether his frocks were black or grey,
■ Poor Boger he can't remember. -
Now the lawyer thought be was Very wise.
To put him through bis exercise ;
But he wheel’d about to their great surprise.
Like Falstaff did Sir Boger.
And cunning spies the wig-;, employ, '
To bribe his servants and decoy, •" •
But his mammy she swears he was Der boy.
The image of his father.
Oh, the Prince of Wales tin other day.
He went to the court ao fine aod gay;
With the fair Princess, and the people aaj.
He was thinking of Lady Mordaunt.
Sir Boger locking so jolly nnd stout,
They trying to put his temper out ;
That he’s a Ticbbouroe who can doubt.
Why, look at his noble figure.
Now this greatest trial of the day.
Might last for years, so people say ;
And won’t there be the devil to pay,
The hungry sharks of lawyers.
May we put them to the right about.
And like a hero see it out;
And a'l his jolly pals live to shout,
He’s woo. Sir Roger Tichbourne.
THE WOUNDED HUSSAR.
ALONE on the banks of the dark rolling
Danube,
Fair Adelaide hied when the battle was o’er.
Oh, whiter, she cried bast thoo wander’d my
lover.
Or here dost thou welter and bleed on the shore.
What voice bave 1 heard ? twas my Henry that
' sigh’d.
All mournful she hasten’d, nor wander’d she far
When bleeding and low on the earth she descried
By the light of the moon, her poor wounded
hussar.
From his bosom that heaved the last torrent
was streaming.
And pale was his visage deep marked with a
scar
And dim was that eye once expressively beaming
That melted in love, and kindled in war.
How smit was poor Adelade’s heart at the sight
Ho bitter she wept o’er the victim of war.
Hast thoacome my'fond love, this last sorrow-
ful sight.
To cheer the lone heart of the wounded hussar.
Thou shall live she replied, heaven’s mercy
relieving.
Each anguishing wound shall forbid me to
mourn.
Ah! no, the last pang in my bosom is heaving.
No light of the morn shall to Henry return.
Thou charmer of life, ever tender and true.
Ye babes of my love that awaits me afar,
His faulting tongue scarclymmraared adieu.
When he sunk in her arms, the poor wounded
hussar.


THE TICHBOURNE A. B. C. 780.
Tile Tichbourne A. B. C.
A;a : Old 11 oman't, taking t.
ifhOOD peoplr all attention, and you aball
\yi pi at nit its,
The fuu of tit rate in my A. B. C.
A stand* for “Asrncn Onion, *’ Butcher once in
Wapping,
And don't eon be surprised to era him Into
Coon a popping,
B ctanis for Bools, a darkey, what of that?
He swears bn knew Sir Roger, before be got
ao fat.
0 stand* for Claisanl, be knows what ha's ahoa*
And in spite jtadgt aad jury, ha'll tea tha tria
oat,
D stands for Defoncs Fund, they rnlssd in stsry
Town,
To itbe the Claimant op again, whsn ha waa
broken down.
E stands for Et. fluting, tbs csss it might go an
To food tbs imagery Lawyers, whsn wa ara
dead aad gaas,
P stands for Fair play, right throagfaant tha
nation.
Aad etsry man thoald hntn it tan, no matter
what hia station.
0 stawds for Great Meetings, wham Iha Claimant
muds a thaw,
Tha Lawyers triad to gag him. hat found it
was oa go,
H ■ toads for Hampshire, aad tha Tkkborna tea.
ante there,
Tha fat maa in Sir -Roger, the people they nan
swear.
X elands for Ireland, wham tha Claim not learnt
hia drill, [naasr will,
H# didn’t forpm tha Donkey, sad nwests ka
J stands for Jajymsn.'de hard for them wa awn,
Especially tha married man, la leave tkair
wives at homa.
K atanda for Kduit,he's the Claimant's conn*
sal now.
Ami if they try in hambmg him, there's boat I
to be a row ;
1 stands for Lean Bivnas, a noble hearted follow.
• - Who, when hia friend waa broker Jews, stood
manfully for tin Roots.
M stands for hte Mether, sba knew without a
doubt,
. Than tha Claimant waa her son, though ha'd
gwtso jafly stoat,
| stands ter Newgate Jail, where lbs Claimant
dnnaed about,
Ha broke down all iha bedsteads, k than they
let kimnam
0 stands far Oxana*, ha'a a proper M P.
And n trump an Banns Tiahbouraa, wherever
" b- may be.
P steads for Prises, where Sxirwoarn was can*
toa>,
Bsea ms be raid tbs migt tbs truth, and nobly
spoke hia mind.
Q * tends for Qoasrioa, there is oas I'd ask yon all
Whsa a f-oar maa calls far Jmslict, da they
answer t* bis call,
E stas h for Rssciirr* his cassia, who says,
aha Barer will.
Goatees »bs danced the Can-can, with R--gtr
in tha mUL
g |U»4| for M Sacral Packet/' tbay make a*
much about,
Reger's eooato disowned bin, ao ha lot iha
aaarat oat t
x standi for Ta.tuo marks, and Loan BiLuv
would yon doubt it T
Thought bad tall a whoppor, white ha was
about It
U a uada for Unity, nay hla witnaaaaa togathar,
Ground tha Jolly Clamant stick, Uka Haaup da
Wax to laatbar ;
Y atauda for Victory, and if Roger wina the day.
He's going oa tha Trap**, with Borin,
at tha Play.
W atauda for Wbajlut, ha'a a vary knowing
aadger,
Ha would’nt back tha Claimant. if ha warn an
artful dodder ;
T atanda for Tan, and though Put ahy of batting.
I'd lay tha Lawyer 10 to 1, ha’ll giro them all
a awaating.
X atanda for Young man, attend to what I nay.
Whan yoa court a prally sonata, don’t you rms
away,
z atauda for Zamua, in a Jury bo* a snooting.
To lot a Judge have hia awn way. is English
lawn abasing.
THIS BLIND
Slave Boy!
Ain :— Tktrfs none Ukt a if older.
ATONE lack to me, mother, why linger away r
From thy poor little blind t-oy, the tong
waary day,
1 mark story foot-step, I hear atary time,
Aad wondrr my mother, can laata me alone t
Thera are »oi of sorrow, and toicra of glee;
But there* no ona can give sorrow or joy uuto imw
For each hath of sorrow or trouble hia abara,
And nous for tha poor little blind boy will oarw.
“ Como daaraat mother and close to my breast f"
Ones more let the little blind boy be carrao’d,
Once more let mo faal thy warm breath, on my
check
And hear thee in accents of tenderness speak.
Oh, mother I hate no ona to iota me, ao heart
Can hear like thine own, in my sorrow apart,
Ka hand is gentle, no toice is ao kind,
Oh, there's is none like a mother can cherish tha
blind.
Tha blind boy no mother thy wailings can hear.
No mother can hasten to banish thy fear;
For the Slate owner dritas bar Otar mountains
no wild.
And for ona paltry dollar Is sold the poor child.
Tha cornet of the broken in spirit shall fall,
Oa him she baa mingled this wormwood aadgall.
And hla wealth like the mill daw shall blight
and destroy,
Who has torn from his parents the pear blind
Slate Boy.


WAITING FOR THE VERDICT
*Who is he now —the big fat man,
They try to crush him all they can,
jSince first the trial it began,
To prove him an artful dodger.
And witnesses they did appear,
And Hawkins he did laugh and jeer,
But cheer up Tichborne, never fear,
| lYou are the right Sir Roger.
cnonus.
-’Then Judge and Jury rattle away,
Hut let the fat man have lisir play.
.And everywhere the people say,
O what will be the verdict.
Judge and Jury are sick of the job.
Day after dav—-’twould tire a snob—
Keneaiey he’s got a clever nob,
■"And i’ll back him for the winner,
ffi. witnesses they all did swear,
'To Roger’s eyes, his nose and hair,
TTo his feet and legs, and you know where
As true as I’m s sinner.
Now Hawkins don't he laugh and grin.
For the crown he thinks he’s going to win
But he’ll find at last he’s taken in,
He can't humbug the Jury.
And all the witnesses he got,
The Carabineers could wollop the lot.
And Captain Brown he fired a shot.
Which put him in a fury.
Now Hawkins he will make a speech,
To Wagga Wagga it will reach,
And'like a parrot he will screach,
To mesmerize the dozen.
But Keoealey he’s a clever chap,
At Hawkins he will have a rap.
And my Lord Tattoo will get a slap,
and Roger’s pretty cousin.
Keneaiey he will fire away,
For he’s a stunner the people say,
The dever lawyer of the day,
and a match for the Queen’s Jester.
Let us hope he’ll prove the claimant
stout.
Is she right Sir Roger, without a doubt
and put his foes to the right about,
What a rumpus in Westminster.
The Judges they are one, two, three,
They’ll all sum up as we shall see,
and 1 hope tqe Jury will all agree.
The Claimant is no dodger..
And if they are good men and true,
and studied this wonderful trial through
There's nothing else for them to do,
But turn him up Sir Roger.
Disley, Printer, High-street, St CiJe*.


THE DEFENCE OF SIR. ROGER.
Good people all attention and listen to my song
While my trial it is making a sensation
And I’ll leave it to you all am I right or am 1
wrong.
Is a question and I’ll leave it to the Nation,
Oh, my look upon me now.
They call an artful dodger,
With Kenealey at my back,
I’ll beat them in a crack
And prove that I’m the right Sir Roger.
Now I won’t recall the past I’ve sun* of that
before
And you’ve read about it all in the papers
How they popped me into quod but I’m true
to the core
Never mind about Cousin’s naughty capers
When x-hey kicked me omt of jail my friends
they rallied round
Hiey knew 1 was not an imposter
And ray friends the Public too, for the work-
ing classes knew,
I was crushed by a cruel prosecution.
Now my trial it came on,&witnesscs were found
From America Australia and trapping,
They were paid by the job every lie cost a pound
'while Kenealey on the sinners kept a-dropping
DeCastro he was fonml hnt he couldn’t tell a lie
And to bribe him they found that. it wap useless
They said that, he was mad but vnu know
that’s all my I I
So they woulcln t let him speak—note was it
i justice,
Mrs Judy nice uid gi.il,but she took 500 Pound
But she called it a stingy prosecution
She saw young orton stripped and swore he
was tattooed,
On r. place where she wouldn’t like to mention
They hired rogues from trapping totell awp-
ping lies,
And each one they told the same crammer,
I was u great Tat boy with a dancing in the eyes
Till the Judge put a stop to their clamour.
Now ray Cousin did appearand Kenealey put
it straight.
It’s naughty but it’s nice will you tell me,
Did you and Roger sing Yankee-doodle in the
mill
But of couse she said oh,'no '• I’m a lady.
Now my noble Lord Tattoo he swore a wick-
ed lie,
But Kenenley found you out, you imposter.
You bought the Captains wife, oh. you naugh-
ty married man,
Why you’re worse then the great Shah of Persia
Now the Shah he came to see me, and if {
gain the day,
He swears that he will make me his butcher,
Because Tm jolly fat he'll take me away
To dance with all his wives in Persia.
Now nay song is nearly done I’ll tell you every
one,
I have confidence in Dr Kenealey,
And rny witnesses are true but I’ll leave them
all to you,
And you’ll hear what my friends say about me.


WE'LL NOT FORGET
POOR ROGEB
NOW.
Tune :--When these old Clothes were New.
Britons all come pay attention,
And list awhile to my sad song,
And when you've heard some facts I’ll
mention,
. You’ll say they’ve proved that right is
wrong s
That the Claimant is the right man.
To many people i:- quite clear,
But the jury found him guilty,
His sentence it is fourteen \ ears.
chorus.
Tho’ in prison they have cast him,
To speak one word they’d not allow,
Our friendship for him still is lasting,
We’ll not forget poor Roger now.
As the case it was proceeding,
From the day it did begin,
It was clear to all, by rending,
They never meant that he should win.
If he dared to ask a question,
Like a dog he was put down,
While the other side iadulgcd in
Jokes more fitting for a clown.
The witnesses against poor Roger,
I think it is a shocking thing,
Dragg’d up from the slums of Wapping,
To take their words it was a sin;
While among the friend* of Roger,
Were soldiers who in battle cool,
Had nobly fought for England'* glory,
They were put down aa rogue* or fool*.
\
A deal of sympathy and cant
Was got up ’bout Cousin Kate,
You may abase the lower classes,
But mind you do not touch the great.
That they are angels dropp’d from heaven,
Divorce court trials will prove to you,
But then, of course, we must excuse them.
Because they’ve nothing else to do.
If there’s any mothers standing round me,
I ask you truly, every one.
If you think that you could ever
Once forget a long-lost son T
And so his mother recognked him,
Which filled the family with dismay.
But suddenly she died, poor lady,
Or a different tale they’d tell to-day.
Then joily good luck to brave Kenealy,
Their threats he did not fear a jot,
Though he had five to one against him,
His voice was beard above the lot.
They may coll the Claimant an importer
A lump of fat—the counsel bawl,
But it is the general feeling,
That he is the right man after ail.


WE'LL NOT FORGET
Poor ROGER now.
Tritons all, come pay attention,
And list awhile to my sad song,
And when you’ve heard some facta I’ll mention.
You'll say they’ve proved that right is wrong.
That the claimant is the right man,
To many people it is quite clear,
But the jury found him guilty,
Hie sentence it is fourteen years
Tho’ in prison they hare cast him,
To speak one word they’d not allow.
Our friendship for him still is lasting,
We’il not forget poor Roger now.
As the case it was proceeding,
From the day it did begin.
It wag clear to all by reading.
They never meant that he should win
If he dared to ask a question,
Like a dog he was put down,
V/hile the oilier side indulged in—
Jokes more fitting for a clown.
The witnesses against poor Roger,
I think it is a shocking thing,
Dragged up from the back s’nms of Wapping,
To take their woris it was a sin,
While among the friends of Roger,
Were soldiers who in battle, cool,
Had nobly fought for England’s glories,
They were put down as rogues or fools.
A deal ol sympathy and humbug,
Was got up for Cousin Kate,
You may abuse the lower classes.
But mind yon do not touch the great,
That they are angels dropped from heaven.
Divorce court trials will prove to you.
But then of course we must excuse them,
Because they’ve nothing else to do.
If there’s any mothers standing round me,
I ask you truely, every one,
If you think that you could ever—
Once forget a long lost son,
And Sv» his mother recognised him,
Which filled the family with dismay,
But suddenly she died, poor lady,
Or a different tale they would tell to day.
Then jolly good luck lo brave Kenealy,
Their threats he did not care a jot,
Thought he had five to one against him.
His voice was heard above the lot,
They may call the Claimant an impostor,
A lump of fat—the counsel bawl,
But it is the universal feeling,
That he is the right man alter all
Disley, Printer, London.


Tichborne Bdget
J3ow the first I shall introduce to your
molice. is the Lore Chief Justice, who just is
ond not like his brother-in-iaw, Old
idice, of the.common pleas, who having
4t plum in the Tichborne pie, took good care
~lhe claimant shouldn’t have a smell of it, but
popp d him into Newgate to starve on skilly.
Next comes the Jury, who know’ as much
shout law as the Royal Family know about
Jnymaking. Look at old Allspice, the grocer,
lie know more about the mysteries of the sugar
tub and tea chest, than Lincoln’s Inn and
Clhancery: and what does little Flaps know
-shout lawsuits, he understands more about
«loth and tweed suits, they suit him best;
and there’s Young Greeneye, just married,
and dreadfully jealous, three months away
tirom His pretty wife Oh ! how he wishes
tkem all at Wagga-wagga, if he was only in
the arms of his Julia. But there they sit
poor fellows like dolls in a box, looking at the
.Judge, as much as to say, puli the string
amd we’ll all dance.
(Now I shall introduce you to the Claimant,
and you won’t want glass *s to see him, the
fat man of the day; there sits like a great
mastiff, while the puppy dogs are barking
their lies, and snapping at the fat buteher of
Wagga-wagga, and his heart is as big as his
tiell^, what pluck! why the greatest bully
that ever wore a wig was glad to cry a go in
the Tichborne battle, but the jolly claimant
wees it out. Now for the witnesses.
A French witness swore Lady Tichborne
was mad, but he did not think it any sin to
«ase the old lady of a few pounds.
Then the Stonyhurst chaps swore the real
Sir Roger was a nice, modest, and good young
man. who never did anything worse than
smoke all day and dnnk all uight (nothing
stronger than brandy); and who never read
sny book worse than Fanny Hill or Moll
Flanders.
Then came the Judy, dear old soul, she
mily got £5OO for her few crackers; she
swore Arthur Orton was tattooed, but she
wouldn’t tell where under another £ 5OO.
Then came the pretty cousin. O, Kenealey,
how could you ask a married lady such a
thing. You know she never was alone with
Roger after dark, 'never danced the can can
in the mill, and never sang the old song of
Oh, do it again, you’ve done it so nicely, do
it again. And the judges and jury believe her.
But the great sensation was my Lord Tattoo
and if he’s a specimen of the upper ten, we
ought to be proud of them ; an honourable
witness, who never did anything worse than
tattoo his friend's wife, and didn’t take £5
for the job. If a jury can rely on his lord-
ship’s word after that, images and wax dolls
shall our jurymen be.
1 Now I shall introduce you to the buffoon
of the Queen’s Bench, he has mistaken his
position, instead of wearing wig and gown,
he ought to wear cap and bells, and turn
circus clown, or as Dr. Kenealey terms it.
Queen's Jester. Fun is very good in its
place, but when a man’s liberty and property
is at stake it is no laughing matter.
And now to conclude my budget. I will
introduce the great wig of the day, Dr. Ke-
nealey, Tichbornes counsel, and if ever there
was an honest lawyer, he's one, had he a
hundred tongues he couldn’t defend his client
better than 'he has done, without assistance
from government, without money, sneered at
by the prosecution, without time to collect
evidence, in spite of all he defends his client
like a man, upset the evidence of numerous
witnesses, shews up to ridicule my Lord
Nose who, not to be cried down by judges or
jury, he fights like a champion for Sir Roger.
But the battle has only begun, the prosecu-
tiou have had toeir d-vy, and now Sir Roger,
Kenealey, and over 200 witnesses will have
theirs. Cheer up Tiehhorne! speak up
Kenealey! and if the claimant loses the day
there will be no more fair play in England.
SHINER.


RELĒEASE
OF
Sir Roger.
'Ton* t—Th« Flying Trapes*.
Sac. 30.
The gallant Sir Roger has come out of gaol.
Thanks to his friends who provided the bail,
With England to back him his cause will prevail,
And give all bis foes a good wanning,
They thought that in Newgate they had him so tight,
That he never would oome out again,
But now he is free he has bothered them quite,
He’ll fight (or his own might and main
CHORUS.
The gallant Sir Roger has oome out cf gaol.
Thanks to his friends who provided the bail.
With England to back him he’ll surely prevail.
And give all his foes a good warming.
His enemies followed a very bad plan,
To smother Sir Roger they’ve done all they can,
There’s not one can say he is not the man.
They would if they could 1 am certain ;
Altho’ broken down his heart did not fail.
He kept up his spirits the same,
And not aU the skilly they had in the gaol,
CoUld make him give up his own name.
Oh what a queer go if he should win the day.
Of squalling and bawling there’ll bo a display,
With pains in their bellies they 11 all run away,
Holding their breeches behind them :
The lawyers would tear, the witnesses swear,
Mr. Surprising would growl like a bear,
He'll pull off his robes, and pull off the hair
Of the cove that brought out the tattoo.
Now bold Sir Roger from prison has come,
We hope he will give them what Pat gave the dram,
Wherever he goes how the people will run,
And cheer him like bricks on his journey ;
A tine lawyer has called him a thief and a liar,
. To keep turn in prison has been his desire.
He might as well shove his long nose in the tire,
For he shan’t have it all his own way.
The warm hearts of England are rallying round.
For a broken-down man ■ being crushed to the ground,
Yon’U never allow it, you’ll say I’ll be bound.
To old Nick we will pitch all tine lawyers:
Just give him a chance, and a fair honest trial,
Tis all that he aaks, for we say
He’ll prove he's Sir Roger without much denial,
if they only will give him fair play.
Then cheer up Sir Roger and never say die.
For England n with you, PU tel) yon for why.
They say you’re ill used, so now they all cry,
Let’s help him to tight them again ;
Don’t be afraid, you'll have plenty of cash
To help you to carry the day,
And lick all the lawyers to tarnation smash,
Ban’s Good Lock to Sir Roger, Huaiall!
The Gipsy’s
Warning
Do not trust lam, gentle lady,
Tho’ his voice be low and sweet,
Heed not him who kneels before you
Gently pleading at thy feet;
Now thy life is in its morning,
Cloud not this thy happy lot;
Listen to the gipsy’s warning—
Gentle lady, trust him not.
Listen to the gipsy’e warning—
Gentle lady, trust him not.
Do not turn so coldly from mo,
I would only guard thy youth
From hiq stern and with’ring power,
I would only tell the truth :
I would shield thee from all danger,
Save thee from tho tempter's snare ;
Lady, shun that dark eyed stranger —
1 have warn’d thee, now beware.
Lady, shun that dark eyed stranger —
I have warn’d thee, now beware.
Lady, once there lived a maiden
Pure and bright, and like thee, fair,
But he wooed and wooed and won her,
Fill’d her gentle heart with care ;
Then he heeded not her weeping,
Nor cared he her life to save :
Soon she perish’d—now she’s sleeping
In the cold and silent grave.
Soon she perish’d—now she’s sleeping
In the cold and silent grave.
Take thy gold, I do not wish it;
Lady, I have prayed for this,
For the hour when I might foil him,
Rob him of expected bliss.
Gentle lady, do not wonder
At my words so cold and wild;
Lady, in that green grave yonder
Lies the gipsy’s only child.
Lady, in that green grave yonctat
Lies tho gipsy’s only child.
1095


THE TICHBORNE BELIEF.
Now 1 believe the Claimant to be,
The right Sir Roger, as you shall see,
Yes, the right Sir Roger,
And no artful dodger,
The sou of his mother
And nq other,
And as Old Parr sung.
She was born very yonng,
And fed with a silver ladle.
And I believe the napkin question,
Was only a washerwoman’s suggestion,
And that he got many a slap
For crying for pap,
That his appetite got worse,
And he swallowed his nurse,
And left her chignon in his cradle.
And I believe to make him a fool,
His father and mother sent him to sehool,
The parle von he learnt to apeak,
But he couldn’t swallkw Latin and Greek,
And he robbed the orchards as school boys do,
Aud blackened the eyes of young Beilew,
In fact he grew so wicked and wild,
They sent him home a great big child.
And made him be a soldier.
So he rode a horse and wore fine clothes.
In the country where the shamrock ’jrows.
His comrades called him a regular calf.
Said he was touch’d, with lots of chaff,
They play’d him tricks—and once His said.
They put a donkey in Tichborno’s bed.
And frighten’d him out of his senses.
I believe he had sweethearts by the dozen.
But he only loved his pretty cousin.
They used to stop oat after dark,
Down the green lanes to have a lark,
By murmuring rills,
And into old mills,
Regardless of consequences.
Then I believe he left his home.
Like Robinson Crusoe, abroad to roam,
He went in the bush and changed his name,
And grew fat and rich by his little game,
For he met young Orton, bought up hordes,
And got into trouble through doubtful courses,
Aud after that got married,
Now I believe his darling mamn,
Searahed for Roger near ans far,
"Who out in the hush was heard to say,
’m a baronat’s son, skedaddled away,
The tale got wind, and spread about,
Till a friend of his mother found him out.
And home the news was carried.
And I believe her long lost son,
Came homo in time to find he was done,
His donghty relations ruled the roast.
Sir Roger was drown’d, he wasn’t his ghost.
They called him impostor, artful dodger,
Too fat to be the right Sir Roger,
Then he went to law with plenty of tin,
But just as the case was going to begin,
She died—his dear old mother.
Now his pretty cousin no longer tarried,
Hut to Mr, Radcliffe she got married,
She turned up her nose at the Claimant so fat,
Never saw him before, she told him nat,
Then the Claimant for spite, he told all about
His pretty false cousin—lot the secret out
How they danced the Can Can down the hill.
And what they did in the dd water mill,
Slap bang before the fury.
Then in came stuttering L»rd Beilew,
With a got up yarn about
That the real Roger was tittoo’d he swore,
Then the Jury quite sick vould hear no more,
Bnt quash’d the easein a jiffy.
Then they collared the Cliimant so cruelly,
And taxed him with forgiry and perjury,
They people cried shame, bat they pop 4 d him in jail
And for spite, the Judge be wonldn t take bail.
And I believe they kicked him out,
And through the country travelled about.
His friends in need, were friends indeed,
For they held great meetings in many towns.
And the public subscribed some thousands of ponnda
Which needled the Judge and the lawyers.
For Onslow and Whalley, for libel, forsooth,
They both got fined for speaking the truth,
Poor Skipworth. because he wasn’t M.P.
They sent him to gaol. and skillygolee,
But don’t he keep up his pecker.
And now the Tichbome trial once more,
But not the Judge who tried him before,
And Lawyer Coleridge had so much to say.
Sneaked out of the case in a shabby wav,
fnc Claimant stands a chance of fair pfav,
So go in and win Sir Roger.
Dislcy, Printer, London.


MIGHT AGAINST EIGHT,
OR HELP FOR
SIR ROGER
See. 30.
Fiat Justitia Ruat Coelum.
You Englishmen attend I pray,
To these few lines I have to say,
Although in Newgate gaol I lay,
I still am Roger Tichborne ;
I stood my ground against the foe,
I had snpp ort from high and low,
And tho’ I’m broken down, yon know,
I still am Roger Tichborne.
Nothing I care for all the lot,
If all the wealth in the world they’.ve got
They have never proved that 1 mn not
T ie real Sir Koger Ticlibome.
So Working Men to you I say,
Help me now to win the day,
Tho’ broken down in gaol 1 lay,
1 still am Roger Tichborne.
I own that I’ve been lather wild,
My poor old mother, meek and mild.
Said vou are my long lost child.
The real Sir Roger 'Tichhome ;
Oh ! had she lived they would not dare,
Against her son to stand and swear.
It was her death I do declare,
That ruined Roger 'Tichborne.
The tattoo marks were all a sham,
Allho’ they did the jury ciam.
Two hundred witnesses swear I am
The real Sir Roger Tichborne.
They say I’ve led a life of shame,
Up to every thieving game.
And Arthur Orton is my name,
And not Sir Roger Tichborne.
But if 1 am the man they say.
Let them prove it without delay,
They know that I can’t run away,
Allho’ I’m Roger Tichborne.
Although in Newgate they have me got.
Without a penny, a wretched lot.
If I stay in prison till I rot,
I’m still Sir Roger Tichbome.
The gentlemen who stood by me,
Were men of honour and high deglee,
Mistaken they can never be,
They know I’m Roger Tichborne.
There is some of them who stand so high,
Thai on their word you may rei
They would not toll a direct lie,
To save the estates of Tichborne.
Bui that won’t do for ray orally foes,
'They’ll try and convict me I suppose,
’They have taken ihe money, and even the clothes
Of poor Sir Roger 'Tichborne.
You Englishmen who love the right.
Fair play’s a jewel in your sight.
Help mo now to gain my right,
For I am Roger Tichborne ;
'They have lock’d me up in Newgate gaol.
But yet my spirits never fail,
’Twill take them all iheir time to quail
The English heart of Tichborne.
On Working Men ihcn I rely.
They’ll not refuse to hear my cry,
Then 1 live in hopes that 1 shall die
In my father s halls at Tichhome.
Then rally round me if you will,
Fm sore you do not wish me ill
Help me to eel up the bill.
On the road to Tichborne;
Then like a man I’ll stand my trial.
And at their charges only smile.
And there I’ll prove without denial,
That I’m Sir Roger Tichborne.
These last words to you I’ll say,
And say the same on my dying day,
Come what will, come what may.
I’m the real Sir Roger Tichborne.
JLOSS«.


COMPOSED B Y
MRS. C. T. M'NAMARA EVANS
ON
THE GREAT TICHBORNE TRIAL!
Would you be surprised to hear the great trial is over,
And the twenty-eight stone man is not the real Sir Roger?
For out in Australia by every one he was known
As the winking, blinking, burly butcher, Arthur Orton.
In Wagga-Wagga all his villany he had planned,
Then to England he came to live on the fat of the land ;
This imposter rode in his carriage like any great lord,
l or the money he received was by perjury and fraud.
Chorus.
, With his dear mama, mama, he set the whole Court laughing ;
He thought to be mighty grand, this vile Orton from Wapping,
But all his castle-buildings, have come to woe and to wail,
Now that huge monster is picking oakum in Dartmoor Gaol.
As a perjurer and a forgercr, a horse-stealer likewise,
But he was known everywhere by the blinking of his eyes,
With his bandy legs, mark on his head, and turned-in toes,
A.O. on his arm, his ankles cut, and his broken nose,
'Phis false-swearing scoundrel, this horse-stealer, Arthur Orton,
Would make us believe he was the real Sir Roger Tichborne. •
A greater imposter never lived since the world began
As that vile perjurer and bushranger, Bullocky Orton.
Chorus.
He was a slaughterman, ostler, and horse-trainer likewise,
Also a bushranger, waiter, and coach-driver beside.
This Orton has a brown mark on his side, and no mistake ;
But, oh ! it is only the size of a large dinner-plate.
Now all the doctors have said with that brown mark he was born,
And if so, he cannot be the real Sir Roger Tichborne.
About the mark on that fellow there was a great bother,
For no such mark was on the veritable Sir Roger.
Chorus.
With all the servants from the army, at their head M'Cann,
Carter, and others, and many a perjured wicked man ;
With all those plotters he was sure he would once more be free,
And make us believe he was poor Sir Roger from the sea.
The late Dowager Lady Tichborne by him she was done,
For he swore, my dear mama, I am Roger, your lost son.
Some thousands he swindled her out of, for him she believed,
Thousands more he would make her give, only she had died.
Chorus.
Now his French he forgot, although it was his native longue ;
Virgil he said was Greek, and bandy a place made with stone ;
But the English he knew was the pure English of Wapping,
If you heard that gentleman talk, you could not help laughing.
A robber of the orphan, a disgrace to the nation :
For eight years in this country he made a great commotion ;
This low, cunning bushranger was sure he would get off free ;
I wish that monster would be transported across the sea.
Chorus.
There are others quite as guilty as that scoundrel and thief,
Who ought to be in prison is many persons’ belief;
For their infamy was great, for robbing an orphan child,
Their plotting did not succeed, now they may all go run wild.
In a gaol for fourteen years, picking oakum he will be ;
I hope and pray this country he never again will see.
The fools that gave him their money,now they may cry and groan,
For many left their families, without food in their home.
Chorus.
lie thought the judges and jury would his falsehoods believe,
Hut neither judges, jury, nor counsel could he deceive.
If he were the real Sir Roger, do you think he would starve ?
All know by writing to his bankers thousands he could have.
A gentleman was poor Roger, in every sense of the word,
Hut that vile imposter is a low, mean, cunning coward.
He would know his cousin if he did not sec her for years,
For he loved her, and for her he offered up his prayers.
Chorus.
lie said I shall make my sisters revel in Tichbornc Hall ;
They will ride in their carriages, and give many a grand ball.
I shall be a great man, and lord it over on Tichbornc land,
And have all the horses and carriages at my command.
My wife shall be a lady, my son the heir of Tichbornc.
No person will dare say his father is that vile Orton.
I shall become a grand man, the biggest in this country ;
No one will know I got rich by fraud and by perjury.
Chorus.
For slandering a virtuous lady you deserve to be
Whipped through the streets of London, and hung high from a tree
You tried to injure that lady, but you did not succeed ;
You are a disgrace to the nation and to every creed.
I shall tell you what to do with him if you wish to know—
Just pul him in an iron cage, and have him for a show,
Drawn about the streets of London and in Australia,
For swearing he was poor Sir Roger lost in the “ Bella.”
Chorus.
Everyone knows the mystery of that den Poets’ Corner,
For Luie came from that place and swore he saved Sir Roger ;
He swore he took Roger out of the boat of the “ Bella,”
But no person could believe such a false-swearing fellow :
That noted place, Poet’s Corner, what a place for swearing !
With perjury, coaching, —oh, what a vile den for learning !
Brown that kept the pudding-shop, he is a noble fellow,
Falsely swore he slowed away poor Roger in the “ Bella.”
Chorus
He perjured his soul ; but what did such a bad fellow care,
If Orton got the day he would give him so much per year ;
That brave Capt. Brown, and Luie, they both now know their doom,
Now the two villains are safe in prison picking oakum.
Mr. Orton, there is an end to your infamous career,
Now Sir Henry can live upon his estate without any fear,
We will bid farewell to you and your vile perjured clan,
For you know you are a scoundrel, and a wicked bad man.
Chorus.
God bless the judges and the gentlemen of the jury,
Also that brave and fearless Hawkins, and Serjeant Parry ;
I hope true men and women will give, with a free good will.
To the gentlemen of the jury, a grand testimonial.
Would you be surprised to hear there’s an end to my song?
So now we will give three cheers for young Sir Henry Tichbornc ;
May both he and his noble mother, have a happy life ;
And may neither have to contend with such another strife.
Chorus.
With his dear mama, mama, he set the whole Court laughing,
He thought to be mighty grand, this vile Orton, from Wapping ;
But all his castle-buildings have come to woe and to wail,
Now that huge monster is picking oakum in Dartmoor gaol.
Entered at Stationers' Hall.


THE END of the GREAT
TICHBORNE TRIAL!
See. 31.
Air—“ A Starry Bight for a Ramble.”
The Tichbome Trial is over ;
And the Judge and Jury, too.
Have settled poor old Roger,
And on him put the screw I
From the very first he had no chance,
As every oue could sec;
And with the Tichbome Claimant,
Now it’s all- U. P. 1
CrtORUS.
So the Claimant’s trial is over.
And Roger they have screw’d 1
For fourteen years they have sent him
To penal servitude.
He had hardly a shilling to call his own
When the trial first beganj
His countrymen assisted him, —
They thought he was the man.
t W hether he was right or not,
r Of course I shall not say.
But for fourteen years
In gaol he'll have to lay.
Many a thousand miles he’s been.
And a rough life he has passed;
He has lived a life of luxury,—
To come to this at last I
Let his name be what it may,
The test he has stood long j
But into gaol they’ve popp’d him.
Whether it’s right or wrong.
Some say his trial waa not fair,
Though carried on with skill;
And thousands of people everywhere
Will swear he’s Roger still.
Tho’ you may think just what you please,
A word you must not crack.
Or they'll send you to poor Roger,
To feed on skilly-and-whack.
If he should be the rightful heir.
It is an awful fate,
To be sent away for fourteen years,—
His poor old heart 'twill break.
He had better stopp’d in Australia^—
No matter about hia name, —
Than to hare come to England,
That fine estate to clsiln.
1064.


END OF THE
TICHBORNE
CASE.
Bee. 31.
The Tichhorne Trial is over,
The Claimant he has lost,
They will not lie in clover
Who have to pay the cost.
To prove he was Sir Roger,
They say that he did fail,
They’ve called an old dodge r,
And they’ve shoved him into gaol.
The Trial is gone and past,
The judge decided so;
To penal servitude, at last,
The Claimant’s bound to go.
For years he’s been before you,
And very few could say,
I believe he’s not Sir Roger,
Or swear the other way ;
The cleverest men in England
' At him have had a shy,
But now his chance is over,
And in gaol he’s doomed to lie.
In every town in England,
' I He met with great applause,.
tAfad working-men with purse and pen
H ave tried to help his cause;
Tho’ his witnesses were humble.
To him they stoutly swore,
But the trial’s gone against him.
And he’s done for evermore.
When first the trial was started,
His money was all gone,
His courage ne’er departed,
Tho’ his case seemed so forlorn;
If he was not Sir Roger,
Why didn’t he run away ;
He would not go, but faced the foe,
And fought them day by day.
Whethc he’s Arthur Orton,
Himself can only tell;
But you'll agree, whoever be be,
That be has stood it well;
But if he is Sir Roger,
It will make his stont heart quail,
To leave his rights bebind.him,
To spend his life in gaol.
Mr. Whalley and Mr. Onslow,
Have helped him with a will,
They believed he was Sir Roger,
And thousands think so still:
If that is your opinion,
I pray you understand.
You must not tell them what you think,
In this free and happy land.
All among the
BARLEY.
Come out. His now September,
The hunter’s moon’s begun,
And through the wheaten stubble
Is heard the frequent gun;
The leaves are paling yellow,
Or lcindling into red,
And the ripe and golden barley.
Is hanging down its head.
Chorus.
All among the barley,
Who would not be blitbe,
When the free and happy barley,
Is smiling on the scythe.
The spring is like a young maid,
That does not know her mind ;
The summer is a tyrant,
Of most unrighteous kind 1
The autumn is an old friend,
That loves one all he can.
And that brings the happy barley.
To glad the heart of man.
All among the barley, &c.
The wheat is like a rich man.
That’s sleet and well to do
The oats are like a pack of girls,
Laughing and dancing too.
The rye is like a miser,
That’s sulky, lean and small.
But the free and bearded barley,
Is monarch of them all.
All among the barley, &c,
1061.


NEW SONG ON THE
Tichborne Trial
Tune—King of the Cannibal Islands.
The Tichborne trial is done at last,
It’s numbered with things of the past,
And so the die at last is cast,
Oh, poor Roger Tichborne.
Kenealey tried all he could do,
To beat the judge and jury too,
And conquer Mr. Hawkins’ crew.
He says I’m for noor Roger.
Two hundred days they’ve had a jaw,
Oh, what a horrid thing is law,
It has been an awful bore,
So says Roger Tichborne.
Chorus.
Now the trial it is over, oh what fun,
Poor old Roger he is done.
Fourteen years on the mill to run,
He’s got —poor Roger Tichborne
The Claimant took it very cool,
Though fat men get warm as a rule,
But he was by no means a fool,
Altho’ not Roger Tichborne.
The witnesses on either side,
To gain their object most hard tried,
To hear them swear you would have
died,
About this famous Tichborne.
Both Hawkins and Kem aley raved,
And each so curious have behaved.
And all the judges anger braved,
All through Roger Tichborne.
The lawyers pocket lots of tin.
And so to mourn will they begin,
The verdict has been given in.
About the fate of Tichborne.
Poor Onslow, Whalley, must feel small
To think they’re licked, thus after all,
While as for Luie perhaps he’ll fall.
Across his old pal Tichboine.
In quod perchance the pair may still
Be pals together on the mill,
And perhaps a few tears may spill,
Upon the loss of Tichborne.
But the’ he has got fourteen years,
The prosecution won’t ’scape jeers.
Nor Hawkins or old Coleridge sneers.
For what they did about Tichborne
Altho* the trial is over, yet
Its strange events weTl ne’er forget.
For many a man will lose a bet,
About the Roger Tichborne.
But perhaps some day he’ll come bac c
too,
And Lady RadclifTe try to woo,
And punch old Hawkins, Coleridge too
And prove he’s Roger Tichborne.
1 ondon;
VV. S, FOR PK\ . Primer & Ps»oli*lier
Monmouth Court, Seven DCs.


SENTENCE OF
THE CLAIMANT.
Writtm and Sung bg Bue;amik O. M. Lownnr,
of Brmmlag. [ Copyright.
AlR: —‘'Guano DiaeoLvtno Views’,
f IIifWAS on Saturday, February 38tb, a tel-
W egi am was scat.
Through all the realms of Britain, the electric
fluid went,
Twaa a momentous message, that thus did wend
its way.
These words, from town to town wars sent, The
Claimant loti Ike dag. ~
The greatest cons emotion prevailed,—upon the
arind.
Of those who were the Claimant friends, when
this verdict the Jury they did find,
The blow it was a crushing one, and caused aa
awful w»il.
The sentence Justice Mellor p su'd, was fourteen
years in jail.
The Claimant long and bravely fought, the golden
prise to claim,
He fierce cross examinations stood, (a credit to
his name,)
He told of how, long years ago, upon the ocean’s
wave,
The Btlla foundered in a st' rat, and five alone
were saved.
He likewise told of 8 onykurst, of Tichbourne),
and of France,
And how, when in Australian bush, by some
most lucky chance,
Into his bands a paper fell, and he an advertise-
scent saw,
Of his father’s death, at Tichhourns Park, which
mads him heir at law.
He then threw out some hints, most damaging!
to a noble lady’s fame,
But with jour kind permission, I’ll not disclose
her name,
For whether true or false, his words, I’m not
prepared to state,
fialss, may be recall them back, before it is
too*l ate.
The lady she denied them, and swore they were
untrue,
1 leave it u each English mind, to Judo between
the two.
And if to prove the story, be told in court, you
fail,
I think you’ll say, they’ve served him right, with
fourteen years in jail.
Inside the court on Saturday, ’twas something
to behold;
The Judge was seated in bis chair, his look was
•tern and co d;
The Claimant’s anxious fuse was seen, a aloud
was oo bis brow,
For the verdict and the sentence, he felt, he soon
must know.
At a few minutes past Twelve, the jury retired,
to their rofito,
And a guilty verdiet they did bring, at twenty
minutes to owe, which scaled Mn doom.
Justice Mellor then, in a voice stoat loud and
clear,
A sentence of imprisonment gave, for a lam of
fourteen years.
And now, upon l lie closing econe, • w<wd or two
I’ll eay,
gfnrrV I lid kit duty, on each ancoeeding
An the verdict, ’ll» aaid, that ho
will moke,
I ho£o boll bo aueoMola), in tbla undertaking
And now*V aak of tkoM aronnd, who on of
Britiok birth.
To giro fair flay, to every mob, no aaatter what
ho’a worth, ,
80 think kindly of the Cfciaaant, and alndy w«U
kis tft)i|
But, don’t let yoor mlndi bo jfoJndlood t boonnon
ke'e eont to Jail. _
806.
THE RETURN OF
TEDDY O'DEAL
Written and Sung bg P O’Hasa, ComaOmn,
JIB t— 1 ' Toddy O'Nail.*
SAD and forsaken I’ve ones more returned,
With pockets quite empty to ould Ireland
•gain.
Sure if Norsk's advise this poor fellow had taken.
And never bad ventured acroea the wide-main ;
Contented I’d have been with my Noiah,
No cause I’d nave given her to weep or to Sail,
But now I’m heart-broken, I've lost my whole
treasure,
I’m a ead, but a wiser Teddy O’Nail.
Chorus :
If all Irishmen would only think ou thin
sooner,
And resolve that they never would leave
the dear soil.
But np firmly for thier righta, they would stand
to cash other.
Then in no other nation, they’d need for to toil.
For isn’t Irishmen just as good aa their neigh-
bours,
They can fight for their Bounty, and that with-
out Ml,
Them, why shouldn’t freedom reign over ould
Ireland,
And make Irehmeu happy, aaye Teddy O’Neil.
No longer I II sing, for my heart’s full of sorrow
To think that I’te lost one, that I love so dear,
O, the thoughts of my Norah, it near knocks me
eraxy,
I’ve now no kind one, my heart fm to oheer.
So I will lave youe. I’ll go a poor wanderer,
But away from ould Erin, I never will sail.
I’ll stay on the noil, till I follow my Noiah,
Then, the old clay, it will cover, poor Teddy
(/Nail. '


ROGER
Tichborne
Draw near good friends and list to me
Tho’ I am charged with perjury;
Roger Tichborne is my name,
And at the trial I’ll prove the same.
Oh, many a time I’ve been to blame,
I’m still the same. I’m hero again,
They say I don’t know my Christian name.
But that won’t do for me.
Hurrah, my friend I’m out on bail,
And at the trial I’ll not fail
To prove what I profess to be—
The heir to the Tichborne property.
I had a row and left my home,
And then in distant lands did roam,
I then was shipwrecked on the sea,
Only a few were saved with me;
I didn’t go down, I wasn’t a flat,
Fished out of that, like a drowned rat,
I was as hard to kill as on old tom cat.
And that you all may say.
I went to the diggings and there was sold,
And finding rubbish instead of gold,
And then bushranging took my way,
Free and easy I passed the day;
Then I drove horses upon my word,
With bed and board on the green sward,
And every day got as drunk as a lord,
A rollicking life for me.
When I came home my estate to claim,
My mother she knew me at once again;
But lawyers then on me did fall,
And said I wasn’t myself at all;
They examined me well the evidence show—
Head and toes, and under my clothes—
The mark on my legs, and length of my nose,
But they could not get over me.
Mrs. Ratcliffe took an oath and swore
That Roger was tattooed all o’er,
And because there was no marks on me,
They said I’d committed perjury.
So into Newgate I was cast.
My enemys thought they had me fast,
But friends came forward and at last
They got me out on bail.
Then if the trial I chance to win,
I will make all my tenants drunk on gin;
You may depend the money will fly,
For a rattling rollicking cove am I;
I shan’t care a pin how the word may go,
No thought of woe—not for Joe!
I’ll live like a king and sing merrily oh,
Oh! hi ho! hi ho!
Then if the trial may chance should win
I’ll make all my tenants get drunk on gin;
You may depend the money will fly,
For a rattling, jolly John Bull am I,
I shan’t care a pin how the world may go :
No thought of woe, —Not for Joe!
I’ll live like a king and sing, Merrily oh
Oh! I oh! I oh!


Jolly Old Sir Roger
Coimc now and listen unto me,
Somf curiout news 1 bring,
lt‘B about Sir Ruijer,
That 1 am going to mng
For one hundred days in Westminster
Hall,
H« boldly stood his ground.
And now of perjury he's accused.
And in Newgate now he's found.
eHOUUS.
• They wan to make him an impostor.
But they've got to prove it true.
And if they do it lair mid square,
They‘ll have enough to do.
it will take a deal of trouble.
Both the big wigs and the small,
And perhaps he'll turn out lo be
Sir Rogei after all.
Now they thought Sir Roger he was dead
In the Bella ha got drowned,
He travelled Australia over.
None thought him above gw»«d i
They *ny the chap that wont abroad.
Was naught but akin and borne.
But the present claimant's for from tnat,
He weight six and twenty etone,
.
TVtT rov U’dy Tichbome »wo»« to fcto,
llv thi* «i j>g w*i byth«t,
She really ought to "knew him.
In spite of all hi* fat ;
About the marks upon him,
They/have made a great to do.
They «ay that he's tattooed n pon
ilia hoop de doodeu do.
Now Sir Roger be has hud
To stand a deal of jaw,
.From the Attorney General,
The chief of all the law ;
But though he is in Newgate now.
When his counsel did him resign.
The case may be quite altered,
, When we hear from Ballaulme
they call him wogga wngga,
Which isn’t quite a treat.
They say he is fed in Newgate,]
Upon Auitralinn meat,
"The hammock they provided him.
It could not hold bin fat,
S# they bought him a special bedstead.
Now what do you say to that.
Now I wonder what he thinks of,
As in Newgate he does stop.
Whether he’d like to bo at Woppmg,
In a large butchers shop.
I wonder if before ho goo* to bed.
Ho offer* up hi* prayer*.
Or withes most devoutly
Tie d got Mr*. Radoliffe there.
Mow if he ia on impostor.
Hoi rlevor I mb sure,
Thoro w«* seventeen against biro,
Biqbty-fiv* to him they *woro.
Now if the pahli* had their will.
They would all agree with me*
They would give tho cfoimant the estates
TVhi settled the ease would be.
OUley Printef, 57, street. &.GiU«


Trial of the
CLAIMANT
Poor old Roger Tichborne now
Is on his trial again,
They will not rest contented,
They never will refrain
From doing everything they can
To strike the fatal blow,
If money can only do it now
To prison he must go.
CHORUS.
They’re doing all they can
Poor Roger for to smother,
They must not, they shall not
Do anything unfair;
You’ve only heard one side,
You’ve got to hear the other,
W ben all their tales will vanish
Like bubbles in the air.
Poor Roger stands before them
like a Briton every day,
When Lawyers cull him names
A word be muatn’t say;
He listens to their chatter,
But fear he does not show,
It he’d been an imposter,
He’d have jack’d up long ago.
Government finds the money
The Tichbornc case to end,
It does not trouble them a bit
However much they spend.
They’re drawing their expenses
From taxes 111 be bound—
So working men will have to pay
To crush poor Roger down*
1 think you’ll say Sir Roger’s
A clever sort of man,
He’s got an Irish lawyer,
Who'll do the best he can ;
Dr. Keancaly will be there
The claimant for to screen,
And when his Irish blood is up
He’ll tell them what he means.
The lawyers they may chatter
And bluster all they can,
They can’t make many thousand
Believe he s not the man :
There was never a man that ever liveo
Upon Great Britain’s shore
Could stand the test that Roger has
For two lorig years or more.
Then may he be successful,
And win the day at last.
He’ll soon forget tne troubles
That will be gone and past;
The friends that have assisted,
As nobly they they have done,
He’ll wish long life and happiness
To each and everyone.


1. Hon Sir John Mellor; 2. Lord Chief Justice; 3. Hon Sir H. Lush; 4. Lady Tichborne; 5. The undaunted “Roger”; 6. C. H. Whalley MP; 7. “The Claimant”;
8. Guidford Onslow; 9. Dr Kenealy QC; 10. The “Heir”; 11. Lady Radcliffe; 12. Mrs Mina Jury.


THE CONVICTION
OF THE
CLAIMANT.
11l sWv yon now m Roger's cans, .
TWy prose that right is wrong;
That the Claimant is tbs right —,
To all it is quite dear.
Yet he is guilty frond of perjury.
And sentenced for 14 }ears.
But to get up a conviction.
They had a deal of bother.
Yet the public sty. and no mistake.
He is no other man than Roger.
If be had been an impostor.
Would they let him out on bail.
No, they would have stuck dote to
their man,
And kept him fast in gaol.
But they knew he was the right man.
You may be sure of that.
Yet they failed to break his spirit.
Or pull down an ounce of fat.
Whoever the Claimant is,
Through thy country they say.
Prom first to last, in this great case.
He has not had fair play,
With all jeers and bantering.
He did not flinch a bit.
As an impostor would have done,
But stood it like a brick.
They called him Castro and Orton,
His credit for to smother,
But I enn’t sec that they have proved
Him either one or t other.
But if bis mother bad lived,
It would have caus’d a deal of botkf;
Fo»‘ fbe would have proved Without I
doubt,
liiwd k KB MR tkodi^,
Dnnrf up frM thu nttm.
Am back shuns of Wipoif.
WWu thu Mn 4 »W W*ud Sir
Ware all staunch men and true.
Tat they ware dovUed, and warn told
Their statement waa untrue.
Here** anooeaa to brave Konealy,
His duty he has done.
He well deter res the nation's praise.
Though the battle he has not won.
But when the Claimant gets his liberty
And once is free again,
Ho will be at them like a cock.
His rights for to maintain.
Now they may call the Claimant what
they like,
But of this you may depend,
They will not shake the confidence
Of the public and bis friends.
They may call him an impostor.
A scheming artful dodger,
But it is the universal cry,
That he is the right Sir Roger.
He is the rightful heir, my beys*
And they’ll prove it, without a doubt
That he is the right Sir Roger,
And some day they’ll find it out.
They may call him Arthur Orton,
For that he does not care,
But the public still believe
He is the rightful heir.
Dislcy. Printer. London;


POOR ROGER TICHBORNE’S LAMENTATION
- you will pay an. i.ticm now,
And listen for awhile,
I’d sing to you a verse or tw*,
About the Tichborne trial.
I'i ey’ve tound the Claimant guilty,
Fourteen years he’s got its plain,
After trying to pull the string
Oh . they’ve stopped his little jgame,
CHORUS
The Tichborne trial is over now,
The claimant’s lost the day.
Kenealy lie spoke freely, bovs,
He did his best I say,
Farewell, I’m bound for Portland,
I must mind what I am at,
They’ll feed me on toke and shilly,
And bring down poor Roger’s fat
■ ey swear I’m Arthur Orton,
The Wapping butcher, I declare,
Some think he’s not his mother’s son,
, Some think he’s the rightul heir,
The public when they go to bed,
I’m sure (hey won’t keep still,
Tney 11 dream of poor old Roger
A hile lie’s dancing on the mill.
I thought to gain the day, my friend•,
1 tried hard to get the pelf.
But they swear I am a dodger.
So they’ve put me on the shelf,
The Jury found me guilty,
I must do the best I can,
So yon pretty girls both far and near,
Pity the great fat man.
Farewell to the old Water Mill,
Now grieving is a folly,
Farewell to all my witnesses,
Farewell to Mr. Whally,
Farewell to wine and brandy too.
Farewell to every one,
I’ll dance the can-can on the mill
And go the w hole hog or none.
To Westminster and wapping now,
I must bid a long adieu,
I’ll think of you Kenealy,
In the land I’m going to.
When the Jury said I was not Roger,
Oh! how taey made me stagger,
The pretty girls they’ll always think,
Of pooi Roger’s Wagga-Wagga.
’Dislev, Printer, 57, Hisrh Street, St.Cib-


DOWNFALL OF THE
CLAIMANT
Or, I wish that I was Free!
Air—l wish 1 was a Bee.
Kind friends attention give,
To what I’m going to say,
For I the Claimant sure enough,
Now have had my day,
But alas my trial is o’er.
As you may plainly see,
For fourteen years on skilly and wack,
Oh what will become of me.
Chours.
1 wish that I was free,
With lots of ready money,
Would’nt I leave ol d Englands shore.
For the land of milk and honey,
But now I am in jail.
As fast as fast can be.
For foui teen years alas my friends,
I hope you’ll pity me.
For hundred and eighty .eight days my
friends.
It’s at the bar I stood,
With Dr. Keanley at my back,
But he conld do no good,
The jury found me guilty,
The judge to me did say,
It<s Orton you are fast enough,
You cannot run away.
But now 1 am in jail.
It’s no use to repim-.
For I must sup my skilly now,
Instead of drinking wine,
And good old English beef,
It’s I must see no more.
My Oysters are for ever done,
Though I’ve eat many a score.
Oh, dear, my friends Oh dear.
What will become of of me,
For I have been a regular Devil,
I’m sure you 6 1l all agree ;
The ladies I could please,
When ever I did try,
But now rhat I am fast in jail.
Dear ladies won‘t you cry.
But now my friends one word,
Just before I go.
I hope the jury every one,
Will go to the Devil below,
I hope the judge my friends,
May soon lose all is riches.
Be terrified to see my ghost,
And dirty his new bought breeches.
C. Wilkinson,
J. BRUETON, Genera Printer 76, Stafford-atrcet Birmingham.


DOWNFALL
OF POOR
OLD ROGER
Fourteen years penal servitude.
'The Tichborne trial is now done,
Doodah, doodah,
hear that Hawking’ side has won,
Doodah, doodah day.
Kenealey now deserves a rest,
Doodah, doodah,
Tor the big fat man he’s done his best,
Doodah, doodah day. ]
chorus/
But poor old Roger’s done.
They have settled him at^last,
They may prove he was the rightful
heir,*
When we are gone and past.
"Now Hawkins he does feel so jolly,
He’s banished care and melancholy,
tte went home on Right,
Tamped into bed and cuddled his wife.
Alai Mother Jury’s got her tin,
can go and spend it all in gia,
/She saw young Orton stripped I’m sure
And darned with him the perfect cure.
The claimant has to prison gone,
:f think he’ll find it rather warm,
For oakum he will have to p'ck,
xfctd his skilly won’t be very thick.
When he did to prison go,
They made of him a perfect show,
They cropped his hair so very thin,
And then his troubles did begin.
To see him strip and have a bath,
1 am sure would makefile people laugh
To dress him they did begin,
A knickerbocker suit they put him in.
They'll melt him down a stone or two,
For the treadmill he will have to do.
His bedstead will be such a topper,
To keep him up, he’s such a whopper.
The claimant now can t blow his bacca,
He’ll wish he’d stop’d in Wagga Wagga
Oh that he will. I know full well,
When he is in his prison cell.
The Tichborne trial is now o’er,
Of trials like that we want no more,
TheX cost the country lots of money,
And make some people feel so funny.
But never mind old boy,
In fourteen years you’ll be free.
And if you do return again,
We’ll welcome you with glee.
Disley, Printer, High-street, St. Giles.


THE END OF THE
TICHBOURNE TRIAL.
CONVICTION OP THE
‘CLAIMANT’
AND SENTENCED TO
14 YEARS’ PENAL SERVITUDE.
AlR:— “Run Him In.”
THE Tichborne trial is over.
And the judge and jury too,
Have settled po6r old Roger,
And on him him put the screw.
From the very first he had no chance,
As every one could see.
So they ran him in, they ran him in.
And now it’s all U. P.
They’re run him in, they've run him in.
All the Claimant’s trial is all U. P.
So many blunders he has made.
That really you must say.
He done his best to prove bis case,
In a roundabout sort of way.
The lawyers they bother’d him so.
About things he could’nt guess,
Till they popt hi.*, in, they popt him in.
They popt him into a mess,
They ran him in, they run him in.
They ran him into an awful mess.
He had hardly a shilling to call his own,
When first the Trial began.
Hi* countrymen assisted him.
They thought he was the man,
Whether be .was right or not.
Or course 1 shall not say,
Bnt they’ve run him in, they’ve run him in.
And in Goal he’ll have to stay,
They’ve run him in, they’ve run him in,
In Penal Servitude to stay.
Many a thousand miles he’s been,
And a rough life he's pass’d,
He has lived a life of luxury.
To come to this at last;
Let his name be what it may,
It’s nothing to do with my aong,
For they’ve ran him in, they’ve ran him in.
Whether H’s right or wrong.
They’ve ran bias In, they’ve him m,
Whether its right or wrong.
Some say hit trial wat not fair,
Tbo’ carried on with thill,
And thousand* of people everywhere,
Will twear he’s Roger ttill;
Tho’ you may think jutt what you pleate,
A word yon mutt not crack.
Or they’ll run you in, they’ll run you in.
To teed on tkilly and wbatk.
They’ll run you in, they’ll run you in.
To live on tkilly and whack.
If he thould be the Rightful Heir,
It it an awful fate,
To be tent away for fourteen yean.
Hit poor old heart 'twill break j
He had better have ttopp’d in Auttralia,
And from England kept away.
Than to get run in, to get run.
To pic* oakum all the day. (
To get ran in. to get ran in.
In pcinon picking oakum ill the day.
BUTTERCUPS AND DAISIES.
Written and Composed by Frederic Maccabb.
And tuny by him in hit OeltbmU* I Entertminmtnt
"Begone Dull Care.”
Mutic at Chappell & Co’s, SO, Sew Band St,.
VyRETTY little flowers in plenty grow
Buttercups and daisies 1
Buttercups and daisies I
All among the grass, so gaily, O >
Buttercups and daises grow,
Thorns and weeds our lives surround,
Nought for that care I,
Brightest blossoms still abound,
And content am I. Pretty little, Ac.
Pretty little children love to play,
All among the daisies,
The buttercups and daisies;
With their happy faces bright and gay,
Pretty little flowers are they.
Though this life is full of care.
Nought for that care I,
Grief and joy alike we share,
And content am I. Pretty little, Ac.
NO. 810.


Dr Kenealy


EIGHT MAN
IN THE
EIGHT PLAGE
DR.
KENEALY, M.P.
Good people give attention and licten to my
s°ng. , . „
For you know that brave kenealy u»‘o Par-
liament has gone,
And he now is in St. Stephen’s, where hi*
name he’ll not disgrace.
For Kenealy is the right man in the right
place,
He has bee return’d for Stoke and he will
his duty do.
He is a true born Irishman, and independ-
ent to.
Then cheer for bfave Kenealy, now his
enemies he’ll face,
For you know he his the right man, in the
right place.
You gallant boys of Gray’s Inn, what did
he care for you,
He trusted to the wonking-man, to Stoke
away he flew,
20C0 there Majority, he got I do declare
And him you spurned, he’s now returned
1 think he had you there,
If him you have disbared, you can never
him disgrace,
For Kenealy is the right man, in the right
place.
Then brsvo Disraeli, for you helpt him up
behind,
And like Dr. Kenealy, In the house [you
spoke your mind,
Why should he want two more with him
two help bim to his seat,
He can do his work a standing on his two
old blessed feet,
You hit the speaker very hard, you [told
him to his face,
That Kenealy is the right man, in the right
place.j
Stick to him Mr. Whally, you are a per-
fect treat,
And you know that brare Kenealy he has
never, yet been beat.
With Guilford Onslow by your side novp
show the rum old codger,
We ain’t forgot the Claimant, for Kenealy
says he’s Roger,
Now let him have his freedom, let us once-
more see his face.
And then you’ll b© the right man in the-
right place.
Then go a-head Kenealy for now you are
in the way.
And tell the members in the house that.
vou must have fair play,
The wsrking classes seat you there and t<>'
them you will stick,
And like a true born Englishman, go at.
them like a brick,
I’m sure you will find plenty, to help you
on your way.
For you know you are the right man in
the right place.
Then raise your voices Icing and loud and
shout my boys, huzza,
For free and independant now, Kenealy’s
won the day,
And in the House of Commons, now he
soon will let them see,
That once again old Roger boy, |we soon
shall have him free,
Let Stoke rejoice with heart and voice for
them he‘ll ne’er disgrace,
Fo*r Kenealy is the right man the right
place.
Disley, Printer, London.


SUCCESS
TO BRAVE
PHENE ALY
(Jo > i people oil l >t with attention,
bile n new song before you I place,
Its concerning brave Dr. Kenealy,
Jolly Roger and the great Tichborne case.
They have done as they liked with poor Roger,
And they’ll do something more if they can
Now the fair fame they’re trying to rob, sir
Of j£enealy that brave hearted man.
Here is success to brave Dr. Kenealy,
To ruin him they will try all they ean,
Because he stuck np for. Sir Roger,
And says he’s a much injured man.
When for perjury they committed poor Rogter,
Who was it that Steped up in time,
Bent back and edge to defend him,
But brave Kenealy we find.
Some hard things they did say against him,
The brave man to try for to bother,
But be fearlessly atuck to his tack, air,
For he knew ke was pleading for Roger,
for 1 1 months he stuck up for sir Roger
Like a true brick he would noCgive in,
But somehow it enrue into my nob, sir,
That the brave man they would nftt let win,
The case for the prosecution seemed aground.
When for the defence Kenealv had hi* buy,
So to rebutt it then Hawkins steped forward
For they could not lick bin by fair play.
On Iho witnesses its no nse of dwelling.
You have heard all that-story before.
The Claimant's were as good I am telling.
As those was against him 1 am sure,
For many of them told rare criwnmevi
Ana amongst them 1 will mention two.
But 1 Din clown on them dead i s a hammer
Mother Judy and Lord Tattoo.
Now there is that nice man Charley Orton.
Who, the claimant has claimed as a brother,
If he thought he could gain a brass farthing
He would skin his own father and mother
But with all his low double dealing
Jack Kettfh may make friends with him yet,
And when he cnnT live by hi* scheming
He will find rope to hang himself yet.
Now they say that the friends of sir Roger:
L* ie with pelf they did pay
Oh purpose himself for to perjure
But all but their prayers they will say,
Bat all parties he has been deceiving
From the hulks, what more could you expect.'-
And no doubt the Claimant believed him
For he knew ho was saved from the wreck.
Some grave charges they lay to Kenealy
Enough any man for to ahock,
On© is, he called the claimant sir Roger,
When the jury declared he was nor,
But his foe* they want to deprive him
Of his well earned fume and his gcAvu,
So now they are bravely conniving
At the game kick) u man when he’s down.
Then justice lot’s have for Kenealy
Ho is the champion of fair play w« se~,
And good luck to our old friend sir Roger
Let's hope we may yet see him free.
H. D jUy, Printer, 07, St* allot.


GIVE 4 CHEEK FOR
Brave MEALY!
Clood people give attention, and just listen to my aongv
You know that bsave iveL<aly into Parliament hit*
gone,
And now he’s in St. S ephe; there Lis name he’ll
■Ot disgrace,
Ter Kenealy is the fit 'eat man to take the place.
Chorus—
tTben cheer for biave Kenealy, now bis enemies he*?2
face, •
Tot Stoke you know be meant to go, and now be’a
won the race.
You Beachera ot the Temple, row w bat did be care
for you.
He trus’ed to the working men, to Stoke away he ftew
2,000 thfie majority, Ire got I do declare,
If him you spurned, he’s now returned, I thick he bay.
you there.
£tick to him, Mr. Whatley, you are a perfect treat,
And you know brave Kenealy, he has never yet
beat,
“With GuiWfo-d Or blow I>y your side, thow the runs
old codger,
Tb :.t we aim f igot the Claimant ft>r.Ke?euly »*ys bin
Roger.
Then raise your voices Io r -ganl b ud, and shout my
boys, huzza!
F»>r tree and imlrj « dont now, Kenealy’s wan the d»y.
An! in the Hou e of C< mu.o ii now, he soon will it's
them see,
Tt.en oace a. sin, old 1C g r, b < ye, wo soon shall list
have him free,
>’cw bios- ne-tight. oil Johnny Blight, he spoko op
like a mss,
Aud Terj quickly there, he let ih* member* und-mawl
kor though ks is a lawyer, he’s a very olevor biokit
fl“’s tor lb* day. S 3 hero I say, ho’U take his sent ILr
Mob;
Then bravo Disraeli, for you helped him up br-himh
like brave Dr. Ke.ealy, in the house hr spc’ e Lis
nind,
Why shoald he want two more wi: h him, to lead hitr l
to bio seat,
He’U do bia work a standing on his two old blessecS
feet.
Then go a-hesd Keneoly, tor uun>v are in the w.-
And tell the members in the lion e that m>u mu -f
have fair p l ay,
The working sent you there, ahd to then*, vot
w 11 stick
And like a true-born Lmhman go at ’em like a brick .
He stuck to the Claimant boys, )«« back iml edg-
you knew,
And when he wm ia Mil'.bank, »o v ait him di 1 go, "
He never will (lettert him, ot that now be tissund
For bold Kenealy always was a tiue man of h';-
ward
Faa free and iu ep ndvr.t at thejmretings he used tc-
»ay
So let me go to Sioke yo i ). n w, and if I win the
day
p epout abent Sir R< ger, I’ll ba at ’em in a ciao’-.
Aid stick to h m wlutt I in, while a shirt is an m/
back.
Th • bold oil itk at 1 oMock, into tin house did steer
Am! now he n eaai t o-kalp-my-greens, to let 'em know
hra there
And on the working nun of Stoke he ne’er will turn
hie 1 ao ,
Than ah m i r kravi leueily boys, for &oke and
radd; - .rh, ek.


Dr Kenealy


A NEW SONG ON
DR. KENEAL
THE
Honest Supporter of the Claimant!
AND THE
NEW MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
For Stoke-upon-Trent.
London:—H. SUCH, Machine Printer and Publisher,
177, Union-street, Borough, S.E.
Tune —“ Oyster-shell Bonnets."
What rejoicing there is in country and town,
The swells and the nobles they are taken down,
Now Dr. Kenealy’s at Stoke-upon-Trent,
By two thousand majority’s to Parliament sent.
chorus.
Hurrah ! boys, Kenealy’s to Parliament sent,
Success to the Electors of Stokc-upon-Trent.
He’s been treate d with scorn by the nobs of the land,
But all their humbugging he’s able to stand,
From his straight honest path he never would flinch,
He never has yet given way not an inch.
He’ll go up to the house and he’ll give it ’em hot,
He don’t care a pin if they like it or not;
He don’t care for nobles, nor judges, nor Queens,
He’ll never sit down till he’s said what he means.
His friends they all say he’s a jolly old brick ;
His enemies wish ho was down with old Nick ;
In my remark I am sure you’ll agree,
A more honest lawyer you never did see.
The Electors of Stoke they have done their work
well,
The votes that they gave at the Election will tell.
At the reck’ning up his opponents did find,
That they were nearly two thousand behind.
The women of Stoke stuck up for the man,
And this is the dodge they all of them plan’d,
They told their dear husbands to vote the right way
Ur they’d sleep by themselves till the next ’lection
day.
The Doctor went round and told them all straight.
For the Claimant in prison he’d fight against fate.
He’ll bother them all, night and day, not a doubt.
Till the prison gates open to let Roger out.
The Electors that day show’d in the town,
They believe in the Claimant altho’ he’s cried clown ,
I hoard a man say, and I’m sure he’s no dunce.
Give a dog a bad name and hang him at once.
Near two thousand a head was a pretty good pull.
More than expected by Dr. John Bull;
His foes are now looking most awfully sad,
And members of Parliament are gone raving mad*
Then may he live long, he’s a true-hearted man, •
He’ll do for the poor all the good that he can,
And get friends to help him Victory to gain,
nd get all he* 9 lost gnee more back again*


RESUMPTION OF THE
TICHBORNE CASE.
LATEST EXDXTXO3ST I
Mr. Hawkins. —Did you not state in your last examination, that you had never been to GREAT-
Claim.ant. —I don’t remember. [BRIDGE ?
Mr. Hawkins. —Now, on your oath, did you never visit ARTHUR WINSPER of that Town ?
Claimant. —I Orton tto forget it; I bought a Pair of BdOTS trom him that looked better on me than
any I ever had !
Mr. Hawkins. —They made you look just like Roger, I suppose ?
Claimant — They certainly fit me first-class, and no doubt made me look just like Roger.
Mr. Hawkins. — “ Would you be surprised to hear” that he sells the best and Cheapest Boots ever
offered to the public ?
Claimant. —Not at all; that was the reason I went to bis Establishment!
Mr. Hawkins —What is his Address ?
Dr. Keneabj. —Does my learned friend wish himself to pay a visit to this Noted Shop ?
Mr Hawkins —Really, my lord, I must protest against these interruptions. If Ido desire to save a few
shillings in a Pair of Boots, I do not see what it has to do with this case !
Claimant. —Don’t make a mistake ! the Address is
ARTHUR WINSPER,
No. 7 & 8, Market Place, GREAT BRIDGE.


THE CLAIMANTS WOES
LONDON
PUBLISHED BY C . SHEAR D. MUSICAL BOUQUET OFFICE. 192. HIGH HOLBORN.
CITY WHOLESALE AGENTS, E.W, ALLEN. 11. AVE MARIA LANE *no F.PITMAN. 20. PATERNOSTER RO#
N°*s+l3 Sc 5414 MUSICAL BOUQUET.


THE CLAIMANT'S WOES,
OR,
ROGER THE DODGER.
2


o












THE TICHBORNE GALOP.


THE TICHBORNE GALOP.
Performed by The Military Bands.
by M.C.BARTER


The Tiolihorne Galop.
BARTER.


Tbe Tichborne Galop.
BARTER.


4
The Tichborue Galop .
BARTER.


3
The Tichborne Galop.
John Blockley 3 Argyll St Regent St W.




