

Baron Sir Ferdinand Von Mueller,
K.C.M.G., M.D„ F.R.S.,
Botanist, Explorer, and Geographer,
Reprinted from THE VICTORIAN HISTORICAL MAGAZINE,
H. J, GREEN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
PRICE. ONE SHILLING.




Baron Sir Ferdinand Von Mueller,
K.C.M.G., M.D., F.R.S.,
Botanist, Explorer, and Geographer.
CHAS. DALEY, b.a., f.l.s.
Reprinted from THE VICTORIAN HISTORICAL MAGAZINE,
Vol. X., Nos. 1,2,
May and December, 1924.
©p 9utf)ontp:
H. J. GREEN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.


CONTENTS.
Early Career and Training
5
7
9
Botanic Gardens : Government Botanist
Alpine Explorations, &c.
Gregory’s North-west Expedition
Director of Botanic Gardens
Bentham’s Flora Australiensis
Exploratory and Botanical Work
Ernest Giles’s Expedition
Official and Administrative Duties
Rearrangement of Offices, Botanical Work
\ ictorian Branch of the Royal Geographical Society
Australia
Scientific Interests—Correspondence—The Elder Expedition
Estimate of Work and Character
Habits—Closing Years, &c.
Memorials


Baron Sir Ferdinand von Mueller.
1825-1896.
[Frontispiece




PREFACE.
This memoir of the life of Baron von Mueller was written
for communication to the Historical Society of Victoria, and
also to the Field Naturalists’ Club of Victoria.
The exigencies in regard to publication in the Historical
Society magazine have necessarily had a restrictive influence
in regard to the subject-matter.
However, the aim has been to give as clearly as possible
an account of the life and works of the distinguished man,
who for more than 40 years was so eminent a figure in the
scientific world, so useful and public-spirited a citizen, and
so energetic a pioneer in opening up and developing the great
resources of his adopted land.
At the Baron’s death, in 1896, ample material in the form
of manuscripts, papers, notes, books, correspondence, &c., was
available for biographical purposes. The writing of a
biography was proposed and approved, but indefinitely de-
layed, until with the passage of years interest waned.
It is a matter for great regret that, when conditions were
most favorable for the undertaking, and intimate friends
and contemporaries willing to assist, the opportunity for
writing a complete biography was lost.
Nothing was done, if we except an extensive but incomplete
bibliography of the Baron’s works in'manuscript now in the
library at the National Herbarium.
The mass of valuable material available at his death
became, in time, dispersed or destroyed, so that biographical
information from this source is now scant or unobtainable,
whilst a new generation has replaced the old circle of friends.
It will be of interest to note that the 30th day of June,
1925, will mark the centenary of the birth of the great
botanist.
Elsewhere are detailed the chief sources of information
referred to in writing this memoir.
In addition, the author desires to thank all those who
kindly supplied particulars or personal reminiscences in
regard to the life of the Baron.


WORKS CONSULTED s
Parliamentary Reports from Government Botanist and Director
for Botanical Gardens, Victoria. 1851 to 1874.
Baron von Mueller’s published works, lectures, papers, pamphlets,
and correspondence.
Transactions of The Philosophical Institute, afterwards The
Royal Society of Victoria.
Wing’s Southern Science Record.
The Victorian Naturalist, articles by Mr, G. A. Barnard,
Professor Baldwin Spencer, Mr. A. Topp, D. 5.0., M.A., & c.
Reports and Transactions of the Australasian Association for
the Advancement of Science.
Proceedings of the Linnean Society, London.
Proceedings of the Linnean Society, Sydney, New South Wales.
Proceedings of the Royal Societies of London, New South Wales,
Tasmania, Queensland, and Victoria respectively.
Reports on the earlier Melbourne Exhibitions.
Journal of the Victorian Branch of the Royal Geographical
Society of Australia.
Proceedings of the Zoological and Acclimatization Society of
Victoria.
Proceedings of the London Zoological Geographical Society.
The Kew Bulletin, Hooker’s London Journal of Botany,
Gardeners’ Chronicle.
Reports of Gregory’s N.W. Expedition, Ernest Giles’s Expedi-
tions.
The Elder Expedition'and Leichhardt Relief Expedition, &c.
Preface to Bentham’s Flora Australiensis.
Official Reports on the Exploration of Country between the
Gascoyne and Murchison Rivers, Western Australia.
Bibliography in German (incomplete). National Herbarium,
Melbourne.
Bibliography by Rev. W. Potter (incomplete), National Her-
barium, Melbourne.
Repoits and I ransactions of various Societies—Agricultural,
Chemical, Zoological, and Gardening.
Berichte der Deutschen Botanischen Gesellschaft.
Obituary notices in Melbourne and Sydney daily journals and
the principal scientific journals in Australasia and Great
Britain; also information supplied from Royal Gardens,
Kew, the National Herbarium, Melbourne', and Kiel
I niversity, Germany.


Baron Sir Ferdinand Von Mueller, K.C.M.G.,
M.D., F.R.S., Botanist, Explorer, and
Geographer.
By Chas. Daley, 8.A., F.L.S.
Ferdinand Jakob Heinrich Mueller was born on 30th June,
in the year 1825, at the town of Rostock, in Mecklenburg-
Schwerin, Germany. His father, who for great bravery at
the battle of Seestadt had been appointed Commissioner of
Customs, was Frederick Mueller; and his mother, Louisa
Mueller, was the daughter of George Mertens, of Ascherleben.
Both parents dying wdiile Ferdinand was very young, he was
indebted to his grandparents on his mother’s side for his
training and education in boyhood. Although he had no
special advantages in regard to his upbringing, young Mueller
became a good scholar, and soon showed evidence of a studious
and observant nature.
At the age of fifteen he was apprenticed to Mr. E. G.
Becker, a chemist in the town of Husum, in Schleswig.
Studying diligently, Mueller passed the pharmaceutical
examination at Kiel, and early evinced a deep liking for
botanical research. At the University of Kiel he studied
botany under Professor Kolte, making profitable use of the
experience afforded by the Museum and the Botanical
Gardens of the town. In his spare time, he collected plants
in the island of Sylt; and, at the age of twenty-one years,
received the degree of Doctor of Philosophy for a thesis on
the Common Shepherd’s Purse (Capsella-hursa-pastoris) .
Diligently pursuing his favorite study, he made a collection
of the plants of Schleswig-Holstein, of which, afterwards in
1853, a description was published in the journal Flora, of
the Botanical Society of Regenburg, Bavaria.
In the year 1846, the young botanist was present at the
meeting of the German Society for the Advancement of
Science, founded by Professor Oken, an eminent German
osteologist. This was an experience which, in after years,
he recalled with much satisfaction. The details of his life
at this period are very scanty, but we learn that the Mueller
family seem to have lacked robust health, both parents and a
daughter having died of consumption, and Ferdinand and his
sisters being wanting in physical stamina. The doctor him-
self had a tendency towards phthisis, and his sister Bertha


was in such a poor state of health that, in the year 1847,
acting upon the advice of a friend of the family—Dr.
of Hernberg, in Hanover, a fellow botanist, who had just
returned from XYestern Australia—Dr. Mueller, relinquish-
ing the idea of a medical career for which he had been pre-
paring, sailed with his two sisters for a warmer and more
genial climate, in the ship Hermann von Beckerath, which
safely arrived at Port Adelaide on the 18th of December,
1847, a year in which there was a notable immigration of
German colonists to South Australia. It was not then the
intention of the Muellers to settle permanently in the colony,
but the outbreak of hostilities in Schleswig-Holstein pre-
vented return, and induced the party to remain in Australia.
Young Mueller immediately obtained employment as a
chemist with Moritz Heuzenroder, of Bundle-street, Ade-
laide; and, for the next four years, 1848 to 1852, he devoted
a great deal of his leisure time to a careful and enthusiastic
study of the interesting and strange flora of the southland, in
which so many new plants, curious in form and structure,
met his view. His excursions and researches were conducted
far afield, a considerable area being traversed. Proceeding
as far north as the little-known Flinders Bange, he ascended
Mounts Arden and Brown, and also pursued his botanical
research around Lake Torrens; eastward he penetrated the
Murray scrubs, where, in crossing the river, he narrowly
escaped drowning. The Mount Lofty Bange, nearer at hand,
was diligently explored, and in addition the coastal fringe at
Guichen Bay. By these excursions, Mueller not only
strengthened his physical frame, and obtained a useful know-
ledge of the characteristic Australian flora, but also gained
valuable experience which served in good stead for subse-
quent exploration of a more extensive nature.
On the 24th December, 1848, in conjunction with a friend
and countryman, F. E. W. Kirchauff, he acquired from the
South Australian Government a block of land in the-Bugle
Banges, between Strathalbyn and Mount Barker. On this
section, about 20 acres in extent, he built a cottage, in which,
with his sister Clara, he lived for some months. However,
the life of a farmer proving uncongenial, he returned to
Adelaide to _ resume _ his former employment. The earliest
papers on his botanical discoveries during this period were
published in German, the first being on the botany of the
Murray scrub, in the Sued-Australis die Zeitung, at Ade-
laide, on 6th June, 1850; the other on 24th December, 1851,
in the Adelaide Deutsch Zeitung.


lu 1852, in co-operation with Dr. Soulier, lie also published
a paper on Australian flora in the journal Linnea, at Halle,
Germany. In the same year, Dr. Mueller contributed a
paper to the Linnean Society, London, on “ The Flora of
South Australia Displayed in its Fundamental Features and
Comparatively.” This paper was translated and read to the
members by the Society’s librarian, Mr. R. Kippit. These
papers, virtually the first-fruits of his researches, were the
forerunners of the manifold series of contributions to
botanical knowledge which only ceased with his life.
Deeply interested in the fate of the missing explorer, Dr.
Leichhardt, his compatriot Mueller first advocated in this
year a search expedition southwards from the Albert River
to find traces of his route. He also, at this period, sent to
Germany further descriptions of South Australian flora,
which were published in March, 1853, at Hamburg, under
Dr. Sender’s direction. In Hooker's Journal of Botany also
appeared “ The Vegetation of the District Surrounding Lake
Torrens.” In the year 1852, at the outbreak of the gold
fever, young Mueller came to Victoria as offering wider scope
for his energies and talents. He was also desirous of study-
ing the limits of Tasmanian vegetation in the south of
Australia.
Bothnia Gardens: Government Botanist.
The Hon. Charles Joseph Latrobe, Superintendent, and
afterwards Lieutenant-Governor, of Port Phillip District,
with commendable foresight, had established the Botanic
Gardens —the original site, selected by Robert Hoddle, the
surveyor, in 1842, being an area of from 50 to 60 acres,
extending from the western extremity of Little Collins-street
to the River Yarra and the border of the western swamp,
and including the portion now occupied by the Spencer-street
Railway Station. A year or two later, owing to the marked
trend of settlement in this direction, the site appeared less
suitable for the purpose, and the Flagstaff Hill, the Richmond
Paddock, and the Fitzroy Gardens were respectively proposed
in lieu of that chosen by Hoddle. However, a committee
of selection being formed from the Town Council, the pre-
sent excellent site was recommended, and cordially approved
by Latrobe. In 1846, the reservation of 83 acres, part of
which had been previously occupied as an area for an
aboriginal station, was announced under the control of the
Department of Land and Works. The first portion culti-
vated was 5 acres in extent, and the first Superintendent, Mr.


John Arthur, was appointed in 1846. At his death, Mr.
John Dallachy was placed in charge—Daniel Dunce, the
botanist, being an unsuccessful applicant.
The area was increased as required, and resumption of land
by -the Government was sometimes carried out in an arbitrary
way, as may be judged by the following note, dated sth
October, 1846, and addressed to Mr. Martin Sullivan, a
grazier, at South Yarra: —“ I have the honour to inform you
that a portion of your run being required for the enlarge-
ment of the Botanic Gardens, you are requested to remove
from such portion of ground as .may he pointed out to you
by the Clerk of Works, or by any party authorized by him.”
Governor Latrobe took an enlightened interest in the
Gardens; and, in 1851, the Curator was able to report to the
Legislative Council that there were 5,000 exotic plants, and
1,000 indigenous species under cultivation. At this juncture,
in 1852, Governor Latrobe wisely decided to appoint a Go-
vernment Botanist for the Colony, and Dr. Ferdinand
Mueller, being well accredited by the eminent botanist, Sir
William Hooker, and being available at the auspicious
moment, received the apointment, his duties being wholly
scientific, whilst Mr. Dallachy continued as Curator of the
Gardens. For some years Dr. Mueller occupied as residence
a small cottage between Government House and the Yarra
Kiver.
Scarcely had he entered upon the duties of his office when,
with characteristic energy and enthusiasm, he began those
explorations of unknown Victoria which kept him busily
employed during the next three years. The scope was very
great. Very little was known concerning the Victorian flora.
The eminent botanists, Sir Joseph Banks and Dr. Solander,
of Captain Cook’s party, had commenced their studies of
Australian plants at Botany Bay in the year 1770, their ship,
the Endeavour, having passed by the eastern extremity of
what is now Victoria. Dr. Robert Brown, the distinguished
botanist, whose name is so closely identified with Australia,
was the first to study the flora of Victoria, on the occasion of
the voyage of Matthew Flinders; but the stay of the famous
navigator was very short, and Port Phillip the only place in
the State at which a landing was made; so that Brown’s
opportunities for collecting were necessarily limited, both in
time and extent. The numerous specimens collected by him
on the south coast of Australia are noted in his Flora Novae-
Hollandiae as being from the south coast of Hew Holland,


their specific habitat not being clearly defined. Allan Cun-
ningham s botanical researches were confined to the region
westward of Sydney. In 1836, Major Mitchell, in & his
memorable overlanding journey through Australia Felix,
collected and preserved many Victorian plants, which Pro-
fessor Lindley, of London, afterwards described and named.
Some minor botanists had also done a little work, hut the
record of Australian flora in Victoria was not extensive- so
there was a wide field for the enterprise of a skilful and
enthusiastic botanist.
Alpine Explorations, &c.
L>r. Mueller’s first expedition, concerning which he fur-
nished a report to the Legislative Council, dated sth Septem-
ber, 1853, was made from Melbourne in a north-easterly
direction to the J utter s Range, near the Ovens River * then
accompanied by Mr. Dallachy, he explored the May Day
Hills, in the vicinity of Beechworth. From here he crossed
to the almost untrodden Buffalo Eanges, where he ascended
Mount Aberdeen, now The Horn, and another lofty peak
The Hump, more than 4,000 feet high. He notes the dis-
covery in this district of the “ high majestic Grevillea Vic-
torias” and also records finding indications of gold in the
langes. Then, proceeding alone in this mountainous region
he ascended Mount Buller, mere than 5,000 feet in height!
“ I was delighted,” said he, “ to observe here for the first
time this continent’s alpine vegetation.” Mount Buller had
not previously been scientifically explored, and Mount Aber-
deen not even been ascended. .After exploring the adjacent
ranges, and marking the physical features and flora, a course
was taken along the Goulburn River and the tributaries of
the King Parrot Creek, from which the Plenty Ranges were
crossed, and the lonely and adventurous journey continued
along the Latrobe River to the coast of Gippsland, the ex-
plorer being delighted with the luxuriant vegetation of the
splendid fern-gullies, overshadowed by towering gum trees.
Some time was profitably spent in the neighbourhood of Port
Albert, then the ocean gateway into Gippsland. From here
the doctor made several excursions to Wilson’s Promontory,
concerning the physiography and flora of which practically
nothing was known at the time. Proceeding homewards along
the coast, the tireless traveller completed his adventurous
journey of 1,500 miles. This enterprising excursion enriched
the botanical collection of the State to more than half of the


species comprising its indigenous vegetation. In the report
referred to, Dr. Mueller, as the result of his wide experience,
makes some general statements of importance.
He found that the vegetation of South Victoria accords
in a great measure with that of Tasmania, one half of the
plants discovered being also found in that island. He notes
that the vegetation of Victoria changes in a remarkable de-
gree beyond the Glenelg Elver, and that some genera and
species found on his alpine quest extend the geographical
range of certain plants previously considered peculiar to
Western Australia. He discovered that the leguminous
plants were predominant in species in Victoria, and the com-
posites, which exceed all other groups in South Australia in
variety, were in Victoria second in the number of species.
Mention is made of the practical usefulness of many plants
in medicine, industry, manufacture, &c., e.g., the bark of
the Sassafras as a substitute for tea, the similarity of the
properties of oil obtained from the Melaleuca to those of
Oajaput oil of India. The economic value of the timber
of eucalypts and the tannin of the acacias is referred to in
the report. The three most gorgeous plants discovered are
mentioned as being Grevillea Victoriathe fern parasite now
called Fieldia Australis, and the Correa Latrobeana. The
doctor also reports that he has commenced a collection of
dried specimens, and has made the Herbarium accessible to
the public. Duplicates of all specimens of new plants
obtained were regularly sent to the Kew Herbarium, already
the repository of a great number of type specimens of
Australian flora collected by earlier botanists.
It is interesting to note that it was on this botanical
exploration that Dr. Mueller sent his first communication
from Victoria to the famous botanist, Sir William Hooker, at
Kew Nursery. Dated February, 1853, from his first camp
in the Australian Alps, it announced the Doctor’s appoint-
ment as Government Botanist. In this letter the Doctor
intimated his intention of describing the flora of Australia,
which he then estimated at 10,000 species. He proposed a
mutual interchange of specimens, and asked for assistance
in the revision and publication of manuscripts. The corre-
spondence thus begun continued persistently and regularly
throughout a lifetime with mutual advantage. Dr. Mueller’s
first consignment of plants to Kew exceeded 2,000 species, and
parcels of plants and seeds unfailingly arrived from him at
Kew up to the very day of his death in 1896. Sets of plants,
either collected by himself, or by others at his direction and


expense, were supplied to the Kew Herbarium. In one
letter he writes, “ You receive always the whole of the speci-
mens of every rare kind. . . • the plants being so much
more useful at Kew than in Australia.’’ Impressed by the
valuable hygienic and medicinal properties of the eucalypts,
as revealed in the close observation of the many species, the
Doctor advocated and, with Mr. Bosisto in 1854, instituted
the process of distilling oil from the leaves, an industry which
has now assumed tremendous proportions.
In November of 1853 another expedition was made with
the object of examining the Grampians Range, with its rich
and somewhat distinctive flora. In this region, the flower-
garden of Victoria, noted alike for the beauty and variety
of its floral wealth, Dr. Mueller traversed the Serra, Victoria,
and Grampians Ranges of the system, noting with keen in-
terest the nature of many plants not only restricted to the
colony, but even to some solitary height or confined area of
these highlands. From here Dr. Mueller passed along the
Avoca River, then north-west to Lake L’Albert and the
Mallee; thence to the Murray River, with its sub-tropical
flora, which from here as an approximate eastern limit
extends westwards to Lake Torrens, in South Australia. He
was interested in finding here some plants previously recorded
in Western Australia, mainly composites and salsolaceous
plants, the latter very valuable in dry areas for sheep pasture.
From the mouth of the Darling River, Mueller now made his
way along the Murray, ascending Mount Hope, and reaching
Albury in January, 1854. Thence by way of the Mitta
Mitta valley, he crossed the Gibbo Range at 5,000 feet above
sea-level, and pursued his course to Omeo. From here he
was desirous of visiting the lofty Bogong Range, but was
prevented by the prevalence of extensive bush-fires. So he
went north-east to the rugged Cobberas, 6,030 feet above sea-
level, and over Alpine country with well-watered valleys,
where sphagnum moss grew freely. He found, almost at
its southern limit, the Currajong, a beautiful tropical plant
with edible seeds. By a circuitous course, progress was made
along the Tambo River and beyond the mouth of the Snowy
River. Here, for the first time, were noted the almost tropical
character of the vegetation, the dark horizontal foliage, the
parasites and climbers, features of plant-growth so different
to those of any part of Victoria. At the Brodribb River and
Cabbage-Tree Creek, Dr. Mueller observed the Fan Palms,
Livistona Australis, plants distinctive of more northerly
latitudes, and solely restricted in Victoria to this small area.


The usual gregariousness of the eucalypts was, in Gippsland,,
broken by the presence of many other trees of different kinds,
including the giant fern-trees, Dichsonia Antarctica, the hill-
ferns, Alsophila Australis, and the huge Todeas of the shaded
mountain creeks, beset with moss and verdure beneath tower-
ing forest vegetation. The traveller was impressed, not only
with “ the geniality of the climate, but also by the capability
of the soil.” From the Snowy River, the Buchan district
was next visited, and then a return was made to Melbourne,
after a journey of 2,500 miles. This extended expedition,
accomplished alone, and as usual on slender means, and beset
with many dangers and difficulties, added to the total of
Victorian species of plants a fourth previously unknown.
Specimens were sent to Sir William Hooker, also seeds and
specimens to Kew. The doctor states, “Ho praise too high
can be bestowed in a general view on the productiveness of
our adopted country.”
During the year 1854 he was busily employed in systemati-
cally organizing the Department, extending the means and
the facilities for collecting plants throughout the State, and
establishing regular communication in regard to botany, not
only intercolonial in nature, but also with the countries of
the Old World. He also gave assistance to Professor Harvey,
who had visited Australia for the purpose of studying the
Algae of our coasts. Being appointed a Commissioner in the
Melbourne Exhibition of this year, he was actively engaged
in arranging for an exposition to show in a practical form the
productiveness of the State. In another direction, he found
congenial work, for with a few others interested in science, he
assisted in the foundation, in July, 1854, of The Philosophical
Society of Victoria, Captain Andrew Clarke, Surveyor-
General, being President. The Victorian Institution for
the Advancement of Science, with almost similar aims, was
formed at the same time by another section, with Redmond
Barry as President. Fortunately, the identity of interests
was recognised, the desirability of union affirmed, and next
year the two bodies harmoniously united to form The Philo-
sophical Institute, with Captain Clarke as President. A
charter being granted in 1860, the Institute was incorporated
as The Royal Society of Victoria, Dr. Mueller being a mem-
ber of council, and for many years taking an active part in
its progress and welfare. In the first volume of the Pro-
ceedings of the Institute are two papers contributed by him,


the first being “ Fifty New Australian Plants, chiefly from
the Colony of Victoria,” 6th November, 1854; the second
on sth April, 1855, entitled “ Gunyang, Solarium vescum, a
new indigenous fruit of Gippsland.”
On Ist November, 1854, Mueller, with, as usual, the mini-
mum of impedimenta, left Melbourne to proceed to the dis-
trict of the Latrobe River; thence to the Avon, from which,
on 14th November, he ascended the lofty peak of Mount
Wellington, 5,363 feet in height, his object being further
acquaintance wfith the alpine flora. Concerning this district
he wrote, “ Whilst travelling along the banks of the Latrobe
River and the Avon, I had ample opportunities for con-
vincing myself that an extensive tract of the country, on
account of the fertility of its soil, the mildness of its climate,
and the facility for clearing the land there for agriculture,
is undoubtedly destined to become, when the internal com-
munication has been facilitated, the abode of a large and
prosperous population.” This shrewd forecast is being com-
pletely verified. We have evidence that Dr. Mueller lost no
time in his researches, for, on the 22nd November, he went
to the Mitchell River; then among wild mountain scenery up
the Dargo River, crossing the Divide over the high plains
near the upper part of the Cohungra River, and north-east
through alpine heights previously untrodden by white men.
On 3rd December he ascended the two highest peaks of these
lofty ranges, naming them respectively Hotham and Latrobe.
From this high elevation he had an extensive prospect of the
grand alpine system of Victoria, and mentions that he could
see the Mount McMillan of Townsend, or Castle Hill of
Tyers. From Bogong he took approximate bearings with
the compass, and traversed the adjacent mountains, explor-
ing the upper Mitta Mitta and the fertile country to Omeo,
nearly sixty additional new species of plants being found.
From Omeo he intended to go to the Cohheras, Maneroo, and
the Munyang Mountains. Whilst resting for a few days at
Omeo, he sent an account of his floral treasures to Sir Wil-
liam Hooker, the English botanist. About the middle of
December, he directed his course north-east towards Mount
Kosciusko, ascended Mount Tambo, a prominent peak, and
then eastwards to the Munyang Range, where the waters of
the Snowy and Murray rise in proximity. On New Year’s
Day, 1855, he successfully ascended “the most northern
alpine hill, the next highest peak being Mueller’s Peak.” The
account is not very clear as to his definite course. From
Kosciusko, via Buchan and the Snowy River, he revisited


Cabbage-Tree Creek, South Gippsland, and by this excursion
almost completed his extensive investigation of the alpine
flora of Victoria. Coming westward, he reached Lake King,
where he discovered the rare A cronychia levis, the native
orange. As results of these expeditions, 100 alpine or sub-
alpine species were secured, of which more than 30 were
indigenous, 40 to 50 also occurred in Tasmania, and a few
were of New Zealand types. He notes that some European
plants, ten at least, also grew in the Australian Alps, although
as far as known nowhere else intervening, and that alpine
plants in Australia continued the general features of the
lowlands rather than exhibiting new genera and species.
Thus, by 1855, the whole central part of the Australian Alps
had been botanically and geographically explored by this
“solitary wanderer in the most perilous and lonely regions,”
as he describes himself. In these expeditions, Dr. Mueller
showed in his enthusiasm for science a courage and self-
reliance of a very high order. With slender equipment, and
mounted upon a favorite white horse, two pack horses com-
pleting the equipage, he would set out alone, travelling over
unexplored parts of the State, with a resourcefulness and
energy that nothing could daunt, satisfied if by his unaided
efforts and discoveries he could materially supplement the
knowledge of the Victorian flora, and reveal the physio-
graphic features previously unknown. Speaking in 1884 of
these earlier exploring days, he said, “ I found more danger,
toil, and hardship to triangulate early through half a hun-
dred miles in the Australian Alps than in having to traverse
half a thousand miles of the mostly open stretches of the
Kimberley country .... at the time of its discovery.”
It is known that on some of these excursions Dr. Mueller
suffered, with uncomplaining fortitude, great privations, and
frequently had to supplement scanty or exhausted food sup-
plies by eating edible parts of native plants, or titbits from
nature’s larder which hunger and necessity alone could
render palatable.
It is related that, on one occasion, after returning from an
arduous outing, an examination of the doctor’s bag showed,
in addition to a few customary handfuls of meal, a number
of the large “ Bogong ” moths, highly esteemed by the blacks
as a delicacy. At another time, his meagre supply of food
was washed away by a sudden rise in a mountain stream,
the doctor having to seek refuge in a tree for the time being
until the water subsided. He was used to short commons,
and several times was reduced to his last match as a means


of lighting fires. When returning from Corner Inlet, the
dense vegetation was so great an impediment to progress that
food became exhausted, and his destination was reached in
a state of semi-starvation. It is to be regretted that so
few details of a personal nature are to be found in the doc-
tor’s reports. The practical results of his Victorian explora-
tions were botanically, geographically, and economically of
the greatest importance, conclusively showing the ardent
scientist’s aptitude for more extensive exploration.
Gregory's North-west Expedition.
The opportunity soon presented itself, for, in the year
1855, an expedition was sent out at the expense of the Duke
of Newcastle, with the object of tracing the River Victoria
in the Northern Territory to its source, and incidentally to
search for traces of the lost explorer, Dr. Leichhardt.
Augustus Gregory was chosen as leader, the other members
of the party being his brother; Dr. Elsey, surgeon and natura-
list; Baines as artist; and Dr. Mueller as phytographic
naturalist. On the 18th July they left Sydney for Moretou
Bay, where the remainder of the party was taken in the
barque Monarch, a smaller vessel conveying horses and 200
sheep. On 24th September the party reached the mouth of
the Victoria River. The plan was for the vessel to go up
the river, the main party proceeding by land. They passed
the Macadam River, and reached the Fitzmaurice River,
where at night, in the tidal rise, crocodiles attacked and
injured three horses, one of which had to be shot. The party
reached the Victoria, but the schooner had grounded, much
of the stores was damaged, and only 40 sheep survived.
On 24th November the two brothers Gregory, Mueller, and
Wilson followed the river on horseback southwards to lati-
tude finding good grass country and level forests. They
then returned to camp. Later, on 3rd January, 1856, the
party of eight men and 30 horses reached the former camp,
from which the Gregorys, Mueller, and one other man,
advancing south, ultimately reached their quest at the head
of the River Victoria, in 18° 12' south latitude, 130° 39'
east longitude. They traced the creeks until they became
lost in a grassy plain, beyond which was sandy and barren
country. Going west, they reached a creek bearing north;
then south-west for 300 miles, with good pastoral land; then
desert and salt-lake country. Leaving Sturt’s Creek, which
flows into Termination Lake, and Mount Mueller, they re-
turned to their depot; then followed the Wickham River hack


to the Victoria. The explorers then decided to make home-
wards via the Gulf of Carpentaria, and on 21st June the
brothers Gregory, Mueller, Elsey, and three others set out,
arranging to meet the rest of the party on their return from
the island of Timor, to which they had gone in the vessel for
provisions.
At the Elsey River, a tributary of the Roper, they found
traces of an old camp, presumedly of white men, afterwards
considered as probably marking a stage of Leichhardt’s ill-
fated expedition. Proceeding down the Roper River, they
crossed the Limmen Bay estuary, skirted the gulf, south of
Leichhardt’s first track, and, skirting the Nicholson River,
followed it down to the Albert, where they expected to meet
the schooner on its return. As there was no trace of the
vessel, on 3rd September, continuing the overland journey,
they left the river and passed over the Plains of Promise,
an area very suitable for grazing cattle, but not sheep. After
passing the Leichhardt River, the party was attacked by
blacks, who were repulsed, their leader being killed in the
encounter. The Flinders was crossed on the 9th September,
and country of an unpromising appearance was traversed, the
party just missing the good pastoral downs a little further
inland. Trending northwards, they crossed the Gilbert
River, and then the water-shed at the head of the Burdekin,
which they traced to the Sutton River; then up this to the
Belyando, over Leichhardt’s route. On the 22nd Novembei
they reached the fringe of settlement at Fitz. and Connor’s
Station on the Dawson River, having travelled 5,000 miles
in sixteen months.
The official account of this expedition was meagre in de-
tails, but the enterprise achieved its aim; and opened up a
large expanse of good country. Dr. Mueller observed nearly
3,000 plants, in which 160 natural orders and more than 800
genera were represented. Among these, nearly 800 species
were new to Australia, 500 of them being peculiar to the
country. The best part of this collection was sent to the
Hookerian Herbarium, in England. The botanical results
of the expedition were chronicled in the Linnean Society’s
journal of 1857. It was in this year that Rostock University,
Germany, conferred on the distinguished botanist the degree
of Doctor of Medicine, honoris causa.
Director of Botanic Gardens.
At this time, in connexion with the Botanical Gardens
and their maintenance, an important change in policy was




Xattonal Herbarium, Melbourne.
[To face p. 17.


made. Discussion had taken place in respect of the manage-
ment and the functions of such an institution. It was con-
sidered that their scope as an educative factor should he
widened, and a special botanic section established in which
the chief families, orders, and species of plants should be
represented, and scientific names attached to the specimens.
The establishment of an Economic Museum was also urged.
Professor E. McCoy, E.G.S., a name of great weight in
scientific circles, in an article on museums, strongly advocated
this, the University to provide the funds. He also showed
the necessity of making suitable provision for herbarium
specimens. The rapidly accumulating specimens, tied up in
buridles, were at this time kept in a little cottage in the
Gardens. They were infested with insects, which caused
deterioration, and were not readily accessible, for the cottage
was used by the workers at the Gardens, both for taking meals
and for sleeping purposes. In consequence, the plants were not
conveniently available for inspection. Across the Yarra Elver,
in part of Kichmond Park, 33 acres had been reserved for the
Zoological Society, founded by Dr. Black in this year, and it
was proposed that the recently-formed collection of fauna
should be connected with the Botanical Gardens, and placed
under the one control. These projects were approved, and it
was considered advisable and politic, as well as economical,
to combine all activities under one head. To this end, Di.
Mueller, who, as Government Botanist, had been on the
Committee of Control, was, whilst still retaining his former
office, appointed as Director of the Botanic Gardens, his
duties and responsibilities being considerably increased. Mr.
Dallachy, who had previously been Curator, remained in a
subordinate position until his retirement in 1861.
With the acquirement of so many new species of the Aus-
tralian flora in his researches, Dr. Mueller lost no time in
advocating the construction of a suitable Herbarium, the
great increase in specimens necessitating better facilities and
increased space for botanical work. Amid the multiplication
of duties involved in an extended sphere of work, Dr. Mueller
still found time to make a botanical excursion to explore the
interesting features of Cape Otway Eorest. In the year
1858, considerable progress was made in the work of care-
fully recording and describing new plants, under the head of
“ Fragmenta Phytographiae Australiae,” a project intended
by the author as a foundation to lead up to a comprehensive
work fully descriptive of the Australian flora, to prepare


which no one was better qualified than Dr. Mueller, and to-
wards which undertaking his labours were definitely directed.
The Fragmenta, a manual of hard work, was ultimately
published in Latin in eleven volumes, a twelfth being com-
menced. This is one of the greatest of his works, invaluable
to botanists, and its discontinuance was probably owing to
the increasing demands upon his time and energies involved
in the publication of other works more acceptable to the
public taste.
In this year the Director reported in regard to the Gardens
that 2 acres had been devoted to the botanic section, in which
1,700 plants, representing more than 100 exogenous orders,
had been planted and labelled; a palm-house, the first of' its
kind in Australia, had been established; the aviary and
menagerie satisfactorily commenced; and a pavilion erected,
in which the band of the 40th Regiment, then stationed in
Melbourne, played on certain occasions, much to the delight
of visitors, of whom over 200,000 visited the Gardens for the
year. These band concerts were very popular, “ the Direc-
tor,” states one who sometimes attended them, “ appearing
in all his official dignity, with decorations on his breast, to
meet the Yice-Regal party and the many ladies and gentle-
men who came in their carriages to enjoy, on the lawn, the
music amid such pleasant surroundings.” From the report
it is learned that the number of plants under cultivation had
been doubled; Mr. Dallachy had been away collecting plants
in the Murray desert country; and the Assistant Botanist,
Mr. Wilhelm j, in the Grampians. Plants of general utility,
interest, and economic value had been imported, the Univer-
sity Herbarium supplied Avith numerous specimens, whilst
45,000 specimens, in 15,000 species, representing about a
sixth of thq vegetation then known, were ready for the pro-
jected Herbarium.
The doctor, at a later period, gave his own private collec-
tion to the Herbarium, which from time to time Avas enriched
through the gifts of private collections, by the interchange
of specimens, by the results of the researches of officers sent
out by the Department, by the gains derived from Australian
exploration, by the useful Avork of amateur botanists, and by
the liberality of public institutions. With the purchase later
of the Sonderian Collection, and that of Dr. Steetz, in 1888,
it was estimated that the Herbarium contained 640,000
specimens. The Herbarium was then especially rich in
Australian types. The doctor’s arrangement was a simpli-
fication of the Candollean system, shoAving geographical,


regional, and geolqgical distributions of flora. The
Systematic Census of Australian Plants, with Geographical
and Literary Annotations, served later as a convenient index
for the Australian specimens in the Herbarium. The ad-
ministration of this useful institution was, to use the doctor’s
words, “ singularly inexpensive,” The Australian collec-
tion of plants was kept separate from the Extra-Australian.
In regard to the Herbarium, in which its founder took
so much pride, he states that the object was “ not to satisfy
idle curiosity, . . . the aim to trace at any time the
characteristics of any plants, whether from the polar or
temperate or inter-tropical zones of either hemisphere;
furthermore, to demonstrate the range of any particular
plant, over whatever portion of the world may be that of
its nativity; to identify the description of any plant in any
work at any time with original, and possibly with typical or
authenticated specimens; to institute by comparison, even into
minute details, the precise name of any species, whatever
their position in the botanic system may be; to guide thereby
again to an accurate recognition of any plants, whether for
medical, cultural, pastoral, forestal, technologic, or any other
purpose.”
In the intervals of his many activities, Dr. Mueller found
time to contribute the Victorian allusions to Sir John
Hooker’s valuable work, Flora Tasmaniae (1858-60). In
the year 1859 Dr. Mueller was elected President of the Royal
Society, the successor of the Philosophical Institute, and gave
an inaugural address at the opening of the new hall. To the
great London Exhibition of 1860, as to the Melbourne and
subsequent exhibitions, he contributed extensive and valuable
collections of the State’s economic resources. Although
increasing duties, and scientific research and classification,
allowed little time for field-work, yet in September, 1860,
Dr. Mueller visited and collected plants in the most easterly
and least-known part of the State, at the Genoa River, and
on to the attractive vicinity of Twofold Bay. It was on
this occasion that he discovered the Gippsland Waratah,
Telopea oreades.
In December of the same year he ascended for the first
time the Baw Baws, a peak of which still bears his name.
An old resident of Sale relates that in the year 1860, he, Avith
a mate, was prospecting for gold near the foot of the Baw
Baws, Avhen they saw a somewhat rough-looking horseman
with a pack-horse suddenly appear in the creek. On accost-
ing him, one of them recognised the doctor, as he had lived


near him in South Yarra. The lonely horseman offered the
prospectors a pound a day each to go with him to the top
of the Baw Baws, an offer which they declined. From this
range, after discovering the alpine springs forming in close
proximity the sources of the Tyers, Tanjil, Latrobe, Yarra,
and some affluents of the Goulburn, all at from two to five
thousand feet in height, and after spending some time in
tracing the remote upper parts of these streams, he returned
by the picturesque Yarra track to Melbourne. Another area
visited was from the Lower Glenelg Biver to Port Fairy, in
the Western District of Victoria.
Again, in 1861, in company with Angus McMillan, the
pathfinder of Gippsland, who provided six horses and re-
quisites, a brief visit was made up the beautiful valley of
the Macalister River to its rugged mountain sources. In
this year, the doctor’s scientific attainments being now fully
recognised and appreciated, he achieved the well-earned and
honorable distinction of being made a Fellow of the Royal
Society of London. As a Commissioner of the Melbourne
Exhibition of 1862, he again had the opportunity of making
known the new botanical resources of the State.
Bentham’s “ Flora Ausiraliensis.”
It was in 1861, in connexion with the cherished project
of writing a standard work on Australian flora, that regret-
fully but unselfishly he surrendered his undeniable cDim
to execute the work, for which he was so splendidly equipped,
in favour of the great English descriptive botanist, George
Bentham, President of the Linnean Society, whose skill and
experience marked him out for the performance of so im-
portant an undertaking.
In Volume I. of this monumental work Bentham pays
a graceful tribute to Mueller’s action and to the important
part which he took in the production of this project. “ When,
indeed,” says he, “ it was first contemplated to bring out a
general Flora of Australia under Government sanction, Dr.
Mueller was naturally looked to as the botanist the best
qualified for undertaking the task of preparing it; and in
the hope that it would be entrusted to him, he had devoted
his utmost energies to collecting the necessary materials.
But there was one indispensable step, the examination of
European herbaria where the published types were deposited,
which he was unable to. take; and it is a signal proof of
the generosity of his disposition, and the absence of all


selfishness, that when it was proposed to him that the pre-
paration of the Flora should be confided to me, on account
of the facilities which my position here gave me for the
examination of the Australian collections I have mentioned
above, he not only gave up his long-cherished projects in
my favour, hut promised to do all in his power to assist me,
a promise which he has fulfilled with the most perfect faith.”
A joint work w T as at first thought of, hut circumstances “ put
this quite out of the question.” “ But important observa-
tions have been frequently suggested by the published work
of Dr. Mueller, or by his manuscript notes, which he has
freely communicated; and a still more essential and generous
contribution to the work has been the loan of the very rich
herbarium he had amassed for the Australian Flora, which
he remits to me in instalments.” In referring to the proposal,
Mueller writes, “ I felt it incumbent upon me to share in so
important a task, and tender to it all the support which
could be derived from the use of our vast collection, and from
the manuscripts connected therewith.” “It was a fine trait
in Mueller’s character,” says Mr. Topp, “ and should always
he remembered to his honour, that in this trying position
he stood aside, effacing himself and his natural claim to be
considered.”
This great work, Flora Australiensis , to the expense of
which, mainly through Mueller’s active efforts and repre-
sentations, four of the Australian Colonies agreed to con-
tribute funds to the amount of a hundred pounds each, was
thus undertaken by George Bentham. Dr. Mueller loyally
and ungrudgingly collaborating, sent all his available collec-
tions of Australian flora, with notes thereon, to London,
where after revision they were dealt with by Bentham, or in
some cases referred to Mueller before final determination for
publication. In this w T ay over one hundred thousand speci-
mens were most carefully examined and returned in safety
to Australia. The correspondence alone on this comprehen-
sive work was enormous, revealing the painstaking method
of the collaborating botanists. Seven volumes of this
scientific classic were published between the years 1863 and
1878, adding much to the fame of both authors. This was
the first work of the kind dealing with the coipplete flora of
a great division of the globe, and containing, to quote
Mueller’s words, “ an almost complete record of the vascular
plants of Victoria,” a flora in itself doubly as rich as that
of Great Britain.


Exploratory and Botanical Work.
As might have been expected from his deep interest in
exploration, Dr. Mueller was an active member of the com-
mittee for the ill-fated Burke and Wills Expedition.
Although he voted with the minority for the appointment
of Major Warburton as leader of that venture, he gave
valuable advice and assistance in the organization and equip-
ment of the expedition. In the subsequent search and
dispatch of relief parties to the missing explorers, Doctor
Mueller’s experience and knowledge of the continent were
of great help to the various expeditions sent out. In the
year 1863, once more directing his course to Western Gipps-
land, he explored the dense forest district through which the
Bunyip, Tarwin, Tyers, and La Trobe Rivers flow; then
from the sources of the Upper Yarra and the Thomson, he
went to Mt. Useful and the Barkly Range. In his report
on this lofty mountain area, he recommended the cutting of
tracks to enable miners with pack-horses to travel more
easily in the ranges. This suggestion was practically carried
out two years later in the alpine expedition for the purpose,
under the veteran explorer, Angus McMillan, over 200 miles
of tracks being successfully constructed.
In the year 1865, at a rumour that Duncan Mclntyre had
found near the Blinders River in Northern Australia two
grazing horses with saddle-marks, and two trees marked “ L,”
about 300 miles from the Gulf, and east of the Burke and
Wills’ route, Dr. Mueller, always deeply concerned in the,
fate of Leichhardt, and with renewed hope that the mystery
might be elucidated, successfully organized in Melbourne
“ the Ladies’ Leichhardt Expedition,” the title suggesting
the source of most of the funds —£4,000 in amount —contri-
buted for the project. The well-equipped expedition was
placed under the command of Mclntyre; but, from the out-
set, misfortune befell the enterprise. Initial mismanage-
ment was followed by the leader’s unfortunate death before
the party could leave the Gulf of Carpentaria, and the
prospects of success were summarily ended. In 1866, the
Baron was actively engaged as a Commissioner of the Inter-
national Exhibition, at which he showed the economic value
of many indigenous plants. In a valuable “ Essay on Aus-
tralian Vegetation—lndigenous or Introduced,” he not only
again emphasized the necessity of afforestation, but with
keen vision foresaw the time when “ Rain-waters now flowing
unutilized to the Ocean, where cast over the back plains,
and artesian borings also, will effect marvellous changes.”


In another direction his outlook was equally far-reaching.
“ Our continent,” says he, “ it may be foretold prophetically
will ere long be regarded of so high a territorial value that
no tract, however much disregarded, will remain unoccupied.”
These wise forecasts, regarded at the time as visionary and
impossible, have been abundantly fulfilled, and testify to
the intuition and judgment of their author. Development in
northern Victoria, the Eiverina, and Queensland, and the
utilization of the Mallee, conclusively show the results of
conservation, artesian boring, and systematic irrigation.
One other utterance, also prophetic in character, may be
noted. “On this I wish to dwell, that in the Australian
vegetation we probably possess the means of obliterating
the rainless regions of the globe, to spread at last woods over
our deserts, and thereby to mitigate the distressing droughts,
and to annihilate even that occasionally dry heat evolved
by the sun’s rays from the naked ground throughout exten-
sive regions of the interior.” At the present day, perhaps,
no trees are grown more freely or to a greater extent over
the globe for re-afforestation purposes on bare or denuded
tracts than the different species of eucalypts.
In 1867, the “ wander-lust ” returned, and the inde-
fatigable collector went to Western Australia to search the
botanical treasures of the rich tract of country between King
George’s Sound and the Stirling Eange, this journey com-
pleting a total distance of 27,000 miles covered on horseback
or on foot in seventeen years. Early in the next year,
Mueller spent a strenuous week in the ascent of Mount Field
East, in Tasmania, a peak about 5,000 feet above sea-level,
and situated between Hobart and Macquarie Harbour. The
vicinity of this mountain, which had not previously been
botanically explored, proved of great interest, “ copious new
information on the distribution of the alpine plants in
Tasmania ” being obtained, and providing valuable material
for further contrast of the flora with that of the Australian
Alps.
About this time, rumours were current among the blacks
of Western Australia of the murder of a party of white
men coming from the east. Dr. Mueller was deeply in-
terested in the report, and offered in 1869 to lead an expedi-
tion to ascertain the truth or otherwise concerning the
matter. The West Australian Government accepted the
offer; but, after preliminaries had been arranged, circum-
stances intervened to debar Mueller from going, and his
lieutenant, John Forrest —a name afterwards renowned in


Australia, both as an explorer and a public-spirited citizen
—was placed in charge. Although no very valuable results
accrued, the rumours were proved baseless, and the dry area
east of Lake Barlee was well explored. Some years before,
in speaking of the experience gained from earlier explora-
tions, Dr. Mueller had expressed the opinion that, “ the
deserts observed by these explorers at such distant parts of
the interior .... are contiguous, but that they are
occasionally broken by oases, destined in future to afford the
means of communication throughout the. continent.” Time
has verified this conclusion in regard to the character of the
interior. Keen as was his enthusiasm for the work of
exploration, it did not lessen in any way the deep interest in
his botanical work, which was now Australasian rather than
Victorian in its scope, of increased importance and extent,
and carried out systematically and continuously in a truly
scientific manner, as far as a limited grant for the purpose
could be applied to an institution of vigorous growth in its
various branches.
Mention has been made of the zoological section on the
Yarra. This was, in 1861, removed to the Royal Park,
although a few monkeys, pelicans, &c., were kept for some
time at the Gardens, an aviary, which was removed during
th e> curatorship of My. Guilfoyle, being the last relic of the
incipient Zoo. Dr. Mueller was a strong supporter of the
Acclimatization Society as a kindred institution to assist and
foster his own useful work ot introducing plants of economic
and decorative value, as well as animals likely to be useful
in various ways, if taking kindly to a new environment. In
both cases, acclimatization had some unexpected results.
The principal outcome of the Society’s work was the estab-
lishment of the Zoological Society Gardens at the Royal
Park. Dr. Mueller was, for many years, Vice-President of
the Acclimatization Society, which—originally founded by
Edward Wilson, of the Argus —combined with the Zoological
Society founded by Dr. Black, the joint name of Zoological
and Acclimatization Society of Victoria being assumed
later.
Arising out of five contributions in the Proceedings of
the last-named Society in 1871-2, Dr. Mueller published,
in 1871 The Select Extra-Tropical Plants, a useful work,
which, re-arranged and supplemented, by the year 1895 had
passed through eight editions, and been accorded world-wide
recognition. It was translated into French, Spanish, Ger-
man, Italian, and re-printed in the United States and the


West Indies. In the preface, the author, in advocating
national botanical research from the utilitarian stand-point,
rightly remarks:—“ Every civilized state should strive to
afford, in well-planned, thoughtfully-directed, and generously-
supported special scientific establishment, the needful aid,
not merely for adding to the prosperity, comfort, and enjoy-
ment of the present generation, but also with an anticipa-
tion of earning the gratitude of posterity; and this ought to
be done with a sensitive jealousy to maintain also thereby
the fair fame of any country for scientific dignity and indus-
trial development.” In this year, 1871, Dr. Mueller was,
on account of his signal services to science, made an here-
ditary baron by the King of Wurtemberg, a well-merited
honour, which was received with much gratification.
Ernest Giles’s Expedition.
About this time, the Baron’s unabated zeal in the en-
couragement of exploration was actively shown in endeavours
to get financial support for an expedition to find a practicable
overland route. It was proposed to connect the McDonnell
Range by a route to the Murchison River. The construction
of the overland telegraph provided a base line for attacking
the desert country from the eastward, but the want of con-
certed or united action among the states in providing funds
for the enterprise prevented the undertaking from being
carried out. Miss Bessie Threadgill, in her South Australian
La,nd Exploration, recently published, writes, “ The first
steps towards making the overland base-line practically useful
were taken as result of the generous and enthusiastic inter-
vention of Baron von Mueller, who had followed with con-
tinued interest the progress of South Australian expansion,
and who had done his utmost to contribute towards it, both
in money and in practical service in the field.” The general
public being unresponsive to the Baron’s appeal for funds,
Ernest Giles was dispatched with a small party in 1872, the
expense of the undertaking being entirely borne by the
Baron, Mr. G. D. Gill, and Giles himself. Leaving Char-
lotte Waters for Chambers’ Pillar and the Finke River, after
a year of hardships and dangers, Giles explored the arid
region south-west of Lake Amadeus, reaching the meridian
125 deg. east longitude, A reminder of this expedition and
its patron is Fort Mueller in the vicinity,
I he extensive salt lake, and a prominent mountain, were
at first named by Giles after the baron, who re-named them
Amadeus and Olga respectively, after 11 two enlightened
royal patrons of science.” Other outstanding natural


features of Giles’s discoveries, left for him to name, the
baron, in transmitting Giles’s map and diary, referred to
the South Australian Government. The result of this
expedition greatly stimulated interest in exploration in South
Australia. Sir Thomas Elder and the State Government
joined forces to send out a further exploration party under
Major Warburton; but Sir Thomas, owing to official inter-
ference, withdrew from the combination, and, at his own cost,
dispatched Warburton in command of a well-equipped party
to explore the desert wastes. The South Australian Govern-
ment’s expedition was entrusted to W. C. Gosse. In Aus-
tralia Twice Traversed, Giles states: —“ Immediately upon
my return being made known by telegram to my friend,
Baron von Mueller, he set to work, and with unwearied exer-
tion, soon obtained a new fund from several wealthy gentle-
men in the rival colony of Victoria.” This was supple-
mented by a moderate subsidy from the South Australian
Government. “ Such dispatch was used by Baron von
Mueller and myself, that I was again in the field, with
horses only, not many weeks later than my rivals.” Writing
to the South Australian Government on Giles’s behalf, the
Baron said, “ Kindly remember that poor Giles has set his
all in the world on his own enterprise, and that this under-
taking at my original suggestion seems to have led to that
proposed by Sir Thomas Elder. In the interest of the poor
man who is without camels, and most slenderly equipped, I
trust that any new expedition from your colony will not
adopt the same line as that of Giles and his companions.”
The gallant explorer on this second expedition traversed
a considerable extent of inland country in South Australia,
and the generally arid character of the surface was proved,
the members of the party almost perishing of thirst. Mr.
W. H. Tietkens, a protege of the Baron, acted as botanist,
his initial practical training being given on a visit to
Wilson’s Promontory, when the Baron, accompanied by
Messrs. Walter and Tietkens, landed at the lighthouse on a
botanical excursion, as a prelude to the more extensive
journey in view, which Tietkens was to take with Giles.
Later in 1869 Tietkins went as leader of a successful expedi-
tion to Central Australia.
To Geographic Travels in Central Australia the Baron
wrote a preface, and revised the work for Ernest Giles, of
whose skill and daring as an explorer he had rightly the
highest opinion. In the appendix to the work, Giles states,
“ I have to thank . . . lastly, my most excellent friend,


Baron von Mueller, who raised the fund on my behalf, and
generously brought me before the public as a man suitable
to undertake the exploration of the unknown parts of the
continent.” The project expressed in the last phrase never
failed to receive the Baron’s unwavering support and en-
couragement.
Fully did Giles in his three expeditions justify the confi-
dence and belief in his ability and intrepidity; and the
Baron took pride in his success and evinced the most kindly
interest in the career and welfare of the “ Chevalier ” whom
he had so practically and consistently befriended. On his
part, Giles heartily reciprocated the cordial feeling. In
the library of the National Herbarium, Melbourne, is a
volume of Australia Twice Traversed, giving the simple
but graphic account of Giles’s achievements despite ever-
present dangers and great privations. Therein is written
the following inscription :
“ To my best friend, the Baron,
“ Sir Ferdinand von Mueller, K.C.M.G., &c., &c.,
who enabled me to commence the horse expedition herein de-
tailed, and through whom I became known to Sir Thomas
Elder, which enabled me to carry out the camel expeditions
which close the narrative.
“ With the very best regards of the author,
“ Ernest Giles.”
Among many other explorers in whose undertakings the
Baron was directly and warmly interested were Babbage,
the Gregorys, Fitzalan, McDouall Stuart, Landsborough,
the Forrest brothers, Winnecke, and the Elder expedition,
&c. He always arranged for the collection of botanical
specimens, which afterwards he would examine and describe,
details of such being usually published in one of the Boyal
or the Linnean Societies’ journals.
Official and Administrative Duties.
Mention has already been made of the various movements
set on foot when the Botanical Gardens were placed under
the management of the Government botanist. From the
various reports on the gardens furnished from time to time
for a period of sixteen years, aH indication of the extent,
the varied nature of the work, and the difficulties in carry-
ing it out may be obtained.


The principal object when the position of director was
created, was to place the Botanic Gardens on a more scien-
tific basis. This object had been kept prominently in view.
The published reports show lioav extensive had been the
operations in every direction.
Hot only had the scientifically-classified plots been largely
increased, the Economic Museum greatly extended, and the
Herbarium placed on a satisfactory basis, but the planting
of trees for experimental purposes had been extensively
carried on. Immense numbers of plants had been grown
and distributed, the figures being 355,218 from 1859 to 1867.
In the year 1868, 49,475 are mentioned as available for dis-
tribution, chiefly to public institutions. Twenty-two and a
half miles of walks had been formed within the enclosures
and planted with 21 miles of trees. Avenues had been con-
structed, drives planted with 42 kinds of trees. Bowers,
rockeries, and grottoes had been built, and a hothouse for
tropical plants erected. Pines had been freely planted. In
1865 it was reported that 185 species were in growth; many
were planted along the river to form a dense belt of vegeta-
tion, for shelter against the westerly winds, to protect other
vegetation, embellish the gardens, and serve to consolidate
the river hanks, as well as to he a substitute for fences
carried away annually by recurring floods.
In 1865 flood waters from the Yarra caused great devasta-
tion in the lower garden area. This had to be remedied by
raising protective * banks, Casuarinas and acacias were
planted on the south side of the river, and a neighbouring
swamp was transformed into lawn. Gullies were planted
and hedges formed, drainage carried out, and a lake with
islands constructed and planted with suitable vegetation.
In a dry season, the water from the lake sometimes evapo-
rated. Eurther, extensive experiments in growing valuable
plants useful to man were consistently carried on, e.g., tea,
tobacco, cotton, coffee, grass-cloth, cinchona; also fruit trees,
timber trees, and plants with some economic value, such as
for dyes, medicines, and fibres.
The pine forest in active growth was expected to make
the gardens less exposed and affected by drought. A great
difficulty was the want of an efficient water supply for the
gardens. The safety and preservation of the plants over an
area of 400 acres was a “ source of very great anxiety and
of extreme toil, both day and night, with an inadequate
water supply.” In 1863 a small windmill was used for
raising the water from the Yarra in the lower garden. It




■
•
•
•
#
r
*


•was not until 1864 that the Yan Yean supply was partly
extended to the area; and in 1868 a steam engine was in-
stalled to force the water from the Yarra to a height of 110
feet, whence it was distributed by gravitation.
The Zoo required a good deal of attention, the housing,
care, and feeding of the animals, purchase and exchange of
specimens, &c., occupying time and labour. Ho fewer than
24 camels are mentioned as being in the collection, and in
1860 there were 37 llamas, also Angora goats, &c. In 1861
the Zoo was removed to Royal Park, the aviary and a few
of the smaller animals only remaining.
How great a distributing centre the gardens became is
shown from the 1861 report, where is enumerated the dis-
patch for one year of 51,290 packets of seeds, 31,455 plants,
36,477 cuttings; 22 cases of plants were also sent overseas.
The ground for experimental planting, was supplied with
means for irrigation, and gradually extended. Among
many useful investigations of a practical nature, the extrac-
tion of essential oils, wood vinegar, spirit, and tannic acid
were taken in hand; as also toxicological research in regard
to plants injurious to stock, investigation of rust in cereals,
&c. A phyto-chemical laboratory for this work was after-
wards installed.
In his reports, the director shows a clear conception of
the wilful folly of indiscriminate destruction of our trees,
and the incalculable value of a well-considered and consis-
tent system in regard to forestry. He suggested to the
G-overnment the establishment of experimental gardens at
Mount Macedon, Murray river, and Eastern Gippsland,
these places varying widely in conditions of climate, soil,
and in other factors influencing plant growth. At the first
named only was anything done to carry out this valuable
suggestion. The director, with lucidity, judgment, and
foresight in regard to forestry, expressed views far in ad-
vance of public opinion on the subject. Thus, in 1869, 'he
writes: Many of the trees which under great efforts are
now introduced, will undoubtedly bear prominence in our
forest culture, a great subject which more and more presses
on our legislature’s attention, since already so much of the
native timber in all the lowlands has been consigned to
destruction. If in densely-populated countries like Belgium,
one-fifth of the whole of the territory is scrupulously _ kept
under forest culture, it ought to be a final ifim, in a far better
clime, to maintain a still greater proportion of its area
covered by woods, if the comfort and multifarious wants of


a dense population are to be timely provided for. It is
especially in the western and northern parts of Victoria
where exertions in this direction have to be made; it is there
where extensive shelter and retention of humidity are
needed.”
The Herbarium had grown apace. It is reported
that from 45,000 specimens in 1858 the number
had reached, in 1865, 286,000, a little over one-
half of which were extra-Australian. The director
had collected a very fine botanical library of 1,086
costly volumes, and hundreds of smaller ones, which,
with the avowed object of giving students a greater
facility in the study of botany than elsewhere obtainable,
he generously presented to the Government. In the year
1868, he had reported, “In special artistic ornamentation
as yet little has been effected, the director deeming it> of
pre-eminent importance to devote his early means to the
raising of trees and utilitarian plants, such as will mitigate
the heat of our summer clime and increase the salubrity of
the city, or such as will play an important element here-
after in our rural economy and originate new industries.”
There were as yet no statues and fountains; the aesthetic
had to be subordinated to the useful.
Hampered by deficient water supply, inadequate funds for
maintenance and expansion, a lack of encouragement, and
an insufficient staff for the requirements of the institution,
the director had a difficult position. Sometimes the oppor-
tunity was taken to make use of the services of the elder
boys from the neighbouring orphanage connected with the
Immigrants Home. Some of these boys made good; but, as
a rule, their occasional work was not very satisfactory.
It will be seen from the account of the actual work done
in the Botanical Gardens, as distinct from that appertaining
to the Government botanist, that the director, in the face
of many difficulties and disadvantages mentioned, had faith-
fully carried out the duties and the projects specified at his
appointment to office, especially so in the direction of
making the gardens practically useful and educative in
character.
His opinions a*d views in regard to the objects of a
botanic garden are clearly set out in a lecture given at the
Industrial and Technical Museum on the 23rd November,


1871, on “ The Objects of a Botanical Garden in relation
to Industries,” wherein he stated—
“ The objects of a botanical garden must necessarily
be multifarious, nor need they be in all instances pre-
cisely the same, , . . yet in all cases they must be
mainly scientific and predominantly instructive. As
an universal rule it is primarily the aim of such an
institution to bring together with its available means
the greatest possible number of select plants from all
the different parts of the globe; and this is done to
utilize them for easy public inspection, to arrange them
in their impressive living forms for systematic geo-
graphic, medical, technical, or economic information,
and to render them extensively accessible for original
observation and careful records. By these means, not
only the knowledge of plants in all its branches is to
be advanced through local independent researches, con-
ducted in a real spirit of science, but also phytological
instruction is to be diffused to the widest extent; while
similarly, by the introduction of novel utilitarian
species, local industries are to be extended, or new re-
sources to be originated; and, further, it is an aim to
excite thereby a due interest in the general study and
ample utilization of any living forms of vegetation, or
of important substances derived therefrom. All other
objects are secondary, or the institution ceases to be a
real garden of science.”
Again, he writes: “ From the days of Greece to the pre-
sent, all institutions distinguished as botanical gardens
were mainly or exclusively devoted to the rearing of such
plants as were adapted for medical, for alimentary, or for
industrial purposes.”
In regard to his critics, he states: “ Although I may have
incurred the displeasure of a few of the less thoughtful of
my fellow-citizens who wished the slender means of my
young establishments appropriated for the ephemeral glory
of floral displays and who wished to sacrifice lasting pro-
gress to unproductive gaiety, yet I feel assured that the fair
feelings of the inhabitants of Victoria in general will ap-
prove of the path of predominant utility which I struck out
for myself, and will respect the consideration • which
prompted me in an equitable spirit towards town and
country to attend in the first instance to pressing necessi-
ties, leaving the unnecessary, or less useful, for the exertions
of a later time.”


Here we get a plain statement of his views in regard to
the conduct of the institution. However, the old order had
changed, the council was now differently constituted, and in
certain quarters there was a tendency to discredit scientific
aims. Although the annual reports show that as many as
300,000 persons would visit the gardens in a year, evidently
finding them an attractive resort, there arose a demand
from a section of the public for re-organization, with the
object of ministering to the aesthetic rather than the utili-
tarian taste. Attractive landscape gardening, ornamenta-
tion, and pleasing effects should be the aim rather than
economic planting, forestry, scientific arrangement, experi-
mental grouping, and laboratory work.
Discussion took place in the press and in parliament, and,
with sympathetic ear, the latter decided to make a radical
change. It was considered advisable to separate the offices
of Government Botanist and Director of the Gardens, the
latter of which the Baron, at short notice, was asked to
resign. Mr. W. R. Guilfoyle was appointed as curator, and
under his skilful and artistic direction the Botanical
Gardens in due time took pride of place as the most beauti-
ful institution of the kind in the southern hemisphere.
Rearrangement of Offices —Botanical Work.
It was with extreme reluctance and a sense of mortifica-
tion that the Baron withdrew from the Botanical Gardens,
with which for so many years he had been intimately con-
nected and for the advancement of which he had worked
with conspicuous diligence and ardour.
Criticism had been directed to the method of manage-
ment, as well as to the aims and objects of such an institu-
tion. There was little sympathy with a scientific system;
ignorance and apathy were shown in regard to the vital
subject of afforestation; but a strong desire was expressed
to make the gardens a beautiful pleasure resort.
At this time reports had been prepared and submitted,
not without considerable divergence in expert opinions, for
the transformation of the domain and grounds in connexion
with Government House into a pleasing landscape garden;
and whilst effecting this, the opportunity was taken to give
expression to the popular opinion in respect to the Botanical
Gardens.
The Baron suffered no pecuniary loss in salary, hut he
keenly felt the abandonment of cherished plans which he
had hoped to carry into effect, and he was sensitively


conscious of a change in status and prestige accompanying
his withdrawal. For the rest of his life he had a real griev-
ance, which he would often unburden to a sympathetic
listener. He never afterwards entered the Botanical
Gardens. The Baron now took up his residence for a while
at a house on the St, Kilda-road, but afterwards purchased
a two-storied house in Arnold-street, within easy walking
distance of the Herbarium. Here, he kept up his bachelor
establishment until his death.
In the year 1873, taking advantage of the new facilities
afforded by railway construction, after visiting again the
Upper Yarra and Goulburn rivers, he proceeded to the
Hume river district, renewing his observation of the alpine
flora; and early in 1874 he visited, for botanical purposes,
Mounts Gellibrand, Emu, and Elephant, and then profitably
spent a fortnight in the country west of Cape Otway. He
was now free to devote his attention and energy wholly to
the scientific department of his work, to extend his publica-
tions on Australian flora, and complete the record as fully
as possible; for, although state botanist, the scope of work
was Australasian, and his connexion and reputation world-
wide.
Yet, once again, in 1877, the Baron, with characteristic
enthusiasm, set out, at the invitation of the Western Aus-
tralian Government, on a phytographic excursion to the dis-
trict in Western Australia between the Gascoyne and the
Murchison, inland from Shark’s Bay. Accompanied by one
or two blacks and a trooper, he again roughed it in the wilds
as in earlier days. This visit was botanieally successful,
and also gave an impetus to discovery in the north-west
portion of the state. In 1879 the Western Australian Go-
vernment published the 'Baron’s report, dealing fully with
the forest resources, suggesting plants suitable for cultiva-
tion for industrial and economic purposes, and giving
practical advice as to the means for forest conservation.
In the same year as this visit to Western Australia there
was published An Introduction to Botanic Teachings in the
Schools of Victoria. In the preface the writer explains
that under the title of a “ Victorian School-flora ” he had
commenced a work describing the indigenous flora as briefly,
simply, and graphically as possible. The first part of this
“ school-flora ” was complete, hut on Ministerial request the
author postponed this project to issue a botanic school-book,
of a less comprehensive character, under the title stated
322.-2


above. This work, although hardly simple enough for ordi-
nary readers, proved of practical use and helpful
to students of the native flora. The Plants Indigenous
to the Colony .of Victoria, commenced many years
before, and published in 1860-2 as Volume 1., with
plates in illustration, had been abandoned in favour
of the Flora Australiensis, “ elaborated,” says the
Baron, “ through my main aid, by Mr. George Bentham.”
The completion of this great undertaking in 1878 was
marked by the bestowal in the following year of the title of
K.C.M.G., the minor order having been awarded some years
before, and the Baron being one of the three first recipients
of such a distinction in Australia. This was a crowning
tribute to eminent service in the field of science.
In 18 1 9 was published the first part of Eucalyptographia,
a Descriptive Atlas of the Eucalypts of Australia, in the
ten decades of which over 100 species of this wonderful
genus are fully described and splendidly figured, their econo-
hygienic, and special properties being fully shown.
In his remarks at the conclusion of the main work the author
looks forward to the necessity of supplemental matter and
plates, to keep pace with additional knowledge of the
eucalypts, refers to the increased recognition of the thera-
peutic value of the genus, aptly quoting, “ The leaves of the
tree shall be for the healing of the nation.” He foresees
clearly “ that the eucalypts are destined to play a prominent
part for all times to come in the sylvan culture of vast tracts
of the globe, and that for hardwood supplies, for sanitary
measures, and for beneficent climatic changes all countries
within the warmer zones will, with appreciable extensive-
ness have to rely on our eucalypts during an, as yet, un-
countable future.” To-day, the world-wide distribution of
the eucalypts in temperate and tropical regions attests the
correctness of this forecast.
In this year, also, was published Part I. of The Native
Plants of Victoria Succinctly Defined , a work which, with
its copious illustrations, gave promise of being a useful
guide to the knowledge of our flora. It was intended to
supplement the Botanic Teachings , but this “ unpretensive ”
work, written “ under singular disadvantages,” as the author
states, was not proceeded with further. The Systematic
Census of Australian Plants, a valuable supplement
to the Flora Australiensis, appeared in 1882, being
a compendium of notes, with geographic ranges speci-
fied, and references to descriptions of species. In 1883 the


Royal Society of New South Wales awarded the Clarke
medal to Baron Mueller. In the following year, with others,
he successfully inaugurated the Victorian branch of the
Royal Geographical Society, and, as president, gave the open-
ing address, and worked constantly and zealously in forward-
ing discovery and exploration under the auspices of the
society.
In compliance with a suggestion made by Dr. Dobson, a
fellow-member and at this time president of the Field
Naturalists’ Club of Victoria, Baron Mueller compiled and
published, in 1885, the Dichotomous Key to Victorian
Plants, a work which, if hardly of a popular nature, has
been, and still is, of special value to students of botany in
aiding the recognition of species. It was intended as a
“ literary guide for facilitating the study of our native
flora.” Other publications of this period included descriptions
of Papuan plants collected on the expeditions of D’Alberti
and Macleay in New Guinea, also on the botanical speci-
mens obtained in Sir William Macgregor’s famous explora-
tion and ascent of the Mount Owen Stanley Range, a pro-
ject first suggested by the Baron. A collection of plants
from New Hebrides by Mr. Campbell was also described.
In the year 1886 appeared a further Atlas on the Myo-
porinae, with 72 excellent plates; and, in 1887-8, The Icono-
graphy of Australian Species of Acacias and Cognate
Species, containing 130 finely-executed plates in illustra-
tion of this remarkable group.
In 1889, the Second Census of Australian Plants was
published, which was not so favorably received by botanists,
its value being somewhat impaired by the author’s unwise
alterations, on the plea of improvement, of the recognized
sequence and application of the natural orders. Some
names of plants appearing in the Flora Australiensis, the
accepted authority, were discarded in the new census, other
names, considered to have priority, being used instead.
This instability in nomenclature —a not infrequent, fault in
botanists —tends to confuse and mislead. The Baron
also, in some instances in his last decade, combined
several genera into one, whilst in some other instances
in describing new species he would use two or three names,
so that, whatever the determination of the genus, he would
be quoted as the author of the species. These occasional
inconsistencies and innovations in botanical nomenclature
were not well received by his contemporaries, and have little
justification for their introduction.


lii 1890-1, the Salsolaceous plants were splendidly illus-
trated, and a similar work on the order Candollaceae com-
menced, the series of atlases forming a succession of valu-
able works of peculiar importance to Australia. Of
the plates mentioned which the Baron was the first
to introduce in this connexion, nearly 700 were prepared,
accompanied by analytic notes of the plants in successive
stages of growth and development, a striking testimony to
the scientific thoroughness of his descriptions. In 1888, the
Royal Society of London awarded its gold medal to the emi-
nent botanist, he being the first recipient of the honour in
Australia. Although so closely devoted to his special field of
work, the Baron was deeply interested in many useful
societies. For twelve years he was vice-president of the Ac-
climatization Society of Victoria, and also of the Horti-
cultural Society of Victoria. In connexion with the former,
he assisted in the introduction of the Angora goat, and in
the project to acclimatize the salmon in Australian waters.
Up to the time of his death, the Baron was secretary to the
trustees of the Zoological Gardens, for 30 years assisting in
the direction and management of the institution with such
public-spirited citizens as Dr. James Black, Major Purchas,
Messrs. F. R. Godfrey, A. C. Le Souef, and others.
From the circumstances of his early training, he was also
in close touch with the Pharmaceutical Society of Victoria.
Victorian Branch of the Royal Geographical Society of Australia.
Reference has already been made to his unflagging de-
votion to the cause of exploration in Australia, but his zeal
in the cause of discovery was not limited to his own country.
As a foundation member, life member, and president of
the Victorian branch of the Geographical Society of Aus-
tralia from its inception in 1884 until his death, he per-
sistently encouraged and assisted its useful operations. In
his inaugural address he strongly advocated further Austra-
lian exploration, continued search for traces of Leichhardt,
the exploration of Hew Guinea and the Pacific islands, and
renewed Antarctic discovery. Successive explorations to
Hew Guinea by Sir William Macgregor, Mr. H. O.
Forbes, R. Cuthbertson, and Captain Everell’s party were
heartily supported by the society, the first being undertaken at
the Baron’s suggestion, and the others dispatched under the
auspices and with the financial assistance of the society.


Among many notable gatherings under the Baron’s direc-
tion as president may be mentioned the fit commemoration
of the 400th anniversary of the discovery of America on
the 12th October, 1892. The Columbus Jubilee was held
in the Melbourne Town Hall, a large and representative
gathering being present, when the chief feature was an in-
structive and excellently-prepared address by the president
on the career of Columbus and the far-reaching results of
his labours.
As in the case of Australian discovery, so dear to the
Baron’s heart, towards the exploration of the Antarctic he
was keenly alert. He was the prime mover in forming an
Australian Antarctic Committee, representing jointly the
Royal Society and the Geographical Society. With the ap-
proval of this committee, the Baron opened up negotiations
with the well-known Swedish navigator, Baron A. E.
Nordenskiold, to undertake an expedition to Antarctica.
Baron Oscar Dickson, of Sweden, promised to advance
£5,000 —half the estimated cost, the other half to be raised
in Victoria—to fully equip the vessel which Baron Hordern-
skiold would command. More than the estimated amount
was promised in Australia; but, after several postponements
of the date fixed for departure, the Swedish promoters with-
drew their offer and support of the undertaking, to the great
disappointment of the Baron and his committee. However,
some time afterwards, Commander Sveyn Eoyn, of Norway,
at the suggestion of Baron von Mueller, despatched the
steam whaling ship Antarctica, Captain Leonard Kristen-
sen as master, to South Victoria Land. This party explored
the vicinity of Cape Adare and the Possession Islands in
latitude 74° 10'. They were the first to set foot on South
Victoria Land. The vessel returned on the 12th March,
1895, to Melbourne. A full report of the voyage was pub-
lished in the Qeographical Society’s Journal, and a copy of
the charts and journal submitted at the International Geo-
graphical Congress at London in the same year.
This modest expedition led to the revival of interest in
Antarctic exploration—dormant for nearly 50 years—and
started a new era of activity, destined to be prolific in im-
portant results. It is pleasing to note that, in a letter
dated October, 1895, the president of the International Geo-
graphical Congress specially thanked Baron von Mueller,
expressing “ high appreciation of the extremely valuable
services ” done by him and the members of the Melbourne
Antarctic Committee. “To your efforts during a course of


years is due the attention now being given to Antarctic ex-
ploration.” The Geographical Society fostered and en-
couraged all genuine undertakings for opening up unknown
areas in Australia and elsewhere, by land or sea, the president
imparting his own enthusiasm to his fellow-members. Every
expedition for discovery or exploration was assured of sym-
pathy and assistance, as well as a cordial reception and full
appreciation on its return. At the famous Geographical
Congress at Vienna the Baron was one of five distinguished
geographers whom, in absentia, the assemblage delighted to
honour by conveying special votes of thanks for meritorious
services.
Scientific Interests — Correspondence—The Elder Expedition.
The Baron was a patron or working member of every
scientific society in Australia, several of which he assisted
to found. The Field Naturalists’ Club of Victoria, the
Royal Societies of Victoria, Tasmania, New South Wales,
the Linnean Society of New South Wales, &c., were among
those most noteworthy. In some of these he occupied the
office of president, or member of committee, and to all he
contributed articles.
In 1893, at the Adelaide meeting of the Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science, he once more
eloquently urged the dispatch of another search party to
clear up that elusive and still-unexplained mystery, the fate
of Dr. Leichhardt.
Outside of Australia, in Europe and America chiefly, the
Baron had been made an honorary or corresponding mem-
ber of over 150 learned societies representative of the do-
main of science, and during his career received in recogni-
tion of his eminence as a scientist a dozen or more decora-
tions from European potentates, including those of Com-
panion of the Order of St. Isabella of Spain, St. Jago of
Portugal, and the Dannehorg of Denmark.
Of necessity, his correspondence was of a most voluminous
nature. It is stated, and can easily he accepted as reason-
able, that during the last 40 years of his life he received and
answered over 3,000 letters per annum. In an obituary
article in the Gardeners’ Chronicle, dated the 17th October,
1896, by one of the Baron’s English correspondents, the
writer stated that for nearly 40 years he had been in corre-
spondence with the Baron, “ and of late years hardly any-
thing has happened with such regularity as the receipt, on
every Monday morning, of one or more communications of


some kind from Baron von Mueller. Two or three were
received weekly on the average, hut occasionally . . .
seven or even nine.”
Truly, the Baron had the “ pen of the ready-writer,” and,
in a bold, running hand of characteristic style, would
methodically answer letter after letter. The form was some-
what impersonal and unconventional, the writer’s address
being usually absent and the preliminary words in address-
ing a person being generally omitted or parenthetically in-
serted after a sentence or phrase had been written, e.g., “ It
needs not my assurance, dear Mr. ”; “Your specimens,
Mr. ”. The subject-matter was to the point, and the
favorite subscription at the close, “ Begardfully ” or “ With
regardful salutation,” “your Ferdinand von Mueller.”
He preferred, in the days when the typewriter and the
telephone were as yet in the future, to answer his letters in
person. This, in itself, was a congenial task, but of great
magnitude. In the 60’s and 70’s there was a private postal
box at the Argus Hotel, Collins-street, inscribed, “ Dr. F.
von Mueller.” Here his correspondence was deposited, a
messenger being sent every day with a dispatch case to bring
out the mail. On the top of this box was also daily placed for
delivery at the gardens, a brown loaf of bread for the Doctor’s
use. Later, when the arrival of the English mail was an-
nounced by an extraordinary, as was the custom, the letters,
packages, exchanges, books, specimens, &c., for the busy
botanist were vast in number and, enormously increasing
with the years, their delivery at his residence usually required
the services of two postmen. Even the Australian cor-
respondence was of very great extent.
As one of the founders of the Australasian Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science, the Baron, in the
session of 1890 at Melbourne, occupied the honorable posi-
tion of president, and, in his inaugural address, made a
comprehensive and instructive survey and a shrewd forecast
of scientific progress. His references to Australian needs
were of practical value, e.g., he advocated “ the retention of
choice areas for the maintenance of original vegetation and
fauna,” a suggestion subsequently carried out by the complete
reservation of Wilson’s Promontory as a national park, and
by the establishment of minor sanctuaries in Victoria as
well as in other states. He also wisely, but vainly it would
seem, recommended the Government “to maintain masses of
forest vegetation near sources of rivers, and to establish
some broad arboreous selvage bordering on streams where


it does not extensively exist.” The pressing necessity for
arboriculture and forest conservation which he advocated
for 40 years was strongly re-affirmed in this address.
The completion of the work of Australian exploration
was urged to such good effect that the Baron received a letter
from Sir Thomas Elder, dated 2nd July, 1890, stating:—
“ My dear Baron Mueller,
“I was delighted to receive, and have had much
pleasure in carefully perusing, your inaugural address
on the A.A.A.S, in Melbourne. The paragraph in your
address referring to geography has revived the interest
which I have always taken in Australasian explora-
tion ; and as you say that 1 talent, enthusiasm, and ex-
perience ’ are available at present, I cannot hut agree
with you that it would he almost a ‘ reproach ’ to per-
mit the opportunity to pass for completing what you
properly describe as the main work of Australian land
exploration. You say that this work in the past has
devolved on nine travellers only, and that space seems
left now for only one more explorer to rank with the
nine. This being the case, I would like to furnish the
tenth exploring expedition; and, if you will take the
matter energetically in hand, as you have done success-
fully on former occasions, I will hold myself respon-
sible for the funds, so that no unnecessary delay will
take place. . . .”
Suggestions as to leadership, special qualifications needed,
and the scheme of operations are then made. “ I am willing
to bear the entire cost ”is affirmed. The Baron joyfully
accepted this munificent offer, which was alike a
tribute to his own enthusiasm and great services in
the cause of Australian exploration and a testimony to
the confidence and trust reposed in him. In conjunction
with the Geographical Societies of Victoria and South
Australia, he organized the Elder expedition, which,
in a year of exceptional drought, successfully explored
an extensive area in South and Western Australia
over almost waterless country, between the 15th and 30th
parallels of south latitude. The total distance travelled in
eleven months was 4,729 miles, 2,745 of which was pre-
viously unexplored, and in part of which some years later
the richest gold-fields of Western Australia were opened up.


It was not only in scientific work and matters of public
usefulness that the Baron took a prominent part, but also
in social life, for his sympathies were wide in scope. Thus,
for many years he was acting-president of the Melbourne
Liedertaefel, and also an esteemed patron of the Turn
Yerein Society, a member of the Old Colonists’ Association,
and also of the Melbourne Club and other organizations.
On the 9th March, 1895, the Victorian branch of the
Royal Geographical Society of Australia paid a pleasing
compliment to their president by tendering him an excursion
to “ The Hermitage,” at Black Spur, where, amid pictur-
esque surroundings, the council and several leading members
held an instructive and enjoyable meeting of the society for
three days.
Estimate of Work and Character.
A favorite quotation of the Baron’s in regard to his be-
loved plants was, “By their fruits shall ye know them ”;
and, giving the text a personal application, we can get some
idea of the man from the character of the work achieved.
Coming to Australia as a young man, practically self-taught,
possessing little more than a sound education, a scientific
training, and a definite purpose in life, it is remarkable how
in his earlier years, by strength of will, he overcame his
physical disabilities; so that in the strenuous work of ex-
ploration he was able, almost unaided, to accomplish so
much valuable work and also, in response to the open-air
conditions of life, to rehabilitate his health so that the com-
plaint which had threatened him was successfully resisted.
His outstanding achievements as a botanist have, in a
great measure, almost obscured in the public mind the recol-
lection of the signal services rendered as an explorer and
geographer. Hot without reason does Labilliere call him “ the
last explorer of Victoria,” so little did he leave for others
to do.
Von Mueller was fortunate in the respect that at the out-
set of his career an unequalled opportunity was afforded
him of taking up, under favorable conditions and_ happy
auspices, the special work for which his strong inclination,
his diverse gifts, and his early training fitted_ him, and in
which there were virgin fields and unusual facilities for the
operations of a competent investigator. The superstructure
which was raised by him in over 40 years of unwearied
botanical research proves the fitness of the term applied to


him by Sir William Hooker, “ The Prince of Australian
Botanists.” Baron Murchison also aptly said of him that
u Robert Brown’s mantle had fallen on his shoulders.”
In addition to articles, essays, addresses, descriptions and
notes innumerable in scientific journals, the Baron published
over 40 volumes in English, Latin, or German on his special
study, gained widespread renown as one of the foremost
scientists of the century, and by his pre-eminence conferred
great honour on his adopted country. Professor Planchon,
a distinguished contemporary, said of him that he com-
bined the thoroughness of the German with the practical
good sense of the English scientist. Both Professor Harvey
and Sir William Hooker, in appreciative terms, dedicated
works to the eminent Australian phytologist.
One outstanding feature of the Baron’s long career was
the earnest and praiseworthy desire to disseminate scientific
knowledge for practical purposes among mankind. A few
of many instances of this may be cited.
As the first to recognize the hygienic and anti-malarial
properties in the eucalypts, he was instrumental in forward-
ing seeds all over the world, and in initiating plantations,
especially in swampy areas in Europe, Algeria, Transvaal,
India, Hew Zealand, California, South America, Cape
Colony, Mexico, &c., generally with the result, as at the
Campagna, at Rome, of considerably ameliorating climatic
conditions, reclaiming unhealthy areas, or supplementing
timber supplies. He also drew attention to the economic and
decorative value of the acacias of Australia, the golden and
the black wattle being successfully introduced by him into
South Africa, where conditions were so favorable for growth
that in recent years the quantity of wattle-bark required
in the Australian tanning industry was supplemented by
the importation of the material from South Africa.
It was the Baron’s custom to disseminate widely in dis-
tant lands seeds of useful Australian plants, with the object
of encouraging their growth in a new environment. In this
way several species of valuable saltbush plants, e.g., Atriplex
nummularis and A. semibaccata, very suitable for pasture
in dry alkali districts such as are found in California and
Arizona, were introduced to those states with very beneficial
results. At Port Fairy the marram grass was first planted
experimentally in an endeavour to check the inward drift
of coastal sands. Proving a most efficacious sand-stay,
the grass became widely planted where occasion required.


The Baron first introduced and tested the suitability of
many of our now famous fruit trees, as well as a surprising
number of other useful plants now thoroughly acclimatized.
By experiment, demonstration, and advice he directly or
indirectly established and developed our cultural industries
in a remarkable degree. Many years ago, with the object
of producing attractive verdure on the bare landscapes of
many of our provincial towns, and also to give the means
of shelter in exposed areas as quickly as possible, he greatly
encouraged the growth of the Pinus insignis, a tree which
though somewhat despised at first grew splendidly in our
climate and proved in the years of the war, during the
scarcity of timber, of the greatest economic value to Aus-
tralia. He was also the first to advocate and practise
forestry on a comprehensive and cosmopolitan scale in Aus-
tralia, hundreds of thousands of exotic forest trees being
reared for distribution. With the object of fostering seri-
culture, he grew and distributed widely the white mulberry
throughout the state. Tropical plants were also success-
fully cultivated in glasshouses, and the wonderful Victoria
regia was first grown at the Botanic Gardens. His early
training in chemistry as well as in botany enabled him to
ascertain by observation and experimental work the medi-
cinal and economic value of Australian and other plants
which came under his cognizance and survey.
Hot the least of his contributions towards the growth and
encouragement of science in Australia which has been pre-
viously referred to, was the establishment of the Melbourne
Herbarium, which during his lifetime became one of the
largest and most complete of its kind in the world.
Throughout Australasia he frequently subsidized, from his
own resources, collectors of plants, and spent his money
freely in the equipment of the herbarium. There was
hardly a botanical garden in the world not indebted to him
in some way, and there was no Possession of the Empire
which did not receive from him some valuable plant pro-
duct capable of acclimatization and suitable for economic,
industrial, or medicinal purposes.
Interested in so many directions and spheres of activity,
von Mueller was a familiar figure in Melbourne. Although
he never married, he was by no means a misogynist. In-
deed, on at least two occasions, he had seriously contem-
plated matrimony, but for conscientious reasons abandoned
the idea and devoted his life to his work with singleness of


purpose and thoroughness. He possessed inexhaustible
patience and untiring zeal in his undertakings, and his
enthusiasm was unalloyed by any sordid consideration of
personal gain or reward.
His benefactions towards genuine national projects, such
as scientific research, exploration, &c., were always generous.
He supplemented the herbarium library by his numerous
purchases and gifts. In his private relations, with unstudied
and natural kindness of heart, he was liberal and helpful
towards charitable objects and those in trouble or distress.
In the preface to the Native Plants of Victoria, succinctly
defined, he states, “ The author . . . has endeavoured
by the sacrifice of almost everything else in life to bear
honorably also his share in the elucidation of the Australian
flora,” It has been said, from an authoritative source, that
he spent £20,000 out of his savings in income in the pro-
motion of the cause of science.
Only once, in a report in 1869, does he refer to the in-
sufficient measure of support which he received. “ Personal
travelling expenses since 1852, and all outlay for scientific
and local journals, British and foreign agencies, means of
conveyance for attending the city, office, light, and many
other expenses, as well as the courtesies which are extended
from a public department frequented by very numerous
visitors, have also ever solely and readily been defrayed
from the Administrator’s own resources, who, not for any
selfish purpose whatever, ventures to place these facts, after
the lapse of many years, on 'record, but simply in justice to
himself, because the obligations devolving upon him in
maintaining the efficiency and dignity of the department
seem not at all understood.” Like one of our great English-
men, he “ could toil terribly ” and become so engrossed in
his congenial work that it became no burden “ to shun vain
delights and live laborious days.”
In his own eager absorption in the work which was also
his chief pleasure, he was sometimes apt to forget that
others did not so whole-heartedly share his enthusiasm, but
were satisfied with a reasonable day’s work. Thus, un-
consciously perhaps, although generally considerate and
kind to those under him, he was prone to expect too much
from subordinates, and with that touch of egotism charac-
teristic of his countrymen thought that they should be as
deeply interested in his projects and advancement as he
was himself.


The Baron had a strong sense of duty, and a high ideal
of life as becomes a true scientist. He was punctual,
methodical, and regular in his work; he had a great desire
for fame, and was pardonably vain of the honours and
titles showered upon him, the tangible signs of which on
special occasions he loved to display. This innocent desire
for appreciation and recognition, fostered in a great degree
by his lonely life, did not, however, make him arrogant or
patronizing in relation to his fellows. Ho one was more
ready to assist and advise when appealed to for informa-
tion. Always accessible, he welcomed assistance in his
work, readily acknowledging the same, and freely recipro-
cating. To use his own words in the preface to Botanic
Tcachings —“ The writer, moreover, has ever been willing
to promote, by correspondence or otherwise, any scientific
inquiries concerning plants, particularly in all instances
where local literary means were insufficient to clear up any
doubts or to indicate the way to further progress to those
who, by taste and natural inclination, desired to engage on
more extended phytologic studies.’’
This inadequately states the case in regard to his willing-
ness to help those who appealed to him. For about ten
years, from 1882 onwards, when studying the native flora
in country districts, the writer had frequent correspondence
with him on the subject, always finding him courteous, en-
couraging, helpful, and reliable in supplying information
required. Quaint in style, his letters had always a character
of their own, far removed from the coldly official touch, and
insensibly conveying the idea of sympathetic and genuine
interest in the subject-matter as well as in the correspon-
dent. On one occasion, after a rather long intermission in
correspondence on my part, in reply to a letter sent with
specimens for identification, I received an answer com-
mencing: “Pleased was I” and subscribed “Yours in re-
gardful remembrance ”.
It was this genuine and .hearty reciprocal feeling evident
in his letters, which gave so much encouragement, that in
response casual or curious inquirers often became keen
students of the Australian flora. Sometimes the Baron
would write to ask that seeds, bulbs, or flowers of a certain
plant of the district might be collected for him, or inquire
as to the presence in the locality of a certain species de-
scribed or sketched. At other times he would forward, un-
solicited, packets of seeds for experimental planting and
testing the results. By these means, the Baron stimulated


interest whilst he maintained a close contact with all co-
workers or “ phytologic collaborators ” —as he calls them in
one of his works —throughout the continent. His own keen
interest and pleasure in the subject of botany were so sincere
that, in sympathy others became interested; so that it has
been said that the Baron never failed in securing, when
required, the help of any one in Australia.
As a citizen, he loved his adopted country with strong
affection, and never sought to revisit the old world. The
late Sir John Forrest said that he often pressed the Baron
to take a holiday and go to Europe, where he would be
received with honour by all men of science; but the Baron
always replied, Ah, hut what would become of my work ?”
This was ever his first consideration. Of no one could it
be more truly said that his work was indeed his life. An
old friend, who in another department of science has
achieved well-deserved fame, and to whom, among others,
the Baron gave encouragement and a kindly helping hand
at the outset of his career, writes: “ The Old Baron, God
rest his soul, was not a German, but a good Australian; and
always said so. Whenever I was going away on an
expedition, I always arranged to spend a day or
night with him, and we had a strenuous time. We
went over the map together; he went over all the plants and
seeds I might find, and where, to look for certain things;
got down scores of books to show me plates or define the
descriptions; gave me wine and cake when he could find
them among his piled-up specimens; and hung on to my
arms to give me parting advice about taking care of my
health. ‘ Beware of the saurians and aborigines.’ I ran
for the last tram to Melbourne from his house at South
Yarra, though several times I walked in after midnight.
With all his quaint vanities, he was one of the biggest-
hearted, good friends a man could have; good in actions, in
thoughts, and in deeds; and I shall always have a very
warm spot in my heart for the Old Baron.”
The following reminiscent account of a visit to the Baron
at his house in Arnold-street the year before his death gives
a good idea of his personality:—
“ My acquaintance with him was limited to those years,
during which time I received perhaps a hundred letters
with his determination of the plants I sent to him. His
last letter was written less than a fortnight before he died.
Only once did I receive a reply not in his own handwriting;
when lying ill in bed, six months before he died, he dictated


(but signed) a reply. The promptness of his replies to
query parcels was remarkable. As certain as I forwarded
one on Monday, so certain was I to get the reply by Thurs-
day’s mail. Although often asked to call and see him, 1
called only once, and spent about three hours with hint. I
shall never forget his greeting or his send-off. When my
name was announced hy his man, I could hear him stump
along the passage talking all the way, and can remember
his grip of the hand and his, ‘Mr. Williamson, you are
welcome; the discoverer of a new Grevilleal’ And ho went
on to say that he had camped for a fortnight within a few
hundred yards of the locality and had not seen the plant.
He spoke of his grievances, and said that he had hud ideas
of spreading the gardens right to the river at Prince’s-
bridge, so that the poor people of Richmond and Colling-
wood would have them at their very doors and not have to
pay sixpence return by tram to enjoy the beauties of the
gardens. He had also some splendid ideals in the matter of
preserving the native flora and fauna. I never forgot his
appeal to me, as a teacher, to instil into the juveniles a love
for native animals; and his plea for the koalas was specially
pathetic, ‘ De poor dings.’
“ Another grievance, and a very real one, was that he was
not provided by the Government with paid field-workers.
He could not do as other colonial botanists, send out
collectors to investigate and help in his systematic work.
He had to depend upon voluntary and unpaid workers,
although I have heard that he paid something out of his
own salary for collecting. I think that every one will admit
that the £l,OOO that he received in salary represented
only a small proportion of the value of the work done
by him for the country of his adoption. He spoke of the
expense of subscriptions to many societies of which he was a
member, and when I appeared sympathetic, he said, 1 Well,
you see I am a nobleman and must keep up my station.’
I had some plants with me which I wanted the Baron to
name, and now and again I broached the subject, but he
would put me off with, ‘ Yes, yes, I will attend to that
for you, but vat I wish to say is dis,’ and then he would
start off on some subject upon which his mind was fixed.
At length he gave me the information I wanted, and he had
lunch brought in—ginger ale, bread and butter, and German
sausage. Frugality in his meals was one of his character-
istics. TVhen the time came for me to leave, he put on his


muffler and hat, and, in spite of my remonstrances, accom-
panied me to the tram track in St. Kilda-road, where he
stood in the blazing sun waiting for a tram. Trams were
not so frequent then; and, on my urging him to leave me as
the day was so hot, he said, ‘ Oh, I’ll wait, it may be the
last time I shall see you,’ which of course it was; so, hold-
ing my hand after the tram had started, he bade me ‘ Good-
bye.’ Can you wonder that I remember it, and that I
retain very pleasant memories of the great botanist, that I
am proud to have known him, and to have first gathered
my knowledge of the Victorian flora under his direction.”
Habits—-Closing Years, &c.
In private life, the Baron was temperate and self-denying,
extremely simple in his tastes, ingenuous in manner, and,
except on special occasions, although not slovenly, never very
studious about his personal appearance. He used to say
jokingly, in comment upon his moderate needs, that he had
never owned a watch or a looking-glass. His headgear was
usually a pith hat of unusual shape, and in later years he
was seldom seen without a thick woollen comforter around
his neck or over his shoulder. This accompanied him
even to banquets or festivities. A lady visitor relates that
on a visit to the Baron’s house, they were amused to observe,
amid many dried specimens, a beautiful plant in a pot with
the Baron’s white muffler draped around it. At his home in
Arnold-street, most of his work in later years was carried
on, where Mr. Luehmann, his secretary, assisted him. His
room was full of specimens, papers, and books. He was a
sincere lover of books, rough usage or careless handling of
them on the part of his assistants being a prime offence.
He comhnenced his work at 7 a.m., going on to 11 a.m., when
he regularly had a prepared meal brought to him. He
frequently slept seated in his chair, and seldom retired until
a late hour. Often, in the 'half-recumbent position most
easeful for his bronchial complaint, with a table and light by
his bed, he would write his correspondence for hours, a large
book serving as a writing stand. About 9 p.m., his attendant
had to take up to him eight or nine cups of coffee, with
brown bread and butter. He was kind and helpful to the
boys who, from time to time, were associated with him,
giving them good advice, and gaining their affection and
esteem. About home, a cap, the muffler, and wooden clogs
were a characteristic part of his attire. He was a familiar
figure in the neighbourhood, enjoying a homely chat with


the neighbours. During Lord Hopetoun’s occupancy of
Government House, the Baron used frequently to visit
informally the Domain, where he would walk and talk with
Lord Hopetoun and his lady. Sometimes for exercise at
dusk he would walk almost mechanically around the block
and return to his room. Polite and courteous, he was
always very grateful for any little kindness shown to him.
His generosity was well known, and he had quite a number
of hangers-on who imposed upon him; for, like the Village
Preacher, “ His pity gave ere charity began.”
The Baron spoke English readily, with the accent, and
sometimes with the idioms, of his mother tongue persisting,
as we see in his writings. He was a good linguist, and his
published works and addresses are, for the most part, in
fluent, virile, and expressive English, with occasional lapses
into German idioms, and a tendency to loose construction
in unduly lengthening his periods. As a Latin scholar, he
was prone to use Latin-derived words rather than the simpler
English synonyms, with which he was not so familiar. In
some instances, this Johnsonian tendency makes the prose
appear rather stilted or pedantic in character. Hew words
are occasionally coined, or words ingeniously used in an
unusual sense to convey the meaning. Frequently a prefix
or suffix, correct in meaning, but not sanctioned by usage,
is added to a word, e.g., we find such words as, unpretensive,
gayness, helpingly, passingly, inproportionate, educts,
ephemerous, unacquaintance, richdom, novations, suredly,
extraexertions, consociate, prevailingly, drippage, with timely
used as an adverb. The use of such words sometimes gives
a distinct quaintness to the expression without obscuring
the meaning. The Baron’s numerous addresses on many
topics exhibit most careful preparation and comprehensive
knowledge, and they are always informative and stimu-
lating. •
From its nature, the science of botany is a difficult one
to present to the young learner or to the general public,
devoid of its technical forms of expression. With every
desire to submit the subject as simply as possible, and in a
popular form, the Baron, in Botanic Teachings, and the
Native Plants Succinctly Defined —the two works written
with that distinct object in view, was not very successful,
owing as much to the inherent baldness of scientific descrip-
tion as to the absence of that useful but rare literary gift
of dealing with a scientific subject in an attractive way, so
as to reach the popular taste. In the introduction to
322.-3


Botanic Teachings, the author admirably and correctly
states, “ The only method of rendering such studies agreeable
and lastingly fruitful consists in arousing an interest of the
young scholars in the native plants of their locality, to afford
them all possible facilities to recognize and discriminate
all the various plants within reach, to lead them by observa-
tion thus started to comprehend the limits of specific forms,
of generic and ordinal groups, and to conduct them after-
wards to the more difficult study of special anatomy and
physiology of plants.”
In his position as Government Botanist, the Baron, in
accordance with this scheme, was able during his career to
foster and greatly encourage the study of our native flora
throughout Australia. The many difficulties in the way of
presenting a popular and educative work on the subject are
further recognized and referred to in the preface to the
useful Dichotomous Key to Victorian Plants, which it was
advised should he “ Available for elementary schools and
high educational institutions; it was to serve the amateur
gatherer of plants in the field, as well as the professional
investigator in the exercise of stern duties; and yet such a
work was to be inexpensive, concise, and reliable.” It was
no wonder that the author did not find the attempt to har-
monize such ill-assorted requirements an altogether con-
genial work. Though never robust, the Baron, on account
of his regular habits, his keen interest in his work, and the
care he took of his health, kept on the whole remarkably
free from serious illness. Peculiarly fortunate in his life
and work, he was also happy in securing in full measure
“ that which should accompany old age, as honour, love,
obedience, troops of friends.” Despite his age, his mental
gifts were unimpaired, his interest in his pursuits unabated,
his duties regularly performed, and his physical powers
fairly well preserved. In this closing year of his life, he
had in prospect another volume of the Flora Australiensis,
had issued another edition of the Select Extra-tropical
Plants, and also contemplated publishing a Flora of Papua.
Other projects which he had in mind were the resumption
of the monograph on Candollacege, the completion of that on
the Salsolaceous plants, and a supplement to the monograph
on the Eucalypts of Australia. In the July number of the
Field Naturalists’ Journal, he had published an article,
“ Kemarks on a Wild Banana,” and had attended and ex-
hibited specimens at the September meeting of the club, in
whose proceedings, almost from its formation, he had always


taken an active and helping part. Ten days before his
death, there was read at the Linnean Society of New South
Wales his note on “ Boronia floribunda,” and in The Phar-
'rnacist and The Chemist and Druggist, in respective issues
for October, were published descriptions of new plants.
Parcels of seeds from the Baron were received at Kew on the
very day of his death.
In October, 1896, when the Baron took ill, no serious
results were expected; however, after a partial recovery, a
relapse took place, and he passed away after an illness of
brief duration. His frequently-expressed wish had been that
he might die in harness as Government Botanist, a wish that
was thus gratified. Strangely enough, only a week or two
before his decease, the trustees of the St. Kilda Cemetery,
with, of course, no prevision of his illness, had presented
the Baron with the plot of ground which is his last resting-
place, and which he had inspected just prior to his sudden
illness. The only relatives he left were Mrs. Clara Wehl,
bis surviving sister, widow of the late Dr. Wehl, of Milli-
cent, South Australia; and her son, Mr. W. M. Wehl.
Widespread regret was expressed at the Baron’s death, not
only throughout Australia—where his name was a household
word—but also in the scientific circles of the world. An
“ In Memoriam ” notice in the Royal Geographical Society’s
Journal (Victoria), conveys the idea of how deeply his loss
was felt by those associated in the various activities of
scientific work: —“ The death of Baron Sir Ferdinand von
Mueller. . . . has bereft Victoria of its most illustrious
citizen, Australasia of its most distinguished geographer, and
the scientific world of one of the most erudite, industrious,
open-handed, pure-hearted, and lovable phytologists that the
present century has produced.”
Testimony to his ability, his labours, and the esteem in
which he was held, was given from every quarter. The
Chancellor of the Melbourne University, Sir Anthony Brown-
less, at the annual commencement, said, “ When speaking
of science, I cannot refrain from paying a tribute of respect
to the memory and to the great talents of my late dear old
friend, the Baron Sir Ferdinand von Mueller, whose fame,
as one of the greatest of scientific botanists of the present
age was world-wide.” The late Hon. Sir John Madden, Kt.,
in speaking at a meeting called subsequently for determining
the form of a suitable memorial, said: —“ It was well known
to all that this was a great man. They who knew him well
never failed to recognize his greatness and his world-wide


renown. Great, indeed, he was if they applied those tests
which meant leaving the world much better than they found
it. He was so unselfish, and so devoted to his labours of
love for the welfare of all. . . . More than this, he was
a man whose modesty was so conspicuous that he appeared
least of all to be aware of how great a man he really was,
and how much he deserved from their hands. He was also
one who was generous to a degree, beyond even what he
could afford; and he was never found in the back-ground
when anything had to he done for the advancement of these
Colonies, no matter at what cost to himself.” With this
might be compared Sir William Hooker’s statement of earlier
date, “ Baron von Mueller’s merits as a botanist were only
superseded by his modesty as a man.” Another old friend,
the late Professor Kernot, spoke of him “as one of the
kindliest, most generous, and simple-minded of men.” Mr.
Maiden, P.L.S., Government Botanist of Hew South Wales,
in an appreciative address, said, “ Personally, I place him
second only to Robert Brown, the ‘ Facile pnnceps hotani-
corum ’of Humboldt. He is the last of the botanists of the
whole continent of Australia. . . . Apart from his
intellectual greatness, the industry of Mueller was prodigious.
The clock was never used by him as an indicator to cease
his labours. . . He was a public servant who did not
work for his pay; a portion of this satisfied his modest per-
sonal requirements; the rest was spent by him in the
furtherance of his studies. He well advertised Australia
in the best sense, and while I think his memory will long
be green in his adopted country, he is affectionately remem-
bered in other parts of the world, as I can testify. Per-
sonally, I owe much to my late .master.” To these expres-
sions of personal esteem and appreciation might be added
many similar tributes from friends and fellow scientists in
Australia and the world at large, who deplored the Baron’s
death.
In a biographical sketch in the Sydney Mail, mention was
made that there is nothing flippant in any of Mueller’s
works, but that they are marked by a high moral tone. This
is undoubtedly true. Broadminded, unobtrusive, and tolerant
iu his religious views, the Baron was a devout and orthodox
supporter of the Lutheran Church, which he regularly
attended and consistently supported. In the Lutheran
Mission Station, among the aborigines at Finke River, he
was deeply interested, giving assistance and advice in the
maintenance of their garden products in so dry a region.


MUELLER MEMORIAL MEDAL.
This medal is awarded biennially by the Australasian
Association for the Advancement of Science for
eminent scientific research.
\To face p. 52"




Frequently, in the Baron’s works, we come across apt quota-
tions from the Vulgate, showing the writer’s familiarity
with the Scriptures. It is twenty-six years since his death,
a new generation who knew him not has sprung up, but his
surviving fellow-workers still speak with kindly recollection
and affection of the simple, quaint, and unaffected manners,
the prodigious capacity for work, the kindliness of heart,
and the invariable courtesy to all of the “ Old Baron.”
“ The name is graven on the workmanship,” an assured
foundation on which Australian botanists for generations to
come may base their labours.
Memorials.
It was only natural that, after his death, the numerous
friends and admirers of the Baron should desire to raise a
permanent memorial to his name and fame, and a strong
committee from the scientific societies, &c., to whom his
work most closely appealed, was appointed. In January,
1898, at the meeting of the Australasian Association for the
iVdvancement of Science, from its members an influential
interstate committee was formed to suggest means for estab-
lishing a national memorial. From this number, Professor
Liversidge and Mr. J. H. Maiden were chosen to represent
the association on the “Baron von Mueller National
Memorial Fund Committee.” This committee had in hand
a sum of £450; and, after discussing many proposals, it
was decided to invest this capital, the interest therefrom to
purchase a bronze medal to be awarded not more frequently
than every second year to the author of the most important
contribution, or series of contributions, to natural know-
ledge, published originally within His Majesty’s Dominions,
within a period of not more than five years nor less than one
year of the date of the award, preference being given to work
referring to Australia. The portion of interest remaining
after the purchase of the medal was to be awarded as a
prize to accompany the medal. A permanent committee of
the Council of the A.A.A.S. was nominated to make the
award, the first recipient being the late A. W. Howitt, D.Sc.,
of Metung, Victoria “ for his distinguished services as an
ethnologist and geologist, and for his exploration in Aus-
tralia.” Since the date of the first award in 1904, the medal
has been awarded in due course, as above set out, to seven
other deserving scientists for researches in various fields of
labour. Previous, however, to the establishment of this
appropriate memorial, as the result of an appeal by the


trustees appointed by will, there was reared a stately monu-
ment of chaste workmanship over the Baron’s last resting-
place in the form of a tall column of grey polished granite,
surmounted by an urn, and hearing an inset medallion of
the Baron. Underneath is the following inscription:—
“ Dedicated by Co-workers in the Field of Science
To the Memory of
Baron Sir Ferdinand von Mueller, K.C.M.G., M.D.,
F.R.S., &c.
Born at Rostock, Mecklenburg, June 30th, 1825.
Government Botanist of the State of Victoria, 1852
until his death, Oct. 10th, 1896;
Director of the Botanic Gardens 1857-1873.
Whose erudite works on the flora of Australia have
secured him immortal fame amongst the renowned
phyt-ologists of the 19th century.”
“Despair not; there are still noble hearts that
glow for the august and the sublime.”
“ Blessed are the pure in heart for they
shall see the Lord.”
This monument was unveiled on the 26th November, 1901,
in the presence of a concourse, numbering many of the
Baron’s old friends, and officially representing every state
of the Commonwealth, the European Consulates, and the
world of science. His Excellency the Earl of Hopetoun,
Governor-General of Australia, performed the ceremony;
and, among others, Professor Kernot, Sir John Forrest,
and J. H. Maiden, all old and close friends of the deceased
botanist, gave addresses appropriate to the occasion.
Tangible and enduring as are these memorials testifying
to the high esteem and sincere regard in which one so pre-
eminent among men was held by his fellows, his most last-
ing monument is in the impress of his personality and
genius upon the institutions, as well as upon the distinctive
flora of our country.
In many parts of Australia mount and stream recall the
memory of the bold explorer and keen botanist. Thus, we
have Mount Mueller in the Baw Baws, the Australian Alps,
Tasmania, and the Northern Territory. The same name
marks a river in Eastern Gippsland, a stretch of the Dia-
mantina in Queensland, and a range in New Guinea; whilst
Fort Mueller, in South Australia, a range in Western Aus-
tralia, and Lake Baron von Mueller, near the Victoria


Desert, perpetuate liis close connexion with geographic dis-
covery or his own wanderings. In many other lands also
verdant memorials in tree, plant, and flower for the use and
pleasure of man recall their introducer. In countries across
the ocean the name has also been bestowed, in honour of the
scientist, upon marked physical features, e.g., on a glacier
in Hew Zealand, a cataract on the Parana river in South
America, a lofty peak in Spitzhergen, a cape in Ant-
arctica, &c.
Then, in his own particular science, few botanists of the
world since the days of the great Linnaeus have had their
names associated in a greater degree with the discovery,
determination, or description of new species than the Baron,
who has left such an imperishable record in botanical
classification.
Por so young a nation, Australia has had many distin-
guished scientists, but none who in so many different direc-
tions achieved such great results and so eminent a name,
which will for all time be indissolubly connected with the
Australian flora and the great country in which he was so
worthy a pioneer. He has left an example which might
well be an inspiration to our young men and an incentive,
not only to national service, but also to devotedness to some
great work for the good of humanity.
In the Australasian, a friend of the Baron, Mr. John
Dennistoun Wood, in a tribute to his memory aptly en-
shrined in verse a thought which must often come into the
minds of those who deeply feel the sense of loss when a life
so full and beneficial to mankind suddenly ends: —
’Twere sad if minds endowed with all the love
Of science should at death forever die;
Fain would one hope that, far beyond the shore
Of death’s black river, some fair land may lie
Where he fresh realms of nature may explore
With more than mortal power of brain and eye.
So may a flower transported bloom more fair
On richer soil, in a more genial air.
Bv Authority : H. J. Green, Government Printer, Melbomme.


