

Barossa Cookery Book
Issued in conjunction with
Tanunda Australia Day,
September 8, 1917
All Proceeds, other than bare expenses, go to S.A. Soldiers' Fund.
400
Jried
Recipes
All these Recipes hare been tried and tested, and bear the signature
of each Donor as a guarantee of faith.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
CHAIRMAN—DR. F. JUTTNER.
Joint Secretaries —
MESSRS. W. TUOHY and W. A. BENTEEY.
Printed at The Barosa News Office, Murray Street, Tanunda.


If You desire information
On the Barossa District, drop a Post Card to
The Editor, Barossa News. Murray Street,
Tantmda, who will readily answer your in-
quiries on all local industries.
The Canaan of Australia.
10,776 acres under Vines, returning a yearly average
to the growers of
The 1917 Vintage*(a mean year) produced 1,201,000
gallons of wine—equal to one half of the State’s
production —worth nearly
Under Fruit Trees, 2256 acres.
The Apple crop, alone, returned in one year.
■ Marble for Government buildings,
Wheat, Oats, Ha}', Wool, Gold, Copper and Minerals.
Other Industries : Butter, Leather, Agricultural
Machinery, Canning, Preserving and Jam
Making, Wine and Brandy.
An Ideal Holiday and Health Resort
EXCELLENT HOTELS.


Barossa Cookery Book
Issued in conjunction with
Tanunda Australia Day,
September 8, 1917
All Proceeds, other than bare expenses, go to S.A. Soldiers' Fund.
B40 OS
All these Recipes have keen tried and tested, and bear the signature
of each Donor as a guarantee of faith.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
CHAIRMAN—I)R. F. JUTTNER.
Joint Secretaries —
MESSRS. W. TUOHY and W. A. BENTLEY.


The Superiority in Cooking
is generally due in a large measure to the quality
of the flour used.
ROLLER FLOUR
F. SCHULZ,
TANUNDA MILLS, ADELAIDE,
;
has a reputation throughout the State, and bakers
and caterers everywhere regularly select this brand
and receive large supplies ?
HAVE YOU A BAG IN YOUR HOME ?
MILL & OFFICES :
Murray Street, Tanunda.


We may live without music, poetry, and art;
We may live without conscience, and live without
We may live without friends, we may live without books;
But civilized mar. cannot live without Cooks.
SIMPLE WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
FOR THE HOME.
1 teacup—l gill, 2 wineglasses, i breakfast cup.
1 breakfast cup—-J pint, i lb. sugar.
2 cupfuls—l pint.
4 cupfuls—l quart.
2 cupfuls sugar—l pound.
2 cupfuls butter—l pound.
2 cupfuls dour or oatmeal —1 pound.
4 cupfuls sifted dour —1 point'd.
1 pint of liquid—l pound.
10 eggs—l pound.
1 egg—2 ozs.
1 'dessertspoonful— 2 teaspoons, i tablespoon, >’ duid drachm.
60 drops—l teaspoonful.
1 heaping teaspoonful sugar—l oz.
1 teaspoonful butter —1 oz.
2 roilnding tablespoonfuls dour—l o*.
7 heaping tablespoonfuls sugar—l cupful.
5 heaping tablespoonfuls dour—l cupful.
Soups.
TOMATO SOUP (DARK).
Two lb. beek cut into small pieces about an incii square, roll in flour, L
large turnip, 1 parsnip, 2 lb. tomatoes, 2 teaspoons sugar, pepper and salt to
taste. Put into a jar and cover all with water; put into oven and let simmer
for several hours.
Mrs. J. P. HEGGIE, Angaston.
TOMATO SOUP.
Cut 0 large tomatoes into medium sized pieces without skinning them;
pour over them 1 pint of boiling water, add a lump of butter, i teaspoon carb.
soda. Boil 10 minutes, then pass through a colander. Mix 1 dessertspoonful
of cornflour gradually into 1 pint of cold milk, asd add to tomatoes. Replace
the soup in the sauce;- an, and boil again for . r > or (> minutes, stirring con-
stantly. Add pepper and salt to taste, and serve very hot.
Mrs. F. E. DODSON, Tanunria.
/
TOMATO SOUP.
Eight or nine tomatoes, 1 carrot, 1 onion, a little parsley and thyme, i>epper
and salt to taste. Put all into a stewpan with enough stock to cover them.
Let them boil up and afterwards simmer for 2 hours. When done pass
through a sieve. Just previous to sending to table add 1 tablespoon of maizena,
mix it with the soup, and let it boil. Take soup from fire, and add a little
cream or milk. The former is nicer if procurable. This quantity is sufficient
for eight or nine people.
Mrs. F. JUTTXER, “Paranook,” Tanunda.
VELVET SOUP.
Take" 2 lb. veal or 1 fowl, and cover with water (after cutting meat into
pieces); add a little onion, carrot, parsnip, pepper and salt; boil all well for
2 hours and strain. Take equal quantities of liquor and milk, and boil for 8
to 10 minutes after thickening with a little flour. Serve with tippets of
toast or fried bread.
Mrs. F. JUTTXER, “Paranook,” Tanunda.


A GLIMPSE OF ANGAS RECREATION PARK, ANGASTON.


Entrees.
HAM CROQUETTES.
Take half a cupful of finely-chopped ham, half teaspoonful
breadcrumbs, 1 teaspoonful mashed potatoes, 2 heaped tea-
spoons butter, 1 egg, pepper and a little salt. Have the potatoes
hot, add the butter first, so that it will melt, then beat in all
the other ingredients. Form the mixture> into balls, roll in
Hour (or may be, brushed with egg), then roll in fine bread-
crumbs. Fry in hot fat, drain, and serve hot.
DEVILLED KIDNEYS.
Three or four kidneys, tablespoonful butter, tablespoonful
chutney, teaspoonful mustard, half-teaspoonful Worcester sauce,
little salt and pepper, pinch of cayenne. Mix the butter, chut-
ney, mustard, salt, pepper, and cayenne in a basin, add Worces-
ter sauce. Wash and skin kidneys, cut into three slices. Spread
over them a little of the mixture, and grill or bake them about
15 or 20 minutes. Always grease the griller or-pan well. Serve
on small squares or rounds .hot buttered toast, with a little
brown gravy. Sprinkle a little finely-chopped parlsey on each.
Garnish with thin slices of lemon.
Mrs! W. SHPPELT. Seppeltfield.
BEEF OLIVES.
One and a half pounds of best rump steak. 3 oz. beef suet,
1 egg, 1 teaspoonful of parsley. 1 teaspoonful of thyme, a little
chopped onion, 2 oz. breadcrumbs, a little lemon rind, nutmeg,
pepper and salt. Cut the steak in slices half inch thick and
four inches long. Take the trimmings that remain, chop them
very fine, and add to the forcemeat; mix well together with the
egg. Put a little in each slice of steak, roll up and tie each
roll. Put in a stewpan with some stock, and simmer gently
for two hours. The twine should be removed before sending to
the table.
S. KUBE, Bethany.
MACARONI CHEESE.
Quarter pound macaroni, 3 oz. grated cheese, li oz. butter,
1 oz. flour, J pint milk, cayenne pepper and salt to taste.
Method—Break macaroni in bits, drop in boiling water, and bod
30 minutes; melt butter, add flour; mix with a little milk, stir
over fire to thicken, boil 2 or 3 minutes, >tir in macaroni and
half of cheese; pour mixture into greased pie dish, sprinkle rest
of cheese on top; brown in a quick oven.
Miss ESTHER NIETSCHKE. Rowlands Elat.
FRIED CUCUMBER.
Pare and lay in cold water for about half an hour. Cut
lengthwise in slices about half an inch or less, lay in cold water
for about 10 minutes longer. Drain and wipe dry. * Sprinkle
with salt and pepper, dredge with flour. Fry to a delicate brown
in lard or butter. Probably you will find you have fried whit-
ing.
Mrs. J. S. PEARCE, Kapunda.


The Wise Man takes no chances
with Life, whether it be eating-, or drinking, or
going on a journey. He -is insured against mishap
and if the worst comes he has made provision for
his dependants during the future.
You must take no chances
The wife- or daughter is. bound to practise her
hand on these Tried Recipes, and “ mistakes will
happen in the best of regulated families.” Be
wise, take no chances ; insure your life in
The A.M.P. Life Society,
and provide against the future.
Rocal Agent :
C. W. H. RAKE, Murra3>- street, Tanunda.
5
it


OYSTERS IN SAUCE.
Put oysters from tin on plate. Take liquor and the same
quantity of milk, with a little salt, pepper, and butter, and flour -
to thicken. When boiling add the: oysters for a few minutes.
Serve with tippets of toast, very hot.
Mrs. F. JUTTNER, “Paranook,” Tanunda.
ASPARAGUS ON TOAST.
Ingredients—-To each half gallon, of water allow one heaped
tablespoonful of salt, asparagus. Mode—Asparagus * should be
dressed as soon as possible after it is cut, although it may be
kept for a day or two by putting the stalks in cold water. Scrape
the white part of the stems, beginning from the head. Throw
them into cold water, then tie them into bundles of about 20
each, keeping the heads all one way. Put them into boiling
water with the salt and boil quickly until tender, with saucepan
uncovered. Dish the asparagus upon toast (which should be
dipped in the water the asparagus has been boiled in), leaving
the white ends outwards each way, with points-meeting' in the
middle. Serve with a tureen of melted butter.
Mrs. A. SALTER, Angaston.
EGG A- LA TRIPS.
Materials—Three medium sized onions, 3 eggs, J pint of
milk, 1 small tablespoonful flour, a little butter, pepper arid salt.
Method—Peel the onions and cut in quarters. Boil with salt in
about a cup of water. When soft drain off the water, mix flour
to a smooth paste with milk, add butter-and pepper. Add this
to the onions, and, stirring, boil till it thickens. Then, havng
previously boiled the gggs till quite hard, shell and slice. , Lift
the onions with sauce into a hot dish, place the egg over top,
and garnish with toast.
• GRETA ROBERTSON, Glenelg.
POTATO PUFFS.
Take one cup of cold mashed potatoes and one cup of s.r.
flour; mix well with 1 egg and a little milk, if necessary. , Roll
out and cut into round shapes. Have ready some cold meat
(which has been put through the sausage ’machine), nicely
seasoned with pepper, salt, onion, a spoonful gravy, and a little
tomato sauce. Take a dessertspoonful of meat and put on to
each round of paste, fold over and pinch edges together. Fryr
in boiling lard or fat until nicely browned on both sides. Serve
very hot.
Mrs. F. JUTTNER, “Paranook/' Tanunda.
SAVOURY (BONNES BONCHEES AUX PRUNEAUX).
Put two capers into a turned olive, wrap this in a stoned
prune, wrap the prune in a thin slice of bacon. Bake in an oven
or fry and serve very hot on a small piece of toast.
Miss. H. TUCKER, Tormore House,. North Adelaide.
TOMATO PUDDING.
Fry good sized onion golden brown, skin double quantity
of tomatoes, and stir into frying pan with onions; add .pepper
and salt to taste. Turn into pie dish, add breadcrumbs until of
firm consistency;- put pieces of butter on top and bake until top
is- brown.
Mrs. B. STOW, Croydon,


Your Friends can Buy
Everything except a Photograph of Yourself.
All Photographs are natural,
life - like, artistically con-
ceived and skilfully executed.
There is a personal touch
/
about every picture.
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT NOW.
Gerhard Graue Studio, Tanunda.
Cordials that please!
Manufactured under Perfect Hygienic Conditions
and the purest of ingredients only.
CREAM SODA,
fcOLA CHAMPAGNE,
SODA AND LIME,
LEMONADE,
STONE GINGER,
BRITISH BEER,
TONIC ALE,
O.K. BEER,
GINGER ALE,
ORANGE CHAMPAGNE,
CHERRY CIDER,
GINGER STOUT,
AND MANY OTHER LINES.
Mixed Consignments sent to any address.
Cyril Warnecke,
Nuriootpa.


TO FRY WHITING IN OIL.
Clean and thoroughly wipe the fish, then rub with flour to
free of all moisture. This is most important. Brush over with
beaten egg and sprinkle, over some fine breadcrumbs. Fry in
hot olive oil-<best) to a delicate brown. Send to the table with
plain melted butter.
S. MARSHALL, Kapunda. ,
BENGAL CURRY.
Slice two or three onions and fry brown, sprinkle flour and
fry with x them, and when all browned add milk or stock and
curry. Have ready lentils, boiled and strained, and pour over
them.
Mrs. MILLER. Tanunda.
SALMON PATTIES.
One tin salmon, 1 cup mashed potatoes, 2 eggs, salt, pepper,
chopped parsley, a little flour to bind. Roll into small patties
and fry in boiling fat till a golden brown.
RUSSIAN KROMESSKYS (BREAKFAST).
Cut bacon into several parts, cold veal previously cut and
stewed, add yolk of egg. Spread the bacon with mixture and
roll. Dip them in batter and fry in boiling fat. The batter—
-1 tablespoon flour, a little salt, 1 egg. and a little milk.
Mrs. W. E. HEUZENROEDER, Tanunda.
SCOLLOPED FISH.
v Take half a pound cold fish, 4 oz. breadcrumbs, 2 oz. butter,
1 oz. flour, pint milk or fish stock, pepper and salt. Method—
Break up fish and'remove all bones; mix with 2 oz. breadcrumbs,
pepper and salt.. Make a sauce by melting 1 oz. of butter in
an enamel saucepan. Stir in the flour gradually, add milk or
stock gradually, removing from fire every time liquid is added,
but boiling up after each addition. Stir in the fish, etc., then
place in a buttered pie dish; put the rest of the crumbs on top
and the other oz. of butter in small pieces. Bake for twenty
minutes.
Sister G. L. RONAQUE, 7th A.G.H., Keswick.
EXETER STEW.
Half lb. gravy beef, 1 oz. dripping, 1 onion. 1 tablespoon flour, 1 pint of
water or stock, 2 teaspoons vinegar, salt and pepper to taste. Cut meat jn
small pieces, melt dripping, and put in the onion, cut small, and fry till
brown, add flour, then gradually add water or stock and vinegar, and then the
meat. Stew one and a half hours gently. One hour before serving add savory
balls made as follows: —Quarter lb. flour, li tablespoons chopped suet, J tea-
spoon baking powder, l teaspoon herbs such as thyme, marjoram, and sage,
pepper and salt to taste, i teaspoon onion chopped finely, and h teaspoon chop-
ped parsley. Put all dry ingredients in a basin, mix with enough cold water
to a stiff paste, form into little balls, and add to the stew.
Mrs. J. OBST, Tanunda.
MEAT ROLL.
One lb. beef steak. 1 lb. bacon, 1 lb. bread .-rumbs, three-quarter nutmeg,
1 egg, little chopped parsley, salt, and pepper to taste. Mix well together,
roll into shape on a board, adding small quantity of flour if necessary. Tie in
a cloth, and boil three hours.
■ Mrs. R. PLAYER, Angaston.
SAVOURY PIE.
Place in a dish alternately a layer of beef cut in thin slices, then onions
and turnips, also cut in slices, sprinkle salt and pepper as required, and
cover with water (care should be taken not to have the dish too full. Place
the dish in oven, and cook slowly for about 1 hour, then cover with paste,-
and bake in a quick oven. Xote —Should the beef be on the tough, side, cook
a little longer before putting on the crust
A. E. SCHULZ, Rowland's Flat,


For the Public Good !
Facts to be remembered.
ALTONA DROPS and
1. Now produced in Australia and made by Australians.
2. Purer than the German drugs as previously supplied to
Australia.
3. Manufactured for the public benefit. AI/TONA DROPS
for Indigestion, Diarrhoea, Sickness, Dizziness, Doss of
Appetite, Stomach Troubles, Impure Blood, etc., etc.
BERG OIL for Stock ailments such .as Colic, Bladder
and Stomach Troubles, Worms, etc.
4. Beware of imitations. When you buy these remedies see
' that the label bears the signature as shown beneath.
You are then getting the pure articles.
5. By buying these AI/fONA DROPS and BERG OIL, you
are building up an Australian industry.
6. If you cannot obtain locally, write direct for your supplies to
. HEUZENROEDER,
MANUFACTURING CHEMIST,
TANUNDA,
Sth, Aust.


BRAWN.
Two pig’s trotters, knuckle veal, about 11 lb. skin of beef. Halve trotters
and meat, put in saucepan, and just cover with water, also add 4 bay
leaves, 0 cloves, 1 teaspoon peppercorns; 1 teaspoon whole allspice, 1 dessert-
spoon salt. Let boil for .'1 or 4 hours. - When cooked take out meat and chop
finely, remove all bones, strain all liquid into a basin, add chopped meat with
about 1 cup vinegar, pepper and salt to taste. Put over fire, and let come
to a boil. Pour into basins to set.
Mrs. F. JUTTXER, “Paranook,” Tanunda.
RABBIT PIE.
One stewed rabbit, a few slices of ham, salt, white pepper to taste, 2 blades
pounded mace, half a taspoonful of grated nutmeg, a few forcemeat balls, 8
hard-boiled eggs, half a pint of gravy, puff paste. Method —Cut up the
rabbit, which has previously been stewed, removing bones; put into a piedish
the rabbit, ham, forcemeat, and eggs by turns in layers, and season each layer
with pepper, salt, pounded mace, and nutmeg. Pour in about half the gravy,
cover with pastry, and bake in a well-heated oven. When done pour in
at the top throle the hole in the middle of crust the remainder of the gravy.
Mrs. A. H. YOI’XGMAN, Tanunda.
VEAL CUTLET.
To prepare a veal cutlet that fairly “melts in your mouth” _is an art
worth your attention. First cut the veal into small pieces and dip it as usual
in bread crumbs, beaten egg and again in bread crumbs; brown the cutlet
in one tablespoonful of butter, pour over it the brown cutlet sauce, and
allow it to simmer for about and hour and a half, or until tender. The sauce
is made as follows:—Quarter tablespoonful of butter, half tablespoonful of
fiour, eighth teaspoonful of salt, half cupful of stock or water, quarter tea-
spoonful of table sauce, quarter tablespoonful of chopped parsley. Prepare
as any brown sauce, by -browning the butter, adding the dry ingredients, and
blending well. Remove from the fire, and add a small quantity of the liquid.
Blend well, and add the remainder pf the liquid. Return to the fire and let it
boil for one minute. Remove, add the table sauce and parsley, and pour the
brown sauce over the cutlet.
Mr. H. W. SCHROEDER, Tanunda.
BEEF,. STEAK PUDDING.
One lb. beef steak or three-quarter lb. beef skirt, and cold water. Sea-
soning—I tablespoonful Hour, 1 teaspoon salt, quarter teaspoon pepper. For
the Silet Pastry—Half.,lb. Hour, “• oz. suet, i teaspoon baking powder, i tea-
spoon salt, cold water. Cut the meat into thin strips about 2 in. or 1! in.
long. Cut. up the fat into small pieces. Mix the seasoning on a plate, roll
in it each strip of meat, put a piece of fat in each, and roll into neat balls.
Chop the suet very finely, and mix with the flour, salt, and baking powder.
Make' into a stiff paste with cold water, turn on to a floured board, and cut
off one-third for the- top. Roll up till the width is double the height of the
basin. Grease the basin and line with the pastry. Put .in the meat and half-
fill with water for gravy. Roll out the one-third ipastry and lay on top, folding
the sides over the top. Lav a greased paper < <er the top, and stand in a
saucepan containing boiling water sufficient to ( ime half-way up. Steam for
three hours, adding boiling water from time to ime.
v Miss- E. HAS. WELL, Rowland’s Flat.
JELLIED FOWL.
Cut legs, wings, breast, backbone, and neck. Add about 1! cups of water
or enough to cover it, pepper and salt, tiny onion, with 2 or ."> cloves stuck
into it. Bring to . a boil, and let simmer until every bit comes off the
bones —not less than two hours. Boil “. or 4 eggs hard, peel and cut in slices,
and place in the'bottom ai«d around sides of basin to garnish. Soak for a
few hours 1 oz. of gelatine in cup of- water, then add fowl and M cups of
liquor, and boil up again. Place carefully in basin on top of boiled eggs,
and let stand o'verniglit. You must have 4 cups of liquor (fowl counts as one).
Take 1 02;. of gelatine to every fowl-and “> cups liquor.
•fc < Mrs. F. JUTTXER, “Paranook,” Tanunda.
COLD PIGEON PIE. ,• ' ’
2 lb. steak, 2 pigeons, 2 hard-boiled eggs. Hour, pepper, salt, and gela-
tine. Cut the steak into nice-sized pieces and dip lightly into flour, pepper
and salt. Cut pigeons into four pieces then proceed to ffll the pie, adding
the eggs (cut in quarters),-fill with stock or water, cover/with and
bake gently for 2 hours. Dissolve ~> sheets of gelatine in three-quarter pint of
stock. When cooked fill the pie by removing ornament on top. This will
set a jelly when cold.
Mrs. EDDY OFFE, Tanunda.


Kemp’s Nurseries
UNLEY ROAD.
For Seesd, Plants and Trees are unexcelled. Give my Seeds
and Plants a trial.
My aim is to give good value as possible for value received.
No better value can be bought.'
All the best varieties of Flower and Vegetable Seeds, Roses,
Shrubs, Hedge Plants, Fruit Trees. Vines, etc., are in stock.
Personal attention given to all orders.
Catalogues gratis and post free on application.
H. Kemp : Unley.
9
WILL
YOU
ALWAYS
'LOOK
FOR
THIS
LABKL ?
9
fr
FOR COMFORT.
NOV - INJURIOUS,
J’I.KASANTI.Y PERFUMED.
FEET-
For Tired, Aching, Swollen,
Blistered and Perspiring Feet.
DIRECTIONS :
& small quantity to be sponged
on the feet at bedtime, and
allowed to dry on.
POISON
Solely Manufactured by
R. M. HARDY,
Chemist, Angaston, S.A.
?
YOUR
FEET
COMFORT
WILL
BE
GREATLY
ENHANCED.


SALMON LOAF.
Take a pound tin of best salmon, remove the bones and break into
flakes with a silver fork. Add 4 tablespoons melted butter, 1 cun breadcrumbs,
£ teaspoon salt, and 4 well-beaten eggs. Put into a well-greased pudding dish,
and steam for 1 hour. This may be served hot on a platter with riced
potaoes and a cream gravy, or sliced cold with a garnishing of lettuce or
parsley and lemon.
Mrs. F. JUTTXER, “Paranook,” Tanunda.
GERMAN SAUSAGE.
1 Ih. rump steak minced, 1 teaspoon pepper, 1 lb. bacon, 1 nutmeg, 1
teaspoon salt, £ lb breadcrumbs. 2 eggs well beaten. Form into a sausage,
tie tightly ih a cloth and boil from 2 to -2J hoursz Remove cloth while hot.
Mrs. E. J. F. CRAWFORD, Angaston.
Puddings, etc.
. VANILLA custard.
Put on to heat a quart of milk with a'pinch of carbonate soda in it; beat
a cup of sugar and a tablcspoonful of cornflour into the yolks of 3 eggs, and
pour gradually into the hot milk, stirring until it thickens; put into a glass,
dish. Whip the white of the eggs to a standing froth, add a teaspoonful of
essence vanilla, and beat in with the hot custard.
Mrs. H. A. DUDLEY, Xuriootpa Post Office.
THORNTON PUDDING.
Two eggs, their weight in flour, weight of 1 egg in sugar and butter,
2 tablespoonfuls raspberry or strawberry jam, $ teaspoonful carb. soda. . Cream
the butter and sugar, mix soda well in the flour, beat eggs well, add
the eggs and flotir to the creamed butter and sugar, fill a w-ell-greased mould
three parts full with the mixture. Steam three-quarters of an hour; serve
■with jam sauce.
Mrs. W. SEPPELT, Seppeltsfield.
TREACLE PUDDfHtT^
Two eggs, their weight in butter and flour,'^thfc'weight of 1 egg-in brown
-sugar, i teaspoonful soda, 2 tablespoonfuls treacle. the butter and
sugar, add treacle, beat,, the 'eggs well.« Mix th'e soda well in the flour,
gradually work in flour and eggs to the creamed butter and sugar, beat well.
Fill a well-greased mould three parts full with the mixture, cover with greased
paper, and steam 1 hour. Turn out and serve with custard sauce.
r 1 Mrs. W. SEPPELT, Seppeltsfield.
PLAIN PUDDING.
One dessertspoonful J dessertspoonful sugar, 1 egg beaten into a
breakfast cup and filled with milk, 1 cup'-S.R. flour, little salt. Beat butter
and sugar to a cream, add egg with well, beaten, then flour with salt.
Steam for two and a half hours. Tis be served with golden syrup or jam.
Mrs. C. A. L. VIRGO, Nuriootpa.
EGYPTIAN PUDDING.
One cup flour, £ cup sugar, £ cup chopped dates, 3 Jablespoonfuls suet,
good tablespoonful jam, pinch salt, 1 teaspoonful mixed spice, small cup milk
with 1 teaspoonful carb. soda in it. Put into mould and boil 3 hours.
S. W., Katpunda.
SPONGE PUDDING. ~
Rub It oz. butter into £ lb. flour in which a dessertspoonful of ground
ginger and 3 oz. brown sugar have been mixed. Add 1 teaspoonful milk, and
beat all together into a soft batter.* Pour into a buttered basin, and boil 2£
hours. Serve with sweet sauce.
Miss S. SOBELS, Tanunda.
A SOLDIER’S RECIPE FROM FRANCE—HOW TO MAKE
’’TRENCH PORRIDGE.”
Take £ lb. Anzac wafers, commonly known as whole meal biscuits or jaw
breakers, powder up, and soak overnight in about 1 pint of water —shellhole
water if procurable. Care must be taken in the soaking stage, or the bis-
cuits may get too soft (I don’t think). Next day boi for about 20 minutes,
than add quarter lb. raisins, and boil for another 10 minutes. Then add milk
and sugar to taste. If prepared in this way a most nourishing and tasty dish
•Xuedtuto »»9 Suupepi ‘ajjo HOIOIA »,ld *q
/ linsajt aip oq


TEA
as now blended will commend
itself to the most exacting taste.
TRY IT!


LIGHT PLUM PUDDING.
Soak 1 tablcspoonful sago in a cup of milk afew hours before making-
pudding, 1 tablespoonful of butter or dripping beaten to a cream with a cup
of sugar, then add the sago with a little more miflc, li cups plain flour, 1 cup
stoned raisins or currants, 1 teaspoonful carh. soda dissolved in a little milk,
and a little salt. I’ut in a greased mould and boil 2 hours.
Mrs. W. BARLOW, Exeter.
LEMON PUDDING.
One cup white sugar, 1 lemon, 2 tablespoons arrowroot, 2 eggs, 1 dessert-
spoon butter. Bind the arrowroot with cold water, add grated rind and juice
of the lemon, the yolks not beaten, and the sugar. Stir all into a pint of
boiling water, and boil for 2 minutes. Then mix in the butter. Put into a
piedish, whisk the whitis into a stiff froth, add 2 teaspoons sugar. Spread
on top, and bake a few minutes. Serve cold.
JAM ROLY POLY.
Ouarter lb. breadcrumbs, quarter lb. flour, quarter lb. suet, £ teaspoon
salt, 1 teaspoon baking powder, water to mix. Place the flour and bread-
crumbs in a bowl with salt and baking powder, add the finely chopped suet.
Mix to a stiff paste with water. Turn out on to a floured board and roll into
a long narrow strip. Spread with jam. keeping away from 'the edge of the
pastry. Roll up and s'cal ends, and fasten in a floured cloth which has
been previously scalded. Tie the ends securely with string. Place on a plate
in a saucepan of boiling water, and boiLfptaJ! hours. Serve with custard.
, y, ELSIE HAESE, Lyndfoch.
‘ , VENETIAN FRITTERS.
Put 2 tablespoolw rice into 1 cup milk, and boil till tender. Peel and
slice 4 middle-sized apples and put on to stew. Mix 2 tablespoons flour with
2 eggs well bea.ten, 1 tablespoon butter, 1 tablespoon sugar, the grated rind
of half a leny(sn. Beat all well, and when apples and rice are cool add them
and mix w ffi again. A few currants may be added, then drop in spoonsful
into boiling lard, and fry a golden brown; drain on white paper, and sprinkle
with suga'r and lemon juice, and send to the table immediately.
Mrs. F. JUTTNER, “Paranook,” Tanunda.
t WAFER PUDDING.
Four oz. flour, 2 oz. butter, 2 eggs, 1 teaspoon baking powder. Rub the
butter into the flour, add the eggs well beaten with h pint milk. Bake on
saucers, and when cooked put jam in and clap over together. Serve hot.
• Mrs. A. BOEHM, Tanunda.
' CURRANT PUDDING.
Two cups flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup suet, 1 cup currants, cup milk, 2
teaspoons carb. soda, 1 teaspoon essence of lemon, 1 egg, and a little nutmeg.
Mixture —Mix all the dry ingredients well together, beat egg well with essence
of lemon, mix soda in milk, stir well together, and boil well for 1> hours.
Serve with brandy sauce.-
C. H. GRAMP, Rowand’s Flat.
STEAMED CHOCOLATE PUDDING.
One cup sugar, 2 eggs, 2 tablespoons butter, 2 cups S.R. flour, 1 cup milk-,
2 tablespoons chocolate, pinch salt. Put chocolate in last soaked in hot
water. Steam 2. hours. Serve with sauce.
H. KOCH, Rowland’s Flat.
KALINGALE PUDDING.
Two eggs, their weight in flour, sugar, and butter, 1 tablespoon jam (rasp-
berry or marmalade), J teaspoon baking soda. Mix rather thin, add a little
milk if needed. Boil for 2 hours.
O. KOCH, Rowland’s Flat.
RICH CHRISTMAS PUDDING.
One lb. breadcrumbs, 1 lb. suet, 1 lb. raisins, 1 lb. currants, 1 lb. sul-
tanas, i lb. almonds, A lb. sugar, h lb. candied peel, spice to taste, 14 eggs,
and 1 gill of brandy. Boil ten hours. Method. Crumble the bread, add suet
chopped tine, then fruit and candied peel, spice, sugar. Mix all togther, then
add eggs, brandy, and mix very well.
Mrs. W. TUOHY, Tanunda.
TAPIOCA PUDDING.
Soak i cup of tapioca overnight is water. Next moaning boil in milk
and sugar until clear; empty into a mould. Beat well together 2 eggs, 1 cup
sugar, rind and juice of 2 small lemons, add quarter of water, put into a
saucepan, and stir until it thickens; put over top of tapioca. Serve hot or
oold. '


PINEAPPLE PUDDING.
Half 11). pineapple, <> oz. tlour, <i oz. castor sugar, quarter lb. butter, 4
eggs, 1 pint milk. Put sugar, butter, and milk into an enamelled saucepan,
and when they simmer remove the pan from the fire, and stir in the flour
gradually and smoothly, stir over the fire for o minutes, and again remove, then
add eggs one by one, and the pineapple, which must be cut small. The con-
tents of saucepan should then be turned into a well-buttered mould. Cover
with a piece of buttered paper, and steam for an hour and a half.
Mrs. \V. PEARSON, Goodwood.
Mrs. J. BOGNER, Tanunda.
APPLE BATTER PUDDING.
Ingredients—One lb. of apples, 2 tablespoonfuls flour, 1 pint milk, 1
egg, sugar. Method—Pare and core the apples without dividing them, and
staud them close together in a piedish. Put the flour into a basin, mix
smoothly with milk, add the egg beaten up in the remainder of the milk, and
beat it well for 5 minutes. Sprinkle the apple with sugar and lemon juice,
pour the batter over them. Bake about an hour, when the batter will be set.
PAULINE SEMMLER, Tanunda.
BAKED RHUBARB WITH CUSTARD.
To 1 pint of milk allow 1 pint of stewed rhubarb, 2 well beaten eggs,
three-quarters of a pint of grated breadcrumbs, sugar to taste, and a little nut-
meg. Mix the finely grated crumbs with the stewed rhubarb in a basin, then
stir in the eggs, milk, and sugar, and mix all the ingredients thoroughly
together. Butter a piedish, put in the mixture, smooth the top, and put itr
a moderate oven until slightly browned : then take out the dish, grate a little
nutmeg sparingly over the pudding, and put in the oven until quite set.
Mrs. G. XITSCHKE, Tanunda.
BOILED FRUIT PUDDING, 1
One cup flour, 1 cup breadcrumbs, 1 cup snet (chopped). \ cup sugar, I
cup sultanas and currants, 1 cup milk in which 1& tcaspoonfuls carb. soda has-
been dissolved, a little nutmeg, essence lemon, or any flavouring if desired.
Boil •'! hours, and serve with custard sauce. * This recipe is sufficient for eight
persons.
M. CHINXER, Foster Street, Parkside.
FIVE CUP PUDDING.
One cup plain flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup suet, 1 cup currants or any kind of
dried fruit, 1 cup milk. 1 teaspoonful carb. soda, a pinch of salt. .Mix all
together well and boil for 4 hours.
’ Mrs. F. E. DODSOX, Tanunda.
WASHINGTON PUDDING.
Three eggs, the weight of 2 in flour, 2 in sugar, 2 in butter, 2 tablespoon-
fuls apricot jam. Melt the butter into a cream, beat the eggs and sugar, mix
the butter and flour together, and a pinch of soda, and boil 1J hours.
Mrs. E. B. GROCKE, Krondorf.
MARGERITE PUDING.
Greece a plain mould or basin, and place a nice quantity jam in the
bottom. Make a batter with 2 cups flour, 1 cup sugar, 4 oz. butter melted,.
2 eggs, 1 cup milk, 1 small teaspoon baking soda, 2 teaspoons cream of"
tartar. Mix soda in flour, pour this into the mould over the jam, then cover
up. Boil 2 hours
Mrs. A. LIERSCH. Bethany.
PINEAPPLE SPONGE.
One oz. gelatine, whites 2 eggs, 4 to H oz. sugar, i gill water, 1 pint
preserve pineapple juice, and juice l lemon. Dissolve gelatine and sugar in
water in small saucepan. Mix with juice, and when, cool whisk with the
whites of eggs well beaten till mixture becomes quite spongy and drops :
slow and thick from a spoon. When set, turn out of basin, and decorate-
with pieces of pineapple.
Mrs. C. A. FOLLITT, Tannuda.
N
' TREACLE PUDDING.
Two cups flour, 4 tablespoonfuls sugar, i teaspoqn sak, 1 teaspoon soda,
1 dessertspoon ground ginger, 2 tablespoons treacle, 1 cup milk. Steam in - ,
buttered mould for 2 hours, and serve with citst-ard.
Miss E. B. BROCK, Tanunda.
STEAMED FIG PUDDING (Original).
One teacup suet, i teacup sugar, three-quarter ettp breadcrumbs, three-
quarter cup flour, 1J cups fig jam, small teaspoon baking powder, large tea-
spoon ground ginger, salt to taste, 1 egg. Serve with sweet sauce or cream-
Steam 2i hours.
Mrs. W. H. JEFFERSON, Union Bank, Xarocoorte.


HONEYCOMB PUDDING.
One oz. sheet gelatine; 2 cups new milk, .'1 eggs, J cup sugar, lemon
flavouring. Soak gelatine in milk with sugar. When dissolved put into
saucepan, let it slowly come to a boil, then add yolks of eggs beaten, let it
come to a boiling point, but must not boil. Have ready whites of eggs
■well beaten to a stiff froth, add, stirring well, not over the fire, then put into
wet mould.
F. E. MARLIN, Glenelg.
ANGEL CREAM.
One pint new milk, J cup sugar, .'! heaped teaspoonfuls cornflour, 2 eggs
(the whites only). LJissolve the cornflour in a little of the milk, and stir
at' smooth into the boiling milk and sugar until it thickens, then add the
whipped whites of eggs after it has cooled a little, and add what flavouring
you like. Serve with custard when cold.
M. TRELOAR, I’arkside.
YANKEE PUDDING.
Take 1 egg, its weight in butter, flour, and breadcrumbs, 1 dessertspoon
golden syrup, 1 teaspoonful carb. soda. Beat butter and egg, dissolve soda
in a little warm milk, add flour and other ingredients, mix well, and steam
ail a buttered mould or basin for 1J hours
X. M. C'LATWORTHY, Westbourne Park.
BREAD PUDDING.
Half a pint of milk, 1 egg. half teacup breadcrumbs, sugar, and nutmeg-.
Boil the milk and pour it boiling over the breadcrumbs, and let them cool;
beat finely and add the egg, the yolk and white separately, add a little sugar
grated nutmeg; butter a small basin, pour in the mixture, tie a but-
tered paper over, tie it in a cloth, and boil for 20 minutes.
Mrs. MILLER, Tanunda.
CANARY PUDDING.
The weight of 2 eggs in sugar and butter, the weight of 2 eggs in flour,
•rind and juice of a lemon, 2 eggs. Mode—Beat butter and sugar together,
jadd eggs well beaten, add flour. Beat all well together, and put into but-
■tcred moulds. Boil 2 hours.
Miss CLEMENCE, Adelaide.
DAINTY APPLE DISH.
Peel and core apples, make syrup of sugar*and water, adding a little
rginger. put on apples whole, taking care they do not touch each other, and
■ .-tew .them gently till tender. Lift them out with fish slice on flat dish till
•cool, then remove to glass or silver dish, and fill each apple in centre with
whipped cream.
TMELDA SMITH, Railway Hotel, Kapunda.
COTTAGE PUDDING.
One tablespoon butter, 1 cup sugar, J cup milk, 2 eggs, 1 large tea-
spoonful baking powder, 1J cups flour. Beat the butter, sugar and yolks of the
eggs together until ligh\ add the milk and then the flour. Beat well. Now
beat the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth, and stir them carefully into the
pudding, add the baking powde**. and mix 'veil. Pour into a greased cake pan,
and bake in a moderate oven for three-quarters of an hour. Serve hot with
lemon sauce. EMMA M. OBST, Tanunda.
CUP PUDDING.
Three oz. butter, 2 oz. flour, 2 oz. sugar, quarter pint milk. 1 egg, 1 tea-
spoonful baking powder. Mode —Beat butter to cream, add sugar, then nour
mixed with milk and egg. Bake in buttered cup for half an hour. Fill cups
°nly * ‘ Mrs. H. R. GUERIN, East Adelaide.
SPANISH CREAM.
Soak i oz. sheet gelatine in 1 pint milk for half an hour, add beaten
yolks of 2 eggs, 2 tablespoons sugar, 1 teaspoon vanilla, whip whites of eggs
to stiff froth, heat mixture, stirring, to nearly boiling point take off fire,
and stir whites of eggs in rapidly and thoroughly. Pour into wet mould to
set. Make a pint of custard, and when the cream is turned out pour custard
roU,ld ll ' \Mrs. RODNEY COCKBURX, Malvern.
SPONGE PUDDING. „ . . '
Three cups flour, 1 cup butter, li cups milk, 2 eggs, 1 teaspoon soda, _
-teaspoons cream qT tartar, 1 cup -sugar. Ko.Ki hour! \ G OERS, Adelaide.


Reliable Furniture.
The comfort of a Home if*
heightened by the quality
of the Furniture. Good
pieces, even if few in num-
ber, look wear well, and
give you lasting pleasure.
I can supply your require-
ments in Reliable Furniture
at under Adelaide prices
B. Freytag, Tanunda.
The Victoria Hotel
TANUNDA
Provides that degree of comfort and homeliness
that gives pleasure to the visitor, and makes him
appreciate the holiday.
ARTHUR F. SCHRADER,
Proprietor.
The Bar is replete with all liquors of high-class
quality and known brands.
A Post Card will secure particulars of the Tariff.


PLAIN PLUM PUDDING WITHOUT EGGS.
One cup flour, 1 cup breadcrumbs, 1 cup suet, 1 cup currants, | cup sugar,
I teaspoon carb. soda, £ teaspoon salt £ nutmeg grated. Mix with a cup of
sour milk, and boil three hours. If you have no sour milk, put a pinch
of acid in a cup of sweet, as the milk must be sour.
Mrs. C. von BERfOUCH, Unley.
WAR TIME PLUM PUDDING.
Half oz. flour, 1! oz. raisins, (1 oz. currants, quarter lb. suet, quarter lb.
brown sugar, quarter lb. mashed carrot, quarter lb. mashed potatoes, 1 table-
treacle, 1 oz. lemon peel, 1 oz. citron peel. Boil as usual for a
pudding of this size.
Mrs. J. S. PEARCE, Kapunda.
VICTORIA PUDDING.
Two eggs, their weight in flour and butter, and the weight of one in sugar.
Beat butter to a cream with the sugar, add the eggs well beaten, stir in the
flour, then add 2 tablespoons raspberry jam; at the very last £ teaspoon carb.
soda well beaten. Boil one and three-quarters hours.
Mrs. A. BOSENBERG, Tanunda.
VICTORIA PUDDING.
One cup flour, 3 tablespoons sugar, 1 egg, tablespoons jam, 1 teaspoon
soda, 1 cup milk, 1 tablespoon butter, essence of lemon. Steam 2 hours in a
mould.
Miss E. AHRENS Vine Vale.
PRUNE PUDDING.
Stew 1 cup prunes, remove stones, and cut in small pieces; add 2 tea-
spoons of vanilla and sugar to taste. Beat the whites of .'I eggs stiff with ."»
tablespoons sugar, mix well with the prunes, put into baking dish, and
brown in a quick oven. Serve with whipped cream.
Mrs. E. E. WOODS, Angaston.
ITALIAN CREAM.
Whip well 1 pint fresh cream, add a large tablespoon castor sugar, 11 des-
sertspoonfuls sherry, and the juice of a small lemon. Dissolve £ oz. of
gelatine in a little water, and stir well into the cream, then put in wet mould
in a cool place.
Mrs. E. E. WOODS, Angaston.
SPONGE PUDDING.
One cup sugar, three-quarter cup butter, .‘1 eggs, 1 cup milk, 2 cups S.R.
flour, flavouring vanilla or essence of lemon. Beat butter and sugar to a
cream, add eggs, milk, and then flour. Put in a well-buttered pudding mould,
and steam 2 hours. Serve with sweet sauce flavoured with vanilla.
Miss K. FREESTINE, Tanunda.
SAGO DATE PUDDING.
One cup breadcrumbs, 1 cup dates or. raisins,' £ cup sugar. 2 tablespoons
sago soaked in a cup of milk, £ teaspoon soda, 2 oz. melted butter, a little
nutmeg or spice. Steam 2£ hours. Serve with sweet sauce of custard.
Mrs. R. S. HAWKE, Kapunda.
SAGO PLUM PUDDING.
Two tablespoons sago soaked in a breakfast cup of milk overnight, £ cup
sugar, 1 big cup raisins, lightly fill 1 cup of breadcrumbs, 1 teaspoon butter,
1 small teaspoon soda soaked in about a dessertspoonful milk. Steam hours
in a well-buttered mould.
E. M. JACOB, Rowland’s Flat.
STEAM SAGO PUDDING.
Soak 1 cup of sago overnight; add 1 cup raisins or currants, 1 cup
breadcrumbs, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup milk, 2 eggs, 1 tablespoonful butter, 1 tea-
spoonful carb. soda. Mix all together and steam 3 hours.
Miss F. FRITSCHE, Tannuda.
SAGO AVOKA.
Large cup sago soaked 2 hours, large cup breadcrumbs, large cup sugar-,
medium cup milk, 1£ cups water, and 1 teaspoon carb. soda mixed, large
tabespoonful butter melted, cup of dates or sultanas, 2 eggs, 1 cup milk.
Place in greased basin, and steam 3 to 4 hours.
V. B. SCHULZ, Rowland’s Flat.
SAGO PLUM PUDDING.
Four tablespoonfuls sago, 1 tablespoonful butter, 1 cup milk, 1 cup sugar,
1 cup raisins or dates, 1 cup breadcrumbs, 1 dessertspoonful carb. soda.
Method —Soak the sago an hour, mix other ingredients, ad(j the sago, and
steam 3 hours.
Miss MARIE WII.KSCH, Tanunda.


Biscuits.
MELTING MOMENTS.
Take <i oz. butter, beat to a cream, add 3 oz. castor sugar, h lb. corn-
llour, and 2 eggs well beaten, then add to the mixture, and when all mixed
weil together add a teaspoonful of baking powder. Drop on to a well-
greased tin about a teaspoonful. and bake 20 minutes.
Mrs. A. F. SCHRADER, Tannuda.
GINGER SNAPS.
Three cups flour, 1 cup sugar, J cup honey or treacle, quarter lb. butter,
1 teaspoonful carb. soda dissolved in water. Rub flour and butter and!
sugar, then treacle, lastly soda. Bake in a moderate oven, roll into little
balls not too large.
Miss A. ROBERTSON, Adelaide.
FINGER BISCUITS.
. Two cups S.R. flour, i cup sugar, quarter butter, l cup milk, 2 eggs
(use yokes only, keep whites for icing). Rub butter into sugar and flour,
beat yokes and add milk, mix altogether. When a nice stiff»paste roll out
thin. Beat whites of eggs, add icing sugar till thin enough to spread. Sprinkle
with chipped almonds or cocoanut. Cut in finger shapes and bake quickly.
Mrs. D. T. KEIGHTLEY, Angaston.
t Mrs. W. J. MATTISKE, Angaston.
ALMOND FINGERS.
Half pound S.R. flour, quarter lb. butter, 2 tablespoons sugar, the yolk
of an egg, and perhaps a little milk. Mix butter, sugar, flour, and h teaspoon
baking powder together. Roll out very thinly, and spread icing on top, and
then sprinkle with chopped almonds or peanuts, and bake in fairly quick
oven till light brown. Icing.—White of an egg with about quarter lb. icing
sugar, and a few drops of vanilla. ,
Mrs. J. E. SWANN, Angaston
Also S. W., Kapunda, 1 tablespoonful sugar; E. N. Jacob, Rowland’s Flat.
COCOANUT CHIPS.
Four cups flour, 2 cups sugar, 1 pkt. cocoanut chips, 1 teaspoonful carb.
soda, 2 cream of tartar, ti eggs, 1 cup of butter. Mix butter, sugar, and eggs-
to a cream, add flour, roll out thin, cut into biscuits.
Mrs. J. A. SCHWARTZ, Tanunda.
COCOANUT BISCUITS.
'lO oz. flour, ~> oz. butter, oz. sugar, 2 eggs. Mix flour, butter, and'
sugar together till sugar is -well dissolved, then add the eggs. Drop them
with a teaspoon into some desiccated cocoanut, put on slide, and bake irr
fairly quick oven.
Miss D. HOFFMANN, Tanunda.
PORT HOPE BISCUIT.
Two eggs, 2 cups sugar, 1 cup butter, \ cup milk, 1 teaspoon cream tartar,
i teaspoon carb. soda, enough flour to mix. Roll out and bake in a moderate
oven. Flavour with essence of lemon.
Mrs. LUNN, Tanunda.
' COCOANUT BISCUITS.
Three cups flour, 1J cups sugar, J lb. butter, 3 eggs, J pkt. of cocoanut,.
and a little essence of lemon. Mode—Mix sugar and butter, then eggs,
cocoanut, and S.R. flour, roll thin, and bake in a quick oven.
Mrs. PERCY BEVAN, Adelaide.'
GINGER NUTS.
One lb. 2 oz. flour, \ lb. butter, i lb. sugar, three-quarter lb. treacle, 1
oz. ground ginger. Mix all the ingredients into a stiff dough, roll out, cut
into small biscuits, and bake in a moderate oven.
Miss J. M. BARTSCH, Angaston.
SCOTCH SHORTBREAD.
Ingredients—4 oz. flour, 2 oz. rice flour, 4 oz. butter, 2 oz. castor sugar.
Method—Put all ingredients into a basin, and mix thoroughly and rapidly
with fingers and thumbs until one moist lump free from cracks is formed.
Form a round or square cake about J in. in thickness. Prick the centre
thoroughly with a fork, and nip the edge between floured finger and thumb.
Place on buttered paper in a slow oven, and cook until a nice brown colour.
Allow to cool before trying to lift the cake, as shortbread is very soft when
hot, and ought be crisp when cool. The cake can be marked while warm:
with a knife in th*e way in which you want to cut or break it later.
Mrs. FRANK COWAN. Edinburgh, Scotland.


’BISCUITS.
Two cups flour, 1 cup sugar, quarter lb. butter, 2 eggs,' 2 teaspoons
'cream of .tartar, 1 teaspoon soda. Put flour and powder in a. dish, then
■add sugar, rub butter into the flour, beat the eggs well and mix, roll out
thin, and put half .an almond on'each biscuit. Bake in moderate oven.
Miss A. MULLEN, Angaston.
•KISSES.
'One !lb. vcosuflour, 3 lb. :flour, i lb. butter, J cup milk, $ lb. sugar, 2 or
2 eggs, l teaspoon cream of tartar, 1 teaspoon soda. Beat the butter and the
■sugar to a cream. Then .add the well-beaten eggs and milk. Lastly flour
.and cream of tartar and soda. Put them with a teaspoon on a greased oven
■slide and bake.
Miss SELMA HETZZEL, Rowland’s Flat.
ITALIAN BISCUITS.
One lb. flour, 1 lb. butter, i lb. sifted sugar, 2 eggs, 1 teaspoon nutmeg,
.2 teaspoons cinnamon, S teaspoon carbonate soda, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar.
Beat butter .and sugar to a cream, add eggs well beaten, sift in flour with other
ingredients. Rdll out very thin and cut jnto rounds; bake in a brisk oven;
•stick two together with a little quince jelly, cover the tops with icing.
O. (IRAMP, Rowland’s Flat.
OATMEAL MACAROONS.
Mix :2£ amps rolled oats, 1 small cup sugar. 2 eggs, 1 tablespoon melted
butter, 2 teaspoons baking powder, a pinch of salt, essence of vanilla. Drop
on greased trays, leaving fair space between. Must be kept i-n airtight
tin.
Miss KATIE SMITH, “The Bungalow,” Angaston.
OATMEAL BISCUITS.
Two cups flour, 2 cups oatmeal, one and a quarter cups sugar, 1 lb. butter,
’1 teaspoon carl), of soda, 2 cream of tartar, 1 egg, and half a cup of milk
(or 4 eggs.and no milk :is a great improvement).
Miss S. AHRENS, Vine Vale.
CINNAMON BISCUITS.
Six oz. flour, 4 oz. butter, 4 oz. sugar, 1. egg, quarter teaspoon ground
cinnamon. Beat the butter to a cream, add the sugar, and beat wellj beat
the egg and add it to the butter and sugar alternately with the flour and cin-
-namon. IT.et the mixture stand to get cold and stiff. Well flour a board and
rolling pin, and roll the mixture out thin. Cut with a cutter or tin lid into
biscuits, place on a floured tin. and bake in a moderate oven for about 2b
■minutes. They should be a light brown.
E. A. HASTWELL, Rowland’s Flat/
CINNAMON. BISCUITS. ■
Half lb. butter, lb. sugar, three-quarter lb. S.R. flour. 1 tablespoonful
..cinnamon, 2 eggs. Roll out very thin and put half almonds on top. Keep
J .white of egg out to brush over the biscuits.
Miss 1\ HARVEY, Austral Gardens.
CINNAMON BISCUITS.
Beat 1 Tb. sugar and 4 eggs, quarter lb. of lemon peels, o dessertspoon-
fuls cinnamon, U 'dessertspoonful cloves, 1 lb. S.R. flour. Cut into shapes and
Take.
Mrs'. J. BOGNER, Tanunda.
BRANDY SNAPS.
Into a Tb. of flour work 1 lb. of butter, add 5 lb. treacle, quarter lb.
brown sugar, 1 tablespoon ground ginger. Work all together thoroughly,
■and make into very thin small cakes. Bake on a tin in a moderate oven for
:2b minutes.
Mrs. WM. IIEUZENROEDER, Tanunda.
COCOANUT BISCUITS.
Ten oz. Hour, 0 oz. butter, S oz. sugar, 2 eggs, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar,
T teaspoon carb. soda.
Miss M. HELLING, Tanunda.
KILBOURNE BISCUITS.
One !lb. butter, X eggs, 1 lb. sugar, li lb. flour. 4 teaspoonfuls ammonia,
.flavour essence of lemon. Method—Rub butter and flour together, then add
ammonia and sugar, and lastly the eggs. Roll ont thin and sprinkle with
<.chopped almonds. Bake in a fairly hot oven.
Miss MARGIE HOMBURG, Tanunda.


SffKfiMnNBNM
■■■ MANGY
INDISPENSABLE
w
*
Si
tzr.
M
In the
Hospital
and the
t-
Home...
-v
CCNH'/P
wmTiwh®a
\3
Since
89
BRAN
Wine
Grap
From
Pure
-m.
4265


DEVILLED BISCUITS.
Sao biscuits or thin captains, dry grated cheese, a pinch of cayenne.
Butter the biscuits well, and sprinkle with cheese and cayenne, and bake till
cheese browns slightly.
Mrs. F. MUMME, Ningana Avenue, King’s Park.
DATE BISCUITS.
One lb. hour, i lb. butter, h lb. sugar, 1 teaspoonful cream of tartar,
h teaspoonful of carb. of . soda, 2 eggs, little milk. Rub butter into flour in
which other ingredients have been mixed, drop in eggs whole, mix thoroughy.
Roll out quarter-inch thick, cut biscuit size, fold over with date between.
Bake in moderate oven till a pale brown.
Mrs. H. A. OBST, Tanunda.
DATE DAINTIES.
I ngredients—Three cups flour, 1 cup cornflour, 2 teaspoons cream of tar-
tar. 1 of carb. soda, 1 cup sugar, h lb. butter, 3 eggs. Method—Mix well, roll
out thin, cut in rounds, fold over with stoned date in each. When cooked
ice with cocoanut icing, or chocolate icing if preferred.
Mrs. L. SCHLUXKE, Tannuda. '
LEMON BISCUITS.
Four lb. flour, 1 lb. butter, quarter lb. lard, •”> lb. sugar, S eggs, 2 cups
milk, i teaspoon essence of lemon, 2 teaspoons carb. of soda, 4 cream of
tartar. Roll out thin, cut in rounds, and bake 10 minutes in a hot oven.
> ' A. MILDE, Rowand’s Fat.
LEMON BISCUITS.
(hie lb. fldur, l lb. butter, i lb. sugar, 2 eggs, h teaspoon essence of lemon.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, pul in eggs one at a time, and beat well;
add flour .and 1 teaspoon baking powder sifted and essence of lemon. Roll
out and cut into fancy shapes, put on a greased tin, glaze with a little egg
and milk, and bake in a slow oven until a pale fawn colour.
v E. H. THOMAS, Rowland’s Flat.
LIGHTNING BISCUITS.
Half pound butter, i lb. sugar, » lb. flour, 4 eggs, 2 teaspoons cream of
tartar, 1 teaspoon carb. of soda. Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add flour
and eggs; spread on greased tray, put quantity of sugar and cinnamon or
chopped almonds on top, and bake. Cut into squares quickly while hot.
Miss META CHANDLER, Tanunda.
PUSS CAKE.
Four eggs, a lb. butter, 11 cups sugar, 3 cups flour, 1 cup milk, 3 tea-
spoonfuls baking powder added last in the flour. Put sultanas and peel if
liked.
Miss CLARA XIETSCHKE, Koonunga.
YEAST COFFEE CAKE.
Three-quarter lb. butter, yolks only of 9 eggs, one and a quarter pint
milk, 3 cut's sugar, pinch salt, 1 lemon peel, ] cun yeast. Method —Melt
butter in the milk, beat eggs and sugar together, add the warm milk, then
yeast, then flour; mix well with hand, then keep in a very warm place to
rise; then put on sledges, and let it rise again. Brush with the white. of
egg, mix butter, sugar, and cinnamon together, and put on top.* Bake in fairly
quick oven.
Mrs. W. EHRKE, Tanunda.
CHEESE CAKE.
Mix three eggs, their weight in butter and sugar, the weight of 4 eggs
of S. R. flour, essence lemon. Line patty pans with pastry, and fill with the
mixture. Bake in very quick oven.
Mrs. BAUERMAN, Sedan
CHAMPAGNE CRUST;
One cup S.R. flour, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup milk, 1 egg, 1 tablespoonful boiling
butter. Mode —Beat egg and sugar, -then add milk, flour, and then boiling
butter. Pour over hot fruit. Bake about half an hour.
Mrs. G. H. RIEBE, Tanunda.
RED INDIAN CAKE.
One and a half lb. flour, 1 lb. butter, 1£ lb. currants, 1 lb. sugar, 5 lb.
raisins, 4 eggs, J lb. lemon peel, 1 pint milk, 2 teaspoonfuls carb. soda. Bake
in a slow oven for 3 hours.
Mrs. A. SCHULZ, Tanunda.


COFFEE ROLLS.
(due egg, butter tiie- ,-i/e- oi ..n . gg, 1 cup sugar, k cups S.R. flour. di\
v/ith ri.ilk p* the voiHsii n>. v of 'C .u'S. '".U as for scones, and double nvci.
M ; ss ALMA KARUTZ, Tanunda.
SPICE CAKE.
'Two eggs will beatc-ti. 1 •.up -ug.r, i cup golden syrup. ?. cup butter. A
.■i,t> milk. 1 leuispivnii sod i. 1 p. tispnotiub ground cloves. 1 teaspoon cinnamon.
1 teaspoon allspice. 1 cup chopp. .1 a tumids. 1 cup ebo|.iped raisins, enough
Hour to make a Miff donah.
Mbg ELSIE, MORGEN. Taturnla.
SPINSTER BUTTONS.
Teti nr S. R. . 4 intiti r, k! eggs, essence lemon. Method —RsiF
butter into rhur. Feat '•««■• a .d '..g..r i"g' liter, take pieces the size of walnut,
r-dl in hands and tlati'-n. dip ~i-l• — in - ;ga‘, and hake in oven for ill* minim-'.
Mis. L M. PARKER.
FRENCH CINNAMON COFFEE CAKE.
Three • np-- "f f.o'.tr. • i . . 11 • i Fe.tt '. " eaip< sugar. 4 eggs. Metl;e».i IF at
b'Mttr and migar It'gellu-i. aid nee- m ! ''Cnttu, paid llot'r: Fake in slow .k.i,
t'-r lia'f-ltn.-.r, .-'pi-', mi top n t; 1 -. In;i ti r. ' inkle' with sugar, and dust e-inn. lUie-n
"M t"| ■.
DATE CAKE.
Mrs. T. M. PARKER.
Ottc lb. tliiiP. i Hi. -;lva:. H . ;/mp. ~i t-ggs. ly IF. dates. J pint milk.
Ftat butler kiml -tigar in- ., en nip. thtt; add egs« one ..l a time, then milk and
dtites. ItistU I'o-.i:-. Turn in'" ' :.l F..kt m moderate oven freirn U’n t" '
minutes.
Miss D. HOFFMANN. Taium.l
SULTANA CAKE.
>,n <d;. Fntt-v. i; n/ >!•!.'at. <> 4 eggs, i citp milk, t U r eo-< | o:." t •. r
F. lour, K-ini-n peel, la 1 1. -,.p. i. ■. : i / N me.an pi tartar, tin ee-'juai le'r tfaspo. M tp.l
. ! -b. e,,d.'. .,i• S. R ~JiiF,l.e i" .. n i-dma''. oven.
Mrs. j. St.'HUl.Z, Tan11ni'.
GINGER BREAD CAKE.
Half 'I. I:m:r. i j -,j .!■ i i: ■ . « ter in. uiaclo. ijunrler 11 1. <i;;;ir,
mmler IF. i;. m- i:; -. k «./. • i in- ■ -ai-.. J • tea si "mat curb. seda. ]A tea~i
r -""iind cinnamon and tdv.-, 1 :•..!*•.•• •: iv-mml ginger. Pui ibe Ham.
■ 'da. spice-s. s«<*nr>i mm aim- ■ i1 a tithed am! split o >• in a
.-.ml mis mil lapi-iht-.. I'm, j n , :itc Imttvr. sueas, and treacle, .nd
u.'il. Heat im the e;4g> ami >■ '-mb ig treacle, etc., among it, ,*ti: ttmt
the tin!e. I'.i'.n -.ii m .t u n-' pa. p dents in the aa-in ; beat np the
i-.-.'ii. iMi.ivom'I'l i : pm-:' in . ai-pt - ...in pi:,. Fake in a good oven.
M ... !. A. St IJWAKTZ, Tan :ml ..
(lakes.
RED INDIAN CAKE.
‘ Lie .mi ■■ m I: I ■ i • -i-. 1 F-'tter, 5 lb. ri.i-itis. A il>. evnam
'' r: c' U. iv.ti-'i: pm’. 4 1 in. :i.nU, U Icaspnnnfuls carb. soda. Fake-
r- -lew ,,Veti n ' r - 'n
Mrs. XV. l'FTRAS. Tam,.via.
light pastry for eclairs.
Five !;•!.• c: ••-••-t: I..M- ■■ us c.isMr sm"ar. oz. better. ; ini
.Per. ‘ ;;i 1 1' 1 r. a •--•••• ;:V1 any tl ;l V - .Min' g desired. d
r.-.Ki A - a. > ■ ■ ■ n !i." pint . : i, ; -i v.;,.-, r. Fiittm. -nL. and sugar. .nil
".km :..-i - :u dm :i mi. ,:M.| -tir v'pnrousl v with n weioden sp'-on.
'<>. n:nve i-ont ,-r.- .v ! * t-.tt id • ■. • j’.vi. : 1 \ -• m;tIi. Xnv; ?.<ld eggs one- :l ..
• Pie- (M.ilir.ili r i. : ;w 1 : -■ .pc i c- I male in a t i. T. Ur- a
v. : e-'\' l ■ i-11\ i - U1 'ivi’ii;. • -:t a 'pipi't-d hoartl mm! y".i f;a
V ' ’ ■■■ A at M . - j . \ . „ ~ ll.lkill? U.'IU. .111'! VlUc
d ' lav X\' 1 . i.i *ii- :n -.:] .vita a v'.ai;> U'niiv, ;t■ -. m-ert
M• -Fl.T.A i >FFK. T..;


DATE PUDDING.
One cup each of suet, breadcrumbs, flour, ,-ugar. and apples chopped
fine. 2 cups dales, 2 eggs, and enough milk to mix. Moil .'17 hours.
■Mr.-. I.. S. 1)1 X( AX. lanunda.
CREAM CAKE.
Three-<|itarter cup sugar, three-puarter cup Hour. •'! eggs. 7. teaspoon soda,
1 civ.-iui hi tartar, i laPle-porg Putter. ami a little -ail. Meat egg- well, add
sugar, whisk till frothy, sitt soda, cream .arg.r, a.gil dour into mixture. Petit
well again. Make 7 to lo minutes ip eery hot om.n, and put together with
u lupoid cream tlavoured with. v;;;:iii;..
Mm W. (.LEX CLARKE, Angttston.
ORANGE CAKE
'.bee-ter He 1, inter, cp art. r !' . su-eu 1! ■ er, 1:: If cut. milk. 1 cun flour, the
ru:c : ot 1 orauu'e, and jmee ■■: .-...i:, Mix fa: 111 — end sugar to a cream, then
i i..-t> ami nine, and lastly Pun. !kk- an- tlr- i. • •.'..triers of an hour. Ice
\v:t ; icing sugar mixed wit it ovar.ee upce. •
\ 1-11.1. ila till.LK.'K, Anyaston.
ORANGE CAKE.
id ! ire ,ak fast ettp sugar. 1 cun IntlP. r. 2 cup- S.R. Hour. 2 eggs. A cup
r..dk. grand rind of 1 orange. .Vdo"!-- fiat PuMcr :o a c-catu, then add
s;r ..r. egg.-, milk, rind, ami lasoy ;h. u.. Mix icing -ngur until the juice of
Mr.-. \V. .i. Si'lTKKV. I’nley.
DAY AND NIGHT CAKE.
<)m- cap sugar, vole- of 2 eggs. 1 taim -p. . m m.-Kw. 1 i.up milk, 1 tea-
curli. soda, anu 2 ot cream el iarit.r. t ream Piute:' at.il sugar, .add the
\, * 11—.', and Peat well, ’.hen ad 1 in -I ot ;: :g led i . t -. Doric mixta, e in halves,
la:: half eup sultaiius. t: ■ • ee i pa a it 1 r I v a -: m and 2 teaspoons
eiimoki:. or cocoa to darken in the tost it ill. Kluvo.u line other with lemon.
ami put each mixture in. a greu-.d tin. ileal win;, s ■ egg- stiffly, and add
1 r up silted icing sugar. Spread bait of the icing on one cake, and put the
Pi.An. one i,u lop: nut on rest o' icing, am! sprinkle o eu.nv.it on top.
Miss M ETA K 1 .ill'l.M AN. Tantutda.
NUT CAKE.
i!< .,i i (carter lb. butter to a ereain. then In- n in ’ IK. white sugar. acid
vj-ifs w i’ll beaten, i pup mi ls. am'. i lb. situd ilouv. Mix 1 teaspoon of
curb. Mi.-bi. - teaspoons erear.; ot tartar. c;ii.li tm' It a- 1 ■■ >■ m mixed spice, i tea-
.-p cinnamon, 1! dessertsp urns teaca, .".mi i. enp i hopped walnuts, vanilla
t,. i:;n.iar. Hake in layers. W hip up cream with e.i.-tnr sugar. vanilla to
;,.;v,i\n'. Kill itt fri'ttra when rob;. L'biee ..in- on top ..» the other, and ice with
i-iton.late icing and waliata, nr. t'v.
Ml.-. 0. N ETTI.E11ECK. T:mumla.
RED INDIAN CAKE.
I la!:' be butter. !<• o/.. siumr, t aree-p’u.rter pin : 'kur. 11 eggs. .1 eup milk,
i lb. er.-.'ai its, (iuarter xuituu.m. little spire ;i:>- ; p uv-p peel. 1 teuspoonfui
rnvk m da dissolved in a iit'.le ir.iik. . li'.'le «;di. Method — Heat butter and
and -uear io ;t cream, add well beaten, then i.te don:. milk, and fruit,
atai last ot ail the soda and salt: then hake in a modvalc oven tor - or Ik
hours.
Air.-. \Y. MARI.OW. Exeter.
DATE CAKE.
Two and a half !b. Ilour. 1 !k but;.;, b art-'.onus hakim- powder, 1 lb.
s'.:;.;:::. or <i eggs, and ;i little milk 1i be date-. Knb tile bnlter into the
lloi.i. neat eggs am! sugar together, the:: .add tip pour. butter. and baking
powder. Roll out half the dough op e. gr-rised tin. sp: ettil it with, stoned
date': roll out tile rest ot tile dough. and cc ver Ju date. .. Spread until a
nice brown.
Air.-. 11. HANK EL, Mile End.
BOILED SPONGE CAKE.
Half nnp butter, mix with 1 cup sugar. add 2 eggs, II cup.-' S.R. Hour, 7
i-iri 11 ;i 1K. a little flavouring'. Stet.ni for - hour.-.
Mir- M. (IRAK 1:1. Taumida.
DOLLY VARDON CAKE
i: ail cupful Putter. 1 cupful sntr;*.-. I •; cupful- mr. egg-. 1 1' n■ 11; r.r
os|- 1 : 1 1 milk. 2 unspn.mtu'is Psk::’g pewiTr. some peri. rai.-i currants ar.d
-pirn Maks' iut!) dough ! <- . v:) •_ • i. uni: aid ~> i . Divide inti) pat :s,
make t wo layers of plain mixtur. . fruit. : a.'! spice -a •: i i the nest, tlnn bake.
I’m layer- together will icing or jam, d.-.rl. layer in centre, and ic<- cake.
Mi-- U. URAl'E. Tammda.


lO Years’ Guarantee
With “DOBBIE SPECIAL”
Drophead Sewing Machines.
Solid
Queensland
I
Maple Cabinet
PRICE
fitted with
£7
15s.
Link Motion,
f.o.b.
ensuring
MILE END
greater speed
RAILWAY
and reducing
STATION.
friction
to a
minimum.
Local Agent, F. C. G. WALLENT, Tanunda.
demonstrate it.
A. W. DOBBIE & CO. LTD.,
Please ask him to
ADELAIDE.
GRATEFUL APPRECIATION.
The Committee of the Tanuntla Australia
Day Celebrations desire to express their
grateful appreciation to Wm, Detmold &
Co. L,td. of Adelaide for the generous
reduction in cost of paper for this Cookery
Book ; the Barossa News Did. for the
printing; the ladies of the Cheer Up
Society for folding and collating; the
many donors of recipes ; and the various
advertisers for support accorded.


RICE CHEESE CAKES.
One egg, its weight in butter, 2 oz. ground rice, 2 oi. sugar. Method-
take butter and sugar, beat well together, add egg well beaten, then ground
rice and essence. Seat well together. Make the pastry roll out quarter inch,
cut with pastry cutter, line patty pans with paste, put layer of raspberry
jam in each, then a little of mixture on top. Bake in a quick ovdn from 3
to 3 minutes.
R. WALLIS, Burra.
PLUM LOAF.
Six oz. S.R. flour, 1 oz. candied peel. 3 oz. butter, fi oz. sultanas, 2 eggs,.
.‘> oz. sugar. Put butter and sugar in basin, and heat with wooden spoon**
until light and creamy; add eggsar.d flour alternately, and beat well for 10
minutes, add flavouring; lastly stir in fruit, pour into tin greased and lined
with paper. Bake in moderate oven 1 hour.
R. WALLIS, Burra.
DATE SQUARES.
Three cups S.R. flour, 3 eggs, 1 cup sugar, 1 lb. dates, J lb. butter.
Cream butter and sugar, add 1 egg one by one, then add flour and roll half
inch thick; then lay the pressed dates very thin, then a layer of the mixture,
and cut into squares with a sharp knife, and bake in a fairly quick oven.
Thev will keep for months.
' ' S. E. HANCOCK, Kapunda.
SODA CAKE.
One lb. butler, 1 lb. sugar, 1 pint warm milk, 2 teaspoons soda (dissolved
in the milki, 1 lb. currants, 4 eggs, 4 cups flour, quarter lb. lemon peel.
Melt butter a little, and mix to a cream. Add flour last. Bake 2 hours in a
flat meatdish. This recipe, makes a very nice dark cake.
, . Selected —Kapunda.
ORANGE CAKE.
Two cups S.R. flour, 1 cup sugar. 1 cup milk l , quarter lb. butter, .‘5 eggs
well beaten, 1 orange rind well grated into the flour, also juice, and bake half
to three-quarters of an hour. •
Mrs. WRIGHT, Kapunda.
ORANGE CAKE.
The weight of 2 eggs in butter, sugar, and >. R. flour, half the juice and all
the grated rind of one orange. Mix butter and sugar, add eggs (well beaten),
then juice and lastly flour. Bake hal? a hour. Ice it with the juice
of half an orange and icing sugar.
Mrs. REGINALD BEVAN, Rose Park.
RIBBON CAKE.
Quarter lb- butter, i lb. sugar, h lb. flour, :! eggs, J cup milk, 2 teaspoons
cream of tartar, 1 teaspoon carb. soda (cream of tartar and carb. soda mixed
with flour). Beat butter and sugar then add eggs one at a time; beat this
well, lastly add milk and flour. Bake iti layers (1 layer plain, mix choco-
late or cocod' with second one,-mix Cochineal with the third). Bake 13 to
20 minutes in moderate oven.
Mrs. REGINALD BEVAN, Rose Park.
„ OfcANGE CAKE.
One and a. half cups S.R. flour, l cup sugar, 1 lb. butter, 3 eggs, grated
rind of 2 oranges, and juice of one. Peel oranges as thin as possible, only-
taking the yellow. Filling—l small cup sugar, juice of half an orange. Boil
together 3 minutes, pour into a basin white of an egg well beaten, and
grated rind of an orange.
Mrs. W. GLEN CLARKE, Angaston.
GENOA CAKES.
( hie lb. flour, 1 lb. butter, three-quarter lb. sugar, (i eggs, J teaspoon soda,
1 cream tartar, few drops essence of lemon. Cream butter and sugar, add
eggs one by one beat well. Add flour and rising, and beat all well
Spread on ungreased paper, and bake in a quick oven about 11 minutes.
Cut in half when cold and spread with any filling liked. Cut in fancy shapes,'
and ice.
Mrs. L. S. DUNCAN, Tanunda.
PLAIN CAKE.
Beat % lb. sugar and quarter lb. butter to a cream, add 3 eggs at the time,
add a small cup milk, then add \ lb. flour and a teaspoonful cream tartar,
i teaspoonful carb. soda. Pour into sandwich tins, or make one cake. ,
Miss A. ROBERTSON, Adelaide.
AUNTIE CAKES.
One lb. maizena, 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder, J lb. sugar, three-quarter
lb. butter, 4 eggs, and a few drops of essence of lemon. Beat butter to a
cream. A teaspoonful to a patty. Bake five minutes in rather quick oven.
Mrs. A. RTGBY, Tanunda.


E. Scbvapcl’s
In conjunction with and appertaining to
those Recipes.
They are good, and some of us are going to feel unwell
for some time hereafter. Why ? Well, you see, Recipes
alone often fail. You must first of all have the right
kind of Stove, viz. : The Radiator, Giffhorn, Barossa,
New Improved and Dover, and the right Kerosene
Stoves, and never forget the famous Patent Copper
Steam Cookers. SCHRAPEL’S sell these at one
price only—THE ROWEST.
Then, of course, you lead off with the flour. Any old flour
will do, but you must have the right kind of Flour Sieves
and Scoops, Flour Casters, Scales, Rolling Pins,
Paste Boards, Graters, etc. Schrapel’s sell these.
Some of the Recipes make mention of eggs —not the eggs
that upon investigation reveal to you that you have beaten
the incubator by a few days. (These eggs really come
under the heading of butchers’ small goods.) Well, with
eggs you need the right kind of Egg Whisks, Egg
Beaters, Egg Poachers, Egg Timers and Egg
Cups, from SCHRAPEE’S.
Fruit, too, is used in baking. Now, have you ever sat
down to enjoy your raisin cake, when “all of a sudden”
your pet tooth struck one of those raisin stones ? When
this happens to you next, just stand erect for a moment,
fold s’our hands, twirl your thumbs, count ONE, and go
straight to SCHRAPP'R’S for Raisin Stoners, Apple
Slicers and Peelers, Lemon Squeezers, Vegetable
Cutters and Lifters, Preserving Pans, Tins, and


35i1l of jfarc.
Bottles.
To make your Cake appetising to look at, don’t neglect the
Icing. Some Cakes look as though the bakist had worked
with a bleeding finger. Call at SCHRAPER’s for Icing
Syringes and Tubes. Also, take along (mind the
assistants are watching) a nest of Cake Tins, Scone
Trays, Pie Dishes, Pudding Forms, Suet shredders,
Potato Clippers, Vegetable slicers, Nutmeg Gra-
ters, etc. Same Prices as above at SCHRAPEE’S.
“ Mothe r ! Mother! the milk! the milk!” Mother
drops her armful of plates and rescues the milk that hasn’t
boiled over. Avoid this by buying a Milk Boiler at
SCHRAPER’S. And while there, inspect also the Butter
curlers, Butter coolers and Butter knives, Toast
forks, Tin enamel, Cast and copper kettles and
saucepans.
Now, when your Cake is ready, don’t forget the mice.
SCHRAPER’S sell various devices which make the mice
forget.
Possibly there may be criticism anent the quality of yo\r
Cake, and you may require either a Hot or Cold Bath.
SCHRAPER’S sell these.
Before retiring after the worry attendant on cooking ai 1
baking, you will enjoy an hour’s leisure at reading or
discussing your neighbours’ recipes. This you can do )
the best advantage in the light of a Kerona Lam? ,
which is on sale at SCHRAPER’s at the Rowest Price.
E. SCHRAPEL,
TANUNDA.


QUEEN CAKES.
Four eggs, weight of .'! in sugar, 4 in flour, ."> in butter. Mix butter with
sugar to a cream, add eggs (well beaten), then flour, add a few currants' if
liked. Put in pat tins, and bake in a fairly hot oven until brown. This also
makes a nice cake recipe.
Mrs. A. F. SCHRADER,,Tanunda.
LEMON SANDWICH.!
Four eggs, weight of 2 eggs in butter, of 2 in sugar, 4 in S.R. flour, quar-
ter cup milk. Bake in sandwich tins. Filling.—Melt 1 oz. butter, add three-
quarter cup sugar, juice and rind of 1 lemon, 1 egg well beaten. Boil and
stir well for 10 minutes, and spread between layers.
Miss CLARA MATTISKE, Stonewell, Tanunda.
APPLE CAKE.
■■Two cups flour, three-quarter lb. sugar, quarter lb. butter, 2 eggs, 2 tea-
spoonfuls cream tartar, 1 teaspoonful soda, quarter cup milk. Mode—Cream
butter and sugar, then add eggs; beat all well together. Sift soda and cream
of tartar with the flour. Bake in buttered sandwich tins. When cool spread
stewed apples between.
. Miss CLARA MATTISKE, Stonewell, Tanunda.
POUND CAKE.
Xitie eggs, 1 lb. butter, one and a quarter 11)1 flour, t lb. sugar, 1 lb. cur-
rants, quarter lb. lemon peel, 1 lb. raisins, and a few almonds and%ssence of
lemon, li teaspoons cream of tartar, 1 of soda. Bake 1J hours.
ELSA SCHMIDT.
LIGHT CAKE. .
1 cup butter, work it till soft, add 2 cups sugar, and work into
the butter, add <> eggs beaten separate. Put in the yolks, then whites. Add 1-
cup of sweet milk, with I teaspoon spda, mixed in the milk, and 4 cups flour,
with 2 teaspoons cream of tartar. Mix well, and bake in a slow oven.
' A. E. LAUBSCH, Kapunda.
DAINTY CAKES.
wo cups powdered sugar, 1 cup butter, 1 sweet milk, 4 eggs, 2J large
cups flour, h cup cornflour, 2 teaspoons baking powder, a little mace. Mix
butter and sugar to a cream, then add eggs which have been well beaten, then
th<| milk and lastly flour and cornflour in which the baking powder and mace
have been mixed. Bake in small tins and ice all over.
Miss SOPHIE XTETSCHKE, Kununga.
„ u;
L APPLE CAKE.
rllalf lb. butter, three-quarter lb. sugar, li lb. S.R. flour, i pint milk, 4
eggs. When all this is mixed, put into baking dish, and for top dressing
slice some good cooking apples, sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon, and then
batee for three-quarters of an hour.
Mrs. IL* SPAETH, Tanunda.
SPONGE CAKE.
Fo> y;,-. 1 cup sugar, 2 tablespoons butter beaten to a cream, 1 cup of
flour, ’sf •'dmSn earb. soda, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar. Mix well, and when
this i »3V)il h?t<e quarter cup of boiling water, add to it, mix again, and then
hake
, Mrs. 11. SPAETH, Tanunda.
SPICE SANDWICH.
.One cup sugar, 2 eggs, 1 tablespoon melted butter, i cup milk, 2 teaspoons
mixed spice, 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar, 1 teaspoon soda. Beat
sugar and eggs together, add melted butter, dissolve soda in milk, and mix
cream of tartar with flour. Bake in sandwich tins, and when cold spread
whipped cream between layers.
Mrs. H. SPAETH, Tanunda.
MARTHA CAKE.
One lb. flour, J lb. sugar, i lb. butter, 4 eggs, quarter cup water, 2 tea-
spoons baking powder. Beat butter to a cream, add sugar, then flour and egg.
alternately, and the water as required, lastly 1 cup sultanas or currants mixed
with the last of the flour and baking potyder. Bake 2 hours in a cool oven.
Miss HAESE, Lyndoch.
MARMALADE CHEESE CAKES.
Two tablespoons marmalade, 2 eggs, 2 oz. butter. -Melt the butter, beat
the eggs, and add to the marmalade. Line patty pans with puff paste, pour
the mixture in, and bake in a quick oven.
Mrs. F. JUTTXER, “Paranook,” Tanunda.


MOCK GINGER CAKE.
Ten oz. flour, 1 lb. butter, 7 oz. sugar, 3 oz. each almonds, lemon peel,
and mock ginger chopped finely, 2 small teaspoons cream of tartar, 1 teaspoon
soda, 5 eggs. Beat butter ancl sugar to a cream, add eggs which have pre-
viously been beaten, then flour and fruit last alternately. a moderate
■oven for 40 minutes.
Mrs. F. JUTTNER, “Paranook,” Tanttnda.
WALNUT CAKE.
Two tablespoons butter, 1 small cup sugar, 1 level cup flour, quarter lb.
walnuts (chopped), 4 eggs, vanilla flavouring, 1 teaspoon baking powder.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, break in eggs one at a time, beat until it
looks light. Sift in flour and walnuts, and if too stiff add a little milk.
Beat thoroughly for 5 minutes, add 1 teaspoon baking powder. Bake in
sandwich tins for 155 minutes. Put whipped cream and chopped- walnuts and
icing sugar between the layers. Ice with white icing and decorate with
walnuts.
Mrs. F. JUTTNER, “Paranook,” Tanunda.
RIBBON CAKE.
Quarter lb. butter, i lb. sugar, i lb. flour, 3 eggs, i cup milk, 1 teaspoon
cream of tartar, J teaspoon soda. Beat butter and sugar to a cream, then add
eggs well beaten, then add milk, and lastly the flour and powder. Divide
into 3 parts, and colour one with cocoa or cinnamon, one with cochineal,
leave the other plain. Bake quarter of an hour in moderately quick oven.
"When cold spread with jam, and lay one on another, and ice.
Miss A. MULLEN, Angaston.
COCOANUT CAKE.
One cup sugar, 5 cup butter, 1£ cup S.R. flour, i cup milk, 3 eggs. Bake
in sandwich tins. Filling—Quarter pint milk, 3 tablespoons cocoanut, quar-
ter teaspoon cornflour, 1 egg. Boil together, and spread between.
Miss L. M. KALISCH, Angaston.
FRUIT CAKE.
One cup sugar, 1 cup milk, i lb. butter, 1 cup treacle, 3 cups S.R. flour,
~2 cups raisins, 1 cup currants, 4 eggs. 2 or 3 dozen almonds, I lb. dates, 1
lb. lemon peel, spice, and cinnamon. Usual method for mixing.
Mrs. J. E. SWANN, Angaston.
FRUIT CAKE.
One lb. butter, 1 lb. sugar,' 10 eggs, J lb. stoned raisins, 5 lb. sultanas, J
lb. currants, quarter lb. figs, 1 lb. dates, 4 pieces lemon peel, 1 pkt. mixed
spice, almonds, a little-salt, 1 lb. flour, 1 teaspoon carb. soda. Bake for 2i
flours in slow oven.
Miss S. SEPPELT, Seppeltsfield.
DATE SANDWICH.
Two eggs, quarter lb. melted butter, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup .m # cups
flour, 3 teaspoons baking powder. Filling—Put quarter lb. stone- into
saucepan, with J cup milk. Stir until dates boil soft.
Miss S. SEPPELT, Seppeltsfield.
FEATHER CAKES.
Quarter lb. butter, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup milk, 4 eggs, 4 teaspoons cream
tartar, 2 teaspoons carl), soda, 4 cups flour, and essence of lemon. Method—
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add eggs, then milk, then flour in which
the powders have been mixed. Beat well, bake in patty pans in a quick oven.
, Miss IVY DOORNE, Tanunda.
CHRISTMAS CAKE.
One lb. butter, 1 lb. sugar, 1 lb. currants, 1 lb. raisins, 1 lb. dates, 1 lb.
almonds, 1 lb. flour, i lb. lemon peel, S eggs, 3 nutmegs 1 teaspoonful mixed
spice, 1J teaspoonfuls ground cinnamon, 1 dessertspoonful baking powder, £
teaspoonful essence lemon. Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add eggs
unbeaten one at a time, with a little of the flour, which should be sifted with
the mixed spice, baking powder, and cinnamon first. Add fruit, mix well, then
add flour. Two tablespoonfuls of brandy improves this cake.
- Mrs. C. A. L. VIRGO, Nuriootpa.
■ MOUNTAIN CAKE.
Three-quarter lb. sugar, i lb. butter, 55 eggs, and 1 lb. flour, 3 tablespoon-
fuls baking powder, 1 cup of milk, essence of lemon to taste. Bake. 1 hour.
Alode — : Beat butter and sugar to a cream, then eggs and other ingredients.
Mrs. F. E. DODSON, Tanunda.


The Store
for Quality...
•i* 4* 4*
To People wanting to purchase
Good Goods.
You are kindly invited to inspect the Stock of
m
nm
Silks, Dressstuffs, Ladies’ Underwear,
Ladies’ Blouses, Mantles,
Corsets, Gloves, Ladles’ Vests and Bodices,
Bridal Veils, Wreaths, Flowers,
Quilts, Pillow Cases, Eiderdown Quilts,
Blankets, Curtains, Sheetings, Calicoes,
Towels, Damasks, Turkish Towelling, Window
, Blinds and all Manchester Goods.
....THE STORE....
for White, Cream, Grey and Striped
Flannellette,
Hosiery, Men’s and Boys‘ Clothing.
Gentlemen !
Have you seen WALLENT'S SPECIAL
Men’s Working Trousers ?
All kinds of Men’s and Boys’ Wearing Apparel
stoeked. Try this Store, if you- haven’t done so
already. You’ll be surprised, with the quality
offered and the low prices asked.
Suits to measure. Style and Fit guaranteed.
F. C. G. WALLENT,
AMILY DRAPER?” “
•Phone 34. TANUNDA.
i


MOUNTAIN CAKE.
One cup sugar, 1 cup butter, h cup warm milk and water, 2 eggs, 2 cups
flour, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar, h tcaspoonful soda. Beat butter and sugar
to a cream, add eggs and milk, then flour with soda. When all is well mixed
lightly stir in cream of tartar. Bake in a flat cake dish, and ice with
cocoanut icing tnade by boiling three-quarter cup of new milk and 2 sugar.
Let it come to the boil, then pour into a basin, and stir briskly, adding
slowly 1J cups desiccated cocoanut. Spread on cake when it is the warmth of
new milk.
Mrs. A. WISHART, Angaston.
• COFFEE CAKE.
Take l cup each of sugar, butter, and milk, 21 cups flour, 5 eggs, and
flavouring. Beat butter and sugar to cream, then add milk, eggs (well
beaten), and flavouring, mix flour with 2 teaspoonfuls cream of tartar and 1
carb. soda. Bake in flat tin 1 1 hours. When done spread butter over too
(while cake is hot), and sprinkie well with ground cinnamon, chopped peel,
cocoanut chips, finely cut burnt almonds, and sugar.
R. X. FUSS, Aberdeen.
FRENCH COFFEE CAKE.
Three cups flour. 2 teaspoons cream tartar, 1 teaspoon carb. soda. 1 lb.
butter, 2 eggs, 1 cup sugar. 1 cup treacle, 1 cup strong cold coffee, 1 cut)
sultana raisins, 1 cup currants, 1 teaspoon mixed spice, 11 oz. candied peel,
icing, and almonds. Cream butter and sugar, add well beaten eggs and
treacle, sift flour, tartar, soda, and spice, add gradually, then add fruit.
Lastly add coffee. Have a shallow papered and greased tin, pour mixture into
it, and bake from three-quarters of an hour. Ice the top, and •sprinkle with
chopped brown almonds.
Mrs. HOSSACK.
CREAM PUFFS.
One lb. water. 1 lb. flour, 1 lb. butter, S eggs. Boil ‘butter and water
until butter is dissolved, then add flour, and stir till smooth; let cool,
then add eggs one at a time. Do no* beat the eggs. Bake in quick oven.
If preferred, mix a little nutmeg and fill with whipped cream.
Mrs. O. E. JUTTXER, Tanunda.
CREAM .PUFFS.
Half pint water. i\lb. butter, nut on fire and bring to boil; put in one
and a quarter lb. flour, stirring well until a smooth paste is formed. Remove
from fire, and when lukewarm add 12 eggs, one at a time. Beat well. Bake in
a quick oven for half an hour. When cold fill with cream, and sprinkle with
icing sugar.
Mrs. C. LINDNER, Krondorf.
CREAM PUFFS.
Fifteen oz. butter, 1 lb. water, 1 ib. flour good weight. Melt butter and
water till boiling, then stir in the .flour till it comes off the saucepan. When
cool break in l(i eggs one after the other stirring well all the time. Bakd
in small cakes for 20 minutes.
Miss P. I. TSCHIRPIC., Tanunda.
CREAM PUFFS.
Put half pint water and 2 oz. butter on to boil; when boiling throw in
quickly 4 oz. Hour. Stir until well cooked and a smooth dough is formed.
Remove from the fire, and when cooled or lukewarm take 4 eggs, simply drop
one whole egg into the dough, beat until mixed, then add another, and so on.
Drop the mixture by spoonfuls on the greased patty pans, and bake in
moderately quick oven for 20 minutes. Whipped cream flavoured with
vanilla for filling.
Mrs. H. P. GUERTX, East Adelaide; also Miss ADA HAESE, Lyndoch.
SPONGE ROLL.
Four eggs, 1 cup flour, 1 cup sugar. 2 teaspoons baking powder. Beat
sugar and eggs well together till it. is like-a frost, then add the flour with
the baking powder. When baked turn out on a damp cloth. Spread on the
jam roll as quickly as possible. This will make one roll.
Mrs. G. SCHRAPED, Tanunda.
RICH CHRISTMAS CAKE.
Beat 1 lb. butter and 1 lb. sugar together, add 10 eggs beaten separately,
add 1 lb. currants, quarter lb. lemon peel, 1 lb. seeded raisins, 1 lb. S.R.
flour, with 1 oz. cinnamon and 1 teaspoonful spice mixed in it. Beat all.
together for 2(4 minutes, and put in buttered paper in tins in a hot oven. Bake'
about 21 hours. Blanched almonds, chopped or grated, are an additional
improvement.
Mrs. DKRXEDDE, Tanunda; als« from Mrs. SCHLUNKE, Tanunda,


and Mrs. J. D. NIETSCHKE, Rowland’s Flat.
CREAM CAKE.
Two eggs well beaten, put into a teacup, till up with sweet cream, pour
into a dish, add 1 teacup sugar, 1£ teacups flour, 1 teaspoon baking powder,
small pinch of salt. Bake about half an hour.
Mrs. C. G. KLEEMAXX, Tanunda.
LAYER CAKE.
One lb. flour, J lb. butter, J lb. sugar, 11 eggs, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar,
l teaspoon carb. soda. Beat butter/ sugar, and eggs, then add flour, etc., roll
out thin, and cut with a plate three layers for each cake. Bake quickly to a
nice brown, and when cold spread any jam between them and ice.
Mrs. C. G. K LEEMANX, -Tanunda.
QOCOA CAKE.
Quarter lb. butter, i lb. sugar, 5 lb. flour, .‘1 eggs, <> tablespoons milk r
4 teaspoons cocoa, 1 teaspoon cream tartar, and J of soda. Put in a little milk.
Bake in layers, put j&m between, and ice with cocoa icing.
Miss E. HAESE, Tanunda.
APPLE CAKE.
Three eggs, 2J cups flour, about quarter cup milk, three-quarter cup sugar,
1 cup butter, 2 teaspoons cream of tartar, and 1 of soda. Beat butter and
sugar to a cream, add milk, then eggs, and beat well, then add flour until
stiff enough to roll out. Stew about 8 ordinary sized apples, and flavour
with essence, spread thinly on half the mixture that has been rolled out
to tit baking dish, then cover with other half, and bake for half an hour in
a steady oven.
■ Mrs. L. X. SALTER, Angaston.
CHRISTMAS CAKE.
Two lb. flour, 2 lb. butter, 2 lb. raisins, 2 lb. currants. 1£ lb. mixed peel,
3J lb. sugar, IS eggs, 1 dessertspoon spice. 2 nutmegs, half glass brandy, half
teaspoonful soda, almonds. Cut up peel the night before and soak it in t»ie
brandy. Beat butter to a cream, add sugar, then other ingredients, flour and
soda last. Bake four hours. Half quantities make a nice-sized cake.
Airs. L. X. SALTER, Angaston.
BIRTHDAY CAKE.
fine lb. flour, half pint milk, <> oz. butter, 2 eggs 1 lb. raisins, quarter lb.
lemon peel, three-quarter lb. currants, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, 1 teaspoon gin-
ger. half teaspoon nutmeg, 1 teaspoon mixed spice, 3 teaspoon soda, quarter
lb. chopped almonds. Dry and sift flour, rub in butter until it is like sand,
add stoned and chopped raisins and currants (washed and dried), add spices
and chopped almonds; break the eggs and mix the whole thoroughly with
your hand; dissolve the soda in milk, and add the other ingredients, and
mixing well. Have ready a baking dish lined with buttered paper, and till
half full, leaving room for rising. Bake at once. At tirst oven should be
hot, then let it cool slowly. Time—about three hours.
Miss CLARA MATT.ISKE, Stonewell, Tanunda.
, SULTANA CAKE. Q
One and a half lb. flour, 1 lb. sugar, three-quarter ft), butter. 1 teaspoonful
carb. soda, 2 teaspoonfuls cream of tartar, C> eggs, three-quarter lb. sultanas, 1
cup of milk. Beat butter to a cream, add sugar, eggs well beaten, then milk.
Mix soda and cream of tartar with flour, add to the rest, then put in sultanas.
Bake 1 hour. W
Miss H. OFFE, Tanunda.
SULTANA CAKE.
One and a quarter lb. flour, <i eggs, three-quarter lb. butter, 3 lb. sultanas,
half cup milk, three-quarter lb. sugar, 2 teaspoons baking powder, lemon
peel, and essence of lemon. Beat butter, sugar, to a cream, add eggs and milk
(well beaten, sift flour, mix the baking powder, peel and sultanas in the dry
flour, and then add gradually to the other mixture. Beat well. Bake in
moderate oven from three-quarters to one hour.
Airs. P. S. SAIITH, Angaston.
»
COCOANUT CAKE.
One cup sugar, j> cup butter, 2 eggs, li cups S. R. flour, i cup milk. Bake
in sandwich tins. Filling—Quarter pint milk. 2 tablespoonfuls cocoanut, quar-
ter teaspoonful cornflour, 1 egg. Boil together, and spread between layers.
Aliss A. ROBERTSON, Adelaide.
CHRISTMAS CAKE.
One lb. butter, one and a quarter lb. flour, three-quarter* lb. sugar, 3 lb.
currants, 1 lb. raisins or dates, quarter lb. lemon peel, quarter lb. treacle,
1 teaspoon mixed spice, 2 teaspoons baking powder, 8 eggs. Bake 1J hours.
• L. C. KLEEMAX, Rowland’s Flat.


GINGER SPONGE.
Ouarter 11). butter, half cud sugar, half cup treacle, 2 eggs, half cup-
niill-. with 1 teaspoon carb. soda dissolved in it. 2 teasnoonfuls ginger, 1 tea-
spo- I'f'.l spice or cinnamon, 2 cups flour. Bake in layers. For Filling—One
t; '' • butter. 1 teaspoon hot water, feyv drops of essence. Mix with
1;■ :u .ar to make paste to spread between cakes.
CHRISTMAS CAKE.
One and a half lb. flour, 1 lb. butter, one and a quarter lb. currants, half
lb. brown sugar, half lb. white sugar, one and a quarter lb. raisins, 0 eggs,
quarter lb. lemon peel, half pint milk, 2 teaspoons soda in milk, 1 wineglass
brandy, and a few almonds may also be added. Bake in a slow oven for B
hours. Half nutmeg grated and 2 teaspoons cinnamon.
Miss M. L. PATTERSON, Frankton.
VICTORIA SANDWICH.
Half lb. flour, 2 tablespoons cocoa, 1 teaspoon cream tartar, half tea-
spoon soda, quartfer lb. butter, half lb. sugar,, half cup milk, B eggs, vanilla
to taste. Mix butter, sugar together, then add eggs one at a time, then a'dd
flonr and cream of tartar, and lastly soda in milk. Bake in shallow tins, place
raspberry jam .between layers, and ice with white icing flavoured with vanilla.
Cocoa may s be omitted and lemon essence used instead of vanilla.
‘ a .> Mrs; B. BROOK, Frankton.
APPLE CAKE.
Three cups flour, i cup butter or good dripping, 1 cup sugar, 2 teaspoons
cream tartar, 1 teaspoon soda, B eggs. Make into a dough, roll out half and
spread thin layer in bottom of baking dish. Chop up C> large apples, sugar,
and flavour to taste. Spread on paste, and cover with the remaining dough.
Bake in hot oven.
Mrs. S. O. SMITH, The Bungalow, Angaston.
SCOTCH BUN.
One lb. butter, 1 lb. brown sugar (white will do), !) eggs, J lb. almonds, 1
oz. mixed spice, 2 lb. currants, 2 lb. raisins. 1 lemon peei. quarter Ib. flour.
Mode —Beat well together butter, eggs, and sugar, and when nearly ready
for flour add 1 wineglass of brandy and 1 of treacle, then add a little soda
and ertam of tartar to flour. Bake 2a'hours or more; not too quick an oven.
Leave three months before cutting to ripen.
Miss T. KARSTEX, Tanunda. *
CURRANT CAKE.
One lb. flour, i lb. butter, J lb. sugar, 1 cup milk, .‘I or 4 eggs. 1 teaspoon
soda. 2 teaspoons cream of tartar, grated rind of le.mon, £ lb. currants.
Method—Beat butter and sugar to cream, add eggs, and beat well, then add
milk and the ;rind of the lemon, then flour with soda and cream of tartar
mixed, and lastly the currants.
A. ’L. KOCH. Rowland's Flat. _
porter cake.
One lb. flour, i lb, butter rubbe*. in. i lb. currants. £ lb. stoned raisins,
quarter lb. lemon peel, three-quarter b. brown sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls mixed
spice, 1 lemon rind grated, 1 teaspov-nful carb. soda, quarter pint porter, 4
eggs. Method —Break eggs in dry ingredients, and when ipixed add the
porter. Mix whole for 20 minutes. Bake'in a slow ov< n. Do not cut for
S days at least. *
, M. A. MATTNER, Rowland’s Flat.
COFFEE CAKE.
Half cup butter, B eggs, 1 cup sugar, B cups flour, three-quarter cup milk,
2 teaspoons'cream tartar, 1 of baking soda. Beat butter and sugar to a
cream, beat the eggs, and add, then the milk, then the flour. Pour into a
flat baking tin. Sprinkle a few pieces of butter on top, also some cinnamon and
sugar. Bake in a moderate oven.
, Mrs. M. KLUGE, Rowland's' Flat.
. I.X.L. CAKE.
One lb. butter, 1 lb. sugar (half white, half brown). 1 lb. raisins, 1 lb.
currants, 4 oz. lemon peel, large winetrlass brandy,,!* eggs, dessertsruoonful
treacle, pinch of soda, 12 oz. S.R. flour. ;<> oz. plain flour. Bake ingjfljmode-
ratc over 2or B hours. This cake should not be cut for 2or B montM.
J-:. M JACOB. Rowland's Flat.
WEDDING CAKE.
One lb. butter, 1 lb. sugar, 1 lb. flotir, 1 lb. curiants, 1 lb. mixed peel, 1
lb. sultanas, £ lb. almonds, S eggs, £ teaspoon baking powder, 1 teaspoon
cinnamon, 1 teaspoon ginger.
Mrs. B. LINDNER, Krondorf.


“ ’Tis Better to Smoke Here
—Than Hereafter.”
A Good Smoke relieve* the Mind, and makes a Man
at Peace with the World.
Ladies !
Secure your Smoking Gifts for your
Menfolk from
Len. Winton,
Hairdresser and Tobacconist, T
His Goods are Good Goods,
and give pleasure to every Smoker.
SOLDIER PARCELS JUST AS YOU WANT THEM.
Music in the Home !
Good Music is always appreciated. We, however,
cannot all be musicians, but we can be appreciative
listeners. < And here is your opportunity to be the
musician and the listener also. For a small invest-
ment you can have the world’s singers in your
home and distribute the pleasure with your friends.
Gramaphones :
The Latest and Best, without blurr or blemish, from 35/ to £6 6/.
Double-sided Records,
Eight Minutes of the Best by the World’s artists. You may choose
your own programme from the large stock held. The prices are
right—2/ to 3/ apiece of two items.
H. W. Schroeder,
The Corner Store, Tanunda, S.A,
Is the Distributing Centre.


SANDWICH CAKE.
Four eggs, the weight of 4 eggs in sugar, the weight of 2 in flour, the
weight of 1 in cornflour, 2 tablespoons butter, 2 talilespoons milk, 1 small
teaspoon baking soda, 2 small teaspoons cream of tartar. Method —Beat butter
and sugar to cream, add eggs one by one, and beat well, add milk, then add
flour with soda and cream of tartar nvxed. Put into sandwich tins and
join with the following. Lemon Filling—Two lemons, the rind of one, add 1
, cup of sugar, 1 egg, 1 cup of water, 1 teaspoon butter, 1 tablespoon flour
mixed smooth with a little cold water. Boil till it thickens.
A. M. CRAMP, Rowland’s Flat.
ALMOND CAKE.
Take 1 lb. each of S.R. flour, sugar, and butter, the grated rind of half
a lemon, (i.eggs, and quarter lb. sweet almonds. Cream the butter with
the sugar, add the yolks of eggs one by one, and beat lightly for 10 minutes.
X'ow stir in the almonds blanched and chopped with the flour. Lastly add
the whites of eggs, which should be beaten to a stiff froth. Bake the cake
in a tin lined with buttered paper, and when nearly done' stick almonds
(blanched and cut in halves) over the top.
M. E. NIETSCHKE, Rowland’s Flat.
SPONGE SANDWICH.
One lb. flour, 1 lb. sugar, (i eggs, 1 tablespoon butter, 1 teaspoon soda,
2 teaspoons cream of tartar, add a little milk for rolls.
' Miss MIXNA LIXDXER, Krondorf.
LEMON ROCKS.
One and a half lb. flour, three-quarter lb. sugar, three-quarter lb. butter,
4 eggs, essence of lemon, and peel, 2 teaspoonfuls cream of tartar, 1 tea-
spoonful of baking soda.
Mrs. O. JACOBS, Tanunda.,
*
CINNAMON SPONGE.
Quarter lb. butter, half lb. sugar, half lb. S.R. flour, 2 eggs, 1 tablespoon
cinnamon. Bake in sandwich tins. Filling—One tablespoon butter, and
2of castor sugar. Beat together and spread between .the cakes when cold.
PRINCE OF WALES CAKE.
Mix quarter lb. butter and 5 oz. sugar together, add 2 eggs and quarter
lb. flour and quarter lb. cornflour, 1 teaspoonful baking powder. Flavour with
essence of lemon. Bake in patty pans in a moderate oven for about 10 minutes.
Mrs. S. HOMBURG, Tanunda; also Mrs. G. SCHRAPEL, Tanunda.
TWELPH CAKE.
Two lb. flour, 2 lb. white sugar, 2 lb. butter, 4 lb. currants, 1 lb. almonds
chopped, h lb. citron peel, 1 lb. candied orange and lemon peel mixed, IS
eggs, i oz. nutmeg, h oz. mixed spice, 1 gill brandy. Put butter in a pan
and work smoothly with a wooden spoon. Mix with sugar and spice for a
time, then break in eggs by degrees.-. Beat the mixture, stir in the brandy,
then flour, work a little, add fruit, sweetmeats, and almonds. Mix lightly to-
gether. Bake in a baking tin for 4 hours. When nearly cold ice it.
Mrs. W. E. HEUZENROEDER, Tanunda.
HEARTS OF LOVE.
Half lb. flour, J lb. cornflour, t> oz. butter, 12 oz. sugar, <! eggs 1 tea-
spoon baking powder. Bake in heart-shaped tins for 10 minutes. When
cooked sift sugar over them.
Mrs. W. E. HEUZEXROEDER, Tanunda.
JELLY CAKE.
Half lb. butter, 2 cups sugar, 0 eggs, 1 cup milk, 2 cups S.R. flour, essence
t>f lemon. Method —Beat eggs separately, whites'and yolks; last of all add
beaten whites of eggs.
Mrs. M. RECHXER, Tanunda.
WALNUT WAFERS.
Two eggs, 1' cup brown sugar, a pinch of salt, 1 cup shelled walnuts,
« tablespoons flour. Mix and drop on buttered paper, and bake till brown.
Miss S. MILLER, Tanunda.
RIBBON CAKE.
Quarter lb. butter, 1 cup sugar, 2 cups flour. 2 eggs, i cup milk, 2 tea-
spoons baking powder. Mix with flour, beat butter and sugar, add well-
beaten eggs, then milk, then flour. Colour as usual. Bake in layers, jam be-
tween, ice top.
Mrs. M. RECILVER, Tanunda.


SUNSHINE CAKE. -
Beat whites of 7 eggs to stiff froth, add one and a quartet; cups sugar, the
well-beaten yolks of the 7 eggs, 1 cut) S.R. flour, a pinch salt, essence to taste.
Mrs. M. RECHNER, Tanunda.
GINGER BREAD CAKE.
Beat 4 cups of sugar with quarter lb. butter. Now beat 2 eggs with an-
other quarter cup of sugar, and mix all together. Stir in half-cup lukewarm
milk with 1 teaspoonful baking soda and J cup golden syrup. Lastly add
one and a. quarter cups flour, 2 dessertspoons ground’ginger and 2 teaspoon-
fuls cinnamon, a few sultanas, and some finely minced lemon peel. Bake
for an hour in a moderate oven.
M. KOCH, Rowland’s Flat.
GINGER CAKE. i
Quarter lb. butter, 2 eggs, li cupfuls flour, 1 teaspoonfuls ginger, 1 tea-
spoonful mixed spice, 1 teaspoonful nutmeg, half cupful milk, 1 cupful sugar,
•half cup golden syrup half teaspoonful carb. soda. Mode—Beat butter and
sugar to a cream, add eggs, then syrup. Mix in flour to which spices have
been added. Put soda into milk and add. Bake in sandwich tins about 10
minutes. Artificial cream for placing between —One tablespoonful butter,
4 tablespoonfuls icing sugar. Mix with 1 or 2 teaspoonfuls of water. Beat
until it thickens like cream; flavour with vanilla.
E. CRAMP, Rowland’s Flat.
WALNUT CAKE.
Two oz. butter, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup flour, quarter lb. walnuts, 4 eggs,
1 teaspoon baking powder, and a little vanilla. Beat butter and sugar to a
cream, break in eggs one at a time, beat, until it looks light, then add wal-
nuts chopped finely, beat five minutes. Lastly add flour.and baking powder,
and put in sandwich tins. Bake 15 minutes. Put chopped walnuts mixed
with 'icing sugar and a little milk between the layers. Ice the top and
decorate with walnuts.
Miss L. HOFFMANN, Tanunda.
WALNUT CAKE.
Four eggs, 1 cup sugar, 1 cup S.R. flour, 1 tablespoon cold water. Fill-
ing—One egg well beaten, 1 tablespoon cornflour, sugar to taste, 1 teaspoon
essence vanilla, i cup milk. Boil till thick, and when cold add three-quarter
cup chopped walnuts. Ice cake and sprinkle with chopped walnuts or walnuts
halved.
Miss G. MITCHELL, Kadina.
RASPBERRY BUNS.
G oz. flour, i teaspoon baking powder, 2 oz. butter, 3 oz. sugar, 1 egg.
i cup milk. Mix up, divide into balls, fill centre with jam, glaze with
beaten egg, and bake 15 minutes in hot oven.
Miss G. MITCHELL, Kadina.
SMALL CAKES.
Half lb. flour, l teaspoon carb. soda, 1 teaspoon cream tartar, J cup sugar,
quarter lb. butter, 2 eggs, quarter cup milk, 2_ oz. currants or sultanas 1 oz.
lemon peel. Bake in greased- patty tins for 15 minutes.
Miss G. MITCHELL, Kadina.
WALNUT CAKE.
Six eggs, i lb. butter, 2 cups sugar, 2 dessertspoonfuls ground cinna-
mon, 2 large cups S.R. flour, 1 cup chopped walnuts, 1 teaspoonful vanilla
essence. Beat sugar and butter, add eggs, then flour, cinnamon, and nuts.
Bake in moderate oven.
Mrs. J. BOGNER Tanunda.
BRIDE CAKE.
One and a half lb. flour, 1 lb. butter, 1 lb. sugar, 1 lb. currants, i lb.
sultanas, 2 oz. almonds, lh teaspoons carb. soda, i teaspoon ratafia, J lb. lemon
peel, G or 7 eggs, and enough milk to mix. Method—Beat butter and sugar
to a cream, add eggs' well beaten, then add the dry ingredients and flavouring.
Do not mix too thin. Bake in a moderate oven 3or 4 hours.
MARIE WILKSCH, Tanunda.
COCOANUT SPONGE.
Half cup butter, 1 cup sugar, 3 eggs, half cup milk, li cups S.R. flour.
Bake in sandwich tins for 20 minutes. Filling—Quarter pint milk, 3 table-
spoons cocoanut chips, quarter teaspoon cornflour, 1 egg. Boil together until
thick and spread between layers.
Miss B. GARRETT, Vine Vale.


APPLE CAKE.
Three-quarter cup sugar, 21 cups S.K. flour, quarter lb. butter, 2 eggs,
quarter cup milk, 24 tablespoonfuls stewed apples. Method—Cream the but-
ter, add sugar, eggs, milk, and lastly flour. Cut in half, and roll about h in.
thick. Put half in a meat dish and spread with stewed apples, then place
the other half on top. Bake in a hot oven. When cool’ ice and sprinkle with
cocoanut.
Mrs. E. HOFF, Tanunda.
RICH POUND CAKE.
~ Take lb. flour, 2i lb. currants, two and quarter lb. raisins,-two and a
quarter lb. sugar, two and a quarter lb. butter, 1 lb. lemon peel, 1 lb.
almonds, 1 cup treacle, .‘! tablespoonfuls coffee, 2 dozen eggs, 2 teaspoonfuls
cream of tartar, 1 teakpoonful carbonate of soda. Beat butter and sugar to
a cream, then add eggs one at a time, and beat well; add treacle and coffee,
then all fruit, lastly Hour with carb. of soda and cream of tartar. Beat well,
and bake from 2} hours.
Mrs. X. BOER, Stockwell.
COCOANUT CAKE.
One and a half cups sugar, three-quarter lb. butter, eggs, nearly a
cup of milk, 1 cup cocoanut chips, .'! cups S.R. flour. Bake in a pretty hot
oven. Ice with icing ,sugar and cocoanut chips.
Mrs. J. F. KURTZ,; also Miss GARRETT, Vine Vale.
DOLLY VARDON.
Half cup butter, 1 cup sugar, 2 eggs, three-quarter cup milk, 2i cups
S. R. flour. Divide the dough into three parts, baking two parts plain in sand-
wich tins. Add to the dough that is left quarter cup of currants, 1 tea-
spoon of mixed spice, and a little lemon peel. Bake quarter of an hour. Put
together with butter, icing the dark laver between.
Miss M. GARRETT, Vine Vale.
RICH CHRISTMAS CAKE.
One and a quarter lb. flour, 1 lb. butter,. 1 lb. raisins, 1 lb. currants, l lb.
lemon peel, quarter lb. almonds, quarter wineglass brandy, three-quarter lb.
brown sugar, quarter lb. treacle, 1) eggs, J dessertspoon mixed spice, 1 nutmeg,
1 teaspoonful of soda, 2 teaspoonfuls cream of tartar. Method—Beat butter
and sugar to a cream, then add eggs and treacle and the other ingredients.
Soak lemon peel and almonds in the brandy overnight. Mix spice, nutmeg,
soda, and cream of tartar in the flour. Bake two hours.
• 1. KOCH, Rowland’s Flat.
POUND CAKE.*
One and a half pounds flour, 1 lb. butter, I 11). sugar, 1 lb.
currants, 1 lb. raisins, 1 lb. lemon peel. 8 eggs, 2 teaspoonsful
mixed spice, 2 of baking powder. Method—Beat butter and
sugar to a cream, add fruit, break in eggs one at a time; lastly
add flour and baking powder. Bake in a moderate oven four
hours.
Mrs. M. TRAEGKR, Tanunda.
POUND CAKE.
Ingredients—l lb. butter, l'J lb. flour, 1 lb. pounded loaf
sugar, 1 lb. currants, 9 eggs, 2 ozs. candied peel, i oz. citron,
i oz. sweet almonds; when liked a little pounded mace. Mode-
Work the butter to a cream, dredge in the flour, add the sugar,
currants, candied peel, cut into neat slices, and the almonds,
which should be blanched and chopped, and mix these well
together; whisk the eggs, and let them be thoroughly blended
with the drying ingredients. Beat the cake well for 20 min-
utes, and put it into a round tin; lined at the bottom and sides
with a strip of white buttered paper. Bake from lAto 2 hours,
and let the oven be well heated when the cake is put in, or
the currants will sink to the bottom. To make this preparation
light, the yolks and whites of the eggs should be beaten
separately. A glass of wine is sometimes added to the mixture.*
Mrs. E. B. MORGEX. Rowland's Flat.
/


WEDDING OR BIRTHDAY CAKE.
Six ozs. butter, 4 eggs, 6 ozs. sugar, 4 11). flour, 4 teaspoon
baking powder, one-eighth cup treacle, 2 ozs. almonds, quarter
nutmeg, quarter pagke.t mixed spice, quarter teaspoon cinnamon,
4 lb. currants, (> ozs. raisins, 2 ozs. candied peel, pinch of salt,
quarter wineglass brandy, quarter teaspoon vanilla.
Mrs. R. LINDNER, Tanunda.
HARRISON CAKE.
One cup butter, 2 eggs, 1 cup sugar, 3 cups flour, 1 cup
molasses or treacle, 1 lb. stoned raisins, 1 small cup milk, 1
teaspoonful cloves, a little cinnamon and nutmeg, 1 teaspoonful
soda. Rub the butter with the sugar, beat the eggs well, then
add the molasses, then add milk which has had the soda stirred
in well; then add the rest of the flour. Lastly, add one pound
of raisins, and quarter pound chopped almonds. Bake an hour
in a moderate oven.
Mrs. CHRIS. HOFFMANN, Langmeil, Tanunda.
SCOTCH SHORTCAKE.
Ingredients—4 lb. flour, quarter lb. butter, 24 ozs. sugar.
Knead flour, butter and sugar together, and roll out to thickness
of half an inch. Bake in a slow oven for 4 hour, or till the cake
is a pale brown.
B. ROBERTSON, Eastwood, S.A.
SULTANA CAKE (Economical).
Ingredients—Three-quarter lb. S.R. flour, 4 lb. sugar, ,6 ozs.
butter, 4 lb. sultanas, 2 eggs, lemon peel, essence of lemon and
vanilla, milk. Method —Cream, butter, and sugar, add the yolks
of eggs, and beat well. Add essences and little milk, then the
flour and fruit. Beat the whites of eggs to a froth, and stir in
very lightly. Bake in moderately deep cake tin. Time—About
3 hour.
E. POTTER, Kadina.
STRAW CAKE.
One cup butter, cream with 14 cups sugar, 3 eggs. 1 cup
milk. 3 cups flour, 1 teaspoonful carb. soda, 2 teaspoonful cream
tartar, pinch salt, essence lemon and currants as liked. Bake
in patty pans in a very quick oven for 10 minutes, or in a
loaf if preferred.
CARRIE PAULL, Kadina.
VANILLA SANDWICH.
Four eggs, their weight in sugar; 3 eggs, their weight in
S.R. flour, 1 tablespoonful boiling water. Filling for centre —
One egg, 1 teaspoonful vanilla, 1 teaspoonful cornflour, sweeten
to taste. Boil 4 cup milk and stir in other ingredients.
Mrs. M. G. BENTLEY, Burra.
DATE AND WALNUT CAKE.
One pound dates, i lb. walnuts, 4 lb. butter, 1 lb. flour, 3
eggs, (i oz. sugar, a good teaspoon baking powder. Method—
Wash, stone, and dry dates (must be quite dry), cut walnuts
into small pieces, crearq butter and sugar, add eggs well beaten,
then stir in flour and baking powder. Mix well, then add fruit
and nuts. Bake as a fruit cake in a moderate oven.
Miss A. AURICHT, Tanunda.


CHOCOLATE CAKE.
One pound butter, 1 cup milk, 3 cups S.R. flour, 2 cups sugar,
(> eggs, essence of lemon. Five dessertspoons of cocoa. Mix
ingredients together and bake in moderately hot oven.
Mrs. E. STANDISH, Bethany.
CHOCOLATE CAKE.
Half pound S.R. flour, quarter pound butter, quarter pound
sugar, 3 eggs, \ teaspoonful vanilla, 2 teaspoonfuls chocolate.
Mode—Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add the well-beaten
eggs, vanilla and melted chocolate. Then sift in flour gradu-
ally, stirring well until all is used. Bake in sandwich tins for
lo minutes in a moderate oven. When cold put between layers
as fcfllows—One small teacup of milk, 1 egg, 1 dessertspoonful
cornflour, 2 teaspoonfuls vanilla, 1 dessertspoonful sugar. Mode
—Beat the egg and add to it the sugar and cornflour, which
has already been moistened with a little cold milk. Have the
milk boiling, and then pour the other ingredients into the
saucepan. Stir well all the time, and when it thickens let it
stand aside to cool before spreading in hetween the cake.
Mrs. E. C. THIELE, Tanunda.
CINNAMON CAKE.
One and a half cups S.R. flour, 1 cup sugar, 4 cup butter,
1 cup sweet milk, a little essence of lemon. Rub the batten
and sugar into the flour, then beat the whites of 2 eggs, mix
in the milk, and stir in all together. When this is baked have
ready the yolks of the 2 eggs beaten, and mix together nearly
a cupful of brown sugar, a teaspoonful of ground cinnamon;
put over the top of the cake, and put in'the oven long enough
for it to set. Three-quarters of an hour is long enough to bake
the cake if put into a flat cake pan.
A. L. NIETSCHKE, Rowland’s Flat.
CINNAMON CAKE.
Ingredients—l cup sugar, quarter cup butter, 3 eggs, 2
teaspoonfuls cinnamon, 4 tablespoonfuls milk, 2 cups flour, 1
small teaspoon soda, 2 small teaspoonfuls cream of tartar.
Method—Beat butter to cream, add sugar and eggs, mix the
cream of tartar in flour, dissolve soda in milk, add cinnamon,
spread jam between layers.
M. THIELE, Rowland’s Flat.
‘puff pastry.
One pound flour, 4 lb. lard, -A lb. butter, a oz. cream tartar.
Rub some of the lard and cream tartar into the flour well. Make
a nice stiff paste with a little water. Roll out the paste 1 inch
thick, lay remainder of lard and butter on in 1 inch thick pieces.
Roll out five times, then let it stand for 2 hours. Roll out again,
and bake'in very hot oven. This is an excellent puff paste
for mince pies or cheese cakes, and should be baked in a very
quick oven.
Mts. F. JUTTNER, “Paranook,’’ Tanunda.
PUFF PASTRY.
One pound good butter, 1 lb. flour, a little salt, rub in 2
or 3 vozs. of the butter, yolk of an egg, and a little water. Stir
with a knife; put the rest of the hotter in the centre of paste
after rolling, and roll out three tiroes; stand awhile, and roll
again a quarter of an inch thick. Cut into squares like scones.
The oven should lie quick (,very hot). Serve with jam or
stewed fruit. '
Miss M-. LOWKE, Tanunda.


A CORNER OF TANUNDA.
NURIOOTPA HOTEL DINING ROOM.


JUMBLE CAKE.
Make puff paste, roll very thin. Place on a I'm tray or meat
dish. Spread raspberry jam over very thinly; place another
layer of paste very thinly on top; press edges together; cut
evenly at the edges; press together and bake in a very quick
oven; when baked put thin icing on top; cut in squares when
cold.
Miss MAB JEFFERSON, Naracoorte.
BROWN COFFEE CAKE.
One cup sugar. 1 cup treacle, 1 cup dates, A lb. butter, 3 cups
dour, 1 egg. 1 teaspbonful each of ginger, nutmeg, cloves, cin-
namon-, and carb. soda, 1 cup strong black coffee; beat butter
and sugar, add treacle, then egg and the coffee, in which soda is
dissolved, then flour and dates. Bake three-quarters of an hour
in slow oven.
Mrs. M. M. PRIOR. Lefevre Terrace, North Adelaide.
QUEEN CAKE.
One pound Hour, three-quarter lb. Stigar, -1 lb. butter, 1 lb.
currants and sultanas mixed, 2 oz\ lemyn peel. 2 oz. almonds, 3
eggs. 1 teacup cream, 1 teaspoonful soda mixed with a little
milk, the grated rind of a lemon, half grated nutmeg. Rub flour
and sugar with the butter, add the fruit, beat eggs, and mix with
cream, soda, etc. Adc? all together and beat well for quarter of
an hour. Bake .about 1-1 hours.
Miss M. TUCKER, “Grafton,” Prospect.
LAMINGTON CAKES.
fine cup butter, lA cups sugar, 1 cup’milk, 3 cups flour, 4 feggs,
1 teaspoon carb. soda, 2 teaspoons reacm of tartar. Method—
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add eggs, well beaten, one
at a time, then the milk, in which the soda has been dissolved,
then the flour, with cream of tartar piixed. Beat all well and
bake in a square tin. When cold, cut in squares and ice all over
with the following: One pound icing sugar, 5 teaspoons cocoa;
mix well, and work in quarter pound butter, vanilla to taste,
and 2or 3' tablespoons milk. Dip each piece when iced in desic-
cated cocoanut.
Miss IVY DOORNE, Tanunda.
One cup butter, 1 cup sugar, T cup milk, 5 eggs, 3 cups s.r.
flour, essence. Icing for same: Half pound butter, 3 tablespoons
cocoa. Mix ingredients together. ' Cut cake in small squares,
spread icing right round same, and roil in cocoanut chips.
Miss B. 'STANDI SH, Bethany.
One cup butter, 1-A cups sugar, 1 cup milk, 3 cups flour, 1
teaspoon soda, 2 teaspoons cream of tartar, 4 eggs. Melt the
butter, pour it over the sugar and .eggs, then add the milk
with the soda dissolved and the flour with the cream of tartar
mixed. Beat all well together; with essence of lemon to taste.
Bake in a tin with buttered paper half an hour or little more.
When cold, cut into squares and ice. Icing for. cake:.One pound
of icing sugar, quarter lb. butter; crush sugar fine, melt butter,
mix both together, add lA tablespoons of, boiling water and 4
teaspoons of cocoanut.
Mrs. J. T. KLEEMANN, Tanunda; also Mrs. PERCY
BEVAN, Adelaide.


GRACE CAKE.
Two cups of (self-raising flour, 1 cup sugar, quarter pound of
butter, a eggs, j cup milk, essence of lemon. Beat butter to
cream, add sugar, add eggs one at a time, essence, and milk.
Sift in the flour. Bake in patty pans in a rather quick oven.
Mrs. J. OBST, Tanunda.
WALNUT CREAM CAKE.
Half pound butter, 1 cup sugar. 1 cup brown sugar, 4 eggs.
% tablespoons milk. 2 cups s.r. flour, and pinch of salt. Beat
butter and sugar to a cream, add eggs, milk, and then flour.
Bake in sandwich tins in'a moderate oven. When cold, spread
one-half with cream and walnuts (chopped fine) and cover with
the other, and then icing, cocoanut chips, and walnuts on top.
Miss K. FREESTUN, Tanunda.
WALNUT CAKE.
Three eggs, quarter lb. butter, 1 small cup sugar, 1 large cup
flour, s.r. flour, or 1 teaspoon baking powder, l large cup wal-
nuts,' and flavour with vanilla, 1 dessertspoon cinnamon. Beat
batter and sugar to a cream, add eggs, separately, then flour
aud cinnamon (sifted) and walnuts. Bake in a moderate oven
for 1-J hours.
Mrs. E. E. K LEHMAN, Tanunda.
SNOW CAKE.
- Two pounds arrowroot. 1 lb. butter, 1 lb. sugar, whites of
3.2 eggs, flavouring. Beat the butter to a cream, stir in the
arrowroot and sugar, at the same time beating the mixture frisk
and the whites of eggs to a stiff froth; add other ingredients
and beat briskly for twenty minutes. Pour the cake into a but-
tered mould and bake in moderate oven.
Miss MONA KLEEMAN, Tanunda.
WALNUT CREAM SANDWICH.
One and a quarter cups of flour, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar,
i teaspoon carb. soda, 1 cup of sugar, 4 eggs, 1 cup butter.
Beat butter and sugar together for twenty minutes. Add flour
and raising, with a pinch of salt. Pour out on four well-grr-’se.*’
pans. Bake in a quick oven for from four to s.x minutes. Wm,*
some cream, add l cup finely cut up walnuts, flavour with
vanilla, and t 'teaspoon sugar. When the cake is cold put the
mixture between each layer.
Mrs. J. T. KLEEMANN, Tanunda.
• CHELSEA CAKES.
Two cups s.r. flour, 1 cup of sugar, quarter lb. butter, 2 eggs.
Rub butter with the flour and sugar, then mix with the eggs,
well beaten: roll out thin, spread raspberry jam over as thin as
possible, and roll up like rolly-polley pudding. Cut in thin
slices and bake a nice brown.
Mrs. J. T. KLEEMANN, Tanunda.
ORANGE CAKE.
Three eggs, weight in sugar, butter, flour, grated rind oh*
©•range, 1 tablespoon milk, 1 teaspoon baking powder. Mode —
Beat.butter and sugar to cream, add eggs, milk, and orange rind. •
Juice ©f the orange for icing.
Mrs. RODNEY COCKBURN, Malvern.


NEW APPLE CAKE.
Melt in a saucepan 1 tablespoonful of butter, sift two table-
spoonfuls flour, add-to melted butter, then stir till quite smooth.
Gradually add l£ cups milk, stirring all the time, then boil till
quite thick; pour into a basin, add sugar to taste and 2 eggs, 1
at a time; put layer of uncooked apples in pie dish and pour the
mixture cn. Bake 40 minutes.
Miss LIZZIE NIETSCHKE, Kuninga.
Scones and Rolls.
GEM SCONES.
One egg-, 1 tablespoon sugar, 11 cups Hour (S.R.), 1 cup water, pinch
of salt, tablespoon of butter. Mix the dry ingredients first; melt butter, add
to them; beat egg and mix with water; mix-all together. Make irons almost
red hot, butter them, place a little of mixture in each, and bake a few
minutes. Split and butter hot. Cake tins will not do to bake in; they must
"be iron.
MisS HILDA WALLACE, Tanunda.
DROP SCONES.
Eight tablespoons flour, i teaspoon salt, 1 teaspoonful soda,
2 cream of tartar, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar, 1 egg, enough milk to
mix into a fairly stiff paste. Fry ih butter. Watch well.
Mrs. E. J. F. CRAWFORD, Angaston.
SCONES.
One pound S.R. flour, 2 dessertspoonfuls sugar, 2 dessert-
spoonfuls butter, 1 egg, 1 cup milk. Beat sugar, butter, and
egg together, then add milk and bake in quick oven five minutes,
then turn shelf round and leave ten minutes more.
Mrs. J. TILL, Tanunda.
COFFEE ROLLS.
Three oz. butter, 2 oz. sugar (well beaten). Into this beat
1 egg, 1 cup milk, 1 lb. S.R. floujr. Bake in a brisk oven ten
minutes.
Mrs. FREDERICK BEVAN, North Adelaide.
COFFEE ROLLS.
Three cups flour, 2 ozs. butter, :> ozs. sugar, 1 egg, 1 cup
milk. Cream butter and sugar, beat egg, then add milk and
flour, mixing together fairly soft dough. Cut into round damp
edges and fold over. Brush with milk and bake in hot oven.
Mrs. A. F. SCHRADER, Tanunda.
MILK ROLLS.
One pound S.R. flour, l i ozs. butter, 1 cup milk and a pinch
of salt. Rub in butter and mix dough. Roll out and cut in
strips, make into fancy twists. Brush with milk and bake in a
hot oven.
Mrs. A. F. SCHRADER, Tanunda. .


Housewives—
IF YOU WOULD LIKE YOUR
CAKES AND SCONES TO BE
ALWAYS NICE AND KEEP
FRESfI, USE
ANCHOR
SELF-RAISING
FLOUR
NO SUBSTITUTES USED.
PURE CREAM TARTAR.


Jellies, Jams and preserves.
TUTTI FRUTTI JELLY.
Soak half a box of gelatine in half a pint of cold water. Dissolve with
1 pint of boiling water, add the juice of three lemons, and cups sugai.
Strain. When beginning to stiffen, put a laver of jelly in a dish, then a layer
of sliced bananas, one of jelly, one of sliced oranges, one of jelly, one
of cocoanut, and finish with a layer of jelly.
Mrs. MILLER, Tanunda.
..JAMAICA JELLY.
Soak 1 oz. gelatine in half a pint of cold water for 2 hours; if not dis-
solved, stand over dish of hot water till quite melted. Add the liquid of 1 tin
pineapple and juice 2 lemons and thin peeled rind of one, 4 oz. loaf sugar, and
half a pint of boiling water. Slice pineapple very thin, and set all in a
mould.
Mrs. MILLER, Tanunda.
DATE JELLY.
Soak three-quarter lb. dates in .'! cups of water for 2 hours. Drain and
strain the water in which the dates were soaked, and put on the fire, adding
la cups granulated sugar. Take out stones, add dates to syrup, and cook till
tender. Soak S box gelatine in little cold water, and stir into the water
in which the dates are being cooked. When thoroughly dissolved, pour the
whole into a mould moistened with cold water, and set in a cool place. Serve
•wth sugar and cream*. Make day before use.
Mrs. MILLER, Tanunda.
PINEAPPLE JELLY.
One oz. gelatine,- 1 pint water, sugar to taste, small piece of acid. Pour
water over the ingredients and soak until gelatine is soft and thoroughly
•dissolved. When dissolved . strain through a fine strainer. Add 1 tin pine-
.apple and juice. Stir well, and set aside till firm.
Miss G. SALTER, Angaston.
TOMATO JAM.
Six lb. each green and ripe tomatoes, sugar pound to pound. Boil sugai
to a syrup, allow just a very little water, add sugar gradually, put in th«
tomatoes (cut up). When nearly done add one heaped teaspoonful of tar-
taric and one bottle of vanilla. Boil hard.
\ Miss B. RIEDEL, Nurieotpa.
CITRON OR- ORANGE MARMALADE.
Wash fruit and cut off any defective parts, put into a
saucepan and cover with water. Cover closely and boil until
a straw will probe the fruit .easily. Take out and cut in quar-
ters, pick out seeds and c\it as finely as possible. Make a
syrup, allow 15 lbs. fruit to 3 lb’s, sugar, add quarter pint of
water to each pound of sugar. Still until it has dissolved. When
it has boiled a few minutes, take it off the fire, pour in quarter
pint of cold water, which will throw up all refuse. Put on fire
and add pulp and peel. Boil fast for half an hour. It is done
when the syrup jellies.
Mrs. W. E. HEUZEXROEDER, Tanunda.
MARMALADE.
Cut 4 lbs. poor man's oranges very thinly and put into
preserving pan with. 1G cups (breakfast cups) of cold water and
let it stand for 24 hours. Boil till tender, then add 1 dozen lbs.
of sugar and boil hard for three-quarters of an hour.
Mrs. FULTON SALTER, Angaston.
MELON AND GINGER PRESERVE.
Cut up 12 lbs. melons, boil 1 lb. green ginger for anoua
10 minutes, scrape and chop fine. Put i) lbs. sugar, melon mn
ginger into a preserve pan, and let stand all night. Next day
boil until clear and a good colour.
W. MITCHELL, Kadina.


ORANGE MARMALADE.
Ten large oranges, 4 good-sized lemons, 16 cups of water,
10 lbs. sugar. Allow oranges and lemons to soak in water for
24 hours, cut up into thin slices and pour 16 cups of water over
the fruit and allow to stand for 24 hours. Then boil it up and
put aside for another 24 hours. Then put on fire and bring to
a boil, at the same time heating the sugar. When boiling add
sugar and boil for half an hour very briskly. Don't fill bottles
till quite cold. Boil in an enamel stewpan.
Mrs. J. D. GARRETT, Rowland’s Flat.
MELON AND LEMON JAM.
Cut melon (after peeling) in pieces, leave seeds in, and to
every 15 lbs. melon stew 3 lbs. sugar over it, and allow to stand,
all night. Also cut 12 lemons into slices, cover with boiling
water (they must be put in separate basin), and leave all night
Next day boil altogether until pulped, then strain through jelly
bag. Allow 1 oup sugar to one cup syrup and boil until jellied,
about three-quarters of an hour. fast.
Mrs. ALEX. COCKBURX, Rose Park.
, \
RHUBARB JAM.
Six pounds rhubarb, 6 lbs. lump sugar and the rind of three
lemons. Wipe the rhubarb dry and put into preserving pan
with sugar, cutting the rhufoarb up first. Mince the lemon rind.
and add other ingredients, keep stirring to prevent rhubarb
from burning. When the sugar is. quite dissolved let the jam.
boil quickly for three-quarters of an hour.
Mrs. MILLER, Tanunda.
LEMON MARMALADE.
Cut the lemons into very fine shreds, and remove all pips.
To every pound of fruit add one pint of water and boil all.
together. Let it get cold, weigh, and to every pound of boiled-
fruit add one and a quarter lbs, best white sugar. Boil quickly
till quite clear, and bottle while hot. This marmalade improves,
by keeping.
Mrs. MILLER. Tanunda.
TOMATO JAM.
Take tomatoes not quite ripe, the green ones are best;,
wipe with a cloth and take off the stems. Put into a preserving
kettle, allowing half a pound of white sugar for every one 11).
of fruit. Add a little water for syrup. Slice one lemon for two*
lbs. of fruit, and add. Boil until thoroughly done, and the
syrup is thick. Do not put much water at first, as it may be
added easily.
Mrs. MILDER, Tanunda.
QUINCE MARMALADE.
Take 12 lbs. quinces (out of each pound reserve one quince)..
Cut the quinces into quarters, wipe them carefully, but do not
peel and core them. Put them in a stewpan and cover with
water; let them boil until quite tender and soft. Strain, and
to each pint of juice allow 1 lb. sugar. Cut up the reserved
quinces into strips, put them into the juice, and boil until they
begin to colour. Then add the sugar in the proportion given l
above, and let all boil together until the marmalade is a pretty
red colour, and will jelly if a small quantity is. put on a plate. '
Miss D. HILDA KLEEMAX.N, Rowland’s Flat.


MELON AND PINEAPPLE JAM.
Four pounds melons, six lemons, two or three pineapples,
10 cups of water. Cut melon and pineapples into scpiare blocks,
and lemons finely. Let all stand overnight and then for every
cup of fruit and juice add one cup of sugar. Boil for about an
hour after the sugar is added, or until a little will jelly in a
saucer.
Mrsf MILLER, Tanunda.
MELON JELLY.
Slice ten pounds melon, sprinkle two pounds of sugar over
and stand all night. Slice 8 lemons, just cover with hot water,
and let stand overnight. Boil all together for one hour, then
strain, and to every pint liquid add two cups sugar. Boil liquid
first for twenty minutes, add sugar and boil briskly for fifteen
minutes. Do not stir while boiling. '
Mrs. MILLER, Tanunda.
APRICOT JAM.
If possible use fresh, firm fruit. Peel the apricots, divide
them and remove stones. Allow 1 11). sugar to every pound of
fruit. Put the prepared fruit in a large earthenware basin, cover
with half the sugar, and allow to stand until the next day, by
which time a thick syrup will have formed. Take this syrup
and put in preserving pan, with the remainder of the sugar.
Let it boil for three-quarters of an hour, and while boiling
quickly put in the prepared apricots and allow whole to boil
gently for about an hour. It will not require stirring, but
occasionally feel the bottom of (he pan with a long spoon.
Blanch some of the kernels, and add to the jam a short time
before it is finished. When the apricots first begin to boil a
thick scum will rise. It is better not to skim this off until the
jam is nearly done.
Miss X. BOER, Stockwell.
MARMALADE,
Weigh the oranges (poor man's oranges must be used),
wipe them and cut them into thin strips, removing tjie pips onlv.
Add three pints water to every lb. of fruit, and let stand till
next day. Then put on fire and boil till skins are quite soft,
and let it remain till next day. Then add 14 lbs. sugar to ever}'
lb. pulp, and boil until done—about half hour’s fast boiling - .
Miss DULCIE AURICHT, Tanunda.
QUINCE MARMALADE.
Cut the quinces very thin and small (as oranres for mar-
malade), and allow 2 cups of quinces to each cup of sugar. Put
into pan as many cups water as sugar. Then,- when boiling,
drop quinces in a little at a time. Boil until nice colour and
stir to keep from burning. Take out the pips, but do not skin.
Mrs. E. TILL, Tanunda.
FRUIT SALTS.
One ounce cream of tartar, 2 oz. tartaric acid, 2 oz Epsom
salts, 2 oz. bicarbonate of soda, 2 oz. citrate magnesia, 4 oz.
confectioner's sugar. All rolled to a powder and mix thoroughly.
Mrs. M. AURICHT, Tanunda.


N igger
Your Boots
with
NIGGER
Boot Polish.
It is the Best,
and Made in South Australia.


Salads, Sauces and Pickles.
HERRING SALAD.
('lean several herrings thoroughly ; let them He in cold water for 4 or
5 hours. Then put a layer in large earthenware jar, next a layer of bay
leaves. Cut up a few onions and slices of lemon, whole pepper, spice, and
cloves, a little cayenne pepper, sugar, and the milk of the herrings which
have been washed. Boil sufficient vinegar to cover, let cool, pour over the
"nerrings, and let stand a fortnight.
Mrs. M. E. HF.rZEXROEDER, Tannnda.
POTATO SALAD.
Cut bacon in little sc|uares, 1 finely cut onion, then fry together; add
vinegar, pepper, salt, and cream. Cut potatoes in rings, and mix with in-
gredients, and serve warm.
Mrs. J. BOGXER, Tamnula.
SALAD DRESSING.
Mix together 1 lieaten egg, I teaspoon made mustard, halt a teaspoon
salt quarter teaspoon pepper, •"> teaspoons sugar, 1 small teaspoon flour, 1. cup
milk, halt cup vinegar (let down to taste with water). I'ut over tire
and stir until it thickens (must not boil), then stand on hack of stove tor
Jive or seven minutes.
Mrs. R. I). FIELD, Xurioolpa.
POTATO SALAD.
Boil some potatoes and mash them to a cream with milk, butter, pepper,
and salt. Chop an onion finely, and mix all well together with about 2
tablespoons vinegar. Put in a glass dish, and sprinkle chopped parsley.
Garnish with hard-boiled egg cut in slices.
Mrs. I. P. HEC.GIE, Angaston.
SARDINE SALAD.
Sardines, eggs, motato sauce, pepper, lettuce. Cut lettuce very finely,
place in an entree dish, pour an egg dressing over same; bone and mash
■sardines. Hard-boil any quantity of eggs required; when void cut in halves.
Squeeze the yolks out, and iniv with the mashed sardines, add a little
pepper and tomato sauce, and a pinch of salt if required. Roli into balls,
and place a ball in each 'half of the whites. Dot these about on the salad in
entree dish, garnish with beetroot or tomato, and serve.
Mrs. W. SEPPELT, Seppcltsiield.
BLOTTER PASTE.
Three red herrings, 1 tablespoonful butter, 1 tablespoonful cream, a
little cayenne, 2 eggs. Bone herrings, put through mincing machine 2 times.
Put butter and cream in a saucepan, make boiling iiot, then add herrings,
.and well bea-ten eggs. Press in pots.
Mrs. j. T. KI.EEMAXX, Tamnula.
ANCHOVY PASTE.
Skin and bone ti red herrings, put them through the mincer sever;;! titties.
I’ut i lb. butter and 1 lb. cream in a saucepan and warm, but do not boil.
Then add herrings with a pinch of cayenne pepper; mix thoroughly over fire,
then add one beaten egg;-mix again. Put in small pots or jars.
FISH PASTE.
Three red herring's put through mincer several rimes; put a quarter lb.
butter and •'! tablespoons on cream into a saucepan, and warm but not boil,
then add herrings with a pinch of cavenne pepper. Mix thoroughly over
live, just bring to a boil, then add 1 well-beaten egg ahd mix well.
Miss E. HOLT, Tan tin-la.
FEDERAL CHEESE PASTE.
(irate J. lb. stale cheese, place a saucepan over the fire with a cvq < ot sweet
milk, 1 tablespoon cream (optional), 2 full tablespoons lir,!!n I small -ea-
stioon mustard, pinch of cayenne pepper, suitspoon salt. _ Add the ch-'ese
and bring to a quick boil, stirring occasionally, and let it Muinn-r for 1.»
minutes. Pour into small pots and seal.
E. M. JACOB, Rowland's Elat.
BLACK JACK TO DARKEN GRAVY.
Put 1 cup of sugar in a saucepan on the stove until it g' *-' quire dark.
Let cool, then add 1 cup of water. Let stand until thin. i'tv. iv.io bottles,
ana cork.
Mrs. M. E. HF.CZEXROEDER, Tmr.tr.d:,.


HERRING PASTE.
Four red herrings, .'! fresh eggs, i lb. butter, 2 tablespoonfuls of cream,
a little cayenne pepper. Skin and bone the herrings, grind them through
a mincing machine, add eggs (well beaten), cream, butter, and cayanne. Mix
well, let simmer in oven or saucepan for al»out quarter hour. Let cool, bottle,
and close tightly.
Miss G. ANDREW, Greenock.
TOMATO CHUTNEY.
Twelve lb. tomatoes, 1J pints vinegar, 2 lb. sugar, 1 oz. cayenne pepper,
li oz. cloves, 4 oz. whole - ginger, lb. apples, quarter lb. garlic, quarter lb.
salt, quarter lb. shalots. Mix all and boil until you can mash through a
colander, then add vinegar and 1 lb. sultanas. Boil for about an hour.
W. MITCHELL, KADIXA.
\
PLUM SAUCE.
Six lb. plums, 15 lb. sugar, pints‘vinegar, 1 tablespoon cayenne pepper,
1 teaspoon salt, i oz. cloves, i oz. allspice, 1 handful whole ginger bruised.
Boil together until the plum stones separate, then strain through colander,
and bottle.
Miss p. B. BROCK, Tanunda.
TOMATO CHUTNEY.
Take 4 lb. tomatoes, 1 lb. apples pared and cored, 1 lb. raisins stoned, 1
lb. onions, quarter lb. salt, quarter pint of green chillies, 2 b. brown sugar,
1 tablespoonful mustard, 1 tablespoonful ground ginger, 0 cloves of garlic,
and pepper to taste. Put the apples, tomatoes, raisins, garlic, and onions
through sausage ’machine, mix well with other ingredients, and boil till the
thickness of jam.
Miss E. B. BROCK, Tanunda.
TOMATO SAUCE.
Take 12 lb. of tomatoes, 1 lb. apples, 1 lb. onions, quarter garlic. Boil
these together to a pulp, then strain through a colander, then add quarter
lb. salt, quarter lb. sugar, 1 tablespoonful pepper, 1 packet of mixed spice,
and a quart of vinegar. A little vinegar may be used to bring the tomatoes
to boil at the start.
, Miss L. RIESCHIECK, Tanunda.
f ' MUSTARD PICKLES.
For 1 gallon vinegar h lb. mustard, 1 small tablespoon turmeric, 1 small
cup flour, 2 cups sugar, a little cayenne pepper. Mix to a thin paste with
cold vinegar. Bring remains of vinegar nearly to a boil. Before adding the
paste stir well, then add vegetables.
Miss ALMA HENTSCHKE, Tanunda.
TOMATO CHUTNEY.
Six lb. tomatoes, .'! lb. apples, 1 lb. onions, 2 lb. sugar, i oz. cayenne
pepper, 4 oz. preserved ginger, 1 cup vinegar, 1 oz. garlic, 1 teaspoon salt, a
few chillies. Cut into small pieces. Boil all together, and after it
begins to boil add a little more vinegar and salt.
Mrs. J. P. HEGGIE, Angaston.
TOMATO SAUCE.
To every <> lb. tomatoes allow 1 lb. onions, i oz. garlic, i oz. cloves, S
oz. ground ginger, 2 oz. salt, cayenne pepper to • taste. Boil all together
slowly for 2 hours, then strain through cheesecloth. Add 1 pint best vinegar
and quarter lb. sugar, then again boil slowly until the proper consistency.
Mrs. J. P. HEGGIE, Angaston.
MUSTARD PICKLES.
Cut a cauliflower into small pieces, sprinkle with salt, and let stand over
night. For a large cauliflower take 2 bottles of vinegar and bring to a
boil. Mix 2 tablespoonfuls flour, 4 mustard, 1 sugar, 1 teaspoonful curry, h
teaspoonful cayenne peppe*, and 1 dessertspoonful tumuric to a paste, and stir
into the boiling vinegar. Drain the cauliflower, put into the vinegar, and let
boil from sto 7 minutes. Use an enamel dish and wooden spoon.
R. A. BENTLEY, Tanunda.
MAYONNAISE ' SAUCE.
Half teaspoon mustard, 1 tablespoon butter, 2 tablespoons vinegar, 2
tablespoons vinegar, 2 tablespoons water, 1 good tablespoon sugar, 1 egg well
beaten, a little pepper and salt. Beat vinegar, water, and egg thoroughly,
add to the dry ingredients. In a saucepan, stir over the fire until thick; don’t
boil. Cream can be added if liked, but it is not necessary.
Mrs. M. E. HEUZENROEDER, Tanunda.


TOMATO SAUCE.
Twenty-four lb. tomatos, i lb. garlic, 1 lb. onions, J oz. peppercorns, i
oz. mace, quarter oz. cloves, 1 lb. apples. Boil for 1 hour, strain, put on to
boil again; add 1 oz. ground pepper, £ oz. ground ginger, quarter oz. ground
allspice, ] lb. salt, 2 bottles vinegar. Boil for 2 hours. .
Mrs. C. R. HELLING, Tannuda.
TOMATO SAUCE.
, Thirty lb. tomatoes, 1 lb. salt, 1 lb. onions, 1 lb. garlic, i teaspoonful
cayenne pepper, three-quarter oz. pepper, three-quarter oz. whole ginger,
three-quarter oz. mace, three-quarter oz. cloves, three-quarter oz. whole all-
spice, oz. mustard, 1 lb. sugar, i gallon vinegar. Cook three and a quarter
hours.
I Mrs. HENSEL, Bethany.
TOMATO SAUCE.
Twelve lb. tomatoes, i lb. onions, quarter lb. garlic, quarter lb. salt, quar-
ter lb. sugar, i oz. rftacc, J oz. ginger, i oz. pepper, i oz. mustard, a little
cayenne pepper, L gallon vinegar.
Mrs. C. WJLKSCH, Tannuda.
PICKLED EGGPLUMS.
One quart vinegar, 1 oz. whole ginger, 1 oz. mustard seed, three-quarter
lb. moist sugar, a few cloves, quarter teaspoonful cayenne pepper. Boil half
an hour, then put in the plums, and simmer 20 minutes.
.Miss ISABELLA KLEEMAN, Tanunda.
WORCESTER SAUCE.
Ingredients—One quart good brown vinegar, 2 cups treacle, 1 oz. cayenne
pepper, 1 oz. cloves (whole), 1 oz. mace, 1 oz. ginger (whole and bruised), 1
oz. garlic, 1 nulmtg ibruistu), 1 uz. salt, 2 onions vmedium size). Method —
Boil gently for 1 nour and strain through very fine sieve; when cool drain
again, bottle, and cork. Ready for use in a week.
Mrs. L. SCH LUN'KE, Tanunda.
PLUM SAUCE.
Six lb. dark plums, .’5 lb. sugar, 2 pints vinegar, 1 handful- whole ginger
(bruised), half handful cloves (crushed), <> teaspoons salt, 1 tablespoon pepper,
pinch cayenne pepper, garlic and onions to taste. Boil 1 hour, strain through
colander, bottle wnen cool, cork well. No need to put in cayenne and garlic
if preferred.
Mrs. FULTON SALTER, Angaston.
WORCESTER SAUCE.
On quart brown vinegar, i cup treacle, 1 oz. cayenne pepper, 1 oz. mace,
1 oz. ginger (w'hole and bruised), 1 oz. sage, and 2 large onions. Boil an
hour. \vnen cokl strain, bottle, and cork. Can be used in •”> or (i days.
Shake the bottle before using.
Mrs. C. S. CRANE, Paradise.
ASPARAGUS SAUCE.
One cup water, 1 egg well beaten, 1 teaspoon cornflour, 1 dessertspoon
suga;, i cup milk, 1 tablespoon vinegar. Mix cornflour to a smooth paste
with the milk, add sugar, add vinegar, beating well all the time. Then add
egg and water. Let all come to the boil. Stir well all the time, then add
a little butter and pour over the asparagus.
Mrs. M. E. HEUZEXROEDER, Tanunda.
MUSTARD PICKLES.
Cut vegetables up overnight with a brine oi water made from 4 quarts
water and 1 pint salt. Next morning take brine, boil it, and put on vege-
tables again for a few minutes, afterwards drain off again, and make a mix-
ture of <i bottles vinegar, 2 big spoonfuls flour, IS spoonfuls mustard, and •”>
tumuric, and 1 cup sugar. Mix up till quite clear. Put on fire, bring to a
boil, stirring all the time so as not to get lumpy. Put in about a dozen
chillies and vegetables. Take off the fire, and let it cool. If liked, a little
curry powder may be added to taste. This mixture will give from lo to
1(1 bottles pickles.
A. KOCH, Rowland’s Flat.
'TOMATO CHOW CHOW.
Six lb. green tomatoes, 2i lb. onion's (tie in a muslin bag), 1 oz. cinna-
mon, 2 oz. cloves, 2 oz. chillies or i oz. cayenne pepper, i lb. salt, three-
quarter lb. sugar, 4 pints vinegar. Mode—Chop onions arid tomatoes finely,
and boil all together for two hours.
Mrs. F. E. DODSON, Tanunda.


TOMATO CHUTNEY.
Three lb. tomatoes, 2 lb. apples peeled and cored, 2 onions, 5 lb. brown
sugar (or white), 1 clove of garlic, ."> oz. stoned raisins, li oz. salt, i oz.
ground ginger (or 2 teaspoonfuls), quarter oz. white pepper (1 teaspoonful',
quarter teaspoon cayenne pepper, three-quarter pint vinegar. Put through the
mincer tomatoes, garlic, onions, raisins, and apples. Then put all the in-
gredients into a stewpan, and boil 21 to 2 hours:, or until a thick pulp, and
bottle.
Miss A. AHRENS, Vine Vale.
MUSTARD PICKLES.
One pint sliced cucumber, 1 pint green tomatoes, 1 pint onions, 1 pint
beans, 1 quart vinegar. Make a brine with pints cold water and *J pint
salt; pour over N sliced vegetables, and allow to soak 24 hours; turn into
colander to drain. Mix 1 cup flour, about .’{ teaspoons, mustard, \ tablespoon
turmeric, nearly quarter teaspoonful cayenne pepper, 1 teaspoon cinnarrfon,
with enough vinegar to make a smooth paste. Heat rest of vinegar, and
add 1 cup sugar. Pour in the mixture until thick and smooth, add vege-
tables, and cook till thoroughly heated through.
Miss META KLEEMANN, Tanunda.
DAMSON PICKLES.
To every quart of fruit allow (! oz. of sugar and 1 pint of good vinegar.
The fruit should not be too ripe, and must have the stalks on. Prick them
all over with a darning needle first, then boil the sugar and vinegar to-
gether, and pour it boiling over the fruit. Next day pour the syrup from
the fruit, boil again for 10 minutes, adding quarter oz. cloves and quarter oz.
cinnamon. Then pour it over the damsons as' before. The third day simmer
altogether gently, being careful not to break the fruit. Then put into a
jar, and when cold cover carefully—the more airtight the better. These
pickles will keep for several years, and are very good for poor appetite or
tender or sore throats.
Mrs. ERNST LIERSCH, Bethany.
GREEN TOMATO PICKLES.
Fourteen lb. green tomatoes, 7 lb. onions, 2 oz. turmeric, i oz. whole all-
spice, i oz. cloves, i oz. ginger (whole), I lb. mustard, 1 lb. sugar or
treacle, 1 teaspoon cayenne pepper. Cut and jprinklc the tomatoes and
onions with salt the night before, and let them drain all night, then pour off
the liquor, and' add other spices. Cover the whole with vinegar, and boil in a
pan until tender. - '
Mrs. M. RECHNER. Tanunda.
QUINCE PICKLE.
*To half gallon 'vinegar add !l lb. of sugar, put into stewpan with 1 oz.
whole papper, 1 oz.-whole allspice in muslin bag, bring almost to boiing point,
then add quinces Jwhich must be peeled and cored and then cut into thin
quarters, using judgment as regards quantity. Too many quinces used
gives less syrup. Boil until the fruit is almost transparent and a deep
colour. When cooked it will all be in one thick jelly. The quinces used
must be jelly quinces and very ripe. '
Mrs. M. ZELLING, Goodwood.
MIXED PICKLES.
One pint each of small whole cucumbers, sliced green tomatoes, small
bottomed onions, one large cauliflower divided into flowerettes, 4 green
peppers cut fine. Make a brine of 4 quarts of water, 1 lb. salt, and pour it
over the vegetaoles. Let it stand for 12 hours, .then turn into a colander
to drain. Mix i cun flour, ti Jablesnoons mu ct ard. 1 tablesnoonful turmeric,
with cold vinegar to a smooth paste, then add l cup sugar and sufficient
vinegar, 2 quarts in all. Boil mixture until it thickens and is smooth, stir-
ring all the time, then add vegetables, and cook until well heated through.
Miss A. Heidenreich. Bethany.
Brinks.
GINGER BEER.
Two gallons cold water, 2 lb. sugar, 2 oz. cream of tartar.
1 oz. ground ginger, i teaspoon essence lemon, 2 tablespoons
yeast, white of an egg, well beaten. Stir well and allow to stand
over night (or 12 hours); strain and bottle; corks must be tied
down. Ready to use in two or three days.
Mrs. S. O. SMITH, “The Bungalow,” Angaston.


HOME MADE O.T.
Forty chillies, 12 cloves, 4 cups of sugar, 2 quarts water, 1
teaspoonful of tartaric acid. Boil for half-hour, strain, and
when cold add 1 teaspoonful essence of lemon.
Mrs. ALEC. COCKBURN. Rose Park.
RASPBERRY SYRUP.
Six pounds sugar, 2 oz. tartaric acid, 3 quarts boiling water.
Pour boiling water over sugar' and acid, and stir until sugar is
dissolved. When cool, add a bottle of raspberry vinegar.
Mrs. M. RECHNER, Tanunda.
Sweets.
SWISS MILK TOFFEE.
Moisten an enamelled saucepan, add 2 ozs. butter, 1’ tea-
spoons golden syrup, 1 lb. sugar. When these are melted stir
in a small tin t>f Swiss milk, boil for 20 minutes. Take off the
fire and stir in 2 teaspoons vanilla. Pour in a buttered dish, and
score into squares when nearly cold.
Miss A. AURICHT. Tanuuda.
• .
BUTTER SCOTCH.
One pound sifgar, it ozs. butter, quarter cup cold water.
Melt butter in saucepan, add water and sugar, boil 20
but do not stir.
Mrs. M. RECHXER, Tajiuuda
COCOANUT LOLLIES^
Two cups sugar. 1 cup milk, cocoanut.
Boil 5 minutes, pour out and stir until i|t‘ creams. When
cut in squares. 4 " -m. '
Mrs. M. RECH_XER, isT amincES.
TOFFEE. ;
One cup water, 2 cups sugar, 1 dessertspoon vinegar. Butter
saucepan well and do not stir. Boil until some in cold water
becomes brittle and until brown. Add dates, figs, and almonds.
Mrs. M. RECHXER. Tanunda.
ALMOND TOFFEE.
Two cups sugar, three-quarters cup water, 1 eggspoon
cream of tartar, quarter pound blanched almonds.. Put sugar
and water into a greased pot. When boiling, add cream tartar
and almonds. Boil till toffee cracks when dropped into cold
water. Pour into a greased tin and leave to set. To be kept in
air-tight tin.
Miss M. HAIXES, St. Peters.
TURKISH DELIGHT.
Two ozs. gelatine, light weight in breakfast cup of water,
soak for 20 minutes, then add 1 cup boiling water and 2 lbs.
sugar; boil 5 minutes, then add 1% teaspoonfuls citric acid and
flavour with fruit essence. Pour into tilts which have been
dipped in cold water. Xext day cut into small squares and roll
in castor sugar.
Miss CLARRIE CLAYTON, Robe Terrace, Medindie.
—Also Mrs. W. BA|ILOW, Exeter.


FRENCH COCOANUTS.
Three cups sugar, three-quarters cup of milk, 1 cup des.
cocoanut. 1 teaspoonful butter, 1 teaspoonful cocoa, pinch cream
tartar. Method—Boil all together for 5 minutes evenly, then
take the saucepan off the fire, and place it into cold water; stir
until creamy. Pour into a buttered plate and wiien nearly cold
cut into cubes.
Miss F. AfANN, Tanunda.
7 CARAMELS.
J Otie cupful cream, 2 teaspoonfuls brown sugar, and an
ounce of butter. Affix* the cream, sugar, and butter well together,
and boil them in an enamel saucepan, stirring all the time with
a wooden spoon. - The mixture should boil for seven minutes,
and then be poured into a basin, which has been rinsed out
with cold water, and left wet. Stir the caramel until it becomes
quijte thick. It should be poured into a buttered tin or plate
to set, but before it is quite cold mark it carefullv into squares.
, Mrs. A. SCHWARTZKOPFF, Rowland* Flat.
TOFFEE.
1 cup sugar, 1 tablespoonful water, 1 tablcsfioonful vinegar.
Stir till it boils; must not stir when it comes to a boil. Test
by ptitting a little in water; if it hardens pour out in well-
buttered dishes.
G. t. THOMAS. Fullarton Estate.
Miscellaneous.
IBIAI. fruit salts
tpjpirter lb. each of cream tartar, tartaric acid, carbonate
EpSOrti salts, and 1 oz. magnesia. Cork securely, and keep
fW Miss S. WUNDKE, Tanunda.' V .
h BUTTER.
sugar of each 1 11)., best salt 2 lb. ; all
in a tine powder. ( AMPenoroughly and add 1 oz. of this to every
• pound of fresh butter, and thoroughly incorporate them to-
gether. The butter thus prepared is next to be lightly pressed
into clean earthenware vessels, so as to leave no vacuities. The
butter does not taste well 'before it has stood three or four
weeks, after which it acquires a rich marrow-like flavour, which
belongs to no other butter. An excellent means to protect the
butter from air consists in filling pots to-within an inch of the
top, then lay on it some salt to die thickness of quarter to half
an,inch, and lastly cover each pot with a plate or. slate. The
salt absorbs water, and in time changes into brine, which forms
an airtight layer on top of the butter, and can be poured off
by simply turning the pot on one side.
Airs. G. NITSCHKE, Tanunda.
HOME-MADE SOAP.
Six and a half pounds fat, 1 lb. caustic soda, 1 lb. resin, i lb.
borax. 2 gallons water. Boil together for two hours. Remove
from the fire and add 1 cup of kerosene. Stir well with a stick
or poker. Wet a cloth and line a box, pour in the mixture,
and put away to set. Next day cut into bars and leave to dry.
Mrs. A. W, SLEADER, “Glenview,” Angaston.


Where there's a Will
There’s a Way.
The Oid Song says:—
WHAT IS TIIIC USE OF REPINING,
FOR WHORE TIIORJOS A WILL TIIORO’S A WAY,
TO-MORROW THE Sl’N WILL BO SHINING,
ALTHO’ IT IS CLOUDY TO-DAY.
THE BAROSSA NEWS,
Tiie District Newspaper with its Printing Offices at Tanunda, is not
repining. Newspaper difficulties are great, we admit, but we still
hold a large circle of readers and supporters who as optimistic as
ourselves believe that “to-morrow the sun will be shining,” and that
this old world will again straighten itself. Meanwhile, we are * doing
our bit ’ to keep the wheels of commerce going.
Are You Doing Your Bit ?
Are You a Subscriber ?
Or, are You in of Printing ?
Any defects in this respect can be easily remedied by you dropping a
line to this Office.
WE ARE STILL ON OUR ‘ METAL.
Best Work and Prompt Attention.


Value
at
the
Central
Store,
Tanunda
means— Quality. Reliability,
which accounts :oi the popularity
and hip Iradinp of
The Central Store.
Ladies' Reqairsmeats,
Gentlemens Requirements,
Children's Retirements,
Home Requirements, >
Tlie Laclies can obtain
;iii HHpontK:r-:s a ; - : |i v ....
Recipes at this Store
cattsxd for. Aperu tor Yulr'Cs
Reliable Garden ami \ cpetarde
Seeds: also Weed ami Pest Kil-
iers, ;ind IIos" aiir.chriu-:£:!LK.
s&IIIIbBBBBBMBBBBM
