

■fz? . * / 1 k
w Sullwan: i
®V© A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH. ®V&
W «)»
#f , By W. J. LAWRENCE. *ff
S ' 1 ' *''
LONDON;
Si»«6 W. & G. Baird, 62 Ludgate Hill, E.C.
[ALL rights reserved.]


ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
New & Secondhand Booksellers
Publishers to University
89 Castlereagh St. Sydney.


. • I
■




TO MY OLD FRIEND,
WILLIAM K. M'CLELLAND,
IN MEMORY OF HALCYON DAYS
WHEN DRAMATIC TASTES WERE MUTUALLY
FOSTERED.




CONTENTS.
PREFATORY NOTE
CHAPTER I.
(1824-1852)
EARLY STOCK DAYS
CHAPTER 11.
(1852-1862)
METROPOLITAN AND EARLY AMERICAN EXPERIENCES - 87
CHAPTER 111.
(1862-1891)
IN THE COLONIES AND ELSEWHERE




PREFATORY NOTE.
rpHIS Sketch has been almost entirely compiled from a
very considerable mass of Sullivana accumulated by
the author during many years—the flotsam and jetsam of
theatrical matter acquired and utilised in pursuit of bygone
literary ventures. It is, indeed, in the words of old Burton,
“a thing of meere industry, a collection without wit or
invention, a very toy.”
Where inspiration has been derived from a thousand
and one sources, it would be futile to attempt to make
reparation to the multitude of writers whose thunder has
been appropriated. But the reader may be afforded a few
of the chief well-springs of information without risk of
tediousness. Among theatrical works, Pascoe's “ Dramatic
List,” Dibdin’s “ Annals of the Edinburgh Stage,” Colonel
Brown's “ History of the Theatre in America,” and the
sensational little book called “ The Truth about the Stage,”
have all proved helpful in their way. Mr. John Coleman?s
(d)sorbing In Mernoriam sketch, in the 11 Theatre” Magazine,
June, 1891, has been laid, freely under contribution as
presenting personal reminiscences of the first importance.
Indebtedness must also be acknowledged to the Memoir of
Barry Sullivan, written by Mr. J. W. Flynn, and published


in the Cork Examiner of May 9 and 16, 1891; and to an
article entitled “ Barry Sullivan's Career," the result of an
interview, which appeared in the Birmingham Daily Mail
of October 13, 1886. Finally, the author desires to return
his best thanks to Mr. W. H. Campbell of San Francisco,
and to Mr. James Smith of Melbourne, for the trouble under-
gone in sending him their impressions of the tragedian's
Australian career.
It is to be hoped that the issuing of this monograph at
once in a popular form will meet with due appreciation
at the hands of that pit-and-gallery section of the public
whose suffrages it was ever Barry Sullivan s especial delight
to win.


BARRY SULLIVAN.
CHAPTER I. (1824-1862).
EARLY STOCK DAYS.
TO few men professing the Roman Catholic faith has
it been given, as to poor Barry Sullivan, to linger
on in this world for close on three years after the
administration of the last rites of the Church. With
the fatal word Thanatos written so long and so plainly
on the great tragedian’s brow, the intelligence of his
release from suffering brought with it satisfaction of a
melancholy nature rather than unpleasant shock. None
the less widespread, however, was the regret at the loss
of one who for fully three decades boasted a well-nigh
undisputed sovereignty over the legitimate drama in the
provinces, and led his willing captives in silken chains.
In the sorrow expressed over his departure there was,
moreover, a deeper and graver significance than the
merely personal. The people were no longer able to
raise the old cry of “ The King is dead ; long live the
King ” —for, sooth to say, the dynasty had gone its way
for ever with the potentate. No more for us the stately
presence, the virile breadth and lusty vigour of Vanden-
hoff, Phelps, and G. V. Brooke. Alas ! these are as the
snows of yester-year. With Barry Sullivan gone we
can no more recall the majestic deportment and sonorous
declamation of the grand old traditional school than


we can revivify the dodo. Doubtless to many of the
younger generation, in these days of Ibsenism and
stage archaeology, the loss will not appear momentous.
“ Tradition, ” said the dead tragedian once to a
Birmingham interviewer, “ Tradition is the peculiar
instruction which Shakespeare himself gave to the
actors of his day, and which has been handed down
from one to another from that time. It is to acting
what Euclid is to the mechanical arts; a book, so to
speak, containing the great principles of the art —the
great ideas of the greatest men in the profession.”
Most indubitably they who are laudatores temporis acti
will agree with all this, and mourn that the heirloom
should lack claimants.
Concerning Barry Sullivan’s early antecedents little
or no definite information was procurable, strange to
say, prior to his decease. Albeit he subjugated his old-
world spirit so far, some six years ago, as to permit
himself to be “ interviewed” by one or two enterprising
English journalists, still he was never in sympathy
with such purely modern methods of theatrical puffery
as the hawking of an actor’s private affairs in the news-
papers, and resolutely refused at all times to be “drawn”
in regard to the experiences of his boyhood. Indeed, the
frankest avowal ever made by him in this direction was
the slight morsel of early autobiography vouchsafed his
admirers in a capital speech delivered at the National
Banquet given in his honour in Dublin, in December,
1878. “It may not be considered out of place,” he said,
“if I mention here the fact that I commenced the art
which I have the honour to profess, not on the first rung


of the ladder, but on the very ground. While yet a boy
I stood alone in the world, without father, mother, or
friend without means, and master only of a little
Latin and less Greek. ,r To this dignified, if perplexing,
reticence on the part of the tragedian must we attribute
the mystery which shrouded until recently the circum-
stances of his origin, and rendered him second only
to Homer in respect to the number of cities which laid
claim to the honour of his birthplace. That his parents
were Irish, and that he himself (to use his own expres-
sion) was “ Irish to the heart’s core,” no one for a
moment ever doubted. Not content with this, however,
there have been perfervid Celts whose patriotic zeal so
far warped their reasoning powers as to induce them on
the slenderest of evidence to maintain that the tragedian
first saw the light in the County of Cork, some pinning
their faith to Clonakilty and others standing up for
Dunmanway. Surely after all it was more in keeping
with the fitness of things that Thomas Barry Sullivan
(or Barry Sullivan, as he is best remembered now)
should have first seen the light in the capital of Shake-
speare’s shire, and on the anniversary of the bard’s
birthday ? Beyond the fact, however, that he was born
at Birmingham on Friday, April 28, 1824, of parents
in humble circumstances, little of any trustworthiness
is known concerning his early boyhood. To Cork, the
home of the O’Sullivans from time immemorial, he is
commonly reported to have migrated with his father
and mother while as yet a child. There, at any rate,
we find him in 1838, a poor, ill-educated lad on the
threshhold of life as a draper’s assistant in a new em-


porium opened by one Swinburne in Winthrop Street.
But what it once pleased the penny-a-liner to call “the
devouring element ” soon made away with Swinburne’s
establishment, and the embryonic tragedian had per-
force to take a situation in Todd’s (now Cash & Co.’s)
pretentious drapery house. Moth-like, however, the juve-
nile counter-jumper had already singed his wings at the
histrionic flame. There was something decidedly attrac-
tive about this orphaned and friendless lad of fifteen, with
his handsome Irish face already showing in its linea-
ments the dawningsof character and resolution, his spare,
elegant figure, and his profusion of jet-black ringlets.
At least so thought the local player folk into whose
good graces he speedily ingratiated himself. Finding
that he had a tenor of light but eminently pleasing
quality, they pressed him into service to appear one
night at the old theatre in George’s Street, for the
benefit of one of the Misses Smith, the charming
duettists, recognised as nieces of Kitty the fascinating
Countess of Essex. Making his bow, e?i amateur, as
young Meadows in the once popular comic opera of
Love in a Village, Sullivan’s success proved so un-
equivocal that manager Seymour of whimsical notoriety
(once epithetised by an enraged actress as “You, Frank
Seymour, the very boards of whose stage are enseamed
with the sweat of unpaid artists ! ”) engaged him forth-
with to play “ leading, singing, walking gentleman.”
Not long afterwards, however, Seymour had a dispute
with Mr. John M'Donnell, the lessee of the George’s
Street house, and, seceding from the management he,
with the financial aid of a friendly solicitor, transformed


the old diorama hall in Cook Street into a temple of the
drama, and proceeded to “run” it in opposition to the
established theatre. Among the stars of varying magni-
tude whom Frank Schemer (as he was significantly nick-
named) induced by specious promises to journey from
Dublin was one Paumier, a tragedian of some distinction,
who turned the tables on the gay deceiver by constituting
himself manager of M'Donnell’s theatre. Exercising
considerable forethought, Sullivan very wisely elected,
in the spring of 1840, to join the forces of the new-
comer. Under Paumier he gained many valuable
lessons in fencing and dramatic elocution which after-
wards stood him in good stead. But his stay there was
of brief duration, as the George’s Street Theatre was
burnt to the ground immediately after the successful
engagement of Mr. and Mrs. Wood, the operatic stars,
causing his mentor to leave at once for England.
Making the best of a bad job, Barry returned to the
fold of the slippery Seymour, and by way of apology
for his former desertion placed himself at the beck and
call of the manager, played a great variety of characters
with unremitting carefulness, and thus laid up a store
of unpopularity with the other members of the Cook
Street company. Things were in a bad way in the
little Victoria Theatre notwithstanding the disappear-
ance of the other house. “ The ghost seldom walked.”
(Few who are not actors will comprehend the sad
significance of this peculiar phrase.) And poor Seymour
attributed it all to that confounded fellow Collins, who
had brought his travelling booth to the city, and by
dint of a good company, attractive melodramas, and


reduced prices was doing a roaring business with the
rough-and-ready playgoers of the neighbourhood. What
with financial straits on the one hand and internecine
squabbles on the other, Sullivan determined once more
to go over to the enemy. Exercising his pow T ers of
persuasion, he induced Collins to permit him to appear
in the booth in a round of leading legitimate characters.
The venture proved happy for all concerned ; money
kept pouring in; and Collins grew so elated that he
set about erecting a more commodious wooden structure
on the site at present occupied by the Cork Opera House.
Strange to say, however, his luck departed with the
abandonment of the old booth. Before long Barry
found it expedient to eat the leek and return to his
former humble position in Seymour’s Cook Street
company. A quaint old building this Eoyal Victoria
Theatre ! Owing to its very primitive construction the
ladies had to dress themselves in the “flies,’ which
were reached by a step-ladder; while the actors had to
content themselves with the dread regions beneath the
stage, and at spring tides (when the water had a
provoking habit of coming up the sewers) not infre-
quently found portions of their attire floating about,
seemingly on a voyage of expedition.
During the winter of 1840, Barry Sullivan had the
felicity of supporting the divine Ellen Tree (afterwards
Mrs. Charles Kean), then very popular in Cork. On
one occasion the bill presented a rather curious combi-
nation of pieces, the evening’s entertainment commenc-
ing with a performance of Sheridan Knowles’ Lore,
followed by the drama of Matrimony, and concluding


with Three Weeks after Marriage. That burly comedian
and capital singer Paul Bedford (afterwards to be
recognised as the Adelphi favourite of “ I believe you,
my boy,” notoriety) faas at this period one of the
members of Seymour’s company, and played Blueskin
to the Darrell of Barry Sullivan in the famous drama
of Jack Sheppard. When things grew dull in Cook
Street, the players, by way of variety, paid flying visits
to Waterford, Limerick, and other adjacent towns. Not
the least important among the formative influences on
Barry Sullivan’s character was a striking episode which
took place during their visit to Clonmel. Utterly dis-
credited by society, actors in those days for the most part
led an ultra-bohemian life, and were rather prone to look
on the wine when it was red. On the occasion referred to,
Sullivan had been indulging in “ the native ”
“ Fresh from the still, and faithful to its fires,”
with the result that when he went on in Rory O'More
as De Welskein the smuggler, he lost control of himself,
and running amuck in the scrimmage seriously injured
one of the attacking party. Grieving over the folly of his
conduct as soon as reason had asserted itself, he vowed
there and then to eschew strong drink. Reflection
showed him that the highway to histrionic fame was
littered with premature tombstones, marking the fate of
self-indulgent genius. He had strength of character,
and religiously kept his resolution to the end.
Equally striking in its way was the incident which
occurred during the visit of the Cork Company to
Tralee, particulars of which will be best related in Barry


Sullivan’s own words. Replying to the toast of his
health at a banquet given in his honour by the citizens
of Cork, at the Imperial Hotel, on Saturday, December
2, 1878, he said, inter alia —“ I was going to the
theatre, and as I was passing through the principal
street, Denny Street, there was a cry of fire. I went
down with the other boys—for I was only a big boy at
the time —to look at the fire, and presently I saw a very
beautiful girl looking out of a window above, and with
her a gentleman with- a white head. To make a long
story short, I went theough the flames and saved those
two. (Applause.) Suddenly I remembered that I was
wanted at the theatre, which, by the way, was in the
Market-house, and I really did not think I had done
anything worth remembering. Two or three days after-
wards, however, it became known that the boy, the
individual, the young man who had saved the lives of
this lady and gentleman —I remember that they were
Mr. Primrose and Miss Primrose his daughter—it was
discovered was young Sullivan, the vulgar little player,
who had done this. Up to that time our theatre had
been doing very badly, but from that time forward we
had crowded houses, I can tell you. (Laughter and
applause.)”
It must indeed be reckoned a happy circumstance
that we are able to relate this incident on the authority
of Sullivan’s ipse dixit; for some such story has been
told about most of the prominent tragedians of the
century. As a matter of fact (Creswick bearing witness)
we know for certain that a similar adventure befell
Gustavus Brooke in his salad days.


On returning to Cork, Sullivan found himself cast for
a leading tenor role in Fra Diavolo, in support of those
celebrated dramatic vocalists Leffler, John Wilson, and
Miss Romer. He acquitted himself with so much distinc-
tion that Wilson, who was a Scotchman, at once gave
him a letter of introduction to the well-remembered W.
H. Murray, of the Theatre Royal, Edinburgh, then justly
considered the wet-nurse par excellence of the histrionic
child. Thither Barry repaired with all due expedition,
and was engaged forthwith under the stipulation that he
was not to be too fastidious about his line of business,
as progress and diversified work went hand-in-hand. It
is worthy of note that during his first season in the
Scottish capital Sullivan found himself associated with
such artists as Edmund Glover, Mr. and Mrs. Leigh
Murray, John Ryder, Sam. Cowell, and the then budding
Sims Reeves, who played walking gentlemen at a salary
of something under a pound a-week. But there were
no princely emoluments for the poor player in those
days. Sullivan himself was engaged by Murray to play
“ second heavies ” and render general assistance in
musical pieces at the modest weekly stipend of thirty
shillings. Kept, however, for some little time after his
arrival at the prompter’s box, he did not make his first
appearance in Edinburgh until the 24th November',
1841, when he played Red Rody in The Robber's Wife.
During Charles Kean’s engagement in March, 1842, he
was the Bates to the star’s Beverley in The Gamester, and
subsequently appeared at the Adelphi during the off-
season at the Royal, acting there the part of Gaston in
Richelieu, when Lord Lytton’s play was presented for the


first time in the Northern Athens. Seekers after the
curious will be interested to learn that when Henry
Irving made his first appearance at the Edinburgh
Theatre Royal on February 7, 1857 (after a brief novi-
tiate in Sunderland), it was in this self-same part; and
that the wily Cardinal on that particular occasion was
personated by none other than the hero of these pages,
then a fixed star in the theatrical firmament. Moreover,
it may afford food for reflection to adherents of either
tragedian to learn that both buffooned it in their time in
pantomime on these classic boards, a period of thirteen
years naturally intervening. In the Pall Mall Gazette of
May 4, 1891, there appeared a sympathetic sketch, en-
titled “ The Late Mr. Barry Sullivan, by One Who Knew
Him,” in the course of which the writer represented the
dead tragedian as having said to him a couple of years
previously, “ Do you remember that I told you the other
day that the prominent actor who had not supported
me was Henry Irving ? Well, I was introduced to Mr.
Irving, with whom I was much charmed, and on my
making that remark to him, he replied, ‘ Pardon me;
when once you were acting in Liverpool I made my
dehut at the same theatre, and recollect I held a banner ! ’
No wonder I didn’t know him again ! ” Of which state-
ment the best that can be said is that it is neither true
nor well found. Here is Mr. Irving’s contradiction :
Lyceum Theatre,
22nd May, 1891.
My Dear Sir,
Let me thank you for your kind letter. You are quite
correct in your statement. The only occasion on which I ever


played with the late Mr. Barry Sullivan was at Edinburgh,
in 1857, when I played Gaston to his Richelieu. The Liver-
pool story is, of course, a silly one.
Believe me, dear sir,
Faithfully yours,
W. J. Lawrence, Esq. H. Irving.
With the secession of Ryder, in the autumn of 1842,
Manager Murray promoted Barry Sullivan to “ first
heavies,” and in that capacity he was not exempted
from appearing in the opening of the Christmas panto-
mime of Johnnie Fa; or, Harlequin and the King of the
Gipsies. Considering that the budding tragedian had
frequently to “ get-up ” as many as eighteen new parts
a-week, it is matter for little surprise that, notwith-
standing many an “ all-night sitting,” he was occa-
sionally weak in his lines, and more often than not far
from letter-perfect. During the engagement of Charles
Mathews and Madame Yestris, a local sheet called The
Prompter, in noticing the performance of Faint Heart
Never Won Fair Lady, launched out at poor Barry, who,
in the critic’s estimation, “ not only acted most abomin-
ably, but was sadly deficient in the text; indeed, once
or twice we were afraid he would absolutely break down.”
Among the great variety of parts which fell to his loi
at this period were Sir Francis Vernon in Uob Fioy (to
the Bailie Nicol Jarvie of Mackay); Sebastian in Guy
Manneriny (to the Henry Bertram of Sims Reeves and
the Lucy of Miss Woolgar); Drayton in Grandfather
Whitehead; Antonio in The Merchant of Venice; and
Beauseant in The Lady of Lyons.


To the last hour of his waking consciousness Barry
Sullivan always spoke of Helen Faucit as his beau-ideal
of an actress, and was never ashamed to confess that
he had learned more from watching her in his tyro
days than in musing over the methods of all the other
stars, male and female, put together. November 14,
1843, marks the date of their earliest professional
association—the scene, the Edinburgh Theatre Eoyal.
It is noteworthy, furthermore, that Barry Sullivan was
present in the green-room of the same house when the
great tragedienne first met her future husband, Mr.
(now Sir Theodore) Martin.
Becoming dissatisfied with his position under Murray
our hero determined to seek his fortune elsewhere, and
so appealed to his Edinburgh friends in a farewell
benefit on May 30, 1844, when the bill comprised four
pieces, besides incidental songs and dances, and a speech
from the benejiciaire. His own share of the evening’s
entertainment consisted in playing Kirkpatrick in the
tragedy of Wallace, and Alexander Massaroni in The
Italian Brigand. On leaving Edinburgh he took with
him an undesirable memento of his sojourn there, in
the shape of a scar on the cheek occasioned by an
unlucky pistol-shot in a stage scrimmage. One whose
face already possessed that perfect handsomeness which
Mirabeau, with supreme self-satisfaction, once said was
only found in the pock-marked man, could readily have
dispensed with such a reminder. Subsequently he
fulfilled engagements at Paisley, Dundee, Aberdeen,
Montrose, and Arbroath, and while still a minor was
engaged as leading man for the City Theatre, Glasgow.


Here he first became acquainted with his life-long
friend Mr. John Coleman, who gave some details of the
engagement in a sympathetic “ In Memoriam ” sketch
(in The Theatre for Jufie, 1891), which we cannot do
better than quote :
“We first met in Glasgow,” writes Mr. Coleman,
“ where John Henry Anderson—the Wizard of the North
—had built upon the Green, within a stone’s-throw of
the Saut Market, immortalised by Bailie Nicol Jarvie, a
beautiful temple of Thespis, called ‘ The City Theatre,’
for the purpose of opposing the eccentric Alexander, who
had for many years monopolised the drama in St. Mungo’s
City. At the period to which I refer there was in this
vicinity an eruption of theatres, licensed and unlicensed
—theatres to suit every taste and every pocket. At the
very corner of the Green stood the Adelphi, a very fine
theatre, built for David Prince Miller, the famous show-
man, whom Alexander had made a martyr by consign-
ing him to the Tolbooth for having acted without a
license. Exactly opposite the Adelphi stood Mumford’s
‘ Bawbee Show,’ where a very excellent company of
comedians were wont to give three performances a-night
of Hamlet, Othello , or Romeo, for three half-pence ! . . ,
Anderson had been himself an actor—an ambitious and
disappointed one—and he could no more keep out of the
theatre than a thirsty cat can keep her whiskers out of a
bowl of cream. He had no sooner made a small fortune
by conjuring than he lost it by management. Upon
this occasion, determining to carry everything before
him, he engaged a double company in every department.
There was an opera company, headed by our great


singer, Sims Eeeves ; and a dramatic company, headed
by the rival tragedians Mr. James Bennett and Mr.
Barry Sullivan, and the then young and majestic Laura
Addison, and Mrs. Ada Dyas. Anderson had engaged
two ladies and two gentlemen for every line of business,
with the intention of having his pick of the best,
retaining the successful and dismissing the unsuccessful
candidates for public favour. As nearly every member
of the company had taken long and expensive journeys
from England, much discontent ensued, and the theatre
was a perfect hot-bed of strife. The disaffection was
increased by the unprecedented occurrence that nearly
every member of the dramatic company was coerced
into going on the stage for the chorus in the various
operas. The opera season lasted for a month, during
the greater portion of which Sullivan, Bennett, and
Miss Laura Addison were condemned to inglorious
inactivity. Sullivan particularly resented this, and as
I sympathised with him he poured his wrongs into the
ears of a not unwilling listener. . . . When he
accepted the engagement for Glasgow, he anticipated
undivided sway; so did Bennett, and their indignation
was unbounded when they found themselves pitted
against each other.
“At length the rival tragedians were notified that they
were to open as Claude Melnotte, and Miss Addison and
Mrs. Dyas were noticed for Pauline, but the play
was to be done after the opera of The Bohemian Girl.
There were more rows, but the man who pays is
usually master, and the Wizard was no exception to
this rule.


“ Bennett was the older and more experienced actor,
and, though anything but a typical Claude, took the
popular fancy. Sullivan ran his rival hard in Claude,
Hamlet, and Romeo, but when it came to Macbeth,
Othello, and parts of that class, he was pronounced to
be an admirable walking gentleman actor of tragedy,
while Bennett was proclaimed to be a tragedian. The
result was (and a very cruel result too) that Sullivan
was dismissed and Bennett remained ‘ monarch of all he
surveyed.’ This was a wrong which Sullivan never
forgot, never forgave, even when time had reversed this
unjust verdict. Only a few years ago, while dining
tete-a-tete at the Savage Club, this subject cropped up,
and instantly lashed him to a white heat.”
Good actor as he always was (and even in the later
sixties his lago was a superb impersonation), poor
Bennett never had the luck to reach the height clearly
indicated by his early promise. When given the chance
of his life by Jarrett and Palmer, who engaged him to
play Richard 111. in a splendidly-mounted production of
Shakespeare’s play at Niblo’s Garden, in April, 1871,
his courage forsook him, and he failed ignominiously.
Truly the mills of the gods grind slowly, but they grind
exceeding small, Barry Sullivan could have well
afforded to blot out all recollection of Anderson’s
injustice when he saw with what unrelenting cruelty
Time had quashed the manager’s decree. By an irony
of circumstance when he received that unlucky sword-
thrust while acting Richard 111. at Drury Lane, in 1876,
necessitating his retirement from the cast, the obscure
under-study who took up his part was none other than


the quondam Glasgow favourite upon whom Anderson
had beamed with a beneficent eye.
After his summary dismissal from the City Theatre,
Sullivan experienced a period of inaction, but was
eventually engaged by a committee to manage the
Aberdeen Theatre. During his sojourn in Scotland his
command of the brogue had enabled him to make a
gratifying hit in an Irish character part; indeed, his
success was so pronounced that he was strongly advised
to seek the path of fame and fortune after the manner
of Tyrone Power. But he had already conceived
Shakespearian aspirations, and, not foreseeing the
acceptance of Brooke both as tragedian and Irish
character actor, feared to create a reputation which he
thought might blast his ambition in the higher walks
of the drama. Meantime we find him in the Granite
City, toiling hard, developing his powers, sparing himself
but little. Finding, however, at the expiration of two
years that his material fortunes, like the farmer drinking
his landlord’s claret, got “no forrader,” he crossed the
Border, and opened his first English engagement under
one Oppenheim at Wakefield. It proved anything but
auspicious, as a demand for salary in arrears on the
part of our hero, one night during the performance of
the tragedy of Bertram, led to fisticuffs with the manager,
and abruptly brought the evening’s entertainment to a
close. Not a whit disheartened at this fiasco, Sullivan very
shortly afterwards succeeded in obtaining an engagement
from Mr. Robert Roxby, of the Theatre Royal, Williamson
Square, Liverpool, as leading man, at a salary of £5 per
week. Among the other members of the stock company


at that period were Messrs. Artaud, Mortimer, Fitzroy,
Willis, Suter, W. S. Branson, J. W. Benson, James
Lunt, Mrs. Seyton, Miss JTreble, Miss Murray, and Miss
K. Love. By some mistake Sullivan was announced to
make his first appearance at the Royal on May 7,1847,
as Sir Edward Mortimer in The Iron Chest —a part he
had never studied, and, moreover, greatly disliked. But
making the best of a bad job he tackled the character,
and, as he once remarked in after years, “ if he had
selected the part himself he could not have made a
bigger success.” Of this performance Mr. Coleman, who
was at that time a member of Copeland’s Company at
the Amphitheatre, writes as follows :
“ While I was occupied with rehearsal he (Sullivan)
came to renew our acquaintance, and to borrow an indis-
pensable ‘property,’ or, to be precise, to borrow a pair
of black silk tights for Sir Edward Mortimer in The
Iron Chest, in which gloomy play he was about to open.
By-the-way, those same tights that very same season
did duty to introduce Robert Brough to the stage as
Lampedo in The Honeymoon, after which inauspicious
event—for poor Bob did not set the Mersey on fire—
they went the way of all—tights. They passed from
my gaze and I saw them no more.
“ The gallery was a shilling in those days, and thither
I went with a friend to give the new tragedian ‘a hand.’
Sir Edward Mortimer was no more suited to Sullivan
than it was to John Kemble. Latterly it has been the
fashion to decry Barry Sullivan as being stilted, formal,
and old-fashioned, but, as I have shown already, in
Glasgow he had been pronounced a walking gentleman


actor of tragedy, and unquestionably his style was too
modern and too natural for this mouthing, super-sensitive
hypocondriac. Of late years I have seen little of
Sullivan’s acting, but when I knew him at his best he
was vigorous, vivacious, and versatile. His Charles
Surface, Young Rapid, Petruchio, Benedick, and Falcon-
bridge were hard to beat; and his Long Tom Coffin,
William in Black-eyed Susan, Rory O’More, Myles-Na-
Coppaleen, and Shaun-the-Post were performances of
unapproachable excellence.
“ The second performance in Liverpool was Jaffier in
Venice Preserved. There was a miserable house, and
the good old tragedian who played Pierre was wretchedly
imperfect, while the beautiful but unfortunate woman
who played Belvidera was worse ; but Sullivan was a
tower of strength in his knowledge of the text, and
pulled the play through to a successful termination.
From that moment I felt convinced he only needed time
and opportunity to make his way —the world itself
comes round to him who knows how to wait, and at
length it came round to him.”
Subsequently, when the management of the Theatre
Royal passed into the hands of Mr. W. R. Copeland,
who also presided over the fortunes of the Amphi-
theatre, Sullivan transferred his services to that sterling
manager. Acting principally at the Amphitheatre his
reputation and popularity in Liverpool grew apace ; so
much so that Copeland before his death made him
promise that whenever he revisited his old friends he
would never play at any other house so long as it
remained in the hands of his family. The tragedian


religiously kept his word, making his last appearance
at the Amphitheatre, prior to its reconstruction, on
November 15, 1880, when he sustained the character of
Hamlet to Miss Maud Brennan’s Ophelia. To his credit
be it said, he never forgot the kindness of those early
Liverpool friends who, by dint of liberal encouragement,
helped him on the way to fame and fortune. Years
afterwards, when he was acting in Melbourne, Mr.
Edward Whitty, a brilliant Liverpool journalist, who
wrote “ The Stranger in Parliament,” went out there
with the view of arresting the ravages of consumption.
The Whittys had been paramount among those who
had supported the tragedian in the Press in the late
forties, and he did his best to smooth the last moments
of the sufferer. Finally, when all was over, he caused
a handsome monument to be erected over the remains
of his friend. Now a memorial to himself—showing
with eloquent muteness that the man who never forgave
an injury never forgot a kindness.
In the midst of his popularity with the Liverpudlians,
Sullivan was induced by a tempting offer from Knowles,
of Manchester, to transfer his services to the Theatre
Eoyal in that city, where he shared the lead with his
compatriot Gustavus Brooke. Here his success was as
pronounced as it was instantaneous. Making his first
appearance on October 9, 1847, as Stukely in The
Gamester , to the Mr. and Mrs. Beverley of Charles
Kean and his wife, he was delighted to find that all the
honours of the evening were not reserved for the stars,
with whom he had the felicity to share the distinction
of a recall. The good impression conveyed at the


outset was amply confirmed on the 26th of the same
month, when Sullivan played Hamlet for the first time
on any stage, having previously studied the part for
upwards of seven years. Basing his conception of the
role on the theory that the Prince was of sound mind
and only pretended madness for a special purpose, the
youthful tragedian invested the character with much
new business of a striking nature. This he claimed in
after years had been copied unblushingly by many
famous actors. Speaking of this early performance
to a Manchester interviewer in 1886, he said—“ I
showed them for the first time the reason of Hamlet’s
sudden change in demeanour as he discovers Polonius
and the King eavesdropping, and at once concludes
that Ophelia is concerned in the plot. The ‘ hawk
and handsaw’ reading, too, I altered. During my
studies I tried to thoroughly grasp the meaning
of each sentence, but I was unable to find any
intelligible meaning in the line as it appeared in the
ordinary text. Taking into consideration the context
and the situation, I, as Hamlet, believe that Guilden-
stern and Rosencrantz had been specially sent ‘to
pump the Prince,’ who discovered their purpose, and
pumped them instead, and I, therefore, when the climax
was reached, said, ‘I am but mad nor’-nor’-west; when
the wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a heron ;
pshaw! ’ the ‘ pshaw ’ being the outcome of the disgust
Hamlet felt at being treated in such a manner. I felt
there was a meaning and a point in the line, when
delivered in this way which was entirely wanting in the
‘ handsaw’ reading. So, too, with the Ghost, who tells


Hamlet he is ‘ doomed for a certain time to walk the
night, and for the day confined to fast in fire.’ This
1 felt was absurd, and I made my Ghost say, ‘confined
fast in fire,’ thereby getting rid of the difficulty, and
making intelligible what had previously been obscure.
I could go through the play, and show many instances
where the lines had become encrusted with absurdities,
arising from the alteration of ignorant commentators
and actors; but I have no desire now to enter into any
argument or justification of my alterations and resto-
rations.” In a word, the new interpretation created
considerable stir, culminating in a banquet in Barry
Sullivan’s honour, at which one of the speakers evoked
much laughter by a voluntary confession. During
the previous week, he said, he had gone to the Eoyal
to see the guest of the evening as Long Tom Coffin,
in the melo-drama of The Pilot. He had enjoyed
himself immensely. Not even Tippy Cooke, he
thought, could have given a better characterisation
of the roistering sailor; while the incidental comic
song was certainly rendered in excellent fashion. But
the idea of such a man attempting to play Hamlet,
as he heard he was doing ! He must go to the theatre
and laugh at him for his presumption. He went, and,
contrary to expectation, stayed to pray that the actor.,
might long continue to play the part.
His wish has been gratified. From Sullivan’s first
performance of Hamlet in Manchester to his last a period
of well nigh forty years elapsed, during which he must
have played the Dane something like three thousand five
hundred times. Of late years his interpretation of the


role was among the most attractive in a limited repertory.
Consequently it is not surprising to find the critic of
the Manchester Umpire saying, in October, 1886, that
“ Sullivan’s Hamlet, like the Tower of London, is
not a performance; it is an institution.” Setting his
face sternly against “moods,” the tragedian always
endeavoured to mete out strict impartiality to all the
characters he represented. He professed to have no
likes and dislikes, but in his heart of hearts, as his
intimates knew, he had decided predilection for the
distraught Dane. It was the first character in which
his “counterfeit presentment” was given to the world,
as they who care to turn over the pages of Halliwell’s
edition of Shakespeare can verify. Thanks to generous
friends and the genius of the sculptor, it will be as
Hamlet that future generations of Irishmen will do
tribute to the demi-god of their fathers.
Speaking to a friend, on setting out on his last tour,
of the great number of times he had acted Hamlet, the
tragedian said, “I can assure you I never go through
the part without finding in it some new point, some
new beauty. Ah! there’s no one can appreciate
Shakespeare like the man who conscientiously attempts
to interpret him. But never in all my career have I
gone on the stage to act Hamlet —or indeed any other
p ar t —without feeling a very great deal of the nervousness
I experienced on the night I first appeared in public.
Before leaving the subject it is worthy of passing
mention that Sullivan (stimulated by the discussion
raised by Devrient’s personation of the part) once
began to study German with the idea of playing Hamlet




in Berlin; but he gave up the attempt in despair, on
finding how many ugly pitfalls presented themselves in
the accent.
Harking back, we find that when Brooke appeared
for the first time this season, on Monday, October 28,
as Claude Melnotte, Barry Sullivan played Richard
Parker in the afterpiece of The Mutiny of the Nore.
Subsequently our hero sustained Pierre to Brooke’s
Jaffier, and the Ghost to the same actor’s Hamlet.
When Ivanhoe was produced, towards the end of the
month, Brooke figured as Isaac of York, and Sullivan
as Front de Boeuf. The piece made a hit, but the
Guardian qualified its praise by hinting that “ Mr.
Brooke and Mr, Sullivan might have advantageously
changed parts as the Jew and the Templar. We think
Mr. Brooke would have imparted more of the chivalrous
spirit to the latter; and Mr. Sullivan would probably
have imparted more intensity with less physical vigour
to the ancient Israelite.” During November, Sullivan
played King Lear to Brooke’s Edgar, Cassius to his
Brutus, Friar Lawrence to his Romeo, and Werner
to his Ulric. While sharing the lead between them
at the Royal the two Irishmen were the best of good
friends. They occupied a joint dressing-room, and
it was there that Brooke made his engagement with
Captain Spicer to appear at the Olympic in January, 1848.
During the negotiations Sullivan’s advice was frequently
taken, and he was at length instrumental in persuading
his compatriot to accept the London manager’s offer.
Again we are constrained to fall back on Mr. Coleman’s
reminiscences. The genial raconteur happened to be


acting at the Queen’s Theatre, Manchester, precisely at
this period, and occasionally fraternised with his old
friend at the Alton House—a noted tavern where the
members of the three local stock companies were wont
to meet. “During our Manchester experiences,” he
writes, “ Sullivan gave himself no tragic airs, and had a
happy knack of saying smart things. One evening as
we lounged into the tavern together, an eminent idiot
was monopolising the conversation, and his theme was
the bard (as it always was) ; he had the bard on the
brain—or would have had, had he possessed one.
“ ‘ Ha, Mr. Sullivan,’ exclaimed the bore in triumph,
‘ the very man we want! You can set us right on the
subject.’
“ ‘ What subject ? ’ enquired Barry.
“ * Mrs. Siddons’ reading in Lady Macbeth. Was
she right or wrong ? Should it be “We fail! ”or“ We
fail ? ” What is your opinion, sir ? ’
“ ‘ Can’t possibly express an opinion on the subject.’
“ ‘ Why not, sir ? Why not ? ’
“ ‘ Because I never have failed, and never mean to
fail! ’
“ Perhaps,” adds Mr. Coleman, “ it cannot be truly
affirmed that Sullivan never failed, but he had a bull-
dog-like tenacity of purpose which never admitted he
was beaten.”
Douglas in those days was as yet in the dawning of
its popularity as a holiday resort, although in great
vogue among the player folk during the summer
months. Thither Barry repaired at the termination of
his first season in Manchester, accompanied by Mrs.


Sullivan, who, however, suffered so much on the voyage
that she never afterwards went with him on another.
When the Theatre Royal re-opened its doors on
Monday, October 30, 1848, Glover, from Edinburgh,
made his first appearance there as lago. “ Mr. Barry
Sullivan,” says The Theatrical Journal, “ played Othello
with his usual care, and into many passages threw much
beauty.” Not long after this George Henry Lewes,
critic and philosopher (dubbed, however, by our hero
“ a poor weak creature ”), conceived the insane idea
that his shoulders were fated to bear the mantle of the
departing Macready. Without any of the fundamental
attributes of an actor save the informing quality,
Lewes was rash enough to appear as Shylock at the
Manchester Theatre Royal on March 10, 1849. Out of
respect for his literary reputation Sullivan humoured
what he considered a mere whim, and agreed to play
seconds to the new-comer. But gossipmongers were not
lacking to convey the intelligence to his ears that Lewes
at an evening party had announced his intention of
taking to the stage permanently, with the view of filling
the lamentable hiatus about to be created. Added to
this he was represented as speaking so contemptuously
of Sullivan that our hero at once stood upon his dignity
and notified Wallack, the stage manager, he could no
longer consent to act with his traducer. The moral of all
which is (pardon the mustiness of the precept) Ne sutor
ultra crepidam.
Serious complications ensued. On the 26th of the
same month a remarkable scene took place at the Theatre
Royal, bringing Sullivan’s connection with that house


to a sudden close. The Stranger was in the bill, and at
the end of the performance, Barry, in the name-part,
was honoured with a recall. On appearing before the
curtain he returned thanks to the audience for their
uniform appreciation of his acting, and intimated that
it was the last occasion on which he would have the
pleasure of acting there. He regretted the fact as the
fault was not his, but Mr. H. J. Wallack’s, who had
treated him unjustly. At this the house began to hiss
and groan by way of disapproval of the manager’s
conduct. Mr. Wallack then appeared, but failed to gain
a hearing. Quietness was not restored until Sullivan
had made another speech, in which the audience learned
that the favourite had been deprived of his benefit night
—then a source of considerable pecuniary emolument
to an under-paid actor. Although theatrical Man-
chester was to a man on Sullivan’s side in the dispute,
the breach was never healed. He left the Royal forth-
with ; but the Queen’s Theatre in Spring Gardens was
secured for a night, and Barry, in Claude Melnotte and
Petruchio, had his benefit (and a big one it was) after
all. A visit to Edinburgh followed in June, when our
hero starred as Hotspur, Young Norval, Romeo, etc.,
etc. Later on Copeland was only too glad to have him
back again in Liverpool, where his reputation in the
legitimate increased by leaps and bounds. When
Phelps played King John in that city during a starring
engagement, he was so pleased with Barry’s acting as
Falconbridge that on his return to town he said a
good word for the Liverpool tragedian to Benjamin
Webster, of the Haymarket, always on the qui vive for


rising talent wherewith to recruit his company.
Negotiations ensued, with the result that Barry Sullivan
made his first appearance in London at the above-
mentioned theatre on February 7, 1852. Thus, after
twelve years’ probation, during which he experienced
all the ups and downs of the provincial stock actor, we
find our hero, at the age of twenty-eight, safely housed
at last in the player’s Mecca.


CHAPTER 11. (1852-1862).
METROPOLITAN AND EARLY AMERICAN EXPERIENCES.
FOR his dehut at the Haymarket, Sullivan, not
inappropriately, chose the character of Hamlet.
Slender and exceedingly graceful in those days, he had
most of the physical qualifications for an ideal Dane,
save that his voice had not then developed its powers,
and was at times thin and reedy. His success at the
outset was not particularly pronounced. Said the
Illustrated London News —“ In the present dearth of
juvenile actors we were sorry to find that the public
took so little interest in the event, and we fear that,
notwithstanding the evident merits of Mr. Sullivan, the
impression produced by his avatar will be exceedingly
small.” The critics praised the artistic discrimination
with which he delivered the text, and remarked how
adroitly he bolstered up his deficiencies by presenting
mental ingenuity and picturesque posing in lieu of
forceful acting. Happily for him, too, they came down
with a dull sickening thud on his innovations and new
readings. This aroused public curiosity, and soon all
London was flocking to the Haymarket to hear Barry
deliver himself of the “hawk from a heron —pshaw!”
heresy. On Saturday, the 14th following, we find him
acting the leading male role (Angiolo the Sculptor) in
a new play by Miss Yandenhoff called Woman's
Heart, the authoress herself appearing as Isolina the


Blind Girl. Other important characters were sustained
by Mr. Howe, Mr. Vandenhoff, and Miss Amelia
Yining. Evidently his first “ creation ” (as the phrase
goes), Sullivan’s Angiolo was replete with power, and
did much to save a piece possessing little merit beyond
the beauty of its diction. According to the Illustrated
London News, Money was revived in April for the
purpose of further testing the merits of the new-comer,
“ His Evelyn is indeed an intelligent and elegant piece
of acting; and we have no doubt that this actor will
gradually grow into public favour.” As a matter of
fact, the comedy was so far successful that it was put
up in the bills again for a week, with Sullivan in the
same character, during October.
About the most important feature of the Haymarket
season 1852-53 was the production of Sir Edward
Bulwer Lytton’s comedy, “ Not So Bad as We Seem;
or, Many Sides to a Character,” on Saturday, February
12, 1853. Originally written for the benefit of the
Literary Guild, this piece first saw the light at Devon-
shire House on May 16, 1851, when it was performed
before the Queen and Prince Consort, by a distinguished
body of amateurs, comprising Mr. Frank Stone, Mr.
Dudley Costello, Mr. Charles Dickens, Mr. Douglas
Jerrold, Mr. John Forster, Mr. Mark Lemon, Mr. E. W.
Topham, Mr. Peter Cunningham, Mr. R. H. Horne,
Dr. Westland Marston, Mr. Charles Knight, Mr. John
Tenniel, and Mr. Wilkie Collins. The play was a
brilliant portrait gallery of well-marked types.
Choosing for his period the reign of George 1., the
author had framed his plot to depict the probity of the


literary character. Although the performance was in
some measure improved in the hands of the Haymarket
Company, the difference between the amateur and the
professional rendering was, strange to say, not very
remarkable. Howe gave an excellent rendering of
Lytton’s hero —one David Fallen—a poor poet, fallen
from the high estate to that of Grub Street Pamphleteer,
and as such beset with trials and temptations. Stuart
acted only middling as the Duke of Middlesex, the type
of aristocratic pride. Leigh Murray, as Lord Wilmot,
a man of fashion (Charles Dickens’ original character),
succeeded admirably in pourtraying the reigning mode;
he also doubled the part of the unprincipled publisher
Curll, whom Pope endowed with dubious immortality.
Benjamin Webster, in Mark Lemon’s character of Sir
Geoffrey Thornside, “ a gentleman of good family and
estate,” gave an impersonation at once clear-cut, subtle,
and full of detail. The hit of the piece, however, seems
to have been made by Keeley and J. B. Buckstone, in
the drunken business allotted in the third act to the
two young gentlemen from the city, Mr. Shadowly
Softhead and Mr. Goodenough Easy. Sullivan played
the part of Hardman, “ a rising M.P. and adherent of
Sir Robert Walpole,” as originally sustained by Mr.
John Forster. Although reckoned somewhat stagey
and inflexible in the earlier and more level scenes, Barry
came out splendidly in the last act —whose burthen
rested almost entirely upon him—aroused his audience,
and was rewarded with several rounds of hearty applause.
When Webster gave over the reins of management at
the Haymarket to Buckstone, our hero elected to swear


of this piece :—
Lord Betterton....
- Mr. Chippendale.
Lady Betterton -
- Mrs. Fitzwilliam.
Sybilla (their daughter) -
- Mrs. Buckingham.
TraV Sybma adveDtUrer en . gag6d t0 } Mr - Bair y Sullivan.
Tom Singleheart
- Mr. Howe.
The Widow Lovelock
- Miss Reynolds.
Catherine (Lady Betterton’sdaugl
biter) Miss Louisa Howard
Charles Perfect (Lord Betterton’s son) Mr. Wm. Barren.
Jemmy Tulip ....
- Mr. J. B. Buckstone.
allegiance under the new chieftain, and on Thursday,
April 7th following, created the part of Travers in
Robert Sullivan’s sprightly comedy of Elopements in
High Life. Some idea of the strength of the Haymarket
Company at this period may be gathered from the cast
Captain Gawk (of the Unattached) - Mr. Compton.
Having entered upon the management of the theatre
with the intention of giving a series of dramatic novelties
from the most eminent authors, Buckstone, later on in
the same month, produced Browning’s poetic play,
Colombo's Birthday , with Barry Sullivan in the principal
male role of Valence the Advocate, and Helen Faucit as
Colombe of Ravenstein, Duchess of Juliers and Cleves.
Sweet and pure in sentiment, although slight in
structure, the piece did credit to the theatre, and met
with instantaneous success. The two principal dramatic
artists manifested great power in the scene where
Valence carries an offer of marriage to the Duchess
from the genial soldier of fortune, Prince Berthold,
although loving her with the deepest passion himself.
Diplomacy urges her to accept an offer which will


eventually make her an Empress, but in doing so she
betrays her real feelings and urges the advocate to
declare his love. It is satisfactory to learn that while
on all hands this scene Was pronounced to be one of
the most delicious within recollection, the rendering
of it by Barry Sullivan and Helen Faucit was
considered fully equal to its merits.
Novelty being quite the order of the day under
Buckstone, another new piece (with an interesting if
somewhat sombre plot), called The Civil Kindness , saw
the light on Monday, June 6, when Sullivan gave a
painstaking and meritorious personation of the hapless
Giulio. Unfortunately the serious dialogue of Mrs.
Crowe’s five-act play was rather too long-winded, and
not always to the point; but some capital comic relief
was afforded by the acting of Buckstone, Corri, Mrs.
Fitzwilliam, and Miss E. Chaplin. A month or two
afterwards Barry repaired to the Standard Theatre (his
first appearance on transpontine boards), were he played
a principal part in the revival of Bennett’s drama
Retribution. Returning to his old love, the Haymarket,
in 1855, he made somewhat of a hit as Claude Melnotte
to Helen Faucit’s Pauline, in May; and on Monday,
June 11, created the character of Franklyn the amor-
ous and distraught hunchback in John Saunders’s fine
poetical play of Rove’s Martyrdom. “Mr. Sullivan,” says
the finnikin critic of the Illustrated London News, “as
the deformed hero, laboured hard, and gave a mechanical
outline correct enough to a part which in the hands of
Edmund Kean (!) would have been instinct with life
and electricity. For his diligence and good intention,


he shall receive full praise from us, and we trust that,
by steady practice and submission to criticism , he may
become an improving actor. Let him, however, above all,
resist a tendency to exaggeration.” After appearing as
Jaques to Helen Faucit’s Rosalind, he had another new
part on Monday, July 28, in the hero of Heraud’s five-
act domestic drama of Wife or No Wife. Miss Edith
Heraud, daughter of the dramatist, created the role of
Olympia, a lady of the period of Queen Anne, who, having
secretly married a nobleman whose position ranked
much higher than her own, laid up for herself a store
of trouble by incontinently losing her marriage certi-
ficate. “ Mr, Barry Sullivan as the hero,” says the
critic just cited, “ was zealous and painstaking; though
in the last scene, which requires, indeed, some central
incident to collect all its meaning into a focus, he was
not so effective as we could have desired.”
Early in the October following, Barry Sullivan was
engaged by Mr. E. T. Smith to play Tihrak in Fitzball’s
grand Egyptian spectacle Nitocris at Drury Lane, This
new play was lavishly mounted—a rare thing in those
days for aught save revivals. But despite the fine acting
of Sullivan, E. F. Edgar, Stuart, and Miss Glyn, it
proved a failure through clumsy stage management,
and resulted in a loss to the treasury of about £2,000.
Theatres in London were not nearly so numerous forty
years ago as they are now, and the salaries of important
artists were a great deal more moderate. Hence Barry,
after remaining at Drury Lane for some little time,
found himself unable to obtain another remunerative
metropolitan engagement, and with the cares of a


regularly-increasing family thick upon him, had to
resort to the provinces. Even there his name was not
much of a draw at the outset. Mr, Coleman tells us
that he once constituted fhe sole box audience on Barry’s
benefit night at Wigan, when there was only twelve
shillings, all told, in the house. “ I had my struggles
in my time,” the tragedian remarked to a Birmingham
interviewer in 1886. “ I knew what it was to play to
empty benches when I first effected a start and affected
the ‘ star.’ But empty benches never discouraged me.
It did not matter if the audience was thirty, or three
hundred, or three thousand, I always did my best.
The consequence was people came again, and every time
I returned to a town I found the audience larger and
larger, until at last I met the success for which I bad
striven and waited.”
On his return to London in 1857, Sullivan held office
for a time under Phelps at Sadlers' Wells, where he
sustained a variety of important characters in the
legitimate. Unable, however, to secure a firm foothold
in the metropolis he decided to hazard his fortunes
in America, and setting sail for New York made his
first appearence at the Broadway Theatre in that city,
on November 22, 1858, in the character of Hamlet.
Personations of Claude Melnotte, Macbeth, Shylock,
Petruchio, and Richard 111. followed. On December
20, he opened at Burton’s New Theatre in the same city
as Hamlet, subsequently playing Beverley, Benedick,
and King Lear. At the latter house he was principally
supported by Wm. Davidge, J. H. Allen, Fanny Morant,
and Ada Clifton. Said the tragedian, in speaking of


this visit in after years—“ I went alone without a great
company, and without hundreds of tons of luggage, but
my success was remarkable. I gained fame and dollars
too, for what money I made, I made for myself.”
Nevertheless, in some of the cities of the Union after-
wards visited Sullivan encountered a spirit of malig-
nant persecution. During his first engagement at the
Walnut Street Theatre, Philadelphia, he was charged
with spitting at Mr. Harry Perry (Richmond) in the
last act of Richard 111., the partisans of that actor
construing a characteristic morsel of stage business
on the part of the Hibernian tragedian into a personal
insult to their favourite. There can be no doubt,
furthermore, that the ill-feeling excited by this mistaken
impression was considerably aggravated by a remarkable
passage at arms which Sullivan had at this time, in this
very theatre, with the great Edwin Forrest. When not
acting himself, the stentorian American tragedian had
an unpleasant habit of going to see whatever rival player
happened to be in the neighbourhood, and of truculently
expressing his disapproval of any passage not delivered
to his liking. This unlucky penchant led to serious
consequences. Under the delusion that Macready had
subsidised the metropolitan press to write him down,
Forrest hissed the eminent tragedian’s Hamlet at Edin-
burgh in 1846, and by his personal animus created a
bitterness that ere long developed into an international
question. It culminated, as most students of theatrical
history know, in the Astor Place Opera House riot of
May, 1849, when thirty innocent beings lost their lives,
and Macready himself had a narrow escape.


Happening to be in Philadelphia during Sullivan’s
visit, Forrest went to see our hero’s Hamlet, and was so
disgusted with the resemblance to Macready (whom
Barry followed in the part), and the many new readings,
that during the first two acts he annoyed both players
and audience by his intermittent snorts of disapproba-
tion. Sullivan bided his time, however, and soon had
his revenge. On coming to a portion of the text in the
second act having direct allusion to Polonius, Hamlet
drew Rosencrantz and Guildenstern aside, and striding
towards the box in which Forrest sat, made a con-
temptuous gesture in that direction, and keeping strictly
to the text, said—“ Do you see that great baby yonder ?
He is not yet out of his swaddling clouts.” Lawrence
Barrett, on whose authority we relate this incident,
adds, “ mingled hisses and applause were the actor’s
reward for what was certainly ‘ a hit, a palpable hit,’
although perhaps not in very good taste.” To which
the best that can be said is perhaps that one does not
give fair words to the would-be garrotter should a
bludgeon prove handy.
To Routledge’s Christmas Annual, The Stage Boor
(1880), Barry Sullivan contributed an interesting
morsel of reminiscence, entitled A Wrestling Match,
which, as it relates to this period, and is about the
only specimen of his literary effort known to the author,
may well be cited here in full.
“ Some years ago,” he writes, “ while on my first
professional tour of America, I played an engagement
in New Orleans, and my Shylock night will be ever
memorable to me, from an occurrence that took place in


the St. Charles’s Hotel, my temporary abode. During
my short stay in the city I had made the acquaintance
of a Mr. Rose, a well-to-do man, a great lover of the
drama, and a pleasant companion.
“ On the evening in question my new-found friend
had taken seats for the performance, and we were enjoy-
ing a quiet chat on the subject of the play, while Mrs.
Rose, who had just left us, had gone to her room to
make some necessary changes in her toilette.
“ While we were thus pleasantly occupied, a friend of
Rose’s, somewhat overcharged with wine, came into the
bar, ‘ liquored up ’ once more, and with his irrelevant
remarks soon put Shakespeare to flight. He had been
to a wrestling match, had caught the spirit of the enter-
tainment, and began challenging everybody to throw
him. To my surprise, he eventually challenged Rose, a
more powerful man than himself, to try a fall there and
then, on the spot.
“ Rose, in the kindest manner possible, evaded the
challenge. ‘No, no,' ‘not now,’ ‘not here,’ ‘some other
time,’ etc., etc.; but all to no purpose, unless, perhaps,
to make the man more insisting and determined to have
his own way; indeed, he went so far as to seize Rose
by the collar to compel him to wrestle, whether he liked
to do so or not.
“ At last, after being taunted and laid hold of several
times, Rose, losing all patience, closed with his tor-
mentor, and threw him heavily. The man, whose name
I forget, raised himself slowly, and, without saying a
word, lurched sulkily out of the bar. I congratulated
Rose on having got rid of such an insolent and impor-


tunate person, and a few minutes afterwards took my
leave, and strolled to the theatre.
“ Half-an-hour had scarcely elapsed when, to my
horror, I heard in my dfessing-room of the tragical
termination to this impromptu match. Rose remained
in the bar, waiting till his wife should be ready, and
talking with his friends. His antagonist returned,
walked deliberately towards him, and, without uttering
a word, took out a revolver and shot him in the back.
Rose turned around quickly, and advanced upon his
assassin—another shot! Still he advanced, and still
another shot. The next instant Rose had seized the
murderer, wrenched the pistol from his grasp, and with
it struck him a crushing blow upon the forehead.
Again was the coward’s weapon raised against himself,
and with the second terrible stroke both men fell to
the ground. His left hand still clutching the wretch’s
throat, Rose, with a dying effort, got to his knees, raised
the revolver for yet another blow when, with a convul-
sive quiver, his whole body seemed to collapse, and he
fell dead across the face of his murderer.
“The tragedy was so suddenly, so swiftly enacted,
that interference or prevention had been impossible.
“ The corse of poor Rose was borne to his rooms.
While ascending the stairs the sad little procession was
met by the unfortunate wife, gaily dressed to go to the
theatre with the husband she had left but a short half-
hour before, in full and happy life, and whose cruel
murder she thus suddenly and hideously realised.
“ That part of the picture I will not dwell upon ; it
may be better imagined than described by me. The


wretched man, who had taken such terrible revenge for
his self-sought and well-merited defeat, never spoke
again; he died three days after his victim—slain, and
righteously slain, by his own murderous weapon.”
Among Barry Sullivan’s best cherished recollections
of his first tour in the New World was his visit to
Halifax, Nova Scotia, where Sothern had entered
upon the management of the theatre, and soon found
his evil star in the ascendant. Even his own Dundreary
had failed to draw, principally owing to the fact that
the English officers in garrison there, who were the
mainstay of the theatre, deemed the personation an
outrageous caricature of the British aristocracy.
Having exhausted all his resources in the endeavour
to please these capricious patrons, Sothern was at
his wits’ end, when Barry arrived to fulfil a week’s
engagement. Our hero’s attraction, however, was such
that he remained close on seven weeks, and piloted poor
Dundreary’s craft into still waters before leaving.
Returning home with a solid balance at his bankers’,
besides many memento nuggets, the gift of enthusiastic
friends in California, Sullivan made his reappearance
in London at the St. James’s Theatre, on Monday,
August 20, 1860, as Hamlet. It has been generally
felt by metropolitan playgoers that most accepted stage
favourites, on their return from a prolonged course of
starring in out-of-the-way and uncultured districts,
prove to have coarsened in style. In such cases the
deterioration usually manifests itself in a desire upon
the part of the artist to enlarge the area of his canvas,
so to speak, and to attain breadth of treatment by slap-


dash painting. Strange to say, Sullivan on his return
exhibited none of these signs and tokens, despite the
fact that during his lengthened tour of North America
he had fretted and strutted' it for the delectation of the
miner and the lumberman, the gold-digger of California,
the backwoodsman, and even (tell it not in Gath!) for
the copper-coloured roamers of the prairies. Hence
The Times, in commenting upon his reappearance, said
—“All the qualities that have rendered his memory
estimable in the minds of playgoers he retains to their
full extent. He is a careful, correct, and perspicuous
declaimer, turning to good account his natural advan-
tages of voice and figure; and he is, moreover,
thoroughly versed in the routine of the part, which he
has evidently studied with laudable assiduity. Though
he makes no particular attempt to startle his audience,
he is neither tame nor listless, and all that he does is
well considered and quite to the purpose. A numerous
audience witnessed his performance of Hamlet, and
greeted him with a hearty welcome.”
On the termination of his London engagement, Barry
made a prosperous tour of the provinces. Towards the
middle of January, 1862, he, in the face of inclement
weather and formidable counter-attractions, laid the
foundations of an abiding popularity in Belfast. For
fully a quarter of a century afterwards he remained the
God of the Ulsterman’s idolatry, and during many
pleasant Christmas-tides upheld the Shakespearian
banner in the Northern capital what time other cities
were indulging in the inanities of pantomime.


CHAPTER 111. (1862-1891).
IN THE COLONIES AND ELSEWHERE.
ON G. Y. Brooke’s return to England, in 1861, after
a lengthened period of unparalleled success in
the Colonies (marred only by his business incapacity
and ultra-bohemianism), the larger cities of Australasia
had, for a time, a heavy miss of a first-class tragedian.
Seeing an opportunity to enlarge his experiences, Barry
Sullivan at once took his tide at the flood, and entering
into negotiations with Mr. J. Wilton, lessee of the
Theatre Royal, Melbourne, agreed to make his debut in
“ the Australian Drury Lane.” His success was by no
means assured at the outset, however, as Colonial play-
goers were not sufficiently off with the old love to be
on with the new. In other words, they still retained
wistful yearnings towards the prodigal who was fated
never to return. But Sullivan was not of that fibre to
become disheartened under momentary coldness. It
was an uphill fight, but he conquered by sheer tenacity
and strength of will.
Mr. W. H. Campbell, a prosperous Ulsterman at
present residing in San Francisco, writes as follows, in
an interesting communication to the author: —
“ I frequently met and was pretty well acquainted
with both G. V. Brooke and Barry Sullivan during the
golden early days of Victoria, better known then as Port
Philip, the ‘ Australian Felix ’ of the veteran pioneer,


John Pascoe Fawkner. Brooke was undoubtedly the
most popular actor who ever set foot in the Colonies,
but he had left for good before Sullivan’s arrival there.
The contrast between the two men, both Irishmen as
they were, was very striking. Brooke was good-natured,
convivial, careless, and had moments of superb inspi-
ration. Sullivan, on the other hand, was practical,
energetic, abstemious, methodical. He was for the most
part painfully aware of his importance, had immense
vim, aimed high, and succeeded in reaching the grand
goal of his ambition.
“ The days when genteel comedy was at its best in
Melbourne found Sullivan, with Joe Jefferson,* Fanny
Cathcart, Heir, and a galaxy of lesser talent playing at
the Princess’s. I think they opened in Money— Barry
as Evelyn, and Jefferson, Graves. A little supper was
tendered these gentlemen and the two captains
commanding the ships which brought them out to
Australia. Of those who made merry that night only
Mr. Jefferson, Captain D. H. Johnston, R.N.R., and
myself remain to tell the tale. H. B. Honaldson
Sandridge was there, and my fellow-survivors doubtless
remember how he and the genial C. L. Throckmorton
went through the farcical ceremony of marrying the
landlord’s daughter over the broomstick for the special
entertainment of our theatrical guests.
“It fell to my lot to propose Mr. Sullivan’s health.
In doing so I alluded to a keen, fussy controversy then
* Passing strange is it that, from first to last, in Jefferson s
delightful Autobiography no mention is made of Barry
Sullivan’s name.


going on in the newspapers over a dispute between the
tragedian and the management of the Eoyal, in which
the ladies of the company were involved—owing to
Sullivan’s methods in regard to them being at variance
with those formerly practised. My endeavour was to
throw oil on the troubled waters, and bring the
unhappy dispute to an end. So I ventured to suggest
to our friend the desirability of compromise, or such
concession as might please the ladies and satisfy
popular prejudice and clamour.
“ Jumping up, the tragedian replied in these charac-
teristic words : ‘Do you think, sir’—addressing me
directly—‘that I will concede? No, sir ! Never, sir!!
Never for a moment, sir !!! Do you mean to say that
I, Barry Sullivan, must stoop down to the people of
Melbourne ? No, sir ! Far from it —I’ll bring them up
to me !’ And he carried out his point, as he always did,
by sheer pluck, energy, and ‘ go.’
“ Though very abstemious, Mr. Sullivan was not a
total abstainer. lon many occasions supped with him,
at Spiers & Pond’s Cafe Royal, when he invariably
partook of a broiled steak or chop, accompanied by a
pint or half-pint of Guinness’s Dublin porter. He was
fond of praise, though impatient of adverse criticism.
‘ Did you see my Don Csesar ? ’ he asked me on the
street, a few days after the production of Don Caisar de
Bazan. He fished for a compliment, and received a
well-merited one.”
Remaining long enough in Melbourne to win all
lovers of the legitimate on his side, Barry, early in
1863, made his way to Sydney, where he met with such


speedy and unequivocal success that he returned there
again and again. On retracing his steps to the Victorian
capital, he, for the first time in his eventful career, took
upon himself the cares of responsible management,
having secured a lease of the Colonial Drury Lane from
Mr. Ambrose Kyte, the proprietor. Unlike poor Brooke,
who had burnt his fingers severely in such enterprises,
Sullivan never had cause to regret his plunge into the
hazardous. Securing the services of such able hench-
men as Mr. Hennings and Mr. H. R. Harwood, he began
his reign at the Melbourne Theatre Royal on March 7,
1868, producing a series of brilliant Shakespearian
revivals which more than recalled the palmy days of his
predecessor and friend. Just as our hero had got his
barque well under weigh, Mr. and Mrs. Charles Kean came
to the Queen city of the South to renew for many an old
colonial happy memories of his boyhood. Manager
Coppin (Brooke’s quondam ally) had arranged for these
eminent artists to appear in the Olympic Theatre, more
familiarly known—owing to its peculiar shape and the
material from which it was constructed—as “ The
Iron Pot.” To most opposition managers the prospect
would have proved uninviting. But Sullivan, nothing
daunted, threw down the gauntlet to the elder tragedian,
and set about producing all the pieces in his repertory.
From all accounts it would appear that only in one
part (that of Louis XI.), did Kean, then in the decline
of his powers, seem to have the advantage over his more
youthful antagonist.
It is satisfactory to find that Mr. W. H. Campbell’s
personal estimate of the Sullivan of the sixties agrees


in the main with the impression left upon the mind of
Mr. James Smith, the Nestor of Australian dramatic
critics, who has now been associated with the fortunes
of The Argus for fully forty years. In a communication
to the author, written some twelve months ago, apropos
to our hero’s career in the colonies, this accomplished
journalist says, inter alia —“ As a man I did not like
him. He was hard, cold, and repellent; and his vanity
amounted to a disease. He seriously believed that the
British stage had only produced three great actors —
David Garrick, W. C. Macready, and himself! His
self-love was as irritable as it was irritating, and his
jealousy of other actors was almost childish. I could
never detect any of the fire of genius in his performances ;
but he possessed great talent, and that ‘ infinite capacity
for taking pains ’ which come very near genius. Short
of that he was one of the best all-round actors I ever
saw—equally good in tragedy, comedy, Irish drama,
and farce. He was also an admirable manager. He
was master of all the duties and detail connected with
a theatre, from those of the call-boy upwards. He was
very frugal, perhaps penurious; for instance, he would
see that no candle ends were wasted behind the scenes.
And no doubt he was in the right, for ‘colonials’ are
naturally wasteful and unthrifty; and poor Brooke’s
loss of the fortune he made here was in part attributable
to his carelessness and his toleration of extravagance
and pillage in his subordinates. In spite of his jealousy,
Barry Sullivan, while managing the Theatre Royal in
this city, surrounded himself with an excellent stock
company—such a company, indeed, as could not be


organised now —a company scarcely less complete and
efficient than Daly’s. Every piece he produced was
handsomely mounted, thoroughly rehearsed, and effec-
tively played, and I have -always understood that he
went home with a small fortune. Ido not suppose his
personal expenses ever exceeded £2 or £3 per week.
His temper was as vile as Macready’s, without being con-
scious of and penitent for it, as that actor was. I wrote
an adverse criticism of some performance of Sullivan’s,
and a day or two afterwards I got into the compartment
of a railway carriage on a suburban line, when he opened
out upon me a torrent of coarse abuse in the presence
of half-a-dozen other occupants of the compartment.
His object was evidently to provoke me to strike him.
But I preserved my own self-control, and ironically
complimented him on his gentlemanly conduct and
demeanour; and he looked and acted like a man
obsessed by an evil spirit. Only a few months before
he had dined at my house in company with Joseph
Jefferson and Sir Charles Gavan Duffy.
“ Sullivan’s reign at the Theatre Eoyal, Melbourne,
was certainly not the least brilliant episode in the history
of that theatre. He was one of the most hard-working
both of managers and actors. He never spared
himself, and he did not spare others. Indeed, he
could not have succeeded or have fulfilled his duty
to the public had he been indulgent or remiss.
There was a good deal of personal magnetism in the
man: he could be almost winsome in his manners;
but you felt that it was the attractiveness of the
* well-graced actor.’ ”


In after years Sullivan always looked back with
pleasant memories to his four years’ sojourn in the
Colonies. In face of the opposition encountered at the
outset he was justified in referring with pride to the fact
that in Melbourne alone during that time he had per-
formed with acceptance for fully a thousand nights.
Obviously enough, like most histrionic birds of passage,
he was delighted with the climate. In speaking of his
Australian experiences to Mr. J. W. Flynn, of Cork, he
said, not many years'ago —“ I often came off the stage
at night hot after an exciting combat, and having hastily
changed my costume for a suit of thin clothes, left the
theatre and drove miles in an open vehicle without a
thought of catching cold.”
To about a round dozen of the world’s greatest players
(of whom the names of Garrick, Peg Woffington, and
Adrienne Lecouvreur come readiest to mind) has it been
given to enjoy posthumous theatrical notoriety as the
central figure in some ingenious “fairy tale” of the
dramatist. But to one only, so far as we know, has it
been given “to enter living into his immortality.” Not
very many moons had waned after our hero had bidden
goodbye to his friends in Australasia ere his counterfeit
presentment stepped on to the boards of the Melbourne
Theatre Royal. A story was once current, it appears,
in the Colonies that Barry Sullivan had some time or
other been arrested at Belfast in mistake for a prominent
and much sought after Fenian. Mr, R. P. Whitworth,
an adroit Victorian playwright (who still lives despite
such delinquencies), seized upon this legend, and round
about it wove a capital little play called Catching a


Conspirator. By a happy inspiration he represented
Barry as spouting Shakespeare to his captors, every
quotation being of such a nature as to strengthen the
suspicions of the police. Thanks to a lively sustainment
of the equivoke and the excellent acting and mimicry
of H. R. Harwood —splendidly made-up to resemble his
old colleague—the little piece had great vogue, and ran
for forty-six nights to good houses.
After acting with his usual success in Queensland,
early in 1866 Sullivan sailed from Brisbane to India,
and thence reached England in June. Thus, with a
score of acting years still before him, he had already
shown his right to the epithet “ world-famous,” the use
of which by indiscreet business managers, in theatrical
advertisements in more recent times, drew down upon his
head the occasional sarcasms of the prunes-and-prisms
school. Greatly improved in health and physique, and
with his histrionic capabilities mellowed in proportion,
Sullivan made his reappearance at Drury Lane, under
Messrs. Falconer and Chatterton, on September 22
following, playing Falconbridge to Phelps’s King John.
“ The new Falconbridge,” said the Athenceum, then as
now a coldly critical journal not easily roused to
enthusiasm —“ The new Falconbridge was safe with his
audience from his very first utterances. Mr. Sullivan’s
conception of the character is nearer to that of Charles
Kemble than of any other actor within the memory of
contemporaries. There is an abundance, but not a
superabundance of spirit in it; the utmost freedom,
without vulgarity ; a graceful ease and not a braggart
swagger. . , . Mr. Sullivan’s success was not con-


fined to the comedy or melo-dramatic element of the
character. There were other portions in which his
display of feeling was given with a quiet but telling effect,
no jot of which was lost with the critical part of his
audience, who were closely scanning his speech, action,
bearing, and expression. His by-play was equally
good ; that is, his part in the drama was never forgotten.
His very bow to King John was of a real Sir Richard
to a substantial king ; and when he bent over the body
of the dying monarch' there was earnestness of signi-
ficance in the action, as if the gallant knight felt a
respectful sorrow for the condition of his uncle. ‘ Old
Drury,’ in short, may be congratulated on its acquisition
of Mr. Barry Sullivan. Some time has passed since he
won golden opinions by his impersonation of Hamlet;
but a certain lack of strength and want of practice were
observable. Since then, however, his experience in the
Colonies has made a considerable difference in this
respect. As manager and chief actor of an Australian
theatre he was compelled to venture what in England
he might have avoided; and having, by his excellent
conduct of his establishment, secured an extensive
patronage was enabled to make essay of his powers in
the most trying parts.”
Impersonations of Macbeth, Macduff, Hamlet,
Richard 111., and Charles Surface followed; the last
mentioned to the Sir Peter of Phelps and the Lady
Teazle of Mrs. Herman Vezin. Said the Daily
Telegraph of October 3—“ Mr. Sullivan’s rendering of
Macbeth is much less familiar to the playgoing public
of this country ; but if the sustained applause of such a


strong gathering as that of last evening be any criterion,
the admiration of the earnest lovers of Shakespeare
who are nightly making ‘ Old Drury ’ their trysting-
place will be found pretty equally divided. Without
attempting an elaborate analysis of the character as
presented by Mr. Sullivan, it would be difficult to
indicate the numerous points of departure from those
readings with which the town is familiar. It may be
briefly stated, however, that Mr. Barry Sullivan
strongly impresses his auditory with the conviction that
from the first supernatural soliciting of the witches
Macbeth is fully resolved to remove all obstacles in the
way of his ambition, and that the letter to his wife
conveys that intention. Lady Macbeth readily becomes
the partner of his crime, but is thus hardly to be
accused of being its instigator, and in those passages in
the text which tend to support this view the tragedian
places very forcible emphasis. There are some notable
variations also from the usual mode of delivering the
most familiar lines which will interest, if they do not
convince, the hearer; and of these ‘Tide and the hour
run through the roughest day’ may be quoted as a fair
specimen. The performance throughout exhibits the
characteristics of an actor who has at least had the
courage to venture on novel ground, and who possesses
the power to render justice to his own conception. It
may be fairly objected to Mr. Barry Sullivan’s notion
of the rapidity with which the thought of the murder
entered the mind of Macbeth that his wife, who con-
siders him ‘ too full o’ the milk of human kindness,’
could have had but little knowledge of the darker


moods of his disposition, or else we must be enforced to
believe that his nature entirely changed on being
accosted by the witches. Whatever opinion may be
entertained it is in favour of the Macbeth of Tuesday
night that he was unconsciously assisted by Miss Amy
Sedgwick, who, venturing for the first time in London
on the personation of Lady Macbeth, gave a suggestive
rather than a powerful rendering of the character. Her
performance is not lacking in intelligence, but it is
deficient in force, and'much less decided in form and
colour than could be desired.”
Unfortunately the heartiness of his reception at
Drury Lane, together with the inducements of a fat
purse and the success of his Australian venture,
tempted Barry to enter upon the cares of management
in the metropolis. Not a whit disheartened by the
proverbially unlucky reputation of the house, he
signalised his inception at the Holborn Theatre on
Saturday, May 1, 1868, by a revival of Money, with
himself as Evelyn. The choice of a piece so titled
must be reckoned among the ironies of fortuitous cir-
cumstance. The enterprise proved what in green-room
parlance is equivocally known as “an artistic success”;
or, in plain English, a serious pecuniary failure.
Sullivan struggled on gamely in the face of ever-
increasing difficulties for a couple of years, and then
threw up the sponge. Oddly enough, every reason save
the right one has been given in explanation of this
fiasco. Ignoring the tragedian’s preceding popularity
at Drury Lane, Mr. W. Davenport Adams, in a
sympathetic article contributed to Black and White


(May 9, 1891), suggests that “he had possibly lost
touch, once and for all, with that rather capricious
person, the metropolitan playgoer.” To this he adds,
“ Moreover, he had become wedded to the star
system. I do not think it can fairly be said of him
that he ever presented a ‘ legitimate ’ play in a
perfunctory or utterly inadequate fashion ; but undoubt-
edly he did not, as a rule, surround himself with
colleagues of the first distinction.” In writing all this
one can quite well see that Mr. Davenport Adams did
not view Sullivan’s career as a whole, but was thinking
of him purely in his latter-day aspect—as a provincial
tragedian. Mr. Dutton Cook, in criticising the produc-
tion of The Gamester at the Holborn, in October, 1869,*
has no such strictures to pass on the conduct of the
theatre. “ Each scene of the play,” he writes, “is
followed with marked attention, and great applause
attends the fall of the curtain. The tragedy has been
produced with due regard to scenic appointments and
decorations; the costumes pertaining rather to the
Kemble than the Garrick period. Hair powder is
eschewed, and the dresses are of the sober fashion
that obtained during the later years of George the
Third’s reign. Mr. Barry Sullivan is well versed
in the traditional style of presenting Beverley s
troubles, and plays the part with considerable power.
That many of the speeches should be delivered in an
extravagant style of elocution, and that the death-scene
should be painfully elaborated, must be regarded as a
*Yide “ Nights at the Play,” p. 79.


tribute to the established rules of the stage. The author’s
language— ‘ numerous prose ’it used to be designated
in the last century—is of a high-flown, decorated kind
that almost bids defiance to simplicity of delivery. Mr.
Sullivan’s exertions —and a performance of Beverley is
no light tax upon the physical resources of an actor —
were rewarded with continual applause. Mrs. Yezin
appears as Mrs. Beverley, and though lacking the
strength and compass of voice required for delivering
with full effect what are known as * the Siddons points ’
of the part, the actress displayed much feeling, and
largely enlisted the sympathies of her audience. Mr.
Cowper gave a subdued and careful portraiture of the
villainous Stukely. Mr. Stephens was quite pathetic
enough as the faithful Jarvis, and Mr. Rayne acquitted
himself tolerably as the chivalrous Lewson.” According
to Pascoe’s Dramatic List, the Mr. Lin Rayne here referred
to made his first hit at the Holborn in a comedy
entitled Plain English —a fact which goes to show that
the management was “ advanced ” enough not to pin
its faith entirely to the stock legitimate.
The true secret of Sullivan’s qualified failure at the
Holborn lay in the inopportuneness of the attempt. In
and about the year 1868 dramatic affairs were in a state
of crude transition. An infusion of new blood had been
experienced with the advent of Fechter, who was fast
popularising romantic drama. T. W. Robertson was
paramount likewise among the forces which were
operating to dissipate outworn creeds ; and the sensa-
tional drama loomed ahead. Amid all this seething
and ferment, Shakespeare (after long courses of Phelps


and Charles Kean) fell into desuetude, and his exponents
became martyrs to the moment. Alack that it should
be said ! Sullivan never afterwards gained firm foothold
in the metropolis ; and to his exceeding vexation never
found himself appraised there at his colonial or provin-
cial valuation. It was the one vulnerable spot in his
armour—the little rift within the lute that made discord
of the hymns of his admirers. “ That Barry Sullivan
was a man of genius,” says the writer in the Pall Mall
Gazette already spoken of in our first chapter, “ will not,
I fancy, be denied ; but his genius, so to speak, was
rather that of the emotions than of the intellect. And
herein, in my humble opinion, lay the secret of his
failure to attain the highest goal. Endowed by nature
with all the personal requisites that go to make up a
great actor, and capable of realising all the feeling he
experienced from it—expressing his conception with
individuality and originality—he lacked the intellect
to extract all the subtleties of a character. And
this failure the London playgoer was quick to
detect.”
One smells out something sophistical in this morsel
of reasoning—probably because of its implied reflection
on the critical acumen of all play-goers outside the pale.
In reality it only expresses a half-truth. Thoroughly
democratic in fibre, Sullivan had an utter repugnance
to working up an adventitious if vitally essential popu-
larity outside the theatre. He had not the makings of
a “ fashionable” tragedian, and lacked that ye ne saisquoi
which made of the diminutive and vocally defective
Charles Kean the idol of society.


Nothing daunted at his repulse, our hero at once
“ appealed to the suffrages of the country,” entering
upon a series of triumphal processions through the
provinces, which, allowing for brief, intermittent
appearances in the metropolis, went on without cessa-
tion until the beginning of the end, some six years ago.
Believing, like Brooke, in courting the favour of the
masses, he was indulged, times without number, with
torchlight processions and other public ebullitions of
popular feeling, and (equally like Brooke) was presented
in his day with “ some hundreds-weight”—to use his
own phrase—of gold and silver trophies. Idolised in
most provincial cities, his popularity reached its zenith
in Dublin, where he would sometimes be mot at the
railway station by congregated thousands, who, accom-
panied by half-a-dozen brass bands, would follow him
to the Portobello Hotel and clamour outside until
appeased by a few remarks from their favourite on the
balcony. Indeed, the story goes that a cockney tourist,
who once chanced to travel from Dublin to Belfast in
the same compartment as the tragedian, became so
unnerved at the uproarious welcoming accorded en
route that, fearing the safety of his scalp at the hands
of the wild Irish, he incontinently took refuge under
the seat and stubbornly refused to be comforted.
Lest, however, it should be considered that these
demonstrations of affection were purely the out-
come of Celtic impressionism, it may be pointed out
that so late as 1885 John Bull himself was similarly
worked up to enthusiasm, Northampton in January of
that year being a noteworthy example. In Liverpool,


where his Nationalist proclivities were widely known,
he had been urged, without avail, three years previously
to stand for the representation of that city in the
Imperial Parliament. At Belfast in 1883 this culmi-
nated in a splendid advertisement for the actor, as
the local authorites deemed it expedient to forbid a
torchlight procession in his honour, fearing a revival of
old feuds between the Montagues and Capulets of
inflammable Linenopolis. What with unvaryingly good
houses and sixty per cent, of the receipts as his share,
it is by no means surprising to find that Sullivan’s
earnings in later days averaged £7,000 per annum, or
that dying, full of honours and of years, he left a
handsome fortune to his kin.
An interesting letter addressed to the lessee of the
Belfast Theatre —
Queen’s and North Western Hotel,
Birmingham, 23rd April , 1873.
My dear Warden,
I am not fixing dates yet, but you shall hear
from me at the first opportunity. lam glad your panto,
has been successful. You will be pleased to learn that my old
luck sticks to me —crowds turned away from all parts nightly
in every principal city I have visited since I left you.
Methinks I hear you exclaim, “ More power to you ! ” Hope
you are both quite well, and with very kind regards from both,
I am, dear Warden,
Truly yours,
Barry Sullivan.
Just shaken hands with the captain with whom I sailed
from Queensland to India.


During the autumn of 1874 Barry Sullivan closed
with an offer of £IO,OOO from Messrs. Jarrett & Palmer,
the American managers, for a twelve months’ tour
through the United States in the year succeeding. The
tragedian’s many Cork friends had some intelligence of
this fact prior to his reappearance at the old Theatre
Royal, in George’s Street, on November 30, when he
was supported by a company under the management of
Mr. J. F. Warden, and having for its principal members
Miss Rose Coghlan 'and Mr. J, F. Cathcart. Conse-
quently, at a matinee of Hamlet, the Mayor (Aid. D.
Nagle), accompanied by a number of distinguished Cork-
men, among whom were two members of Parliament,
visited the theatre, and, on behalf of “his fellow-citizens,”
presented the tragedian with an address and testimonial,
the latter consisting of a magnificent two-handled vase
of solid silver, in the Louis Quatorze style, standing
upon a richly-chased Shrewsbury salver of the same
metal. By way of inscription, the salver bore the fol-
lowing ;—“ Presented with the accompanying vase, as
a tribute to Barry Sullivan, from the citizens of Cork,
who are proud of his genius and his fame.” As the
time drew near for his departure, another “ God-speed”
was tendered him by his old friends and admirers in
London, who assembled at a farewell banquet, held in
his honour at the Alexandra Palace, on July 14, 1875.
Among those whose names were appended to the
tastefully illuminated address presented to our hero on
that occasion (and afterwards published in reduced
fac-simile by an enterprising photographer), we remark
in particular—The Earl of Dunraven (chairman),


Andrew Halliday, E. L. Blanchard, F. B. Chatterton,
W.Creswick, E. Falconer, Joseph Hatton, George Honey,
Justin M'Carthy, John Ryder, Guy Roslyn, G. A. Sala,
E. A. Sothern, A. M. Sullivan, B. Webster, and Charles
Wyndham. Similarly feted at Liverpool on the 24th
following, the tragedian sailed for America six days
after, and made his reappearance in New York at
Booth’s Theatre on August 30. A memorable night
this! Sullivan’s heart swelled with pride when he
found himself escorted to the theatre by the Irish Regi-
ment the famous Sixty-ninth, who, some two thousand
strong, soon crammed to repletion a house already half-
filled by the actor’s affectionate compatriots. The play
was Hamlet, with James Cathcart as the Ghost, Fred.
Warde as Laertes, and Louise Hibbert as Ophelia. On
the same night Mr. E. L. Davenport, a formidable rival,
played the Dane at the Grand Opera House in opposi-
tion to our hero. “ Mr. Sullivan is a long way from
being a great actor,” says Appleton's Journal (No. 388,
vol. xiv., p. 345). “He has a very pleasing face and
presence, a fine mellow voice, and he knows how to pose
in very picturesque attitudes, and to fill the eye with a
succession of well-studied pictures. He unites in these
particulars the instincts of the sculptor and the painter;
his eminently picturesque make-ups show a fine taste
for colour, and his attitudes evince a plastic grace that
would make him always an attractive actor in purely
picturesque parts. Nor is he without a calm, balanced
intelligence. But there is absolutely no fire and no
imagination. His grasp of Hamlet is of the stage,
stagey—that is, it is just that perception of the part


that a thoroughly trained actor would have who has
limited his study to all the external arts—of how he
shall walk, how he shall stand, how he shall sit, how he
shall do this and that piece of ‘ business,’ how and where
he shall deliver this and that line—but there is no sub-
jective insight, no heed of the fires that burn within,
no psychological study, no imaginative grasp for the
character of the melancholy and philosophic prince.
. . . In the play scene he makes a telling picture by
graceful posing on the floor; and, in fact, throughout
this actor is always good in a stage sense, but never
really anything more. He is not vigorous enough to
please the untutored, nor introspective enough to charm
the lovers of Shakespeare’s great creation.” To this it
is only fair to add, on the authority of Mr. Laurence
Hutton,* that Hamlet was never looked upon as Barry’s
strongest part in America. Richard HI., Beverley, and
Richelieu were his best drawing cards there ; although
his success, taken generally, was not so thorough as his
great English reputation would have justified.
Our correspondent, Mr. W. H. Campbell, renewed
his acquaintance with our hero at San Francisco early
in 1876, whither he had repaired to open the new
Baldwin Theatre. “ Strolling up Market Street one
forenoon,” he writes, “I met Sullivan, who invited me
into the Baldwin Theatre, where rehearsal was going
on. As we chatted quietly in the back stalls, his quick
ear detected some mistake in the recital of the piece.
‘ What’s that ? What’s that ? Horrible—that will
Wide “ Curiosities of the American Stage,” pp. 289 290.


never do !’ he muttered. Then he called out lustily,
‘ Stop ! Stop ! Hold on will you there ? ’ Like a
flash he left my side, bounding over seats, footlights,
and every other impediment, and was upon the stage
amidst the performers before I could realise what was
the matter. A good deal of his financial success he
attributed, by-the-way, to his son, Mr. T. S. Amory
Sullivan, whom he described to me as a very capable
business man, who attended closely to details.”
Although the adherent of a school which paid little
attention to scenic accessories, and utterly ignored stage
archaeology, Barry Sullivan was a martinet at rehearsals,
and despite the limited extent of his latter-day
repertory, never wearied in the task of thoroughly
instilling the business of the piece into his company.
A scene of striking importance would be run through
again and again until all concerned felt easy in their
parts. If the rehearsal went off to his satisfaction he
never omitted to thank the ladies and gentlemen for
their patience and attention. To those, however,
whom he found abstracted or careless he did not
hesitate to say, “ Here am I putting into a nutshell
what it has taken me years of labour and observation to
acquire, and you haven’t the common courtesy to pay
attention.” Always kind and gentle to the humblest
member of his company whom he found trying to do
his best, he invariably came down with a strong hand
on all lapses from strict discipline, whether in the form
of drunkenness, gagging, guying, or fluffiness. He
attributed failure to the “ all-right-at-night ” system,
and saw everything rehearsed as it was to be played.


Preserving this dominating principle outside the theatre
he was never hail-fellow-well-met with his company,
and did not believe with that unfortunate genius Charles
Dillon in adjourning after the labours of the morning,
in association with his satellites, to the nearest house of
refreshment. Keeping himself to himself when not
rehearsing, he generally remained during the day at his
hotel, musing over the role he was to sustain in the
evening, and attending to such details as the examina-
tion of every weapon with which he might have to
fence during the performance. Unfortunately, owing
to his rigid economy there were from time to time
many incompetent players in his provincial companies
who neither admired his exclusiveness nor relished
his rebukes; and these, together with bibulous stage
carpenters and property men, were not slow in circulat-
ing mendacious stories to his detriment. He was always
a good friend, however, to those who served him faith-
fully, and once gave an old dresser, who had followed
his fortunes for years, a present of one hundred pounds
to start him in business as a tobacconist.
As an offset to these stories let us hear what the
anonymous author of “ The Truth about the Stage”*
has to say regarding the actor. “My own experience
of this eminent tragedian contrasted agreeably with the
lying reports of my stage companions. If I had been
fortunate enough to meet Mr. Sullivan at the commence-
* A production which owing to its extreme pessimism
created some sensation on its appearance in 1885. The late
Mr. Hal Louther is said, in theatrical circles, to have been
the author ; but nothing is known for certain.


ment of my career, I should have been saved many
years of toil and degradation I have known
his finest dramatic situations ruined by young actors,
who through nervousness - have either forgotten some
particular bit of business, or failed to give the proper
cue. At the end of the act, when some poor fellow had
gone to the tragedian’s dressing-room to apologise for
his shortcomings, instead of black looks and a curse he
has received kind words of encouragement. On one
occasion, when a persevering young actor ruined a
grand scene in a Shakespearian play, I heard Mr.
Sullivan interrupt his apology, when the curtain fell,
with the following words : —‘ My dear boy, you did
your best. You were a little nervous. You will do
better next time.’ The play of As you Like It was
being performed at a provincial theatre in the Midland
Counties one evening, Mr. Sullivan enacted the role of
the melancholy Jaques. Touchstone was represented
by one of those clowns who always say more than is set
down for them. This particular comedian thought he
could improve upon the author. In the wrestling scene,
when the wrestler was thrown, he had to say, in reply
to the duke —
“ ‘ He cannot speak, my lord.’
“ In order to obtain a laugh the comedian distorted his
features,and exclaimed ‘He says he cannot speak, my lord.’
“ When the act-drop fell, Mr. Sullivan went over to
where the comedian was standing and said—‘Touch-
stone was a fool, but not a d d fool as you have
made him. You have obtained a laugh, sir; but you
have spoilt your part.’ ”


Genius may be a law unto itself, but mediocrity, more
especially in the legitimate drama, must go by accepted
canons. Leaving the metropolis out of the question,
the provinces at the present moment are not devoid of
sound Shakespearian actors. But the question might
well be asked (and in big capitals)—on whose shoulders
fell the mantle of Barry Sullivan, as a repositary of the
traditions ? Even in his own late day, the tragedian was
never tired of complaining that the bona-fide actor had
disappeared with the stock system, that few among the
coming men knew how to speak their mother tongue
or walk the stage correctly, and that the one besetting
sin of the profession was the insatiate thirst for unearned
advancement. Whatever the faults of his system, it at
least afforded a rough and ready training in Shakespeare
for the novice, the loss of which cannot but be felt and
deplored. One has only to point to the many prominent
actors and actresses who learnt the A B C of their art
under Barry Sullivan to justify the “old guard” of play-
goers for their loyal support to the chieftain.
Reappearing at Drury Lane on September 23, 1876
(what time the dramatic critic of The Times and the
lessee of the theatre had a wordy warfare concerning
his impersonation of Richard III.),* our hero had the
* Macbeth and Richard 111. were performed on alternate
nights during this engagement, the latter with “new historical
scenery ” by William Beverly, and “ historically correct
costumes ” designed by Alfred Maltby from researches among
the following authorities :—The Harleian MSS., Hewitt,
Meyrick, Shaw, Grose, Blanche, &c. Among those figuring
in prominent support to Sullivan were J. F. Cathcart,
Henry Sinclair, Charles Vandenhoff, Frank Tyars, Percy Bell,
James Johnstone, Mrs. Hermann Vezin, Madame Fanny
Huddart, and Miss Edith Stuart.


misfortune, on the sixtieth night of the run of Cibber’s
hybridous play, to receive an unlucky sword thrust in the
left eye, Mr. Sinclair, the bright, particular Richmond,
having made a mistake in the preconcerted business of
the great fight in the last act. For some time the
recovery of his sight was despaired of; but after lying
twenty days and nights, Richard was himself again,
seemingly, in every faculty. We qualify this record of
his recovery advisedly, as a curious episode related
by Mr. J. W. Flynn will go to show. It appears that
some time afterwards Barry, while on a visit to Cork,
called at the house of a friend, and had occasion in the
course of conversation to allude to the accident. “ The
strange thing about it,” he remarked, “is that while
the eye is quite healed, there is a sort of mist over it, as
if all were not right yet.” On hearing this one of the
daughters of his host asked the tragedian to turn his
eyes to the light. “ Why, Mr. Sullivan,” ejaculated
the lady, after examining the injured place with the
scrutiny of a hawk, “ there’s a hair in your eye !”
Further consultation with an eminent London oculist at
once demonstrated the correctness of this statement. A
hair of the eyelash which had remained in the eyeball
after the process of curing the wound had been effected
was then removed, giving to the tragedian his pristine
visual acuteness.
When one recalls to mind the intense realism and
soul-stirring vigour of the Sullivanic stage combat—in
every way the antithesis of the “ two up and two down ”
of the palmy days—the wonder is that accidents were so
infrequent. Some idea of the virulence with which


Barry, as Richard, assailed Richmond in the last act
may be gathered from the fact that, comparatively
trilling as is the latter-mentioned part, he would never,
under any circumstances, permit it to be doubled,
deeming the brief but remarkably effective contest with
himself quite exhaustive enough for the sturdiest
member of his company. It was no mean compliment
to the tragedian that his stage-fights in Richard 111. and
Macbeth invariably drew as big an audience of profes-
sionals in the wings as of horny-handed sons of toil in
the pit and gallery. With the first superb flourish of the
Crookback’s sword, excitement reached fever-heat, and
the house, as if by an electric shock, became surcharged
with a terrible sense of the realism of the thing. The
“ gods,” losing all touch with the illusion of the scene,
not infrequently viewed the contest as a matter of
personal rivalry between the actors, and, scrambling to
their feet as one man, invariably punctuated each cut
and thirst with stentorian cries of “ Go on, Barry !”
On Saturday, December 1, 1878, a National Banquet
in Sullivan’s honour was held in Dublin, at the Exhibi-
tion Palace, when Mr. C. J. Fay, M.P., read an address
eminently flattering to the guest of the evening. The
Right Hon. the Lord Mayor (Maurice Brooks, M.P.),
presided, and the large and distinguished assembly
comprised the leading citizens of Dublin, members of
Parliament and of the learned professions, and repre-
sentatives of literature and art. A similar compliment
was paid the tragedian on the following Saturday
evening, when the citizens of Cork tendered him a
banquet at the Imperial Hotel. It was then he made


the memorable speech from which we have already
quoted in our opening chapter, and in the course of
which, referring with pardonable pride to an early
period in his starring career, said, “ I took my
standard as a Shakespearian actor and determined to
raise the Shakespearian banner aloft, and never to
lower it. And I assure you that it was with extreme
difficulty I, for many years alone, upheld the Shakes-
pearian drama in Great Britain. Every new piece,
every new straw that came upon the surface, was
caught up in order to make ends meet; but I never
lowered the Shakespearian standard, and perhaps to
that I now owe the honour, the delight, the privilege,
of standing here, your guest, to-night.” At a latter
stage of the proceedings the tragedian so far unbent as
to delight the assembly with a capitally-rendered Irish
comic song!
Erected by public subscription, on a plot of ground
bordering on the river, and presented by that munifi-
cent patron of the bard, the late Mr. C. E. Flower,
the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre, Stratford-upon-
Avon, was dedicated to Thespian worship on April 28,
1879, by a performance of Much Ado About Nothing.
On that noteworthy occasion Barry Sullivan renewed
old-time associations by playing Benedick to the
Beatrice of Helen Faucit, who as Mrs. Theodore (now
Lady) Martin, emerged from a well-earned retirement
to pay her tribute to the Master. As You Like It,
Hamlet , and Much Ado were represented on subsequent
evenings, when our hero appeared alternately with Helen
Faucit and Miss Wallis. During the August following


a series of five benefit performances were arranged at
the Haymarket Theatre (through the generosity of Mr.
J. S. Clarke, the lessee), as a testimonial to Buckstone
the comedian; and at one of these Sullivan repeated
his impersonation of Benedick. In quite a comedy
mood at this period—and with equal generosity—he
played the same part to the Beatrice of Miss Wallis,
at one of two benefits tendered in Manchester to Mr.
Tom Chambers, sometime treasurer of the Theatre
Royal in that city. The other took place on the pre-
ceding night, when Henry Irving and Ellen Terry
appeared in Charles I.
A second dramatic festival, extending over three weeks,
began at the Memorial Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon,
on April 19, 1880, when Sullivan as the star was
principally supported by Messrs. W. H. Stephens, John
Amory, W. H. Hallatt, Arthur Matthison, F. A.
Scudamore, H. Hamilton, Steyne, H. Turner, and
Mesdames Masson, Austin, Hope, and Newcome. The
productions consisted of Hamlet, The Lady of Lyons, As
You Like It, Othello, The Merchant of Venice, Much Ado
about Nothing, The Gamester, and The School for Scandal.
Behaving in the true spirit of an artist and an enthu-
siast, the tragedian, although preferred half the receipts
by the governing council, gave his own and his com-
pany’s services free as a donation to the institution.
In keeping with the steadfastness of his loves and hates
was Sullivan’s princely act in heading the testimonial
presented by the profession and the public to Mr. and
Mrs. J. F. Warden, after the destruction by fire of the
Theatre Royal, Belfast, early in June, 1881, with the


handsome sum of fifty pounds. Not that this was by
any means the tragedian’s first substantial tribute
of esteem to the man who had for years organised his
provincial tours and in every way conserved his interests.
Among the few cherished relics saved out of the debris
of the Theatre Royal fire was a very massive vestibule
clock presented years previously by Sullivan to his
fidus Achates. Although it never recovered the shock
of this disaster, and, like a more famous timepiece,
“ stopped short, never to go again,” its proud possessor
has given it a place of honour on the dress-circle lobby
of his new theatre. Unfortunately a slight misunder-
standing marred the communion of our Damon and
Pythias in later years ; but one is safe in saying that no
sincerer mourner followed the remains of Barry bullivan
to their last resting place than Joseph Warden.
Not contenting himself in merely subscribing to
the Warden testimonial, our hero gave especial eclat to
the opening of the new Theatre Royal, Belfast, on
Thursday, December 22, 1881, by appearing there,
under circumstances of some personal inconvenience, as
Evelyn in Money. It was stated at that time that he
had been offered the enormous sum of £24,000 for a
ten-months tour in America. For the truth of this we
are not prepared to vouch ; but it is at any rate certain
that Transatlantic playgoers were still prepared to
receive their old favourite with open arms, bo late as
the July of 1886 Mr. Henry E. Abbey made overtures
to the tragedian for a tour of forty weeks, commencing
in New York, and proceeding through Boston,
Baltimore, Chicago, Philadelphia, bt. Louis, bt. Paul,


Cincinnati, Omaha, Kansas, and Denver, thence to the
Western States of Canada. The American manager
was to provide the entire company, scenery, and all
accessories, to defray all the star’s travelling and hotel
expenses, and allow him 70 per cent, of the receipts.
It is safe to infer that only the lack of self-confidence,
induced by ill-health, prevented the tragedian from
swallowing this tempting bait. Happily for his Trans-
atlantic friends, they did not see him in his decadence,
and can only remember him in the meridian of his
powers.
Of Sullivanic stories, good, bad, and indifferent, there
is virtually no end. Two feline anecdotes are related,
which speak volumes for the tragedian’s hold upon his
audiences. During an engagement at Cork, in 1881,
Richard 111. was played at the Saturday matinee to an
overflowing house. The curtain had not long lisen on
the tent scene when, amid the deepest silence and the
most concentrated attention of the audience, a large
black cat, the property of the housekeeper, emerged
slowly from the wings. Making straight for the foot-
lights—like an old actor striving to get into the focus-
pussy upraised one paw and gave forth a pleading
miaou;! There was a smothered exclamation from the
background which had not the ring of a benison, and
the cat, having delivered herself of her message, made
a graceful exit on the O.P. side. For keen appreciation
of the humour of an unrehearsed situation, commend us
to a South of Ireland audience. But, strange to say,
the incident, which on most occasions would have
evoked a burst of merriment, passed over with a flicker-


ing smile and a tightening of the lips. About two years
afterwards (or, for the benefit of the sticklers for chapter
and verse, on Monday, September 17, 1883) a similar
episode occurred, with equally happy results, during an
engagement at the Prince of Wales’s Theatre, Birming-
ham. Just as Barry Sullivan, in the closet scene of
Hamlet, had exclaimed “A rat, a rat, dead for a ducat
—dead,” and rushed off hastily, another very fine and
large black cat (all well-constituted theatrical cats are
of sable hue) bounded after him, as if to make assurance
doubly sure.
In Stirling’s “ Old Drury Lane” a storyis related which
we give in the writer’s own words. “ Sullivan, acting in
the Potteries, requested the leader of a small orchestra
to let him have the wind instruments behind the scenes
in the fifth act of Richard the Third.
“ ‘ Sir, I c —a —n —t’ {with a stutter).
“ Offended Tragedian : ‘ Sir, I insist; send up your
wind.’
‘ ‘ Agitated Fiddler : ‘ I—I —I
“ Enraged Actor : ‘ Where’s the manager?’
“ The manager answered for himself: ‘ Here, sir.’
“ ‘ Mr. Elphinstone, your conductor objects to let me
have his wind instruments on the stage for the march
in the fifth act.’
“ ‘ Poor fellow ! he stutters, and is deaf.’
“ Barry : ‘Why did he not tell me so ?’
“ Irate Violin : Yes ; and I—l I’ll tell you more,
sir: there’s only one wind, a trombone. Am I to—
to— to cut him in two ; send up one half to you, and
keep the other half in the orchestra ?’


“ This silenced Richard; he proceeded to Bos worth
Field minus wind.”
Of late years, when not pursuing his professional
avocation, nothing delighted Sullivan better than spend-
ing his days in that quondam Bohemian resort, the
Savage Club, of which he was an extremely popular
member. It was remarked there by his many friends
that the grace of action and old-world courtliness which
were distinguishing traits of his art-work clung to him
unconsciously in his private life. Not that, like the great
Elliston of yore, he acted off the stage as well as on.
Everything he did or said was effected with so much
naturalness and ease that one could quite well see that
the acquirements and accomplishments of the actor had
merged into and become part and parcel of the individu-
ality of the man. In the Pall Mall Gazette sketch already
referred to, Sullivan’s anonymous panegyrist took occa-
sion to point out that in the early days of his Savage
Club membership it was his custom to dye his hair, “but
since the time when the Prince of Wales accepted the
companionship of that last corner of Bohemia, his broad,
strong frame, surmounted by a handsome head, with its
refined and clear-cut features, its white hair, black
shaggy eyebrows and piercing eyes, formed one of the
most decorative ensembles in human shape well to be
conceived. His face was plentifully pitted with smallpox,
but such was the charm of his sweet smile, or, when
in anger, of his flashing eye, that the marks seemed
in no way to interfere with its beauty.” To which
pen-portrait might well be added the fact that bullivan
possessed in striking degree that peculiar conformation


of nose wherein the nostrils expand upon the cheeks—
an invariable concomitant, according to the testimony
of expert physiognomists, of well-developed histrionic
capacity.
The allusion just made to the custom in the profession
of dyeing the hair on the first indications of the foot-
marks of time becoming apparent, remind us of a rather
good story. Some years ago Mr. J. F. Warden and
the popular tragedian Mr. T. C. King were to meet in
Birmingham, to renew their professional associations
after a long separation. On proceeding towards the
theatre King met one of the company coming in the
opposite direction, and evidently considerably excited in
his mind over something. “ Have you seen Joe Warden
yet?” said the other with abruptness, on arriving at hailing
distance. “ No,” replied King, “ what’s up ?” “Bless
your soul, he’s as white as the driven snow.” “ Bah,”
retorted King, with half-amused petulance, as he strode
away, “ there’s nothing in that. I could have been
white twenty years before Warden, if I’d wanted ! ”
Taking up our narrative, we find that Barry Sullivan,
on Wednesday, July 26, 1882, entertained a hundred
of his fellow “ Savages” to supper at a banquet given
in the Criterion Restaurant. Subsequently, when mak-
ing the usual inquiries, one of the guests sent him the
following acrostic :
B e mine, dear friend, to say we owe
A pleasant debt to you,
R emembering how, two nights ago,
R effecting all your genial glow,
V our guests around you drew.


S urrounded there by song and wit,
U nheeded sped the night;
L ike laggards, when we rose to flit,
L o ! it was morning light.
1 will not frame upon my lip
V ain words my heart to speak
A t such a pledge of fellowship—
N o ! words are all too weak.
On the verge of his provincial tour of 1888-84 the
Savage Club returned the compliment to the tragedian
by giving a supper in his honour, towards the middle of
August, in their own dining hall. Mr. P. J. Duffy, a
Dublin man, presided over an assemblage of close on
two hundred members and guests—all men of light and
leading, of the stamp of Barton M'Guckin, Charles
Duval, Walter Mackay, Edward Terry, Charles Warner,
and Signor Carados. Sometime in the “ wee sma’
hours ayont the twal ” Mr. Horace Lennard, the society
poet, recited the following impromptu fait a loisir as
fitting to the moment: —
How often is mirth but a mask for a sorrow,
And laughter is loudest when hiding regret;
The guest of to-night shall have left us to-morrow,
So let us be merry—the table is set.
Away on the warpath a chieftain is going,
The trail of the Guineas is seen through the land,
The Savage shall follow where’er it is showing,
And gather the bright golden scalps in his hand.
What cheer shall we give him who now is departing,
The bravest of all our Bohemian tribe ?
A shake of the hand and a toast before starting,
The goodwill of player, of painter, and scribe.


May Health and Good Fortune for ever attend him,
May Pleasure be always his scarecrow for pain ;
And after his triumphs may fellowship send him
To rest on his honours among us again.
The supper card, designed by Mr. Walter Mackay,
so long identified as “The Captious Critic” of the
Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News, was quite a
happy inspiration. As thus: —
MENU.
“ Better cheer may you have, hut not with better heart.” —
Comedy of Errors.
SALMON.
“Sweet fish ."—Cymbeline.
SALMON MAYONNAISE.
“ What have we here ? A fish.”— Love's Labour Lost.
RICHELIEU LOBSTERS.
LOBSTER SALAD.
“Mysalad days, when I was green in judgment.”— Antony
and Cleopatra.
“Short-legged hens ."—Henry IV.
(ROAST AND BOILED.)
“There is cold meat.”— Cymbeline.
“ A piece of beef and mustard.”— Taming of the Shrew.
“Baked meats,” — Romeo and Juliet.
BEEF A LA PRESSE.
“ What’s this V'—Taming of the Shrew.
HAM-LOTTE ( i.e ., A LITTLE HAM).
“My Lady Tongue. "—Much Ado About Nothing.
GALANTINE OF VEAL.
“Is not veal a calf V’ — Love's Labour Lost.
GAMESTER PIE.


“ Sweets to the sweet.” — Hamlet.
VERONESE PASTRY.
MERINGUES AU MICHAEL GUNN.
SHAMROCK JELLY.
CREME AU MACBETH.
“ Stewed prunes.”— Measure for Measure.
“ Pippins and cheese.”— Merry Wives of Windsor.
“Just so much as you can take on a knife’s point.”— Much
Ado About Nothing.
“A thousand salads.”— All's Well that Ends Well.
“Drink to the general joy of the whole table and to our dear
friend. ” — Macbeth.
Opening his tour under Mr. Michael Gunn’s manage-
ment at the Royal Alexandra Theatre, Liverpool, on
Monday, August 20, Barry Sullivan proceeded to “gather
the bright golden scalps ” with the utmost prompti-
tude, playing during his first week there to upwards
of £1,300. Visits to Leeds, Sheffield, and Birmingham
followed with equally pleasant results ; and the warmth
of the Caed mills failthe given him in Dublin was some-
thing to remember. This tour (which ended in May,
1884) is noteworthy for Sullivan’s capital assumption of
Falstaff in Henry IV., in which the younger generation
of playgoers were afforded some indication of his early
versatility. An impersonation in the highest sense of
the term, Barry’s fat knight had not a suspicion of the
measured mannerisms of voice and action which marked
his latter-day tragic acting. Indeed, the Belfast News-
Letter, to our mind, did not exceed the limits of critical
panegyric in referring to it as “a piece of comedy
which, for subtlety of portraiture, without a suspicion


of caricature, is scarcely equalled upon the modern
stage.”
Nothing of moment occurred from this period until the
year 1886, when the first indications of Sullivan’s iron
constitution giving way under the strain were to be noted.
Paradoxical as it may seem, the last of the great tradi-
tional school of tragedians unwittingly courted death
in striving to avoid the errors and indiscretions which
blasted the career of many of his illustrious predecessors.
Steering his barque with exceeding care, he sailed clear
of the Scylla of self-indulgence only to become wrecked
upon the Charybdis of asceticism. Of firm resolution,
and never giving way to moods, not a drop of liquor had
passed his lips within the walls of a theatre for fully forty
years. Warned by the result of Kean’s occasional “cold
brandy” at the wings, and of Brooke’s “hot rummer,
he eschewed stimulants, merely moistening his lips from
time to time with lemonade or barley-water. Apart
from this, he lived, on the whole, somewhat frugally;
and even for supper was wont to content himself with
a glass of water and a piece of dry bread. Naturally
enough this extreme abstinence, combined with the
continuous and very exacting labour of acting, told in
time on an otherwise strong frame. When Sir Andrew
Clarke was called in, on the first serious signs of
breaking up becoming apparent, he at once advised
the tragedian to live more generously, and take a
little whiskey with his meals. It was too late,
however, and one can only regret now that such self-
denial in the cause of art did not meet with more
fitting reward.


Skilfully patched up, the tragedian started his tour
on September 13, 1886. Replying to a Manchester
interviewer shortly afterwards, he expressed his great
dislike to the spirit of the present generation of actors
who advertise their every ailment. “ What little repu-
tation I’ve had,” said he, “I think I have won finely and
honourably by my public performances, and I detest
and despise those tricks which now seem to form part
of the actor’s stock-in-trade. If a player now-a-days
has the toothache the news seems to find its way into
print; but throughout my illness, which was long
and severe, I sedulously prevented any details from
appearing in the papers. Let an actor stand or fall by
his art, and not depend upon adventitious aids and paltry
newspaper advertisements.”
Eager for work, the strong mind so far subjugated
and buoyed up the ailing body, it was actually said
of him by the press in Glasgow—during the prosperous
visit there of March, 1887 —that he showed no falling
off in his robust and vigorous method, and appeared
like Antaeus of old to have renewed his powers
after temporary discomfiture. His confidants, neverthe-
less, knew full well he had suffered greatly all through
the tour, and that towards the end of it he had
extreme difficulty in acting at all. As a matter of fact,
when he brought his Liverpool engagement at the
Royal Alexandra Theatre to a close on Saturday, June
4, 1887, with an impersonation of Richard 111. he had
all unconsciously fought his last fight and aroused
his last audience. Fitting was it that the unpre-
meditated event should take place in the city where


his gifts were first recognised and his talents so gener-
ously fostered.
Resting for some months in the bosom of his family,
at his residence, 46 Albany Villas, Hove, Brighton,
Sullivan recuperated to such an extent that he urged
upon his eldest son and business manager to make the
usual engagements for the tour of 1888-89.* Not long
after this, however, as the tragedian was indulging in a
hearty laugh over some reminiscence of his salad days,
which he had just related to the home circle, he fell
back in his chair, without a word of warning, stricken
with paralysis of the brain. So little hope was enter-
tained of his recovery that on Thursday, August 23,
1888, it was deemed expedient the Rev. Father Donnelly
should administer the last rites of the Roman Catholic
Church. At this juncture one is somewhat curiously
reminded of the passage from Hamlet, which the trage-
dian had written out years previously for reproduction
in fac-simile in The Era Almanack of 1875 —
If it be now, ’tis not to come ;
If it be not to come, it will be now ;
If it be not now, yet it will come ;
The readiness is all! ”
With some such philosophy, indeed, did he bear his
long and tedious illness. Helplessly bedridden, and with
but faint glimmerings of intelligence, he was grit to
the last. Kept alive for weeks and weeks on milk and
* These dates were not cancelled subsequently, as stated
by The Era in its obituary article, but fulfilled by Mr. John
Amory Sullivan, the tragedian’s younger son, who appeared in
his father’s repertory.


lime-juice, he wasted away under the devastations of
disease until the task of lifting him in and out of bed,
which could with difficulty be performed at the outset
by two sisters from the Convent of the Sacred Heart, was
accomplished with ease before the end by only one of
these sympathetic nurses. With it all, however, he clung
stubbornly to life, and only yielded at last to an attack
of Russian influenza. After a moment of consciousness
he passed quietly away at one o’clock on Sunday, May 3,
1891, in the presence of the entire family, consisting of
his wife, three daughters, and two sons.
On the Friday following a solemn Requiem Mass for
the repose of his soul was celebrated at the Church of the
Sacred Heart, in Hove, the music being impressively
rendered by some of the principal members of the choir
of Brompton Oratory. Subsequently the remains were
conveyed to London, and thence to Dublin via Holyhead,
for interment on the following day in Glasnevin Ceme-
tery. Owing to the privacy of the funeral arrangements,
there was not as large a gathering of the public on
Saturday morning as might have been expected; but
by twelve o’clock Westland Row was crowded with
people, waiting to get a glimpse of the cortege as it passed
towards Brunswick Street. All along the route knots
of sympathetic Irishmen had gathered to pay their last
respects to their great compatriot. Signs of mourning
were also to be noted in the drawn blinds and closed
doors of many of the principal places of business.
Encased in a coffin of polished elm, with Gothic
fittings, the remains of the deceased tragedian were
conveyed to their last resting-place in a hearse drawn


by four horses. Conspicuous among the mass of floral
memorials sent by sorrowing relatives and friends was
a large wreath of beautiful roses “with Henry Irving’s
respectful sympathy,” and another composed princi-
pally of lilies of the valley and orchids, “with loving
sympathy from J. L. Toole.” The chief mourners
■were Mr. Amory Sullivan and Mr. Terrot, secretary
of the Savage Club.
Glasnevin Cemetery was reached about one o’clock,
when all that was mortal of poor Barry Sullivan was
rendered up to Alderman Meagher and Mr. J. Lombard,
members of the cemetries committee, and to Mr. John
O’Connell, the superintendent. After prayers had been
read in the Mortuary Chapel by the Eev. Mr. Coffey,
chaplain, the body of the great actor was laid in its last
resting-place in the new chapel section, bordering on
the O’Connell circle. “After life’s fitful fever he sleeps
well” —side by side with some of Ireland’s noblest sons.
Calm-fronted, staunch, expectant, and unshaken,
He dared the worst that any fate could bring—
For him, by iron purpose ne’er forsaken,
The grave no victory had, and death no sting.”
Among the sorrowing friends and admirers of the
dead actor who heard the clods rattle with a cruel
harshness on his coffin were Mr. T. D. Sullivan, M.P.;
Mr. T. Harrington, M.P.; Dr. J. E. Kenny, M.P.; Mr.
John Redmond, M.P.; Mr. Patrick O'Brien, M.P.; Mr.
Edmund Leamy, M.P. ; Dr. Christopher Gunn and
Mrs. Gunn, Captain M‘Keon, Dr. Wade, T.C.; Dr. J. J.
Murphy, Dr. Michael Connolly, F.R.C.S.; Professor


Fitzpatrick, Messrs. Michael Davitt, Charles Hyland,
Ellis Jones, J. Whitbread, F. R, Benson, J, B. Hall,
Charles O’Connell, 8.L.; W. J. M'Dowell, W. Willis
Healy, Joseph Gallagher, Gerald R. Fitzgerald, J. F.
Warden, J. Petrie O’Byrne, John O’Hea, S. R. Cunning-
ham, James Woods, J. J. Nagle, R. M. Levey, Charles
Dunne, 8.L.; John Horgan, R. Downing, J. Symington,
John Clancy, Christopher Enrell, P. J. Gough, J. B.
Armstrong, John Magrath, Hugh Doyle, W. W. Small,
J. Wyse Power, Joseph Holland, James Logan, James
Pentony, James Carlyle, J. C. Sherlocke, Christopher
Carroll, Timothy Hanley, jun., Thomas G. Warren,
Patrick Biggins, Jeremiah Perry, John J. Foley, A.
Rosenberg, R. F. O’Connor, George J. W. Stone,
Bernard Goulding, jun., C. H. Callanan, and James
Delaney, the last mentioned representing the Dublin
Typographical Benevolent Fund, to which the deceased
had been a frequent donor.
Of Barry Sullivan’s career, more particularly in its
latter-day aspects, something more by way of impartial
summing up needs to be said before closing this record.
Despite the venom of detractors, who affected to see
the whole man in the stilted mannerisms of his brief
period of decadence, he can never be said —like many
another fine tragedian —to have lagged superfluous on
the stage. To the last his popularity with provincial
audiences never waned ; but we fear it was a popularity
born of accretive goodwill rather than critical appre-
ciation. If, therefore, he did not experience the cutting
callousness meted out to the great Edwin Forrest, who,
in the sear and yellow leaf, played week after week to


a succession of empty houses, there is at any rate no
doubt that without much excuse he lingered too long
on the boards for his reputation’s sake. Whatever his
blemishes they were purely the outcome of the dogmas
of his school reduced to an absurdity, most likely, by the
exigence of the times. It was the stately and orotund
school of the Kembles, the “paw and pause” cultus,
which really lost all true vitality with the abandonment
of the stock system a score of years ago. It is best for
us that we should frankly acknowledge its demise at
this period, and concede that Barry Sullivan, by dint of
a fine individuality and immense will-power, galvanized
it in after years into something bearing a marvellous
resemblance to full-blooded life. Obviously enough the
twitching corpse of out-worn creeds had begun to
crumble away even before the hands of the manipulator
had lost a tittle of their cunning.
At the outset of his starring career, and in fact up
to the year 1876, Sullivan, during his provincial
wanderings, contented himself in taking with him a
leading lady and gentleman, by way of principal
support, confident that the stock companies then in
vogue were sufficiently grounded in the legitimate for
Ins purpose and for the requirements and demands of
the (theatrically) uneducated audiences of the period.
The rule of the metropolis soon, however, began to be
felt in the larger provincial cities owing to accelerated
methods of travel, and with the dawn of the combina-
tion system country playgoers were taught to look
for a higher level of all-round acting, with more careful
stage mounting. Conservative to the finger-tips, our


hero presented an unbending front to this innova-
tion, and, deprived of his stationary stock company,
arranged for an itinerant one to accompany him. In
justification of the faith within him he strove for years
to perpetuate an anachronism, labouring with so much
strenuousness against overwhelming odds that one need
scarcely wonder whence came the seeds of disease whose
development resulted in premature dissolution.
To say that Sullivan never enjoyed the support of any
players of capability' or eminence would be doing an
unwarrantable injustice to his memory. Glancing back
through the vista of years, we can easily recall without
much forethought, as having figured from time to time
in the tragedian’s retinue, such names as Rose Coghlan,
Adeline Stanhope, Maud Brennan, Grace Edgar, Mrs.
Hudson Kirby, J. F. Warden, J. F. Cathcart, George
Warde, J. G. Swanton, and Bassett Roe. But taken as
a whole, his support from first to last had all the crudity,
all the unevenness, and all the inefficiency which marked
the second-rate stock company in days of yore ; and his
productions were generally mounted and costumed “ in
a concatenation accordingly.” It was only necessary for
Henry Irving to make one tour of the provinces in 1876,
and present his repertory with attention to ensemble and
careful staging, to give the death-blow to this slip-shod
method of performing the legitimate. Year after year,
however, Barry Sullivan went on in his own sweet way,
and it was not indeed until the tour of 1883-84 (when
“ special scenery and armour ” figured prominently in
the bills) that any concession was made to the spirit of
the times.


For the limited nature of his latter-day repertory,
Barry Sullivan was less to blame than some of
his posthumous detractors would have us believe.
During the last two decades of his career, he had
favoured the provinces with productions of Richard 111.,
Hamlet, The Gamester, Richelieu, The Stranger, Macbeth,
The Merchant of Venice, The Wonder, The Lady of Lyons,
Much Ado About Nothing, The Taming of a Shrew, The
School for Scandal, Othello, Money, Don Ccesar de Razan,
The Wife, King Lear, Henry IV., and Love's Sacrifice.
In many of his lesser known impersonations, he was
if anything finer than in the parts now prominently
associated with his name. In King Lear he had the
regal bearing, the powers of voice, the tender though
vehement spirit, essential to the character. His curse
scene, as the demented king, has certainly never been
excelled within living memory, save perhaps in the one
noteworthy instance of John M'Cullough. His Julian
St. Pierre was magnificent in its melodramatic pictur-
esqueness and force, and his Falstaff surprisingly
unctuous and natural. Nevertheless, experience taught
him that the first seven or eight plays on our list
possessed the greatest drawing powers, and hence he
grew in time to perform little else.
“ You said just now that you had no favourite
parts,” said a Liverpool journalist once in the course
of an interview with the tragedian.* “ Now, I confess
I have always found it rather difficult to account for
your preference for Beverley and the Stranger—the first
especially.”
* Vide The Liverpool Liberal Review, Nov. 7th, 1886.


“I have no special fondness, as you seem to imply, for
those parts. In producing them I am guided by the
judgment of the public. You mayn’t like them, but the
public do. Besides, I consider Mrs. Beverley one of the
most charming characters in dramatic fiction.”
“ But the unrelieved gloom of the story ? ”
“ (Smiling) People like to be harrowed sometimes,
you know —regularly screwed up; and English people
do especially. Another proof of the truth of the saying
about their taking their pleasures sadly.”
Something has already been said in these pages of
the hold which Sullivan had on his admirers in such
characters as Richard 111. A curious scene, which took
place since his death, in the Belfast Theatre, served to
show how thoroughly acceptable he had rendered the
effective clap-traps of Cibber in that exacting role. Mr.
F. R. Benson, with praiseworthy reverence for the bard,
had announced a performance of Richard 111. from the
original text, but “ the gods” on the night of production,
being practically unversed in the refinements of descrip-
tion, soon became mystified at the absence of all the
well-known and well-beloved points. The clamour in
the regions above grew apace until Mr. Benson thought
it expedient to step forward and explain the discrepancy.
The house then settled down to enjoy the performance,
but not before one of “the gods” had jocosely suggested
that they should “ Send for Barry.”
Sullivan’s frequent repetition of the half-dozen
characters referred to no doubt contributed in time to
the development of a stageyness which opponents of the
old school were not slow in animadverting upon. But


other elements conduced to the decline in his maturity
of a man whom we know, on the testimony of experts,
to have been in his early days not only an actor of
extreme versatility and naturalness, but one, moreover,
who was somewhat in advance of his time. Mr. John
Coleman has expressed some surprise that the protean
acquaintance of his youth should in later years (when he
seldom saw him act) be characterised as stilted and old-
fashioned. Still the two styles are after all reconcilable.
Youth, ever anticipative, lives in the day after to-morrow;
Age, blandly retrospective, pins its faith in the day
before yesterday.
The responsibilities of Barry Sullivan’s position grew
with his ever-increasing popularity. Hating incom-
petence, he yet (partly from principle and partly owing to
economic considerations) put a premium upon it in his
companies. Playgoers came in time to tolerate such
blemishes, and gave the tragedian to understand that
he alone was “ the show.” Hence he divined that
great things were invariably expected of him, and, sooth
to say, he seldom disappointed -the anticipations of his
audience. Though an actor of the emotions rather
than of the intellect, he could not afford—with all
this responsibility resting Atlas-like upon him—to
have those moods which are at once the blessing
and the curse of the intuitive actor. Unlike
many others of his class and kidney, he fought
these demons with stern resolution instead of
alcohol. His was the victory every time; but in
gaining it he grew more and more mechanical in
utterance and bearing.


In conceding this, however, to his detractors we
abate not a tittle of our claim that, in days to come
when reputations can be dispassionately weighed, Barry
Sullivan will rank side by side with the leading theat-
rical luminaries of the century. The stage wants many
such men now —men of high ideals; steadfast of purpose;
thorough ; capable of self-abnegation in the cause of art.
But alas! autre temps, autre moeurs! Under existing
conditions it would be idle to look for the up-spring-
ing of a new race of Creswicks, Phelps, Booths, or
Sullivans. Darkness fast gathers in around the Old
Guard of playgoers, but amid their sorrow and despair
they have still some slight consolation left in remem-
bering that
“ Those great spirits went down like the suns,
And left upon the mountain tops of death
A light which made them lovely.”
THE END.


APPENDIX.
barry Sullivan’s first appearance on the stage.
—Vide p. 12.
Although the tragedian frequently stated that he made
his debut, under Seymour, at Cork, as Young Meadows
in Love in a Village , he apparently never gave the date
of the occurrence. It would seem now to have taken
place at an earlier period than is usually assigned to
that event. Just as we are going to press an important
communication reaches us from Mr. George Arbuckle,
Solicitor, of 42 Fleet Street, Dublin, in which our
correspondent says—“ His name (as ‘Mr. Sullivan’)
appears all through the bills of Seymour's Company in
1837, and that is also what he is called in Paumier’s
bills all through the Spring season of 1840, when he
appeared in several small parts with Mrs. Honey,
Sheridan Knowles, Miss Elphinstone, and others. I
saw Barry Sullivan several times with Mr. Paumier
(an excellent tragedian but never sufficiently appreciated)
in the season of 1840, and recollect his appearance well.
He was then deeply marked with smallpox, which wore
out as he advanced in life. I was present, futhermore,
several times subsequently when he acted with Frank
Seymour’s Company. I did not see him in 1837, but
have very little doubt that he is the same who appears
in Seymour’s bills of that year.”


While some surprise might naturally be expressed
that a boy of thirteen should make his debut in a
leading role in a comic opera, it is not impossible that
Sullivan at that age might have had a good soprano
voice qualifying him in some measure to render the
music of the tenor part.
In corroboration of his statement Mr. Arbuckle for-
wards two interesting play-bills dealing with the old
Theatre Royal, George’s Street, Cork. The first (under
Seymour) bears date June 16, 1887, and shows that
“Mr. Sullivan” played Seyton to the Macbeth of
Charles Kean, then fulfilling a starring engagement, and
the Gardener in the farce of The Weathercock. The
other bill is dated Monday, February 24, 1840, and
shows that our hero played First Pirate to the Norman
of Paumier in the drama of The Sea Captain, and
Firedrake (a Demon) in the musical burletta of
(riovanni in London to the Don of Mrs. Wilkins—
announced as her original character.




J Aff
BitfUo
f- ii t>
3 1508 01667614 5


f ,


ESTABLISHED
Manufacturers by
1852.
Special
Appointment
To His Royal
Highness
the Prince of Wales
And His Excellency the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, <k
Cantrell & Cochrane’s
World Renowned Table Waters.
‘GINGER ALE.”
CLUB SODA ,'' “ The Beverage of Health.”
What the Faculty says of “CLUB SODA.”
“CLUB SODA ’ neutralises the lactic acid in the blood, which gives rise
to Rheumatism and other affections.
“ CLUB SODA ” is an antidote to acid dyspepsia.
“ CLUB SODA ” promotes digestion.
“ CLUB SODA ” is the most wholesome daily beverage that can be taken.
“ SPARKLING MONTSERRAT
“CLUB KOLA,” “CLUB ALE,” NEW SPECIALITIES.
.Soda, Seltzer, fotass, and icithia Wafers, Lemonade, &c.
Works: DUBLIN and BELFAST.
LONDON DEPOT { 7 woods tock e |tree t. oxford
GLASGOW DEPOT; 51 & strlet! REY
THIRTY-ONE GOLD AND PRIZE MEDALS AWARDED.
Purveyors to H.M. Imperial Houses of Parliament.


Corporal John S. Sullivan, who has had
a bar added to his Military Medal, is a
gnandgpn 'of Barry Sullivan, the famous
tragedian, who was in Australia in the
'sixties of last century. Amory Sullivan, of
Ppddington (N.S.W.), father of the corporal
of* other Diggers who have been
t killed an‘d«two more who have been invalided
'home—was manager for his father in Aus-
tralia.
faoJMJL £** J Ay<!l****j- *


JA ty>
