









Bathurst in the {Ehii-fies.
SOME MEMORIES OF THE EARLY DAYS.
(BY A NONAGENARIAN.)


BATHURST IN THE THIRTIES.
(By a Nonagenarian.)
sketches were contributed to
the Saturday edition of the Ba-
thurst Daily Times in the end
of 1901, and beginning of 1902.
The extreme modesty of their
authoress led to their appearing anony-
mously, but most readers had but little
difficulty in concluding them to be the
work of a beloved and venerable lady,
who has occupied a most useful and pro-
minent, though unostentatious, place in
our community for 70 years.
They were dictated to one who would
gladly have continued his interesting and
pleasant work for an indefinite period.
The proprietor of thepaper nowpublishes
them in this form, with a portrait of the
authoress, for private circulation among
her friends, as a token of his gratitude
to the lady for her most vivid pictures of
the past.
Chapter I.
THE JOURNEY UP.
The lady who steps into the train at
Redfern at ten in the morning, and,
after a bracing trip over the mountains,
leaves it at Bathurst in the early even-
ing, just tired enough to enjoy her
night’s rest, can hardly imagine what
the journey meant to her sister of 7a
years ago. This was the manner of our
coming. From Sydney to Penrith was
the first stage of our journey, and even
that required changing of vehicles, for
the first portion to Parramatta was
traversed in the mail coach, and then
we transferred to a gig, At Penrith we
were hospitably entertained by Mr.
James Smith, superintendent of con-
victs and on the arrival of horses from
Bowenfels next morning, we started,
Mr. Smith escorting us. We got our
first taste of mountain roads when we
reached old Lapstone hill, with its three
zig-zags. The hill was covered with
loose waterworn stones of varying sizes,
much resembling the lapstone of the
shoemaker, hence the name. At the
top of the second zigzag I came within
an ace of ending my journey. A dray
loaded with wood was rounding the
corner, and the wheel skidding at the
turn, the load struck my horse violently
on the legs. He reared and turned with
a spring, landing with his forefeet on
the very edge of the precipice
down which rattled the stones struck
as he came to a stand. My brother
and Mr. Smith were horror stricken,
but the latter, with the quick resource-
fulness of the bushman, was off his
horse in a twinkling, and had mine
by the bi idle ere I well knew what
was happening. At the top of the hill
our genial host and guide handed us
over to the mailman, a mounted police-
man, who carried the whole of the
weekly mail in a small piece of leather
strapped on to the front of the saddle.
The postage from Sydney to Bathurst was
then one shilling per letter. The Sydney
Morning Herald was issued weekly, and
was not half the size of one of our
Bathurst dailies. We reached Springwood
without further incident and were glad
to rest there that night.
Next day we made the Weather-
board our terminus, and but for the
excessive heat it was in the month
of February—would have enjoyed the


journey. The Weatherboard, in those
somewhat unimaginative days, took its
name from the house of accommoda-
tion which was its outstanding feature
a most uncomfortable place, where the
holes in the walls, which one could hardly
call windows, were closed at night by
rough shutters, kept in place by a couple
of logs leant against them from the out-
side. The next day Mount York was
reached, and the following we set out for
Wallerawang. Our police postal escort
had gone ahead of us, so we were put into
the care of a stockman going west. The
descent of Mount York wasmost exciting.
We dismounted, of course, and horses
and riders skidded down the hillside,
sitting down when the pace became too
fast.
At Wallerawang we were the guests of
Mr. Andrew Brown, who, in the morn-
ing, provided us with fresh horses for the
last stage of our journey. The road from
Wallerawang was not too clearly defined ;
several new tracks and deviations were in
process of making, and our stockman in
charge seemed somewhat mixed in the
matter of roads. Towards midday he
got very uneasy, and finally declared that
we had lost the way, and, admonishing
us to stay where we were, galloped to the
top of the nearest rise to take his bear-
ings. In his absence, we heard a sound
like an avalanche tearing down the moun-
tain side, and, ere we were aware of what
was the cause of it, a mob of wild cattle
were about us, surveying us in that wild,
noisy way, which is not indicative of
friendly intent. However, before they
had decided on any course of action,
our guide galloped down, brandishing
his stockwhip, and they vanished as
quickly as they had come. Our friend
assured us that his heart was in his
mouth when he came in sight of’us and
our visitors. He was very certain I was
the first lady they had ever seen, and
astonishment, not chivalry, had prevented
their stampeding over us.
We spent a quiet Sunday at Sorn
Bank, Green Swamp, singing, like the
Psalmist, the “ Lord’s song in a strange
land and on Monday Mr. Campbell
escorted us to Kelloshiel where we
were the guests of Mr. and Mrs. Ran-
kin, till our quarters in Bathurst were
ready. On the way we called at Kelso
rectory, and were kindly received by the
Rev. Mr. Keane. We were not sorry to
complete our journey, for the whole ex-
perience was too novel to be pleasant.
The heat, the loneliness, the sombre co-
louring and monotony of the bush, the dis-
comforts of horseback travelling, and the
painful shock (to those not inured to such
spectacles) of coming upon chain gang
after chain gang of convicts, making and
mending the road, all tended to give the
experience a depressing tone. This was
certainly relieved by the great kindness
of those whose hospitality we enjoyed on
the way. And the well known and regal
kindness of those at this end made us
quite forgot the trials of the road.
Chapter 11.
FIRST IMPRESSIONS.
We stayed at Kelloshiel till suitable
quarters were secured for us at Saltwater
Creek, behind Kelso, in a house latterly
used as a wool wash. Kelso was then the
“ city,” and Bathurst the penal settle-
ment. Kelso boasted of two public
houses - one at each end of the village—
and a number of straggling, low-roofed
cottages. The only shop in the whole
district was carried on in a small end-
verandah room of one of the public
houses, and prices ran decidedly high.
The name, so full of memories, to a
Scot, of one of the sweetest of old world


towns, seemed most inappropriate ; and
yet there was pathos in the very inapt-
ness, for it suggested pictures of the un-
known earlysettler who named it Kelso—
either, homesick and disappointed, shut-
ting his eyes, and letting imagination
play, until the untidy village of the wild
west became the city of his dreams; or,
hopeful and strong, taking the wilder-
ness in hand to subdue it, and plant in
it a new Kelso, more glorious than the old,
in the land of undimmed sunshine.
There was nochurch building. The Rev.
Mr. Kean lived in a cottage parsonage,
which occupied the site of the present
handsome rectory at Kelso, and cele-
brated Divine Service in an old barn
behind the parsonage. In this year
(1831) the ministry and worship of the
Scotch Church were established in the
district, the chaplain being the Rev. Mr.
Thompson. The spiritual needs of the
Roman Catholics in the district were at-
tended to by the occasional visits of
Father Thierry (a brother of Judge
Thierry), from Sydney. Bathurst consisted
of six brick cottages and two mud houses,
occupied by the military, police, and
Government officials, the hospital, and
the convict establishment, with its lumber
yard. The main building was on the
site of the present police barracks, and
was a two-storied building, with the bar-
racks above and the gaol below. On the
other side of the road —the stump of a
tree, which grew in the middle of the
garden, still marking the site—was the
building which, under one roof, com-
bined Court House, Post Office, and
quarters of the Police Magistrate, and
Colonial Surgeon. Adjoining was the
stockade, and quarters of the mounted
police. Major Croaker was commandant,
and Dr. Busby surgeon. At least one of
the officers was a scion of a noble house,
and there were five ladies in the “ City of
Bathurst.” As all lived almost under the
same roof, visiting, even in the summer
time, was not an arduous duty. The
commandant’s wife was a singularly sweet
and amiable lady, universally beloved.
The little community, however, was not
confined to its own resources, for the
families who resided in the surrounding
districts (many of whose descendants are
still with us) were the embodiments of
hospitality.
The pleasant occupation known as
“ shopping ” took a strange form in
those days, for, unless on our rare
visits to the metropolis, it meant
sending an order to Sydney, and then
waiting, perhaps two months or longer,
till the goods arrived (often much
damaged by the wear and tear of road
and weather). Up to-date fashion could
hardly be adhered to under the cir-
cumstances, and winter clothing had to
be ordered in midsummer, and vice
versa. Theie was no bridge over the
river, and often, in flood times, con-
siderable difficulty was experienced in
getting mails and supplies across. One
occasion comes to memory, when the
bread and meat contractor, who lived at
Kelso, being suddenly cut off by a flood,
hit on a novel method cf delivering his
stores. A blackfellow threw across the
stream a boomerang, to which was at-
tached a string. This was the guide to a
rope, and soon a washing tub was being
pulled across, the contractor steadying it
by a rope fixed to its side. This original
cable punt crossed the water several
times, till the whole of the bread and
meat supply was safely landed. A similar
method was frequently resorted to in the
transmission of the mails.
The servants were all convicts, and con-
siderable difficulty was experienced in the
way of getting suitable female servants, as
at that time they had to be got from Sydney.


A woman’s factory was, however, added
later to the penal settlement at Bathurst.
A lady, the wife of one of the officials,
had an excellent servant, who had one
failing, a liking for strong drink. She
was frequently found in a state of in-
toxication, and on one occasion set fire
to a child’s cot. Where she got the
drink was a mystery, till she was care-
fully watched, and then a romance was
revealed. She was seen to steal out and
take up her position at the closely barred
gate ; shortly, a man came along with a
pannikin, and the woman producing a
long straw thrust it through the bars, the
man holding the pannikin as close as
possible. After a long pull she with-
drew the straw with a sigh of satisfaction,
and the watcher came forward to smell
rum, and detect a male convict outside
his yard. It turned out that the man,
almost nightly, managed to slip out of
his quarters and secure some rum, which
he gallantly, and under difficulties and
danger of discovery, shared with the dis-
tressed damsel. The story ought to
finish with their release, a wedding, and
a joint pannikin for the rest of their
lives. But, as a matter of fact, lam
happy to say the girl, on her release,
married a decent man with no liking for
rum, gave up the rum herself, and be-
came a worthy matron, esteemed and re-
spected in an old townshipin aneighbour-
ing district.
Chapter 111.
FROM SETTLEMENT TO TOWNSHIP.
In 1830 Bathurst was but a penal
settlement, and Kelso the town, but
very shortly thereafter Bathurst com-
menced the growth citywaids. The first
public building not connected with the
settlement was a church. Anglican ser-
vices were held by the chaplain and in-
cumbent of Kelso, Rev. Mr. Keane, but
no church of that communion was then
on this side of the river. On the arrival
of a Scottish clergyman, services (inaugu-
rated by the Rev. Dr. Lang in the veran-
dah of one of the public houses at Kelso)
were commenced in Kelso, and very
shortly afterwards the Presbyterians
moved in the direction of building a
church in Bathurst; the conclusion of
their labours being the erection of old
S. Stephens’ Church, which occupied the
the site now filled by Mr. Gartrell’s
bakery in William-street. This church
remained in use till 1872, when the con-
gregation moved into the handsome
building now known as S. Stephens’.
The members of the Wesleyan commun-
ion had the use of the Scotch Church
on Sunday afternoons ; and the Anglican
chaplain, Rev. Mr. Keane (who came
over from Kelso at an earlier hour to
perform Divine service in the settlement)
and the Scotch clergyman used fre-
quently to worship with the Wesleyan?.
One Sunday afternoon, the Rev. F.
Lewis—the first Wesleyan minister in
Bathurst—had in his congregation these
two clergymen, and the Rev. Mr. Saun-
ders, of Sydney (the only Baptist minis-
ter in Australia then, who was, with his
wife, on a visit to the Kelso rectory.
This fine spirit of Christian brotherhood
amongst the clergy was not without its
effect on the people, and sectarian
rivalry and differences were unknown.
Shortly after this, the community re-
ceived another addition to its numbers
and importance, by the advent of a
resident Anglican clergyman. This gen-
tleman, the Rev. Mr. Sharp, held his
first services in the billiard room of a
public house in Durham-street.
Clergymen and doctor dwelt now in Ba-
thurst, but no lawyer had yet arrived, and
none was needed just then The first pub-


lie official,not directly connected with the
settlement, was the surveyor who laid
out the city, and put up the blocks for
sale. Among the first buildings in the
surveyed town were two public houses,
one in Durham-street, and one in
William-street, between Howick and
Durham streets; the latter was deco-
rated with a painting of a handsome
lady, and was named “ The Sign of the
Good Woman.” A memorable incident
about the period was the revival of the
public stocks in Bathurst. Mr. Even-
den, the Police Magistrate, having re-
tired owing to ill-health (he lived at
Littlebourne, and died there), a young
gentleman, son of a Sydney Judge,
was given the appointment. He imme-
diately set himself to his work, with
great zeal, and no little efficiency.
Stocks were set up near the Court
House, where drunkards and others did
penance in the eyes of the community.
Various things militated against the new
magistrate’s “ reform ” in this direction.
The children of the officials used to
minister to the unfortunates in durance,
and one morning the late Mr. John
Busby was missed from the nursery in
the surgeon’s quarters to be eventually
found dealing out bread and butter to a
penitent dtunkard in the stocks, who,
poor fellow, the child explained, had had
no breakfast. The stocks did not long
remain in use, the public feeling was
never in favour of them, and the case of
a woman who fainted in them, and falling
backward, almost broke her neck, brought
their reign to a sudden ending.
Up to now goods had mostly been car-
ried by private drays, but an enterpiising
man at O’Connell started a small carry-
ing firm of his own. His experience was
not altogether a happy one. On one
occasion his train of two drays was
months on the road, and, no tidings
reaching him of its location, he set out
on a search expedition to discover the
teams in the mountains, with most of the
cargo gone, and the teamsters having a
prolonged carousal. Unfortunately for
him, part of the loading had been casks
of wine, etc., for some gentlemen in the
district. On the arrival of the teams in
Bathurst, the residents got all that was
left of the things they had ordered from
Sydney. One public official, whose
grocery supplies, medical stores, and
clothing-including mourning garments
for his wife and family—were aboard,
received one cask which contained 2lb.
flour, two medical journals, and two
pieces of piping cord. The hardships
of getting supplies were added to by the
drought and scarcity which visited Ba-
thurst in the thirties, but that is a story
in itself, ar.d must have a chapter to
itself.
Chapter IV.
THE FIRST BANK IN BATHURST.
No sooner was Bathurst laid out, and
allotments sold and building commenced,
than the need of a bank made itself felt;
and, with that splendid spirit of enterprise
and self-help which has ever characterised
the City of the Plains, the inhabitants
determined to have a bank of their own.
The project was greatly assisted by, and,
indeed, could not have been carried out
without the help of, the late Mr. A. K.
Mackenzie of Dochairne, who had been
a banker in England. The commissariat
having been removed to Sydney, the
building used as a store was secured for
the bank premises, and the old iron
chest which had done service for many a
day for Government money was the first
“ strong room.” A provisional board of
directors started operations, shares
readily taken up, and in no time thp


Bank of Bathurst was in full swing, and
the notes —of one, five, and ten pounds
—were in general circulation. Even
those who were dubious of the result of
the experiment did what they could to
help such a useful institution ; and a gal-
lant officer, of exalted rank in the Im-
perial army, who resided in the district,
in handing a large cheque to one of the
directors, intimated that he knew he
would never see it again, and wished to
make a gift of it at once to the bank.
“ You will burn your fingers,” he con-
cluded ; “ this is all the extent to
which I will burn mine.” He, how-
ever, had cause to change his opinion,
and found the bank not only a tem-
porarily useful, but a profitable, insti-
tution.
Among the first directors of the
bank were Mr. Mackenzie and Dr.
Busby; and Mr. T. M. Sloman was one
of the earliest officers. At first specie
was brought from Sydney in strange
ways; and consignments of “ table
salt,” “ millinery,” and casks of “ corn,”
carried at their heart parcels of gold,
silver, and notes. The bank prospered
and paid splendid dividends. At length
the Union Bank sent up an agent, who
bought over the business of the Bathurst
bank, at a sum which gave the share-
holdeis their money back with interest
almost cent, per cent. Mr. Lee (of
Claremont), one of the directors of the
old bank, built the house (which still
stands at the corner of Howick and
William streets, and is known as “ The
Duke’s Corner ”) for the new bank, and
the “ Union ” opened its first branch in
the west, with the late Mr. David Ken-
nedy as manager. Later on it opened a
branch at Orange, and, when the Ba-
thurst business was sold to the Commer-
cial Banking Co., Mr. John Busby, who
had been trained in the Union Bank, was
brought from Orange (where he was in
charge of f he branch), and managed the
Commercial Bank in Bathurst till his
death.
When the Union Bank took over
the business of the Bathurst Bank it
paid all the notes of the old bank as
they came in, for a time, and then put
up those that remained to auction. An
enterprising citizen secured them, get-
ting a good price from the bank ; but he
had cause to regret his bargain, for, for
years, jQ\, £s> and jQ\o notes dribbled
in upon him, and, several years after he
thought all must be paid, a belated
note reached him. He demurred
at making a payment as so long
a time had elapsed, but, finding
that no time limit had been set,
he reluctantly paid over his ten sove-
reigns for the grimy piece of paper, and,
for many a day, was haunted by the
dread of other such unwelcome visitors.
The Bathurst Bank just sold out in time
to save itself, for the drought followed,
and was of such a character that no local
financial institution could have borne the
strain. The Union Bank, on the other
hand, with large resources elsewhere, and
local advisers, had no difficulty in get-
ting through that trying time. The story
of the scarcity then must now be told.
Chapter V.
THE GREAT DROUGHT.
The cycle theory of the seasons was,
of course, not known in Bathurst seventy
years ago, but ;he same alternation of
wet and dry spells, with runs of good
seasons between, was experienced then
as now. The early thirties were in a
rainy cycle, when grass flourished and
men perished !
The prisoners working on the moun-
tain road were housed in rough bark


huts, very suitable for dry weather, but,
as events proved, most disastrous to
their inhabitants in long-continued rain.
The protracted wet weather of the period
of which we write, reduced the prisoners,
especially in the Mount Victoria district,
to great distress, and the mortality rate
was very high. The Government doctor
at Bathurst had a round embracing the
whole of the Cox River and Mount Vic-
toria districts ; and the Bathurst hospital
was full to overflowing—as many as fifty
patients being housed at a time ; pass-
ages, wash-house, and mortuary all being
used as wards. The prevailing sickness
gave a good many idle men the oppor-
tunity to sham sickness; and most amus-
ing and ingenious were some of their
devices. One man rolled up his trousers
leg, and showed the medical officer a
foot and ankle all the colours of the
rainbow. The doctor said he should
like to see the leg above the knee, but
the patient stoutly asserted that such was
quite unnecessary, as his limb was per-
fectly healthy from the knee up. Even-
tually, force revealed a strap so tightly
fitted round the leg as to be embedded in
the flesh. It is needless to say he went
to a less comfortable place than the hos-
pital. So large was the death-rate that
the making of coffins of the simplest
sort was impossible, and mortal remains
went to their last resting place between
two sheets of bark.
The drought, which commenced in
’37, stayed the unhealthy conditions
caused b/ the wet seasons, but it brought
its own troubles with it. One of the
first of these was the breaking up of the
Bathurst Carrying Company, an associa-
tion of citizens and settlers who had pur-
chased their own horses and drays, and
organised a better system of carriage of
goods from Sydney. At first the “Convey-
ance Company” thought to weather the
drought, but the price and carriage of
fodder, and the losses among the horses,
necessitated its selling out. This was
done, and the shareholders had to meet
a considerable deficit. Many of them
paid up with reluctance, looking upon
the call as not only burdensome but un-
just—ample evidence of their ignorance
as to the responsibilities of public com-
panies. The effect of the drought was
to reduce the price of stock to almost
nothing. Sheep went down from jQ 2 to
4s. a head, and a number of settlers in
the district, who had borrowed the
money to buy large quantities at the
former price, suffered greatly, many of
them never being able to recover from
the loss. Later, when most of the stock
had died, prices rose—milch cows could
not be had for money, and a resident
gave for a goat to provide milk for a
young child. Food became scarce, and
prices for all food stuffs went up to
famine rates. Many of the settlers
sought to send back their servants to the
authorities, but were told that they had
had them in the times of plenty, and
must keep them thiough the period of
scarcity. Children suffered perhaps
most of all, and it was the custom of
people, visiting with their children, to
carry their children’s bread with them,
knowing how small might be their
friend’s store. Most of the flour to be
had was almost unfit for human use,
and could not be baked into palatable
bread. It was made from American
wheat, which, thrown loosely in:o ship’s
holds, malted on the voyage, and at the
end had to be washed before being sent
to the mill. For three years not a shower
of rain fell in Bathurst. Early in the ’4o’s,
however, the clouds, which had often ga-
thered, but always dispersed without rain,
brought torrents, which flooded the river,
and turned the wilderness into a garden.


Chapter VI.
THE OLD HOSPITAL, AND A RIVER
STORY.
Reference has been made in these
reminiscences to the old hospital, which
was a plain four-roomed building, with
out even a fence round it, standing on the
site now occupied by the swimming baths.
In the thirties it was looked after by the
Government doctor, an overseer dis-
penser, assisted by two wardsmen, a man
cook, and a washerman. The patients
were prisoners, but one small ward was
reserved for soldiers. The female pri-
soners, when attacked by illness, were at-
tended by the surgeon at the places in
which they were employed; but, this
being often very inconvenient, the wo-
man’s factory was established, and a
room set apart as a ward. Patients fre-
quently reached the hospital in strange
and terrible plights, and on one oc-
casion, a scurvy patient was sent in from
the Junction with his irons embedded in
his flesh, cutting him almost to the
bone. The surgeon (Dr. Busby) sent
for the lumberyard blacksmith, and had
the irons struck off, immediately report-
ing his action to his superior in Sydney.
He, in turn, brought the matter be-
fore the Governor, and the surgeon was
sharply called upon to give reasons for
his act. He forthwith reported that
ordinary humanity and professional re-
quirements alike necessitated the course
he took. This hardly satisfied the au-
thorities, and when the man, shortly
after made his escape, and was never
heard of again, further correspondence
took place.
One good result, however, came of the
whole matter. For some time the sur-
geon had been urging less iron and more
guarding in the case of sick prisoners ;
and regular sentry duty was now com-
menced at the hospital, the sentries going
on duty in turns of two hours through-
out the day and night.
During all the years of his service, and
notwithstanding the fact that he often
had to send up for punishment men who
were shamming illness, the surgeon was
only twice molested, and, on one of these
occasions, he was taken for someone
else. This took place on the Sydney
Road near Fryingpan, on a dark night,
when two men rushed out upon him,
seized his horse, and bade him “ Bail
up!” but, on discovering who he was,
disappeared as suddenly as they had ap-
peared, exclaiming, “ O, it’s the doctor !”
Fryingpan took its not very aesthetic
name fiom the one article of use in a
hut at that place, built in the first in-
stance for the accommodation of soldiers
on escort. The floor was innocent of
furniture, and the walls of adornment,
save a useful frying-pan which hung in a
conspicuous and conver.ient place, and
did duty for all and sundry. The other
occasion on which an attempt was
planned on the doctor’s person, was
when a prisoner, whose pretence of ill-
ness was not sufficient to delude the eye
of the surgeon, borrowed a pair of scis-
sors with the avowed object of cutting
out an article of dress “forgot” tore-
turn them, and, in the middle of the
night, had a very bad turn. The doctor
was hurriedly summoned from his quar-
ters, but the gaoler, whose suspicions had
been somewhat aroused, insisted on pre-
ceding him in entering the cell. He was
not wrong in his surmise that the pri-
soner meant mischief, for the moment he
entered the “sick’’man leaped at him,
and struck him viciously with the pair of
scissors. The weapon passed through
his hat, but glanced off his head, inflict-
ing nothing worse than a scalp wound.
On finding that it was not the doctor he


had struck down, the prisoner expressed
great regret for his “ mistake.”
Two river matters were much talked
of in those days—one has been satisfac-
torily settled in the Denison and Ranken
Bridges ; the other has been frequently
dealt with, and is at the time being once
more coped with, and that is the en-
croachment of the river on the rich lands
on the Kelso side.
In the thirties, on the Kelso side, op-
posite the site on which the Denison
Foundry now stands, there was a pound,
with a comfortable residence and a beau-
tiful and productive garden. Bit by bit
this garden was swept away, until but a
narrow strip stood between the bank and
the house ; and then came the end.
when a slight fresh undermined the
bank, and the house followed its fruit
trees and flowers down the river.
The first bridge, an unpretentious
wooden structure, suffered the same fate,
and, in its career down the river, struck
and carried away the Eglinton Bridge,
which had been planned and built by
Mr. George Ranken, the proprietor of
the fine estates known as Kelloshiel,
Saltram, Westbourne, and Osborne. The
construction of Mr. Ranken’s bridge
gave rise to a good deal of criticism, and
one day a young man (who afterwards
became famous as Sir Saul Samuel, and
who then represented his uncle, a Sydney
gold buyer), ventured to air his ideas on
the subject, in the presence of the en-
gineer himself, in the Royal Hotel. Mr.
Ranken bore with it for a time, and then
addressed the critic : “ Young man, that
bridge is strong enough to carry all your
race to Jerusalem, and it will stand till
your great Bathurst bridge carries it
away.”
Thestoryof thedestructionof thebridges
and Mr. Ranken’s gallant rescue of a dis-
tressed couple needs a chapter to itself.
Chapter VII.
THE RIVER.
The most ardent admirers of the City
of the Plains can hardly claim to-day
that the river, in the vicinity of the town,
is a thing of beauty. In the thirties,
however, and for long after, fringes of
fine swamp oaks on both banks gave it
a charm which one must now travel
miles up or down to find. The trees
disappeared in time through the en-
croachments of the river, but not before
they had been sadly disfigured by the
ravages of soldiers and citizens, who tore
down the branches to provide them-
selves with cheap and effective brooms.
Long after most of them had disappeared
a huge one stood almost in the middle
of the river all by itself. During a flood
a young clerk attempted to cross the
stream on horseback. The horse was
swept off his feet and drowned, and the
youth with difficulty reached the tree,
where he put in the greater part of a
night and day before he was discovered
and rescued. In great floods, the Vale
Creek and river, between them, shut the
townspeople in. One of these floods
gave an expanse of water extending from
the bottom of Hereford Hill to Esrom
House. This was the great flood of
’44, when Mr. George Ranken did his
his splendid piece of rescue work. An
old couple, of the name of Dwyer, lived
on the bank of the river, not far from
the site the Ranken Bridge now occu-
pies. The old man, Con., had a small
tan pit, and his wife, Mary, had been
nurse in the Panken family.
Besides the Saltram Creek, there was a
millrace on the Kelloshiel side, some
two and a half miles long, constructed
by Mr. Ranken in what must have been
an old bed of the river running through
Kelloshiel, Saltram, and part of Alloway


Bank. In flood time this made a
second stream quite as strong and
deep as the river itself. Between
these two streams the old folks were
hemmed in, and, as the waters con-
tinued to rise, it was evident that in a
short time there would be but one
stream, which would sweep before it the
frail cottage and its occupants.
Mr. George Ranken, accompanied by
his son, Mr. James (then a lad of 17),
planned a rescue for his imperilled te-
nants. On the further bank of the mill-
race stream stood a huge and solitary
swamp oak, between which and the cot-
tage there lay a hundred yards or so of
water of varying depth, but without much
current. Mr. Ranken saw that if a rope
could be fixed to this tree, the work of
rescue would be comparatively easy.
A man in his employment of the name
of Hollandsworth volunteered to swim
the current, and, with a rope tied round
his waist, plunged into the seething
waters. Strong man as he was, the
stream was too much for him, and
shortly he gave up and went under.
Willing hands quickly dragged him
ashore. He was landed more dead than
alive, and died three days later.
After Hollandsworth’s attempt no one
seemed anxious to volunteer, so Mr.
Ranken tied the rope round his own
body, and, disregarding the expostula-
tions of the crowd on the bank, essayed
the raging current. After a hard struggle,
he reached the tree, fixed the rope to it,
and, partly wading, partly swimming, in
the quieter waters between the banks,
reached the cottage. He found his old
nurse sitting on a bed, with a candle in
one hand (busy with her prayers) and a
quart-pot in the other, bailing the water
out of the window, the good woman’s
motto evidently being Ora et labora.
Both were landed safely, the only mis-
hap being that the old man, in his
transit, went under once or twice and
swallowed more water than he cared for.
Mr Ranken, none the worse for his
exertions, came up to Kelso, and rescued
another man from a watery grave the
same day.
In ’55 the Denison and Eglinton
bridges were opened, and in June, ’67,
the Denison Bridge was swept away, and
in its career down stream, carried away
the bridge on which Mr. Ranken had
expended much time and money.
The destruction of the Denison Bridge
was a most dramatic thing, and just
escaped being most tragic. It was
crowded with people watching the racing
flood and the labours of the men who
were trying to guide the great logs, that
came down, past the supports of the
bridge. Suddenly the middle arch
cracked ominously, and began to give
way, the crowd parted, and rushed to
the nearest bank. They were hardly on
land, when the whole structure went
with a thundering roar. Those who, in
their hurry, made for the Kelso side,
had to remain there two or three days,
till it was possible to get back to
Bathurst,
Chapter VIII.
BUSHRANGING MEMORIES.
My earliest recollection of bushran-
gers is at once heroic, tragic, and comic.
A band of desperate escapees appeared
in the district, and made a raid on the
inhabitants of Perth, George’s Plains,
and Hockley. They commenced at the
home of a settler, by the name of John-
stone, on the Vale road. Mrs. John-
stone was lying very ill at the time, and
they were humane enough, desperadoes
as they were, to leave the place quietly
at the supplication of the husband. The


gang contented itself by pressing John-
stone’s man servant into their service.
At George’s Plains they encountered a
gentleman, I think of the name of
Payne, an army captain, recently settled
on a property in that district. The cap-
tain was shooting ducks in the creek,
ami on being called on to stand and de-
liver, refused to give up his gun. The
gang threatened to shoot him. The
brave, but perhaps not too tactful soldier,
intimated, as he faced them, that co-
wards of their stamp were not game to
shoot a man who looked them in the
face. At this they shot him where he
stood, and galloped off leaving him
dead. They next visited Brownlea,
where Captain Brown and his wife, not
long from India, had settled and made a
home. With the Browns was a lady, a
neighbour, who had come over hurriedly
to warn them that bushrangers were in
the district. Captain Brown, after hid-
ing the ladies in the garden as best he
could, met the gang as they invaded the
house, but, being powerless to stop them,
he let them have their sweet will. Their
first business was to smash everything
breakable, then they ransacked the
debris of wardrobes and drawers and
decked themselves, and even their
horses, in the wonderful treasures of
Indian needlework Mrs. Brown had
brought with her. Discovering a store
of wheat, then at 8s a bushel, they threw
it all into the yard and put their horses
in amongst it to eat and trample at will.
Their wanton destruction of property,
instead of satisfying them, seemed to
madden them, and, notwithstanding the
unwillingness of her host and hostess,
the lady vi itor determined to speak
them fair ; for, according to her own
account, she had wonderful powers in
quietening savages. Tust then her op-
portunity came, when the Captain, in a
bullying tone, demanded needle and
thread to fix some Indian spoil upon his
hat. “ Allow me,” said the tactful lady,
with a curtsey, as she drew out her
pocket needle case; “ Allow me to
sew it for you, Sir.” “ I want
none of your curtseys, and none of
your ‘ sirs,’ ” was the surly response,
“ but I’ll take that handkerchief about
your neck.” “ Certainly, I am most
happy to give it to you ; and I hope you
will not go near my place (naming it),
for my husband is an invalid, and the
shock cf a visit from your band would
kill him.” The captain, not quite so
surlily, assented to this, as well he might,
considering that, as afterwards appeared,
he had been there already. The bush-
rangers then took their departure, and
shortly a bullock dray (drawn by one
bullock) arrived to take the lady home,
and reported the visit of the gang to her
husband. She was greatly distressed,
and especially bewailed the fact that
there was no stimulant in the house to
help the invalid over the shock. Cap-
tain Brown hastened to remedy this, for
the visitors had not discovered his rum
cask ; but no vessel could be found to
put the spirits in, so great had been the
breakage. Eventually an unbroken sauce-
pan was discovered, and the good lady,
in her curl papers and great leghorn hat,
took her seat on the bag of straw pre-
pared for her on the dray, with the pre-
cious saucepan in both hands, and a
most anxious face bent over it, lest the
jolting of her springless carriage should
spill the reviving fluid. It is pleasant to
relate that she found her husband not
much the worse for his exciting experi-
ence. At King’s Plains the gang en-
countered the police, killing one of the
constables in the engagement. Even-
tually they were hunted down by a body
of military and police ; and ten of them


were hanged in Bathurst, on a gallows
erected where the School of Arts now
stands--six on one day, and four the
next. They were attended in their last
hours by Rev. Mr. Kean (of Kelso) and
Father Thierry, who came from Sydney
for the purpose. One desperate fellow
advised Chaplain Kean to stand well
clear of him on the gallows, or he
would take him with him; and ad-
dressing the crowd, gathered to wit
ness the execution, said that his
mother had warned him that he
would die in his shoes, but she was
wrong. At which he kicked his shoes
off amidst the crowd. The bodies were
buried in the old cemetery, at the cor-
ner of George and Lambert-streets, the
other nine as they fell, this man’s
body with his shoes by his side.
Years afterwards, when the laying out
of the city necessitated the removal of
the remains in the old cemetery, the
grave-digger brought back the whole story
by telling of the nine skeletons with shoes
on their feet, and one with the shoes
placed one on either side of the body.
Another gang, several years later,
scoured the Glanmire district to the
terror of the inhabitants, One day
news came to Mr. Ralston, of Yarrows,
that the bushrangers were approaching.
Other two families were gathered at
Yarrows for mutual protection and com-
pany —the Leightons’, of Glanmire, and
Mr. Arthur Ranken, his wife and
child. Mr. Ralston, whose cart, coming
from Bathurst the day before, with
supplies, had been rifled and the horse
stolen, had his arrangements complete ;
and, on the news arriving, ordered the
ladies to their hiding places under a bed,
where stray shots might not reach them,
and with the, stirring cry to his tutor and
guests, “,To arms, Horniman, and gen-
tlemen,” rushed out.
It was a false alarm, however, and the
gang crossed country to Evans’ Plains
on their way to Bathampton, the over
seer of which property they had threat-
ened to shoot. Mr. Park, of Bath-
ampton, was from home, but his wife, a
gallant little lady, the daughter of a high
officer in the British army, hearing their
approach, left the house by a pantry
window, and made her way to the over-
seer’s house to warn him of his danger,
and stayed with his affrighted wife tiil
morning. She carried with her from her
own house a carving knife, which she
declared she intended to use on her
assailants, and finally on herself when
all hope was gone. Fortunately she did
not have to put her threat into execu-
tion, for the bushrangers, either chang-
ing their minds or getting alarmed, went
on without attempting to visit the
manager’s house.
Chapter IX.
A LAST WORD.
These bushranging memories remind
me that we owe something even to the
bushrangers. No thanks to them, how-
ever. Two most desirable families settled
in our district as the result, more or less
directly of bushranging episodes. A
noted desperado in Tasmania so ter-
rorised a lady whose house he entered
that her husband was glad to bring her
to a place where the memory of her ad-
venture might be forgotten. She had
gone to her bedroom, and, looking into
the mirror, saw the bedstead slowly mov-
ing towards the door. She at once sur-
mised that someone was underneath it,
and attempting to cut off her escape.
Screaming, she rushed for the door, got
out, and fainted on the stairs, where her
husband found her. The shock left
effects on her health of which she never


quite got rid. The same villain shortly
afterwards attempted to rob the place of
a prosperous and plucky Scotch settler.
The Scotchman closed with him, but the
scoundrel had such a grip of his neck-
cloth that he could do but little. The
wife came on the scene, and, at her hus-
band’s suggestion, got the old gun, and,
putting it to the ruffian’s head, pulled the
trigger. “It won’t go off, Jamie,” she
plaintively cried; “what shall I do?”
“ Take hold of the barrel, and club him
with the stock,” muttered the fast-chok-
ing Jamie. The lady obeyed with such
good will that the burglar not only re-
leased his grasp on Jamie but on life it-
self. The worthy couple were the heroes
of the hour, but the police advised them
to change their residence, as the one sure
means of evading the revenge of the
gang. Selling out, the whole family
came over, and took up land within some
miles of Bathurst, and the name is still
represented honourably in our midst.
Seventy years in Bathurst mean his-
tories that many books could not con-
tain. The whole place is full of me-
mories of the living and those whom
men call dead. Only those who have
lived long in one place, who have
watched it grow, who have human asso-
ciations with every part of the landscape
and natural scenery, and whose memories
fill every street, and house, and public
place with the friends and citizens of the
years that are gone, can tell how familiar
and friendly, and almost human, a spot
on earth may become. Such is Bathurst
to me, the city of a long and happy life,
of many friendships and countless
mercies. The old Scottish version of
the Jew’s love for his city, as expressed
in the 102nd Psalm, gives voice to the
feeling—
For in her rubbish and her stones
Thy servants pleasure take ;
Yea, they the very dust thereof
Do favour for her sake.
Beautifully situated, with natural advan-
tages of an exceptional nature and a
climate that cannot be surpassed in Aus-
tralia, Bathurst must have a great his-
tory before her ; and what the old resi-
dent of seventy years hence may have to
say of growth and progress it would not
be safe to foretell. One thing can be
said with certainty : The Bathurst that
is to be is in the hands of the inhabit-
ants, and what civic fathers, and teachers
and preachers, and women and men of
all classes combine to make it, that must
it be. Over our city I venture to place
the ancient motto on the aims of the city
most dear to my youth, “ Let (Glasgow
flourish by the preaching of the word.”
The city so anciently and happily
* mottoed,’ has flourished wondrous.’y by
the preaching and practising of the word,
in the departments of municipal govern-
ment, of which it is a model to the
civilised world and of commercial enter-
prise ; in both of which, integrity, deter-
mination, application, enterprise, and
generous dealing, and mutual considera-
tion between man and man reveal the glory
and use of a Christian civilisation. In
what special department of human service
in the Commonwealth Bathurst is to
flourish is not for me to say. The wis-
dom, industry, integrity and unity of her
people alone can discover and develop
that.








