

BATLE FRONTS
OF OUTBACK
FRNACIS BIRTLES




BATTLE FRONTS OF
OUTBACK
BY
FRANCIS BIRTLES


SET UP, PRINTED AND BOUND
IN AUSTRALIA BY
HALSTEAD PRINTING COMPANY
LTD., ARNOLD PLACE, SYDNEY
1935
REGISTERED AT THE GENERAL
POST OFFICE, SYDNEY, FOR
TRANSMISSION THROUGH THE
POST AS A BOOK
OBTAINABLE IN LONDON FROM
THE AUSTRALIAN BOOK COM-
PANY, 37 GREAT RUSSELL
STREET, W.C.I.


TO
DINKUM
A BLUE AUSTRALIAN CATTLE-DOG, MY
SOLE COMPANION ON MANY A TOUGH
TRACK IN THE GREAT OUTBACK WILDS
OF AUSTRALIA




CONTENTS
A CYCLONE IN THE INDIAN OCEAN - 1
IN AFRICA '
AN AUSTRALIAN POLICE TROOPER IN ZULULAND - H
AROUND AUSTRALIA ON A PUSH-BIKE - - - * 20
THE NEVER-NEVER LAND 39
IN THE TRACK OF BURKE AND WILLS - - - * 64
IN TROPICAL JUNGLES 93
TWO ABORIGINAL STORIES -118
1 9 7
TROPIC WATERS
A TROPICAL WET SEASON 140
IN ARNHEM LAND 159
THROUGH FLOOD AND FIRE 193
A PIONEER FLIGHT 206
BY CAR FROM ENGLAND TO AUSTRALIA - - - 219
THE EVOLUTION OF THE MAIL SERVICE - - - 269
_ 282
GOLD --------




CHAPTER I
A CYCLONE IN THE INDIAN OCEAN
The night blackness of “on top” was in a
turmoil of bellowing wind, banging of iron
tackle blocks, slat-slat-slat of steel stays on
steel masts, roar after roar of cyclone-driven
seas as they swept past to leeward, and the
thunder of breaking waves as they slid in-
board over the lee bulwarks.
In my bunk in the deck-house amidships, I
could bear gallant stiffs of “Liverpool Lime-
juicers” battling with a stubborn goose-
winged fore lower topsail, the weather sheet
of which, beyond their power to man-haul,
had been taken to the clanking capstan.
Faintly I could hear their stamping chorus.
Shouts and yells could be heard from far aloft.
The ship gave a horrible sinking heave,
lurching over to a dangerous angle. Suddenly
there came a yell, “All hands on deck. Shake
a leg!” I found that it was impossible to
get out on the lee side of our quarters as that
door was three feet under water, and the sea
was whanging viciously against the weather-
door. We four apprentices broke open the
skylight overhead, and as I squeezed through


into an inferno of darkness, spray rattled like
shot on my oilskin-clad body. We had to get
aft to the mizen mast, as that was our place
in times of emergency. Through the phos-
phorescent waters pouring over the deck, and
swirling around the stanchions, we could dimly
see a long rope running fore and aft—a life-
line rigged up.
Watching our chance we dashed for this,
barefooted. Then came a mighty wave that
loomed far above the weather-rail, and curled
over. We jumped into the rigging at the foot
of the mainmast, and the thunderous water-
fall just missed us. Another rush and we
were on the quarter-deck. All the sails of this
four-master full-rigged ship had been taken
in during the previous dog-watch, but we had
to set a reefed spanker. Orders were given
to goose-wing the main lower topsail, so all
hands had to go down on to that main deck
on the dangerous weather side, and haul in on
the main sheet. Even in those minutes of
danger discipline amongst the all-nations crew
prevailed. Bosun on the down haul. A.Bs on
the long haul. O.Ss (ordinary seamen) and
brassbounders (apprentices) in the humble
rear.
A thundering wall of water buried us. Even
while it was happening, the little Cockney
steward took a turn of the rope around a
belaying-pin, and the men were swept away
down into the lee scuppers. Three of them, clad


in heavy oilskins, went clean overboard to lee-
ward. As the ship sagged over more and more,
the inward slip of a wave sent them aboard
again! The ship had only steerage way —
luckily for them. I found myself tangled up
in a squirming rope. In line again
Another heavy sea. The ship’s decks were
now over at a fearful angle, the rail buried
all the time, right under.
‘‘Belay! All hands aloft!” We scrambled
into the weather rigging. The goose-wing sail
had been squared and the ship was sogging
slowly along. The trucks of the mast were
swinging in gigantic pendulum effect as we
scrambled up over the cross-trees. As she
rolled I could feel beneath my gripping fin-
gers the shrouds tauten and sag alternately.
The ship’s sides were outlined as though with
fire, while trailing astern was a blazing comet-
like wake.
Rain! Rain! Breath smothering rain. The
rolling seas, beneath its onslaught, could not
curl over and break. There came a few
moments of intense anxiety. Slowly at first,
the sailing ship—as I could see by the wake
now moving to off the quarter —was begin-
ning to answer to the two roped-on men who
controlled the helm. Then she swung around.
As she came around broadside she was buried
in one thunderous roar of destroying waters.
She sogged around and the goose-wing and
staysails went “all aback.” Hastily we slith-
ered to the deck.


The battlings, yells, and cursings of that
hour of getting the yards squared and then
hauled right around!
There’s whisky in the cabin,
And we cannot get it out.
There’s a fire down below.
Sung in shivering chorus.
The “old man” took the chanty singer’s
hint. There was rum and there was hot coffee
awaiting us down below. So eight bells found
us all standing, close packed, streaming wet,
around the galley stove.
We had been through a cyclone circuit,
drifted close in to its dangerous windless dead
centre, wore ship, and now hove to, drifting
outwards again. The gale was still bellowing,
shrieking and howling. The ship was canted
over and the lee-rail under at a dangerous
angle. The force of the wind kept her from
rolling, but she did pitch! The stern would
rise until sharply defined against the skies;
then come down with a thundering whang on
the heaving waters. The night’s damage had
been: chart-room aft skylights, although bat-
tened and covered, smashed; two life-boats
splintered; main deck-house lifted bodily on
to the weather side and torn from its steel
mountings to a height of eight gaping inches;
forecastle flooded; all the pigs and fowls
drowned, and ropes and hauling tackle wave-
washed into a terrific tangle.


CHAPTER II
IN AFRICA
The marching measure, sung half-sarcastic-
ally but with an underlying' note of great
weariness came bawling from a four-abreast
squad of the ranks of a mobile section of
mounted rifle-men, and I was one of them.
My seafaring days were over. My ship had
got into Capetown shortly after the declara-
tion of war. The port authorities wouldn’t
permit members of the ship’s crew ashore —
so I had had resource to strategy! I went
down the ship’s side and on to the wharf in
my working clothes, with my best clothes con-
cealed at the bottom of two buckets of cinders.
I toiled across to the ash-heap giving my best
impersonation of a hard-working lawful-
minded member of the mercantile marine. I
emptied the buckets, grabbed my clothes, and
ran.
I hid in a cave on Devil’s Peak, up on Table
Mountain. I had some tucker and there was a
puddle of rain-water near the mouth of the
cave. I lay there for three days until my
ship—l could see her far below me—sailed


away. Then I came down and enlisted in the
Cape Colonial Forces. ...
The two miles long column, winding in
and out amongst the rocky knolls of kopjes,
took up the chorus. They were heavily over-
coated with those big khaki waterproofs that
were issued to the troops of the Cape Forces.
They had Stout collars worn turned up to pro-
tect our freezing ears and the lower half of
our unshaven faces. Blinking with the dust
of an all-night trek, and stiff with saddle
weariness, knee to knee we rode along. Be-
tween choruses could he heard the soft earth-
muffled drumming of thousands of horse-
hooves. There were isolated but hearty curses
as rifle-barrels —arm slung, with butts carried
in leather rifle-buckets slung from the saddle
—became momentarily entangled thi ough a
horse squeezing inwards as it tried to avoid
the cat-like claws of the thorny “wait-a-bits.
These, passing under the grass-empty bellies
of the horses, put new life into the poor brutes
for a while. Sometimes the horse would
stumble into an ant-bear’s hole; there was the
startled “sheckle-sheckle” of a wild guinea-
fowl; gasping barks from colonies of earth-
burrowing, upright-sitting rodent dassies;
vultures, gorged to capacity, flop-flopped and
rose heavily on lazily beating wings against
the yellow dawn. The air that we breathed as
we rode on, mile after mile, was polluted with
the odour of week-old, jackal-torn carcasses


of horses which had met with cruel lingering
deaths in a disastrous running skirmish of
several days before. Some of their former
veldt riders were now sleeping peacefully be-
neath scattered earth mounds. Our men gave
passing salute, some by bringing their rifles
to the “carry-arms” position—rifle upright,
butt on oif-side saddle-leg—others by simply
lowering their rifle-barrels, strapped to right
arms. Seeming almost furtive, we passed
quietly by.
In the ranks we did not know what our
objective was, but we knew only that our er-
rand was urgent because there was no halt
for breakfast. We were known in more than
one district as the “Forty Thieves” to Briton
and Boer alike. Kaffirs and Zulus would smile
—but there was a glint of sadness in their eyes
—whenever the “Scellem Bosses” of semi-
military police passed by.
Down near a little vlei (waterhole) we could
see Kaffirs running back to their circular,
grass-thatched humpies. Here we pulled up
and filled our water-bottles. We ate a hurried
meal of “Machonacies” —tinned mysteries—
fresh pickled mealie-cobs, eggs which ap-
peared and then disappeared, the refreshing
raw contents being sucked into grinning, gap-
ing orifices that were surrounded by dusty
whiskers. The horses fed —each man saw to
that—on fresh mealie-cobs, they were taken to
the water’s edge to drink.


‘ 4 Prepare to mount I Mount I’ ’ The steeds
backed, side-stepped, neighed, and whinnied.
They were a mixed lot of Indian Army re-
mounts, docile but sly; Australian-bred
walers, long of stride and gallant of spirit;
and Dutch ponies that gave their riders, when
“trippling,” the impression of sitting in a
rocking-chair.
We rode all day. Late that afternoon, by
swinging arm signs, there came along the line
the order to “T-r-o-t.” It was comical to
watch the all-nations horses, with long or
short legs, all trying to make their own
natural pace, and wrathful though expert
horsemen trying to make the regulation mili-
tary trot. I understood why we were called,
officially, 44 Irregulars. ’’
1 4 Canter! ’ ’ That’s better I 4 4 Move into line
and wheel I’ ’ Horses snorted with pained
fright as swan-necked rowelled spurs were
accidentally forced into their ribs. Then came
the order, 4 4 Gallop! ’ ’ Prom end to end of the
miles of long irregular units came the neigh-
ing of galloping horses, many of them fighting
savagely with their riders for control of the
curbing bridles.
Down into a dry creek-bed I went with
about fifty other men and we hastily dis-
mounted. In groups of fours the plunging
horses were held, each by one mounted man,
while we waited. I had not noticed before,
that odd cracklings of rifle-fire came from


some hills about a quarter of a mile away.
Looking back I could see several riderless
horses trotting about. There were some quite
unconcernedly feeding. Others, motionless,
were stretched out on the ground.
Led by the Irish sergeant, one by one we
crawled, helly-flat, from hush to rock, from
rock to ant-hill. The rocky landscape ahead
seemed so peaceful but, now and .again, angry
buzzes and whip-cracks sounded; and little
zips of dust erratically dotted about belied the
impression of peace. A long way down were
series of rifle-fire, but near to where we lay in
the hollow, all was quiet. Cautiously I peered.
What was the use of shooting when I could see
no living target? A man about twenty yards
away from me started to play about. He rolled
over on his back, doubled up his knees and,
like a kitten, pawed with two grabbing hands
at his haversack, which, in the scramble, had
slipped around and was now packed on his
stomach. He rolled over again, and then lay
still.
Far over the sharply defined kopje-ridges
we could hear the distant rolling thunder of
galloping hooves. The rebels had been out-
flanked as some of our troops had circled
around out on the veldt. Hastily we ran back
to “horse.” My steed was a mad-headed
fiend and had gone crazy when he heard the
galloping. He tore my legs against thorn
bushes; pig-rooted over treacherous ant-bear
B


and dassy holes; jumped over small dry water
channels and, whilst in full gallop among the
others, he bared his teeth and slung his hind-
quarters this way and that. A red rag tied
to the base of his stubby tail fluttered its warn-
ing to those in the rear, who gave him a wide
berth.
Horses that night were close-hobbled, in
South African style, as they might be wanted
hurriedly. They were tied in circles of about
a dozen head to forage on the bushes and scant
grasses, under the care of sentries, for empty
now were the saddle nose-bag emergency
rations.


CHAPTER III
AN AUSTRALIAN POLICE TROOPER IN
ZULULAND
Later I went up into the Transvaal and was
there for two years, helping to keep law and
order in a country that had not settled down
after the upheaval of war. “It’s all in the
day’s work,” as the boys used to say—from
loafing down to sue a nigger for his dog-tax,
to riding out in the frosty dawn to quell a
Dutch rebellion. And it was all in the night’s
work, from patrolling a street in comfort, to
sleeping out on the veldt, with the saddle un-
der head, the stars above, and the jackals all
around.
I have arrested a black man in the morning
for owning more wives than he’d paid for; a
yellow man at noon, for deserting from the
mines; and a white man at night, for preach-
ing sedition.
I have spent days on end with nothing more
exciting than a summons to serve; and I have
gone out to hunt a rebel Dutchman, with a
troop that lost all its horses and had to be
brought back by transport wagon. That was


Durant’s rebellion. The job took three months,
for we had to abandon our horses and follow
him into country where horses would have
been useless, even if they had not died. We
found the nest, scattered it, captured the ring-
leader, and dug up a buried cannon and am-
munition.
But to get down to something definite. Let
me dip into my diary, dig out the bones of a
fairly average day, and clothe them with a
little flesh of narrative. Here is one: 10
August, Pietersburg, North Transvaal:
It was just an hour after midnight that I
went from barracks for foot patrol duty. Each
white trooper had a native boy, and on the
corner I picked up mine. Six feet of muscular
Zulu, with a collar-box cap on one side of his
skull, a murderous knobkerry swinging in his
right hand, and a grin of welcome across his
face as he saluted.
Together we tramped the quiet street —or I
tramped and he padded barefooted. Suddenly
he paused. Down the wind came the sound of
singing and shouting. With one accord we
made straight across country to some well-
known native kraals, my boy’s eyes shining in
anticipation of some fun. They heard us com-
ing. Out went the lights and there was dead
silence. I kicked open the door and flashed
in the lantern. The bull’s-eye might have
disclosed any number, up to a dozen, of break-
ages of the law. Anything from indulging in


a drink of native beer —which no native was
allowed to possess within eleven miles of a
township—to hatching a plot against the
Government.
The glare showed a sheepish bunch of “boys”
and “girls,” the only crime discovered being
the loss by two of their number of their resi-
dential passes, which every native had to
carry. These two were promptly handcuffed,
the hut unsuccessfully overhauled for liquor,
and we departed with our prisoners. I met
the 4 a.m. train from Pretoria and examined
all natives and Orientals for passes. Mean-
time the boy took the prisoners to the lock-up,
where they were searched and put in the cells.
A message reached me to return to barracks,
saddle up, and with a squad of ten troopers,
ride out to Mashabi’s kraal, some forty odd
miles away. Reports were coming in of a
probable native rising. A number of boys,
deserting from the Rand mines, had drifted
down and were stirring up trouble. There had
been beer-drinking and war-dancing. The
Boer farmers had been losing stock and were
afraid of even more serious trouble. Hence
our raid.
We rode out fully armed, but unbreakfasted
and unprovisioned, as day was breaking. At
a small store on the outskirts of the town we
dismounted and laid in a stock of the usual
up-country tack —tinned stuff, and from Chi-
cago at that! The place was kept by a Jew,


who was in deadly fear of a raid by some
Chinese, escaped from the Johannesburg
compounds. He asked for protection. The
troop could not stay, but on his entreaty, I
was told oft, with a police boy, to see if I could
find those whose presence threatened his
safety.
Taking his boys, who were only too glad to
help, I set out. After hunting through some
old Dutch houses that had been broken up dur-
ing the war we struck the spoor of the Chinese.
Big splotches on the sand told us that they
had their feet tied in canvas sacking. Sud-
denly a figure appeared over a small kopje-
top, stood for a second, and fled. I sent a
rifle-bullet whistling over his head to stop him.
It might have halted him, but my four black
allies had started in pursuit, and the sight of
them doing a fast four hundred and forty
across the sand, with assagais waving and
blood-curdling shouts rending the air, was too
much for his nerves. He made off up a donga.
A little later we found him, with five other
Chinese, and proceeded to handcuff them.
While we were doing so a diversion occurred.
Two other Chinese, armed with steel-shod
pickaxe handles, had come across one of our
scouters and had bailed him up behind a rock.
One of them threw his pickaxe handle —and
missed! It was a fatal move on his part, for
the boy picked up the weapon and, whirling
it round, smashed the Chinaman’s skull with a


single blow. Making the Chinese carry their
dead comrade, we marched back to the Jew’s
store, where I left the police boy in charge of
the prisoners, and set off to overtake the raid-
ing force.
I found the troop, soon after midday,
camped under some wait-a-bit bushes. The
fifteen police boys, who had been sent out in
front of us, were still somewhere on ahead.
We made a meal that was solid in more senses
than one —tinned beef and biscuits, washed
down by Dutch coffee, a brew concocted of
burnt maize and sugar-cane.
We had covered thirty miles, and hoped to
make it a surprise party. We got close enough
to the kraals to hear the thump of the tom-
toms and the frenzied shouts of the dancers,
when a thin column of smoke shot into the air
from a kopje on the left. It broke, and was
followed by several clouds like puffs from the
chimney of a locomotive. We knew then
that our approach had been seen. The natives
were smoke-signalling an alarm, by means of
a damp fire and a piece of cowhide.
At a word from the officer in charge the
troop split into two sections. One trotted
straight forward. The other galloped round to
the far side of the village. Our approach to
the place was simultaneous with the arrival of
the police boys.
We dismounted and began to raid the huts,
while the boys surrounded the village in a sort


of cordon. The hut walls were of wicker and
mud, and were roofed with long grass tied
from a pole in the centre. In the first hut I
entered there were half a dozen natives. I
grabbed one. The others burst a hole in the
wall and disappeared—only to surrender or
be knocked down by the boys. A few leaked
through the cordon and got away to the hills,
but when we came to sort things up we counted
seventy-two prisoners, including the chief and
the ringleaders. We searched the huts for
gwelo (native beer) and remains of stolen
stock. Calabash after calabash of gwelo was
poured out on the ground. Some chunks of
fresh meat that could not be satisfactorily ac-
counted for were seized, and the “owners’ ’
added to the prisoner squad. Next came a
round up of the village dogs, and the dispatch
of those whose owners had not paid the dog-
tax.
So we travelled, a handful of mounted men,
and fifteen police boys who had already done
their forty miles afoot, but who looked very
much fitter than the crowd of shuffling, evil-
smelling, woebegone prisoners who had danced
and shouted frenziedly enough a few hours
before, but from whom all the effervescence
had evaporated.
The sun was well down the sky by the time
we cleared the village, but we marched steadily
on until we sighted the spot where we had
camped earlier in the day. We were in a


hurry to hunt firewood, tend the horses, set
watch, and cook supper.
I have called the foregoing an average day.
It was, of course, an exceptionally full day. I
have made no mention of the recreations that
came the way of a trooper of native police.
There was big and little game hunting for
lovers of the gun and rifle; racing, hurdling,
and tent-pegging for the enthusiastic horse-
man; and no end of subjects for the artist and
amateur photographer.
The day that I have described, however,
does introduce a great problem that was, and
is still, stirring not only South Africa, but
also the world outside —i.e. the black-risings.
For every native rising that the world hears
of, a dozen occur, though the Press make light
of them or suppress news of them altogether.
The black problem is one of the questions of
the age, and its solution is uncertain; but if
the white rulers govern the black people with
a slack hand, big trouble will certainly come.
The Rand, the great goldfield around Johan-
nesburg, was worked by native and Chinese
labour. The mining was all reef work, and
thousands of natives were engaged in digging
out the ore. Most of them were country-bred
niggers whose ambition was to work long
enough on the mines to save for the price of a
kraal, a piece of land, and a wife or two to
work for him. In addition to the natives, The
Rand gave employment to something like


forty-five thousand Chinese coolies, and, as
far as I saw or heard of them, they were
mostly low-class people. They were engaged
in China by agents who received so much per
head, the recruits being required to satisfy
certain standards of size and health. They
were shipped to South Africa—generally by
special steamer —under a three-years’ con-
tract. They were examined on arrival at
Durban and sent up by special train to Johan-
nesburg. At the end of their term of labour
they had to be repatriated.
One of the duties of a trooper was to arrest
all Chinese found wandering loose round the
country. It was a thousand to one on that the
wanderer was a deserter. His invariable ex-
planation to the bench was, “Lost um way,”
whether he had “lost his way” a mile from
the compounds or two hundred. When a
Chinese was arrested he was taken to the
Labour Identification Office, where the Ber-
tillion records were kept. His finger-prints
were compared and he was identified as being
from such-and-such a company. He was taken
before a special court and fined, generally
£1 to £3, with seven days or a month as al-
ternative.
On the whole, the Chinese on the mines re-
ceived very good treatment. They did not save
their money, but spent it at the “Jew stores,”
largely in sweet-stuffs. They had their own
police and court and, when I came away,


the authorities had constructed a prison camp
very like the old refugee camps of Boer War
times. Except for fighting and stealing, they
were fairly well behaved. When they got a
chance they raided the Jew stores. That is
explainable on the grounds that a Chinese at
home is accustomed to seeing a thief punished
by the loss of his head; so breaking stones in
a barbed-wire enclosure was looked upon by
them as a trifling punishment.


CHAPTER IV
AROUND AUSTRALIA ON A PUSH-BIKE
The period for which I had signed on with
the South African police came to an end. I had
no wish to make police duty my life’s profes-
sion, so I left the force —and was once again
faced with the problem o‘f what to do next.
It occurred to me that my own country offered
opportunities for hard living and adventurous
exploits. I returned home, and before long
started on a push-bike ride across Australia
from west to east.
I left Fremantle on Boxing Day, mounting
my machine on the Esplanade beside the
waters of the Indian Ocean. The best that can
be said of that journey is that I reached my
objective and I learned a lot about Australian
deserts that was of use to me on subsequent
travelling. I was unfortunate in meeting with
a particularly dry season for my crossing, and
very soon after starting, the journey devel-
oped into a contest between myself and the
desert, I pitting my wits and physical endur-
ance against the lonely, thirsty miles, and the
water that should have been there —but


wasn’t! I travelled eastward for about six
hundred miles, through the goldfields to
Laverton, and then struck across country,
north-east, with the object of making Alice
Springs. After five days’ plugging through
the heat and silence of the sand and spinifex
country, I reached Minnie’s Creek, to find it
dry. I camped, and the following day headed
south for a native well. That also was dry.
I was forced to head back to Laverton, reach-
ing it in a condition of almost complete ex-
haustion through want of water and bodily
fatigue, on the eleventh day after leaving it.
Abandoning my idea of crossing by a north-
erly route I set out in a southerly direction
toward Kurnalpi, a distance of two hundred
and fifty miles. I reached it, and from there
essayed to make the South Australian border
at Eucla on the shore of the Great Australian
Bight. At Gardunia, a rock-hole, I obtained
a little water that carried me on for five days
through scrub and sandhills. I reached a clay-
pan, twelve miles long by about a mile and a
half wide, with a bluff at the south-east end of
it. It was covered with stunted saltbush. I had
hoped to find water, but there was none. There
was nothing for it but to make back for
Gardunia. I can’t describe that journey. I
couldn’t obtain relief at the few rock-holes
along the way, because those that were not
bone-dry, were filled with festering bodies of
rabbits.


At Gardunia rock-hole I got two quarts of
water; spelled there until next day, and got
another two quarts. With this I was enabled
to return to Kurnalpi. I struck south through
Norseman then, and finding water at Balla-
donia, a desert soak, I made for Eucla. The
Australian desert, though grim, is not an al-
together relentless adversary. The difficulties
of that journey to Eucla were relieved very
pleasantly at Madura, an old deserted station
near Eyre’s Sand Patch, where I discovered
an artesian well giving forth a good supply of
water. It was not only plentiful, but it was
hot! I enjoyed a bath.
I reached Eucla and, abandoning the coast,
struck across country for Port Augusta. The
journey to Eucla had not been without its
difficulties, and there were more to be faced.
In addition to the loneliness and the hazards
of the desert, march-flies came to plague me.
They attacked my face so fiercely that I was
rendered almost blind. I had to lie up for a
couple of days at one place, with the exposed
parts of my body, including my face and head,
covered with sacking, and with my eyes plas-
tered with a poultice of flour and water mixed
with a dilution of permanganate of potash.
I reached Port Augusta and the dry wastes
of the desert, which were, in later years, to be
traversed by a railway, were behind me. The
remainder of my journey to Sydney, except
for a bout with floods and head winds encoun


tered between Adelaide and Melbourne, was
just a matter of plugging steadily through
rural lands.
The outside track, wandering beyond the
veil of things known, called to me —so I
packed up again and went. I set out to ride
from Sydney to Darwin; from Darwin
through Central Australia to Adelaide, and
back to Sydney along the coast by way of Mel-
bourne. I was not clear of civilization before
I found myself involved in the first of many
difficulties that I met. In southern Queens-
land I was trapped in a bushfire. I got through
it with large holes burned in both tyres of my
bike. I rode into Qympie—to the mirth of the
townspeople—on the steel rims, making a
noise like a tinker’s wagon.
The tropical wet-season thunderstorms
caught me when I was far out in the middle
of a perishing dry stage of eighty miles along
the blacksoil plains of north-western Queens-
land. Eleven inches of rain had fallen in five
hours! A few inches deep, the water covered
the ground, stretching away to the horizon
and, as far as I knew, for many miles beyond.
I was dismounted and pushing the heavily-
loaded bicycle. My light canvas shoes were
pulled off at every step, so I removed them and
shoved and scrambled along barefooted.
Sometimes a snake would glide away from in
front of the bike. The tops of bushes were
crawling with centipedes, scorpions, and


spiders, that had taken refuge from the flood.
Hosts of seething flies bespeckled my swag,
bike, and body. Myriads of them buzzed
around at every jolt, and then, in a sagging
mass, settled on the cheese-cloth net that I had
pulled over my head and tied around my neck.
Suffering with aching legs, arms, and back
I pushed my outfit along, and eventually came
out on to one of those ten miles wide “deserts. ”
Scrubby, sandy, and waterless in the dry win-
ter months, but now, compared to the black-
soil plains, a paradise. Clumps of spinifex
were everywhere. I got rid of the fiendish
flies for a while by putting a match into the
tall inflammable stuff, extending a hearty
welcome to my tormentors by keeping still,
and then rushing through the heat and black
smoke. About sundown, I camped.
A few days previously I had left my bike
lying in long grass while I scouted round a
waterhole on foot, looking, among the dozens
of cattle-tracks that radiated from it, for the
faint old packhorse-track that I had to follow
for hundreds of miles. When I came back to
my bike, my outfit was being burgled by a
dingo. The wild dog was tearing at my swag
to get at a lump of boiled salt-beef that was in
the centre of it. He gave way very hastily to
an even yet wilder man; but irreparable dam-
age had been done to my mosquito-net, and I
was mercilessly attacked by thousands of
blood-hungry mosquitoes.


Then minute black ants had taken posses-
sion of my blankets and, entangled in the wool,
it was impossible to shake them out. I tried
to do so by the light of the camp-fire and in the
midst of my efforts I saw a flabby looking
reptile lying quietly near my feet. It was a
death-adder. These creatures, in flood-time,
invariably seek shelter under drovers’ pack-
saddles.
As the weeks became months I pushed on
over mountain, desert, forest, and plain. I
was following up the overlanding cattle-track
that leads the drovers down from the far
north-west of Australia even right down to
Bourke, in New South Wales —an eighteen
months’ journey.
In the Northern Territory I had varied
experiences. In some places the progress was
extremely slow on account of the long cane-
grass. Often it was three times my own height
and, when in it, it was impossible to see the
track. I could not walk with the machine be-
cause of the manner in which the vegetation
pulled it from my grasp. My method of
getting through it was to mount and charge at
it; taking a spell when the density of it and
my own spent energy brought me to a halt.
Tucker was a problem. The amount that I
could carry was limited. There were times
when I was reduced to existing on flour gruel
with a little sugar in it. I take credit for en-
durance, but there were times when my jour-
c


ney would have come to a finish had it not
been for bush-folk who were ready to provi-
sion me from their own supplies.
Occasionally I saw signs of myall (wild)
niggers about. At one camp, on going down
to the creek for water, I came across a freshly
built stack of sticks, laid across stones, all
ready for lighting. Near by there were flat
stones and roller stones and a quantity of
seeds ready for crushing. There were foot-
prints about. I had disturbed a native camp.
Several times while I was eating my meal the
cockatoos started to shriek and fly about,
clearly showing that niggers were lurking in
the vicinity. They were probably as hungry
as hawks, but were too scared to approach.
Their dread may have been accounted for by
the fact that there is a superstition among
them that anyone who is, or looks mad, will
cast the evil eye on them; so when they meet
such a one, they keep beyond the influence of
him. Doubtless when they saw me coming
spinning along on the silent bike—-it would
have been their first sight of one—covered
with mud after the day’s ride, with bare legs
long hair and no hat, they came to the conclu-
sion that here was “one mad fellah.”
Around Newcastle Waters I made some
good running. The country was hard and
gravelly and sloped gently downward in the
direction in which I was travelling. Racing
down these tableland slopes one day I heard


a strange noise. It sounded something like
that made by black cockatoos, but, owing to
the rush of the wind past my ears, I could not
quite identify it. Coming round a corner 1
surprised a dingo and several half-grown
pups. The mother promptly took to the bush,
but the pups turned tail and ran straight down
the track ahead of me. Seeing a good chance
of getting even with the dingo tribe for the
howling din I had had to endure during many
sleepless nights, I gave chase. I was just
overtaking the hindmost one when a number
of lubras and piccaninnies jumped up and ran
shrieking into the long grass. I had, inad-
vertently, committed the unpardonable sin ot
attacking niggers’ dogs! .
A short distance away I caught sight ot a
band of bucks who were evidently on a hun-
ting expedition, for they were fully armed.
Attracted by the howling of the pups and the
screaming of their womenfolk, they stood like
statues, with spears poised and eyes blazing,
awaiting my oncoming. It did not take me
long to grasp the situation. Concluding that a
flash past would be my best move, I put my
head down and pedalled for all I was worth.
The rush rather upset their calculations, for,
although ten or a dozen spears were sent flying
after me, and the sound of their peculiar
“singing” sent shivers down my back, 1
escaped without hurt. One spear, better
judged than the rest, found an opening be


tween the spokes of my front wheel, but the
angle at which it struck and the speed at which
1 was going, caused it to snap. The broken
halt swung upward and gave me a rather
painful blow on the arm, but it did not stay
my flight. I rode fifty miles before I camped
that night.
The travelling conditions varied. In be-
tween the rivers, after a fall of rain, there
were sometimes extensive areas of black mud,
sticky as glue. On many occasions I had first
to carry my bike across some belt impassable
to wheels, and then go back for my kit. Often
lack of food kept me travelling when I needed
rest, and sometimes, even in the middle of a
half-dried flood, it was lack of water I I have
been bogged on the blacksoil plains and, suf-
fering the tortures of thirst, had to go for-
ward, or backward over my tracks to some
place where I could fill my tank.
Nearing Pine Creek I found myself getting
into touch with “ civilization. ” I began meet-
ing people on the road. True, most of them
were Chinese,. but after my solitary sojourn
it was refreshing to meet human beings of anv
breed or colour. The first man I met was a
Chinese on trek. He was carrying a swag, but
not in the orthodox Australian manner. He
had it in two portions, one slung from each
end of a bamboo-pole that he carried over his
shoulder The second man was a Chinese
wood-cutter, the next a parcels-carrier doing


his afternoon round, and after that the signs
of the Chinese invasion were everywhere.
There were Chinese hamlets with gaudy flags
floating over the shops and joss-houses,
Chinese-looking horses, dogs, and fowls. In
fact the few white men I saw looked Asiatic,
owing to the wearing of Chinese boots and
clothing.
I was now within a few miles of Port Dar-
win, and the whiff of fresh salt air seemed
to put new life into me. Four miles out a
party of cyclists met me and escorted me into
the town.
I left Port Darwin on 18 June 1908, after
a severe attack of fever, and set off on the
journey down through the heart of Australia,
to Adelaide. Owing to my recent illness I
found that ten miles a day was quite enough
travelling in the hot sun. Through the fever-
belt I found the going much better than I had
expected. The long grass was broken down
by the south-east monsoon, and in some parts
the natives had burnt a lot of the country
while hunting for goannas. At a station on
the Elsey River I replenished my larder with
poultry in a manner that was rather doubtful,
but which I hope will be forgiven me in view
of the fact that I was building up my strength
for a battle with long arduous stages. An old
gin had been left in charge of the homestead.
I squared her with some baccy. The fowls
were wild and could fly a hundred yards at a


time. I couldn’t catch them, but the old gin,
moved by a promise of more baccy, soon had a
band of lubras, piccaninnies, and dogs at work.
After a few miles of cross-country work, they
brought in the fowls. The birds bad lost many
of their feathers in the rough and tumble. I
wrung their necks, strapped them to the bike,
and after making little gifts of baccy all
round, went on my way.
At Daly Waters I was getting well out of
the fever country, but the number of snakes
was exceptional, and it is remarkable that
every one I met made for the bicycle. The
weather was fine; the nickel parts glittered in
the sun, so perhaps it was that which attracted
them. I surrendered the machine to them,
every time, by hastily dismounting on the op-
posite side —then hunted for a stick or stone
with which to debate the question of owner-
ship.
On getting near water, toward evening, I
saw a small fire twinkling, then another and
another. Before I quite understood my posi-
tion I was right in the middle of a blacks’
camp. Had I not been close up to a state of
collapse I should have ridden straight on, but
I had reached a state of exhaustion when I
must rest, no matter what the consequences.
As I swept silently into their midst, the
flames twinkling red on the bright parts of my
machine, the niggers threw courage and sense


to the winds, and took to their heels as one
man. ~
From behind cover among the timber they
watched me begin to unload my traps, and,
slowly began to approach and watch the pro-
cess of unpacking. I took good care to let
them see that I had nothing that would be ot
use to them, and, to make my position as secure
as I could, I began to act up to my reputation
of “mad fellah.” .
I talked to myself and generally behaved in
a very exaggerated manner. The ruse was suc-
cessful. They gathered around but treated
me with the greatest respect. Although I felt
myself being closely watched, there was no
attempt to interfere with me. I heard the
word “Kaditcha” used. I guessed that it was
employed in reference to my bike. I had
learned that Kaditcha signified a spirit or
being that moved swiftly and silently. Per-
haps they regarded the bike as an embodiment
of that spirit.
I took up a bundle of dried leaves and
boughs that I found near one of the fires and
dropped them on the glowing coals. In the
blaze that followed I saw a snake dart out
from among them. I had actually lifted him
with the firewood. I searched for him in the
grass around the fire, but although I could
hear him drawing himself about, I could not
find him. I was not sure how long the niggers
would remain in awe of me. Neither was my


attempt at sleep a huge success, for, what with
the niggers on one hand and the snake some-
where in the vicinity, I lay alert during the
greater part of the night. I packed up and
left at the first streak of dawn, thankful at
being allowed to depart in peace.
I had other experiences with the blacks. I
camped one night with some that had pre-
viously been in touch with white men. They
treated me to a share of a favourite dish of
theirs —roast goanna and leaves, served in a
coolamon. It looked all right, so I tried a
mouthful. I can taste it yet! It ate its way
into my membranes and flavoured everything
I ate for days afterwards. I rinsed my mouth
again and again, but without avail. I had
absorbed that taste and it stuck to me. I had
never fully understood, until then, what was
meant by an acquired taste.
Below Barrow Creek the Government had
put down a series of wells for travelling stock.
I used them, as far as possible, as stages of
my journey. It was a wonderful sight to
watch the thousands of birds that came to
them to drink; shell-parrots, tom-tits, Java
sparrows, finches, cockatoos, and small grey
doves, no bigger than sparrows. Hovering
over them might be seen the ever hungry hawk.
I was glad to note that the weaker birds were
adepts at keeping under cover. While I was
having a meal at one of the wells some of the
smaller birds took shelter under the kit on my


bicycle. I drew some extra buckets of water
so that they might drink after I had gone.
I reached Alice Springs, in the heart of the
Macdonnell Ranges. The township called
Stuart, consisting of a few houses, a store, and
a pub, was on a scrub and grass flat, over-
topped by high mountains on all sides. From
there about a thousand camels, driven by
Afghans, were employed carrying freight to
the Arltunga goldfields. These Afghans were
allowed to carry fire-arms, and had revolvers
stuck conspicuously in their belts. They had
the reputation of using the natives badly.
Rain started after I felt Alice Springs. For
three nights I had to camp out in a drizzle and
go on short rations to boot. On the first night
I managed to make a fire, and steamed along-
side it until daybreak. I was without water,
notwithstanding the rain, for the sandy coun-
try took the water in like a sponge. On the
second night I camped inside a large rock
cave. Noticing that it was damp, I swabbed
it down with a cloth and succeeded in wring-
ing out as much as did for a drink.
The Depot Sandhills made heavy travelling.
I camped for the night at one of the mail
changes, a two-roomed hut in which I found
two gins, two bucks, a few piccaninnies, six
female dogs with litters, and a small herd of
goats. They were all huddled round the fire
in what, for want of a better name, we might
call the kitchen. There was no other shelter


about, and tbe wind was blowing bitterly cold
across tbe desert, so I entered tbe place and
made arrangements to cook my meal, tbe other
lodgers looking on in a state of abject indif-
ference. I ate and tben rolled myself in my
blankets, but sleep was out of tbe question.
The goats kept up a continual scuffling, bleat-
ing, and clattering of hooves on tbe stone floor,
while tbe dogs fought them for the warmest
corners.
I crossed tbe gibber plains near Charlotte
Waters, passing through a sand-storm, and
then rode into Hergott Springs. Beltana, with
its beautiful, snow-clad mountains, came into
sight; then Petersborough, with its smiling
green valleys—and so to Adelaide.
There is little mystery about the road from
Adelaide, through Melbourne, to Sydney. I
plugged comfortably along over metalled roads
running through a settled country-side, and
arrived in Sydney on the afternoon of Wed-
nesday, 23 September 1908. I had covered a
distance of eight thousand and three hundred
miles and had been thirteen months on the
trip.
Next I was headed for the South Kimber-
leys, and I had a thousand miles behind me
for each month that I had been on the road.
One day, as I was plugging along on a dry
stage of fifty miles, the ground seemed to rise
up and hit me. I must have fainted, for there
is an interval of time unaccounted for, be


tween that sudden uprush of the ground and
when I realized, hazily, but with a feeling of
great surprise, that the sun, which had been
high overhead, was sinking toward the hori-
zon. ;
I camped, and next morning my hands were
semi-paralysed. It was not possible to remain
in camp and at rest, as the water-supply in
my two-gallon canteen was low, so I packed
up and pushed on. Some time after starting
—just how long I don’t know —the ground hit
me again! My memory must have deserted
me after that, for I can recall no more until
a party of drovers picked me up. They found
me lying quietly under my little calico shelter
out on a sand patch not far away from a soak.
As near as we could judge afterwards, from a
blackfellow following my tracks, eleven days
had gone by since I fell down in the middle of
the dry stage. Guided, I suppose, by subcon-
scious instinct, I had walked, with the bike
alongside, to the water; and had made camp
there by putting up the calico shelter and stuf-
fing branches into the open ends to keep the
flies out. The food was untouched and no fire
had been lighted, but my water-bag had been
replenished several times, as was shown by my
bare footprints leading from the shelter to the
soak. The drovers camped with me for several
days, then, though still weak, I set out again.
About a hundred and fifty miles farther on
I ran into rainy weather. The heavy going


must have been too much for me. I don’t
know exactly what happened—only that I was
found lying beside my machine and was taken
in a buckboard to Roy Hill station in the
South Kimberleys. Here I met with great
kindness. Mr and Mrs Macdonald took me in,
and nursed me back to health —a process that
took some weeks.
I set out again. Notwithstanding the delay
at Roy Hill, I made good time. I arrived in
Fremantle knocked up and weary, but with
seven thousand miles behind me, covered in
seven months.
I left Fremantle, intending to put up a
push-bike record across Australia, via Ade-
laide and Melbourne to Sydney. The distance
was 3175 miles. I hoped to average a hundred
miles a day. It was on a day in January 1912
that I set out. From then, day after day, from
morning until long after dark, I pushed on.
The bike was heavily loaded with food, water,
clothing, and blankets. It was not long before
the lonely miles of mulga, saltbush and spini-
fex closed in behind me —and stretched for
hundreds and hundreds of miles in front.
At night the glow of my carbide lamp would
show, crouching down at the silent approach
of this new invader, such nocturnal wanderers
as rabbits, wombats, and echidna. The latter
are prickly porcupines, and I took good care
to avoid them. Then came hundreds of miles
along the track of the overland west-east tele


graph line repairers. It was here that I had
to toil and spin. Two hundred and sixty-eight
miles were covered in one day of fifteen hours.
Telegraph operators every few hundred miles
were on the qui vive, and progress reports
were being forwarded to the cities.
I travelled light on that stage, throwing
away nearly everything. Water was obtain-
able at twenty-five mile intervals in Govern-
ment tanks, with water catchment galvanized-
iron sheds, overhead. They were wonderfully
cool shady places, at which I would fain have
rested; but time —plus gore sucking, green,
one-inch long march-flies that blood bespat-
tered me —drove me on. Speed, at any rate,
kept those summer-time bush fiends from
drinking their fill from me.
At Nullarbor sheep station, where I arrived
at midnight, the manager was waiting to re-
ceive me with hot bread and milk —my fav-
ourite refreshment when record breaking.
And I thankfully took away with me fifteen
hard-boiled eggs. There followed hundreds of
miles more of lonely toil. People along the
way were taking a sporting interest in my
race against time and offered hospitality that
cheered and helped greatly.
Then Adelaide. Two thousand miles in
twenty days! And then on to Sydney, where
I had a letter to deliver, the first ever sent
overland from Western Australia to Sydney.
After a bath and a shave I put on once more


the shackles of civilization —a white collar
with a stiff shirt and a black bow-tie, all sur-
rounded by a black dinner-suit; with shiny
black shoes below and well-oiled hair above.
I had dinner ; and then to a box at the theatre.
From there the letter, which had come over-
land, per bike, at the rate of a hundred and
two miles a day, was delivered to the addressee,
a well-known and very charming actress. The
incident gave a pleasant finish to a ten-
thousand-mile, round-the-continent ride.


CHAPTER V
THE NEVER-NEVER LAND
I had a car. As cars went in those days, it
was a good car. It had one cylinder and
developed ten horse-power. There was a chain
drive to the two rear wheels. It had wooden
axles, and the two-seater body was supported
on spiral springs. In these days, a man ac-
customed to the modern car would scarcely
trust such a one as ours to take him on an
errand from one suburb to another. We ex-
pected it to take us from one ocean to another.
My companion was Syd Ferguson, of Syd-
ney workshop fame, greatly skilled in the
queer ways of early time motors. We had a
mass of kit; petrol and oil for a thousand
miles, tools, spare parts, axes, shovels, bed-
ding, food and, strapped on behind, as a sort
of life-boat in case of desperate need, was the
trusty old bike. A seasoned desert traveller
hesitates to throw away dirty water before he
has clean. As guardian over all our posses-
sions was fox-terrier Rex, the first dog to face
the transcontinental journey from west to
east.


It was a golden sunshiny day, with a nip in
the air from the vast blue Indian Ocean which
lay immediately behind the little Brush car.
A Fremantle notable was giving a valedictory
speech. He talked of the wonders of modern
science, of visions of steel rails linking up the
goldfields of the West with the far distant
cities of Adelaide, Melbourne, and Sydney.
Old goldfields prospectors stood by, leaning
against veranda posts, smoking thoughtfully,
with a sceptical glint in their eyes. To the
accompaniment of cheers we chug-chugged
away, bound for regions where never yet had
a mechanically propelled vehicle been seen.
We followed the old Cooigardie track, pushing
a way through overhanging scrubs and getting
many a thrill from tree-stumps hidden be-
neath mulga and saltbush.
We were stuck in the slimy mud of a salt
lake. It had a crust on the surface that looked
like concrete. Syd, longing to try the car’s
paces, came tearing down a hill-side. I knew
that the lake surface was fine for a bike, but
—we got a salt and mud bath as the spinning
wheels sank up to the axles. We had to off-
load and carry boxes for over a mile. We cut
scrub and packed it under the car, but the
wheels, with their chain drive, revolved mer-
rily. Round the protruding rear hubs we took
a turn with ropes and led them fifty yards
back to a telegraph pole. The engine power
was put on and up came the telegraph pole by


the roots. It was evening before we got the
car out of that gleaming white morass.
A drizzling rain set in next day, and as
there were more salt lakes ahead, we cut
across country to the Kalgoorlie railway line.
Here there were bridges across the salt arms,
and we could drive the car over-the sleepers.
The mud and slime on our tyres made the car
slip and bounce, each time coming perilously
close to going off the edge of the bridge. At
one place a front wheel slipped down between
two far-apart sleepers. We were jacking up
and pushing for an hour before we got on our
way again.
At Ooolgardie we went south along the
camel-wagon tracks in open forest and mulga
country to Norseman, and actually beat, for
the day’s run, that crack Cobb’s mail and pas-
senger coach which, up to then, had held the
all-vehicular record.
We turned eastward, and ahead lay a
thousand miles of limestone plateau which,
to-day, form one of the best natural surfaced
highways in Australia. But at that time the
going was dangerous and slow, owing to
stumps about three feet high, all hidden by
tall grass growing in the centre of the tele-
graph repairers’ buggy-tracks. Even five
miles an hour was unsafe.
The cattle and sheep stations and telegraph
station staffs en route were all keenly in-
terested, as they had never had a ride in a car.
D


They would come along part of the way. Some
were so enthusiastic that they forgot about
haying to walk back; awakening to the fact
with suddenness and alarm. Little did they
dream that within a few years visits from cars
would become a nuisance. I was told only
recently by a station manager that I was to
blame for this.
The numerous sandhills beyond this open
country caused us many an hour of digging out,
cutting bushes to lay down, and miles of walk-
ing in order to find out means of dodging such
hills as the “BullockyV’ and other sand-
ridges with boggy salt lakes between. Mobs
of dingoes followed the tracks of our strange
vehicle. At night they prowled inquisitively
around the camp, and we could not sleep for
their howling. Rex, chained up, was frantic
to get at them, but we dared not let him loose
for the old dog dingoes would have torn him
to pieces had he gone among them.
As we came closer to what is now South
Australian wheat-fields, there were vermin-
proof fences. Portions of the country were
drought-stricken and all the wild creatures
inhabiting the, as yet, unexplored lands to the
north, were migrating south towards the coast.
For miles the dead rabbits were piled three
feet deep along the netting fence. Thousands
more, in all stages of perishing condition,
crouched down or hopped aimlessly about.
Emus staggered around in starved and thirst-


tortured condition. Thin kangaroos, too weak
to stand upright, gazed pathetically and hope-
lessly at our car. In the only green shade that
we passed in many miles —that of a sturdy
wilga—there were piles of dead pink cocka-
toos. They must have come a long way in
search of water and, knocking up in the hot
sun, had sought the shade, only to perish
there.
Dingoes, thin but not of dying appearance,
were prowling about. We surmised that they
must be getting what moisture their bodies
needed from the blood of their prey. There
were large patches of turned-up earth to
be seen, and among them tunnels led under-
ground, and down these, numerous wombats
bolted as we chugged along. They seemed to
be able to live without water!
We got beyond this belt which has an aver-
age rainfall of only five inches, and the scene
of perishing gave way to agricultural lands.
Beyond these we came to the auriferous lands
around Broken Hill; then to pastoral scrub
sheep-lands adjoining the Darling River.
Onwards to more agricultural lands, then to
townships nestling among the foothills of the
Blue Mountains. Rising over the ranges on a
metalled road we shivered along amidst a
fairyland of snow, cliffs, gum forests and
mountain bungalows. On the eastward descent
of the ranges we looked out over the plains


around Penrith, and saw, in the distance, the
smoke haze of Sydney.
Later, following the journey from Fre-
mantle by car, my brother and I drove north
along the coastal lands of eastern Australia —
just loafing along from place to place with
nothing to bother us but bad roads and a flood
or two. Motor tramps, we styled ourselves.
The almost unbelievably bad condition of the
roads and the difficulties consequent thereon,
lent a certain zest to the undertaking, but
civilization—of a sort —kept pace with our
progress, and it was not long before I was
longing for the lonely lands.
I set out from Sydney in a twenty horse-
power car for a destination which I had not
decided upon. For sole companion I had a
bulldog. He looked on the world with such
a fixed expression of disapproval that I called
him Wowser. My luggage consisted of
photographic outfit, moving-picture outfit —
bioscope it was called at that time —guns and
personal necessities. They were carried on a
platform mounted astern. Heading west and
northward along the Bay o’ Biscay road to
Parramatta the little car dived and swung to
the rattle of the pots and pans of the expedi-
tion. Wowser looked pained but patiently
endured the ordeal. Fifty miles out the roads
improved. I could hear the deep-toned subdued
hum of my good engine, set at speed—the
sweetest music on earth to the motorist.


The third day out found the green grass
left behind and the beginning of the brown
country. A thunderstorm was looming on the
horizon. Twenty miles away across the black-
soil plains a belt of sandhills lay in a dancing
shimmer of heat. Comfort and shelter were
there, and dry earth. Here there would soon
be flood-waters, bogs, and mosquitoes. I wanted
to reach the sandhills before the storm burst.
Already I felt the first splashes of rain so,
opening up the throttle, I commenced to race
with the oncoming tempest.
Bellowing winds met me with clouds ot
yellow dust, through which chain-lightning
flashed vividly. In the murk of the dust-fog,
the car ran into a mob of emus who were also
sprinting for the sandhills. They kept on their
way, ignoring the mechanical monster in their
midst. With long, sweeping strides they kept
abreast for miles at a speed of thirty miles
an hour. Finally they disappeared in an extra
heavy squall of dust.
Soon the track became as slippery as a
schoolboy’s slide, but I kept on my way for a
few more miles and then, without warning, 1
found the car bogged in a bluebush
a sizzling hiss of rain I set to work with shovel
and jack, and after strenuous labour I got
under way again. Within a short distance the
car bogged again. The process of bogging and
digging out was repeated several times.
ing wet, with mud over everything, I reached


the edge of the sandhills, and felt firmness
under my wheels, just as the last of the day-
light disappeared.
Crawling under a mulga bush I rolled my-
self in my waterproof sheet and, forgetting
the pangs of hunger, went to sleep. Wowser
followed suit, he camping in one of my pack-
ing-cases. That night the rain fell continu-
ously, and it was bitterly cold.
We made good distance the next day. We
crossed the Darling River and reached Wil-
cannia. Owing to the drought, provisions
were expensive. This tin hamlet obtained its
stores from small steamers drawing flat-
bottomed boats in their wake. When the river
is “up” the price of goods is down, and when
the waters are down the price of goods is up.
So runs the local legend.
Following a sandy route down the Darling
we at length arrived at Menindie, whence the
Burke and Wills expedition set out on the
northerly half of its ill-fated journey. In
front of the store about fifty pack-camels were
lying, loaded for the track. Wowser alighted
and waddled over to give them friendly
greeting. One that was standing kicked him,
knocking him over and over. He recovered
from the rebuff and, getting back on to all
fours, took a grip, astern, of the ship of the
desert. Round and round they went, Wowser
holding on for all he was worth, the camel
bellowing, buck jumping, and kicking up


clouds of dust. The Afghans who were in
charge yelled. The other camels became mixed
up, and broke their head-lines. Pack-saddles,
blankets and rations fell off in all directions.
It was the greatest commotion Menindie had
seen for many a day. The loose camels scat-
tered, pursued by their profane drivers.
Passing through Broken Hill I turned
toward Adelaide, where I had made up my
mind to fit out the expedition for a journey
across the continent to the Gulf of Carpen-
taria. I decided to take the little Ford car
that I had used on previous trips. Shipping
the bodywork, running-boards, and mud-
guards, I made a light platform on the chassis
with detachable flooring boards, for use when
down in a bog or heavy sand.
Six benzine cases were placed on the boards
to carry my equipment, these being preferable
to heavier boxes, as I could thus man-handle
everything without undue strain. Space was
reserved for six cases of petrol and oil and
forty gallons of water. I had already fitted
oversize tyres and, as these would have to be
deflated when crossing the sandhills I equipped
a second set of security belts. Of personal
comforts I took nothing. My medicine-chest
consisted of a bottle of cough cure and half an
ounce of acetic acid. Flour, tea, and sugar
were my mainstay in the tucker-line, and I
depended on my rifle for my fresh meat. In
addition to being equipped to make a motion


picture record of my journey, I was track-
blazing through lands where cars are now a
commonplace.
On the second day out from Adelaide I
reached Wilmington Pass. On previous trips
through this country the steep, gravelly hill-
sides were alive with rabbits. That was all
changed. From a drought-stricken land bunny
had disappeared, having either perished or
migrated to more hospitable surroundings.
The Australian rabbit is a born explorer, and
has established his pioneer colonies in regions
where white men seldom venture. He is a
creature of great adaptability, and will find
food-supplies either above or below ground.
In the mulga country he is often to be seen
twenty feet up among the shrubby branches,
feeding from the leaves and bark, or lying at
full length on a swaying limb, sound asleep in
the warmth of the sun.
On being alarmed bunny leaps nimbly to
the ground, and disappears into the limestone
burrows. He does not remain long in there,
however, as they get very hot under a glaring
sun. For his moisture he gets sustenance from
the roots of mallee and sugar-gum, and he
thrives often thirty miles from the nearest
water. Nevertheless, he is very partial to liquid
refreshment when he can get it, and it is not
advisable to leave one’s water-bag lying un-
attended on the ground.
When the rabbits were plentiful in this sec


tion of the country, it was interesting to watch
the scene at a desert rock-hole on a moonlit
night. The pool would be surrounded by
hundreds of rabbits —two and three deep—
waiting their turn to drink their fill. Sud-
denly, as one watched, the line would break
at one end and three dingoes would come
trotting down with a lordly air, speedily
guzzle a few mouthfuls and then jump into
the pool, still drinking as they swam about.
The motor smell evidently overcame the
smell of man, for presently they came out to
investigate. With peculiar sharp, swerving
trots they circled round my camp. From my
bunk on the ground I made a sudden catcall,
and hissed. The leader bounded several feet
into the air and stumbled backward over his
companions. These latter showed their white
fangs and snarled, with hairy bristles stand-
ing up on their backs and bushy tails bent
slightly. Suddenly they dashed away toward
the skyline, and as suddenly, changing their
minds again, returned. This time they ap-
peared close at hand, taking whatever scanty
shelter the surroundings offered. Presently
a long drawn out wail sounded from far away.
For a moment they stood at attention, dark
figures silhouetted against the night; then giv-
ing the dingo-call in reply, they turned and
trotted quietly away, out of the picture into
the darkness.
I left Box Flat in the early morning. A


high wind was roaring up from astern, so, like
a wise navigator, I decided to take full ad-
vantage of it, and put up the hood of my car.
Heading away to the left I came to the Strez-
lecki River and, stopping my car, I went
ahead on foot to seek a crossing-place. For
over a mile I tramped across the sandy chan-
nels of the river-bed, on the opposing side of
which sandhills, scores of feet high, had been
built up by the wind. I returned to the car
and followed the river of sand upwards for
some miles until I came to a spot at which, by
charging down the steep incline, racing the
engine and slipping the clutch on low gear, I
just managed to get over. Here, on a little
dried-up saltpan, I discovered that scores of
thousands of rabbits had perished in the
shelter of the stunted saltbushes. Mobs of
half-starved dingoes were wandering about
seeking titbits or crouching in the shade of
the shrubs; they took no notice of the car. I
hurriedly left the evil-smelling locality.
I pursued my way over miles of scalded
plain —called scalded because the hot sun
scalds up all sign of vegetable life. A few
hundred yards away I sighted dingoes. Put-
ting my engine at full speed I dashed into the
centre of them, causing a general scatter.
Selecting one particularly healthy-looking
dog I put the car at him. He streaked away
in a cloud of feathery dust, his ears laid back
and his teeth showing in a grin. Putting all


his heart into it, he headed for the distant
sandhills, with the car, travelling at twenty-
five miles an hour, in hot pursuit. I yelled,
Wowser barked hoarsely and, as the speed of
the car increased, the dingo was further re-
called to the urgency of his Suddenly
the old bush outlaw slewed round, made a
frantic spring at the car, missed, and was
promptly bowled over. Looking back, I saw
him “all out,” returning over our tracks. I
let him go, despite Wowser’s reproachful
glances.
The wind dropped, and the heat became
intense. I lay down and fell into a light sleep, to
be awakened by Wowser’s growls. In the dis-
tance I saw seven niggers approaching. The old
gin was carrying a coolamon containing water
very carefully under her arm. A lubra had
a piccaninny, with little chubby fingers grab-
bing her long woolly hair, perched on her
skinny shoulders. This young lady carried the
day’s rations —a half-dead goanna which she
dragged along with its tail held in her claw-
like hand, the reptile’s head, with gaping
mouth, trailing along in the dust. A young
buck, with careless, jaunty strut, walked in
front of her, carrying naught but a light
wooden kangaroo spear. Two white-headed
and white-whiskered old aboriginals formed
the rest of the party. One of the old fellows
had white clay in his beard and hair, a sign
of mourning. I greeted them with two uplifted


fingers. Wowser, growling, retired to his
oily retreat under the car.
From behind the old gin a shy little young-
ster, finger in mouth, reluctantly appeared. I
gave them all some boiled lollies, the two ladies
of the party receiving their allowance from
the dignified and oldest male member. They
saw that I had observed native manners and
etiquette according to their customs, and
became friendly. The buck became inquisi-
tive, and started to examine the car. Wowser,
underneath, made a pounce and missed, and
was caught by me. The niggers cackled with
mirth, and peered cautiously under the car
at the bulldog now chained up. The lubra
tried to make a face of the same expression
as the dog’s. Meanwhile the native mongrels
appeared on the scene, grabbed the goanna
and shook out the little life that was left in
it.
I headed north-east, for Innamincka. On
the way I encountered heavy sandhills, and
dust-storms of great violence. All the exposed
portions of my face and hands bled from the
friction of the wind-blown gravel. In the
dryness that accompanied the storms my
finger-nails became brittle, my lips cracked,
and the woodwork of the camera shrank and
split. Tired and knocked up I came out, a
week later, on to a great stony plain Sturt s
Stony Desert. Blood red was the predomin-
ating colour of the earth. Overhead there


was a blue sky, streaked with windy mares-
tail clouds. In the crevices between the
boulders green shoots of scrub showed out.
Kangaroos, turkeys, and rabbits were to be
seen. In the queer, distorted ways of the
Never-Never, I would see a kangaroo gazing
at the moving car. On looking more closely
I would discover my prospective meal to be
a rabbit squatting on his haunches fifty yards
away. One meets with all kinds of dream
tricks in this land of distortion. Under a
hot sun, the closely packed boulders, over an
area of thousands of square miles, absorb and
radiate a great amount of heat, which a
northerly wind carries down toward the
southern part of the continent, and creates
the hot northerlies that sweep over South
Australia and Victoria.
In the distance and up to windward smoke
clouds drifted down toward me and brought
with them a plague of grasshoppers. A
vigilant hawk, which had followed overhead
all day, swooped down and while still a-wing,
seized a flying insect in his talons and devoured
it. Soon I was in the thick of grasshoppers,
and the air was dark with their bodies.
Whatever inconvenience they were to me,
they brought delight to the wild turkeys.
The wild turkey, or bustard, is a grey bird
standing about three feet high and weighing
up to twenty pounds—an excellent table fowl.
The old cock bird is very dignified, but inquisi


tive, a quality that leads to his undoing.
Every evening toward sundown, when in
turkey country, I would load up my little .22
repeater, drive the car along and keep a look-
out for next day’s rations. Turkey would be
the main item on the menu. I used to boil
the bird whole in a kerosene-tin —feathers and
all if in a hurry—taking it out next morning,
cutting the legs and breast off, and giving the
rest to Wowser.
Trees and a variety of game indicated that
I was approaching more favoured regions.
Pink galahs and white corella cockatoos
added a beautiful detail to the landscape.
Somewhere, a few miles away to the left, was
Cooper’s Creek —which meant water and fish.
I felt hungry at the idea, and also remembered
that for over a week I had been one of the
great unwashed. Wowser jumped over and
raced alongside. A dejected looking emu,
lying in the shade of a coolabah-tree, staggered
to its feet, stumbled, its legs kicking weakly.
I drew up alongside and found that it was a
case of “perish.” Filling a four-quart billy-
can with water from my canteens, I opened
the poor bird’s beak and poured the contents
in slowly. After waiting half an hour I re-
peated the performance. The desert roamer
rose and with unsteady gait made oft.
A cold breeze arose, so taking my quart-
pot of tea I got into my bunk to consume my
victuals of dough and salt-beef. Night came


and I grew sleepy. Emus grunted among
the timber, a crane croaked hoarsely down by
the river, fish splashed in the pools. The fire
flared up and the hood of the car loomed
darkly against the stars.
I awoke before dawn, frozen. The atmos-
phere and the surroundings were still and
silent, and it was bitterly cold. I soon got a
warm fire going. Getting out my fishing-line
and carbide lamp I went down to the water’s
edge, and lighting the lamp, and hastily turn-
ing over the slate rocks, I found some small
frogs to use for bait. I cast out, and down
went the bait. With a swish and a rush the line
was out of my hand. A hasty grab—a three-
pound black bream I
The sun was now rising. Some white sea-
gulls clamoured harshly overhead—strange
visitors, nearly a thousand miles inland. They
were from the Great Barrier Reef, off the
coast of Queensland. Thousands of years
ago, here, was a great inland sea. Does the
primeval instinct of former ages still exist in
these birds, and account for the migration to
this, their old-time breeding-ground, as is
proved by guano deposits.
My breakfast of fish was pleasant, notwith-
standing the fact that, owing to drought
conditions, the stale waters had imparted a
slightly weedy flavour to the flesh. A strange
process occurs in some of the fresh-water
holes out back. When not renewed and


cleaned by floods they become stale, smelling
and tasting of weeds. This condition con-
tinues for a week or two, then the water again
becomes sweet. The moon is said to be an
influence in the matter, but this supposition I
have never been able to verify.
Natives who live mainly on a fish diet are
prone to leprosy. On the northern shores of
Australia, where fish forms a big portion of
the food-supply, the disease is fairly common,
while in the interior of the continent the
aboriginals are free from it.
For two days I camped on the banks of
Cooper’s Creek, developing photographs,
washing clothes, house-keeping, and filling my
larder from nature’s store. Kangaroos, wal-
labies, wild pigeons, ducks, swans, and cranes
were plentiful, and in addition to edible fish,
there were mussels, and ground-and-tree-
seeds in abundance.
On this permanent waterhole Burke and
Wills had camped, exhausted from great pri-
vations, their two companions, Cray and King,
having died but a few days before, some miles
down the creek. Food was everywhere, but
they had no means of laying hands on it, owing
to a series of mishaps which had left them
stranded through no fault of their own.
Blackfellow tracks were to be seen along
the banks of the creek. Wanting to get some
more cinematograph pictures, I made several
smokes by burning dry lignum bushes. The


black smudge rose in a spiral, which I broke
every few seconds by smothering it with a
green bush. Then, from the top of a big
sandhill I waited and watched. There was
no immediate reply, but my signal was seen
and, on the following morning, natives came
in to my camp.
There was much yabber and jabber when
they saw the car. I arranged with them to
“act” for the moving-picture I was making.
The salary they demanded, and which I
agreed on, amounted to a full supply of
rations —flour, sugar, tea, treacle, salt billy-
goat—and boiled lollies. Sustenance in re-
turn for their services in the cause of public
amusement and instruction.
Three of the old men had been companions
of King. Recalling that the blacks had fed
him from their supply of nardoo seed, I got
them to show me their method of obtaining it.
We drove to where it was growing. Forget-
ting that my companions were not accustomed
to a pace faster than a walk, I sailed along,
dodging and swerving among the trees. It
was only when I happened to glance at the old
men’s faces that I realized that they were in
fear of their lives!
When we returned to camp we found the
gins howling. An old gin, evidently senile,
had wandered away from the camp during the
night and disappeared among the desert sand-
hills. She had not been missed until after
E


our departure. All the bucks were away
looking for her.
She was not found until the third day. In
the meantime a young man had died. He was
buried, and the mound was neatly covered
with six-foot lengths of wood. Behind the
grave a circular bough hut was built to receive
his wandering spirit. Beside the grave his
father, a white-whiskered, white-haired man,
stood guard with a big stick in his hand. He
had white clay daubed all over him. His vigil
would last fourteen days and fourteen nights.
The chief luxury of these blacks was pituri,
a root from a bushy vine that grows in the
Mulligan Sandhills, but is rare elsewhere. It
is first chewed by a lubra and then rolled in
white ashes. After that it is passed around
among the members of the tribe, who chew it
in turn. Its effect is narcotic. They were
fond of dried white ants, mixed with a white
clay and rolled into balls; and of white wood
grubs, swallowed without preparation other
than removing the heads.
It was time to leave my black friends.
Ploughing a passage through flat, sandy plains,
with patches of desert oak and box-trees,
I came out on the Innamincka road. A cloud
of dust became visible miles away. It turned
out to be the Innamincka mail express—two
dignified camels, side by side, harnessed to a
four-wheeled buggy. On the box-seat was the
young driver, wearing a freshly laundered


white shirt. He looked very spic and span
to me, who had not had a boiled shirt to wear
for weeks. We halted, camel and car (it was
a case of old and modern styles and smells),
and exchanged news and views. Innamincka
was but six miles away, so, bidding him good-
bye, I opened the throttle, and before long
came in sight of a few white houses perched
high on a hill. A couple of miles of red-
coloured boulders were left behind, and I
entered the main street of a township that
comprised a tin store, a tin police station, a
few tin dwellings and a hotel built of sun-
dried mud.
They were putting up a gallant fight against
drought at Innamincka. Hundreds of cattle
and horses were being watered at one small,
but apparently inexhaustible well. The work
went on day and night, the men toiling in
shifts of three, getting the water up for the
stock. At night, in the glare from a torch,
strange sights were to be seen. A black-
fellow hunted the beasts away until the
troughs were filled. In the background
gleamed hundreds of eyes, and there arose
the continual roar of the impatient and rest-
less cattle. Wild dogs and other creatures o±
the bush, their thirst overcoming their dread
of man, sneaked up to the troughs. One beast,
more venturesome than the rest, charged the
aboriginal, who jumped into the troughing.
The animal slipped and fell in, also. Another


black boy, to make the beast rise, twisted its
tail. Slipping and sliding, the beast got out
of the trough, charged and staggered back to
the mob. Conspicuous among the men was
a bearded old-timer. He was a giant in size,
over sixty years of age, and was toiling with
the energy of a man of twenty. He was, if
legend counts for anything, one of Broken
Hill’s early-day boxers, and a one-time
opponent of Bob Fitzsimmons.
I left Innamincka for Birdsville, south-
western Queensland, carrying mails from one
little outpost to another. Making a course
between high sand-ridges and over volcanic
ash-heaps, I headed away for the Diamantina
River. The going was very dead, and, on
low gear, the car sank up to the axles in brick-
red and yellow dust. The dust was of a kind
known out back as bull dust, owing to the
cattle being in the habit of rolling in it. This
dust has a peculiar effect on muddy water. A
little sprinkled in a pool will clarify it in a
very short time.
Far away a rising fog made its appearance.
Cattle were going in by thousands to the river.
I approached, and in closely packed lines,
head to tail, the column stretched away out,
far beyond the shimmering horizon. Their
tracks lay across that which I was travelling.
The herd separated and then, as I could travel
only slowly owing to the nature of the track,
they started circling around me in hundreds


—ringing, with their heads stretched out,
stiff tails twirling in the air, wild-eyed and
emitting occasional bellows. They smothered
both the car and myself in a cloud of dust. I
was glad that they were not in close formation
as there is always a chance of their rushing
at the object of their fright. Many'an over-
lander has met his death as a result of these
maddened charges.
I pushed on slowly through them and, after
travelling some distance, passed around the
end of a sandhill and saw before me the
vermin-proof, wire-netting fence that ex-
tended along the Queensland border. This
fence is said to be the longest in the world.
It extends three thousand miles right around
Queensland from the Pacific Ocean to the
Gulf of Carpentaria. Sand is continually
drifting up and burying it, or strong winds
blow away the ground surface, leaving sections
of the posts and netting in mid-air. Where
it passes into the tropical north it is liable to
damage or destruction by flood-waters. Its
maintenance is carried out by boundary-
riders; solitary men who ride up and down
its length on bicycle, camel, horse, or donkey.
Passing between the border gate I went
through the ceremony of photographing the
car with its front wheels in Queensland and
its back wheels in South Australia.
Near by, some cows, each with half a dozen
calves, were grazing on the herbage. One cow


will take care of several calves while their
mothers are away on a twenty-mile walk to
water showing how life changes its ways to
meet the demands of environment. Often a
little calf will jump unsteadily to its feet from
the hollow in the ground in which its mother
has stowed it away, hiding it from the dingoes;
knowing that her own tracks will be obliter-
ated by those of the other cattle.
I had been told that I would reach a road be-
tween the fence and the river. I kept a keen
look out for buckboard tracks and eventually
came out on a well defined mail-track. Running
short of water, I crossed the mail-track and
made straight in the direction of the river.
Stopping the car on the edge of the banks,
in the shade of the over-hanging trees, I
undressed and, from a little rocky bar, dived
in, enjoying a swim after the days of heat
and dryness. Also, I brought drinking-water
from the centre, where it was cooler and
sweeter than along the shallow edges. Over-
head, in the branches, white cockatoos were
screeching. There came a roar of tens of
thousands of wings and a great mob of pink
and grey galahs swooped in to drink from
the stream. A snake slithered into the water;
in his mouth was a frog that screamed with
the small voice of a terrified child.
Late in the afternoon I retraced my way to
the _ mail-track, and turned along it. The
engine got into its full stroke and, roaring,


we headed up the road for Birdsville. I kept
the Diamantina River on my right. Some
miles farther on I saw trees and water on my
left. I realized that I had crossed the course
of the Diamantina without knowing it! Burke
and Wills did exactly the same thing, and I,
in thinking over their misadventures, had
often criticized them for doing so.
Gleaming patches of white on the skyline
indicated my approach to Birdsville. As I
rattled up to the beginning of the main street,
the local camp niggers and all the several
white inhabitants came forth to greet me.
That night I retired to rest in an outback bed
—sapling chassis, bodywork of greenhide
straps and fencing-wire.


CHAPTER VI
IN THE TRACK OF BURKE AND WILLS
Leaving Birdsville, I set out on the twelve-
hundred-mile run to the Gulf of Carpentaria.
The scrubby sand patches now gave way to
open plains dotted with scraggy gum-trees.
Three days later I came out on to the red,
stony, undulating plains. Here I sighted
what appeared to be an inland sea, but what
was in reality the flood-waters of the Georgina
River. Along its margin thousands of black
duck, teal and water-hens, whistled and
cackled. I shot a few, and after roasting them
on hot coals, stowed them away in the car.
I found it quite impossible to cross the river
here, so I headed away inland, over heavy
sand-ridges and blacksoil country.
Speeding along at twelve miles per hour
over tussocky bushes and soft ground, I struck
a rock. The front axle was badly bent, and
the radius rods were doubled up, but that was
the extent of the damage. The engine
started all right. The battle began over
again. I struggled on, steering a rather
crazy course, until I came to some firewood.


Here I stopped and lit a fire so that I might
straighten the bent axje. Night found the
repairs effected. I turned in under the car
and slept. Next morning, over the dusty,
volcanic ridges the car wheezed its way on
low gear, the high being impossible even on
the down gradient. The setting sun found
me not many miles from my starting-point.
There was a glorious desert sunset, and I re-
call that I enjoyed it in spite of the weariness
which my weakness and the strain of the day’s
journey made me feel. The sky was dark
blue, orange, green, and purple; and through
the purple the setting sun, magnified by the
alkaline dust suspended in the atmosphere,
glowed like a rayless ball of flame.
As I made camp that night a cold clammy
breeze sprang up that felt as if it blew from
the vaults of the dead. In a sandhill I hol-
lowed out a shelter from the wind and spread
my blankets there. With Wowser at my feet
I lay down. It was a while before I slept.
That sense of great loneliness was on me. No
one who has not been out in those vast regions
can imagine the sense of complete aloneness
that can come to the traveller. The creaking
of the grasses seems to emphasize rather than
break the stillness.
Next morning I found the squashed remains
of my cold roast duck and shared the meal
with Wowser. Big truculent dog-dingoes were
wandering about, or sleeping in little caverns


in the breakaway cliffs. My camp was on the
edge of what in ages past had been an inland
sea.
For twenty miles the car struggled along
on low gear, the going gradually becoming
worse. Big cracks in the ground, some of
them nine inches wide and many feet deep,
made the going difficult. Down into these
the front wheels would flop, while the back
wheels spun helplessly. With jack and shovel
I would release the wheels, only to have to
repeat the process in a few minutes time.
There followed two days of this sort of travel-
ling with my water-supply getting very low.
The nearest water was in the Georgina, away
to the west, but how far I did not know. The
travelling became heavier still. To lighten
the car I dumped all my kit overboard, keep-
ing only the bicycle and some food.
I got into some very had country and the
water was finished. Even on low gear, racing
the engine and letting the clutch in gently I
could not make progress. Nor would the
forward gears take me hack over the way by
which I had come. Floating on the horizon,
above a mirage, were some sandhills. Toward
them I directed a course backwards. The car
humped along at three miles per hour, the
engine racing as though the heart would come
out of it. The overheating caused another
stoppage. Thirst was consuming me. Wowser,
too, was panting and whining on the seat he-


side me. I began to fear that I was trapped.
A flock of wild-fowl passed overhead, winging
their way toward water —the only possession
of any value in the world, it seemed to me.
Another stop. I tore the woodwork off the
back platform, placed it on the ground, and
ran the car on this for a few yards. She
picked up speed and, with everything full on,
ploughed a track for a short distance. It was
a last spurt. Suddenly there was an awful
rattle and a knocking from the engine. She
back-fired several times and then stalled.
Nothing would shift her.
I was stranded in the desert without water.
It was a case of travel or perish. I deflated
the tyres of my bike in the hope that I would
be able to use it, and set off. Wowser, his
tongue hanging, panted beside me in the shade
cast by my body. The strain of pedalling the
machine through the heavy going proved too
much. After three miles of plodding I
abandoned it. The sun beat down on the
baked earth. There was no shade for miles.
I trudged on, sick with heat and thirst.
Wowser was knocking up; he kept stumbling
on to his nose.
We went on all day. Sometimes I sat down
on the hot earth to rest, with a bit of cheese-
cloth over my head to keep the flies away. At
such times the dog crept into the shade of my
body and lay gasping. I tried to carry him,
but was not equal to sustaining his weight


Night fell with still no sign of the river. My
throat burned; my tongue seemed to be packed
tightly in my mouth, preventing the free
passage of air to my lungs.
I took westerly bearings from two stars that
I kept over my right shoulder. A cold wind
from the west now sprang up. Wowser, a
little refreshed, limped along in front, head
up and sniffing at the air. We walked all
night. About three in the morning a mob
of ducks, flying low and obviously headed for
water, cheered me.
Dawn; and silhouetted against the sky were
some dead lignum bushes; a sign of flood-
water country. Then, apparently about five
miles away, a dark line of timber indicated
the Georgina. In the clear light of that
country the trees may have been farther from
me than that. I know that I walked for a
long time without their seeming to take on
any increase in size.
We were stumbling along through part of
a large expanse of lignum bushes, when
Wowser gave a whine, and there was a whirr
of wings as a flock of wild duck rose from
cover. Turning, I pushed a way through the
scrub to the place from which they had risen;
and, with heart beating from fear of hopes
born only to be dashed, I stumbled through
boggy ground and came upon a wide shallow
lignum pool.
It took me a long while, sipping with


caution, to allay my thirst; and when that had
been accomplished I lay down to rest under a
lignum bush. I dozed and awoke stiff and
sore. I had to keep travelling. Somewhere
on the Georgina lay a cattle station, but
whether up river or down, from my present
position, I could not say. I made up my mind
to chance it up-steam. The banks of the river
lower down were, I knew, low and subject to
flooding.
We reached the river and followed the
easterly bank until progress was blocked by a
dense growth of lignum. We crossed, and
after some distance, came to a stretch of calm
backwaters that were black with thousands
of whistling ducks. On our approach they
flew up with a flapping of wings that almost
drowned their whistling chorus. There were
a few that were too wet to rise. One of these
darted into a bush. I cut off his retreat and
was fortunate enough to catch him. In
making the attempt I must have been
prompted more by instinct than by pressure
of immediate need. Hunger had left me. I
tied him to my belt and went on.
The country broke into sandhills. Through
some thick timber between them, I came upon
a wire fence. Then I saw the fresh hoof-
tracks of a horse and, following them, came
to a well defined pad. This in turn brought
me within sight of a homestead roof. As I,
with Wowser snuffing at my heels, staggered


past the camp of the homestead blacks, figures
appeared in the doorway of the house and a
man came hurrying toward me.
I was taken in and, during the several days
that it took me to recover, was treated with
true outback kindness. Wowser, too, coddled
back to his customary strength, was put on a
diet of dainties.
When I had sufficiently recuperated I set
out, with a mounted black boy and two pack-
horses, to return to my car. The horses were
in good nick, and a day’s fast travelling
brought us, towards dusk, to my bicycle tracks.
Following these up we came to the machine,
lying where I had abandoned it. We tied it
on one of the packs and headed back toward
the car. From there we went back along my
tracks and salved the gear I had discarded. The
carbide lamp was a help in finding it. It was
late when we returned and made camp.
Next morning, with that optimism peculiar
to motorists, I gave the handle a swing, and
to my surprise the engine started. And so
did the black boy. I took the wheel and for
a little way made progress; but the continual
low-gear work had depleted the petrol-supply.
The car gave a splutter or two and stopped.
On examination I found that the tank was
empty. We rode back to Glen Gyle station.
I learned that a hundred and twenty miles
away a spirit-driven engine was being used.
This was the nearest point at which I might


obtain benzine. Refusing a kindly offer of
a loan of horses, I set out on my bicycle. After
travelling about twenty-five miles I fell in,
and had my midday meal, with a cattle-drover.
He told me that a car had arrived at Cluny
station, on King’s Creek. At about four in
the afternoon, after abandoning my bike and
swimming the wide and weedy stream, I found
the car. It was standing in the shade of a
tree. I reached the homestead, and there met
Mrs Duncan, the owner-driver, who had made
a pioneer journey with her brother across six
hundred miles of central and western Queens-
land. They were stranded, also, for lack of
petrol, and had not sufficient to carry them
to their station, some hundreds of miles
farther on. She and her brother had just
arrived at Cluny.
The manager of Cluny came to our rescue.
He undertook to send a buggy to Boulia—-
three days distant —to get the necessary spirit.
In the meantime, from what remained of her
own supply of petrol, Mrs Duncan filled a
number of bottles. I took these back to my
stranded car, and with them was enabled to
work my passage through the sandhills to
Cluny. A week later the 44 rescue” supply
arrived, and we made preparations to depart,
as the driver who had been in to Bedourie
brought news that the river was coming down
a banker as the result of rains hundreds of
miles away. It was likely to be a race, on my


friend’s side, to reach the Diamantina, while
I had to make progress a hundred and twenty
miles northward to reach the crossing.
Reaching Bedourie, I rested long enough
to bathe in the hot artesian waters. Fish were
plentiful all round the casing, although the
water temperature was 110 degreesf
The flood had come down. It was exciting
work charging down steep inclines through a
few inches of water, where all the outlying
channels were steadily filling. It was strange,
too, to see the plains all wet despite the fact
that there had been no rain for a year. Death-
adders were numerous, and centipedes and
scorpions, flooded out of the cracks in the
ground, swarmed over every spot likely to
escape the rising waters. To my left was a
range of hills and toward these I battled a
passage beside the spreading flood.
Night fell, and big grey kangaroos, looking
ghostly in the powerful glare of the head-
lights, stood dazed and motionless. Then,
suddenly springing into action, they dis-
appeared into the surrounding blackness. I
shot one. I took otf the tail and my midnight
camp was made pleasant by delicious odours
as it cooked in the blackfellows’ style: placed
in the ground and covered with clay after it
has been wetted and packed with red-hot
stones.
On arrival at the river-crossing I found it
five feet deep in red muddy waters. The task


of unloading my kit and carrying it across
the stream on my head was a cold and heavy
one. This accomplished, I walked over to
Manor Downs station and got three of the
hands to help me drag my car across the river.
To effect the crossing I took the car well back
from the bank and then let her go at it, at top
speed. Just before reaching the stream I
shut off the engine so as to keep the water
from entering the cylinders. There was a
rush and a plunge; a churning of water
poured in and buried me to the chest. The
car stopped in midstream. Fastening on a
rope four of us heaved and strained, dragging
the car through the torrent, and finally drew
it up the steep and boggy bank.
Smothered in mud, with red water oozing
from her, the car looked a derelict. An
hour’s hard work set the engine in going
order. Then I found that the crank-case was
filled with water and caked inside with mud.
I remedied this after further labour, and
started on my way again. A few miles
farther on I came to another crossing. We
got through but the car bogged in the soft
muck coming out. The back wheels had
barely left the water’s edge. Nightfall found
me still struggling to extricate the car. I lit
the carbide lamp and toiled desperately,
jacking the car up and packing stones under
the wheels. My rate of progress was just
equal to the rise of the flood —about two feet
p


per hour. I had only to maintain that rate
of progress in order to win, for I was moving
gradually on to firmer ground. It took all
the resource and energy that I possessed. It
was a nice little drama, in its way, that
struggle in the glare of a carbide lamp be-
tween the creeping waters and a lone traveller
in Never-Never land. At 2 a.m. victory was
mine. We chugged up on to firm ground.
Even Wowser whined his relief of mind.
Weary and shivering I sought my bunk.
Next day I camped on the Burke River.
Along this, to the north and east, the Burke
and Wills expedition is believed to have
travelled. For the best part of a week I
travelled across monotonous stony and scrubby
plains, until the northern Queensland railway
broke the dreariness. Here, at Gilliat Siding,
I replenished my exhausted stores of food
and motor fuel, and again headed away in a
northerly direction across a series of low-
lying ranges. These are mentioned in Wills’s
diary.
Natives state that the Burke and Wills
expedition went down the Cooper. Wills’s
diary states that they went down the Strez-
lecki, travelling west. This suggests that
they were in error—and that the blacks were
right—for the Strezlecki runs south-westerly.
Wills’s diary is incomplete. A number of the
missing leaves are in the possession of out-
back station folk.


After crossing a number of creeks with
steep banks I came to tbe bead waters of tbe
Flinders Fiver. At one of the lagoons tens
of thousands of white cockatoos were congre-
gated. The ground was white with them, and
where they rested on the trees they gave the
branches the appearance of bending under the
weight of large snowy blossoms. The flapping
of their wings and the sound of their harsh
cries was deafening. On the river’s edge
dozens of crocodiles lay basking in the sun.
Wowser found one camped at a distance from
the others. It ran from him —fortunately.
He sprinted earnestly along behind it as it
dashed for the water with its waddling but
very fast gait.
One crocodile, which I shot, had swallowed
some large black rats. Blackfellows tell how
these are caught, and I believe their story to
be true. They say that the crocodile lies out
on a sand-bank, apparently sound asleep, with
his mouth open. A hungry rat, seeking
“tuckout” along the edge of the water, spies
the cavity with a nice piece of meat inside (the
crocodile’s tongue). The crocodile remains
absolutely motionless —like “dead fellah,” as
the natives say—and the rat walks into the
trap. Then down comes the huge jaw and the
rat is swallowed. These “Johnstone” croco-
diles are comparatively harmless. They grow
up to a length of about twelve feet. Though
living chiefly on fish and certain species of


vegetation, they have a liking for an occasional
meal of nigger-dog.
There were some blacks camped near by,
and they, in pursuit of small game, had set
grass fires furiously burning. I watched
an old gin stooping over a burrow, singing for
a meal in the shape of a goanna, that had
taken shelter from the flames. Why the
singing should make the reptile come out of
his burrow is deserving of scientific inquiry.
My layman’s theory is that he does so with
the idea of making a protest concerning the
horrible concert being conducted at his front
door. With swinging head he emerges and is
promptly killed with a smack of the gin’s
heavy yam-stick.
On the banks of the river the tea-trees grew
as high as sixty feet, with a ground girth often
of ten feet. The bark of the tea-tree was in
use by the blacks for a number of purposes.
It was used for corroboree head-dresses, being
bound together with cord made of human hair.
It was used for making shelter huts, and soft
blankets, into which the chubby, rolling-eyed
piccaninnies were wrapped. Ground into
powder the bark was also used as an antisep-
tic for wounds.
Wanting some sweetstuffs, and seeing the
small wild bees soaking up moisture on a wet
clay-bank, I touched one of them with a light
flake of this bark. The sticky gum adhered
to the little worker, and away it flew. Be


cause of the little piece of bark, which added
to its apparent size, I was able to follow its
flight. It went straight up, thus showing me
that the hive was close at hand. Had it flown
in a straighter line I would have known that
the hive was some distance away. I found it
in a hollow branch of a freshwater mangrove.
The honey, or rather a sticky sugar, like a mass
of small pea-shaped globules, had an excellent
flavour.
In order to obtain it I had to cautiously
manoeuvre to avoid a hornets’ nest; a round
affair, as big as a frying-pan, and honey-
combed with cells. Egg-laying was in
process. Each hornet, having deposited its
egg in one of the cells, flew away, returning
soon after with a green spider, carried be-
tween its hind legs. The spider, in a state of
suspended animation from the effects of a
toxin administered, presumably, by the hornet,
was placed alongside the egg, the cell being
then covered with wax. It would remain
there as food for the young hornet when it
emerged from the egg.
I rested on the Flinders River for a few
days and then was soon on my way again.
For some distance I had to force a track
through cane-grass ten feet high. It was
rather exciting, the view being limited and
bumps and washouts frequent. I was right
in the gulf country. The tall grass gave way
to bush sprinkled with pandanus palm, and to


jungle. The pandanus, or corkscrew palm,
branches like a tree, the palm heads being on
the ends of the bare limbs. The fruit, in
shape, is like a large pineapple, but is hard
and woody to the taste. The natives roast
them and eat the inner portions.
In mid-afternoon I fell in with a party of
buck niggers, and that night reached their
camp. I was among the saltwater estuaries,
not far from the shores of the Gulf. Here I
witnessed a marriage ceremony. The man
and the girl walked hand in hand to the foot
of a shady gum-tree and, together, lit a fire.
A possum was placed on the embers and
roasted. Then there was a rush of laughing,
yelling, painted figures from the darkness of
the surrounding bush, and the ceremony was
completed.
In the morning the lubras and piccaninnies,
with coolamons in their hands and dogs trail-
ing behind, set out from the camp to secure
that portion of the day’s food—water-lily
roots, seeds, edible roots, leaves and reptiles
—that custom has made it their duty to
obtain.
The bucks, in parties, made off for the
hunting- and fishing-grounds. As they were
not unfriendly I accompanied one of the
groups. With home-made nets bundled up we
set off for the nearest of the tidal channels.
As the tide was not yet at the full, they hooped
their nets together with switchy branches, and


then, in line, we advanced up the shallow
waist-deep inlet. Fish darted about frantically
in front of us, charged the nets, and becoming
entangled, were picked up and thrown flap-
ping on to the banks. We had gone only a
little distance when there was a yell
that seemed to rise in unison from every
throat. The nets were hastily dropped and
there was a frantic scramble for the shore.
A long submarine-like string of bubbles, and
a mud trail in the waters, advancing at a
great pace, had given warning of a charging
crocodile. He passed by, giving a vicious lash
with his tail, a blow that churned the water
like a steamboat propeller. The danger past,
we re-entered the water, the blacks laughing
and splashing as they advanced.
Soon we went over to the main, or larger,
side channel. Boughs were hastily broken
down and a barricade built of them across the
stream. After that, there was a wait for the
turn of the tide. When that took place the
fish, having fed up-stream, came down with
the ebbing waters. The leafy barricade shook
as big fish, finding their progress barred,
endeavoured to break a way through. The
niggers, hunting as much for the fun of the
chase, I think, as to obtain food, were aquiver
with excitement. Whizz went a spear. The
shaft bobbed up and down and then started
away up-stream at express speed. Spears were
now flying fast and furious, plunging into the


agitated mass of barramundi, tiger mullet,
salmon, and kingfisb. The natives were in the
water, jabbing with their spears and bringing
the fish to the bank. One gave a yell of pain
and came out limping, badly stung by a cat-
fish. In the excitement I, too, rushed in, but
feeling something big, soft and slimy around
my shins, hastily scrambled out again.
A shark’s fin, cleaving the waters, tore
down-stream, and in a rush and a rip, a breach
was made in the barricade. It was hurriedly
covered with some grass nets. A native dug-
out log canoe came down-stream, paddled by
two finely built natives. They were chasing
a dugong, trying to harpoon it. Rolling lazily
over the barricade, and breaking portion of it
down, it disappeared with the now fast-
moving current. The blacks on the shore
pursued it, but the mammal reached the main
river and disappeared into the salty depths.
We returned home well laden with game.
Some of it was salted down to be kept for
future barter with Malays and Chinese.
The piccaninnies, too, had been earning their
“tuckout,” digging down into the soft soil at
the foot of the long creeping vines, for the
yam roots, which, when cooked, add a succu-
lent item to the daily diet. In a little tidal
rivulet, three feet deep, a girl was throwing
out on to the rush-grown banks numbers of
mullet, which, while going down-stream, were
caught in a grass clap-net. Several youngsters


and a mob. of dingo-pups were energetically
hunting a small three-incb lizard which even-
tually took refuge up a scrubby tea-tree.
Laughing and yelling gleefully the little
binghis went up after it. A limb snapped,
the lizard dropped to the ground, the excite-
ment of the chase ended in an anti-climax
one of the pups swallowed him whole.
Twilight—camp-fires flickered and gleamed
beneath the lofty trees; a purple smoke haze
drifted through the bush. There was a mur-
mur of subdued voices around each of the
camp-fires. A night hawk skimmed swiftly
through the overhanging branches, screaming
as he charged along. Close by, in the river, a
bull crocodile bellowed. Mosquitoes sang
shrilly about my head. I went to the
blacks’ smoky camp-fires accompanied by
Wowser. The bulldog had proved his fighting
prowess during the day. I noticed that some
of the gins had tied up some of their most
beloved mongrels.
There was to be a corroboree. With the
blacks, corroborees are of two kinds. One kind,
such as those connected with the ceremonies
of initiation, are serious matters, and may be
witnessed only by the initiated. Others, such
as that which was to go forward that night,
occupy the same place in the blacks’ lives as
the books and theatres do in ours. They a fiord
entertainment and often supply a resume of
some recent and significant happening.


Visitors were coming in from surrounding
camps, with wallabies, baked whole, under
their arms, and small bag-nets of high-smell-
ing dried fish on their heads. Isolated groups
were hard at work, painting themselves with
white, red, and yellow ochres, smearing their
faces with blood on to which they daubed
turkey feathers that had been ground to fluff
between stones. A chattering monotonous
sing-song mingled with the clatter of boom-
erangs. The orchestra was tuning up. The
music was drawn from the straight, hollow
branch of a tree, which made a sound like
“didjeroo-didjeroo-did-jer-oo.” A native, with
staring, bulging eyes and sweating body put
all his energy into making this monotonous
melody. It is the only wind instrument that I
have seen the blackfellows use.
Flaring firesticks, carried by elderly
natives, were brought out to a soft sandy piece
of ground. The surface was thoroughly swept
with boughs, and this formed the dancing-
stage. Around this fifty-foot circle was the
audience, squatting on haunches. They num-
bered about two hundred, composed of white-
whiskered old bucks, bleary-eyed old gins, and
lubras with their babies wrapped in tea-tree
bark and held close to their breasts. Standing
alongside, with fingers in their mouths, and
staring with round wondering eyes, or
huddling in close to mother, were the black
piccaninnies, half afraid, yet unable to run


away because debil-debil lay beyond the line
of encircling fires.
The dance illustrated a traditional story,
one that was perhaps hundreds of years old.
As it went forward the time given by the
orchestra was kept with a stamping of feet by
the performers, while the audience assisted
with the clack of boomerangs, one against
another, and, on the part of the gins, by the
clapping of hands brought smartly down on
the inner sides of the thighs. It ended when
the man who was playing the tragic role
dropped exhausted in the centre of the open
space and fainted —or perhaps fell asleep.
For some minutes absolute silence reigned.
Then, with a leap and a bound over the heads
of the audience, a Kaditcha or debil-debil
appeared, painted in streaks of white to repre-
sent a skeleton. With sneaking leaps he
proceeded to dance the dead-man corroboree
around the prostrate man. The watching gins
started a wailing chorus. It was sustained
for a while and then died away. This ended
the corroboree.
Soon fires which had died down burned
briskly again. Supper came on. I had a few
boiled lollies among my outfit, which I served
round. There were murmurs of approval.
The piccaninnies chewed in silent satisfaction,
throwing confiding glances in my direction.
Next morning it was found that in the
enthusiasm following on the evening’s enter


tainment a too hearty supper had been eaten,
with the result that dismal voices were now
complaining, “Tuckout finish.” The males
were going out for a hunt, to which I, as the
possessor of a much-esteemed rifle, was in-
vited. I rolled a mosquito-net, filled my ban-
dolier with .44 cartridges for my repeater,
and, clad in a bathing-costume and elastic-side
boots (a bathing-costume does not require tak-
ing off; when crossing a river) joined the black
hunters. Of tucker I took none, past experience
having taught me that it was only a weight
to carry and a general handicap—when car-
ried outside. Wowser, trotting at my heels, did
not look more disapproving than usual. Most
of the hunters had a small ball of possum fur
tied to a band around their necks. This was
to place between their teeth when spear-
throwing. Its purpose seemed to be to prevent
the teeth from grinding together when making
the lunge. Various kinds of spear-heads were
carried, wrapped in tea-tree hark —to be
changed according to the sort of game being
hunted.
We had not been long on our way when a
native bees’ nest was discovered and looted.
The blacks ate the bees and the young, along
with the honey. Made curious, I sampled
them, too, and found them to have a spicy
taste. At a lagoon we drank, and ate a little
of the water-lily roots, which tasted something
like green cabbage.


Going on again, we kept silence. My com-
panions spoke to each other only in sign
language. We were getting into game country.
Ahead, gleaming through the trees, was a
swamp. The blacks wandered about through
the reeds for a while, in apparently aimless
fashion. A few wild ducks rose and'passed
overhead. Then one of the men —a young
fellow —flung his spear. It tore through a mass
of water-weed and stood upright. He recov-
ered it with a struggling black duck impaled
on the point. Taking the victim off, he
promptly killed it by biting the back of its
neck, and then hung it to his plaited-hair belt.
Several ducks were caught in this manner by
the different members of the party. The spears
used for the purpose had two wooden points
attached to a six-foot shaft.
The possible catch of ducks being limited,
we set off in search of other game, such as
kangaroos and wallabies, in the little open
glades through the bush. Duck spear-points
were taken off, and wicked-looking barbed
ends attached. Barbed spears are seldom used
amongst the timber, as the hooked points
become entangled in the foliage. In timber
country a long spear is used.
Then came my turn, and as ever since boy-
hood days I have hunted the ’roo, I took
command. Organizing the party into groups
I sent them into the dense scrubs and, going
out into the open, I waited. Presently out


came bounding a ball of fur, chattering in
fright and twirling his little left arm vigor-
ously. It was an organ-grinding wallaby.
Wowser, waiting the word, trembled and
whined, but I decided that the animal was
not worth a shot.
The long grass waved suspiciously about a
hundred yards away and I saw a ’roo creeping
along on all fours. I whistled shrilly and he
raised himself on his hind-quarters and looked
about him, ears flicking backwards and for-
wards. A shot failed to bring him down and
away he went, bounding over the four feet high
tussocks. A flying shot hit him; he staggered
and then went on. Wowser went after him,
and some of the blacks appeared and took up
the chase. The ’roo and the dog disappeared.
We quickly ran the tracks down along the
edge of the scrub. Here Wowser had the ’roo
at bay. The latter was as tall as a man and
full of fight. The dog, more courageous than
discreet, rushed him; and the ’roo, stooping
over, grabbed him in short muscular forearms.
There was a tussle, and Wowser, twisting
round, got a grip of the ’roo’s throat. The
dog’s greatest danger was that the ’roo would
raise a hind leg and rip him with the big
centre toe. A blow from a nulla-nulla, which I
had seized from one of the blacks, ended the
struggle.
The blacks were in great glee. We went
back to our hunt, which after this proceeded


in more orderly fashion, the natives beating
through the jungle while I, waiting in the
open with my rifle, brought down whatever
game made its appearance. We returned home
with a good bag.
We had not long returned when the hoarse
croaking of crows and shrill squarking of
cockatoos flying around in circles against the
sky announced someone’s approach. There
was a waving of the long grasses outside the
camp, and above them were seen, bobbing up
and down as their owners approached, black
heads with white clay headbands. Into our
camp they came; jaunty looking bucks, spears
in hand, meek and weary looking gins with
babies on their shoulders, youths and girls in
the rear, and, bringing up behind, a mob of
skinny tick-bitten mongrels.
It was a friendly tribe from a southern
inland district coming back from the coast.
The feminine section was loaded with salt-
pan salt. Mutual arrangements allow of one
tribe passing through another’s territory,
especially when gathering salt. It was a point
of honour not to interfere more than was
necessary with the local tribe’s game-supply.
That night there was a friendly intermingling
between the two tribes, the men forgathering
and the ladies withdrawing to discuss what-
ever it was that especially concerned them.
A day or two later I went with a hunting
party to the shores of the Gulf, which lay but


a few miles from the camp. The tide was
going out when we reached the beach. We
came across a three feet wide track extending
from the water’s edge to the foot of a sand
hillock, and thence back again in a Y-shaped
formation. At the apex of the tracks we dug
down with our hands for a few feet, and
there came upon that which we expected to
find—turtle eggs. There were eighty, or more,
of them. They were of the shape, size, and
texture of tennis balls. The niggers promptly
made a hole in the ground and proceeded to
hunt through each other’s hair for matches
which I had given them. A fire was soon
lighted, and when it had burned down to a
hot ash, the eggs were placed on it, covered
over, and left to cook.
In the meantime we amused ourselves with
small grass nets at the mouth of a tidal chan-
nel. A few fat mullet were snared, and then
my net was suddenly torn from my hands. At
a little distance from me there developed a
swirl of muddy waters. I approached the
disturbance cautiously. Out of the churning
mass of muddy foam there rose a long, saw-
like snout, around which my net was en-
tangled, and I had a glimpse of the body of
a six-foot saw-fish. The niggers made a rush,
and spears were driven into the leathery hide.
The captive was dragged ashore and the net —
completely ruined—was disentangled.
We lunched on turtle eggs and, after a


siesta, wandered about among the mangroves.
The ground was marked with a network of
cracks and sizzling hisses rose from under-
foot. Down into a jagged hole at the foot of
a tree the natives peered, jabbering. A spear
was thrust down. There was a grinding, chop-
ping noise and, after a little digging, out came
an enormous crab. He was eighteen inches
across and had blue boney claws big enough
to break a man’s fingers. He was a valued
addition to the mullet that we had netted.
Rifle-fish were fairly plentiful. They were
about ten inches long, brown on the back, with
stripes in black and silver underneath, and
remarkable for the fact that they came to
the surface to spit. We found a crocodile’s
nest among the rushes at high-water mark.
Strangely enough, two of the natives would
not go near it. They were young men and
held that if they interfered with the croco-
dile’s property they would at once become old
men. Having no fears of this kind concerning
myself, I scraped away the decaying vege-
tation and came —after uncovering very un-
pleasant odours —upon a clutch of thirty-two
eggs, some of which were just about to hatch.
Opening some of them I dragged out some
nine inches long crocodiles, that, for all their
extreme youth, hissed furiously and snapped
at my fingers.
I did a little effective fishing with my rifle.
Prom a tea-tree that overhung the stream I
G


saw some big, fat, black bream lazily disport-
ing themselves in the limpid depths. I rubbed
my hand softly on the side of the tree, which
caused bits of light fluffy bark to fall and
float on the water. The bream rose to inves-
tigate—and with them came an extra large
barramundi. I took aim and fired. The barra-
mundi zigzagged wildly about and some of the
bream —stunned by the shot —floated dazedly
down-stream. I was intent on the big fish.
Passing the rifle back to a black, I dived in
and caught the big fish, holding it to my chest,
with the fingers of one hand hooked in its gills.
Two of the blacks, with a shout of delight,
came to my assistance, while others, plunging
into the water, secured the bream.
Late in the afternoon smoke signals
appeared, rising at a distance of a few miles.
They were from a party that had gone dugong
hunting. They had been unsuccessful but
had secured some turtle-meat. The signals were
answered by us. We arrived back at the camp
shortly after the party that had signalled
us. They had brought in about two hundred-
weight of steaky looking meat. That night
I had portion of it, grilled on the coals. It
made a good supper, taken with a little baked
mullet.
I did a fair amount of cinemaphotography
while with these blacks. The films had to be
washed at night, in the edge of the river, by
the light of a carbide lamp. I filmed portion


of an initiation dance one night, working by
the light of one-minute magnesium flares. The
dance was the Flying Fox corroboree. The
man being initiated sat in the centre of a ring
while the rest, squatting around him at a little
distance, made their way toward him with
movements suggestive of those of a flying fox.
I had the camera set up, the dance was in
progress, and I gave the word to a native that
I had previously instructed, to go around
the circle and apply a firestick to each of the
flares. He did this and for a while all went
well, the dancers executing their grotesque
movements with great seriousness, myself
turning the crank of the machine, and the
flares burning brightly. Unfortunately the
flares had become damaged by exposure;
instead of burning steadily they began jump-
ing about, darting across the ground like a
swarm of meteorites across a moonless sky.
Their antics were opposed to the grave nature
of the dance and it came speedily to an end.
Next morning I decided to make straight
for Normanton. A wide detour was neces-
sary along that part of the coast, as swamps
and steep washouts were numerous. After a
few hours of low-gear work through long
grass, stumps, and ant-beds, I came out on to
the northerly road running down the Norman
River. The car looked like a small steam-
roller, the wheels being swollen to enormous
proportions with black mud matted with
grass.


Through the scattered tea-tree and pan-
danus palms I could see the glitter of steel
rails, the first I had seen for many months.
They were laid down, incidentally, on steel
sleepers, as wooden sleepers would have been
very quickly destroyed by white ants.
Nearing Normanton I stopped and paid my
respects to a Chinese grave. There were
four cornerposts, covered from top to bottom
with Chinese characters. The mound of earth
was covered with dried flowers, pieces of
crockery-ware, and bottles. The Chinese, in
the north at any rate, have a custom of placing
bottles of liquor on the graves of their coun-
trymen, to appease the evil spirits. As the
bottles in this instance were all empty I as-
sumed that the evil ones had been duly pro-
pitiated. In fact I could see their boot-tracks
on the ground, and a couple of half-burnt
matches, as if one of them had lit his pipe
before going on his evil way.
I had arrived in Normanton and my journey
was behind me. I had collected some in-
teresting data on matters connected with the
Burke and Wills expedition where some
doubt existed, and I had made a moving-
picture film depicting life and scenes of the
Australian inland, that was later shown all
over the Commonwealth. As we drove into
the little capital of the Gulf country Wowser’s
expression of disapproval was as pronounced
as on the day he left Adelaide.


CHAPTER VII
IN TROPICAL JUNGLES
I was in the jungles of Cape York. I had
cycled up there from Sydney and was living
with a tribe of blacks. My only “white”
companion was Hinkum, an Australian cattle-
dog. For days, heavily laden, the blacks and
I had tramped over scrub and sandhills,
scrambled up rocky cliffs and jungle-clad
ranges. Here, amidst a picturesque tangle
of tropical creepers, orchids, big timber and
palms, we camped on the edge of a placid
running creek. Birds were singing a wonder-
ful variety of melodies. The Go-walloys-de-
blue pigeons in thousands were cooing to each
other as they fed on wild fruits. A tropical
kookaburra, having lost his familiar southern
laugh, “crawked” in terror as a small falcon
pursued him. Two aboriginals were busy
jabbing spears into inquisitive heads that
peered out of holes under the soaking, mossy
creek-banks. With a heave they brought out
four feet long eels.
Among the many tall trees a big white cedar
attracted our attention. This was to be our


future craft —a dug-out canoe. After dining
on grilled eel, two natives set to work, and
late in the afternoon the giant came crashing
down. In his fall he tore away live vines for
hundreds of yards around. Dinkum and an
assortment of native mongrels promptly ran
in, searching for game. They encountered a
nest of infuriated hornets! One sampled
Dinkum. He thought one of the native dogs
had bitten him. A dog-fight took place in the
midst of a swarm of stinging darting insects.
The log selected for our dug-out proved
solid in trunk and limbs, the wood as clear in
colour as yellow-white ivory. Sitting astride
the aboriginals hewed big slices out with their
tomahawks. For several days they sweated
and toiled, chopping and charring the in-
terior. While this was going on I spent a
good deal of my time exploring the jungle. I
climbed a conical peak a thousand feet high
and enjoyed a fine panorama of sea, moun-
tains, jungles, valleys, plains, and freshwater
lagoons. Near the mouth of the river there
was an excellent natural landing-ground for
aircraft. One never ceases to wonder at the
extent and variety of the little known and
vast north of Australia.
Hoping to vary a menu of damper and eel
that threatened to become monotonous I
wandered about the jungle in search of game.
Hook-like lawyer-vines in many places made
progress somewhat slow. The dog, too, had


his worries. There was a pea-shaped plant
with soft hairs around it, that, when trodden
on, exuded blobs of sticky substance. This
stuff got between Dinkum’s toes and clung
in masses round his feet. With his mouth he
would tear some of it off —only get his
whiskers plastered with it. A queer looking
dog it was that, with peculiar gait, trotted
sniffing along the trail of scrub-turkey or wild
One day, in a mound of decaying leaves, I
found several turkey eggs. Each one was
planted singly, with the wide end uppermost.
The reason for this was that the chick, when
hatched by the heat of the vegetable mould,
would find itself lying on its back, feet up-
wards. As it became vigorous and restless it
would tear away the rubbish between it and
the surface. The scrub-turkey chick, as soon
as it emerges from the mound, is able to tend,
for itself. It makes for the jungle, where it
can get its food, and can dodge, sprint, or hide,
in an expert and bushmanlike manner.
Having ascertained that the eggs were fresh,
I put the rest in my shirt. #
Suddenly there came the rustling ot bushes,
the stamping of feet, and then barks, snorts,
and grunts. Several wild pigs dashed by. An
old boar, seeing the dogs coming, backed be-
tween the broad-bladed roots of a wild fig-tree
and stood at bay. He was a wicked looking
devil. He had tough fighting sheaths on his


shoulder-blades, and a line of stiff hair raised
along his bony spine. His ears twitched, his
eyes gleamed with a baleful blue light. He
chopped his big molars and frothed at the
mouth.
I wanted pork, so I lashed my sheath-knife
to a strong stick and sparred around. A
hooked lawyer-yine held me for a moment.
“Whuff! Whuff I” With startling quickness
the boar rushed at me. His tough shoulder-
blade struck my knee-cap as I jumped side-
ways. Dinkum grabbed one of his hind legs
and a tussle ensued; but the boar was too
powerful for the dog to hold. Before I could
recover myself he broke away and went crash-
ing into the jungle. It was a quite unprofit-
able incident. Eggs were streaming all over
me, my leg was numb and rapidly swelling,
and so I hobbled back to camp.
At last the canoe was afloat, and the
aboriginals were cutting pieces out here
and there, in order to give it good balance in
the water. It took a couple of days to accom-
plish this. Then we packed up and journeyed
down the river to the coast, shooting the small
rapids in fine style. Toward evening we drew
in to the bank, and after landing, climbed
some very high sandhills. The tops of these
were worn flat by the trampling of the feet of
generations of aboriginals. Their custom
was to erect barricades of boughs and lie in
hiding behind them, waiting for birds and


game coming down to the freshwater native
wells on the flats.
Away to the east blue seas were studded with
dark reefs and wooded islands. To the west
serrated purple mountains loomed up against
the glory of the setting sun. High up 'above all
were rapidly moving clouds of most unusual
appearance—they frayed away to drifting
specks on their outer edges, and though the
evening was still they came toward us as if
driven by a high wind. Crouched behind the
barricades we lay hidden and watchful. On
nearer view, the cloud masses broke into vast
flocks of birds—innumerable nutmeg pigeons
coming in to drink. From a height of many
hundreds of feet they descended swiftly,
swooping and swerving through air-pockets
and atmospheric currents. They descended
to within ten feet of our heads, black and
white birds in untellable numbers, whirring
past at fifty miles an hour.
Up the aboriginals jumped, hurling their
waterlogged throwing-sticks—left and right
handed—into the thick of the bird-flight. In
a very short while we had sufficient birds to
make a number of pigeon-pies—pigeons
cooked feathers and all, rolled around with
wet clay and baked among hot ashes. When
cooked, the brick-like crust was broken and
the hot damp feathers fell off. The plump
morsel was excellent. The blacks particularly


enjoyed the fruit contents of the crop—wild
plums, as soft as if they had been stewed.
As I ate I watched the last of the flights
disappearing over the sea. They were return-
ing to their nesting islands after feeding all
day in the jungles. Their crops were full of
large berries as food for their young. Law
prevents the commercial exploitation or
wholesale destruction of these migrants who
come, each year, from far overseas to rear
their young on the islands off the shores of
Cape York. Aboriginals—and white men
temporarily resident among them, I hope —
are exempt from game laws when killing for
food.
After supper, the water being calm and
moonlit, we tested the sea-going qualities of
our canoe by paddling out toward a rocky reef
some ten miles from the shore. A smoke
haze from a hushfire enveloped us, and for
hours we drifted along, expecting the tide to
carry us on to the reef. We worked at the
paddles, moving with a soft ripple through
misty nothingness. There was nothing by
which we could guide ourselves; neither sight
nor sound. Relief came when something rose
out of the water astern and gave a startling
yowl. This awoke many sea birds, and their
cries guided us to the reef.
As the water shallowed the binghis jumped
overboard and shoved the canoe ashore be-
tween the coral. As they waded, one and the
other would give a “yakkhi” yell when finny


shadows darted past their shins. They were
in fear of the dreaded stone-fish —a squat,
ugly, drab fellow who lay in the sand with his
poisonous barbs only too ready to be used on
the offensive. The waters lapped gently on
a shingle beach, so the canoe was dragged well
up above high-tide mark.
A drizzling rain began and the incoming
tide made me move from a washed-out tidal
cave but I managed to squeeze underneath a
big boulder. Singapore ants —a minute
variety—crawled over me in thousands. I
was prepared for ants in the inland, but to be
plagued by them on a tropic island was more
than I had expected. A centipede rattled his
bony person around my ear-tip; hermit-crabs
poked their heads and claws out of their bor-
rowed shells and pulled the hair of my legs
and head. Dinkum growled at something in
a crevice that hissed and growled fiercely back
at him —the smell told me that it was a native-
cat. The rain cleared off, and I sighted a
gleaming row of lights about a mile away. A
comfortable looking passenger steamer had
dropped anchor, evidently not trusting herself
to pick a course at night-time through the
reef-studded seas that fringe this part of the
continent. The boys on the other side of the
little island were chanting an aboriginal song
of the rain—a wonderfully realistic imitation
of the varied voices of frogs welcoming the
beginning of the wet season.


We arose before dawn. On the sandy
beach thousands of nocturnal crabs were feed-
ing and scampering about. These we hunted
with sticks and spears for our morning meal.
Day came, and the heads of turtle were seen
popping up, taking a breather before diving
down again to feed on the water-grasses a few
fathoms below.
We went out after turtle. The natives
pushed off silently. With a pole, which looked
like a clothes-prop, and to which was fastened
a ten-inch nail, a native stood up in the bows,
his big “hoop” balanced on the gunwales. A
turtle was rising; we could see his dark cara-
pace coming up through the blur of the water.
All aboard the canoe froze. With a sideways
fall the huntsman harpooned the turtle. Then
he sprang overboard, reaching the turtle with
quick strokes. He mounted it, and getting a
grip of its shell close behind the foreflippers,
prevented it from sounding. With utter
disregard of sharks, crocodiles, and other
man-eaters of the sea, the excited natives dived
overboard to the assistance of the harpooner.
They grabbed the turtle and tied it to the
cauoG.
" The splashing, banging, and yelling brought
several inquisitive sharks about. Their fins
sheered the surface, and they paused, sank,
and darted toward the centre of turmoil.
Then, losing their nerve, the sharks came to


the surface and circled round and round, while
the aboriginals scrambled aboard the canoe.
We paddled toward the shore. The sharks,
now on the turtle-blood trail, became frantic.
One daring monster charged at the turtle.
With blows from the paddles and prods from
the improvised spear, he was kept away, but
the hungry brute chased the canoe right into
the shallows and became stranded for a few
moments. We reached the shore in time to
get my rifle and let him sample a few .303
bullets. The incident being one of everyday
occurrence to the natives, they unconcernedly
off-loaded and proceeded to the business of
killing, carving, and cooking.
This, according to the ideas of civilized
people, is a cruel and savage ritual. The
sighing four feet wide creature, according to
custom, has its eyes poked out. It is then
turned on its back on to a smouldering fire —
its flippers now and again sweeping the sand
in powerful blows. While it lies on the fire
the fifty yard long entrail is hauled out and
devoured foot by foot. The meat has now
become detached from the shell, so it is torn
apart and placed in a hole in the ground which
has previously had a fire lit in it with stone
placed on top. These red-hot stones—handled
with damp paper-bark that was carried in the
bottom of the canoe—are taken out and then
replaced on top of the flesh. Damp grass and
leaves are put over all, and the lot covered


with sand. The cooking process requires
several hours.
Later we headed away toward a point about
eight miles distant. Our craft, steady enough
in slack water, needed careful balancing in
the sea. The aboriginals were still eating. A
wide, flat stone was in the bottom of the canoe
and on this a small fire was smouldering. One
of the blacks remained constantly in the bows,
signalling, by snaps of his fingers and slaps
of his hand on various parts of his body, the
way around a slightly submerged reef or sand-
bank, or a passage through a channel. Also,
as a pastime, he would now and then grab his
fish-spear. It had four eighteen-inch prongs
of sharpened wood, fixed to the shaft by means
of bloodwood gum. Every fish he speared
was promptly rendered helpless by his biting
it through the spine.
As the canoe was new it was as yet ungreased
and unseasoned. Leaks developed, and I sat
in six inches of smelly water most of the time.
A shell was used as a bailer.
We crossed the sea, and once more among
the mainland sand-banks, were poling along
with a foot of water under our keel. We
turned from open water and made our way
up an estuary where, beneath shady trees, we
floated silently along on the incoming tide,
seeking the junction of fresh and salt water.
The paper-bark trees and sea-mangrove forest
locked their branches above the stream,


making a shadowy aisle. Eocky caverns and
grottoes with water tinkling into them lined
the smooth narrow sand-beaches. Clear
springs of fresh water bubbled up to the sur-
face of the sea-salted water on which we
floated. It was an enchanted waterway.
For some time two shark-fins had been
following us, doubtless attracted by the turtle
smell and the greasy trail; so, with my shot-
gun, I put a charge into a dorsal fin. Heav-
ing, it charged toward us —whether it was
attacking the canoe, or did not see us, I do not
know. There was no time to reload. We
were in danger of being swamped—if nothing
worse. I, with gun-butt, and the boys with
paddles, splashed and yelled, at the same time
taking every care to keep the canoe balanced.
There were a few very anxious seconds.
Three yards aw T ay from us the surging shark
swung around and streaked away seawards,
the resulting waves lapping over the gunwales
into the canoe.
We turned around as the tide was now on
the ebb, and after a little while came up with
some natives who were making their way
along the shore of the estuary. Cliffs, near the
water’s edge, had forced them into the stream.
They were wading neck-deep. Theirs was a
motley procession. First came the bucks, with
spears and boomerangs. Then came the gins,
some with puppies carried shoulder-high,
others loaded with assorted swags and coola


mons containing fish, goannas, snakes, and
other food. There was one old dame with a
necklace of dead bandicoots hung around her
skinny neck. Piccaninnies were carried
head-high, their chubby fingers clutching
their mother’s woolly matted hair. Behind
the humans came a trail of swimming dogs—
whimpering in fear of the crocodile, Ghingi
the Bog-chewer, who, legend states, always
takes the hindmost. A hundred years of
dominating that estuary had made Ghingi
bold. In actual fact we saw him sliding out
of his carrion shelf beneath the slimy rock-
ledge. A trail of bubbles and mud told that
he was on the move.
Out at sea the Kunalby family was seeking
a dugong supper. I could hear faintly their
chanting refrain “singing” this sea-cow. Old
man Kunalby was sitting on the fat hack of
a speared dugong, “singing him dead.”
We camped and next morning decided to
do some hunting afoot. We beached the
canoe, and after making our way along the
coast at low tide for a few miles, decided to
follow up the banks of a river. I was out on
the grassy plain that extended from the
river’s edge when the natives, who had been
walking along close by the bank, attracted my
attention. Speaking in sign language, with
raised hand tapping their jaws, they told me
that a crocodile was lying asleep on the mud-
bank near an overhanging mangrove-tree.


Having given me the message, the group of
natives remained still. They were afraid of
being “ heard’ ’ by the crocodile. These
estuary crocodiles keep inside them hundreds
of small water-worn pebbles, which, I believe,
combined with the resonant hide of belly,
form a very sensitive sound or vibration
register, and warn the beasts of the approach
of an enemy. The crocodiles, and all other
wild creatures, I think, are affected by vibra-
tion as apart from sound. The blacks even
believe that the mental attitude of the hunter
is liable to disturb the prey. These primitive
students of telepathy declare that in approach-
ing a crocodile it is better to think of goannas,
birds, fish, and other subjects that would have
a soothing effect on a crocodile’s mind.
Cautiously I crept through the head-high
grasses. Reaching the edge of the river I
peered through the bushes, but could not, at
first, see anything except the low grey hank
of mud. Gradually it dawned on me that I
was gazing, not at earth, hut at the side of an
enormous crocodile. Not caring to shoot until
I could see a vital spot, I tried gently to part
the grass and tangled leaves. The movement
spoiled my chances. With a loud whoof,
and a swinging bang of his tail, the old bull
slithered off the mudbank. He struck the
water like a steamboat propeller, and dis-
appeared, leaving behind him a pungent
odour of musk; while a trail of froth, rising
H


bubbles, and stirred up mud showed the way
he had gone. The tracks showed him to be
about twenty feet long. His body height,
when he rose for that swift rush into the
water, must have been at least three feet.
Looking at the pool of water, calm and beauti-
ful, one could not realize that it contained
such a fearsome inhabitant.
Farther up the river we camped for dinner,
where I did a little line fisliing. Needing
live bait I put a piece of damper into an
empty pickle-bottle, then tied a piece of cord
to the bottle and threw it into shallow water.
In a few minutes six little mullet were tightly
jammed inside. They went in after the dam-
per, and filling the bottle with their bodies,
could not turn to get out again.
The country had changed now to open red-
day plains, dotted with patches of grass and
stumpy shady trees. The salt-laden breeze
and the exertion of walking had given us a
good appetite. The boys had their own
method of securing a meal. Close by, like a
drain, was a small channel nearly filled with
high-tide salt water. Gathering armfuls of
grass the natives made a pile on the bank.
When they had gathered a sufficient, quantity
they pushed it into the drain, completely
blocking it up. They piled in some more,
making a kind of table-top standing above the
level of the water. When the tide turned the
mullet came down-stream with it. Reaching


the grass barrier, they leaped. The table-
top proving too wide for them, they fell on it.
The natives were standing behind it, down-
stream, and as the fish fell, they picked them
up and threw them on to the banks. In a
short while they had enough for all hands.
The securing of each meal in the bush
provides its own experiences, and as the need
of,a meal is something that recurs with unfail-
ing regularity, one hunting incident follows
another. Late afternoon came and we went
duck-hunting. One of the boys, “Jimmy”
Doo Doo —meaning, a little bird —a black
giant of enormous strength, pointed out a
shallow lagoon. Scattered about its surface,
feeding on the water-lilies, were hundreds
of duck and young wild geese. As fast as we
could tramp in the knee-deep waters, the
young geese swam for the opposite bank, with
“Moses,’ ’ an eager young savage, well ahead.
This was “good tuckout” for a “young
fellah.” It would make him strong; the fat
would make his skin shiny and the feathers
would add to his handsome appearance in the
corroborees. On the ridge beyond the water
I had a fleeting glimpse of a fast sprinting
blackfellow, nude, and grasping in each hand,
by the neck, a wildly flapping gander, while
close in front of the pursuer, and going strong,
were several half-fledged geese. This ani-
mated silhouette was seen for a moment
against a yellow-red sunset, then it vanished


over the edge of the ridge. Close to where I
was standing, mother goose made anxious
noises as she watched the chase from the top
of a high, dry tree.
Other blackfellows had arrived and were
hurling sticks at single ducks, or among a mob
as, flying low, they settled uneasily on the
water. I wondered why the ducks did not
leave the lagoon, and discovered the reason
when I observed a duck-hawk hovering over-
head. With a spear in hand I wandered
about, looking for ducks hiding under the big,
floating, water-lily leaves. These birds, having
got their feathers soaked and waterlogged,
could not fly.
When we had caught a sufficient number
of ducks for our evening meal, we returned
over the plain to the river-bank. The water,
brackish when the tide was up, was now fresh
with the stream that followed the ebb of the
sea. We camped on the bank underneath a
wide-spreading tree. The blacks were camped
about fifty yards away. I had a shark hook
and a length of thin wire rope with me. I
baited the hook with a fat duck, flung it out
into deep water, tied it firmly to a stout
branch, and then went to bed. My loaded
rifle, which I had a habit of keeping within
reach, was placed on the inside bottom of my
net, to keep the edges down.
Something kept me awake —instinct per-
haps. I was uneasy, without being nervous.


Picking up the rifle I peered out from under
the net. Owing to the slope of the ground
I could see very little, just the starry sky and
the hump of the river-bank. The water was
hidden from me. There was a strong smell
of crocodile in the air. I would hunt the
brute by waiting for him. I was out to kill
a crocodile, and I would give myself the excit-
ing pleasure of letting one stalk me.
Though a creature of ferocious savagery,
he was a cautious crocodile. I waited for
what seemed hours, my ears and eyes alert.
Once or twice I nodded, and then, with a jerk,
awakened to realize the danger. The only
sign I had of the stalker was the sucking
sound of mud, as at intervals, one foot would
be withdrawn from the ooze, and then
another.
A sharp snap of a dry twig warned me that
the reptile was now up over the bank, and on
to dry ground. I expected to see his bulk
looming above the rise of the bank. Just
as I had lifted the net and was lying rifle in
hand, a black, with a lighted firestick in his
hand, came running, calling out that he could
smell crocodiles. The crocodile was scared by
the moving light. I heard him swing round.
Jumping up I saw him as he reached the
water. A bullet sent the phosphorescent mud
flying up alongside his ribs —and that was the
end of our acquaintanceship.
Before the black returned to his mates we


searched the bank by the aid of the firestick.
We found a wide track —a crocodile road —
worn by the brutes sliding in and out of the
stream, over the mud. It ran through the
fringe of a small mangrove thicket. It was
the only place from which attack would be
likely to come. Having had enough of the
thrills of being stalked for one night, I closed
the track with boughs and dry sticks. Any
movement through these would awaken me.
It was some time later in the night that the
shark-line sang with a sudden strain, and I
heard little mangroves breaking as it thrashed
to and fro. I called to the blacks. Three of
them came running. The wire line was sway-
ing up and down stream as we laid hands on
it and began to haul in our catch. As it came
close to the bank we saw a big groper firmly
hooked. At the moment we sighted it a croco-
dile dashed round the corner of the mudbank.
He turned slightly over and grasped the big
fish around the body with his two front claws.
We heaved, and the fish slipped out of his
grasp and came up the bank with a rush.
The crocodile disappeared. The groper’s
ribs —he was about five feet long—showed
where the claws had sunk in on both sides.
Deep scratches furrowed the hide for about
three feet. We lit a big fire. As the flames
mounted, their gleam went far out over the
water. We could see the upper parts of the
heads of several floating crocodiles, their


eyes reflecting the glow of the fire. One of
them, in seeming derision, spurted two long
jets of water from his nostrils. I gave him
the benefit of a soft-nosed .303 bullet. Follow-
in the crack of the rifle the water was churned
into a phosphorescent cauldron. Streaks like
comets darted about in frantic confusion
below the surface. Then all was stillness.
From the opposite hank came the long-
drawn wails of a pack of dingoes. The fire
died down. The blacks departed to their
camp and I returned to mine.
Yowie, the yellow dingo dog, had lost his
aboriginal master. The scent track had
ended abruptly on the overhanging trunk of
a giant tea-tree. Cautiously Yowie gazed
down into the clear depths of the still waters
below. Down there, too, lost among the gloomy
shadows beneath the gently swaying blossoms
of the water-lilies, Grhingi might be lying
in wait. Daintily Yowie’s delicate nostrils
were raised, sniffing. With pricked-up ears
he turned and trotted along the bank of the
river, pausing now and again to give the ages-
long howl of the primitive dog. From the
boulder-strewn gorge up-stream, came faintly
answering calls from his wild bush mates. He
stopped and stood hesitating. His master
had crossed the stream. Was it to be the com-
forts of the blazing camp-fire, or was it to be
the call of the wild 1 ? Longingly he looked


across the silent waters. Two sinister bubbles
—Ghingi’s eyes—rose and floated slowly
towards him. With a snarl he slunk away
and turned toward the bush and the southern
hills.
The sun was setting in a lurid glow. Low
down on the skyline were banked up dark
cloud masses. Through them glimmered and
darted streaks of forked lightning. Wearily
old man Kunalby came into the smoke halo of
the camp-fires and threw down the results of
his day’s hunting. His old wife Kwog-wog (the
crow) had gathered up a supply of water-lily
roots. Hurriedly a meal was cooked, but as
they sat eating it the storm broke. Grabbing
small sheets of bark, every member of the
tribe sat huddled under them, shivering and
trying to keep the fires from being washed
out. In high-pitched, quavering voices the
old “flour-bag fellahs” and aged women
started to sing to the elements—at first savage
threats, but later, as the force of the storm
increased, tearful requests. Old man Kunalby
and Kwog-wog bethought them of Yowie, the
aggressive one, leader of the hunting pack,
who was missing. Had the Evil One, Ghingi,
who but the night before had “gone outside of
a short fellah dog” (a fat puppy) also got
Yowie? The song changed to one of savage
hate and hunger for vengeance. “L-O-N-G
fellah tooth” must be destroyed.
My black boy, Moses, Hinkum, and my


overlanding-self were camped on a little knoll
close by the blacks, overlooking a wide
expanse of grassy plain. On the bank of the
river near by several dug-out canoes were
being loaded. To-morrow we were going out
to slay the Evil One. But of this we must not
speak, for Ghingi would then become aware
of our intentions.
At dusk the natives crawled into the five
feet high piles of grass that they had gathered.
They burrowed into them and slept through-
out the sultry night, well away from the
vicious mosquitoes. At dawn we entered the
canoes. We kept to the side of the stream.
Grasses, higher than our heads, parted at the
bow of each canoe, slithered alongside, giving
us a dewy shower-bath, then closed in astern.
Beneath our keels the water was four feet
deep. A few yards behind a lone blackfellow
poled along a small flat-bottomed craft with
blunt bows that slithered over the wet
grasses. He was gathering a supply of wild
goose eggs, and spearing fish for our morning
meal.
An hour’s sailing brought our little fleet out
into a chain of beautiful water-lily lagoons
where we camped, well to leeward of the river.
A canoe went out to scout, and a native
climbed to the top of a tall tree as a look out.
By hand signal language he kept us in touch
with the river hunters.
Suddenly, whispering excitedly, all hands


bent over and raced for the canoes. On the
opposite side of the lagoon, the floating water-
lilies were being dragged under, one by one,
below the surface. The crocodile was return-
ing from the night’s hunt, to his camping
place down-stream. A few hundred yards
behind, the scouting canoe followed cautiously.
On our side of the river, three feet long
sharpened iron spikes were deftly shoved into
the ends of twenty feet long bamboo poles.
Fathoms of human hair rope were attached
to them; then the canoes were eagerly pushed
into deep water. Quivering with excitement
the savages dipped their paddles, expertly
avoiding the clinging tendrils of water
growths. A turtle, sunning itself on a log,
became alarmed and flopped into the depths.
The crocodile’s eyes floated up to the surface.
He saw us. There was a swirl of the waters,
then a long line of swiftly moving bubbles.
To the sound of wild yells, the canoes sprang
into racing speed. Anxious scouts on over-
hanging trees shouted lustily. A branch
snapped and an over-eager informer plunged
into the depths. Over the mirror like surface
the chase continued; then a gust of wind
created ripples. The track was lost.
On the banks we gathered, and the mob,
momentarily disappointed but not dis-
couraged, sat down to talk. Meanwhile hungry
natives, men, women, children, and dogs, were
arriving. Some tottering old fellows came


along. Few were their words but apparently
mighty was their wisdom. Knowing “Ahs”
and “Urns” and snapping fingers told a story.
The Dog-chewer had “gone to grass.”
An hour’s paddling brought us to what
seemed to be the end of the water.. On the
edge of a tangled mass of weeds the canoes
were fastened. Naked sweating aboriginals,
with long poles balanced in two hands, jumped
on to what was a big island of floating grass.
Rapidly they moved about it in order to keep
from sinking into the treacherous waters
beneath, while long poles prodded through
and through. The heat was intense; even the
aboriginals at times staggered exhausted into
the canoes. Again came a welcome shout as
a long line of bubbles, froth, and muddy water
was seen streaking away back up-stream.
The canoes formed into line and, beating
the water, kept the crocodile from returning.
Up-stream, natives, standing in the water’s
grassy edge, were shouting and splashing.
Then the tree lookouts gave word that the
crocodile had settled down in a deep hole out
in midstream. This was hastily surrounded
by canoes and improvised paper-bark rafts.
Long poles felt the bottom cautiously, some
twenty feet below.
A signal from the central canoe; a grin of
delight on a poleman’s face; silent excitement
as the long spear pole went down; then, with
a vicious grunt, the long shaft was driven


home. It sank under like a disappearing
periscope. All the canoes back-pedalled
hastily. A whirlpool hurst from below. A
huge tail swung over, and a wide gasping
mouth, armed with rows of wicked teeth was
glimpsed for a second. The canoe was
violently jerked into swift motion as the spear-
rope became taut, and the frail craft towed
rapidly toward the floating grass patch.
Paddling alongside more canoes hitched on,
and the strain brought the Dog-chewer to the
surface. In fury he turned a series of somer-
saults, and his mouth closed tightly on a log
of slimy wood. Two jets of water spurted
from his nostrils.
The two ropes were now handed to the wait-
ing crowd on the banks, and light spears were
showered at the captive. In savage anguish
he snarled and bellowed as he was hauled
ashore. Howling gins and yapping mongrels
became mixed up in the melee. The croco-
dile, though in desperate straits, was still on
the alert to create damage. A nigger dog
came within range. A tremendous sweep of
the tail stifled a frightened howl and sent
the dog hurtling into mid-air. Forked sticks,
with bundles of grass on the end of them,
were shoved into the reptile’s mouth.
Boulders were showered on its head. An
eager, nimble blackfellow jumped forward
and buried a tomahawk in its skull. Then the


hungry mob swooped down to cut up the
carcass.
Fires were lighted. Dainty bits of entrails
were half-roasted and devoured. The main
juicy portions were then, for some hours,
cooked underground, with hot stones and
damp paper-bark. At sunset the real feast
began, with corroboree songs and laughter.
Eventually the fires died down. Silence and
sleep descended on the camp. An owl hooted
mournfully. As a pale quarter moon quietly
slipped up above the mosquito-haunted
camp, into the last glow of the dying camp-
fires a gaunt yellow dog came sniffing. His
nose led him to a sandy hunk of grilled croco-
dile tail. He squatted down, eyes gleaming
brightly, and with two front paws on his prize,
feasted greedily. Yowie had come home!


CHAPTER VIII
TWO ABORIGINAL STORIES
‘ ‘ T woot ! —Twoot! —Twoot! ’ ’ The sounds were
murmured over and over by gentle voices from
amidst the stately moonlit palms that bowed
their graceful forms high above the dense
mysterious jungle. Moses, my dusky camp
boy, a callow and complex mixture produced
by a mission training overlying aboriginal
superstition, was squatting on his haunches
near the red-hot coals of the camp-fire. He
had dined well and was therefore in a roman-
tic state of mind.
For many months he had allowed himself
to become the slave of her relations. All his
worldly goods were theirs. His clothing,
tight-fitting, now adorned her father. Love’s
sacrifice was more than complete—he had just
admitted to the giving away of my best hunt-
ing-knife. I gave him the choice of two
things. Let him follow the soft-eyed Oonah
in the tracks of his old rival Ooraladie the
maker of rainbows, or let him stay in the
peace and security of my camp I
Tragedy had already forced him on to the


thorny sandhills of domestic woe. It had
given him a wife whom he didn’t want. His
cousin, totemic brother to the tooting owls,
should have married the woman; but he had
unwisely permitted himself to be rear man of
a party of aboriginals crossing a tidal creek,
and had stepped into the gullet of an old-man
crocodile. His departing yell was the last
sound heard from him. Tribal law dictated
that Moses should marry the cousin’s bride.
This he had done. She was talkative, but this
was not a real tragedy, because tribal custom
sanctioned his use of a nulla-nulla to create
silence. His tragedy lay in the voice of his
mother-in-law; like a frog in a swamp, “talk-
talk-talk-talk,” for Kwog-wog, his mother-in-
law, was privileged to talk all day and all
night.
Moses listened moodily to what I had to say,
then started in a low, cowed voice, to sing his
mother-in-law among the sticky glue plants
of the inner jungle; to sing the feather-footed
Kaditcha devils to strangle her and suck her
blood. Oonah was to be his I Had not his
father and her father given them to each other
when, as piccaninnies, they played about on
the green banks of the water-lily lagoon % Had
he not passed her many times with averted
face ? Had she not spoken to him many times
from a distance % Spoken by hand signs, say-
ing that she would put her footprints on
top of his in the sandhills! Oonah could carry


heavy loads of fish which he might spear. She
was a good finder of bush foods. Her dogs
were keen hunters of game.
Oonah had no mother. She had died many
years before from a disease known as waddy-
on-the-head! The tribe, mourning in wound
cuts, blood, and white clay, had carried her
bones about, wrapped up in paper-bark. One
day a jaw-bone was missed. The camp dogs
were blamed, but Moses, responsive to the
mission training that had taught him fore-
sight, was the one responsible.
He carried the jaw-bone, carefully wrapped
in flannel, about with him; or, when fishing,
had it carefully hidden in the bow of his canoe.
It was a good thing to have, for had it not
helped him in the spearing of many wide
turtle and fat dugong? With its aid would
he not become a powerful domestic man ? Had
not the old mission-hairy man told him the
Bible story of the man who was mighty and
powerful, destroying his enemies with the
jaw-bone of an ass'?
“Twoot! Twoot! Twoot!” Moses roused
himself and went thoughtfully down the hill
to his little circular paper-bark humpy. He
came out again in a few minutes, and I saw
his figure slip away into the darkness of the
undergrowth.
I was awakened just before moonset by
bloodcurdling yells from Moses. Grabbing
my rifle I ran, stumbling, toward where the


turmoil arose. On an open patch of ground
I sighted a group of natives. Two of them,
Moses and his rival the old doctor-man,
Ooraladie, were dancing a dingo-trot, like
cardboard figures against the moon. Their
yells were rousing the jungle. In the fore-
ground Oonah’s male parent was critically
watching the performance. A crowd of elderly
male natives, who had arranged the ceremony,
sat under a tree, beating boomerangs to-
gether and clapping their hands on their
thighs. From about the jungle the voices of
forbidden females w 7 ere raised in falsetto
wails.
Singing the 4 ‘ Song of the Last Young Man, ’ 9
old Ooraladie —with my hunting-knife in his
hand—advanced, grimacing and high-stepping
upon his youthful and thoroughly scared
victim. Moses, despite his fright, held grimly
on to his jaw-bone mascot. He was trying to
conceal it behind his back. The old man
continued his weird dance. As the last lip
of the disappearing moon showed above the
horizon Moses lay spread-eagled on the bare
ground.
At sunrise, from my camp in the jungle of
the hill-side, I saw a quaint procession. In
the lead was Ooraladie, be-plumed. Natives
with painted spears followed meekly. Behind
them came Moses, a humble looking being,
wrapped in paper-bark from head to foot. In
the rear were all the females, wailing and
i


crying in the native tongue, “Oh, my Moses!
Oh, my Moses! Old man bin takem!” The
voices of the camp dogs helped to swell the
melody. At a distance followed the bride-to-
be, Oonah. She was silent, but was busy
painting her lips with white clay and plaster-
ing her face with charcoal powder.
For two weeks Moses was seen no more. He
was a close, lonely prisoner in a grass hut
that stood in the glare of the tropic sun. All
the time, near by, was his old mother-in-law
Kwog-wog. She was talking him thirsty
and singing him hungry for stealing to him-
self another wife, and taunting him with
pointing the bone at her.
No man saw Moses’s face and no man heard
his voice until, one golden sunset, when the
camp-fires were yellow flickering points of
light in the dark green jungle, and the smoke
was softly weaving blue wreaths among the
trees; then, solitary Oonah’s soft voice close
to the hut crooned, “Come, come, come!”
The harsh voice of Kwog-wog, like a frog
in a swamp, said, “Go, go, go!”
The love owls among the palms said,
“Twoot! Twoot! Twoot!”
WOMPI—THE “BLUE FLIER”
Wompi, the old man fellah kangaroo, was
making a final dash for a scrub refuge on the
edge of a blacksoil plain. He was doubled up


like a gigantic bouncing ball, tail held high
in the air as a balance, nervous head bent right
over into the shelter of doubled-up forearms.
His powerful hind legs were working with
machine-like precision, propelling his two
hundred and fifty pounds’ weight in twenty-
feet leaps at thirty-five miles an hour.
At the end of one long bound, with startling
rapidity, he stopped his full flight, flung his
doubled-up body to its full height of seven
feet and stood on hind legs tiptoes, his weight
thrown back on to supporting muscular tail-
tip. With flicking ears he breathlessly looked
around, frightened anger blazing from his
eyes. His jaw pouches were distended; through
grinding teeth he sucked in air; short power-
ful hands and arms were thrown defensively
across his heaving chest —a magnificent mar-
supial, more than a match for any human in
physical combat.
The morning sunshine glinted on his glossy
grey body, and a thin trickle of blood from a
long slashing tear near the backbone slowly
stained the grass underfoot. Wompi gazed
up at the blue glory of sky overhead and
chattered nervously. Zooming upwards was
a huge bird. It swung away out across the
plains, circled, dropped, and at great speed
came along close to the earth. Following fast
behind it came its feathered mate.
With body tense the ’roo waited the on-
slaught. There was a noise of wind rushing


through wings. The attackers swept slightly
upward, then, at they came in line with
Wompi’s head, they upended and struck at
him with talons, beak, and beating wings. The
attack was brief; then they flew onwards, up-
wards, and again circled. The kangaroo, in
that split second before the contact, had
doubled up with his head sheltered between
his hind legs. As they passed by he sprang
again into those powerful leaping strides,
which, before the next onslaught, brought him
close to the scrub belt.
The cunning male bird dived between him
and the scrub. It came hurriedly to earth
and, with beating nine-foot width of wings
tried to turn the quarry. The hurtling ’roo,
however, did not stop. In one leap he jumped
over his enemy. Even as Wornpi passed over,
the giant bird rolled over on its back and
struck a tearing blow at the low head. A talon
tore out an eye, and the vicious beak slashed
open the tender flesh between the legs.
The wounded kangaroo dashed blindly into
the dense patch of mulga and lay hidden there
for hours. A thousand feet up, circling round
and round, were his aerial attackers —waiting I
Ever-watchful bush eyes noted this. Kwog-
wog, the white-eyed crow, sinister harbinger
of tragedy, flitted silently up, investigated,
and then came his ringing, raucous, mocking
croaks and chortles, “Caw—caw!”
Hearing this, one by one, other black tortur


ing devils of his own breed arrived hungrily.
Their signalling cries were taken up far and
wide. Carrion hawks glided up, and they, too,
waited. Poor Wompi, breathing heavily in
great pain, and thirsty too, dare not come out
into the open.
Suddenly he sat bolt upright—alert I He
glimpsed a tawny yellow dog which stood
looking at him. It wagged its bushy tail, but
there was a furtive, evil grin on its face as it
slunk away. Fear gripped the ’roo. He stum-
bled, half-blind, for a mile or more, scrambled
over a rocky ridge and came out on to a
well worn kangaroo-track. Several of his
bush mates came clattering down from small
caverns high up on a hill. They passed him
by, steadily thudding on to a small waterholc
in an otherwise dry creek-bed. Late in the
afternoon the crows flitted away to this for
their evening drink.
At sundown Wompi reached the cool muddy
water, and on all four shaky legs, sipped
greedily. Even as he drank, a yellow wild dog
rushed in, snapped at his hind-quarters and
jumped back. Then came a silent determined
pack of them, and they took it in turns to rush
in and snap. Quite unconcernedly their evil
mates would sit on their haunches, scratch
themselves with their hind legs, or 101 l about
—hut ever on the alert for outside danger. The
worried ’roo, now bolt upright, waded into the
three feet deep water. He stayed there for


hours while the cowardly dingoes, with lolling
tongues, silently watched him from the steeply
shelving rocky banks a few yards away.
Toward the middle of the night a young,
full-grown dog, indiscreetly driven by greedi-
ness, sprang into the water. Wompi came over
to meet him as he swam. With clutters of rage
he bent over, grabbed the dog by the neck, and
held him under water until he struggled no
more. The carcass sank, then slowly drifted
until it became stranded against a boulder.
At dawn the ’roo was still shivering in the
water, encircled by foes. Dingoes, hawks, and
crows were all around him—waiting! After-
noon came and a cawing crow flew low over
the doomed one’s head. As though this was a
given signal, the impatient, slavering hunger
of the wild dogs made them frantically rush
in. The weakened ’roo, bravely fighting, had
not a chance. Torn and slashed, he was dragged
out on to the bank and ripped to pieces.
High up in the sky, the two eaglehawks,
circling round and round, watched the climax
of the tragedy, as the dingoes fought and
snarled, over the now scattered bones. Car-
rion hawks swooped down, and cheeky crows
hopped in for their share of the bloody loot.


CHAPTER IX
TROPIC WATERS
We had halted for a rest in the shade of a
small cave on a rocky cliff overlooking the
sea. In the cool, blue-green depths below, we
watched shoals of fish swimming by in endless
variety. Astern of these, flashing and darting
about, were numerous large kingfish and bar-
ramundi. With a movement like lightning
they would cleave into a terrified swarm of
mullet. A tense situation was developing. Deep
down, a shadowy monster was cautiously
creeping over the gloomy seaweed-covered
reef. A flight of big, spotted stingrays came
winging along to investigate, then scattered in
consternation. A few hundred yards away, a
fat wide turtle was feeding on a mass of gently
waving sea-grass. Every few minutes he would
come to the surface, sigh like a lover in
distress, then submerge. Stealthily old-man
crocodile—for it was he on the bottom of the
reef—stalked the shell-back.
Then, nosing along the deep, rocky edges of
the cliff, there came another grim dark
shadow. Sometimes, in the play of light and


shade, it showed up nearly white. It swam
quietly along, pausing now and again to inves-
tigate submarine nooks and cracks. A startled
lobster, with a back flick of its tail, darted to
the surface. It shrieked and backed into a
place of safety. A black-faced cod, hidden in
a crevasse, distended his gills, opened his
comedy mouth, and spat out a small shell in
disdain. He well knew that he was out of
reach of those grim jaws passing just above
his place of hiding.
The twenty-foot shark drifted away for a
few yards and rolled slowly about, coming
close to the surface. He froze, and seemed to
be listening. The most wicked eyes in all crea-
tion glared and rolled. Suddenly, and without
leaving a bubble behind, he streaked away
seawards. He came to the surface, paused for
a few moments, then raced along with his
dorsal fin cleaving a clear-cut water effect on
the tranquil surface. Frightened fish darted
and leaped in all directions; and old-man
crocodile, in a gloomy hollow, became no more
to the eye than a stationary shadow. Round
and round in ever narrowing circles, swam the
shark. Fifty yards away from the crocodile
it halted, then broke away in a zigzag line,
with a flashing burst of speed. Lazily a school
of smaller sharks came up and then dis-
appeared in a hurry.
The big shark that we were watching swam
between the rocks. He swept round in a wide


curve, and then, straightening out, charged
downwards toward the enemy below. To meet
the onslaught the crocodile turned over on his
back—l saw his white belly gleam through the
water —then the fight became obscured in a
sizzling underwater mass of foam and sea-
weed.
Once only during the next half-hour did the
combatants come to the surface, when a brief
glimpse showed the crocodile’s forearm and
shoulder gripped by the shark’s jaws, and the
saurian trying to stun his enemy with tre-
mendous blows of his tail. The crocodile, with
jaws agape and snarling, seemed to be unable
to free himself from his adversary.
To our disappointment the battle raged out
to the edge of the reef, where the fighters dis-
appeared deep down into fifty fathoms of
water. The turmoil had scared the fish into
shallow water and several mullet had become
stranded on a sand-bank. We retrieved these
and had a meal. Meanwhile a colony of
thoroughly scared stingrays had dug into the
shallow sand bottom. As the tide was coming
in, several sharks took advantage of the in-
creasing depth to harass the stingrays. They
raced at them, sloshing and banging and
thumping on top of them; trying to break the
suction by which they held to the sand and so
bring them to the surface. The water was not
deep enough to cover the sharks. So I got to
work with my .303, firing into the thrashing


mass of bodies. I killed enough to keep a mob
of aboriginals in shark’s liver and oil for a
month.
We decided to camp in the cave for, when
the tide went out, fresh water was obtainable
from small springs that bubbled up through
the sand of the beach near by. We had visitors
during the day. A tribe from somewhere in-
land came down to gather sea-salt. I gave
them all shark beef. In a few minutes blood
and entrails were scattered all over the beach.
Fires were lighted. Piccaninnies gorged them-
selves on nearly raw titbits, and dogs fought
over sandy chunks.
During the following day a camp of flying
foxes was discovered among the trees of a
mangrove swamp that extended back from the
coast. It was found by a few of the natives
who were scouting away from the main party.
Smoke signals brought all hands to the spot.
Amidst a dark mass of tropical verdure,
large, bat-like creatures, over two feet across,
were circling around in clumsy flight. Tons of
them were hanging upside down from sway-
ing, crackling branches, screeching, biting
and clawing viciously at each other. There
was a dreadful smell in the air around the
camp. Boomerangs and throwing-sticks went
hurtling into the mob, and spears were jabbed
into the victims as they fell struggling to the
ground.
One nigger mongrel, yelping, bolted blindly


out of the melee with a screeching, clawing
vixen obscuring his face and savagely biting
his ear. The roar of wings was deafening.
The sky was clouded over with the flying
creatures. The natives returned to camp laden
with spoil, and flying fox was the item of
their day’s menu. When cooked they looked
like round, baked hot pies. Everything was
devoured; not even the squeak remained.
Dusk fell. Camp-fires—ours and those of
the visitors, who had settled themselves on
the edge of the scrub —were flaring brightly.
There was a hum of many voices. Meals were
finished and bright firesticks showed the
natives the way to the small springs of fresh
water, the firesticks keeping the debil-debils
away.
We left the vicinity of the cave and con-
tinued our way through the jungles and along
the beaches of the peninsula. Our diet con-
sisted largely of turtle-eggs that we dug from
the sand. There was some bush honey too. I
have a mental picture of a mob of stark naked
aboriginals, half-smothered in a cloud of
smoke and stinging insects, frantically burst-
ing open a log to get at the sweetness. “Oh!
Yak-khi! No more sit down that one alonga
log!”
Hot days brought an invasion of goannas.
Expertly they cleaned up any turtle eggs ly-
ing near the surface of the sand. Following
them came razor-backed wild pigs who


scooped up the remainder. Greedy, snuffling,
ill-tempered creatures, they were the descen-
dants, so legend said, of pigs released by
Captain Cook from the Endeavour. Some-
times they were known as Cape York Run-
ners, and, it was alleged, once started, they
would not stop trotting until they had crossed
Australia. We had come to the home of Dennis
the Wild Boar.
Dinkum disappeared among a wilderness
of lantana scrub. It was impregnable to
human progress, but, standing at a little
distance, I could trace his progress by watch-
ing a little willy-wagtail that followed him
overhead. He disturbed several wallabies, who
came bounding out and crossed a patch of
grass. My black boys’ dogs went after them
in full pursuit. They pulled up suddenly and
started to sneeze —sneezed until I thought
they would collapse. The wallabies, fearing
pursuit, had fled across a patch of sneeze-
grass. We found that wild animals, in that
locality, often evaded capture in this manner.
A cassowary came ducking and dodging
along in a great hurry. A big noisy village of
“colony birds” had their nests high up on a
nearby tree. With great cunning they had
chosen one whose smooth glossy bark rendered
it python-proof. At the base of the tree there
was evidence that a goanna had just been
feeding on young birds that had fallen from
the nests —a mishap that ofttimes occur. Right


at the base of the tree I saw a hollow in which
was the peculiar glow of an edible fungus.
There is a small reptile which is invariably
found living among these fungi—a vest-
pocket snake—with black and white markings.
Its bite is an antidote for an over indulgence
in alcohol. It is not more than six inches long;
a mere vest-pocket snake. While I was think-
ing of this there came tumbling and flying
overhead a dollar bird; so called, I think, be-
cause it makes a noise like your last dollar
going over a marble counter.
A crashing of bushes made me jump around.
Scampering in all directions was a mob of
young pigs, while piercing squeals came from
out of the dense undergrowth. Dinkum had
caught one. It was impossible for me to get
through the lantana. The blacks’ dogs rushed
toward the sound of the squeals and I heard
the old mother-pig crashing through the scrub
snorting and grunting with rage.
My attention was drawn by a hoarse squeal
away to my right. Dennis, himself, the incar-
nation of a four-legged devil, had trotted out
from the lantana on the beach side. He stopped
and stared at me. He chewed his grinders,
stamped a forefoot, and then began to back-
pedal, his little tail twitching a danger signal.
He charged. The blacks were not in sight. My
only weapon was a long hunting-knife tied to
the end of a stout stick. It was not enough
with which to meet a frontal attack by four


or five hundred pounds of infuriated wild
boar. I swarmed up a sapling. The boar hit
the butt of it a blow with his armour-plated
shoulder as he raced by. He swung round and
his little eyes blazed savagely. I whistled for
Dinkum. He came from the lantana and,
rushing in, caught the boar’s hind leg.
Round and round they fought. I dropped
from the sapling and grabbed my improvised
hunting-spear. I was afraid that Dinkum
would be hauled into the dense thicket, so I
headed the boar off and got in a slashing jab
at its ribs with the knife. Accelerated by the
jab, the muscular lump of animated pork gave
a “whuff” and bolted through the scrubs,
down toward the beach. Dinkum had to let
go, but he rapidly followed the boar.
As I came out on to the sands, there was the
ruffian, sitting on his haunches, waist-deep in
the salt-water, with the dog standing guard
at the water’s edge. One of the blacks, with
his dog, came running along the beach. He
had a four-pronged fish-spear in his hand. The
boar started to swim seaward, but the thrown
spear caught him in the neck and he returned
to the shallows. The dogs met him, and the
black’s dog got a tusk rip that laid the flesh
on its shoulder open to the bone.
The boy had retrieved the spear, only to
find that it was useless owing to the prongs
being bent double. He picked up a piece of
beach timber and, watching his chance,


brought this down on the boar’s head. Dennis
blinked, shook himself, and charged. Dinkum
rushed in and applied his famous leg-hold,
while I sparred around, getting in a knife jab
here and there. He was a tough and danger-
ous ripper.
We got him out into a waist-depth of water.
Here he had to swim, and, with sticks, we were
able to control his movements. In the excite-
ment of the kill we forgot about the dangers
of sharks and crocodiles. Eventually a king
hit on the snout knocked him out. We towed
him ashore. That night the smell of roast
pork rose from the blacks’ camp-fires and
drifted along the seashore.
We had rejoined the main tribe, but not at
the old camp. I had added to my possessions
a small string of horses, with packs and
saddles, obtaining them from one of the Gulf
stations.
It was a starlit night. My little paper-bark
hut nestled at the foot of a clump of man-
groves on a sandy beach where the gentle
lap-lap of the waters of an incoming tide
made peaceful music. A soft glow of light ap-
peared behind the dark outline of the ranges,
inland. Then a full moon appeared behind
palms and lit the sweet-smelling waters of
the lily lagoon close by. In the glow of a
small camp-fire, my aboriginal boy, Moses,
was crooning softly to himself as he lov


ingly polished the lock and barrel of my
Long Tom Martini rifle. He paused, listened,
smiled, and looked dreamily past me. Faintly,
from the hill-tops, came the almost imper-
ceptible sound of bovine growlings and
rumblings. Then, startlingly close, there came
an answer —a series of angry snorts, then de-
fiant bellowings of rage. They echoed and re-
echoed between rocky gorges and dense walls
of lawyer-vine jungles. The noise was fol-
lowed by that of the crashing down of scrub
as a mob of wild cows charged away toward
the bull that had bellowed from the hill-top.
Before dawn I was awakened by the
jangling of bells. Moses and Dinkum were
bringing in the wandering horses. Without
Dinkum it would have taken hours to get them
in, for the cunning brutes had a habit of
plunging into the scrubs and hiding there. The
dog’s presence altered all that. Crouching low
he would run at the horses’ heels, then bite
low and crouch to allow the kicking hoof to
go right over his head and body. A few lessons
from Dinkum made the horses realize that
they must keep their engagements at the stock-
yards.
They came up in a scampering, bucking,
heel-flinging hurry, but once inside the rails
they were most docile. We saddled up and
travelled in Chinese file through the head-
high grasses, Moses as tracker. The dogs kept
one behind the other because past experience


had made them wise. They knew that if they
were to leave the narrow track made for them
by the horses the long grasses, dragging be-
tween their legs, would eventually cripple
them.
On foot, we cut a track through a gloomy
region of dense jungle and cat-clawed lawyer-
vines the hung downwards from the leafy
shades. The experienced horses, in fear of
these entanglements followed meekly. Through
a gorge we went, knee-deep in rushing spring
waters, following up the cattle-tracks. The
dogs went along, nosing the moss-grown boul-
ders of the jungle. Now and again we caught a
glimpse of them with their feet moccasined all
round, inches deep, with glue plant. There
were blobs of it clinging to their whiskers.
We came out on to grass plains with belts
of pandanus across them. We mounted and
followed up the cloven hoof-prints of a big
bull. We knew, from past experience, that
these would eventually lead us to where the
cows and calves were grazing. We had
travelled some distance when a big, russet-
hided, red-eyed bull jumped up from along-
side an ant-bed. The horses sprang to a
gallop. I gave mine its head and sat down
in the saddle. The knowing animal sensed
every grass-hidden danger. He leaped fallen
logs, changed his stride to dodge sunken holes,
and swerved around trees that grew too close
K


together for my legs to pass in safety between
them.
Moses, the expert, was getting ahead of me
—he would pass right through a tight fit by
mounting with his closed knees on top of the
saddle. Once the bull swerved and my horse
came up alongside him. Then a patch of
bog caused me to make a detour, and while
I was doing so the bull disappeared into
the jungle. I pulled up and listened. Dogs
were barking down a gully and yells arose,
so I cantered in that direction. The bull was
standing at bay in one of those three feet high
table-top scrubs. Well he knew that he thus
had the dogs at a disadvantage. Just as know-
ingly the dogs kept outside the scrub, but
surrounded it.
We decided that it was unlikely, after our
hunting him, that he would lead us toward
the remainder of the herd. So we called the
dogs off and went on our way. We had
stopped to rest the horses for a short while and
the dogs, who had taken advantage of the halt
to lie down, sprang up, alert. Across the
open country came a funny sight—a mob of
cows, helplessly drunk. They were gone in
the legs and their faces had a silly leer. We
hardly knew whether to be amused or scanda-
lized. The cows’ calves, quite sober, bleated
and bucked playfully around, and sometimes
one would try to get a drink. The cows had
been eating—not drinking—too greedily of


the heart of the full grown zamia palms. They
gazed stupidly at us. I remembered that we
were out of beef —and here it was looking at
us. With the rifle I dropped a young fat cow.
The rest of the herd wandered dazedly away.
It was after dark when we wearily came
into camp. "We partook of fried steak and
boiled wild yams, and, as sweetmeats, we ate
of the local wild ginger which I had experi-
mentally boiled and par-baked in a mixture
of wild bees' honey and water.
So to bed—without looking under it.


CHAPTER X
A TROPICAL WET SEASON
“Quart-pot ! Quart-pot I What ho I What ho 1”
The sound came in hilarious chorus from
bullfrog swamps at the foot of a hill in Cape
York. I sat and watched the gathering of the
wet-season clouds—dark masses of cumuli
curling over the edges of distant precipices.
Chain-lightning zipped and twisted from
ironstone peaks down into gloomy gorges.
Overhead, flocks of white cockatoos screamed
with fright as they encountered air bumps
and pockets. A terrific thunder-clap made
the ground shake. The lightning struck near
by with a blinding flash. I saw the branches
of a big green tree fly into yellow-red splinters
as the bark of its trunk split open and fell
slowly to earth.
The heat was oppressive. There came a
strange sound from behind precipitous walls
many miles away—a distant dull booming,
intermingled with a mechanical whine. High
above these sounds came quivering notes like
those of a gigantic swarm of mosquitoes.
Dinkum rose to his feet, sniffing and shiver


ing. There was no need for fear as our cave
home was as secure as the hills themselves.
The sounds became louder. They now came
from around a bend in the valley, a terrific
booming.
Suddenly the end of the long swamp below
me seemed to dissolve into whirling smoke.
The vapour swept hundreds of feet into the
air and met the rolling clouds overhead. Then
the whirling mass collided with the forest
along the foothills. Not a breath of wind
moved where we were sitting, but the
explosive sound of the impact nearly stunned
me. Roaring and bellowing the tornado tore
down into the valley.
When the swirling mists eventually dis-
appeared not a tree had been left standing,
and the deluge from the swamp waterspout
had created a landslide. The turmoil ceased
suddenly. Even the frog songs had stopped.
Then grunts arose on the still air from
startled crocodiles. Curlews wailed and rock
wallabies, in frantic haste, bounded up the
hill-sides as a roaring mass of water, logs,
scrub, and grass came down a rocky creek and
spread out over the valley flats. As the dark-
ness set in, rain began to fall in big drops.
The rain fell in slanting sheets, but so well
protected were we that scarce a sound of the
storm could be heard by us. My cameras and
equipment were all neatly stowed along
projecting shelves of rock. I had a fireplace


in which smokeless pandanus palm-cobs were
burning. The ceiling of this kitchen had been
decorated by aboriginals. The water-supply
was contained in a rock-hole that was filled
with rain-water. A piece of hessian kept out
the mosquitoes. My two aboriginal boys had
built a paper-bark hut for themselves not far
from the entrance to the cave.
My camp was an enforced one. Of white
men’s stores and rations I had but little, and
many months of tropical wet season lay ahead
of me. During this time heavy rains would
isolate me from the outside world—miles and
miles of impassable bog, dozens of flooded and
crocodile infested rivers and creeks were
between me and my food-supplies—and, being
high up in the hills, game was scarce. My
motor car was lying scores of miles away,
with a blown-out cylinder head gasket, and
miles of fever-haunted lowlying country sur-
rounded it. I had been forced to take to the
hills, and a tribe of aboriginals had helped
me carry my kit to my present abode. As I
lay on my vermin-proof cheese-cloth netted
bunk that night, I recalled the nerve-racking
battle that I had fought during the previous
twelve weeks.
It was the lure of gold that had brought me
north again. For some time I had known
of a new auriferous area in a previously
unprospected part of the peninsula. It was
flour-gold, in ironstone capped quartz, and as


assays of samples had shown good results, I
was anxious to follow up the reef. I had put
the few pounds I had in hand into equipment
and had set out accompanied by my good
friend Dinkum. The car equipment included
a boat and a trailer.
I struck trouble first when heading for the
Cooper, through south-western Queensland.
There were three days of blustering sand-
storm. These were followed by a calm
morning in which the scrubby trees among
the sandhills were enshrouded in a heavy grey
pall of fine dust. There was no sunshine or
shadow. The temperature of the thermome-
ter on my car registered 125 degrees.
Heavier became the spewy sand-flats and
steeper yet the sandhills. With tyres deflated
to twenty pounds pressure, and charging in
second gear, I managed to speed the car from
hill-crest to hill-crest. Dropping down into
low, after charging nearly to the top of a dune,
the engine started to misfire. Then intermit-
tent hursts of water came spurting up through
the radiator cap.
While I was taking the cylinder head oft,
the wind started to blow once more. A giant
sandhill to windward nearly smotherecj, me.
The tops of the dunes were being swept off
and whirled around. The fall of sand
threatened to bury the wheels. Hastily I
worked, putting on a new gasket. It was
my last one. As I clamped it down, grit could


be felt between the parts. Filling the
radiator with water from my precious supply,
I then cranked the engine by hand. It failed
to start! The carbon pencil brushes of the
magneto had jammed owing to the fine dust
penetrating. There was no spark on the ter-
minals of the high tension wires. The points
and contacts of the plugs for the magneto
and battery were also jammed. The fine dust
made it impossible to fit the parts together.
I rigged up a windbreak of blankets and tried
over and oyer again. Eventually I decided
to wait until the wind dropped, so I carried
armfuls of saltbush and planted them on
the windward side of the car to prevent its
being engulfed by the sand. I had food and
water, so I rigged up a cheese-cloth shelter
from the tormenting myriads of flies and ants.
When the wind dropped the warm pall of
darkness seemed impenetrable. Not a sound
broke the desert stillness. By the aid of an
electric spotlight I put together the ignition
parts and started the engine. A blue static
glow enveloped the wiring. The air was
charged with electricity, caused, doubtless, by
the friction of millions of fine sand particles
moving through the air. I rubbed Binkum’s
coat. It crackled and sparkled. Feeling my
own hair I found it in the same condition.
I waited until about midnight before
making a start. By that time the drift-sands,
owing to salt impregnation, were damp, and


the tyres were able to get a grip. In the
powerful gleam of the headlights I emerged
from the sandhills and motored across a big
saltpan.
Towards dawn to get the benefit of a little
rest during the hours of comparative cool-
ness, I camped for a little while. At sunrise
I cranked up once more —and heard a swish
of water sounding in the sump. The gasket
had blown again I I removed the engine head,
and after lighting a couple of choking smoke
fires to keep the swarms of flies at bay, set
about trying to effect repairs. I carefully
shellaced the damaged gasket. The smoke
fires, while causing me considerable incon-
venience, were only partially successful in
their results. The gasket and the top of the
cylinder block, before I had finished, looked
like a couple of fly-paper traps, with buzzing
insects thick on them. I replaced the block
and the car was got under way. It stopped,
soon after, in a heavy sand-drift.
The sun was blazing hot, so op three
cylinders the car was forced across a flat and
pulled up in the thin shade of a stunted tree.
The engine head was again taken off, disclos-
ing an utterly ruined gasket. The hood of the
car was made of heavy sail cloth. I cut a
gasket out of this, covering it with grease.
Just as I was fitting it on a willy-willy,
charged with dust, grit, and falling leaves
came whirling around me. I cleaned off the


filth and, after replacing the engine head,
made another start. The canvas blew out be-
fore I had gone a hundred yards.
I got out of the car and lifted the bonnet.
Dinkum knew that I was in difficulty with the
car. While I was wondering what to do next
I saw him leap from the seat, run around
behind the car, and start “heeling’ ’ the back
tyres. That was the only bit of amusement
I had during those days. I appreciated the
helpful intentions of my doggy mate, but
the mass of insensate machinery was proof
against his efforts. I cut up one of my leather
suit-cases and fashioned a gasket from it, but
the grit and filth would not allow the head
to sit down evenly. There was another blow-
out before I had gone a quarter of a mile.
I camped for two days, eking out the water
and waiting for better weather —which did
not come. While camped I carefully patched
the old gasket with brass shims, when I once
more started. We came out on to gibber
plains, where, as far as the eye could see, were
blood-red boulders about the size of a football,
lying close together. Under the blazing sun
the hard ironstone soil became as hot as the
Hobs of Hades. The heat was so intense that
patches on the inner tubes of the tyres kept
lifting off. This was a difficulty added to
that of the weak gasket. The latter blew off
eleven times during the next two days I
Eventually I cut up a fibrolite suit-case to


get another gasket. I soaked it in hot oil, and
I smeared a tin of apple jelly over the head
and block in the hope of making all secure.
After screwing the head back into place I put
the last of the water into the radiator—keep-
ing back only sufficient for a quart-pot of tea.
The car was now thirty-five miles distant
from the last waterhole. We were well over
the watershed. The next place where I could
look forward to replenishing my supply was
at the end of a dry watercourse that I would
have to follow for about thirty miles. The
dust-storms that were blowing up again would
make this a difficult matter and dangerous to
a . because the extremely limited
visibility might cause me to miss the few
stunted gums that would mark the waterhole
I sought.
I kept the car going, being exceedingly
careful to let the clutch in or out without a jar
on the mechanism or compression. When I
came to the watercourse I carefully re-
tightened the engine head bolts. All the furies
of the desert seemed to be let loose that day;
but the car kept steadily along in second gear
until, late in the afternoon, it stuck in a sandy
creek-bed. I, dog, and radiator were in sore
need of water. The droughty appearance of
the country that we had come through
engendered fears as to what I would find when
I reached the waterhole. Through the fog
of dust there came walking towards me some


skinny cows and calves —their bellies puffed
out and damp mud on their legs. I swung
across the heavy sand and charged up the steep
bank, following the cattle-tracks for about
two miles, and then a fearful odour. I knew
what it signified—bogged cattle. A lull be-
tween the drifting dust-clouds disclosed a
group of trees, so I manoeuvred the car to
windward of the waterhole, and pulled up
under one of the trees.
With two water-cans in my hand I went
down to the waterhole. Dozens of cattle were
lying about, dead and dying, along the water’s
edge. There was a green slime on the coats
of some. Dingoes had been eating them alive.
Eyes, picked out by the crows, were flyblown.
I waded into the muddy water and filled the
tins.
For over two thousand miles I travelled in
fear of the gasket again blowing out. I
purposely kept the engine over-oiled as the
resulting carbon helped to seal any weak spots.
Somewhere two spare gaskets were following
me by medium of a horse mail-coach, but I
was not destined to see them for many a day,
for the coach came only half-way to the Gulf
coast line.
On second gear I trundled along. The
surrounding open forest country was en-
shrouded in a pall of blue smoke, and the
wheels of the car churned up a mingled cloud
of burnt ashes and dust. I was travelling in


the wake of a bushfire lighted by a mob of
aboriginals. Then I came out on to a series
of unburnt grassy pockets between the jungles.
The black soil, hidden under six feet high
grasses, was bumpy with “Bay o’ Biscay”
tussocks.
Miles away to my right the flames were
devouring a paper-bark swamp. For hun-
dreds of feet dense masses of black and white
smoke rolled upwards into a blue sky, while at
the foot of all this, there was an ugly red
glitter where the plain had caught alight. It
was early morning and the trade-wind had not
yet sprung up. When it did I would be on
the lee side of the fire and in a dangerous
position. There was nothing for me to do
but keep straight on, as a dry creek on my left,
with impassably steep banks, prevented me
from getting farther away from the fire.
I forced the car up to ten miles per hour.
I hoped that the creek would bend away to the
left but, instead of that, it kept ever curving
to the right, forcing me closer and closer to the
flames. At last I decided to go back. While
I was turning there came a spurt of water
from the radiator cap and a horrible rattle
from the engine. Hastily, I switched off.
With mattock and spade I delved into the long
tussocks of grass, trying to clear a space
around the car so that I could start a check
fire.
Steadily the flames were coming on, then,


length by length, the red banners died down,
disappearing under wreaths of blue smoke
that rose from the smouldering ground. Well
back to the right the flames were still blazing
merrily along. Walking across to where the
fire had gone out I found that the creek-bed
had made a big curve backwards, that the car
was in the bend, and that the flames would
miss the corner.
I settled down to investigate my engine
trouble. I found that number one piston had
drawn water in, and on the compression
stroke, had smashed the piston to pieces. The
connecting rod was bent and the gudgeon pin
had made an ugly score up and down the cylin-
der walls. The wet season would soon be on,
and all the surrounding country under water.
I had spare piston and rods, but was still in
trouble about the worn gasket. I doubted if
the heavily laden car would pull up the grades
leading to where I intended to camp in the
mountains.
While I was inspecting the engine a couple
of blacks, out hunting, came along. I told
them that I was needing water. They took
me to where, under an overhanging bank of
the creek, about half a mile from the car, there
was a small soak. It yielded a ration of about
a gallon a day.
The natives stayed with me and the next
morning I got them to bring a number of
their tribe to help carry all my stores and


equipment into the mountains. I had to
abandon the car for the time being. I was
delayed two weeks waiting for the blacks,
who were away in the hills on an initiation
ceremony. The atmosphere, day and night,
was of great humidity. The storms were
coming. After three days of waiting thunder-
clouds broke over the distant mountain-tops
and, during the night, I heard the gurgle of
running waters. In the morning I walked
down the creek and found that the flood from
the hills had stopped running just short of
my soak. A few days later a long column of
smoke arose about fifty miles away, in the
direction in which I hoped to make my camp.
During the next day and the one following,
the smoke fires arose, nearer and nearer. Then
mobs of niggers came in, laughing and yelling.
My messengers had told them of my difficulty
and they had burnt a track, pulled obstacles
out of the way, blazed the bark off trees and
would pull the car “all same buggy.” They
were “strong fellah.” They had had “big
fellah tuckout,” as plenty of goannas, bandi-
coots, and snakes had been found sheltering
from the forest fires.
I let them pull the car to a small rise above
flood-water, about a mile away. They found
it heavier dragging than they had expected.
They sat down, perspiring, and solemnly
yabbered. They would leave “ ’im sulky fellah
buggy sit down longa house,” (make a bough


shed for it), and would carry my kit for me
to wherever I wanted it taken. I gave them
some tobacco and a few pipes.
Dark storm-clouds massed tier upon tier.
Grumbling thunder echoed and re-echoed.
Flickers of lightning lit up the distant moun-
tains and the masses of jungle around the
camp. Then heavy splashes of rain began to
fall, a chilly breeze sprang up, and the blacks
were reduced to shivering silence.
Next day the whole camp, men, women and
piccaninnies, set out for my wet-season home,
each with a bag or bundle on head. The
ground was slippery. Every creek channel
had to be waded. They travelled until about
ten o’clock and then camped right through
the heat of the day. In the afternoon a few
of the bucks went away, spears in hand, to
return later with kangaroos and other game.
It took me a week to reach the cave in the
mountain-side where I was to spend the wet
season. The blacks departed with the excep-
tion of the two men that I had first met. They
could not stay with me in any great numbers
as the natural food-supplies in that hilly region
were not very plentiful; but they would
return later on a crocodile-hunting expedition,
and it was arranged that I should go with
them.
For three months I was forced to remain in
the hills. The lowlying country was inter-
spersed with swamps and tall grasses. It was


impossible to do anything about the car. One
day a dug-out canoe, with an aboriginal poling
it along, came through the swamps into the
valley. His hunting companions were waiting
for me at a place about twenty miles away.
Putting rifles, cameras, and a mosquito-net
aboard, my camp boys and I went back with
him to where the series of swamps drained
into a big creek.
The waters of the creek were deep, clear,
and calm. Crocodile “roads” were to be
seen leading up the steep, grassy banks.
Floating islands of grass made the passage
at times very difficult. Beneath these the
old-men crocodiles often made their daytime
camp.
We reached the main party of the blacks
and found them already engaged in a croco-
dile hunt, in which we joined. Canoes were
tied alongside one of the grassy islands and on
top of it men with spiked poles were prodding
the waters beneath. Suddenly a pole was
pulled viciously under and disappeared. An
angry crocodile had taken a bite. A few
seconds later it reappeared, floating to the
surface, up-stream, and behind it arose a long
string of bubbles. With yells the natives
jumped into their canoes and raced after the
crocodile, whose progress could be followed
by the water-lilies that were pulled beneath
the surface.
It came to rest in a deep pool, and around
Li


this the canoes gathered. An old man, stand-
ing in the bow of one of the dug-outs, took
hold of a long bamboo with which he gently
felt the muddy bottom. With excitement he
called up another canoe, and this time a long
bamboo spear, with a rope fastened to the
head, was gently pushed downwards. Then,
with a savage grunt, the weapon was driven
through the body of the crocodile.
Up to the surface the crocodile came in a
tangle of foam and grasses. It bellowed
deafeningly, snapped its jaws and struck
terrific blows with its tail; then it tore along
the surface of the water, head up, dragging
the canoe after it. It looked like a launch.
Finding itself confronted with a muddy bank
it came out of the water and slithered into
a patch of long grass. The natives raced for
the shore, where they landed and came
forward cautiously. Grumbling notes from
the saurian made them extremely careful.
The crocodile stood up strongly on all four
legs, inflated its body and, with tail swinging,
stood ready to charge. Then came an
aboriginal running straight at the monster
with a long pole, on the end of which was tied
a large bundle of grass.
The crocodile opened its mouth and tensed
itself for a swing of its all-destroying tail, but
right into the mouth the pole was quickly
shoved. The jaws met on the mass of packed
grass and the pole went on down into the


beast’s throat. Six feet of it went down into
the gullet. The crocodile tried to escape, but
several men rushed to the assistance of the
man with the pole. The crocodile threw itself
over and over in its struggles and eventually
lay on its back. More natives rushed in and
hung on to the animal’s tail. One swung a
tomahawk and severed one side of the jaw-
bone. Another furiously hacked away at the
body base of the tail—hacked savagely until
the hangers-on dragged it apart from the
living beast.
With exultant yells they descended on the
carcass, and were loading crocodile beef into
their canoes. Fires were lighted in their
camps; huge chunks of crocodile were put
into underground ovens; an enormous haggis
was made and buried under hot ashes; and
the camp dogs feasted royally. That night
there was a great feast in the aboriginal camp.
The “Old Fellahs” fed to the limit of their
capacity on a haggis that reeked to the top
of the bamboo jungles. Gorged and greasy
piccaninnies rolled silently in the dust.
Gorged dogs staggered away to bury yet
another morsel under the tall grass. The old
dames, hands crossed over their centres, sat
silent, propped up against bloodwood-trees,
gazing dazedly, and feebly nodding their
heads at each other —too full for words.
The young men and women were the first
to recover, and they, being modern and more


or less disdaining tribal custom, forthwith
began various flirtations. Totemic laws were
not for these rebels. Apparently the moon is
responsible for ninety-five per cent of the
marriages, and the other five per cent occur
because there is no moon.
Toward midnight, lighted paper-bark
torches were carried to the water’s edge, and
large thirsts were quenched. Singing songs
of Ghingi the Dog-chewer, the whole camp
proceeded, to make an informal corroboree of
the day’s adventures. There was a bright
moon overhead; the dark jungle surrounded
many camp-fires blazing in a small cleared
patch of ground, and wreaths of smoke hung
over all. The corroboree actors, dancing and
lunging with spears, sang of many past hunt-
ing deeds, and of tribal laws relating to the
hunt. Then down on the ground rolled the
man who was impersonating the crocodile.
There was a hair rope in his mouth to repre-
sent the spear. He was hauled along the
ground to the accompaniment of crocodile
growls, laughter, affrighted cries from the
babies, clapping of hands, and howling of
dogs.
Sunrise next morning found the tribe deep
in sleep. Some were sleeping among the ashes
of burnt-out fires, some wrapped in soft paper-
bark, but most of them were curled up, chin to
knee, while close beside each sleeper burned a
fire of three small logs, tip to tip. They were


entirely naked, as no busk blackfellow of the
nortk wears any clothing. The usual early
morning exodus in search of food was not this
day necessary; so they slept on until the in-
creasing heat of the sun awakened them.
Following the crocodile capture-1 remained
with the blacks for some time, going back to
my cave in the hills for brief spells.
Eventually the flood-waters dried up and two
aboriginals from a station brought my mail
to me—including the two spare gaskets.
I went back to the car and overhauled it.
The magneto was shorted, the battery was
flat, everything rusty, and grass ten feet high
covered all. It took me a couple of weeks to
get it in going order. The aboriginals went
away as the food-supply was growing scarce.
I lived on young sand palm tops and black
bream from the creek.
My gold-mining venture did not prove
successful and after a short while I headed
back across the continent, travelling on three
cylinders. There was no compression in
number one, water and grit having cut out the
white-metal connecting-rod bearings. It took
me six months to travel two thousand miles,
then one day, while going down a steep grade
in desert country, the gasket blew again.
Water jammed on the compression stroke and
a big piece blew out of the wall of number
three cylinder.


In a howling sand-storm I walked to the
railway. I camped there and, after a few
weeks of waiting, managed to get an old
model T Ford engine. I bolted this to the
chassis and threw the other engine away. This
carried me back to Melbourne.


CHAPTER XI
IN ARNHEM LAND
I was on my way to Arnhem Land, to see new
country and to have a few months with my old
friends the blacks.
Kangaroos were lolling about beneath shady
trees. A big old-man ’roo rose from his noon-
day camp, where he had been having a nap.
He wiped his eyes with the backs of his paws
and stood erect, throwing his chest out and his
head back, and looking proudly defiant at the
throbbing machine as I brought it to a halt.
He was showing off before his harem of several
wives.
Quietly I gave the word to my dog, who
slipped overboard, sneaked quickly and
unseen through the grass from behind, grabbed
the buck’s tail and upended him. Grabbing
my camera I ran over to the mix-up, but the
’roo broke away and departed rapidly, follow-
ing in the direction that his wives had already
gone.
I camped on a waterhole, and a brown-
backed, grey-breasted bower-bird came hop-
ping around, looking at the bright parts of the


car. Taking fright, it flitted into a nearby
bush. From the bush there came the sound
of a frog screeching in agony. Then a distant
kite-hawk spluttered and whistled. A young
crow was heard practising its notes. I heard
the rustle of dry boughs in the wind. The
bower-bird was the cause of it all, giving a
marvellous imitation of these sounds.
I pushed on, the nose of my car headed for
the tropics. Little ghost sprites of dust
sprang up and danced across the shimmering
plain. Blasts of heated air came from the
stony ridges and patches of scalded earth.
The steady hum of the engine caused me to
doze over the wheel once or twice. Toward
noon I halted in the shade of a gum-tree with
about six leaves on it, boiled the billy, and ate
a meal. All signs of life had disappeared,
even the flies. I was drawing on my emergency
water, as the car was using it at the rate of
about a gallon to ten miles. The lime, soda,
and alkali sedimentary deposits created great
heat.
Cloud-flecked was the blue sky, giving
promise of rain. The car was delving into
brown, powdery dust, which the front axle
would scoop up in a blinding swirl, right over
the top of the hood. In this shadeless land
lean cows were standing to create a shadow
where their young calves might rest.
In low gear I forced the car along over the
devil-devil lumps and the big cracks in the


ground. The tracks led on through a large
pool of water on a claypan. Dinkum
anxiously started to look and sniff. For a few
minutes I was, myself, deceived. It was a
mirage. Half an hour later we halted on the
steep, clay banks of a waterhole. There was
no shade thrown except from the leafless
limbs of a cockatoo-eaten tree. Out into the
yellow muddy water I swam. It was luke-
warm but I sworled up some that was icy-cold,
and then I filled the water-bag and canteen.
With my rifle I shot some ducks. The
entrails I put into an empty benzine-tin and
lowered it into the water. In a few minutes
I hauled it out again quickly. Several
shrimps were inside. With these I baited
and threw out some fishing-lines. Yellow-
belly, or golden-perch, up to a few pounds in
weight, bit readily. As I angled, V-shaped
flying squadron of pelicans winged their way
northward toward the Gulf of Carpentaria.
The plaintive cry of black cockatoos also
interested me. They did not, as a rule, inhabit
the regions I was traversing. There must
have been a big drought in the unexplored
land.
That afternoon I rescued a calf that was
being attacked by a mob of dingoes. Some-
thing attracted my attention when passing by
the scraggy trees surrounding a waterhole. I
alighted and, stalking between the trunks, got
within fifty yards of the disturbance. There


were fourteen wild dogs, some white and
others yellow. The mother cow would charge
into the mob. They would open out and stand
back a few yards. Some would stretch out on
the ground and yawn. The calf would stand
up, shivering with fright and pain, in front of
its protector, only to be knocked down again
by the cow as she charged a dingo that gam-
bolled in front of her. Then the dogs would
close in again. To watch them it seemed as if
they were playing a casual game. It was a
very real battle, and it was being fought in
deadly silence. There was no snarling, bleat-
ing, or bellowing.
With my .44 I blazed into the pack. Dingoes
bolted in all directions. Some, not seeing me
in my hiding-place behind a tree-trunk, came
leaping my way, and, seeing Dinkum moving
toward them, halted to give fight. He would
have been badly mauled. Yelling, I ran at
them, firing as I went. My dog grabbed one
by the throat, but could not get a firm hold.
He came back to me and spat out a mouthful
of hair. The dingoes scattered, and the cow
and calf trotted away up a gully.
Sweeping torrents of dust enveloped the car
as we ran before the wind. Kangaroos, in little
groups, were camped, stooping, with their
backs to the gale. It was interesting to see
the young ones sheltering under the lee of the
mothers, who crouched over them. They all
ignored the car. Rain started to spatter down,


and the dust disappeared. Soon, clods of sticky
soil were being hurled up by the wheels.
Lumps like bricks were landing on top of the
hood. At sundown I came out on to dry land.
On the McArthur I pitched my camp and
arranged with a mob of natives to go down the
river in canoes, as it was impossible, at this
point, to proceed right down the coast by car,
for the native wells were all dry. Some hun-
dreds of coastal natives were scattered along
the river, hunting and fishing. They had
walked scores of miles to come in before the
wet season for the annual young-man-making
ceremonies. In connection with these a fight
was being enacted down the river.
Out on a grassy plain I sighted them, scat-
tered groups of wildly excited beings. A few
spears were whizzing and boomerangs were
hurtling. Angry and voluble were the argu-
ments; impolite, forcible, and uncomplimen-
tary were the actions and the language. The
women were taking part in it, making vicious
swings at each other with fighting-sticks,
screeching, scolding, and leaping. Children
were crying and dogs were howling. Painted
men neatly dodged missiles of war thrown by
others who jumped up out of natural hollows
in the ground, and disappeared.
Several sad-looking young men were sitting
in the shade of a big tree. They had not eaten
food for days. They were to be the chief
figures in the evening’s ceremony. They had


to go through these rites before they could
gain the women of their parents’ choice. One,
a Boorooloola boy, confided to me, “Too much
marry no good. Too much stop in one place.”
The young men were being subjected to
endurance tests to prove their fitness or other-
wise for the status of manhood, among which
was starvation. They had been required to
spend a day and a night, without protection,
in a mosquito-infested swamp, leaving it at
moonrise in the evening; they had been forced
to lie all day, naked, in the blazing sun. To
increase their torment their heads had been
swaddled in soft paper-bark. While they lay
there, coolamons of stinging insects had been
poured on their sweating bodies. They were
forbidden to cry out or exhibit any sign of
suffering. The weaker ones sometimes died as
a result of the hardships of these ceremonies.
If one of the older men had reason to be
jealous of one of the young men being initi-
ated —perhaps wanting his girl—he would not
be above increasing the young man’s torture
in the hope that it would kill him.
While the young men were going through
these ceremonies—which lasted about a fort-
night—the old men of the tribe instructed
them in the ancient tribal laws. They were
told of the laws governing women, marriage,
hunting, and food. There was the law of the
four blood-groups, the Fish, the Reptile, the
Bird, and the Animal, which of these might


mate and which might not. This was know-
ledge that had come down by word of mouth
from the dim past It was regarded as being
of greater importance than all the other laws;
and over the finer distinctions involved many
arguments had occurred among the elders.*
While the young men were enduring the pangs
of hunger and thirst the corroboree-singer
came and sang to them the Song of the
Barramundi. It was a lengthy song, rendered
in an expressive tenor voice. It depicted the
barramundi gliding through the cool waters;
obtaining his food; swimming leisurely in
the shade of the river-bank trees; darting
hungrily upon his prey; and, at last, gliding
from sight into the depths of the stream.
While the ceremonies were going forward
I decided to go down-river. Early one morn-
ing we were afloat, navigating a cockle-shell
of a dinghy with a tarpaulin as sail. Two
dug-out canoes accompanied us. They were
loaded with an assortment of yabbering, sing-
ing natives, whining dogs, cooked reptiles and
fish. Each put up a sail made out of an old
Government blanket. They rippled along, one
on each side of the stream.
Sometimes the sun would reflect on a shin-
ing lump floating on the water. This would
* It is worth noting that modern medical science has discovered
a similar number of blood-groups. Blood transfusion, with bene-
ficial results, can only take place between similar blood types. It
seems strange that a supposedly ignorant race of savages should
have been in possession of this knowledge.


slowly sink out of sight—it was a wet crocodile
watching the proceedings. A white blob on
the water ahead kept bobbing up and down,
travelling seawards. With difficulty we over-
hauled it, and it proved to be a white goat
carcass being towed along by a crocodile. The
niggers kept away from it for fear of the
crocodile showing fight and upsetting the
canoes. They came paddling toward us, a curve
of water under their bows showing the power
behind the hefty paddlemen’s stroke. The
canoes were balanced on the gyroscopic prin-
ciple of ‘‘keep moving along.” A line of
bubbles showed where the crocodile was
crawling along the mud-silted bottom. From
the banks of the river, as we drifted along,
sounded nature’s alarm. From woodland
creature to flying bird the approach of man
was heralded. That curse of the stalking
hunter, the ever-watchful and squawking
white cockatoo, was spying on us from over-
head. Then the animal warning. In the scrubs
we could hear the thud of wallabies making
away along their pads.
Splotches of yellow sand, stirred up from
below on a three feet deep sand-bank, meant
sport. The aboriginal never tires of his spear.
It was a stingaree digging in, in an effort to
evade the notice of a hungry shark that was
lurking at a little distance. Quivering with
eagerness the spearman peered into the murki-
ness below. Savagely he drove a spear down


wards. A fleeting shadow below the surface
darted into shallower water. Streaking along
the top like a periscope was the spear-shaft.
It came to rest again.
Leaping overboard, with spears quivering
ready to strike, three natives waded'after it.
The shark was still hovering about. The
periscope streaked toward a nigger, then a
big floppy mass volplaned along the surface.
Yelling, scattering, and scared of the stabbing
barb with which the stingaree was equipped,
the natives hurled spears into it. Flopping
feebly, its blood tinging the waters, it sank to
the bottom. From there it was hauled ashore.
The barb was at once broken off, to be used
later for a spear-head.
On landing I shot a wallaby. The natives
cooked it by putting red-hot stones inside it
and burying it in the hot sand. As a delicacy
they made a haggis of various parts.
A glorious sight to be seen in the Gulf
country at the monsoon changes, and known
as the “Evening Glory,” appeared in the sky.
Swiftly moving gloomy clouds, golden-edged
from the setting sun, rolled up from seaward.
Arched across this was a rainbow. The spec-
tacle had a strange effect on the natives. The
rainbow was their traditional omen of danger.
All yabber and chatter ceased around the
camp-fires. Their smiling faces became down-
cast, their eyes held a look of furtiveness and
uneasiness, their nerves were on edge. They


remained like this until the sky cleared—then
all was well.
During the next few days I tramped about
the surrounding country. It was almost all
open forest with small grassy plains. Pine
shady trees were everywhere. Numerous
smoke-signals were to be seen. Distant tribes
were coming in, hunting as they marched, to
the man-making ceremonies, enacted just be-
fore the wet season commences. Some of
these young men were with my party. They
anxiously watched all the native tracks for
the footprints of both friend and foe. By
the tracks they could name every aboriginal
who had passed. One pair of small foot-
prints, pigeon-toed, with two toes missing
from the left foot—probably burnt oft while
the owner had been sleeping too near his
camp-fire—was a cause of speculation and
concern. They were the tracks of an old repro-
bate who acted as medicine man, astrologer,
doctor, wizard, rainmaker, hauler out of
devils from the body, etc., at the forth-coming
rituals. Having not yet reached manhood the
young men were privileged to show fear.
Incidentally, these young men are often the
best to take on a long journey. Married men
are liable to disappear without notice. They
all suspect their wives and the other fellow.
All day long food-supplies were brought
in. These were roughly sorted out and cooked
by the men and women who were considered


too old to go hunting and digging. The amount
of food brought in would determine the dura-
tion of the ceremonies. Mysterious little
groups were scattered about down in quiet
gullies, busily painting themselves and their
boomerangs.
As the sunset glow faded away behind
scraggy overhanging pandanus palms, there
arose the sound of tapping boomerangs, the
booboo of didjeroos, the odour of baking meats
and the subdued hum of many voices. The
orchestra was tuning up, or rather, warming
up for the opening scenes. The flickering of
the firestick torches from various directions
moved toward the reflection of a big bonfire,
against which were outlined moving nude
shapes and grotesque phantoms.
From out of the dark scrubs came a shout-
ing challenge. Into the circle of firelight came
a branch-waving, white-painted group of abo-
riginals, spears at the ready, the barbed points
quivering as they danced toward a common
centre. Knees knocking together, toes turned
in, bodies wriggling, they gave a quaint ex-
hibition of the very latest in dingo trots. Loud
boomed the didjeroos, emphasizing the down-
ward stamp of feet. Clackety-clack tapped the
boomerangs, giving the time to the dancers’
bodily movements. A monotonous clop-clop
came from the many hands of the audience.
High above the babel of sound came a
quivering falsetto voice—wailing of the trees
M


of the dead men. From the outside darkness
a blunt pointed spear whizzed into the group,
slid snakily and fast along the ground, leaving
a streak of dust behind. It was smartly dodged.
The master of ceremonies promptly stepped
forward, spear at the ready, peering toward
and cursing at him who had thrown the spear
and who represented the hidden enemy. This
ended the first part of the ceremony. The
dancers took their places among the audience.
The meat was brought, and feasting com-
menced with much laughter and shouting.
After supper the greater part of the audi-
ence dispersed. This was in accordance with
tribal law. The women and children went first,
weeping and wailing, then the younger men.
At last only the young men who were to be
initiated and the old men were left. Their
ceremony, which was a secret one, lasted until
dawn.
The sun rose that morning upon weary
groups of overfed, under-slept, bleary-eyed
natives. They gossiped in undertones. In the
white ashes of the burnt-out camp-fires a
conglomeration of women, children, and dogs
slept. Remnants of meat and half-picked bones
strewed the camp. Swarms of flies seethed
everywhere. In the tree-tops hungry crows
cawed and croaked; and a hot tropical sun
shone over all.
I left the camp that day and, with the two
boys, I sailed back up the river. Reaching the


motor-camp I spent a few days overhauling
and repacking for the journey around the
coast to Arnhem Land.
The car, on low gear, was slowly pushing a
way through fifteen feet high grass. The
heavy log bumper-bar, swinging from the
front dumbirons, forced the growth down-
wards in long graceful swaths. It passed be-
neath the chassis with a peculiar hissing
sound. The revolving drive-shaft was packed
tightly all round and looked like a huge cotton-
reel.
To front and sides the extent of vision was
limited to the wall of grass, but looking back-
wards, there could be seen the lane along which
we had come. Some natives were following
us, for heads and shoulders, bobbing up and
down, could be seen. The heat of the tropic
noon, inside that forest of grass, was intense.
The grass-dust was stifling, and the glare from
the wall of stalks made our eyes smart and
become inflamed.
There was danger of fire from the red-hot
exhaust-pipe. Several times small fires started
among the rubbish that lay a foot deep inside
the car. Each time I doused them with water
from the water-bag. We had a hundred and
twenty gallons of petrol aboard, several gal-
lons of oil, a case of cartridges, and thousands
of feet of cinematograph-film.
The grass plain gradually became rougher
and rougher, and developed into that curse


of the overlander known as devil-devil coun-
*7: At the bases of the tall grasses were
eighteen inches high tussocks. These caused
the car to swerve and buck, making driving
both difficult and tiring. Prickly-grass seed-
heads came zipping over the radiator like mil-
lions of small arrows. They pierced the cloth-
ing and penetrated the flesh with their minute
but thickly barbed ends.
~ J he grasses began, almost impercep-
ibly at first, to change colour and character.
1 hey became greener and ranker. My two
aboriginal boys got out and made their way
ahead, stabbing sticks into the ground in order
to test for underlying bog, and I followed
slowly with the car. We halted. There was a
two-hundred yards wide bog. It could not be
avoided as there were big swamps at each end
o± it, at a distance of a mile or so. We had a
special method of crossing these belts of bog.
Ihe aboriginals who had been following us
now came limping up. They had been forcing
then way through these lands for some days,
the long grasses dragging between their
skinny legs had made the inside parts raw.
They were bleeding and full of prickles. In
icir usual hunting walkabouts these places
would have been avoided until dry enough to
burn off thoroughly.
They got to work on the long bamboo-like
growths in the channel. The bog was bottom-
less and the car would sink out of sight if it


once got off the track we were about to make.
The grass was smashed and trodden down
systematically. The lower layer was put down
fore and aft of the way the car was to go,
and to the full width of the wheel track. The
adjoining reeds were then bent jover and
stamped crossways over the first layer. In a
couple of hours we built a very effective semi-
floating bridge to the firm land on the other
side.
We off-loaded and carried the kit across,
then partly deflated the tyres and put chains
on. Gently I drove the twenty-three hundred-
weight mass on to the partly floating reeds.
The bridge sank down until the muddy soak-
age was up to the axles. The top layer of cross
reeds started to float, and the bumper-har
scooped these along until they bunched three
feet high. To overcome this, the niggers stood
on the reeds, yard by yard, as the car moved
along at a snail’s pace. Then, for the last few
yards, I fastened the crocodile-trapping flex-
ible wire rope to the car and the natives hauled
steadily as I let the clutch in.
The car was sinking right down, as the reeds
were quickly losing the air that was enclosed
in them. I took a chance and stepped on the
accelerator. The car made a dive at the natives
as it came safely out.
Ahead of me was a wonderful sight. Whirl-
ing clouds of woolly white smoke were going
up thousands of feet into the air, a winding


white column against the blue. Below the
white smoke were majestic rolling banks of
black smoke, hundreds of feet high and miles
long. Beneath all was a lurid red glow. Among
the swaying trees of a tea-tree forest, flames
were crackling, and thundering.
Across the plain the fire was making a clean
sweep of the long grass at a rate of about ten
miles an hour. It miglff travel hundreds of
miles, right across the big buffalo plains to
which we were bound. So I sat and watched
for a couple of hours in order to let the
stifling smoke clear away.
Far away to the south was a line of blue
hills. Long columns of smoke were rising, one
by one, and coming toward us. The “Stone
Men of the Hills” were replying to us. They,
too, were coming down to the coastal plains
to eat of fish and of buffalo meat. “Mulga
wires” had told them of the arrival of “Moto-
car Frank” and plenty of tobacco. I always
encouraged them to visit me. I was fond of
fishing and shooting, and with plenty of blacks
to eat the spoils of the chase I could pursue my
hobby untroubled by the dislike of needless
waste and killing. It also gave me a chance to
study and photograph them.
That afternoon the country changed to tea-
tree flats and open forest. The ground surface
was of a heavy, sandy loam. Everything was
black from the bushfire. Soot, ashes, and smoke
came swirling along in suffocating eddies. My


two blackfellows were blacker than ever. I,
too, was quite black, and a powdering of char-
coal covered the kit in the car.
On low gear, nearly axle-deep in sand, the
car boiled along. Sometimes it was necessary
to charge across acres of those infernal bur-
rows of sand goannas. The axle would strike
and scoop up blinding, choking showers of
ashes and hot cinders. Once a back wheel stuck
deep in a hole right alongside a hollow tree
that was blazing inside like a furnace. The
limbs overhead were ablaze, and at any mo-
ment one of them might have fallen on top of
the car.
When once more moving onwards, the fiery
branches of the burning trees that we passed
were a danger, and the two natives, seated on
top of the baggage, kept a sharp look out.
When we came to a safe spot I gave the over-
heated engine a rest, while the aboriginals
got down and hunted for snakes, goannas, and
bandicoots that had taken refuge in hollow
logs and ground holes. All this tuckout was
put on top of the rear luggage. One item of
their collection, a big rainbow snake, came to
life again! We were driving along. The first
hint I got of the snake’s return from the
shades was when the two niggers tumbled over
backwards and fell off the bouncing car. I
had no shirt on. The reptile slithered across
my spine, went downwards among the cargo
and stowed away there.


I pulled up, but found that the aboriginals’
interest had become centred on some tracks on
the ground—they forgot the snake. They
pointed to the spoor of a big bull-buffalo. We
decided to follow it up. They trotted in front
while I came close behind with the car. We
were still two days’ journey from the real
buffalo-hunting ground.
Suddenly there were yells and a stampeding
crash: a big bull rushed out from among the
bamboos, halted for a moment, swung round
at sight of the car, and then leapt over the
edge of a ten feet deep breakaway. He
stumbled on to his knees, got up, and rushed
away up the other side of the creek. We were
beef-meat hungry I The creek was uncrossable
here, so I abandoned the car and all hands
got on to the bull’s tracks. The aboriginals,
as they walked rapidly along, kept stooping
over, picking up dust and rubbing it under
their armpits. They said it was “to kill smell
alonga blackfellah. ”
Now, a wounded bull-buffalo is one of the
most dangerous of big game. He is cunning and
will lie down, or wait behind a tree, until the
pursuing hunter has gone past. He will then
charge—and he is a devil for wickedness. His
victim, once down, is trampled and smashed
to pieces. His sense of hearing and smell is
very acute.
One man tracked while the other black and
I kept a sharp look out. Presently a medley


of mongrel yelps told us that a mob of natives
must have discovered the old bull. The sound
came from a spot half a mile ahead of us.
Arrived at the place where the blacks and dogs
were gathered, we found the bull at bay in a
pool. He had his stern up against a clay bank
that was overhung by a bushy tree. Now and
then he would charge out at the dogs that
were tormenting him, and strike at them with
his front hooves. The aboriginals were holding
off as they did not want to smash up their
spears on the tough hide.
As I came panting up, the bull came out
on to the bank of the pool. He was covered
with mud. Water streamed off him. His
little tail kept twitching, and his eyes were
red and bleary. The niggers had not waited
for his near approach. They were swinging
from branches or scrambling up tree-trunks.
He backed into the water again and would
not come out. I did not want to kill him
there. The position was badly placed for skin-
ning—and I would have to drink that water
at night. But there seemed to be nothing else
for it. One of the swimming dogs got within
range of him and he butted it, smashing it to
pulp against the clay bank by using his bony
forehead in a series of short jabbing stabs.
While he was prodding I fired and the bullet
struck him at the base of the big horns, and
he dropped. The natives rushed in and hauled
the carcass to shallower water. It took them


some time to do this as it was then dusk. To
enable them to see to carve up the beef a big
fire was lit and kept blazing. The night wind
was chilly, and the shivering, naked natives
hacked off lumps of meat which they warmed
at the fire and devoured while it was still
quivering.
The following day we went on our way, and
two days later reached the real buffalo country.
We had not far to seek for game. Just as
we were ready to start, we saw, away in the
distance, what appeared to be dots of light
moving slowly through the timber. These were
buffalo coming out of the jungle, with their
dew-wet backs reflecting the slanting light of
the sun. We mounted and set out. Stiffy—l
had nicknames for the boys—was in the
mechanic’s seat as tracker and pilot. Moses
was jammed into a cubby-hole in the back of
the car as observer.
I took the car out on to the plains and began
to circle the mob of quietly feeding buffalo.
As we got closer the cows with calves became
restless. They trotted out toward the car and
then bolted back again. Then the mob started
to ring. They opened out, cantered, and then
broke into a lumbering gallop.
Selecting a big fat cow I opened up the
throttle. Clouds of dust rose from the flying
herd. Bumping and heaving over tussocks at
twenty-five miles per hour, the car, with diffi-
culty, got in amongst them. With a burst of


speed I drove the car up to the animal I had
chosen and ranged alongside. I was steering
with one hand, and with the other I gripped
my shortened .303 carbine. Watching a
chance, and almost touching the ribs* I fired.
Down fell the beast. Out of the dusty mist
the dim forms of buffaloes were racing along,
the roar of the open exhaust subduing the
thunder of their hooves.
I was fearful lest we should strike the
timbered edge of the plain—in the dust there
was no seeing where we were going. Then just
as a bull was about to gore the racing car, I
dodged abruptly. We very nearly capsized.
For a moment the bull was thus going in the
opposite direction to us. He swerved and fol-
lowed at a great pace. We struck a flat clay-
pan, where I was able to speed up to forty
miles per hour. A belt of thick timber lay
ahead. The buffalo had fallen astern, but he
was going—or rather—coming strong. I
pulled up suddenly and the boys made a bee-
line for a nearby tree. The enraged bull
stopped a hundred yards away. He shook his
massive head. His attention was diverted from
the car to the two blacks, both trying to climb
the young tree at the same time. He started
to trot, swinging his head down between his
forelegs and then bringing it up again with a
long powerful sweep of his horns. He broke
into a gallop, heading for the slim tree on
which the thoroughly scared boys were


perched. All this happened while I was re-
loading the rifle-magazine.
The first shot made him slew round and
come straight for the car. As his head threw
upward at thirty yards I fired for the throat.
He stumbled, but came on. I made a frantic,
running jump to get on to the other side of
the car. Dinkum scrambled to meet the buf-
falo and, dodging the beast’s fore-end, expertly
grabbed him by a hind leg. The bull swerved
to meet this new opponent. I got a side-on
shot at the shoulder-blade. He went down,
with Dinkum still hanging on.
We flayed the bull and, after removing the
best cuts from the carcass, returned to where
the cow had been shot. Our activities had at-
tracted the attention of local blacks. While we
were skinning the cow they came streaking to-
ward us across the plain to make friends and
to share in the supply of “strong fellah beef.”
Very seldom would they themselves attack a
buffalo; not only because of the breaking of
spears into the making of which much time
and labour had gone, but because of the days
that would often have to be spent in tracking
down the dangerous, wounded beast until it
became too exhausted to move. It was not long
before I had a camp-following of bucks, lubras
and piccaninnies sufficient in number to grate-
fully consume all that my rifle would provide.
The next day I encountered a cow-buffalo
and two calves coming down towards the


water. It would have been useless slaughter to
have used the rifle —the blacks were miles
away—so I lay watching them. A few minutes
later another cow and a big bull come trotting
playfully down. On the edge of the pool they
drank deeply and then waded out into deep
water, eating the tops off the water-lilies and
softly squawking to each other. The very
young buffalo has a call like a child’s trumpet
being blown, but the mature beasts are almost
voiceless; the best they can manage is a frog-
like croak.
A hundred yards away from where the buf-
faloes were feeding two pairs of bubbles ap-
peared on the surface of the water. They were
the eyes of two crocodiles looking greedily, I
have no doubt, but fearfully, I think, at this
supply of succulent beef. The old bull must
have seen them. He began to blow nervously,
then the small herd started to heave and splash
toward the opposite shore. The wind changed,
and they caught a sniff of my camp, which
they had not, up till then, noticed. Clattering
away over a rocky bar, they trotted into the
gloomy depths of the jungle.
Next morning, and I was once more on my
way. Out on the plains hundreds of beasts
were peacefully feeding on the short sweet
grass. The numbers of these creatures —
Asiatic water-buffalo really—in the north is
astonishing. They were originally imported
from the Orient for the use of the pioneers


at the long since abandoned settlement at Port
Essington. Going bush, they multiplied until
thousands of their descendants roam over the
ten thousand square miles of the Territory
coastal lands. They never wander inland, but
keep to country adjacent to the Arafura Sea.
They are gregarious when on the open plains,
grazing hundreds in a mob. When not feeding
they go in little parties to their mud wallows
and haunts in the tidal mangroves, river, and
bamboo-swamps. They are of enormous
strength, being bigger than any domesticated
cattle, and are courageous and keen-witted in
an emergency.
I intended rejoining the blacks as they
would be looking to me for further supplies of
‘ ‘ strong fellah beef. ’ ’ The buffaloes took very
little notice of my passing across the plain.
Here and there one would arise from under a
shady tree or from a wallow in a swampy pool
and gaze at the growling car, but that was all.
Two young bulls attracted my attention.
Their antics were so strange that I stopped
the car and started to stalk them with my
camera. One was amusing himself by driving
his powerful horns into a big ant-bed, and,
with an upward swing, throwing the earth all
over himself. Near him two birds of the plover
variety were skipping about picking up the
swarms of white ants rendered shelterless by
him. Near by a cheeky brolga was waiting
to get a chance at all this wriggling tucker.


The buffalo, sighting this long-legged bird,
charged. There was a dead even sprint for
about fifty yards, then the brolga flew, the
buffalo passing just beneath it. The other
buffalo was resting on the shady side of an
ant-bed, head down, half asleep, stern against
the mound. The beast that was in playful
mood turned from his pursuit of the brolga,
lowered his head and charged the ant-bed,
striking it full tilt. It tipped over—it must
have weighed half a ton—on top of the beast
that was dozing. He lunged to his feet in a
cloud of dust, then they both made off in oppo-
site directions. This alarmed the whole mob.
They gathered, and with a thunderous sound
of hooves and a crashing of vegetation tore
into a bamboo thicket.
Ahead of me smoke-signals were arising. I
walked over to where some giant paper-barks
were growing in a swamp and at the base of
one put a firestick. In a few minutes the tree
was blazing from top to bottom, sooty black
smoke curling upwards into the air. Then I
followed along the tracks of the retreating
buffalo. In the jungle, at a little distance, I
heard yodelling “ Yak-khis” called to me from
various quarters. Then, laughing and calling
out, a group of aboriginals greeted me. The
hurtling mob of buffalo had scattered them
in all directions —mostly into tree-branches.
Looking down into a ravine I heard yells
coming from its depths, so I left the car and


followed the natives cautiously. Moses had
met a wild hull, not a buffalo, but a bad-
tempered, red-eyed, russet-hided, cleanskin.
It had taken a dislike to the native’s red loin-
cloth and had charged. He had, with the speed
of a scared goanna, climbed up the first escape
available —a looping, prickly jungle vine—
and was now clinging to this. Every time he
tried to climb up a little higher the vine dis-
obligingly slipped down a little. Below was
the bull, rampant, slobbering froth, pawing at
Moses’s hat, which had fallen to the ground,
and now and then gazing up at the boy.
Dinkum went to Moses’s rescue in true
cattle-dog style, attacking from the rear. The
boy took quick advantage of the distraction.
He dropped to the ground and, like a flash,
scrambled up the steep banks of the ravine.
The aboriginals wanted me to shoot the bull,
but I had no liking for a rough and tumble
scrimmage with a possibly wounded and
savage bull among the hooked and clinging
lawyer-vines.
We left him and soon afterwards the boys
got on to the tracks of some of the buffaloes.
They picked out the tracks of a fairly large
beast and followed it briskly, while I followed
behind in the car. The nature of the country,
plain and jungle, forced me to make short
detours. I was returning toward the blacks
when I saw from their behaviour that some-
thing was happening. They were snapping


their fingers excitedly. Hearing them, 1
stopped the car and ran forward. In and out
among the timber and the ant-beds, a buffalo
calf that had lost its mother in the stampede,
was struggling with two dingoes. One had a
grip of its throat and the other was'hanging
on to its belly-flank. It had its four legs out-
stretched, trying to stop the calf from run-
ning. I shot one dingo. Dinkum and a black-
fellow’s dog tackled the other. There was a
glorious scrimmage that ended only when the
dingo was cleverly speared by one of the
blacks.
Moses grabbed the calf by the tail —on see-
ing us it had, with misplaced faith, come
trumpeting toward us. The blacks wanted the
calf for tuckout, so they killed it. Camp was
made at a muddy buffalo wallow. No stones
being available for cooking purposes the boys
obtained clay and, after rolling it into balls,
placed them on top of the camp-fire to dry and
become red hot. These were placed on top of
the buffalo veal, after it had been put in a
shallow hole and covered with water-soaked
tea-tree leaves.
While the meat slowly roasted, the natives
made long rolls of grass. Using these as drags
they netted the wallow and brought out scores
of small fish and yabbies. These were cooked
on the coals of the camp-fire and eaten
straightway, just as an appetizer for the forth-
coming feast.
N


At night I lay for a little while, identifying
tll n n j“!w, A f owI > ali S htin g on the car, softly
called Whuk-wuk! Whuk-wukl” For a while
there was silence. I heard the scuffle of his
wings as he flew away. Not long after, frantic
guttural noises were intermingled with hisses.
Ihe owl had met a native wild cat and a fight
0 the death was taking place. Amongst the
long grasses a frog screamed; rapidly its cry
came closer and closer. Then I felt it bury itself
m the folds of my net. There was a slithering
sound and then quietness. I switched on my
hand-torch and, without moving my body or
raising my head, put the beam where the
rog was hiding. A snake was prodding its
head in and out of the folds of my net. The
dark s^ur^ slipped away into the
As a lurid morning sun peeped over the dense
mangroves the tide was nearly at the full.
Wanting bait, I walked over to a deep rocky
pool in a nearby creek. This was teeming with
pilchards, so I tied three hooks together in
giapnel shape, fastened on a line, threw out,
and then hauled in rapidly. This acted as a
jag on which several fishes were impaled. I
got some crickets, to, in case the fish would
not take the pilchards. These were got simply
by shovelling the loamy sand into the water
and catching them as they swam ashore.
1 was after the fifty-pound barramundi,
which 1 could hear rumbling and turning over


the stones in deep water at the foot of a small
red bluff. They were hunting out small red
crabs.
Now and then one would come swirling up
in pursuit of its prey. Sometimes this would
be a flying fish, and there would follow an ex-
citing race along the surface of the water.
It was comic to watch this, as invariably there
would come tearing along the fin of a shark,
and Mr Barramundi would leap upwards, an
affrightened, gleaming streak of silver against
the blue sky. Sometimes, in his fright, a barra-
mundi would become stranded in a maze of
ever-shallowing channels.
Old-man crocodile soon became aware of
this. He sneaked cautiously along the bottom.
There would be a terrific bang of his powerful
tail and a stunned barramundi would fall back
to be grabbed in his grim jaws. The saurian
would then waddle out on to the sand-bank
and, like a dog chewing a bone, dine slowly
but heartily.
There were watchful eyes other than mine.
Even as the fish’s head fell from the croco-
dile’s munching mouth there was a swoop of
white wings. Swinging talons seized the tit-
bit, and a fish eagle zoomed upward, circled,
and made away to a six feet wide nest in the
head of a cypress pine.
The tide waters were now dead calm, but the
undercurrent had set in. From out at sea
there came faintly the voices of blackfel


lows chanting in a canoe. Old man “Wire-
whiskers” had harpooned a big fat dugong.
•!i, had^ dlVed overb °ard, stuffed its nostrils
with soft paper-bark, and now, astride its
slippery back, in a high-pitched tenor voice
was singing it dead-fellah, bone-fellah, dead-
lellah, fat-fellah.
We left camp at sundown and sailed for a
while. The moon rose later, and shone brightly.
Ihe natives, singing softly, paddled quietly
along the deeps, or poled cautiously through
the shallows. All kinds of queer things lurked
? 1 7 sterioils depths. Once a crocodile
slithered in close by, and another took a flying
leap into the water from a high bank He
looked, as he jumped, like a giant frog.’ The
backwash, following his impact with the sur-
face, made our frail craft rock dangerously.
He was a particularly cheeky saurian and
soon came barging along to inspect us. Head
and shoulders high up above the water as he
surged along, he looked like a small motor
boat. Evidently, on closer view, he decided
that we would be too dangerous for him to
attack. In the bottom of the canoe a small
hre was burning on a flat stone. Strips of
paper-bark were lighted and, whilst still flar-
ing, were flung overboard. The crocodile
promptly disappeared.
Toward midnight we came to a long stretch
of shallows. Sometimes a crocodile would
grunt in the mangrove-forest, or a sea-curlew


shriek overhead. To lighten the canoe and to
decrease the draught, most of the natives
waded alongside with spears in their hands.
All the dogs, too, had to get out. They followed
astern, swimming, and whimpering with cold
and fear. The musk reek of crocodile hung
heavy above the waters. I was wading with
a heavy calibre repeating rifle in my hands.
We made camp close to the water’s edge —
of necessity, as swamps began a few yards
back from the bank. The crocodiles, if they
were very hungry, might come out and make
a rush at the dogs. In case this should happen
I had two of the blacks’ mongrels close to my
net. Dinkum I had inside with me, and my
loaded rifle was close at hand.
Before turning in I served out tobacco. This
was my currency and it was in great demand.
As I lay in my bunk I could hear some of the
natives hard at work. They were chopping
branches of trees and pulling up grass: get-
ting ready for the next high tide, which would
fill all the smaller creeks.
At dawn the tide changed. The flow from
the ocean had commenced. The formerly
placid waters were in a turmoil —banging,
swirling, and jumping. They seethed with
fishes. The natives were waiting at a creek
channel that branched from the main stream.
It was thirty feet wide and about five miles
long. Its incoming waters were flowing
strongly but silently.


The natives, having been taught to be
cautious, were peering from behind trees, and
talking to each other excitedly—not by word
of mouth, but silently, by animated inter-
change of hand-sign language. A big “run”
of fishes was going up-stream. The smaller
ones crowded past first, and then, as the waters
ever deepened, came the bigger varieties. A
big bull crocodile drifted and paddled by with
only his watchful eyes and keen nose above the
water. Then the waters stilled to a high slack
tide, and there was for a few minutes a scene
of intense activity.
Poles were hastily driven down into the six
feet deep water; bushes were interlaced with
them and grass packed against them right
across the stream. The natives swam and
dived, making all secure. Their nerves were
on edge, but their work was all done methodi-
cally, quietly and quickly.
The barricade was finished. In the water,
on the up-stream side, expert spearmen stood
with their weapons at the ready.
Without warning, the bough-barricade
shuddered under the impact of some hidden
power beneath the muddy waters. A con-
tinued movement of the poles indicated that
it was seeking a way through. In silence the
natives waited. A floppy fin arose above the
surface and a big black body rolled over
exposing the yellow-white under parts of a
five-hundred-pound groper. It was a menace


to our structure, and we would perhaps lose all
the fishes. A heavy spear was jabbed into it.
In pain and fright it swung around, and, with
the spear bolt upright, swam back up-stream
and disappeared behind a mudbank.
I followed it with the rifle, and could see the
quivering spear-shaft apparently lying on the
mud. Half sliding down the slippery bank,
I tied a stout fishing-line to it and began to
heave slowly. The aboriginals were driving
spears into the bigger fishes and dragging
them out. No time was wasted because old-
man Ghingi the Dog-chewer was close by and
as the tide got lower and lower he would be
sure to come our way.
About three tons of big fish were now flop-
ping and gasping on the banks. The waters
were reduced to eighteen-inch pools filled with
quietly moving masses of salmon, mullet,
bream, perch, and crabs. We went away up-
stream, searching every section of mudbank
and sand-flat for the crocodiles. We found
the groper stranded, and a Johnstone River
crocodile camped alongside it. He had been
tearing lumps of flesh off the big fish. He was
cheeky, and greeted us by standing stiffly on
all four legs, blowing his body up and gurg-
ling. He was hit a resounding whack on the
nose with a lump of wood, collapsed and shut
his mouth. His “long fellah” nose was
promptly tied up.
A call came echoing from the mangroves.


The old-man crocodile’s tracks had been
found. They were winding in and out, be-
tween and under the maze of tangled man-
grove roots. It was impossible to follow them
directly through the sombre shades. We had
to balance and crawl, four feet above the slimy
ground, over those slippery, shell-encrusted,
flesh-cutting roots. We could hear a monoto-
nous, dribbly sound. Then we found him lying
low in a mud puddle alongside a mangrove
log. With yells of fiendish delight the savages
greeted their enemy. They knew him. He was
a sixteen-foot black crocodile with one fore-
foot missing—it had probably been bitten off
in an encounter with a shark.
He gave a few subdued bellows and then
squirted two jets of water through his nostrils.
He opened his mouth, gaping until I could see
the barbed spikes of a catfish which had
become embedded in his palate. These open
jaws were the danger signal, but swing his tail
he couldn’t, as the mangrove log and the roots
near it prevented him.
There was a scene of exultant carnage. The
eyes were prodded out with spears. Into the
mouth was thrown a rotten hunk of wood on
which the ferocious teeth closed and became
embedded. The natives spat on him, belted him
on the nostrils, then cut off his tail with blows
from a tomahawk. He was carved up while
still alive and carried away in quivering
sections.


CHAPTER XII
THROUGH FLOOD AND FIRE
In the year 1921 I was sent out by the Prime
Minister’s Department on a special mission.
I had to furnish a comprehensive report on
the country to be traversed by a proposed rail-
way that would, by connecting Oodnadatta
in South Australia with Alice Springs in the
Northern Territory, form a transcontinental
north-south line. My off-sider during the
journey was Roy Fry.
The route to the far north was at that time
just a camel-pad and overlanding cattle-track.
Except for the unmade heavy sections of sand-
hills and bad river crossings, the travelling,
for a car, was reasonably good as far as Alice
Springs. Onwards from there, long grass
in which ant-beds nestled firmly, gave a lot
of trouble. Hidden stumps among the bushes
were dangerous obstructions. Speed was often
limited to five miles per hour. To-day there
is a well defined, fire-cleared motor road
where speeds up to sixty miles an hour are
possible. k , , iiJ


Heavy rains had fallen. With a bump and
a jar our car stryck a submerged rock below
the running flood-waters. We were piloting
a course west and northwards through lakes,
swamps, and creeks, longing for the “desert”
lands marked on our maps. The track along
the Overland Telegraph line was flooded.
Backing off the “reef” on to which we had
floundered I headed the big six-cylinder car
into the beams of the setting sun. They were
shining at us over the rough mountain ranges
west of Barrow Creek.
Within a day or two of escaping from the
waters we were slowly pushing a way through
ten feet high spinifex, which was in seed and
inflammable. The radiator was chock-full of
seeds and grass, cemented solidly in with the
dust of ant-beds that the bumper was continu-
ally breaking down and scattering around.
Showers of spear-pointed grass-seeds flew
oyer the windscreen, burying our kit and
piling a foot deep on the floor-boards. Below
the boards, sticks, grass, and creepers were
tightly packed. Getting under car, had it
been necessary, would have been extremely
difficult.
It was around the engine and the exhaust
that the danger lay. Dozens of times a day
smoke would curl up and flames lick the
boards around our feet. Fortunately, the
carburettor—the air intake of which I had
enclosed with a big bulb of gauze wire—was


on the opposite side to the exhaust pipe, which
became red-hot owing to heavy low-gear work.
The heat of the exhaust pipe fired the debris
clinging around. At our feet we kept tins of
water and bags of sand. Quick action was
necessary, so we held fire drills until we were
practice perfect. Should the fire get' right
underneath the bodywork it would have been
impossible to__extinguish it quickly enough, as
the petrol drums would catch alight.
We eventually cleared a course down the
bed of a flowing creek. A direct crossing was
impossible. We had to enter the water and
follow it for about a mile, to a place where,
it seemed to me, there was a reasonable chance
of getting out again. The drums of fuel were
unloaded and allowed to float down with the
current. We tied two ropes on to the stern
of the frame members and took a turn around
a tree. My companion lowered away while I
sat at the wheel, the brakes slightly on, gears
in reverse and clutch out. I had chains on the
back wheels to help out the action of the
brakes. The ground was too hard for spraggs
to be placed under the car.
Arrived safely down on the edge of the
creek, I pulled up. I covered the radiator and
engine with waterproofs, put three feet of
piping over the intake and breather pipe, took
the fan-belt off to prevent the water being
whirled up, and started the engine.
We entered the water and headed down


stream. It was a strenuous and hazardous
journey. The rushing waters helped to push
the car along over the basalt boulders that
formed the bed of the creek. Close attention
on my part kept the car on a more or less even
keel. We came to where I hoped to effect a
landing on the opposite bank. With a crack-
ling roar the powerful car charged straight
up a steep sand-drift and on to firm ground.
While we .were reloading a big bull-camel
with a Southern Cross, Western Australian
brand on him, came along. With long neck
outstretched he was tearing down mulga
branches. He must have wandered fifteen
hundred miles from home. Deserting camels,
in Western Australia, always journey east-
ward.
At Alice Springs I had supplemented our
petrol-supply with drums of kerosene. We
needed it for an emergency, owing to the fact
that camels would be unable to bring further
supplies of petrol for a good many weeks,
because heavy rains had also fallen between
Oonadatta and “the Alice/ ’ The next depot
was a thousand miles away. The car pulled
well on kerosene, so long as the temperature
of the engine was high, but there was no
flexibility of control. The fittings on the dash-
board enabled the utmost to be got out of the
kerosene. With a primer of petrol in the
special induction fitting, hot water in radiator
and plugs heated over a fire, it was even pos


sible to start up the engine. To obviate wear
I used a heavy-grade oil in the engine, and
changed this lubricant frequently.
Once more we found ourselves compelled
to face lowlying country. Getting bogged at
the end of the day became a regular thing.
Roy Fry, though by no means a seasoned
bushman, was a stayer. We were never con-
tent to go to bunk with the car squatting down
on its hind parts in a bog. The headlights
seemed to leer at us in these circumstances.
Many a time, when night hung over the water-
logged plains, we toiled with jack and shovel,
our electric spot-light bringing a swarm of
buzzing insects to impede our labours. We
always gave ourselves the satisfaction, on
waking up in the morning, of seeing the car
ready to commence the day’s journey, even
though we knew that before many miles were
covered it would be taking another rest in a
sticky claypan. When were held up,
Rinkum supplied us with rabbits.
Once it was a week before we were able to
move. By that time the engine was very hard
to start; the battery had given up the ghost.
Luckily I had fitted a single-cylinder magneto.
This, after it had been timed to fit in with
the distributor head, functioned very well.
For weeks we battled on at the rate of a
few miles a day. We expected to run out of
the flood-area at any time, but, as we found out
later, the flood-waters extended northward


for hundreds of miles. Fuel-supply, both for
the car and for ourselves, was causing anxiety.
Under ordinary circumstances the car would
do sixteen miles to the gallon of petrol, but
heavy pulling in low gear reduced the ratio
in many places to three miles to the gallon.
The car pulled in a manner of which no light
car would be capable.
We determined to push along. It was of no
use to sit down on these lonely plains—roots
and lizards are not tempting fare. A flowing
creek gave us a lot of trouble. We off loaded,
rigged up a Spanish windlass and dragged the
unfortunate bus through it, carrying the
baggage across. Increasing floods told us that
the storms were still sweeping the ranges
ahead.
Tennant’s Creek telegraph station could not
be far away. Leaving Roy in camp I took the
life-boat—i.e. the bicycle that we carried hung
over the stern of the car, and set off. After some
twenty miles, which took all day to cover, I
arrived at the station with mud-soaked clothes
and shaking limbs. I had a good meal, secured
some food-supplies and started back to Roy.
I came across two aboriginals camped in a
pass between the hills. They agreed to travel
with me, carrying the food. About midnight
I knocked up. Wetness, coldness, and weari-
ness were wearing me down. We lit a fire,
made some coffee, and had a brief spell. Just
before dawn we sighted Roy’s camp-fire. He


was sitting alongside it, nursing his empty
stomach. (He had dined the day before on
half a dozen finches —birds about as big as a
sparrow—which he had shot with a .22 rifle.)
We continued our laborious way and, a couple
of days later, came within sight of Tennant’s
Creek station. We were within three hundred
yards of it when there came an ominous noise
from the carburettor. Our supply of petrol
had given out. We were hundreds of miles
from the nearest depot. No one would be able
to bring petrol to us through the floods for
weeks to come. Of food the telegraph station
officials had barely enough for themselves.
They gave out hopes that we might possibly
get some petrol at Hatches Creek, a hundred
and fifty miles away.
It was a forlorn hope, but it was better than
lying down under our difficulties. I got horses
and packs. A week’s riding brought us to
Hatches Creek. The tide of prosperity had
dropped away from this old mining-field.
Wolfram prices had fallen to zero. Open cuts
—holes in the ground—and heaps of wolfram
and quartz, in hundreds of tons, gave evidence
of suspended operations. Scattered bough
sheds now hung, collapsing, to the rocky hill-
sides and along the banks of the creek. Stray
parties of natives cooked their goannas under
the galvanized-iron shelter of the once pros-
perous miners’ and overlanders’ store.
Scattered over an area of scores of square


miles a few miners still stood by their claims
waiting for better times. Of food-supplies
there were none. Hundreds of miles away a
camel-team was said to be battling along
through flood and bog, but we could not afford
time to wait for its arrival. There were a
few abandoned drums of benzine, but owing
to being left standing on the ground the
bottoms of these were frail and rusted, and
to stow them safely on lively packhorses was
a work of art. Our supply of flour was re-
duced to about three pounds—three pounds of
weeyily dust to feed three men and a dog
durmg a return journey of a hundred and
nity miles; a week’s travelling over mountain
ranges and scrubby, boggy plains. On the
outskirts of the field we camped for the night
thankful that feed and water for the horses
were plentiful.
Later at Frew River we camped in a beauti-
±ul well grassed country. The series of deep
waterholes, like lakes, were surrounded by
mountains. Here we had better fortune than
we had expected. We met with flocks of duck
and other waterfowl and were able to supple-
ment our dwindling store of food.
Through the auriferous mountains walla-
bies, rabbits, and bandicoots kept us supplied
with meals with varying degrees of regularity
Following the rains, large spiders had come
forth to spin their webs from bush to bush and
tree to tree, -The strands were almost as strong


as thread. The webs were large and were
mostly at a height from the ground that a
horseman’s face, if he were not watchful, was
carried full into them. When that happened,
they wrapped themselves round his head. They
were messy things, dewy wet in the morning
and full of the corpses of insects.
We reached Tennant’s Creek and set forth
again in the car. In camp, on our first night
out, I made a sort of blancmange for our tea.
We ate half of it and the remainder I put on
the bonnet of the car, out of the way of the
ants. In the morning we set out table again.
On getting the blancmange I noticed that it
had a peculiar spotted and mottled appear-
ance. I examined one of the bluey looking
spots and discovered a semi-cooked tadpole set
in the jelly. It had been made with water,
taken in the dark, from the billabong. Roy
was not looking, so I buried it. Dinkum
discovered it. He scratched it up and ate the
shivery thing with evidence of relish.
After nearly three months of fighting floods
we saw the last of the storms. As we got
farther north the land became drier —and the
grass more inflammable. We stuck badly in
the Warlock Ponds, which had no crossing
then, as there is to-day. Eventually we got
to the Katherine railhead. We refitted, and
with eighty gallons of petrol aboard, set out
for the return journey south along the border
o


of Queensland. From there we proceeded via
Birdsville to Farina, South Australia.
Beyond Warlock Ponds, Old Elsey station,
Northern Territory, lies a hoodoo land, and
the hoodoo was waiting for us. On the second
day out we were pushing slowly ahead through
long dry grass. I was aware of danger and
was taking the best care that I could under
the circumstances. The car hit a hidden
stump. There was a roar, and up shot a sheet
of blinding, orange-coloured flame. Mind and
body seemed to float gently apart. With a
grim effort I threw out the gear lever and
put the brakes hard on. The car stopped.
Then, with clothing ablaze, I leaped out, and
throwing myself on the ground, rolled over
and oyer through the grass.
The grass around the car was alight. Even
as I turned in search of Roy a huddled-up
figure lurched out of the flames. He fell and
then staggered to his feet. The car was now
almost hidden in fire. The flames roared up
to a height of forty feet. Eighty gallons of
petrol were ablaze, and a strong side wind
was making an intense heat. On the weather-
side I rushed in and grabbed a water-bag. A
puff of flames seared my face. The awful
truth dawned on me. We had lost everything
we possessed; the car and almost £2OOO worth
of cameras, clothing, photos, cinema-films, and
money in notes. The mental distress was as
bad as the physical.


Only a cupful of water was in the bag. Roy’s
feet were terribly burned. Dinkum, sneezing
and snorting, was rolling in the long grass, a
bit scorched, but otherwise unhurt. Not until
the first shock of the event was over did Roy
and I realize the extent of our injuries.
Bootless, we set off on a tramp to a half-
caste’s camp about five miles away. Darkness
was setting in. To Roy, half-fainting, I gave
a mouthful of water every few minutes. The
sharp-pointed shafts of spear-grass stuck into
our burnt flesh, and the sharp rocks cut my
mate’s injured feet. We called for aid, from
an aboriginal’s camp, and through a knee-
deep boggy swamp we stumbled, and then
collapsed alongside a camp-fire. A kindly
half-caste immediately sent a blackfellow to
Mataranka cattle station for help. Uncouth
but kindly luhras lifted up our heads and gave
us tea to drink. There followed a night of
terrible agony.
On the hard ground we lay in a bitterly cold
wind. Our wounds could not endure the touch
of our clothing. It seemed to he a never-ending
night. Native dogs and dingoes howled to
the brilliant morning star, that glinted and
gleamed through the branches of the gum-
trees.
Shivering, we crept nearer to the warmth
of the camp-fires, but raw flesh and tortured
nerves could not endure the warmth. A
jabbering of voices, and the blackfellow came


into the circle of light, a bottle of salad-oil in
nis hand—medical aid from the Chinese cook
at Mataranka. This blackfellow—his name I
do not know—had travelled thirty-four miles
during the night. He told us that the station-
hands were a long way out, mustering cattle,
and that before word could be got to them, and
they reach us, it would be midday.
Tearing up his calico tent-fly, our friend
gently wrapped up our unprotected arms. In
silence and suffering we spent the morning
huddled under a shady tree. Two ever-watch-
ing gins held me and anxiously jabbered to
each other, for I had become delirious.
Parched, I asked for water, and drank
slowly but greedily out of the cool water-bag.
My throat was dry and my tongue swollen.
Both of us, by now, had big baggy blisters on
our faces. Our eyebrows and eyelashes were
gone.
Noon, and some white men arrived with a
five-horse buggy. The aboriginals filled the
bottom of it with grass, and on to this we were
lifted. Over all a tarpaulin was stretched to
help keep off the dust and heat. One hundred
miles away was the railhead; and it was
a further two hundred miles to the Darwin
hospital.
Jolting, rattling, and bumping the buggy
went along through the scrubby forests. The
five horses trotted along, or toiled slowly
through the heavy sand patches. Dumb


insensibility crept over us, killing the awful
aching and stabbing pains. ,
The heat of the day gave way to a chilly
night. Continual clop-clop of horses hooves,
cracks of a whip, “gee-ups” of the driver,
the smell of a sweaty off-side nigger, heaves
and bumps as the wheels struck ant-beds in
the Then the horses stopped, heav-
at an Inland Mission
Hospital—Maranboy tmfields. Kindly hands
lifted us out. Morphia was injected, and to
a Land of Nothingness we glided.
At daybreak the bandages were peeled ofi.
Delirium. A graceful woman garbed in paie
pink came soft-footed over to where I lay.
Then while her beautiful voice sounded near
by, the throbbing flesh of my arms was slowly
torn ofi from shoulder to finger-tips. Weeks
and weeks followed of physical anguish and
mental distress. Twice Eoy lingered just on
the edge of life. _ , ■, *
To the Inland Mission and to the skill ot
the Sisters we both owe our lives. Particu-
larly was it owing to the skill of those nurses
that we came out without a scar on our
scorched faces. Months passed before we were
able to leave the hospital, and when we did, it
was to go south by steamer. The ea
neither of us was equal, just then, to an over-
landing journey.


CHAPTER XIII
A PIONEER FLIGHT
After many years of overlanding by push-
bike and motor car I found my way into a new
world. It was a roaring world with ceaseless,
rushing gales, rolling masses of wool-clouds,
and, down through deep aerial crevasses
fleeting glimpses of white-specked cities,
ribbons of tracks, and rivers weaving in along
dark blue masses of earth. It was a lonely
world the loneliness of vast eternal spaces.
In it I found companionship with a new tribe
of youthful, capable men, strapped in and
controlling a balanced and roaring dragon of
the air. They were a breed that came into
existence with man’s conquest of the air—
eyeballs slightly flattened owing to enormous
wind-pressure; lips tight-set; nostrils thin,
owing to the overplus supplies of air forced
into their lungs; ears not attuned to the
lighter sounds of earth, as the drums were
toughened owing to the everlasting thunder-
mgs and rush of winds. When on earth they
bore themselves with the quiet manner of men
who serve a new and ruthless god.


I was to go to the inland with the first
aeroplane to cross the desert. The biplane was,
for those 1921 days, a splendid craft. A He
Haviland 4, equipped with a 12-cylmder, dbD
horse-power Rolls-Royce Eagle Eight engine,
radiator water cooled. This was to be the
means by which I was to complete the investi-
gations that I had been making for the
Federal Government.
My flying companions were George .Bailey,
mechanic; and pilot Frank Briggs, a wel -
known aviator at that time.
To the cheers of a few onlookers as
recently as 1921 a departing plane gave occa-
sion for cheering —we got under way. Gent y
at first, then faster and faster we moved as
the bucking and bellowing Be Haviland
speeded up to seventy miles an hour Ine
precise moment when we left the ground was
when the bucking ceased. We leaped oyer
some telegraph wires with the bonnet slanting
steeply upward, and through the fast revving
propeller I glimpsed dark gloomy clouds.
I turned and looked backwards. Straight
down along the tail-line I saw Melbourne
mistily dissolving into a series of dull coloured
squares, all held together by little streaks of
streets and railway lines. Alongside the speed-
ing fuselage and slightly below it white, steamy
looking wisps of clouds raced astern. Suddenly
the scene was blotted out by vapour—we had
entered a cloud.


The clouds cleared away and revealed below
us an agricultural district—a wide-spread
carpet of yellow ochres, burnt umbers, and
vivid greens in streaks and squares, while
weaving and winding, through it all was a
brown network of ploughed furrows.
Slowly the ever-changing and glorious
scenes below drifted by. Our music to this
play of shifting shapes and colours was the
soul inspiring roar of the Eagles 365 H.P. in
full blast. The rolling hills, like petrified
waves were creating pockets and other dis-
turbances of the air. All about us was a
deafening uproar; roar of the engine; roar as
of tornadoes of wind racing past; whip-cracks
of air-currents; yowls as of cats being flayed
alive; the short stubs of belching, open
exhausts, with flickers of flame on both sides.
Then there was a violent tail-swing, followed
by a steep banking of the plane.
Pilot Briggs was hanging on to the joy-
stick. Gently pushing forward, and as gently
hauling back again, his booted feet on the con-
trols seemed to be supplying wind-power to a
church organ. He nodded his helmeted head
sideways and glanced overboard through the
observation slit in the right-hand wing. Gazing
over, our heads nearly blown oft by the
tremendous slipstream of wind, we could see
far down into darkened shadow depths of the
timber-clad hills. The whole surface of the
*and below was deeply pock-marked. We were


passing over the deserted prospecting shafts
of the early goldfields. A few minutes later
we glimpsed the mining city itself hiding
under the earth-streaking, purple shadows of
a passing rain-cloud.
We mounted higher and higher, close to a
ceiling of sombre cloud. Suddenly the plane
side-slipped. Pilot Briggs had seen danger.
A big eaglehawk swooped down. I got a brief
glimpse of him with woggling neck and ruff
feathers sticking stiffly out. He fell past us,
went by underneath and swung upwards
again, zooming into a misty cloud. Gaining
height he charged down again—and missed by
fifty yards I After us he came, but our hundred
miles an hour made him appear to be flying
backwards. Probably his nest and young were
in the peaks above which we were passing.
Had he become entangled in the propeller, or
rigging, a dangerous forced landing might
have resulted.
More air-bumps; more eaglehawks trailing
hopelessly, and then disappearing into the
swirling mists. The plane wiggled sideways—
the pilot’s way of calling our attention.
Thousands of feet below a little black grub
with a tuft of white on its head, was threading
its way along two parallel pieces of grey cotton
—an express train. Away in the far distance
a white spot gleamed through the misty blue.
It was Nhill wheat-silo, a hundred miles off, be-
tween stern granite clad passages up which


we were flying. We were crossing the tail of
the Grampians. There were more bumps as
we passed over the ranges, and, on either hand,
little wisps of white clouds raced by.
Slowly a wonderful panorama of tree-clad
hills, little paddocks, miniature houses and
streaks of blue water drifted by. Nhill came
under our plane. We circled out wide,
spiralled and spiralled downwards, and, on
a long glide came to rest in a yellow flowered
paddock of green grass. Fuel-supplies and
lunch were awaiting us. We stayed a while
after eating and filling up the tanks, for
aeroplanes were still a novelty and people
flocked out to see the machine.
We rose to the air again, following the rail-
way line across the Ninety-mile Desert. Below
us were rolling sand waves, desert sandhills,
and then more paddocks fitted together in
fancy-work patterns. There was a golden gleam
from the waters of the Coorong; then came the
Murray River —and in flood. We were flying
low. White pelicans were huddled closely
together on the outlying pools of the river,
and wild duck upended themselves and dis-
appeared below the waters.
We made height as Mount Lofty Ranges
came into view. Passing over them we peered
down into hair-raising depths of gloomy
gullies, and gazed on little villages set on the
mountain-tops. We were flying into a glorious
sunset. Skimming low over a high peak, there


opened up to view, through the ruddy and
purple glow, a dream city seen through a
dreamy mist —Adelaide in its nest between the
mountains and the sea.
Adelaide was our hopping-off place for the
interior. We left soon after daybreak. A
stinging sea-breeze, laden with sleet, beat in
our faces as we took off. We rose to the higher
air and hailstones like little dervishes, danced
on the taut green wings of the plane. The
tremendous back-draught from the propellers
blew the rain away from the sheltering cowls.
A burst of sunshine revealed the diamond
shaped outlines of the vineyards and orchards,
all set in a geometrical world.
During the afternoon the country changed.
There were blue serrated ranges to the east,
dry white salt-lakes to the west, and brown
desert lands below. We could see kangaroos,
startled by the roar of our passing, bounding
along. Then came a glorious sight. Every
waterhole, creek, and billabong of sky-
reflected blue, from blue-misty skyline to sky-
line, was fringed with the bright heliotrope
of Salvation Jane —a desert wild flower. In
between were hundreds upon hundreds of
patches of bright yellow dandelions, white of
wild everlasting flowers, reds of parakeelya
plants, vivid emeralds of grasses, and green
bushy growths of stunted trees. The burst
of flowers in the desert was the after effect of


a thunderstorm. Overhead was a cloudless blue
sky.
We flew low over a gorge, skimmed over the
wave-like formation of a mountain in the
Flinders Range. Immediately after there
came a swinging down bump. The loose
luggage in the fuselage jumped up and nearly
fell over the side. The plane dropped for five
hundred feet. My seat seemed to fall from
under me. Black smoke poured out of the
exhaust-pipe and the engine started to miss
badly. On a glide we were at last forced down;
sweeping by just below were the tops of
bushy gum-trees. With a crashing clatter the
machine hurtled among the saltbushes, buck-
jumped several times, and then came to a
sudden halt. Some hours later we just man-
aged to take off.
Toward sundown we landed at Maree and
camped for the night. Out on the plain stood
our frail craft; a graceful, light thing of
wood and linen, pegged down, and riding out
a gale of dust and wind. Several donkeys and
one inquisitive camel came to stand before it
in respectful admiration. A billy-goat experi-
mented with a new item of diet by licking the
castor oil from the fuselage.
Next morning the inhabitants of the town
—many of them had not previously seen a
plane —came to give us a send-off. When the
engine was revved up the township mongrels
bolted for the skyline and a watching mob of


aboriginals followed them part of the way.
As the plane swung round the tornado blast
from the blades blew up a swirling mass of
dust, tin cans and rubbish. Through it I could
see a perambulator with a baby in it being
blown backwards; some Afghans seated on a
fence losing their balance; men leaning
forward holding on to their hats, and women
leaning down holding on to their skirts.
Several camels gave a fine exhibition in buck-
jumping.
The scene faded out as we swung and heaved
above the lower-than-sea-level flats of Lake
Eyre, a region of sand and salt surrounding
thousands of square miles of boggy morasses.
Far away to the east was a golden bar, hang-
ing in the sky—apparently a body of water
recently drained down from Queensland
rivers, hundreds of miles away. Farther on we
flew over a series of hills that looked like
inverted pie-dishes of varying colours set in
a huge bowl of barren brown earth. Little pin-
points of blue, here and there, denoted small
waterholes. The early morning was calm, and
through the glassy atmosphere, so still and
crisp, our powerful plane raced steadily along.
Pilot Briggs waggled the joy-stick, signalling
to us. Ahead, below, through taut rigging and
between the ever out-stretched wings, was a
wonderful panorama. Thousands of square
miles of scrub-dotted plains melted into the
deep blue mysteries of unexplored lands.


Vision by vision, a winding S-shaped series
of white loops, varied by peculiar flat-topped
curved cone formations, was disclosed. There
were the Finke River and the mountains,
showing the effects of the glacial erosion of
thousands of years ago.
Suddenly there came a wriggle of the plane,
and our attention was called to a long string
of camels plodding along. They looked like
mechanical insects. They carried, we knew,
among other things, petrol-supplies for our
return journey. They were six weeks out from
the place we had left.
We passed over the Depot Sandhills, well
but not very favourably known to me in my
push-bike days. As seen from the air they
looked like frozen waves about to curl over on
to the dense mulga and spinifex that grew in
the hollows between them.
As we watched them we plunged into an
air-pocket and a vile-smelling swirl of castor
oil came from the exhaust. Sniffing it out
hastily I breathed in short respirations and
then sat tight. The plains below us were
blackened from grass fires. Delicate traceries
of white denoted where trees had been burnt
to ashes. Trunks, branches and limbs were
clearly outlined. The skeleton tracery of a
burnt camel could be seen.
Bold and striking deep blue outlines loomed
up. We were on to the Macdonnell Ranges, in
the middle of which was Heavytree Gap, the


southern gateway to Central Australia. Wave-
shaped, rocky, Mount Gillen seemed to race
beneath us; Alice Springs came into sight.
Smoke-signal fires on a patch of burnt-over
ground marked our landing-place, and we saw
little white specks moving about on a rocky
ridge. With us rested the satisfaction of being
the first men to sight these regions from the
air. _
We remained two weeks in Alice Springs,
inspecting the surrounding country. Then
the camel-team arrived —ninety pack-saddle
bull-camels, laden with petrol and forty tons
of other freight—timber, sheets of galvanized
iron, sacks of flour, stores, and barrels of
beer.
We left, making an easterly detour from
our previous route. The machine taxied gently
down the wind, the steering skid playing tip-
cat with small sticks and stones. Then, with
a roar, our giant hornet swung around, a
swirling dust-storm belching out behind.
Looming up on all sides were mile upon mile
of serrated dark-blue and golden-hued moun-
tains. Far away to the north, seemingly
suspended in the sky, were light yellow flashes
—the grassy highlands of Sturt’s Plain.
A cloud of dust lay low over the mulga
scrub. Underneath this was circling a mob of
overlanding cattle. As we drew nearer they
broke into stringing flight, pursued by gallop-
ing horsemen. Briggs, with quick observation,


saw what was happening. He raced the plane
ahead, banked and circled. The cattle halted,
made a ring and remained steady. We
exchanged a good-bye wave with the drovers.
We were flying above a huge depression
which extended, east and west, for about fifty
miles on each side of us. Green, flat, table-
top mountains, their cliffy sides splashed with
red, white, and yellow ochres, stood like lonely
sentinels amid rolling sandhills. Gleaming
white sand rivers and creeks, dotted with
clumps of trees, took a sinuous course
to the south. Around and above scrubby
thickets white specks wheeled and circled
as we passed. They were flocks of white
cockatoos. Yellow, white, and red sand
streaked this old inland sea. Far away
to the west dark country denoted better
pastoral lands. Wifi-willy dust-storms in
stately spirals and columns pointed upwards.
Once more there was the old-grey-carpet
effect of the spinifex and saltbush lands, and
the scene was criss-crossed by green lines of
timber following the watercourses. Scores of
square miles of country were crimson and
pink with wild flowers.
The air became unaccountably hot —we
were flying at three thousand feet. On the
southerly skyline there were piling up some
ugly-looking clouds. All below began to be
swept by streaking sand-storms. Higher and
higher these rose, blotting out our visibility.


I could feel fine sand and grit on my face.
The head wind increased in violence. We
passed into wet drifting clouds and, as we did
so, a blinding glare of lightning caused the
wet aeroplane wings to look as if they were
made of burnished gold. There came a terrific
clap of thunder, then peal after peal, drown-
ing the thunderous roar of the engine. Heav-
ing, swinging, plunging, and diving the plane
raced through bullet-like streams of slanting
rain.
Underneath the scrub and spinifex plains
to westward were on fire, blazing red against
fast-driving dark clouds. A curtain of flames
was encircled by a complete rainbow, appar-
ently lying flat on the earth. The heat from
the over-worked engine came in wafts to our
faces. The fumes of castor oil combined with
the fearful swaying made us air-sick. As we
fell into air-pockets, or bumped upwards on
ascending air-currents, I watched the controls
sag and tauten—and marvelled at the strength
of those frail seeming linen wings. A stab of
cold hail struck us while still in an atmosphere
of intense heat. We were bucking a southerly
buster in all its strength and grandeur.
We had to find Oonadatta, and effect a land-
ing. Anxiously we peered below, seeking to
learn our exact whereabouts. We broke
through into a belt of blinding sand-dust.
Oodnadatta lay below us. We glided down
through the thick dust. There came a gentle
p


bump, a leap-frog, and a fifty-yard run against
the gale. We were out and had grabbed the
wings almost before the plane ceased to move.
The machine was pegged down in a stinging
downpour of rain and hailstones.
That completed our exploration of the
interior by plane. Our next flight was back to
Adelaide, and, following a short rest, from
there to Melbourne. Wei flew wide over
Hobson’s Bay and circled over the masts of a
newly arrived English mail steamer as she
went up the channel. We had come from the
far distant heart of Australia in fifteen hours
flying time.


CHAPTER XIV
BY CAR FROM ENGLAND TO AUSTRALIA
I was in London, and was about to undertake
a pioneer motor drive to Melbourne. Respon-
sible people along the route bad been writing
to equally responsible people in England with
a view to deterring me, but I set off, despite
their efforts. I had an outback Australian’s
belief in my ability to meet whatever contin-
gencies might arise.
To witness my departure on this pioneer
journey a number of notable persons had
gathered: Sir Robert Hadfield, the eminent
engineer; Sir Harry Brittain, the Empire
journalist; and representatives of sporting,
business, political, and diplomatic circles, I
had letters from the Prince of Wales, letters
to consuls, and one from the Siamese
Ambassador —all wishing me “Good Luck.”
The Open Road was calling, and soon I was
on my way. Through labyrinths of streets my
car hummed along, and then, as the road
opened out, I started to roar down the high-
way to Folkestone Harbour and the cross-
Channel ferry to Boulogne, seaport of France.


Europe lay before me! For six thousand miles
I would have to depend on my own resources.
I could speak no foreign languages, nor could
I understand the devious ways of the many
nondescripts who acted as professional
money-changers.
I decided to camp out all the way and to
carry my own food-supplies. This would over-
come the language difficulty to a very great
extent. Coin and note values were on a par
with the languages. In some countries I would
feel like a millionaire, my pockets stuffed with
notes, but the stuffing would disappear after
one simple meal at a wayside inn. I would
go away feeling that all the confidence trick-
sters had fleeced me, whereas I had in reality
paid only two shillings for my meal.
Darkness and drizzling rain. My car roared
along the splendid deserted highways of
Prance. The gloom enshrouded forests of the
hills were sodden and dripping. The wind
howled and as the powerful gleam of my head-
lamps swept on, I could glimpse big guns, old
barbed-wire entanglements and washed out
trenches. As I reverently slowed down a flood
of memories came to me. I had reached Hamel.
Thousands of white painted crosses were
around me, seemingly keeping an everlasting
vigil. Over what ? I cannot define it—but my
best mate lies asleep at Hamel.
Germany struck me as being a land of
simple prosperity. Well ordered, brightly


painted villages were dotted along the road.
In Australia every home stands in its own
block of land, but in other countries most of
the farmers live in a community village and
walk or drive to and from their holdings. All
stock, too, returns to the village, where it is
impounded for the night, generally under the
two-storied houses. All refuse is carefully
stacked, and later taken away to He spread
on the farm lands.
Steadily climbing up the forest-clad moun-
tain ranges of Austria, I found gorgeous
autumn-tinted leaves. The blue bedimmed
vistas of brown and green plains dotted with
smoke-canopied hamlets presented a glorious
sight. Down the road came a bell, tinkling.
Then appeared a cheery party of revellers in
horse-drawn sledges. We met at the foothills
and dined merrily at a Noah’s Ark inn. They
gave me some of the liquid that they were
drinking. It tasted like our own outback hotel
“Chain Lightning.” I promptly named it
“Donner Und Blitzen.” As “ Thunder and
Lightning” it will probably be called through-
out that district.
A murky, foggy night. Rows of squalid,
ill-lighted houses squatting in a sea of slimy
mud. Down this, the main street of a Jugo-
slavian village, I drove my car. Deep pot-
holes made it necessary to drive slowly.
Quaintly garbed men cursed and yelled at
miniature bullocks yoked to lumbering


wagons. Barefooted women screeched at long
lines of scraggy packhorses on whose backs
were stowed household furniture. Perched on
top of the load were the children and the
fowls. Mobs of geese wandered everywhere
hissing defiance at all comers. The noise of
uncouth singing in guttural chorus came from
beer and wine reeking hostels. Neat and
spruce gendarmes stood at attention in gay,
stripe-painted sentry boxes.
All one day I travelled over the broken
country in the highlands of Greece. Down in
the valleys there seemed to be continuous
forest lands. On closer inspection I found
them to be olive-plantations. Toward night-
fall the ascents became steeper. Cloud-drifts
and sudden gusts of rain made steering a right
course difficult. The half-moon made false
tracks ahead. Then the road narrowed down
to a track, grass-grown and bouldery. Hairpin
bends became numerous. Suspiciously I
rounded a corner which led me out on to a
stone bridge, the end of which led to a sheer
cliff. Getting out of the car I walked forward.
Ten yards of the bridge had been swept away
by an avalanche. I peered down into a
crevasse hundreds of feet deep. Millions of
tons of earth and rocks had buried the road.
Gingerly I backed the car off the weakened
overhanging arch. There was no room in
which to turn. For five miles I drove in re-
verse, then camped on a windswept tableland.


At Athens I arranged to cross the Mediter-
ranean to Alexandria. This made my journey
six hundred miles longer.
From Alexandria, northern Egypt, I
followed the waterways of the Nile —canals of
scenic charm —through villages picturesque
but unclean, to Cairo. Then on to Suez with
its wonderful oil-fuel depots—a life stream
of Empire. I crossed the Red Sea where it
meets the Canal. The Sinai desert was in
sight.
Late that night I camped on top of a huge
rock to get away from the drifting sand. The
going had been heavy, sandhills and break-
away cliffs in a series of ever-ascending
plateaux. In places there was wire netting that
had been laid down during the war. With
under-inflated tyres I charged the softer
patches. Sixty miles away I could clearly see
the lights of the Port and Canal, and two days
later I arrived on the borders of Palestine.
Since I had left London the complexion of
the races of mankind had become, by
imperceptible degrees, darker and darker.
Where Europe and Asia met was hard to
define. Despite the advent of tourists, the
peoples still retained their centuries-old
methods of living, as described in the Bible.
Rogues sometimes they may be, but there still
remains about them a glamour that they can
never quite lose.
On past the wonderful lakes, five hundred


feet below sea-level—the old-time fishing boats
lying in the shallows. Alongside them may
be seen the latest in American cars being
washed by the Biblical characters previously
referred to. On to Beersheba, Jerusalem, and
the Syrian border—where every piece of soil
is cultivated to the fullest extent. Then to
Damascus, famous of old for its steel and in
modern times well known for its “steal.” The
city is very picturesque. One cold, frosty
morning I watched a desert Arab winding
vigorously at a non-starting Ford. He looked
like a bundle of white rags whirling around
on the cranking handle.
Solo-motorists were not permitted to travel
over the desert route to Baghdad. Convoys were
the general rule, but I eventually found myself
speeding at fifty miles per hour over open
plains. A gigantic queer-looking dog, low in
the hind-quarters arose from behind a heap
of earth. His hair stood straight up along a
bony spine, from the end of which his short
tail dangled loosely.
Looking over his shoulder, he showed his
long yellow fangs. I swung the car round at
this grinning hyena, and gave chase. He loped
off in a straight line at about twenty-five miles
an hour. Then, as the car closed on him, he
darted to one side, stopped, then watched the
car critically as it shot past. Several times
this was enacted. I could see his plan. He


was making for the rough washouts on the side
of a small hill. He beat me to it.
I was now in unsettled country where
travellers were likely to be held up by wander-
ing bands of robbers. I took no chances. I
found a deep ravine, well off the caravan
route, waited until it was dark, and then drove
the car in under an overhanging rock.
The great open places in Arabia reminded
me of the freedom of our outback. Most people
speak of deserts with awe. To one who has
lived in this type of country, it seems like
Paradise after the over-populated regions of
England and Europe. The freedom-loving
Arab is a sportsman. Many times I have driven
up to their quaint black skin tents. These tents
were simple outside, but often the interior
was a mixture of luxury and simplicity side
by side.
Woven tapestries, cushions, and brass orna-
mented lamps were the furniture. Small cala-
bashes of sour camel’s milk and sweet food
were given me. The motor was not new to
them. Often the headman of these nomadic
pastoral tribes would be the possessor of a car.
Domestic camels, when on trek, are gaily
tasselled and belled. So, too, must the car be
decorated with imitation flowers, celluloid
kewpies, and mascots. This caravan route,
from the Mediterranean to Persia, dates back
to close on three thousand years. Alexander the
Great, with his legions, marched along here


on his journey toward India. His fortifications
and Roman bridges still stand, half-buried in
the accumulated dust of centuries.
Giant motor coaches now speed through
weekly in safety and comfort. Mecca-bound
pilgrims, in fleets of one-ton trucks, barge
through the clouds of dust. Sometimes a raid
by nomadic tribes is made. The Royal Air
Force, stationed at Baghdad, patrols this
route. Several times a spluttering machine
came low down over my speeding car. The
pilot would wave cheerily, bank, and with a
sudden burst of power from the engine, zoom
upwards and speed away. The Arab does not
love the air-patrols—the eyes of the desert.
They upset the sporting raids which have been
his by right since the dawn of history.
Late one night I arrived at a fort twenty-
five miles from Baghdad. Owing to banditry
the officials would not allow me to proceed. It
seemed to me that these bandits of the road
had declared, at present, an open season for
motorists, especially at night-time. I was fear-
ful of the interior of those huge stone or mud-
walled caravanserais. For hundreds of years
they had been occupied each night by travel-
lers, and the brand of fleas had practised on
pilgrims for three thousand years. In dumb
show I protested. I scratched my ribs and
then pretended to nip something between my
thumb-nails.
Laughing, the officials led me into a well


furnished office. We ate cakes and drank wine.
On a cushioned settee I slept for the night.
At daybreak I was allowed to go on. Cross-
ing over the Euphrates on a bridge of boats,
I entered Baghdad. A swarm of guides and
mendicants surrounded the car. I recognized
them as the descendants of the Forty Thieves,
but they had multiplied exceedingly!^
Wonderful was the mixed population. The
womenfolk are said to be the most beautiful in
the world. Remarkable in feature, dignified
in deportment, magnificent in apparel, they
walk chattering gaily among themselves along
the littered cobble-stone streets.
Baghdad, at the time of my visit, was under
British organization, and was mainly con-
trolled by a unit of the R.A.F. Iraq was learn-
ing to govern itself, and was finding the effort
difficult owing to the cosmopolitan nature of
its inhabitants. Here I was inoculated, and
then proceeded to the Persian border.
The Persian customs officials were reported
to be a tough lot, but I was surprised and
pleased to find that every consideration was
given to me. Owing to cholera, all travellers
were quarantined for five days. The delay
caused me anxiety, as snow was falling in the
mountains.
Out in the open once more! During the war
a main metal road had been made by the
British from the border to Teheran. Heavy
motor traffic was causing it to fall to pieces.


This road led up on to mountain ranges eight
thousand feet high. They were already be-
ginning to cover with snow. I decided to
cut across country to Ispahan, and thus
avoid the snow-line. Leaving the main
road at the little village of Khangavar,
I followed cart-tracks which led through a
caravanserai occupied by camels and mules.
The plains and passes were covered with a
white mantle of snow. Light flakes started
to drift slowly down; then more and more
until I could see but dimly into the white and
greyness on ahead.
The snow came down softly and fast, eddy-
ing around the car. The mountains were
blotted out. I was enclosed in a white nothing-
ness. For hours it kept on. I passed a kind
of dugout in a steep hill-side, but it was too
draughty for shelter. Bushes standing up
above the snow on both sides of the track were
my guide. Then the bushes disappeared.
Straining my eyes I peered into the silently
eddying whiteness and kept the car as near as
I could to the general direction of the track.
I could not tell downhill from uphill. Glass
worms seemed to be floating before my eyes.
The car stuck in a snow-drift at the foot of
a steep hill. I shovelled away the banked-up
snow from the axles and undergear, and put
chains on the back wheels —the icy-cold copper
links sticking to my fingers. The Sundowner
(my car) forced a passage to the top. Looking


back along the car-tracks there seemed to be
a trail of blood. The underlying red soil had
been churned up with the snow by the chains
on the wheels.
The journey was mostly downhill, but even
then the car had to plough along in low gear
with the radiator boiling by reason of the alti-
tude and the heavy going.
One night, on the stilly, cold, star-lit gloom
around about, I heard a faint, strange,
heavenly kind of music. It came nearer—a
wonderful medley of tuneful melodies. Thou-
sands and thousands of camels, ponies, don-
keys, sheep, and goats were going by, depas-
turing as they moved slowly. And each one
had several bells made of brass, wood, or
bronze tied to its neck. From the rear came
faint sounds of singing, and “Allah,’ ’ “Al-
lahs,” and whacks on riding donkey sterns
as the mob was urged along.
It was a nomadic tribe, moving from the
snow menace of the hills to warmer, low-
lying pastoral lands. I lay low, not even
drawing attention to myself by scaring away
some inquisitive camp dogs, which would have
barked had I chased them. There were bad
men among the band of drovers —robbers and
cut-throats —British consulates had warned
me about them. The shifting, long-gowned,
sheep-skin clothed mob passed me by. I could
smell them for long hours after.


With the coming of daylight I was on my
way again.
Across big open plains, surrounded by far
distant mountains, some thousands of soldiers
were deploying in open formation. I could not
ascertain their objective, but a few miles to
the rear were some of their weary comrades.
Some of these were limping. I invited one
party of seven to scramble aboard. We could
not understand each other, but judging by
their travel-worn condition, they must have
marched a very long way—they may have been
out hunting bandits. The Sundowner, with a
warlike crowd of deadbeats, all whiskers and
dust, rifles and fixed bayonets aboard, looked
as though just back from action front.
We passed through the main body unchal-
lenged, the leaders raising their hands in
greeting and salutation. At a fortified village
twenty miles farther on the soldiers unloaded.
One of them thanked me with a hand to head,
mouth and heart movement. He bowed stiffly
from the waist and disappeared inside a
gloomy portal.
Onwards the Sundowner’s nose was pointed
to a distant gap in the hills. I was anxious
to get into the hills before night, and then,
in the early morning, to traverse the snow
pass before the sun made a slushy dangerous
mess of the surface. Just after sundown the
car became stuck in some heavy sand-drifts,
so I scouted around on foot, looking for the


best way through. When I came back I found
that the luggage straps had been undone, and
that all my blankets, waterproofs, and warm
clothing were missing. Footprints were
plainly visible. There was no firewood in those
lands, and I could not camp without bedding
as the cold was too intense. Several times the
car stuck in drifts, but frantic digging, with
the engine running meanwhile, got it'out.
I knew that I should have been down to
two thousand feet—there was an altimeter
fitted on the instrument board —so I concluded
that I must have passed a village where I
should have turned east. I turned back. After
a time dogs could be heard faintly down in a
valley. I motored toward the sound, but did
not dare get out to make inquiries.
I reached the edge of the town and halted
to look about me. From between mud walls a
gendarme came out and spoke to me. Another
followed him. They got aboard and piloted
me through a maze of mud walls and mud-
enclosed bazaars. The car had great difficulty
in rounding the many sharp angles around the
corners of the little shops. The whole place
was night-deserted. Outside the high mud
walls of the British Mission hospital my com-
panions knocked loud and long. I felt com-
forted —I would have felt comforted if the
building had been a gaol. As streaks of dawn
showed in the sky the heavy wooden door
swung open and I drove through, sick and


shivering. The black-capped Persian officials
of the hospital could not understand me, so
they aroused the British Resident. He saw my
plight, made me hot coffee, and then to bed I
Two days later I had left the snow regions
and was out on the dry stages of a desert run.
The wind suddenly turned to the south. The
air smelled of the sea. Big sandhills were in
sight. Just as I arrived at these the wind
increased to a thundering gale. The sky be-
came obscured with dust. Streaming torrents
of sand shut out all vision. My car stopped
dead, axle-deep in a drift where it would soon
be buried. Hastily I deflated the tyres. With
difficulty I spread my blankets behind the rear
wheels and reversed out on to harder ground.
I then had to sprint to get my blankets that
had blown away and were being buried in
sand-drifts.
I pushed on all day across the frost-bound
desert, and that night camped outside the
walls of a fort on top of which sentries kept
watch, Then on to Sultanabad. Here I took
a day’s rest at the British consulate. Snow
was falling thick.
I left early next morning, motoring through
a labyrinth of narrow streets between high
mud walls. It seemed to be a city of the dead.
Looming high above the city, aloof and cold,
were blue-hazed, snow-clad mountains.
There has been for centuries a wonderful
irrigation system in the dry areas of Persia.


Snow waters have been dammed high up in
the mountains. From here the waters are led
in underground channels that radiate out to
desert villages hundreds of miles away. The
long lines of earth dumps, each heap standing
about a hundred yards from its neighbour,
form one of the striking features of the plains.
The going was heavy. The whole world
seemed to be blanketed in snow. I -crawled
along, roaring in low gear, mile after mile.
Above the sound of the engine rose that of
hard snow crushing, and ice splitting under
the slowly revolving, chain-skidded wheels.
The copper exhaust-pipe—racing type—was
red-hot from end to end, and a plume of steam
spiralled from the radiator-cap. Icicles were
hanging all over the bodywork and chassis.
The track was a lonely one. I was a little
anxious because the country was infested with
nomads of the gentle shepherd-bandit variety.
I saw one or two of them. They were armed
with flint-lock guns that had mouths like loud-
speakers. They were loaded, I knew, with a
pound or so of home-made black powder, well
rammed; and on top of this was a double
handful of slugs, assorted small ironmongery,
and pebbles. The dogs that accompanied them
were huge, gaunt, lanky, speedy, streamlined
brutes that were kept for the purpose of guard-
ing the sheep and goats from attack by half-
starved snow wolves.
I had a running skirmish with a group of
Q


these hounds. A number of them raced up
alongside the car at a time when, on a bit of
good going, I was doing about twenty-five
miles an hour. As the Sundowner bumped
and swung across a creek-bed one of the dogs
sprang down from the high bank. His snap-
jnng jaws just missed my hand on the steering-
wheel. The next moment he rolled over and
over under the back wheel. As the car
up the succeeding steep hill I looked
back. The other dogs were tearing him to
pieces.
AjS I mounted higher, the track became
boulder-strewn and increasingly slippery with
ice. There were deep washouts. The way led
up and up in very steep grades with sheer
drops of hundreds of feet to gullies and tor-
rents far below. A dense fog came up and hid
the depths from view, a fact that did not add
to my comfort as I could see only a few yards
at a time, and the knowledge that danger lay
just beyond the veil of mist increased the
strain. The mist made the air fairly warm,
and loosened the ice grip on the rocks above!
Now and again I could hear crashing and
thundering as boulders and snow came bound-
ing and rolling down the slopes.
There came a wind. The fog split and
swirled away among the gorges. During the
day the wind increased to storm velocity, and
snow and sleet began to fall. Doing downhill


the car was, in many places, ploughing chassis-
deep through the drifts.
I hoped to get down the mountain and reach
the mud-walled caravanserai that I was al-
most certain to find at the foot of the hills, but
my best speed was too slow, matched against
the oncoming night. Just before dark my car
bogged in a heavy snow-drift, right close to a
goat-yard. This was almost buried fin snow.
In the far corner of it was a strongly built
mud hut with air slits built into the walls. The
door was a tunnel-like entrance, six feet long.
Notwithstanding the fact that bleatings and
snufflings came from within, I decided to camp
there. I crawled inside to investigate.
The gaunt body of one of those wolf dogs
came in through the tunnel and lay down on
guard. He seemed to regard me as a new sort
of goat. Every time I turned to go out he
stood up. He was a big dog and very un-
friendly. I could see his watchful eyes shining
in the half dark. It occurred to me that
perhaps my lambskin coat was having a mis-
leading effect. I took it off and started to go
out. The effect was startling. He rose up
and came at me, growling. He was dull-witted
as well as savage. I resumed my top garment,
deciding to be a goat for the remainder of the
night.
Outside the wind howled increasingly.
Snowflakes drifted in through the tunnel; but
in the goat-warmed atmosphere I was quite


snug. With the idea of getting some milk I
chased a goat into a corner, only to find, after
a very determined struggle, that it was a billy!
During the night I woke up to find a bearded
nanny licking my whiskers while her husband,
near by, was stamping his left forefoot. Taking
my time from him I stamped in unison. I was
afraid that he was going to make a charge. As
we faced each other there came from outside
a sardonic laugh and several blood-thirsty
groans. It was a starved hyena. Still, with a
guardian at the door, there was no danger of
his adding himself to the company.
I slept soundly until more bleatings and
snufflings awoke me. There was a patch of
sunlight in the doorway and the goats were
filing out through the now unguarded portal.
I too, cautiously, took part in the exodus. Out-
side, I found the world white beneath a blue
sky. I got the car going. A few miles farther
on was a wide but shallow, fast-flowing river.
I set out on foot to investigate.
It took me half an hour to explore the cross-
ing and to stick branches up among the rubbly
shoals.
These were to act as guides on the zigzag
down-stream course that I would have to take.
I let the car in gently and headed down
toward where I intended leaving the stream.
The rush of the water had a peculiar effect, and
all sense of the movement of myself and the
car was lost. Half-way across a front wheel


jammed hard in a crevice between two rocks.
The back wheels started to slew round. Hastily
I threw out the gear. There was danger of
a complete wreck. I left the engine running,
as the oil and water would otherwise have
frozen. Another flood spume might have come
down on top of the current that was running.
I got out and commenced jacking up, to free
the wheel. WTdle I was working I noticed the
water falling. "Within three hours the flood
had diminished to a tiny trickle in the centre
of the river-hed. I was still in difficulty. The
car refused to move until the ice grip on the
brake drums had been removed.
For several days after that I journeyed on,
seeming to be the only person alive in a world
of rocks, mimosa-bushes, and snow. I was
traversing those lonely desert valleys at the
foot of the gigantic mountains of the Afghan-
istan frontier. # ,
Travelling, owing to sporadic outbursts ot
brigandage, had been prohibited by the north-
west frontier political agents; hut I had
papers with me, authorized in England, which
had overcome the difficulty. I was travelling
at my own risk, so I continued on my way,
through several rocky passes. Invariably near
to these passes, spring wells, centuries old,
could be found by looking around for worn
tracks. In some instances the mouth of these
would he covered with an enormous, heavy flat
stone, neatly balanced in such a way that it


could be tilted up. Others would be in a tunnel-
liKe passage, reached by a series of rocky
steps, one hundred feet down into semi-dark-
ness—the dismal echoing haunt of snakes and
vermin. Always, close by, were hundreds of
slabs of stone, some upended, some lying- flat
some built up into table-top cairns—a grim
history in stone of battles and skirmishes that
had been fought through hundreds of years
right up to the present day. Afghan, Pathan’
feikh, and Gurkha were buried there. Oft-
times, too, I saw isolated, weather-worn tomb-
stones: “To the memory of forgotten
Tommy Atkinses, heroes of long ago. I was
ill suffering from malaria. I was in its grip
for weeks after. h
Some nights later I drove past a challenging
Gurkha sentry who, seeing—and, incidentally
hearing—-that it was a sahib, brought his
bayoneted carbine to a brisk salute and al-
lowed me to enter the gate of a barbed-wire
entanglement. A big marquee, lighted up with
those ornate polished brass lamps so beloved
by the Babu class of Indian, drew my atten-
tion. Oriental garbed figures, silhouetted
against the yellow light, came and peered—
one approached me and salaamed almost down
to the ground In that stilted, precise English
of the official Indian, he offered me the “most
welcome.” And would I “be so kind as to
make the enter-amice.”
Blinking as I came into the brightness, I


explained myself by showing to the now eager
hosts my pictorial route post-card.
Within a few days I was on my way again—
equipped with a supply of raw eggs and some
medicine. The day was sunshiny but with a
nip in the air from the snow of the adjacent
fourteen thousand feet high alps. All that day
my car was climbing up—up until the
altimeter showed eight thousand feet. Dense
chilly fog came down as I camped out on the
cheerless plateau. Morning came with dense
but swirling mists; somewhere in the distance
I could hear an aeroplane circling round, and
now and again, there came a dull explosive
thud. I guessed from this that I was not far
away from Quetta, that military encampment
city near to turbulent Afghanistan. The thuds
were British aviators at bombing practice.
From miserable, hard-to-follow by-roads,
my car suddenly came out on to a splendid,
metalled military highway. Drifting down on
the fog came the sound of “A-yaa, a-yaa”—
the sound of coolies hauling at something. A
yellow glow through the murk guided me to a
tree-lined avenue, which I traversed in semi-
darkness and came to a splendidly appointed
dak bungalow. It was one of those better class
rest-houses so common —every fifteen miles or
so—on the thousands of miles of main trunk-
roads in India. It had every appointment,
including damask linen table-cloths on which
were set shining cutlery, polished glass and


crockery. There were carpets and white-
sheeted, mosquito-netted beds, whilst coloured
servants in white clothes were numerous.
Half-way to Sibi I pulled up at a rest-
house. A party of white officers and their
wives were out on holiday, shooting. They
made me welcome for the night. Next day I
came out on to the Sind Desert, where wave-
like spurts of dust from the front wheels of
the car were almost suffocating. That night
I reached Sibi. It was Christmas Eve. I gave
up the fight and went into hospital.
For a fortnight I lay there, grateful for
the care and gentle treatment that I received
after my hardships and buifetings. The in-
habitants of this little north-west frontier
village always live in fear of raids from over
the border. In times of alarm they gather into
the shelter of a barbed-wired stone-walled fort
—and fight until help arrives by air and by
land. By the time I was well enough to leave
I had missed the Christmas festivities. To
make this up to me, the warrior folk of the
little camp had loaded up the Sundowner with
a big hamper chock-full of roast duck, boiled
fowl, and sweetmeats. The doctor assured me
that I could “Eat—so—plenty!”
After motoring across the Sibri Desert I
crossed the Indus River on a bridge of boats,
then went on to the wonderful system of irri-
gation canals built by a British company. As
I gazed from the top of a big mud temple I


could see the vast plains. It was a remarkable
sight. From skyline to skyline there were
thousands of one hundred and fifty feet square
paddocks of rice—locally called paddy-fields.
The blue lines of the irrigation ditches and
the green squares of the rice looked very fine
under a deep-blue sky.
Then I began to get a sample of what
motoring through rice-fields was like: Each of
the tiny paddy-fields is bordered off from its
neighbour by eighteen-inch high sod walls.
These have become hardened by hundreds of
years’ exposure to the weather. When the
annual flow of the rivers is in progress the
numberless small irrigation channels are
opened up and the water is allowed to flow into
each paddy-patch.
Winding in and out over these patches is a
rutted'track made by wagons drawn by pairs
of water-buffalo. Where the wall rises the
wagon wheels have cut two tracks into the
baked sods; in the centre is left a solid lump of
earth. Along these tracks the car must be
driven. The only method of progress is to
make a series of accelerated charges in low
gear, with the clutch out, at sufficient speed to
slice off, with the front axle, the bump of
hardened earth.
Sometimes the car would stop with a jerk,
or sit, see-saw fashion, on top of one of the
bumps. This meant digging, filling in, and
jacking up, so as to clear the obstruction. It


was a family pastime for the rice coolies to
knock oft work and come up at the moment the
car came to a halt. They would squat down
on their lean haunches and watch in perfect
silence while I worked with jack and shovel. 1
never asked them to help as I thought it might
be against their religion to touch the oily,
greasy Sundowner.
. ( ? rea . t work . kad been done by the British
nrigation engineers. Snow rivers are brought
from the mountains in channels two hundred
yards wide, which eventually branch out into
a network through thousands of square miles
of country. They have earned good dividends
—which was their intention—and have prac-
tically disposed of the famines of years ago.
But I could not help noticing that the coolies
have bred themselves up to the limit of the
increased food-supply, and seemed to be get-
ting beyond it. Out of good was coming evil.
Practice might show that irrigated soils
would break down through overworking, or
by becoming impregnated with chemicals that
would alter their nature.
At Lahore I came out on to that great mili-
tary road that extends for one thousand miles.
Along a glorious tree-shaded route I speeded.
Sometimes, in the heat of the day when all
other traffic was asleep, I touched seventy
miles an hour. I was in a land of temples,
bazaars, and huts, a land teeming with mil-
lions of coloured human beings who lived


amidst a great variety of odours. I was on the
main trunk highway to Delhi and Cawnpore.
It was fun to see the antics of thousands of
monkeys. They would lope across the road,
timing themselves to miss the car by a
whisker-breath; then, chattering in great glee
they would spring up the big tree-trunks.
From the leafy shades overhead they would
peer down and grin with a mocking gleam
in their eyes. Their choruses invariably
startled up wild peacocks from the tall grasses.
These looked like floating blue flames. All
life is sacred to these people, so animals are
plentiful. Occasionally deer would bolt into
the seclusion of the trees.
I speeded on toward Benares, halting there
a while to watch the crowds of religious de-
votees, I inspected Delhi, with its gun-battered
walls, grim reminders of the days of the
Mutiny, and I passed Agra with its beautiful
tomb. Early one morning, through a slight
mist, there came wafting waves of sound;
strange clatterings and boomings. Then I
heard, far distant, the sound of bagpipes.
Closer and louder the sounds came. The mists
parted on the plains and revealed a modern
mechanical army on the move, marching with
that steady click-click that only the British
Tommy Atkins can achieve. Long lines of
khaki, above which glinted—almost flame-
like in the morning sun —thousands of fixed
bayonets. Then came the mounted men of


the Indian cavalry, then Pathans with heavy,
slogging tread, and little Gurkhas with their
famous snickersnee knives. After them came
the skirl of the pipes, and to the tune of
“The Cock o’ the North,” the famous Black
Watch marched by with swaying sporans and
chequered kilts. Above the army moved its
complement of planes, a formation of bombers
and troop-carriers, and, high above these,
aerial scout-machines. It was a great sight!
One afternoon, toward sundown, I came out
on to the banks of the Hooghly. The villages
around Calcutta teem with natives—six mil-
lions of them, I understand. Dust, smoke, and
dense traffic made travelling slow. The maze
of streets made it difficult for me to find a way
into the heart of the city. A motorist—a white
man—offered to show me the way in. On my
arrival he invited me, on behalf of his firm,
to become their guest during my stay. The
Sundowner was jdaced on exhibition. I was
made to feel at home in Calcutta.
It was there that I met Mr Percy Stollery,
a young Canadian who expressed a desire to
accompany me on the remainder of my
journey. I warned him that there was a
chance of his head being the chief decoration
on the top of a wild Naga hillman’s spear.
He looked quite hopeful at the prospect, so I
accepted him as companion—and he proved to
be a good mate!
So we started off from Calcutta one bright


morning on an attempt to motor through to
Rangoon —across two thousand miles of land
that had never yet been crossed by a car, and
we were told by most intelligent persons that
we were attempting the impossible; roadless
jungles, impassable mountains, tigers, ele-
phants, head-hunters and fever lay ahead. But
they gave us practical assistance by presenting
us with an elephant-gun and cartridges. The
narrow road ahead of us was criss-crossed with
hundreds of ropes. Farmer coolies tie up by
their heads, their goats, horses, or cattle to
about fifty yards of rope, tethering the other
end near to the road. Private unfenced
agricultural lands were on both sides. The
speeding car had to run over these lines. So
long as they were slack it was all right, but
often the affrighted animals would haul back-
wards. I feared many a time that the revolving
propeller shaft would either wind the ropes
up or pull the animal’s heads off.
Most of the townships were on the banks of
rivers and near to the fords. The crossings
were generally about waist-deep; a safe depth
for the two-wheeled bullock drays of the
country.
We came to the River Ganges and found it
flowing wide, deep, and strong. For half a
day we scouted about, endeavouring to find
some means of crossing. At last we discovered
a kind of large rowing punt, used for taking
cattle across. This we hired. We laid down


a series of planks—slippery, muddy, and wet
—between the bank and the side of the punt,
where it lay in shallow water. Taking the car
along these planks was like driving it along
a greasy pole. Its weight made the ferry tip
its gunwales under water. I accelerated and
got aboard in a hurry. The car balanced nicely
on the bamboo and matting deck. Before we
were half-way across, the ferry started to
leak badly. We were three hours making the
journey across the river.
I decided that it would be better not to turn
eastward yet. The Sunderabunds—a gigantic
series of deltas and swamps—would be impas-
sable. We headed north for the Brahmaputra
River. Numberless smaller rivers had to be
crossed. Often we had to improvise rafts,
made of bamboos lashed together. These
would lose buoyancy owing to the air in them
escaping, and, by the time we got across the
stream, the axles of the car would be awash.
Sometimes we would use two canoes, lashing
these together. On occasions the car had to be
lowered, by means of ropes, down the steep
banks.
After having crossed the Brahmaputra we
made eastward along the watershed of the
Darjeeling Hills, the southern outspurs of
which were clad in dense jungle. Through this
jungle wound roads and tracks connecting
the various villages. Stollery carried the
elephant-gun and I was at the wheel. We


were out spotting for tiger, leopard, and other
kinds of spit-cats.
We were now six weeks out from Calcutta
—monotonous, heavy, slow travelling —and
we had not seen a white man during all that
period. We had expected to get good fishing
in the creeks and to shoot small game, but we
found that all the lands were eaten out by
villagers or bush natives.
We crossed the Brahmaputra and headed
south for Assam, a country ruled by a Mahara-
jah under the protectorate of a British
Resident and advisers. For two days we
motored over a splendid, well graded military
road, through magnificent mountain scenery.
We reached Imphal the capital, one night. It
was pleasant to meet the small white com-
munity at the club.
We rested a week and then set forth. We
had been presented with a billy-goat-sheep of
a strange Assam breed and of an even stranger
aroma. We stowed him away in the back
locker of the car, with his bearded head poking
out above the streamlined body. His protest-
ing bleats were close to my left ear. Farther
aft again was a stock of vegetable, and some
cakes. Coiled on the back of the car was a
hundred yard length of rope, a crowbar,
pick, shovels, and an axe.
The road eventually gave way to a dray-
track, ever narrowing, which at length
developed into a coolie foot-pad. Great diffi


culty was experienced in keeping both wheels
in a secure position, as first one wheel and
then the other would go over the edge. Coming
round a bend in the valley we found, looming
away up into the blue skies, a jungle clad
mountain with wisps of cloud tipping the
top. Seemingly just to “put the wind up us”
we saw streaks of yellow earth in a series of
acute hairpin bends. We camped on a creek
at the foot of the mountain.
The battle ahead of us, we knew, would be
long and dangerous. I had made up my mind
that the car was going through, or that it
would never come back. Not knowing what
was ahead of us, our motto was, “Sufficient
unto the day is a mile thereof.”
We spent a week at this camp, plotting out
a course for the first three miles ahead of us,
deciding where the corners had to be cut away
and the track widened out; seeking for
acceleration patches; tuning up the engine;
and, as a final aid, taking down the back
gearing, and reversing the crown wheel on
the pinion. This gave us our lowest and most
powerful gear for use in climbing the grades.
It was an unusual but necessary arrangement
—one gear forward and three in reverse.
When the hot rays of the morning sun had
dried up the surface of the coolie-track, the
Sundowner, stripped of all loading, and with
gurgling exhaust, faced those skyscraping
hills. Stollery waited at the first bend, half


a mile ahead. Sitting at the wheel I reversed
the Sundowner for about a hundred yards,
then trod on the accelerator more and more as
the car got into its full speed of —ten miles
per hour. The engine revolution counter on
the dash showed four thousand five hundred
per minute. Roaring as though doing eighty
miles an hour —the certified top speed the
car climbed the first grade, with its incline of
one in two. We were ascending the first of
the hills—there were sixty waiting for us.
One hundred yards beyond where Stollery
stood there was a hairpin bend where a day’s
digging out had made possible the feat of
swinging the car through at speed. There was
also a nasty piece of ground that might break
away and cause a capsize.
Round the hairpin bend went the front
wheels, locked hard over. The hack wheels
skidded violently—and the bend was passed.
The car got into full blast, bounding over
rocks and washouts. There was not an inch
to spare on either side. Then full stop.
We fastened a Spanish windlass from the
dumhirons on to a stump, and, by repeated
jacking up behind, and by using bamboo skids,
we got the car around the two acute bends.
The steep grade ahead necessitated the build-
ing up of a sloping, four feet high embank-
ment on to which the car was backed, with
the result that a good jump-ofi was obtained
for another desperate rush for half a mile.
R


When the car stopped, the gradient was so
steep that the sump oil flowed out past the
rear of the crank-shaft. Luckily it was pure
castor oil and the clutch, immediately behind,
did not slip on the heavy pulls, as a conse-
quence.
Day after day, ever higher and higher, with
the air getting colder and colder, we mounted,
alternately carrying kit stage by stage, and
for a few desperate minutes daily, driving the
car. The valleys gave way to cliffs, with hair-
raising scrambles along the edges.
There was a routine about our days. We
would get up each morning wondering—l
speak the plain truth—if we would be alive at
sundown. We would inspect the track ahead,
do some bullocking with the shovels, or carry
kit and stores on our backs up the steep
grades by rough tracks. Then I would take
my place at the wheel, with the radiator slant-
ing up at the swirling clouds. On the
Sundowner would go with its outside wheels
skidding along the edge of a precipitous drop,
and its driver conscious of steeply sloping
banks of dark green jungle, and valleys far
down below, glimpsed through gaps in white
layers of mist.
At the head of gloomy gorges streaks of
waterfalls disappeared into mysterious and
hidden regions. It was at the head of one of
these gorges that there occurred a particu-
larly thrilling incident. We had left the car


on the summit of a steep descent that ran
alongside a cliff-edge overhanging a deep
valley. The track in front of us was not quite
wide enough to allow the car to come down.
Hours of work would be necessary on the hard,
stony inside bank. With this prospect ahead
of us I was getting our tucker from the car
and Stollery, down the track a little, was boil-
ing the billy. I thought I would giye him a
pleasant surprise.
Getting aboard the car, I let it gently down
over the slope. Bit by bit, I eased it down,
pausing frequently to look at both sides, hor
a few seconds half of the outside front tyre
and half of its rear companion were actually
overhanging the edge of the cliff that tell
sheer to the tree-tops. I had a sinking
—remembering that the rotten edge of t e
rock might crumble. I let the brake slip a
little, and drew a breath when the wheels had
rolled past the narrowest portion of the track.
A few yards more and I pulled up alongside
the camp-fire. We ate our meal without the
thought of an immediate bout of back-break-
ing foil ahead of us. I was glad of this for
Stollery’s sake. He was a game, patient, and
loyal lad.* .
The jungle nights were eerie. As soon as
the sun went down, cold mists would envelop
right through with me to Melbourne. Some months
after arrival there-as his hobby was chemistry-he got work
in a laboratory. A bottle of acid burst in his face and those
smiling eyes of his were burnt out. He was blinded for lift.


the camp, and, although we were camped amid
green trees and a tangle of undergrowth, there
was very little firewood to be obtained. Even
that little was damp and rotten. Mosquitoes
were in myriads, so we had to camp under
nets.
For possible massive antagonists, such as
wild elephants, we always kept a two-gallon
tin of petrol handy, ready to spill around the
camp and a box of matches with which to set
it alight.
Just before the first yellow glow of dawn—
when the dank mists were congealing to drip-
ping dew on the mosses that hang from the
Jungle branches I awoke. Something big,
heavy, and soft-footed struck the ground near
Stollery’s mosquito-net! As though in a dream
I visioned the thing as it padded, softly and
quickly, close to my own net-enshrouded
head. My nostrils were filled with a
nasty wild-piggy odour. Stollery must have
wakened, too, for we emerged from our nets
together. I had the elephant-rifle and he his
long hillman’s dah knife. I swung the spotlight
round and its ray gleamed for an instant on
the striped body of a tiger as it slipped away
into the undergrowth.
In the early morning monkeys, in hilarious
choruses, would troop along through the tree-
tops. Often we got amusement watching them,
down in a creek-bed, rolling rocks over in
search of insects. On one occasion I put an


explosive elephant bullet alongside a rock just
as a monkey was turning it over. His frantic
leap, and the alarm of his mates was funny to
watch. .
From that incident was born an idea. W e
were desperately meat-hungry. The energy
we expended in our toilsome journey across
the mountains was not being made up by our
rice diet. Wh had reached a stage where we
dreamed of white man’s tucker—juicy steaks.
I shot a monkey. We skinned him and cooked
him in a two-gallon petrol tin. As he boiled,
the victim’s grinning face, with teeth showing,
and little clasped hands, made me feel like a
cannibal. But curried rice and monkey put
new life into us! We had to keep the matter
dark as the natives have a superstition that
the killing of a monkey brings bad luck.
The grades of the hills got steeper and
steeper. On some of the slopes the brakes
would not hold. If the car were stopped it
would slide backwards with locked wheels, in
spite of the deflated tyres and anti-skid chains.
Once the car was committed to an ascent the
summit had to be reached. We took the pre-
caution of having the long rope fastened to
the dumbirons, in front, and the free end
hitched around a tree, ahead. Stollery would
take up the slack as fast as he could. Often
my life was in his hands. If the grade proved
too steep he made fast. As the rope became
worn it developed a tendency to snap, and


most grimly I had to hang on to foot and hand
brakes, while my mate scrambled breathlessly
on the steep hill among jungle vines and
tiiorns, to nnd a secure anchorage. Had he
ailed me, the Sundowner and I would have
gone down the mountain-side.
, docs a man do these things? For the
thrill of blazing a new track; of going where
no man has been before; of doing what other
men said couldn’t be done.
In some places the semi-wild mountain men,
who had never previously even heard of a car,
stood in little groups along the way. They reck-
oned that the Sundowner was packed inside
with Nahz” friendly devils from the insides
ot dead men. These hillmen have queer ideas
concerning the virtues of their dead enemies.
They are called head-hunters, but the term is
a mere euphuism. The purpose of a hillman’s
man-hunt is to prove his own manhood by
obtaining from the vanquished certain evi-
dences of the male physique, which, after
being dried, are presented to the hillman’s
beloved to adorn her necklace.
Many of the grades had a bad list. Here,
Stollery would take in or give out rope, as
necessary. If a landslide started he would
hang on, giving me time to get out and tie up
with another rope to a nearby tree. Down
steep slopes and acute hairpin bends, we would
tie a few yards of slackened rope securely to
the front dumbirons, I would get aboard and


let the car go with a rush. As the rope
tightened suddenly the nose of the car would
be brought round with a jerk. The front-wheel
tyres would be jammed over sideways, with
one rim scraping the rocks or earth.
There were occasions when we would hear
a sound of grunting coming toward us, or
overtaking us. This would come from Naga
hillmen coming back to the villages, -carrying
immense loads in baskets, slung from their
foreheads and carried on their backs. Long
strings of native men and women would pass,
toiling up or down the mountain-sides. The
men’s legs would be bound up in a casing of
cane and clay.
We visited one of their villages, by scramb-
ling up a winding track for about a mile.
Dense jungle was on both sides of us —the
village could scarcely be seen for the tangled
growth around it. It was enclosed on three
sides by a fourteen feet high stockade of poles
sharpened on the top end. These were to
prevent the wild animals, such as bears, tigers,
and leopards, from making forays, and to
keep raiding tribes at bay. The entrance was
a sort of tunnel, with a heavy drop door of
sharpened bamboos. Behind and above this
again was a flat grid that looked like a wooden
scarifier —an additional means of welcoming
unwelcome visitors. Just inside, as we entered,
there were several women at work on a sort


of spinning-jenny. They were winding up
black goats’ hair into cloth.
A crowd of squat, coloured men surrounded
us. A skinny, white-headed old man took us
out on to a bamboo platform in front of a big
grass thatched hut. Here there was a sort
of balcony overhanging a cliff with a sheer
drop of hundreds of feet. We squatted down
on mats and admired the glorious panorama
of valleys and ranges—all purple, darkening
into the glow of an amber sunset. Long
bamboos were brought in, carried in an up-
right position—Mountain Dew with a kick
like a back-firing motor. There were some
cockroachy looking insects floating on the top
of it. I imagined, at the time, that they had
been allowed, through carelessness, to fall in
and drown themselves in the beverage; but
perhaps, from the hillmen’s viewpoint, they
served the same purpose as the cherry in a
cocktail.
Several young women walked with most
graceful deportment to the centre of the stage.
They sat down cross-legged and started to
comb their hair with enormous wooden rakes
I’m sure that these were not combs. They
powdered their little pug-noses and white-
washed their parted lips. The elders collected
in a circle around them, and the younger folk
stood well back. Then a fellow with a musical
instrument started a drone like that of the
bagpipe, and the chorus ladies started to


weave and wave their braceleted arms in a
series of graceful attitudes. A young man
came up, bent over almost to the ground, and
took one of the ladies away. ~
Meanwhile, the rice-whisky flew like butter-
milk. By skilful handling we managed to pour
our potions between the cracks in the floor
of the balcony. The ceremonies ended with the
entrance of the news vendors. These .were the
strangest of all the characters that we met.
They travel from village to village supplying
and collecting gossip. They sat in the middle
of the stage and the natives gathered close
around. One had a little flute made of bamboo.
With it he made flowing notes of music. His
companion took a very deep breath and t en
recited an item of news in a sing-song voice.
Custom demanded that he make his items
short and snappy. He had to get each one ott
his chest in one breath. It was quite an art.
When they had finished they were rewarded
with a few handfuls of cooked rice.
There were a few dogs about the village.
These were kept for breeding pups—a table
delicacy among the hillmen. Hunting wild
game is the chief occupation of these people.
A little mountain rice is grown, but the labour
involved is very great. The land grows only
one crop, and then a fresh patch must be
cleared The weapons used for hunting are
primitive. The spear and the knife play a
large part; but they also use a bow without


an arrow Numbers of clay pellets, uniform
m size and shape, and baked hard in hot char-
coal are carried in a satchel slung to the
hunter s waist. One will be placed on the
s ring of the bow and held in position by the
nger and thumb. The missile is then dis-
charged with the same action as when using
an arrow. All kinds of small game are bagged
when using this curious weapon.
One evening, a day or so later, we reached
a terrific grade up which the car was unable
to go under its own power. We had Spanish
windlassed the outfit part of the way up, when
darkness set in, so we camped. Just about
midnight there came clattering along some
undreds of buffalo, driven by armed hillmen.
j wa A:J us ! enough room between the car
fui« cllff ec| g e f or the animals to pass, but
this they refused to do. The car was secured
on the steep slope by being tethered to a stump.
The men wanted to cut the rope. That would
hay e “eant good-bye to the Sundowner. I
grabbed the elephant-gun. The hillmen saw
that I meant to use it if they interfered with
the car. Eventually the Sundowner was
covered with bushes and the buffaloes were
aH nfht ° g ° PaSt ° ne bj on ®' The took
At last we got over the Naga Hills, our rate
of progress averaging a mile a day. Hundreds
ot miles of country had yet to be traversed
country over which a car had never been


driven. had no means of ascertaining
whether we could do it or not, so decided to
try our luck up the Kabaw Valley. A few
times we tried unsuccessfully to get over the
Irrawaddy River.
We kept south, and for hundreds of miles
followed a river which led us to another moun-
tain range, over which a passable bullock-track
led. Crossing the range, we came again to the
Irrawaddy, travelling through teak forests
in intense heat. The leaves were two feet
deep on the ground and it was impossible to
see tracks or to discover obstacles except by
hitting them. A nightmare road for an over-
landing motorist!
Troops of large black monkeys were
everywhere, investigating prospects under
the fallen debris, and snakes swarmed all
around; up the trees, in the water and among
the rubbish underfoot. The air was dense with
smoke from forest fires. A village headman,
coming our way, killed a tiger, and presented
us with the skin. The teeth, whiskers, and
claws he removed, to be ground into a powder
and used for medicinal purposes.
In these regions we found that a white man
was regarded as something akin to a god. As
we motored along natives would bow to the
ground, pick up dirt and scatter it ovei them
selves, while others would lower their
umbrellas and salaam deeply.
When in camp the headman of a neighbour


ing village would pay us a visit. Sitting on
a log, with a number of natives kneeling in
tront of me, their hands clasped before their
races and their bodies occasionally bowing to
the earth, I would endeavour to behave with
the kingly dignity that was evidently expected
ot me. It was rather difficult in my ragged
unshaven and, sometimes, unwashed condi-
tion, but I did my best.
All these people are goat-eaters, they have
very arge families, and their characteristics
c anged as we went along. A religious type
of country folk was met with. Temples and
pagodas were scattered about everywhere and
the booming of gongs, deep and mysterious,
came from the secluded shades of great forests.
he musical chants of the Pongees—local vest-
mented pnests-could be heard as they came
wa king out between majestic paired statues
ot Burmese lions, to collect the daily food
th at is them by the disciples.
Thirty thousand pagodas are to be seen in
this district alone, some of them dating back
two thousand years, while others have recently
been built. They are covered over with
thousands of pounds worth of golf leaf. These
pagodas are erected by religious devotees. A
man dunng his life, will have one erected.
It affords him great spiritual consolation to
gaze upon the symbol of his belief
From a nearby hut that is built of bamboo
and roofed with leafy thatch comes a sound


of extraordinarily sweet music. It tinkles in
silvery, graduated tones, then, in jazz-time
effect, string instruments and a clashing
cymbal keeping it company. It is the funeral
music of a bereaved household. Cakes and
sweet drinks are there for the visitors, and
rice and green vegetables are laid out in long
lines across the road. “Why be sad.?” say
the voices. The eyes, however, tell a different
tale.
When we passed through the timber lands
of Burma, chanting gangs of coolies were at
work. It was interesting to watch the eleph-
ants hauling timber. They would give out
heart-rending groans, double up their hind-
quarters, and then heave mightily on their
chains, attached to big logs. Sometimes they
would kneel down, place their tusks under a
timber, and roll it to wherever it was required.
We made a number of ferry crossings on
canoes, lashed together. Sometimes hundreds
of green bamboos would be cut and made into
a raft. The green bamboo rafts, as I have
previously explained, lost air and consequent
buoyancy. In crossing one of the rivers we got
into grave difficulties owing to this. Hundreds
of coolies came to our assistance. They swam
alongside, helping to support the sinking craft.
There was a red-lime dust through which we
motored. As soon as water touched us, it
began to sting furiously. We found this out
one hot midday when we thought to cool our


selves by taking a batb. The irritation that
followed immersion was very painful. We
corroboreed up and down the banks of that
creek until one of us thought of engine oil.
We rubbed this on, fresh and black from out
of the sump. It was a case of ease before
elegance, as we realized when we contemplated
one another.
We were back in the land of the two-wheeled
dray, drawn by a pair of cows or buffaloes.
The beasts walk along in the same ruts that
are made by the wheels. The roads are never
repaired. When the ruts become too deep the
coolie dray-builder overcomes the difficulty by
making the wheels higher. This keeps on
until only the backs of the oxen are visible.
There was a special express dray, made up
of light woodwork and drawn by trotting
bullocks, that sped along at twelve miles an
hour. They could easily run away from our
car, for I had to drive carefully. These big
ruts had to be straddled, a very tricky job
when going through timber country, as logs,
stumps, and boulders would bump the wheels
over into those three feet deep holes.
We reached a big village, where a troupe of
public entertainers was visiting. The popu-
lace had taken a week off to see the show.
Under a large bough shed we sat. Around us
were hundreds of men, women, and children.
Some were sleeping on mattresses which they
had brought with them, and others were


smoking, eating, or talking. In the distance
was the stage, on which puppets were enact-
ing what I took to he a comedy-drama. The
manipulators of the figures, while pulling the
strings, were in full view. The frantic efforts
of a fat Burmese puppet to catch, hold, or
ride his fiery steed were most amusing. The
horse had eyes as big as saucers, and he did
everything but turn himself out-side in'
One afternoon we expected to be within
reach of civilization. We came out on to a
road crossing the plains and, with yells of
delight, noted that there was the track of a
motor car. About midnight we came to
Pakkoku, a town on the Irrawaddy. Not a
soul was in sight. We wanted to find out if
there were any Europeans in the neighbour-
hood, and where they might be found. Seeing
a car turning a corner ahead of us we set out
after it. The outfit was driven by a native
chauffeur, and seated in the back was a white
man. With delighted greetings we pulled up
and got out to meet him. Immediately this
“Sahib” caught sight of us he told his driver
to “Quickly go!”
We hunted round some more and found the
local dak bungalow. It was full, so we camped
out on the lawn. These dak bungalows, main-
tained by a department of the Indian Govern-
ment, are a great convenience in a land
where, for hundreds of miles, there are no
hotels. At them the traveller can get sleeping


accommodation, though in most cases he has
to provide his own bedding and food. There
is a caretaker in charge.
We found a good friend next morning. He
took us in to a white man’s breakfast. Being
skilled in first aid, he treated and bound up our
many wounds, escorted us to the ferry across
the Irrawaddy River, and accompanied us
across. There he set us on the right track for
Rangoon, hundreds of miles away. Just be-
fore two o’clock in the morning we sighted a
series of queer looking lights, which turned
out to belong to one of the Burmese oil-fields.
Following the Irrawaddy southward for
some days, we met, about eight o’clock one
evening, a crowd of cheering motorists who
had come out to meet us. There were repre-
sentatives of civic, commercial, and sporting
bodies, and there were two Burmese princesses
—charming, quaint English-speaking girls of
the Royal household. The Indian Press gave
us generous acknowledgments, saying that we
had opened up a new motor trade route, and
that Australian “petrol pioneers” were among
the world’s foremost.
We found that the European residents of
Rangoon make their lives well worth living.
Club life there is most attractive. The people
are hospitable and prosperous. The place is
free of the filth and disagreeableness that
characterizes most Asiatic places.
A week later we were again on the move.


We were headed for Singapore, the last leg of
our Asiatic journey, and we had to keep
moving as the rainy season was due to com-
mence within three weeks. For days we battled
along over paddy-fields and through jungle.
Then came a stretch of good road along the
coast. This was followed by another battle
along river-beds. Here rain caught us and we
had to camp for a few days.
We had one or two bad camps, sitting
huddled up under the hood of the car. Between
storms, mosquitoes, and anxiety, we had plenty
to torment us. Dawn showed us a dense heaving
green jungle all around us. Mossy festoons
swung wildly in the storm. The rain poured
down. Malarial chills took possession of us.
The wet season in this part of the world means
a downfall of three hundred inches of water in
three months. While we were crawling along
toward the west coast our clothing rotted with
mildew. Our sodden blankets had small toad-
stools growing on them. Our supply of biscuits
went soft and developed a mottling of green
and blue. The country was waist-deep in
water for miles. We dreaded being caught in
the floods, for soon the streams would be
coming down in bankers. A coastal boat was
leaving for the south. I decided to take it.
Three hundred miles away we would be beyond
the rainfall belt. We yielded this portion of
our route, not to the difficulties of the way, but
to the exigencies of the season,
s


We arrived at Penang. The rubber planters
along the way treated us with great hospi-
tality. It was interesting to motor for
hundreds of miles through forest after forest
of rubber-trees. There was a slump in rubber
prices. The general opinion was that it would
be temporary, owing to market operations, but
that some of the smaller concerns would be
put out of business.
The European and Asiatic portion of our
journey was, comparatively speaking, drawing
to a close. The car had travelled from London
13,300 miles by land and 750 by water.
The oil-tanker Unda was about to leave for
Darwin and the company speedily made
arrangements for us to go aboard, where we
were made comfortable with beds up on the
captain’s bridge. Stollery, who had braved
the tough journey, fell ill with jungle fever
while aboard, and I, too, got my share of it.
We touched at Borneo and a few days later
arrived in Darwin. Here, although my car
belonged to Australia, had been used on a
record drive from Darwin to Melbourne, and
was well known to Darwin, officials and
residents, it was seized by the customs officers.
They would not release it until personal
appeals to the Prime Minister, Mr Stanley
Bruce, resulted in his sending them instruc-
tions to render us every assistance.
The old Sundowner should, by all the
builder’s rules of stresses and strains, have


been scrap-iron, thousands of miles back along
the track, but it left Darwin on the last stage
of the journey humming “Home, Sweet
Home,” in a voice that, if mechanical, was
true in every note. I marvelled at that engine.
It was a much-used piece of machinery when
I took it to London. Since then it had covered
over thirteen thousand miles of rough pioneer-
ing, overloaded, and at an average crank-shaft
speed of two thousand five hundred revolu-
tions per minute. I worked this out roughly at
one hundred and twenty million revolutions
for the journey.
The old-time cattle-track along the overland
had changed beyond recognition since first I
knew it. The Federal Government had put
down bores and wells, and there was a good
surfaced road right across some hundreds of
miles of blacksoil plains. This had been made
by the use of fire-ploughs drawn either by
donkeys or tractor power. In place of weary
horse-teams we met motor lorries carrying
stores to the outback stations.
We came to Longreach, the hub of western
Queensland motoring, and crossed many of the
car-tracks that radiate from that town to the
outer outback. The car has altered the meaning
of life for the men and women —and children
—of the interior. It has brought them
comfort, given them social opportunities,
given them better chances in case of sickness


and childbirth, and widened - their whole
mental and physical horizon.
We camped between Longreach and Charle-
ville. As we lay at rest, we heard above the
murmur of the bush life around us, the
droning of a plane. It was the outback mail
and passenger service. Looking up we saw,
high up, white wings gleaming against the
blue. From the days when the invention of
the “diamond frame” bicycle marked a step
forward in the march of change I had taken
mechanical transport into the desert lands. I
had taken bike, car, and plane on many
pioneer journeys. My expeditions with pen
and camera had helped to make the interior
a reality to the general consciousness. I
hadn’t got much out of it except my battered
old Sundowner and a store of memories, but
I had been in the van of the battle fronts of
outback.
Subsequently, the Sundowner, being re-
placed by a new car, went to the National
Museum, at Canberra.


CHAPTER XV
THE EVOLUTION OF THE MAIL SERVICE
Allusions in the foregoing chapter to changes
that have taken place in the outback since
first I knew it set me thinking of the evolution
of the mail service. I know all the ways by
which mail was brought to the homesteads and
camps of back-of-beyond. I had met the mail-
men on their lonely tracks and had camped
with them by a pinpoint of light pricking a
thousand miles of darkness.
There was the Aboriginal Express of the
Gulf of Carpentaria.
Young “fellah” aboriginal Jimmy was
footsore and weary. Yesterday he had ambled
and walked sixty miles; to-day he had
scrambled for forty more, over rugged
ranges. Stiffly he sat down by a little rock-
hole of water, to eat a supper of salt-beef and
damper. By a little camp-fire he coiled himself
up, smoked a pipe of “Niki-niki” twist to-
bacco, and then slept.
Before noon of next day he was crossing a
sun-baked plain, sixty miles wide. Half-way
across this stage he came to a bullock’s jaw


bone fastened to the top of a stick stuck in the
ground. Close by was a biscuit-tin, weighted
to the ground with several old horseshoes.
This was the post-office. Opening the lid of
the tin he took out one solitary letter and
started on the return journey.
Jimmy was “tired long fellah, long fellah,”
but knowing how eagerly his well-beloved boss,
back at the little out-station, was awaiting
the quarterly mail, he was sacred to his trust.
Proud, too, he was of these missions. He was
the “Pig Gubmint V’ messenger. Dusky men
of hostile tribes perforce gave to him full
right-of-way when crossing their lands. A let-
ter in a cloven stick was his sign of authority.
Late that night he arrived back into the
ranges, where, for mile after mile as he limped
and strode along, he sang songs—singing away
the feather-footed Kaditcha devils and spirits
that haunted the rocky caverns high up in the
over-hanging cliffs. At the same rock-hole he
again slept. True to aboriginal style he
had eaten all his station rations. Hungrily he
set out next day. As he walked he
dropped lighted matches into the long grass.
A trail of dense smoke arose, hundreds of feet
into the air, and formed fleecy clouds in the
blue sky. His boss, seeing these from afar,
would know that he was on the return journey.
Late the following night Jimmy reached the
little timber and bark hut. The lonely boss
retired to a hide bunk where, with the aid of a


fluttering slush lamp he sought solace in his
mail.
Jimmy is dead now. Half blind from a dis-
ease that attacked him, he went out one day
to hunt bandicoots. A bushfire surrounded
him and he perished in the flames.
I recall the packhorse mail of the Cape
York Peninsula.
A fierce rain squall swept through jungle
and forest. Huge branches swayed about, and
occasionally crashed to earth. Torrents of
muddy water swept down the mountain rivu-
lets and raced onwards in the fast running
creeks. Along a slippery red mud track came
a cavalcade of six tired packhorses driven by
a wiry little old man clad in a dripping oilskin
and seated on a big bony horse of the waler
type. In front of them was a spewy quicksand
flat across which a winding ribbon of water
denoted the track. Carefully the experienced
horses follow this line, knowing that bottom-
less bogs are on either side.
Their progress was brought to an abrupt
end, for ahead of them was a roaring muddy
creek, sixty feet deep and running a banker.
The man drove his horses a few hundred yards
up-stream to a rough granite ridge and
unloaded them. As darkness fell the rain and
wind ceased, but the waters kept on rising
until the ridge became an island.
Mailman Mac made a smoky fire around
which the shivering horses stood in a circle —


heads to hind-quarters, their switching tails
thus keeping away the myriads of sandflies
and mosquitoes not only from their own sterns
but from the head of the animal behind. The
mailman retired to his bunk inside a
cheese-cloth camp-net and went to sleep
to the strains of a strange nocturne—
jangling of horse-bells, banshee shrieks of
curlews, chirping of crickets, croaking of
frogs, howling of dingoes, and, over all, the
distant rumble of thunder, high up in the
ranges. For two weeks the mail was delayed
at this spot.
Old Mac rests now in a simple, wooden-
railed grave alongside his old-time mail route.
There were the Bicycle Mails of the Wes-
tern Australian goldfields.
Express Mail Rider, Paddy O’Lennie, was
recumbent in the shade of a sparse mulga
bush during his lonely midday camp. Small,
weazened, and sun-dried, clad in dusty singlet
and khaki shorts, he looked like the remains
of an Assyrian mummy. Rampant when seated
on a speeding push-cycle, he was the envy of
the younger athletes of the Coolgardie gold-
fields dispatch-riders. He was good for a
thousand miles weekly, be it either on sandy,
waterless camel-pads in the heat of mid-
summer, or pedalling on the edges of vast
expanses of dried up salt lakes in the bleak
winds of winter. Reliable deliverer of regis-
tered mails, telegrams, and parcels to


lonely mining-camps; welcome distributor of
urgently-needed medicines and other neces-
sities ; cheerfully enduring thirst, hunger,
heat, loneliness, and great physical strain, he
was a product of the old goldfield days—a
Speed King of the Great Overland Tracks.
I have watched the camels of the “Hoosta”
Mail Trains of Central Australia being loaded
for their day’s journey of thirty miles —part
of a three hundred and forty miles trek on
His Majesty’s service.
An early morning, cold drizzling mist hid
the sandhills and claypans surrounding a
camp in the interior. Gurgles and groans,
clanking of hobble-chains and the merry
laughter of aboriginal off-siders filled the air.
Long Dan, the white man contractor, was in
charge. A lanky six-foot Australian he could
manage a string of fractious bull-camels at
such times when the imported Asiatic “Ghan”
driver would be breathing prayers to his gods
and loud-mouthed curses at his camels.
Dan scorned the use of the quieter teams
of cow-camels. Give him for leader a lustful,
savage roarer that could bite a piece out of the
slugs of galvanized iron that were carried
heavily balanced on each side of his pack-
saddle. And give him a train of pillar front-
legged masculines, their breath reeking of
the kerosene bush which they had devoured.
Sometimes Dan had a few passengers. In
consideration of their comfort he kept some
T


fast-walking cow-camels which would be sent
on ahead, in charge of an Afghan or aboriginal
driver, to the next camping-ground. At the
best of times this would be a cheerless journey,
for it entailed sitting for hours on an up-and-
down, swaying, smelling mass of animation,
slowly crossing a seemingly interminable,
mulga-dotted plain, under a blazing sun, with
a furnace-like northerly blowing, or in the
teeth of a southerly buster, with a blinding
sand-storm driving before it.
To-day trains that thunder along in a cloud
of smoke and steam, two days out from
Adelaide, speeding across the continent to the
Western Australian goldfields along the
straight bright rails have supplanted the
winding camel-pads of the desert.
I can give you a picture of the Buckboard
Mails of North-Central Australia:
“Gid arp! Cluck! Cluck V 1
An expert flick of a long-handled whip-lash
startles a loafing leader of a four-horse buck-
board buggy, the wheels of which are slowly
churning through the deep, white sandflats
of Birdum Creek. Driver Harry Beckham,
now well known as the “Pizzer” of Mrs
Aeneas Gunn’s book, We of the Never-Never,
was in a merry mood. Pompey, the aboriginal
horse tailer, was bringing along the mob of
spare mail horses, half a mile behind. Even
at that distance the strains of the Pizzer’s
singing scared the lively, green-grass fed,


prick-eared steeds. A halt at a small stock-
yard among the lancewood-trees, a drink of
tea, a change of horses, and they would start
again on the seven-hundred-mile mail-route.
I was on an overland push-bike journey at
the time, and for company for part of the way,
we two, buggy and bike, camped together at
night. The average day’s run was thirty miles.
The Fizzer’s arrival at the lonely cattle and
telegraph stations was the biggest event of the
year. In addition to telegrams, mails, and
parcels, he carried, for sale, all kinds of small
and useful goods.
Poor old Fizzer —merry soul —has gone.
He was drowned shortly afterwards. A flooded
creek ... a restive packhorse washed oft its
feet ... a gallant attempt at rescue, and
Fizzer’s body was found, a few days later,
miles down the stream.
Some of his old stockyards are still to be
seen along the overland track. A bushfire may
destroy them at any time. Should they not
be preserved ? Overland motorists, not know-
ing their history, pass them by without a
glance.
Memory recalls Cobb and Co.’s Coach Mail.
One night, with my well-laden overlanding
bike alongside, I lay camped in the mulga.
A bright full moon was shining over the
silvery-grey scrub. Clopping steadily along,
hoof and wheel sounds softened by deep dust,
a Cobb and Co. coach appeared on the track.


A powerful carbide bead-lamp on top of the
vehicle created a silhouette effect amidst the
rising cloud of dust. The spirited horses, the
motionless form of the driver, and the dummy-
like figures of the passengers nodding in their
sleep form a ghost-like memory of the pioneer-
ing days that can never return.
For over seventy years the coaches of Cobb
and Co. played an important part in the
delivery of mails. Starting in Victoria, their
organization steadily grew until it spread over
the greater part of Victoria, New South
Wales, and Queensland. In 1870 the company,
in these three colonies, was harnessing six
thousand horses every day, and their coaches
were travelling twenty-eight thousand miles
per week. Gradually, however, the railways
forced them to the back country and even there
the motor car brought about their end. In 1924
when the Yuelba-Surat, Queensland, trip was*
abolished, the last Cobb and Co. coach
vanished from the Australian bush.
There were the “Elizabeth” Mails of South
Australia.
Yells, curses, shouts, and violent intermit-
tent explosions intermingled with a rattling
sound as of empty kerosene-tins being dragged
along. Heaving up over the steep gradient
leading out of a boggy creek there comes, half
hidden in dripping mud, a strange apparition.
It looks something like a huge tin luggage-case,
beneath which are skidding wheels enshrouded


in muck and clinging grass. Inside, a slush-
bespattered man is seated clinging ferociously
to the steering-wheel. Outside is a mob of
naked, perspiring aboriginals. Over the top
the vehicle climbs, halts, then speeds away
from the now laughing blacks, and in a cloud
of blue exhaust smoke and radiator steam,
comes to rest alongside the cattle station stock-
yard. The pioneer “Lizzie” mail has arrived.
There were the “Hell-Fire Jack” Mails of
Central Queensland:
A four-cylinder, forty horse-power, two-
ton mass of steel is hurtling across the black-
soil plains at seventy miles per hour. At the
wheel is a well known one-time cattle-drover
and amateur boxer. He has recently been
successful in proving to the Government that
motor cars are capable of giving a reliable
mail service, and now has got a contract on a
three-hundred-mile stage.
Little by little, public clamour forced
reluctant shire councils to improve the roads.
Stations, too, at their own expense, improved
their wayside routes. The course of long
journeys—the hundreds of gates that had to
be opened and shut—was gradually lessened
by the substitution of SS entrances and
Y-shaped ramps. Petrol companies broke
down the twelve-hundred-mile stages by
establishing depots at police stations, at
station homesteads, and at small wayside
towns. Garages, too, came into existence.


Now there arose in the land a new type of
mailman business-like, expert motor-drivers
who could raise the hair on the heads of the
most blase commercial travellers; drivers who,
in clouds of dust, raced across the shimmering
plains of outback—“Hell-Fire Jacks” of
Central Queensland.
On the Transcontinental Railway Mail:
A dapper but pudgy figure of an elderly
man is seated at a piano. Standing, with a
hand resting on his shoulder, a famous prima
donna is singing. The long, brightly-lit saloon
sways to the accompaniment of a subdued
rhythmic rattle and the undertones of the fast-
speeding express. A party of well-dressed
men and women lounge cosily in deep,
cushioned arm-chairs listening to the music.
Dimly, through the curtained windows, can
be seen the horizon of the vast Nullarbor
Plains. Overhead, stars glint, reflected in the
sheen of speed-polished steel rails, which,
apparently never ending, divide a still primi-
tive land. It is a lonely, mysterious land,
where the dingo still prowls and breeds its
primeval kind; a savage, hungry land in
which stone-age men still fight, wander and
hunt as they did a thousand years ago.
The Air Mail Service:
Mulga Jim and aboriginal King Billy stood
at the door of a little tin hut far away in a
remote corner of Central Australia. High up
in the sky was a tiny speck, circling. A faint


drone filled the air. The speck sank lower and
lower and started to spiral. Round and
round, lower and lower it came, giving vent
to an occasional drone. Then the aeroplane,
now a thousand feet up, gave vent to a
tremendous roar of power, and in a wide
sweeping circle swooped over the roof of the
little homestead and banked steeply. From
the cockpit a goggled figure gazed downwards
and then dropped a small bundle to which
were fastened red, white, and blue streamers.
It fell into the stockyard. The service plane
then streaked away, and whilst still in sight
of sharp-eyed Billy glided down and landed
on a claypan ten miles away. Mulga Jim had
meanwhile picked up the package of pioneer
air-mail. To it, tied loosely and fluttering in
the breeze, was a piece of white paper with a
scrawled message on it: “Where is Connelly’s
Lookout*? Reported by natives that a pros-
pector is perishing fifty miles away from
there to westward. Will wait your arrival on
claypan about ten miles west.”
Two fast horses were hastily saddled, and
the two men galloped away. In a little over
an hour they reached the waiting plane.
So the machine taxied to the end of the clay-
pan and, with the mechanic hanging on to a
wing-tip, turned around into the breeze.
“All aboard!”
Faster and faster along the ground the


roaring lurching aeroplane sped, and then,
with a blast of full engine power, leaped up.
hour later, from a height of five
thousand feet, a blackened trail of burnt
spinifex was sighted by the airmen. As they
circled lower, there could be seen the remains
of a camel, and then, farther on, another
carcass. Hawks could be seen fluttering low
over a dense belt of mulga at the foot of a red,
rocky cliff.
Several dingoes scrambled up the rocks—
sure sign of water according to Jim. There
was not a landing-ground for miles around
and there was no sign of burnt trails beyond
this spot; no smokes; no sign of human life.
Taking grave risks from air-pockets, or from
the engine cutting out, the search party flew,
at tbs height of a few hundred feet, around
and around. Sadly, as the sun was sinking,
they headed back, wirelessing, as they flew, a
message to the outside world, and then landed
on the claypan.
The next few days were full of great hard-
ship to the ground party on a hundred mile
search for the prospector. Dense, half-dry
thickets ripped and tore their flesh and cloth-
ing. They came to the burnt trail and Billy,
now on foot, eventually picked up the tracks
of the prospector’s camels. He had shot two
of his animals to drink of any entrail water.
Into the gloomy thickets they followed the
tracks but only a dead, hobbled camel, that had


eaten of poison bush was there. They found
a water-soak which had been scratched out by
kangaroos in a sand patch at the foot of a big
rock. Radiating out from it for miles were
human tracks. Following up one of these the
two men came across some clothing; then a
pair of boots; then later ... high up in the blue
sky the plane was circling and circling and
droning a sad dirge. Prom it the watchers saw
the ground party lay out —a calico cross. The
prospector was dead.


CHAPTER XVI
GOLD
As I have indicated elsewhere in this book I
had for a number of years entertained hopes
of a lucky strike of gold. My travels across
and around the continent had given me
opportunities to study mining. I had an
acquaintance with mining geology—sufficient
to enable me to recognize auriferous country
when I saw it, and to prospect it intelligently
when found. I had located a number of gold-
bearing reefs in different parts of the con-
tinent, but all of them were, at the time I speak
of, unworkable.
I spent a number of months in Arnhem Land
working alone. I had a feeling in my bones
that it was here, in this little-known part of
the country that fortune awaited me. I was
in open forest country; it was burnt over and
blackened by fires set going by the aboriginals,
and was scorched by the heat of the summer
sun.
One day in an undulating ridge I found that
which I had spent months seeking—gold. I
prospected the country for miles around, and


dollied sections of different outcrops. Dish-
washing gave good traces of the yellow metal.
The indications were too promising to leave.
I worked there during the whole of the wet
season, from October to April. From a party
of blacks, travelling through that part of the
country, I obtained some tea, giving them
some tobacco in exchange. It was a lonely
camp. The country carried no game, with the
result that there were no natives camped in
the vicinity. That little tribe, passing through
on a pilgrimage from one hunting-ground to
another, were the only human beings I saw
during the months I was there.
Time rolled along. Trade depression, re-
striction of credit, and a soaring increase in
the price of gold took place. Capital began
to flow into mining ventures. I returned to
Sydney to find that capital was less interested
in new ventures than it was in old workings
which were known to contain low-grade ores
that were payable at the increased gold prices.
However, I got sufficient capital together to
form an expedition to go north and open up
the lease.
In 1933 I left Sydney in charge of a party
of six men, with the necessary equipment.
There was an uneventful —although very
boggy—trip north. And before long the brood-
ing and lonely valleys where I had struggled
with hunger, sickness and fatigue were


echoing to warning calls of, “F-I-R-El”
and the thudding blasts of mining explosives.
Although everything looked very promising
there was a good deal of anxiety for me. To
secure capital I had, naturally, to part with
the greater part of my interest in the concern.
The shares of the company were listed on the
stock exchange and were rising on the pros-
pects of the field. This was not as good, from
my point of view, as it seems on first sight.
Stock exchange rules prevented me, as the
original vendor of the mining-lease, from
operating with my shares for a period of six
months. What I. feared, with a rising market,
was a “boom and a bust” before I could get
going. I had faith in the mine, so I put a stop
to all bulling of the market by giving pub-
licity to the extent of our developments and
demonstrating that there was nothing, as yet,
to warrant a boom.
Then I went bush. I couldn’t just stick
around the workings and fret, so I packed up
and returned to the solitudes to open up some
more of those intriguing ironstone quartz
formations, to delve into sundry overburdens
of alluvial flats; to see if I could find another
good mine.
Then disaster came close to me. I lay on
my bunk with my two legs swollen, my left
arm paralysed, and my nerves stretched to the
limit. I was ill with the dreaded beriberi.
Months of living on bad flour and mouldy


rice had brought it on. Help came in the shape
of a solitary, wandering blackfellow, whom
chance had directed to my camp. He set forth,
with a scribbled note that I had given him, to
a white man’s camp some distance away,
where lived an old-age pensioner.
He arrived back early next morning with
some eggs and two bottles of vinegar. This
old aboriginal gathered some green herbage
and boiled it for me. I found out later that
its name was Fat Hen, a kind of local spinach.
Its curative properties were not great, but it
was helpful. Within a few days, although weak
and still suffering from my malady, I was
able to drag myself about.
One day I heard the distant droning of a
plane. I fired up a heap of dead rubbish, send-
ing a column of smoke into the air. I heard
the plane coming closer. Then it came into
view. It descended to just above my head and
passed round and round the camp, roaring,
and skimming just above the tree-tops. The
pilot was leaning from the cockpit, staring
down at me each time as he thundered past.
I know now that he was making sure of my
identity. He had picked up something for me
in Darwin. He was en route to Central
Australia and had deviated from his course in
the hope of locating my camp.
At last he was satisfied that the man staring
up at his plunging plane was I. There came
drifting down a stick to which was tied a


letter. He watched me pick it up, waved fare-
well, then banked and zoomed away into the
sky on his long flight.
I opened the letter with hands that shook
a little. It was from my brother-in-law, whom
I had left in charge of my affairs. My mining
venture had prospered. The company had
installed its own battery on the field. Three
trucks were kept constantly employed carting
ore. They had even cleared a landing-ground
and installed an aeroplane to serve the busi-
ess of the mine. My shares, on exchange, had
increased many times over in value. One lease
that I had held had been sold outright. I was
a rich man; independent for life. I looked
down at my bedraggled person—and just
couldn’t believe it.
All my life I’d been a battler, either cutting
the deck with nature in her more grim moods,
or else stroking a reflective chin over the
problem of how to pay my way. I’d been
broke a dozen times. And now the grand
climax of my hopes came to me, sick, in my
lonely camp in the Never-Never. I wasn’t
really jubilant, I was stunned. It may have
been caused by my weak condition —but I just
about broke down.
And that is my story. Like most yarns it
has a postscript. lam now enjoying being a
man of means and of leisure. I’ve got some
of the things I’ve always wanted—the sort of


things a man of my tastes dreams of owning
when he hasn’t a cracker. There’s a motor
caravan that has cost me as much as I could
have lived on for five or six years in the old
days. And there’s a little fleet of sporty two-
seater models fitted with every possible refine-
ment. I’ve got a photographic—and cinema-
photographic —outfit that couldn’t be improved
upon. It includes everything, and everything
is of the best.
And all the while I am planning to go back.


Halstead Printing Company Limited,
Arnold Place, Sydney




