

"Be-anga"
WOOLLOOMOOLOO 1937-1946


"Be-anga"
WOOLLOOMOOLOO 1 937 - 1 946


He is “Be-anga”
WILLIAM JOHN MacKAY
N. S.W. Commissioner of Police


"BE-ANGA”
THE industrial district of Woolloomooloo in
Sydney, New South Wales, was bathed in
warm sunshine on this, the first day of April,
1937. The happy laughter of children lent a
musical background to the words spoken by
the Lieutenant-Governor. He was officially
declaring open the newly created Woolloo-
mooloo Rotary-Police Boys' Club.
To those assembled, people in all walks of
life, this was to be an experiment; a building set
aside and equipped as a club in which the
youth of the district could occupy their leisure
hours in healthy recreation, an experiment which
has, in nine short years, proved to be of such
success that, with mushroom-like growth, fifteen
like clubs have sprung into being throughout
this State.
The success and smooth working of these
clubs tend to cause the Man in the Street to
accept them as something which just came
into being; a utility which is and should be
available to the youth of the State. But behind
the New South Wales Police-Citizens Boys'
Club movement lies a story—a story based on
experience, thought and courage; a story that
the past and present members of the initial
club, are proud to relate.
Our story had its beginning in the latter part
of the last century —the year 1885 to be exact
—when the lives of a Scottish Constable and


his wife were made happier by the arrival of a
lusty baby boy.
The boy was named William John Mackay,
and, much the same as all babies, he laughed,
he cried, cut his teeth, romped on the floor,
learned to walk and talk, outgrew his baby
days, went to school, until the day arrived
when he, like other boys the world over, needed
the company of friends of his own age so that he
might enjoy to the fullest his leisure hours. But
being reared in an industrial area, he found
that the only place available to meet his friends
was on the street corner. No organised exer-
cises or games to fill in their time and to rid them
of their youthful energies. Their fun was of their
own making and whatever devilment they
could think up, which soon brought them in con-
flict with persons, property, and the law. In
fact, none of the three would be immune from
damage were they wanted in their games;
therefore, it can be readily understood that he
and his friends were not over-friendly with the
local police.
With young manhood upon him, yc ung
Mackay began more and more to think how
unfair it was that, in a world of plenty, some
lads through no fault of their own and because
of their environment could never hope to rise
above the slum area in which they were brought
up.
At the age of nineteen years Mackay junior
followed his father's footsteps and joined the
City of Glasgow Police. He eventually became
discontented with his duty, a duty which called


upon him to suppress the devilments of the
younger lads of the area, whilst knowing full
well that, were facilities made available to the
lads, their wrong-doings against persons,
property, and the law would never be com-
mitted, or, for that matter, thought of. He
severed ties with his homeland to seek fortune
overseas, having heard of the opportunities
that existed in parts of the British Empire, which
to him, so far, were places of which to dream,
and he sailed for Australia,
Arriving in Sydney with very little, if any,
capital, his first duty to himself was to find a
job, and more by accident than design he be-
came Constable Mackay of the New • South
Wales Police Force.
His rise from the bottom of the ladder to its
highest rung is a feat known to all; but during
that climb up the ladder of promotion, he found
time and again that the conditions of the lads
of this City, because of their surroundings and
lack of suitable places in which to meet their
friends, were much the same as experienced
by him and his aquaintances in Glasgow,
causing lapses into lives of carelessness and
sometimes crime. Sydney, too, had its slum
areas.
About 1928, William John Mackay was ap-
pointed superintendent of the Criminal Invest-
igation Branch. From that date on, the youth
of this State had a champion, for with his
position and the memories of his own youth
before him, any youth who transgressed the
law found a sympathetic listener in the Chief


of the and the lads always received an
opportunity to better themselves in a lawful way.
In 1936, the Government of the day sent Mr.
Mackay overseas to study methods in combat-
ing crime, but Mr. Mackay went further than
that: he also studied what was being done
to prevent crime. At Norwich, England, he
found a Police Boys' Club had been established
by the Chief Constable of that City, and its
function confirmed his ideas that, given an
opportunity, the youth of the city could over-
come the disabilities of. a tough up-bringing.
Later, he visited Germany and Italy where he
saw other youth movements in operation, and
then to the United Sates of America, where in
New York and Washingon D.C. he saw the
Police Athletic League in full swing.
Returning to New South Wales, he took the
best of the schemes from those he had seen, and
at a Rotary Club luncheon, at which he was
guest of honor, expounded his views at length,
and finally asked the assembled Rotarians
for their support in raising funds to provide
suitable places where lads, brought up in the
industrial areas, could meet, play, engage in
sport in general, some place where their
attention could be occupied, thus giving them
a chance in life, and assisting to prevent them
from becoming street-corner loafers.
The Rotarians immediately became interested
and before long a drive for funds was made.
An approach was also made to the Govern-
ment of the day, resulting in the old disused


Police Station at Woolloomooloo being made
available, and with the money raised the prem-
ises became the first Police Boys' Club.
At first the youths and, in many cases, the
grown-ups of the locality were suspicious of
this attempt to win the boys' friendship, and
in the early months the membership did not
exceed 100 boys. As time went on and it was
found that here was a place where one could
read, box, wrestle, and engage in all kinds of
games and sport, the membership rapidly
increased.
That the Club was becoming popular with
the boys was also shown in another direction,
for reports on juvenile crime took an abrupt
drop downwards, and since that day in 1937
when the Club was opened has never reached
. the heights of those days when the street comers
were their only playground.
The success of the experimental club caused
other areas soon to get behind the movement,
and to-day Mr. Mackay stands the "Be-anga”
of an organisation that has an active member-
ship of 12,000 —sixteen functioning Clubs and
ten further Clubs in the process of formation, a
Health Camp, at which the members may enjoy
their week-ends and holiday periods. The
members of the organisation have war service
records second to none.
★ ★ ★
We, the past members and members of the
first Police-Citizen' Boys' Club, wish to express,
for all to see and hear, our appreciation, grati


tude, and respect to Mr. William John Mackay,
N.S.W. Commissioner of Police, and our pride
in being allowed to be associated with a man
who, although he has risen high in the affairs of
this State, could still remember the days of his
youth and so use the experience gained in that
period of his life that we, the youth of New
South Wales, might benefit.
We the youth HAVE benefited.
Woolloomooloo, the district in which the foun-
dation stone of the N.S.W. Police-Citizens' Boys'
Clubs was laid, derived its name from the
manner in which the Aborigines pronounced
the words Wind-mill; therefore, we are proud
to find there is also an Aborigine word which
is applicable to Mr. Mackay, and the word has
been used to title this story: "Be-anga,” which
translated from the Aborigine to the English
tongue means father, responsible person, or
leader.
Mr. Mackay we salute you, Be-anga.
Type donated by Consolidated Press Limited. Set up and
Printed by the Printing Section of the East Sydney Police-
Citizens Bovs’ Club.
