

BE MEN
A SERMON
PREACHED IN
THE ST. KILDA CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH,
ON SUNDAY MORNING, 11th APRIL, 1858,
BY THE
REY. THOMAS BINNEY,
IpKnxster of tfrt Wagfr-IroitM Stertnm.
PUBLISHED BY SPECIAL REQUEST.
Saif the .Profits to he given to the Funds of the Congregational Some Mission
MELBOURNE;
W. FAIRFAX & CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
STEAM PRESS, 78, COLLINS STREET, EAST.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.


~ia-Ja:J(a |
NOTICE.
It may be proper to state, that the permission of the Preacher
tms obtained, though not without difficulty, to the appearance
of the following report of his discourse. As, after its delivery,
a collection teas made on behalf of the Congregational
Home Mission, the Publishers will have much pleasure in
handing the half of any profits realized by its sale, to the
Treasurer of that Institution.


hi*' ssp- R (
n..\- 'b •“T
BE MEN.
“ Brethren , he not children in understanding : howheitin malice he
ye children, hut in understanding he men." —1 Cor. xiv, 20.
The apostle, you will observe, in the verse immediately
preceding this, that “in the church he would rather
speak five words with his understanding, than ten thousand
words in an unknown tongue.” Now, though the English
word “ understanding ” occurs in both verses, two different
words are used by St. Paul. The first of his terms stands
for the intellectual faculty itself; the second refers to its
state of development, or rather to that of the moral senti-
ments. In speaking of his “ oion understanding” the
apostle refers to his power, as a rational being, of compre-
hending any truth or statement, and of making it intelligible
to others. In telling the Corinthians not to be “children ” but
“men” in “understanding,” he refers to that mature condition
of both mind and heart, and general character, Avhich dis-
tinguishes a person of thought, prudence, discretion, common
sense —of solidity and wisdom, of manly and dignified aims and
purposes. So, again, though the English word “ children ”
occurs twice in the text, the words used by the apostle are
different, and admit of being differently rendered. The first
may be regarded as standing for boys, the second for babes.
The one gives us the idea of youth—very inexperienced,
but beginning to display the elements of character; the other
takes us back to unconscious infancy, before any of the
primitive forces in human nature have begun to be developed
at all. Then the word rendered “ malice,” though it may
be specially regarded as standing for those passions which
the English term suggests, yet it may also be taken more
generally as designating all evil dispositions and affections
whatsoever. In the last place the word rendered “ men ”is
a term that signifies “ perfect,” and refers not only to ma-
B 2


turity as to age, but to completeness of education, to fulness
of mental development, and fitness for the manly discharge
of the great and serious duties of life. Thus looked at, and
thus explained, the text, you perceive, would seem to say ,
this: ‘Don’t feel and act like a number of mere boys—
whose minds are immature, vain, volatile—lncapable of deep,
serious thought and high moral aims. With respect to all
that is bad, indeed—passion, concupiscence, envy, malignity,
deceit, and so on —I would that you were even infants—the
veriest babes ; but as to all that is holy, wise, virtuous, be
like those, who, having gone through a long course of intel-
lectual and moral discipline, are at once ripe in years, and
perfectly equipped as to knowledge and accomplishments,
thorough “ men ” in fact, as to the culture of their under-
standings, their superiority to all that is narrow, mean, or
selfish, and their lofty and dignified idea of life.’
Such, I think, is the full meaning of the apostle’s exhor-
tation. It was most appropriate as addressed to the Corin-
thians, and will be seen to be so by referring to the context,
and considering the condition and behaviour of the Corin-
thian church. It is in itself, however, very suggestive; it
shows great knowledge of human nature ; it is full of good
sense; and will be found, I hope, before we have done with
it, to afford us some useful and important practical lessons.
Let us now look more distinctly at the ideas and import
of the text, and illustrate them by referring to the conduct
of the persons to whom it was originally addressed.
After what has already been said about the meaning of
the words of the text, I think the best way of looking at the
ideas of it—those which it either expresses or involves —will
be to trace the progressive development of a human being,
according to the three aspects of humanity suggested by the
images and phraseology of the apostle, and to notice how
they may be applied, for practical purposes, to the Christian
character and life.
In the text, then, we think we can discover traces of the
infant, the boy, and the man ; and we find something belong-
ing to each used for moral and religious ends. Let us see
what can be made of this, or how it may shape itsel , when
steadily looked at.
A human being comes into the world as a congeries or
combination of extraordinary capabilities. It is so much
raw material—so many diverse powers or forces, that may
be drawn out, and developed into different forms of future
character. By taking the two terms of the text —“ malice ’


and “ understanding”—as representative terms, that is, as
standing for the classes of things to which they respectively
belong, it would recognize the two great departments of
human nature —the intellectual and the emotional. Under the
one term may be included the capacities of reason, intelli-
gence, conscience, and the higher powers of the mind; under
the other, the passions and affections, and the lower propensi-
ties of our mixed constitution. Every human being is made up
of these two great classes of capabilities; each has both and
all; —with the exception, of course, of those rare instances
in which there is some original and incurable defect, as in
the case of idiots, with whom, in our present argument, we
have nothing to do.
A little infant, then, has wrapped up within it two great
classes of powers—the capacities of the intellect, and the
forces of the passions. These are to be unfolded and de-
veloped in the future man; but at first they lie with him in
the cradle as so many slumbering elements, just as if he had
them not. Without referring to the undeveloped state of
an infant’s understanding , the apostle fixes attention on the
undeveloped condition of the passions. This was the one idea
that he wanted; and this, therefore, is what he exclusively
refers to, and which we have exclusively to regard. Look-
ing at a little sweet, slumbering babe, or at one smiling and
crowing on the maternal lap, the apostle seems to say —
‘ Whatever capacitg there may be here for what is bad, it is
not manifested yet; whatever germ there may be of what is
malign, vindictive, or impure, it is not yet developed and
displayed. How calm and beautiful the little thing looks !
How free from the gross and turbulent agitations which
deform society and degrade men! What does it know of
vanity and ambition—of envy and malice, the burnings of
hatred, the swellings of pride, the strife, rancour, bitterness,
and malignity which are to be seen and met with in the
world? True, all the men in the world were once babes;
they once looked innocent and beautiful like this. Would
to God, that, in one sense, they were babes again !—that, so
far as all that is bad is concerned, they were “ simple con-
cerning evil,” free from its outbreaks and its manifestations !
But Christians ought to be this. By the conquest and the cru-
cifixion of their wrnrser nature —by the restraining and morti-
fying of their passions—by the expulsion of corruption
through the cleansing influences of the regenerating Spirit,
they ought “ in malice to be children;” —that is, by the “put-
ting off ” of “ the old man,” they ought to resemble those in


whom his bad elements are yet undeveloped, or by whom, so
to speak, he is not yet put on.
The apostle’s next idea, or that which we take next, is
the picture of a number of youths, who have advanced be-
yond the period of infancy and childhood, but who have not
yet attained to man’s estate, or acquired the knowledge,
dispositions, and habits belonging to riper years, especially
when those years are distinguished by the wisdom of expe-
rience and the discipline of virtue. Look, then, at a num-
ber of youths—pieces of humanity that are neither boys nor
men —and only think what, for the most part, you will find
them to be. They are necessarily inexperienced; they have
no proper knowdedge of life, no deep, just views of the world
into which they are advancing, or the business for which
they were born. They are often very conceited; they think
a great deal of any small acquirement they may have made,
or of any little natural or social advantage by which they may
be distinguished. They are frequently pert, forward, vain,
priding themselves on their father’s wealth, or their own ima-
gined perfections and accomplishments. They generally attach
importance to trifles, and are often torn by the most violent
passions, inflamed, mortified, elated, distressed, on account
of things which men smile at as small or ridiculous. They
have high thoughts of what they would like to do, and to be;
attaching often vast importance to w r hat is merely showy and
superficial. There are often among them envyings, and
jealousies, and rankling animosities; and these, too, all
springing out of circumstances which, one day, they will
come to regard with indifference or shame. They like
pleasure and excitement; they are fonder of reading for
amusement than for knowledge ; and have no notion what-
ever of the wearing anxieties, or the solid and stern duties
of life. They know nothing of sympathy with suffering;
they can hardly understand what is meant by self-sacrifice;
they have not got to the apprehension of the greatness and
beautifulness of duty as duty. They may be amiable, cheer-
ful, generous, goodnatured ; but they are often all this in
connexion w T ith an unsuspected selfishness, without deep
thought, or steady principle, or real, considerate regard for
others. Their minds are not filled with varied knowledge ;
their hearts have not been schooled and disciplined by expe-
rience ; their tastes have not been ripened and rectified by
time; they have not themselves been subdued by sorrow;
their erroneous notions have not been corrected or rebuked
by observation ; their whole character is raw and immature.


However promising they may be, from their uncorruptedness
and sincerity, they cannot but be defective in those things
which give solidness, weight, polish, and proportion to disci-
plined virtue and manly worth.
As in infants the reason and the feelings are alike unde-
veloped,—and the apostle fixes on the one idea of the absence
of the bad affections and passions from which to enforce a
religious lesson —so in youth, when both parts of our nature
have unfolded to a certain extent, the apostle directs us to
the frequent appearance, at that age, of what is the result
of the want of proportion between the development of the
understanding and that of the passions. The understanding
needs to be opened and cultivated—the passions grow of
themselves. If the intellect be let alone, it will not expand;
if the feelings be let alone, they will expand the more. The
one requires to be encouraged and stimulated; the others to
be repressed and restrained. The consequence is, that in
early life, before the higher parts of humanity can have been
ripened by knowledge and experience, the inferior parts are
strong and active, as by the force of an internal impulse.
Hence we have the phenomena that so often distinguish im-
maturity of character, —folly, vanity, conceit, selfishness,
ignorance, indiscretion, the want of common sense, the ab-
sence of large knowledge, of just views, of intelligent appre-
hension of the ends and duties of life—of all those things, in
fact, which make up that moral “ understanding” in which
the apostle wished the Corinthians to be men , but which is
seldom found to be the characteristic of youths or boys. It
is on this last idea, again, that he fixes—to this one thing he
wishes by his words to confine our attention.
The last point to be observed is, that the apostle has a
third image—the image of full grown men; men, too, re-
garded as mature in character as well as in years. The
human beings who are first presented to us in a state of in-
fancy, with the different parts of their nature equally unde-
veloped, and then, secondly, in a further state, when both
parts have begun to be developed, but in which the higher
and nobler part is the less advanced and unfolded of the two,
are now, thirdly, to be seen in a condition the reverse of this
in a last state, in which the reason, the conscience, the
moral and spiritual elements of humanity are all fully deve-
loped and matured, and in which, too, the bad and inferior
portions have been brought down and have got subdued.
The apostle supposes a number of human beings to have
passed through a thorough course of culture and discipline,


and to have been advanced, too, to contact with the serious
and ennobling realities of life. These men have had their
minds enlarged by all knowledge ; they have been elevated
and purified by the contemplation of the beautiful
and the pursuit of the true ; they have been taught to
subdue and master themselves—to endure hardness, to help
each other—mutually to serve, to honor, to prefer; they
have acquired an intellectual equipment, and attained a
moral fitness, for what they are to be and to do in life. And
more than this—by contact with life, by duty, by suffering,
by sorrow and change, by deep experience of good and evil
—their whole nature has been so affected, that they have
attained to a full and thorough understanding of what life
is, what it is meant for, what men ought to be in themselves,
and in relation to one another. And they are this: they are
sagacious, prudent, discreet, loving, humble, modest, patient,
free from the levities and follies of youth, conquerors of the
selfishness and the passions of the flesh, ambitious only of
what belongs to character and goodness, and fully bent on
the brave and resolute pursuit of duty.
Such, then, appear to me the different images which the
words employed by the apostle would suggest to the reflec-
tive reader, and such the order in which they may be
arranged. Now observe, in the next place, the appropriate-
ness of this mode of illustration to the condition of the
Corinthian church, and the force of the text as originally
addressed to it.
To do this, you must recal the connexion in which the
text occurs, and strongly realise the character of the Corin-
thians, as seen through the medium of the apostle’s remarks.
The words before us occur in a dissertation on those mira-
culous spiritual gifts by which some among the primitive
believers were distinguished; in the progress of which dis-
course we learn how it was possible for these gifts to be
abused, and how, in point of fact, they were actually abused
at Corinth. Among these gifts there was that of speaking
in foreign tongues —of interpretation—and, as I think, of
copious and eloquent discourse on the themes of their new
faith. The Corinthians, it would appear, were all ambitious
of personal distinction ; they each wished to have the best
and highest gifts conferred upon themselves; and those who
were entrusted with any, especially the power of unknown
or eloquent speech, were utterly regardless of order and
propriety in their use and exhibition. Instead of being used
as a sacred trust, for wise, weighty, and useful ends, they


were prostituted to purposes of personal display, and made
to minister to a puerile vanity. The Corinthians had no
just ideas of the dignity and greatness of the Divine life ;
they did not understand how those singular gifts in which
they exulted had been bestowed upon them for the benefit
of others, not for their own personal glorification, and how
they were to be exercised, therefore, with solemnity, wisdom,
and great conscientiousness. The Christian church became
a theatre of display ; and the Christian life, instead of being
somethino; serious and earnest —a work and a warfare, a
O , 1
building to be erected by strenuous exertion, an agony and
struggle for life and death—instead of this, it put on the
appearance of a boisterous holiday, and was as little dignified
as a plaything or a song. But, worse than this, with the
immaturity, vanity, and folly of boys, there mingled at
Corinth the passions of men. They could not all be first;
some must listen if others speak ; where some lead, others
must follow. But this is difficult where all are ambitious :
and hence among the Corinthians there were “ envyings”
and “strifes,” “jealousies” and “divisions.” The society
was torn by schisms and dissensions ; and individuals were
disfigured by combining in themselves fully developed had
feelings with a narrow and childish intellect and heart.
It is to this state of things that the admonition in the text
refers. The apostle reasons with the Corinthians; he en-
deavours to instruct them by laying clown important general
principles, and to reprove them by severe and appropriate
censure; aiming thus at once to open their understandings,
and to subdue their passions. He tells them that “ gifts”
are a solemn trust, and bring with them a solemn responsi-
bility ; for that “ the ministrations of the Spirit are given to
every man for the profit of others.” He insists, therefore, that
“ everything should be done unto edifying,”—that is, that the
church may be benefited, and not that the actor or speaker
may be glorified. He ridicules their ambition in all wishing
for the best gifts, as if all the members of the body wished
to be the eye, which, of course, would be the destruction of
the body itself. He mourns over their strifes, their puerile
animosities, their silly conceit, their absurd jealousies and
envyings of each other ; and, looking upon these things as
sure signs of ignorance and immaturity, of the want of an
enlarged well-informed mind, and of a properly disciplined
and purified heart, he embodies his feelings in the words
before us— ‘ “Be not children in understanding”—mere boys,
without deep and comprehensive views of duty. “In malice,”


indeed, and all foolish and angry passions, I wish you were
even like “ babes” who have not yet manifested these dispo-
sitions at all; but “in understanding,” in wisdom and know-
ledge, in mastery of yourselves, and in calm devotedness to
the great business of the Christian life, I wish you to be men
—men, not only in the sense of having arrived at full age,
but of having attained maturity of character.’
In this way the meaning of the apostle has come to shape
itself to my mind. By being “ men in understanding ” he
does not refer exclusively to largeness of knowledge —the ex-
pansion and development of the intellectual faculty—but, in
connexion with this, including it, or including it in some
degree, he refers to that moral development of both mind
and heart, that maturity of the inward man, which consists
in deep and just views of truth and duty, in sobriety, ear-
nestness, unselfishness, fidelity to conscience, brotherly love,
with every other virtue which marks the condition of the
“ perfectly ” and properly developed soul—the man who is
not a babe, by none of his powers being developed at all—
who is not a vain, immature youth, by the development of
the inferior parts of his being, exceeding that of the nobler
■ —but who is one who has attained “ full age,” by all the
higher faculties, intellectual and moral, being so developed
that all the inferior have been conquered and repressed; so
that, while literally a man, in respect to wisdom and worth,
he is figuratively a “ babe,” as “ concerning evil.”
We shall conclude by noticing some of the advantages
which attend the possesssion of a character like this.
1. It is favorable to stability both of opinion and conduct.
One who is really not only spiritual, but a spiritual man,
may be depended on. His intelligence is large; his
views are matured ; his principles are established ;
his habits are fixed : he is not likely to become
marked by the levity and inconstancy, the changes of
opinion, or the unaccountableness of behaviour, which are
often seen in the ignorant and the immature, the young and
superficial. This point is strikingly illustrated in the epistle
to the Ephesians—in a manner, too, which bears on several
of the particulars of this morning’s discourse—in the fourth
chapter and the eleventh to the sixteenth verses. Christ,
when He ascended up on high, gave gifts unto men. “He
gave some, apostles ; and some, prophets; and some, evan-
gelists ; and some, pastors and teachers; for the per-
fecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity


of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man , unto the measure of the stature of the fulness
of Christ: that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to
fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the
sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive: but speaking the truth in love, may grow
up into him in all things, which is the Head, even Christ.”
In this passage you will observe that the arrangements in
the Christian church, the institutions and gifts conferred
upon it, are represented as established and conferred for the
very purpose of training, disciplining, and developing the
Christian man till he attains spiritual maturity—a maturity
of knowledge, holiness, and love ; and that one of the ends
to be answered by this is, that being no longer a child, liable
to be influenced by others—to hear arguments which he
cannot answer, and to have doubts insinuated which he can-
not repel —he will be in no danger of being the sport of
every wind of doctrine, or of falling under the influence either
of erroneous or immoral teachers. He will have “grown
up into Christ in all things and, filled by His Spirit, and
established by His strength, he will be too wise to exchange
light for darkness, and too experienced to fall easily into sin.
2. Manly Christian character capacitates for entering into
the profounder portions of truth, and for enjoying, and being
benefited by the higher forms of instruction.
Preaching may be too elementary, and it may not be
elementary enough. In some parts of the church where a
very simple style of preaching prevails, there is the constant
reiteration of just the three or four truths which make up
what we call the Gospel. The people are thus always kept
at the alphabet, or in the spelling-book, or in the shortest
and easiest reading lessons, and are never introduced to the
high arguments which lie beyond. In other parts ot the
church, where a style of preaching more abstruse and argu-
mentative prevails, the result is, that theology is taught
rather than religion—the preacher becomes more of a lec-
turer or professor going through his argument than of a
minister in the church speaking “ to instruction, edification,
and comfort ” and giving to the flock its “ portion of meat
in due season.” The danger here is, too, that plain, element-
ary instruction will be neglected ; and then trains of thought
will be gone through, and discussions indulged in, which
take too much for granted, and for which the people are not
prepared. This will be like reading the higher authors
before the pupils have learnt anything of grammar. The


great thing is for Christian people to be such thorough
“ men” ' that they may delight in being introduced to “ the
deep things of God,” and may be able to benefit by the high-
er forms of discussion and argument. Simple, plain, element-
ary preaching is very proper and very important in its
place; but the Bible is a book which demands, both for
explanation and defence, a great deal beyond that. The
character and wants of the age, the popular and plau-
sible forms of error, the ignorance in the church, and
the subtlety of the world, together with the nature,
the magnitude and grandeur of Christian truth, all de-
mand, both in preachers and hearers, greater efforts
after that “ manly understanding,” which includes in it,
among other things, accurate knowledge and large intelli-
gence in relation to all spiritual truth. Without the culture
of their own minds, the full development of their spiritual
faculties, a congregation will listen to the higher forms of
Christian teaching, not only without benefit, but with
weariness and wonder: it will be irksome and incompre-
hensible, because, however good and valuable in itself, it
is addressed to those who are not in a condition to under-
stand and use it. That it is not right for people to continue
in this state, you learn from the epistle to the Hebrews, in
which the writer says, that “ by the time they should have
been teachers, they had need that some teach them again the
first principles of the oracles of God.” He exhorts them to
“ leave ” the principles and rudiments of truth, and “ to go on
unto perfection; ” and he does this on the ground, that
“ every one that useth milk is unskilful in the Word, and
is but a babe ; ” while “ strong meat belongs to them that
are of full age , who, by reason of use, have their senses
exercised to discern good and evil,” or their faculties
developed to understand truth and error—(Heb. v., vi). In
the same style he speaks in this epistle to the Corinthian
disciples: “I, brethren could not speak unto you as spiri-
tual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ.
I have fed you with milk, and not with meat, for
hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now
are ye able.” As if he had said — c I have much to
show you which I have not yet touched; I have forms
of truth and modes of argument to depict and to employ,
surpassingly beautiful, and distinguished for sublimity,
depth, and force: but you cannot bear them yet; you
could not enjoy or receive them if you heard them. Give
me the proper audience ; let me have hearers who “in under-


standing are men” and I will undertake to lead them into all
that is profound, great and sublime in the revelation of God ;
and instead of their being fatigued by the demand made upon
them, or offended by the form in which I convey my thoughts,
they shall feel refreshed and strengthened by the exercise,
and find themselves wiser, better, and happier men.’
3. To be “men in understanding,” in the sense of the
apostle, will correct religious taste, and elevate and improve
the general character.
The fact, indeed, is that a manly understanding would
show that the taste was corrected, and the general character
improved and raised. The Corinthians preferred the showy
to the substantial; they liked better to be dazzled than
taught; and they liked better to dazzle than either. They
lived on excitement, on petty personal gratifications, on “ vain
shows,” rather than in the accomplishment of useful works
and great duties. Their character was factitious, flashy,
superficial; each preferred himself to the rest, and loved
himself so much that he had nothing but envy and ill-temper
for others. The apostle wished them to be “ men in under-
standing,” that all this might be thoroughly corrected. And
so it will be still, if we, too, rise into the character that
has been set before us. Christian men, who in some degree
answer to this, are superior to dependance on flash and
rhetoric, or any of the many and mean arts by which Chris-
tian teaching is often disfigured. They “ hunger and thirst ”
after truth and goodness, knowledge and wisdom, and value
most what will most enlarge their views of truth, and most
efficiently aid them in duty. Having got rid of the craving
for distinction, learnt the more excellent way of being great
—the extinction of selfishness, and the service of love, they
will be free from those evil tempers and passions in which
small and contracted souls indulge. They will delight in
the cultivation of all that is grave, noble, and dignified in
the Christian character, and be distinguished and known
alike for the strength and the beauties of holiness. Such
persons will be like babes “ in malice,” for the very reason
that they are men “in understanding,” Their hearts will
be purified from corrupt passions; they will have something
of the “ meekness and gentleness of Christ,” by having
attained to the fulness of “unfeigned love.” Christians
who are thus “ men ” in the church, will not be found to be
otherwise in the world: they may have the simplicity and
guilelessness of children, but not their Aveakness. They
will be grave, prudent, wise, sedate; they will be benefi-


cent, patriotic, useful; they will “ adorn the doctrine of
Christ in all things and they will have “a good report of
all men, and of the truth itself.”
4. In the last place, those who are “ men in understand-
ing” will best know how to receive the kingdom of heaven
like little children.
At first sight this may appear like a contradiction, or, at
least, an improbability. It may be thought, moreover, that
the New Testament seems to demand the understanding of a
child in order to the simple reception of the faith.—“ Except
ye receive the kingdom of God as little children ye shall in
no wise enter therein.” This, however, is not exactly the
case. It is not the childish, undeveloped understanding that
is required, but the feeling in the child that is the effect of this—
a readiness to rely on authority, and to receive the testimony
of those whom it looks up to, without questioning, hesitation
or doubt. A spirit of docility and dependance like this, is
the best preparation for receiving and entering into the
kingdom of God. But this spirit is not, in a man, the conse-
quence of ignorance, but the fruit of knowledge. Those
who know nothing, and those who know a little, are often
the proudest and most conceited, and think themselves wiser
“ than seven men that can render a reason,” It takes a long
time before some minds are brought to a state of child-like
submission; they approach it in proportion as their faculties
develope, and their acquaintance with the circle of truth in-
creases. The more they advance in the study and apprehen-
sion of science and religion, the more they become aware of
the feebleness and fallibility of human thought; and they
are more disposed to distrust themselves when they know
much, than they were when they knew little. It requires
the cultivated understanding of the man to know when he
has arrived at an ultimate fact—where it is necessary to
pause or stop in curious enquiries, and when it is proper to
welcome the positive utterances of authority, and to rely
upon them like a little child. He who has longest studied
the Gospel—who has risen into its strongest and purest light—
and who, by broad, deep, aud varied experience, has had his
soul so schooled and taught as to have become proficient in
the learning of the heart—that is the man who will have
most about him of the humility of childhood, from his hav-
ing found out for himself both the extent and limits of the
human understanding. The most mature Christian will live
in the exercise of the most simple faith. He who knows
most of God will knoAV most of himself; he will, therefore.


believe when others doubt, and will distrust himself when
others presume. To be a “ man in understanding” is certainly
one way of becoming a child in faith and dependance. It
was not when he was either a babe or a boy that David could
say, as he once sang, “ Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor
mine eyes lofty; neither do I exercise myself in great matters,
or in things too high for me. Surely I have behaved and
quieted myself like a little child ; my soul is even as a weaned
child.” It was quite appropriate that he who could speak thus
should embody the lesson of his large knowledge , and the re-
sult of his long experience , in the closing words of the psalm—
“ Let Israel hope in the Lord from henceforth, even for ever.”
That such feelings and such faith may be yours, “be not
children in understanding : howbeit in malice be ye children,
but in understanding be men.” Amen.
STEAM PRESS OF W. FAIRFAX AND CO., 78, COLLINS STREET, EAST.


WORKS PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY
W. FAIRFAX & CO., MELBOURNE STEAM PRESS,
78, COLLINS STREET EAST, next door above The Argus office.
ABSTRACT AND ANALYSIS of the Evidence in the case of Lang and Drake.
By Rev. Dr. LANG. Demy Bvo., 100 pages. Price Is.
BRADSHAW’S GUIDE TO VICTORIA AND THE ADJACENT COLONIES:
Published first day of' each month, with Map. This Work contains all kinds of information,
alike useful both to the Visitor and Resident. Compiled by W. FAIRFAX. Demy 12m0.,
132 pages. Price 6d.
CHURCH AND STATE. By Rev. Dr. CAIRNS. Demy Bm, 28 pages. Price Is.
CHINESE QUESTION ANALYSED. By ONE WHO KNOWS THEM. Demy
Bvo. Price Is.
DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY. By JOHN TURNER. Demy Bvo. Price Is.
ELAIOPATHY. Lecture by W. HOBBS, Moreton Bay. Price 6d.
FACTS AND FIGURES: or, Notes of Progress, Statistical and General. By
WILLIAM HENEY ARCHER, A.R.G. Demy quarto, 12 pages.
FREE CHURCH NARRATIVE ; an account of Negotiations for Union. Demy
Bvo., 96 pages. Price Is. 6d.
GOLD FIELDS’ ACT. A practical explanation. By J. D. WOOD, M.L.A.
HANDBOOK TO AUSTRALASIA, including all the Colonies, with a History
and present Requirements. Also a Map. Compiled by W. FAIRFAX. Demy 12mo, cloth,
gilt. Price ss. to Subscribers; single copies, 6s.
JOHN PRICE. —Biographical Memoir, with full Report of Trials, &c. By T. L. B.
Demy Bvo., 96 pages. Price 2s. 6d.
JOHN SADLIER; or the Ruined Speculator. By Rev. H. THOMAS, B.A-
Demy Bvo. Price Is.
LABOR, REST, AND RECREATION: delivered in Exeter Hall, London, before
the Young Men’s Christian Association. By the Rev. JOHN GUMMING, D.D., with an
Introduction by the Rev. A. C 4.IRNS, D.D. Demy Bvo., 24 pages. Price Is.
NEW YEAR’S SERMON; with Remarks suggested by the Decease of the Late
Governor, Sir Charles Hotham, K.C.B. Preached in Chalmers’ Church, Melbourne, Sunday,
Jan. 6, 1856, by the Rev. A. CAIRNS. D.D. Demy Bvo., 24 pages. Price Is.
OBIGIN AND PROGRESS OF THE NATIONAL SYSTEM OF EDUCATION-
By ARTHUR DAVITT. Demy Bvo., 28 pages. Price Is.
PRINCIPLES OF REPRESENTATION. By EDWARD WILSON. Demy Bvo-
Price Is.
PRIZE ESSAY ON EIGHT HOURS’ QUESTION. By J, A. ALDWELL. Demy
Bvo. Price Is.
RAILWAY ECONOMY IN VICTORIA. By FRANCIS CORBETT. Demy Bvo.,
72 pages. Price 2s. 6d.
REGINALD MORTIMER ; a Tale of a Soldier’s Life. By Captain H. B. STONEY,
40th Regiment. Demy Bvo., in twelve parts.
SOUTHERN SPECTATOR; a New Religious Magazine. Edited by Rev. R.
FLETCHER. No. sis now published, for April, 1858. Demy Bvo. Price Is.
TRUTH AND LOVE. By the Rev. RICHARD - FLETCHER, of St. Kilda, being
the Annual Sermon preached before the Congregational Union of Victoria, May, 1856. Demy
Bvo., 24 pages. Price Is.
THE DANGERS AND DUTIES OP THE YOUNG MEN OF VICTORIA; or
Counsels adapted to the present Crisis. By the Rev. Dr. CAIRNS. Lecture delivered before
the Victoria Early Closing Association, May 29, 1857. Demy Bvo., 32 pages. Price Is.
THE CHURCH, THE STATE, AND THE WORLD. By JOSEPH TAYLOR.
Demy Bvo., 36 pages. Price Is. , •
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE: Statutes and Regulations. Demy Bvo., 76
pages. Price Is.
VICTORIAN HANSARD.—Debates of both Houses. Demy Bvo., On’e Shilling per
sheet of 16 pagds. Upwards of 1000 pages are now published.
WANDERINGS IN AUSTRALIA FOR TWENTY-THREE YEARS, including
Travels with Dr. Leichhardt. By DANIEL BUNCE. Demy 12m0., 216 pages. Price 3s.
WORK AND LEARNING. By G. W. RUSDEN. Demy Bvo. Price Is.
Books and Pamphlets Printed by Steam Flatten Machine.
