

VICTORIAN HARBORS.
BELFAST (PORT FAIRY).
REPORT
BY
SIR JOHN COODE, C.E.
June 4879.


VICTORIAN HARBORS.
BELFAST (PORT FAIRY) HARBOR.
5 Westminster Chambers, London, S.W., June 1879.
Sir,
The last instalment of the documents supplying the required information j
relative to the Harbor of Belfast reached me on sth ultimo, and I have now the honor
to furnish my Report on the improvement of this Port.
The points on which my opinion is desired by the Government of Victoria are
as follows :
“ The best means of utilizing and increasing the effect of the works lately
executed and improving the shipping facilities of the place, and, in
the event of a breakwater being entertained by the Government, the
most suitable site for, description, and construction of such work.”
In illustration of this Report, I send the accompanying drawings, Nos. 1 and 2. i
These show the river channel, the entrance, and the hay in their present state,
together with the works which I have to recommend for execution. The latter are
indicated by red color, and will hereinafter be particularly described.
It appears, from a report by Mr. Wardell, that, when the improvement of'
Belfast Harbor was under consideration in the year 1865, the question was limited to
the practicability of reducing the bar at the entrance of the River Moyne, “ so as to
permit of the passage at low water of vessels of about 4 feet draught.”
By reference to Drawing No. 1 it will be seen that, for the purpose of
improvement, training banks have been constructed on both sides of the river
channel below the town —the work on the south side commencing at the flour mill
near the Custom House, and that on the north side at a point opposite the Look-out
Station. Similar banks have also been constructed around Goat Island and on each
side of the northern portion of the “ Back Passage.” From the original coast line,
seaward, the works executed for the improvement of the entrance consist of two
moles or training piers, formed of rubble stone deposited pell-mell, running in a
north-easterly direction for a distance of about one-third of a mile. By means of
the works just described, coupled with the removal of rock from certain parts of the
river channel (which removal was in progress at the time of my visit in March of last
year), and by the dredging operations then about to be immediately commenced, the
river channel and entrance had been so far improved at the time of the new survey
in October last that, instead of depths ranging generally from 7 to 9 feet at low water
in the river channel at the south end of the town, and from 1 to 2 feet on the bar at
the entrance, the low water depths in the former are now from 8 to 12 feet, showing
a gain of from 1 to 3 feet, whilst over the bar the depths now range from 8 to 10 feet
at low water of spring tides, thus showing a gain of from 7 to 8 feet at the entrance,
which is conclusive as to the soundness of the principles on which the design was
based.
The foregoing description, coupled with an inspection of the accompanying
drawings, will serve to show the past and greatly improved present condition of the
port. I now, therefore, proceed to describe the further works which I have to
recommend for execution.
The works which I have to recommend for present execution are— First. The:
deepening throughout and the widening of certain portions of the existing channel
from the entrance up to Challacomb’s Wharf, so that there may be a navigable depth
of 12 feet at low water of ordinary spring tides, for a width varying from 60 feet in the
bottom between the present training piers to 40 feet at the upper end. For facilitating
the navigation the width would be increased to 70 feet at the bend or curve under
Flagstaff Hill and to 80 feet at the curve opposite Goat Island.
Introductory.
Drawings.
Works
already exe-
cuted.
Farther works
recom-
mended. See
drawings.


Second. The rectification of the training hank on the north side of the river
at the curve opposite Goat Island last referred to. The stone in the present bank
should be utilized as far as possible, the deficiency being made good from the blue
rock excavated in forming the new channel.
Third. The deepening of the new swinging basin (which has been formed
since the time of my inspection), so that all such vessels as can navigate the improved
channel may be able to turn easily.
Fourth. The alteration of the line of the northern end of the channel on the
west side of Goat Island, so that the water flowing through the Back Passage shall be
delivered more directly in the line of the river currents than at present.
I estimate the cost of the works above recommended, including a proper
allowance for contingencies and superintendence, at £22,500, assuming that the
dredger previously employed at Belfast will be available for completing the work.
There can be little doubt that seaward of section No. 15 the full depth in the
J improved channel will be maintained by the currents from the Back Passage, without
aid from periodical dredging. On the upper side of section No. 15, where the scour
is mainly dependent upon river freshes, it is very probable that occasional dredging
will have to be resorted to.
In order to arrive at some idea of the practicability and cost of utilizing the
Moyne Lagoon as a tidal reservoir for obtaining additonal scouring power through
that portion of the harbor above Goat Island, the sections and borings were extended
northward of the bridge and into the lagoon itself. These have shown that it would
be impracticable, at any reasonable outlay, to make the lagoon available for scouring
purposes by means of tidal water.
If, therefore, in the portion of the harbor above Goat Island the depths should
not be self-maintaining, it may be a question for consideration whether it will be more
economical to resort to periodical dredging operations or to construct sluices at the
bridge by means of which the fresh water may be impounded and made available for
occasional flushing between half ebb and low water.
With respect to the construction of a breakwater at Port Fairy, having fully
considered this question, I find that the effectual sheltering of the anchorage and river
entrance would necessitate the construction of a work nearly, if not quite, 3,000 feet in
length, and would involve an expenditure of not less than £450,000 or £500,000.
Having regard to this fact, and bearing in mind that sheltering harbor works are in
progress at Warrnambool, about 10 miles to the eastward, and also that Portland Bay,
about 30 miles further to the westward, from its geographical position, natural
configuration, and depth of water*, is a much more suitable site for a breakwater, I am
decidedly of opinion that any harbor improvement works at Belfast, beyond those
hereinbefore described and recommended for immediate execution, should partake
of the character of improved and extended internal accommodation, adapted for, such
vessels, whether steamers or sailing craft, as may require to lie afloat at all times, with
such further prolongation of the piers in the direction shown on the drawings as may
be necessary for forming a suitable deep water approach thereto.
Entertaining this view, I have laid down in red dotted lines upon Drawing
No. 1, and in the position best suited for a work of this class, a general outline of such
a floating basin as would be best adapted to the circumstances of the case. This
design should, however, be regarded as preliminary, and subject to modification
hereafter. When the time for the execution of such a work may arrive, it would be
requisite that the site should be carefully examined and sections and borings obtained
in such detail as is customary and necessary in cases of the kind.
I should remark that, in view of the strength of the currents which are
generated by tbe heaping up of the water, when the surf is breaking heavily at the
south ‘end of the Back Pass, it would probably be found necessary to construct
regulating sluices across the channel, on the western side of Goat Island, at or about
the point marked x x in red upon the plan, not, of course, to exclude these currents
which, within certain limits, are very beneficial—l may say, indeed, that they are
absolutely essential for the maintenance of deep water in the entrance channel—but
solely for the purpose of checking and controlling their velocity when circumstances
may require , so that they should not interfere with the passage of vessels into or out
from the suggested basin.
It may become a matter for consideration whether the erection of such
regulating sluices might not with advantage be undertaken prior to and independently
Estimates.
Maintenance
of improved
depth.
Moyne
Lagoon, &c.
Breakwater.
Suggested
floating
basin.
Regulating
sluices.


of the construction of a floating basin, seeing that the outrun between the training
piers was described to me to be occasionally such as to render the entrance difficult
for vessels desiring to enter. Although much of this objectionable outrun is due to
periodical flood water from the back country, there will doubtless be many occasions
when the strong outset, if not wholly caused by the heaping up of the water at the
south end of the Back Pass, cannot be otherwise than greatly aggravated thereby;
and, under such circumstances, the action of the regulating sluices could not fail to be
beneficial.
In conclusion, I have to express my thanks to the mayor, Mr. Bruce, and the
local authorities ; to Mr. Corbett, representing Mr. Atkinson ; and to Captain Symons,
the Harbormaster, for their attention and the facilities afforded at the time of my
inspection. As at the other ports which I visited on behalf the Victorian Government,
Captain Payne, R.N., and Mr. Steel, C.E., rendered much valuable assistance in
connection with my inspection at Belfast.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Conclusion.
JNO. COODE.
The Honorable the Commissioner of Public Works,
Melbourne.
Uy Authority: John i'EiiKEg, Government Printer, Melbourne^


