





■ \


THE ESCAPE FROM THE BLACKS AT LAKE ILLAWARRA.


BEN HALYARD
A STORY OF BASS AND FLINDERS.
A. G. ALANSON
HEADMASTER RANDWICK S. PUBLIC SCHOOL.
SYDNEY
DYMOCK’S BOOK ARCADE,
Educational Booksellers,
428 George Street




BEN HALYARD.
CHAPTER I.
DILB A AND DOONGA.
ON a craggy headland of Eastern Australia more
than a hundred years ago Dilba and Doonga
stood, and looked away through the night over
the Pacific Ocean. The white surf boomed beneath,
and at times spouted higher up the cliff sides where,
caught by the wind that was bearing gently land-
ward, the spray splashed on the dusky forms
gazing so intently, and, startling them, made them
retire a little from the ledge and seek shelter.
The headland is Cape Banks, named in honor of
the man whose money and enterprise were the chief
means in discovering Australia to the British. South,
a mile distant, lies a similar head, Cape Solander,
named after Dr. Solander, botanist and scientist
with Banks, of Cook’s expedition. Between is the
entrance to Botany Bay.
Fitting is it that the two arms of Australian
coast, first to open themselves to receive the British,
should be named as memorials of honor for all time


to two of the first explorers. It requires but that
the bay within be named Cook Bay, to make the
fitness and the honor complete.
Stingray Bay, from a kind of fish there abundant,
Captain Cook called this place, but after sailing
from it and while voyaging north, the name on the
charts was altered to Botany Bay because of Dr.
Solander’s numerous discoveries of remarkable
plants, many of which botanists believed to be long
extinct.
But the name Botany Bay has little significance.
The flora truly is old and peculiar to very ancient
geological periods, but it is now fast losing both
beauty and abundance. Stunted gums (eucalypti) and
bottlebrush (Banksia ), low scrub and heaths, with
masses of bracken and grass-tree, these chiefly con-
stitute the flora of a shore which everywhere is
sandy when low, and rocky when rising, breaking
upon the ocean in long ramparts of massive strength
and rugged grandeur, or shifting with every wind in
dunes behind white lines of surf.
The country was named New South Wales, but the
British knew the land only as Botany Bay. And
Botany Bay was the place of transport for the felon,
the convict who, having proved himself unworthy of
his home land, therefore must be an outcast in a
distant and, what was then thought, very savage
country, to amend his life in repentance or, as often
happened under the severity of the treatment, to
sink lower and lower in vice and shame.
* Named after Sir Joseph Banks. These plants were the
first Australian plants botanically named.


But all the blot on these shores now has long been
removed. Would it not be well then that the name,
too, passed, as passed Yan Diemen’s Land to the
pleasing title, Tasmania—in honor of Tasman, its
discoverer—when transportation ceased? Cook Bay
were a fitter appellation, surely. Then in honored
and immortal remembrance were held three names
great in the history of Australia —Cook, Banks, and
Solander.
Across the bay, south from where Dilba and
Doonga sheltered, the waters deeply reflecting the
starlit night, suddenly became a gleaming plain,
rising where caught up by the clasp of the wind, into
tongues of flame, dancing, changing, flashing. Near
shore in the shoals the lights and flashes were more
vivid and brilliant where the fish gambolled, or
rushed away in hurrying lines before some greater
fish which came amongst them, a pursuing foe.
The bay was bathed in phosphorus. Dilba and
Doonga watched the luminous waves with fear.
They knew nothing of the cause, and, though often
they had seen the bay thus illumined, yet familiarity
had not removed their awe.
Among their people there had ever been the belief
that after the waters turned to flame, some disaster
came.
They noted the flame-waters, and then watched for
the disaster. Something important was, of course,
sure to happen sooner or later, somebody of their
people would fall ill, or be wounded, or die, or fish
would become scarce in the bay, or a neighboring
tribe would make war upon them.


Now all or any of these things might happen,
and did happen apart from the phosphorescent
waters, but then they were not especially regarded,
then they were not the evil consequences of unseen
and much-feared spirits who made waters to flame
as even dry grass before a bush-fire.
The savage had learned to associate the flame-
waters with disaster; he believed the flame-waters
to be at once the herald and the cause of calamity
to his people.
“Doonga, do you see how great is the flame-water
to-night?” Dilba, as he spoke, stretched out his arm
and pointed with his spear across the bay.
“The flame-water is indeed much to-night,” an-
swered Doonga. “I have not seen it so great since
we were children.”
They spoke in that language whose liquid tones
roll with honeyed movement upon the tongue, and
while they spoke they stood nearer together and
drew their opossum rugs closer about them, shiver-
ing as if the wflnd that passed had blown a cold upon
their spines.
But the wind was warm—warm in the breath of
the sea and a summer night, for it was January of
the year 1788.
“Since we were children,” said Dilba slowly, in
meditative voice, “that is nearly twenty years ago,,
that time of which you are thinking, Doonga. It
was the night before the great sea-ghost came up
with the sun from out of the waters far over there.”
And he turned about and, taking Doonga’s arm,.


pointed across the Pacific, far upon whose waves a
while before they had been gazing.
“Even so,” answered Doonga, “the sea-ghost
came with great body parting the waters, and with
wide wings high over, that made it fly not unlike a
sea-bird. But upon its body were men—men like
us, but pale of skin. Do you remember them when
they bathed and sported in the waters of the bay?
White men they were! How we wondered at them!
We were children, and we were afraid; but our
fathers would have fought with them had not their
chief, a white man*, with no beard about his face,
and with his hair long plaited down his back, asked
for peace, which our people, mightier than they and
ruling all this land, granted,”
“But signed they not that they would come again?
And did not one of them give out his spirit, and did
they not lay him over there where the stream runs
into the bay? And still he lies there, for we feared
to go and cast him out; and his spirit, does it not
watch these lands? And will it not watch until the
white man returns? How far they go we know not,
but the everwatehing spirit of the pale-face who
sleeps beyond”—Dilba pointed south —“has he not
remained to warn us that his fellows will come
again?”
From where they stood, south across the bay,
faintly discernible in the night, rose the hills under
whose feet Forby Sutherland (a seaman of Cook’s
expedition), the first white man to die and be buried
Cook, 28th April, 1770.


in Australia, lay, thus holding in the silence of his
grave the future land of his people.
“It is as you say,” answered Doonga, slowly;
then leaning upon Dilba, he looked into the night
with fear, half expectant that from the mist below
the line of stars across the waves he would again see
the sea-ghost rise.
Suddenly both started and clutched their spears.
Out from a heath clump near a figure leapt and
stood before them.
“Ha, ha! Dilba and Doonga, I startled you!
Startled you, ye fearless watchers of the night! I
came and you did not hear! I laugh at you! Ha,
ha, ha!”
Dilba threw aside his spear, raised in defence, and
turned angry away.
“You are ever where you are not wanted, Cooya,”
he muttered surlily.
“And what says brother Doonga?” she asked, as
standing tiptoe upon a small rock she put her hands
up about his bearded face, and held her face towards
him as for a kiss.
“Doonga is ever glad to see Cooya,” he answered.
“But she should be in her place at the camp, not
here. Is Dilba’s supper prepared?”
“It is, and therefore have I come, I saw you
watching, and I stole upon you. Keen is the ear of
Doonga and keener the ear of surly Dilba, but the
foot of Cooya falls more softly than the dew upon
the leaves. So I came and you did not hear, and
Dilba is vexed that I have surprised him.”


Dilba turned upon her at her words, and raised
his nullah-nullah as if to strike.
Cooya dropped her arms, clasped her hands before
her, and bowed her head for the blow, but Doonga
knocked aside the descending nullah, and, tripping
Dilba, sent him rolling over a rock ledge into some
ferns below.
Just then the phosphorescent lights upon the bay
went out suddenly, leaving the waters a dark mirror,
in which the stars glimmered and twinkled as in a
heaven below the earth.
“Let us not quarrel, Dilba, the flame-water has
gone; let us together look for the disaster that must
follow,” spoke Doonga kindly, as Dilba, rising and
muttering curses, made as if he would attack his
brother.
Doonga’s words checked him. “I think we may
look for disaster in Cooya, you and I,” he answered,
and turned from the headland downwards along the
inner shore by a path that opened into a long, white
sandy beach.
Doonga and Cooya followed, staying sometimes
while Doonga talked more earnestly and Cooya stood
to listen, looking fondly into his dark face bent down
to hers. For Doonga was ever kindly to Cooya, and
she, so small to him, so lithe and light of limb and
round, with large dark eyes, loved to show Doonga
how much she knew that he was kind.
The camp stood in a curve of the beach, sheltered
by clumps of honeysuckle and bottle-brush.
Dilba walked straight to his fire, and threw him-
self down beside it, ill-tempered.


Presently, however, the odor of baked ’possum
aroused him, and, though still muttering annoyance
at Cooya, he sat up with his feet bent tailor-wise
beneath him, and began to eat.
Just then Doonga joined him, raked another ’pos-
sum from the ashes, and fell to following Dilba’s
example.
Twin brothers were these two dark, strong
savages, great warriors, great hunters, having no
rivals save each other.
It was Dilba who could hurl the spear straightest
and farthest, Doonga who could send the boomerang
curving most and widest in its deadly flight.
Dilba made, the keenest stone axes, but Doonga
climbed best the sternest tree and cut the opossum
from the hollow, or the honey of the wild and sting-
less bee.
Cooya was their half-sister, the daughter of their
father, the king, the youngest, and of all their
people’s daughters, to their eyes, the fairest; they
loved her with peculiar affection.
“I wonder will the sea-ghost come again,” Doonga
said as if to himself, as he threw the last bone of
the ’possum behind him, and drew his rug closer as
he lay nearer the fire, his limbs in the cooler ashes.
Dilba did not answer. He had eaten more ’pos-
sum than Doonga; he had commenced his meal in a
bad humor, his sullenness and the over-abundance of
his feast had grievously affected his digestion; he
half opened his eyes, and with a surly grunt turned
over and pushed himself up to the fire on the other
side from Doonga, and fell asleep in the ashes.


CHAPTER 11.
THE ARRIVAL OF THE “SEA-GHOSTS.”
DILBA slept long into next day, but Doonga rose
early and walked north along the sandy
beach, gathering cockles on the soft, wet
sand as he went.
He climbed again the northern headland from
which he and Dilba had looked on the night before,
and, rolling himself comfortably into a grassy cleft
of the cliff, lay watching the sea.
But once had white man ever sailed that sea.
Cook in “The Endeavor,” with Banks, Solander,
Green, and crew, had eighteen years before—l77o—
up over that hazy, blue curve to the east, and
anchored in “Botany Bay.”
Every day during his stay Cook ran up the British
flag to proclaim to all that the sovereignty of that
nation must be admitted there. Then he sailed away,
disappearing into the mists of the north as won-
drously as he had come, leaving behind him the mysti-
fied savages to talk of him and his crew until his
reality passed into memory, and his visit became as
a dream to the tribes, a ghost-like visitation; the
only remaining record, the mound over which
Sutherland’s spirit ever hovered.
The old men grew older, some passed, and the
children became men; the pale-faces had not re-


turned, the land was still the heritage of those native
to its soil, whose rank is that lowest among the races
of mankind.
Why should Doonga, watching the sea, have fear?
So many years had passed, why should he dread so
strangely to-day that the pale-faces were near?
He turned over and looked across the cliffs away
from the sea; it was foolish for him to be so troubled.
High up on an overhanging crag he espied Cooya.
Sitting up surprised, he watched her intently.
She was standing clear against the blue sky, her
hair racing in the wind over her naked shoulders,
one hand raised above her eyes, peering into the
east.
Doonga rose.
“Coo-ee, Cooya!” he called, placing his hands
trumpet-shape about his mouth.
Cooya dropped her hand and looked below
‘‘Come up, Doonga! Come quickly!” she called.
“Come and look over the sea!”
She pointed across the water, and peered again,
shading her eyes.
Doonga, his heart bounding with fear and appre-
hension of his forebodings being true, ran up the
cliffs, nimble as a rock wallaby, and panting with
excitement and exertion, stood beside Cooya.
“See, Doonga!” she cried. “See the white cloud
so small upon the line far out there! I have been
watching it, and it is moving, coming nearer. Is it
the sea-ghost come again?”
She clutched Doonga’s arm, and turned trembling
to him, looking up into his face for protection.


Doonga drew himself up, proudly gratified at his
responsibility.
“Do not be fearful, Cooya!” he said, quietly, put-
ting his hand upon her shoulder as she stood closer
to him, while shading his eyes with the other hand
he looked long and steadily over the sea.
“It is the sea-ghost, truly,” he said. “Let us sit
here and watch a while.”
He turned to a stone and sat down, while Cooya,
doubling her feet beneath her, crept close to him in
silent fear, and nestling against his knees, watched
with him the white sail draw nearer and nearer.
“Do you remember the sea-ghost, Doonga? The
sea-ghost that came long ago?”
“Yes, Cooya, I remember well, though I was only
a boy; and I have heard so often of it since that 1
have not forgotten. The sea-ghost came on the day
you were born. Your mother was a seer; she could
read the forms of the clouds, and understand the
voices of the wind. She saw in the trees the way of
the sun, and knew when to go up on the hills before
the rivers should flood. As the wild duck knows
when to build high by the river banks, so your
mother knew the signs of the seasons. She would
go into the night alone, and returning give the word
that the voices had called, and at the sunrise the
place of that camp would know no man. None
delayed where your mother warned to leave.
“ ‘Cooya,’ she called you, because a voice called
her on the day of your birth.
“ ‘Cooee! Cooya! Cooee! Cooya!’ it called. The
answering call ‘Cooya’ she did not understand.


“She held you to her, and cried, ‘Cooya? Cooya?’
looking about with great fear, and then there
boomed a sound like the cloud sounds in the storm,
and all the people ran to see.
“Coming through the heads into the bay was the
sea-ghost. It came on, stopped, and shook its wings,
boomed out once more with great white smoke
breaths, and then lay still upon the water.
“And then lay still your mother. You were
motherless, Cooya, and your father’s people have
guarded you ever since, though almost all are afraid
of you. They call you ‘Cooya,’ though they do not
understand.
“There is a prophecy concerning the pale-face,
made by Boondi, who lived alone on the cliffs north
from here*, that when the dark-face shall call and
the pale-face shall answer, then shall have come the
time when the dark-face shall go as night to the
west, and the pale-face come as dawn in the east.
The call of the night shall be answered by the call
of the day, and the night shall pass.”
Doonga finished speaking, and stared seaward
while Cooya still leaned against his knees, her eyes
soft and dreamy and her thoughts all mist.
“What shall we do, Doonga?” she asked pre-
sently.
“We can do nothing,” he answered helplessly.
“We don’t understand; we only stare. We are
afraid, and we don’t know why. We are very brave,
Cooya, among our own. The tribe of Wonga Wonga,
our father, has conquered all the tribes from north,
Bondi.


where Boondi lives, to south beyond Deeban, and
towards the sun to the sleeping beds of the eel—
Parramatta. But in the presence of the pale-face we
are nothing. Has it not been said that the pale-faces
are the spirits of our own forefathers? Is there one
so brave as would dare to disturb even the place
where the dead white man lies?”
Doonga took a handful of gravel from a rock
hollow, and aimlessly threw the pebbles down the
cliff side.
Meanwhile the sea-ghost drew near. It was the
ship ‘ ‘ Supply, ’ ’ the armed tender of Captain Phillip’s
expedition leading the first fleet to Australia.
The date was the afternoon of the 18th of Janu-
ary, 1788. The fleet had left England in May, 1787,
crossed the Atlantic to Rio Janeiro, where extra pro-
visions had been obtained, and thence sailed to the
Cape of Good Hope, whence, after adding to their
supply of seeds and trees, the ships crossed the
Indian and South Pacific Oceans to Botany Bay. The
true story of the hopes, fears, sufferings, and
tragedies of that historical voyage has never been
written. Captain Phillip’s reports and records were
for official eyes; the humanness, the heartside of the
story is untold, and no imagination, reading between
the lines or gazing upon the skeleton, can create it
or clothe the dead bones with living flesh. For that
story to live it should have been writ by the
hand and from the heart of one who voyaged that
journey and suffered. No such hand wrote. The
dead past has buried its dead without a memorial
stone, and it is well. As there are words better


unsaid, so also are there truths of history better
unwritten.
The “Supply” was now standing into the bay,
direct from the east, bowling along under a moderate
breeze from the north-east.
Doonga, watching closely, was soon able to distin-
tinguish the men upon her decks, which towered high
out of the water in the manner of the ships of her
day, so contrary in design to modern construction.
Doonga and Cooya rose from their watch as the
ship drew near, and Doonga, taking Cooya’s hand,
ran down the cliffs towards the bay. On the beach
he stopped and waited to see the vessel come through
the heads, but Cooya ran on to the camp.
Swiftly she ran among the gunyahs, through the
playing groups of piccaninnies and the smouldering
camp fires, round which many men of the camp lay
drowsing, to her father’s gunyah.
The old king, stout and heavy, and dim of eye,
sat lazily sharpening a stone tomahawk, his legs
doubled beneath him, and his ’possum rug fallen
from about his shoulders.
Ebon black his skin shone, grey black the hair
upon his breast and beard, while on his uncrowned
head the white of age lay heavy.
He droned a slow chant as he worked, stopping
now and then to mark his progress, with the man-
ner of desiring to prolong his work merely that he
might have occupation.
Cooya bounded suddenly upon him.
“Father, the sea-ghost has come again!” The old
king dropped his tomahawk and stood erect, his eyes


flashing, his chest heaving, alert for attack yet
fearful.
“Where, my daughter?” he cried.
Cooya, panting and excited and also trembling at
her father’s startled and stern face, pointed east-
ward.
“From up out of the great waters!” she an-
swered, her pointing arm trembling as her voice.
The king turned and looked. At that moment
“The Supply” came full into view.
Heading farther into the bay she hove to, ran out
her anchor, dropped her sails, and, running out her
guns, sent across the bay and echoing far inland
a salute that proclaimed delight at the success of an
accomplished voyage.
The camp that had gathered quickly broke into
confusion, and many rushed out upon the beach
where Doonga had been standing some time alone
watching “The Supply” come to her anchorage.
Some gathered about their king, and seizing their
spears and nullahs prepared with him to attack if
those from the ship should come ashore.
On “The Supply” the men were busy lowering
away a boat to make shore and hoist the British flag
in disregard of the claims of that old native king,
who now stood before his men unquailing, while he
pointed to the ship and called upon them vehemently
to drive the pale-faces back to the sea from which
they had come.
The boat was lowered, the oars flashed in the sun-
shine, and the pale-faces came rowing quickly
towards the blacks.


“Seems there are some queer-looking natives
ashore there to give them a reception,” said an
officer, looking through his glass from the quarter-
deck.
“Ay!” agreed another near by. “Our fellows
had better hang off a bit, and see how the savages
feel before getting too close.”
“What about covering our advance with a gun?”
“Oh, we might train one on to the wretches, but;
a blank shot is as good as one loaded. The sound
is enough! Cook got along very well with them,,
though he never seems to have trusted the black
blackguards.”
“Cook was as clever as he was humane. He knew
how to deal with savages, yet he met his death
among them after all.”
“The best warning for us to mark inside our
hats, but Ha! Our fellows have stopped! And
see, there’s a savage running out into the water!”
From among the crowded savages Cooya sprang,
and, running through the shallow surf towards the
boat, called out in long, wild tones, three times
repeated, “Coo-ee! Coo-ee! Coo-00-ee!”
“Ah, that’s like a call of welcome!” exclaimed
the officer, with the glass still to his eye. “Let’s see
if we can answer it. It’s different from any of our
own calls; but here goes!”
So putting down his glass and shaping his hands
about his mouth, he called loudly, ‘ ‘ Cooya! Coo-
ooya!” And the boat took up the cry, and sent it
shoreward, “Cooya! Cooya! Coo-00-ya!”


The night had called, and the dawn had answered.
The prophecy of Boondi was fulfilled.
The sun of civilization had risen upon the land
of long night.
“Coo-ee!” “Cooya!” “Coo-ee!” “Cooya!”
The tribe was appalled. The old king stood
transfixed, gazing upon his daughter returning
frightened and trembling. Then the memory of the
events of her birth swept upon him, and he heard
the agonised cry of her mother, “Cooya!”
With a cry of horror as at »ome apparition, he
looked about upon his people. Suddenly they, too,
seized with the same dread, broke into loud cries
and ran from the beach, while behind them there
boomed out a heavy blank shot from “The Supply.”
“The noise’ll quicken their feet; they’ll run fur-
ther inland than they meant to!” laughed the man
with the glass, as he took it up again and watched
the scamper of the savages.
The boat came ashore, the flag was hoisted on a
pole quickly erected, and King George 111. reigned
over a new dominion.
The next day, the 19th, came the twenty-gun
frigate, “Sirius,” followed on the same day and on
the 20th by three store ships and six transports,
filled with the first British colonists of New South
Wales.
The frightened savages ashore thus beheld eleven
“sea-ghosts,” with a thousand pale-faces, anchor
in the bay, while they could but hide in the brush,
awed by the number of the apparitions, and afraid
to go forth and repel them.


The king called a council of his warriors upon the
second day, and long they argued, while Cooya sat
retired within her father’s gunyah and listened.
She was sad and dejected; the women passed her in
silence, shrinking from her as from an evil spirit,
while the men, though no less fearful of her, scowled
from their dark faces, muttering curses.
And now, even as she sat retired, she saw the
warriors’ angry glances turned upon her, and heard
her name muttered in condemnation.
Dilba and Doonga were among the council, and
Doonga appeared to be pleading for her, but Dilba
was standing apart sullen and silent.
The old king seated upon an end of a log, with his
’possum rug drawn closely about him, heard all in
silence. When none seemed to have more to say he
stood up.
“AVarriors,” he said, “we are a passing race. The
pale-faces have come, and we must go. The prophecy
of Boondi is fulfilled. The sun has come up out of
the east, and we must go as night westward.
“I am Wonga Wonga, king, and father of Cooya,
who is the daughter of Mia Mia, the seer who has
passed; and I know!
“Look now across the bay, and mark the horde
of pale-faces and their wondrous floating homes,
which they guide where they will! Who are they?
From whence have they come? They rise from the
ocean, but they live not upon it, for do they not
come on land? The number of them is great, and
their power far beyond us! My daughter Cooya
rowed her canoe last night among their ships, and


saw men bound among them. There are rulers,
kings, there, who have bound their fellows! We do
not understand these things, but ray warriors, if the
pale-face can overcome the pa’e-face, what, my war-
riors, is our hope? Surely we fear the weakest
among them, how then can we hope for victory
against the strongest?
“We fought them not long years ago. let us decide
for peace now and hide away in the shadows, for
truly shad the prophecy be fulfilled!”
Wonga Wonga ceased, and stood erect, with his
sad face westward, while his warriors passed before
him in silence.
Cooya watched and heard. When all had passed
Wonga Wonga turned to his gunyah, and, unheeding
her, sat in the ashes of his fire, staring forward
gloomily.
Cooya slipped away through the brush and wan-
dered alone. She was the emblem of the death of
her people! Had not Doonga told her the story?
Did not the men curse and the woman shun her?
That night Cooya bent over her father in his sleep
and touched his forehead with her hand; then she
crept out of the camp, carrying a spear and a toma-
hawk, and in the belt of her rug a womerah that
Doonga had fashioned for her.
Swiftly she travelled south all night and through
the following day, until on the’ next night she came
to a deep ravine at the head of Deeban (now Port
Hacking), where she sheltered in a cave, and re-
mained alone.
In her flight she so crossed and recrossed her track


that even the keen eye of the sullen Dilba, who
sought her for many days, was baffled, and she was
lost to her people.
CHAPTER 111.
THE FOUNDATION OF THE CITY OF THE SOUTHEEN
SEAS.
THE fleet still lay in Botany Bay, with its living
freight unshipped. The terrors of Wonga
Wonga and his tribe were as nothing to the
sufferings and wretchedness of the bound convicts,
while officers and soldiers alike longed for relief.
Could they but get ashore half the burden would be
at once removed!
But exploration of the bay had proved vain in
finding suitable soil and shelter for their first settle-
ment, while also the wide shallow bay, with bed of
poor anchorage, threatened serious danger to the
fleet should winds arise. Through the heads the
seas rolled in long, heavy swell, and the ships tossed
unsafely, straining at. their unsteady cables.
Captain Phillip therefore decided to search beyond
Botany Bay. and so set out one morning in “The
Supply,” sailed through the entrance and steered
northward.
Here the seas roll deep and free against long walls
of sandstone cliffs, high, jagged, and ragged, worn


into fantastic shapes, colored with many stains of
storm and decay, and banded with long, dark bars
left by trickling waters from the hill swamps that
rise to westward inland.
Heaths and dwarf shrubs, grass-trtes and bfftcken,
bottle-brush and clumps of low wattle, with swamp
plants and coarse grasses, grow upon the hills to the
cliff edges. At intervals the tumbling sea runs
inland, breaking in many lines of white and pale
green surge upon little beaches of bright, buff sand.
Maroubra, Coogee, Bondi are bays so formed.
North of Bondi the cliffs are higher, but declining
rapidly inland so remarkably that their summits are
their ocean edges.
This decline cannot be seen from seaward, and the
mariner gazing at the stupendous wall of unbroken
sandstone with its boiling surge of storm wave, or
its lapping fringe of singing foam, dreams not that
waters calm and deep lie but a few cable lengths
behind, so strangely closed is the entrance to Port
Jackson, the Port Jackson of Cook geography, 1 the
Sydney Harbor of the people of Australia.’
From the south the cliffs trend gradually inland,
while from the north a high, bold headland pushes as
if it had intended to overhang the trending Southern
shore, and had suddenly stopped, abrupt and frown-
ing on the seas that roll past from 1 east and south
and north. ■ ——ms nny
Opposite, and as if hurried forwaid to check the
inrush of the ocean, rises Middle Head, which divides
the waves arid ‘ sends them to left and right 1 in ' two
deep arms, more calm as they advance into dong,


winding rivers among tree-clad hills, lapping against
steep cliffs, or in soft spray songs upon the w r hite
sands of many beaches.
Dense foliage everywhere makes new songs for the
sea breeze, aud dhe sunlight draws the colors of sea
and forest, and blends them in faint mists that rise
under a north-east summer wind, while above is
almost ever the serene blue of a southern sky.
Captain Phillip and his men feasted with glad eyes
and glad hearts, glad for the beauty that must ever
soften and make easier the trials of the saddened
colonists, and gladder for the safety of the deep and
sheltered coves, so deep that to the very cliff edges
in many places a ship could approach in safety and
make the abutting rocks a landing stage.
Phillip, delighted at the happy discovery, returned
to Botany Bay, and on the 26th of January, 1788,
seven days after the first arrival, the whole fleet
weighed anchor and sailed for Port Jackson, ten
miles north.
As they left Botany Bay two French ships in com-
mand of La Perouse arrived on an expedition of
general discovery. At once Captain Phillip invited
La Perouse and his crews to come with him and see
Great Britain take possession of a land destined to
.become the fairest in the Empire’s possessions, and
great among the nations of the world.
To mark the occasion of the visit of La Perouse,
and to honor him as a great navigator, while deplor-
ing his sad end, a monument is erected on the north
shore of Botany Bay, a little inland from Cape
Banks,


Near by is now the last camp of Wonga Wonga’s
people. Half-caste and mongrel they are, protected
and fed by the Government, by the pale-faces—“the
white feller”—who came out of the east.
Soon none will remain. The last of them will pro-
bably be honored with a public funeral, and the
occasion will be one for inferior and voluminous
oratory and maundering sentiment.
Wonga Wonga and his people saw" the fleet pre-
pare for departure. With joyful hearts and cries
and talkings of excited delight they came from their
camp to climb the cliffs and watch the ships put
seaward. They wondered if the ships were leaving
for ever, bearing away the spirit of the pale-face, who
had watched alone so long, for they had noticed that
several of the white men had visited Sutherland’s
grave, and re-formed the mound and tended it with
that sentiment peculiar alone to civilisation and
Christian people.
The aboriginals crowded the northern cliffs, afraid
to yell their delight from fear that the departing
Englishmen might in some way punish them. How
they did not know! Why they did not know! They
only knew that they feared! All was mystery, and
mystery was fear.
Cooya had disappeared. And now the ships were
about to depart, Wonga Wonga’s people would fear
no more.
But as Phillip’s fleet put out there appeared two
more ships, the expedition in command of La
Perouse.
Concerned, and still more mystified, the savages
23
BEN HALYARD


watched to see what these additional arrivals might
do, but when they saw the new-comers join the
others and sail north, they broke into wild shouts of
joy, and believed that these last ships had come to
call the others elsewhere.
But Dilba and Doonga, who now stood among
their fellows, had seen the “Supply” go forth alone
when Phillip had explored Port Jackson, and they
had followed, travelling along the cliffs between
Cape Banks and South Head, and then—still watch-
ing the ship—skirting the southern shores of Port
Jackson, until the “Supply” stopped at a cove about
six miles from the Heads, called by Captain Phillip,
Sydney Cove, now the Circular Quay, the chief berth
of the ships of Sydney.
Dilba and Doonga did not hasten on their return,
so, though the distance direct across country to
Botany from Sydney Cove is short, they arrived only
as the fleet was sailing out of the bay.
They joined the tribe upon the cliffs, but when
the people showed delight Doonga sneered at them.
“Do not be so glad!” he cried, “the white people
are moving but a little farther north! Dilba and I
followed when one went and returned alone; we saw
where it went, and it is now leading the others. The
pale-faces are not leaving the land, but you may be
glad if you like, for they are not likely to come
back to us!”
Doonga looked scornfully at those who listened.
Then seeing that his scorn had not the effect he
desired of making them think him braver than them-
selves, he called out, “If any of you will venture


Dilba and I will show yon where the pale-face goes.
Come Wonga Wonga, and you, warriors! The dis-
tance is not far! Come north and see!”
Wonga Wonga and many of the tribe followed
Dilba and Doonga. When they reached Sydney
Cove they joined with the tribes there to watch the
ships arrive.
Amazing stories did they tell to those who had
not seen the ships, so that the tribes of Port Jackson
became afraid also, and made no attack upon the
landing of the British.
The fleet anchored in the cove, and gladly the
relieved people—prisoners, soldiers, and officers
alike —went ashore.
With loud cheering and salutes from the guns,
occupation of the country was formally declared,
and immediately the settlers began to build their
new homes.
As is the movement of the earth and the heavens
so ever and everywhere is the progress of civilisation
—from the East unto the West.
“We have seen His star in the East, and have come
to worship Him. ’ ’ And before His star, the Israel-
ites, the favored people of God, had entered Canaan
from the East. And from the East did not the
nations spread westward over Europe?
Columbus also advanced upon America from the
East, and the decaying people of whose ancient glory
we know so little, were they not failing upon the
West of those lands ? f
Australia was long known upon its western shores,
but it remained little known and unadvancing until
25
BEN HALYARD


civilisation approached it from the East. Then
rapidly development upon development ensued, and
the trend was—and is still—ever westward.
A study of the advancement of the peoples of the
world, those of history and those of to-day, reveals
that progress is ever as the coming up and the going
down of the sun.
Wonga Wonga, when he saw that the white people
had determined to settle on Port Jackson, at once
returned to his own camping grounds at Botany,
feeling safe from molestation, at least for some time.
But Dilba and Doonga held aloof, and taunting
Wonga Wonga with cowardice, went and camped
alone not far from the white men, so that they
might watch, and plan schemes for attack.
Dilba believed that Cooya would be found con-
cealed among the whites, and Doonga, though he did
not share Dilba’s beliefs, was yet desirous of revenge,
for he connected the pale-faces with her disappear-
ance.
Disappointed, sullen, and revengeful, these two
savage brothers hung on the outskirts of the British
camp, seeking opportunity to do harm, chagrined
also that they had but themselves to work the mis-
chief, for all their efforts failed to incite the Port
Jackson tribes to make an attack upon the white
strangers.
Never in the history of the world was a country
occupied by an invading people so peaceably as was
Australia by the British, and when we consider the
size of the territory acquired, the absence of opposi-
tion is the more remarkable.


CHAPTER IY.
BEN HALYARD.
ON a warm October morning, seven years later—
-179S—H.M.S.5 —H.M.S. “Reliance” lay in Sydney Cove.
A new Governor ruled in the growing colony.
Phillip, after four years of toil, anxiety, and priva-
tion, had retired broken in health; then three years
passed during which the duties of Governor were
borne by Major Grose and Colonel Paterson, of the
Y.S.W. Corps.
In September, 1795, they were relieved by Captain
Hunter, who had commanded the “Sirius,” accom-
panying Phillip on his first expedition to the colony.
Some months afterwards the “Sirius” had been
wrecked and Hunter had returned to England to
command another ship, and some time later to be
appointed the second Governor of New South Wales.
The anchor and gun of the “Sirius” are now erected
as a memorial on the spot where Phillip declared
possession of Australia for the British. Hunter had
now been in office little more than a month, and his
ship meanwhile lay idle.
Against her rail on this early summer morning
leaned two young men, one taller and more spare,
the other sturdy and more solid, one displaying
determination by his quiet reserve, the other by his
expressed and open impetuosity.


Near them a boy lay coiled on the deck in the
shadow of the poop awning. He wms drowsing and
day-dreaming, reflecting hazily upon his English
home and wondering how long the “Reliance”
would stay on the colonial station—not that he had
any desire to return home; his mother was dead,
his father away with Nelson’s fleet, and only a mar-
ried sister, whose husband was a landsman and dis-
liked the sea, remained.
She lived in Plymouth and with her own to care
for, the boy coiled in the shadow felt that he was
happier where he lay.
He wondered if the British were fighting on the
other side of the world, and whether his father were
in the thick of it.
He sat up excited at the thought, and wished
earnestly that the “Reliance” might be ordered
home and put in action.
There was nothing to do here. He was only a
ship’s boy, unable to read and write, feeling vaguely
that he was a servant of his King and country, and
that in some way he was useful, but longing to be
active to do something that people could see was
good and great, that would serve somebody with
distinction, bringing much benefit upon his fellows
and honor to himself. f
Even if he Avere to die in the doing, he felt he
would have no loss; he longed for a name, and he
felt that he could give great service did he but have
the opportunity.
“What startled you, Ben?” asked the taller man.
Ben rose and saluted. “I was just thinkin’, sir,


I’d like the “Reliance” to be goin’ ter fight. It’s
very slow ’ere, sir!”
Lieutenant Flinders smiled.
“ A boy of your own heart. Bass,” he said, “want-
ing to be up and doing.”
“And of yours, too, eh?” returned Bass. “I ven-
ture that you are as tired of the duluess of having
nothing to do as any of us.”
“You want to see fight that you may have bones
to mend, legs to saw off, and gashes to sew up,”
laughed Flinders. “You fellows are the repairers
of His Majesty’s army and navy.”
“Yes, we are,” answered Bass cheerily; “but I’d
rather be cutting heads off in the rush and the dash
and the heat of it than trying to patch fellows up
down below. You fighters have all the glory; we see
the pain and the after wretchedness. He’s a pluckier
man who down below utters never a groan while
his arm comes off, or his head is stitched in half a
dozen places closing yawning gashes, than the fellow
who wins a special valor badge for bravery while his
blood is up. I don’t desire to do the repairing, I
assure you, especially of any of the “Reliance” men,
and more especially of you, Matthew Flinders,
Lieutenant of H.M.S. “The Reliance,” and bosom
friend of yours truly, George Bass, surgeon of that
very estimable ship.”
Bass laughed merrily as he finished speaking, and
laid his hand affectionately on his companion’s
shoulder.
“You are a sturdier fellow than I, Bass. You
ought to have been in the Navy, and I where you are.”


“Nonsense! You’ve a lean, hard face. You’d look
too melancholy; you’d make a wounded chap feel
he’d no hope by the pitying look you’d give him. I
know you don’t care much for the fighting business:
you’re a man of peace, always wanting to do a good
turn to every man, but ship’s surgeon wouldn’t suit
you any better than being lieutenant. With all the
row there is on in Europe, we’re, with our tastes,
better off out on this convict station, but we don’t
want to be idle for all that. We’re like Ben here,
longing for something to do, but it must be some-
thing worth doing and something stirring and
adventurous; all the better if it be something
nobody has done before!”
Ben had retired a little after answering Flinders,
but had listened eagerly to the conversation, and
now stood alert to hear what Bass might propose.
But Flinders spoke.
“Well, you know already what I want to do. I’m
for exploration! Here’s a new land, and hardly
anybody has gone a mile beyond where the settle-
ment has stood, in seven years! We can alter all that
if only the Governor will give us a chance. There’ll
be plenty of adventure and risk, I’ll warrant, while
we’ll have all the delight of being first! We’ll
penetrate the unknown, have a feast of the best
excitement, and render also, I think, service of much
value to our King!”
“Agreed!” cried Bass. “Let’s off at once!”
“Not so fast, my impetuous friend; his Excellency
may disapprove, and we cannot leave without his
permission.”


“Just so; that’s what I intend. Let’s off at once
to ask him. He won’t refuse, I’m sure,” Bass confi-
dently continued. When here before in Phillip’s
time he himself explored; in the chartroom now you
can see some of his work. He made a survey of
Botany Bay, this harbor, and also Broken Bay to
the north. If he admits the value of that work —
which is not unlikely since it was his own —” smiled
Bass, “he cannot deny us. Come along, Flinders,
let’s find the Governor, and hurrah for the unknown
seas!”
With mirthful steps and happy eagerness they
hurried away.
Ben sat down under the awning again, and felt
sad.
Those departing merry fellows were his officers;
they might do much, and also many things he could
not. They had education and position; they could
go and talk with the Governor freely ; they were
friends with him as well as his officers. They often
went about with him, and had advantages and a
life Ben could never hope to know. Now they were
hastening away light-hearted and happy, filled with
great plans for exploration, while he could but stay
aboard the ship, a poor ignorant sailor boy.
Such were Ben’s thoughts, and in his heart were
yearnings for doing and being something great that
he could not define.*
Would ever an opportunity open for him? Would
he be able to know and seize his opportunity when it
should offer ?
Feeling weary, he tried to shut Bass and Flinders


from his thoughts, as with a sigh he turned over
and doubled himself up to sleep.
He was just dropping off when the bos’n came
along and roused him up to go and tar some ropes.
Ben cheerfully put his dreams aside and promptly
obeyed, ever ready to do the duty that fell to his
lot; he was, though only a sailor boy, a true hero.
The morning had far advanced when Flinders and
Bass returned. Ben watched their coming back,
eager to know how they had succeeded.
They came aboard, and began to pace the deck
together, talking earnestly, while Ben, having
finished his work, drew near unobserved and
listened.
“But we can do very little without a crew and a
boat equal to holding them,” Flinders was saying.
“We don’t know how much we may be able to do
ourselves until we try,” Bass answered. “We have
permission to go; that alone is very much, for we
had considerable doubt that we’d even get a hear-
ing. Let’s make the most of it, and set out on our
own account! Let us do as much as possible; we ’ll
succeed all right, and our success will give us a
claim for assistance in further explorations. We’ll get
a boat and a crew by and bye, never fear. Who’ll
say we won’t get a ship?”
Flinders smiled doubtfully.
“A ship is a far cry,” he answered. “We can’t
do much by ourselves, and if we’re not successful—”
“Oh, we’re going to be!” broke in Bass, confi-
dent and impetuous. “The Governor thinks just
now that we’re only a couple of young fellows,


having much idle time, and thirsty for adventure; so,
though he thinks our proposals romantic and school-
boyish, he gives us permission to go and drown our-
selves, provided we do not involve anybody else in
the catastrophe. Should we do well the Governor
will get not a little of the honor for having sent us
out!” Bass laughed. “Young fellows are always
kept under,” he went on; “yet if young fellows
didn’t push a little further than their fathers the
world would make little progress. Flinders, my
friend, we’ll set out by ourselves, and when we
come back I venture we’ll be better treated on a
second expedition. ’ ’
“But We’ve only a dingy eight feet long! Eight
feet! Think of it. It would be right enough for
knocking about the bay here or pushing up the
rivers, but —” he stopped and shook his head, “vety
risky outside.”
“All the more exciting, and all the more to our
credit when we do succeed! We must go outside,
you know!” ■ • A
Flinders assented by a nod.
. “So,” went on Bass, “I propose that we go south
first and explore Botany Bay; we-could start to-mor-
row morning.”
“Agreed,” answered Flinders. “Then we had
better go and have a look at the boat, and see if
she’s all safe and sound.”
“She’s all right, sir!” exclaimed Ben, coming for-
ward eagerly, and suppressing all reserve in his
desire to participate in the expedition.


“How do you know?” asked Flinders kindly,
though a little surprised.
“I’ve sailed her, sir, ’tween ship an’ shore often.
I know the boat you mean well; she’s the boat the
bos ’n uses. ’ ’
“What’s her name?” asked Bass.
“She ain’t got none, for a.wonder, sir! She’s most
called ‘the dingy’ when she’s spoke of.”
“Then we’ll give her a name, boy,” said Flindei’s.
“We’ll call her the ‘Tom Thumb.’ ”
‘ ‘ The ‘ Tom Thumb ! ’ Good name! ’ ’ exclaimed
Bass. “Good luck to her!”
Pleased and jolly they took a boat, and put ashore
again, where by the landing was fastened the little
eight-foot boat, painted white, with a narrow black
water-line.
They stood looking at her as proud as if she wex*e
the best afloat. She was theirs to carry them out on
unexplored seas, to open a way to new land, to lead
them to fame and honor. What possibilities lay in
the ‘ ‘ Tom Thumb !’ ’
Their imaginations took uncontrolled flights.
Already they had achieved success, honor, greatness
in their little boat!
“Fellows who feel as we do, never fail,” ex-
claimed Bass. “How eager I am for to-morrow!”
Ben stood back while they examined the boat,
making general remarks as they walked round her
and turned the sides and keel up for closer in-
spection.
“She’s only big enough for you and me, George.”


said Flinders, easting a glance at Ben’s wistful face
as if he had thought at first of taking him.
Ben’s eyes glistened and his heart leapt, and then
sank.
“We could stow the boy in if we thought of
taking him,” answered Bass. “We’re not allowed
a crew, but we might have a boy. There’s nothing
against that in the Governor’s assent, and by the
look of Ben he is willing.”
“I’ll go, sir; I ain’t afraid!” cried Ben, eagerly,
his fears of refusal vanishing.
Bass laughed. “No, I don’t think you are! You
shall go if we can get the captain to let you off doing
nothing to do something.”
Flinders smiled at Bass’s humor, while Ben was
too pleased and excited to make answer. He was
going with his officers exploring new seas! They
were glad to have him! No more dull days and
idle times!
Ben did not fall asleep quickly that night. His
opportunity had come, and he lay long thinking
what would be his gain in the adventures that were
to commence with the morrow.


CHAPTER Y.
The fiest voyage of the “tom thumb.”
THE next morning as the dawn broke and the har-
bor mists, lifting from the waters, stole up the
glens, and lingering a moment on the hill crests,
spread away into the bine, Flinders, Bass, and Ben
pushed off from “The Reliance,” spreading their sail
to catch what they could of the failing land breeze,
and swinging out on the current of the fast ebbing
tide.
Past Garden and Shark Islands they ran, stood in
to east and south of the Sow and Pigs (the only
shoal rocks in Sydney Harbor), beat north across
the heads, and then riding on the long ocean swell
passed out south as the sun rose above the watery
horizon, and lit the high and ragged cliffs in ruddy
gold.
The salt breath of the sea stirred them, and their
hearts leapt as merrily as did the boat upon the
waves.
Before long the breeze freshened from the north-
east, and they rapidly approached Cape Banks. Flin-
ders steered and Bass held the sail, while Ben lay
in the bottom of the boat, curled comfortably upon
some canvas, with his back against a small water
cask.
Bass hummed a song, while Flinders, full-hearted
and imaginative of what this first step of his great


desire might lead to, watched the boat ride on the
waves, the only boat on all the wide Australian
Pacific, where now hourly the waters are churned
and pounded by the tramp of the world’s transports.
The Genius of Exploration has little of the earth’s
veil to lift to-day—untrod earth is small—but her
sister spirit, the Genius of Discovery, is leading
men ever onward and higher in the world of art,
and the student of the laboratory and the work-
shop is the explorer of to-day, making his fellows
better fitted to dwell in Earth’s choicest parts, made
known to him by his forerunner, the fearless navi-
gator and leader of expeditions into strange seas
and among savage animal peoples.
Bass’s droning swung in rhythm with the run of
the boat, and Ben, himself a good sailer, sat up and
watched Flinders handle her.
“She’s a good ’un to sail, sir!” he exclaimed en-
thusiastically. “See how she bears up and then
slips away to miss the break! She keeps wonderful
dry for such a little ’un!”
Flinders smiled. “She’s like a lot of things in
this world, Ben; needs handling properly.” As he
spoke, letting the tiller bear away a little he
brought her bow up just as a small white head broke
on a wave. The wave hissed, splashed over the gun-
wale amidships, and soused Ben in a fine shower.
Bass burst out laughing. “She’s rather wet for
such a little Tin, now, Ben!” he exclaimed.
Ben shook himself and laughed also, while without
looking at either of his companions, he replied slyly,
“I think Mr. Flinders made a mistake in the steerin’,


sir; he was doin’ all right till then; the boat’s all
right; it is the way yon handle ’em, sir!”
“Good, Ben!” cried Flinders, “and it’s all easy
when things are all favorable, but easy times never
produced a good man yet.”
“And hard times have killed many a good one,”
said Bass in contrast.
“Not as many as easy times have ruined. ‘Great-
ness grows from the poor, because they have need.’ ”
“Well, you’re not hard up; why do you want to
bother about exploring and risking these unsafe
expeditions ? ”
“Because I’m in need, if not actually of money,
of satisfying a desire to do some good in the world.
How do you feel about these things yourself?”
“Well,” Bass laughed. “I don’t know how I feel.
I’m just hitting out this way without considering
the good of it at all. I know it’s good for me, but
whether it’ll be any good to • anybody else—why,
that’s a matter I haven’t thought about.”
“It’s worth thinking about,” Flinders said pre-
sently in slow, thoughtful voice. Bass did not
answer; he hauled the sail a little closer under an
extra puff, and looked lazily at the green water
rushing past.
They were now running well down on Cape Banks.
Altering his course east a point, and then standing
across the bay southward, Flinders passed Inscrip-
tion Point, where now is fastened' into the rock a
brass plate commemorating Cook’s landing, and ran
ashore at Bonna Point, an eastern head of Quibray
Bay.


After hauling up the boat Ben was soon busy
getting dinner while Bass and Flinders took their
bearings east from Cape Solander to form a basis of
exploration of the south side of Botany Bay.
When they set out again an hour or two later
they sailed round Quibray and Weeney Bays, which
lie between Botany and Cronulla, a wide, long curve
with sandy reaches of beach and dune, extending
southward towards Port Hacking.
Then steering eastward into the open once more
they passed Towra Point, and after a few miles ran
past a low cape, dark with waterfowl, standing in
long and deep rows from the shore baywards, on
rocks uncovered at low tide. Most curious of all
were the lines of great white-breasted grey-winged
pelicans, gazing so solemnly from their deep eyes
above their wonderful bills, which will hold as many
fish as a fisherman’s basket.
Passing this point, named by Flinders Pelican
Point, they landed where a grassy plot, green and
cool under a sheltering rock ledge, promised a com-
fortable camp.
As the boat passed the crowds of waterfowl rose
and spread through the air, the pelicans giving forth
strange, hoarse cries, and flapping across the bay
as if strongly resenting the intrusion of the
explorers.
Bass furled the sail, and hauled the “Tom Thumb”
ashore above the tide line, while Flinders and Ben
built the fire. The sun dipped in the haze of a
southern early summer evening, and across the calm
waters lay long barred reflections of pink and


purple, and gold-red mist softly fading to leave the
waters dark and star reflecting. Occasionally a fish
splashed, breaking the silence, leaped among the
hovering gnats, turned its glistening scales a moment
in the waning light, and sank again.
Overhead flew long, changing lines of black swans
to settle in the coves on the shallows, where the fish
gather through the night for the worms so plentiful
on the mud flats. Their long necks speared straight
before them as their white-pinioned wings swept
them rapidly onward, while lower upon the water
flocks of ducks cut the air in their peculiar whistling
flight.
Not till night shut out the scene did Ben grow
tired of watching the flights of birds, while Bass
and Flinders lay upon their blankets by the camp
fire, looking up at the stars, as they lazily smoked
with only now and then a word.
Strange, weird, and old Australia, longest raised
above the oceans of all lands, wrapped herself in
night, and those whose names were to go dowm on
the pages of history as her first explorers felt the
weirdness as they lay and watched.
Beyond the gleam of the fire, back from the bay,
the forest stood dark and silent, except for an occa-
sional rustle of the boughs in the wind or the call
of a night bird higher up the hill.
Ben crept a little nearer the fire, and listened to
Bass and Flinders talking of the war at home, while
yet his own thoughts kept reverting to fear of
attack from blacks, who might now be waiting about


the forest to fall upon the explorers when they
should sleep.
“Do you think we’re safe ’ere, sir?” he asked
presently, when he canght Flinders’ eye regarding
him as if he knew of what Ben was thinking.
• ‘ ‘ Safe as anywhere else in the bush, Ben, I sup-
pose,” Flinders answered, “if we were to put out
into the bay we could drop the kellick, but we
couldn’t sleep so comfortably; she’s a small bunk for
three.”
“I’ll take my turn at the watch,” he suggested
eagerly.
“You’d fall asleep,” answered Bass, laughing.
Ben did not think that he would, but did not
answer.
Flinders, admiring his pluck and willingness,
turned to Bass. “Let’s give him the first watch; we
can both sleep during that. After two hours he can
call one of us, and we ’ll watch on. alternately
through the night while Ben sleeps undisturbed.”
“Good!” said Bass. “I’m willing; here goes!”
and he knocked the ashes from his pipe against his
boot, rolled his blanket tight about him, and in less
than five minutes was snoring by the fire.
“Call me at once if you feel sleepy, Ben,” said
Flinders.
“Ay, ay, sir!” answered Ben cheerily, and soon
Flinders, too, was asleep.
The night was warm, so Ben let the fire die down
a little, and the reflection being less, he was able to
see farther in among the trees behind the camp.
But though Ben watched intently and was ever


alert for the faintest sound of footfalls, he did not
perceive a figure that came out of the night, darker
than the shadows, and stood motionless watching the
camp.
It was Cooya.
Seven years she had been estranged from her
people, never crossing to the north side of the bay,
coming often alone to look across with longing eyes
to the place of her birth and her father’s tribe, but
always returning to the tribe of Deeban at Port
Hacking, to whom some time after her flight she had
joined herself.
The tribe of Deeban held her in fear, though they
permitted her residence among them. In occasional
intercourse with the tribe of Wonga Wonga they
learned the tradition of the prophecy, and how the
king’s daughter, Cooya, had fled, and had been
sought in vain, so they came to know that this girl,
who had at first lived alone, and afterwards come
among them, must be Cooya, Wonga Wonga’s
daughter, she of the prophecy; and from that time
they regarded her with awe, treating her with
homage from fear, knowing not but she might be the
embodiment of some spirit connected mysteriously
with the white men.
She came and went free, hunting for herself when
it pleased her, at times sharing the spoil of others.
When they spoke of the pale-faces she grew
almost angry in her vehemence, declaring they must
not be molested, and insisting that they were the
spirits of her people’s ancestors. When then they
laughed at her, though they half believed her and


feared, she went away, and wandered often many
days alone. Dilba and Doonga had come to know
where she had fled, and had sought her.
Surly Dilba had turned angry from her—angry
that she would not come back with him. Doonga
neither was able to persuade her, and, though to
him she had been kind when he urged her, he longed
no less, for still she stayed.
“Go, Doonga!” she had said. “Cooya cannot
return! ’ ’
Talking with Dilba, “What think you of Cooya?”
Doonga one day asked.
“A spirit of evil and a curse and a blight upon
our people!” exclaimed Dilba, turning upon Doonga
as if he would quarrel.
But Doonga, though hurt at his brother’s bitter
words, did not answer.
They rarely quarrelled. In their common loss and
in their common desire to injure the white man they
found a mutual sympathy. Opportunity had offered
little for their attacks, so from constant meeting with
the whites as well, they had come almost to relin-
quish their hopes, and to settle down as had their
companions, indifferent what the intruders might
do.
But with the savage there occur often outbursts of
long, smoulderingsfires. About the time of the arri-
val of Bass and Flinders Dilba and Doonga had with
all the old desires suddenly discontinued their asso-
ciations with the settlers, and gone to Wonga Wonga
and other kings and tried to stir them to drive every
pale-face from the country;.


But they had not succeeded. Wonga Wonga was
very old, and, moreover, content, for the white man
had not interfered with him nor shown desire to
drive away his people. So Dilba and Doonga camped
by themselves south of Botany Bay, determining to
hold aloof from all, while indignation rankled in
their hearts.
Thus it came about that from the cliffs of Cape
Solander they saw the “Tom Thumb” come through
the Heads, and make the south shore.
Leaving their camp they followed, and closely
watched the explorers, taking every care to hide
themselves, and hoping that when night fell they
would have an opportunity for attack. Could they
but kill the crew of the ‘ ‘ Tom Thumb ’ ’ they felt that
they would have carried out at least their part in
driving out the white man.
Moreover, they would never have better opportu-
nity ! The daring of the white man was impertinent!
The savages laughed, then grinned maliciously, and
contemptuously contrasted the powers of the ex-
plorers far from their fellows, with their own might
and cunning.
Keenly following, when Bass and Flinders made
their fire on Pelican Point, Dilba and Doonga were
less than half a mile distant, seated upon a half-
burnt log planning their attack.
But Cooya, wandering alone, had also seen, and
unobserved had marked Dilba and Doonga’s pur-
pose, and now from a rock among the trees watched
their approach.
The time of Ben’s watch was closing when Cooya


saw Dilb a and Doonga emerge from among the tim-
ber a little beyond the camp fire, and steal slowly
towards Ben, who sat with his back towards the
threatening natives, while Bass and Flinders slept
soundly near his feet.
The Australian aboriginal possesses in a marvel-
lous degree the art of concealing his approach. Even
in open daylight he will suddenly appear before you
and close at hand, often with a friendly grin at your
surprise, when but a moment before you had not
even suspected his presence. Had Ben been gazing
intently in the very line of their coming he would not
have distinguished the black, swift, creeping form
from the shadows of the earth.
Dilba led, and held in his left hand, clutched very
firmly, a tomahawk, while snakelike he drew himself
over the ground with his right.
When about twenty yards short of Ben he stopped,
and raising his head, seemed to be carefully consider-
ing the situation, while Doonga, who had crept up
beside him, lay low.
As Dilba looked about Cooya came swiftly for-
ward from the other side of the camp, and silently
advanced until the glow of the fire shone upon her
and lit up her figure against the darker background.
At that moment the night owl (mopoke) began to
call again dismally, and Dilba turning to Doonga
muttered curses upon the bird which the male
aboriginals regard with strangely superstitious
dread, while the women look upon it favorably, and
protect it.
But Dilba’s curses upon the bird were' abruptly


Stayed, as Doonga, looking up, saw Cooya suddenly
appear.
“Dilba! See!” he gasped, pointing with his right
hand at Cooya.
Dilba gazed with him, helpless in their astonish-
ment.
Cooya, stepping a few paces nearer, swiftly threw
a light spear. It shot between the heads of Dilba and
Doonga, and glanced beyond them from the ground,
making a faint rustle among the dead leaves.
Together Dilba and Doonga sprang to their feet,
and ran as for their lives away from the camp, while
Cooya sent after them the mocking call of the
mopoke, and turning, withdrew among the trees.
The call so near startled Ben. He had heard it
through his watch, but it had seemed far up on the
hillside. This sounded almost immediately in his
ear!
Looking round sharply he stood up. “Mr. Flin-
ders ! ” he called excitedly, certain that somebody
was close about, though gaze as he would the night
gave nothing but shadows.
At his call both Flinders and Bass roused in-
stantly, but though they searched while Ben
explained, they found nothing.
“Fine targets we make against the fire glow!”
said Bass, shrinking with that peculiar fear of a
brave man who dreads no open and seen danger, but
falters as he turns perplexed to face his foe, not
knowing whence the blow may come.
“I don’t think there’s anybody about,” answered
Flinders cheerily.


“It’s all right, Ben!” he exclaimed. “You’ve been
thinking you’re watched until you feel sure you are.
We always make our own ghosts, you know! Ha,
ha! Turn in, Ben!”
Ben obeyed, and alternately through the night
Bass and Flinders continued the watch, the fire
damped down, while from a sheltering rock one more
keen of eye than they—Cooya—sat also watching
until the dawn.
Through the forest back to their own camp has-
tened Dilba and Doonga, Dilba cursing Cooya for a
witch and a spirit of evil, Doonga silent, wondering
with great wonder how strangely Cooya ever inter-
vened to protect the pale-face. What spirit possessed
her? What hand directed her?
Doonga mystified, and also fearful of Cooya, un-
answering, let Dilba curse on.
The next morning the ‘ £ Tom Thumb ’ ’ sailed on up
the river, called in honor of the King, George’s
River.
Cooya followed unseen, at night taking up her
vigil, resting by day and pushing on at evening to
overtake the explorers.
Dilba and Doonga, however, did not re-attempt
attack. The “Tom Thumb” successfully navigated
George’s River and its many winding arms, and after
penetrating twenty miles inland towards where now
is the small town of Liverpool, returned; Bass and
Flinders being much satisfied with their success.
Home to “The Reliance” they sailed, and on the
day after arrival Flinders presented his reports and


charts to the Governor, who welcomed him and Bass
very heartily.
Ben returned to ship-hoy’s duties with a new in-
terest. He had been beyond the daily drudge, had
entered a wider field, had put windows in his house
of life from which he could look forth upon a greater
world than within its walls. Both Flinders and
Bass had praised his service, and liberally rewarded
his ever-willing labor.
They never passed him without a cheering word
or a jocular allusion to some amusing incident of the
voyage.
He felt himself raised. He had won recognition,
and what was dearer to him, had created within
himself the knowledge that he had assisted in a work
of honor and benefit.
Ben, like most of us, associated no honor and no
benefit to others (and none to himself) with his
every-day work. He resumed the monotonous duties
of an idle ship more happily, hoping before long to
accomplish more successes.
But the “Tom Thumb” lay snugly stowed away,
Ben daily attending to her care.
“Look after her well, Ben!” had been Bass’s
order as he continued cheerily, “We’ll want her
again soon.
But the “Tom Thumb” lay housed nearly six
months, for “The Reliance” was ordered to Norfolk
Island, a thousand miles off the east coast, where,
under Lieutenant King, a branch convict settlement
existed, and with “The Reliance” went Flinders,
Bass, and Ben.


CHAPTER YII.
OFF FIVE ISLANDS.
AUTUMN had come to the Southern Land, an
Australian autumn, not so much a season of
“falling leaf and fading tree,” but rather a
resting in the full sense of yielded richness ; in which
the warmth fades lingering, its mellow sense broad-
ening, and the changing mantle being put on slowly
that at no time suddenly is it realised that winter is
upon the land.
It is in this gradual sense of failing summer and
slow, advancing winter that there lies the charm of
an Australian autumn, such an autumn (in special
mention) as the eastern hill Slopes and coast ranges
of New South Wales know.
“The Reliance” was once more anchored in Port
Jackson, and the “Tom Thumb” was good and taut
as the day when she -had sailed upon her first voyage
of discovery.
Ben had overhauled her, scraped her keel, and
painted her; “dressed her in her Sunday clothes,”
he had said, as he assured Bass that she would take
them anywhere.
So, early, just as the eastern sky’s night mantle
was tinging with rose before it changed into broad
light, on the morning of March 25th, 1796, once more
the ‘ ‘ Tom Thumb ’ ’ sailed out through Sydney Heads
with Flinders at the tiller, Bass at the sail, and Ben
curled up in the bottom,


South of Botany Bay a long and broken arm runs
inland among high hills and rugged land, rich in
rocks, in ferns and flowers, in palms and eucalypti.
This is Port Hacking (Deeban, of the blacks). From
the landward slopes of the coast hills the waters
gather and flow into the head of the bay through
wild, densely-grown gullies at the bottom of steep
ravines. From the nature of the bay, more estuary
than bay, it was thought that there a great river
reached the sea. A great river meant a great road
to inner Australia. As Pizarro pushed up the mighty
Amazon, scaled The Andes, and from the Peruvian
heights looked out upon the Pacific, so might Bass
and Flinders penetrate by this great river of Port
Hacking, and return rich in the discovery of new
lands.
To explore Port Hacking and the imagined great
stream, the “Tom Thumb” bent her course.
“Well out, Flinders!” said Bass. “Let’s out to
catch the breeze and drift south.”
So Flinders ran far to sea before he shaped her
course for Port Hacking; so far he ran that among
the long line of cliffs, now low upon the west,
he failed to pick up Cape Solander, and with the
breeze and the current which here sets strongly
southward, the “Tom Thumb” was soon far south
of the port she sought.
“We’ve sailed too far,” said Flinders, as the day
advanced, “let us make shoreward and see what the
coast is like.”
Altering his course he ran under the cliffs of
northern Illawarra, where a range, some heads of


which are nearly two thousand feet, skirts the coast,
ending northward in broken masses, which in places
abut the sea in stupendous cliffs sheer to the deep
water several hundred feet.
“No landing here,” said Bass, “let’s farther
south. ”
And farther south they went, the “Tom Thumb”
bounding along under her small sail, a white speck
upon an unsailed sea. South the range recedes, and
country undulating at the range foot, flat upon the
shores, lies between the mountains and the sea. Here,
standing boldly forward, rises a conspicuous moun-
tain. Flat of summit, straight and steep in ascent,
with a rim of receding ranges north and south, the
mountain rises like a hat.
“See the mountain like a hat!” exclaimed Ben.
“And Hat Hill we shall call it,” said Flinders,
examining the range through his glass. And “Hat
Hill” it appears upon his charts, and in his writings.
Mount Kembla this remarkable mountain is now
called; to north a sister peak arises, Mount Kiera.
Kiera and Kembla tower above Illawarra, the most
conspicuous feature of the landscape.
From their slopes streams run and discharge into a
sea-connected lake, Lake Illawarra.
The sea ran fresh under the north-east wind, and
on the reefs and along the long line of beaches the
surf broke heavily, showing no bay or estuary.
Bass and Flinders, approaching nearer, saw that
opportunity for landing anywhere here was unfavor-
ble and dangerous.
They ran out to pass a point where now stands th§


Wollongong Lighthouse, and the little seaport of
Wollongong.
South the beach recedes in a long curve of buff
sand skirted with “honeysuckle” trees. The curve
by bending eastward forms an open bight, sheltered
seaward some little by the Five Islands. Towards
the outermost of these Flinders steered, but the
freshening sea beat heavily to north and east, while
to leeward the swell made landing impossible to
the “Tom Thumb.” This is the place where Cook,
passing in the “Endeavour,” attempted to land on
Saturday, 28th April, 1770. He was not able to get
ashore on account of the surf.
Barren of trees, but grass-grown with a long,
thick carpet ,with rough, craggy sides and no shel-
ters, are the Five Islands.
Between Kembla and Kiera the sun had set, leav-
ing an opaline sky, against which the hills stood
solid and clear. Above Kembla’s head spread a long
scarf of wind-rift cloud, fleecy, like long lines of win-
ter-woolled sheep, tinged with fading purple-gold
against the deep, dun shadows of the cloud mass.
The “north-easter” lessened after sunset, so under
the lee of the inner island Bass and Flinders decided
to lie for the night.
“Out with your kellick, Ben!” called Flinders.
Overboard Ben sent the kellick, and the rope ran
out to thirty feet.
The night settled. The cloud sheep grew grey,
and spread wider across the sky plains until they
vanished in the depths, and the stars, the camp-fires
of the heavens, shone steadily while on the point to


east and south, from the black mass of forest, there
showed dimly the dull, red glow of natives’ fires.
“Blacks ashore, Flinders,” said Bass, looking
landward, “we’ll have to look out for those fellows
in the morning.”
“Probably they’ll not be dangerous,” replied
Flinders, “these tribes are not too distant from Syd-
ney to be ignorant of us, so no doubt they’ll be
friendly. ’ ’
“I wouldn’t trust the wretches,” answered Bass,
“they’ll hang about for months, and never show a
sign of enmity, and then first chance you give them
—being alone or unguarded—down they come upon
you, and—” Bass shrugged his shoulders as he
paused—“your case is settled. These savages are
like dingoes, that don’t bark but bite, and sharp,
too, when they mean business.”
“Well, savage or otherwise, Bass, my friend, we’ll
have to face them in the morning; we want water,
our keg is low; so ye heave ho, ashore we go!
And—” Flinders proposed laughing, “you who have
such a bad opinion of the savage shall call upon him
first that you may specially alter your judgments,
while Ben and I defend your advance with the
empty keg. That’s Red Point, south of us below
those fires. Cook marked it, and no doubt there’s
plenty of water near, because of the camp. A black
never carries water far; he prefers much to sit down
alongside of it.”
“Laziest people yet discovered, I’d say,” re-
marked Bass.


“Except w’en they’re after yer, sir; red ’ot with a
tommyhawk! ’ ’ exclaimed Ben.
“Well, we’ll prove that to-morrow, Ben, when
Mr. Bass goes ashore, for they’ll not be lazy if they
catch him. Your first watch, Ben; wake us up if the
boat is drifting.”
“Ay, ay, sir!”
Flinders curled himself in the stern, Bass in the
bows, and soon Ben alone was watching the stars
and the steady glow of the camp fires ashore.
Through the night the “Tom Thumb” rocked safe
under the island cliffs with the swish of waves for
lullaby and the peering stars for watchers until the
great day-star spread his heralds wide from the
east, telling that their vigil was done.
CHAPTER VIII.
“TOM THUMB LAGOON.”
“ A NOTHER lovely morning, Flinders! Wake
r\ up!” cried Bass. “Hurroosh!”
Flinders sat up and rubbed his eyes, blinded by
the sun rays catching the wave tops across the
sea.
“Where away now?” asked Bass, as Flinders
yawned himself awake.
“To explore these islands,” answered Flinders.


Five Islands extend seaward from Red Point—so
named from the color of the rocks, and form an
outer guard for Port Kembla, an open bay affording
but little shelter.
Bass and Flinders discovered no landing, and
from close examination as their boat coasted the
cliffs saw nothing upon the islands to attract them
ashore.
“Let’s make for the beach, Flinders,” suggested
Bass, “we ought to find a landing somewhere along
the mainland; the bay makes a wide bend, and it
looks as if we should be able to get ashore above
the point.”
So they put about, and stood eastward.
North of Red Point the land is fiat and low, while
across a wide depression extends a shallow lagoon
covering several acres.
From the lagoon a stream flows over the sands of
the beach into the sea.
This stream changes at almost every fresh in the
lagoon, often being blocked by the sands under an
advancing tide or opened out by receding waters
to run like a mill-race into the ocean.
Towards the channel the explorers sailed, but the
north-east wind had freshened by the time the “Tom
Thumb” lay off the mouth, and the surf rolled too
heavily to land.
“Take the cask and swim ashore, Bass,” said
Flinders. “No sharks among the the surf, surely.”
“Hardly,” said Bass, readily obeying and jump-
ing overboard, laughing as he pushed the cask
before him and waded the last few paces.


Soon he was making across the soft sand to some
rocks where appeared a pool of fresh water.
The lagoon was covered thick with wild fowl;
black swans, with their red bills; ducks, brown and
grey; divers, in their little groups, scuttering above
or below water; and pelicans, solemn and philoso-
phical. Great grey cranes stood along the shores
or waded in the shallows, and plovers and sand-
pipers ran and darted, pulling the worms greedily
from the mud-flats left exposed by the tide.
Bass filled his cask as he watched the game, his
sportsman’s instinct keen and the promise of a game
supper no less gratifying.
He determined to get his gun and ammunition dry
ashore, so he rolled the cask over the sand and
hailed the boat.
Flinders put in as near as he dared, and, calling
to Bass to be careful, waited to take him aboard.
Bass picked up the cask, and, holding it above his
head, waded out.
“A little nearer if you can!” he called. “Keep
her head on, Ben! Keep her head on!” he shouted
as Ben tried to fetch her round, and Bass, reaching
forward to put the cask aboard, missed and let the
cask go.
Ben grabbed the cask, Flinders pushed out an oar
to fetch the boat to, a wave broke farther out than
usual (they had been lying clear of the surf), the
boats swung broadside on, and in an instant Flin-
ders, Ben, cargo, and boat were upset in the surf!
“Lay hold of the boat, Ben! Don’t let her drift!


Head her ashore! ’ ’ Flinders cried, as he shook the
water out of his eyes.
Ben caught the tiller rope and held on; then he
scrambled along to the painter, and, catching that,
hauled the boat up on the sand, while Bass and
Flinders, righting her, pushed her high and dry.
“Lucky for us she didn’t turn bottom up,” said
Flinders, “or we’d have lost everything that
couldn’t float!”
Hurriedly looking over their things they found
very little missing; then they sat down, and with
rueful faces contemplated their position.
“Pleasant!” said Bass, dismally sarcastic. “Not a
dry thing! And only a few minutes since I was
calculating how many of those wild ducks over
there I could kill in one shot; and, further, how
many roasted we could stow away for breakfast.
Real bad luck, I call it!”
Bass groaned, and dug his heels into the sand, sit-
ting disconsolate with woful face and lank, wet
hair dropping drips down his neck and his naked
back.
“Cheer up, old fellow,” said Flinders, “you’re
better off than I, for you are wet with your clothes
off, while I am wet with mine on.”
“Then get them off, and put yourself on the same
footing,” growled Bass, “But there, I beg your par-
don, Flinders!” he hastened to add. “I felt crusty
for a moment over our upset, but please don’t notice
it? Let’s to work and put ourselves as right as we
can; we’ll have to play the savage to-day while our
clothes are drying, and instead of duck Ben can


catch fish in the lagoon; it looks a likely place; we
can have duck when the powder’s dry.”
Soon Bass and Flinders had bailed out the boat,
spread their clothes and other things to dry, and
were cheerfully making the best of the mishaps.
His work done, Flinders left Bass lying on the
sand in the sun, and wading through the lagoon
mouth walked some distance northward, but saw no
natives nor anything of special interest.
He named the lagoon after the boat, Tom Thumb
Lagoon.
The town of Wollongong now stands to the north
of it, and the inhabitants in 1896 celebrated the cen-
tenary of Bass and Flinders’ landing on the spot
where the explorers had reached shore so acci-
dentally.
While Flinders had walked and Bass had had a
sun bath, Ben had been lucky with his fishing.
“Boiled or grilled, sir?” he asked as he came to
Bass with half a dozen.
“I think we’ll try both, Ben; you do the grilling
—there’s the iron—while I do the boiling. Get
the can full of salt water; nothing like their own
native element to boil fish in!”
Bass and Ben had just completed their cooking
when Flinders returned.
“Capital!” he exclaimed, sniffing the air. “An-
ticipation, my nose would say, is not the least part
of the pleasure of a good meal.”
“Pleasure is of two kinds,” said Bass, earnestly
and impressively; “that which we expect to have
and that which we have.”


“I’d add a third,” said Flinders laughing, “that
which we think we have.”
“Well, we mustn’t think we’re dressed by for-
getting we’ve no clothes on,” said Flinders. “I pro-
pose we dress for dinner.”
Ben gathered the clothes, and soon they were
happy round the jolliest meal they’d had on their
travels. When it was over they lay on the warm
sand sunning themselves, Bass and Flinders smok-
ing; they the first white men, and those blue wreaths
the first whiffs from the pipe on those sands.
“I don’t see anything of the blacks,” said Flin-
ders, sitting up lazily and looking along the beach
and then inland.
“A good thing, too, old fellow, for we’re stranded.
Our powder’s wet, and we’ve never a shot to fire!
We’d have a bad time if the savages came along.”
“I’m afraid we would,” assented Flinders:
“moreover powder doesn’t dry in an'hour.”
“But as it will dry as well afloat as ashore,” said
Bass, jumping up, “let’s get our cargo aboard, and
make out to sea before we are discovered; we’re
safe out there.”
Rousing, they soon had their cargo stowed, and
were pulling away outside the surf for Five Islands.
“A jolly day after all!” said Bass.
“But no swim to-morrow morning and a cramped
sleep in the boat to-night.”
“Better than no sleep at all,” laughed Bass.
“We’re doing all right! Up with your sail, Flin-
ders, my boy, I’m tired of pulling!”


Bass shipped his oars, and, the north-easter filling
their little canvas, seilt them merrily along.
They sailed among the islands only to find, as
before, that they could not land.
“I’m sorry we can’t get ashore here,” said Flin-
ders, “these islands would make us a splendid camp-
ing ground, and we could sleep all night without a
watch, as the natives would hardly be likely to
come off to them after dark.”
Bass looked under his sail as they went past.
“No chance, except in a very calm sea,” he
answered. “Let’s away past the point, and see what
offers there.”
So they sailed past Red Point, but only to find
still no landing.
The afternoon closed, and darkness came on
before Flinders put about and ran back to ride out
the night once more under the lee of the same island
that had afforded them shelter on the previous
evening.
Ashore the native camp fires again shone out,
while from the rocks of Red Point two tall savages
stood looking seaward.
“The boat lies under the island,” said Dilba, “we
could swim to it.”
Doonga looked at the night, and then at the sea
and the surf on the rocks beneath them.
“It is too risky,” he answered; “they are three,
w r e are two. If we failed how could we escape? It
is a long way to return defeated.”
Dilba replied with a savage exclamation of dis-
gust. “You are always afraid of late, Doonga; the


shadow of Cooya haunts you, and makes you a
coward! She is not here now; why fear then? Let
us go; we can kill whoever watches. A blow, a
lurch of the boat upsetting the sleepers, a few
strokes of the oars from us, and we are safe away;
and Dilba and Doonga have lessened the number of
the white man a little!”
Dilba roused to anger as he spoke, and for the
moment his words fired Doonga.
“I will go!” Doonga exclaimed.
“Good!” cried Dilba. “Follow me!”
They ran down the rocks to reach the beach and
swim out from the sand, but as they started there
came from the forest, thick and dark behind them,
the cry of curlews, calling and answering, then cry-
ing all together.
Dilba stopped.
“Curse the birds!” he exclaimed. “I never suc-
ceed if they call. I have noticed so often. They
were calling the night when Cooya appeared and
stopped us; they are evil as the mopoke, and—”
Dilba turned suddenly. “Did you speak, Doonga?”
he asked in tones of fear.
“No. You are afraid now, Dilba!” Doonga
jeered.
Stung at Doonga’s jeers, Dilba struck with his
spear at his brother, who, springing aside, tripped
and fell, heavily striking his head on a jagged
rock.
He lay unmoving for a few moments, while Dilba
stood over him, and then, seeing that he was hurt,
stooped and raised him up.


Presently recovering, Doonga sat npon a stone.
“You can’t go now,” said Dilba contemptuously.
Doonga rose. “It is well,” he said. “Our scheme
would have failed to-night, I am sure. I did not
want to go; now I cannot. lam dizzy, ’ ’
He walked away a few paces unsteadily, then he
stopped and turned upon his brother.
“Dilba, I will not quarrel with you to-night. We
have never yet fought, and we need never if you
will but hold your evil temper. But I fear we shall
some day fight, and then one, or both, shall die! ’ ’
Doonga turned upon Dilba threateningly for a
moment, and then walked across the sands to the
camp fires.
Later Dilba joined him. “We shall quarrel no
more, Doonga, ’ ’ he said, as he threw himself down.
“I do not know,” answered Doonga sullenly.
‘ ‘ And to-morrow we shall see what we will do with
the white man,” Dilba continued hopefully.
“We shall see,” said Doonga slowly.
Dilba grinned scornfully. “I would pursue them
alone,” he said, tauntingly.
Doonga did not answer. He raked together the
fire, and they soon lay asleep.
Out on the sea Ben Halyard, awake on his watch,
gazing deeply into the stars and thinking upon the
events of the day, felt the strange sense of his own
helplessness steal over him. About him how great,
vast, and unknown everything appeared!
How fortunately, despite the accidents of the
morning, the day had closed!
He looked again into the sky and stars, and from


them and from the waters and the roar of the shore-
ward surf there came to him the sense that over all
these and over himself there ruled a great Director,
and as he gazed deeper he murmured in unconscious
response to the impulse of his impelling circum-
stances, “Our Father, which art in heaven.” The
answering voice of the deep and of the heavens was
the voice of his Father. And Ben Halyard had no
fear.
CHAPTER IX.
RED POINT.
THE morning of the 27th came in with the wind
still in the north-east; warm and moist it
blew, driving white filmy veils of -mist up the
clefts of the cliffs and inland to hang along the
nearer belts of foliage. So salt is- this mist that the
leaves slowly die by its effect, and gradually the
seaward rim of the forest becomes a belt of half-dead
timber leaning landward.
“Still a nor’-caster!” exclaimed Bass. “No use
trying to thrash back to Port Hacking against
this! ’ ’
“Not a bit of use!” replied Flinders. “I think
we might go ashore and have breakfast. I think we
can run under Red Point and land without upsetting
to-day. How’s the powder, Ben?”
“Still wet, sir; powder takes a long time to dry!”


“Well, we’ll dry it ashore. Up with your kellick
and let’s away!”
Ashore Dilba and Doonga woke. Their camp was
inland half a mile among the timber.
Dilba looked surlily at his brother.
“Anything to eat?” he asked jerkily.
Doonga without speaking threw him half a bandi-
coot, half-cooked and cold.
Dilba chewed it savagely; then rose and walked
away towards the beach intending to look for crabs
and oysters. As he passed through the timber he
caught sight of the white sail of the “Tom Thumb”
flittering up and down upon the sea.
He watched it for a while to fix its course; then he
turned and called to Doonga.
Slowly Doonga left his camp, and came towards
Dilba, for he resented the tone of Dilba’s call.
‘ ‘ Run ! Hurry! ’ ’ called Dilba. ‘ ‘ The white men
are coming ashore!”
Doonga did not hurry, but stopped and looked
seaward until he saw the “Tom Thumb.” Not till
then did he hasten towards Dilba.
Night had gone from the sea and hills, the curlew
and mopoke were silent, Cooya was far away, the
day shone; at call there were savages a mile or two
distant willing to help should Dilba and Doonga
need. Surely now would the white men be taken!
Their eyes gleamed as they stood together.
“What shall we do?” Doonga asked.
“Watch, and see what they do,” was Dilba’s
answer.
Then steadily the brothers made their way towards


Red Point under which now the “Tom Thumb” was
drawing.
Running in with a wave Flinders landed her safely
on the sand. Ben jumped out as she struck, and
hauled her clear of the water. Then they got out
their food, and set about enjoying their breakfast.
Ben sat with his back to the sea, and as he ate
he frequently looked along the sands and over some
grassy knolls that lay between the beach and the
timber.
As he glanced a tussock of coarse grass, moving
unusually, caught his eye, and made him look
closely.
“What can you see, Ben?” asked Flinders, notic-
ing his steady gaze.
“I think there’s somebody moving over there,
sir,” Ben answered, rising and pointing to the tus-
sock which now bent unsuspiciously in the wind.
Not satisfied, though seeing nothing, Flinders
advanced upon the tussock, when suddenly upon the
rocks to the left Doonga appeared, beckoning in
friendly manner.
Dilba, from behind the tussock, seeing that his
chance of attacking unseen was lost, and that Flin-
ders’ attention was drawn off by Doonga (to save
Dilba), slipped away in the hollows of the sand-hills,
emerged upon the beach many yards distant, and
came from there openly towards the explorers.
Doonga, also seeing Dilba approaching, now as a
friend, came down from the rocks. His appearance
there had saved Dilba from a probable attack by


Flinders, and their open advance was now made to
disarm the explorers’ suspicions of their treachery.
“Hulloo, Doonga!” exclaimed Flinders. “You
here!”
“Yas, sir. Bin come along see people!”
Both Bass and Flinders had met with Dilba and
Doonga about Sydney before the first voyage of the
“Tom Thumb,” and Flinders’ feeling Was now rather
of gratification that they had chanced upon natives
whom they knew.
“And here’s Dilba!” Flinders exclaimed also.
“Yas, Dilba; dat’s ’im!” Doonga assented simply.
“What are you doing so far away from your
tribe?” asked Flinders.
“The people here friends,” answered Dilba; “the
white man see his friends, so do we.”
Bass looked at the savages suspiciously, but their
faces were expressive only of simple respect, with no
sign of treachery in glance or smile.
“Plenty of water here?” Bass asked.
Dilba laughed.
“Plenty!” he cried. “Plenty fish! Plenty bird!
Big lake ’way over there!” Dilba pointed south
through the timber.
“How far?” asked Flinders
“Not far. You go in boat; we keep along shore;
soon be there!”
“Any of your people there?” Bass asked.
Doonga looked sharply up from his bent brows,
and watched Bass’s face.
“Plenty! Good fellow! Glad to see you!” Dilba
answered.


Doonga smiled and stood silent.
Flinders beckoned to Bass, and they drew apart in
conversation, while Dilba and Doonga stood watch-
ing them innocently and expectant, as children
might stand aside from the conversation of their
fathers, not knowing what it all meant.
“We’d better not go,” Bass argued. “Those
fellows may have followed us down the coast pur-
posely to attack us.”
“But they haven’t been about Sydney lately,”
objected Flinders, “and they can’t have known of
our coming away; they appear very friendly.”
“All the more reason for suspecting them, and
besides, because we have not seen them is not an
argument for supposing that they have not seen us!”
“That may be; but I think they are reliable. They
seem very glad to see us.”
“No doubt,” muttered Bass. “And I think we’ll
trust them,” continued Flinders, not heeding Bass’s
interruption,
“When the powder’s dry,” answered Bass, laugh-
ing. “Hey! you fellows!” he called, “have you
had anything to eat?”
Doonga looked at Dilba and smiled, then shook his
head at Bass, and rubbed his hand on his stomach,
at which Dilba also laughed and shook his head.
“Come along, then,” said Flinders.
The blacks followed him to where the remains of
the interrupted breakfast lay spread, and, sitting
down, ate steadily for more than a quarter of an
hour without speaking.
Flinders supplied them, and at him they nodded


and grunted while Bass sat on a stone smoking and
watching their faces.
When they had finished they stood up and thanked
Flinders, whom they evidently desired to please,
while towards Bass they acted as if they knew
he was not their friend, and were suffering an
injustice.
“We show you the way now?” Dilba asked.
“Not yet awhile,” answered Flinders.
Doonga.and Dilba exchanged glances, and then
withdrew and lay down on the sand a little way off,
but neither spoke to the other. Their every move-
ment betokened thankfulness and submission.
Bass went over to the boat, while Ben cleared up
from breakfast.
Flinders boiled some water, and then after rum-
maging among some small parcels put up in canvas
brought out a shaving brush and razor and a small
hand glass.
He fixed the glass against a rock, and commenced
to shave, while Bass, whistling softly, spread the
powder to dry in the sun.
Dilba and Doonga started up at once as Flinders
set about lathering his face, and, all curiosity, they
came and stood peering close behind him. To them
his face was hairless, for they saw no beard upon
it; they had wondered why his face had not been
bearded like their own, and had concluded that he
was too young, but now they stood amazed at his
strange proceeding.
Flinders saw in the glass the reflection of their


curious faces behind him, and shaved on much
amused.
Bass, looking up from his powder drying, burst out
laughing.
“Mind you don’t cut yourself.” he called out.
“Your spectators would suffer from shock.”
Flinders for reply turned a laughing lathered face,
and went on with his work, while Bass and Ben
became spectators also, but of Dilba and Doonga.
Flinders finished shaving, and, wiping his razor,
turned to the natives, laughing and rubbing his face
with one hand, while he held out the razor towards
Doonga with the other.
Doonga drew back from the bright mysterious
instrument.
“Very sharp,” explained Flinders, with a smile.
The blacks stared.
“How would it be to shave these fellows?” asked
Bass mirthfully.
Dilba and Doonga looked hurriedly and anxiously
from Bass to Flinders and back again, and then at
each ot 1 er. and made as if they would be off. They
were unarmed, as they had dropped their spears for
diplomatic reasons.
“They are too much afraid,” answered Flinders.
“Hey! you fellows; don’t clear out!” he suddenly
cried, as he saw Doonga abcut to slip away with
Dilba ready to follow.
The blacks stopped, and tried to look as if they
had never intended flight.
“You have your beard cut off?” Bass asked
Dilba.


“Baal! (No)” Dilba exclaimed, starting back.
“It won’t hurt you,” said Flinders quietly.
‘ * Come, sit down! ’ ’
But both still hesitated.
“Cut their hair, sir, instead of shavin’ them, and
show them by me,” suggested Ben, eagerly, anxious
to see how the blacks would look if their long matted
hair and bushy beards and ragged whiskers were
trimmed close.
“All right, Ben,” answered Flinders to Ben’s
suggestion.
Ben got out the scissors, and, sitting down on a
stone, took off his cap.
“See, it doesn’t hurt!” said Flinders, snipping
away.
Doonga and Dilba drew nearer, and presently were
standing close about Ben, eagerly and curiously
watching.
No sooner had Flinders finished than Doonga
offered himself.
“Cut mine!” he said impetuous as a child.
Flinders set to work. He cut the ends of the
heavy locks about the neck, and combed them into
curly glossy clusters behind the ears; then he cut
away much of the whiskers, pointed the beard, and
with an air of most serious and polite attention
twisted the moustache to points, and, bowing, held
the small mirror before Doonga’s face.
Up started Doonga, and seizing the glass looked
at himself again and again, till vanity overcame sur-
prise, and he smiled at his reflection much self-
satisfied.


The explorers stood about and laughed quietly,
careful not to let Doonga think they were having
fun with him.
But Dilba saw their amusement at Doonga’s vain
delight, and his hatred of the white man rose like a
torrent.
He snatched the glass from Doonga’s hand, flung
it viciously upon the sand, and stood glaring de-
fiantly, and contemptuous of Doonga.
Flinders picked up the glass and looked sternly at
Dilba, who seemed to quail, and then suddenly
changing, muttered, “Dilba afraid.”
Flinders, completely disarmed, smiled and believed
him.
“Cunning wretch!” muttered Bass under his
breath.
Flinders put aside his scissors and Ben packed all
away into the canvas.
“Show us the way to the lake now,” Flinders said;
“can you see it from here?”
“Not far,” answered Dilba. “See it from top of
the rock,”
He and Doonga set off up the cliff to Red Point.
Flinders and Ben followed, Bass staying to see
to the powder and stow away their things once more
into the boat.
Doonga when he got to the top of the rock pushed
his two spears out of sight in a cleft, and was stand-
ing innocently looking southward, with Dilba, when
Flinders and Ben joined them.
From Red Point south extends a sandy beach, buff
and bright, along which the Pacific breaks in rolls


of foam, while landward the wind piles dunes, bound
with tussocks of coarse grass.
Southward rises AVindang Island, a huge pile of
basalt, flat-topped and carpeted with a heavy sward
of luxuriant grass.
The island slopes gradually up from the landward
side and meets the ocean with mighty cliffs seaward.
A delicate-hued convolvulus and the brilliant flowers
of the mesambryanthemum climb the inner sheltered
cliffs. At low tide the way is dry between Windang
and the mainland.
“What place is that?” asked Flinders pointing.
“Windang,” answered Dilba. “You go into the
lake there. AVe go along shore; you fetch boat
round.”
“Very well; get along, and don’t let the sea-
breeze take the curl out of your moustache,
Doonga!” said Flinders, laughing.
Dilba and Doonga turned away and set out along
the sand, Dilba muttering threats, but Doonga more
friendly, though fearing Dilba, whose wrath must
soon break out. When they were sheltered for a
while by the sand hillocks they stopped, and Dilba
crept quickly back for their spears.
The “Tom Thumb” was soon again afloat, and
rounding Red Point stood merrily south for
Windang.
“There go our black friends,” said Flinders, indi-
cating where Dilba and Doonga could be seen toiling
over the sand as they neared the island.
“Our black enemies, you mean,” objected Bass.
‘I don’t like taking these fellows on trust, Flinders;


our guns are not cleaned, our powder’s still a little
damp. I think it’s just a bit foolhardy to run in
there unprepared for an attack.” '
“I think they’re to be trusted, Bass,” Flinders
answered.
Bass demurred, but not disposed to argue left the
responsibility to Flinders, determined, however, to
keep a very observant eye on his own safety.
“Who knows what’s brewing ashore?” he observed
presently, as if he must say something.
“Who knows what’s brewing anywhere?” was
Flinders’ illogical answer.
“Figs!” said Bass to himself.
CHAPTER X.
LAKE ILLAWARRA.
THE lake of which Dilba and Doonga spoke is
now known as Lake Illawarra. It lies shallow,
wandering among hilly promontories, spread-
ing over flat bulrush and reed beds, dotted here
and there with an island rich in semi-tropical vege-
tation, the crown gem in “The Garden of New South
Wales.”
To the sea the lake flows by a channel winding
across sandy shoals; the banks low on either side,
fringed with swamp oak, through whose needle
leaves the wind sings pipelike melodies.
The channel meets the sea south of Windang, and


is fordable at low tide, but always dangerous, for
quicksands lurk, and the wet, glistening beach so
beautiful in its reflecting beams, is a death-trap, ter-
rible and overwhelming. Sometimes the channel is
quite closed, and Illawarra is truly a lake.
Dilba and Doonga reached the lake entrance before
the “Tom Thumb,” and, hiding away their spears
again, sat upon the sand to watch the boat come
over the bar.
The tide was setting in, and almost at the flood,
but the waves run free and strong for some distance
before the channel is reached, and over this tumbling
sea Flinders had to steer his tiny boat with utmost
care.
“Steady, Bass, my boy! Steady!” he cried.
“There’s no telling what’s brewing anywhere,”
said Bass, as if talking to himself.
Flinders laughed out, and Bass’s face shone cheery
again, as, letting the sail go he furled it and took
out the oars.
Flinders watched the rise and break of the surf
for a moment, measuring with careful eye the dis-
tance between each crest and trough of the breakers.
As two waves in irregular quick succession broke
and ran calm, though foamy, shoreward, Bass at
Flinder’s exclamation, “Now’s our chance!” drove
the boat with all his force into the channel, and still
rowing rapidly pulled on until Flinders ran her up
on the sand.
It will be riskier going out,” said Flinders, step-
ping ashore.


“Especially with a crowd of yelling niggers after
you!” said Bass prophetically.
As he spoke Ben sprang up. “Blacks, Mr. Bass!
A lot of ’em!”
From the timber on the north bank emerged eight
or ten natives armed with spears and boomerangs.
They hurried to join Dilba and Doonga, who now
were coming towards the boat.
“I hope those wretches won’t attack us!” cried
Bass ; ‘‘ we haven’t a shot to fire !’ ’
“Push off,” said Flinders quietly, stepping back
into the dingy.
Bass sent the boat far out into the channel. Dilba
and Doonga made signs to them to come ashore far-
ther up stream, but Flinders shook his head, while
the natives, talking excitedly and gesticulating, kept
pace with the boat alongshore.
After about half a mile the blacks were joined by
others from among the timber, and on a grassy point
sheltered by a thick plantation of fig trees, they
assembled and made more vigorous signs to Bass and
Flinders to land.
Their threatening manner made Flinders favor
stopping to conciliate them, but Bass was reluctant.
“They’ll only become worse if we persist in stay-
ing here,” said Flinders. “They can give us as bad
a time afloat as ashore, if they swim out and sur-
round us.”
‘‘ V ery well; you ’re skipper, ’ ’ answered Bass. “I’m
with you!”
They drew in to the point, and Bass and Flinders
jumped ashore, leaving Ben to mind the boat, Ben


felt that he would not have been surprised if his
masters had been clubbed at once, but when he saw
that the savages did not immediately fall upon them
he breathed more freely.
“Now Dilba, what have you to show us?”. a4ked
Bass, boldly confronting Dilba.
Dilba smiled cunningly.
“We want you to go away up river,” he answered,
pointing westward through the trees.
“What is there?”
‘ ‘ Plenty duck, plenty fish ! ’ ’
‘ ‘ Quite enough here for us! ” answered Bass.
“Ha! Let that gun alone, you black savage!” he
shouted at a native, who was looking curiously at
the weapon, which Flinders had stood against a
fig-tree to disarm suspicion.
The savage started back and looked sullenly at
Bass.
- “I don’t see that we have gained by coming
here,” Bass said in undertone to Flinders.
“We’ll try and parley with them,” answered
Flinders, “they’ll come round presently. If they
don’t we may be in for a nasty time.”
Bass looked sternly among the savages, and then
laughed and went whistling to the boat, and brought
back an oar which Flinders had broken in his efforts
to stop the boat from capsizing on the beach off
Tom Thumb Lagoon.
Bass handed the oar to Doonga. “There, Doonga,
mend that, and you, you black son of the bush,” he
said to another who was staring blankly at him,
“you help him!”


But the savage did not understand English, and
slunk off, while Doonga, pretending that he also did
not understand, was made by Bass to sit down with
some others while he was shown how to work.
Flinders brought up some powder and spread it
in the sun, and then began to clean the guns, trying
to interest the natives in them while he talked also
to Dilba.
But Dilba was sullen, and, pointing to Flinders
and to the guns, spoke to his companions in their
own language, so that Flinders, noting their sus-
picious looks, put the guns aside.
Flinders felt that matters were fast becoming
more awkward; he must break up this band of
threatening savages, or at any moment they might
rush upon him and murder him. Bass seemed able
to influence those about him; but Doonga was there,
and Flinders quickly perceived that it was Dilba
whom they must suspect most of treachery. ■
Looking round he saw the almost empty water-
cask which Ben had put ashore.
“Here, Dilba, fill this with water!’
But Dilba only pointed up stream and shook his
head.
Flinders was quite unable to understand why they
always desired to go further inland. Suspicion of
their intentions, however, assured him that to go
would be disastrous.
“No water!” Dilba answered. “Plenty up river;
come along!”
Flinders began to feel desperate when still more
alarming a long coo-ee was heard from the bush and


several more natives came down. They pressed
quickly and curiously to see the white men.
Bass took up the oar at that moment finished, and
hurried to Flinders’ side, Doonga following. But at
sight of Doonga the newcomers set up a noisy clamor
and flocked about him in astonishment.
“Our chance!” cried Bass, recognising the cause.
“Cut these fellows’ hair, and we’ll watch an oppor-
tunity to get away when they are in a good humor.
They seem delighted with Doonga!”
“Doonga!” Bass continued, calling to the sur-
rounded black, who was wondering why he had not
been noticed before. “Tell them we’ll cut their hair
too!”
In an instant half a dozen savages were pressing
upon Flinders, and in a minute or two Flinders com-
menced to cut away for dear life.
The greater number now being no longer threaten-
ing, Bass now turned upon Dilba.
“Water, Dilba!” he said, sternly pointing to the
cask.
“No water!” Dilba insisted.
“Flinders!” Bass called out, “stop barbering, and
make Doonga tell these savages that if we don’t get
water you won’t cut their hair!”
On being told more than half a dozen rushed to
the cask, and, hurrying away to the foot of a sand-
hill, soon returned with the cask full.
Dilba, seeing them go, skulked away to the rear
of the crow T d, and drew off a few others to talk with
him.
Bass put the cask into the boat, tested the powder,


and to his delight found it dry, and while Flinders
was cutting the savages’ hair more and more des-
perately, made all ready for slipping away.
“Load the guns, Ben,” he said quietly, “but don’t
let any of them see you; I’ll try to draw them
off.”
Taking Flinders’ mirror Bass went back among
the natives, who soon were struggling so frantically
to see themselves that he had to fasten the glass to a
tree, and compel one at a time to pass, while anxi-
ously he watched for Flinders to finish, and get
away to the boat, leaving the mirror, round which
they clustered, behind.
How exactly they were to escape neither knew.
Flinders finished, and looked round for more; his
last subject had darted off to Bass’s mirror. No
more offered. Dilba and his few stood a little way
off.
Flinders in a moment saw Bass’s design, and made
for the boat. Bass disengaged himself suddenly from
the clamorers, and quickly followed, but Dilba and
his, few intervened, and by their angry words
attracted the others.
Doonga came between Bass and the foremost of
the threatening savages.
Go up stream!” pleaded Doonga, who seemed
to promise escape in the advice.
“We’ll go to our boat!” answered Bass,
The savages on Doonga’s telling them seemed for
the moment to understand that the explorers would
go as desired in their boat, and they fell back.
Bass, seeing the pause, stepped in, and Flinders


turned to join him, when suddenly with an angry
cry Dilba moved to, stop him, only to check himself
angrily as somebody caught his arm and called
“Dilba!”
He turned sharply about'to see Cooya looking at
him.
He dropped his tomahawk, and before he could
recover Flinders was in the boat, with Bass rowing
hard up stream and calling to the savages to follow.
Dilba, maddened, struck at Cooya, but she sprang
aside and laughed. Then he rushed to the bank and
hurled his spear after the boat, while the savages
clustered, excited and uncertain how to act.
Swinging round, the “Tom Thumb” got away
down stream, well into the current, before the
natives realised the change.
“Pull, Bass; pull!” cried Flinders. “They’re
after us! They’ve noticed our ruse!”
Along the banks came the running savages. Could
they reach the point where commenced the long,
shimmering sand, whose treachery they knew, before
the boat should pass, the explorers were outdone.
But the tide had set out, swishing and swirling
it ran; swifter and swifter as the stream narrowed.
The tide alone would carry the boat far faster than
Bass could pull it! With Bass’s added strokes the
‘ ‘ Tom Thumb ’ ’ shot on as if over a rapid. No swim-
mer would try that stream.
One savage, who had outstripped the others,
reached the point as the boat shot past. He seemed
about to plunge. Flinders levelled his gun, but the
savage hesitated, and with a wild, glad cheer from


her crew the “Tom Thumb” swept over the bar out-
side the surf to her home —the ocean.
CHAPTER XI.
THE WAY NORTH.
THE sun had set when the ‘‘Tom Thumb ’’
rounded Windang, and made her way north
against a fresh breeze and a white-capped sea.
With the growing night the npr’-easter as usual
dropped, and Bass and Flinders took up the task of
pulling “home.”
“Home” to them was their safe anchorage under
the islands beyond Red Point.
They pulled on in turn, silently. Ben, tired, lay
in the bottom of the boat.
About nine o’clock they came abreast of Red
Point, passing which they picked up a slight head-
wind, which, with the current swinging south round
the headland, drove them back almost as much as
they advanced.
It was approaching midnight before Red Point
was rounded, and, with hearts soon to be satisfied,
pulled for the old mooring.
Doonga had not joined in the pursuit of the “Tom
Thumb,” but had remained with a few old men
watching the race for life down the channel. Cooya’s
sudden coming had unnerved him, either for check-
ing the savages or assisting their attack.
As he wondering saw the boat toss out on the


open sea safely, and heard the baffled yell of Dilba
and the tribe, he thought of Dilba’s anger; it would
surely be visited upon him, and, though he feared
not Dilba in fight, he dreaded the sneers and jibes,
the sullen company for days, and the muttered
curses and threatenings to which for peace sake he
made no answer.
Without waiting for the return of the others, he
turned and hurried away into the forest, determined
to make his way alone back to his tribe at Botany.
The old men saw him go, but they knew not why,
and could only point his track, when Dilba, still
more angered that Doonga had deserted him,
demanded to be told whither he had gone.
Through the bracken fern, among high spears of
close-growing grass-trees, upon no path, but bearing
ever north, Doonga went, nor ceased his haste until
he had passed the dead ashes of his morning camp,
and waded through the mouth of the “Tom Thumb”
Lagoon, and laid himself down in the hollow of a
sand dune overlooking the scene of the upsetting of
the “Tom Thumb.”
With the morning he rose and hastened on.
Before him the beach extended one far sandy curve,
broken only by the horns of the little bays, whose
crescent-shaped shores relieve the line.
The sun shone hot as summer, and the soft sand
grew warm, so that Doonga, full with his meal of
raw cockles, drowsy under the sun, and from his
short rest of the night, fell asleep.
He woke at the sound of a voice that seemed far
off. He sat up and stretched his arms, and stared


half-frightened to see Cooya sitting upon a sand
knoll near.
“Glad, Doonga?” she asked.
“Very glad to see you!” he answered. “Where
are you from? Has Dilba come?”
“I am from the lake,” she answered. “You have
travelled fast, for you had passed me. I had need
to haste; but you! Why are you running away, and
alone?”
“That Dilba may find others to let loose his wrath
upon!”
Cooya laughed, her eyes flashing through her
curls of hair, fallen in black coils across her face,
her chin in her hands, propped up by her knees.
“You are afraid, Doonga!” she said, tauntingly.
Doonga leapt to his feet, angry for the moment;
then he threw himself down on the sand again and
laughed also.
“Cooya knows how true her words,” he said, and
played with the sand.
“Has the white man put his charm upon you,
Doonga? How strange is your appearance! Your
hair; was it frightened off?”
Doonga looked up. He was proud of his altered
looks, and he laughed merrily at Cooya’s fun.
“Why did you follow us here, Cooya?” he asked
presently.
“Because you wish.to kill the white man, and it is
better you do not. I have followed you everywhere
you have been.”
Doonga looked at her astonished and afraid.
“The white man will not harm you; you will be


better if you serve him. Our people are foolish!
Why did you not make my father and his warriors
fight the white man openly when he came?”
“We knew it was useless. Had we not the pro-
phecy ? ’ *
Cooya laughed in ridicule. “Two cannot stay the
prophecy if a tribe could not! Give it up, Doonga!
I am hunted and alone, scorned of my own people!
If you cannot agree, leave as I have left and go
west! West!” she repeated, muttering to herself,
and absently pulling the sand-sedge from the hil-
lock where she sat.
“Will you come with me, Cooya? You can mind
the gunyah of Doonga, and fish for him in the sun
rivers, and he will fight for you!”
Doonga rose excited from the sand, and stood
before Cooya, who also rose, and bowing her head
muttered, “Cooya will obey!” At which Doonga,
picking up his spear, strode away glad along the
beach, while Cooya followed.
Dilba was behind. Doonga hurried; too soon
might he have to fight for Cooya!
As they turned a point, from which a reef ran
out, they saw the white sail of the “Tom Thumb”
a mile or more to sea.
With the rising sun her crew had set out north,
and were now making towards Port Hacking.
“Yesterday was almost a failure,” Flinders said.
“Let us get back to-day to what we first set out
to do—explore Port Hacking.”
“And leave these Illawarra savages until we are
better prepared,” said Bass, assenting. “Up with


your kellick, Ben, and ye ho! heave, ho! Let’s
thrash along!”
So all the day of March 28th the “Tom Thumb”
sailed northward skirting the coast, while along the
sands and shingle, making faster way, Dooriga and
Cooya travelled to rejoin the tribe of Wonga Wonga
a little while before turning westward for ever.
The northern end of Illawarra is buttressed by
gigantic cliffs, the meeting of the mountains and the
sea.
Clifton (truly, Cliff Town), the little village is
now named that clings, not always too securely, to
the mountain side upon a narrow terrace, below
whose precipices two hundred feet the sea roars,
while above —a thousand feet—hills ascend, tree-clad
in huge eucalypti, giant figs, and fragrant sassafras,
relieved by dark masses of vine-grown trunks, by
waving cabbage palms and bangalows and clusters
of green, drooping, graceful treeferns, and crowned
by castled walls of rock, whose sharp, weathered
crags stand clear against a sky of deep brilliant blue,
or veil themselves in the mists the seawind brings
from north and south and east, where far the Tasman
sea extends.
New South Wales has not among all her charm
of scenery a picture more fair to show than that
framed for view by the mountains and the sea at
Clifton, North Illawarra.
Hills, tree-clad or bare, though evergreen in their
grass mantles, swell, to fade into rich levels by the
streams or jut upon the sea in rocky headlands,
forming the outer guard of crescent-moon bays, ex-


tending buff of sand, white of foam and bine of sea,
into the southern horizon; their loops like necklaces
suspended, or the embroidery of the delicate blue
garment that covers our world.
To where a valley runs in between the cliffs upon
a beach that makes a yellow break among the dark
rocks, Bass and Flinders sailed, and landed.
The foliage in all these sheltered spots is rich and
dense. A small stream runs out of the valley and
oozes across the sand.
Flinders built their fire, while Ben caught some
eels in the creek, and Bass, cheated of his sport at
“Tom Thumb” Lagoon, took his gun and success-
fully followed a flight of grey flock pigeons to their
feeding ground, a giant fig that grew some distance
up the hill side.
When Bass returned and cleaned his game Flin-
ders prepared the heartiest meal they had eaten
since they left the lagoon.
Then as night came down they rolled themselves
in their blankets upon the sand, soft and yielding,
with space unlimited in which to spread their
cramped limbs.
They set no watch, for the cliffs and precipices
were their guard, and they had little fear that they
were followed.


CHAPTER XII.
THE NIGHT OF STORM.
WHILE Flinders and Ben were cooking break-
fast next morning Bass wandered away to
explore the cliffs.
On the southern side of the beach upon which
they were camped a large flat rock extends, dotted
with great boulders that have fallen from the
heights. Examining these Bass found among them
squared black masses, which he took to be black
stone. Such masses were afterwards seen by Clarke
and his companions—shipwrecked sailors making
their way overland by the coast to Sydney from
Cape Howe—and upon burning were found to be
coal.
Bass at a later period revisited the cliffs, and dis-
covered an extensive coal seam. The place was
called Coal Cliff, the first discovered of the great
coal mines of Illawarra.
Breakfast over, the “Tom Thumb” was once more
headed north.
The wind was light, fitful caps came from the
land; a haze hung low upon the water, and the sky
was dull slate, covered with thin clouds, such as
when they veil the heavens by night, make round
the moon a watery circle.


Though the sun shone dully, the heat was great
and the air heavy.
After a while the wind died away wholly, and
Bass took out the oars and settled down to a long
steady pull.
Flinders and Ben took regular turns as on they
toiled under the sweltering heat.
By the afternoon they had advanced twelve miles
from the Coal Cliff, and they drew in for shelter
under a headland north of Bulgo.
Tired, Flinders suggested that they drop the
kellick, and ride the night out.
He looked wearily shoreward, and then up at the
sky and over the dull sea.
They got out supper after a while, and afterwards
sat idly in the boat with depressed feelings and fore-
bodings of danger inexplainable.
So the sun set, and as the hills grew darker the
sea made hollow, drear echoes under the cliffs.
Ben felt eerie as he looked shoreward.
“It would be nasty to be run ashore ’ere, sir,” he
said to Flinders.
“Yes, but we’re not likely to be sent there, Ben,”
answered Flinders cheerily, “we are well out and
fairly sheltered; we’d have to be blown clean out
of the water to shift us. ’ ’
He glanced over the sea and smiled confidently at
his companions. There was nothing to fix or make
more secure in the “Tom Thumb,” the little eight-
foot ship needed no “making snug” for the blow.
The long walls of cliffs grew darker and darker
as the night shut in black and lowering, until the


shore was distinguishable only by the boom of the
surf and a white line faint and often quite shut
out, at the foot of the black mass.
As sunshine, blue sky, and sparkling waters fill
with happiness and security, so equally the darkness,
the hollow moaning and strange whispers of the sea,
and the oppressiveness gave the sense of impending
danger and a feeling of dread which the explorers,
strive as they might, could not cast off.
A herald puff of wind shifted the boat slightly.
“From south,” Bass said. “We had better run
dead east for a mile or two if we have to up
anchor.”
As he spoke lightning straggled in long chains and
the wind shook the boat again.
Ben curled down in the boat, and wished he could
go to sleep and forget this dread that made him so
restless. Bass sat in his usual place, smoking and
watching southward. Far on that horizon a narrow
fringe of light showed, which, stretching over the
ocean faintly, illumined its dark surface, while the
clouds hung blacker.
Rapidly the storm rolled forward, a black curving
line of cloud reaching from the east to the west
horizon. (The southerly storm now about to burst
upon the “Tom Thumb” is a feature peculiar to the
east coast of Australia, especially of New South
Wales; experience has taught seamen of to-day to
prepare for such storms, which almost certainly
occur after heat.)
Flinders watched the onrushing cloud-fold, and
listened to the roar along the cliffs.


“I think we’ll run with it, Bass,” he said, quickly.
“Make things secure, Ben, and have the bailer
ready; you’ll want it!”
Flinders steered seaward. That ugly black mass,
with its roaring surf line, threatened grimly. Their
hopes of riding out the storm went suddenly, Flin-
ders gripping an oar desperately.
Though one storm is much like another —be it a
typhoon of the China Sea, a blizzard of the North
Atlantic, or a “southerly burster” of the South
Pacific—yet those upon whom its severity falls feel
it to be all-important; it is to them the storm, to them
its awfulness and its dangers are transcendent.
Should the “Tom Thumb” fail in this, her storm,
history were robbed of a great name, Australia of
a great benefactor.
And the “Tom Thumb” was a boat eight feet
long! The storm such as has sent many a stout
coaster to the bottom!
For an hour none spoke. In wind and foam and
piercing spray, drenched, desperate, they fought
on.
Fast and faster, never ceasing, Ben threw the
water windward, and fast and faster the waves
broke and seethed as if they must flood and drown
the boat, while Flinders clung to the oar and Bass
to the tiny sheet.
Between the lightning flashes Flinders watched
the blackness, and when the cliffs lit for the instant
marked their distance seaward, and held the boat
away from the leeward surf.
Qne false turn of Flinders’ steering oar, or the


failure of Bass to hold the sail, and the boat must
sink.
But Flinders feared not so much for himself and
for Bass as for Ben. Human skill and power could
guide no boat through that sea without shipping
water. Ben was almost spent. He was failing at
every effort, praying to God with heart and lips
that he might hold out.
The fringe of light to south had broadened, the
heavens less dark, illumining the ocean, showed
ahead huge masses of surf surging at the base of a
long and lower cliff.
Bearing off Flinders steered past the foam, and,, as
with leaping hearts the explorers felt that she must
strike on the point, a wave bore her past, and in a
moment, before her crew could recover their shock,
the “Tom Thumb” was sailing into unbroken,
though heavily heaving, water under a sheltering
headland.
In an instant down came Bass’s sail, out shot
the oars, and after a few desperate strokes towards
safety, the boat lay rocking secure in calm water.
“Thank God!” said Flinders reverently, as he
reached forward, and dropped the kellick.
“Thank God, indeed!” answered Bass quietly,
and the exhausted sailors sank down in their boat
overcome.
The safe navigation of the “Tom Thumb” through
that storm is one of the most remarkable feats in the
annals of maritime adventure. Flinders dwells upon
it in his records, and reverently tells of their sudden
and unexpected delivery.


Through the remaining hours of the night they
rested safely, while outside the far headland the
storm raged until morning, when the gale dropped
and the sun rose on a heaving distraught sea, with
the remnant of a wind that unwound the mists from
the waters, and, bearing them landward, made them
a filmy veil for the hills.
CHAPTER XIII.
ON THE HEIGHTS.
DILBA delayed among the natives of Lake Illa-
warra, not to partake of their hospitality, nor
to entertain them with his companionship, but
because, disappointed in his efforts to kill the white
men, and, further, angered at Doonga’s forsaking
him, he grew sullen, and obstinately refused to obey
the impulses that told him it were better to follow
Doonga and live at peace with him and the white
man.
So he brooded long, muttering curses on his
failure, and excited to greater anger whenever he
thought upon Cooya’s interference. Then suddenly
he departed, and returned northward alone.
He travelled in the tracks of Doonga and Cooya,
but did not overtake them. He saw no sail to sea-
ward, and so concluded that the explorers had put
in to Watta Mowlee, not knowing that Flinders and


Bass were ignorant of this shelter. He pushed on
rapidly.
The storm was breaking as he climbed the hill
south of Watta Mowlee, and looked down upon the
bay, whose sands lay faintly discernible below him
some half mile.
But he saw no boat.
The wind hurrieaned across the exposed hill, and
Dilba pressed forward for shelter under the lee.
He dropped over a low precipice, and found that
the rocks overhung several feet, where the soft
sandstone, worn by wind and sea mist, had been so
eroded as to leave a floor and roof, with inner wall,
like a gallery.
Dilba, relieved, stood a moment in the shelter, and
then made his way along the passage. On turning
a corner he stopped suddenly.
Before him, just distinguishable through the dark
from the dull glow of the low fire, over which they
crooned, sat Doonga and Cooya,
Dilba carried one spear and a nullah nullah. He
crouched suddenly for a moment, watching with
bated breath, to ascertain whether they had heard
his coming.
But his bare feet had scarcely sounded, and the
noises of wind and storm above the crags enveloped
all sounds in their own.
Rising cautiously, Dilba poised himself, and took
aim at Doonga’s back, which, but a few yards dis-
tant, was so bent over the fire as to offer the best
attitude for Dilba’s purpose.
At the instant that Dilba’s arm was drawn back


contracting the muscles to give fullest impetus when
released to the hurl of the spear, Doonga, with that
unaccountable prescience that tells of approaching
good or ill, turned and looked round.
He saw Dilba and the hurtling spear. With a yell
of anger and fear he threw himself back, and the
spear, passing over him, struck through the breast
and out through the back of Cooya, who, at Doonga’s
cry, had suddenly started up from opposite him.
She fell back, and writhing, rolled from the rock
ledge and dropping a few feet, lay dead among some
low brush that fringed the rocks.
Doonga stood up with the fire between him and
Dilba.
Doonga was weaponless; Dilba held his nullah-
nullah tightly, ready to strike.
Dilba lowered his nullah as eye met eye.
“Need we fight?” he asked. “She is dead.”
Doonga did not speak. He leapt across the fire,
and grappled with Dilba. He gripped firmly the
wrist that held the nullah, rendering the weapon
useless, so that Dilba let it go, and equal, they fought
for each other’s throats.
For a time they strove so evenly that they moved
but little from their footholds. The fire flickered
up, and fitfully lit their dark struggling forms.
The rain spattered over the cliff edge and upon
the leaves.
Lightning at intervals lit all in a white glow.
While the crew of the “Tom Thumb” fought the
sea and storm for life, Dilba and Doonga here
fought for each other’s life.


Steadily at length Doonga began to force Dilba
back. With a sudden wrench he locked Dilba’s arm,
and, releasing his grip of it, sunk his fingers deep
about Dilba’s throat.
Dilba swayed, stumbled and fell backward.
Doonga nothing relaxing, fell with him, his fingers
gripping like teeth. So they fought on, Doonga
above.
Not a word was spoken. Gasps and hisses of
struggling breath were the only sounds that came
from the combatants.
Dilba was failing at every struggle, Doonga could
feel the efforts grow less and less as, savagely exul-
tant, he gripped the tighter.
Deeper he forced his grip. Dilba quivered and lay
still. Doonga stood up trembling.
Then he went down among the brush, and found
Cooya.
He drew out the spear and threw it aside. Then
raising Cooya he carried her, stumbling through the
storm, back to the rock ledge. There he mourned
until day, when he covered her with grass and
boughs, piled heavier with stones and wood.
Then taking the body of Dilba he dragged it some
distance to where the cliff sheered steep towards the
sea, and savagely pushed it over the precipice.
Then he hurried away, saw the “Tom Thumb’s”
crew landing on the sands of Watta Mowlee, but
made no sign, and soon disappeared into the forest.
His way was far, and he went alone.
His savage and superstitious soul was vexed with


dread and grief and mystery, and he thought only
of escaping to new country.
Western tribes gave him welcome, and the white
man saw him no more.
CHAPTER XIV.
WATTA MOWLEE AND HOME.
WITH the sun Flinders woke, and roused Bass
and Ben.
“Let’s put ashore at once,” he said, “I am stiff
and sore; we are coated with salt, and we and every-
thing aboard will be the better for a sun bath.”
Bass dragged himself stiffly into a sitting posture,
and looked round the bay.
Shoreward the surf was combing the sand in white
rolls, while seaward beyond the headlands the waves
were running high and wild. Ragged clouds hung
against the misty blue, and caught the colors of the
rising sun, and made shadows against the hills.
Ben rubbed his hands to loosen the joints, and
hauled in the kellick.
Bass took the oars, and pulled ashore.
“We are lucky to be here,” Bass exclaimed
heartily. “Providence Bay we should call this place,
for surely we are safe in it by His favor.”
“Whether we name it so or no, it will be always
‘Providence Bay’ with us,” Flinders assented
gravely.


There, with the earth beneath their feet, sailors
true and brave though they were, did the explorers
fully realise that they were safe, and how severe
had been the struggles of the night.
The leaves and grasses glittered, while from the
wet earth stole wisps of mist to vanish in the higher
air.
A flock of little brown birds with bright scarlet
beaks and scarlet backs, twittered cheerily from
bush to bush, while some seagulls, with harsh cries,
fluttered and quarrelled over a dead fish floating in
the surf among some sea-w T eed.
Dilba lay dead under the cliff on the hill; the ants
were beginning to find him. Cooya a little distant.
Doonga was passing through the forest.
After breakfasting hungrily the crew of the “Tom
Thumb ” rested, lying in the sun on the sand, dozing
or chatting happily with grateful hearts.
Each had bravely and unflinchingly .fought his
part in the fight, and so had held the boat safely
through the seas. But none of the three, they felt,
had steered her to the safety in which they now
rested. The hand of God had guided the “Tom
Thumb.”
In the darkness, upon an unknown shore, hard beset
by storm, not knowing whither their way, seeing no
refuge, they had striven, to find themselves suddenly
relieved, now on this morning after to lie on the sand
and w r atch idly the sea that would have wrecked
them, and to delight in the security and beauty, in the
peace and sweetness, with fullest thankfulness.


“We’re meant for better things,” Bass remarked,
as if talking to himself.
“Yes, by the blessing of God,” answered Flinders,
“we are. We’ll explore this Austral land from ocean
to ocean before we’ll feel our work is done!”
“We will!” cried Bass exnltingly. “I like your
term, Austral land,” he added reflectively.
Flinders smiled. The words had fallen glibly,
prompted by a thought unconscious, but he remem-
bered the incident, and afterwards adopted from
them the name, Australia—name most pleasing of
sound, most descriptively accurate.
By noon the sea had gone down, and a gentle wind
from the south-east promised an easy passage north.
Once more the “Tom Thumb” was cargoed, and
sailed out of the bay gleaming in the clear sun, past
the headland to north.
As they rounded the head the explorers looked
back on Watta Mowlee, with its bold heath-clad
headlands, its basin of calm sea, itz beach of buff
sand, and its densely timbered hills. Watta Mowlee
(they learned its name afterwards from the natives
of Deeban) had saved them from the storm; no spot
in all their explorations would ever be more kindly
remembered.
High and steep cliffs extend continuously north of
Watta Mowlee, with a trend eastward, terminating
at Bombora Head.
After sailing for about two hours the “Tom
Thumb” passed the Bombora, and Flinders made
out the entrance to Port Hacking, their original
destination.


The waves were breaking roughly on the bar, but
men who had braved seas far heavier were not to be
deterred.
Picking up a channel, over the bar they went, and
with a hearty cheer entered Port Hacking.
They camped ashore, having for supper a feast of
fish, for which Port Hacking has since become
famous.
The next day they explored the bay, proving it of
no value as a harbor, and merely the estuary of small
unimportant streams. So the dream of a great river
reaching far into the continent vanished.
Early on the morning of the 2nd of April, the
ninth day of their expedition, the “Tom Thumb”
left Port Hacking bound for home.
As they were putting off two natives came down
to the shore.
Ben,, being first to notice their approach, ex-
claimed, “Here come two blacks!”
“Dilba and Doonga again!” cried Bass, as he
watched them coming across the rocks.
Flinders put up his glass. “No,” he said. “They
are not those two scoundrels; they are strangers.”
“I don’t think Doonga was as bad as Dilba, sir,”
said Ben. “I was watching them both pretty close
when we were at the lake.”
“Perhaps not, but bad enough. They meant to
finish us off if they could have got us away from our
guns, or farther inland, where we could not easily
have been traced. Yet, when I think of it, I wonder
more and more why they didn’t finish us where we
were! They seem to have some strange superstitious


dread that holds them back, no matter how they
threaten. However,” Flinders concluded, “I am not
so disposed to trust blacks as I used to be.”
“Glad to hear it!” cried Bass. “I’ll feel safer
myself after that admission. Is there any sign of
others with these two? Of Dilba and Doonga I
expect we’ve seen the last. There seemed prospects
of a falling out I judged from Doonga’s being
friendly at the lake. In any case they’ll stay away
from Botany for some time.”
“No doubt,” answered Flinders slowly, “though
they needn’t have any fear of our hunting them. We
haven’t time, and besides it isn’t worth while. Yet
they were mysterious fellows; they always seemed
to turn up at curious times and places, as if they
had some devilry on hand.”
“Mysterious or no,” answered Bass, “we’ll have
dry powder and plenty of it next time we make their
acquaintance. I’ve been wondering who the gin
(blaekwoman) was who caught hold of Dilba!”
“I didn’t see anybody,” answered Flinders.
“I did,” said Ben, “but I thought she wanted the
tomahawk for herself.”
“Murdering villains!” growled Bass. “I wonder
what these two are after!”
The two natives had now reached the beach off
which the boat lay, Bass having let her drift quietly
farther from shore.
After talking with the visitors a little. Bass pushed
the boat back and he and Flinders went ashore.
The natives belonged to the Botany tribe, and had
wandered south in search of game.


They knew Dilba and Doonga, but had not seen
them for some time. As they were hungry—the com-
mon condition of their kind—Bass fed them well,
and then the “Tom Thumb” sailed away.
Past the long wide beaches of bright Cronulla,
past The Merries, and the headlands of Botany, from
which Dilba and Doonga had watched on the night
before the sea-ghosts came, and behind which the
tribe of Wonga Wonga was daily failing; northward
the “Tom Thumb” drove.
The one white moving speck on that field of blue,
she sailed on. At evening she lay safe beside “The
Reliance” in Port Jackson.
The “Tom Thumb’s” work of exploration was
accomplished.
Welcomed and cheered on every hand, her crew
took up again their every-day work.
Shortly after “The Reliance” sailed for the Cape
of Good Hope by way of Cape Horn.
Flinders lived to become the greatest of Australian
explorers, facing danger ever with the same courage
as “on the night of storm” (which he never forgot
or depreciated), bearing with patient suffering long
years of imprisonment in the Mauritius, where he
was basely robbed of his charts by Baudin, the
French navigator, to reach England, his home, at
last, and die just as he leapt to fame on the day
his works were published.
Bass won brilliant honors for a brief period in
Australian exploration. Then leaving the Australian
station he passed from notice somewhere on the


coasts of Chili, and his final end is not recorded. His
monument is Bass Strait.
Ben Halyard went with “The Reliance.”
As she bent her sails to the Pacific winds and the
brown-rocked Australian coast dipped from view on
the western horizon, Ben watched until the last
shadow of the land had faded into the mists, and
thought lovingly of his voyages in the “Tom
Thumb.”
He had longed to achieve some great success. He
felt now that he had not failed. He had done his
part.
History is silent of his name; he was but a ship’s
boy, but history records the bailing of the boat on
that wild night upon the stern North Illawarra coast,
and in that brave deed lies undying honor to Ben
Halyard. Had Ben failed then, despite all struggles
of Bass and Flinders, the Pacific would have rolled
for ever over the man who afterwards conquered all
the Australian waters, and made their ways known
to all navigators.
Ben Halyard goes.
He may have “gone into action” as he had desired
on that morning when he lay dreaming in the sun
on the deck of “The Reliance,” perhaps served
under great Nelson and joined in the glories of Tra-
falgar, but he would render no greater service to his
King and country than when he stood to his post
in the storm off Watta Mowlee and saved Flinders
to Australia.


D YMOCK’S BOOK ARCADE,
Educational Booksellers,
428 George Street, Sydney.


