

BENDL
Of the Boak
the
Itt rendering
Water Workr
directors fee’
widers gene 1
ipon the presi
eason of tk
vdiich it has
rosecuting
The year
Company —
ud it is tip
nth no small
pon the pas'
fforts failed '
ntrusted to tj
urely advance i
ion of being th*
! > L<llv hi i : ! r'j.f
GO WATER WORKS COMPANY.
BEPOE
;T> 03? Directors, presented to the Shareholders ,
General Meeting held August 31 1859.
report of the proceedings of the Bendigo
ks Company, during the last twelve months, the
el that they, in common with the body of Share-
srally, have much cause for mutual congratulation
■esent promising condition of affairs, as well as by
ie uniformly successful issue of the various plans
ias been their privilege to devise and mature, in
j the common interest of the proprietors.
• just ended—taken as an epoch in the history of the
-has been one of no ordinary labour and difficulty;
lerefore not without considerable satisfaction, and
all degree of pride, that the Directors look back
at with the conviction that in no case have their
in effect; and that the great scheme which has been
their management has been so far steadily but
iced, as to have earned for it the enviable distinc-
ie pioneer project which has opened up a new


channel for the capital of the Colony, and revolutionised —so
to speak—the entire system of gold-mining throughout
Victoria.
The events of the year have been so far important that the
Directors feel compelled —at the risk of tediousness —to make
a somewhat detailed resume from the date of their election, in
order that no portion of the Company’s affairs may be mis-
apprehended by the Shareholders.
The duties of the Directors, appointed at the Meeting of the
11th August, 1858, were, up to the 24th February, 1859, con-
fined exclusively to the carrying out of the provisions of the
Subscription Contract entered into at that Meeting ; namely,
the Incorporation of the Company by Act of Parliament.
It will readily be believed that this result was not accom-
plished without considerable expense, delay, and labour, seeing
that many deep-rooted prejudices had to be overcome —preju-
dices which, now happily for the Colony, are rapidly decaying,
but which hitherto, with the absurd notion of benefiting the
individual miner, have tended to retard the development of
the resources of our gold districts ; seeing, also, that the privi-
leges sought by the Company’s Bill were of a novel and im-
portant character ; and, lastly, that the promoters had to go
before Parliament wdth the unworthy suspicion attaching to
them, that it was not in contemplation to construct Water
Works at all, but that the mere washing of a certain quantity
of auriferous earth was all that was intended.
With the Incorporation of the Company, the Subscription
Contract became invalid, its intention having been fulfilled,
and the Directors (empowered by the Act) proceeded to carry
on the works of the Company with vigour.
It will here be desirable to explain as briefly as possible the
alterations which have been necessary in the original project, as
enterprised by Mr. E. N. Emmett. Eelying upon the accuracy
of the statements made by the projector, backed, as they were,
by the opinion of an engineer of some note, the Provisional
Committee appear not to have tested the feasibility of the


original scheme, previous to the appointment of the present
Board; but immediately upon taking office the Directors sought
out, and, as they firmly believe, obtained the highest professional
skill, in the person of Mr. Joseph Brady, the Company’s per-
manent engineer, whose undivided services are secured, by agree-
ment, until the completion of the works. After a most careful
survey, prosecuted by that gentleman, it was found that the
storage capacity of the reservoir at Golden Square (the only
reservoir included in the original scheme), was less by nearly
one million of gallons than what had been stated in
the prospectus issued by the Provisional Committee,
which prospectus was framed upon the statements of the pro-
jector and of his engineer. Further, that in place of the
drainage area being forty square miles, the result of Mr.
Brady’s survey proved it to be only 13£ square miles.
So wide a difference in calculation of course necessitated a
thorough remodelling of the scheme, and the Company’s en-
gineer marked out a series of reservoirs, tier above tier within
the area of the watershed (the various basins being connected by
a contour race or ditch, cutting off the water supply from the
lower portion of the ground), by which means storage capa-
city, at various levels, for nearly 312 millions of gallons has
been obtained, and the area of the water surface increased from
21 to 101 acres.
The effect of this alteration will be, that whereas by the
original scheme it would have been absolutely impossible for
the Company to supply any quantity of water for at least four
years to come for mining purposes, and none at all for domes-
tic use (owing to the mineral springs upon the reservoir at
Golden Square, and the drainage of a portion of the town into
it), they will now be in a position, and it is practicable, within
six months from this date, to deliver fresh water throughout
the town of Sandhurst, at a pressure not inferior to that of the
Yan Yean in Melbourne.
All the necessary cast-iron pipes, fire-plugs, hydrants, hoses,
and other appliances of a water company, are already on their


way from Europe, aud a very profitable source of permanent
revenue is now actually within the grasp of the Company.
While upon the subject of water as a distinct means of di-
vidend, it may be as well to state that by the arrangement of
the various reservoirs devoted exclusively to the high-level and
low-level mining supply, the Company will be enabled—with-
out interfering with the mining operations at Golden Square —
to supply the various puddlers aud other miners for a distance
of eight miles in one direction, and of four and a half miles in
another. The revenue to the Company from these sources
alone, will, it is anticipated, provide a very acceptable profit
upon the entire capital invested.
The Company have been put to some expense by way of
compensation to the miners located upon the site of the re-
servoir at Golden Square, at the time of possession being given;
but it is satisfactory to know that an amicable settlement was
arrived at without the necessity of legal intervention. Eor
the last four months the ground has been entirely free of
trespassers.
With respect to the tenure of the land occupied by the
Company for the purposes of the undertaking, the Directors
have the pleasure to announce that in place of a lease of twenty-
one acres for a limited number of years, as was originally contem-
plated, they have succeeded in obtaining from the Crown a grant
in fee simple of the whole of the various sites for reservoirs,
amounting in all to one hundred and one acres, and including
a valuable block of three acres for the machinery at the gold
washing establishment. The Crown grant is now actually
signed and in the possession of the Secretary, and the Direc-
tors consider themselves warranted in believing that the satis-
factory nature of the terms obtained has tended materially to
enhance the value of the Shareholders’ property.
The following general report by the Company’s engineer,
dated 24th August, has given satisfaction to the Directors, and
will, it is anticipated, be received with approval by the body of
Shareholders.


ENGINEER’S REPORT.
Bendigo Water Works, Sandhurst,
24th August, 1859.
To the Board of Directors of the
Bendigo Water Works Company.
Gentlemen,
I have the honor to submit the following General
Report of the progress of the Bendigo Water Works since the
commencement.
The design is being carried out strictly in accordance with
the plans and details submitted to parliament, from none of
which have I yet seen occasion to deviate.
The works for the gold washing establishment at JSTo. 1
Reservoir, Golden Square, were commenced on the 21st of
March, and have been carried on without intermission to the
present time. The buildings comprise washing shed, engine
shed, workshops, and offices, all of which are nearly completed,
and the machinery is so far advanced as to enable me to com-
mence regular working on Monday, 29th instant.
At the public inauguration of the works, on the 18th instant,
the pumps and incline gearing were not complete, as a con-
siderable portion of the iron work had not arrived. On that
occasion two waggon-loads of earth were washed, in order to
test the working of the puddling machinery, which fully
answered my expectations ; and I am quite satisfied the size
cylinder adopted will be found equally efficient with any
machines in use elsewhere.
With respect to the ground to be washed, it is certain that
over an area of fifteen out of the twenty-one acres in the
reserve, not more than one-half of the wash-dirt has been re-
moved. The remainder—six acres—has been partially worked
by horse puddling machines ; but very little of the wet ground
in the creek bed has been touched. Under these circum-
stances the Company is warranted in entertaining the most
favorable expectations of the results of the enterprise.
A quartz-reef (the Hibernian reef) traverses the reserve for
upwards of three hundred yards : the claims on this (outside
the Company’s boundary) have yielded good stone, and there
is reason to anticipate valuable results from this source.
Judging from the outlay on these works up to the present,
I am satisfied the cost of excavating and washing will be con-
siderably under the amount stated in my estimate; and I have
also reason to believe the value of the washed gravel as railway
ballast, was underrated. In short, I cannot enter into detail
of any matter of expenditure, as compared with my calcula-


tions, without feeling assured of the most satisfactory results ;
and so far as the works have yet been executed, they have been
completed within my estimate.
The works of the Eeservoir (No. 7), for the town supply
(six miles from Sandhurst), are being rapidly prosecuted. The
dam was begun on the Ist of June, and at the present there
are 16,000 cubic yards of earth placed in it, closely rammed
and puddled in the most perfect manner. The total cubic
quantity in the dam will he 68,750 yards, and, at an ordinary
rate of progress, it will be completed by the Ist of January
next, in time for the autumnal and winter rains.
In conclusion, I thank you for the trust and confidence re-
posed in me during the progress of these works.
I remain, Gentlemen,
Tour obedient Servant,
JOSEPH BEADY.
In the erection of the machinery, and the construction of
permanent works at Golden Square, the Directors have spared
no reasonable expense; and they believe themselves to he
within hounds in stating, that for excellence of workmanship,
niceness of adaptation in all its details, as well as for extent
and capability, the gold-washing establishment of the Com-
pany has no rival in this Colony —if, indeed, in the world.
The Company’s works were formally inaugurated on the
18th instant, in the presence of a large and influential section
of the Sandhurst population; and it is an especially gratifying
fact that the whole of the machinery (then started for the
first time) worked in the most admirable and efficient manner.
Two loads of “ stuff” were passed through one of the cylinders,
not with the view of testing the character of the ground, hut
in order to demonstrate the principle upon which the gold-
washing will be executed. It may, however, he interesting for
Shareholders to learn, that gold in quantity exceeding the
datum upon which the calculations of the Directors have been
founded, was obtained from the pan of the one cylinder used
on that occasion.
With respect more particularly to the anticipated average
yield of gold from the whole of reservoir No. 1, it would of


course be dangerous—until a fair trial has been made —to in-
dulge in any very extravagant expectations.
The Directors, nevertheless, consider themselves justified in
believing that the yield will far exceed the original estimate,
and the excellent character of the machinery, as a gold saving
apparatus, materially assists this belief.
The statistics of some of the mining companies already in
operation, with respect to the quality of earth washed, and the
return of gold obtained, are certainly of a very encouraging
nature, and warrant the Directors in anticipating the most
satisfactory results from the working out of the reservoir at
Grolden Square. This ground is believed to be of a much
more auriferous character than that of even the most success-
ful mining company; the area is twenty-one acres, and more-
over (as appears by the Engineer’s Eeport), a very great pro-
portion has not yet been properly worked, Eurther, when it
is remembered that after the mining operations of the Com-
pany have ceased (as well as for a considerable period during
their prosecution), a large and permanent revenue is to be
derived by the sale of the water impounded in the eight re-
servoirs, which will then be completed—when this is taken
into consideration—the Directors submit that there is much
cause for congratulation on the prospects of a great success.
The whole of the Company’s Shares have been disposed of
in two separate issues. Upon the first issue (7865 in number),
Two Pounds per Share have been called; and upon the second
(4135), One Pound only has yet been subscribed. The profits to
the Company, by way of premiums upon a portion of the second
issue sold by tender, have amounted to £4695 10s., a sum
more than sufficient to wipe off all the preliminary expenses
incurred in the establishment of the Company.
The Books have been balanced to the 30th June, and a
statement of receipts and disbursements examined and certi-
fied by the Auditors has been prepared. The following is the
statement referred to :


i- CO I co eo oo I co j . S .
OtC r-t O I CO I •= •
3- 1 "S* 9 I S I a
* ,&
•Tl *.
Q • * • • * • * §
M O
'Tj • C3 • •
{/) • fZ • •
« : : : : : w t g :;::::: : : : :
PQ £4 • *4) •
£ So • ’g • fe ' . • - •
Q g « o
S5 , O *2 __
M . 3 * 2 • . iS <S •
m • • so • j • S I ® • S • * • • „ 3 •
<! .2 o g+=C
° i: f; K g. S J||I
3 55 ►* '353 £ £ w a bo O
. sSl »l Jlpll I
il- I S|J §| : ii if
2 = « ocsl h % § wgpq.-- 2
U6 B § a Sg> ®»
III g| sgSIPlllIl S«| s fs
£ 5S S 3* cduJK'o-dscrfi) w S3 rj
5 5s £££! &5
w 5 s * * 5 5 s 5
O Oi
K ' I 05
O *• \ |
UO (M \ ■
S S \ I £
s \ I ®.
«+* \ «
o o o o rococo \ W
JOOOO N \
05 (N <N C- \
(D X IC H C3 H \
O) O M N \
H U5 \
«« \
E3 ••••••• \
a> \
i s
OQ I g * • • • • \
N ~ ' 00 \
u >« W
4® : :& : :
"S ® S
B o .. s H «
5!|** 5 J \
?£ ■§ fi a
£S a” -5 ft \
wS§°« gag" \
\
PS <D •—; l. S n »
I&SKS g||g \
S ££££
£ s s S. s
w
W
EH
Ph
O
EH
W
S
P 3
O
fe
>: S
2 S
< 0
£ o
2
O oS
o Ph
*pr
5 afjzi
CC
O W M
S Si
E3 O
S 10
K C^ o
UJ -■-
< sb
5 5^
Q Ph
o
o <C
G oq o
Z
S a
CO w
o
s
PH
o
EH
0
Eh
<1
EH
m
fa-
g
O iO M VO 05 Tj<
co *-h c co co m
O -t* H CO O CO
CB £
jjh n (N M
CO o O 00 00 CO rH
CO Tf 05 CC Tt< W
A
w
>
M
w
o
W<y
i a
CO I S R • • • •
n!H s ’ m
g
4® : •> : :
"S ® a
£o , S W w
PI-* 5 ;|
?£ ■§ t a
SS a" .5 B
P.S® tJ Oi <;,3 CS
Ba§°«
H~ s« O S fc, PO
b rH t/2 HH .
usia
OCS tfi NO C C | • CO r- 00
(M rH CO CO O O o r*-«*Oin
J>HHWiOO • CO rH 00 CO
»C H 00 O CO • O 00 M 00
pH o CO rH -»t X-
rH T*
OQ
«
O
H
HH
P
P
<1
£ .
Ha
td O
§«'
®d
•d
o
<v
u
M
o
0
a
s
«s
*d
1
c 3
•d
d>
P .
*5 05
P
c 3 GO
X H
w .
•g
o
r-<
SO
§
I s
z
«
p
o
a
|
a


Since the date of the above statement, the receipts have
been about £6000; and the expenditure on account of works,
&c., as follows; viz. at No. 1 reservoir, £4000; at reservoir
No. 7, £lBOO ; for machinery, tools, and rolling stock, £1400;
and for salaries, Directors’ fees, office expenses and sundries,
£9OO.
Shareholders are doubtless aware that at the conclusion of
this Meeting they will be called upon to take into considera-
tion the case of Mr. E. N. Emmett, as the projector of the
Company; and it is therefore necessary that such explanation
should now be offered as will enable them to understand the
position of that gentleman with the Company as a Corporation,
and with themselves individually as Shareholders, In the first
place, Mr. Emmett has relinquished all claim upon the Com-
pany, having on the sth of May executed a full release
without consideration, and upon the single condition that the
Directors should give him an opportunity of stating to Share-
holders, at a general meeting, “ what he did in the formation of
the Company.” It must therefore be borne in mind, that in
making his statement, Mr. Emmett will address himself to in-
dividuals, and not to the Shareholders as a Company. The
Directors have no wish to appraise the value of Mr. Emmett’s
past services, beyond the sum which has already been paid to
him on account of preliminary expenses, but they desire to ex-
press a hope that his appeal will be responded to with such
liberality as the circumstances of his case may be shown to
warrant. Much unfavorable and illiberal criticism has been
indulged in by persons out of doors, and by a portion of the
Press of this city, with respect to the conduct of the Company
in arranging with Mr. Emmett; and while this officiousness , by
those not in any way interested, may have given some little
annoyance, the Directors have refrained from making any ex-
planation of the matter until the present, which, in their
opinion, is the only siiitable occasion.
In their Eeport of the 11th August, the Provisional Com-
mittee recommended to their successors in management, that the


amount of remuneration to be given in free shares to Mr. Em-
mett, should be decided by arbitration; and immediately upon
commencing their duties, the Directors arranged for a settle-
ment in the way proposed. Arbitrators were appointed, and
an umpire selected; but previous to any meeting, the Com-
pany were advised by their solicitors, that the award would be
binding upon them only, in so far as that it might come in the
shape of a recommendation from the Directors to the body of
Shareholders, at the next general meeting. The result of
this quasi arbitration was, that the umpire, to whom the case
was referred, awarded to Mr. Emmett 1750 free shares of £5
paid. This took place before the incorporation of the Com-
pany, and previous to the impracticability of, or rather the de-
fects in the original scheme having become known.
The matter remained in abeyance until after the incorpora-
tion of the Company, which took place on the 24th Eebruary,
1859. On that date Mr. Emmett wrote to the Board, de-
manding the ratification of the agreement by the appropriation
of the Shares in the manner directed by the umpire. This
letter was referred for the opinion of the Company’s solicitors;
and as legal difficulties suggested themselves, the Directors
prepared a most elaborate and impartial statement of the whole
case, which, with all documents and minutes, both of the Pro-
visional Committee and of the Board of Directors, was re-
ferred for the joint consideration of Mr. Carter and Mr.
Fellows.
Upon the legal opinion thus obtained, the Company have of
course acted. They were advised that neither the Directors
by themselves, nor the Shareholders at a public meeting, acting
in concert with them, had any power to grant either shares or
money, by way of remuneration, to Mr. Emmett, unless every
single share were subscribed for, and every individual Share-
holder were to sign an indemnity in favor of Mr. Emmett for
his “ breach of trust and fraud,” (being himself at that time a
Shareholder) in the acceptance by him of such terms. The
Directors were further informed that it would also be a “ breach


of trust and fraud ” in them to grant either money or shares to
Mr. Emmett, in satisfaction of his claim; hut that they had power
to reimburse the projector to the extent of any expenses in-
curred by him bona fide in the formation of the Company, and
previous to the passing of the Act.
Under these circumstances, Mr. Emmett having been in-
formed of the nature of the reply, was recommended to con-
sult his own legal advisers. This he did, and the result was,
that after a few days’ delay, he consented to release the Com-
pany without consideration; upon the condition that he should be
allowed an opportunity of stating his case to the Shareholders,
at their next general meeting. Mr. Emmett’s claim for pre-
liminary expenditure, amounting to £6BO, was acknowledged
by the Company, and paid.
The Directors, in making this statement, have confined them-
selves to facts as they have occurred, and refrain from any
direct comment—in their collective capacity as a Board—upon
a matter which can only be dealt with by Shareholders—as indi-
viduals. At the same time, in strict justice to Mr. Emmett, it
is but right to say, that whether or not he be equitably en-
titled to further compensation than he has yet received, it is
certainly true that circumstances have warranted him in
anticipating it; and without expressing an opinion upon the
value of the scheme, as originally introduced by him, the
Directors are ready to admit that, but for legal obstacles, Mr.
Emmett might have established a reasonable claim upon the
funds of the Company, in consequence of the arrangement
made with him by Shareholders who adopted the Eeport of the
Provisional Committee in August 1858,
In conclusion, it is only necessary to add that the entire
Board of Directors appointed at the Meeting in August,
1858 (not having been elected by the Shareholders
under the provisions of the Act), now retire, each being eligi-
ble for re-election. They trust that the Proprietors will be
satisfied with the results of their management for the last
twelve months; and in relinquishing the trust hitherto re-


posed in them, desire again to congratulate their fellow Share-
holders upon the position which the Bendigo Water Works
Company has assumed; not only as a promising and permanent
investment, hut as the herald of a new era in the history of
gold mining, the effects of which are already beginning to
make themselves felt throughout the Colony.
Signed on behalf of the Board of Directors,
THOMAS BROWN, Jtjn.
Chairman,
Melbourne, August 31, 1859.
PRINTED AT THE HERALD OFFICE, BOURKE STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.
