

THE CAREER AND FATE
Benjamin Boyd
HllKliflfniUnilitiiSiHiKllUdtiiiHiifUiiiMlllltllimiltlUHlHiClNUiliimiltUlllUliMilililltlliiUlUtKlHHlHHimiHliniilillWUMll
Merchant,
Adventurer and Pioneer.
Founder of Boydtown,
Twofold Bay.
PRICE : ONE SHILLING.
Magnet Print




f *
v a
* *
t I. . ■‘T
T &
V v * : 0 I
\* mmsMM a •• .:•:....«*•: ;•. .■••••:;••? m I
14. —I |
ju :i •
T BENJAMIN BOYD. 4 X
*r 4.
Jfct Photo reproduced from Ard in’s Sydney Magazine, 1843. %
\ t
*■•. ■♦
>4*44444* 4*444*4*444*4*4*4*4*4*444i4*4*4*4* i|* 4*4*4*44*^




BENJAMIN BOYD
MERCHANT
From an article by J. H. Watson, F.R.A.H.S.,
in the Journal of Proceedings of the
Royal Historical Society.


The name of Benjamin Boyd, or as
he has by custom become to the Syd-
ney public, Ben Boyd, has been much
in evidence lately; but the contribu-
tions and correspondence in the press
betray a lamentable ignorance on the
part of many of the writers.
It has been sought by some to weave
a web of mystery around the memory
of one who once took a prominent
part both in the mercantile and social
life of Sydney, and whose tragic fate
caused a great sensation among the
commercial community of his day. As
no connected history of Boyd has been
written,but much has been made pub-
lic of incidents in his career and of
his celebrated yacht, the Wanderer,
the object of this paper is to collect
these together and by verifying them
with public documents so get together
what we may look upon as the true
history of that adventurous spirit, so
far as relates to New South Wales.
Benjamin Boyd was born at. Merton
Hall, Wigtonshire, Scotland. He was
the second son of Edward Boyd, of
that place, by his wife Jane, daughter
of Benjamin Yule, of Wheatfleld, Mid-
lothian.
He had four brothers —Edward Len-
nox Boyd (who was the eldest of the
family), Mark Boyd, W. S. Boyd, and
James Boyd.
Benjamin was born about 1796, and
the earliest traceable record of him
is in 1824, when he was a stockbroker
in the city of London. Previous to
coming to Australia he had some in-
terest in the St. George Steam Packet
Company, being also broker to the
company; and he seems to have been
indebted to them to the extent of
£3943, which debt was merged into
the account of B. and M. Boyd. About
1840 he floated the Royal Australian
Bank, he and his brother Mark being
the brokers. At Mark Boyd’s bank-
ruptcy, which took place ii 1854, after
Benjamin’s death, he state! in his ex-
amination: "That his brotier went to
Australia as representative of the
Royal Bank (of which 1b was the
manager). Debentures of he bank to
the amount of £200,000 were sold.
This sum was taken by hi: brother to
Australia. The whole of the money
went to his brother and hfe colleague,
Mr. Robinson, in Australia Mr. Ben-
jamin Boyd also constituted the Aus-
tralian Wool Company. He formed
himself into this company in Novem-
ber, 1841 He issued debentures in
the name of the Australian Wool Com-
pany, and they, to the extent of
£15,000, were deposited with the Aus-
tralian Banking Company, of which
his brother was the manager, and he
was a director.” It is not necessary to
follow this subject here, but this much
has been introduced so that we may
see what it was that caused the ad-
vent into Australia of the subject of
this paper.
The “Port Phillip Gazette” of June
15th, 1842, has in Its shipping news
this item:
"Arrived. — Wanderer, yacht, from
Cape of Good Hope. Passenger, Mr.
Boj r d.”
And amongst the news of the day
the Wanderer is referred to as being
celebrated in song and story, and that
her arrival had been looked for with
a degree of pleasure, mercantile ad-
vices to the Seahorse Steam Company
having mentioned the visit of Mr.
Boyd. The Seahorse, steamer, and sis-
ter vessel, the Ju,no, are also referred
to as having both previously arrived
at Sydney. The other passengers by
the Wanderer are stated to be Mr.
James Boyd, the owner’s brother, and
Mr. W. O. Brierley, a marine artist
well known to fame, as well as other
gentlemen whose desire for adventure
had led them to join Mr. Boyd.


We learn that the Wanderer left by a paragraph which stated fhat
Plymouth on December 23, 1841, un-
der the command of Captain Bushby,
R.N., and with a sailing master, whose
abilities had been proved in the ser-
vice of the Hudson’s Bay company.
She had a picked crew of fourteen
hands. Captain Bushby left the yacht
at Rio de Janeiro, and including stop-
pages at Cape de Verde, St. Helena,
Rio, and the Cape, Melbourne was
made in 157 days.
Another Melbourne paper of the
same period informs us that a news-
paper was published on board during
the passage, and from specimens re-
printed it appears to have been of a
jocular and punning character. Ama-
teur theatricals were also indulged In.
It is also stated that the mercantile
community were desirous of giving a
banquet to Mr. Boyd, who, however, in
a letter to Mr. J. B. Were declined the
honour.
Then on July 13, 1842, appears the
notice that the Wanderer had sailed
on the 12th for Sydney, via Launces-
ton.
Some difference in the tonnage of
this yacht appears to exist, for in all
the “arrivals” and “departures” she is
stated to be of 84 tons, whilst in the
book, by John Webster, “The Last
Cruise of the Wanderer,” her dimen-
sions are given as of 240 tons.
Melbourne newspapers had prepared
Sydney people for the arrival of the
Wanderer, and the Sydney “Herald”
duly announced it, as follows:
“July ISth.—Arrived from Port Phil-
lip, having left 12th instant, Royal
Squadron schooner Wanderer, 84 tons.
B. Boyd, commander. Passengers:
James Boyd, Esq., Messrs, Brierley,
Bogue, Goddart, Downes, and Pra-
thent. ”
This announcement was followed up
“This beautiful yacht arrived yester-
day from Port Phillip after a tempes-
tuous passage of six days. On coming
to an anchor in the Cove the Velocity,
schooner, belonging to Mr. Boyd, fired
a salute, and the neighbouring heights
were crowded with spectators to wit-
ness her arrival. The Wanderer is
armed to the teeth, and is fitted up in
the most splendid manner; in fact she
fully answers the descriptions which
have been lavished upon her by the
Port Phillip journals.”
Such, then, are the newspaper ac-
counts of Mr. Boyd and the Wan-
derer, but in none of these do we find
any xeason given for his arrival in the
colony; but a close investigation of
the shipping columns of the Herald
gives much information associated
with his name, and from which we are
able to gather the history of his ad-
vent. The first mention of his name,
as far as can be traced, is when a
steamer named the Seahorse arrived
in Sydney on 2nd June, 1841. This
boat, which became well-known in the
intercolonial trade, was of 243 tons,
and was brought out by Captain Ew-
ing, whose sou, Mr, John Ewing, of
Greenwich, has contributed some in-
teresting details in connection with
the correspondence which has recently
taken place in the press. Amongst
the cargo was a quantity of wine for
B. Boyd and some office fittings and
paper for the Royal Bank.
On March 28, 1842, another steamer,
the Juno, of 362 tons, reached Sydney
under command of Captain Spiers.
The entire cargo of this vessel also,
according to the manifest, was for B.
Boyd, and consisted of flour, bread
pork, wines and spirits. The agents
were B. Boyd and Co.
This steamer was followed by ano-
ther on June 6 the same year, the Cor-


nubia, a small paddle-wheel boat of 94 Navigation Company.
tons in charge of Captain Keen. Her
cargo also appears to have consisted
of such provisions as would be sup-
plied to ships, and wines and spirits.
Mr. J. P. Robinson, afterwards mem-
ber of the Council for Port Phillip,
came as a passenger by this vessel
This Mr. Joseph Phelps Robinson is,
in the various papers and documents
consulted, styled sometimes the mana-
ger of the Royal Bank, at others, as
Mr. Boyd’s partner, and also as mana-
ging director of the Royal Bank of
Australia.
The schooner Velocity, referred to
as having fired the salute in Sydney
Cove on the arrival of the Wanderer,
is stated to have belonged to Mr.
Boyd, had arrived in Sydney on May
1, 1842, or two months and a half be-
fore (he Wanderer. The Velocity was
commanded by Captain Browning, a
gentleman who afterwards became
one of the best known business men
of Auckland. He died in 1888, at the
age of 82 years.
The cargo of the Velocity, like that
of the other vessels mentioned, con-
sisted almost entirely of what could
be called ship’s stores and wines and
spirits, as also some furniture. Neither
of the vessels appear to have had
what Is generally known as general
cargo.
The inference to be drawn from this
is that the three steamers named were
in some way connected with the St.
George’s Steam Packet Company, of
which Boyd was both a broker and a
director. And Arden’s Sydney Maga-
zine, published in 1843, tells us that
the Juno and Cornubia were under-
stood to have been sent out for sale
on commission to Mr. Boyd. Tie Port
Phillip papers associated them with
Mr. Boyd, and said they were under
offer by him to the Port Phillip fit earn
Looking carefully into th manifests
of these vessels, the only conclusion
to come to is that Boyd hd made all
his plans before he left Egdand, and
the cargoes were such goos as would
supply his whaling fleet, wich he had
yet to create, and to stoic his store
and hotel in his yet unfouded town.
Whilst dealing with thee, the first
of Boyd’s vessels, it will h as well to
here correct one of the mny errors
published respecting the icider-ts in
connection with his careei
In a long obituary noticiof the late
Captain Browning, pnbliaed at the
time of his death, it was stated that
this gentleman was giver by Boyd
“charge of one of his largesteamsbips,
the Sea Horse, and she vas brought
out to Tasmania and Sydney by him.”
This was not the case; ihe steamer
came out under the command of Cap-
tain Ewing, who held the position of
master of her for the first three trips
she made in the intercolonial trade.
The notice just referred to is re-
sponsible for the statement that Cap-
tain Browning Induced Boyd to come
to Australia by the stories he told
him, and the narrative he published,
of his adventures in Australia and the
South Seas.
Of those whose names are published
as having arrived with him in
Wanderer, Mr. Brierley's is the best
known, he having, even at that early
date, been recognised as an artist of
note. Mr. James Boyd went to the
Sydney office of Boyd and Co., and
Messrs. Bogue and Downes were after-
wards captains of some of Boyd’s
whaling fleet. Messrs. Goddart and
Prathent, the other passengers named
in the list, would probably be connec-
ted with Boyd’s business venture, al
though their names have not been


’ tet with in any of the sources of in- prise in the south part of the colony
formation this paper is indebted to.
Boyd was not long in establishing
himself in Sydney, for in the October
number of Arden’s Sydney Magazine
for 1843 appears this advertisement:
“The Royal Bank of Australia here-
by gives notice that they will sell
their drafts, or Scotch Bank accept-
ances payable in London, at two per
cent. v J. p. Robinson,
Resident Director.
Office, 2 Church Hiil.”
Low’s directory for 1844-45 which
is the first issue of that work, gives
the address of Benjamin Boyd, Esq.,
Royal Bank, 10 Church Hill, and a
later edition of the same tells us that
Boyd and Co., Merchants, have their
offices at Church Hill, and their stores
at Duke’s Wharf.
If we consult the Shipping Gazette
f-nJ General Trade List, the first num-
ber of which was issued on 23rd
March, 1844, we ca.n there read that
the firm of Boyd and Co. had in port
the three steamers before alluded to
and all “laid up,” and the whaling
barque, William, of 344 tons, which is
entered as refitting. The barques,
Terror, of 257 tons, and Fame, of 208
tons, are listed as being at sea, so by
this it is apparent that he had entered
on that industry to which he was to
devote his wonderful energy for the
nexr. few years and which was to
prove so disastrous.
Boyd very early after his arrival
commenced to put his plans into
operation, and took up large tracts of
land in Monaro, Riverina, and the
western district. These must not be
confounded with lands held by Archi-
bald, and W. M. Boyd, who were
squatters in New England and in no
way connected with the subject of
this paper. But it is wit!* his enter-
that he was more closely associated.
The rich pasture lands of Monaro he
largely stocked with cattle and sheep,
and as these at that time were out-
side the settled districts, and could
boast of no roads, he determined to
take advantage of the natural outlet
of the district, Twofold Bay, by found-
ing a town there, and shipping from
there the produce of his territory.
This bay, which was discovered by
Bass on January 11th, 1798, when,
with Flinders, he made an exploration
of the South Coast, is situated 240
miles to the south-west of Sydney,
and up to the advent of Ben Boyd, re-
mained much in the state its discover-
er found it.
It was on the south side of this that
Boyd in 1843 commenced to build a
town, with wharves, stores, an hotel,
residences for those connected with
his various works, and a church. At
East Boyd he founded his whaling
establishment, not only as a rendez-
vous for his own whalers, but in the
hope of attracting other ships engaged
in that industry in the southern seas.
The founding of Boydtown involved
ihe expenditure of vast sums of
money, the materials for building hav-
ing to be taken from Sydney, as well
as all the workmen required for the
purpose. A great deal of information
respecting the career of Boyd is to be
found in a weekly paper, the Shipping
Gazette, Issued for the first time on
23rd March, 1844, and which was dis-
continued cn 31st December, 1860:
and for much that is written here that
publication is the authority. In one
of its earliest numbers amongst the
arrivals from Boydtown, Twofold Bay.
is the Wanderer, R.Y.S. schooner, B.
Boyd, Esq., and among the passengers
she had was Mr. O. W. Brierley. of
whom more will be heard. There is


also notified the departure of the ’South Head of the bay, built with
schooner Harlequin, for Boyd Town,
with forty-three emigrants; these by
a paragraph, seem to have been eight
carpenters, four stonemasons and
bricklayers, one plasterer, one smith,
two stockmen, and fourteen labourers,
the balance in numbers being made up
of their families. In the same issue
it is stated that the Wanderer had
maintained her character as a fast
vessel, having run the distance from
heads to heads in the space of 24
honrs. It is also stated that a post
office had been established at Boyd
Town and that the Wanderer had
brought the first mail.
The best description of Boyd Town
is to be found in the Gazetter of the
Australian colonies, by William Henry
Wells, published in Sydney in 1848.
To it sixteen pages are devoted, whilst
the author is content to give four and
a half lines to the Government town-
ship of Eden, its competitor in Two-
fold Bay. We are told that Boyd
Town, “although but lately founded,
Is already a flourishing seaport en-
joying a commerce of considerable
importance: and being the key to the
extensive Maneroo country (whence
an excellent road has been construc-
ted), is the chief port of outlet for the
south-eastern districts of N.S.W. Of
the convenience, capacity and safety
of the anchorage, both at Boydtowu
and East Boyd, Captain Stokes, R.N.,
Lieutenant Woore, R.N., Mr. Survey-
or Tyers, and every other officer who
has visited Twofold Bay speak in the
nighest terms. Both townships are
named after their founder, Mr. B.
Boyd, to whose spirit and individual
enterprise must be ascribed every
sign of advance and improvement
which now greets the eye of the visi-
tor to this fine bay.” He then goes
on to speak of the lighthouse which
Boyd erected on Torarago Point, the
Pyrmont stone cut and dressed in
Sydney, and carried up to a height of
76 feet, it being the finest building of
its kind in Australia. But it is a light-
house which never showed a light, as
Boyd was not prepared to give the
guarantee which the Goverment re-
quired as to the regular exposure of
a light of a certain power. Its pre-
sent appearance is due to its having
been struck by lightning.
Wells’ desexiption then goes on
with some particulars of Boyd’s whal-
ing establishment at East Boyd,
whence he says “uine sperm whalers
now sail.” From another source of
information these appear in 1545 to
have been the barques William, Juno,
Fame, Terror, British Sovereign, Re-
becca and Lucy Ann, as also the
schooner Edward and the brig Mar-
garet. This goodly array of vessels
shows how the business of the port
was improving when one owner alone
had that number employed.
Continuing the description Wells
says, “There is a convenient jetty,
300 feet long, and as vessels seeking
the port to refit have the advantage of
a heaving-down hulk, and every neces-
sary mechanical assistance, abundance
of water, and every description of
provisions and vegetables, both Boyd
and East Boyd are favourite resorts
for shipping. The laying out of Boyd
Town is in good taste. A handsome
Gothic church, the spire of which is
visible twenty miles at sea, ranges of
commodious stores, some 120 feet in
length, well built brick houses, and
neat verandah cottages, a splendid
hotel in the Elizbethan style (one of
the most unique establishments in the
colony), large salting and boiling
down houses, and various other sub-
stantial proofs of an increasing trade
and commerce mark the rapid advance
of this young and hitherto almost un-


known part of the Pacific.”
The ambitious efforts and hopes of
Boyd seem to have been leading on
to success and prosperity, but in an-
other direction he must have been
sorely tried by the ill-fortune which
attended his steamers.
The Sea Horse which, since the
rime of her arrival in June, 1841, had
been making regular trips to Port
Phillip and Hobart Town, according
to her log book, "On the sth June.
1843, at George Town Cove, got on
shore, when the water was ten feet
forward under her, and six feet aft;
the ship heeled over at low water and
strained very much; her butts above
water appeared injured and strained.
At flood she righted and got off; she
reached Sydney on the 11th June.”
The actual meaning of what occurred
at this time was, that the centre of
the keel rested on a rock, which as
the. tide fell, forced that portion up-
wards and she became hogged, or
broken backed. As there was no dock
m Australia, the vessel was laid up,
and Boyd claimed from the Royal Ex-
change Assurance Company and other
companies which had insured this ship
the sum of £5OOO each as for total
loss, equalling £25,000 in all. The
companies refused to pay and Boyd
brought an action against the com-
pany named for £5OOO. This lea to «
long and costly lawsuit in the London
courts. A special commission was
sent out to Australia to examine the
witnesses and the case came on in
the Court of Queen’s Bench, in the
Guildhall on Monday, July 6th, 1846,
before Lord Chief Justice Denman
and a special jury. A very strong bar
was engaged on both sides and the
case occupied two days. The evidence
taken on commission in Australia hav-
ing been read, witnesses were called
for the plaintiff. Tnese included cap-
tains of vessels trading to Sydney
and who had seen and examined the
Sea Horse and the carpenter of H.M.
S. Fly, which vessel had been hove
down in Mosman’s Bay, as well as
engineers and professional men. The
report occupies three columns of the
paper and concludes with these words,
“The jury having expressed a desire
to retire and take with them the
policy of insurance, the survey, and
some of the documentary evidence
which the learned judge furnished
them with, they withdrew to con-
sider their verdict. In less than an
hour they again appeared and re-
turned a verdict for the defendants.”
“The verdict was evidently a source
of considerable surprise to the great-
er part of the crowded court.” The
cross examination, of Captain Hugh
Maclay, who at Boyd’s request had
examined the Sea Horse, elicited the
fact that, there were thirty-five per-
rons on board to examine the vessel.
There was a dinner given and Mr.
Boyd was in the chair (laughter), and
no champagne, but other wines (laugh-
ter).” Other witnesses gave similar
evidence, which no doubt weakened
Boyd’s case.
Those who know anything of legal
proceedings can readily understand
that in this case the costs would be
very large, and it is only natural to
expect therefore, that the plaintiff
would appeal, which he did, and a new
trial was" asked for.
In the meantime, and only three
weeks after the trial in the Guildhall,
a general meeting of the proprietors
of the Royal Bank of Australia was
held in the board room, No. 2 Moor
gate-street, London, the chair being
occupied by Mr. John W. Sutherland.
Quoting from the report in the Daily
News of July 31st, 1846, “The chair-
man said it was a matter of great
gratification to him and the directors


to have such a statement of the corn-. which case was concluded on the 25th
pany’s affairs as that for the past year
to lay before the proprietors. He then
read a letter from Mr. Benjamin Boyd,
late member of the Legislative
Council of New South Wales, and
chairman of the Pastoral Association,
upon the general affairs and prospects
of the Bank under its able manage-
ment in Australia. This appeared to
the directors so good as to warrant
them in proposing “that the half
yearly payment for the current year
should be at the rate of 6 per cent
per annum, free of income tax.”
Messrs. B. Boyd and J, P. Robinson
were eulogised for their judicious and
able superintendence. And Messrs. J.
W. Sutherland, Mark Boyd and Joseph
Phelps Robinson were re-elected di-
rectors, and the thanks of the pro-
prietors were given to the manager,
J. H. Rae, Esq., to Benjamin Boyd,
Esq., and to J. P. Robinson, Esq. in
Australia, for their exertions in the
interests of the Company, and to the
chairman. The meeting adjourned.”
To show the value of the informa-
tion conveyed to the Board of Direc-
tors by Boyd, when in his report to
them he says: “Cattle sold from £l2
to £l5 each and sheep 20s to 255.”
The Sydney paper which reproduced
the above meeting in its columns, has
on the same day the market quota-
tion: “Average price of fat cattle is
45s and unshorn sheep 10s to 20s
each,” whilst at the time Boyd’s ac-
counts were closed on the preceding
31st January, fat cattle were 45s to
65s and sheep were realising 6s to
7/9 each. No doubt owing to his enor-
mous expenditure at Boyd Town, for
which no return could be had, it was
becoming necessary to put the best
face on financial matters.
Boyd would be anxiously looking
forward to his appeal, argument in
May, or nearly eleven months after
the trial, but judgment was only de-
livered in July by Lord Chief Justice
Denman. The whole case and facts
are reviewed and reported in five
columns of the London Shipping and
Mercantile Gazette, and concludes
with six words, “Rule discharged in
all the points,” which being interpret-
ed means Boyd lost the case. To add
to Boyd’s anxieties, the steamers Juno
and Cornubia remained unemployed
the greater portion of the time they
were in his possession, with occasion-
al trips to Port Phillip up to 1847,
when in October of that year the Juno
is loading at the Circular Wharf for
Port Phillip and Adelaide, and on the
21st left for those ports under com-
mand of Captain Kirsopp with a large
cargo and about sixty passengers.
The object of this trip was to open
steam communication with the west-
ern colonies, this being another of
the ambitious schemes of Boyd; and
the South Australian Gazette of No-
vember, 1847, gives a long account of
“a banquet to Captain Kirsopp, R.N.”
(falthough that name does not appear
in the navy list of that year). All the
leading professional and mercantile
men were present, and the occasion
was recognised as commemorating a
most important event. The health of
Mr. Boyd, the owner of the Juno, and
prosperity to him was proposed and
responded to.
Samuel Sidney, the author of “The
Three Colonies of Australia,” In that
work, which was published in London
in 1852, speaks of Boyd as “a fair
specimen of the haughty, gentleman-
ly, selfish class he represented,” who,
when “he had only been eighteen)
months in the colony, employed two
hundred shepherds and stockmen, be-
sides artificers. He was building a
town at Twofold Bay, had two steam-


boats, and a schooner yacht, the Wan- the present wharf that Boyd cut out
derer. He had devised a scheme for
saving labour by putting three thou-
sand sheep instead of eight hundred
under the care of one shepherd,”
Even at this time, 1843, Boyd was
a man of some importance, for Sidney
describes him as “A man with an ap-
parently unlimited capital, an impos-
ing personal appearance, whose fluent
oratory,'and a fair share of commercial
acuteness, acquired on the Stock Ex-
change, at once and deservedly placed
him at the head of squatocracy. His
aim was the possession of a million
sheep. He was the chief of the hund-
red thousand sheepmen, with whom he
combined to obtain fixity of tenure
for their sheep pastures, to put down
small settlers, and to reduce wages.”
It is also said by this author that
so unpopular was Boyd with the work-
ing population in this country that he
dare not visit his stations until the
time that the Police-Magistrate, with
a police guard, made his annual round.
During the few years that Boyd was
in. New South Wales he had entered
extensively into the whaling industry.
His large fleet rendezvoused at Boyd
Town, and also at Mosman’s Bay,
which in the 40’s was the principal
ship-repairing depot in Port Jackson,
and ships for London loaded whale-oil
there and completed their cargoes at
Sydney. His small coasters brought
his wool from Twofold Bay to Neutral
Bay, where he had a wool-washing
dam, and it was there prepared for
shipment. The remains of the dam are
still to be seen there, but the grounds
have been built over and its identity
has been lost. In the Illustrated Syd-
ney News of 1855 there is a picture
which shows Craignathan House in
the centre, with a three-storied build-
ing on its left close to the water’s
edge; and it was between this and
in the solid rock a tank forty-five feet
square and eighteen feet «t6ep, from
which he supplied shipping with water.
The newspapers of the day in their
shipping columns, tell us the story of
Boyd Town —it was during the period
under consideration - next in impor-
tance on the coast to Sydney; and "a
constant succession of vessels seem
to be passing in and out of its waters.
All the steamers to Melbourne and
Hobart called there; barques loaded
cattle and sheep there regularly for
New Zealand and Van Diemen’s Land;
hides, tallow and wool were shipped
for Sydney to be transhipped in ships
loading for London.
Thm-e must have been some control-
ling power on the spot to look after
all this commercial activity. Boyd
himself could not always be there; his
presence was necessary in Sydney,
the headquarters of his business.
Might it be suggested that this ele-
ment was supplied by a shipmate in
the Wanderer of Boyd’s, Mr. Oswald
Brierley?
The keynote to this is to be found
in a letter addressed by a correspon-
dent at Boyd Town in October, 1845,
to the Melbourne Courier of Novem-
ber 3rd, wherein it Is said that “Up to
this time the whaling party estab-
lished there by Mr. Boyd had succeed-
ed in taking eleven large ‘right
whales,’ a larger quantity than has
been killed in that bay for a number
of years back. This extraordinary
success is mainly attributed to the
superior management of Mr. Brierley,
the young gentleman who has the
general direction of the establishment
this season.”
It may not be out of place here to
say a few words about Mr. Brierley,
afterwards Sir Oswald Walter Brier-
ley, marine artist to the Queen. That


he was closely associated with Boyd stone of the Exchange was laid. This
there is no doubt, as he came out
with him from England, and his cot-
tage with its garden and mulberry
trees are favourite resorts for tourists
at East Boyd. In the New South
Wales Almanac and Remembrancer
for 1848 his name appears as a magis-
trate at Boyd Town. His name is also
closely associated with Mosman’s Bay,
for on the dining-room wall at Oswald
Bloxsome’s bouse, “The Rangers," he
painted his celebrated picture of
“HM.S. Rattlesnake In a gale off the
Island of Timor, November, 1848.”'
Mr. George Evans has in his posses-
sion Brierley’s picture of the arrival
In Port Jackson of the Wanderer;
and he painted the “Two Wanderers,"
by which it is evident that there was
another yacht of the same name be-
fore the Wanderer of Boyd fame came
out from England. Then there is “The
Trial Trip of the Seahorse.” “The
Galatea off Twofold Bay” is commem-
morative of his visit to Australia in
1867 with the Duke of Edinburgh;
and the picture in the Art Gallery,
“South Sea Whaling off Twofold Bay,”
recalls his connection with Boyd.
The Mosman’s Bay of Boyd and
Brierley's time can scarcely be re-
cognised as the Mosman of to-day. A
■sketch of it in 1846 shows a ship “hove
down close to the present tram ter-
minus, and several large stores and
accommodation houses for the use of
the crews of the ships being so treat-
ed. The only road then was made
from “The Rangers” to the wharf by
Mr. Stuart Russell, the author of
“The Genesis of Queensland,” at a
very great cost, this gentleman hav-
ing succeeded Mr. Bloxsome at “The
Ranger's.” A correspondent In the
“Herald, who signed “S.P.. ” tells us
that Brierley returned to England In
the ship Helen Baird, and fixes the
date as shortly after the foundation
event took place on the 25th August,
1853, and by a reference to the press
the Helen Baird sailed on the 30th
of September, but the name of Mr.
Brierley does not appear in the pub
lished passenger list.
But to return to the subject of our
paper—Mr. Boyd, who appears to have
been judged differently by writers of
his day. The Heads of the People, a
-small illustrated paper published in
1847, devotes some space in its issue
of Saturday, Ist May, to the “vexed
and complicated labour question," and
says: “It is known that to Benjamin
Boyd, Esq., of Church Hill, the colony
is indebted for the initiative of an ex-
periment ■which, so far as it concerns
the real and practical effects of civili-
sation and the blessings of Christian-
ity, will do more to solve a most diffi-
cult problem in colonisation than all
the efforts of the South Sea mission-
aries can possibly effect for a century
to come."
It then goes on to say that Mr.
Boyd’s arrival “for the purpose of or-
ganising the extensive ramifications
of the Royal Bank of Australia, was
one of the chief causes of the favor-
able reaction in the monetary arrange-
ments of the colony.”
It further says that: “It is unneces-
sary to dwell on the long and angry
discussions which for many months
past have agitated this colony in re-
rpect to the best mode of answering
that pressing question ‘How Is labor
to be obtained?” It then enters at
considerable length into the manner
in which Boyd thought to solve the
riddle, which briefly told is as follows,
gathered from the shipping news of
the day: “April 20th, 1847. Prom
New Hebrides via Boyd Town, the
schooner Velocity, Captain Kirsopp.
The Velocity sailed hence for the


Islands on the 31st January for the was wrecked on the Sandwich Island
purpose of bringing on to Sydney a
number of native laborers for Messrs.
Boyd and Co. In this mission Captain
Kirsopp has been very successful,
having obtained sixty-five strong able
bodied men, viz., twenty-six from the
Island of Tanna, twenty-three from
Lafou, and sixteen from Anatam.
Sixty-two of these have been landed
at Boyd Town, and from thence would
be forwarded to Maneroo, to be em-
ployed as shepherds. The other three
have been brought on to Sydney as a
specimen of the kind of men they are.”
Captain Kirsopp, having been so for-
tunate in this venture, was again dis-
patched on a similar mission, and re-
turned this time with fifty-four men
a,nd three women. Arrived September
24th, 1847, Portenia, brig, 222 tons,
Captain Lancaster, sixty-four native
laborers, four native women, two
native boys.
The report says the Portenia is
to be dispatched for a further supply.
A ship arriving in December says
it is extremely difficult to get the
natives of these islands to come on
board for cleaning up on account of
the visits of the Velocity and the Por-
tenia. They believe all the men taken
away to be dead, and in accordance
with an old custom, they killed all
the women, the wives of those men.
Now what was Mr. Boyd’s motive
in bringing into the colony these na-
tive islanders? Is he to be credited
with a philanthropic spirit or a desire
to Christianising these heathens? If
we read between the lines, the object
was evidently to work his stations
cheaply. His losses up to his time by
unremunerative investments must
have been enormous. And to add to
them, at the very time he was landing
his first lot of island boys, his barque,
the British Sovereign, of 359 tons,
and the crew barbarously murdered.
The report of this disaster says the
vessel was uninsured.
The end was now fast approaching
and when the shareholders in London
had become thoroughly dissatisfied,
Boyd was removed. “The Dictionary
of Natural Biography” tells us that
they allowed him to retain three
whalers, the Wanderer, and some land
at Norfolk Bay. The Bank was even-
tually wound up, and the shareholders,
in addition to losing their capital, had
to make good a deficiency of £BO,OOO.
There is something exceedingly
pathetic in the short and bare notice
of the departure of the Wanderer
from Sydney on October 26th, 1849.
It reads thus:
“Wanderer, R.Y.S., Mr. B. Boyd,
owner.”
No tonnage, no passengers, no guns
fired, no crowds to see her off, as
seven years ago assembled on the
heights overlooking Sydney Cove to
welcome the yacht and its owner,
who had come with such a flourish of
trumpets. What must have been the
feeling of Boyd as he left the moor-
ing, and ‘ sailed down the harbour,
passing Neutral Bay, then almost in
its state of natural beauty, the scene
of his residence and works, commem-
morated now by the Ben Boyd road;
then a view of Mosman’s Bay, where
his ships went for repairs, and he had
no doubt friends residing. for even
then there were residences scattered
about in the bush, notably “Rangers,”
Oswald Bloxsome, and “The Nest,”
built by Mos man; and finally out the
Heads, reminiscent of his friend Brier-
Icy, who had put on canvas his cele-
brated yacht passing in, on her first
appearance in New South Wales
waters.
But Boyd was not a man to be long


despondent. Of a sanguine tempera- cisco, where Boyd arranged with
ment and a genial disposition, he
would soon shake off any feeling which
his financial difficulties had caused,
and would look forward to future suc-
cess, as in his floating home he skim-
med the eastern sea for the golden
land of California. Boyd, no doubt,
like hundreds of people in Sydney,
had the gold fever. The news that gold
had been discovered in California was
not long in reaching Sydney, and
every week saw ships leaving for San
Francisco carrying away those who
hoped to become rich on the diggings.
In the week In which the Wanderer
sailed, five vessels took their depar-
ture for that port, each one taking
passengers. One of Boyd’s own whal-
ers (or rather that had been his), the
Fame, a barque of 202 tons, under
command of Captain Bradley, was
among the number.
.Little is known of Boyd’s doings
In America as the opportunities of
obtaining information are few; but
Captain Audley Coote, a gentleman
who is living amongst us, communica-
ted to the Honorary Secretary of this
Society that, while on his way to
Washington in 1894 he saw Mr Frank
Aaron (son of the late Dr. Aaron, of
Sydney, and his brother-in-law), who
left Sydney for California in 1849.
Mr. Aaron told him that before he
left, Ben Boyd had arranged with
him to go to Twofold Bay and bring
the Wanderer up to Sydney, as she
had been left there without a captain;
hut he did not go. Mr. Aaron left for
California shortly afterwards, and was
in San Francisco when the Wanderer
arrived there.
A few days after his arrival, Ben
Boyd, Frank Aaron, and seven or
eight South Sea Islanders (the crew
of the Wanderer) all went together
to the gold diggings. They were not
successful and returned to San Fran-
Aaron to be his sailing master (or
captain) and take the Wanderer back
to Sydney; but at the last moment
Boyd changed his mind and engaged
an American named Ottiwell In that
capacity and who brought the yacht
on to Australia.
Mr. John Webster who at present
and for some years has resided at
Hokianga, New Zealand, supplies the
truer version in his book published
for private circulation, “The Last
cruise of the Wanderer, R.Y.5.,” but
which is undated, although in the
preface it is stated to be "after so
great a lapse of time.”
He tells us that “Boyd decided,
when in California, upon a cruise
among the islands of the Pacific. And
the writer (himself) equally a lover of
strange scenes and romantic adven-
tures decided upon joining him ” He
tells us also that Boyd had a definite
object in view. This was to establish
“a Papuan Republic or Confedera-
tion; to lay the foundation of some
sort of social and political organisa-
tion on which the simple machinery
of an independent state might be
afterwards erected.”
As only' the newspaper shipping re-
ports have from time to time describ-
ed the Wanderer, and these have not
always been the same, it may be as
well here to give Mr Webster's des-
cription. He says “The Wanderer was
a very handsome and fast-sailing top-
sail schooner of 240 tons 0.M., she
had a flush deck; her cabins were fit-
ted up with every possible attention
to convenience, and with great
gance. Her armament consisted of four
brass deck guns, two six pounders, and
two four pounders, mounted on car-
riages, resembling Dolphins, four two
pounders, rail guns, two on each side;
and one brass twelve-pounder travers-
ing gun ("Long Tom”) which had


(lone service at Waterloo. In all, tbir- tak’ng in water and firewood and re-
teen serviceable guns. Besides these
there were two small highly orna-
mental guns used for firing signals.
These were said to have been obtain-
ed from the wreck of the Royal
George at Spithead, and a coat of.
arms traceable upon them was sup-
posed to be that of Admiral Kempen-
ftfldt. There were ample stores of
round shot and grape for the guns,
and a due proportion of small arms,
boarding pikes, tomahawks, etc.
She was accompanied by a tender,
a schooner named the Ariel, of 120
tons purchased In San Francisco. Mr.
Webster was captain of the Ariel, but
quitted her to join the Wanderer, giv-
ing the command of the tender to a
Mr. Bradley.
As the tender forms no part of our
interest in the Wanderer, It may be
mentioned that she parted from the
Wanderer with instructions as to a
rendezvous, but was not heard of
again during the cruise. A Mr. Wil-
liam Ottlwell was engaged as captain,
Mr. George Crawford being mate, and
with Mr. John Webster, a. Mr. Gill-
bank Barnes and Mr. Boyd were the
five Europeans on board, the crew
consisting of natives of the Islands.
It is doubtful from Webster’s account
whether the departure from the "Gold-
en Gate” took place on the 3rd, or
the 4th June, 1851, it is very ambigu-
ously expressed in his opening chap-
ter, although it is not a material
point in the story.
It is not necessary to follow the
Wanderer across the Pacific and
through the first four chapters of "the
cruise,” but on the 10th of September
we find her entering a lovely harbour
on the north-west of the Island of San
Cristoval, called by the natives Marau,
but which Boyd named Wanderer’s
Bay. Here they remained some days,
pairing their sails and gear. On the
17th they put to sea for a cruise along
the coast In search of the Ariel, when
at midnight It blew a gale and the
foreyard carried away. They then
stood in tjO the shore, and entered a
land locked harbour called Makira, a
little to the north of their former an-
chorage. Here it was necessary to
procure a new yard, so, having select-
ed a likely tree. It was felled, and
Crawford undertook the task of mak-
ing the yard. By the Ist October this
was accomplished, but whilst Craw-
ford was at work on his spar, the
others made frequent excursions in.
the island, shooting being the sport
engaged In, as game was very plenti-
ful. The natives on the whole were
very friendly, and much bartering and
trade were done. It will be well, In
view of what took place in 1854, to
bear this in mind, as this visit to
San Cristoval will form a particular
feature in an investigation which the
Sydney public were Interested in. On
the 6th October the Wanderer left
Makira Bay and met with baffling
winds and calms, but on the 14th the
yacht being becalmed was towed into
s beautifully sheltered cove and an-
chored in fifteen fathoms of water,
to the accompaniment of yells and
shouts from crowds of armed natives
ho had followed the yacht along the
coast
Leaving the Wanderer In this beau-
tiful sheltered cove in the Island of
Gnadalcanar on the evening of thp
14th October, 1851, let us return to
Sydney and take up a newspaper of
December following and we read there
bold headline—
WRECK OF THE YACHT “WAN-
DERER.”
( From the Shipping Gazette, Decem-
ber 6th, 1851.)


On Thursday, the 13th ult., Mr. B. him, if he had only been made prison-
Boyd’s yacht, the Wanderer, anchored
off the bar at Port Macquarie, and on
idle following morning a boat belong-
ing to Messrs. Oohen and Co. put off
to her to ascertain if any communica-
tion. was required with the shore. The
crew found her In a disabled state,
her mainmast and foremast both
sprung above the deck, as well as her
jib-boom. They reported that Mr.
Boyd had been killed by natives, and
they expressed a wish to enter Port
Macquarie in order to get her repair-
ed, as during the night after her arri-
val off the bar the windlass bad
broken in two from the centre, and it
was impossible to proceed to sea. Mr.
Easton, master of the Elizabeth Cohen,
advised that on account of her draught
of water she should not come in, but
subsequently went off wfth his crew
to assist. The yacht was lightened
and her anchors slipped (by reason
of the loss of her windlass) and a
short board having been made, they
f«tood In for the bar, favored by a gentle
breeze from the north-east. Just on
the bar the breeze suddenly abated
and the heel of the vessel gently
struck, and a strong flood tide carried
her to the south shore, where, not-
withstanding every exertion, she be-
came stranded. Messrs. Cohen’s bar
boat was stove in, but they sent out
their tug boat, and at ebb tide all the
movables that it was possible to se-
cure were got out, and conveyed to
Messrs. Cohen and Co.'s stores.
THE LATE MR. BOYD.
(From the Rhlpnimr Garotte, De-
cember 20th, 1851.)
We have received a copy of the log
of the Wanderer, showing the proceed-
ings of the crew of that, vessel on the
death of the late Mr. Boyd. Eveiy
effort to ascertain the fate of that un-
fortunate gentleman and to rescue
er and not killed, appears to have
been made.
Yacht Wanderer, R.Y.S.,
October 20, 1851.
Report of the proceedings of the
Wanderer from the 14th to the 19th
October, 1851, Inclusive:
Tuesday 14. —This day at 3 p.m. we
came to an anchor in a small bay on
the west coast of the island of Guad-
alcanal being in south latitude 9.40,
east longitude 159.50.15. A number of
canoes were alongside, but without
any articles of trade; and at sundown
they went ashore. The night passed
in perfect quietness.
Wednesday 15. —This morning at an
early hour many canoes were along-
side, without any trade or warlike
weapons. At half past six Mr. Boyd
rose in unusually good spirits, and,
taking the small boat, with one na-
tive of Oceana Island, went ashore to
shoot game. The boat was seen to
enter a small creek, and was imme-
diately out of sight of the ship. Mr.
Boyd fired one shot soon after. Many
natives were seen standing at the en-
trance to the creek. About seven o’-
clock another shot was heard, but
nothing transpired to excite our sus-
picions. During the morning several
natives were very persevering in their
attempts to come on board, lut were
as frequently driven off. At lalf past,
"even all the Europeans went In to
bathe, and while in the water the
natives tried hard to induce them to
take the boat ashore; they offered
their women and every allurement,
but without success. When they (the
Wanderers) "were out of the water, ’he
natives wished them to go and shoot
birds, but on the opposite side to
which Mr. Boyd had gone, but. no one
went. Things remained thus until
nine o'clock, excepting that the mini


her of canoes had increased. Break- Having time to load our six-pounders
fast having been ready for some time,
the gong was sounded for Mr. Boyd,
but no answer was returned. At this
time a native stole a handkerchief,
and pulling off some distance held it
up for us to go and get it. We sent
Godog, a native of Byron’s Island, to
swim for it, but as he approached,
the canoe pulled off. He was called
back, and came on board, and sat on
the rail forward on the starboard bow;
two natives followed him up and made
the first attack on Tim, a native of
Byron’s Island, with a club, striking at
his head, but he received warning
from Godog and met. the blow on
arm, and knocked the wretches into
rhe water. The alarm was now given,
and we were quite unprepared for an
attack. Our deck guns, contrary to
our usual custom, were neither loaded
nor run out. All our small arms were
below, but in five minutes we were all
armed, the four white men with mus-
quets and the crew with boarding
pikes and cutlasses. At this time up-
wards of two hundred natives were
round the ship. Three canoes came
up upon our starboard quarter, from
one of which the first spear was
thrown, passing between three of us.
A gun was fired over their heads, but
this seemed only to give them con-
fidence, for, uttering fearful yells and
blowing on war conchs, they pulled
up to the ship with the intention of
hoarding us. Spears and other mis-
siles flew through the rigging, when
the first shot levelled Its mark, and
every succeeding one told with deadly
effect. The canoes were now driven
from aft, but they tried to board us
forward. So determined were they
that a number had climbed on the mar-,
tlngale backropes, and were coming
up in the face of boarding pikes and
cutlasses, when they were shot down.
They now began to retreat, and one
or two more shots decided the battle.
and long tom we had complete com-
mand of the whole bay and did not
cease firing until their village was
deserted; and the natives having to
round a point within range of shot,
they were annoyed with grape as long
as possible.
We now manned the boat and went
to seek Mr. Boyd, but all the traces
we iound were the place of struggle
and the marks where he had fired two
shots. The small boat lay in the creek.
We searched to the left of the creek,
but with no avail. We now went to
the village. Here a number of natives
were concealed in the bush not far off,
by their hideous yells, but they would
not show. We searched their houses,
and then fired them. We now pro-
ceeded to break up their canoes; in
one. we found a dead native, who was
killed by a grape shot through the
right eye. We left him, and going to
the beach, where another canoe lay,
we found a belt belonging to Mr. Boyd.
The day was spent in searching for
the bodies, but without success.
From the marks ashore, and the
situation of the wadding of Mr. Boyd's
gun, it would seem as if he was at-
tacked as soon as the boat got out
of sight of the ship, and was killed
after a struggle in the water; but
what became of the bodies God only
knows.
That the natives should have at
tacked us in the face of so many
large guns may seem strange to many,
but by their motions they evidently
thought that the fire was the only
thing to hurt them, for when a mus-
ket was leveller! at one ho put up a
wicker shield and came boldly for-
ward; and in fact one canoe came
up, receiving a two-pound charge of
grape. That we should have beaten
them off, unprepared as we were, was
more than we expected. If they had


come on in a body the tale would off and on during the night.
never have been told, for what could
be expected of four men to two hun-
dred well-armed savages. As It was
it was a hard fight.
Thursday, October 18. —This morn-
ing we manned the boat and went
round to the first village to the S.E.
of our anchorage. As we approached
the shore about a hundred natives
were seen upon a hill to the right of
where we landed. From these we ex-
pected an attack. We moved up to
the village, and, posting a watch on
the natives, searched the houses and
then set fire to them. Here we des-
troyed two canoes, and laid waste
their plantations. Two shots were fired
at the natives to induce them to come
down, but they made off the opposite
way. We then returned to the ship,
and, having consulted together, it was
unanimously decided to make every
risk in searching for the remains of
the late Mr. Boyd, and as -we had
visited every place we could with the
boat, we determined on to-morrow to
move the vessel up the coast as far
as we knew the natives came from,
and taking the villages in rotation,
destroy them, landing at the same
time to make every endeavour to get
information of those we had lost, and
if possible to capture one or two
natives, Intending to detain them un
til such ilme as they could speak (for
our understanding) and give an ac
count of the murder.
This day Messrs. Crawford and
Wel-ster took possession of the vessel
on behalf of Thomas Winder Camp-,
bell, Esquire, of Sydney.
Friday, 17t,h October.—At an early
hour this morning we tov ed out to
sea, and taking a strong breov.e at
10 a m , stood off, and at 6 n m, made
the land to the windward of the first
village we Intended to visit. We lay
Saturday, 18th October. —At 10 a.m
hove to, lowered the boat, and went
to sound, but found no anchorage.
Wore ship and stood in to the land,
and made preparations for cannonad-
ing the village. Brought long tom to
bear on the starboard side, two six-
pounders and two twopounder guns.
At a quarter past 3 p.m. the first shot
was fired, and then followed seven
rounds of six pound round shot, dis-
tance half a mile. The natives ran
from the houses, and took shelter
among the trees. Stood off again, and
at 4 p.m. tacked ship, with the inten-
tion of giving them another raking,
when the wind falling off made ir,
very dangerous to go in near enough
to do execution. We therefore stood
off tor the night.
Sunday, October tilth.—During the
night the wind drew more ahead, then
fell calm. We therefore did mt make
the land until half-past 12 pn„ when
we manned the boat with th« follow-
ing as a crew: Messrs. Ottiwdl, Web-
ster and Barnes, Dick, Tom, Friday.
Sandy, Peter, Harry, Bango, aid Jack
—ln all eleven souls. Mr. Cawford,
with two sick natives, remaned by
the ship. The boat’having pilled In
ahore as close as she could for the
breakers, rounded to opposite the vil-
lage, and fired two rounds ff grapo
from a large gun which she carried
into the village. She then pulbd down
about three-quarters of a mle, and
under the lee of a large rock he com-
pany landed, with the excejtion of
Harry, Bango, and Jack; thee
natives remained in the bet and
pulled her to the village. Th other
eight walked up to the setlement,
and having searched the houes (all
of which the natives had mtlrely
cleared, set fire tp them, and also to
three canoes. At this time thenatives
were seen gathering in large timbers


at the next settlement, about two
miles up the coast. At this point they
were expected to make a but
on the party moving in that direction
they ran, making fearful yells. No
traces whatever of our friend could
be found.
Three p.m., there being every in-
dication of a slorm, the party took
to the boat, but before we were throe
hundred yards from the shore the
rain and wind, with heavy fog, came
on, and we lost sight, of the ship. The
storm increased every minute, and
knowing that Mr. Crawford had no
hands on board to work the ship,
made us the more anxious to get on
bard. We kept the boat heading along
the shore, and in about two hours
saw the vessel, distant about a quar-
ter of a mile, and at half-past 5 p.m,.
we were all safely on board.
After this escape we considered it
useless to attempt any further pro-
ceedings on a coast where we could
find no safe anchorage, and where our
company was too small to leave a
sufficient number on board to work
the vessel in case of difficulties, and
at the same time have an effective
crew ashore. We shaped our course
from these wretched shores, and bore
away for the coast of New Holland.
Estimated number of killed ... 25
Number of houses burned ... 50
Number of canoes burned ... 15
(Signed) William Ottiwell, Master.
Geo. C. Crawford, Mate.
John Webster.
Glllbank Barnes.
(The above copied verbatim by
James H. Watson.—27-30 April, 1907.)
(Copy of original letter in posses-
sion of J. Arthur Dowling, Esq.)
Port Macquarie,
November 20th, 1851.
T. W. Campbell, Esqre.,
Sydney.
Sir. —Since Mr. Crawford left we
have obtained the opinions of several
competent judges (inhabitants of the
town), who are unanimous In saying
that should the weather continue fine
the vessel could be got off easily, but
in the event of strong easterly gales
she would undoubtedly become a tota)
wreck.
Under these circumstances, not hav-
ing the command of sufficient labour,
and proposals being made by Messrs.
Cohen and Co.* (*The Elizabeth
Cohen —Easton, master.) to detain his
vessel, and by means of his crew,
with the assistance of our own, to
make attempts to float the vessel and
to bring her to a safe place within
the bar, I thought it proper, with ad-
vice of Mr. Webster and inhabitants
of the place, to place the vessel under
the charge of Messrs. Cohen and Co.
for the above purpose, in consideration
of which service the sum of two hun-
dred pounds sterling to be paid them,
the said sum to be paid only in the
event of vessel being got off.
I remain. Sir,
Your obedient servant,
William Ottiwell,
Master of the schooner
Wanderer.
(Copy of original letter in posses-
sion of J. Arthur Dowling, Esq.)
Port Macquarie,
1 December, 1851.
Dear Sir, —I arrived here late last
evening, and found that the Wanderer
was not yet afloat. The agreement
with Messrs. Cohen and Co. has been
cancelled. The yacht I would advise
to be sold as soon as possible, for the
rate of wages and the scarcity of
labor in this place would make the ex-
pense of floating, etc*, so much more
than the real value of the vessel that
it would be a losing concern to those


who might attempt It.
The vessel has been entirely strip-
ped and her contents and gear been
stored with Messrs. Cohen and Co. I
send their account up to to-day. With
regard to the papers of the late Mr.
Boyd, they are (as I Informed you)
under lock: but the Captain and Mr.
Webster consider they are not author-
ized to send them to you unless they
receive an order tp do so from the
Supreme Court. This opinion they take
from the Magistrate of this place.
The papers will be forwarded to Syd-
ney without delay on receipt of this
order, which can be sent by return of
post on Monday next. The plate Mr.
Webster declines to send until his bill,
£l2l/4s, is guaranteed: the same with
regard to the Oriel's papers. This
vessel Is the property of Mr. T. W.
Campbell. With regard to sending a
vessel here to remove the contents
of the Wanderer, it would be folly, for
unless all the bills (now sent) be pre-
viously paid the parties to whom the
money is due (and who have posses-
sion) will not deliver them up. I have
not had time to compile a Dr. and Cr.
of the Wanderer, but shall do so at
my earliest convenience, and send it up.
My candid opinion is that any per-
son doing so would be a fool to ad-
vance a shilling on account of the
vessel unless he was well assured that
he had good and sufficient authority
to act in the matter, for I cannot but
see that it is a mess. Therefore I
should say sell the hull, spars, masts,
rigging, sails, etc., as she lies; and
the sooner that is done the better for
all who may be interested in her, as
her officers and crew cannot live here
without great expense.
The proceeds of sale would more
than pay (at least I think so) her
debts. Therefore no ready cash would
hare to be advanced. I have already
stated that floating her is out of the
question, so do not give that a mom-
ent's thought. The letter you gave
me for Mr. H.R.A. has not been
claimed, and I cannot find out the
party. The ship’s boat has been hand-
ed over to Messrs. Cohen and Co. in
lieu of their boat destroyed. Anxious-
ly awaiting instructions from Sydney,
I am.
Dear Sir,
Yours truly,
George Crawford.
R. Campbell, Esqre.
Much that has appeared In the
newspaper correspondence within the
last month or two has been written
by those who have not read up the
story of the murder of Boyd, or the
wreck of the Wanderer; and there
has been an attempt made to enshroud
the whole surroundings in mystery.
Sir Horace Tozer, the Queensland
Agent-General in London, writing to
the M.A.P., says: "The full story of
the Wanderer will probably never be
known, and the mystery attached to
the wreck no doubt helped to deepen
the impression it made on my mind.”
Sir Horace, although he saw the
wreck take place when he was a boy,
shows a lamentable Ignorance of
many matters which he writes about
Boyd. Any reasonable person who
has read the published accounts
which appeared at the time must feel
fairly satisfied that Boyd met his
death shortly after he landed. At any
rate, such is the opinion of those best
able to judge, his companions on bis
yacht. That there can be any doubt
as to the fate of the yacht herself is
Inconceivable, as she went to pieces
before the eyes of the people of Port
Macquarie, on the south head of the
harbour. You would notice in the log
account of the death of Mr. Boyd, It
Is stated that Crawford and Webster


took possession of the Wanderer on ment"*t o take steps to test the truth
behalf of Mr. Thomas Winder Camp
bell. When disaster overtook Boyd in
ids commercial ventures, and he was
superseded in the management of the
Royal Bank’s affairs, he was given the
Wanderer and three whalers. These
latter, when being reported after this
took place, were stated to belong to
B. Boyd, but the port registry has the
name of T. W. Campbell, owner,
against them. We can infer from this
that Boyd was only nominal owner,
and that he had parted with his in-
terest to the Campbells.
The air of mystery surrounding
Boyd la not of recent date, for from
time to time rumours were spread
about that he was held prisoner by
the natives of Guadalcanal These
took definite shape -when a cutter
named the Oberon, trading to the
Solomons group, returned to Sydney
on October 15th, 1854, and Captain
Truscott reported “having spoken the
barque Woodlark, Captain Blaxland,
who reported he had spoken the
barque Belle, the captain of which in-
formed him that he had spoken an
Amercian whaler lying off Guadal-
canar Island, where they saw the
name ‘Benjamin Boyd' cut on nearly
the whole of the trees. Captain Blax-
land was at the island of San Cristo-
val in July, when the natives of that
place told him there had been a canoe
there some time before from Guadal-
canar Island, the natives of which
said there was a white man and a boy
on the island, and described the man
as tall and having a long beard. These
two reports coinciding with each
other, we hope steps will be taken
without delay to send a vessel to
Guadalcanar to make Inquiries."
The outcome of this was a public
meeting held in the Sydney Exchange
on October 19th to urge on the Govern-
of these statements. The moat pro
minent men of the mercantile life of
Sydney were present, and a committee
consisting of Captain Towns, Mr.
Thomas Winder Campbell) Captains
Williamson and Fox, and Mr. E. S.
Hill were appointed to carry out the
object.
The owners of the Oberon, Messrs,
Lawrence Corcoran, Captain Truscott,
and Mr. J. G. Raphael, taking the sen-
timent of the meeting as a Avarrant,
sent that vessel away to make the
search. The committee in the mean-
time were urging the Governor, Sir
William Denison, and the Government
to send a man-o’-war, and eventually
H.M.S. Herald w T as despatched on the
mission.
Captain Truscott, on arrival at Guad-
alcanar, interviewed natives, and fin-
ally got possession of a skull, said by
the chief to be that of Boyd, for twen-
ty tomahawks. With this he set sail
for Sydney, which he reached on De-
cember 3rd. Drs. McKellar and Ben-
nett, who inspected the skull, said It
was not that of Mr. Boyd. It was sent,
to the Museum, and Mr, Sheridan Wall,
the Curator, was of opinion that It
was one of a native of the island.
The Herald, which had to be inter-
cepted, at Tanna, and ordered on to
the Solomons, reached there after the
Oberon had sailed with her prize, and
carefully examining the places that.
Boyd had visited at San Cristova’,
found his name several trees, which
Boyd had cut in 1851, when he stayed
there a month. But at Guadalcanar
they found no trace of him, or the man
with the long beard, 0 r the boy. After
a fruitless search the Herald came
on to Sydney, which was reached on
January 30th, 1855.
Captain Towns, as chairman of the
committee under whose auspices the


Oberon made her trip, applied to the of It seems to convey the impression
Government on the day after return
for payment of expenses incurred.
The amount involved was £3OO, which
the Government refused to pay. Much
correspondence and debate in Parlia-
ment took place over this matter, ex-
tending over two-and-a-haif vears.whcn
by a vote of Parliament the amount
was paid.
Such was the career and the fate of
Benjamin Boyd, a name for many
years familiar to the Sydney public,
but of whom very few knew anything.
He was of a generous disposition,
warm-hearted, and one whose society
was sought, and he entertained nobly
in Sydney and Boyd Town. There
has always been an air of romance
about the name. The very curtness
miiiMJiiuiniinr.Mn.MHimmnimin.'itiinnmmmti/im!
of a jolly-good-fellow style of man,
and as one has proceeded with the
elucidation of his seemingly mysteri-
ous existence the result is disappoint-
ing, for an idol seems to be shattered;
and as this life is full of contraries,
so he In one of the most beautiful
spots on earth met a cruel death;
and. her owner gone, what more fitting
end could the Wanderer have than
to be broken up on a calm day on the
hard rocks of Port Macquarie!
The Wanderer, as a beautiful and
graceful sailing yacht, will long he
remembered, and Sir Oswald Brier-
ley’s picture in the Art Gallery will
keep her form and name before (he
Sydney people as long as the canvas
will last.
THE “SEA HORSE,”
Australian Steam Packet, 500 tons,
the property of Benjamin Boyd, Esq.
The "Sea Horse” arrived at Sydney
on July 4, 1841.


Mr. Holiday Maker!
Eden offers you a complete breakaway from the hurry and bustle
of a city existence. Her golden beaches and sheltered coves, with
their exhilarating surfing and safe swimming, will rejuvenate you.
From her rocky headlands, her beaches and estuaries, you will
obtain excellent fishing, while launch parties to the deep-sea fishing
grounds, and harbour excursions, can be arranged.
A fine camping ground, wood and water supplied, under the super-
vision of the Eden Advancement Association, adjoins Asling s Beach,
open to the ocean, with its unsurpassed surfing. On this same beach
abound pippies and sand worms, luscious bait for the bream, mullet;
whiting, and salmon which patrol the beaches and give you a great
opportunity of testing your skill and incidentally providing a welcome
addition to the camp menu.
Come here for your next holidays
Everything for the Tourist at
Ramsey Bros.’
EDEN STORE
We carry largest stocks of
Fishermen’s and Surfer’s Requirements
Films Stocked. Best brands Groceries.
Call in and see us.
Phone 6.
Box 6.


