

Pe TH Wrtr)
Cj/Cj^U
, l
« : v
(ji! @/Vw\, Pyttd yif CU JY.% 4/
19$$.




THE
QUARTERLY REVIEW.
Art. I.—Wanderings in New South Wales, Batavia, Pedir
Coast, Singapore, and China; being the Journal of a Natu-
ralist during 1832, 1833, and 1834. By George Bennett,
Esq., F.L.S., Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons, &c.
London, 2 vols. Bvo. J834.
TF our readers are as weary of new novels as we confess our-
selves to be, they will thank us for pointing out a book of
travels, which carries one rapidly and pleasantly over a wide di-
versity of sea and land; presents many objects of natural history,
and traits of social peculiarity, well calculated to excite and gratify
our curiosity; and is distinguished by a merit now exceedingly
rare among writers of this once rough-spun class, namely, free-
dom from the slang and cant of sentiment. Mr. Bennett some-
times, no doubt, treats of serious subjects in too light a vein;
but we acknowledge that, as his offences in this way are not
numerous, we are willing to overlook them on account of the
satisfaction which results from the absence of pseudo-poetical
raptures about nothing. Most recent travellers seem to have
been bit with the ambition of rivalling those overgrown babies,
male and female, honourable and right honourable, who record
the ecstacies of * what they call their minds ’ in the gilded pages
of the Annuals. We do not pretend to class Mr. Bennett,
on the whole, with such authors as Captain Basil Hall and Sir
Francis Head ; but he has, in common with them, what must be
felt as among their chief excellencies—a manly temperament, and
a thorough scorn of puerile rhetoric.
We are told little or nothing of Mr. Bennett’s own condition or
peisonal objects——and in this omission we acknowledge another
wholesome deviation from the prevalent fashion. We infer, how-
ever, that he has been employed for some years as a surgeon in
the merchant seivice; and are hopeful that his literary adventure
may stimulate many of the well-educated gentlemen who in these
piping days of peace are content with such employment, to improve
the opportunities which their mode of life affords for the extension
of natural science in almost all its departments. Humbly as their
position may be thought of, we are of opinion that it is in their
own power, by so doing, to elevate it very effectually in general
estimation. The number of persons destined for this branch of
VOL. liii, no. cv. b the


the medical profession, who can afford to cultivate and ex-
pand their minds by extensive travel at their own charges, is
extremely limited. A few voyages in a merchant-ship afford a
very good succedaneum, and may serve to fill up not only plea-
santly, but in every sense of the word profitably, those years which
hang the heaviest on the spirits, as well as the purse, of the young
practitioner, whether in town or village. No professional man, it
must be remembered, is so effectually fettered to the spot, after he
has once settled himself in life, as he who labours in this honourable
walk. The lawyer has his long .vacation, and usually contrives,
in these days of steam-boating, to refresh himself with an annual
excursion, either to another of his Majesty’s kingdoms, or to some
interesting part of the Continent. But a week after he has been
bawling himself hoarse in the noisome atmosphere of Westminster
Hall, he may be detected in eating pates de chamois on the
Simplon, or dancing reels in the Hebrides, or gliding in a carriole
amidst the gloom of a Norwegian forest; nay, by skilful manage-
ment, he may re-appear at Michaelmas with a budget of good
stories from Moscow or Constantinople—or even bring back with
him from Jerusalem a legitimate claim to the style and title of
Hadgi. Even the parish clergyman may occasionally command a
furlough, and enlarge and strengthen his attachment to his own
country and calling by a few months’ perambulation of less
favoured regions. But the country doctor is a complete fixture;
nay, it is considered as the most hazardous thing in the w'orld,
even for the first-rate physician or surgeon of London, to absent
himself for a fortnight on end, even at the dullest season of the
year, from the habitual scene of his exertions. We believe a
Halford or a Brodie would no more dream of spending an August
at Tbplitz or Baden, than a Pemberton or a Follett of passing a
winter at Washington or St. Petersburgh. In short, patients are
apt to regard and resent it as a positive injury, when they are com-
pelled, by the absence of a first confidant, to make their delicate
discoveries to a second. On every account, then, the young
iEsculapian, if he has any ambition to * survey mankind with ex-
tensive view,’ ought to make carpe diem his motto.
Mr. Bennett’s title-page has this defect—that it does not pre-
pare us for finding a considerable portion of his book occupied
with observations made neither in New South Wales, nor Batavia,
nor China, but on ship-board, while far enough from any land
whatever. This part of the work is, however, about the most
interesting ; and no wonder—for here he has had time and oppor-
tunity to test his first-sight impressions by subsequent remark and
experiment, much more largely than with respect to any of the
announced scenes of his * Wanderings.’ The mass of facts which
he


he has brought together concerning the oceanic birds, in particu-
lar, appears to be highly curious. We shall not, however, in this
place, consider critically what additions he has made to the mate-
rials of science strictly so called—we mean as to the addition of
species, if not of genera, to the zoological system ; but afford the
general reader some specimens of the style in which he describes
those incidents of his life at sea which he has turned to solid ac-
count in the technical sections of his Appendix.
We begin with a paragraph or two on that well-known pheno-
menon which has so long perplexed and divided our philoso-
phers,—the peculiar phosphoric light given out by the ocean,
more especially and more brilliantly in tropical regions, during the
absence of the sun’s rays. Mr. Bennett had one splendid oppor-
tunity of witnessing this effect when traversing the bay of Manilla.
He thus writes :
‘ The wake of the vessel is one broad sheet of phosphoric matter,
so brilliant as to cast a dull, pale light over the after-part of the ship;
the foaming surges, as they gracefully curl on each side of the
vessel’s prow, are similar to rolling masses of liquid phosphorus;
whilst in the distance, even to the horizon, it seems an ocean of fire —
and the distant waves, breaking, give out a light of inconceivable
beauty.’—vol. i. p. 36.
‘lt must not be for a moment conceived that the light described
as like to a sea of “ liquid fire,” is of the same character as
the flashes produced by the volcano, or by lightning, or meteors.
No : it is the light of phosphorus, as the matter truly is, pale, dull,
approaching to a white or very pale yellow, casting a melancholy
light on objects around, only emitting flashes by collision. To read
by it is possible, but not agreeable ; and, on an attempt being made,
it is almost always found that the eyes will not endure the peculiar
light for any length of time, as headaches and sickness are occasioned
by it.’—p. 38.
Having stated his concurrence in the opinion, that this bril-
liant appearance is mainly occasioned by shoals of the molluscous
and crustaceous tribes, but that it may often be accounted for
merely by the debris of dead animal matter with which sea-water is
loaded —our author gives us the result of a practical experiment of
his own on the Bth of June, 1832, after a large shoal of fish had
been observed:—
‘ Late at night the mate of the watch came and called me to witness a
Very unusual appearance in the water, which he, on first seeing, con-
sidered to be breakers. On arriving upon the deck, this was found to
be a very broad and extensive sheet of phosphorescence, extending in
a direction from east to west as far as the eye could reach: the lumi-
nosity was confined to the range of animals in this shoal—there
was no similar light in any other direction. I cast the towing-
b 2 net


net over the stern of the ship, as we approached nearer the lumi-
nous streak, to ascertain the cause of this extraordinary and so
limited phenomenon. The ship soon cleaved through the brilliant
mass, from which, by the disturbance, strong flashes of light were
emitted ; and the shoal (judging from the time the vessel took in pass-
ing through the mass) may have been a mile in breadth : the passage
of the vessel through them increased the light around to a far
stronger degree, illuminating the ship. On taking in the towing net,
it was found half filled with pyrosoma atlanticum, which shone with a
beautiful pale greenish light—and there were also a few small fish in
the net at the same time; after the mass had been passed through,
the light was still seen astern until it became invisible in the distance,
and the whole of the ocean then became hidden in darkness as before
this took place. The scene was as novel as it was beautiful and in-
teresting, more so from having ascertained, by capturing the luminous
animals, the cause of the phenomenon.’—vol, i. p. 39, 40.
Of the length to which albicores, bonitos, sharks, and dol-
phins will follow a ship Mr. Bennett gives us many striking in-
stances. One albicore having been wounded on the back by some
sharp instrument, leaving a noticeable scar, first caught his atten-
tion on this voyage, 3° north latitude, and he continued to recog-
nize it almost daily as far as latitude 11° south—a distance of eight
hundred and fifty miles. The length of aerial voyages accom-
plished by the huge albatross and other oceanic birds is even
more extraordinary. In reviewing Earle’s residence at Tristan
d’Acunha, a few Numbers back, we extracted some curious de-
tails as to the habits of the albatross when on shore; but that
writer said nothing of the real roc on the wing. Mr. Bennett
says :
‘ It is pleasing to observe this superb bird sailing in the air in
graceful and elegant movements, seemingly excited by some invisible
power—for there is rarely any movement of the wings seen, after
the first and frequent impulses given, when the creature elevates itself
in the air—rising and falling as if some concealed power guided its
various motions, without any muscular exertion of its own—and then
descending and sweeping the air close to the stern of the ship, with an
independence of manner, as if it were “ monarch of all it surveyed.”
It is from the very little muscular exertion used by these birds that they
are capable of sustaining such long flights without repose.’—p. 45.
The largest albatross shot by Mr. Bennett during this voyage
measured fourteen feet, but we have seen distinct accounts of spe-
cimens reaching across the wings to full twenty feet. He proceeds
to say:—
‘ When seizing an object floating on the -water, they gradually de-
scend with expanded or up-raised wings, or sometimes alight, and float
like a duck on the water while devouring their food ; then they skim
the


the ocean with expanded wings, as they run along for some distance,
until they again soar in mid-air, and recommence their erratic flights.
It is interesting to view them, during boisterous weather, flying with,
and even against, the wind, seeming the “ gayest of the gay” in the
midst of howling winds and foaming waves.
‘ To watch the flight of these birds used to afford me much amuse-
ment, commencing with the difficulty experienced by them in elevat-
ing themselves from the water. To effect this object, they spread
their long pinions to the utmost, giving them repeated impulses as
they run along the surface of the water. Having, by these exer-
tions, raised themselves above the wave, they ascend and descend,
and cleave the atmosphere in various directions, without any apparent
muscular exertion. How then, it may be asked, do these birds
execute such movements ? The whole surface of the body in this,
as well as, I believe, most, if not all, the oceanic tribes, is covered by
numerous air-cells, capable of a voluntary inflation or diminution, by
means of a beautiful muscular apparatus. By this power, the birds
can raise or depress themselves at will; and the tail, and great length
of the wing, enable them to steer in any direction. Indeed, without
some provision of this kind to save muscular exertion, it would be
impossible for these birds to undergo such long flights without repose
as they have been known to do ; for the muscles appertaining to the
organs of flight, although large in these birds, are evidently inadequate
in power to the long distances they have been known to fly, and the
immense length of time they remain on the wing, with scarcely a
moment’s cessation.
‘ When several species of the albatross, as well as petrels and other
oceanic birds, are about the ship at the same time, no combats have
been seen to take place between them; but on the death of one, the
others soon fall upon and devour it.’—vol. i. pp, 46, 47,
Another great source of amusement was shark-fishing—of
which sport Captain Hall’s enthusiastic details must be in every
reader’s recollection :
‘ The capture of one of these voracious animals frequently beguiles
a tedious hour during a long voyage. Its struggles, when brought on
deck, are very great, but a few severe blows on the nose soon disable
it from further exertion. When seizing any object, •the animal turns
on the side, not (as is generally supposed) on the back. The shark,
judging by an European palate, is not good eating : the fins and tail
are very glutinous, and are the portions most relished by the seamen ;
when dried, they form an article of commerce to China, where thdy
are used in soups. ...... I have seen several sharks and bonitos
about the ship at the same time, but I never observed the former at-
tempt to molest the latter.
‘ Attending the shark is seen that beautiful little fish, the gasteros-
tcus ductor, or pilot-fish ; which first approaching the bait, returns
as if to give notice, when, immediately after, the shark approaches
and


and seizes it. It is a curious circumstance that this elegant little fish
is seen in attendance only upon the shark. After the shark is hooked,
the pilot-fish still swim about, and for some time after he has been
hauled on deck ; they then swim very near the surface of the water,
and at that time I have seen them taken by a basket from the chains
of the ship. When the shark has been hooked and afterwards escapes,
he generally returns, and renews the attack with increased ferocity,
irritated perhaps by the wound he has received.’—vol. ii. p. 266.
The shark, Mr. Bennett says elsewhere, is more wary of taking
the bait when unaccompanied by the pilot-fish; he will then come
close, and withdraw again, several times before he ventures to seize
it; but when the little pilot is in company it hazards the first ad-
vances to the rancid beef or bacon, reconnoitres carefully, and at
length reports the result at head-quarters, upon which the huge
monster is seen at once to plunge onward, and makes his snap
at the bait without hesitation.
‘ That which is termed muscular irritability, and which is met
with in all cold-blooded animals, is well exemplified in the shark,
which perhaps possesses it to a greater degree than other kinds
of fish. I have seen a shark transfixed with a harpoon after it
had been hooked, so as to cause the viscera to protrude ; it was
hoisted on deck, when, after a quarter of an hour had elapsed, the
lower part was separated from the upper —the detached lower
portion for a long time displayed great powers of vitality;—when
the head and upper portion were afterwards thrown into the water,
the pectoral fins were moved as in the action of swimming. How
long this irritability continued I cannot say, (but from other in-
stances that I had seen I should consider for a long period,) as it
soon went astern of the ship. I have frequently seen the animal
hauled on deck, the whole of the viscera extracted, and the body, when
thrown overboard, swim for some distance in this mutilated state.
Again, a shark has been hung up with the abdomen ripped open, the
whole of the viscera extracted, and the head detached ; yet symptoms
of vitality, or rather muscular irritability, remained for three hours
from the time of its removal from the water ; and this frequently oc-
casions the spectators to consider that the animal is in a state of suf-
fering. It is only in the cold-blooded animals that we meet with this
to such an extent; in the warm-blooded animals it occurs, but in a
very slight degree.’— lbid. p. 270-272.
Blumenbacb, in his Manual of Natural History, says, — 1 The
extraordinary strength of the reproductive power in several am-
phibia, and the astonishing facility with which the process is car-
ried on, depend, if I mistake not, on the great magnitude of
their nerves and the diminutive proportion of their brain. The
former parts are, inconsequence, less dependent on the latter;
hence


hence the whole machine has less powers of motion, and displays
less sympathy; the mode of existence is more simple, and ap-
proaches more nearly to that of the vegetable world than in the
warm-blooded classes; but, on the contrary, the parts possess a
greater individual independent vitality. In consequence of this
latter endowment, stimuli which operate on one part, or one sys-
tem, do not immediately affect the whole frame by sympathy, as
in warm-blooded animals ; and hence it is that we are enabled
to explain the peculiar tenacity of life which is displayed under
various circumstances in this class—as, for example, how frogs
still continue to jump about after the heart has been torn out,
and turtles have lived for months after the removal of the whole
brain from the cranium. The long-continued power of motion in
parts which have been cut off from the body, as in the tail of the
water-newt and blind-worm, is to be explained upon the same
principles.’
The length of time during which this irritability exists in snakes
has given rise to the opinion of the vulgar, that 1 if a snake is killed
in the morning, it will not die before sunset.’ Among nume-
rous instances of such irritability even in the w'arm-blooded class,
the human heart, for some little time after death has taken place,
may be stimulated to perform its natural action by being punc-
tured ; and in a limb after amputation, the muscles are excited to
contract by the plunge of a scalpel. Of the effects of galvanism
we need say nothing.
Among other marine objects discussed in this chapter, we find
* the Guinea-ship’ of our old navigators—called, in the dialect of
modern sailors, the ‘ Portuguese man-of-war’—that beautiful mol-
luscous animal the physalia, of which Lamarck enumerates four
species, all inhabiting the tropical seas, but some of them seen occa-
sionally in high latitudes during the summer months. They are, of
course, more readily discerned in calm weather than in strong
bi eezes, and have then a strong resemblance to a miniature vessel
resting on the surface of the waters —whence their popular names,
ancient and modern. The vulgar notion that the animal has the
power of voluntarily collapsing its bladder-sail, and sinking to the
depths of the ocean, when danger approaches, appears to have
been for ever disposed of by our author’s observations. He found
several thrown on the shore of New South Wales in tempestuous
weather, the bladder portion still remaining inflated ; and while at
sea he frequently landed them on deck from his hand-net in the
same condition. The inflated membrane is evidently meant
merely to keep the creature buoyant on the surface, while its long
tentacula are extended below in search of prey. The bladder
is of a light azure hue, streaked with delicate sea-green, and
the


the most brilliant crimson—nothing can be more beautiful ; but
the long purple appendages below are dangerous instruments.
They twine themselves instantly round their natural prey, or the
hand of the rash captor, and inflict pungent and intolerable pain
by means of their acrid exudation. Mr. Bennett appears to have
subjected himself to a day of great agony by one of these experi-
ments. For what purpose a similar property has been affixed to
certain vegetable tribes is one of Nature’s mysteries.
On the ‘ flying-fish’ Mr. Bennett bestows several interesting
pages ; and he seems to have successfully combated the notion of
Cuvier, that ‘ the animal beats the air during its leap, alternately
expanding and closing its pectoral fins.’ Our author says, ‘the
structure of a fin is not that of a wing: the pectoral organs of the
flying-fish are simply enlarged fins, capable of supporting, per-
haps, but not of propelling, the animal.’
, fish, the organ of motion for propelling them through the water
is the tail, and the fins direct their course ; in birds, on the con-
trary, the wings are the organs of motion, and the tail the rudder.
The only use of the extended pectoral fins in the fish is for the
purpose of supporting the animal in the air, like a parachute, after
it has leaped from the water by some power which is possessed
even by the whale. From the structure of the fin, I cannot consider
it at all calculated for repeated percussions out of the water ; while in
that fluid it continues its natural action uninjured; but it soon dries
when brought into contact with the air, and the delicacy of the
membrane between the rays would very readily become injured,
were the organ similarly exerted in that medium. The greatest
length of time that I have seen these volatile fish on the Jin has been
thirty seconds by the watch. . . . Their usual height of flight is
from two to three feet ; but I have known them come on board at a
height of fourteen feet; and they have been well-ascertained to come
into the channels of a line-of-battle ship, i. e. as high as twenty feet
and upwards. But it must not be supposed that they have the power of
elevating themselves in the air, after having left their native element :
on watching them I have often seen them fall much below the ele-
vation at which they first rose from the water, but never in any one
instance could I observe them raise themselves above that height: I
therefore regard the elevation they take to depend on the power of
the first spring or leap they make on leaving their native element.’—■
vol. ii. p. 31.
The flight of these animals has often been spoken of as if it re-
sembled that of birds j but our author says,—
* I cannot perceive any comparison—one being an elegant, fear-
less, and independent motion—whilst that of the fish is hurried, stiff,
and awkward. Its repeated flights are merely another term for leaps.’
Mr. Bennett laughs at the common talk about the severe
persecution


persecution to which these poor things are exposed : he says they
are no worse oft than any other branch of the animated creation;
but surely he himself paints their situation, when he saw a great
shoal of them near the Cape Verd group, in December, 1832, as
rather more distressing than is usual with either birds or fishes
puisued through the waves by a host of bomtos, and whenever
they rose into air, pounced on by a ftock of gannets and boobies.
I he sight of this double chasse, says the philosophical surgeon,
‘ afforded much amusement and interest to those who beheld it.’
—(P* 35.)
But we must now get ashore, and attend Mr. Bennett in some
of those 1 Wanderings in New South Wales’ which occupy more
than half of his book. He seems to have made good use of the
time which his captain s stay at Sydney enabled him to bestow
according to his own inclinations—in short, to have performed
several long and laborious journeys to different points of the
colony exploring, to the best of his ability, the manners of all
classes of its inhabitants, rational and irrational. On colonial
politics he does not say much ; and here we shall follow his
example. It is, however, his well-considered opinion, after all
that he saw and heard, that convicts should no longer be sent to
New South Wales otherwise than ‘for the purpose of being-
employed on the public works,’ and that free emigration ought to
be strenuously encouraged. We are much inclined to believe
that the time is come when the society of this colony should be
deliveied, if possible, from further influx of moral pollution, and a
new penal settlement established on some other part of that
vast continent. The population of the existing colony is now a
large one; and it is the duty of Government to give it the best
chance of entirely shaking oft' the lamentable taint of its original
formation, which it can scarcely be expected to do so long as a
constant succession of fresh blackguardism is infused into the
system. Who can doubt that this is a country which must make
a great figure in the world, either for good or for evil, before three
generations more shall have passed away ?—or contemplate without
alarm the existence of a powerful nation born and reared amidst
such a moial atmosphere as at present shocks every new visitant
of Sydney, and is but too apt to corrupt and harden the whole
being of any one who protracts his residence there ? We believe
that, if it were consistent with our feelings of duty to lay before our
readers a detailed picture of real life, as it exists even among the
upper class of society in that colony—of the domestic crimes and
tragedies which have been brought to light there even within the
last few years—-it would be readily allowed that no fiction could
surpass the horrible truth of such a statement. The exceptions are,


we well know, many—and we consider them as among the most
honourable exceptions in the world ; but the prevalent tone of that
society in which incidents that we might particularize could have
taken place, must be something quite beyond the reach of an un-
sophisticated English imagination.
But to waive these grave matters ; —the common stories about
the extreme severity of labour in the penal gangs are considered by
Mr. Bennett as gross and wilful exaggeration. He saw a farm-
servant, who had for some misdeed been spending six weeks in
one of the ‘ iron gangs,’ on the day of his return to his usual
employer’s establishment. His fellow-servants immediately re-
marked how much he had improved in appearance since he left
them ; and on being weighed, it turned out that the man had
gained twenty pounds in the course of his unhappy six weeks.
What sort of convict makes the best shepherd ? We venture to
say no man could have guessed the fact—it is the London pick-
pocket I He is the laziest of animals, and in that fine climate the
shepherd’s is the most indolent existence possible.
The surgeon gives us many painful and disgusting details about
the aboriginal savages of this region, but has not, we think, added
much to the stock of valuable information. He evidently contem-
plates their utter disappearance at no very distant date; and, in
truth, we see no reason to differ from him on this head. These
scarcely human tribes must go, almost as surely as the wild
animals, their sport and prey. All attempts at civilization have
utterly and completely failed : they appear, indeed, to be very
many degrees below even the worst of the New Zealanders, —we
mean morally and intellectually, for, as to physical structure, the
New Zealanders are a very handsome race—these among the
most hideous of all the living caricatures of humanity. They have,
however, like all degraded human beings, their share of cunning •
and we could not but smile at Mr. Bennett’s account of his meeting
with one of them, who took his black coat for an indication of the
clerical profession, and immediately advanced a claim for a
shilling, on the ground that Government gives an annual grant of
five hundred pounds for the promotion of Christianity in this
quarter —of which, by conversing for a few minutes with the
stranger ‘ white feller’ in the said black vestment, this shrewd
‘ black feller ’ considered himself to have fairly earned a portion.
Mr. Bennett explained the gentleman’s mistake, and was curious
to hear what his notion of a clergyman might really amount to.
The answer brought out his pregnant definition :
‘ He white feller belonging to Sunday, get up top o’ waddy, pile
long corrobera all about debbil, debbil, and wear shirt over trowsel.’
—vol. i. p. 210.


He retails elsewhere an old but not a bad story of General
Macquarie’s attempt to induce the natives to cultivate the ground,
by a distribution of seeds and implements :
‘ Among the packets of seed sent for distribution were some which
contained fish-hooks : these, together with the seeds, were given by
the governor to the sable monarch, King Bungaree. Some time after
the governor inquired of him whether the seeds had yet come up ?
“ Oh, berry well, berry well,” exclaimed Bungaree, “ all make come
up berry well, except dem fish-hooks; dem no come up yet. ” —p. 338.
Wherever men can be compared with women, we are pretty sure
to find the moral advantage with the latter; and here, it seems, is
no exception to the rule. Mr. Bennett has one short story, which
we shall allow to speak for itself—dismissing some flourishes with
which, unlike himself, he introduces it:—
‘ A female of one of the aboriginal tribes in the Murrumbidgee
country cohabited with a convict named Tallboy, who, becoming a
bush-ranger, was for a long time sought after by the police for the
many atrocities he had committed, but always eluded pursuit. This
female concealed him with true native ingenuity, and baffled his pur-
suers—she would fish and hunt for him, whilst he remained secluded
in the retreat she chose. She often visited the stock-keepers’ huts
at the different stations, and whatever provisions she received from
them were immediately conveyed to the unworthy object of her de-
voted attachment. Although many knew she was privy to his con-
cealment, yet it was found impossible to elude her vigilance; neither
promises of rewards —enough to excite the cupidity of any individual,
but one in whom a higher feeling was paramount —nor threats, could
induce her to acknowledge that she was acquainted with his place
of concealment. The brute, however, manifested no kindred affec-
tion, but would frequently beat and ill-use her. Whilst she adminis-
tered to him the refreshing cup of kindness, he bestowed on her
misery in return. Shortly after he had, in one instance, given
way to his natural brutish disposition, by ill-treating the being who
had done so much for him—he was on the verge of discovery—
indeed had himself given up all hopes of escape; when she again
saved him, by engaging to point out to the police his place of retreat,
and led them away, under that pretence, in a contrary direction, af-
fording her paramour time and opportunity to seek out a safer asylum.
When she arrived with the police at the spot where she had informed
them he last was, he of course was not there, and a strict search in
the vicinity was equally unsuccessful: she then left them to continue
their pursuit, pretending to know nothing further respecting him. At
last he was captured by venturing out too boldly during her absence,
was tried, condemned, and expiated his offences on the scaffold at
Sydney. She wished to follow him, on hearing he was a prisoner,
but that was impossible ; so, reclaimed by her tribe, she was obliged
to become an unwilling wife of one of the blacks.
& * This


1 This unfortunate female was ordered by her husband, whose word is
law, to follow him at a time when she was rendered incapable by illness :
on her hesitating, he with savage barbarity struck her with his toma-
hawk over the head and legs so severely, that she fainted from loss of
blood. She was found lying on the ground, and taken to the house
of a settler residing on the banks of the Murrumbidgee river, and
every kindness and attention shown her; but after lingering, suffer-
ing severe mental and bodily anguish, she expired.’
The dingos, or native dogs of New South Wales, are the wolves
of the colony—they breed in the holes of rocks, attain great size
and strength, commit grievous ravages among the herds and flocks
of the settlers, and are hunted by whole packs of European dogs.
The cunning of these animals, and the agony they will endure with-
out any external indication of suffering, are favourite subjects with
our author, and we must spare room for one or two of his anec-
dotes :
‘ One had been beaten so severely, that it was supposed all the
bones were broken, and it was left for dead. After the person had
walked some distance, upon accidentally looking back, his surprise
was much excited by seeing master dingo rise, shake himself, and
march into the bush, evading all pursuit. One, supposed dead, was
brought into a hut, for the purpose of undergoing “ decortication; ”
at the commencement of the skinning process upon the face, the only
perceptible movement was a slight quivering of the lips, which was
regarded at the time as merely muscular irritability: the man, after
skinning a very small portion, left the hut to sharpen his knife, and
returning found the animal sitting up, with the flayed integument
hanging over one side of the face.
‘ Another instance was that of a settler, who, returning from a
sporting expedition, with six kangaroo dogs, they met a dingo, which
was attacked by the dogs, and worried to such a degree, that finding
matters becoming serious, and that the worst of the sport came to his
share, the cunning dingo pretended to be dead. Thinking he had de-
parted the way of all dogs, they gave him a parting shake and left
him. Unfortunately for the poor dingo, he Avas of an impatient dis-
position, and was consequently premature in his resurrection, for
before the settler and his dogs had gone any distance, he was seen
to rise and skulk away, but, on account of the rough treatment he
had received, at a slow pace ; the dogs soon re-attacked him, when he
was handled in a manner that must have eventually prevented any
resuscitation taking place a second time.
‘ These instances may account for the fact why skeletons of the
animals are not found in places where they have been left supposed
dead. I have more than once been taken where one had been killed,
as I desired to have a skeleton, but no remains of the beast were visible;
and crows and hawks do not devour animals, bones and all, in this
country.
‘The


* The Australian dog never barks ; indeed, it is remarked by-
Mr. Gardiner, in a work entitled The Music of Nature, “ that dogs
in a state of nature never bark ; they simply whine, howl, and growl:
this explosive noise is only found among those which are domesticated.”
Sonnini speaks of the shepherds’ dogs in the wilds of Egypt as not
having this faculty ; and Columbus found the dogs which he had pre-
viously carried to America to have lost their propensity to barking.
The barking of a dog is an acquired faculty—an effort to speak, which
he derives from his associating with man.’—vol. i., p. 235.
In this, of course, as in every book about New South Wales,
the kangaroo claims right to fill a considerable space. The chase,
by no means a very safe amusement, of the ‘ old man kangaroo,’
as the blacks call the full-grown male, seems to have found great
favour with Mr. Bennett, and he sketches some scenes which, as
he himself says, might have deserved to be immortalized by the
pencil of a Landseer. We content ourselves, however, with one
or two of his lighter pages. An Irishman of his acquaintance
had a favourite dog, who rashly pursued a large kangaroo into a
water-pool, and was ducked almost dead for his pains :
‘ Pat, in a great rage at the threatened death of his dog, would
have shot the kangaroo, but his gun missed fire; he then entered the
water-hole “ to bate the brains of the baste out ” with the butt-end of
the gun ; but the “ baste,” not fancying to be thus treated, turned from
the soused and now senseless dog to his more formidable adversary,
and a struggle took place, in which the man was often thrust under
water, and victory was promising much in favour of the kangaroo,
when some of Pat’s companions fortunately coming to his assistance,
attacked and killed the animal with clubs, and rescued him in almost
an insensible condition. I asked him how he felt when the beast
hugged him ; he replied, “ Not very comfortable, he tumbled me
about famously ; they are mighty strong bastes, and don’t seem to
like being meddled with.” Indeed, many persons when alone are
afraid to face a large “ old man” kangaroo. A man, recently arrived
in the colony, was sent after cattle; he returned in great terror,
having come suddenly on the ranges upon a kangaroo, as “ large,”
he said, “as a horse.” I asked him the colour of the animal; he re-
plied, that he did not recollect it; he only wished to get away from
the beast, and, running down the hill, was glad when he saw the
animal warnt following him. It is probable, when he went down one
part of the range, the animal, equally, if not more frightened, de-
scended another.’—vol. i. p. 286.
* The part of the kangaroo most esteemed for eating is the loins ;
but the tail, which abounds in gelatine, furnishes an excellent and
nourishing soup: the hind legs are coarse, and usually fall to the
share of the dogs. The natives (if they can be said to have a choice)
give a preference to the head. The flesh of the full-grown animal
may be compared to lean beef, and that of the young to veal; they


are destitute of fat, if we except a little occasionally between the
muscles and integuments of the tail. The colonial dish, called a
steamer , consists of the flesh of this animal dressed with slices of ham.
The liver, when cooked, is crisp and dry, and is considered a substi-
tute for bread.’— lbid. p. 289.
The passion of the aborigines for hunting kangaroos, opos-
sums, and so forth, appears to be inextinguishable, but to be
much more intimately connected with the cravings of the stomach
than with any of the nobler stimulants of the chase. The moment
the kangaroo is killed, the struggle begins, not, as in an English
field, for the brush, as a trophy, but for a limb to be forthwith
broiled (with the hair on) and devoured. Nay, in many cases, they
do not even wait for any application of fire, but, tearing the animal
joint from joint, knock off the end of a bone instanter, and begin
sucking the marrow before it has time to get cold. No abundance
of beef and potatoes seems to damp in the smallest degree these
ancestral appetites ; and no new artificial habits strike deep enough
to interfere with their immediate indulgence when opportunity is
afforded. A friend of our author observed a native woman, well
clothed, and of really decent appearance, engaged in some domestic
offices in the plentiful kitchen of a farmer on the Murrumbidgee.
He expressed his satisfaction at what he saw, but was assured that,
though she had just risen from a capital dinner, if she discovered
an opossum on the top of a tree, she would instantly strip her-
self to the skin, and mount seventy or eighty feet into the air,
rather than lose the chance of securing such a honne-houche.
We find it still more difficult to sympathise with these people
in that rage for the flavour of pounded moths, which collects
whole tribes of them as often as the proper season comes round,
upon certain masses of granite, not far from the Been Station on
the Tumat. Captain Cook was astonished, when at Thirsty Sound,
with the profusion of butterflies— ‘ the air absolutely crowded
with millions of myriads of them for three or four acres together
and Captain King, in his Survey of Australia (vol. i. p. 195), de-
scribes much the same scene at Cape Cleveland: ‘ the stem,’
he says, ‘of every grass tree {xanthorrhea) , which plant grows
abundantly on the hills, was covered with butterflies, and on their
taking wing, the air appeared as it were in perfect motion.’ We
presume the two captains were not scientific enough to distinguish
a butterfly from a moth, and that they both refer to the same
species of insect, called by the natives bugong, of the grand annual
capture and cookery whereof the present author had an oppor-
tunity to be an eye-witness.
‘ The bugong moths collect on the surfaces and also in the crevices
of the masses of granite in incredible quantities; to procure them
with


with greater facility, the natives make smothered fires underneath
those rocks, and suffocate them with smoke, at the same time sweep-
ing them off frequently in hushels-full at a time. After they have
collected a large quantity, they proceed to prepare them, which is
done in the following manner :
‘ A circular space is cleared upon the ground, of a size proportioned
to the number of insects ; on it a fire is lighted and kept burning
until the ground is considered to be sufficiently heated, when, the fire
being removed, and the ashes cleared away, the moths are placed
upon the heated ground, and stirred about until the down and wings
are removed from them ; they are then placed on pieces of bark, and
winnowed to separate the dust and wings mixed with the bodies: they
are then eaten—or placed in a wooden vessel, and pounded into
masses or cakes, in colour and consistence resembling lumps of dough
made from smutty wheat mixed with fat. The bodies of the moths
are large, and filled with a yellowish oil, resembling in taste a sweet
nut. These masses will not keep above a week, and seldom even for
that time ; but by smoking they are able to preserve them for a much
longer period. The first time this diet is used, violent vomiting and
other debilitating effects are produced ; but after a few days they be-
come accustomed to its use, and then thrive and fatten exceedingly
upon it.
‘ These insects are held in such estimation among the aborigines,
that they assemble from all parts of the country to collect them from
these mountains. The crows also congregate for the same purpose.
The blacks (that is, the crows and aborigines) do not agree about
their respective shares—so the stronger decides the point; for when
the crows enter the hollows of the rocks to feed upon the insects, the
natives stand at the entrance, and kill them as they fly out, and afford
them an excellent meal, being fat from feeding upon the rich bugong.
So eager are these feathered blacks after this food, that they attack
it even when it is preparing by the natives ; but as the aborigines
never consider any increase of food a misfortune, they lie in wait for
the crows, with waddies or clubs, kill them in great numbers, and use
them as food.
‘ The quantity of moths which may be collected from one of the
granite groups it is calculated would amount to at least five or six
bushels. The largest specimen I obtained measured seven-eighths
of an inch, with the wings closed, the length of the body being five-
eighths of an inch, and of proportionate circumference ; the expanded
wings measured one inch and three quarters across; the colour of the
wings dark brown, with two black ocellated spots upon the upper
ones; the body filled with yellow oil, and covered with down.
‘ When the natives about the Murrumbidgee river heard, on my re-
turn, that I had visited the “ bugong mountain,” they expressed great
delight, and wished to see what I had collected. On showing them
the few insects I had, they recognised them instantly ; but I thought
there was a feeling of disappointment at their curiosity only, not appe-
tites,


elsewhere in the neighbourhood of Canton. As is well known,
the owners and their families inhabit the upper part of these
vessels,while their innumerable flocks of feathered creatures are
accommodated in the hold. Mr. Bennett was fortunate enough to
inspect same of them just after the rice harvest had been gathered,
which is the season of joy for the broad-bills, as they are then at
liberty to fatten upon the rich gleanings of the paddy-fields.
‘ On the arrival of the boat at the spot considered proper for feed-
ing the quacking tribe, a signal of a whistle causes the flock to waddle
in regular order from their domicile across the board placed for their
accommodation. When it is considered that they have gorged suffi-
ciently, another signal is made : immediately upon hearing it, they
congregate and re-enter the boat. The first duck that enters is
rewarded with some paddy, the last is whipped ; so that it is ludicrous
to see the last birds (knowing by sad experience the fate that awaits
them) making efforts en masse to fly over the back of the others, to
escape the chastisement inflicted upon the ultimate duck.’—vol. ii.
p. 115.
Mr. Bennett had the good luck to sail, in his return from
Canton to Macao, in company with Mr. Davis, the accomplished
orientalist, then chief superintendent of the Honourable East
India Company’s establishment; and he appears to have owed
much valuable information to that enlightened gentleman’s con-
versation. But we have perhaps given as much space to this
book as the nature of its contents may seem to justify—so we
must now close our extracts with the surgeon’s account of the
mode in which the Chinese and Japanese produce those dwarf
trees, which we mentioned in our last number when reviewing
Messrs. Fischer and Meylan :
‘ The Chinese procure the dwarf orange trees, laden with fruit, by
selecting a branch of a larger tree upon which there may be a good
supply of fruit: the cuticle being detached from one part of the
branch, is plastered over with a mixture of clay and straw, until
roots are given out, when the branch is cut off, planted in a pot, and
thus forms a dwarf tree laden with fruit. Other means are adopted
to give the trunk and bark an appearance of age; and these, with the
dwarf bamboos and other trees, must certainly be regarded as the
principal Chinese vegetable curiosities.’
In Mr. Bennett’s volumes, if our reader has been at all amused
with what we have exhibited in this article, he may depend on
finding a great deal more of at least as interesting matter; he will,
in particular, be well entertained with the author’s history of a
favourite Ungka ape, which partook his cabin with him during
his last voyage from Sincapore to London. T his creature seems
to have been about the most intelligent and amiable specimen
of the turpissima bestia hitherto recorded : he regularly dined with
the


the doctor’s mess, and was on intimate terms with most of the
passengers—but more especially—which, indeed, will surprise
none who have observed the manners of animals—with a child on
board, whom it attended almost like a nurse. Ungka liked every
thing in the way of eating and drinking that passes current among
men—except only wine; but if he had any relish for tobacco, Mr.
Bennett does not mention it. Some few years ago, however, a
captain in the Company’s naval service brought to this city an
animal of (we believe) the very same species, who not only took
snuff habitually, but indulged himself with a pipe or two every day
after dinner, filling the bowl for himself, and even lighting it very
knowingly. This little gentleman, too, was quite free from the
Mahometan prejudice against the juice of the grape. A friend of
ours visiting him the first week after his arrival in Cheapside,
found him in the act of finishing his mutton chop and potatoes,
and about to begin his usual pipe, with the accompaniment of
some Madeira negus. He was sold for the high price of 500?.,
but died very soon afterwards.
There are two or three monkeys now in the Zoological Gardens
m the Regent’s Park, whose passion for snuff affords much
amusement to the visiters. They seem to rub it zealously into
their eyes and ears, as well as their nostrils, and, after some
minutes of triumphant sneezing and snorting, to enjoy the narcotic
influence of the Nicotian weed, with the calm contentment of an
old-fashioned philosopher.
Art. ll.— Correspondance de Victor Jacquemont, avec sa Famille
et plusieurs de ses Amis , pendant son Voyage dans Vlnde,
1828-1832. 2 vols. Paris. 1833.
The same translated. 2 vols. London. 1834.
lyr JACQUEMONT was, we understand, the son (born in
1801) of an apothecary in Paris, who, having shown con-
siderable aptitude for what is called natural knowledge, was, on
the recommendation of Baron Cuvier, appointed by the adminis-
tration of the French Jardin des Plantes to travel into Central
India for the purpose of investigating its natural history and
collecting specimens of zoology, botany, mineralogy, &c. During
this mission, which extended from August, 1828, when he sailed
from Brest, to September, 1829, when he landed at Calcutta, and
thence to December 1832, when he died at Bombay, he wrote a
series of letters to his family and friends, which they have rather
indiscreetly published, and which have been, we are informed,
received with more approbation than we can think them— in any
respect —entitled to.
c 2 It


It is singular enough that about the time when Mr. Burnes
was employed in his travels in Central Asia, of which we gave an
account in our last Number, M. Jacquemont should be traversing
parts of the same region, and that the results of their respective
labours should be produced almost simultaneously. It is impos-
sible, however, to imagine a stronger contrast than these works
exhibit; and we can boldly and conscientiously pronounce that, in
every respect but one, the comparison is in favour of our country-
man, Jacquemont is, we admit, a livelier writer than Mr. Burnes:
the epistolary form—the variety of persons to whom his letters
are addressed—and a very loose versatility of topics, are naturally
more amusing than the orderly and accurate style of narrative
employed by Mr. Burnes; but in all other respects —in all the
solid and valuable qualities which inspire esteem for the man or
confidence in the traveller—he is infinitely superior to his French
competitor.
M. Jacquemont is, indeed, the personification, the beau ideal ,
of a literary coxcomb of the modern French school. Clever,
having some acquaintance (we, as yet, possess no means of judging
how much ) with the inferior sciences, and a loose smattering
of popular literature, his letters are in general lively and enter-
taining enough, but disfigured by such frequent vanity, vulgarity,
and impiety, as would, in our opinion, counterbalance all their
literary merit, were that ten times greater than in fact it is. For
much, however, of what is blameable in the work we must not too
severely censure Jacquemont personally; he wrote in confidence
to his nearest relatives, and perhaps did not intend that his letters
should ever be made public—at least he is not responsible for
their publication; but we confess that it adds considerably to
the regret and alarm which we already felt as to the state of
moral feeling in France, to find that a family, which seems other-
wise amiable and respectable, should, for the sake of either
notoriety or profit , have betrayed to the public the confidential
letters, in which this giddy young man not only takes unwarrant-
able liberties with the characters of gentlemen—and, what is
infinitely w'orse, of ladies —into whose society he was admitted, but
exhibits himself as having lived a professed atheist and died with
no more sense or hope of an immortal soul than one of the baboons
of his own zoological collection.
We dare say that, if the truth could be known, it w'ould turn
out that this profession of atheism w r as mere swagger. We have
always doubted whether there could be such a thing as a sane
atheist; but a naturalist-atheist w'ould assuredly be a monster.
If there be any one study more than another which teaches that
‘ Arguit, infabro, non in se, tnachina mentem,’
it


it is that of the mechanism of nature; and Jacquemont’s atheism
was probably, like his incredulity on several other topics, either
utter thoughtlessness, or (which is more likely) the silly affectation
of passing for an esprit fort. For this reason, and for more serious
considerations suggested by his early death, we shall say no more
on this part of the character which he has drawn of himself, and
which his family have had the lamentable indiscretion to publish.
We shall have but too much room for censure on less offensive
topics; but before we arrive at them we have two or three obser-
vations to make on the preliminary part of the work.
It appears from the preface to the translation, (for the original
edition does not condescend to give us one syllable of explana-
tion relative either to Jacquemont or his mission,) that in June,
1828, Jacquemont came to London to make some prepara-
tory arrangements for his expedition. The translator taxes the
French editor with something like ingratitude for not having ac-
knowledged the civilities and assistance which Jacquemont re-
ceived on this occasion from some individuals in London; but
we are not quite sure that the French editor has not, in this single
instance, acted with discretion. The chief assistance that Jacque-
mont received in London was a packet of letters of recommenda-
tion to sundry persons of consideration in India, and seeing (as
our readers will by-and-by) how very unpleasant—even to those
of whom he means to speak most civilly—must be Jacquemont’s
indelicate revelations of their social and domestic life, the French
editor may have thought that he conferred a favour on the givers
of those letters in not making them publicly responsible for their
result. We honestly confess we never should have forgiven our~
selves if we had had the misfortune to have introduced Jacque-
mont to any one of the ladies of whose names he makes such
familiar, and we think indelicate use.
The translator next reproaches the Court of Directors—the
1 Merchant-Kings’ as he sneeringly—the ‘ Vieilles Perruques,' as
Jacquemont insolently calls them, of Leadenhall-street—with
some illiberal reluctance—some ‘ fastidious delays’—to give M.
Jacquemont the necessary permission to travel in their terri-
tories. Now, when we recollect some former French missions,
which, as is now avowed, cloaked aggressive projects against
our Indian empire, under scientific and diplomatic pretences—
when it is notorious that the most powerful of the native princes,
Runjeet Sing, has actually French officers in his service who
have disciplined his troops in European tactics, even to the
degree of receiving the word of command in French —we should
have thought the Court of Directors highly blameable if they
had, without some previous inquiry, opened India to this new
mission.


mission. The delay, however, so far from being vexatious, or
even ‘ fastidious,’must have been wonderfully short, for Jacque-
mont’s whole stay in England was less than three weeks. His
special patrons first announced his mission to the Asiatic Society
on the 19th June; the permission of the Directors is dated the
25th June ; and the recommendation of Jacquemont, as a member
of the Asiatic Society, (by one of whom this complaint seems to
be made,) did not take place till the 28th June; —so that the tardy
consent of the ‘ Vieilles Perruqnes ’ was granted within a week after
the first steps, and three days before the next steps taken by his
zealous friends in the Asiatic Society. We shall see, by-and-
by, that Jacquemont abused the indulgence thus, we will say,
too readily afforded him ; and the Court of Directors, instead of
being the objects of reproach, might, with more reason, complain
of those (whoever these were—for that does not appear) who so
inconsiderately recommended a person of whom they seem to have
known nothing, and whose indiscretion—if he tells the truth—.
might, on more than one occasion, have produced very deplorable
consequences.
Before we arrive with M. Jacquemont at Calcutta, we must
notice a curious incident that took place on his passage out. Soon
after they had left the Cape of Good Hope, the French brig-of-
war, the Zelee, in which he was a passenger, fell in with an Eng-
lish merchant-ship, into which—after the stranger had hailed them
in English, which was heard and known to be English—(she must
therefore have been so close that every seaman must have seen she
was a merchantman) —into which vessel, we say, the captain of the
French man-of-war, in a paroxysm of terror, fired his whole broad-
side of round and grape, and so near were the ships, that
Jacquemont says the broadside was fired at the moment that they
thought the stranger w r as about to board them*.
This seems to us one of the most w'anton and unjustifiable
attempts at wholesale murder that we ever read of: but our readers
will be anxious to know what damage was done—how many
innocent lives w 7 ere lost by this atrocious discharge of ‘ round and
grape’ at so short a distance. We are happy to inform them that
only one spar and one sail were so much as touched; and but
one man was wounded:—a wonderful escape —but more won-
derful still, when it is added that the one sufferer was a French
* Such is Jacquemont’s own story. But we are assured, as this sheet is passing
through the press, by a gentleman recently arrived from India, that the blame of this
affair rested not indeed solely, but chiefly, with Jacquemont himself, who volunteered
to act as interpreter, but unluckily misunderstood and misreported the answer of the
English captain: but this, if true, would be no justification of the French com-
mandant, who should rather have believed his own eyes than Jacqueraont’s ears.
sailor.


sailor, wounded on board their own ship, in firing their own cool
and well-directed broadside ! Although we are unwilling to recur
to the subject of Jacquemont’s impiety, we cannot refrain from
extracting the consistent conclusion of this remarkable story,
which we sincerely hope is not characteristic of the French navy
in general. The wounded man was so badly hurt that amputa-
tion of the arm became necessary, and his life was in danger—the
rest Jacquemont shall tell in his own words.
‘ The priest, whom we have on board, of course availed himself of
our man’s amputated arm yesterday, to go and puzzle him with salu-
tary thoughts on life and death. But, being informed of what was
going on by M. de Melay, who had seen his reverence going on tiptoe
towards the hospital door, I went immediately, and caught him in the
very fact of frightening the poor devil. He understood me directly,
and sheered off as soon as he perceived me. I have advised the
wounded man’s friends not to quit his bedside, but to keep the cure ,.
as they call him, at a distance ; if he insists, they will receive him
with a good broadside of slang.’ —vol. i. p. 66.
This M. de Melay was the royal governor of Pondicherry : M.
Jacquemont also was on board in an official capacity ; and both
held appointments under a sovereign who then bore the title of
Most Christian King —and who at least was a Christian King I
The whole affair is in perfect consistence ! Their broadside wounds
their own man, and their public functionaries insult the discipline
of the ship and the religion of the state! But it is time to turn
our attention more directly to Jacquemont himself.
It is said by one of our essayists that, if you wish to discover a
man’s character, you should try to get him to talk of himself, be-
cause you may generally conclude that he is really the very reverse
of whatever he may represent himself to be. This is literally true
of Jacquemont, for d force de se preconiser as the most modest—
the best natured—the politest and most fascinating of mankind,
he convinces you that he was one of the most impudent, conceited,
ill-bred, and tiresome coxcombs that ever inflicted their imperti-
nence on society. Let us prove our assertion out of his own mouth.
We will begin with his debfit in Calcutta
‘ The company was assembled in Lady William Bentinck’s drawing-
room. I was once more her chevalier , and sat next to her at dinner, that
being of course the place of honour. Every thing around was royal
and Asiatic; the dinner completely French and exquisite, delicious
wines, served in moderation, as in France, but by tall servants with
long beards, in white gowns with turbans of scarlet and gold. Lord
William asked me to take wine, a compliment which I immediately re-
turned, by begging the honour of taking wine with my fair neighbour,
who was conversing with me on a variety of agreeable topics, and
offered to act as my cicerone. To give our appetites time to revive
for


for the second course, an excellent German orchestra, led by an
Italian, performed several of the finest symphonies of Mozart and
Rossini, and in a most perfect manner. The distance from which the
sound proceeded, the uncertain light flickering between the columns
of the neighbouring room, the brilliancy of the lights with which the
table was illuminated, the beauty of the fruit which covered it in pro-
fusion, and the perfume from the flowers by which its pyramids were
decorated, and perhaps also the champaigne, made me find the music
admirable. I experienced a sort of intoxication , but it was not a stupid
intoxication. I chatted with Lady William in French on art, litera-
ture, painting, and music, while I answered, in a regular English
speech, the questions put by her husband concerning the internal
politics of France, I did not avoid showing, in my opinions, all that
might excite disapprobation, employing, however, to express it, the
most modest forms, which a lad of sixteen in England considers him-
self entitled to dispense with.’ [What impudent dogs these English
are !] 4 Returning to Lady William’s drawing-room to take coffee, of
which I drank Jive or six cups without perceiving it, I found myself
complimented by every one enough to turn my head. You will imagine
that I did not fail to engage the physician, who is still young, in con-
versation, on the novelties in physiology ; for I had no opportunity, in
the general conversation, of speaking on subjects connected with my
own profession of naturalist, and I wished to show myself in character
before the hour of departure.’—vol. i. pp. 277 —279.
Can there be a more perfect picture of the mingled astonishment
and assurance of an impudent and vulgar person, admitted for the
first time into good company, and painfully labouring to appear at
ease ! The immediate return of Lord William’s compliment by
asking Lady William to take wine—the intoxication produced by
such unusual phenomena on a dinner-table as lights, fruits, flowers,
and champaigne—the chatting in French to Lady William on art
and— besides art —on literature, painting, and music—which we
suppose are not arts—the set speeches in English to her husband—
thecae or six cups of coffee drunk without knowing what he did—
the being complimented thereupon by every body to a degree to
turn ms head; and finally the crowning the whole by entertaining
the mixed and admiring audience of ladies and gentlemen by a
physiological discussion with the doctor, for the purpose of ‘showing
himself in character are all traits of the highest comic. The
last, in particular, is almost equal to that other ingenious savant,
M. Thomas Diafoirus, immortalized by Moliere, who, wishing ‘ to
show himself in character ’ to Mademoiselle Angelique, invites her
and her friends to a physiological discussion— 4 a venir voir I’un de
ces jours, pour vous divertir, la dissection d’une femme sur quoi je
dois raisonner! ”
Our next extract, however, must excite more serious feelings,
and


and will temper our amusement at his folly with something ap-
proaching to disgust at his effrontery. Before we produce it, we
think it proper to premise, that Lady William Bentinck is not
more distinguished for her high rank and personal accomplish-
ments, than for her piety and exemplary moral conduct in all the
relations of life. We owe this preliminary tribute to an amiable
lady, whose name we should not have been induced by any con-
sideration to have quoted, if it had not been already obtruded on
all Europe in this publication, and if the anecdotes in which she
is mentioned had not been extensively circulated in our own pe-
riodical literature, without that censure of Jacquemont’s ingrati-
tude and impertinence which they so richly deserve.
* Lady William Bentinck is religious, or rather endeavours to he so.'
—vol. i. p. 99.
‘ For a week I was overwhelmed with attentions [at the Governor-
General’s country house]. There was no Lady William for any one
hut me. I spent several long days with her— tete-a-tete — chatting
about God — she .for, I against —of Mozart —Rossini—painting—Ma-
dame de Stael; of happiness and misery ; and of love in reference to
both—of all things, in short, which require, if not intimacy, at least a
great deal of confidence and reciprocal esteem especially on the part of a
woman —English too —religious and strict, with a man— young, a
bachelor and a— Frenchman!’ —p, 114.
This last word w ? as utterly superfluous !—ls there a man in
Europe but a Frenchman who could have penned such a passage
even in the most confidential private letter?—is there a father in
Europe, except a Frenchman, who would have sanctioned the
publication of such a letter from a recently deceased son ? An-
other passage, though not so flippant, is to our feeling—and, must
be, we have no doubt, to that of Lady William Bentinck—still
more offensive; for he would have us believe that these alleged
discussions ‘for and against God’ had a serious effect on her
ladyship’s mind.
‘ I,’ says he, ‘ am no better for her attempt to convert me, whilst
she, I really fear, is not quite so sure of the truth of her doctrine as
she was before.’*—vol. i. p. 88.
We shall see, as we proceed, so many proofs of the mendacious
vanity of the man, that we cannot help doubting even his most
ordinary statements; but anecdotes so inconsistent as the fore-
going with the character of any Englishwoman, and most espe-
cially with that of Lady William Bentinck, we reject at once, on
the internal evidence, as well as on the general character of the
witness.
There are some other ladies treated with, if it be possible, still
* This is our own version—the translator having, as we shall hereafter more fully
show, mistaken this and several other idiomatic passages.
greater


1 1 estimate myself not according to money, but according to my own
personal good and amiable qualities. By the vulgar method, I should
require at least 1 50,000 francs per annum to maintain the position
which I occupy with my 6000 francs, and should still probably remain
beneath it.’ —p. 121.
Or, in other words, the ‘personal good and amiable qualities’ of
Monsieur Victor Jacquemont are to those of ordinary men in the
proportion of rather more than 150 to 6. This, however, must
only be understood as of the relative merits of Jacquemont and an
Englishman. With a Frenchman, the difference, though great, is
not so enormous:
• If a thousand of my countrymen were to come into this country
with double or triple Avhat I brought, they could not probably succeed
in getting into even tolerable society; by a peculiar [ unique ] favour I
have obtained a dispensation from riches, and my relative poverty
has only added to the gratification of my amour propre.' —p. 168.
That is—to any Englishman 1 stand in point of personal merit
at 150 to 6, —to an ordinary Frenchman at about 2 or 3 to 1 —
but one Frenchman in a thousand might, perhaps, be equally suc-
cessful! And what places the truth of these calculations beyond
all doubt is, that it is the English themselves—arrogant and selfish
as, on all other occasions, they are —who assign to M. Victor
Jacquemont this exalted place in the scale of human nature.
Nor, after he has left the artificial order of society, where men
may be estimated by money, does he find that he is at all depre-
ciated ; he is, if we may venture to pursue his own allusion, a
kind of Spanish dollar, which is current all the world over. He
writes —
Encamped at Moneah. —‘ I have the happiness to please every dis-
tinguished person that I have met .’
Encamped at Sinniput. —‘ Welcomed as I everywhere am, though
an entire stranger, because I always bring the most honourable re-
commendations, I am soon after caressed for my own sake.’
From Delhi. —‘ My letters of introduction always procure me a very
flattering reception, but I should consider myself singularly unlucky
indeed, if I did not find out in the evening that it is for my own sake
that lam thus welcomed. My manners immediately force English
stiffness to unbend, and I metamorphose into bonnes yens —that is,
into Frenchmen —all the English with whom I spend even twenty-four
hours.’
This would be very flattering to our national pride, if we could
entirely believe it—to be within twenty-four hours of perfection ,
would imply a very advanced state of civilization ; and he, that in
the lesson of one day can become a Frenchman, must be already
very near the summit of human excellence ; but our modesty—
awakened by the contagion of Jacquemont—is afraid to indulge
in


in such presumptuous hopes, particularly when we recollect that
in those passages in which he evidently speaks w'ith the greatest
enthusiasm and sincerity—we mean those which dilate on his own
transcendent qualities—he seldom fails to enhance them by some
very injurious comparisons with the dull, unhappy English—dull
and unhappy, at least, when not instructed and enlivened by his
vivifying presence. But, as we before hinted, it is not the Eng-
lish alone who are subject to his charm.
‘ Wade [the English resident] writes me word from Loodiana, that
Runjeet Sing has written to him about me, and that of all European
lords he had seen, no one pleased him so much as / have done.’—
vol. ii. p. 9.
And then, lest it should be supposed that this was an unauthorised
report of Captain Wade’s, Jacquemont prudently confirms it by
his own authority—
‘ He [Runjeet] proves it by his attention to me.’— ib.
Runjeet Sing, it is well known, writes and acts to every Euro-
pean he sees exactly as he did to M. Jacquemont—but all the
commonplaces of oriental civility passed for honest tributes of
personal admiration with this happiest of men.
Then his thoughts recur to the countless number of dear friends
whom he has left scattered along the lines he has travelled, like
little Poucet’s pebbles in the forest — 1 whose friendship shows
itself in his absence in a thousand ingenious ways,’ —but he thinks
it necessary explicitly to add—
‘ I owe it all to myself. lam the real architect of my fortunes. I
do not allude to the 5000 rupees which I have collected in my strong
box, [he however looked, as we see, to the main chance,] but to the ho-
nourable reputation I enjoy with every one.’ —vol. ii. p. 74.
His friends in France were, it seems, astonished, and somewhat
incredulous, at the accounts he had given of the amiability of the
English; but he apprises them that they have read his letters too
hastily—that he meant not to say that the English were amiable
in general, but only made so by his means and under his influence.
‘ You say,’ he writes to his father, ‘ that since the English are so
amiable to me they must be very different in India from what they are
at home—there may be something in that—but I take to myself the
greatest part of the merit of this hind of miracle.’ — vol. ii. p. 242,
‘ How singular is my fortune with the English ! They assume to
me an expression of kindness, in spite of themselves as it were, and
probably for the first time in their lives! Your friendship for me, my
dear Zoe', would enjoy the miracles I thus and without effort operate.’
—vol. ii. p. 260.
When a man gets to the performance of miracles, we think it
high time to submit at once to his supremacy, and we therefore
here close our feeble and imperfect exhibition of M. Victor Jacque-
mont’s


mont’s innumerable and indescribable virtues and accomplish-
ments, as testified by the best-informed and most unprejudiced of
all witnesses—M. Victor Jacquemont himself.
Is not all this very surprising ?—We talk of the march of mind
and of the lights of the age—but has there appeared, since letters
were invented, such an extravagant tissue of personal vanity ?
The only thing that we recollect at all like it is the strange Auto-
biography of Benvenuto Cellini; but here is a French savant , se-
lected by his Government as a man of science and discretion—
noted in his own family, even to ridicule, for excessive modesty—
who makes his first appearance in the world in higher flights of
extravagant egotism than the crack-brained Italian did, even after
he had astonished the world by the still unrivalled productions of
his art!
As to M. Jacquemont’s scientific qualifications for, or success
in the mission on which he was employed, we can pronounce no
opinion; for, strange to say, amidst the vast mass of letters, and
the great variety of topics which he introduces, there is scarcely
an allusion to his scientific pursuits. We are told that his col-
lections were large, and for aught we know they may be found
to contain some very valuable articles, — but we confess that
we do not anticipate much addition to natural knowledge from
his own scientific essays. He seems not to have been of a
discriminating or analytical turn of mind, and is miserably de-
ficient in the first elements of induction. We shall give a few
specimens. Happening to have fine weather during the first
two-thirds of his voyage, he frequently and decidedly expresses
a total disbelief in storms—a slight gale off the Cape only con-
firmed that opinion:—
‘ Two days after our departure, we encountered off the Cape of
Tempests and as we doubled it, the gale rendered a matter of course
by poetical tradition. It drowned a few of our fowls, and that was
all. You know that decidedly there are no tempests. The longer I
am afloat, the more I am convinced that they are only a happy fiction
of poets. The word is hardly known to seamen, and they never make
use of it. The maximum of the species, speaking prosaically—that
is, sticking to the truth —is a very strong wind; it breaks a mast or
two, and drowns nobody. It is not terrible to look at; it is only
vexigenous [engendering vexation], disagreeable, and ugly. The pic-
turesque in it is very rare.’ —vol. i. p. 61.
This letter was closed at the Isle of Bourbon, on the 3d of
February, but on that very day week, this Farcus deorum cultor
was destined to receive, like Horace, (but not, we are sorry to
add, with so good a result,) a lesson from the angry heavens.
On the 10th February began a hurricane, which was attended with
the


the most appalling appearances and the most calamitous results
both ashore and afloat; the Zelee was blown out of the roads,
leaving Jacquemont, and, what was worse, all her officers—except
one Lieutenant and one midshipman—on shore. This event
cured him of his presumption about storms ; but he does not
seem to have drawn from it the better and more extensive lessons
with which it was pregnant. Before he has even landed in India*
he had formed a decided opinion on the insalubrity of the mode
of life prevalent there amongst the English :
‘ I am fortifying myself in a devout love of abstemiousness, which,
I have no doubt, will cause me to enjoy perfect health in India, amid
hepatitis , fevers, dropsies, and disorders without number, which
afflict the rich English, who commit excesses at table seven hundred
and twenty times a year.’—p, 77.
To this subject he frequently recurs—and repeats his censure of
the perilous absurdity of the English mode of life—or we should
rather say of death —for 1 the English for the most part die,’ as he
tells us, ‘ from not following a regimen similar to his.’—(p. 122.)
Aorisitat Calcutta only that this mortiferous system prevails;
in all the remote stations, even up to the Himalayah, he regrets
that his excellent and hospitable friends were—in spite of his pre-
cept and example—digging their own graves by those habits which
cannot fail to produce, as this sapientoracle warned them, ‘ hepatitis ,
fever , &c. and we cannot doubt that he would have given us a
similar account of the deleterious habits at Bombay, but that—
unfortunately—just as he reached that presidency, he himself
died of ‘hepatitis and fever and it so happens, that, at the last
account we have seen from India, all the numerous friends to
whom he had predicted early death—the Bentincks, Wades,
Kennedies, Halls, &c.—were—every man of them—alive to lament
his loss, and what they may probably consider a not much lighter
misfortune—the publication of his letters. A pretty conclusive
refutation of his medical hypothesis.
It is to the same presumptuous and thoughtless style of reasoning
that we attribute those violent boutades against the English cha-
racter in general, which contrast so strongly with his panegyrics
on every individual Englishman he encounters. He had imbibed,
it seems, from the old apothecary his father—who, for aught that
appears, had never been in England, nor even spoken to an English-
man—the idea that the English were ‘stiff’— ‘ proud’—‘harsh’—
‘ unamiable’—‘with little natural affection’ and ‘ no idea whatsoever
of the charms of society. ’ M. Victor Jacquemont comes amongst
them, and flnds them to his infinite surprise, in every instance, and
xvithout one single exception —hospitable—kind— amiable—affec-
tionate—social, and in short, the exact reverse of his preconcep-
tion.


tion. How does this phenomenon strike the mind of our philoso-
pher? If his father, hot from a history of Siam, had told him that
all the elephants in India were tvhite, while he had found, on the
contrary, that every elephant, wild or tame, which he had seen,
was, without a single exception in some thousand specimens, brown,
would not a reasoning naturalist have suspected that the apothecary,
who had never been in India and never perhaps had seen an ele-
phant, except one in the Jardin des Plantes, might be mistaken,
and that the real colour of the animal was certainly brown? Not
so Jacquemont! in spite of the evidence of his own senses, he con-
tinues to be of his original opinion ; but not being able otherwise
to reconcile his father’s theory with his own experience, he' comes
to this rational and scientific conclusion, that, although it is indis-
putably true that all elephants are naturally white, yet it invariably
and ‘ miraculously ’ happens, that whenever a Frenchman ap-
proaches one of these animals he instantly becomes brown ; —or, to
come to Jacquemont’s point—all Englishmen are naturally brutes,
but under the bewitching influence of a Frenchman, they miracu-
lously change their natures, and become the most civilized and
amiable of mankind.
The following, though not quite a corollary of the former pro-
position, is nearly allied to it. He sneers at the multitude of native
servants which every lazy Englishman requires, and he contrasts
that with his own personal activity and simplicity. ‘ I shall,’ he
says, p. ] 19, 1 have but six servants, while an English captain of
infantry’ [a vastly inferior animal to M. Jacquemont] ‘ would
have five-and-twenty .’ And again — l An English ensign has a
table in his tent, as well as chairs; for my part, I will eat kneeling
or standing.’ (p. 123.) Now mark the sequel of this boast. We
turn over a few pages, and we find that, in the pride of his heart,
he acquaints his father (vol. i. p. 316), that he never has less than
fifty attendants, exactly double what he had before ridiculed in an
English captain of infantry ; and he subsequently tells us that he
had ‘ chairs and a table, and not less than sixty attendants.’ And
here we cannot but express some little wonder at the kind of state
in which this worthy appears to have travelled. His allowance
from his own government was originally but6ooo francs — i. e. 240 1.
a-year—about the same as the pay of an Enylish ensign in India—
and he frequently complains that the subsequent additions to his
income w'ere not available to him.—How then w'ere the ex-
penses of his escort, and other services of that nature, defrayed ?
Was the Indian government at any charge for Jacquemont’s
journeys?—We hope not. Eord William Bentinck has—as M.
Jacquemont and better authority than M. Jacquemont’s tell
us —attempted a system of economy so strict as to occasion
great




tion. How does this phenomenon strike the mind of our philoso-
pher? If his father,, hot from a history of Siam, had told him that
all the elephants in India were white, while he had found, on the
contrary, that every elephant, wild or tame, which he had seen,
was, without a single exception in some thousand specimens, brown,
would not a reasoning naturalist have suspected that the apothecary,
who had never been in India and never perhaps had seen an ele-
phant, except one in the Jardin des Plantes, might be mistaken,
and that the real colour of the animal was certainly brown? Not
so Jacquemont! in spite of the evidence of his own senses, he con-
tinues to be of his original opinion ; but not being able otherwise
to reconcile his father’s theory with his own experience , he' comes
to this rational and scientific conclusion, that, although it is indis-
putably true that all elephants are naturally white, yet it invariably
and ‘ miraculously ’ happens, that whenever a Frenchman ap-
proaches one of these animals he instantly becomes brown ; —or, to
come to Jacquemont’s point—all Englishmen are naturally brutes,
but under the bewitching influence of a Frenchman, they miracu-
lously change their natures, and become the most civilized and
amiable of mankind.
The following, though not quite a corollary of the former pro-
position, is nearly allied to it. He sneers at the multitude of native
servants which every lazy Englishman requires, and he contrasts
that with his own personal activity and simplicity. 1 1 shall,’ he
says, p. 1 19; ‘ have but six servants, while an English captain of
infantry’ [a vastly inferior animal to M. Jacquemont] ‘ would
have five-and-twenty And again —‘ An English ensign has a
table in his tent, as well as chairs; for my part, 1 will eat kneeling
or standing.’ (p. 123.) Now mark the sequel of this boast. We
turn over a few pages, and we find that, in the pride of his heart,
he acquaints his father (vol. i. p. 316), that he never has less than
fifty attendants, exactly double what he had before ridiculed in an
Finglish captain of infantry ; and he subsequently tells us that he
had ‘ chairs and a table, and not less than sixty attendants.’ And
here we cannot but express some little wonder at the kind of state
in which this worthy appears to have travelled. His allowance
from his own government was originally but 6000 francs — i. e. 240 1.
a-year—about the same as the pay of an English ensign in India—
and he frequently complains that the subsequent additions to his
income w'ere not available to him.—How then were the ex-
penses of his escort, and other services of that nature, defrayed ?
Was the Indian government at any charge for Jacquemont’s
journeys?—We hope not. Lord William Bentinck has—as M.
Jacquemont and better authority than M. Jacquemont’s tell
us —attempted a system of economy so strict as to occasion
great




■
.
.
■
'
■
.
