

Pern pern
f - C --f , A- \tov- - * %.. ' OLf O
rb irin J M*6V\rß fMf*
&'KINDER TRAGEDY ; I®s
ERTRAN
BEING THE ACCOUNT OF THE
EXTRAORDINARY TRIAL OF MR-. AND MRS. BERTRAND, AND MRS. KINDER, AND THE
SUBSEQUENT TRIAL AND CONVICTION OF
[BERTRAND IN HIS CELL,]
LOUIS BERTRAND
AT THE CRIMINAL COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
FOR THE
MURDER OF HENRY KINDER,
01 THE CITY BANK, SYDNEY.
WITH PORTRAITS OF MR. AND MRS. KINDER AND MR. AND MRS. BERTRAND;








INTRODUCTORY.
Writers of fiction and recorders of facts appear to have, of late
years, vied in supplying the demand for sensational reading. At one
time Fiction was the most startling. It were well if it had continued
so ; but, unfortunately for the credit of the present age, stern Fact
has, within the past few years, eclipsed its rival —startled society by
its pictures of the Road tragedy, Dr. Pritchard’s case, and many
others of a similar hue; displaying human nature in phases almost
too horrible to be real. Happily for Australia, these things were,
until the past few days, only known to us by report. Would that
they had remained so ; but the trial just finished at the Sydney
Supreme Court furnishes a case more atrocious, more terrible, and
with more disgusting and horrible details than any before recorded in
the annals of crime.
[MRS. KINDER.]
In the following analysis of this extraordinary trial, our readers
will find the leading features of the case, but to the evidence deta.led
at the trial, and printed herewith, we must refer them for the full
particulars Bertrand, who is a member of the Hebrew persuasion,
and a dentist by profession, commenced to practice in Hunter-street


about three years ago,'arid shortly after married a Miss Palmer, who
always bore the reputation of being a person of unblemished character
and kindly disposition. Bertrand’s practice increased to such an
extent as to warrant his removal into a more fashionable locality ;
and, accordingly, some eight or nine months ago, he removed into
Wynyard-square, where he continued to reside up to the time ot ms
arrest. It was here that he appears to have made the acquaintance ot
w
o
S';
w
fi
M
op
w
3
w
H
<
ij
Y>
«
w
0
S'.
t
M
X
s
1
w
o
-<
H
H
O
O
•<
M
»
-<
Mrs. Kinder, who, with her husband -the paying teller of the City
Bank—resided at the North Shore, in the cottage shown in the
above engraving. Bertrand’s confession to his sister, and the


evidence of Burne, his assistant, furnishes the sequel. Mrs. Kinder
and Bertrand became more intimate, and eventually illicit intercourse
took place, and soon after Bertrand appears to have formed the design
of getting rid of Kinder, whose jealousy was awakened against him.
Bertrand’s first intention appears to have been to murder him with a
tomahawk. He actually procured the weapon, and, assisted by Burne,
rowed across the harbour at midnight, to Kinder’s house; but,
although he told Burne that they had drugged Kinder that night,
from some cause or other he appears to have failed. About this time
a man named Jackson appears on the scene. He came from New
Zealand, where he knew the Kinders, and where he swears to have
been criminally intimate with Mrs. Kinder, with whom, on his arrival
here, he renewed his former intimacy, and through her became a
guest at Bertrand’s, and finally at Kinder’s, where it was hoped by his
rival that Kinder might become so jealous as to commit some act of
violence. This, however, does not appear to have occurred ; and
Bertrand, wishing to be rid of him, gave him money, and sent him
away—hinting, at the same time, that he (Jackson) might be accused
of murdering Kinder if he stayed there much longer. Jackson com-
plied, pretended to go to New Zealand, but in reality went to
Maitland, where he stayed until after Kinder’s death. Mrs. Kinder’s
visits to Bertrand’s house, and vice versa, continue, and the shooting
of Kinder appears to have been so far determined upon, that Burne
was sent to purchase a pair of pistols. He did so, subject to approval,
and the same night Bertrand, disguised in woman’s apparel, accom-
panied him to where the pistols were, approved of them, and gave the
price of them to Burne. The pistols were conveyed to Bertrand’s,
and next day Burne was sent to purchase a sheep’s head, upon which
his master wished to practise. The sheep’s head was taken into the
laboratory, and there used by Bertand. We now come to the result.
On the 2nd of October, Bertrand ordered his wife to di-ess herself and
to take the baby and nurse-maid over to Kinder’s house, where he
himself followed later in the day, and in the evening he and Kinder
went to Hind’s public-house, had a glass of beer, and left together—
a very short time after which Kinder was shot. But so well was the
affair hushed, that only Dr. Eichler —who was called in some hours
later—heard of it for two days. Eichler found the deceased insen-
sible, labouring under concussion of the brain, the side of his face
blown away, and the wound presenting the appearance of having been
treated with some preparation of iron, probably a styptic. Bertrand
informed him that Kinder had shot himself, and the doctor appears to
have been satisfied with the information. Two days elapse before
the alleged attempted suicide is made public, and when the police
constable went to make inquiry he was met by Bertrand at the door,
and told that the doctor’s orders were, that no person must speak to
the wounded man. The officer entered the room, and then Kinder
makes the remarkable statement that “ he did not shoot himself,
and became very much excited. Kinder’s doctor saw him on Thursday
night; when he came next day Kinder was dead. On the following
day an inquest was held. Bertrand was the principal witness ; he
swore that Kinder shot himself with his own hand ; that he was a
very jealous man, but that to his knowledge Mrs. Kinder had never


given him cause for any jealousy. He accounted for the concealment
of the affair on the ground that it was thought Kinder might recover,
and its publicity would only injure his position at the bank, ihe
iury appear to have been satisfied, a verdict of suicide was returned,
Kinder was buried, and the same night Bertrand occupied the same
bed with Mrs. Kinder, and compelled his wife to share it with them.
After staying at Bertrand’s for some days, Mrs. Kinder left tor
Bathurst, Bertrand accompanying her as far as Penrith, where it
seems a compact was made that he would keep a diary of his thoughts
respecting Mrs. Kinder, little thinking that he was about to forge on*
of the strongest links in the chain of evidence to be brought against
[MRS. BERTRAND.]
him. Portions of that diary have been published, and it speaks for
itself Bertrand’s chief difficulty was now how to get rid of his wife.
He tells several persons he intends obtaining a divorce, and marrying
Mrs Kinder. One obstacle is apparently insurmountable, and we
find'him regretting that his wife is too virtuous, and gives no chance
of evidenced serve his purpose. He flogs her with a whip tries to
get her to sign a paper that “ she, being tired ot life, dies by poison
at her own hands,” but in vain. What his next step might have been
is uncertain, had not Jackson reappeared, and sent Bertrand a letter


from Maitland, hinting that he knew about a certain tragedy, and
threatening disclosure if he did not get £2O to take him out of the
country ; but Bertrand is equal to the the emergency ; he hands the
letter over to the police, Jackson is arrested, tried at the sessions for
endeavouring to obtain money by threats, and sentenced to a year’s
imprisonment.
A formidable rival is now got rid of, and Bertrand in his diary thus
records the fact“ Thus perish my enemies. He is disposed of for
the present.” Soon after this he confessed to his sister his infatuation
for Mrs. Kinder, and also that he had shot Mr. Kinder in the presence
of Mrs. Bertrand and Mrs. Kinder, and his intention to get rid of his
[MR. KINDER.]
wife. Other events were hastening, and the false security in which he
wrapped himself proved to be of the flimsiest description. On the
25th of October, Jackson was sentenced, and on the 21st of November
Bertrand was convicted at the police court for using threatening
language to a Mrs. Robertson, whom he threatened to kill, at the same
time stating he had shot Mr. Kinder. The charge was considered
proved, and, in default of bail, Bertrand was sent to gaol for fourteen
days. Mrs. Robertson’s evidence appears to have awakened the atten-
tion of the authorities. Enquiries were set afoot, and on searching


Bertrand’s house, his diary, and letters from Mrs. Kinder of a damna-
tory character were found. Burne made certain disclosuies, an rs.
Kerr acknowledged what she had heard from Bertrand’s own lips, and
it was decided to arrest all the parties. Mrs. Kinder was arrested at
Bathurst and remanded to Sydney, where Mrs. Bertrand and her
husband were already in custody. On the 29th Nov. the three prisoners
were brought up at the Water Police Court, when, after hearing pre-
liminary evidence, thay were remanded until the 4th Dec. e case
was then resumed, and all the prisoners were fully committed to the
next criminal sessions for the wilful murder of Heniy Kinder.
The Kinders had formerly resided in Auckland, New Zealand, in
which colony Mrs. Kinder was born, her father being a publican, and
a man much respected by his friends and fellow-townsmen. i.
Kinder was a man or high social standing, and his relatives were
some of the most respectable persons in the colony.
Bertrand is a young man, apparently of five or six and twenty years
of age, about five feet five inches in height, and rather effeminate m
appearance. Mrs. Kinder appears to be about the same age; m
height she is rather above the average, and in personal appearance
decidedly inferior to Mrs. Bertrand ; towards whom the public feeling
is one of pity. The un' -rtunate woman was ill-treated, and submitted
to the most atrocious degradation, either through fear of her life, or
to shield the unhappy wretch whom the law called her husband.
THE TKIAE.
SYDNEY CENTRAL CRIMINAL COURT.
February 14th and 15th.
(Before his Honor the Chief Justice and a general jury.)
Henry Louis Bertrand (remanded from the last sittings of the
Court) was indicted that he did, on the 6th October last, feloniously,
wilfully, and of his malice aforethought, kill and murdei Henry
Kinder, at St. Leonards, in the district of Sydney.
Prisoner had previously pleaded “ Not Guilty. , , ,
Mr. Butler prosecuted for the Crown. 1 'nsoner
Mr. Dailey and Mr. Windeyer, instructed by Mr. W. Roberts.
The learned counsel for the Crown opened the case, which he
alluded to as one of the most extraordinary in the annals of crime, by
explaining the causes contributing to the death of Kinder, and went
onto contrast the two versions—that by Bertrand at the inquest, an
that in evidence in the present case—of the circumstances under
which the pistol wound was inflicted. The motives for the crime
were he said, to be found in Bertrand’s intimacy with, and strong
passion for, Mrs. Kinder, and his expressed determination to marry
her - and numerous quotations were cited from Bertrand s diary to
show the nature of prisoner’s past relations and future intentions with
regard to her— his references to some past action of his, calling foi con-


frition, and his seeming doubt of God allowing “ a wretch like him to
go unpunished”—and the allusion to those who opposed his union
with Mrs. Kinder : “ X tell thee thou hast need of God’s help indeed
if thou hast me for an enemy—l, who value life as I value weapons to
be used when required, and then thrown away or destroyed, some of
course being kept for future use if necessary.” The learned counsel
went on to show the importance of the fact that prisoner, who was
present at the shooting, for days gave no information of it to the
police. It was, too, a strange coincidence that Bertrand should, in
disguise, go with his assistant to buy pistols, one of which should be
proved to be the instrument of Kinder’s death. The jury would have
to take the admissions of Bertrand, together with facts that un-
doubtedly went to prove a design on his part to take Kinder’s life.
Evidence would be adduced to show that on several occasions he
made excursions at night to Kinder’s residence, with the intention ot
murdering him, and this failing, he fell back upon the idea of shoot-
ing him. Pistols were purchased—he practised firing at a sheep’s
head, and let fall an expression to a man named Jackson, to this
effect, —“ You would not like lb be implicated in a charge for the
murder of Kinder,” and told him he must not be Surprised at any-
thing he might hear when he went away. With regard to the nature
of the wounds, it would be in medical evidence that the two bones
injured could not have been broken except by a shot fired from be-
hind while the victim had his head stooped —an attitude it was highly
improbable a man would assume if he intended to blow his brains out.
If Bertrand was mad, it could only be the madness of his passion for
this woman. The learned counsel then proceeded to call evidence.
Detective Elliott, who arrested Bertrand, produced two packets of
letters (in Mrs. Kinder’s handwriting), a number of phials, powder-
flask and box of caps, one bullet, a tomahawk, single-barrel pistol
(secret trigger, and out of order), nipple screw, a diary, and a day-
book, all obtained at Bertrand’s residence, No. 7 Wynyard-square,
Henry Wager, resident clerk detective department, who arrested
Mrs. Kinder, at her mother’s house, in Bathurst, found there and
produced a letter signed “ Louis Bertrand,” an envelope addressed to
Bertrand, a note addressed to the manager of the City Bank, and a
pistol (with trigger guard).
George McKay, deposition clerk to the City Coroner, produced the
depositions taken at the inquest on the body of Kinder, comprising
the evidence of Mrs. Kinder, Bertrand, William Cooper, and Dr.
Eichler. (Depositions read.) A pistol was produced at the inquest
and claimed by Bertrand as his property ; it was something like the
one now produced (the one with secret trigger), and it would go off at
half-cock.
The verdict of the jury was that deceased died by his own hand.
The following other witnesses were examined;—-Alfred Burne
(Bertrand’s assistant), Charles Lett (clerk in the Crown Solicitor’s
office), Charles E. Kanclaud (cashier in City Bank), Alexander Bell-
house (previously of the Telegraph department), Harriet Kerr (Ber-
trand’s sister), Mary Agnes Bobertson (an acquaintance of Bertrand),
Sophia Taylor (nursegirl in Bertrand’s family), Ann Brown (servant to
Kinder), Thomas Buchanan (who passed to the North Shore with


Kinder on the day of the shooting), William F. Bind (hotelkeeper),
Mrs. Palmer (Mrs. Bertrand’s mother), John Sharp (batcher), Joseph
Myers (from whom pistols were obtained), George Buckley (coat
owner), Charles Price (shopman at Giles and Co.’s), Francis A. Jack-
son (formerly squatter in New Zealand), Dr. Eichler, Mr. Watt, Dr.
Wright, Dr. Alio way, and Dr. Alleyne. The following facts were
elicited in evidence ; . , ,
Henry Kinder, a native of London, thirty-five years of age, had
been married five years, his family consisting ot two children. Whilst
in New Zealand he was connected with the Union Bank and Bank ot
New Zealand. On leaving that country, about two years ago, he
came to Sydney, and when the City Bank opened some twelve months
afterwards, he was appointed chief teller in that establishment.
Within about two months from this time Bertrand met with Mrs.
Kinder in his practice as surgeon-dentist. A mutual regard led to
further interviews, and Bertrand, having introduced his wife at
Kinder’s house, the families became on visiting terms. Not long
after the commencement of this acquaintance Bertrand told his assis-
tant Burne, of whom he seems to have made a sort of semi-confadant,
that’Mrs. Kinder had taken a violent fancy to him, and already made
allusion to an act of illicit intimacy with her. The communication by
Bertrand had been maintained with the Kinders lor about lour
months, when Francis Arthur Jackson, a squatter, who in New
Zealand, after her marriage, had been a party to Mrs. Kinder s incon-
tinence. opportunities for which he obtained by stupifymg the husband
with drink, came to reside at Kinder’s house, at the North Shore,
where he renewed the same kind of intercourse. Here, a few days
after his arrival, he came in contact with Bertrand, who, in order to
get him out of the way, determined to set Kinder against him. lie,
however, changed his tactics, and induced Jackson to abide at his
house in Wynyard-square. They had met in Mrs. Kinder s P^ esence
at the North Shore, and at the request of Bertrand she settled their
rivalry by signifying her preference for Bertrand. Jackson and lie
then entered into a mutual explanation, in which each stated the
peculiar relationship he had had with her. Mrs. Kinder continuing
her intimacy with Bertrand, visited bis house—in one instance stayed
there a week. In addition to some other correspondence forwarded by
the hands of Burne, Bertrand sent her a letter containing a diamond
ring bringing back as an answer that she would come perhaps in the
afternoon, and that day she came whilst Bertrand was out. The inti-
macy became closer as weeks passed by ; and he had now reconciled
his wife to a divorce. Bertrand at length betrayed strong passion lor
Mrs. Kinder, and expressed his intention to marry her, adding that it
was a bad thing for him that his own wife was so virtuous that it gave
him no way of getting rid of her. Jackson (to whom this was said at
Bertrand’s house) urged it as impossible that he could marry Mrs.
Kinder, her husband being alive. Bertrand replied, “ All things are
possible, and time will show it. Kinder is rapidly killing himsell
with drink, and if that won’t do it other things will.” Mrs. Kinder
also told Jackson that Bertrand wanted t-i marry her, but that it was
out of the question. She said she feared him ; he appeared to have
a kind of mesmeric or controlling influence over her. Having so far


succeeded in his scheme with regard to Jackson as to detach him from
Kinder’s and get him into his own house, according to his own ad-
mission, Bertrand drugged him for the purpose of getting from him
letters written to him by Mrs. Kinder. In the month of August,
Bertrand, accompanied by Burne, took a boat at midnight and went
over to the North Shore, stating that he wished to get to Kinder’s
drawers, but when they arrived, having pointed to Kinder’s bedroom,
on the windows of which the moon was shining, he said the light was
too strong, and he would have to come again some other night. About
three days afterwards they went again at night, Bertrand, whilst they
were crossing the water, telling Burne that very likely next morning
Kinder would be found dead in his bed, having committed suicide,
and letters from Jackson be found in his hand. They arrived about
one o’clock. Bertrand took off his boots and went into the house.
When he rejoined Burne (who whilst he was away had fallen asleep)
he said Kinder’s beer, which had been drugged, was untouched, and
that he was very restless in his sleep. Within seven or eight days
they made another midnight trip to the North Shore. Bertrand this
time took a hatchet and told Burne that he intended to knock out the
brains of Kinder, who had insulted him at the theatre. On this
excursion he also informed Burne of his intention to get a divorce
from his wife and to marry Mrs. Kinder. In answer to a remark by
Burne, that it would be impossible to get a divorce from his wife
unless he could get something against her, Bertrand said he would get
some one and pay them until he got something against her. They
reached Kinder’s an hour after midnight, and Bertrand, taking off his
shoes, again entered the house through the same window. As they
were returning to the city, he told his companion that Llewellyn (Mrs.
Kinder’s brother) and Jackson were again in the house, and he did not
think it safe, especially as the boards creaked. A week more elapsed,
when Bertrand made preparations for another nocturnal expedition to
Kinder’s house. He induced Burne to buy him a dark red Crimean
shirt, because, as he said, it would not show the colour of blood, and
desired him to “ make him up” so that he could not be recognised.
Before they started he shaved himself, put on a shell hat, the red
Crimean shirt, and wore a mask that half concealed his face. Taking
off their boots before quitting the house in Wynyard-square, they
passed out by the back door, put on their boots in a lane at the rear,
and crossed the water at about half-past one o’clock. Having reached
the North Shore, Bertrand got inside Kinder’s house and remained
there about three quarters of an hour, after which he came back to the
wharf and told Burne that he did not like to go home without finishing
what he had come to do, and requested Burne to accompany him to
the house, go in with him, and if anything happened, to take his part
and knock out the brains of any one who interfered. Burne declined
to run the risk, stating that it was too romantic for him ; and Bertrand
having proceeded to the house alone, returned in about half an hour,
said they had not “ done it,” and they pulled the boat back to the city.
Burne, although taking the precaution to carry the hatchet and keep
Bertrand in front of him in the boat, regarded these excursions as a
farce, knowing Bertrand to be very eccentric in his manner, fond of in-
dulging in strange caprices, and telling queer stories. He frequently


boasted of his success with women, spoke of romantic adventures in
Brussels, of fighting a duel in Paris, and said that he was on the stage
at Sadler’s Wells, where he had an amour with the chief actress.
He once took poison, and was very ill, and one day he seized Mrs.
Kinder, calling her by the name of his wife (Jane), and tried to force
her on the bed, and Burne, who interfered, he then attacked, tided to
break his arm against the bed-post, and knocked his head against the
wall. On another occasion he attempted to split his wife’s head open
with a hatchet. One evening, two or three weeks subsequent to the
last boat trip, Bertrand, attired in female apparel, accompanied Burne
to purchase pistols, Bertrand providing the money for two. He cast
some bullets; and the next day a sheep’s head was procured, at which
he practised pistol-firing in his workroom, with the object, as he said,
of ascertaining which part of the skull a bullet would most easily
enter. Mrs. Palmer (the mother of Mrs. Bertrand) hearing what
appeared to be reports of pistol shots, came down stairs with her
daughter, and looking into the workroom—the door of which was
opened to her daughter’s knock —she saw much smoke, and observed
the sheep’s head on a side table. He ordered her away, and she left
the house, Burne was aware that Bertrand was too well acquainted
with the anatomy of the head, as not to know which part of the skull
a bullet would soonest enter. About the end of September, Jackson
having obtained some money from Bertrand, went away, Bertrand
being led to believe that he was going to New Zealand via Melbourne.
Before he went, Bertrand said to him, “ You would not like to be
implicated in a charge for the murder of Kinder,” and told him he
must not be surprised at anything he might hear after he left. Jack-
son, instead of going to Melbourne, went to West Maitland. Kinder,
who had been on leave of absence on account of ill health since the
23rd, -was getting much better. He was at Sydney on the 2nd Octo-
ber, and returned in the middle of the day, quite sober. On the
morning of that day Mrs. Bertrand went over to Kinder’s, taking the
baby and nursegirl. In the afternoon, earlier than usual (at half-past
five), the nursegirl was sent back home with the baby. In the evening
Bertrand was at Kinder’s, and they went out to a neighbouring
public-house (Hind’s), but left after being there about ten minutes,
having had only one glass of ale each. Immediately before they went
there, Kinder was seen in good spirits playing with his children in
front of the house. When they returned to the house, Bertrand walked
up and down the room very fast, kept his gloves on, and had one
hand in his pocket. He and Kinder began to talk about Kinder’s
business affairs, speaking of New Zealand and reading letters. Whilst
Mrs. Kinder and Mrs. Bertrand were standing at the window arrang-
ing flowers in a bonnet, there was a loud report, Kinder was then
sitting in a chair near the piano : a pistol dropped from his hand, and
in his mouth Bertrand placed a pipe. That night, about eleven
o’clock, Dr. Eichler (for whom a message had been left some hours
previously) called to see Kinder, whom he found lying on a sofa in a
half-conscious state with a torn wound reaching from the maxillary
angle up the right side of the head in the direction of the temple,
about four inches in length, evidently caused by a pistol shot. There
was no appearance of the entrance or exit of a bullet. The local


arteries and nerves were torn and the zygoma was loose. When the
serious nature of the wound was explained and Kinder was advised to
settle his worldly affairs, and prepare to appear before his Creator, he
sank into a kind of stupor. As Dr. Eichler, after dressing and clean-
ing the wound, was returning to the city, Bertrand, whom he met at
Kinder’s house, accompanied him, and informed him that Kinder,
who had been drinking, appeared to be in money difficulties, that the
sight of some letters had much depi’essed him, and that he was jealous
of Jackson, to whom he (Bertrand) had given some money to get
him out of the way. Next morning, at his own house, Bertrand told
Burne the news of Kinder shooting himself, and, stating the particu-
lars, said he had gone out with him to have a drink, and that before
getting back to the house had shown him a pistol, telling him that it
was perfectly empty, although actually it was loaded. He placed a
cap upon the nipple, and told Kinder to go into the room and frighten
the ladies by pretending to shoot himself. He went in, continued
Bertrand, and did so, and of course shot himself. None of the doctors,
he added, thought the wound had been inflicted by a bullet as none
could be found. On the Monday evening Bertrand told Kinder’s
servant not to fetch Dr. Ward as he would report through North
Shore, and so Kinder would lose his situation. Kinder told this girl
that he had struck himself a severe blow with a stick, but she thought
she heard him say, when Mrs. Kinder was present, that he did not do it.
She saw Bertrand trying to stanch the blood, and he said he would go
for Dr. Wright. On Tuesday morning he was visited by Dr. Wright,
who was sent for and told that Kinder had shot himself. He saw the
wound, the direction of which he described as upwards and slightly
backwards. On the 4th, Mr. W. F. Dind, a neighbour, went to
Kinder’s to ascertain whether it was a fact that he had shot himself.
Outside the house, met Bertrand, who informed him that it was true,
and repeated the circumstance as to his pecuniary embarrassment.
Whilst they were talking, Kinder in alow tone called “ Bertrand,”
upon which Bertrand said the doctors would not allow any one to see
him. The same evening senior-constable Emerton, generally called
“ sergeant ” in this district, having that day first heard of Kinder
shooting himself, went to the house, where he saw Bertrand. He
found Kinder in bed cosily smoking a pipe, and asked if he knew him.
Kinder said “ Are you the sergeant ? ” and Emerton replying in the
affirmative, Kinder added “ What lies these people here are saying
about me shooting myself, as I did not do it.” He then commenced
to pull the bandage off his face, and Emerton, whilst assisting Ber-
trand to replace it, asked who did it, but Kinder made no reply. On
leaving the room Bertrand said Kinder always accused his wife of
doing it, and that Mrs. Kinder had the pistol, but she was too
ill in bed to be disturbed. As they were parting, Bertrand remarked
f ‘ I suppose you won’t say anything about this till we see how it gets
on # ” Emerton replied “Certainly I shall—l shall report itto-morow.”
On the sth Dr. Eichler again saVv Kinder, found him considerably
better, and perceived no indication of sudden danger to his life. He
conversed with the doctor in German, and when asked how the wound
happened, said, “ I don’t know,” or “ I don’t recollect.” The Same
day Bertrand whilst in his workshop took from his pocket a phial con-


taining a white liquid, which he said —(speaking to Burne)— -was
poison that he intended to give to Kinder, stating, at the same time,
that he had frequently before give him poison, but it had never taken
effect. He asserted that Kinder stuck out to the last that he did not
shoot himself, and said he must not leave him too long for anybody
else to speak to. In the evening Mr. and Mrs. Bertrand were at the
house of an acquaintance, named Mrs. Robertson, when Bertrand said
he would go next day and say that he shot Kinder. Kinder died in
the evening of the 6th, Friday, in the course of which day Bertrand
and Mrs. Kinder were seen laughing together in a cab that was pro-
ceeding towards the Haymarket. On the 7th, a coroner’s inquest was
held on the remains, at which Bertrand, who was examined as a
witness, said he saw Kinder place the pistol to the side of his head ;
that after the report the pistol fell from his hand, but the pipe he had
been smoking remained in his mouth. He also stated that Kinder
was jealous of his wife, but that for the last six months she had never
given him cause for the unkind manner towards her. Mrs. Kinder,
who also gave evidence at the inquest, stated that the pistol produced
Kinder had always kept locked up in a chest of drawers. Bertrand
swore that it was his ; that he gave it to Kinder, who, the Friday
previous asked for one in order to have some practice at bottles. The
jury returned a verdict to the effect that deceased, whilst labouring
under a fit of temporary insanity, shot himself with a pistol loaded
with powder. On the 10th, Jackson, who had read the report of the
inquest, wrote from Maitland to Bertrand, saying in a letter marked
“ private and confidential,” “ I am shocked, horrified, stunned at this
denouement of your plans; I little thought when you told me not
to be surprised at any thing after my departure that it would end in
this. If the jury had known one half that I could tell them,
this would ring through the whole civilised world.
As for the accomplice and accessory, I pity as much as blame
A few words of mine to a magistrate,
or a hint to the police, would be sufficient to bring about a
search into the affair, and cause you more trouble than you can
conceive. ... I seem to be a sort of accessory by the
fact of concealing what I know, and still more what I suspect. That
feeling is growing stronger every hour, and will burst forth unless you
give me the means to get to some other land, where I may forget the
horrors of this, as I could not remain in a country where such a fearful
tragedy was enacted. ... On the receipt of this send
me £2O, and I will get away by the Tararua, never to return. . .
I consider you two are now one in everything.” For sending this
letter, Jackson, who had offered to apologise, was soon after prosecuted
by Bertrand and sentenced to twelve months’ imprisonment. On the
hearing of the case at the Court of Quarter Sessions, Mrs. Kinder,
who was witness, swore that her husband had had no ground for
jealousy of Bertrand. Mrs. Harriet Kerr, Bertrand’s sister, who, on
her arrival from Melbourne about the 20th October, went to reside at
his house, immediately after heard from him of his attachment to, and
intention to marry, Mrs. Kinder, and soon discovered the unkindness
with which he treated his wife. Bertrand, whilst Mrs. Kinder was at
his bouse, told Mrs. Kerr, in her presence, that Kinder was sitting


near the piano whilst the two ladies w r ere at the window when he shot
himself with one of a pair of pistols he (Bertrand) had bought, in order
that Kinder might fight a duel with Jackson. On or about the 21st
of October Mrs Kinder left Sydney for Bathurst, whence she kept up
a correspondence with Bertrand, marked by occasional expressions of
ardent regard for him, and denoting a reliance upon his future services
to make provision for getting her employment. Before they parted
he undertook to write for her subsequent perusal, a diary.
THE LETTERS.
The following letters from Mrs. Kinder to Bertrand will be perused
with much interest, as they show the exact relationship in which the
modern Messalina stood to the murderer of her husband ;
“ Bathurst, 23rd October.
“ My Dear Friend—You will be pleased to hear that we reached
our journey’s end in safety last evening. I assure you I was not
sorry, for it was indeed a weary, weary time after saying good-bye to
you. We drove on and on all day long through dust and heat until
we reached Hartley—fancy thirteen hours of it. I really thought the
day would never end. To mend matters, the poor little children
suffered dreadfully while we stopped at Hartley, until five next
morning. I was so tired I could not sleep. We again started, and
drove on and on again until we reached Bathurst, about three o’clock.
Ido not think I was ever so tired in my life; the very thought of the
last two days makes me sick : I trust I may never again experience
such utter prostration. You will wonder how I like the place. As
far as I have seen, I am not in raptures; it appears dreadfully dull,
but I must not judge hastily; I think I shall like it well enough.
Dear mamma and Sarah were looking out anxiously for us. I do
not think I ever before felt how much I have to be thankful for
having a quiet home and dear friends to welcome me to. When we
are wearied out in mind and body, how kindness and love comes
home to us. I was much disappointed in not having a line from
either Llewellyn or yourself this afternoon, I trust you will write
very often, and tell us all about everything and everybody, and your-
self in particular. Mamma was in a great way about the telegram ;
she could not make it out. Thank you very much for sending it so
speedily. The sentence was much more severe than I expected.
Please give my kind love to Jane, and kiss the dear children; also
kind regards to your sister. I trust you are all well at home. Tell
Jane to be sure and not to forget to send me her portrait as soon as
possible. Mamma does not think yours a good one at all. Your
sister also promised me hers ; I hope she will not forget. I have
been telling mamma about her, and I should like mamma to see her
likeness so very much. I think her so nice looking in every way. I
am so tired to-night. I cannot write at any lengh. You must please
excuse all mistakes. I will write a long letter the next time. lam
going to church in the morning to have a look at the natives. Will
you kindly give our best-wished love to Llewellyn, and tell him he
must not neglect us. You must make him write and tell us all the


news. I must conclude now, or else I shall be late for the post.
They are quite well; in kindest regards to yourself and all the family,
and believe me ever to remain truly yours,
“Eelen Kinder.”
“ Bathurst, 31st October.
“My Dearest Darling Love—l have just received your dear, kind,
and most welcome letter. Oh, darling, if you could but know how
my heart was aching for a word of love from you. Dear, dear love,
your kind loving words seem to have filled a void in my heart I
cannot convey to you in words the intense comfort your letter is to me.
It has infused new life into my veins. I was tormenting myself with
all sorts of naughty thoughts, darling. Write very often—every day
if you can—and I will be here to answer. There is no fear of our
correspondence being seen, as Ido not read my letters out; the one
to-day I did, as it did not matter, and it was such a nice, good letter.
I wished mamma to have a favourable opinion of you. Do bear up,
my own love, and hope for better days. I tell you this when my own
heart is sinking with fears for the future, Lovey, Lovey, if we could
but see each other occasionally it would be some comfort; but that
weary waitng, waiting, is terrible. Do you know, I seem to be able to
bear it less and less with patience ; the hours and days drag on ;my
only comfort is at the end of a day, and to think of your words.
•Every day brings the end nearer, and yet how do we know what the
end may be. You may not be able to accomplish your purpose on
account of the expense—even it will be granted you ; but I must not
give way to thoughts of this kind, or I shall both unnerve myself and
you ; but surely, surely, things will turn out right some way or the
other. lam truly grieved to hear about your difficulties, dear one, I
fear you will be hard pushed ; you have such an expensive household;
you must be as careful as passible on our account. Mamma feels very
much your being burdened with Llewellyn, but my parents are in such
a position at present they have no choice but to accept your kind
And indeed, dear, there seems little or no prospects that I can see here
for the future. I would try and get a situation in some house in
Sydney ; here there is no such thing to be had. However, we must
hope for the best. I suppose you would not be ashamed of our poor
home when you come up, darling; but I know that will make no differ-
ence to you. If I lived in a shanty it would be all the same, would it
hot ? Now, about your coming up, dear daihng; how I should like
to see your dear face, and to have a long, long talk with you about
affairs in general. But, my own love, I fear if you were to come just
now you would not find it pay you. Everything is so dull, and what
I fear more is that people to whom you owe money would be down on
you directly, thinking you were going to run away. Dear darling, all
this advice goes sadly against the dictates of my own heart, for my
spirit is fairly dying for you. A glimpse of you, oh ! dearest, dearest,
\vhat would I not give to be taken to your heart; if only for a moment’
I think it would content me. It is no use, dear. Your love is
food and nourishment to me. I cannot do without it. I tried to
advise for the best, but I cannot, I cry out in very bitterness. If I can
only be near you—only see you at a distance once again, I think I


could bear myself. I believe, darling, if our separation is for long I
shall go out of my mind. I cannot live without seeing you sometimes,
but if we lived anywhere near Sydney we could have this occasionally
which would have kept us up ; so all this long time of waiting here I
might as well be at the end of the world. If you can manage to do
so without risk, darling, come up at Christmas. I must try and
live at least—until your own judgment tells you we can meet
without injury to yourself. How is Jane ? What is the matter? It is of
no use to say I am grieved at her being laid up \ that would be
a mere farce between you and I. May I, then, not make a pretence,
As for her assertions with regard to Mr. Jackson, I shall not . . .
them ; for if I am to be taken to task about all she may choose to say
about me I shall have enough to do. lam not aware that she is so
very particular with regard to her statements generally as to think it
worth while giving second thoughts as to what she may say about me.
I know her, and you ought by this time. If you allow everything she
may say to influence you against me, I have done, but, darling, I am
yours, 1 leave my conduct to he judged by you as you think fit; there
let the matter rest. It ought never to have been broached. Oh, dear
“Lovey,” I feel heartily you know whenever you approach me, though
some may say 1 get angry at anything you may say yourself. I am
always ready and willing to listen to you, my dear one, for being
settled. You will be glad to hear that the bank have sent me £2O;
it will be a little assistance. I intend keeping it, if possible ; it is
handy in case of wishing to get away from here at any time. Mamma
wishes very much we could have got into any sort of business near
Sydney, very much. When you come up you will be better able to
judge of affairs. “Papa” talks of going to New Zealand, almost
directly, for he is very unsettled, and that he had better do, there is
nothing to be done here ; he quite expects me to make a good match
one of these days. I tell him I would not give him thanks for the
best man living, if I could only make my own living. Bess is quite
well, and Polly has not been very well and is very cross ; I hope her
temper will improve, as it is rather trying. I think the weather is
much hotter here than in Sydney. Tell Llewellyn he must be sure
to write very often, and, dear love, will you send us the paper every
day; you know the post leaves Sydney at four p.m., and it reaches
here the following afternoon at three, so we can almost hear daily.
What a long, long letter I have written. Ido not seem to have much
left. I wrote to Mr. Paterson last evening. I trust your dear chil-
dren are well, also your sister and family; give her my kindest
regards. Do not let any one see my letters or diary, as they are for
your eyes alone, and oh ! dear one, of all things, do not neglect
writing, it is the only comfort I have during our separation Tell
me all about yourself—your goings, sayings, and doings. I really
must finish now. My own love, better, fondest love, ever yours.
Good-bye, lovey, pleasant dreams —Nelly. I kiss you every night,
and P. dear one before sleeping, and cry God bless you, and let me
dream of you. I cry oh, oh ! off my heart, and to ache with longing
to see you. I told you in my past letters the sort of place this is.
I don’t see the least likelihood of ever making a living out of the
business ; everything is dreadfully dull, it is a horrid place, I dislike


it infinitely ; I would not name this if I could see any prospect. I
do so wish we could have found something to do nearer, if not in
Sydney somewhere not so utterly isolated as this is. I feel my posi-
tion very much, as I know how little able we are to afford the extra
expense we must be at. If there was anything I could do to make it
up there 1 should not mind, but there is absolutely nothing. What
goods we have are very little, and the few we have there is no sale for.
I do not know how things are to go on if it were not for the children.”
„ , T _ _ “ Bathurst, November sth.
My own Dearest Love—l received your two dear kind letters,
enclosed with one for Sarah, yesterday. I thank you again and again
darling for them. I thank you still more for your kind consideration
of my dear father. It is too bad of me to worry you with my troubles
when you are too straitened with your own ; but no, I will not say so
as I know you prefer me to consult you on all things. I have a strong
faith, dear one, in your judgment, that I feel I can do nothing without
your approval, and then I have been so accustomed lately to look to
you for advice and direction in all my worries, incapable to act inde-
pendently of you. I have too much to say to you. I scarcely know
where to begin. I think I will begin about myself and doings, likes
and dislikes. I have not been very well the last day or so. I have
been suffering from my old pain in my side ; also headache, particu-
larly to-day. I fancy it is working harder than usual that brings it
on. Hester is getting better, and easy to nurse. She seems easier to
nurse when lam by. All the rest, lam happy to say, are pretty well.
Boor papa is not very well, for he is unsettled. I think I shall
to tell you what occurs each day, then you will know, which is not
much. With regard to my eye, I have not been out more than two
or three times during the week of an evening, to post my letters and
twice to church last evening, and twice to-day. This is the result of
my stay in Bathurst. Ido not care how little I see of the place or
people, for the whole set of it is a bad and disgusting place, darling,
you have no idea. I have had some people call on me. I have been
introduced to one or two gentlemen, and a young fellow studying f or
the law appears rather a mean fellow. They tell me his family are
considered some of the great folks here; he is rather tall, and talks
like a book ; but the people here, on the whole, appear perfect snobs
Ihe less I see of them the better. I shall be pleasant. Do not be
angry with me, and think me very discontented. Dear one there is
one thing to be said in my present frame of mind. If they were
angels they would not be likely to please me. It is wonderful with
what different ideas we look at the same thing one time and another
is it not. Our own kindred feelings are the rule by which we judge
everything. When they are out of tune, all things jar. To end up
this account of to-day, lovey, I will tell you. lam in the nursery all
the afternoon, the children are both asleep near me, as I write and all
the rest are gone to church. I intend to post this when they
come home. I will now, dearest one, turn to affairs in general, mine
in particular. lam most grateful, dearest one, for your thought for
me. 1 have been considering your advice, and have arrived at a sort
of conclusion; but to mature matters, dearest, I think I had better


explain exactly how we are situated. Oh ! darling, darling, if 1 could
only but see the old surgery there, and leaning my head against yours,
as I have so often done, and tell you all and everything; what a comfort
it would be to me ; but no, that can never be, perhaps never again.
You tell me to have fath, and so I will dear, dear one, if you
tell me to ; but it is very difficult. lam not penitent I fear. Patience,
you know, is not a virtue that I am gifted with ; and, after all, darling,
Ido not think you would see of me more. I could be constant to you
for years perhaps, with only the hoped-for change—that is not me, love.
I love you, you know full well, and I do not think you would like it
to be such; at least, if you would, one’s feelings are to be studied.
But, dear me, I have wandered from my subject; I had better done
with that first. Dr. H., however, you must know that we are under
a rent of five and twenty shillings a week for this shop, which must
be paid monthly. The only dependence we have to meet this claim
and living expenses, are the profits arising from the sale of goods in
the shop. There are about or £3OO worth ; but, of course, they
have been obtained on credit of four and six months bills, I believe.
These bills, of course, will have to be met, or partly so, as they fall
due. If there was any sale for goods, we might do, but up to the
present it has not half paid the rent, and we must live besides. Ihe
only other dependency mamma has is about £SO a year, which she gets
from a little property in New Zealand. So you see, all things con-
sidered, it would be much better for me (do you not think so ?) to
leave here. Mamma would take care of the children for me, and if I
got ever such a little, it would be a help, and there would be one less
in family to keep. I intend to get into a business house here, even
if Ido not get much. I shall be learning a business which may be
useful to me. My dressmaking and millinery, though it would suit
myself, would not suit other people ; so you see, dear love, after you
have considered the case, I think you will agree with me in thinking
my plan a good one. Ido not wish, in fact, to be dependent. I feel
it will not do to depend on papa’s exertions. He may succeed in get-
ting into a business, either in Sydney or New Zealand, but I want to
feel independent if we can, in case of failure. 1 forgot to tell you that
mamma’s little income goes principally to keep up the payment of
papa’s life policy, which it would be a great pity, after so many years,
to allow to fall to the ground, it being the only provision for us all in
case of anything happening to papa. Now, dearest one, I want you to
be on the look-out for me, about a situation in some house of business,
in case I fail in getting employment here. You must not be too par-
ticular, darling. The more money you can get the better it will be.
Do you think there is any chance in our succeeding? Oh, love, the
thought that I might be a rather easier distance off you makes me wild
with pleasure. Dear, dear one, I can place everything to your own
judgment; I know you will do everything fur the best for me. I
may not want to get into a place here ; I need not tell you what I
should prefer ; your own heart will tell you that. It will be better
not to say anything to papa about it; if he can, he intends to get into
business in Sydney—if possible, an hotel —if possible, of course , I
should like that best, if it could be managed; but I much fear the
want of means will prevent him. If he does not succeed in that ven-


ture, he will go to New Zealand by the mail, on the 16th. We were
almost decided to take an hotel here, and continue the other business,
but on second thoughts I don’t care much for it, as I do not think it
would answer, besides, I hate the place; it would tie us too much, for
anything that is done would have to be done in my name. I should
notmmd it m a respectable house in Sydney, but this is such a bad
place. This is, oh, dreadfully matter of fact, dear, dear love, but it is
necessary; therefore I know you will not mind it. Do, dear love
write as soon as you can, and tell me what you think. You see how
we are situated. If papa goes away, we have nothing but our own
exertions to depend upon Oh, dear, dear love, what can you mean
about mammas secret? I know of none. Do tell me. I have tortured
6 wl SmC ! y ° Ur ter Came * Darlin ffi that must be some
“ r ak o e * ™ a l secre ‘ can Jhe have ? Oh, my love, have pity and
tell me. She has said nothing further about our letters : but Ido
not think she likes our writing much. Oh, darling, you preach
patience, but how can I be patient? I cannot be. I won’t be. I
wont be, I have no fear about your getting on, lovey. It is the un-
certainty of our meeting is to me terrible. I have every faith in you
as far as you are concerned: but others—that is the thing. lam
always well when I get a letter to strengthen me. You are rmht in
saying I want you. Try to help me, oh, dear, dear life, now, love, in
a, hurry, as 1 hear mamma coming. God bless you. Good night, dar-
ling love, and plenty kisses from your own darling Child.”
, vT . _ “ Bathurst, November 9th.
1 7 own dearest,—l received your dear kind letters this afternoon.
Oh, darling, why have you not written before this week ? I have
been so wearying to hear from you ; I thought you had forgotten me,
or that something dreadful had happened. But I must not be too ex-
acting, must I, dearest love ? and you have so many claims on your
time ; it is very, very good of you to think of and write to me as you
do, but lovey, make excuses, and forgive me for complaining. You
can have no idea, in the midst of agreeable society and pleasant sur-
roundings, what the disappointment is to me when I am denied the
one and only pleasure of my life—the getting a letter from you, dear
one. It is five long days since I last heard from you. I thank you
very much for your kind and loving words, they always strengthen me.
I am so thankful you have been doing a little business again ; it only
wants a start ; you will get on nicely now, I trust. lam sorry to say
matters do not improve at all with us. I have been trying to get in
several of the houses of business here, but find there is no opening;
they are all shortening their hands, the times are so bad. I have also
tried for a governess’s situation; it is partly vacant, as the lady has
gone to Sydney who has been holding it, and it is uncertain whether
sJie will return. lam to know more about it on Monday. If I set
ever so little it will be a help. Poor, dear papa is, I trust,
Sydney by this time. Poor old man, I never saw him so low-spirited
before leaving us ; he has never been so poor in his life, and left us
uncertainly provided for, I do hope and pray he may succeed.
h, Dorns, darling ! I do not know how to thank you sufficiently for
yom gieat kindness to my brother. Ido not know what he should


do were it not for your kindness in giving him shelter just now. You
will feel willing in your own mind, without words from me, how grate-
ful we are to you. I have no news to tell you about myself, except
that my whole thoughts are given to you. Oh ! I do feel so very
desolate and have such a craving to see you at times, and then, again,
I bow my head in utter humiliation of spirits when I think of my
utter umvorthiness ; and to bring a blight on all that I love and care
for me. Oh ! if I could only be a true Christian, but my thoughts
and desires are so terribly wicked. lam myself terrified at them.
God forgive me and strengthen me in the right way, and teach me to
bear with patience whatever the future may have in store for me.
My sister-in-law and brother have written very kindly to me, asking
me my plans. I intend writing by return mail, and telling them how
lam situated. Ido not expect anything from them. lam glad you
have been enjoying yourself, darling; I picture you all to myself very
often. Poor Mrs. Robertson, lam sorry she is so delicate ; she has
not answered my letter yet. lam getting so subdued by trouble, that
I do not feel so severely as I did, I think, or I should feel it unkind
in her not writing, but I suppose she has no time. The clergyman of
the parish and his wife were here to see me ; he is a very young man—
a curate. I have been to church this evening; I heard him preach ;
I liked him much —his words came home to me. I have not been out
before since I last wrote to you. I am happy to say the three dear
little children are well; lam also better myself to-day—it is peace of
mind I want. Nelly is getting such a plump little thing, she will soon
walk, I think. Give our kindest love to dear Llewellyn and papa;
tell Llewellyn, mamma likes him to write in the way that it amuses us.
Also, please to give our kind regards to Jane and your sister, at least
mine—mamma does not know her—and kiss your dear children for
me. I think, dear one, I would rather you should bring your diary
with you, as I should like to read it together, it would be such a
pleasure. I do not know how I shall feel when I see your dear face
again. The thought sets my breast beating and my blood gurgling in
my veins. Do, darling, not fail to write as often as you can. Spare
me a little moment. I must not forget to thank you for your kindness
in seeing about my business. It would, perhaps, be better not to go
to Sydney exactly, but somewhere on the line. I should like to get
into a first-rate establishment for a few weeks to learn dressmaking, as
a really good one would do very well here. In that case, then, there is
no place like Sydney; but, darling, I leave myself entirely in your
hands—feeling, love, you will do everything for me best. lam not at
all certain of obtaining what I want here, so you will continue to look
out for me. Dearest, will you not? I am, 1 fear, a great sore to you.
I must now conclude, or I shall be too late for the post-office. Good-
bye, dear, dear, precious love. God for ever bless you and preserve
you from harm, and preserve your dear children.”
“ My own darling, what a treat it is to me to get your dear letters.
The one enclosed in Llewellyn’s letter I thought was bearing the best
of news—news that has distressed me. Your loving words are the
only comfort. I have around me surrounding darkness. Indeed,
dearest one, everything looks very dull indeed; but with regard to


your affairs and ours, I do trust, dear lovey, your business may im-
prove : it will be dreadful if it does not. I am very glad to hear that
your sister, dearest, has some prospect before her. I think you were
most sensible in your advice to her, for everyone appears to be in a
bad state, and not much likelihood of improvement; so that a cer-
tainty, be it ever so little, is not to be despised. Matters here are
nearly as bad as it is possible to be. I really do not know what we are
to do ; there is no sale for anything; we do not take five shillings a
day, and yesterday and to-day we have not taken sixpence—a nice
prospect, is it not ? My own dear love, you said you would advise me;
Ido so sadly want it; I do not see that there is anything for me to
do. You think of my trying for a situation in some establishment
here or elsewhere. The children are my great lies; were it not for
them, I think I might do something. If I could get £4O a year even.
I could even then take mamma and give her all I could. It would
not cost much for my clothes. You see I could not leave mine to her
without compensation. Darling, do not think me a bother to you, but
which shall Ido ? Do you think there would be even a chance if by
obtaining a situation of any sort under consideration, I should feel
more independent ? I knew how it would be. Mamma has already
commented on my getting letters from you, and says the injury l am
doing you and Jane by encouraging your love. She also advises
me to be careful what we write, as she says there are many reports
with regard to us in Sydney, and that the detectives have power, and
might use it if they thought to find anything out by opening our
letters. I was not aware that they had that power ; it is only in case
of there being anything suspicious with regard to people. But to
come back to the subject. Dear one, Ido not ask advice so much
with regard to ourselves, but mine is real necessity for something to
be done. Mamma gave me a regular lecture to-day. I knew she would
see through us ; and as good as told me she would not countenance
anything wrong. I, darling, know what I shall have to bear. I told
mamma°plain out I cared for you, and you for me; I also said I should
not think of marrying. All this makes me more anxious to be to a
certain extent independent of them, if 1 could in any way manage it;
but, independently of that, they cannot keep themselves, much more
me and the two children. lam telling you really how matters stand.
Dear one, as far as anything in the shape of love and affectionate wel-
come to the last crust they have I can depend ; but I would
rather be a common servant than a dependant on them under the cir-
cumstances. I do think of trying to get into one of the shops here,
but will do nothing until hearing from you. Oh, love, love, consider
for me, and advise me; I know I should have great opposition to
my living there first, but 1 should not mind, that would force off.
Fancy, mamma said she would rather Llewellyn was begging in the
streets than that it should be only on my account you kept him; but
still she is kind in her actions; I know she feels very grateful to you,
at the same time she is right-minded, and looks at things as they are
in the eyes of the world. ©You must not be angry with her for my
sake, love; she is a mother, and advises as she thinks for the best.
I fear, dear, dear love, you have every reason to complain of this
letter not being loving, but, my own dear, dear love, I have only you


to depend on for ndvice ; with regard to my own heart’s feelings, there
is no one else in this wide world to which I can talk as to you. Love,
love, you ask me to say I love you, dear darling, it is borne m sorrow
and trouble, therefore all the stronger my heart and mind ache with
the strength of my love, as it is one almost without hope,—love you,
oh yes, better than anything in this wide, wide world—not only love,
but respect, I look up to you as through nature; do not ask it 1 love
you you must feel it in the bottom of your heart how Ido love you,
and ! shall continue to love you always. Oh, dear, dear darling, it is
a week this evening since I left—what an age, it keeps three bundle
and sixty days, love. Sweet love, papa and mamma are gone to church,
so I got this chance of writing—l shall enclose it in Llewellyn s letter ;
I also enclose Annie’s character, will you be kind enough to read it to
her and also put her surname, as I do not know it. Oh, deary, !
must finish now ; trust you will be in better spirits, and that you will
clear up all my difficulties in your next. Dear, dear love, good-bye.
“ Bathurst, November 11th.
«My own dearest one —Oh, is it, can it be true—yes, that there is
a possibility of our being ever in the same city ? Oh, dear, dear love,
the thought is too great a happiness —even am I not dreaming but
darling is there even a remote chance of such a thing coming to pass .
You cannot imagine my feelings when I read your dear, dear letters;
what thought and trouble you do take, dearest, on my account. I can
never repay you sufficiently. Yes, words are weak to all that I leed,
and yet, I cannot help saying again and again how grateful 1 am to
you for all your care and anxiety on my account. Now come to busi-
ness dear love do you think there is a likelihood of papa being able
to take a house and stock it, you know he has no money. I think
your plan an excellent one. if it is practicable. Papa and I spoke
about it before his leaving. I think we should do well. I told him
the very last thing to try and manage to get into something of the
kind as I never can make up my mind to live m this place, so far
away from all I love. You know he had serious thoughts of taking an
hotel here, but I set my face against it, it would tie us to the place;
but oh, darling, to be near you, I could live on dry bread and water,
anything in the world but separation—let hardship and adversity
come, I can bear anything if I can only see your dear face, if only at a
distance, sometimes. Only let me be able to obtain a living for the
children and myself, though ever so poor a one, it is all I ask so long
as I can be near you, love, I told you in my last about the situation
I was inquiring about. I am to hear more about it on Monday. Even
if I take it I shall not bind myself in case of anything turning up.
How I do trust everything may turn out as we wish, but 1 fear it is too
good to be reality ; but I have faith in your good luck, ‘ Loo, and
such dependence on your judgment, darling, that I seem to fancy
that nothing can go wrong if you wish otherwise. Lam rather souy
you told papa the exact state with regard to ourselves. Deal, you
know he is changeable, and I don’t want mamma to have any idea just
yet 'J I am sure nothing would delight him more himself, he is s
fond of you; but you know ho is easily led. I shall be glad if you
can manage this business somehow. As tar as being jealous goes, yoi


have no business to speak of such a thing, you ought to know me by
this time. I have told you that lam completely altered, my future
life is laid out as a map before me—nothing will change it; good
fortune or ill, I intend to do my duty to the best of my ability where-
eyer 1 may be. As far as my heart goes it has found its rest; not
all the world will alter me in thought or deed. lam glad to hear
that your brother-in-law is getting on. I hope your sister will like
her new house ; give her my kindest regards. I think had she known
me under more favourable circumstances she would have liked me ;
but that cannot be helped, the good or ill opinion of others after all
does not alter one for better or worse, does it deary ? I am what I am.
I trust dear you will write again very soon, as I shall be anxious to
know how things are going. Mamma, I think, would very soon be
brought over, as we are not making our salt at the business. lam going
to write to New Zealand to morrow. Mr. Cooper sent me a very kind
little note with the letters which I answered. I must now conclude,
dear love, trusting you will have good news for me next time you
write ; and oh, darling, fancy, fancy, each other to be always near
each other. Dear love, I shall die with pleasure if it comes about.
Good-bye, and good night, dear, dear, kind love. God for ever bless
you. Ever yours, most.affectionately.”
“ Bathurst, November 14th.
“ My own dearest love—l received your kind and loving letter of
Monday. I thank you very much for it, darling ; but oh, how am I
to answer it ? I have nothing cheering to say. With regard to our
coming to Sydney to live, I sounded mamma about; but as she says
very truly, it would be a great risk removing. She would like, of all
things, to be in Sydney if she could see her way clear before her. What
she thinks, is that the goods, of which we have very few, by the time they
were taken down again,theirvalue would be so decreased, that we should
scai’cely be able to make enough out of them to pay the carriage. She
also says, that house rent would be so high and competition so great,
that she does not see how it could pay us to remove. Another thing,
we could not leave here without giving a month’s notice. It is a sort
of place that you cannot stir without all the world knowing your
doings. So you see, love, that if I could even persuade her, which I
do not think I could do if I were to try, if things failed afterwards, I
should get all the blame. Do not, pray, say Ido not want to be near you,
dear, dear one, you know so very different. What I want you to do
is to get me some employment in or near Sydney. Mamma, when I
was telling her I could not and would not make up ray mind to remain
here, said it was a pity I came up ; but she says she will take charge
of the children, that they shall be no hindrance to me if I wish to
leave home. So darling dear one, if you want,me to be near you, it
is our only chance you getting me something. I have made up my
mind not to try further in Bathurst. Mamma did not get a letter
from papa; you know how undecided he always is. As we are situ-
ated here at present, we can live for some months at all events ; but
what mamma thinks, is that we run great risk of not being able to
even do that if we go to the expense of moving, unless we see our way
clearly of making a living in Sydney. I was much disappointed


about the hotel affair, for mamma would have gone into one without
a murmur. However, it cannot be helped, can it dear one ? How
black everythings looks, lovey, does it not ? Our good fortune seems
to be deserting us. You say you heard a great deal lately. Ido not
wish to bo uncharitable, but it appears to me there can be only one
person to attribute talking to, considering you appear to spend the
greater part of your time in their society ; I am, perhaps, unjust, but
I should like to know of what I am accused, and who my accusers are.
I will say no more. I leave it to your own heart to judge me, and to
your own discretion to tell me what you mean. Ido not choose to be
maligned by any one without cause, either to gain their own ends or
for any other purpose. It is surprising how delicate people grow now-
a-days. Louis, I am in a rage with that interesting little friend of
yours. She is double-dealing. You may find her out yet. I had
better not say any more, for I find my temper is getting the better of
me. Dear, dear love, how Ido long to see you. You would soon put
rne all right: do try and get me something near you. I shall always
be tormenting myself with all sorts of jealous fears. If lam away, be
sure and write to me again soon, lovey, what you think I must say.
Good-bye, most dear precious one, with endless love. Forgive me,
for you know my disposition too well to be angry with me, particularly
as it arises from caring too much for you. Good night and good-bye.
God bless you. Ever yours,—E. E.
“ Give rny kindest love to Llewellyn and papa. Ask papa to write
his plans. Also tell him a young man from Weeke’s was here to-day,
and said that if the affair was not settled Mr. Weeke would take pro-
ceedings immediately. Give my kind regards to your sister and Jane,
and kiss your dear children for me.
“ Tell Llewellyn mamma was much pleased with his journal, and
hopes he will continue it. We are all well. I have been suffering the
last day or two with violent headache, but I feel better to-day.”
“ Bathurst, November 18th.
“My own dear Louis—l received your dear, kind little note about
an hour since. I have very little time to answer it; but I must tell
you, lovey, it has put new life into me, the hope that you may be suc-
cessful in your endeavour to get something for me to do that will bring
me near your dear self. Oh, rny darling love, Ido long for that time
to come about. Ido not care how hard I have to work, or how much
anxiety I may have, if I can only be where 1 shall be able to have a
cheering smile from you, dear. Dear love, do help me in it: it is
absence from you that hurts me so/ Oh, I know I could bear anything
but dishonour ; and love, that I could bear, if it wei’e only myself that
was the sufferer. This, dear one, I know you will understand. My
feeling for my parents and young sister; besides, I know, for your
own and my sake, you would always shield me, you dear generous one.
How can I repay you for all thoughts for my happiness, for I know
well you feel that it is my happiness to be near you ; but, darling, not
for my sake must you involve yourself in difficulties, dear. Dear, that
must not be. I must have patience, and be content to wait and hope,
if that is the only means of sparing you, for you must not worry
yourself so much on my account; darling, lam not worth the labour


you take about me. I had a letter from papa. He writes for us to
come down at last. He says he thinks it would be best, but mamma
thinks differently. I told you the reasons in my last letter, also, what
I want you for to do for me in case all does fail. I have quite made
up my mind not to try for anything here until you give me no more
hope. This I trust you will succeed in, some way or the other ; in
fact, I am sure will, if you make up your mind to. How Ido hate
this place, too. Hate! hate! hate it! There, it does me good to
even write my mind freely. I do not like to say too much to poor
mamma, for she does her best to make me happy, and really is striving
hard to make a living. I know I worry her often, for my disgust will
break out sometimes, in spite of myself. It is very ungrateful of me,
I know, for what should I do had I not such a kind home to come to,
poor as it is, and my loving relatives to welcome me. Oh ! I fear, dear
one, lam very wretched. I know it is being away from you. If you
were only here, and I could be even in the same town, I should be
all right. Don’t think me a little goose, but Ido long to think of the
time when I shall see your dear face. Very, very often that is what
makes me want to come to Sydney, or somewhere near, or else I would
make up my mind to stay here and be content, for if it were not for
you all places would be alike to me. Oh, Ido hope you will succeed,
darling. I pray you may, for I quite expect it. Papa goes to New
Zealand ; the best thing will be our leaving to be off there. I quite
expect to find myself in Canterbury one of these days, and fancy, dear
dear, lovey lovey, all those miles apart. Oh, how would we bear it!
But we must hope our good fortune will favour us in this. I cannot
say any more, dearest love, as I have no time. I have to be very busy
to-night making a jacket for some girl or other. You must remember I
am a seamstress now—not a lady with my time at my own disposal. So
good bye, my own dear one. Be sure to write as soon as possible, and
let me know the result. Adieu. God bless you, love. Ever your own,
affectionately. I have enclosed a few lines for papa. Dear Louis,
please give them to him. Ever yours.”
November 21st.
“ Oh, darling Louis—Your letter has quite bewildered me. Oh,
lovey, what shall I say, and what shall I do. You must not be angry.
But Ido not quite understand about this business. You say some-
thing about papa’s going to New Zealand. If lam going to Sydney
to go into the house, he must not go ; he must stay in some capacity
or other, as it would never do for me to enter into it without his coun-
tenance, darling. Darling, both yburs and my reputation would be
gone at once, you see. It he could stay, I will come at once. Oh,
dear darling, he must stay, or I cannot come. lam too young, in
reality, after all that has been said about me. Deal’, dear love, for
myself I would risk all; but supposing it should not answer. My
having lived, as it were, in, and keeping your house, without either
of my parents to come and see me; it would preclude all chance of
my getting my living in any other way. Llewellyn is no use in that
respect. As my friends are here, he would cry out directly, and we
neither of us are rich enough exactly to run counter to its prejudice.
Mamma would not, at least could not come just now—in fact, I would
rather she did not until we could see our way clear. lam talking


reason now, lovey; but oh, do, do get papa to stay, if only for a
time, just to see how things will go ; so that I may come, only do so
at once. I will be with you if you do so, goody. I will fly direct,
and only be too glad, as it is just what I should like to have, plenty
to do. Deary, you must, you will see that I could not come to the
above. The only liability papa has immediately is for a bill about
£7O to meet. You see, if he could arrange that week, I would tell
mamma of it at once, as he grows impatient. If that could only be
managed, there is nothing to prevent papa stopping here at least
three months, and by that time I should have got settled, or some
other arrangement might be made; besides, darling, I know nothing
really about the business. I could not get on without papa. Mamma
would go on with her business here independently of me. Oh, L do
hope you will get him to stay; you can if you only make up your
mind to. I have told mamma about it. She says it papa is asked for
it might answer best. She much doubts my being able to manage
such a thing, but the idea of my going alone is, I tear, altogether
wrong. I feel it myself, too, dear ; in fact, my dear, you must, if
papa does not remain, get me a situation. You see, deary, in an
hotel is such a public affair that my position would be noticeable di-
rectly ; and, dearv, you know that must have a little consideration.
I should not like'to be in public, and I know you would not like for
me to be a disgrace to every one connected with me. You see m y
parents had not been in the colony that would have been something
different; but as it is, I have no voice for entering into such a thing
without their countenance. I will write a tew lines to papa, which
I will enclose, and you can give it to him—that is, as you like, lovey—
as far as Llewellyn is considered—if I can, I should preler his not.
And now, darling, with regard to yourself. What can 1 say to thank
you for your care and anxiety for me ? Are you not, dear, running
great risks about these promissory notes ? Oh, do, dear one, be care-
ful not to involve yourself in difficulty. This, perhaps, is good ad-
vice, but consider the cost, love ; but no, I will not despair. Things
will’turn all for the best, I am sure, only patience, patience, that is
the natural cry. Do not forget what I have said about the situation,
lovey. If you fail—but you will not fail if you choose otherwise.
You must write by return of post, dear love, as I shall be tormented
till I hear, for my heart throbs when I think I shall be with
you in less than a week, but I think it will be nothing like a week
before I see you if all goes right. Telegram to me, love ; that will be
best it will so relieve my anxiety. I could then answer, and tell you
when to meet me at Penrith. Oh, this meeting, love ; oh, I shall go
mad ; it is too delicious to dream of; oh, let it be in reality, darling,
do, do. For you my feelings will burst out; but still, dear one, I
trust you will do what is best for us both in the end. I would say
[remainder illegible.]
THE DIARY
Sydney, October 26, 1865.
Thursday, 26th.—She is gone—l am alone ; oh, my God, did I
ever think or dream of such agony. lam bound to appear calm;
so much the worse. Ido so hate all mankind. I feel as if every


kindly feeling had gone with her. Ellen, dearest Ellen. I thank, I
dare to thank God for the happiness of our last few moments. Surely
He could not forsake us, and yet favour us as he has done. Tears
stream from my eyes; they relieve the burning anguish of my break-
ing heart. Oh, how shall I outlive twelve long months? Child—l
love thee passionately—aye madly. I knew not how much until she
was gone. And yet lam calm. ’Tis as the dead silence that preludes
the tempest. What fierce passions are contending in my breast!
Love, jealousy, revenge, hate, and unappeased rage ! Can I ever be
good'? I will try, since my love wishes it. Dearest child, what
would I not do for you, my wife in heart, soul, and spirit ? Angel of
love, star that hath illumined my dark existence, I am grateful, ever
gratetul, for the intense happiness you have caused me. Oh, darling
love, give me by thy future life faith, new sterling faith in thee. Thou
art all I possess both in this life and in the next. Do not rouse the
demon that I know lies dormant within me. Beware how you trifle
with my love. lam no base slave to be played with or cast off as a
toy. I am terrible in my vengeance—terrible ; for I call on the
powers of hell to aid their master in his dire vengeance. God,
what am I saying ? Do. not fear me, love ; I would not harm thee
—not thy dear self, but only sweep away as with a scimitar my
enemies, or those who step between thy love and me. Think kindly
of me, of my great failings. See what I have done for thee—for my,
for our love. Think of that, and then doubt me if you can.
Oh, Ellen, I swear that since the creation of the universe no woman
was ever loved as thou art. Dear love, are you not proud of that ?
And I feel that lam loved equally well. lam so ill, Ellen ; I want a
smile from those dear eyes to give me hope, renewed energy. My life
seems ebbing away. I want to live now, since thou art the prize to
be won. 1 have thee, I know, but I crave, my own darling, to call
thee wife before God and man. Will that ever be? If I thought
not I would not live. No! what is life without thee? One burning
kiss, love. Adieu. Will you think of our last parting? You did
not leave me, or I you. We left each other of our own free will, that
we should sooner meet again. How strange it seemed—you going
one way and I another, and yet I seemed to carry you back with me.
Thy darling spirit is ever by me. Courage, dearest, courage, and all
will yet be well. The journey will fatigue you greatly, and I not
there to help thee, my love. That happiness will fall to the lot of some
one who knows not the pleasure he is robbing me of. Dear one, 1
pray that you may not be ill—that my love will strengthen, instead of
exhausting you, my own child. I feel I love you as mother, sister,
brother, husband, all, all combined. What work I have before me
God only knows, but 1 will call his love to help me, and strive to do
right. I leel I shall. Thy dear devoted love shall save me. I know
it will, and we may yet be good and happy together. In the train I
borrrowed half the Empire, which contained this paragraph:—
“Francis Arthur Jackson, convicted of sending a threatening
letter to Henry L. Bertrand, with the intent to extort money, sen-
tenced to twelve months hard labour in Parramatta gaol.” It pleased
me. lam satisfied. Thus once more perish my enemies. He is
disposed of for the present. Are you sorry ? Come home. The


first thing Jane did was to tell me, that after all our quarrel with re-
gard to your laughing at Jackson, you, while I was in court, laughed
openly at him. Did you do so ? If so you will be his ruin, for I have
not done with him yet. Why will you enrage me ? I called on
Cooper at the City Bank, and gave him your letter. The Board meets
to-morrow at 12 a.m. I trust to God that they will do something for
you. Afterwards telegraphed to you Jackson’s sentence; am doing no
business whatever, Alfred not here to day. Obtained five copies of
your darling likeness. Kept two for myself, gave one to Jane, and
one each to my sister and Mrs. Robertson. I had also three of mine
at the same time. I have been very ill all to-day, and very sad. That
is not to be wondered at —how could Ibe otherwise ? I could eat no
dinner ; had nothing whatever to eat since breakfast with your dar-
ling self until half-past 7 to-night. Great pain in my stomach; I
fear that I shall be ill, Mrs. Robertson was very ill when they re-
turned from the railway, and was obliged to go home directly in a
cab alone. My sister promised to go and see her this evening; and
accordingly, Harriette, Jane, and myselt went to see her at 9 o clock.
We could not go sooner, because of the children. I was taken very ill
at her house, and was obliged to take one of my powders. I gave her
your portrait; she liked it very much. Mi’s. Robertson gave me two
pearl shells to look at, to see if they could be mounted into sugar-
spoons, and asked me if it would be very expensive to get them done,
when I told her that it would be. She asked me to accept them, and
that she would try and get others from the Islands for herself. Ido
not know what to do, whether to accept them or not; however, I will
consider what to do. It is now a few minutes to 2 o’clock, high time
to retire, particularly as lam very weary and tired. I placed one of
your dear darling portraits this morning in your locket; so I carry
you, my love, about with me, and kiss your dear eyes again and again.
Love, dear, dear Nelly, how do you bear, bear our separation? Oh,
darling, you must be tired and worn out. God bless and guard thee,
Ellen. (One day nearer to thee.) —Louis.
Friday, 27th.—Am very unwell to-day; not busy. Oh, Ellen, I
hope that I shall not be obliged to keep my bed. You know, love,
what I have to do. I suffer so very much, dearest, bodily pains, and
you not by to cheer me with a smile. I am in agony, and yet I can
write this, and feel intense pleasure in so doing. 1 am doing no
business, earning no money, and yet I require so much. By this
you, my love, will have seen and embraced your mamma. Will you,
my love, in the kindness and affection of a mother and sister, forget
me ? No, you can never, never forget, even without speaking of love,
my kindness, or what I have done for you, for I have done a great
deal. I have not been able to eat any dinner to-day; I am afraid I
shall die of lowness of spirits. How can Ibe gay ? Nothing seems
to possess any interest for me; no kind of amusement: my chief
happiness consists in looking at your dear face. Oh, dearest, what
should Ido without you ? Do you feel thus ? I am now, by my
agonies, paying a debt to retributive justice. How and what 1 made
others suffer, God only knows; but if I have, I richly deserve all I
now feel; and you, my love, have you not done the same? ’Tis
strange, our two natures are so much alike. They say that those


whose characters resemble one another never agree; but it is not so,
my love. I love a companion who can understand my sentiments,
respond to the very beating of my heart, help me to think, to plan,
and by clear judgment advise with me on worldly affairs. A woman
is not a toy. God did not create them for that, but as a help ; for,
dearest, is not a good, loving wife a great boon: her price is above
rubies. Women are as men make them; their natures are naturally
soft and yielding, and easily moulded to any form. I have found,
from experience, that half tho trouble women give their husbands is
caused by the husbands themselves—sometimes directly, but mostly
from some indirect cause, that might have been avoided if the man
had used even moderate care in the guidance of the being sacredly
intrusted to his charge. It is man’s prerogative, his duty, to advise—
and see that his advice is acted upon—those he loves, whether chil-
dren or women, and a lord of the creation deserves to lose his estate,
and morally become a beggar if he is too idle, or worse, too wicked to
guard innocence and virtue from the evils that surround them.
Dearest Ellen, I have been sometimes cruel, very cruel apparently,
but, my own love, it was requisite. You, of course, could not see
that you were spoilt —spoilt by a heartless world. What, what did
they care for your happiness, for your future? All they did was to
amuse themselves for the time being; and so they flattered and
pampered you, and gave you your own way, until you scorned and
despised, instead of respecting those who ought to have been a
guidance to you. It was thus I found you, and my own love dis-
covered at a glance what was wanting. I, under the circumstances
of the case, considered it my duty, as I loved you, to do all in my
power to destroy the influence and evil accumulated by years of
neglect. The task was not easy, as you know it was painful to me in
the extreme, as every unkind word I gave you caused me more pain
than it could possibly cause you my love. At nine this evening, Mrs,
Robertson called. She brought John with her. She said she came
in to see Miss Willington, I being a little better, we had one game
of whist; I and Jane were partners. I lost my temper, for a wonder,
and disgusted Harriette and good Mrs. Robertson exceedingly. She
only staid until ten o’clock. I am much better, and am now bound
for bed. You, my love, are, no doubt, after your arduous journey, fast
asleep. Pleasant dreams to thee, my own dear love. Dream of the
future, for in that do we both look forward to repent our sins and
make peace with our God. lam sure He will help us to be good, if
we try with all our heart, with all our strength. Good-bye, sweet
Ellen. I kiss thy dear semblance. God guard thee.—Louis.
One more day stolen trom fate.
Saturday, 2«th. —Slept late. A great deal better. Harriette
brought me my breakfast in bed. Jane was taken very ill with great
pa n in her side. Harriet is now putting turpentine to her side and
stomach. lam taking the opportunity of writing my business letters.
Was not very busy, but did a little. Wrote to you, my own darling,
two letters —they occupied me all the afternoon. I knew you would
be anxious to hear from me, and also that you would not be contented
with a cold every-day letter, such as you could show your mamma;
so, my love, I sent you the half-sheet for your own dear eyes alone to


peruse. Will you be able to make it out 1 I wrote so small, and
crossed it so much, that I think, dearest, you will have some trouble
at least to read it. I know you will not mind that, as you know the
reason for my doing so. Dear Ellen, lam alone now with thy spirit.
’Tis twelve o’clock. Thou art perhaps asleep, or thinking of your
dear loving Louis —think of the time when we shall meet to part only
in death, When will that time arrive 1 It approaches surely, but
what slow steps ; but it will come —believe me, it will come, as you
believe there is a God. I have said it. I forgot Jane was better: so,
about half-past four, Harriet, Jane, and I went out for a walk, showing
her the new buildings in New Pitt-street. I spent the evening in
designing silver work. I am too ill to write you any more to-night.
Good-bye, darling. Dear love, God love and keep thee. Three days
nearer to thee, dear Ellen. —Louis.
Sunday, 29th.—Last night I read in bed until past two o’clock;
woke late this morning; do not feel very well; lam afraid my old
illness will come, no matter how I strive to ward it oft. I am not
happy —how can I be? I want affection; I cannot live without it.
Oh, dear Ellen, what would life be without thee ? or even the hope of
possessing thee—that alone is food for the heart and mind. My own
dear love, I talk incessantly of thee—l speak of thy gentle ways, of
thy abilities, what thou canst do, what thy favourite airs are, and all
that recalls thy dear name has a charm for me. Harriette, my dear
sister Harriette, is a comfort, for, dear girl, she knows I love to talk
of thee, my own darling, and so listens attentively to the enumeration
of thy excellent qualities. I forget at times she is a woman, for lam
sure she must be jealous of the immense love I bear thee ; she olten
says she wants her husband to caress her. I awoke this morning
when the church bells were ringing, so, of course, Avas too late lor
church ; feeling rather tired, I did not dress or shave. I fear, my
dear Nelly, that not having you to fascinate, I shall become quite
slovenly and untidy, for, if I consulted my own feelings, I should not
dress at all. I dare say, also, that I shall become ugly again, for you
know how uglv I was before I knew you. I may be so now, only you
do not see it, or rather pretend not to. Never mind, my love, if lam
good enough for jou, you are my world. That is all I desire; no,
that is not all, for I am ambitious —very, very ambitious, I want
fame as Avell as vvealth and power, and, as usual, little Bertrand must
have his Avay. You know he is a spoilt child—spoilt in more Avays
than one. So, as I was saying, I must have fame, fortune, and
power, as Avell as the most ardent, pure, passionate, and devoted
lovo of the most fascinating, amiable, and best of women that
the Avorld at present contains. There, if this is not flattery, I
don’t knoAV Avhat is; but it is not, it is the truth. At least I
think it is the truth to the best of my belief, as Ave say in court. Oh,
I must not speak of courts ; Ave have had enough of them, at least for
the present. But you knoAV, dearest love, Avhat is the next court that
I should like to extend to me its jurisdiction. I long for the time
Avhen I shall be able to commence to see about it; but patience, pa-
tience. Louis, restrain thyself-—not too fast. I shall excite myself
unduly, dearest Nelly if 1 continue this topic any longer ; so, no
matter how pleasant, I had better desist, particularly as it is getting


into the small hour of the night, and I have to tell you how I spent
the rest of the day. After breakfast I went to the workshop, having
one or two little things to put to rights. When there I commenced
to model in wax, and not having had anything better to do I stayed
there, designing a figure of a native of Fiji, to form with the pearl
shell given me by Mrs. Robertson, a pair of salt-cellars, which if I can
carry out according to my desire, I intend to send to the forthcoming
exhibition to be held in Melbourne next year. I also intend to finish
the centre-piece that you saw —I mean the one with the palm-tree.
I will try and give you some idea of my design for the salt-cellars.
There will be for one —a naked figure of a Fijian kneeling in a grace-
ful attitude, holding the pear shell, which is shaped like a flat basket,
above his head, from which will droop of seaweed. The
figure will rest on an appropriate stand, emblematical ot the seashore,
and the spoon will consist of a paddle formed of some other kind of
shell, small of course. I purpose making the other exactly the same,
only that the figure will be that of a female of the same island. They
both will be cast in solid silver, frosted, and will be about three and a
half inches high. They, with my other affair, will take up a good
deal of my time, so I shall pass many, many hours alone, thinking
of thee, my own darling love—for, dearest, it is for thee now that I
toil all that Ido will be thine, and all praise I obtain will be that
thou, my own love, shall delight in it. At nine o’clock we went out
for a quiet walk, as I felt the want of it after working all day, and
came home at eleven ; it is now, my darling, past twelve, and I must
to bed. You see, my love, nothing whatever passes but that I care-
fully narrate, as I promised thee. lam sure you would not believe
what comfort it gives me to talk to you, my love, thus. I know you
will see and read this; and besides, it is a mirror in which i will
see the reflection of my mind, and it is thus of great use to me in
putting me on my guard as regards my conduct every day. I know
my own dear, darling love, every night before I lay down to sleep, that
my love for thee burns as clearly and as brightly as ever. Oh, I thank
God, dear Ellen, that it is so for thy dear sake, for if I had ceased to
love'thee, what wouldst thou have done ? I sincerely thank Him that
I not only love thee without an effort, but that it would be impossi-
ble for me to do otherwise. I have no control over myself on this
point; then, darling, think of me as I deserve ; there has not been
one second since thou has left, but that my every thought has been
0 f t hee—thine image has filled my heart, and thy dear sweet name
gently murmured in my ear. Good-bye, loved darling child, I burn
to embrace thee, Ellen once again—adieu.—Four days out. of the
365.—Louis. . , . ~
Monday, 30th.—Was wanted early, having a good chance of taking
£2O • will know to-morrow. Did no other business. About ten
o’clock received letter from my dear love ; was very much grieved
Ellen was so tired by the journey. I cannot bear such cold commu-
nications, they seem to me but a mockery ; however, 1 must be
content that I have any at all. I kissed thy darling letter, my Ellen,
it has soothed me greatly. Dear love, lam almost despondent. My
sister’s husband lias been offered an appointment in the Work s
Department, in Melbourne, and I tnink will soon return there, so


we shall lose her society sooner than we expected. I am sony for
that, but it cannot be helped. I am occupied all day m working and
modelling my Fijian. I have him nearly ready for casting. In doing
this I neglected my own work, so I shall have to be up before si
to-morrow morning to complete a set that has to by t re
in the afternoon. Mrs. Morris called to-day about her-, and will
have to come again Monday next. I am as is usual, at piesent
much pushed for money, and do not know what to do to obtain some.
At eight o’clock we went out to see Mrs. Robertson, and, as usual,
had to walk home, which tired us all very much Lewellyn wrote to
Ellen and I am going to write in his letter before going to bed ,
so as it is half-past one, I shall conclude this day’s entry Nearest
sweet one, I look on thy darling face, and my heart feels as it it
would break with love, intense love, for thee, Ellen ; that you are
well and peaceful is my last prayer to-night, dearest. Adieu, adieu,
once again. Five days passed away never to return. Louis.
Tuesday 31st. —Arose at six o’clock; did not stay to dress ; went
to work at once; got my part finished before breakfast; at June went
out on some business ; saw Cooper, and he gladdened my heart by
telling me that Mr. Ford had written to you, my darling, enclosing
£3O Oh ' my love, what a blessing ! I could hug the duectors
with very jov. lam sorry to say that lam not doing any business
at all, I have not taken a shilling as yet. I don t know really what I
am to do; it is dreadful, is it not, dearest? but in all my trouble I
think of thee my darling, think of thy dear sweet face, of thy bound-
less surely better «h£ wealth I know that I want
money and money I must have. I have nothing, my love, but bad
news to write, and I do not like to write then, for it depresses my
Ss I have not thee to comfort me. Oh ! Ellen how thou
dwellest in my soul; night or day thou art constantly with me ; loved
dearest whatf what am I to do without thee? lam so very weary,
my own darling. I seem to stifle in this place ; it is no longer what
it used to be to me, but I live on in hope, glorious hope in the future.
You have many times doubted my love, have thought it was like other
men, deceitful; and, love, you have had occasion to doubt others, for
I could not blame thee, child. But as years roll on thou wilt see for
there is a veil before thy eyes—thou wilt see then what steadfast true
love I have for thee, my life ; when I have accomplished all I pro-
iriised then, aiid oily then, you my darling Ellen will understand
•what I have done for thee, for our loves. I look back at the past and
am myself astonished at what I have dared and successfully executed.
Can and will you say after that, that you have not faith in me; that I
am changeable and could care for others besides thee, darling. Ido
not doubt thee dearest Ellen. lam not even jealous of thee, because
I have faith, true faith, in thy holy, good love for me. Oh, my own
one my love, do try and be good, very good to atone for thy past
follies for they were nought else. I know tny heart, and if thou
hadst me for thy husband how different my Ellen would have been.
But it is not too late ; now if you pray God with a true repentant heart
to help you love, lam sure He will. Oh, I dare not lift up my voice yet.
I feel that I dare not as yet ask His forgiveness, so Ellen, my own ear
wife, pray also for thy husband. Supplicate our Saviour that He


may soften my heart, and that He will suffer me to approach
the throne of grace. I shall strive hard to be a good man. I want
to be good, for I feel that if I do not I shall become entirely enslaved
to the Devil; that soon there would be no hope for me either now or
hereafter. But enough of myself. I speak a great deal of my affairs
to my dear sister. She loves me very much, and is very much con-
cerned about my future happiness. She is favourable to our divorce,
and thinks that under the circumstances it is the most kind thing I can
do for Jane, and in fact for all concerned. We speak constantly of you,
my own love. Jane, as usual, goes to sleep, which gives us some time
to ourselves. I worked hard all day, but took no money. At half-past
six we three went out for a walk in the Domain. I sat a moment on
the seat we sat on that night. Do you, my Ellen, ever think of those
delightful times ? When, when will they come again ?—perhaps never
Oh ! my God, I trust so, or I should die ! Sweet darling, sweet love,
I kiss thy loved and loving name. My Ellen, my world, my God,
adieu ! Six days gone—how slow the time.—Louis.
“ Wednesday, Nov. Ist.—A nice time this to commence to write—
half-past one in the morning. Well, better late than never; and now
all are gone to bed, I feel free to breathe; I feel again as if I were a
single man ; but it is nothing new ; since my love was gone, I seem
to delight in staying up till one or two o’clock. I have not been to
bed once since Ellen left before half-past one or two; it seems to mo
the only time when not harrassed by business of any description, I
can devote all my heart and thoughts to thee my loved one. Oh,
darling, how shall we both drag through the weary time ? When will
it end ? You see, my angel, I can do nothing active at present. My
own love, I have had hardly time to do anything to-day, I have been
so very busy—plenty to do and to occupy me. All promises, and yet
nothing definite or tangible. I look at my book, and see no orders
entered ; all to come, perhaps. But now, then, oh, my dearest, my
Ellen, I wish to get on for thy dear sake. What—what can Ido with-
out money ? Nothing at all. But to resume : As I was saying, I
have a great chance of doing some business. I trust I may. At six
o’clock, Harriet, Jane, and I went out for a walk—that means, shop,
ping—which, of course, disgusted me, and put me in a bad temper,
which, by-the-bye, has become of late my chronic state. We came
home, and while the children were being put to bed, I sat down and
made out several accounts, and some business lettters, in the hope of
being able to get in some money, I trust I may succeed. We had
tea about a quarter to nine; and while we were at the table Mrs.
Robertson came alone. She did not intend to stop, but Jane made
her lake off her bonnet, and we sat down to a game of whist, Harriet
being my partner. We lost, Llewellyn very kindly tried to get some
ices, but did not succeed. He also went to the Flore Australienne, to
get some tarts, as we, as usual, had nothing in the house. At eleven,
she went. I accompanied her home. I went in, as she promised to
lend me a book on the Fijis, as I could not finish my figure without
some guide, not having ever seen a native of those islands. She told
me then that she had a letter from Darling Ellen. I felt quite
jealous. I envied her, and more so when I saw that it was a much
longer letter than mine. I could not resist the impulse, and when,


she had her back turned, I kissed the letter. How weak lam even
to admit this much, but I must write the truth. Oh, my love, do not
forget your fond Louis. See, dearest, how he thinks constantly of
thee; how every moment of his life he ever has thee in his heart.
Thou, my Ellen, art enshrined there for ever. Mrs. Robertson fancied
that I had seen your letter, or that I had opened it before she had it.
She asked me how long Harriet was going to stay in Sydney; and
when I told her not very long, she said that I ought to take her out
more than I do, and let her see some places of amusement. She and
the Defries are going to the Prince of Wales Theatre on Friday, and
she asked us to join them and make one party. So, as Harriet would
like to see the theatre, I am going to take them. I can ill afford to
do so, but my sister will think I am very niggardly if I do not let her
try and enjoy herself a little while she can. Oh, my Ellen, dear love,
you know and appreciate me as I deserve, and, darling girl, you know
lam not mean. I had to walk home, and am very tired, so will now
leave also for want of material, having nothing more to write. Good
night, my own precious, darling love. Sweet dear, am I always in thy
thoughts and next thy heart, as thou art to mine ? Adieu ! One
week, love, since we parted—one long, weary week !—Louis.”
“ Thursday, 2nd.—Harriet awoke me this morning by placing a
letter before my eyes. Dull as lam usually, I sprang up wide awake.
I knew—l felt by instinct, even before I saw the writing, that it was
from my love. Oh ! what a delicious half-hour I passed in bed !
Yes ! the dear epistle was so long, that it took me a whole half-hour
to read it through. My loved darling, what a dear good girl she is to
comfort me so greatly. Such sweet, kind words of hope and love.
What—what could Ido without her ? She is my life—the very air I
breathe. I shall go out of my mind with excess of love. The letter
was a compound of joy and sorrow. Yes. My dear Ellen commences
to feel how hard poverty is to bear—to feel how different it is to work
for pleasure or for existence, but I believe it chastens us to go through
trouble ; it takes from our hearts that false pride which is below the
dignity of a noble mind to experience. I have my difficulties, and I
feel them the more that I require so much. I have a great deal to
do. Courage, both of us. What is our love, if the mere calamities of
casual affairs upset us thus ? I should feel ashamed of my love, of
what I have done for it, if it were no different from that of others ; that
is our only excuse either on earth or Heaven for what we have ac-
complished. Oh, my Ellen ! my wife, dear wife, do try and be strong
to fight our battle with me side by side; in spirit let us face as sturdy
warriors the shock of warfare, of deadly strife against men or things
that oppose us ; let us not be cowed or terrified at aught that besets
us. I warned you what to expect, and, dearest, for the greatness of
our love for one another, surely we can bear, aye, fifty times more than
what we have to bear. As long as thou, my Ellen, art true, so long
will I fight and gain the victory. Ido not fear the result, the end to
me is clear and palpable. lam sure of it; I never failed yet in my
life. Thus I feel better. I have been in such a good temper all the
day; lam sure my sister will bless Ellen, as she knows that my dar-
ling is the cause of my happiness. lam so pleased that I can write
openly to ray own love, it will be such a source of comfort to me to do


so, and to receive letters in return. How I do treasure them ; they
are to me meat and drink. Oh, to know that her heart beats as
warmly as mine does —that her love is as firm, strong, and much purer
than my own, is in itself enough to turn my brain. My own pet!
and she longs to see me, the dear child. Poor Ellen ! I pity thee—
patience—patience—my darling love, and all will soon be well with
both of us. Oh, how my heart beats when the very idea of being in
the same town, of being able to see each other occasionally, the very
thought that that could be possible or likely, quite took away my
breath. Dear one, how glad I am that you suffer as Ido from our
separation. Am I not cruel, dearest, selfish, but I cannot help it;
my intense love makes me so. Llewellyn was much annoyed at
having no letter. I think Sarah might write to him. I forgot to tell
him to send the paper to Bathurst. lam doing no business ; I did
not see a soul all day, I was all day in the workshop, occupied in
casting my figure. Alfred stayed to dinner and tea to help me; and
after all my work at half-past eleven at night, it is all spoilt. I have
to commence all over again. It is very vexing, as I set my heart on its
being right the first time. Calder came up to see me this afternoon.
I went out with him for ten minutes, and had a glass of ale —the se-
cond I have had since you, my Ellen, left. It is now past twelve, and
lam going to write to Ellen. I must write her a very nice letter in
return for her dear one this morning. Adieu, my love, my darling
love, adieu. Eight days gone. —Louis.
Friday, November 3rd.—Received a letter from my dear Ellen;
she complains of business being very bad at Bathurst, and sees no
prospect of making a living. The dear girl almost asks me to look
after some sort of a situation near or in Sydney. Oh, 1 do hope and
pray that she may come, that we may be near one another; ’tis great
happiness for me to know that ray darling child feels the separation as
much as I do; I will try hard, very hard, to get something for her to
do ; I trust I may succeed. Oh, it is hard that, through me, my sweet
Ellen is thus placed. lam sure I feel it more than she does, to see
the woman I adore seeking a situation to work for her daily bread, it
is so very hai’d for me to bear. Oh, why can I not share all, all I
possess with her, take her to my heart and home. No! the world
would not allow such a breach of etiquette, so we must, I suppose,
abide by its decrees. I hate the vile hypocrisy that is inborn in man’s
very nature. I despise all, everything worldly except pure unadul-
terated love. This, oh world, is thy only redeeming feature ; but for
love, what should we be, worse, far worse than the lowest brutes in the
scale of creation. I have done ; it makes me sick when I think of
these things. lam doing no business ; one solitary half-crown this
day; but it rained hard all day, so I could not expect people to come
out in such weather. I was at work all day and night at my Fijian.
I cast him this time in six pieces, and five of them are sufficiently
correct to make do, but I shall have to make a new body, that being
the imperfect face ; it was twenty minutes to two before we left the
workshop, so lam too fatigued to write. I wrote Ellen a long letter
to-day, it seems to me the only comfort I have left, to receive and write
letters to my darling love. Oh, Ido long to see her once again. My
soul yearns for thee, oh my loved dearest one. I shall pray to God


that we may be near each other; that I may be able to counsel and
advise thee, love, that I may watch over thee, and guard thee from all
ill. Oh, my sweet loving child, will that be possible ? I hard y dare
to realise the hope ever of such taking place, for fear that I shall raise
in my heart expectations that may not come to pass. I have no news.
Of course we did not go to the theatre, as it was wet. I was so very
dad as I could ill afford a pound at such a time, to throw away on
such amusements. Alfred sleeps on the sofa to-night; it is pouring
with rain, and rather cold. Adieu, my Ellen, dream my own love
that we are locked in each other’s arms once more. God bless thee,
my love, good night. The ninth day passed away.-Louis. Annie
called, and I gave her Ellen’s letter, which I read to her, and she
November. —Did no business to-day again, although
the day was fine ; occupied myself all day in casting my silver work ;
took longer, as Alfred goes early on Saturday; I am happy to state,
that after all my trouble with it, the figure is at last correct, and
almost ready to be soldered together, although there is an immensity
of work to be gone through before it is fit to be seen. After tea
agreed to go to Mrs. Robertson’s, and while we were dressing to go,
she came herself with John ; so, as we were ready, we all went back
with her home, and played cards until twelve o clock. She very kindly
gave me a pair of all the shells she possessed as I am going to make
a good collection of natural curiosities. She also gave Harnette a great
number of shells, and a native comb. I have one too. We came
home at half-past one, quite tired out. I feel that late hours begin to
tell upon my constitution. Mrs. Robertson very kindly invited us to
dinner to-morrow, and as we did not accept the invitation, she is
coming to our house early, and we are going at half-past two o clock
to Manlv Beach. Oh, my Ellen, I feel so strange not having one of
yonr dear letters to comfort me, so I console myself, before going to
bed by reading your last letter, and looking on thy dear, dear face
I got Mrs. Robertson’s portraits for her, as I was quite ashamed at
her asking me for them so often. Llewellyn went to the theatre to-night,
as we were going out. Good-bye, my loved one, my glorious darling
■puipri adieu Louis. Ten days gone.
Sunday sth.— Slept as usual late. Jane is very good, and tries to
make me as happy and comfortable as she can. I went into the work-
shop and tried P to cut out the pieces of pearl from the shell Mrs.
Robertson gave me, but unfortunately it broke all to pieces, and is, of
course spoiled. I also worked at my Fijian. At about one o clock
went up to dress. Had to hurry. Dear Harnette made me such a
nfce stew of the breast of veal; it was delicious, only we were so very late
that I could not enjoy it as I might have done. Mrs. Robertson did not
come until about a quarter after two, so that by the time Harnette
and Jane were ready we were too late for that boat, but luckily there
was another at three o’clock, so we went by that one. It was a beauti-
ful day cloudy and not too hot. I have not been down to Manly for
a very long time, so it was quite a treat. Oh, my Ellen, my lovely
dearest, how I thought of thee, how 1 ' on f d l°f
that that alone was wanting to make the day delightful. Ido so leei
the want of some one to love; I mean for the one I love. I want to


embrace her, to be able to pay attention to my love, and to be a very
slave to her slightest will. We took Harriette, it being her first trip
to Manly Beech, to the Fairy Bower. We went upon the verandah,
then, which would have been very pleasant had it not been for the
parcel of rude men and women ; but we must expect that on Sunday
—it is the same all over the world. We went back to the steamer
through the bush, and almost lost our way. We gathered some wild
flowers, and, after all our trouble in getting them they threw them
away. We returned to Sydney at half-past five, and it was nearly
seven when we got home. As there was nothing for tea, I went to
Myer’s, and got some preserved fish. I met on board the steamer Mr.
Bellhouse, an acquaintance of mine before marriage ; I asked him to
come to tea to-morrow, and spend the evening with us. After tea, Mrs.
Eobertson was taken very ill, so that she could not go home, and is
sleeping with my sister. Jane is obliged through that to sleep with
me. It feels so strange, as I have not slept with her for a long time,
it seems like sleeping with some one else’s wife. Llewellyn spent the
day with John at Mrs. Eobertson’s, and came back after tea, but both
went home, as he is to sleep there to-night. Oh, my Ellen—l know,
my love, you would be jealous, my own dear, and you have no reason
to be so, as I love you so very fondly. It is now a quarter to one, and
I must now to bed, as I have to commence to-morrow in earnest. I
must now decide upon some course of making money. This will
never do. lam almost helpless on this point. What am Itodo ?
Never mind—six days are sufficient to think or write of business
matters, so for this day I have done. I shall awake, I trust, to receive
a letter from my darling Ellen. Ido hope and pray that there is one
on the road for me. It is my only comfort. Good-bye, my own dar-
ling, dearest love. God bless and preserve thee. I hope and pray
that things may look better at Bathurst, for it troubles me. God
knows how anxious lam about my dear, dear wife. Adieu, —Louis.
Eleven days gone.
Monday, 6th.—\\ e got up early, on account of Mrs. Eobertson. It
was raining fast, and continued to do so all day. I was kept pretty
busy with patients, but did no business at all as regards money, I
have work to do. Jane made Mrs. Eobertson stayed to dinner, but
she would not stay after dark, and went home at half-past five in a
hansom alone. She would not stay on account of Agnes being rather
unwell. I was working at my figure a good deal all day. I told
Llewellyn to send the paper regularly to Bathurst, but I see he did not
do so. I don’t know what my darling Ellen will think of such neglect.
Mr. Bellhouse came after tea, as he thought we would expect him on
account of the weather. As we had not had tea he joined us, and
after tea we played whist—Jane and Mr. Bellhouse, and Harriette and
myself. We won, and Mr. Bellhouse lost 3s. 6d„ for which he intends
to buy Harriette a pair of gloves, as he does not like playing for
money. At half-past eleven he went out, and I went with him. I
took three glasses of brandy, which made me feel very sleepy and
stupid. I stayed out with him until one o’clock. I took Spry with
me; he begins to like me very much. I am glad of that, for my
darling Ellen’s sake. Mrs, Morris came accompanied by Mrs.
Douglass, her mamma. I took the model of her mouth, and she is to


have the tooth on Wednesday at twelve. She asked after Mrs. Kinder,
and also what Mrs. Kinder intended doing. Jane did not sse her.
Mrs. Douglass is going to be married. I feel veiy depressed to-day.
I think it is not having received a letter from my darling Ellen. I
want a letter every day. I cannot get on at all without it. Oh ! my
dear love, Ido hope that you, my love, are not ill. Oh ! dearest one,
I long, long to see—to embrace thy dear self. What shall Ido with-
out thee, my dear child ? I love thee passionately, nay, more fondly
than ever. Oh ! my beauty, do not grow cold and formal; I shall die
outright. lam half dead already. Oh ! my Ellen, we ought to cor-
respond every day of our lives, until we can see one another. My life
seems, nay, is a complete blank, since thou, my sweet one, art gone.
I had no idea; and as 1 knew I loved thee, that thou wert so wrapt up
in my very soul, until, my dear Ellen, thou left me of myself alone —•
oh, lovey ! my own true love. Say, only say, thou wilt be his in spite
of all and everything; say that; write it to me often, and I will bless
thee and God that it is so. Oh! my own dear, dear Ellen, adieu.—
Louis. Twelve days done.
Tuesday, 7th.—Jane woke me this morning by telling me that Mrs,
Robertson was taken very ill, and she would like to see Jane. Ihere
was also a letter from my darling Ellen, God bless her. Did no busi-
ness at all worth speaking about to-day. Mr. Belhouse called with
Harriette’s gloves. I was in the workshop the best part of the day.
I paid Hafer £3 as I promised. Jane and Harriette went in the
afternoon to see how Mrs. Robertson was getting on, and took both
babies with them. At six o’clock I went out to fetch them, but to my
surprise Mrs. Robertson was up, and made us stay to tea. While at
tea Mrs. Defries came in, and we did not leave then until eleven. The
ladies have arranged to spend the day (Friday) with Mrs. Defries, at
North Shore. The Defries are going home to England at the end of
this month. lam sorry to say that Ellen is not well. I am not well
myself. I fear that late houi's are not good for me, and I shall have
to go to bed at a reasonable time. It is now past two o’clock, and I
am very tired. I have plenty to occupy my mind and thoughts, both
with my own business and those of whom I am so very anxious. I
wrote a letter just now to my jewel, Ellen. I shall try hard and get
her some house of business here, if I can. Good night, my own love.
Sleep soundly, and may you wake refreshed, and the thirteenth day
gone. —Louis.
Wednesday, Bth.—Thank God, another day gone. What a weary,
weary, weary time. However will a twelvemonth pass ? God only
knows. My heart grows sick and faint when I look into the future.
Oh, God, is this Thy retribution for our sins ! Did I flatter myself
that the Almighty would let me—a wretch like me—go unpunished;
but I tell thee, fate, I defy thee. What do I care for aught, only that
lam with my Ellen. Oh, sweet dear angel, why art thou not near to
soothe my anguish ! I do feel as if my heart was rent in pieces—
crushed; and then dark thoughts obtrude themselves before me;
fiends rise and mock me; they point to a gate, a portal through which
I feel half inclined to go, but not yet. What would my love do without
me ? Perhaps soon forget me, and maybe to love another. That last
thought is horrible, Ellen. I half hate thee at the very idea of such a


thing. Oh, could I be certain she loves me as I love her, what a
comfort it would be. I possess no means of keeping her love. I know
I can fascinate when she is with me, but away there are so many fine
handsome men that I dwindle down to insignificance in comparison.
Oh, Louis, for shame, is this right to think in this manner? No,
Ellen, I will not, my love, do thee the unkindness of those ideas. My
own darling love, I will no longer torture myself thus. I have faith,
and against the whole world. No matter what thou hast been, my
child, I hold thee up as a true virtuous wife to me, for you have been
true to me, oh my dearest love. When can I call thee mine ? When
shall I have the right to love thee openly ? That it may not be long,
I pray for both our sakes, as I fear all this tends to undermine my
health. By-the-bye, I ought not to stay up the way I do. I am sure
I must be very strong to stand it every night until three or four o’clock,
and working hard all day. I must take care of myself for thy sake,
my dear one. I want to give thee, my love, not a worn out husband,
but a man in all the vigour and energy of the prime of life, that I may
live long to make the I’est of my existence happy. What a comfort to
be alone. It is now nearly three o’clock, and I have not yet noted the
events of the day. I was rather busy, although not making much
money. I was engaged filling teeth, and went without my breakfast
until half-past eleven. Jane went to Newtown to see her sister, who
is confined. At eleven Mrs. Morris came for her teeth, and as I had
not breakfasted, I made her wait in the parlour until I did so. She
asked me and Jane to call on her, and also invited my sister to come
with us. She did not see Harriet to-day. She was busy all day in
the bedroom with the children. I hardly saw her at all. I went out
and saw Cooper. He told me that he had letters for Ellen from New
Zealand from John Kinder; also, he informed me that John Kinder
desired him to have a wooden cross put upon the grave temporarily.
They think down in New Zealand that Harry did not intend to kill
himself, but only to frighten his wife, and they seem kindly disposed
towards Ellen. I am glad, for I like her to have friends, I
spoke to Mr. Douglass about getting Ellen something to do, but he
thinks it would be better to let the old affairs blow over first for a
time, if possible. I was introduced to a gentleman to-day at the
Cafe. I and a friend are to meet him to-morrow, at one o’clock, to
lunch. I shall go a little more into society —I mean of men—than I
have been in the habit of doing of late. I wrote another page of my
letter to my dear Ellen, but I could not say all I intended to say on
account of being too late for the post. I worked all the rest of the
day and night, until hall-past one, at my silver Fijian. I have put
all the pieces together to-night, and he is all ready for the firm work.
Shall have it soon finished. I must be up early to morrow, as I
expect people before breakfast. It is a holiday to-morrow, but I, for
one. will not keep it as such. My love, I must have done correspond-
ing with your dear darling self, for this diary is for thee, my Ellen.
You, my love, know my every thought; and in the future, when you
read this, you will see my inmost soul. Love, good night. I pray
that God will give thee health and patience to bear thy heavy burden.
Once more, good night.—Louis. Fourteen days, my love, since thou
art gone.


Thursday, 9th November.-Do not feel able to write. I»“ doing
i o- Tn mv «?nrnrise after I had been out, I heard that Mr.
no business, lo my surprise, auei x uau u
Wood had been. I flew to see him. Ido not know what possessed
me, but I felt almost as if it were part of my own deal Ellen, i lelt
so very, very glad to see him. It being a holiday, spent nearly all t
day with him, talking of affairs in general that concerns ushoth H
told me exactly how they are all situated, and we thought of tak Q
an hotel between us, in Mrs. Kinder’s name. I hope we may be able
to do something for my dear Ellen, for Ido not like.to. work The
dear, dear girl did not forget me, and sent me her little Bell. I seem
to be quite out of my senses with joy at the thought that I may s
see her. Papa came to tea with us, and after tea we went out fox a
short walk, and came home and played whist, About half-past eleven
he went. I accompanied him, and our conversation was s° mterestmg
that I stayed out till nearly two o’clock. I also am ashara 7
hud much to drink. I was not intoxicated, but ratiher excitedl I to!d
papa all about our affair. I could not bear to hoar him planm
marriage for my own darling, so thought it best to tell him all. He
plainly said that if Ellen loved me sincerely, and that it was lor both
our haupiness, he would not object. So that is settled I commenced
to write to my dear love the moment I returned, but was sa excited
at the events of the day that I could not manage it, and got only to the
end of four pages. Oh, my dear, dear one, what can I say to s
what great joys fills my heart when I think of thee. Adieu, my Ellen,
adieu. Fifteen days gone. —Louis. , . ,
Friday, 10th November.—l got up rather late; do feel rathei
unwell. I went to finish my letter to dear Ellen, but to my surpr
I found that—what with the excitement, combined with hi an dy ad
water—l had written on two separate sheets of paper, and the wnti g
so terribly bad, that I was not inclined to send it but on second
thoughts I decided on finishing the same letter, as I do not mtend tc
hide anything, even the most trivial, from my sweetheart. However,
I wrote her a nice long letter, telling her all that papa wished me to
I hope she will be able to make it out. I was rather busy with people
calling, but not making money at all. About halt-past ten, » •
Robertson came to the house to fetch my sister and Jane to spen
day with Mrs. Defries. They were ready for her, and started directly.
I went out to dine with a friend, and afterwards went to look for Mr
Wood I could not see him anywhere. I was annoyed, as I did not
like to close my letter without hearing if there was any more news to
write about. However, I was obliged, at four, to post it and then
went up stairs to dress, to go to North Shore to fetch the ladies.
While dressing, Mn Wood came; the time being rather short, so I
asked him lo come up and stay with me until I was ready to go.
had had a short letter from John Kinder, which I read. He ha
fuather news to tell me. He walked down with rne to the North Shore
Ferry I felt very strange. I went over in the Kinbih. It brought
a crowd of ideas that I thought were buried for ever back to my
memory This is the first time I have been to the Shore since poor
Harry’s funeral. lam standing on the deck, my face turned towards
the little house with the two chimneys, as I used to do when on wings
of love I flew to the arms of my beloved. Oh, my heart sinks within


interrmlt I f hapPy meetin S s alone, and none by to
interrupt us Those were happy moments, but indeed alloyed with
bitter thoughts How horribly jealous I was. I was mad. How
could I bear to know that my Ellen, my own dear love, belonged to
some one who had the legal right to do or say anything he liked to
hei. It drove me raving mad, and I am what I am. I looked
around me, and saw people coming and going as they used to do,
and I racked by those thoughts : surely there can be no worse hell
than our own conscience. 1 rode up to Defries, and got a scolding
for being so late. It was past six o’clock. We stayed until half-nast
ten, and a carriage came for us which cost 6s. I Carried the babies
home when we reached Sydney. Mrs. Eobertson ate no tea. so I
went out and got some oysters and a crayfish. However Mrs.
Eobertson was afraid of it. I ate too much and made myself very ill’.
About half-past one I saw Mrs. Eobertson home. We walked all the
way and I rested about a quarter of an hour at her house. Of course
’ll to u '! alk back, and was T uite knocked up* It was past three
0 c ock before I got home. When I returned I awoke Llewellyn in
unlocking the back door, and he told me that Jane thought while
lymg on the sofa that something jumped upon her, and she fainted.
Harnette also went into hysterics, and Llewellyn, in one of his usual
fits, knocking his head. Luckily I was out of all this, and I slept
like a top. I have to be up early to-morrow morning, so I will not
write more at present, or I shall not get to bed at all. I long to
have a letter from my dear Ellen. I trust I may have one to-moiTow.
Adieu, my love, adieu. Sixteen days gone.—Louis
Saturday, November llth.-Could hardly wake this morning,
feeling as if I had not been in bed at all Was very busy with
patients until one o clock. Mr. Loady called for me to go and lunch
1 detained him more than half an hour. While he was waiting, Mr.
Defries called, dressed in his Volunteer uniform; he was going to
receive his prize, £2, from Lady Young. There is to be a review
this afternoon in the Domain. Jane is very ill, indeed so ill that she
could not finish dressing and I am afraid she will not be able to come
down stairs to-day. I asked Mr. Defries to come out and lunch with
us as he was here; so we went to Still’s and had a very nice dinner at
my expense. After dinner I went with Defries to the barracks, and
waited to see them formed and march in the Domain. This was about
half-past three I then came home, and had not been in two minutes
R l oberts ? n came , expecting that my sister and Jane would so
with her to the review, as Mr. Defries intended, after the review to so
out to her house. I went back to the Domain, and tried to let him
know that she was at our house. I was tired looking for him; however
1 managed to find him and we came back together. We made him
stop to tea, as Mrs. Robertson was here, and as the downstairs room was
rather close and full of flies. Jane and I went out to Zuccani’s, and
bought a very handsome lamp for the drawing-room. Mr Defries
went home about half-past 9 o’clock, and we played whist. Mrs
Eobertson was my partner, and we lost frightfully. However, Mrs
Eobertson during the game said something to me which offended me
and because I was annoyed she became quite ill and fainted. After
lying down a little while she became better, and when alone with me


she told me she could not bear me to be cross with her. She also
told me that it was through me she had been ill previously. She is
very nervous, and I am grieved that X should indirectly be the cause
of making her unhappy. I received this morning a long letter from
my darling Ellen. My own darling is very low spirited, and she up-
braids me greatly for not writing more freely than I do. I am sure
I occupy every spare moment in writing either in my diary or to her.
Poor dear child Ido so pity her. She says I must be happy with all
my pleasant surroundings. Dear girl, could you only read my heart
and soul you would see nothing but blank despair. I don t know how
it is, but I seem to get more despondent every day. Oh, my Ellen, I
call on thee, and thou answerest not. Mr. Defries, when I was out
with him, spoke to me about our affair. He said he knew more about
us than we imagined—that he had watched us all along, and that he
thought it his duty to speak to me on the subject. What I imagine
is this—that either Mrs. Robertson or Jane have hinted something to
him of what they know. I thought it best to hear what he had to
say, so that I might be on my guard. He knows the truth of my
love for Ellen, and also that she loves me. He almost knows that I
intended getting a divorce. He begged of me almost on his knees to
try and love my wife. He said that Ellen did only care for me for
what use she could put me to, and that she had said so openly; that
he could tell me things that would astound me —sufficient to make
me give up Ellen altogether, and never see her again. I listened at-
tentively to all he had to say, and when he had finished he said that
he felt for me as if he was my brother. He exhorted me if I cared
for my happiness in this world and my eternal welfare in the next,
not to be tempted by the devil. Mrs. Robertson is always talking in
the same manner, so I think she has been speaking to him about us.
I intend to write to my darling love to-morrow. I broke Jane’s fan
in a passion. Mrs. Robertson said she would write to Ellen soon, in
answer to my question whether she had written. About a quarter
past one she was well enough to go home ; so, as it was so very late,
although John was with her, I could not let her go home alone under
his protection. I accordingly took her home, and when we got there
I was so tired and worn out myself that I was obliged to lie down,
late as it was, on the sofa. I remained until a quarter past 2, and
then had a glass of gin and water to revive me for my homeward
journey. X can assure you it was no joke at first, this walking such a
long distance, tired as I was. I was too tired to write in my diary, so
wrote this Sunday afternoon. Oh, my Ellen, my dear love, do,
do come to me ! What am I fit for without thee ? Harriette heard
from her husband, and he wants her to go to him at once. I am
going to keep her until the end of next week, as I have her mouth to
put to rights. He seems to be getting on better, and has already
something to do—some shops to put up. Ido hope they may get on.
As for my affairs, Ido not know in the least how lam to get on. I
have that bill of £25 12s. Bd. to meet on the 30th of this month, and
it is now the 11th, and I have not a penny towards it as yet. I shall
try and get my creditors to let all the old accounts stand over, and
pay for everything as we get it in the future. That is the only way.
I suppose I must go insolvent. I trust that I may not have occasion


to do so. Defries asked me before he left to go over and breakfast
with him to-morrow, and afterwards go to church at St. Leonard’s,
which I intend doing. I guess that he wants to talk to me about
Ellen. Well, I do not remember anything now worthy of notice
during this day, so will draw to an end. Adieu, my love; adieu,
my own one ; bless thee, and guard thee from all ill. —Louis.
The seventeenth day passed away. Sunday, November 12th.
Harriet awoke me at a quarter past 8 o’clock, instead of 7, as I desired,
so I had to shave and dress in a hurry, a performance that I object to
infinitely. However, I got away from the house at near 9, and took
a waterman’s boat over to North Shore. It was cloudy, and looks for
rain ; also very windy. The tide and wind were against us, so that
it took five and twenty minutes to go across. There were no ’busses
running at that hour, so I made for Defrie’s house on foot. It was
then nearly half-past 9, and the appointed time for breakfast was that
at the very latest. To make matters worse, instead of going by the
road, I went the road through the bush that I went through on one
occasion with my darling dear Ellen. I sauntered leisurely along,
and a vision bright along with me. I recalled that happy walk. I
once more fancied she, the loved darling of my heart, was by my side c
Oh, God, what I suffer. Oh, this love is terrible; it will kill me, I
know it will. What excruciating agony, intense bitterness of the past.
All that I possess of brain, nerve, and soul is devoted to this one
object of my life. When shall the end arrive ? If need be, I will
willingly sell my soul to Satan for thee, oh, my dear one. What is
the future to me, or my salvation ? I do not want it unless my
Ellen share it with me. No, where she goes there I shall be found,
no matter what penalty I have to pay. I glory in ruining both body
and soul for the idol I worship and adore. Be she as wicked as
Satan, or as vile and wily as the serpent, I, even I will save her—will
raise her from the depth of hell. I feel this is in my power to do, or
I perish in the attempt. I, Ellen, even I, thy lover, wicked as I am,
will be a saviour to thee. Thou shalt bless and almost revere me for
what I shall do for thee. I shall be a beacon in this vaccilating
world of ours, to show what the human will is capable of, and what the
power of love can perform. Dear, sweet, loved Ellen, the more they
oppose us the greater will be my power of resistance. Poor fools, to
try and thwart my will. I tell thee, all thou hast need of is God’s
help. Indeed, if thou hast me for an enemy —I, who value human life
as I value weapons, to be used when required, and then thrown away
or destroyed —some, of course, kept for future use if necessary. Be-
ware !if I have my way in this —if I obtain this sole object of my
being.—l feel that I shall be reclaimed; but if not, no matter from
what cause, Heaven help the world. Oh! I shall indeed be revenged!
What my brain contrives my hands can execute. But enough of this
for the present. I am furious on this one subject. Now to my
account. In wandering, I strolled along until I got to Neutral Bay,
forgetting all about breakfast, and was only recalled to myself by it
commencing to rain rather heavily. I then found how far I was out
of my way, and had a run for it. I managed to get to Defries’ before
I got very wet, and I found him, poor fellow, waiting breakfast, and
wondering what the deuce had kept me so late. lam sorry to say that


Mrs. Defries was taken ill last night with a slight attack of cholera m
fact she was in bed, and so I did not see her at all. After breakfast
in fact the moment we had finished-we went to church as the bells
had commenced some time, and we had a little walk. It was ram g
slightly, but as we both had umbrellas it did not matter, it
pretty kittle church. I did not pay much attention to ;
being occupied with my own thoughts. The very fact that Lllen,
Ellen, had been within those walls was sufficient food for my mind
ruminate on for hours. Defries rode down with me to the ferry and
came over with me, and went back by the same boat, as I used to *»
with Kinder. It does seem so strange—not two months ago and a
this to have happened; I almost fancy it is a dream. I had promised
to be home to dinner by two o’clock, as I did not like leaving my
sister all day. I forgot to mention that Mrs. Robertson had promised
to come and dine with us if she was well enough. Of course as it
rained all day, she did not come, so am unable to state whether she is
ill or not. /directly after dinner commenced to write, and on |j n " e
to do so all the rest of the afternoon and evening. Mr. Bellhouse
called on us after dinner, and is going to return this evening. Ido
not feel at all inclined for society, and in fact I have of late become in-
different to all and everything but the one absorbing subject that e
grosses all my faculties. My own dear, dear Ellen, my dearest loi e,
what a great deal you will have to answer for. I hope your back
is broad, to be able to bear all this. It is now past 8, and we aie
about having tea, so I will not wind up this day as yet until all are
gone to bed as usual. I told Llewellyn to tell Mr. Wood, if he saw
him, to come up to-night, as he called twice this morning when I was
out, and no one saw him. I hope he will come, as I want to see him.
By-and-bye I am also going to write to answer my lovey s dear letter.
God send I may comfort her. lam wretched, I am so morose. lam
perfectly disgusted with myself and everyone else around me. 1 am
sorrv for that, as I know it makes dear Harnette very unhappy to see
me thus. But what am Ito do? I cannot help myself. 1 did not
make my own nature; and if 1 suffer, I can’t help showing i*. Mr.
Wood came in while we were at tea. He charmed me a little. He has
decided on going to New Zealand, but before he goes he would like
Ellen and Mrs. Wood to come and open business in Sydney, to take a
small shop as a beginning. I should like that greatly, as I am sure
thev would do well, at any rate, better than they do at Bathurst. He
fust told me as I was going to write to mention this m my letter to
'Ellen He is going to write to Mrs. Wood to-morrow himself, to hear
what she thinks of this plan. Now, I am going to begin my letters
So good-hye my faithful diary, my mirror, in which I see the reflection
of every thought. Adieu !—Louis.-Eighteen days gone.
Monday, November 13th.—Rose in good time, took out two or three
teeth • did no further business to-day. About half-past one, Detries
called as he had promised, and said that he was going to see Mrs.
Robertson. We made him stay to dinner, until about three o clock 1
received a letter from my darling love. She is well. She wrote m
answer to my letter telling her of the hotel business. I also wrote to
Ellen to-dav a long letter, telling her that we could not as yet take an
hotel, but that papa proposed for them to come to Sydney. Ido hope


a , nc * P^ a y ,^ iat may come to pass, as I really do not know what I
snail do it my darling- is away much long-er. At about four o’clock,
Mrs. Robertson came. Of course, we did not expect her, as Deffries
said she expected him. So we missed her. Harriette, Jane, and Mrs.
Kobertson went for a walk in the g-ardens; and, as I was waiting- at
dome tor a patient, I decided to remain at home for Deffries, as he said
ne would call on his way home. He came and took Ag-nes away with
him. Afterwards I went to meet the ladies; and we then went and
t- + Ce t,r in T f\ tt ' street before coming home. After tea we played
whist Mrs. Robertson was my partner; as there was a debt that had
to be worked off, we played for money. At half-past eleven, she left.
accompanied her home, and as it was a fine night, we walked the
whole distance. I stayed nearly an hour with her, in conversation
about my Ellen. She advised me, if I cared for myself and my friends,
to have nothing at all to do with Ellen; and she said, moreover, that
she never could admit Mrs. Kinder into her house or friendship, after
what she knew of her. She also told me that she heard something said
between us that was disgraceful, and that she staid up three hours, tell-
ing Ellen about it. Of course, I must make her revoke those ideas, as
1 intend to make use of Mrs. Robertson. Deffries has also been trying
all he can to set me against Ellen. Poor dear one, it only shows me
ail the more how necessary is my love to her. Dear, dear child, Ido
trust that she is truly penitent for what she has done, and that with me
she will be m future a truly good and virtuous woman. I am sure of
her, tor, much as I love her, she should die the moment she did wrong- •
even a thought or look, with what I know, would be sufficicient to
make me do it. Why do people try and torture me thus ? Oh, Ellen!
it is indeed a lottery, whether we will draw happiness or blank despair
1 am prepared for the very worst, and God help the world if this my
forlorn hope fails. I feel depressed, terribly depressed in spirit, to hear
these accusations against my own darling love. To hear her spoken of
as being bad, almost as bad as it is possible to be, is sufficient to upset
my intellect. They tell me that she went into Deffries’ bedroom, and
rvu ° n n or three hours, until Mrs. Deffries had to turn her out.
Uh, my God! I must be mad to listen to or repeat such things, but I
seemed spellbound at the time, and seemed to take a morbid delight in
making myself miserable. I cannot account for it in any other° way.
Ellen, my dear, my own dear love, I must be near you. I want to
look in those dear wicked eyes, and I know they cannot, will not de-
ceive me; and yet I am, to a certain extent, blinded by passsion, and
she knows it. But lam unlike other men, and she knows what to
expect if 1 have, like others, cause to repent what I have done. I
must drop this painful subject—it will unman me—unfit me for the
battle iam fighting. Enough excitement of mind for one day. Adieu,
my thoughts. Adieu, my own Ellen.—Louis. Nineteenth day since
1 commenced this.
, J. ie ®4 a y> November 14th, 1865.—1 forgot to mention yesterday
t at Detnes came to say that they would come and spend the day with
us 0 hay. I was not busy, so went to see Layard at one o’clock.
Euckily, fie was at home. We arranged about Palmer’s money. He
ms paid altogether about £35; and the balance of my share as yet is
obe £l*, 10s,, which I am to have to-morrow. I spoke to Layard


about taking an hotel for Ellen—in fact, for myself—so that if my busi-
ness is injured by the Kinder affair, I shall have something to fall back
upon. I have the offer of two very nice ones, and am undecided which
of the two would suit me. In fact, my plan is this—to take the place
for myself, and put my darling in it for me, in her name, Mr. Wood
will manage the affair, and if we so arrange that if anything happened
to Mr. Wood, it would not affect me. Also, as it will be mine, I shall
have everything in my power, and both Ellen and I will be inde-
pendent of every one. I stayed and dined with Layard; and as I had
ordered our dinner by half-past two, I appointed to meet him at one
o’clock. When I returned from his house ,1 found Mrs. Robertson
waiting, but the Deffries had not then come. They soon came, and we
had a very agreeable dinner. Directly after dinner, Layard called in
the dogcart for me. Went and saw both the hotels—they are very nice
ones. I came home alone, and while we were at tea Mr. Wood came.
I told him how things were going on, and he seemed delighted at the
prospect of such luck. He showed me a letter he had written to Ellen,
telling her of his going to New Zealand and of their coming to Sydney;
of course, then, he was not aware of what I had been doing. I intend
to write to my love to-morrow —that is, if I come to any decision about
this hotel business. Afterwards we played vingt-un until late. I saw
Mrs. Robertson home, and was in bed by two o’clock—that was early
for me. Now lam sure, tired as I am, I shall not sleep, as I have so
much to think about. Adieu, my Ellen, my thoughts are constantly
directed to thee.—Louis. Twenty days gone.
Wednesday, November 15th, 1865.—Busy in the workshop finishing
the set of teeth for Miss Horneybrook, as I want the money for it.
Went to Layard about the hotel. I do not know what to think of it,
or what to decide upon. I should like to have the Railway Hotel, as it
is nearer town. Mr. Wood seems so undecided about the affair that I
am afraid I shall have to act independently of him. He does not seem
to be at all grateful for what I have done, or the trouble and anxiety
the business causes me. At three o’clock the ladies went with their
babies to spend the afternoon at Mrs. Robertson’s. I went out there at
six to tea. We played at whist and lost. I and Mrs. Robertson lost
3s. each, Jane and Harriette being partners. lam to see Layard at
ten to-morrow. It being late, and me having a bad foot, Mrs. Robert-
son kindly pressed us to stay all night, which we did. I was very
unwell, and both Jane and Mrs. R. were kept up until past four. How-
ever, we slept late, and had a nice cold bath, which put me all to rights.
I left there at eleven o’clock, leaving Harriette and Jane to come home
later. Twenty-first day.
Thursday, November 16th, 1865.—When I came to town I found
two letters for me—one from Mr. Tidemann, saying that he was in-
solvent—so that is a loss of £9 that I depended on; the other from my
darling Ellen. It is a" rather peculiar one. I called, after I changed
my shirt, on Layard, It appears that Mr, Wood, contrary to my in-
structions, had humbugged with the people at the hotel, and spoilt all.
The woman wanted nearly £2OO more to-day, when she thought so
many people were after it; and I am sure I do not know how to
manage it at all, as I have no money whatever. I, however, will not
give up the idea, as I am sure dear Ellen would do well with me


After I came from Layard, Mr. Wood called and said if he could not
have the hotel altogether, he would go down at once to New Zealand,
and write for all the family to come afterwards to him. He has acted
in a most shameful manner to me, after what I have done. I see
through it all; he wants to trade with my love for his daughter, and so
make me do all I can for him. On that account, God help that old man
if he flies in my face. lam his match, and I think he knows it. Well,
he said he would not let Ellen come to Sydney, and that he would write
to her forbidding her to come. Let him do so —I do not care. She is
her own mistress; and as for me, Ido not care a damn for any one in
the world. lamin a wretched temper all to-day. At dinner time Mr.
Defries called, and said*he was going to the Glebe. At five Jane and
my sister returned, bringing Mrs. Robertson with them. She stayed
till eleven o’clock. I saw her home. As it is very late, I must weary
of this day. lam rather annoyed at the hotel. I might not have such
a chance over again. Twenty-two days gone.
Friday, November 17th.-—Went to Layard’s at ten, to hear what was
decided about the hotel, and found that i could not have it at all, as the
woman had been tampered with by Mr. Wood. That is unfortunate,
as I would have preferred that one. However, it is gone and cannot be
helped. I did no business at all to-day. In the evening after tea we
went out to the Glebe, and stayed till past one o'clock. Mr. Deffries
came late and slept there all night. In coming home Harriett’s boot
hurt her so much that we could not proceed at all; and as it was too
late for any sort of conveyance, I thought of the expedient of taking off
my own boot and letting her wear it; so I walked from Christ Church
to Wynyard-square barefoot. I can hardly put my foot to the ground,
it is so painful. lam anxious to hear from Ellen in answer to my last
note, I cannot call it a letter. Adieu, my loved one, adieu.—Louis.
Twenty-third day gone.
Saturday, November 18th, 1865.—Had an appointment at ten, and,
as we were up late, did not get any breakfast until twelve o’clock. I
had to meet Layard to decide what was best to be done, and, after con-
sidering all things, T have taken the University Hotel, and intend to-
morrow to write Ellen the whole truth of the matter, and if she decides
on coming down at once, I am sure we shall both of us make money,
besides being able to see each other so often. I will keep Mrs. King as
barmaid, as she will understand the business of the place; and besides,
mv dear love will be saved not only work and trouble, but also a great
deal of unpleasantness. Layard will join me in the business, and of
course, after a time, if we get on, we can take a better house nearer
town. I went to all the rest of my creditors to-day, and they all acted
very kindly to me, and none of them will trouble me at all for this
money. I am sure it is very good of them, as it relieves me from a
great annoyance at present, as all I have to obtain for immediate use at
once is £ll rent and the bill of £25 12s. Bd. About the bill, Ido not
know where I can find money for it, as I have none. However, I never
stuck yet for an idea, and am not likely to do so at present. At half-
past three Mrs. Robertson came to go with Jane and my sister to the
Gardens. As they were not ready to go until four, I dressed myself
and accompanied them. There were a wretched lot of people there,
which quite disgusted me. We came home at about seven o’clock to


tea, and then went up stairs, with the intention of playing 1 cards, but
Mrs. Robertson was taken very ill indeed, and so we did nothing. At
eleven she went home. I rode with her, and wandered back. 1 hat is
the events of to-day. lam awfully tired out. Adieu. I am sure Ido
not know what to ’say to Ellen, or whether I had better go to Bathurst
to fetch her.—Louis. Twenty-four days gone.
After she left, Betrand kept up a correspondence with Mrs. Kinder,
but only one of his letters to her was found, and that written with a
view to its being seen by her mother contained nothing of interest.
Early one morning, about the end of October, Bertrand went into
his sister’s bedroom and whilst she was dressing the baby, asked
her to sit on the side of the bed, as he had something to say to
her, and he told her that he shot Kinder. She expressed her discredit
of the statement, and when he repeated itemphatically, she hid her face
and wept. « Don’t cry,” hesaid, “ I don’t regret what 1 have done I would
do the same to any other man who stood in my way. He admitted
that after shooting him, he put a pistol in his hand and a pipe in bis
mouth, and threw the pistol with which he was shot into the harbour.
They had planned it well, he added, and if ever it came to the public,
it would not be believed. He cautioned her not to let his wife know he
had told her this, and in the presence of the wife never said anything
about it. In the first week in November he invited to his house a
former acquaintance named Bellhouse, and when he came next cay
told him that he was sorry for Kinder, but that he wanted him out ot
the way. He also told him that he was going to get a divorce from his
wife, and being a powerful mesmerist, he had influence over her One
evening Mrs. Bertrand drank some brandy and water given to her by
her husband ; came out of the room, and with Mrs. Kerr retired to the
bedchamber they both usually occupied. When she entered the room
she sank into a chair quite exhausted, and, to the astonishment ot she
companion, immediately fell fast asleep. Mrs. Robertson with whom
the Bertrands were on visiting terms, was also told by Beitiana
that he shot Kinder, and on the evening of the 15th ot
November he, with his wife and Mrs. Kerr, were at Mrs. Robertson s
house, where they remained all night. After Mrs. Kerr had retire ,
and Mr. and Mrs. Bertrand had partaken of supper, he took a small
card from his portemonnaie, threw it on the table, and ordered his wile
to take it up. She hesitated and turned pale, but he insisted upon her
taking it, and afterwards said it was the card Kinder had in his hand
when he was shot. That evening, as they went into the drawing-
room, he was excited, calling for Ellen, for Jane, and Alfred (assistant).
He cried out,“ Bring the milk and mix the poison. I say, Ellen, >ou
give it to him. I say you are to give it to him. Don’t wring your hand ,
he feels nothing now.” In the dining-room of Bertrand s house, one
evening, whilst Mrs. Bertrand was lying on a sofa in a state more like
stupor than natural sleep, again reverting to his proposed union with
Mrs Kinder, he said to Mrs. Kerr,“ I don’t want to kill Jane ; but it
I cannot get a divorce, I shall get up an adultery case with some
respectable married woman, and Jane can sue me for a divorce.
That Mrs. Kinder was a bad woman he said he knew ; but it was
because she was wicked that he must marry her ; he would make her a


female poisoner—she was a second Lucretia. Pausing a little, and
leaning over his sister, he hissed through his teeth, “ Kinder did not
die by the shot we poisoned him. She (pointing to his wife, who still
Jay on the sofa) mixed the poison.” He said it would never be detected,
i 1 e< P lent ty’ about the ghost of Kinder, and when he saw jam on
the table he made some allusion to blood. It was not unlikely, he also
said that before Mrs. Kinder went to Brisbane (as she was then about
r- e W x? ulc ! *? e his wife ’ s funeral. Whilst at the house of
Mr ‘ - L>eh ’ l^ s . North Shore, one evening, he acted in a most extraordinary
manner, threatened to raise the ghost of Kinder, pretended to be the
devil, and put on hideous grimaces, and made horrible noises. When
he got back home that night, he went out with Mrs. Robertson’s leg-
horn hat on to get a lobster. He professed to have great mesmeric
power, and said Mrs. Kinder was the best medium he ever knew
Another strange statement he made was that a dead man was in the
house, and that was the reason there was so many flies about. Often
he threatened to murder his wife, and say that Mrs. Kerr did it. Since
Kinders death, Mrs. Robertson was a frequent visitor at Bertrand’s
ome and he at hers. On several occasions when, late in the even-
ings, he accompanied Mrs. Robertson to her house, he alluded to his
shooting Kinder, and also told her that it had been Mrs. Kinder’s wish
at Kinder should be shot whilst Jackson was in the house so that he
mig t e blamed for it. She at length became terrified by his recital of
the circumstances, and disliked to hear them. Having voluntarily made
ei cognisant of the crime committed,he then threatened to kill her. On
tus giuund and being afraid of him, she sought the protection of the
authorities who, in default of his finding sureties to keep the peace,
committed him for fourteen days’imprisonment, which sentence he was
under when the charge of murder was brought against him. The body
was exhumed at beginning of December (two months after death), and
examined by Dr. Eichler, Dr. Alloway, and Dr. Alleyne. Beside the
injunes discovered by Dr. Eichler before the inquest it was found that
the ascending portion of the lower jawbone was broken. Dr. Alloway
was of opinion that this must have been produced by a bullet, or by
some other hard substance. The direction of the wound, too, he held
to be from behind forward and from below upwards, thus again differing
fiom Dr. Eichler, who asserted the direction to be from the maxillary
angle to toward the temple. Again, Dr. Eichler was of opinion that
gunpowder and wadding, or paper fired fron a pistol close to the face,
would be sufficient to cause the wound, whilst Dr. Alloway held that
the maxillary bone could not have been so injured without the use of
a bullet or some hard substance. Dr. Alleyne, though less decided in
this view, substantially agreed with Dr. Alloway in his conclusions.
Ur. Eichler still retained the impression that Kinder inflicted the
wound upon himself, but so far joined in the conclusion of Dr.
Alloway and Dr. Alleyne as to admit the possibility of the shot being
bred by some one else, and also to the possible use of the hullet. Dr.
* owa y> however, maintained that the position must have been a most
extiaordinary one if Kinder inflicted the wound himself. That the
wound was one that might or might not cause death, and that the
patient s condition on the sth of October (as stated in evidence) indicated
a probable recovery, was concurred in by all three of these professional


gentlemen. Dr. Eichler could not assign any visible cause or matter
of fact to which he could attribute death on the 6th ; and Dr. Alloway
would not have expected death on that clay after the favourable change
said to have been exhibited the day before. Mr. Watt, the analytical
chemist, who carefully examined the contents of the stomach after
exhumation, discovered no poison, but said, however, that it was not
inconsistent with the result of his analysis that death, which occurred
two months previously, should be caused by poison of an organic
nature, vegetable poisons being rapidly decomposed in the stomach.
Mr. Dallevt addressed the jury for the defence, pointing out in limine
the more than ordinary necessity in the present case for the jury to di-
vest their minds of all prejudices, however loathsome or foul might be
the impressions from circumstances so atrocious and revolting as those
elicited in evidence, and to give a solemn, calm, nay, religious conside-
ration to what had been brought before them. There was this pecu-
liarity in the case, that prisoner was tried on his own admissions. The
theory of the prosecution was that prisoner, having been insanely
impassioned of Kinder’s wife, determined to possess her, even at the
cost of the husband’s life ; but seeing that without this sacrifice he had
possessed the woman, the basis of the theory was utterly struck away.
Proceeding to analyse the evidence, he referred to the extraordinary
but unreliable and uncorroborated testimony of Burne. If prisoner
desired the destruction of Kinder, it was highly improbable that, with
his knowledge of subtle and deadly poisons, he would have gone
through this filthy, vile, melodramatic process of accomplishing the
murder. This witness must have had his facts from the wretched
melodrama he was in the habit of performing, not from actual life. If
it be true, prisoner must have in his life carried on an extravagant
career, only in keeping with the most scrofulous of French novels. But
when he heard all this gasconading about prisoner’s amours and ad-
ventures, he himself treated it as mere trash, unworthy of credence. It
was not contended that prisoner was insane; if he perpetrated the
crime he had no such insanity as would exonerate him from rhe opera-
tion of the law ; but he was sufficiently insane to relieve him from any
significance being attached to the extravagant statements he so fre-
quently made. The sister’s testimony showed that he was capable of
lying assumptions of power supernatural and physical that only the
wildest maniac would pretend to exercise. After some remarks on the
general character of self-accusing evidence, the learned counsel urged
that as so many men of position and previous reputation had invoked
the tribunals by the publication of pretended crimes, some consideration
mio-ht reasonably be allowed the miserable utterances of a wretch proved
to le a liar —a man to whose declarations of his own criminality a wit-
ness, who had known him for years, attached not the least importance.
Without attempting to damage the credibility of Jackson’s evidence, he
f minted out that the action taken by Bertrand on the receipt of the
etter he sent was anything but that of a man conscious of guilt. He
might, if a murderer, have quietly taken the apology offered, but he
chose by prosecution logo into the midst of the police, and accept the
investigation of a court of law. In the madly wild gesticulations
assumed by the prisoner to terrify women, there might have been this
idea—l am not fascinating, nor rich, nor famous, but I will undermine


their chastity with ingenuity and power by terrifying them into acqui-
escence, by convincing them that I am a devil in infamy and agency.
He was not a murderer; murderers were made of sterner stuff. ‘ They
did not babble of their crimes. The characteristic of such criminals was
secresy and stealth, not blabbing of the blood they had shed. If the
jury believed the tales he told of the murder, how would they deter-
mine the mode in which it was accomplished ? He stated that Kinder
shot himself, next that he put the pistol treacherously in Kinder’s hand,
that he himself shot Kinder, and again that he poisoned him. The
diary would show the extraordinary nature of this man’s mind—how
utterly worthless were his declarations, and how all truth-speaking had
gone from him. There was an irresistible argument in the absence of
Mrs. Kinder’s testimony in this investigation. That diary was written
for her eyes alone; in that he poured out his nature; it was a revela-
tion of his soul. He would abandon his wife—did not care for his
children—this adulteress being all that he desired. But it was impos-
sible there was a bond of love between them, for if the theory of the
prosecution be true, the bond was one of fear of impending justice.
The case might be stripped of any consideration with regard to the
pistols purchased by Burne. The pistol by which the injuries were in
dieted was undoubtedly that produced at'the inquest, arid which it was
admitted the prisoner gave to Kinder. Another point, if looked at
calmly and dispassionately, would justify any jury in pronouncing a
verdict of not guilty. If between the time Kinder received the wound
and the time of his death any human being’ went into the house, and
Kinder, being sane, did not say that he was shot by Bertrand or some
one else, the case for the crown must fall to the ground. He must
have known whether he was shot or not, and he had several opportuni-
ties of making it known. If prisoner had determined to murder this
man, he would have let him bleed to death ; but he did all a non-pro-
fessional man could do to preserve life. The learned counsel lastly
dealt with the medical evidence as to the wound, to which, he con-
cluded, little importance could be attached—pot only on account of its
indecision, but as it admitted the equal possibility of the wound being
inflicted by deceased or anyone else. There was no proof that he died
of poison. The learned counsel concluded his address by exhorting the
jury to weigh well the matters he had submitted—to listen with atten-
tiveness to the charge from the Bench, and expressed his conviction
that they would satisfy their consciences, and by their verdict do justice
to society.
Mr. Butler rose to reply, when the counsel for the defence ob-
jected, on the ground of a decision by the Supreme Court, that counsel
prosecuting- for the Crown without a commission was not entitled to a
reply.
The jury, being consulted on the subject, preferred to take His
Honor’s charge on the following morning.
Friday, February 16th.
His Honor this morning delivered his charge to the jury in the
indictment against Henry Louis Bertrand for murder. He agreed
with counsel on both sides that there could not be conceived any case


coming before a jury that demanded more caution, or one in which
justice more required the absence of prejudice and preconception. It
was highly essential to truth, justice, and humanity, that the frequently
very difficult task of banishing such influences should be accomplished,
as in the present instance the jury might not only have imbibed
prejudices, but these might be strengthened by some matters that had
transpired in evidence. It was, perhaps, impossible altogether to
divest their minds of previously received impressions from evidence
that exhibited a state of almost unparalleled wickedness ; but unless
they vigorously strove against them, the prisoner might be deprived of
that justice he was entitled to. That he was wayward, eccentric,
strange, unaccountable, audacious, and reckless, there can be no
doubt, and that the state of his mind was not absolutely >ane, the
jury would have no difficulty in concluding. On that giound, how-
ever, he could not be acquitted if the jury held him guilty of the
imputed crime, although they could not escape the conviction that his
intellect was not sound. Regarding him as the author of the diary,
and if they believed this contained the outpourings of his mind, the
jurv must not take the picture of this man’s mental state as portrayed
by the counsel for the defence, for there was before them not a man
but a fiend—a monster in human shape. Against this concepnon
the jury would have to struggle, for, though steeped in wickedness
and malignity scarcely equalled by that of the Temptei of mankind,
the question to be decided by the evidence was, “ Did he murder
Kinder ? ” The counsel for the Crown did not deny that portions of
this man’s conduct were irreconcilable wi h the idea of guilt, but
admitted that they tended strongly to show innocence. For instance,
there was evidence showing that he did things tending to save the
life he was charged with taking. He admitted that he supplied the
pistol with which the wound was inflicted. It was contended in the
defence that in the whole diary there was no confession of guilt, or
an allusion to a crime committed that would entitle the jury to con-
clude that it referred to this murder. The counsel for the Crown
held that there were passages that admitted of this interpretation —
obscure hints that might be explained on some hypothesis as having
reference to a deed of darkness. Supposing the wound was sed-
inflicted, and prisoner prompted Kinder to fire the pistol himself,
telling him it was not loaded, or that whilst Kinder held it near him
prisoner pressed it against his cheek so as to effect its discharge at his
head, the object and the criminality were the same—the attainment of
this man’s dea h. There were too many circumstances to lead to the
belief that he did desire it. Then it might be said if he desired
Kinder’s death, why did he stanch the blood. Supposing Kinder
shot h in self, and Bertrand had no hand in it, still his death must
have been an object of des re, though, notwithstanding this, he
adopted means to stop the bleeding which probably would have de-
stroyed the man. But this must be added —supposing Kinder fired
the shot, could it he denied that still prisoner rather desired his death
than that he should live. Innocence must he assumed when there
was one single tact clea’ly inconsistent with the idea of guilt as
against fifty circumstances that only tended to show guilt ; and
further, if a single circumstance led to a reasonable doubt, the


prisoner was entitled to its benefit. If the jury were convinced that
he desired this man’s death, they might comprehend how he came to
standi the blood, which led to an assumption of innocence. Had he
allowed a man who so wounded himself in his presence to bleed to
death, he, as a dentist, being acquainted with the means of stopping
hemonhage, might conceive he nn some risk. Or he might consider
the man in his power, that it was probable he would die, and that
then this would be evidence of his innocence. The stanching of the
blood, therefore, though inconsistent with the idea of guilt, was not
conclusive of innocence. If in the diary indications were discovered
of prisoner having done the deed, the jury might consider whether he
wou.d state it plainly, or only darkly hint at it. The prosecution of
Jack-on was the act of a madman, and yet the argument now used in
prisoner’s favour might have suggested itself to his mind, namely,
that it accused of this crime he would point as an evidence of inno-
cence to that prosecution. In the ordinary course of things a man
guilty of this crime would have given the £2O Jackson required for
Ins srence, but here pri-oner showed matchless impudence, audacity
incredible, the nature and extent of which was inconsislent with his
inn icence. If guilty, it was unparalleled rashness so to rush into
the jaws of destruction. He must have felt that it would lead to
further inquiry. If prisoner was a guilty man, his was a remarkable
example or the saying, “ Quern Deus vult perdere, prim dementat." The
jury were bound to consider whether this proceeding was an indica-
tion of innocence—whether they could get rid of the supposition that,
unlike most men, his revenge was such that he would gratify it at any
cost, and that having got this man down, he imagined that anything
he said against him would not be believed. This point, like that of
stanching the blood, rested on the threshold of the jury’s deliberations
and they must get rid of it before proceeding to other matters!
Jackson s testimony must be received with caution, with a tendency
to distrust, but yet the question must necessarily occur—ls he a
witness of truth ? After all, Jackson said no more than other wit-
nesses whose evidence pointed to guilt. There was, pet haps, nothin*
so revolting in this case as the fact that this woman (Mrs. Kinder)*
whilst living with her husband, should be challenged to express her
preference for one of two paramours in their presence. His Honour
now quoted portions of the diary, commenting upon them, and
pointing out their bearing upon the case. He showed that the
consummation of the union for which prisoner seemed so anxious
would involve the death of Kinder and Mrs. Bertrand or a
donble divorce When prisoner said, “If I have made others
suffer, God only knows, and “Have not you done the same,” it
indicated evidently something they had done jointly. It might
refer to their criminal intercourse, or to the suffering of Kinder
There was nothing to show that Kinder had any suspicion of his
wife s intercourse with prisoner. The passage, “ Dream of the future,
for in that do we both look forward to repent our sins,” admitted
of the interpretation that he alluded either to some other sins or to
the crime with which he was charged. He says, speaking of their
prospective union “ When will that time arrive-it will come, as you
believe there is a God—l have said it”—thus affording a revelation of


the ■working of this man’s mind that it was very important to consider.
It amounted to this, “ I say a thing, and it will surely come to pass,”
and it, would be recollected that he said to the witness that all things
were possible to a determined man. There were several passages that
might allude to the adultery or to the killing of Kinder ; but that in
which he spoke of what the power of love could perform was pure
nonsense, befitting only a madman. In this diary, he spoke of being
“ horriidy jealous of Kinder,” because he had the legal right to do or
say anything he liked to the object of his passion, and this feeling he
expressed to his sister. He says, “It drove me raving mad, and lam
what I am.” “ Hacked by these thoughts,” he added, “ surely there
can be no worse hell than one’s own conscience.” It was not that he
repented of the sin of intercourse with this woman during her hus-
band’s lifetime —he gloried in that, and spoke of their interviews as
“ happy moments”—the reference was to some crime. It might be
the killing of Kinder, but it certainly might mean something else.
After reading some further extracts, His Hoxoua drew attention to a
topic of deep importance. He said confessions were rarely to be
relied upon ; but a jury must consider the circumstances. The pri-
soner boasted of his guilt, and had narrated the mode of his proce-
dure. The jury would have to decide upon the probability of the
truth of his statements, and to satisfy themselves on these points. Is
the victim dead or living?—Was the prisoner near the spot when the
crime was committed ?—Had he a motive for its commission ? If so,
why not believe his confession ? There might be an object in con-
fession. Of this there was the recent instance of McEncroe, who said
he set fire to the Cathedral. It might be that if the prisoner did the
act, he was suddenly struck with remorse, or confessed as a means of
saving his life. The jury might arrive not only at the conclusion that
he might have made this statement of guilt, being innocent, but if
there was nothing else in the case tending to his condemnation, tlmy
must irresistibly come to that decision. But the question was,
whether, notwithstanding that some of his actions were inconsistent
with guilt, there were not circumstances showing a strong motive, as
his passion for this woman, whom he yearned to make exclusively his
own. For this he said he would do anything. With regard to Jack-
son—he, under the pressing temptation of poverty, stated his willing-
ness, if he got £2O, to abstain from telling all he knew of prisoner’s
connexion with Kinder’s death. An upright man would scorn to take
money on this ground. He asked for means to get away from this
scene of horrors. It was, however, quite plain that if this £2O had
been given, prisoner would not have been safe. Jackson might have
betrayed him, and have adduced this gift of hush money as conclusive
damning evidence against him. It was not until he was in the hands
of the police, that Jackson offered to withdraw all he had said. It
was said thatßurne was not to be believed. He was a clever but nar-
row-minded young man apparently, having a memory stored with
dramatic incidents, and that he was on the highway to destruction was
pretty clear. But did he in his testimony perjure himself? He said
things that were incredible enough ; but were they incredible as re-
ferring to the conduct of such a man as the prisoner ? It might seem
strange that he should go in disguises, attired as a female, buy pistols,


and that he should get a sheep’s head to fire at; but these circum-
stances were substantiated by other evidence. So with regard to the
night excursions to Kinder’s house. Such things might be expected
of a very eccentric wild individual. He might have thought that if he
said he shot Kinder, he would not be believed, and that the fact of his
making such a statement would lead to an interpretation of his inno-
cence. It was, however, very difficult to judge of this man’s conduct
by the rules that would guide one in judging of the conduct of other
men. It was a matter utterly immaterial as far as the guilt was con-
cerned whether Kinder died of the wound or by poison ; but the jury
ought to have a clear idea of the agency by which the death was
effected. Again, it might have been expedited by poison. Of this
there was no evidence except the exclamation made by prisoner whilst
in a state of excitement. It might be probable or not, but the jury
were not to condemn a man on probabilities without evidence. If
poison was administered by some other person, not by prisoner, and
the death was thereby accelerated, still Kinder might have died from
the wound, as the injury was pronounced sufficient to cause death,
although it seemed at one time that it would not be fatal. It must
be recollected that on one occasion prisoner said he had poisoned him-
self. Dr. Wright, who attended him, stated that the assertion was
untrue. If this pistol, supplied by prisoner, loaded by himself with
wadding, powder, and bullet, was given to Kinder with a representa-
tion that it was not loaded, and Kinder was told to discharge it near
his head, and death ensued, that would be murder. If he intended
that Kinder should shoot himself, and by the slightest pressure from
behind prisoner effected the discharge of the pistol, with a similar
result, that also would be murder. As to the motive for suicide, it
was said that Kinder was jealous—of which there was no evidence,
and that he was in pecuniary difficulties. There was some testimony
pointing to this. But was it likely that he would shoot himself in the
presence of a man and two women ? Had he no suspicion of the
dentist and his own wife, that he should shoot himself in their
presence, and why put the pistol to his ear ? Why, if he chose to
destroy himself, should he fire in the extraordinary way indicated by
the direction and character of the wound. His Honour made some
remarks with regard to the evidence of Burne, whom he declined to
treat as a witness unfavourable to the prosecution, the reason being
that although this witness added to his evidence the assertion that he
placed no credence in the extraordinary statements of prisoner, the
witness explained that he had not had an opportunity of stating it in
his evidence before. His Honour then proceeded to read the evidence,
making a few comments in passing. The jury were not altogether to
disregard prisoner’s statements at the inquest, it must be borne in
mind that the diary and some of the letters were not then in evidence
He pointed out, as a somewhat significant matter, that Kinder, when
wounded, desired Bertrand to attend him, and this, it might be
argued, was inconsistent with the idea that Kinder knew he was shot
by Bertrand. But in evidence it appeared that Bertrand himself said
Kinder always accused his wife of doing it, so that if Kinder was under
this impression he might have no repugnance to Bertrand’s services.
In conclusion, His Honour exhorted the jury to carefully consider


what had been advanced on behalf of prisoner, as well as that urged
by the Crown, and asked them to determine whether deceased died
of wounds inflicted by prisoner or through his agency, or by poison
alone when he was recovering. They must decide whether they
believed prisoner’s confessions taken in connection with the circum-
stances in evidence, and whether as against these statements there
were any circumstances that had a tendency in prisoner’s favour.
The jury, after being locked up for twenty hours, being unable to
agree upon a verdict, were discharged.
SECOND TRIAL.
Thursday, 23nd February.
Mr. Butler was counsel for the Crown ; prisoner was defended by
Mr. Dailey and Mr. Windeyer, instructed by Mr. Roberts.
The challenge of jurors was so extensive as to exhaust the panel,
wnich was supplemented by nominations of the Sheriff from the by-
standers, and most of these also were ordered to stand aside.
The learned counsel for the Crown stated the case with great force,
detailing and grouping the circumstances to be stated in evidence, so
as to show their tendency and effect, while the conclusions deducible
from these circumstances were pointed to with a clearness and com-
prehensiveness that, perhaps, gave the utmost strength of which they
were capable to the grounds for the prosecution.
Mr. Dalley intimated that in order to save time prisoner had con-
sented to have His Honour’s notes of the evidence taken on the
previous trial read over to the witnesses as they appeared in the box,
the counsel on each side having an opportunity of asking whether the
witnesses adopted their former evidence, and whether they desired to
add to it or qualify it in any way.
Detective Elliott adopted his evidence as read, as did the whole of
the witnesses, without varying on any material point. While Mrs.
Harriet Kerr, who is a sister of Bertrand, was being examined, His
Honour told the prisoner his conduct was very unseemly in pacing up
and down the dock and laughing at witness, and said although he had
no power to prevent it, it was ill-becoming one in so grave a position
The witness here became so affected that counsel forbore a cross-ex-
amination.
Friday, 23rd February.
Mr. Dalley, in an eloquent and argumentative address, spoke for
three hours on behalf of prisoner. He referred to the peculiar dis-
advantages under which the defence had to be made, the prejudices
to be contended against, and the more than usual warmth with which
the prosecution was conducted. The basis of the defence was the
unreliability of prisoner’s statements, oral and documentary, on the
ground of his half insane and extravagant character, the absence of
witnesses who might have been called to prove what actually occurred
at the time the shot was discharged, and the existence of facts to
show that prisoner took steps tending to save Kinder’s life.
Mr. Butler replied, and His Honour having summed up, the jury
retired at a quarter-past six o’clock. In two hours they returned with
a verdict of—Guilty.
The prisoner being asked if he had anything to say why sentence


should not be passed upon him, made the following statement, his
voice betraying no trepidation, and perhaps only a natural weakness :
“Although very ably defended by Mr. Dailey and others acting in
my behalf, I still have to call your Honour’s attention to the fact that
throughout the defence no evidence has been taken to prove that
Kinder had intimated his intention or threatened in any way to take
his own life. This was an oversight by Mr. Dailey. Witnesses
might have been brought to prove that Kinder, shortly before his
death, threatened to shoot or drown himself, and stated that he had
firearms, powder, and shot in the house, with which he intended to
do it. He was in such a state of mind from nervous depression that
he had to leave the bank. I have lent him money until I told him I
could do no more for him. He was in such difficulty that nothing in
his house belonged to him. This letter from New Zealand pressed
heavily upon him, and I have witnesses who could prove not only
that the letter was given into my hands, but that it came from New
Zealand ; and it was quite sufficient to upset the mind of a man
laboming under his embarrassments. Neither Mrs, Kinder nor my
wife were called, although they could prove my innocence. A certain
amount of intelligence and ability is imputed to me, and yet it is
assumed that I would entrust such a terrible secret to women, who
are known not to be in the habit of keeping secrets. If I could have
poisoned him, why should I have shot him ? Then, as to the state-
ments I made. I was in the habit of hearing jokes and joining in
them very freely, with a great deal ot nonsense, about the time of
prosecuting Jackson, as to shooting men and running away with their
wives, and it was in jest that I told my sister what she has stated.
But, by a kind of fatality, circumstances have been brought together
that make it evident that I am guilty. If I made confessions, and
my conscience pricked me, yet I denied them directly afterwards.
I have been fairly and impartially tried ; but I do complain that the
Crown seemed more intent upon taking my life than was warranted
to satisfy the end of justice. If I die lam murdered, and, in spite of
the decision of the twelve men who have given this verdict, I deny
the world to say that there has been a murder. I do not care for
life ; all I am now interested in being to vindicate myself in justice
to my family. I have been unkind to my wife, maddened as I was by
love for this woman, and she never seemed satisfied with the mention
of my passion. I w r rote that diary not intending it for the eyes of
anybody but herself, and to gratify that romantic feeling which seemed
to be part of her very nature. The facts I mention can be proved.
It is not the ends of justice to take the life of an innocent man ; its
object must be to satisfy society by acting upon the established truth
of facts either of innocence or guilt. I was in the habit of leading a
loose wild life, and now, because of it, there is reputed to me a crime
which was never thought of before Jackson alluded to it in his letter.
We two have discussed a marriage with Mrs. Kinder—two men of like
character. He said it was not impossible for him to marry her, but
that it was for me. Mrs. Kinder attributed her husband’s suicide to
jealousy of me, so that, although I am not actually his murderer, I
was the instrument of his death. This pricked my conscience. Then
I strove night and day to tear myself from the fascination which


seemed to beset me—to repent of what I had done—and endeavoitre
to be a better man. This may be ridiculed after what has transpired*
It seems to be mv fate, and lam content to die. It is not death I tear,
but I desire justice. The evidence on the inquest was given truthfully,
on my honour as I stand here. I did not wish to expose Mrs. Kinder
it was not required that 1 should expose her character or my own,
so as unnecessarily to injure either of us. I said, ‘To the best of my
belief Kinder had no cause for the unkind way in which he treated
her.’ I was striving to teach her to make herself a good home.
There is evidence of all that. It may be said that Mr. Woods was not
called because he was interested, but I complain of the most unfan
and most unjust manner in which my case has been treated from
beginning to the end—the exparte statements at the police office
having, in contravention of justice, been published, and the who e
case put before the public to make a sensation. To this I attribute all
the prejudice against me. Your Honour is not an interested party,
and may have the means of ascertaining the truth of what 1 have said.
No evidence has been taken as to whether Kinder put himself out of
the way ; but evidence is adduced to show that I had a motive in
getting rid of him, and therefore it is assumed I put him out of the
way.” . ,
His Honour said : It is no unfrequent thing for me to hear pro-
testations of innocence after conviction; but I have never found it
consistent with duty, truth, or the interests of society to accord them
any serious consideration. Even under the gallows I have known
their innocence protested by men of whose guilt I have felt as certain
as of anything 1 have known personally myself, and whose guilt was
demonstrated by evidence so clear that no human being possessed o
the power of reason could doubt for an instant that the result arrived
at had been right. Of course these protestations with many persons
go for much, but by those with more experience, and equal feeling,
more responsibility, who desire to see justice and nothing more, they
really pass unheeded. You are evidently a person of great ability, acute-
ness, and considerable cunning, with sufficient cleverness to seize upon
weak points and make them appear an excuse, which to reflecting persons
could be no palliation whatever. You say you are not afraid to die, and I
trust you are not, but believe me that in the opinion of a great majority
of thinking men, wherever this evidence will go, you ought not to be
allowed to hope forgiveness here. You say you desire only to clear your
character. For whose sake ? For the sake of your wife and children ?
Can it be possible that any human being who has heard what has passed
at this trial, who has read the diary, who knows your intercourse with
that abandoned woman supposes that you attempt to clear your character
for the sake of your wife and children. How can you, who in the same
breath utter a falsehood, be believed in this? The jury have now
pronounced their verdict, I am now at liberty to look at other matters
I did not think proper to refer to before. I did not read one line of
that to which lam now going to allude. I was informed that Mrs.
Joinder might poshbly have been tried on evidence to be given by
your wife. Upon inquiry I then made, I found that she had indeed
given some information that she was stated to have given to your own
sister in a confession, but having been permitted to see you, I believe


she has receded from it. [Prisoner : I have never seen my wife since
1 have been in gaol ] Then it may be possible she has not receded
10m it. I shall feel myself called upon, after your address, to lay
before the public that statement, If she was not called as a witness,
you must, with the intelligence you possess, have known that she
could not be called. She has made a statement which, unless your
sister is perjured, positively confirms the verdict of the jury. [Priso-
ner. My sister is perjured.] Then the case displays unparalleled
wickedness, but this, the deepest in dye—that a sister, for no object
of her own, should falsely state that your own wife admitted to her
that you had shot Kinder. She may have some remains of affection
for your children, and even for the character of their father, but can I
doubt that your sister spoke the truth when she said she heard this
extiaoidinary statement from you ? Ido not believe you are an insane
man, but a perfectly sane man would never have made the declarations
you have made, and I thoroughly believe your sister when she related
this : 1 said to his wife, “ good God, has Henry really shot himand
she answered, “ Yes, he has.” Her details, too, are quite consistent
with my idea of the mode in which the deed was done. Can any one
doubt the guilt when a man is accused by wife and sister and their
statement sustains and accords with all the probabilities of the case ?
I hear your declaration with sorrow and with pain, but I place not
the slightest dependence upon it. I have a greater responsibility than
the jury, and I declare to you now, before God, I believe you thoroughly
guilty, and I have no more doubt of it than that you are before me at
this moment. W hen I first heard the case I did entertain doubts, and
I have lain awake hours thinking over the various points involved,
and dctei mined if these doubts were not removed not to try you again.
But now I have not the slightest doubt of your guilt, and I believe I
can demonstrate to any man that you are guilty. I think it utterly
impossible for a rational person to believe that the man shot
himself. You say he had intentions. I have had great experience in
criminal trials, extending over thirty-two years, and have tried perhaps
more cases than any judge in the country, and I have never known a
case clearer than your own ; nor have I known a single case in which
a man who was really determined to kill himself talked about it to
his friends. If a man talks of committing suicide, it is almost a proof
tha.t he never intends to take his life. Is there the slightest proba-
bility that without any temptation, and with his pipe in his mouth—
having only half an hour before been playing with his child, and just
bought oysters for his wife and given them to the servant to prepare
for suppei this unfortunate man, no pistol having been seen in his
possession about that time, go into the drawing-room in your presence,
in the presence of your wife and his own, and commit a bungling
attempt at suicide like that described by you. No person ever heard
of such a thing in the annals of crime. He might have been embar-
rased and addicted to drinking. Had he not been a drunkard, his wife
piobably would not have been seduced by Jackson, and you would
not have debauched her. If drink did not give the temptation
to crime by him, it afforded opportunities to crime in others. All
the records of Criminal Courts show repeated instances of crime being
committed through the agency of drunkenness—the victim being a


drunkard, and affording opportunities for crime against himself. I
do not think Kinder was drunk on that day, but, whether drunk or
sober, it is inconceivable that he could have intended to take his life
in that bungling, stupid, incredible manner. Ihen I find you had
everytemptation, every motive, for destroying him. You were madly
in love with this woman, with a passion eating into your vitals, and
you would have committed any crime to have her as your own. Ha
mad I believe you to be, for you never could have talked as you di
unless there was a partial disturbance of your mind—wild, eccentric,
strange, to an utterly unprecedented degree, your mind was over-
shadowed by the influence this unhappy woman had acquired ove
you. I heai you say that at the time of writing to her the impas-
sioned sentences, burning with love, you had no other intonUhan to
satisfy the cravings of her romantic feelings. Why, you admit that
you wrote them as a deep and abandoned hypocrite. I
it I believe that, maddened by the passion of your attachment
her you did this terrible deed, and your statements previous were to
be accounted for by the idea that in saying his death ™ “
occur, when it eventually took place, you as his friend would not be
looked upon with suspicion. Ido not make any excuses for Jacks ®“’
his conduct was extremely bad. But I feel some sympathy for him
believing that he spoke the truth. I think he deserves punishment,
Tu the law was never meant for a case like his but for persons who
wrote threatening to accuse persons of crimes they never committed
I am satisfied he believed what he said that you did to him utter
dark mysterious, dangerous hints, and used expressions, justifying
hhn i7the behef that you intended to commit the murder; and
therefore, I think the man should be pardoned. He has had sufficient
punishment for writing that imprudent letter. A prudent man would
sav “ I cannot prove the case against this cunning person, and it will
only involye me P in ruin; but I know what has taken place; it is horrible
1 wfll inform the police, and let them take what steps they choose. Y et,
being in distress and trouble, he said he would be silent if you gave him
£2O g with which, probably, he would have gone to Mew Zealand once,
and nothing would have been heard of him. It was grossly wrong to
barter away the interests of justice in that manner. But he did not
demand money by threatening to accuse you of crime
grounds for believing you committed it. You allud J
call a prejudice against you, yet you must see that arises in
an abhorrence of your proved crimes, and whmh i g the a lmost
universal feeling of the country, and this verdict will, I believe, b ®
received with perfect approval. On this trial there have been adduced
two points making the case stronger than before ; and l am not sm
nrised the previous jury should entertain doubts. Now, I think theie
would scarcely be a dissentient voice against a verdict of guilty. No-
thing can pain a judge so much as the assumption that a verdict is
uniust I believe you to be guilty, and I shall feel deeper pain than 1
express if I thought there was anything wrong in the verdict,
because 1 am satisfied you will suffer death. lam sure you deserve
the verdict and I am certain in my mind that it is true. An J » en
you talk about idle words, and complain of being spoken of as a fiend
surely when one reads your journal, hears what is said by your sister


6y Mrs. Robertson, by Burne, by Bellhouse, and knows why you in-
vited this man t) your house, all their testimony uniting and tending
the same way, you cannot but be regarded as a fiend. You are not °a
human being in feeling. I can speak of you with compassion, because
I do not think you are fully possessed of the mind that God has been
pleased to give to almost all of us. On that account alone, I feel some
sympathy. It is distressing and sad that any father of a family a
man that might be useful in his generation—should die on the scaffold
for a crime that makes human nature shudder. The sentence is,
that you be taken hence to the place whence you came, and thence, on
a day to be named by the Governor in Council, to the place of execu-
tion, and at that place be hanged till your body be dead. If you are
to find mercy, as I hope you will, seek it elsewhere, but from no
human tribunal.
The prisoner asked if he might be permitted to see his wife. His
Honor directed him to make an application of that kind to the Sheriff;
but he hoped that that officer would be very cautious before complying
with the request.
The prisoner, up to the time of his removal from the dock, main-
tained his self-composure.
MRS. KINDER SINCE THE CONVICTION OF BERTRAND.
I bis miserable worn in, the paramour of her husband’s murderer,
it will be remembered by those who have read the preceding pages,
was earnestly recommended by the Chief Justice, when passing sen-
tence on Bertrand, to leave the colony as quickly as possible. This
very sensible advice was readily acted upon, and the air of Australia
is no lougei infected and polluted with her vile breath, she having
gone under an assumed name to California, or some other country, in
the first ship that sailed from the port of Sydney.
How she escaped punishment for her many crimes, is best explained
by reading the following colloquy between Mr. Buchanan, a Member
of the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales, and Mr. Martin,
Attorney-General of the same colony:—
Mr. Buchanan, pursuant to notice, asked the Attorney-General,—
“ 1. Is it true that Mis. Kinder has been discharged from custody?
2. Did Mrs. Bertrand confess that Bertrand shot Kinder, as stated by
his Honor the Chief Justice ; and, if so, to whom and under what
circumstances was the confession made ? 3. Was Mrs. Kinder in the
house at the time Kinder was shot ; and, if so, had she not the same
means of information which led Mrs. Bertrand to the knowledge of
Kinder’s murder? 4. Were not Mrs. Bertrand and Mrs. Kinder, as
proved by the evidence, in the same room, while the murder was being
carried into execution in the next room ? 5. By Mrs. Kinder’s con-
cealment of what she manifestly knew of this murder, is she not
liable to be charged as an accessory after the fact, if not privy to the
whole design previous to its execution? 6. If so, why is she not
arraigned and tried for the crime of murder ? ”
Mr. Martin, n answer to these questions, said “ Mrs. Kinder has
been discharged from custody. According to the evidence of Mrs.
Kerr (Bertrand’s sister), as given by her at the Water Police Officej
Mrs. Bertrand stated to Mrs. Kerr that Bertrand had shot Kinder,


she g— MrB ' Bertrand b y
h - b t™fT
sion, Mrs. Bertrarlv. , . A sh« nau anyunug
poisoning. Mrs. Besi e ™, , , ge \{, » I understand, sta e m .
to inquiries made by the pa ;<>e (buth ot in the course o any < o
rial investigation), that she com&m sa y at t^iat V I V UC . s , xr\ n .
husband was poison. By the evidace it appears that o is.
der and Mrs. Bertrand were in tb house and in the same room
Kinder, when he was shot. I cainot say whether Mis. m M
the same means of information oi the occurrences reierre 0 a ‘
Bertrand, nor is there any pcof that Mrs. Bertran ne '^ : ° ,
murder, beyond the statement ihich Mrs. Kerr alleged Mis.
to have made. There was no evidence to show that i rs.
manifestly knew of Kinder’s nurder, and if she did know o
concealed it by merely abstainin' from declaring it, she won * V
reason of such abstaining, be anaccessory, —still less wou sue •
staining be evidence that she ws privy to the whole design P^ e
to its execution. If a person kmws of a felony and does not t !sc
it, such non-discovery does not nake him an accessory a tei ie a .
He must be proved to have done some act to assist the felon person y.
Thera was no evidence that Kinder died by poison, and tiere oie,
evidence to convict any person of the crime of murdering or assis i g
in murdering by poison. There was no evidence that m er .
killed by a pistol-shot, but there was evidence that Mrs. Km ei
in the shooting, or counselled, aided, or abetted it. s e ue _
the shooting after it occurred, there was no evidence that,
knowledge, she assisted Bertrand. There was therefore no evidence
to warrant her trial, either as a principal or an accessory, and she was
entitled to her discharge.”
So it will be seen that although Mrs- Kinder was morally accessory
to the “taking off” him to whom she had pledged her fealty at the
altar, yet the legal proofs were not sufficiently cle .r to insure convic-
tion. has had a narrow escape, and her foot no longer treads on
British ground; she has gone to a foreign land, where, it is to be
hoped, she will “ strew repentant ashes on her head, and lead a
of honesty and sobriety for the future.
AFTER THE SENTENCE. .
It is the custom in these colonies, and one which, in our opinion,
is “ more honoured in the breach than the observance for P™™ 6 * 3 ’
after they have been tried, found guilty by a jury, and sentence y
a judge, to be tried over again— twice,—once by the newspaper writers
and then by the public out of doors ; and this course has not been
departed from in the present instance. No sooner had the Chief
Justice pronounced the last dread sentence of the law upon the
wretched convict, than the usual agitation was commenced.
The old insanity dodge was the first attempt towards saving the
life of the convict. The uncle of the murderer forwarded a petihon
to his Excellency the Governor of New South Wales, to the*e ec a
the murderer was insane-that insanity ran in « he l > Jj* ‘j
uncle of Bertrand’s died in the Eoyal Free Hospital, Cray s Inn


64
Road, London, upwards of tw ..
and that another uncle also diej y y ® ars a g°> from brai- disease |
month of March, 1866. u mad on the first of As P resent
Bertrand, since his condemn" ■,
ni cation through the Sheriff 10n > tran^ ltted . a commu-
mformed, extends over manv ° the GovP- or ’ wh l ch > we a ™
dissatisfaction in reference tn th* Pages ° e l 0^ lsca P-. It expresses
the case; complains that ir> Oser-acions of the judge who tried
graphs publisC the nuWic nSe,aenCe ° f the P am P hlets a nd photo-
the Judge was was incensed a^ainst him - that
that the jury sacrificed him tn SOEe ° f S? witnesses perjured, and
there was some truth in h ; s oi„! PP - e^8 ? ub 10 an ? er - He admits that
his wife, and asserts that if e F dence as to his treatment of
she could have proved hL Llf Kl ™ had callad a * a witness,
statement because he is afraid ZTw he not make this
his death, the stain mar hi?- J bing execut ed, but so that, after
he is innocent of the charge n b ’ s name - He declares that
to heaven for vengeance * n ba * dbe su ffors his blood will cry
afflicted with fnsa S t? W tbat Bertrand's mind was in any way
of March tive Council met and fixed th/lQth
treme penalty of the law murderer should ***er the ex
convict was to get up a n„hlic 6 St6p taken by the fnends of the
tence, to which I3*f K ; P n , ° P e . t,tlon » praying for a reprieve of sen-
pereons in the first trial" nam6S ° f S6Ven ° f the
for a rule nisi for arre^ wr n Pplj t 0 f the Su P reme Court
Judge Hargreaves bein? the onlv!r ’ ln ° h Was refused by a ma Jority,
was moved to rehear arguments 7 &fter which the court
petitions have been presented to the r wlthout avath No less than six
prayers of which iLl been.™ k *
known to the convict he became v!/ u th . lS faCt being made
doubt would have committed cni '/I 'T excited > and there is no
been within his reach Since the a PP liances and means
murderer he has beenvtilaiZ w in the COnduct of the
«o means of ‘ and day ’ S ° that he has
not very likely to be attempted. bj abs ° lute starvatlon ; which is
rumours have been b° f P. er , trand ’ aII sorts of absurd
tion. We are in a Poston to L P and educa-
these reports. He f« « ° State / hat there wno truth in any of
Jewish family and his life^m 6 1 °., a res P ectak^e > kut not wealthy
Mrs. Kinder, presented B no^extraordina^o^unu^al^atures. B^llo6
gramed S r^Te^2raU n st S BeS 7 M ” h 12lh - in
fl«t. the illegal ShZe of the “ COnv ' cli “. »n four grounds ;
portion of the evidence fn the second reading a
voce: tliird, the right of the (V 1 la ’ '"Stead of taking it
that arrest of , r P ;° Secutor to reply 1 and? fourth,
Court. The b ’*" ‘ h<!
_ J.OLIJ,
-’^ns^asras^ ■.. >KD


(■BERTRAND DESCENDING THE SUBTERRANEAN PAS-AGE TO
THE COURT.]
U 1
O
Oo
O
O
rv»
-in
o
o
o
4N


[BERTRAND ADDRESSING THE COURT IN ARREST OE JUDGMENT-!
