

[?]




EX<:>-v ; - •
,/C^V




BERTHA SHELLEY,
THE LILY OF THE SHELLEY!
[An Australian Story of Forty Years Ago.]
BY WILLIAM AUBREY BURNAGE.
CHAPTER I.
“ Lo ! ’tie a gala night
Within the lonesome latter years !
An angel throng bewinged, bedight
In veils, and drowned in tears
Sit in a theatre to see
A play of hopes and fears.
While the orchestra breathes fitfully
The music of the spheres !”
- Edqab Allan Foe.
It was night. No moon nor stars shed their
pale beams upon the silent streets of York;
find that grand old city of a thousand memo-
ries lay in placid slumber, wrapped in a
mantle of thick darkness, —save hero and
there in some of her narrow back alleys, where
taverns of questionable respectability still
drove a stealthy trade in the “ cup that mad-
dens” with the abandoned wretches at their
gaming tables. A cold, drizzling rain was
falling; and the rude gusts of a December wind
howled and moaned by turns, as they swept
boisterously along through the network of
streets and lanes away to the broad Atlantic.
It was a night to lead the homeless poor almost
to doubt the. Mercy that could leave them,
weary and brokenhearted, exposed to the piti-
less storm with scarce a rag to cover their
shivering limbs.
Along one of the narrowest and dirtiest of
the back streets, a man was hurrying with
rapid strides. He was so closely muffled
that, had it been daylight, it would have been
impossible for anyone to have recognised him.
His broad-brimmed felt hat was shoved low
down over his face, and a thick comforter,
rolled several tnrni|around hie throat, concealed
the lower part of his features. A heavy great
coat enveloped him to the heels, and fitting
loosely, defied recognition by his figure.. It
was a dangerous part of the town to be out in
at such an hour; but the heavily-loaded cane, .
ironically called a “life-preserver,” which he
carried, would have warned any desperado
lurking about to think twice before attacking
him. Stopping before the most disreputable-
looking tavern in this most disreputable street,
he applied his eyes to the crevices of a shat-
ter, through which light was streaming.
‘ All right,’ he muttered ; * the knave and
the fool are both there, waiting to be put to
work. And now, my brave Sinclair, you’ll
rue the day, that you were mad enough to
come between me and Anne Egerton.’
Shoving his hat still further down over his
eyes, and burying his chin yet deeper in the
folds of his woollen comforter, so as to avoid
detection from any Ute stragglers in the bar,
he knocked at the door. Being far after
twelve, it was shut and locked : but giving a
private watchword, be was admitted. ■
In the room that the traveller had taken
the precaution to reconnoitre before entering
the tavern, sat two men playing cards. The
table was covered with'a miscellaneous litter
of greasy cards, brandy bottles, half-emptied
glasses, and tobacco pipes; and a vacant chair
at one side of the table showed that the party,
was not complete.


Throwing down a car'd, one of the players
exclaimed, ‘Twenty-seven and four—thirty-
one, with a pair 1 Four holes! I’m ont.
Darby !’
‘Yes, it’s your game. But I’m
hanged if I’ll play another band to-nighti 1
wish Mr. 1 Clayton ’ud come. It’s past one
now ; and I want to get to most. It’s not
often I crawl off to my bunk before morning;
and I’d like to get to bed early to-nigbt for a
change.’
‘ It’s deucedly wet end dark, Darby ; but I
specta he’ll be here directly. I don’t care
about playing any more either,’ He continued,
throwing down the cards, ‘it’s slow work,
playing for the honour of the thing.’
‘You’re about right, old man,’ returned his
companion, looking up. ‘ There’s nothing
like a heavy stake to give the game an in-
terest. But it won’t do ’twixt me and you,
’cause the winner ’ud only have to share it
back. And if one on ns got sharping, tbere’d
likely be a row; and that’s best avoided, as
we’ve some ngly secrets to keep. Here, try
these cigars—they’re real Spanish. I knocked
the fellow on the head as smuggled ’em ; so I
know they’re right ’uns,’said Darby, handing
Bow a cigar-case handsome and costly enough
to have belonged to a peer of the realm.
‘Holloa, mate! where’d you get that spicy
case from f asked Bow, helping himself to a
couple.
After eyeing , the cigar-case for a few
moments silently, as if weighing the propriety
of answering the question, Darby suddenly
■burst out into a boisterous fit of laughter.
Any person hearing it, and not seeing from
whence it came, would hate taken it for the
chattering of an ape with a severe cold. ,
‘What the devil’s the matter with yon.
Darby! What’s tickling your fancy now!’
asked the other worthy, gruffly.
Disregarding the question, _the facetious
Darby laughed, in his peculiar way, till his
whole face became as bright a crimson as his
nose, and the tears fairly rolled down bis un-
washed cheeks in a grimy flood. After laugh-
ing till he had thoroughly exhausted himself,
he gasped out, ‘That eigar-casr, Bow j By
Jove, it was a jolly spree!’ and then rolled
■away into another fit of merriment, by way of
bringing himself round.
‘ What about the cigar east, IXuby !’ asked
the other, irritably.’
‘ I can’t see nothing to laugh at in it, ’cept
yon bought it. It’s many a day I ’apects
since you bought anything.’
As soon as the mirthful Darby had subsi-
ded into a normal condition, and bis flaring
nasal organ bad again monopolised the crim-
son of his features, he began to enlighten Bow
upon the secret cause of his recent ebullition
of merriment.
‘ You remember, Bow, abont two years
ago, before you joined pals with me, that old
Sir Humphrey Grey was found dead on the
Loudon road —shot through the head J Well,
he lost this identical case that night, and ha
aren’t likely to And it again, I reckon.’
‘ What, did you cook him, Darby 1* asked
Bow, with a shudder, ‘ I thought Black Jim
did that job. He got lagged for it any how.’
‘ I never tell tales, Bow! I’m mum as a
mouse when it pays! But be lost this cigar
ease that night, and here it is.’ Here be gave
way to another paroxysm of laughter, which
was soon cut short by the stranger gently
opening the door, and entering the room.
Hubeit Clayton took off his heavy great-
coat, bat, and comforter, and sat down to the
table. He was a singularly handsome man,
and a striking contrast to his two companions.
He appeared to possess every trait of mascu-
line beauty. But it was a beauty that|had
the unaccountable effect of causing all he came
in contact with an undefined sensation of re-
pulsion. Tall, of an elegant figure, with eyes
dark and full of expression, and features al-
most faultless in contour; yet, withal, an in-
describable something that neutralized the
usual consequence of good looks—it was the
beauty of the serpent—the comeliness of the
beast of prey 1 None could look upon
him without at once observing the unusual
handsomeness of bis person; yet few could
entertain for him other sentiment than aver-
sion. Perhaps it was his eyes that, bright
as the dark orbs of woman, were nestless as
the eyes of a wildcat! Perhaps it was the
lips that, perfect in outline as a very ‘ Cupid’s ■
Bow,’ had a sinister habit of drawing tightly
together, in a manner painfully suggestive of
a cruel and remorseless disposition! Or, it
may have been his teeth, which, ryhsn he


smiled, gleamed in their glittering whiteness,
like the incisors of a wolf or panther 1 And
yet this man, from whose base and tieacber-
ous nature all recoiled by instinct, was loved,
as few better men are ever loved, with a pa-
tient, changeless devotion. There was one
gentle girl, whose whole soul was bound up in
- bis existence, and who loved on in spite of
every obstacle that reason could urge against
him. But this lady possessed the rare quality
of discretion; and though she would have
cheerfully given her life’s blood to turn him
fronrhis evil path, she would bold no commu-
nication with him. Under the guise of a
gentleman (he was one by birth and educa-
tion) he had won her heart; but, when she
learnt the dreadful truth (it laid her on a sick
bed for months) that he bad long forfeited all
claim to the name of gentleman, she steadily
refused to see him again. But she loved him
with' even an intenser devotion than before,
and still held the hope, dearer than life, of
his yet reforming and becoming more worthy
of her. .Many offers of ,marriage had been
made to her; but she declined them all,
though some of her admirers had coronets to
lay at her feet. She would marry Hubert or
none. Poor Anne I It was the old old tale
of misplaced affection 1 Pity the tyrant Cupid
has such illimitable, such arbitrary power!
Every effort of reason is vain, when he gives
( forth his mandate, as pert Titania found when
she fell enamoured of Nick Bottom, the wea-
ver, with the ass’s head.
Darby Gregson, the hero of the cigar case
adventure, was a short, thick-sat man, about
forty years of age. There was nothing par-
ticular about him to distinguish him from the
restof his villainous species, but a pail of twink-
ilpg grey eyes, small, and deep-sunk, which, to-
gether with a very prominent and warm-
colorued nose, gave him a striking resemblance
to a dressed pig. He was quite a lion among
the criminal class at York, having achieved
more daring robberies (and, it was whispered
—murders) than the greatest expert among
the inhabitants of the country gaol, and with-
out ever having been caught. He was clever
enough to so arrange his plans, that if the po-
lice discovered a crime, some one else was im-
plicated by circumstantial evidence, and often
condemned; while he, the real perpetrator,
sat among the crowd in court, not even sus-
pected—unless, indeed, by some of bis own
class, and who, only having vague suspicions,
did not dare to breathe them, fearful lest- they
should be'the next victims of his consummate
cunning.
Mister Bow, the winner at cribbage, was a
young man about twenty years old, though,
to judge from appearance, no one would have
taken him for less than doable that age. He
was a tall, lank, awkward built youth, of a
most comical figure. His little, spherical
head was set low down between his shoulders,
in a way that would be sure to occasion con-
siderable difficulty to any but an adept in the
art of adjusting the noose, should it ever be
the pleasure of fate to promote himself to the
top of the tree in bis profession. His lower
limbs, too, were decidedly excentric, and so
wide apart at the knees, that, had he joined a
troup of acrobats, he might have won immor-
tal fame hy leaping through them, after the
manner of jumping through a hoop. What
name was bestowed upon him at the baptismal
font, neither he nor his friends had ever heard.
Indeed, it was a’question he had not yet de-
cided whether he ever had been inside a real
church. He had once, in the paik, listened
to a “ ranter,” as he irreverently called the
preacher'; but that was so long ago, that he
could recollect nothing but having picked a
little girl’s pocket of her handkerchief, and
sold it for a penny to buy a bit of bread. He
had always gone hy the name of Bo«, ever-
siuce he could remember. Where he got the
name, or what it was given to him for, he
knew not. Some of his companions held the
opinion that he was called so from the shape
of his legs, while others, as positively, de-
clared that it was from Bow-street in London,
whosu levees he had been in the habit of visit-
ing almost from infancy. He had no recollec-
tion of father or mother; and was not fully
satisfied that be had ever had either. Any-
way, the first that be remembered of himself
was being taken to Bow-street on his tenth
birthday, for stealing a sausage from a cook-
shop for breakfast. From that da>, poor Bow
had been almost a constant pensioner at the
old gaol. There are many like poor Bow—
men with natural good qualities enough to be-
come useful members of society, if society had


only given them a fair chance at the start.
On the particular occasion in which poor
Bow first tried his hand at stealing, he did so
at the'bidding of a hard master. He had not
eaten anything for two long days, and he stole
this same sausage to appease the craving of
hanger. Poor child ; his little heart ached al-
most as much at the sin he felt be was com-
mitting, as it did at his empty stomach. From
that day, driven by the same hard master
(what.honest employment could a homeless,
friendless urchin, of ten years old, hope to find
in busy London 1) he had sunk from one stage
of crime to another, till he was here the pal
and accomplice of Darby Qregson, the most
desperate villian in York.
Hubert Clayton sat for a few minutes gaz-
ing into the glowing embers in deep thought.
There were depths of crime, which even Bow
was incapable of; and it was this fact that
held Mr. Clayton in reverie. Suddenly, look
ing up,‘he said, with his soft, insinuating voice,
‘ Bow, will you kindly oblige me by asking the
landlady for a lookjat the morning’s Guardian
—that’s a good fellow V
Bow hurried away to the bar for the paper,
and as soon as ho was out ot hearing, Clayton
leaned across the table, and asked in a whis-
per, ‘ Do you think Bow is safe, Darby ? I
am afraid he is too chicken-hearted for the
job.’
‘ Safe I’ returned the other villiaain, under his
breath ; ‘ Yes, safe as a Newgate-street-bird
always is—that’s unless you’re going in heavy.
I wouldn’t trust him with the knife; but if
its only swearing a bit thick, he’s right. Be-
fore I’ve finished his edecation, be’ 11 use the
knife like a butcher ; er he’ll not larn as smart
as my last pal did.’
Hearing the returning steps of Mr. Bow,
they turned .the conversation to the weather.
‘ Yes; its an awful wet night, Mr.- Clayton
■ —bad enough to drown all the paupers in
York,’said Darby Gregson.
* Sit down, Bow, and let us settle the busi.
ness wo arranged for to night,’ said Clayton,
to Bow, as he received the Guardian. ‘Just
say before I open my plans whether you will
go in for it,’ be continued; ‘lt’s not too late
to back out yet, but remember, six inches of
cold steel under the left shoulder-blade, if
either of you try to back out after I let you
into my secret.’
* I’m your man,’ said Darby Gregson, with
energy. ‘You can’t have too ugly a game for
me ; and you, Bow—,’ he continued, turning
to his companion in many an “ugly game,’’
‘You’re not going to turn Methodist at this
time o’ day ¥
‘Mel I’d like to know what I’m to do
fust!’ replied Bow, with hesitation. What-
ever little moral courage he had ever pos.
sessed, poor fellow, bad been knocked out of
him years and years ago, when, as a child, he
had the bitter alternative ot stealing or starv-
ing.
‘ Recollect two things, Bow. Fifty pounds
hard cash, and that we're not going to use the
knife; so make up your mind at once,’ said
Clayton, impatiently.
‘All right. Mr, Clayton, I’ll go in for it,’
answered Bow, after a pause. His dearest
wish was to get money enough to buy a don.
key and cart and a small stock of the articles
peddlers deal in, so that he might turn
hawker, and ‘ live respectable-like.’ He often
had a twinge of conscience at his nefarious
mode of existence, and had several times
peeped through the door of a Methodist meet-
ing-house —he had never dared to approach a
church ; it seemed far too grand for penniless
sinners. But his vile companions had jeered
and laughed him out of it. Pity that the
“Servants of‘the King’ do not go more out into,
the highways and hedges to bring in guests
for the feast. And ye, Pharisees, who gather
up your garments around you, as if fearful of
touching even the hem of the contaminating
garments of such as poor Bow, -and exclaim,
in your egotistical selt-righteousness, ‘ 1 thank
thee, 0 Lord, that 1 am not as this man !’
what have ye to show that, with his training,
ye would even approached the door of a
house of prayer 1 That ye would not have
sank to the knees in moral pollution, where
he is but over his boots 1 Or that, had he
had your opportunities, he would not have
far outstripped you in all but your bard-
heartedness and hypocrisy ? When the day
of judgment comes, ye may find to your cost,
that many such, judged by the law of their
own hearts, fallen and corrupt though they
be, shall stand in better plight than ye, who


had the law and kept it not Jbnt in empty and
and outward show.
‘ I’ll go in for it,’ Bow reiterated, ‘ if
there’s no murder in it!’
‘lts settled upon then,’ said Clayton, tak-
ing some papers out of his breast pocket,
‘and now to busines. You, Darby, are a
clever pensman just copy this signature upon
this cheque.’
‘Yes, I’m pretty smart with the goose
quill; and I need be, as its about all I ever
learned at school!’ said Gregson, taking the
papers. ‘John Greville f he asked, looking
at the signature. ‘ Who’s he T
Sir John Greville, of Earleigh Hall, near
Cambridge,’ returned Clayton.
With the dexterity of an adept, Daiby
Gregson copied the name, and so perfect a
copy was it, that Sir John himself would
have hesitated before swearing that he did
not write them both.
‘How, I want this forgery fastened upon
Mr. Sinclair. You know, Percy Sinclair, of
Elmsdale V
‘Yes,’ answered Darby, nibbling his pen.
‘This is my plan. He will be home from
college in a few days, and I have learnt that
he wants to buy a horse. How, I will give
you my brown cob—it will just suit him—and
yon must manage to sell it to him. Don’t
stick at a price, but let him have it at any
reasonable figure. This cheque has not the
amount filled in, so' you must put down
in it whatever you get for the horse, and then
take it tothe bank. Express a donbt as to the
genuineness of the signature, and refuse to
take the change unless they guarantee it to be
no forgery. They will find out the forgery
quick enough ; and then yon must swear that
you received the cheque from Sinclair, in pay-
ment for the horse.’
‘ Capital!’ cried Gregson, with enthusiasm,
delighted at the depth of the villainous
scheme. ‘ Really, Mr. Clayton, you lick me
holler ; I can’t hold a- candle to you after
> this!’
‘The amount of the cheque tallying exactly
with the price of the horse, and Sinclair’s just
coming from Cambridge, where Sir John
Greville lives, will be evidence enough to
transports parson,’ continued Clayton. ‘You
share whatever jou get for the horse between
you two.’
*1 don’t half like the job, Mr. Clayton,’ said
Bow, ‘but ’
‘ There’s no buts in it!’ roared Darby.
‘ You’re a chicken-hearted sneak if you want
to back out now.’
1 Its too late now to think of consequences,’
said Clayton, with one of the repulsive smiles
that most exhibited his glittering, pointed
teeth; and drawing a cruel-looking glass
dagger, he continued, • This for anyone who
breaks faith with me.’
‘ You mudt have a queer grudge against
Mr. Sinclair,’ said Darby, ‘ What’s it for V
‘I hate him-! that’s enough for you,’ an-
swered Clayton, savagely.
* No, but it isn’t enough,’ replied Darby,
decisively. ‘ We’ve agreed to do the job, and
we'll do it; but we must know why. Mustn’t
we Bow I’
‘ Yes,’ said Bow, in a more determined
tone than he usually, spoke in.
‘ I’m a bit curious, Mr. Clayton, but you
needn’t be afraid of me or Bow blabbing;
we’re as mum as moles when it pays.’
‘Well, then, if you must know,’ Clayton
answered, in no very pleasant tone, ‘ he pre-
vented me from marrying his cousin, Anne
Egerton, by his cursed interference. He
didn’t want her himself, and he wouldn’t let
me have her.’
‘ How T asked Darby, eagerly.
* I have told yon all I will!’ returned Clay-
ton, with ill suppressed anger. 1 1 don’t like
talking about such matters.’
‘ If you wan’t Bow and me to go in for the
job, you must tell us all about it!’ declared
Darby,
‘ Curse you for a pair of inquisitive mag-
pies !’ he exclaimed, with an expletive or two
it is best to leave out. *He heard something
about that affair at Ascott, and told her about
it!’
‘ Didn't want a card-sharper, etc., etc., in
the family. Ha, ha, ha!’ laughed Darby.
* Come, a truce to this fooling, or we may
quarrel; and that’s hardly worth while un-
der the circumstance !’ said Clayton, rising.
‘ I made a good haul at Epsom last week; and
I will give you another hundred between you
the day he is lagged!’
5


The plot laid to his satisfaction, the arch
villain left the tavern, and returned through
the drizzling rain to his lodgings ; and Bow
and Darby, after drinking success to the
scheme in another glass of brandy, laid down
upon the floor and were soon asleep.
CHAPTER II.
■ “What power is there like lore ? One tjentle word
Or tender glance more potent is to soothe
The raffled brow, by anger overcast.
Than all the bitter might of stern reproof !”
Beaumont and Fletcher.
A week after Clayton and bis villainous
companions had laid their plans to fasten the
terrible crime of forgery upon Mr. Percy
Sinclair, that gentleman and a friend were
riding together, homeward bound from Cam-
bridge. It was night, but far different from
the dismal, rainy night that Clayton had re.
paired to his rendezvous with Darby Gregson
and Bow. Through the clear frosty air the
stars sparkled like living diamonds; and the
broad bosom of the earth was shrouded in a
robe of spotless white ; while the bare limbs
of the trees, and roofs of the farm-houses,
were covered with the feathery snow flakes.
They were trotting briskly; but, reaching a
rough part of the road, they drew rein, and,
as they walked their horses carefully over the
ruts made by the late rains, resumed the con.
versation that had been interrupted by the
rapid pace they bad been travelling at.
‘Yon were saying, Sinclair, that you
thought of entering the church. Now, I
think that a man with your powers should
choose the legal profession. There are dolts
enough for clergymen, without the pulpit
monopolising all the talent of the country !’
said George Darrell, a college friend of Mr.
Sinclair’s.
‘I differ with you,’ Darrell. I think there
is no-more honorable use to put the talent you
are pleased to credit me with than to the ser-
vice of heaven 1 You appear to me to bold
strangely inconsistent views upon this subject.
Now* if you admit the truth of eternal punish,
inent and reward, you must concede the ne-
cessity of having those, whose privilege it is to
preach salvation, men able as well as willing
to fulfil their sacred office with success. And
if you deny our theology, why have the clergy
at all t No, Darrell, the cause of our church
being so lukewarm and paralysed is the pre-
sence of so many incapable in our pulpits.’
‘ Hem I Be that as it may, 1 think the
country needs clever statesmen quite as much
as able preachers, and as I believe you possess,
in a high degree, the powers necessary, you
will see why I endeavour to dissuade you
from entering holy orders. A good man needs
little more than a - mediocrity of brains to be-
come a good clergyman, or even a bishop ; but
a great statesman—and our country is sorely
in need of such just now—must possess mental
endowments of a far higher order.’
I will allow, Darrell, that a Pitt or a Fox
requires to be a far cleverer man, as the world
counts cleverness, than 'is indispensable to the
clerical profession ; but I am not vain enough
to suppose that I possess the stupendous in-
tellects of such men ; and 1 think I cannot
better employ the little tallent I do possess
than in preaching the way oi salvation to my
fellow sinners.’
‘ You may be right, Sinclair, as you'usually
are, but 1 confess I fail to see the necessity of
your burying yourself in a curacy, when there
are so many as well adapted for the surplice
as you are, and so few, as well fitted to shine
at the bar, or in the senate.’
* Well, Darrell, we will have a further con-
versation upon this subject another time. Our
roads diverge here, I turn aside toElmsdale,
and I suppose you ride on into York.’
‘ Yes ; I want to get bomcas soon as possi-
ble. My father’s health is very precarious;
and 1 fear from my sister Ada’s last letter, he
is not long for this vale of tears—as you per-
sons call it.’
‘I trust your forebodings of evil lack foun-
dation Darrell. You will come and spend
a week with us if possible? We have splendid
shooting at Elmsdale,' said Sinclair, as he
turned his horse’s bead to a narrow path that
left the high road.
‘lf I possibly can. But can’t you take a
rideout V asked Darrell, reining up.
‘ I have to go to York to-morrow to buy a
horse, as old Marlborough is broken down ;
and I will call on you; but I shall not be
able to spare more than a couple of hours, as I
I am reading bard,’ answered Sinclair.


‘ Don’t read too hard, my friend !"With all
your preachingfpredilectioo, you seem to think
enough of the things of this world to strive
hard for the highest honors Alma Mater has
to' bestow.'
‘ Well, its cold sitting here ; so, till next we
meet, adieu,’ returned Sinclair, laughing.
‘ au revoir F exclaimed Darrell; and, put-
ting spurs to his fiery, blood horse, was soon
out of sight.
Sinclair loosened his rein, and old Marl-
borough, needing no urging, was soon trotting
briskly, despite his being broken down.
In Elmsdale House, on this same winter’s
night, the bright, scarlet curtains were drawn
closely over the windows to keep out the
hard, freezing air, and upon the hearth a huge
fire of logs was roaring and crackling menily,
and shedding a warm, ruddy light around the
room. The candles were not yet lighted, al-
though it was nearly nine o’clock. Little did
the family circle, sitting round the fire in this
cosy room, know of the biting frost, or the
keen cutting wind without : except, indeed,
by the latter’s ceaseless moaning and whistling,
as it strove pertinaciously to enter through
the crevices and keyholes.
The party round the fire was not a large
one. Mr. Sinclair, a retired physician, sat in
an armchair on one side of the fireplace. He
was a white-haired, benevolent-looking, old
gentleman, whose genial kindness, almost as
much as his skill, had made him a universal
favourite with his patients. Opposite to him
sat his wife her husband’s equal in every
good and genial quality of heart. She was
busily engaged by the flickering light of the
fire in knitting a pair of woollen socks for
“ the boy,” as she fondly called her only son.
Percy bad never worn a pair that she had not
made, and never should while she had
willing fingers, and a heart overflowing with
maternal love. Before thefiresattheyounglady
of about eighteen summers. There is no need
to speak of her gentleness and kindness of dis-
position. That was proved by the loving way
the little people crowded around her ; and the
beauty of her character was reflected vividly
upon her sweet and delicate features. Lean-
ing upon the back of her chair, stood Florence,
a bright little damsel of fourteen j and Maud,
the pet and plaything of all, lay cosily nestled
upon her lap -, while Alice knelt at her feet. .
‘ 0, cousin Anne, do tell us a tale !’ asked
Alice, fixing her large blue eyes upon the
young lady’s face.
‘ O yes, yes, do! exclaimed Florence, de-
lightedly,
‘Tell Maudie petty tale; do, tousin
Anne.’
Cousin Anne answered the little pet by
imprinting a kiss upon its fat, dimpled
cheeks, and the affectionate little creature
twined its tiny arms about her neck, and hid
its laughing face among her flowing tresses.
It was a picture of calm, domestic happi-
ness—that scene around the bright December
.fire—one could never grow tired of gazing
upon; one that would tempt any bachelor to
cast away the miserable misnomer, called
‘ single blessedness,’ and embark upon the
sea of matrimony.
‘ Well, Maudie dear, what aball'it be f
asked the sweetest voice (save one) that T
ever heard.
*O, puth in booths, tousin Anne!’ cried
the little thing, delighted at the idea of beiug
allowed the honour of choosing.
‘O, no, Maudie,’ said Alice, ‘ We’ve heard
that so often 1 Tell ns a new one, cousin.’ -
‘ A new one, dear V asked the young lady,
smiling.
‘Ess, tousin Anne, about ‘Hey diddle
diddle.’ ’
The novelty of ‘ Hey diddle diddle’ set
the children laughing ; and after their merri-
ment had subsided, and they had wiped away
the tears, that trickled down their young
cheeks, cousin Anne commenced the promised
tale, in the orthodox fashion of—
‘ Once upon a time, a very] long while age,
there lived in a large forest an old deer and
her two young fawns. Little deers are called
fawns, you know.'
‘'lttle dears like Allie and me, tousin
Anne V interrupted brighteyes, looking up.
‘ No, birdie. Little deer with four legs.’
‘Like little lambs, aren’t they!’ asked
Alice.
* Yes, dear. Well, the old doe and her two
fawns lived in this beautiful forest. There
were such large oak trees, with wide-spread-
ing branches, and on the ground there were


such toft, green grass and lovely flowers, all
growing wild. Little violets, and bluebells,
and yellow primroses and cowslips; and there
were dear little white daisies, and large
red poppies, and lots more, too many for,me
to tell, it would take so long.
‘All night, eh, tousin Anne?’ asked
brighteyes, again.
‘ Yes, darling—to tell you all of them.’
* 0, don’t tell all, tousin Annie. • Maudie
want to seep by-bye.’
* Don’t talk, Maudie dear; you interrupt,’
said Alice, gently stroking her baby sister’s
silky hair.
‘ And there was a clear, pebbly brook wind-
ing its way between the green, flowery banks.
The brook used to sing all day and all night
to the little fawns; and the dear little birds
used to sing to—oh, so sweetly. There were
thrushes, and blackbirds, and larks, and
pretty little goldfinches.’
‘ And ’ittle dicky-birdies too, tousin Anne!’
‘ Yes, pet. And the busy bees used to
hum so merrily; while they were gathering
their honey ; and the bright yellow butterflies
used to fly about among the long grass in the
warm sunshine. Sometime the little fawns
would chase them; and then they would fly
a little way to a pretty flower, and stand tip-
toe on it, till the fawns would nearly catch
them, *jand then away they would fly again 1’
* Ob, what fun,’ exclaimed Alice, clapping
her hands excitedly.
‘ The little fawns like to live in this beauti-
ful forest, where the grass was so green and
soft; and they thought it was the most beau-
tiful place in the world. But one day the
mother deer saw a large, fierce wolf prowling
about, and ahe was frightened that ha wanted
to kill her two dear little fawns; and so,
while the little things would be scampering
about, she would stand upon a big rock and
watch for the wolf.’
‘ But, cousin, why would the wicked wolf
want to kill the harmless little fawns!’ asked
Alice.
‘ To eat them, Alice,’ replied Cousin Anne.
‘ Maudie, eat wolf!’ exclaimed birdie, sit-
ting up—her eyes glowing with sympathy for
the poor fawns.
‘ Oh, don’t talk, Maudie !’ exclaimed Flo-
rence, impatiently. ‘ You keep interrupting.’
‘ Speak gently to little sister, F10.,’ said her
mother, looking up from her knitting.
As answer, Flo. stooped over the talkative
little puss, and, kissing her, whispered,
‘ Don’t talk any more, that’s a dear.’
‘ One day/ continued cousin Annie, * when
she was watching, she saw the wolf stealing
along, and it came up close to the little fawns ;
but they didn’t see it. Then the mother
called them to run to her as fast as they could ;
but they wouldn’t, and pretended they did
hear.’
‘ What naughty ’ittle tings !’ cried the irre-
pressible Maudie.
Flo. put her finger on birdie’s lips re-
provingly, ‘Oh, don’t talk any more, Maudie !’
* Then the mother deer ’
*O, if here isn’t Percy!’ cried Florence,
rushing into her brother’s arms, as he stood
in the entrance of the half-open door.


CHAPTER III.
There’s a divinity that shapes our cnds,i
Rough hew them as we will.-
Shakspeare.
Directly after breakfast, next morning,
Percy Sinclair saddled Marlborough and rode
into York to look about for a successor to his
old friend. It was upon Marlborough that he
had received his first riding lessons, and the
old horse had served him faithfully for so
long, that he, had now fairly earned his pen-
sion. A false step the night before, which
nearly resulted in a fall, urged his master to
superannuate him at once, though, with care,
there was plenty of work in him yet. Percy
Sinclair was so absorbed in ‘ reading up,’ that
he could not rest till he removed all excuse for
leaving his studies, and so lost no time inset-
ting forth on his horse dealing expedition.
He had barely ridden half-way, when he met
a rough-looking man, mounted upon a beauti-
ful brown cob. He drew rein and gazed upon
it with admiration. It was a deep-chested
animal, with a magnificent barrel, and a splen-
did set of legs. It came along proudly champ
ing its bit, and prancing (the rider was touch-
ing it with the further spur) ; and with its
arched neck, and fiery, glancing eyes, was a
grand looking horse. As the rider came
abreast of Percy Sinclair, he reined in, and,
wheeling the cob half round, said, ‘There,
Mr. Sinclair ! Don’t see a piece of horseflesh
like this every day.’
‘Heis a splendid animal, certainly. Will
you sell him T Percy inquired, as he recog-
nised in the speaker the notorious Darby
Gregson.
‘ What do you think he’s worth V asked
the cautious Darby, in reply. He intended
wringing as much as he could from his victim,
though he was not to ‘ stick at a price.’
‘ That is not for me to say !’ returned Percy
Sinclair. ‘ What is it you want for him 1 ,
Name your figure, and if it is not too high, 1 ‘
may purchase him. I want another horse.’
‘Yesj I know. I was bringing him out to
Elmsdala to show him to you.’
* Indeed ! Why, I only returned home last
night.’
‘ I know ; I saw Mr. George Daiiell at the
Royal Hotel this morning; and I heard him
telling Mr. Werning about your old chestnut
stumbling yesterday. He said you wanted a
new one.’
‘Yes. The old fellow is getting rather
shaky now.
• Well, what do you say to half a century ?’
said Darby, half inclined to ask for a whole
one.
‘ Fifty pounds! Yes, I will give you that
for him, if he is as sound as he looks !’ Sin-
clair replied.
‘Curse it ! he’d have given the hundred, if
I had only asked,’ muttered Darby savagely.
His avarice was whetted by the readiness with
which Sinclair agreed to the price. ‘Don’t
you think he’s worth seventy-five?'
‘ To be candid with you; if he is as good as
he looks, he ought to be worth a hundred
guineas,’ replied Sinclair ; ‘ but with me, it is
not so much what he is worth, as what I can
afford to give. Will you take the fifty ; I
can give no more.’
‘ You are going into York V asked Darby,
who could not sell without Bow being by to
witness.
‘ Yes!’
1 Well, he is not mine ; he belongs to my
mate. But he wants to sell him ; and if you
will go with me, I dare say he’ll take fifty ;
though it really isn’t enough.
‘ Disregarding the last suggestion, Sinclair
replied, ‘ Thank you, 1 will see your mate ;
and if you have no objection to changing
horses, I will try his on the way.’
Darby raising none, they changed ; and the
cob acquitted himself so well that Sinclair felt
half inclined to give the other twenty-five that
Darby had asked for; but recollecting several
expensive books he required, he decided to buy
a commoner horse, if he could not get him for
the fifty.
Bow was wailing for them at a livery stable
in one of the back streets.
‘ Mr. Sinclair ’ll give fifty for the cob,
Bow, and I think you had better take it,’ said
Dai by to his companion, as he dismounted
from Marlborough.
‘He can have him at that,’ answered Bow,
in a husky voice.


Darby Gregson looked at bis mate with a
fo-wn, and said significantly, ‘You’d better
go over to Turner’s and get a glass of brandy.
This cold weather’s too much for your nerves.
Just go and warm ’em up a bill’
Bow hurried off as if glad to be released.
He looked more like a culprit going to his
own funeral, or a lovelorn swain at a rival’s
wedding, than the thriving horsedealer Darby
had introduced him to Sinclair as. He had
not been himself since the night of the con-
spiracy. He had undertaken work that his
heart was not in; and conscience, that still
small voice that will be heard, was making
him very uncomfortable.
After the sale was effected, and Darby
Gregson with his usual cunning had contrived
to let all the idlers about the stables under-
stand that Mr. Sinclair was the purchaser of
the splendid brown cob at the door, they went
across the s f reet to Turner’s Weaver’s Arms,
to settle and give a receipt. A couple of bet-
ting-men were at the door; one of them re-
cognised Clayton’s horse. * Holloa, Greg-
son,’ he exclaimed, ' What are you doing
with the Captain P
‘ O, Clayton sold him to my mate. Bow;
and he has just sold him again to Mr.
Sinclair, here, for fifty notes. Dirt cheap,
Isn’t it V answered Darby.
‘ Has the cob foundered, or what’s wrong
with bimf the betting man asked with a
significant leer.
‘Nothing. He’s sound as a bell,’ returned:
Darby, grinning.
The betting man shrugged Lis shoulders in-
credulously, and Darby Gregson followed
Sinclair into the parlor, 'Bow was already
there, and held in his hand the five ten-pound
notes that Sinclair had just given him. Darby
Gregson wrote out a receipt, as Sinclair was
impatient to get away; and the pretended
horsedealer signed it with a cross. Wishing
the villains good day, Percy Sinclair left the
parlor; and, sending Marlborough back to
Elmsdale by the ostler, he mounted ‘ Whirl-
wind,’ as he called bis new horse, and rode on
to pay his promised flying visit to George
Darrell, little dreaming of the terrible storm
that was brewing. It must have been some
strange presentiment of impending trouble,
that led him to give his horse so ominous a’
name. An awful whirlwind was about to
buist on his devoted head.
As soon as Mr. Sinclair left the room,
Darby Giegson filled in the cheque with the
amount received for the horse, and then rang
for drinks. As the bar-maid entered, the
cheque slipped from bis fin gers, and fluttered
away under the table. He stooped down and
searched for it with great diligence, but in an
opposite direction, and the girl picked it up
and handed it to him.
‘Ah ! thank you, Dora !’ he said, with a
grin, intended for a smile ; and taking the
paper from her, asked if she didn’t think the
signature a strange one.
‘ John Greville ! Yes, it is a curious scrawl
—the G’s more like an E,’ she said, carelessly.
‘ What shall I bring you 1’
‘ Dark brandy ! And you, Bowl’
Bow shook himself up from bis brown study,
and jerked out ' Gin,’ and then relapsed
again. Boor Bow, he would have given his
life to undo the work of the last ten minutes;
but bad not the courage to inform against
Clayton and Gregson.
After swallowing the spirits, the pair went
into the bar; and Darby offered the cheque
to the publican to take out the price of their
drinks.
“ Fifty pounds! No, I haven’t it by me 1
John Greville, who’s he? I don't know the
name,’ said Mr. Turner, as he drew a pint of
half-and-half for a thirsty mason.
‘ 1 don’t know the man ; but the cheque’s
right enough I got it from Mr. Percy Sin-
clair just now, for the horse’ 1 sold him,’
Darby said.
‘ldare say it’s safe; but I haven’t the
change,’ returned the publican.
Darby’s infamous purpose being served, he
pocketed the cheque, and paid in silver fur
the drinks, and then, followed by the miser-
able Bow, left the hotel. .
As soon as they were in the street, Darby
proposed taking the cheque to the bank at
once to get it off their hands; so they re-
paired to the Bank of Yorkshire, and pre-
sented it for payment. As if fate was party
to the atrocious conspiracy, Mr. Inspector


Barlow, of the York detective force, stepped
in just after them,
‘ i want this cheque cashed,’ said Gregson
to the cashier. He felt rather confused, des-
pite his bombast, (for he felt the Inspector’s
eyes to be upon him, as a cat’s upon its an-
ticipated prey. Many a time the Inspector
had run him close; but hitherto, by bis cun-
ning stratagems, Darby had foiled him.
‘ The cashier glanced at the cheque. John
Greyille ! This is a Cambridge cheque, I see.
There will be a discount to deduct; and you
must endorse it,’ he said, legal ding Darby
and his queer-looking companion with sus-
picion.
‘ Ah ! that reminds me! I offered the
cheque just now to one of my tradesmen to
take a small account out; and the man (he
comes from Cambridge) says the name is a for-
gery. Now, if it is, I am not going to en-
dorse it. A m I V
At the mention of forgery, Mr. Inspector
Barlow pricked up his official ears, and lis-
tened attentively, though he was just then
very busy searching the “ Wanteds” in the
mornings Guardian.
‘ If you have anything about with his sig-
nature on, you might compare them;’ suggested
Darby, who was anxious to get away out of
the inspector’s sight as soon as possible.
‘ A cheque of Sir John’s was passed through
this bank yesterday,’ said the cashier, after a
moment’s reflection. ‘ We can soon see if
this one is genuine,’ saying which he went in
search of it.
‘ Where did you get that cheque from }'
asked Mr. Inspector Barlow, authoritatively,
as he took out his memorandum book.
Bow hung down his head, self-condemned;
but Darby replied with the lie he had new
repeated at least a dozsn times in the last
hour, ‘From young Mr. Sinclair, of Elms-
dale.’
‘ What business transactions had yon with
Mr. Sinclairf pursued the inspector, as he
jotted the information down.
‘ I sold him a horse this morning,’ returned
Darby, quailing beneath the piercing eyes of
his old enemy.
Here the cashier returned with a genuine
cheque. After a careful study of the two
signatures be called the inspector, and said,
‘ Mr. Barlow, just look here a moment; this
is as clever a forgery as 1 ever saw !’
The inspector examined the cheques atten-
tively for a few seconds. ‘Yes, Mr. Ingram,
it is a forgery ; and a clever one!’
- ‘ Not so clever, but there is a blunder in
it,’ replied the cashier, looking at ■ the names
through a pocket microscope. ‘See, Sir
John’s second initial is L—Lionel, I think—
and in joining the last letter of John to the
surname he makes a minute capital L in the
hairline. There is only a curve in the forged
signature.’
‘ iou are right!’ exclaimed Mr. Barlow,
admiringly. ‘Pity you never joined the
force. You wouid have 'made a good detec-
tive.’
' ‘ Here, Mr. Barlow, this is- more your
business than mine; you will know beat
what to do with it,’ said the cashier, handing
the cheque to the inspector.
‘ Yes, I think 1 can work up a case!’ the
officer replied. ‘ And now what about these
men? 1
‘ Well, I think the best thing yon can do,
sir, is to go Jback to the ‘Weaver’s Arms’
with me and Bow, and old Joe Turner and
the barmaid can prove who paid it to me,’
said Darby,
Mr. Barlow scratched his head very, de-
liberately for a couple of minutes, and then,
saying, ‘Just wait here for a moment,’ darted
out into the street, and across to the barracks,
from whence he returned almost immediately
with a brand-new policeman. . ■
‘Murphy, stay with these two'gentlemen
till I come back; 1 shall be back in-half an
hourl’ said the Inspector, and then darted
off again.
Mr. Murphy, aliye to the great responsi.
bility of his position, ’planted himself firmly
by the wall close to the opening of the door,
from which situation be eyed his prisoners,,
much as a.eat would a mouse, always seeming
to be looking somewhere else, yet ready to
ponncenpon them if the least attempt was
made to escape. After a professional survey of
his charge, out of the corners of his eyes, Mr.
Murphy decided that Bow, whose face was pale
as pipeclay, and whose whole appearance ex bi


bited symptoms of remorse, was the one that
would swing, Mr. Darby Gregson being only
‘accomplish.’ Mr. Murphy, having been in
the force only about a foi might, formed very
decided opinions, and prided himself upon be-
ing able to see through a prisoner ‘ like a
lamplighter.' In what particular way the
simile of the lamplighter was used I am not
in a position to say. Probably Mr. Murphy’s
meaning had,reference to the traditionary ex-
pedition of that remarkable biped. With a
withering glance at poor Bow, and a grave
shake of his judicial head, Mr. Murphy mut-
tered, ‘ Yer jist up for infanticide or bigamy,
ye spalpeen, as sure as I’m one of his Majesty’s
oflfieers of the pace! Ah, ! yer don’t think
it p’r’aps, but I can see through yer jist like
a lamplighter.’
Altogether unconscious of being seen
through like a lamplighter, poor Bow stood
in the furthest corner of the room, diligently
counting the flooiing boards within view,
while Darby Gregson spent the time chatting
loquaciously with the various customers that
passed in and out of the bank. In half an
hour Mr. Inspector Barlow returned. ‘The
people at the ‘Weavers’ Arras’ corroborate
your statement about your receiving the
cheque from young Mr. Sinclair for the
horse,’ he said, addressing Darby. ‘ I dare-
say some one else passed it into his hands ;
but the next step is to see him and learn
where he got it!’
‘ You don’t want me or Bow any longer?’
asked Darby, anxiously. He was alarmed
lest Bow should turn informer.
‘Murphy, goto the station and tell Ser-
geant Hawkins to meet me at the corner of
the Haymarket in an hour; he is to he
mounted, and to bring my horse with him,’
‘ Yes, sir,’ answered Mr. Murphy, in his
deep-toned, professional voice.
‘ In plain clothes, tell him !’ Mr. Barlow
called after the expeditious Murphy, who was
already out on the pavement,
‘ And now, Mr. Gregson, I don’t think I
shall need the attendance of either yourself or
your mate any further to day.’
Will you take down our address! asked
Darby.
‘ 0, no ; not at all necessary, my dear fel-
! low. We will keep our eyes upon you,
j never fear. We’ll catch you quick enough
when we want you.’
I Rather disconcerted by the abrupt manner
i of the inspector, Darby called on Bow to fol-
[ low, and the pair slunk off, leaving that gentle-
man in earnest conversation with the bank
officials, about an embezzlement that had been
lately discovered in the bank accounts.
CHAPTER IV.
The quality of mercy is not strained :
It droppeth as the gentle rain from Heaven
Upon the place beneath. It is twice bless’d—
It blesseth him that gi/es, and him that takes ;
s Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
The throned monarch better than his crown!
Shakespeare.
While Percy was riding into York to make
his new purchase, Dr. Sinclair was out in his
gig, visiting among the neighbouring poor.
Since he had given over active practice, he
had taken the indigent portion of the commu-
nity around Elmsdale entirely under his own
charge, thus relieving poorer professional men
of the burden such a class of patients inva-
riably are. He spent his leisure hours in pre-
scribing gratuitously for all the poor within
five miles of home ; and while on his daily
rounds, distributing medicine and advice, he
was often enabled to alleviate much distress
attributable solely to absolute destitution.
Mrs. Sinclair and the housekeeper were in
the breakfast-room, making arrangements for
the approaching Christmas holidays, and the
little people were with the governess, at
morning lessons.
‘What, Anne, going out?’ asked Mrs. Sin-
clair, as Miss Egerton entered the apartment,
dressed for walking.
‘Yea, aunt: I am going down to the Oaks
to see Ella Blake. Her mother has just sent
me word she is worse.’
‘ Poor child ; I don’t think she will last
long,’ the old lady said, with sympathy.
‘ Will you tell uncle of the change directly
he comes in ?’ Anne asked.
‘Yes dear. And, Mrs. Butler, send James
down with some more wine and jellies, she
must have finished the last by this time,’ Mrs.
Sinclair said,'turning to the housekeeper.


« 1 shall be back in an hour, I think, aunt;
but if the poor girl is very much worse, I may
stay longer; so you must not be uneasy if I
am not back to lunch,’ said Anne, as she
passed out on her errand of love.
Miss Egeiton was an able seconder of her
uncle’s practical benevolence; and there was
not a sick-room among the poor for miles
about where her gentle ministering had not
assisted as much as her uncle’s physic in Res-
toring the invalids.
What pleasure is greater than that of la-
bouring for the good of others—of contribut-
ing to the happiness or need of the weak or
unfortunate 1 There is no joy to compare with
It in the whole round of the life of a purely
selfish person. The heart that can feel for
the sorrows of others and delight in alleviat-
ing their distress, is susceptible of a variety of
pleasurable emotions the unsympathetic are
Strangers to. Beyond the consciousness of
having done right, the delight of making
others happy is in itself a happiness far deeper
and more lasting than any pleasure within
the grasp of the churl, who lives for himself
alone.
It was a far more beautiful morning than
we in thissunbrowned southern world may ever
hope to see. Nature had on her winter robe
of white and blue. The snow sparkled and
glistened in its dazzling purity, and the azure
concave above shone like a vast inverted sea.
It was studded here and there with little fleecy
clouds, that looked wondrous, like snow-clad
isles in that far-off illimitable ocean of blue.
Miss Egerton, though her soul was in full
sympathy with the beauties of Nature' gave
no heed to the scene, but hurried on, her
thoughts intent upon the youthful sufferer she
knew was anxiously expecting her. A quarter
of an hooi’s brisk walk over the snow brought
her to the Oaks, a farm of her uncle’s, tenanted
by Mr. Blake. The mother of her patient met
her at the porCh.
* Oh ! Miss Egerton, Ella is so much worse
to-day; and she has been asking for you all the
morning !’
‘ I am vary sorry to hear it, Mrs, Blake !
I. hope she will soon rally again/ replied Anne,
hopefully.
‘I am-afraid she never will get better any
more !’ answered the mother, sadly. ‘ She has
been alllng'for mors than a year now. She
seemed to take a change for the worse last
night, and she .has been getting lower eyer
since !’
‘ Poor Ella 1 Is she in much pain, Mrs,
Blake ]’
‘ She was a while back ; but 1 think it’s
more languor now/ replied Mrs. Blake, as she
led the way through the front room, with its
quaint diamond-panel windows and sanded
floor, to the bedroom beyond.
Upon a small bed by the window, lay the
wasted form of a young girl in the last stages
of consumption. The fell work of that mock-
ing disease which so well counterfeits the flush
of health, was almost complete.—The bud was
nearly blasted: the tender stem all but cut
through! Ella lay weak and helpless upon
the bed ; her eyes closed, and her long, dark
hair shadowing her clear, pale brow, and mak-
ing the transparent whiteness of her skin the
more startling by the abrupt contrast! With
what an ethereal loveliness this disease clothes
its victims ! It would seem as though a bodily
preparation for the sphere of eternal beauty
had commenced on earth !
‘Ella dear/ Anne said, softly, as she
stooped over the invalid, and kissed her cold
brow, ‘ How do you feel to-day V
The sufferer opened her large, liquid eyes,
and, smiling faintly, answered in a tone so
low, that Anne bad to put her ear close to
the invalid’s mouth to catch her feeble whis-
per. ‘1 don’t think I shall live long now,
Miss Egerton. Do read one of the beautiful
chapters we used to learn at Sunday school 1
That one about Charity, in the first Corin-
thians !’ Anne took out her pocket Bible, and
turned to this really beautiful description of
* Heaven-born Charity,’ and read it in a
clear, subdued voice. Then she talked to Ella
of heaven, in a way that roused the girl’s
drooping heart, and made herding yet closer
to the promises that never fail.
Presently, Dr. Sinclair came int) see his
gentle patient. ‘Well, Ella/ he said, kindly
stroking her long hair. ‘ Have you been silly
enough to get worse again, after all my phy-
sio V
She replied by a feeble, languid smile, and
a glance full of gratitude from her large,(lus-
trous eyes.


‘ Anne, you have been talking too much to
Ella this morning. She is too weak to bear
it;’ Dr. Sinclair said, noticing the girl’s
flushed face.
, * Good-bye, dear ! I will come and see you
again to-morrow 1’ said Anne, rising at the
hint.
Dr. Siuclalr left some medicine for his pa-
tient ; and then took his niece with him in
the gig, and drove home. Percy was back by
one o’clock ; and after lunch be and Anne went
round to the stables to see his new horse. She
admired the beautiful creature exceedingly;
but Percy was restless, and proposed a walk
in the park ; so they soon left Whirlwind to
his oats and his own meditations.
‘1 say, coz,, do you believe In presenti-
ments V Percy asked, rather abruptly.
‘ No, Percy ! Why V
‘ Oh, never mind, coz.! I’m as superstitious
as an old woman to-day ; but let us talk of
something else.’
They sat down upon a seat under the bare
limbs of a young elm, and talked of many
things else—of what had happened at home
during Percy’s last term at Cambridge, and of
all the troubles and triumphs he had undergone
during that period. Then Anne surprised
him by asking whether he had seen Hubert
Claytou during his ride into York.
• No, Anne, I did not! May I enquire
why you ask /'
‘ Poor fellow, I hear he is going down hill
faster than ever now ! Mr. Fairfax told me
yesterday he is getting so notorious, that even
the betting men and gamblers shun him. I
wonder whether anything can ever be done to
reclaim him !’
‘ There is only one thing that can soften or
humanize Mr. Clayton. If he is ever fortu-
nate enough to meet with some serious acci-
dent, that will confine him -to his bed for
months, he may be led to see his errors. Sick-
ness is the only reformer for such as ho I And
1 am afraid, that unless he died, while mel-
ted and humbled by adversity, he would re-
lapse again into his former vicious habits 1’
‘ Poor Hubert,’ said Anne, with tears in
her eyes. ‘ Does it not seem strange that one
with so many advantages over others, should
be so utterly lost to every instinct for good 1
* I wish, Anne, that you could overcome
this unfortunate preference for one so
thoroughly unworthy of you! If there was
any prospect of his changing I would not be
so anxious for you !’
‘I can never change, Percy. When I
thought him all goodness and honour, I pro-
mised to be faithful until death ; and I could
not change my heart even were I willing to
break my word. The purposes of the Lord
are deep and His power infinite. Who can
tell that He may not, in His own good time,
melt Hubert's heart and change his disposi-
tion V
' Pardon our interruption, Mr, Sinclair;
can yon grant my friend and I ten minutes,
private interview 1’
Percy and Anne turned round at the sound
of the voice, and saw two strange gentlemen
standing before them,
‘ Certainly, sir; but would it not have
been better to have called at the house and
left the servants to inform me of your re-
quest J’ Percy said, with rather more hauteur
than an aspirant for pulpit fame should have
exhibited.
‘We saw you from the gate,’ said the
stranger, without noticing Mr. Sinclair’s
anger, And when we explain our business
you will see the reason we wished to speak
with you before entering the house.’
‘You speak in enigmas!’ returned Percy.
‘Anne,’ he continued, ‘You had better go
in ; and I will speak with these gentlemen
here, as they wish it.'
Miss Egerton went home, wondering at the
strange manner of her cousin’s -visitors.
Directly she was out of hearing Mr. Inspector
Barlow opened the conversation by saying,
‘ I have called to make some enquiries about
a cheque that passed through yonr hands
lately. It is a forgery j and I want you to
tell me the name of the person you received
it from, together with all other information
you can furnish, me with concerning it.’
‘A cheque? Ido not understand you !
‘We do not for a moment wish to link
your name with it, beyond its having passed
through your hands. The cheque is a forgery,
and it has been traced to you. What we
want is the clue that will carry us on to the
actual culprit.’


‘ A forgery; and traced to me 1 I do not
understand you 1’
* Mr. Sinclair, are you mad ? If you deny
having had the cheque, in your possession,
what conclusion can I come to but that the
crime is at your door? As you value your
liberty, give us the information we require,
and let us go. Recollect, we have no idea of
your being complicated.'
Percy Sinclair stood for a few momenta
perfectly bewildered. Recovering himself, he
said, ' There is certainly some mistake 1
Come with me into the house, my father
may be able to explain the mystery; I only
returned from Cambridge yesterday.’
f Stay a moment! The forgery was most
probably committed there ; for it is the
cheque of Sir John Greville’s you paid Darby
Gregson for a horse with, that has' been
forged.’ '
‘ I 1 I paid him in ten-pound notes. He
will tell you so.’
‘ He tells a very different story j and both
his mate and the people at the ‘ Weavers’
Arms ’ say they saw the cheque with you.’
‘This is getting serious,’ said Percy Sin-
clair, more and more puzzled. ‘ I assure you,
I paid him in ten-pound notes,’
‘ Have you the numbers V
* No; I very seldom trouble to take them
down.’
‘ Did you get the notes at the bank ? If so,
and you remember, the date, we may get the
numbers there,’ said Mr. Barlow, anxiously.
He was beginning to think Mr. Sinclair knew
more than be chose to.tell.
‘ No j my father gives me a quarterly allow,
ance, and I put iuto my desk what 1 do not
use. 1 could not say to six months when I
received any particular note, or to what quar-
ter’s savings it belonged.’
‘ You have nothing then but your bare word
to support this assertion about the notes ?’ Mr.
Barlow asked, impatiently.
‘ Nothing; as I never dreamt that I should
ever need anything.’
‘ Hem,’ said Mr. Barlow, thoughtfully. He
tmned to his companion, and they held a .con-
versation apart for a few minutes. Turning
to Percy Sinclair again, Mr. Barlow said, ‘ I
am sorry to say, that unless you can give me
the name of the person you received this
cheque from, it will be ray painful duty to
arrest you upon the charge of forgery 1’
* Arrest me for forging a cheque I never
saw? Impossible!’
* Only too possible, If you persist In feigning
ignorance 1 Either the person yon received
the cheque from forged it, or you did ; and un-
less you give me a clue I am driven to appre-
hend you 1’
‘ I tell you, on my honour, that 1 received
no cheque from any one; and I paid none to
Darby Gregson!’
‘ Mr. Inspector Barlow, seeing the Impossi-
bility of getting the information he came for,
was reluctantly compelled to take Mr. Sinclair
in charge? He had entered the park firm in
the conviction of Mr. Sinclair’s innocence;
but his manner, and strange denial of having
had the cheque, much altered his opinion.
Laying his hand upon Percy’s shoulder, he
said, ' You must consider yourself my prisoner.
Do you wish to see your friends before I re-
move you to the station V
Percy Sinclair was some moments before
he could answer, so surprised was be at the
unexpected turn of events. At last he ex-
claimed, ‘ Either there is some terrible mis-
take, or you are playing an unpardonable joke
upon me!’
‘I would to heaven it was a mistake, Mr.
Sinclair,’ said Sergeant Hawkins, who had
till now left the conversation to his chief..
'You are the last man I ever thought to ar-
rest ; but it is only too true that Darby
Gregson swears he got the cheque from you,
and several others are ready to take oath
they saw it with you. So you must either
account for its possession or come with us.’
‘ Do you wish to see your friends before wa
go ?’ Mr. Inspector Barlow asked, kindly.
‘ No, thank you ; it would only distress
them. 1 can leave a note at the lodge for
my father.’
They started on their melancholy walk,
and soon reached that indiscriminate abode
of vice and misfortune—the county gaol;
and soon Percy Sinclair beard the grating of
the prison bolts as the heavy door closed up-
on him—a prisoner, arrested for forgery !


CHAPTER V.
Black shadows fall
From the lindens tall,
That lift aloft their massive wall
Against the southern sky ;
And from the realms
Of the shadowy elms
A tidc-like darkness overwhelms
The fields that round ns lie I
Longfellow.
Much surprised at the mysterious manner
of her cousin’s visitors, Miss Egerton hurried
back to the house.
‘ What have you done with Percy, Anne f
Dr. Sinclair asked, as she entered the draw-
ing-room alone.
‘i have just left him in the park, uncle,
talking with two gentlemen,’ she answered.
‘ Do you know who they are, Anne T pur-
sued the old gentleman, laying down his book.
; ‘ They are strangers to me, uncle; and I
expect they are not friends of Percy’s, for he
seemed very much annoyed at their disturb-
ing him in the park, instead of coming to the
house.’ •
- - ‘ Some one come about the lease of the farm
that Schofield left, I dare say ; I will go and
see them,’ said Dr. Sinclair, rising. ‘ They
have no«right to bother Percy about these
matters. In what part of the park did you
leave him, Anne?’
’ Near the oak avenue, uncle; you can see
him from the lawn.’
Little aware of the real object of his son’s
visitors, Dr, Sinclair went in search of them,
to attend, as he supposed, to the business of
letting his vacant farm; and Miss Egerton
retired to her boudoir. Her conversation in
the park with Percy had revived the bright
memories of the past, when Hubert first won
her trusting love ; and her heart was full.
Would he neVer forsake his evil ways ?
Would he never become more worthy of her ?
Poor Anne! Strange that so much sorrow
should be crowded into the life of one so fair 1
that met her View as she opened
the door was hot calculated to relieve her
feelings. The children had strayed from the
nursery into her room, ! and were up to their
eyes |in mischief; Little Maud was perched
upon the table, blue-eyed Alice, standing tip-
toe Upon a footstool, was peeping into the
mysterious chaos of her cousin’s desk, while
Florence, presiding over the fun, was scatter-
ins; the contents of the desk about and search-
ing for curiosities. Miss Egerton stood at the
door, spellbound.
* Look Allie! here’s a bit of poetry
addressed to cousin Anne, and it’s got Percy’s
name at the bottom,’ said Florence, as she
opened an old envelope and drew out a letter.
‘O, what fun, Flo 1 Let me see it 1’ cried
the excited Alice.
‘Wait a little, and I’ll read it,’ said
Florence.
Alice mounted upon the table, and sat
with arms folded in an attitude of deep at-
tention, while Miss Florence read in a voice
of great importance
“ Lines to my-cousin Anne, on presenting her with o
brooch on her tweflth birthday.
Accept my love with this brooch, sweet Arme,
And wear them both as long as you can.
The one is made of mother-of-pearl,
But the other's of far more worth, my girl.'
The one you’ll wear till it’s broken or lost,
And then forget it-so little its cost;
But the other will follow you night and day,
Till death-that’s if you don’t fling it away.
The more it’s worn the brighter it shines,
Like gold that comes from the Indian mines.
Then say, dear maid, you accept with the brooch
My love ? Ah ! a frown ? Nay, do not reproach !
What !*jAnne, art offended ? O, fie ! O, fie!
Though anger may add a new charm to your eye,
And give a fresh touch to the delicate tint
Of lily and rose on your cheek, ’tis a hint
That of my gifts, the best of the two,
You do not prize as you ought to do.
I’m sorry, indeed, that my offer offends,
But come, my girl, let us kiss, and be friends I”'
While Florence was reading, the pair
perched upon the table looked on as grave
and knowing as a couple of young owls, and
when she bad finished they joined her in a
hearty laugh. For a moment, Anns felt very
much inclined to box Miss Florence’s ears
(what young lady would not, at finding the’
contents of her desk strewn upon the table,
and her letters made a laughing-stock of, by
a troop of mischievous children 1) but she
suppressed her rising temper, and, closing the
door behind her, startled the youngsters, in
the midst of their mirth, by stepping up -to
the table and saying, gently, ‘ Who gave you
permission to enter my room, Florence ?’
Florence turned round, and the burning
flush' which overspread her cheeks showed
that she knew she had done wrong in. open-;
ing her cousin’s desk; but she artfully con-
cealed her feelings, and asked, with quiet


effrontry, ‘ Did Percy write this for you,
cousin Anne?
‘Yes, Florence, your brother did write
those lines, when he was a little boy nq older
than you. They are only childish nonsense;
but I value them as I do many other things
In my desk, as mementos of the happy days
of childhood. But this is not the question.
What would you think of any one who would
go into your papa’s library, when he was-
away, and pry into his desk V
‘I would say he was very mean and
wicked !’ replied Florence, her eyes flashing
at the bare, idea of anyone daring to touch
anything belonging to her father.
‘ Why would it be wicked and mean,
Florence 1’ asked Anne, looking steadily into
the delinquent’s eyes,
' Because he—he—because he would be in-
terfering with what did not belong to him/
replied Florence, in confusion.
‘I think 1 know a little girl who has been
interfering with what does not belong* to her.
What can I think but that she is both mean
and wicked V
Poor Florence hung down her head and was
silent,
‘ Now, don't you think, Flo., that a girl
who could open another person’s desk is un-
worthy of being trusted?’
The little culprit burst into tears, and
Alice and Maud, though not exactly knowing
what was the matter, joined in chorus,
‘ I have been very thoughtless and wicked,
cousin Anne; but lam really very sorry,
and I won’t do so any more !’ sobbed the re-
pentant Flo.
‘ I will forgive you, Florence ; and I hope
you will, in future, recollect the meanness of
prying into other people’s secrets, and never
be guilty of it again. Now, go and tell aunt
what you have done, and ask her forgiveness
too.’
‘ Oh, cousin, J don’t like to !’ exclaimed
Florence, ashamed to own her fault.
‘ My dear child/ said Miss Egerton, ‘ifyou
really are sorry, you will go without murmur-
ing. If you were not ashamed to open my
box, why be ashamed to confess it 1 Your
mamma will be far more vexed at knowing
you were afraid to own your fault, than at
your being guilty of it.’
Florence reluctantly went into the drawing-
room to report her misconduct, and Anne set
to work sorting her papers, and patting them
back into the desk, while the little ones,
still perched upon the table, dried their eyes,
and amused themselves by watching her at
work. Anne had scarcely completed her task
when Florence came running back in great ex-
citement. ‘ Oh, cousin Anne, mamma’s cry-
ing, and papa’s walking up and down the.
room so fast, I think he must be ill 1' she said,
as she burst into the boudoir.
Without waiting to lock her desk, Anne
hurried into the drawing-room a strange
terror at her heart. She found her aunt in
tears, and her uncle pacing the room in great
perturbation. An open letter was lying upon
a table near her aunt’s seat. It was written
hurriedly, and was in pencil. She picked it
up and read it. It was from Percy, explain-
ing the cause of his having to accompany the
police into York, and asking his jfather to
go to him at once. The note was concluded
by an assurance of his innocence,- and a request
that his father would keep the real nature of
the charge a secret from his mother and the
girls, as long as possible, as it would be sure
to distress them. It was plain enough no'w,
why the strange gentlemen wished to see him
alone! Dr. Sinclair stopped before Anne,
and, taking ths letter from her, read it again.
' * There is only a mistake, Mary. I have
no doubt it will be easily removed 1’ he said,
to comfort his wife, though he had grave
doubts of the mistake being removed without
the delay and disgrace of a regular trial. ‘ I
will go at once, and see what can be done,’
and without waiting for a reply, he hurried
away to the stables, and taking Marlborough,
galloped off to town. Being broken-down
seemed no hindrance to the old horse, and he
covered the distance as quickly as even Whirl-
wind himself could have done. ’ ' ‘
Mrs. Sinclair was completely prostrated by
the dreadful intelligence. She relapsed
from one fit of hysterics into another, till she
was completely exhausted. Her boy, her
Percy, in jail for a terrible crime ! Oh, it was
agony to think of I Anne strove to compose
her aunt by leading her thoughts to, Him
whose all-powerful arm still held Percy in its
protecting fold ; but her grief was too recen


too poignant to allow her to think of anything
but the awful calamity that had fsllen upon
her beloved son. She realized all the danger
of the position of one accused of forgery, and
all the disgrace that would cling to him, even
if acquitted. The possibility of bis being
guilty never once crossed her mind.
Miss Egerton had no time to give way to
her own sorrow. With much difficulty, she
and the housekeeper removed Mrs. Sinclair to
her bedroom, and after sending the children
Up to the nursery, she sat watching by her
aunt’s bedside. Her heart was very heavy,
and she longed to go to the prison to comfort
her cousin ; but duty bade her remain where
she could be of service, and she sat watching
all the long, weary hours, until her uncle re-
turned with the distressing details of the ar-
rest. Ob, how long seemed those tedious
hours to the pale watcher ! Time crawled by
slowly, as if bent on prolonging her sus-
pense.
Percy Sinclair, on finding himseif locked in
the cold cell, sat down upon the rough
prison stretcher to collect his thoughts. All
had occurred so suddenly, that it seemed
more like a dream; but as he glanced
around the dim-lighted cell, and up to
the grated window, the terrible truth of
reality was forcibly impressed upon him.
But half-an-hour ago, he was a free man, with
prospects so fair and promising, and no v !
He had not long been brooding over his al-
tered position, when he heard the bolls slowly
drawn back, and some one enter the cell.
Supposing it to be the jailer, he did not look
up, but sat with his head supported upon his
hands, in deep dejection.
‘My son, what terrible visitation is this
that has fallen upon us?’ exclaimed a voice
tremulous with grief.
Percy rose at the well-known voice, and in
a moment was in his fathers arm’s.
• You cannot believe me guilty father V he
asked eagerly.
‘I will not believe you are capable of any-
thing dishonourable, or contrary to law, my
dear boy. But what is it they accuse you of 1
your note was so vague 1’ answered the father.
Dr. Sinclair sat down, and Percy narrated
to his father his conversation with Mr. Inspec-
tor Barlow, and at a glance the old gentleman
saw the strong points of the case.
‘ My poor boy; it is indeed a serious charge,
and there is so much circumstantial evidence
againstf you, that I am afraid you will be
committed ; but we must strive to prepare a
strong defence for the assizes. The court is
so close, there is no time to lose. I must re-
tain counsel at once !’ he said.
‘ But, father, would it not be better to wait
and see if I am committed before engaging a
barrister V Percy asked.
‘ My son,’ returned the old gentleman, ‘if
this villain, Gregson and his companion,
swear to the tale they told the police, and the
people at the hotel support their evidence,
nothing can save you from committal • and
we must take advantage of the extra time to
prepare your defence. Who would you like
to have as counsel ? There is no one in York
1 have much faith in.’
The father and son discussed the different
aspects of the case, and the various barristers
available. Percy recollected a rising young
lawyer in London, who was gaining celebrity
as a subtile and eloquent special pleader;
‘ I will start by to-night’s coach for Lon-
don, Percy, and see this Mr. Granville Dud-
ley, He is said to be the most able pleader
at the bar, and if money can secure his ser-
vices, I will bring him back with me. 1
roust go'now, my son, as your mother is anxi-
ously waiting my return. She is much af-
fected by this trouble. Keep a brave heart.
I have no doubt alt will come right in the
end !’
They parted with heavy hearts ; for though
each spoke hopefully, to reassure the other
both were oppressed with dark forbodings.
When the door closed upon the retiring form
of his father, Percy returned to the stretcher,
and bis gloomy meditations. As Dr. Sinclair
was being let out at the gate, he begged the
turnkey to make bis son as comfortable as he
could. He offered the official money to do so,
but he drew back, and said, proudly, ‘ No, sir,
thank yon all the same 1 I never takes no
pay to be malevolent. I’ve been up myself,
and as innercent as a babby, and, of course,
I’ve a sort of fellow-feeling for criminals.
Whatever I can do to aggravate your son’s
comfort I will do cheerfully, and expect no


other reward than the reputation of my own
conscience!’
Dr. Sinclair, seeing honest Bob Starkey’s
benevolent meaning through his somewhat
contradictory English, pressed his hand, grate-
fully, and then, mounting old Marlborough
again, galloped back to Elmsdale, to allay the
fears of his family, and to prepare for his stago-
coacb journey to London.
CHAPTER VI.
Your hearts divest of all vindictiveness,
And banish pleading pity from your breasts ;
Then shall your free, unbiased minds be blank,
Unsullied tablets, on whose virgin white
Dark.hinting prejudice, or weak compassion,
Has writ no guiding notes ; and so your verdict
Shall be as truth may find.
(From Judges summing up in author’s 3fS. drama .
“Constance.")
The surprise in York at the announcement
that a college student preparing for the church
had been airested for forgery was intense;
and the report caused a profound sensation
among the prisoner’s immediate friends. Now
was the time to discover of what metal they
were formed. Some few, among whom was
George Darrell, remained firm in their belief
in his innocence ; but the majority shook their
heads doubtfully, and stood aloof till the sun-
shine of prosperity should again smile upon
him. Public opinion was against the prisoner.
With its usual inconsistence, the populace
jumped at the conclusion that the word of
Gregson and the landlord of the Weavers’
Arms was incontestible proof of guilt. But
it was at home that the blow fell heaviest.
Words are powerless to describe the conster-
nation and anguish that shrouded the pris-
oner’s family. Ten years at least seemed to
have been added to the age of Dr. Sinclair.
He had hitherto been remarkably erect, but
now he stooped like a decrepit old man, and
seemed scarcely to have strength to move
about. His wife was thrown upon a sick bed,
and lay dangerously ill. Miss Egflrton’s grief
was no less acute; but, through her aunt’s
illness, the managemeut of the house devolved
upon her, and she had no time for demonstra-
tive sorrow.
As Dr. Sinclair predicted, Percy was com-
mitted by the magistrates to stand his trial at
the ensuing York Assizes; and as the sittings
were so near, bail was refused. Dr, Sinclair
succeeded in retaining Mr. Granville Dudley,
the special pleader, and that gentleman re-
turned with him from London. The time
intervening between the committal and the
day of trial was occupied by the counsel in the
arduous task of studying the case and prepar-
ing the defence. The evidence against the
prisoner was only circumstantial, and it had
many weak points; but it was strong enough
to convict him, unless the links could be
broken; and Mr. Granville Dudley bad a task
before him worthy of his great reputation, and
demanding his best efforts.
At length the day of trial arrived. It was
beautifully clear and bright, and a striking
contrast to the sad feelings of many who had
those near and dear to them waiting to be
arraigned for crimes of which, alas, too many
were guilty. But not even guilt is able to
sever the golden links of affection ; and many
a heart ached with hopeless dread as the hours
drew on for the motley crowd of prisoners to
be tried—those hearts aching the most that
were only too well assured of the guilt of their
friends. The uncouth savage, apprehended in
the act of robbery with violence, was loved as
devotedly, and mourned for as sincerely, by
his ill-used wife and little ones, as was the
gentlemanly bank clerk, charged with embez-
zlement. It is only in adversity so great that
the full strength of home ties can be realized.
The excitement caused by the trial of Mr.
Percy Sinclair was so intense that, hours before
the court opened, the streets adjacent were
thronged with an eager crowd) anxious to
secure seats. When the doors were thrown
open, the police Lad much difficulty in check-
ing the rush; and before a third had obtained
entrance, the court was crowded to suffocation 1
Mrs. Sinclair was still confined to her room,
and Miss Egerton had to remain with her, so
that neither were in court; but Dr. Sinclair
was present. A sad wreck the trouble of the
last few weeks had made of him ! As he en-
tered the court by a private door, he passed
his son’s friend, Mr. George Darrell, who
whispered, ‘ Whatever be the result of to-day,
I, for one, will never believe him guilty!’
With a grateful pressure of the hand, the old
gentleman passed on, his heart too full of grief
for words, and took his seat beside the counsel
for his son. A case that had been postponed


from the previous day was on for consideration,
before the one could be heard that had so
aroused the public interest. The people in
court sat out the hour it occupied with ill-
concealed impatience. At last the case was
disposed of by the burglar being convicted and
sentenced to fifteen years penal servitude ;
and the next ( Rex versus Sinclair) was called.
The low buzz of impatience ceased instantly 5
and in breathless silence the crowd waited the
appearance of “ the forger,” as the foregone
decision of public opinion had already designa-
ted the prisoner. Beyond the circle of his
immediate friends, few held the hapless Percy
innocent.
The prisoner entered the court escorted by
two policemen, and took his place in the dock.
He was very pale ; and on his careworn fea-
tures, were traces of intense mental suffering
—evidences of guilt thought the prejudised
crowd—but there was an air of calm resigna-
tion about|him that seemed strangely at vari-
ance with his position. He stood proudly
erect, and glanced round the court for a mo-
ment, as if anxious to discover his friends
among the throng; and a hum of sympathy
arose from the excited crowd. Though con-
vinced of his guilt, had the crowd possessed
the power of deciding the verdict, it would
have acquitted him to a man. Yet no 1 In
a front seat sat one who, had be been judge
or jury, would have condemned even to the
death. He was there to watch th- progress of
his vile plot, and gloat over the misery he was
causing. BefSre him sat the grief stricken
father of the prisoner, breaking visibly under
his load of sorrow. He regarded him for a
moment with a curious glance, much as a sur-
geon experimenting in vivisection might haye
observed the symptoms of his subject. Then
he turned his attention to the prisoner, and
meeting his; gaze, gave him a glance of un-
quenchable hate, aud vindictive, triumph.
“ Ah,” he muttered, “ None may thwart my
wishes, without being crushed out of my path !
Bitterly shall .you roe the day you interfered
between me and Anne Egerton !” ,
•How any human heart could thus glory in
misery of its own making, is a problem in
ethics that would puzzle a Plato.
The prisoner saw his father sitting near his
counsel, but the old gentleman never raised
his head. He sat gazing vacantly upon the
heap of papers upon the table. He could not
have borne up, had he met his son’s eyes.
The Crown Prosecutor opened the case by
briefly explaining the nature of the charge.
He accused the prisoner with forging and ut-
tering the cheque before the court, with in-
tent to defraud Sir George Greville, of Far-
leigh Hall, of the sum of fifty pounds. He
would not detain the jury with a long address,
as the evidence was so simple and conclusive.
In support of the charge, he would call wit-
nesses to prove, first, that the cheque was a
forgery, and secondly, that the prisoner paid
it to one of the witnesses for a horse. The
prisoner, then, would have the onus prohandi
of accounting for its possession j and, if he
could not do so to the satisfaetion of the jury,,
a verdict of “ guilty” must be found.
Sir .John Greville was the first witness
called. He gave his evidence very reluctantly ;
for he was one of the few who refused to be
lieve the prisoner guilty, whatever proof
-might be brought against him. But, on being
pressed, he was compelled to swear that the
signature was a forgery.
The prisoner’s counsel had nothing to ask
this witness, so he was sent down. The next
witness called was Mr. Darby Gregson. No'
difficulty for the crown prosecutor here. The
witness very readily described the sale of the
horse,- and gave his version of the settlement
at the Weaver’s Arms. In examining him,,
the crown prosecutor laid [great stress upon
the date of sale, and amount of purchase
money corresponding exactly with the forged
cheque. When Sir Thomas Beaumont finished
questioning Darby Gregson, the witness turned
to retire. Mr. Granville Dudley was on his
feet in a moment. ‘ Stay a minute, Mr.
Gregson ! I have a question or two to ask, it
you have no objection.’
Darby looked as If be had a very decided'
objection; but he returned to : the box.
‘ Who was in the room, when the prisoner'
paid you this cheque V the advocate asked.
‘No one, only my mate Bow 1’ answered
the witness.
• ‘Noone else then.could have seen the pii-
soner Jiand you the cheque V


'No! But Kora Hudson, tie barmaid,
came in just after; and she saw that he did
gire it to me/replied Darby, 1 / ' ''
‘No one, then, but yourself and your mate,
saw the' cheque in the prisoner’s possession ?
'I don’t know who saw it,’ said the wit-
ness, sulkily,; He did not like tire line of
questioning,
‘Will you swear that anyone else did see
the cheque in prisoner’s possession V askad
Mr. Dudley, looking narrowly at the witness.
Darby Gregson hesitated a moment • but,
feeling it scarcely safe -to swear falsely just
here, replied ‘No; I won’t say that anyone
did!’
‘ Were you ever in Cambridge I’
Darby hesitated again. It was not a ques-
tion he wished to answer.
‘ ITou are on oath, recollect. The truth,
mind ! We can easily find you out, if you
prevaricate,’ said Mr. Dudley, sternly,
‘Where you ever in Cambridge?’
‘Yes!’
* How many times have you been there ?
1 1 don’t know,'
• A dozen times, do yon think ?’
■‘No!’ ■ ■ - ' •
‘ Half-a-dozen, then}’
‘ I can’t say. PVaps I was.'
‘That will do, Mr, Gregson, You may go
down now,’ Mr. Dudley said, as he resumed
his seat, and made some notes.
Darby Gregson exchanged % triumphant
glance with Mr. Clayton, and left the witness-
box. He was glad the ordeal of cross-ques*
tioning was over, as ho was fearful of contra-
dicting himself.
The next witness ■called was Bow. He
shuffled into the witness-box in a state of
great excitement, and glanced round the court
with a frightened look, as if seeking for pro-
tection. Hubert Clayton caught his eyo with
a significant glance of warning. It seemed to
bring him to himself at once ; and his
answers to the crown prosecutor’s leading
questions strengthened the evidence Darby
Gregson had just given. Mr, Clayton smiled
with satisfaction, as he beard Bow dismissed
by the prosecuting counsel. Bow was the
one weak point in his villainous scheme; but
his restless eyes glittered with auger, as Mr,
Granville,Dudley rose, and politely, requested
the witness to remain. ‘ . ( --
: * In what street was this horse-selling busi-
ness transacted?’ be ashed, looking steadily
at Bow.
‘ In Oxford-street,’ the witness answered,
trembling. He had just caught a glimpse of
the prisoner’s pale face, and, longed to tell of
the foul conspiracy; but a warning-glance
from the arch-villain restrained him, and in
his confusion he scarcely knew what he was
saying.
‘ At the Brown Bear Inn ? Mr. Dudley
asked.
‘No, sir.. We was in the parlour of the
Black Diamond Tavern.’
‘Or the Weavers’ Arms'?
* Yes, it was at the Weavers’ Arms }’
‘ In what street did yon say ?’ again asked
the counsel for the defence. He saw the wit-
ness’s confusion, and determined to make the
most of it.
‘ Harper’s Lane,’ answered Bow.
* Are you sure it was Harper’s Lane?
‘ Yes ; it—it—it was Oxford Lane,’ stam-
mered Bow.,
‘ As you are so clear upon the locality, per-
haps you can tel) me the time this business
took place ?
‘ Yes, sir.’
‘Very well, then. What o’clock was it?
‘JJust after breakfast, sir.’
‘Yes, yes ! But 1 wish to know the hour/
said Mr. Dudley.
‘ It, it was nearly two o’clock/
‘Two o’clock} How do you know it was
two o'clock ?
‘ ’Cause Darby wanted to get to roost early/
‘O, indeed! Well, was it daylight or
lamplight?’
Bow was completely confused, ‘ There
was no lamps, only candles/ he said, help-
lessly.
Had you had dinner at the time the pri-
soner settled for the horse/
‘ No, sir; it was only just after breakfast/
‘ And the lamps were burning V
‘ No; there was only caudles/ .
‘Tery good !’ Mr. Dudley said, ashe jotted
down some notes." ‘ Did you see the prisoner
writing upon this cheque?’


No sir.
Did you see it hi his-possession at all?’
Yes! No ! I went to ask for the paper..
You did not see-the forgery committed
then
No, sir.
Are you sure T
No sir.’
That will do, Mr. Bow. You may go
down now,’ the lawyer said, resuming his seat.
A satisfied, smile about his lips showed that he
was pleased with the result of the examina-
tion. As the witness tottered out of the box,
Mr. Cleytongave him a glance that made his
blood run cold—a- glance full of relentless
hate, which said plainly enough that Bow’s
life would be worth but little when Clayton
should meet him alone.
Several other witnesses were called ; but
they only proved the sale of the horse, and
that they saw the cheque in Darby Gregson’s
bands. These the piisoner’s counsel declined
to question. The examination of witnesses
for the crown was concluded in about two
hours. No witnesses for the defence were
called, beyond a professor frena Cambridge,
who gave testimony to the prisoner’s exem-
plary conduct at college, as the evidence for
the crown was of a nature not to be rebutted
by conflicting proof. The crowd in court,
who had been wavering in their decision every
five minutes during the examination, now
settled themselves down to listen as the cele-
brated special pleader rose to address the jury.
Mr. Granville Dudley rose, and glancing
anxiously at the prisoner, commenced his ad-
dress.
‘ My Lord, and gentlemen of the jury—Dur-
ing the period that I have had the honour of
practising in the law courts of ray country, I
have defended prisoners charged with every
shade of guilt —from the revolting crime of
infanticide, to the lesser but serious offence of
burglarybut never before did I approach
a case in which I was so firmly convinced of
the innocence of the' accused, or so dbubtful
of my ability to establish it. I am deeply
impressed with the magnitude of the responsi-
bility I have undertaken p ft r, should I fail,
an innocent man must be convicted and con-
demned.. I charge you, then, to throw aside
whatever opinion you- may have.formed upon.
this case before entering .these "falls, and ter
follow me attentively, and .without prejudice,
while 1 go through the evidence against the
prisoner at the bar, and demonstrate to yqu
the possibility, oi bis innocence. If I prove
that this evidence is not inconsistent wit h the
iuridfcence of the'accusedpyou are hound, Ba-
you respect yonr oaths, to giye him the bene-
fit of the doubt, and a verdict of acquittal.
If there be the least possibility of the prisoner
being guiltless, and' you convict .him, you-
yourselves will, be committing the great —the
awful crime of condemning a possibly inno-
cent man! I admit that the cheque before
the court is a forgery but I deny that the
prisoner either forged or uttered it. The evi-
dence that would fasten the crime upon him
is wholly presumptive-—with the single excep-
tion of the testimony of Gregson ; and you
could not convict the prisoner upon the evi-
dence of a man who-has, according to the re-
coids of this court, been far oftener in the
dock than the witness-box. And then this pre-
sumptive evidence tells as pointedly against
the witness Gregson as it does against the
prisoner. I do not charge Gregson with the
crime, nor insinuate that be is in any way
connected with it, though I have ray own
thoughts upon the subject; hut if I show yon
that this evidence implicates the one as much
as the other, you- cannot reconcile your oaths
with a verdict of 11 guilty” against the priso-
ner! In examining the witnesses, my learned
friend laid much weight upon the fact of the
prisoner, during his college terms, residing in
the vicinity of Sir John Grenville, where, be
presumed,, the prisoner would have many op-
portunities of studying Sir John’s signature.
Now, the witness Gregson has bad the same
opportunities.. He admits having visited Cam-
bridge at least half a dozen times;: and the
cashier of the Bank of York has proved that,,
even here, in the witness’s regular place cf
abode, specimens of Sir John’s signature float
about as negotiable paper. Thus far the pre-
sumptive evidence is- as applicable to Gregson
as the prisoner. Then, the forged cheque
being dated on the day the prisoner purchased
the horse, and its being filled in with the ex-
act amount of-the .sale,-appears to tell seri-
ously against the prisoner. But here, again,,
it points as-unerringly to the witness, Greg,-


son swears the prisoner wrote upon the cheque,
and then handed it to him in liquidation of
the purchase-money. But his evidence here
is totally unsupported ; and I wish you to
observe that it would have been possible for
this witness to have pocketed the cash the
prisoner paid him, and as soon as he had gone,
to have entered the date and amount into a
previously-forged cheque, for the purpose of
defrauding his mate. The only witness whose
testimony in any measure corroborates Greg-
snn’s in the matter of the forgery is the man
Bow; and you must all have observed the
strange hesitation with which he gave his evi-
dence. He contradicted himself repeatedly ;
and, I ask you, did he not look like a man
committing perjury for the first time?! You
can never find a verdict upon the evidence of
a man who at one moment swears it was at
two o’clock in the morning the forgery was
committed, and the next that it was directly
after breakfast—who cannot say, with cer-
tainty, whether it was by lamplight or daylight,
whether it was in the Black Diamond Tavern
or the Weaver’s Arms—whether it was in
Oxford-street or Harper’s Lane 1 It was evi-
dent he had but half learnt his lesson. The
evidence of the other witnesses for the Crown
only proves that the forged cheque was
in Gregson’s possession, and, consequently,
whatever weight may be attached to it,
• tells exclusively against him. No wit-
messes have been called for the defence,
excepting Professor Harwich ; as, under the
peculiar circumstances of this case, heaven
alone can prove the prisoner’s innocence. But
you have had his whole life before you; and
Professor Harwich’s testimony of his blame-
less and exemplary conduct at the university
is borne out by your experience of him from
boyhood here at York. 1 challenge your
whole community to point out a single in-
stance in which he ever did anything mean
or dishonorable ! And can any suppose that
in the utter absence of motive, he could change
so completely as to commit this crime. If
he had been in ' debt, or was living in
luxurious debauchefy, such a‘ crime might
have been possible ; but while living within
his quarterly allowance, and knowing that to
for extra money was to receive It; can
be so absurdly credulous as.* to, believe
I that he could have been mad enough to risk
punishment and disgrace lor the purpose of
indulging in what, in his instance, would
have been as unnecessary as hazardous a
crime. And now, gentlemen of the jury—if
you are positive the evidence against the ac-
cused demonstrates the impossibility of any
one else having forged this cheque; if you
you are certain that the prisoner, and no
other, is guilty, you must, of necessity, convict
him. But, if the merest shadow of a doubt
is upon your minds; if you would hesitate
for one moment to stake your salvation upon
the truth of the prisoner’s guilt—as you value
your happiness in this world and the next —
as you would yourselves be preserved from
the most appalling of all calamities, an un-
just convietion—you must acquit the pri-
soner ! Look round upon this venerable
gentleman, the father of the prisoner, who
has lived a life of usefulness among you, and
who is now fast breaking under the load of
sorrow and disgrace, that this fake charge
against his only son has brought upon him.
As you must meet Him before the bar of hea-
ven, to answer for your verdict of today, be
careful you do nothing that shall there con-
demn you for being unrighteous judges here.
Think of the once happy home, now the
abode of grief; where sorrowing mother and
sisters are awaiting your decision in the
anguish of suspense. Your verdict shall dis-
pel the cloud of trouble that now enshrouds
it, and light up with joy the sorrowing feature
of the loved ones at home; or it shall cast
the withering blight of disgrace, misery, and
despair upon their hearts for ever ! And think
of yourselves. If you condemn the guilty, you
perform your duty well. But, if you condemn
the innocent, beware ! ‘ With whatever mea-
sure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again.’'
The secret of true eloquence lies not so
much in what is said, as in the manner of
saying it; and though, perhaps, there was
nothing particularly affecting in Mr Granville
Dudley’s address to the jury, of which the
above is but an outline; yet the tone of
thorough conviction and earnestness with
which he pleaded, and his touching appeal on
behalf of the prisoner's friends, won over the
vacillating crowd ;, and;, as he sat down* there


was scarcely a dry eye in the body of thecourt,
■After a'silence'of a few seconds, the Crown
prosecutor rose, and replied at some length to
the speech of the prisoner’s counsel. He
'urged upon the jury the danger of being car-
ried away by an appeal to their feelings, and
charged them to view the evidence before
them dispassionately. It was no concern of
■theirs whattbe resulfof the verdict ruight.be;
They were bound by their oaths to find a
verdict ■ upon evidence alone.' The cheque
had been traced to the 'prisoner, and, lie bad
not accounted for its" possession, and' the
natural conclusion , followed that ha was
guilty. Certainly, no one' bad seen the. pri-
soner forge' the' cheque (what man would be
idiot enough to’ admit witnesses to such a
crime ?) and no one' had actually observed the
prisoner place the cheque in 1 Gregsbn’s hand
‘ —he was .too wary for, .that; but ample
evidence had been adduced to establish, be-
yond a doubt, the fact' of’Gfegsbh’s receiving
it frOm the prisoner! ,Tt 'is a wise provision
of our criminal code, I! tfcst the guilty shall hot
escape through their cunning in avoiding eye-
witnesses to their crimes. If the evidence
brings the crime to the door of 'the accused,
and be fails, to rebut.it,‘he must be,regarded
as guilty. 1 This crime, has been brought to
the door of the. prisoner : he had so failed,
and 1 they' must perform" their' painful, but
imperative duty; "He (Sir - Tlipmas .Beau-
mont) could not' resume, his seat ,without ex-
pressing his entiie disapprobation 'of the
treatment'the' 1 tidiness Gregson 1 had ’received
from hik '.learned 'friehdf .Toestablish the,
prisoner’s ihgdcehce; nqt'toatlenipf to shuffle
the charge’upon Soother,’was the duty of the
counsel for the'.defencp'. i ' , ‘
■ The crowd, ‘always ( rthitabie J as‘wafer,'. was'
again Undecided' in its .opinions. '. The . words
ringing’in Its ears’altogether efflfeed tha effect 1
of Mr. Granville Dudley’s, address,."and
“ guilty” br“ hotguilty’* 1 was a problem that
sorely puzzled if 1 , 1 * ™
The judge bHefly; shamed, up’ ghq ",coa r ,
eluded; hts charge jurywith’ the’’ neiiall
caution to gly l^1 the' benefit .of any’
doubts ib might 1 hntefiklb’'.add this jury re-*
tired to deliberate vipbb its jr
The' tiro bcblitl^ I hied,’ who'/h'ad'stoken^tp 7
eventful morning, were, among the crowd on
the benches, and they soon'made a ,book by
offering to|give three to one on “ Conviction,”
and to take four to one on ‘Acquittal.’ Hubert
Clayton laid no wager ; but while waiting for
the jury to return, he registered a vow to
wreak a terrible vengeance upon the unfortu-
nate JBow, if the prisoner should escape from
his plot.
Who shall describe the agony of suspense
endured by the venerable mourner at the
table, or his anxious son in the dock, as they
waited for the jury to return with its verdict.
After an absence of nearly a quarter of an
hour , (which appeared, to those most deeply
concerned, a quarter of a century), the jury
returned into court,, Again the bu?.z of im-
patient expectation ceased, and the oppressive
silence that,followed was broken by the official
voice of the clerk of arraigns,: as he asked in a
monotone, ‘Gentlemen, of the jury—How
find you the prisoner, ‘ guilty’, or ‘ not guilty f
‘ Guilty ! with a sttong recommendation to
mercy!’
, To the plotter, exultation; to the victim,
despair I
CHAPTER VII.
Can these things be ? Can fortune stoop so low
As aid the aim that deals the secret blow,
And crushes human hearts, in fiendish glee ?
Dwell, justice,, still on earth, that we should see
The vile triumphant and their victims, they—
The best and noblest of the sons of clay !
..., ~ , .I Author's Sr.S.
Look here, Bowj, I’m hanged if, I’m going
to be gulled like this ! , The money we got for
the horse is .all.we.have,yet bad for the job,-
and, we was to get fifty pounds cash down, and
another th,e day he was lagged.’ The speaker
1 was , Mr,'Darby, ; Gregson, .his bearer, Mr,
Bow, , The; latter ;wa‘s much changed since the
mid night; rendezvous, at the Black:, Diamond
iTayejn, ,|p. Harper’s, .Lane, and he-looked
more . like a,’subject, for.’disseCtion, strayed,
from, Uje hospital.harifhy, than a living man'
dunning ;fpr. payment.,They were standing-
on the,pavement pn tjie.jOppokite isideof the,
sti^ei^ta.Mi;,,Hubert.Cjayton’s lodgings; ■ and!
were, patching for the appearance of that gen- i
tjeman;, ,He,bad failed,in keeping hisipart of
the jiifsinqus contract,,and they, were-tired of
tjje,delay, Darby, Gregsqn ,»aa determined to


wait no 10ng.,., t and Bow—— Well, let
bim speak for himself. ‘ I’d give a good deal
more ’an my share, Darby, to get the poor
young feller off agin ! I can’t sleep for think-
ing of him. It sits on me like a nightmare!’
‘ Come, drop that wining, Bow, I’ll not
listen to none o’ that foolery. Suppose you
was to go' and inform agin yourself; you’d
only get sentence! to life for your pains; for
you see, you’d be up for wilful and corrupt'
perjury!’
‘All I know, Darby, is, I’d like to forget
it. I never goes to sleep, now, but Im swear-
ing away young Mr. Sinclair’s life.’
Darby Gregson did not like the turn their
conversation had taken, and wishing to get
Bow out of the way before Mr. Clayton should
appear, he thought it prudent to send him
away on other business. ‘I say, Bow, just
go down to. the Black Diamond, and see if
costermonger Ned is knocking about. We
must manage to take the measure of Arkrigbt’s
plate before the new moon. 1 will stay and
see Clayton.’
‘ All right, Darby ; how long’ll you be ?’
‘I don’t know. 1 saw him go in half an
hour ago; and he has’ntcome out again since.
It’s no use going to the door; they’d only
swear me out he wasn’t in.’ ;
‘Mr. Arkright went, to Leeds to-day !’
said Bow, after a few moments’ reflection.
‘ VVould’nt to-night suit well ? It’ll be dark
enough.’
With all Bow’s scruples, and remorse for
the horse-stealing villainy, here he was, ready
and eager to ‘ take the measure’ of Mr. Ark-
right’s'plate, as Gregson called it; or, in
other words, to commit burglary. Shall we
blame him, or attribute his depravity to acci-
dent of birth, and force of education?
‘ Capital thought of yours, Bow ! Tell
Ned not to blab it to the other coves. Three on
us is enough for this job. • The fewer on us,
the more each’Jl get.’' r;
‘I hope we’ll make a tidy' lift this time,
Darby ! ; What time shall I tell Ned Shaw V
‘l’ll see him at the Black Diamond in'ah
•hour. ' We must crack the nut about half-
past two o’clock in the rOoining.' Everybody’s'
dead asleep between two'and three,’, ; - ‘ ‘
Bow started on'his mission of diplomacy io;
costermonger Ned; and Darby Qregson -Sat
down upon the kerbstone to wait for his vile
employer. Darby had been mistaken
in supposing Mr. Clayton had recently en-
tered bis lodgings, or that gentleman had
slipped out again the back way; for while he
and Bow were unfolding their intentions upon
Mr. Arkright’s plate, Mr. Clayton was stand-
ing close behind them, concealed by a loaded
brewer’s dray. What he heard appeared to
•please him, for a smile flitted over his hand-
some features; ‘ Ah,’ he muttered, ‘ the very
thing I wanted. Now, instead of paying you
the price of your knavery, I will send you
alter Sinclair.. I’m not quite fool enough to
leave you here to torn on me the first time
that you may take offence 1’
As soon as Bow was out of sight, Mr. Clay-
ton walked a short distance down the street,
still keeping the dray between him and Mr.
.Darby Gregson, and then turned round and
approached him. .Darby was so intent upon
watching the entrance door of the Belgravia
Private Boarding Establishment, that he did
not bear his steps. Mr. Clayton stood for a
moment with a peculiar smile upon his thin
lips, and then startled Mr. Darby by giving
him a heavy slap upon the shoulder, and say-
ing ‘ Where the dickens have you been all the
morning. Darby V
Darby turned round with a wondering
stare tO,is it you, Mr. Clayton ! I was just
waiting here for a friend !' . ,
‘ One you hadn’t much faith in, eh V asked
Clayton, with a low, grating laugh. ‘ Well,
to tell you the truth, he has as little in you !
Where’s that chicken-hearted mate ,of yours T
‘Bow? I haven’t set eyes on.him since
yesterday.’. , , ■
‘ Hem ! , That’s rather transparent, Darby !
Well, I. wanted, to talk to you both upon
money matters. 1 shall not be able to settle
with you for about ten days. . The twenty-five
pounds each, you have already, had, will keep
you going till then.’,., , ~, ~ ,
‘Ten days! That’ll, he Wednesday week.
All right, Mr. Clayton ; I’ve ho doubt you’ll
be 1 as good as your word. : You see, if you
kren’t, 1 we 1 can easily' bring you to 'reason
4 Come; "• Darby, ! my ; hoyv’ nohV'of ' your
threats; 1,1 1 I 'know ' whaf you'’'mean : I; but I
reckoned all that,''before 1 Lengaged you. ! I’m


.iiot afraid of anything you can do. If you
■swear'tbat you perjured yourself at Sinclair’s
trial, what value could a jury set to anything
you might swear, against me? So, you see,
. you have nothing but my acknowledged gene-
rosity to induce me to settle with you.’
Darby Gregson was quite taken aback by
■this view of the case. Cunning as he was, he
had been completely overreached by Clayton ;
and for a moment he was speechless from rage
and surprise 5 ■ but, recovering himself, and
seeing the only chance of getting his infamous
.wages was submission, he replied, meekly,
* You quite misunderstand me,.Mr. Clayton !
. Neither me nor my mate doubts your word.
You will settle with us on Wednesday week V
4 Yes; at Joe Turner’s. You and your
mate may meet Cue there after the theatres
are out. . Till then, adieu 1’
4 So long!’ answered’Darby, clumsily lift-
ing bis hat, in response to the other’s elegant
bow.
Mr. Hubert Clayton took the shortest way
to the office of Mr; Inspector Barlow ; and
the discomfited Darby bent his steps to the
Black Diamond, to hold counsel with Ned
Shaw, the costermonger and housebreaker.
He found Ned and Bow in the private parlor
hatching their plans over a bottle of cognae.
On the circle of rogues being completed by
the arrival of tbeii ringleader, it was definitely
settled that they should take advantage of
Mr, Arkwright’s absence, and “crack the
nut’’ during the small hours of the following
morning. Costermonger Ned, in his double
charactered vendor of vegetables and general
spy for the h6'usebreaking«ommunity of York,
had visited the house, and noticed that a back
window on the ground floor ;was unprotected
by shutters. He proposed, cutting the glass
away with his diamond chisel; and then un-
fastening the bolt by inserting his arm through*
the aperture, raising the, sash,' ' This, would
admit them and the .work'. of, 1 securing, the
valuables wonld’then be easy., ■.
. When the yillains had settled their plans
to their,satisfaction, they - separated, to avoid'
■suspicion, arranging to’ meet by thelHay-
■market at two o’clock in .the. morning., ’ , • '
: While .thCi.burglara were arranging (heir
plot, o^pk;yijl^Cl^tpnjWM;quiet!y)fiir mk
cum venting- them, and saving (though from
no motive of benevolence) the family of Mr.
Arkwright from the loss and danger of the
midnight visit of the desperate wretches.
, ‘Ah! Mr. Clayton, jon here!’ said Mr.
Inspector Barlow, looking up from his books
—books in which the criminal class of York
were registered like so many beasts of prey,
and their dark deeds chronicled.
4 Yes, 1 have called to see you upon a little
matter of business.’
4 Indeed 1 Well, take a seat,’ returned the
Inspector, shutting his journal and turning
his scrutinizing gaze upon his visitor.
Mr. Clayton did as he was bidden, his ever
restless eyes taking stock of all within view
without appearing to be looking at anything,
‘ By-the-way, Mr.-Clayton, I have wanted
to speak to you'for some lime past, but I
have been too busy to spare time.”
Mr. Clayton fidgeted in his seat. 4 Has that
white-livered tool, Bow, been here V he asked
himself, anxiously.
4 Have you any idea what I enter in this
book V asked the Inspector, trying to catch
his visitor’s eyes.
4 Not the slightest,’ replied Clayton, at
that moment studying that pattern of the
floorcloth.
: 4 The names of all who cause, or are likely
to cause trouble to society.’
•’lndeed!’ said Clayton, much alarmed by
the ominous information.
4 Your name is not here yet, Mr. Clayton.’
4 1 am most happy to hear it,’ Clayton re-
plied, with a feeble attempt at a laugh.
4 Take my advice, young man, and drop
your present acquaintances and mode of life
at once, or you may find yourself registered
here before long. I knew and respected your
fathei, and, for bis'sake, would be sorry to
see ; you.in trouble. It was only last night
■that you were seen in company with, a known
gambler to leave the lowest bouse in the city.
Recollect, 1 caution you to give up that man’s
company M and /dive the .honourable .life;,your
lamented father, did, or ypu, will.sqon have;
cause to repent your folly,} ~j , ;
4 Truly,'. I 'Ought, to »be r grateful; fdm your'
polite attention,! said Clayton,, with a-ghastly
smile,iu-p'.j-J vtfwU •r'pmiuiU!-'-


. r And you .are Hot?' Welly as you; willy alld
now about the business.’'.;;il \
‘ If; X: put; "you i on tbe trail’ of a packet#
burglars, will it , be'necessaryifdrl me tC> a|)' j
pear against:them V - 10 ; ‘ '• '' ' i
‘That depends'upon : the'cirodraataacesiof
the case.’ ' " ' ■■■'"’ •• ‘ » *
‘ I overheard a plot to break info' a house
to night. If you promise that my name shall
not transpire, I will give you information
that will enable you to take the burglars in
the act.’
‘ 1 promise you,’ said the Inspector, as he
opened his note-book, and, pencil in hand,
waited for the information.
‘ Mr. Arkwright’s house is to be entered
and robbed between midnight and three
o’clock to-morrow morning.’
‘ Do you know the men?’
‘ No. I have a suspicon ; but, as it is so
easy to implicate the innocent, I decline to
say whom I suspect, .1 would not, for the
wealth of the Indies, have the sin upon me of
assisting to condemn the innocent.’
‘ How tall were these men ? Can yon give
me any particulars that may assist in identify-
ing them V
‘ I can give you no farther information.
Catch them in the act, and you will not need
to identify.’
‘You are right; we will catch them in the
act; and give them a free passage to His
Majesty’s colony of New South Wales,’
‘And now, having told you all I have to;
tell, I will wish you good-day,’ said Clayton,!
rising. :
‘ Good day, Mr, Clayton, and thank you!:
And don’t forget my hint, I assure you, on i
my honor, your name is in everybody’s mouth/;
Mr. Inspector Barlow returned to his books,:
and Mr, Clayton left 'the office in deep;
thought.. York must indeed be getting too .;
warm for him, when such a hint was necessary.;
As he was walking slowly back to his lodg-;
rngs, a companion in many a midnight revel;
met him. The gentleman was on horseback,;
and returning from parade, where, he had, for;
the last time, done duty as lieutenant in one;
of the regiments of light cavalry. He was a;
man barely thirty years old, yet he wore upon ;
his dissiapated features the unmistakable traits;
of premature age ;■ and it needed but a glance!
t<v perceive i that he had ruihetf Bis constitu-
tion, as well as his reputation, by ‘ fast living,'
>a*>i'a!;cafeW of ''vice is fashionably', called,
t' What isdn a name?’ asks the poet. : / More
than,is usually .suspected K 'f .Mr.i;Smith is a
very, wild fellow, a fast young! man; industri-
ously engaged, in-sowing his wild;oats.’ So-
ciety smiles upon him,.and.receivesihim with
open arms. Tear away the mask ; .speak in
honest;; plain English, and say,.‘. He is a heart-
less and debauched scoundrel, scattering mis-
ery and destruction in bis path,’ and society
turns from' him .in; loathing and contempt!
‘ What is in a name V A great deal!' Would
the world but call every act by its proper
name, and more would be done towards puri-
fying the moral atmosphere than by a score
of repressive laws !
‘ Holloa, Clayton, what’s up 1 Why you’re
looking as glum as a cat in a, showerbath !’
said the horseman, reining in. '
Mr. Clayton looked up with a start. He'
had been so engrossed .with bis thoughts, that
be had not beard the, approach' of the other,
‘ What, Hanison, is it a fact you’re sold out ?
Renwiek told me this morning that yon had.’
‘Yes, Clayton. My uncle bad an heir
born a week ago; and so my creditors have
come down upon me : like a flock of harpies.
Cursed nuisance, isn’t it ? and so I’ve had to
sell out; and I’m off to Botany Bay, or New
South Wales, or whatever they call it.’ '
‘ Out of the frying-pan into the; fire. No
one ever thinks of going to Botany Bay, unless-
a considerate Government provides him with-
a free passage; and then I expect , he’d
rather choose his own. location, and stay at
home.’
‘T’ve tried often enough, Clayton, to teach
you to judge rationally, instead of jumping at
conclusions. Now, you just know nothing:
about the matter !’
‘ What are the peculiar advantages offered-
by the Antipodes? I. have just been thinking,
of a trip to Italy.’
‘The advantages are fiee grants of laud
and servants, and Government assistance. A
few years there, growing wool and tallow, and
we shall be able to return to civilization mil-
lionaires—a pleasanter piospect than the
present of being sent to the Marshalsea T
(debtois’ prison);


*By Plutns, I’m more than half Inclined to
go with you ?’ ■ ■ ,
‘ Can you find the wherewithal ? I’ve none
to spare, and you're usually pretty short.’
‘ I made a good haul at the two last race
meetings, and I fleeced a couple of green-
horns at Kenford’s last night, so I’m pretty
well in for a while/ replied Clayton, un-
guardedly.
‘You’ll lend me a couple of hundred V
‘ I’ll not lend yon a couple of hundred, or
any other sum, larger or smaller; so don’t
expect it, Harrison. But if you're ballasted
with cash enough for the venture meet me at
my lodgings this afternoon, and I may ar-
range to go with you. I should like the ex-
citement of shooting blackfellows and chasing
mad cows amazingly.'
Holloa, here comes Hollowboy, the
sheriff’s bailiff 1 He has a strong attach-
ment for me, so I’m away down this lane.
Put him off the scent, Clayton, and oblige
yours, etcetera, Balph Harrison, Esq., late
lieutenant in his Majesty’s eighth regiment of
Hussars,’ said ths ex-lieutenant, with forced
gaiety, as he trotted off down the lane.
* That Botany Bay idea is not a bad one,’
said Mr Clayton, as he watched the retiring
figure of the intending emigrant. .
‘ Worn’t that Lieutenant Harrison a talk-
ing to you jest now, governor?’ asked a
gruff voice, at his elbow.
‘ Yes, my man,’ replied Mr. Clayton, turn-
ing round, and recognising Mr. Hollowboy,
the terror of all the debtors of York.
. * What street did he turn down? I lost
sight of him through a ’bus coming betwixt
' us.’
‘He rodee down that lane to the first
crossing, and then turned to the right.’
The sheriff’s bailiff followed in pursuit,
while the pursued, turning neither to right
for left, lost no time in increasing the distance
between him and the baffled instrument of
justice.
Pull of projects for the future, occasioned
by the inspector’s hints, and his own subse-
quent conversation with Harrison, Mr. Clay-
ton returned home to his lodgings.
The sentence passed upon the unfortunate
victim of Hubert Clayton’s revenge, was
" transportation for life to the penal colony of
New South Wales.” We must cast a veil
upon the first few weeks following the day of
trial, no uninspired pen being equal to the
task of describing (he sad effects of the verdict
upon the prisoner’s unhappy family.
At length arrived the day that was to drag
Percy Sinclair from all he held dear on earth,
and send him forth on his dreary voyage to
the antipodes. The sensation in'York was
almost as great as on the morning of the trial.
The social position of the ptisoner, and the
esteem that the community felt for his vener-
able father, in no small degree occasioned the
general interest evinced ; but there was a still
deeper cause at work. Daring the weeks 1
since the trial, the people bad had time to
carefully examine the evidence, and the public
opinion was, well, to say the least, considera-
bly surprised at the verdict; and more than
one advancedMiberal was heard to impeach
the judicial institutions of the country. • ‘ If
its a matter of a few paltry pounds/ growled
an old barbar, who gave more time to politics
than shaving, ‘ the cleverest men in the coun-
try are empannelled for the jury, but if it’s j
a charge thatmay take a man’s life or liberty,
any clown is good enough, even if he don’t
know a big B from a bull’s foot!’ And the
sentiments was echoed by the crowd of idlers
collected in his shop. . .
At ten o’clock this morning, a police van
drew up in front of the prison, and immedi-
ately after, half a dozen prisoners, all ironed,
were hustled through the gate, and placed in
the van. Percy Sinclair was one. The door
was locked, the escort formed, and the com-
mand was given ‘ forward !' and the sad cor-
tege started southward, en route for the
depfit, from whence the prisoners were to 1
embark on their long and dreary exile.


A sorrowful group were gathered round
the fire in the drawing-room of Elmsdale
House . on the evening succeeding the
departure' of Percy. In an arm-chair,
op one side of the fireplace, sat Dr.
Sinclair, his little daughter Alice upon his
knees. Florence, seated upon a hassock by
his side, was leaning caressingly upon his
shoulder, and gazing sadly and thoughtfully
into the embers. On the opposite side Mrs.
Sinclair was nursing the wee pet Maudie,
who, too young to understand the grief that
oppressed the others, yet seemed infected by
its influence, and lay silent and still in her
mother’s arms. Miss Egerton was at a table
apparently reading; but the pages were damp
with tears, and her thoughts were with her
unhappy cousin, whom she loved with all the
tender devotion of a sister. It was a sad
spectacle, this bereaved family mourning for
the beloved one torn from their midst! Not
a word was spoken by the sorrowing group.
In silence they grieved for the lost. That
morning they had parted from him who now
occupied the thoughts of each; and ‘should
they ever see him again?’ was the question
that forced itself upon the minds of all. De-
solate, as when the sable hearse carries of! the
victim of Death, seemed the cold future now !
Ay ! more desolate : for then there is no un-
certainty to add the tortures of suspense to the
pangs of parting. No need then to ask the
feverish question, ‘Shall'we ever see him
again V Fur this world at least the question is
settled.
That morning, as the police van rolled away
with its freight of sin and shame, the broken-
hearted mother of ‘ the forger’ fainted. This
new trouble distracted for the time Dr, Sin-
clair’s attention from his grief; and after some
delay she was restored. With returning con-
sciousness came memory. ‘ My boy ! My
poor, poor hoy! [ have nothing left to live
for now !’ she wailed piteously, wringing her
hands in her despair. With a strong effort
her husband assumed an appearance of tran-
quility. ‘ Mary, 7 ' he whispered, ‘ Do you for-
get, we have three yet left to us I Baby Maud
is perhaps crying for mamma now. Willyou
not return to her V .
The appeal had the desired effect. Mis.
Sinclair allowed herself to be assisted into the
gig, and driven home ; and here she sits pres-
sing the darling to her heart.
We must now leave the mourners, and fol-
low the exile across the billowy main to the
far-off land of Australia. Who can tell
whether we shall ever meet with them again.
Perhaps in the course of our story we may,
perhaps we may not! The future, in fiction
as in real life, can only be read when it ceases
to be ‘ the future.’
CHAPTER VIII.
“ Look to the waters! asleep on their breast,
Seems not the ship like an island of rest ?
Bright and alone on the shadowy main,
Like a heart cherished home on some desolate plain.
Who as she smiles in the silvery light
Spreading her wings on the bosom of night.
Alone on the deep, as the moon on the sky,
A phantom of beauty, could deem with a sigh, ,
That so lovely a thing is the mansion of sin.
And souls, that aresmiten, lie bursting within?
Who, as he watches her silently gliding,
Kemembers that wave after wave is dividing
Bosoms, that sorrow and guilt could not sever,
Hearts that are parted and broken for ever ?
Or dreams that he watches, afloat on the wave,
The death-bed of hope, or the young spirit’s grave ?”
—,T. K. Hebvey.
Four months had passed since the convict
transport Southern Cross left her moorings in
the Thames, and started on her long and
perilous voyage to New South Wales. She
had . experienced changeful weather since
leaving England—now stormy now still:
nearly lost in the Bay of Biscay through the
heavy gales, considerably endangered on the
line by the protracted calm. But she had
passed safely through these perils of the deep,
and was now sailing in the Great Southern
Ocean before a gentle breeze, three-fourths of
her journey done.
Midnight upon the sea ! The waning moon,
rising upon the wide circle of waters, was
shedding a softened splendour upon the vast
scene, and illuming the white sails of the
lonely vessel till she glistened in its, sil-
very rays like a floating iceberg. Above, the
dark blue sky, gazing down with its million
eyes upon the foam-flecked waves; below,
the dark blue waters, proudly beating the
vessel onward upon her coarse. No imagina-
tion of poet, or painter can create a scene of
such glowing, such wondrous beauty, as this
piesented by Nature to those who
the vast wilderness of the deep. ~


All but the watch were in their berths,
and, excepting one prisoner, were qnietly
sleeping. But one in this silent hour was
brooding over his wrongs —hope and despair
at war in bis weary heart. Nearer and
nearer, as day succeeded day, he approached
the land of his exile. His heart was filled
with a vague dread. Had he foreseen the
dangers and troubles awaiting him there,
could he have borne up? His feelings were
well expressed by the lines he bad that morn-
ing written upon a piece of rough paper that
he had picked up :
“ God doth impart
His blessings, oft disguised in charity.
Then, aching heart.
Cease brooding o’er thy matchless misery !
There is no sense
In troubling for the future, when we have
Omnipotnce
Of watchful love in all extremes to save I”
It had been well for Percy Sinclair, could
he have exchanged the delicate sensitiveness
of the poet for the callous indifference of the
felons around him—at least as far as con-
cerned his mental suffering. The novelty of
their position past, they settled down to their
degraded situation readily, as if it were na-
tural to them : It was so to most. But he—
never shall the iron leave his soul,—never
shall he know a moment’s rest till he can
walk erect again upon God’s earth a free
man, all taint of crime removed. Shall that
day ever come ? Who can peer beyond the
dark veil into the future ? All caged in that
floating prison may again be free ; none may.
Time and time’s Master may alone tell what
is in store for each, for all!
From the lonely vessel speeding through
the moonlit waters, we turn to the then al-
most unknown continent of Australia.
On the eastern coast a large river (large at
least for Australia) meandered through an ex-
tensive valley, and, after a course of upwards
of a hundred and Gfty miles, flowed into the
Pacific Ocean. Upon the dark foliage of the
dense cedar bushes, and primeval forests of
gums and ironbarks that clothed the valley,
sbone the sime moon, in her universal power
and splendour, tipping the topmost boughs
with a silver radiance. Could they of to-day,
glancing back over a period of forty years,
look from a bird’s-eye view upon this Yalley
of the Hunter, as it appeared under the moon
on the night of our story, what an almost in-
credible change would they perceive. Now,
through its entire length can be seen, in the
presence of towns and villages, of cultivated
fields, and meadows dotted over with sheep
and cattle, and in the extermination of the
beautiful cedar bushes, and wholesale destruc-
tion of othertimber, theprogressof civilization.
Then, but in small settlements, at distant in-
tervals along the river, where adventurous
sheep and cattle farmers bad pushed forward
their flocks and herds in search of new pas-
tures, the mighty forest was undisturbed, save
by the native wild beasts and wilder man.
Where now stand the growing centres of
white population, were the encampments of
the indigenous proprietors of the soil. Where
now stands Newcastle, the second city of the
colony (and, in the eyes of the world, the
first in the southern hemisphere) was a small
village, numbering less hundreds than now it
does thousands. Maitland, another village of
forty years ago, has since expanded into a
populous and wealthy town. Barely in any
country has the face of nature been so com-
pletely transformed in so brief a period.
As we gaze back (in imagination, of course)
upon the moonlit valley, we can discern a new-
built homestead, standing upon a slope, about
half a mile from the river, and facing an ex-
tensive an'd partially-cleared “flat.” The
farm appears as if snatched from the forest’
that presses round it on all sides, as though
jealous of the intruder’s presence. The bouse
was erected in the style of architecture pre-
valent at the time—a wooden building with
a passage running through, and a broad ver-
andah in front and on two sides. The droop
of the roof was steep, and the material em-
ployed in covering the house was shingles, or
thin boards split from gum or ironbark bil-
lets. Near the river was a row of huts for
the Government men, and, about half-way
between them and the house, were the yards
and pens for the cattle. We cannot now stay
to describe the farm or station in detail, but
must torn to the real object of our visit—to
introduce to our readers the “ Lily of the
Hunter Yalley,” the loveliest girl that Austra-
lia (in the year 1835) could produce. We do
do not pretend that our heroine was fairer


than some of the lilies now blooming upon the
banks of our noble river; but if all women
were only as beautiful as she, and as good as
they looked, what a terrestrial paradise our
world would be.
Late as it was, a candle was burning in a
small, but tastefully arranged bedchamber,
and an open book was lying upon the carpet
by the bedside. These links of circumstantial
evidence were sufficient to convict the occu-
pant of the room of the dangerous practice of
reading in bed. But a glance at the sweet
beauty ol the sleeper would disarm any but a
misogynist of all thought of reproof. It is
useless to attempt a description of her loveli-
ness. The rich colour of her cheeks, the daz-
zling whiteness of her brow, the exquisite con-
tour of her whole features would baffle the
brush of an artist, and no pen can portray the
luxuriant wealth of her lightbrown tresses;
Her ruby lips were parted the sweetest of
sweet smiles wreathing them (’tis said, they
dream of heaven who smile in sleep), and they
disclosed a set of teeth—to what may we liken
them ? Twin rows of tiny pearls! The
similie is too hackneyed, and yet there is no-
thing else in nature at all resembling them.
Her eyes well, of course, being asleep, her
eyes were out of sight ; but we will tell our
readers (in confidence) that they were of hea-
ven’s own hue a rich and pensive blue.
She appeared, in her gentle slumber, more
like an exquisite piece of Grecian sculpture,
than a breathing, human being. Never yet
had trouble cast its baleful shadow upon her
young life. Looking at all that is in store for
her in this veritable vale of tears, one could
almost wish that she might escape it by pass-
ing away before the dark side of the world
(“the beautiful world” as she called it) should
appear to her. If they so young, so fair, so
good, must meet with bitter trial, how can
we expect our journey to the grave to be
through a path of roses 1 But away ; let her
sleep on. She shall awake to the stern reality
of life soon enough—too soon 1
And now, back over forest and flood, to the
lonely ship. We left her in all the glory of
moonlight. No moon now visible. Wo left
her (and not half-an-hour since) gliding along
before a gentle breeze, all sail set. She Is
now dashing along under bare poles, the heavy
seas pursuing her, overtaking her and
leaping upon her trembling bulwarks,
as if bent upon thrusting her and
her load of shame down, down beyond the
light of heaven. Dark the scene as the lowest
depths of Tartarus, save ever and anon, red
flashes of lightning illuminated it with mo-
mentary and ghastly brightness, and revealed
to the terrified mariners the vast expanse of
black and surging waters. Stealthily as a
beast of prey approaches its victim, came the
hurricane upon the ship. A cloud, a little
cloud, rose upon the distant horizon. It was
followed by others, till a vast mass of moving
vapor encompassed the southern sky, and, ad-
vancing upon the wings of the storm, soon
blotted out the light of the moon, and changed
the bright scene to one of gloomy darkness.
Among the wretched prisoners in the hold,
there were more prayers (if prayers they may
be called) offered for the destruction of the
transport than their own safety, and even Percy
Sinclair, as the rolling of the ship caused his
chains to bruise and chafe his limbs, felt so
despondent that be almost hoped the night
would prove bis last.
Bravely the vessel bore on through the
struggle of wind and wave, her creaking tim-
bers witnessing to the terrible force of the
storm. Hour after hour,passed, as she plunged
along in her mad career, the issue still uncer-
tain—now settling down in the black trough of
the seas, as if abandoning herself in despair to
the seemingly inevitable, now springing upon
the crest of the mountain rollers, as if inspired
with new life, and, shaking the salt spray
from her quivering sides, dashing forward
through the darkness—fleeing before the rude
breath of the storm-fiend. The blackness of
night, chequered by the intermittent glare of
the thundercloud, gave place to the dull light
of morning—the hurricane unabated. At
daybreak the foremast went by the board, and
in cutting away the wreckage, several men
were washed overboard.by the heayy seas that
continually swept the ship.
Fortunately for the plot of our story, the
weather moderated about noon, or one of our
principal characters had been lost to us. At
mid-day the wind began to lull, and gradually
subsided into a steady breeze ; and the bruised
and battered Southern Cross, victorious in the


late direful struggle, lay helplessupon the waves,
a sad witness to its terrible violence. If any
earthly situation could shadow forth, however
faintly the horrors of the gloomy, nether world,
the hold of that floating prison during the con-
tinuance of the storm was a foretaste of the tor-
tnresof a lost hereafter. Shut down by battened
hatches that precluded ventilation, and almost
smothered the unhappy wretches confined
below, lying in pitchy darkness, and dashed
from side to side by the rolling of the ship,
the intervals of the startling crashes of thun-
der filled by the shrieks of the timid and
maniac laughter and blasphemies of the
hardened—it seemed a very pandemonium to
Percy Sinclair.
| Soon after two o'clock the hatches were
lifted, admitting to the almost stifled prisoners
the inestimable blessingof pure air. Withawill
worked the crew and some of the more handy
among the guard, and before night the South-
ern Cross was sailing under a jury foremast;
and at midnight, when the moon again shone
brightly upon the waters, none could have ob-
served a trace of the storm, save in the heavy
swell of the wayes. On she sped before the
favoring wind toward that land to be the
grave of most of her motley living freight.
CHAPTER IX.
Maiden ! with the meek, brown eyes.
In whose orbs a shadow lies
Like the dusk in evening skies I
Thou whose locks outshine the sun,
Golden tresses, wreathed in one.
As the braided streamlets run !
Standing, with reluctant feet,
Where the brook and river meet.
Womanhood and childhood fleet I
Gazing with a timid glance,
.On the brooklet’s swift advance.
On the river’s wide expanse 1
Longfellow.
Another four months, and the Southern
Cross has given up her charge, and her mixed
assortment of prisoners are penned in Hyde
Park Barracks—the more desperate portion to
be employed upon public works, the remain-
der to be assigned to various masters, and
scattered broadcast among the settlements.
Prom Sydney, the capital town of the young
colony, we turn northward, and reach the
scene of our future chapters—the Valley of
the Hunter River, Situated several miles
above the mouth of the river was an extensive
cattle farm, the property of Walter Shelley,
Esq.- Our readers may recollect it as the
scene of our late midnight visit. The owner of
the estate had named it Field Place, after the
birthplace of his illustrious namesake, the im-
mortal poet Percy Bysshe Shelley.
Field Place was a large Government grant
of some two thousand acres ; and was sur-
rounded by almost unlimited grazing land,
the nearest neighbour being at least ten miles
away. Mr. Shelley had been a military officer
in a regiment Stationed in New South Wales ;
and on resigning his commission, and marry-
ing the only daughter of one of the high colo-
nial officiate, he had received, as a free grant,
this splendid estate. He bad prospered be-
yond bis most sanguine expectations, and now
possessed some of the best sheep and cattle in
the colony. There was nothing in his appear-
ance or manner to lead a stranger to guess
his original profession. He had completely
merged the soldier into the cattle-farmer—or,
in the expressive term of the colony, the
squatter. Few of his comrades, who, like
himself, had relinquished the sword for the
plough and the stockwhip, were so thoroughly
successful—probably because they did not re-
linquish with it the fashionable indolence and
indifference, that in times of peace are its
usual accompaniment. It was his boast to
possess the best flocks and herds, the least
troublesome government servants; and —when
business carried him to the neighboring village
of NewcastleorMaitland,and be took a glass or
so too much wine—the handsomest wife and
daughter in the coiony. The latter part of
the boast, though, perhaps, only excusable on
the plea that “ when the wine is in the wit is
out,” was, nevertheless, as true as the former.
Few matrons of thiity-six were as fair and
comely as Mrs. Shelley, and Bertha—’tis sel-
dom two such lilies are seen in a lifetime!
It was early morning, and before the stars
had faded from the sky, the pride of Field
Place was up and out, inhaling the invigorat-
ing air, and adding to the bloom upon her
cheeks and the brightness of her eyes by the
healthful exercise of walking. A young friend,
the daughter of their next neighbour, and a
gill of her own age, was expected on a visit
that morning, and Bertha, accompanied by


her father, was to ride out to meet her; and
wishing to start directly after breakfast, she
had gone down to a small paddock at the back
of the stockyard where her pony was usually
kept, to take him to the stable for his morn-
ing’s feed. Snowflake never remembered re-
ceiving his corn at any other hands than hers ;
and guided by self-interest (what can we ex-
pect from men, when even horses are actuated
by mercenary motives !) directly he heard her
voice, singing as she came along,, he trotted
up to the sliprails, and stood waiting impa-
tiently, for them to be taken down.
‘ Good morning, Master Snowflake, she
said, gaily, as she let him through. ‘ You
must make haste over-your breakfast, old
fellow, or you’ll lose it; for you have to take
me for a ride directly I have finished mine !
Come along !’ The pony regarded her for a
moment with his large grave eyes, as seriously
asifhe'knew all about it, and then, without
waiting for further parley, trotted off to the
stable to lose no time in beginning. Bertha
followed him, laughing at his hurry, and, hav-
ing filled his bin with corn, left him to enjoy
himself, while she got her own breakfast, and
prepared for her ride. On the verandah she
met her father returning from the huts,
‘ Well, pussy, ready for your ride this morn-
ing f he said, smiling at her excitement ‘See
those red clouds along the top of the hills to
the east! Don’t you think it will rain to-
day ?’
‘Now, Papa,’ she answered, gravely, hold-
ing up a finger in mock repioof, ‘Don’t you
prophecy rain ! It doesn’t look more like a
change, than it did when you went to New-
castle last week. Mind, I shall be ready in
an hour, so don’t beep me waiting,’ and with
out staying for a reply, she hurried into the
house. Her father followed, and found
breakfast ready and bis energetic little
daughter busily engaged in cutting sand-
wiches for their lunch in the bush. ‘ I have
some good news for you, Grace!’ Mr. Shelley
said, addressing his wife as he took his seat.
‘ Indeed, Walter,’ replied the lady, looking
up.
‘May I guess, papa?’ Bertha exclaimed,
forgetting her hurry aui laying down her
knife.
Mr. Shelley .looked at the bright, eager
face, u roguish'twinkle in his eyes. ‘Yes,
Bert, you may try j but you can’t guess, so
you had better give it up.’
1 Is it a matter of great importance V
‘ Yes I’
‘ Yery great importance !’
‘ Yes !’
‘ Are we to have a new Governor?’
‘No! It’s of more importance than a
dozen new Governors.’
‘ You have bought me the new saddle you
promised ?”
‘ Guess again, pussy! More important
still!’
‘ We are not going to live in Sydney again ?’
Bertha asked, with a frightened look. The
forest tiower had no love for town life.
‘No, it is something of even more import-
ance yet. Do you give it up?’
Mrs. Shelley looked on with an amused
smile upon her fair face, while her husband
was teasing Bertha. With a sigh of relief
at the escape from Sydney life, that young
lady demurely ‘gave it up.’
‘ You won’t tell your visitor, Miss Blair!’
‘ No, papa !’ this said eagerly ; girls dearly
love to be the beepers of secrets, though, as a
rule, not very successful in keeping them un-
assisted.
‘ I found a hen’s nest in the stockyard with
a dozen eggs in it.
‘Oh, papa!’ was all that Bertha could ex-
claim in her vexation and disappointment; and
her father indulged in a hearty laugh at her
evident annoyance.
‘ But to be serious, Grace,’ he continued,
turning to Mrs. Shelley, ‘I was told by the
overseer, just now; that another transport is
in. He heard it yesterday from Mr. Drayton,
who was passing on his way to Sydney. We
want another hand or two; so I will start
to-morrow for Sydney myself to try if I can
procure a- couple more. I dare say. your
father could select me a couple of respectable
men from among the cargo’—men sent out for
some minor offence.
‘ And try if you can get me a cook, Walter.
1 want another girl; the work is getting too
much for Janet,’ said Mrs. Shelley, handing
her husband his tea.


Mr. Shelley agreed to attend to the request;
and no more time was spent in talking, all
being anxious to get through the breakfast, and
about the business of the day ; and before the
sun was an hour high, Bertha and her father
were mounted, and attended by a tame black-
fellow upon one of the stock horses, cantered
off to meet their expected guest. The road
led through the beautiful valley, now along
the bank ot the broad Hunter, now among
the trees of the park-like bush, far away from
sight or sound of the river; through dark
brushes and open forest it wound along—the
musical note of the bell-bird falling upon the
ear as they rode through the dense cedar
groves, the homely song of the magpie as they
emerged upon the open ground. They can-
tered along, the silent bush resounding to the
joyous mirth of the merry light hearted girl,
as her father recited anecdote after anecdote
of his youth, and of the many strange and
amusing things he bad witnessed in his cam-
paigning days. As they reached the outskirt
of the station they overtook the overseer
riding along slowly, and attentively examining
the road.
• ‘ Holloa, Davy, what’s 'the matter now ?’
Mr. Shelley asked, as they reached his side.
Without looking up the overseer replied,
‘ Them infernal blackskins has been at the
sheep again, Sir. Just after you left the
stockyard this morning. Jack, the boy, came
up, and reported twenty sheep missing from
his flock. I sent him on with the rest, and
went myself in seareh of the runaways.’
‘ Ah ! Do you think you are on their trail ?’
Mr. Shelley enquired, as be dismounted, and
stooped down to examine the path.
‘Yes, Sir, I’ve got it as sure as a gun. They
crn’t be far ofl ; for the tracks are quite fresh,’
replied Davy Collier, the overseer.
‘Bale dat track belongin to jumbuc!’ sug-
gested Jerry the blackboy.
‘ Why, you black devil—l beg your pardon,
Miss ; black rascal, I mean, —the tracks are as
cleat as your pipeclay teeth !’ exclaimed the
overseer, eyeing Jerry suspiciously, ‘ Come,
now, I believe you know more than you pre-
tend to about these jumbucs. Where did
other blackfeller take ’em V
‘ Bale dat Jerry know, Daby,’ answered
Jerry with a look of injured innocence. ‘Me,
tink it alonga dat scrub !’ he continued, point-
ing in a direction at right angles to the track
of the sheep.
‘Well, what do you think, Davy?’ Mr.
Shelley asked, remounting his horse.
‘ That the darkies have taken them to the
Broad Lagoon, where we may find them in a
quarter of an hour, and that Jerry here is
what I was lagged for—accessory before the
fact,’ replied Davy.
‘ You tink it jumbuc [sheep] go dat way V
asked Jerry, with a grin, pointing in the di-
rection of the Broad Lagoon.
‘ Yes, you nigger, and very well you know
it,’ answered the overseer ; but before he had
concluded his complimentary affirmation, Jerry
had put spurs to his horse, and was out of
sight among the timber, following the trail at
full speed.
* Well, you’re a cute un !’ soliloquized
Darby Collyer, looking after him. ‘ Will yon
ride with me after the sheep, Sir? I’ts not
more than a mile to the black’s camp on the
Broad Lagoon 1’ he added, as he was about fol-
lowing in pursuit.
‘ I think we will, Davy, There’s no dan-
ger, Bertha, the blacks are only some of our
own tame ones.’
‘ Very well, papa ; I’m not a bit afraid !’
replied the adventurous young lady, feeling
very like a hetoine, at the prospect of riding
to the rescue.
The three left the road and slowly followed
the trail down a long slope, and through a
natural gap in a brush, and found them-
selves upon a large plain, scantily timbered as
an English park ; but, before Bertha could ex-
press her delight at the beauty of the prospect
she now beheld for the first time, Davy ex-
claimed ‘Well, after' this, I’ll back a darky
agin a Yankee for cuteness ; blowed if I won’t!
Look there, sir, Jerry and half the tribe driv-
ing the missing sheep this way. I’ll lay a
crown they’ll swear they just found them.’
And there, about halfway across the plain,
were the truants with their dusky keepers,
who were urging them along with great
energy, probably wishing to put as much
ground as possible between them and their
camp, before they should meet ‘ Misser
Selley.’


The overseer pressed forward at a gallop,
and, before Bertha and her father could come
up with them, be was in the midst of the jab-
bering crowd,
‘Look here Daby, me make-a-light jumbuck!
[find sheep.] What you give it me?’ bawled
a dignified old darky, who carried upon his
breast a brazen advertisement of his kingly
rank.
‘ Give it yon this, you infernal old thief!
What for you steal him jumbuo!’ said the
overseer sternly, and, showing the length of
his heavy stockwhip. A perfect Babel of
tongues joined in asserting their innocence, and
protesting that they never steal him anything
belongin to Misser Selley,”—one old fellow
raking in a tone of injured dignity, “ What for
.hat jumbuo want to come along a blackfel-
'er like a that!’ The question delighted the
table crowd, who accepted it as unanswerable,
md shouted “ Budgery, Euringa pialla [good
Euringa talk] like a-that!’ Flattered by the
.jopular applause, Euringa essayed again.
What for that murry gourri jumbuo yan
good fat sheep come] along a blackfeller V
Before Davy could retort to the sophistry
if the unbleached philosopher, Mr. Shelley
nd Bertha rode up.
‘ That murry budgery [very good] Missie
lerta,’ shouted a chorus of voices ; for the
ondgery white piccaninny’ was a great favorite
mong the blacks who visited the station.
‘ Missie Berta murry coula [very angry]
•elongin to blackfeller, when that manjum-
,uc like-a this,’ said the overseer.
‘Bale that Euringa, man jumbue Missie
3erta !’ asserted the sophist.
‘ Bale that King Bony!’ said the chief;
Bale that me ! bale that mo ! shouted each
a turn, anxious to retain the good graces of
Missie Berta.’
Jerry sat upon his horse and grinned in
iilence.
Where did you make-a-light jumbuo,
erry ?’ the overseer asked him abruptly.
‘ That King Bony and lot a blackfeller fetch
im jurabuc back to station,’ replied the cun-
ing savage, gravely,
‘ Well; Davy, now that they are found, I
vill leave you and Jerry to drive them home ;
, nd we will continue our ride,’ said Mr.
Shelley, turning his horse’s head towards the
brush they bad just crossed.
‘ Very well, sir,’ returned Davy, heading
the sheep for the gap.
Leaving the overseer to attend to the driv«
ing, Mr. Shelley and Bertha retraced their
way through the brush to the road beyond ;
and after a brisk ride of a couple of hours met
Mr. Blair and his daughter Edith.
‘Here they are!’ ciied Bertha, excitedly,
as her fiiend appeared in sight; and urging
her pony to a gallop was soon at her side.
‘ O, I’m so glad you’ve come, Edith !’ ex-
claimed the impetuods Bertha, as soon as the
preliminary salutations were over. ‘ I was
afraid you would disappoint me,’
‘ Mamma says I may stay with you for a
fortnight,’ replied Miss Edith ; and Bertha
fairly clapped her hands with delight. It was
seldom indeed she had the pleasure of the
company of a friend of her own age.
Miss Blair was a direct contrast to Bertha?
though a very beautiful girl. Her eyes and
hair were dark brown, and her raauner>gentle
and retiring, while her companion was a very
lily in complexion, and as impetuous and
energetic as Edith was quiet and reserved,
but in kindness of heart and sweetness of
disposition they were well matched. Equal
in beauty of character they.were, though of
different types of loveliness; equal in graces
of person ; and there are many who would
prefer the brown eyes and delicate features of
the gentle Edith to the more dazzling fairness
of the lighthearted Bertha.
* By the right, wheel, Forward !’ said 'Mr,
Shelley, in a tone of playful command, at the
same time turning his horse’s head in the di-
rection of home. The others followed his ac-
tion, and they rode slowly back, the girls in
advance laughing and chatting merrily as their
ponies cantered along ; and their fathers fol-
lowing, gravely canvasing the condition of the
colony and other kindred topics.
‘ I hear, Shelley, that the bushrangers are
away beyond the Wollombi, —in
the direction of Windsor,’ said Mr. Blair, af-
ter he and bis companion had exhausted the
land question, treatment of convicts, city
gossip, and other usual items of conversation.
‘Four of them were taken about three weeks.


ago and banged. ' From what they said, it
appears, the gang is completely dispirited and
disorganized, .and it is the current opinion, in
Sydney, that the survivors will. be arrested
and dispatched before long.’ • '
‘I hope so, Blair. However, we have no
cause to complain; they never molested
either of us,’ replied Mr. Shelley.
‘ But that is no proof they would always
be so considerate. However, we are safe
now, or at least till there is another gang
formed.’
• ‘ Bourke [Sir Richard Bourke, Governor]
seems determined to stamp out the crime.
All runaways are to be hung, without en-
quiry being made as to any actual deed of
robbery.’ .
‘ Rather warm that! However, it is better
to hang an incipient bushranger at once, than
to wait till a dozen valuable lives are sacri-
ficed.’
‘ Holloa ? What’s this ? Sheep tracks V
‘ Yes ; my blacks walked off, last night,
with a score of fat wethers; but the overseer
got on their trail, and found them over by the
broad (ggoon yonder. The cunning rascals tried
to persuade me they had found them, and were
taking them home,’ said Mr. Shelley, laugh-
ing at the recollection of the scene on the
plain beyond the cedar bush.
‘ Don’t tell me villainy is born of our arti-
ficial society, and that to be an unfettered sou
of the forest is to be all that is honest and
noble,’ exclaimed Mr, Blair, joining in the
laugh. ‘My experience is that our noble
savage is as cunning and avaricious as his
white brethren.’ , • •
■Look, Blair, our girls are nearly out, of
sight; we had better, overtake them,’ and,
loosening rein, they set their horses into a
gallop, and soon came up with the light-
hearted pair, who were chatting away quite
oblivious of all the world but themselves, the
subject of their discussion at the moment be-
ing the relative merits of their respective
ponies, Ruby and Snowflake.
‘ Whato’clpck is it, papa ?’ enquired Bertha,
as the gentlemen rode up.
‘About dinnertime, you think, eh?’ an-
swered Mr. Shelley, laughing. ‘Riding ap-
pears to sharpen your appetite.’
‘ Not fat from one, I should say,’ suggested
Mr. Blair, looking at the shadow under his
horse’s feet. ,
Mr. Shelley looked at his watch. ‘You
are not far out,’ he said; ‘it wants ten
iniuutes. There is a creek [Australian syno-
nyrae for brook] about a quarter of a mile
further on, where we may boil the tea for
lunch. Canter on, girls.’
The girls cantered on (or rather their ponies
did, which was all the same), and in about
ten minutes the party had reached the creek,
and dismounted. . Mr. Blair hobbled the
horses, while Mr. Shelley made the fire, and
set down the quart-pots of water to boil ;
while waiting for which performance on
part of the pots, the girls made an impromptu
swing of a tough vine depending from the
branches of a large gum tree; and enjoyed
themselves immensely, their fathers beguiling
the interval by discussing business topics.
‘ Ob, by-the-hye, how are you off for men V
asked Mr. Shelley, after they had satisfactorily
settled a suit between two neighbours higher
up the valley, that was being tried in Sydney.
‘ There is another transport in.’
‘ls there? Well, I’m full handed at pre-
sent,’ replied Mr. Blair, throwing some more
sticks upon the fire.
‘lam going down to-morrow to get a gene-
ral hand, and Mrs. S. wants a housemaid, or
something of the sort, and had you required
another man, I could have got him for you
quicker, perhaps, than you could have pro-
cured him yourself. Fullerton manages these
matters for me very expeditiously.’
, ‘lt is very convenient to have a friend at
court,’ said Mr. Blair ; ‘and if I had needed
another’band, I would'have been glad to avail
myself of your kindness, 0, I tell you what
you may do—buy me a strong dray and a
tarpaulin. Mine are both pretty well worn
out. ■ In fact, they were so when I got them.’
‘ I will execute that, and any other commis-
sion you entrust to me, with pleasure; and
now that the water is boiling, call the girls,
while I throw in the tea.’ , .
Mr. Blair rose, and walked in the direction
of the peals of ringing laughter that saluted
his ear, and Mr. Shelly made the tea and took
out of bis saddle-bags the sandwiches Bertha
had prepared.


‘Papa fa going to have a flower garden
Made in front of the house, Edith, and a
summer house. Won’t that be delightful Y
said Bertha, pausing for a moment, from the
exercise of swinging her friend. ‘ And that
reminds me I most ask him to get the seeds
and cuttings while he is in Sydney, He is
going to morrow.’
‘I wish he would get some snowdrops,
Bertha. Will you ask him to; they are such
dear little things. Come peeping up directly
the snow is off the ground ! Oh, we love the
snowdrop in England !’ exclaimed Edith, with
enthusiasm.
‘England must be a beautiful country,
Edith ! 1 wonder whether I shall ever see it.’
Wonder on little lady; ’tis the hand of
mercy that hides the future ! Wonder on!
‘ I forgot that you are a native, Bertha, and
can know nothing of our beautiful English
spring,’ said Edith,
‘ How old were you, Edith, when you came
to Australia V Bertha asked, rather envious of
her companion’s good fortune, in having seen
more of the great world,
‘Between twelve and thirteen ; but young
as I was, I remember, vividly, the beautiful,
green meadows, dotted over with daisies and
cowslips and little blue violets. The grass
and trees there are a real bright green, not a
browny-green as they are here. And then
the sweet singing-birds, Bertha; they are not,
perhaps, as lovely in form and colour as your
jparrots and lyre-birds, but oh, such sweet,
such delightful singers!’
‘Now, young ladies, come along,’ shouted
Mr. Blair from a distance—saving his legs at
the expense of his lungs.
‘ Come along, Edith ; ‘ that cobbon pot be-
longin to boil,’ as our blackboy, Jerry, would
say,' exclaimed the impetuous Bertha; and
the bright pair abandoned their swing, and
ran a race back to the fire.
Half-an-hour spent over their lunch in the
bush, and the party were mounted again, and
cantering homeward, under the smiling sun.
Would that the sun could smile thus for ever
■ —the dark cloud of care_[never obscuring its
brightness 1
CHAPTER X.
Spirit of Beautt, that dost consecrate
With thine own hues all thou dost shine upon
Of human thought or form, where art thou gone?
Why dost thou pass away, and leave our state.
This dim vast vale of tears, vacant and desolate ?
Ask why the sunlight not for ever.
Weaves rainbows o’er yon mountain river ;
Why aught should fail anil fade that once is shone;
Why fear, and dream, and death, and birth,
Cast on the daylight of this earth
Such gloom; why man hath such a scope
For loye and hate, despondency and hope!
Perot Shellet.
Sydney in 1835 ! The metropolis of Aus-
tralia forty years ago, bore a very different
aspect to its present. In place of the magni-
ficent public buildings and substantial ware-
houses of to-day, were humble slab or wea-
therboard tenements; and the lumbering bul-
lock-dray, now a rare sight in its streets, was
the ordinary means of transit. But time,
that has made these changes among the works
of man, has been powerless to alter the face
of our beautiful harbour. It is now disturbed
by more constant navigation, and the presence
of the crowd of vessels continually moving
upon its waters has scared away the flocks of
waterfowl thacat one time frequented it; but
the ‘ harbour with a hundred bays’ defies the
hand of man to mar its beauty, which must
remain co-existent with time itself. Then, as
now, through its varied extent, were places
vieing with, nay, surpassing in natural pic-
turesqueness and beauty the most vaunted
bays of the older world. The numberless ro-
mantic coves along its shores were each in
itself a study for a landscape painter. Alike,
yet how different! Each with its background
of abrupt forest-clothed hill, its open sward,
covered with a carpet of rich verdure, and its
foreground of dark-blue waters. The same in
general features, yet with what infinite variety
of detail 1 Then, as now, the tourist would
well be repaid the trouble of a journey from
Europe to witness the beauty of the fairest
harbour upon the face of the whole earth.
Hyde Park Barracks was a large brick
building, at the eastern extremity of Eing-
street, and was employed as a sort of head-
quarters for the unassigned convicts. To
this barracks Mr. Shelley and his father-in*
law; Mr. Fullerton, went, armed with the
necessary authority, to select a couple of ser-
vants.


‘ I have my eyes on a gentlemanly-looking
young fellow, who arrived , the other day in
the Southern Gross,’ said Mr. Fullerton, as
they walked op Macquarie-street, towards
the barracks. ‘ I think he would suit me as
a clerk, but if he takes your fancy you may
have him.’
‘ W hat was he transported for ? I don’t
want anyone likely to demoralize my men,’
replied Mr. Shelley.
‘ I don’t know. I intended to inquire, but
it slipped my memory. 1 don’t imagine he
was either a burglar or a highwayman, though,
from bis appearance,. -
‘ 0, by-the-bye, a girl, too ! A cook I think
it was that Grace said,’ exclaimed Mr. Shel-
ley, as if suddenly recollecting something he
ought not to have forgotten.
• Here you will find all you may require,
from a scullery maid to a legal adviser; and
from the villain who cheated the gallows, to
the unfortunate wight, transported through
Justice being as blind as she professes so be,’
replied Mr. Fullerton, as they entered the
gate. . .
It was the hour for the unemployed pri-
soners to be assembled in the barrack yard ;
and Mr. Fullerton pointed out the subject of
their conversation standing among several
other men, all dressed in the prisoner’s mot-
ley garb of shame. Before finally deciding to
take his father-in-law’s choice, Mr. Shelley
examined the group attentively ; but seeing
none to compare in evident respectability
with the thoughtful-looking young man bis
attention had been directed to, he selected
him, and took down the name of ‘ Percy
Sinclair, forgery, ex Southern Cross,’ upon
his printed form of application. He also
picked out a pale, thin, young man, about
twenty years of age.
, ‘ What do you want that youth for? He
is not strong enough for bush work, 1 should
think? said Mr. Fullerton.
‘ 0, he’ll do for a shepherd,’ returned his
son-in-law. ‘The poor fellow doesn’t look
able to rough it with some of the masters, I
know. Well, my man,’ he continued, ad-
dressing the youth, ‘ what were you sent out
for?’
‘ Cos I stealed a bit of a loaf out’r a baker’s
cart, when my brothers and sisters was a
starvin !’ he replied—his eyes flashing de*
fiantly, as if he would repeat the crime (if,
in the eyes of heaven, a crime it was) under
similar distressing circumstances. Who would
not, and still claim to be a man ?
‘ And now about the maid servant for
Grace,’ said Mr. Shelley, bent on redeeming
his promise to his wife. {‘Oh, that all hus-
bands would do the same I’ sigh some of our
fair readers.)
They repaired to the part of the barracks
set apart for female convicts.
‘ What do you think of that girl yonder ?'
Mr. Fullerton said, pointing to a young girl
standing by a window, and gazing listlessly
out upon the street. ‘I don’t suppose, from
her appearance, she ever fried a steak or
peeled a potatoe in her life ; but it would be
a pity if a girl like her were assigned to some
of the heartless wretches about here, gentle-
men though they call themselves. If she
should be a little awkward in the kitchen at
first, Groce could teach her the work.’
‘ She is, certainly, a moat interesting-look-
ing girl, i wonder what in the category of
crime her’s was?’ replied Mr. Shelley. ‘Unless
appearances are strangely deceptive, her pre-
sence here, in a convict barracks, is another of
blind Justice’s blunders. Well, make enquiries
for me, and if you think she will suit us,
enter her in the application form. It seems
an anomaly to look for moral character in
such a registry office as this; but you see, I
am more anxious to obtain servants with th*
least possible amount of vice, than 1 am to
secure useful ones !’ said Mr. Shelley, thought-
fully.
‘lf the face is an index of the mind, you
cannot do wrong in taking her. Goodness
seems written upon her every feature, and if
those dove-like eyes of her’s, beaming with
innocence and truth, belong to a depraved
and guilty woman, I have lost all faith in
physiognomy. You wonder, perhaps, why I
take so great an interest in this girl. I will
tell you ; but it must go no further. I was
through here yesterday with Browolow (you
know him—the most heartless libertine in
Sydney.) Reappeared struck with the girl’s
appearance, and told me he should apply for
her, as he was in want of a housekeeper!’ said
the elder gentleman.


'lf that’s how the wind blows,’ returned
Mr. Shelley, ‘I will take her. Can you gel
the assignment papers made out by to-
morrow V
* I will try. And now about the flower,
seeds for Bertha. You can get the best va-
riety from old Ben. Jacobs, in Castlereagh-
street. I will see abont these papers at once,
while you are attending to any other business
you may have on hand.’
‘Thanks. I have enough to attend to, to
keep me employed till dark ; so don’t wait
for me, when you are ready to go home!’
said Mr. Shelley, as they were passing out of
the Barrack gate.
‘ Very well 1 But manage to get back in
time for an early tea. I have not had a good
game of blackgammon since you were in
Sydney last!’ replied Mr. Fullerton.
Promising to return home in time for the
coveted game, Mr. Shelley bent bis steps to-
wards Hyde Park, or the Race-course, as it
was then more commonly called, and his father-
ia-law turned down Alacquarie-street, to at-
tend to the business of getting the assignment
over.
Two nights after the thriving squatter had
selected his new hands, he placed them on
board the little Sophia Jane, and started
homeward. The steamer left the wharf at
eleven o’clock, and passed down the harbour.
Percy Sinclair finding the fore-cabin close
and hot went on deck, and paced its contrac-
ted space in gloomy reverie. He liked the
appearance and manner of his new master,
and felt that he ought to feel grateful for,
falling into the bands of Captain Shelley, as
that gentleman was still called in Sydney ; but
be could not dismiss the hauntingthought, that
he was now, to all intents and purposes, a slave,
and in a position more degraded than that of
the negros in the United States—they were
accepted to be such through no fault of their
own ; but he, and those in his shameful situ-
ation, were looked upon as having, led by their
evil passions, voluntarily abandoned their
good name, and forfeited with their liberty all
claim to sympathy and respect. To those,
who, like himself, were victims of a miscar-
riage of justice, these bitter reflections oc-
casioned the acutest mental suffering.
Wrapped in this cloud of gloomy reverie,
Percy , Sinclair passed down the harbour, un-
conscious of the moon-flooded beauty that lay
upon the scene. As the steamer was ronnd-
ing the North Head, he was aroused by a
touch upon his arm, and, on turning round,
found a young girl, also arrayed in prison
garb, standing at his elbow,
‘ I hope you will forgive me, sir, for addres-
sing yon, but I would so much like to know
whether you are assigned to Air. Shelley of
the Hunter Rivet V she said, in a low voice.-
‘Yes!’ answered Percy Sinclair, in a blunt
preoccupied manner—he had evidently left
his politeness behind him.
‘I beg your pardon, sir, for disturbing you,’
she answered, timidly.
Percy noticed the disappointed tone of her
sweet voice, and, holding out his hand, said
kindly ‘ Alake no apology, Miss ? It is for me
to beg your pardon for my discourtesy. Yes,
I am assigned to Mr. Shelley. Are you?’
‘Yes, sir,’ she answered smiling, reassured
by his altered tone, ‘and I hoped you were
also ; because be is, I am told, a kind and just
man, and because, as I am going among stran-
gers, I would like some one I have seen be-
fore to be there too. I was one of your fel-
low-prisoners in the Southern Cross.’ This
last sentence was said in a low whisper, as
though the poor girl was loth to speak of her
shame, and afraid of hurting her companion’s
feelings.
‘Ah, 1 remember having seen you on the
deck of the transport. Well, as we are still
to be fellow-prisoners,’ he said, with bitter
emphasis upon the last word, ‘ and may be
thrown very much in each other’s company, it
will be convenient to know each other’s names.
Mine is Sinclair—Percy Sinclair.’
‘ Aly name is Marion Alacaulay.”
‘ Marion Alacanley ? Too pretty a name
for a convict!’ he said, thoughtlessly.
‘ I might say the same of yours,’she replied,
and added, ‘lt is not always wise to judge
by appearance ; but unless 1 heard it from your
own lips, I could not believe you guilty of
anything very wicked.’
An expression of pain flitted across bis fea.
tores. ‘ 1 am very grateful to you for your good
opinion of me, Miss Alacaulay,’ he replied.
1 must admit that 1 hold the same of you.
However, we are here—guilty, or not guilty


—and whatever facta may say to the contrary,
we are, in the eyes of all, convicts.’
* I cannot say why, unless it is because you
so strongly resemble a very dear friend of
mine, but I feel strangely drawn to you, and
would so much like to have you as a friend 1
Have you a sister T
‘ Yes,’ he replied, mournfully, the picture
of home rising vividly before him.
* Then, may I be that sister, till you see
her again?’ she asked, eagerly.
In spite of himself, Percy Sinclair began to
feel a deep interest in his fellow-pri-
soner. Taking both her bands in his, he
said, gently, ‘ Yes, Marion, we will be brother
and sister, true and dear to each other as such
for ever.’
The girl fairly wept—her heart overpowered
by the joy of having found a friend, after those
weary friendless months at sea. ‘ltis so new
to have anyone to care for me, ever so little,’
she sobbed, * that I can’t help this weakness.’
With all a brother’s solicitude Percy strove
to comfort her. After she had relieved her
pent-up|feelings by a few minutes’ silent weep-
ing, she looked up and said, in a voice tremu-
lous with emotion, ‘ Oh, Mr. Sinclair, my
heart is slowly, slowly breaking. May I tell
you my sad story 1 It is all, all true—too
true 1’
Feeling that the recital of her troubles
might compose her a little, he led her to a
large coil of rope by the bulwarks, and making
a seat of it for her, said tenderly, ‘ Tell me all
your grief, if its relation will ease your heart!’
She began the story of her past life, but at
first his thoughts would wander continually
back to Elmsdale ; to bis beloved parents and
sisters, and the pure-minded, true-hearted
Anne. As Marion proceeded in her narra-
tion, however, he became absorbed in its
mournful interest.
‘ I am the daughter of a clergyman— a
curate, who laboured in a small country town
in the county of Westmoieland. We were
poor, as the family of a curate usually is ; but
we were all so contented and happy, till papa
died, two years ago, I was just seventeen
then. Mamma, only survived him a month ;
and my brother Reginald and I (there were
only two of us) were left to fight our way
alone through the void world. Regiuald ob-
tained a situation as tutor in a gentleman’s
family; and I went out as governess. 1 was
engaged in the family of a gentleman the next
neighbour of Reginald’s employer; and after
the first pangs of our gtief had subsided, we
gradually became more contented and recon-
ciled to our altered circumstances. I used
frequently to meet my brother, as the parks
of our respective employers adjoined ; and for
nearly a year we were very happy. About
that time a gentleman, a school friend of my
brother’s, came on a visit to the neighbour-
hood, and renewed his acquaintance with
Reginald. I often saw him in my walks with
my brother; and he was so noble and good,
and so very kind, that when one day I met
him alone, and he told me he loved me, [
found I already loved him as devotedly as he
did me. He was not in a position to
marry, being only a poor artist and
writer for the magazines, and we were
to wait for a year, by which time he was
to get the situation of editor of one of the
London Reviews, as the gentleman who then
occupied it intended resigning. This is the
anniversary of the day we were betrothed and,
and— ’ Overcome by emotion she could say
no more for a few minutes, but, by an effort,
suppressing her sobs, she continued : 1 Living
with my employer’s family was a young lady,
a cousin, named Sara Grey. She had met
Edgar in Paris two years before ; and though
be only thought of her and treated her as a
friend, she fell violently in love with him.
When she learnt that we were engaged, she
seemed to go mad with jealousy. She accused
me of having undermined her in his affection,
and threatened to have a terrible revenge.
Well, she kept her word. The eldest of my
pupils had a small gold brooch set with dia-
monds. One day, about a month after Sara’s
threat, I received permission to visit a sick
aunt, who lived in a neighbouring town, and
to stay a few .days. I packed my little carpet
bag with a change of things, and. Edgar drove
me over in a gig that a friend of his lent to
him. I found my aunt so very ill that I had
no time to open the bag ; but next morning,
having occasion to take out a clean handker-
chief, I unlocked it, and, on lifting up a dress,
out rolled the brooch. . How it came there I
couldn’t tell; I picked it up, and at that mo


ment entered a police officer with a search
warrant. No need to search ! He found the
missing piece of jewellery in my hand! But
I cannot tell you more now, I feel so very,
very miserable!’
She leaned her arm upon the damp bul-
warks, and, resting her fair head upon it, ap-
peared to sleep, but the deep sighs that con-
tinually escaped her shewed that the un-
happy girl was only too much awake to her
misery.
CHAPTER XI.
See, the fire is sinking low
Dusky red the embers glow,
While above them still I cower—
While a moment more I linger.
Though the clock, with lifted finger,
Points beyond the midnight hour.
**»««**
Every quivering tongue of flame,
Seems to murmur some great name.
Seems to say to me “Aspire!”
But the night-wind answers, “ Hollow
Are the visions that you follow;
Into darkness sinks your fire,”
Longfellow.
It was afternoon, and all was hurry and
bustle in Field Place, for Mr. Shelley and the
new servants were expected home. The black
boy, Jerry, was stationed as sentry upon the
landing stage to watch for and report the
first appearance of the Sophia Jane round the
bend of the river, Bertha and her friend,
Edith, were engaged in assisting Mrs. Shelley
in some household duties, but they could not
restrain their curiosity and impatience, and
were continually making excuses for running
out upon the verandah to watch,
* I wonder what sort of a girl papa has
brought!’ said Bertha, as she put away the
work she had finished. ‘ I hope she may be
some one I can like. I wonder if she will be
able to speak French !’
‘ And I wonder whether she will be a good
cook 1’ said Mrs. Shelley, smiling at her
daughter’s estimate of a servant’s qualifications.
‘Mamma,had one servant who was an
educated woman,’ said Edith. ‘ Sometimes
real ladies are unfortunate enough to come
out to the colony as prisoners.’
‘Oh, how dreadful that must be 1 Well, if
there were any real ladies upon the Southern
Cross, I hope papa has brought one!’ replied
Bertha,
‘And how about the cooking, Bertha) If
O’
your papa brings a lady, who talks French
she will be piecious little use in the kitchen!
said her mother.
‘O, you can teach her the useful art of
cookery in return for what she teaches me 1’
replied Bertha. ‘ I dearly want to learn
French.’
‘That cobhon big ship come along now,
Missie Berta 1’ shouted the excited Jerry,
bursting unceremoniously in among them.
‘ Come along, Edith. -Will you go with
us down to the river, mamma )’ asked Bertha,
snatching up her bat.
‘No, my dear. Papa will be hungry, I
expect, so I must stay and attend to the tea.’
Away ran the girls, Jerry in advance, and
were soon by the bank. The Sophia Jane
was then a couple of hundred yaids from the
landing stage, and preparing to bear up to it.
‘O, I am so glad papa has returned,’ said
Bertha. ‘ I’m always frightened when he is
away; the sea is so dangerous.’
‘ Perhaps the hutkeeper has neglected to
prepare tea for the new men. Would it not
be right to send Jerry to him, with orders to
do so at once?' said the thoughtful Edith.
‘ Certainly, Edith dear ! Jerry, go and
tell Brown to put the kettle on at once, and
to set the tea things. The new servants may
be tired and hungry.’
Jerry scampered off with his young mis-
tress’s orders, and the girls sat upon a log,
watching the approach of the boat, and specu-
lating upon the probable appearance and dis-
position of the new arrivals, Bertha still
harping upon the possibility of the new cook
speaking French.
‘ I often think, Bertha,’ said Edith, after a
pause, ‘ when I look at the prisoners, what a
strange book could be written of their his-
tories ; what harrowing tales of broken hearts
and crushed hopes it would shew ! Strange
that people will sin, when sorrow is its cer-
tain consequence, 1
* What a queer girl you are, Edith—always
moralizing. Look, papa is waving his hand !’
The girls waved their hats in return; and
in a few minutes the little steamer was puff-
ing away at the landing-place. Mr, Shelley
assisted the female servant ashore, and, after
kissing his daughter and shaking hands with


her companion, he returned aboard to help
the men servants in getting the dray and
other purchases off the steamer,
Marion Macaulay stood apart, watching
the scene with a half-frightened gaze.
‘Look, Edith, what a nice-looking girl the
new cook is.’
‘ What a sweet expression she wears, Ber-
tha. Could you fancy any one like her being
very wicked ! How sad and lonely she looks
too ! Let us speak to her.’
‘ Come along, then,’ said the impulsive
girl, leading the way to the new servant.
‘ Are you tired after your long journey ?’ she
asked, kindly.
The young gill turned. ‘ Yes, Miss, a
little. Are you Miss Shelley V
‘Yes! Here, sit upon this box, and rest
yourself, while we are waiting for papa!’
‘ Thank you, Miss! Bull am more sea-
sick than tiled !’ she replied.
‘And more heartsick than either!’ said
Edith mentally, noting the sad expression of
her features.
‘ Then come along up to the house, and we
will get you a cup of tea, and then you can
lie down and have a sleep,’ said Bertha.
‘Thank you 1 You are very kind !’
‘ What is your name ?’
‘ Marion Macaulay, Miss !’
‘ What a pretty name ! Well, come along.
You look very unwell !’
The girls walked up to the house, and in-
troduced Marion to her new mistress; and,
after the yonng girl had a cup of tea, she was
sent to her room.
Mrs. Shelley was pleased with Marion’s ap-
pearance, , but she shook her head when Ber-
tha asked her what she thought of the new
cook, and said ‘1 am afraid I shall have to
teach her that useful art, in return for what
she may teach you; as you suggested just
now !’
The dray and other things being safely lan-
ded, Mr. Shelley took the new hands down to
the huts, where he left them, saying as he
turned away, ‘ Now make yourselves as com-
fortable as you can ! .1 shall not expect you
to do much until next week.’
Percy Sinclair’s heart sank, as he sat down
upon a rough stool in his new quarters. He
was now in verity a slave, to be driven hither
and thither at the will of another—to be
lashed like a dog, if it sopleased his master;
for so the law allowed.
‘ Come, draw up, mate, and have a pannican
o’ tea. It’s no use bein down in the mouth ;
you might have got into was bands than our
old man’s. Come, draw up !’
The speaker was Hal, Brown, the hut-
keeper, a one-legged reminiscence of the
battle of Corunna.
Percy Sinclair obeyed mechanically, and
took his seat at the table.
' And you, too, young un’ 1’ Hal. continued,
addressing the more youthful-looking ‘ hand.’
‘ Jest you draw your stool up too, and take
this!’ he said, tilling another pannican with the
refreshing beverage.
Hal. Brown saw, and shrewdly guessed the
cause of the low spirits of the 1 new hands,
and did his best to rouse them. ‘ Come lads,’
he said, encouragingly, as they sat, Percy
Sinclair gazing gloomily into the tire, and his
companion aimlessly, turning his spoon
round and round in his tea. ‘ Englishmen
oughter be like cats —always come down on
their feet. Brown-studyin won’t mend the
matter —make it wus most likely—and a good
linin’ o’ damper and beafsteak, washed down
with a quart o’ hot tea, 'll very likely improve
it; so just take my adwice, and set to like
alligators.’
Thus advised, Percy and his companion,
whose name, by-the-way, was Giles, helped
themselves to the new wheaten damper and
steaming steak ; and, if they didn’t altogether
set to like alligatois, they ate at least as hearty
a meal as could be expected under the ciroum-
stances, Hal. Brown the while striving to
amuse them by relating some of his many
adventures. Having a very fertile imagina-
tion, Hal. was never at a loss for an adven-
ture, and could tell thrilling accounts of hair-
breadth escapes by sea and land, in any ocean
or continent his hearers chose. Ou one occa-
casion he had been caught giving personal
reminiscences of Richard the Third, on Bos-
worth Field, in which he figured as having
encountered Crookback himself; but oh a
bystander pointing out the impossibility of
the thingi he coolly replied, * Ah, 1 forgot, it
was my grandfather! Well, its all the same!*


It is strange what a powerful influence a
cheerful companion exerts upon the spirits of
even the saddest. Before the meal was half
over, bis heaters were listening with great
interest to his absurd and improbable tales.
1 I’ll jest tell you a little adventure that
happened to me about six months ago,’' he
said, as he seated himself comfortably with
his back to the wall, and bis wooden leg
stretched out before him, one end of it resting
upon the table. ‘ I was settin here as I
may be now, when in comes our old man.
‘Holloa, Hal.!’ says he,',*Can you drive a
team V ‘ Yes, sir,’ says I. ‘ I’ve done a
power o’ drivin in my time,’ though, be-
tween us three, I knew no more about driv.
in than old Brindle, the offside poler.
‘ Well,’ says he, ‘ the bullock-driver is down
with the ,tio-doloro in the stomach, and so
you’ll have to take the dray to Newcastle in-
stead. Get the cattle yoked by daylight to-
morrow, as we must start directly after
breakfast.’ ‘All right, sir,’ says I; and off
he goes to the overseer.to get the dray loaded.
I followed him to the door, and saw the over-
seer drivin the bullocks up to the stockyard
to unyoke ’em. I was rather afraid I couldn’t
manage the yokin-up business, so says I ' to
myself, ‘ By St. George, if I could only turn
’em out with their neckties on, I’d be right as
a Jew in the mornin!’ ‘l’m going to the
yard, sir,’ says I, callin after the master;
‘and if you ; want to speak to the overseer 1
can send him up to the house.’ ‘Ah, do
Hal.!’ says be. ‘Tell him to come at once,
it’ll be dark in half an hour ; and I want him
to-see to puttin a couple o’ cases dnto the
dray.’ There wasn’t no time to lose, as the
overseer was takin down the rails to let ’em
into the yard; so says 1, ‘ All right, sir,’ and
got over to the yard as quickly as my two legs
would carry me.’ (Here Hal. happened to look
down, and saw that he had only one leg and
a fraction; but not thinking it necessary to
correct so trifling a mistake, be repeated, with
an emphasis on the numeral,) ‘As fast as my
two leg* would carry me.’ ‘ Never mind
unyokin the cattle, 1 Davy,’ says I, ‘ the bul-
lock-driver ’ll be here in a couple o’ minutes.
You’ve got to trot off to the house, the old
man wants you at once.’ ‘But the bulloek-
driyer’s in bed, Hal.’ says he, ‘got a touch o’
the ague or somethin’ o’ the sort.’ ‘ Niver
mind him, Davy,’ says I, ‘ he’s better agin,
Jest you look sharp, the master’s waitin’.’ So
Davy leaves ’em in the yoke, and started off to
the house; and I jest turned them out, yokes
and all. Well, I was up and had the cattle
in the dray next mornin’, before anyone else
was about. ‘ Holloa, Hal.’ says the old mao,
when he came down after breakfast, ‘you’re
ready early.’ ‘Yes, sir,’ says I. ‘ I’ve got an
uncommon knack o’ gettin’ the cattle into
their harness early.’ Well, we started about
eight "o’clock, and got along all right for a
couple o’ hours, till the old man got tired o’
the slow time we was marching at, and can*
tered on, leavin’ me to fetch the team along ;
and then my troubles began. The leaders
took a fancy to the short grass under the logs
by the roadside, and in ferretin’ after it they
kept tangling the chains and wheels among
the logs. 1 talked to the wretches till I
couldn’t stand it no longer, and when I found
moral suasion, as the parsons call it, wouldn’t
go down with ’em, I laid into’em with the whip.
I swore if they didn’t hit out, and make up for
lost time, I would ; and I cut ’em right and
left, till they shook 'emselves together and
made off through the bush at the double.
They knocked me down and the whole team ,
went over me. The wheels would have gone
over my head, too, as I lay stunned by the
hoofs of the bullocks, only I made a dive and
caught a grip o’ the pole at the ring-bolt, and
hung on like a old fool. On they went at a
gallop through the bush, draggin’.me and the
dray after ’em like a squadron o’ light cavalry
at the charge.’
Here the old fellow paused, and wiped the
perspiration from his pinched features and
bald head. ‘My eyes, it was hot work 1’ he
said, glowing at the recollection. ‘ Well, they
pulled up after about five miles. When I
managed to get out o’ my uncomfortable siti-
vation, I found we’d bin travellin’ on one
wheel—the near side one had snapped off
clean as a carrot. The boxes bad got piled
up on the offside, and balanced the dray,
so that when the cattle stopped it was stand-
in’ up all right like a goose on one leg.’
This last was rather too much for his
hearers; and, in the hearty laugh, which it


caused, Percy Sinclair forgot for the mo-
ment his own troubles. -
‘ The cattle bad wasted so much time fish-
in for the short grass among the logs, that it
■was nearly sundown, so 1 turned the wretches
out, and made the fire to boil my quart. After
I had got my supper, I sat tbinkin about one
thing and another, till it got dark, and the
moon rose. I can’t tell bow long 1 was sittin
thinkin, but presently I was startled by hearin
a whole troop o’ dingoes behind'me, bowlin’
like devils 1 I jumped up, and looked round ;
and all was as still as a church yard. Then I
heard a bullock bell tinklin 1 It was right
off in the bush, and sounded nearly a quarter
of a mile away from my camp. Holloa, says
I, that infernal off-side leader’s on the tramp.
1 must fetch him back before 1 turn in ! I
called Piocher, the cattle dog, to go with me;
but be was standin under the dray with bis
back up and his tail as brushy as a aggrawated
tom cat, and bis two eyes shining like a rack
o’ t bagonets. He wouldn’t budge a inch, he
knowed a game worth two o’ itj and if I’d
only had as much savvy as the dog, I’d have
knowed there wasn’t a bell on any o’ the cat-
tle. But I was a old fool, and I forgot it.
Well, I hadn’t gone more than two hundred
yards, whan 1 sees old Snowball, the off-side
leader, as I thought, raakin right forjj the
bush. I tried to head him back to camp, but
the faster I ran the faster he ran; and so 1
followed him on and on through scrubs and
gullies, over creeks and ridges, till I was pretty
uigh baked. What puzzled me more than
nothin was, that whether I went fast or slow,
the white bullock was always the same distance
in front o’ me, and I could see him jest as
plain when the bushes and logs was between
us, as I could on the open ground. Well, at
last I got desperate like, and puttin on a spurt
I dashed right up to him. Bound he turned,
and down went bis bead to rush at me quite
nateral. O’ course, I shut my eyes, not par-
tio’larly wishin’ to see my latter end under
such werry unfavourable circumstances; and
on he came like a hurricane. I felt his horns
graze my two sides, and then double up and
nearly squeeze the wind out o’ me, and I felt
his breath on my face as cold as a snowstorm.
1 opened my eyes fora moment,and tbebullock
was gone, and a girl with a face as white as
the moon washoldin mein her arms. Round
her neck she had a piece o’ rope tied tight;
and on the bark o’ a gum tree jest behind her
there was two letteis cut, E. R., with 1829
under it. I didn’t see no more, for I jest fell
down in a fit, and there I lay till ’
‘ Look here, mate,’ interrupted the over-
seer, who had entered unobserved, and stood
listening at the door during the latter part of
the hutkeeper’s story, ‘if you believe a word
Hal. Brown tells you, you’ll pay him a better
compliment than they do who know him
best. He is known about here as the biggest
liar out of’ [Perhaps it may be as well not
to specify where !] ‘We call him Old Iper-
bly,’
‘ Iperbly ?’ Percy Sinclair asked in sur-
prise.
‘ Yes; it‘s a name the master gave him ;
it means stretching,’ answered the overseer,
in explanation,
‘ Now, Davy,’ exclaimed the hyperbolical
Hal.; ‘ none o’ your slanderin’ a fellow like
this, before company! It’s all true,’ he con-
tinued, turning to his new friends; it’s all
true, every word of it. You may pound your
lives on it!’
‘Why, you blundering old magpie, you do
think these men are green enough to believe
you would be sent to drive a team to New-
castle with a wooden legsaid the overseer.
Hal regarded |the substitute alluded to for
a moment with an air of reflection, and
then burst into an uproarious fit of laughter.
‘lt’s not the first time you’ve bowled me out,
old fellow,’ he said, stroking the ungainly ap-
pendage affectionately, when at length bis
merriment had subsided.
‘Liars have need of a'good memory, Hal.,’
the overseer observed, laughing, as he took off
his spurs, and hung them and his stockwhip
on a peg in the well.
‘ Ah, well, this same wooden leg o’ mine
once saved my neck; so I mustn’t quarrel
with him,’ said Hal.
‘lndeed’!’ said Sinclair, incredulously.
‘I was to have been strung up jest after
the battle o’ Corunna, for stiekin’ my bagonet
into a friend o’ mine; only a cannon ball car-
ried away my left leg, and the doctor’s swore
I couldn’t survive the shock, if they bung me
up with a wooden one,’ Hal. explained.


* Well, limp ofl now, and look to your hur-
dles,’ said the overseer. , ‘The new hands’ll
hear enough of your adventures, before it’s
your next turn to be hanged, I expect 1’
Old ‘ Iperbly went forth on his afternoon’s
expedition of inspection and repair to the
sheepfold; and the overseer turned to intro-
duce himself to his new fellow-servants. ‘What
is your name ?’ he inquired, addressing Percy.
‘Mine is Sinclair,’ be replied; ‘and this
young man’s is Giles.’
‘ Well, I’m Davy Collyer, the overseer,’
said that functionary, ‘I daresay we’ll know
each other pretty well before long. Can yon
ride
‘Yes,’ replied Sinclair, ‘I was considered
a very good rider at home.’
‘ Riding trained horses upon a good road,
or even after a fox hunt, is a very different
matter to keeping the pigskin down a moun-
tain with one of our unbroken colts under
you,’ suggested Davy Collyer. ‘ Anyhow, it’s
as well to know as much to begin with. Mr.
Shelley says you are to help me with the
cattle. And you,’ he said, turning to Giles,
* are to help Jack, the boy, with the sheep.’
‘ When shall I begin to assist you V Percy
asked. ‘Mr. Shelley said he did not expect
us to do much till next week ; but I would
rather be at work ; it will leave less time for
thinking.’
I shan’t have a horse -in fit for you to
ride, till Saturday; but, if .you’d rather be
doing something, you may drive the pigs
down by, thp river, to-morrow, and mind
them. And you can take a tomahawk with
you, and cut down some of the wattles, ’ the
overseer replied.
I loik to work too; can’t ’ee give I no
work ?’ said Giles.
Yes; you may go out with Jack, the boy,
he’ll show you what your work is.’
‘ Thank’ee, zir,’ said Giles,
Davy Collyer rose, saying.he did so.
‘Well, the best thing you can do now is to
turn-in, and make a long night of it. Good
bye 1’
They took, the .overseer’s friendly advice,,
and turned in ; but it was long before Percy
could sleep, though his companion ,was .soon
snoring. His thoughts were, busy with the
last six moDtbs of his life; and, like a rapid
panorama, sped before him the trial, his part-
ing with the loved ones at home, and the long
dreary voyage of the Southern Cross, with its
storms and calms. At last, he fell asleep,
thinking of the poor girl, who, if her tale was
true, was, like himself, another victim of pre-
sumptive evidence.
Directly after breakfast, next morning,
Peicy Sinclair placed a hatchet in his belt,
and, taking the whip the hut-keeper gave him,
drove the pigs to the riverside, and began his
dual occupation of pigheid and woodman. It
was a beautiful day : the waters of the broad
Hunter reflected back the clear, cloudless sky,
and a bracing breeze was blowing; but he
paid no heed to the beauty or novelty of the
scene. He worked hard to drive away
thought. It was his first day of practical
slavery. He, who, till his arrest, had always
.had servants to wait upon him, was now com-
pelled to labour at the will of another. The
change was so new, so sudden, that to think
of it made bis head and his heart ache ; and
to dispel thought he laboured hard. The
pigs being as pigheaded, as they proverbially
are, he had no time for idle reverie.
‘ What do you say to a run round the farm,
Edith V Bertha asked, as she and her young
friend emerged from the parlour, where they
had been engaged upon some needlework.
‘ We pan easily get back by dinner time.’
Edith would like it immensly; so the
bright pair sallied forth, and rambled down
by the wheat-field, past the stockyard, had
an interview with their ponies in the little
paddock at the rear of it, and on across the
ereek over the log bridge, and reached the
river in the midst of a beautiful cedar bush,
talking, as they went, in the merry, hopeful
strain of innocent girlhood. They found a
shady little nook under a spreading cedar,
and sat down upon the grass, and talked of
many things—of their respective childhood,
and what each could remember of it, of their
visits to Sydney and Newcastle, and of the
poor convicts, who were sometimes so cruelly
treated. The last theme naturally turned
their conversation to the new servants.
‘ Well, what do you think of the new cook
now, Bertha 1 She couldn’t have suited you


better, 1 think—talks French, and is a real
lady,’ said Edith.
‘You can’t guess half how glad I am,’
Bertha replied. ‘She can leach me when
mamma is too busy. You know, I want to
be a clever woman some day. And then she
will be company for me, when you have to go
home. Have you seen the new men yet?’
‘No; have you?’
‘ Yes ; I saw them when I went down to the
paddock to drive the ponies to the stable to
feed them. One is a rough plough-boy look-
ing fellow ; but the other appears to be quite
a gentleman.’
‘Don’t move, Bertha!’ Edith whispered.
* Look there, under that wattle tree !’
Bertha looked in the direction indicated;
and they both sat motionless, watching . a
small animal that slowly crept from the
thicket, and bopped along towards the river.
It was a wallaby, an animal resembling a
kangaroo, in form, but not half so large.
After quenching its thirst, the little creature
fed about upon the soft grass, the girls watch-
ing its graceful movements with great in-
terest ; but presently a laughing-jackass (a
large grey bird, of the kingfisher species), on
a neighbouring tree, scared the timid beast
away by its discordant cacbinnation.
‘ Ah, there; it has gone!’ Bertha exclaimed,
in a disappointed tone, as it fled to cover.
They sat, still talking with all a girl’s ex-
haustless repertoire of chitchat, till the short-
ened shadows warned them it was time to
return home.
‘ We will keep by the river till we reach the
landing-stage, and then go up to the house
along the path,’ said Bertha rising.
Edith raising no objection to the proposed
route, they began their homeward walk. Slow-
ly they sauntered, as those in the early flush
of youth delight to walk, when surrounded by
the beauties of nature.
• Percy Sinclair worked with energy, and by
noon had a considerable number of the young
wattles felled. His unusual exercise had given
him an appetite, so he drove his charge to the
liver’s bank, and sitting on a log, where he
could keep them under his eye, be began his
lunch of beef and dampen He had not been
seated many minutes, when he saw a beanti-
fully marked diamond snake glide from under a
heap of rubbish. It was the first he had ever
seen ; and lacking the colonist’s inveterate an-
tipathy to the reptile, instead of attacking
it, he sal quietly watching its movements.
Presently his thoughts wandered away over
the dark sea to Elmsdale; and in dreaming of
parents and sisters, he forgot the presence of
his comely, but dangerous visitor.
‘ Look, Edith, there comes the Sophia Jane
on her way back to Newcastle.’
The voice roused him from his reverie, and
he glanced up.
‘What interesting girls! how very lovely
the fair one is!’ he mentally ejaculated, as bis
gaze fell upon the bright features of the beau-
tiful Bertha. But in another moment the
color bad left his lips, and all thought of her
loveliness forgotten. The snake was standing
erect just behind her, its mouth open, its
foiked tongue protruding, and its vindictive
eyes glittering like diamonds.
‘ I.can’t see her, Bertha,’ exclaimed Edith.
‘ You can see her better here, Edith,’ said
Bertha, and all unconscious of her terrible
danger, was stepping backwards right upon the
angry reptile. Its head swayed backwards
and forwards several times, as if gathering
force for the blow, and then darted at her arm,
which was only protected by a thin muslin
sleeve. With a spring Percy bounded forward
and, throwing his arms around the girl, lifted
her beyond the reach of danger. When he
stood her down, she turned round upon him,
her eyes flashing with anger, and exclaimed,
haughtily, ‘ What do you mean, sir, by touch-
ing me ? 1 shall tell papa directly I get home !’
‘Allow this to plead my excuse,’ Percy
said, smiling ,at her anger, and holding out
the band to which the snake was still cling-
ing,
Bertha turned sick with horror, and said
as he shook the reptile off, * Oh! you will
die 1 The bite of a diamond snake is certain •
death 1 What can we do V
‘ It is certain death, unless the part is cut
out,’ said Edith, who, though pale from fear,
still kept her presence of mind. ‘You must
cut. the piece out at once, sir: Have yon a
knife ?’
* No, unfortunately,’ replied Percy, ‘ But
perhaps this may answer the purpose!’ and
taking up the hatchet, and laying bis hand


upon the log, ho severed the bitten finger just
above the first joint, before the girls could per-
ceive his intention. Bertha gave a slight
scream, and stood trembling by, while Edith,
saying, ‘ Bravely done, sir, it was your only
chance !’ tore up her handkerchief in slips and
bound up the wounded hand.
‘ Thank you, Miss,’ Percy said, when she
had finished the task, ‘ I think 1 can get back
to my work again now ;’ and he continued,
turning to Bertha, ‘ Do you think, Miss, you
can forgive my rudeness now in lifting you out
of that reptile’s way ?’.
‘Can yon ever forgive my ungrateful words V
she asked in reply. ‘ You have saved my life ;
that l ean never forget. You must go up to
the house with us, and papa will dress your
hand properly. I hope it isn’t very painful!’
* It is nothing,’ be said, making light of the
pain that really was very acute. ‘lf I go
with you, these pigs will be getting into mis-
chief.’
‘ Never mind them, sir ; you have saved
his daughter’s life, and Mr. Shelley will care
nothing what becomes of them,’ said Edith.
‘You really must go with us, and have your
hand properly dressed.’
Percy left bis charge to look after each
other, and accompanied his new acquaintances
to the house. Mr. Shelley met them at the
door. Bertha ran up to him, and said, point-
ing to her preserver, ‘ Oh papa, that gentleman
has just saved me from a diamond snake, and it
has bitten him.’
‘Ah! What? Bitten by a diamond snake i
Then we must cut the piece out at once I
Blood!’ be exclaimed, noticing the bandage,
‘ You have already done so ?’
‘ I chopped off the bitten part of the finger,
sir; and this young lady very kindly bound
the wound up with her handkerchief,’ said
Percy.
‘Then there is no danger, I hope,’ Mr.
Shelley said kindly. ‘Go in, girls, I will at-
tend to Mr. Sinclair. Come this way.’
Percy followed his master into a little room
off the kitchen, and there Mr. Shelley removed
the bandage. < How much time elapsed be-
tween the bite and your cutting off the fin-
ger 1’ he asked, anxiously.
‘Barely a minute, sir,’ Percy replied.
‘Good; then there cannot be much danger,’
Mr. Shelley returned. After applying some
Friar’s balsam to the wound, and binding it
op, he said, ‘ Now, you may tell me how it
occurred. Something was said about your
rescuing Bertha from the snake. Was she in
any danger ?’
Though there was no tremor in her father’s
voice, nor tremble in his skilful fingers,—ho
held such command over himself—yet the deep
earnestness of bis tone showed that her escape
had been uppermost in bis mind while dress-
ing the mutilated hand.
Percy Sinclair briefly described the manner
of the accident, or adventure. During his re-
cital, Mr. Shelley listened silently, deeply
moved by the narrow escape of his darling.
When Percy concluded, he seized his hand,
and shaking it gratefully, exclaimed, ‘ You
saved her life at imminent risk to your own !
I can never pay the debt of gratitude I owe
you.’
‘ Don’t look at it in that light, sir; I only
did what any other man would have done,’
said Percy depreciatingly. ‘I was rather
amused,' he continued, ‘ at the energy with
with Miss Shelley resented my touching her,
before she discovered my motive in-doing so.’
‘ The darling. I don’t believe I could have
survived her loss. Dinner is ready. Come
in, and allow me to introduce you to her
mother.’ .
Mr. Shelley led the way to the dining-room.
As they entered, his wife rose from a seat,
where she had been sitting, listening with tear-
filled eyes, and thankful heart to the girls’
account of the adventure.
‘Grace, but for the courage of Mr. Sinclair,
we should have had no Bertha now,’ Mr. Shel-
ley said, as he led Percy forward.
Mrs. Shelley thanked him as only a mother
can who so narrowly escapes losing an only
child. Bertha approached her preserver,
and said half in fun, half in earnest. ‘ And now,
Mr, Sinclair, you must allow the heroine of
this adventure herself to thank you for saving
her life. I hope your hand isn’t very painful.’
‘ No, miss; It is not nearly so painful as I
had expected it would be,’ answered Percy
confusedly, as he gazed upon the'rich beauty
of her animated features and sparkling blue
eyes.
During dinner—the conversation still runn


ing upon the all-absoibing topic—Mr. Shelley
said, turning to Percy, • if I had the power of
making you a free man, Sinclair, I would gladly
dose. However, I will do what I can. Heie
you shall be treated as such. You shall be
my friend, and act for me as superintendent.’
‘Thank you, sir; thank you,’ I wiM be
faithful to you in both relations,’ answered
Percy.
The afternoon passed pleasantly away; and
towards bed time, Percy Sinclair rose from the
sofa, upon which Mrs. Shelley had insisted on
his lying, for the purpose of returning to the
huts. Mr. Shelley laid bis hand upon his
shoulder. ‘Don’tgo back to the huts, Sinclair,
Mrs. Shelley has prepared the little room off
the kitchen for you. You can call ityour own
for the future.’
, Percy retired to bed in his new quartets,
and soon fell asleep. The incident of the
morning appeared to have improved his posi-
tion. It had done so in reality, but that one
fair face would intrude itself upon his dreams.
Better for him had the adventure of the snake
never occurred. Better for him— for more
reasons than that of his mutiiated hand—had
he still been herding at the huts, dreaming of
any one else under heaven,|than of the daugh-
ter of the kindest but proudest gentleman in
New South Wales! Could he but wake in his
bed of last night, and hod the rescue a dream,
what despair and misery in the dark future had
'been spared to him !
CHAPTER XII.
The river nobly foams and flows.
The charm of this enchanted ground,
• And all its thousand turns disclose
Some fresher beauty varying round ;
The haughtiest breast its wish might bound
Through life to dwell delighted here,
.Nor could on earth a spot be found
To nature and to me so dear.
Ooald thy dear eyes, in following mine,
Still sweeten more these banks of .Rhyne.
Btron.
Two years had passed away since the little
steamer Sophia Jane landed “the forger” at
.Field Place. ‘His colonial experience had
been far more agreeable than he could have
anticipated—more agreeable, indeed, than fell
to the lot of most of the unfoitunate exiles to
New South Wales. He had not been sub-
jected to the degradation of the lash, as he
had seen many, and his master treated him
more as a friend or a son than a convict-ser-
vant—never forgetting the occasion of his hav-
ing rescued Bertha from the fangs of the snake.
In comparison with others of his unfortunate
class, Percy Sinclair had nothing to desire save
the removal of the stain of infamy from his
name. His position upon the station was
that of general superintendent, and being kind
and just, he was as great a favourite with the
men as with the master. He was looked up
to and liked by all, and could not, even among
his own family at Elrasdale, have been more
thoroughly comfortable. Yet, surrounded
with all that ought to have made him happy,
he was feveiishly anxious to leave Field Place,
and willing to. hazard the harshest treatment
from another master (and he knew some to
be biutul as the slave-drivers of America),
rather than remain with Mr. Shelley. And
for the cause of his restlessness, Master Dan
Cupid—-the urchin at the bottom of so much
mischief—was solely responsible. During the
two years that he had been assigned to Mr.
Shelley, he had been frequently, almost con-
stantly, in the company of thei bright and beau-
tiful Bertha ; and, to be so, and remain heart-
whole, was beyond the power of human philo-
sophy. His had been one of those inex-
plicable cases of loye at first sight. He had
loved her from the day he-saw her first, from
the hour that in snatching'her from the reach
of the snake, he had been bitten in her stead
—bis mutilated left band was a memento alike
of the adventure, and the dawn of his love.
But with the love that filled his heart, was the
consciousnes haunting him day and night, that
the sweet object of his thoughts was as far
above him as the daughter of an English gen-
tleman was above a convicted felon—as far
beyond his reach as though she lived in
another world. “ Win her heart! Perhaps
he might; such things bad been. And what
then ? Cast a blight upon her fair young life
for ever 1 For how could he ever dare to
aspire to win her hand? ■ No hope before him
—none ! No father dared give bis daughter
to a convicted felon !” Many, many a bitter
reflections had cost him. Had he,
like Jacob, been called upon to wait s6ven
years, aye, seven years twice told, he could
have joyfully waited, borne op by the strength
of Hope. But for one in his position hope was


presumption, madness! Could he live in
the same house with her, see her dear
face, hear her sweet voice every hour of the
day, and not love her ? Impossible ! He
must flee from the sweet yet hopeless thrall I
Better fall into the hands of the most brutal
of masters, than remain! More welcome
labour, starvation, the lash (the daily bill of
fare of so many of his class), than the tortur-
ing conviction that fate had sealed his lips —
that his honor forbade his ever breathing his
devotion.
One morning, he formed the resolution of
asking Mr. Shelley to request the Government
to oancll his assignment, and recal him to Syd-
ney, He had been superintending some work
in the barn, and seeing his master approach-
ing alone, he determined to make the request
at once. .
‘ Well, Sinclair ; how would you like a run
to Newcastle to-day,’ Mr. Shelley asked, as
he entered. ‘ Very much, indeed, sir,’ replied
Percy Sinclair, hesitatingly.
‘Saddle your horse, then, and go with me,
I have business there, and you will be com-
pany.’
Percy thanked his master for his kindness.
‘ But, sir,’ he continued, ‘ I have a very great
favour to ask of you. I hope you will not
think me ungrateful, but 1 would much like
you to get me returned to the central dep6t,
or exchange with some one on the Hawkes-
bury.’
For a moment, Mr. Shelley was dumb from
surprise. ‘What! Are you serious P he
asked, at last. ‘ You would be treated very
differently there. Why do you wish to leave
ns?’
‘ I cannot hope to be as kindly treated any
where, as 1 have been here. Don’t ask me
why,’ Percy answered, evasively.
‘ If you can give me a reasonable cause for
wishing to leave Field Place, I will endeavour
to gratify your desire, but not otherwise. You
little know the misery of a condition of un-
mitigated servitude. I have seen more of it
than you; and for your sake—l have not for-
gotten my lasting obligation to you—l must
refuse, unless you can give me a sufficient rea-
son,’ Mr. Shelley answered gravely.
Percy was about to press his request upon
bis master, feeling it necessary to his future
peace to escape from the dangerous fascination
of the object of his hopeless love, bat she en-
tered at the moment, and interruptedtheic
conversation
* Two letters for Mr. Sinclair, and one for
papa,’ she said, handing each bis own. * Mr.
Drayton brought them from Newcastle on his
way home.’
Percy was conscious of feeling very confused
as he took his letters from the dear hand, and
of saying something, he didn’t know what, in
return.
Mr. Sinclair is thinking of leaving us, Ber-
tha,’-said her father, as he opened his. ‘ Try
and persuade him to change his mind!’
‘ Going to leave us!’ exclaimed Bertha, open
ing wide her beautiful eyes in astonishment
* Why, Mr, Sinclair 7
If Percy had shrunked from telling
Mr. Shelley the cause of his resolution, how
could he reply to her pointed question J ho
said something about wishing to see more of
the country, and then sat upon a cask to read:
his letters.
• Come along, Bertha! We will leave Mr.
Sinclair to his letters and his reflections, hop-
ing, however, that he will change his mind and
stay among his friends,’ Mr. Shelley said, lead
ing the way back to the house. Hff returned to
the door directly, and said. ‘ Get your horse
ready as soon as possible, Sinclair.. We must
start in an hour.’
Percy promised to do so, and after a few
minutes’ thought, he opened his letters. Ono
was from his father giving him news of home,
theother from Anne Egerton, telling him what
his father in kindness had hidden, that
through the failure of a bank her ancle had
lost a considerable part of his fortune. Elms-
dale would still remain his and a few hundred
i yearly; but in consequence of her uncle’s
reverses, she intended going out as governess,
as she was loth to be a burden to them. She
asked her cousin to let her know if there was
any opportunity of her getting such a situation
in the colony. He folded up his letters, and
without waiting to speculate upon their various
items of news took a bridle from the stable
hard by, and went for his horse.
His back was scarcely turned when a head'
was thrust out from under a quantity of hay
upon the loft, and the gruffest of gruff voices


exclaimed In a gruff whisper, ‘ The young
fellow Clayton let in for forgery, or I’m a
Methodist! Queer, how people do meet. Him
and the master is going to Newcastle; that’ll
be two less to manage to-night. Now that
I’ve learnt all that I can, I’ll watch a slant,
and slip away into the bush. To-night, we’ll
find enough here to keep us bushrangers jolly
for a month!’
. There was no mistaking the physiognomy
of the desperate Darby Gregson. Transpor-
ted for burglary nearly two years before, he
had escaped, and joined the gang of outlaws
that infested the Hawkesbury and Hunter
Rivers, and the intermediate ranges of the
Wollombi,
Four hours’ ride brought Mr. Shelley and
Percy Sinclair in sight of the little settlement
of Newcastle. They entered the village
through a honeysuckle scrub, the road, knee
deep in sand, and drew up before Rouse’s
Hotel. After dinner, Mr. Shelley said to his
companion, as they were smoking upon the
verandah, ‘ I have business with several gen-
tlemen, Sinclair,- so, if you like, you may
amuse yourself the while by strolling through
the village. Be here at five o’clock ; it will
be moonlight; so I think we will return to-
night if I get my business finished.
Mr. Shelley went out to attend to his busi-
ness, and Percy bent his steps to the top of
the hill at the back of the settlement, from
•which point of advantage the little town lay
spread below him like a map.
He stood upon the hill between the ruins
of an old windmill and Christ’s Church,
the blue waters of the Pacific behind him,
and before the broad estuary of the Hun-
ter River. The hill, which was covered
with a carpet of coarse verdure, and dotted at
intervals with the picturesque grass-tree, un-
dulated toward the river, where it fell abrupt-
ly to a broad belt of sand, that formed the
southern bank of the estuary. The village
lay rather to the right of the hill, and consis-
ted mainly of one. street, running from the
river up the slope to the top of the cliffs. The
military barracks was situated at the upperend
of the street, and opposite to. the cottages of
the commandant and officers; and at the Tower
stood the stockade,' The houses were prin-
cipally constructed of slabs or weather-
boards, ■ and had a rough and primitive
appearance. The street was extended, where
it reached the river, by a wooden pier
or wharf, at the end of which a small
vessel was discharging ballast. The road in-
land traversed the bed of sand upon the bank
of the river for a short distance, and then en-
tered a thick scrub, where it was soon hidden
from view by the dense growth of native
honeysuckle, Several teamsters were en-
camped at the entrance of the scrub, and were
engaged in unyoking their cattle and driving
them across the ford to an island in the angle
of the river.
[This island received its barbarous appella-
tion of * Bullock Island ’ from this practice.
It occurs to us that there would be a peculiar
appropriateness in permitting the island to re-
tain the name ‘ Onybegamba,’ bestowed upon
it by its original possessors, and in calling the
town now rapidly rising upon it ' Shortland,’
after the discoverer of the river.J
On the brow of the hill facing the scrub the
Anstralian Agricultural Company’s coal-pit
was situated, and a tramway, crossing the road
upon a wooden bridge, and reaching the river at
the nearest point, carried the coal-trucks to
the shoots, under which the colliers received
their cargoes. While, from his station on
the hill, Percy Sinclair was gating upon the
scene, a train of loaded trucks, impelled by
gravitation alone, began to travel down the
incline. Two sets of waggons, attached to an
endless hawser, were employed —the full ones
running down to the shoots, and by their
weight hauling the empty-ones back to the
pit. In the back-ground of the landscape be-
fore him, the river appeared from among the
cluster of islets -that concealed its upper
stream, and rolled down a channel nearly
two miles wide in a straight course, till reach-
ing the North Shore it turned abruptly to the
east and flowed into the sea. From the sea-
ward extremity of the northern bank the
shore stretched away in enclos-
ing an extensive Jbut, owing to its numerous
reefs and shoals, useless bay, At the entrance
of the rivet a large rock or island stood' sen-
tinel; and from the nearest point of the main
land to it a gang of convicts were employed in
constructing a breakwater. To the right, over-
looking the sea, and separated from the town


by a dense scrub of wiery, furze bushes, stood
the gaol, and between the scrub and the upper
portion of the street was the hospital.
Percy Sinclair spent an hour upon the hill,
gazing gloomily upon the beauty of the scenery,
and contrasting its brightness with his own
prospect. His heart was filled with thoughts
of so sombre a hue, that they cast a dark
shadow on all he looked upon. He had been
happier had he followed the golden advice of
the philosopher, to compare. his state only
with the situation of those in a worse position.
But, perhaps, this would, to him, have been
an impossible task, inasmuch as he felt his
case to be more desperate than the condition
of even the miserable wretches, who bore upon
their backs the visible badge of their slavery
the mark, of the lash.
, After an hour of self-imposed torture, he
rose from the grass, upon which he had
been reclining, and walked along the hill
to the town. He slowly passed down the
street, heedless of all but his own gloomy
thoughts, and reached the landing stage upon
the bank of the river. He stood for some
time silently watching a number of prisoners,
taking ballast from the vessel lying at the
stage; but, presently, rousing himself, he
entered into conversation,with one, who had
been wheeling ballast down a plank, and was
now resting upon the shafts of his barrow,
•‘ Hot work for a day like this,’ Percy said,
addressing him.
‘ Yes, sir; it be too hot for a blaokfeller!’
the man answered, wiping his face with his
cuff.
, ‘ Have you been out longi’ Percy enquired.*
‘Yes, sir, a goodish bit; I came out in ’32,
, ‘You have been out a long time. May I
ask what you were transported for?’ Percy
asked, with what might, perhaps, appear un-
pardonable curiosity; but in those days, such
a question followed as a matter of course,
when prisoners met for the first time.
‘ I don’t like to talk on it, sir ;’ replied the
man, ‘ for when I thinks o’ the lass an’ the
two little ’uns, as I left at home, I feels dan-
gerous like. , I was out o’ work—couldn’t get
a job nohow—an’ my Lizzie an’ our two little
’uns was a starvin—hadn’t tasted a mouthful
o’ wittles for two whole days. Oh! it was
horrid to see ’em gettin thinner an’ thinner,
an’ whiter ah’ whiter day arter day—dyin’
by hinches, as I calls it—an’ never a mor-
sel to give ’em. I’d a’ laid in a ditch, an’
rotted, afore I’d a stole a’ hapnth for my-*
self; but it diuv me mad to see my
Lizzie a wastin’ away, and to hear our little
’uns a cryin’—“ Gim me a bit o’ bread,
daddy—on’y a little bit; I’ze so hungerly!’
Y es, air; I stole a sheep to save the lives
o’ ’em as I’d a’ worked my fingers off to a’
kept honest, if I could.
“Yours is a hard case; but there are
thousands of others as hard,’ said Percy,, too
deep iu his own troubles to feel much affected
by the poor fellow’s story, ‘My own ex-
perience is as bitter as yours, though perhaps
in a different way.’.
‘ You can’t tell what it be, sir j it’s only
we poor convicts as knows what real misery
be.'
, ‘lam sorry to say I am as much a convict
as you. I am a lifer; but, thanks to Pro-
vidence, I have a kind master, who treats me
more like a friend than a servant.’
‘ What, you be a prisoner, and dress like a
gentleman ? Then you must belong to Mr.
Shelley. He’s the’ on’y master on the river,
as I’ve ever heerd of, who’d treat a man like
that,’ .
‘Yes ; I am fortunate enough to be assigned
to him,’ replied Percy; , r
‘Don’t you live up the river near Mait-
land ?’ the man asked, thoughtfully. ,
‘ Yes; the station I am on is between this
and Maitland.’
‘ I beered. the sergeant tellin the captain
jest now, that the bushrangers be on this side
agin ; they was seen on the Wollombi on
Monday, comin this way.’ ; ;. '
‘Surely not!’ exclaimed Percy, his heart
sinking at the thought of Bertha being in the
hands of the outlaws. ‘ Where are they now ?’
he asked, anxiously.
‘ The sergeant said as how he ’spected they’d
attack some o’ the stations between here and
Maitland, an’ theq rush off to Scone. Any-
way, they go up to morrow with some soldiers.’
To-moirow ! Who knows that, perhaps,
even now they may be attacking the station,
and he not by to protect her} He must at
once see Mr. Shelley and warn him of the
danger, and then gallop home. With a hur*


tied ‘Good-day; thank you !’ to the ballast-
wheeler he turned to go, but to his utter as-
tonishment encountered Hubert Clayton, who,
carpet bag in hand, was hurrying to a boat
that was waiting to row him across to the
brig in the stream. * Ha, Sinclair, didn't ex-
pect to see me, I suppose!’ he said, with a
triumphant smile, as he recognised his victim,
‘ I did not indeedsaid Percy, ‘ but I am
glad to meet a familiar face, in my exile.
Have you been long in the colony f
‘,'About eighteen months. I have a station
on the Cowpasture River; but my boat is
ready, and time and tide wait for no man.
Good-bye.’
He shook hands with Percy, and turned to
enter his boat. As he passed a constable on
the steps, he whispered, ‘ That man yonder,
in the grey suit, is a convict at latge ; see if
he has his pass,’
Percy had not gone more than fifty yards,
when a rough hand was laid upon his shoulder,
and a surly voice asked, ‘ Are you a prisoner,
or a free man V
‘ A prisoner,’ Percy replied, impatiently.
* Where is your pass P
‘ My pass'l’
‘Yes, your pass. You aren’t deaf, I hope.’
‘ I—l haven’t it with me,’ said Percy, with
ill-concealed annoyance.
‘1 thought as much. Well, come along,
I must lock you up; it won’t do to let such
cattle as you stray about the street.’
In vain Percy protested that his master
was in town, and urged his necessity to look
for him at once. The constable was inexor-
able. As he locked him in however, he said,
‘lf I see Mr. Shelley, I will let him know
where you are.’
Two hours of intolerable suspense and
anxiety passed before Mr. Shelley learnt of
the arrest of his servant. He at once left the
company he was in, and hurried to the lock-
up-
‘ I am sorry that this unpleasantness has
occurred, Sinclair. We must .be careful it
does not happen again. It is always wisest
to have a pass in your pocket in case of acci-
dent.’
* Have you heard, sir, that the bushrangers
are on the river again V Percy asked, disre-
garding the suggestion.
‘ Yes, Russell told me that they were seen
on Monday, by some settlers, at the head of
the Wollombi Erook, and that a party is to
start in the morning to patrol the road to
Maitland,' in case of their attacking any of
the stations along the river,’ answered Mr.
Shelley. .
‘ I feel very uneasy about the ladies, sir,’
replied Percy, ‘ Though it is very improbable
that the bushrangers will molest them to-day,
or even that they are in the immediate neigh-
bourhood of Field Place; yet, we have no'
guarantee that, at the present moment, the
homestead is not jin fames, and those we
lo , that your wife and daughter are not,
even now, in the power of the outlaws. The
men will all be away till dusk, you know.’
* That is not very likely,’ said Mr. Shelley,
turning pale at the bare idea. ‘ It is more
probable that they have gone northward from
Maitland. They would scarcely venture so
near to the head quarters of the military.’
‘ If your business is not concluded, I would
like to get my horse and gallop home at once,
in case of being needed,’ Percy said, earn-
estly.
• We will both go, Sinclair. It is not at all
probable that anything is wrong; but you
have imparted a share of your uneasiness to
me, and I shall not feel satisfied till we get
home.’
They hurried back to Rouse’s Hotel, got
their horses, and were soon galloping
homeward as fast as the sandy nature of the
road would permit.
The camp where Darby Qregson had left
his desperate comrades was situated in a deep
ravine at the back of a range, about three
miles south of Field Place. A range of low,
rugged hills, covered with a dense forest of
stunted gumtrees, and bordered at its base by
almost inaccessible brushes, afforded a good
cover to the outlaws. On the opposite side
of the range from the river, a path, unknown
to any but themselves, led through the rpugq
broken country to the head of tfie Wollombi,
and thence across the h{gber range to Wise'-
man’s Ferry, upon the Hawkesbury. This
line of retreat, along which they had reached
the Hunter Valley, being open, the bushrah;
gers felt secure, and determined upon boldly
attacking the stations along the river, repaij;


ing to their fastnesses when too closely pressed
by the police. Field Place being the first in
their programme, Darby Gregson had been
despatched at night to reconnoitre. His pre-
vious housebreaking experience in York now
stood him in good stead. With much diffi-
culty be had succeeded in concealing himself
in the loft over the barn, the doga being very
uneasy and wakeful, from which post he learnt
that Mr. Shelley and Percy were to be absent
in Newcastle, and that all the hands but Hal.
hutkeeper, would be away from
the homestead till evening. ■ Soon after Mr.
Shelley and Percy started for Newcastle, he
stole from the barn, and escaped Into the
bush. Retracing his steps up the ridge he met
the chief of the gang—a rough looking fellow
with shaggy, beetling eyebrows, and a sinister
gleam inhis dark eyes—a man who looked every
inch a villain. He had all Darby Gregson’s
ferocity and cunning, tempered with a yet deep-
er touch of cruelty. Why he had never been
hanged, was a question Justice would have
found difficult to answer, unless as a set off
against having hung some Innocent persons
by mistake. He bad been convicted of man-
slaughter, and transported for life for delibe-
rately murdering a sick wife, to avoid the
expense of supporting her. In theeame sittings
Justice had sentenced a woman to death for
etrikingahalf-druhken husband with a hammer
In self defence, when he was kicking her in his,
brutal passion. So much fox upright, infatlable:
Justice]
‘ Well, Darby, how does the land lay V Nat
Bryant asked, as Gregson reached him.
‘ Pretty snug, captain. All the men 're
away, except a one-legged old feller, and he’s
hntkeeping nearly half a mile from the
house. Shelley and one of the hands went to
Newcastle this morning, and won’t likely get
bpck till late tQ-night,
) Then w fi will lose po Jsipie In getting to
jyork, Parky,’ said tbe captain promptly. It’s
po use risking a fight we pan help it.’
‘There’s four finelooking woipen there,
captainparby suggested,
I Hang the women, Darby,’ returned his
more practical chief. ‘ It’s rations we want.
!jHow ’re they off for beef and flour ? That’s the
main point.’
I I hadn’t myioh cbancj to look about, cap?
tain ; the doga was too restless. All I learnt
was that the coast is clear.’
Well, trudge along, Darby ; let’s get back
to camp, and lose no time in getting the other
fellows out,' said Nat Bryant, leading the way
up the ridge.
They walked on in silence for a quarter-of-
an-hour till they reached its summit, and then
pausing for a few minutes to rest themselves,
turned and looked down upon the lowlands by
the river. To the right and left, as far as the
eye could reach, the valley was covered with
a dense" brush, excepting immediately beneath
the ridge upon which the bushrangers were
standing, where the forest penetrated to the
river’s brink, and left a few thousands of acres
clear from the undergrowth of brushwood. The
homestead of Field Place was visible at the
foot of the range, the blue smoke curling up-
ward in the calm morning air; and half a
dozen cows and a horse were seen grazing
about the stockyards. To the left of the clear
ground, about a mile from the house, and
hidden from it by the outer angle of thebrusha
small herd of cattle were being tended by two
men on horseback, and a quarter of a mile
further on two shepherds were rounding up a
flock of sheep.
* Look, captain, all the men are away out o’
sight o’ the house,’ said Darby Gregson, point-
ing to the stock-keepers and shepherds, ‘ we
could burn the place down, and them never
the wiser,’
‘ Yes, Darby; but come along. There’s no
time to lose. It’ll be as well to have the job
over before they get back to the huts,’ replied
Nat Bryant, turning to descend the further
side of the range. Darby Gregson followed ;
and they descended the precipitous face of the
hill with extreme difficulty, having in places to
lower themselves in the crevices of the rocks
by means of the vines and saplings that grew
among them. Reaching the bottom of the
hill they entered p deep gully or ravine, which
was filled with a tangled growth of young
timber. Although it was early forenoon, the
gully was as dark as night, the steep hills on
all sides and the dense foliage shutting out
the light of day. They entered the gully by
a pathway that bad been cut through the
brushwood, and followed it for fully a quarter
of a mlle ? when they suddenly emerged upon


fth Open space, cleat of timber, and covered
with a rich carpet of grass, soft and even as
an English lawn. This natural clearing was
almost circular in form, and occupied a space
of about two acres. A tiny stream of water
flowed through the open space; and in its
centre a large and graceful cedar tree rose to
a height of nearly fifty feet. This beautiful
spot was the temporary retreat of the bush*
rangers; and they had erected a small hut of
sheets of bark under the tree. As Darby
Gregson and the captain entered the clearing,
three other desperadoes rose from the green
sward, and advanced to meet them.
* Now, lads, stick your pistols and
knives in your belts, and follow me. The
coast is clear in the station over the range ;
and we must get at their beef-casks as soon as
possible, for ours are nearly empty,’ said Nat
Bryant.
‘ How about the horses, captain V asked a
thin, wiery fellow, iu appearance much resem-
bling a Scotch terrier, ‘We can’t get them
over this, part of the range.’
‘ They’re hobbled in the flat at the bottom
of the gully, Jennings, and they’ll be safe till
we get back,’ returned .the captain of the
band of ruffians. ,
The gang promptly armed themselves, and
were soon clambering the 1 steep side of the
range, on "their way to the scene of. their
meditated robbery, ,'
By the time they had reached the top of
the hill side, they were out of breath from the
exertion, and paused for a few minutes to
rest. The captain of the gang took advantage
of the opportunity afforded by the delay to
unfold his plans. . -
‘ Now, my lads,’ he said, addressing the
men, ‘ recollect that the first consideration is
provisions. Beef and flour we want j and we
must have them at any cost, After the ra-
tions are secured, if we can contrive to carry
off the women to our camp in the gully down
yonder, we will do so; and the devil help
them if they ever escape again. You,' Darby,
take Jennings and Foley down that side of
the ridge, and wait in the edge of the brush 1
till you see Hollingshed and me coming up on
the other side. We must take the house
front and rear, to prevent the women escap-
ing, Don’t show quarter to any man you may
meet; but just shoot him down as yott Wotild
a ’possum. It’s not likely we will see any,
for the master and one of the bands are in
Newcastle, and the rest are among the cattle
and sheep In the open country round there
at the back of the brush. ‘ But if you do,
• a *
give ao quarter/
After each of the gang had- passed his
opinion upon the feasibility of the plan, or
suggested an amendment; orders were given
to continue their march ; and, separating into
two parties, they began to descend the hill
towards Field Place.
They had not left the crest of the hill more
than five minutes, when the boughs of the
tree, under which they had been talking;
commenced shaking, and a dark figure—toma-
hawk in band—slid slowly down the trunk
to the ground. ‘ Halloa 1 What dat wild
white-feller want?’ Jerry exclaimed, as from
behind the cover of the tree be watched the
retiring bushrangers. “ Me link it dat make-
a-ligbt [go to] station, and kill Missie Berta.
Jerry get it tunder gun, and shoot him wild
whitefeller.’
Animated by the determination to protect
his young mistress, the black boy lay flat
upon his face, to avoid the ‘ wild white-feller’
from seeing him, and, in that posture, crawled
in a direction at right angles to the way .the
bushrangers were taking, till he reached a
hollow in the ridge that completely concealed
him, and then, mounting to his feet, ran
swiftly across the open ground, to the cover
of the brush, and reached it unperceiyed by
the robbers. He ran on, dodging ;the
saplings, and crawling under the tangled
bushes, till he' reacted the edge, of
the brush, close to the stockyard. 1 Hal.
Brown was at work, making a pigsty, and
the excited Jerry startled him by rushing up,
and exclaiming, with great .vehemence,, and
with alia black’s energetic gesticulation, [Look
here, Perbly, dat wild white-feller cornin’
along ridge to kill Missie Berta!, dare, dat
much wild white-feller,* he continued, indi*
eating the number of bushrangers upon his
fingers; and then, without waiting for fur-
ther, parley, he raced away up to the house.
‘ What the black imp is drivin at is past
my comprehension. Anyway, there’s a screw,
loose somewhere'; so I’ll jest go up to the


house and see. But it’s the duce of a dis-
tance to march at the double with a wooden
leg. Ah, there’s old Kitty; I’ll ride her,’
Having no bridle at hand, Hal. snatched up a
thong of stringy bark, and, catching the quiet
old mare, and making a halter of the bark, be
mounted her. To steady himself,'he clung to
the mane with one hand, and with the
other thrashed the mare with a small
paling he bad snatched up. Old Kitty started
off towards the house at a short trot, but-was
soon so discomposed by the happing of Hal.’s
wooden extremity against her hank, that she in
pressed her pace to a gallop, much to the dis-
comfort of her rider, who had some difficulty
in keeping bis seat.
CHAPTER XIII.
They come, a ruthless band.
On deeds of darkness bent —
Their passions rudely fann’d
By moody discontent.
Ah, heaven help tfie gentle prey,
That in their hands may fall this day !
Anther’s M.S.
Mrs, Shelley and her servants, Marion
Macaulay aud Janet Wilkins, were sitting
sewing in the parlour, and Bertha was prac-
tising a music lesson.
‘ Marion,’ Bertha exclaimed, pausing from
the difficult exercise that had called for long
and patient application, ‘ did you ever try to
improvise music !’
‘lmprovise music, miss! You mean, to
compose as I played f Said Afarioo, looking
up from her'worlf, ‘
* Yes; think" in music, and play as you
think/'
‘No, miss; I have always been satisfied to
play the compositions of others. Although I
can play passably, l am no genius,’ x
‘Well, I always fancied 1 ! could compose 1
tunes if 1 tried j and I did so this morning,
when you were in the diary with mamma,
and I ought to have beeu dusting (she- furni-
ture,'
f Ah, that is why the dust is so thick upop the
chair and table legs,’ said Mrs. Shelley, smil-
ing, •* Well, the next time you are ambitious
of. being a musical improvisatrice, just finish
your work before you try, I think you will
be wiser in studying your exercises tfiap lu
atffmptjpg the impossible,’
Well, just listen, mamma,’ Bertha replied*
‘and 1 will play over what I composed this
morning.’
4.8 the fair girl spoke she touched the keys,
and a silvery ripple of music, soft as the plash
of falling waters, caused her mother and
Marion to suspend their breath in astonish-
ment and delight. The dulcet prelude was
followed by passages now grand and solemn,
now. joyous and sparkling; one moment of
wierd and fantastic feeling, the next of ex-
quisite and tender sweetness—a rapid and
startling succession of every emotion knowq
to the human breast.
‘Oh, how beautiful!’ exclaimed her
hearers, as she finished, and turned to them
with her blue eyes beaming with pleasure,
and her delicate features animated with the
excitement of “ thinking in music,”
Genius, the creative, the highest power of the
human mind, how should they of coarser clay
revere thee—thou of all man’s endowments
the most"godlike—thou that acceptest teach-
ing of none but heaven 1
‘ Shall I play it again, mamma V Bertha
asked, proud that her mother was pleased
with her performance.
Before Mrs. Shelley could answer, Jerry,
the black boy, rushed in, tomahawk in hand,
and panting from the exertion of his long
race. ‘Look here, Missie Berta, dat wild
whitefeller come along by-by and kill him
you)’ be exclaimed, as soon as he had re?
covered his breath.
f What do you mean, Jerry ?’ asked his
young mispress, half airaid he had gone mad.
'* What is the matter, Jerry 1’ Mrs. Shelley
asked kindly, as he stood staring from one to
the other, in great perplexity,
‘All dat much bushranger,’ he cried, extend?
mg the fingers of one hand ; come along plea*
santly, and kill him everybody.’
At this, moment, Old Iperbly limped in.
‘ There’s no time to apologise for intrudin’,
ladies; the bushrangers are cornin’, if I under*
stand Jerry right,’ he said, as he wiped his red
face with the sleeve of his jacket.
‘Yes, ’Berbly, dat one, two, por, seben tree
bushranger,’ answered Jerry, counting upon
his fingers,
‘Now, look here, ladies,’ cried the hntkeeper
noticing theif terrified looks, ‘ it’s no use faint-


In*. Jest brush about and get all the muskets
yon can, and the domed wretches shan’t touch
a ’air o’ your heads while Hal. Brown’s got a
leg to stand on.’
This energetic speech had the effect of rous-
ing them from the feminine tendency to faint,
and in a few minutes they had collected and
brought into the parlor all the arms and am-
munition in the house.
‘ Ob, Hal., do you think——’
* Tbinkin be domed,’ exclaimed the veteran
savagely, there’s no time for thinkin’ I Don’t
any o’ yon say nothin’ unless it’ll help us out
o’ this fix.’
Hal. Brown saw the only way to keep them
from succumbing to their terror was to keep
them from talking of their danger, and acted
accordingly. The arms available were six mus-
kets, a pair of horse pistols, and the sword Mr.
Shelley had worn when in the army. There
were also a hundred rounds of ammunition
for the muskets, and a few charges for the
pistols.
‘ There’s no time to lose, if Jerry isn’t givin’
us a false alarm. Let me see;’ he continued
scratching his head for an idea, ‘we can’t well
hold this house long; they could set it afire,
and smoke us out. Jerry go into the tool
shed, and get some nails, and a axe, and the
biggest auger you can find, and run up to the
dairy with 'em.’
Jerry darted out to execute the order.
‘ Now ladles, the only chance as I can see is
to get to the dairy, as soon as possible. It stands
away from any buildin or fence, and so we
cannot be surprised. Hick up some o’ them
muskets and cartridges and come along.’
They carried the weapons and ammunition
to the dairy, as directed, while Hal. looked
about for a stont.cord, and some strong boards.
Everything procured that the old soldier’s
sagacity suggested, they entered the dairy, and
Hal, barricaded the door and open win-
dow by nailing strong boards against them.
Then he took the auger and bored a couple o'f
holes through the door.
‘Here, Jerry, bore a hole through that thin
slab at the end o’ the dairy wall, while I load
them muskets,’ he said, handing the tool to the
blackboy.
* Now, ladies, don’t say a word any o’ you
but jest watch me load these muskets, and then
you’ll know how to, if there is any casion,’ he
said, as he drew out the ramrod of one of the
pieces ready for loading.
In silence the four women watched him
charge the muskets. They were pale from
terror, but Jerry’s determined manner pre-
vented them from giving expression to their
emotion of fear. As he laid down the last
one, Bertha said, ‘Oh, what will happen
to- 1*
‘ Now, look here. Miss, if you’d like to see
all o’ you with your throats cut and your eyes
gouged out, just begin to talk; and if you
wouldn’t, just do what 1 tell you, and ask no
questions !’ Hal. interrupted with well-
feigned sternness. He knew the natural
weakness of his little garrison, and took the
only course to obviate it —that of insisting on
silent and unreasoning obedience. The mus-
kets and pistols loaded, he turned his attention
to boring more loop-holes. He bored a couple
—one at each end of the front wall, and
then knocked out the wooden shelf-pegs that
were driven into holes previously bored. By
this means he secured several loop-holes in
each of the walls, and would be enabled to fire
in any direction that danger threatened.
‘ Now, Jerry,’ he said, when all his prepar-
ations were completed, ‘you must watch at
that hole in the door, and tell me when you
see them cornin’. Take this musket, and
when I tell you, fire it,’
‘Jerry took the weapon, and the post as-
signed him, and kept a sharpilook-out. Hal.
then set one of the girls to each of the other
sides, and gave another look to the weapons.
‘.I can load a musket, Hal.!’ Mrs. Shelley
said, while he was so engaged.
‘ That’s a good job, ma’am 1 You’ll have
practise enough presently, I’m afraid; unless
Jerry is tonkin a fool o’ us 1’
‘ Here come u dat bushrangers/ exclaimed
Jerry, excitedly, and raising the muzzle of his
musket to the loop-hole to fire. Hal. gently
removed it. * Don’t fire till 1, tell you to,’ he
said, in a whisper; and then, turning to two
of the girls who had shrunk back from their
posts in terror, he said, ‘Back to your loop-
holes, and watch ; or I’ll open the door, and
let them domed wretches in 1’
The threat bad the desired effect-


Hal. Brown looked through a loop-hole, and
saw the two parties of bushrangers approach-
ing the house from opposite directions.
‘By St. George,’ he muttered, ‘ this’ll beat
Qorunna! —five to one ! it’s to a big odds I I’ve
seen some warm work, in my young days, but
nothin’ as hot as this’ll be !’
The bushrangers stealthily approached the
bouse; and Darby Gregsou led his brace of
villains over the garden fence, and in at the
back door, while Hollingsbed and the captain
entered at the front. -
‘ Oh, where are they Hal. ? Are they com-
ing this way V asked Marion Macaulay,
anxiously.
Hal. .Brown turned upon her savagely.
‘By St. George,’ he muttered, ‘ if any o’ you
speak agin without orders, I'll, capitulate at
once I All you’ve got to do is to watch your
side o’ the dairy, and tell me when you see
’em cornin’. You see, ma’am,’ he whispered
to Mrs. Shelley, in explanation, ‘I don’t
want to be uncivil, but we must keep up dis-
cipline ! I’m not goin’ to risk my life to save
you all, unless you help me; and you can’t
do no good by chatterin’ and faintin’.
‘You are right, Hal.,’ replied Mrs. Shel-
ley ; ‘ and we will cheerfully do whatever
you direct. If we do escape, I ’
‘ Wery well, ma’am; but there’s no time
for talkin’ now,’ interrupted Hal., turning
back to the loophole to watch the movements
of the enemy.
Mrs. Shelley sat upon a low stool, a loaded
musket in her grasp ready to hand to their
protector. She was very pale, and her lips
were tightly compressed. Bertha stood at
her post, watching through a loophole at one
end of the dairy, her beautiful features flushed
from the intense excitement of fear,
'Nothing but the brusque and decisive
.manner of old Hal. prevented her from faint-
ing. Marion Macaulay was as timid and
fearful,.but more self-possessed, and ready to
follow • the old man’s orders. She was sta-
tioned at- the opposite end. Janet Wilkins,
the housemaid, whose post was to watch at
the back, was so stupified by fear that
she stood motionless as a block, hearing and
and seeing nothing.
The bushrangers spent a quarter of an hour
in eager search through the house, but not
finding the ladies, they assembled in the ve-
randah, and, after a few minutes’ consultation,
gave up the search under the impression that
their prey bad escaped into the bush. They
then set about collecting provisions, some
carrying flour bags and others rolling beef-
casks out of the store-room, and heaping them
on the green before the house.
‘Now, girls,’ said Hal. Brown, turning
from his post of observation, ‘if you’ll jest sit
down here and hold your tongues, you may
leave the loopholes. The bushrangers are
busy yobbin’ the stores, and me and Jerry’s
enough to watch ’em.’
The girls took advantage of the permission
and seated themselves by Mrs. Shelley,
Marion Macaulay saying, timidly, as they did
so, ‘ May I ask you one question, Hal. V
‘ Well I’ answered the old veteran, gruffly,
not wishing to encourage talking.
‘ Do you think they will go away quietly
with what they steal, or that they will look
for us again before they go f
‘ How can I tell what they'll do; I aren’t
inside o’ them !’ he growled in reply, as he
turned to the trustworthy Jerry, who was in-
tently watching the movements of the bush-
rangers. ‘ Jerry,’ he said, touching him on
the shoulder to divert his attention for a mo-
ment, ‘ Where did you fust see ’em ?’
Without taking his eyes off the outlaws,
Jerry replied, ‘Right along top ridge, Perbly.
All him bushranger come along over dother
side range.’ i
‘ Then they won’t pass us in carryin’ the
rations away, ladies; they’ll take the short
cut hack round the other end o’ the bouse,’
Hal. said, to reassure them. But the next
moment he threw them back into the arms of
despair, by doubting whether the bushrangers
might not set fire to all the buildings before
leaving, as was their usual custom; in which
case they would not be likely to overlook the
dairy.
The bushrangers loaded themselves with
the rations and started with their burdens
round the further end of the house, as Hal.
Brown had predicted, and away up the hill. Old
Kitty was grazing in their line of march, and
on reaching her Darby Gregson caught her,
and, throwing his bag of beef over her back,
led her up the ridge by Hal. Brown’s halter


of stringy bark. Hal. watched their retreat
with much satisfaction. Although ready
enough to figure as hero in the thrilling ad-
ventures he treated his friends with, he had
no ambition to incur personal risk if it could
be fairly avoided.
‘All dat wild whitefeller go now Missie
Berta 1’ cried Jerry, delightedly, as he saw the
last of them disappear up the ridge.
‘ God be praised for our deliverance!’ fer-
vently ejaculated Mrs. Shelley, ‘ It is a mer-
ciful providence that they did not think of the
dairy. They would have killed us all if they
had found us!’
‘Perhaps the bushrangers may.meet papa
and Mr. Sinclair. Oh, I shall be so uneasy
till they come home !’ Bertha said, anxiously.
‘ You have nothin’ to be afraid on. Miss
Bertha,’ Hal. returned. ‘The domed bush-
rangers are gone the wrong way to meet the
master.’
‘ We may go back to the house now, Hal.
Knock away the boards and open the door.’
Hal. stood with his back to the door. ‘ No
one leaves this fort, ma’am, till the men come
back at sundown,’ he said, firmly. ‘ Perhaps
I ought not to be so bold, but you see I know
more about bushrangers than you do, and 1
won’t let anyone out o' this till we have a re-
inforcement. I have been a soldier, ma'am,
and so has the'master, and I’m certain he’ll
see that I am right.’
‘ Do you then think there is more danger,
Hal. ?’ Mrs. Shelley asked, gazing at the old
man in blank despair. ‘ Do you really chink
they.will return?’
‘lf the homestead was in flames, ma’am,
Pd think they wasn’t cornin’ back ; but bush-
rangers isn’t often satisfied without doin’ more
mischief than robbin’ . a store-room. No,
they’ll come back sure as a gun; and so not
one o’ you ’ll leave these quarters if I can pre-
went. it, and 1 think I can. Jest sit down all
o’ you and make yourselves as comfortable as
you can under the circumstances, and me and
Jerry ’ll watch. Perhaps, if they should find
us, we can hold out till the men come home
at sundown.’
‘ Hal., could not Jerry find his way through
the brush to where the men are, and give the
alarm V Marion Macaulay asked, eagerly.
1 No! I’ve thought o’ that, Marion; but
the bushrangers ’ll most likely be back befoie
Jerry could reach the back o’ the run ; and 1
can’t spare him Jerry’s a good shot.’
‘ But, Hal.,’ persisted Marion, bent on de-
vising some means of escape, ‘ could not we
all steal away into the .brush 1 They could
never find us if we once got into it.’
‘ Have they got any horses to ride us down
with ? that’s the question 1 Recollect, it is
more than a quarter o’ a mile to the brush.
Are they watchin’ the place now from among
the trees on the ridge, their horses standia’
close by 1’
‘ I don’t know !’
‘Then, if we don’t know, we must not risk
ourselves 1 It’ll take ’em longer to storm us
here than to cut us to pieces on the open
ground. A weak army always fights behind
entrenchments, and we must not expose our-
selves,’ Hah.replied,
Half an hour of intense suspense passed,
Hal. Brown and Jerry both watching the
part of the bush where the enemy had disap-
peared, and the weaker part of the little gar-
rison seated upon a wooden bench, talking in
whispers, their anxiety increasing every mo-
ment.-
A furious barking at the back of the dairy,
and a loud voice swearing, suddenly startled
them all, and caused Mrs. Shelley and -the
girls to spring to their feet in terror.
Not a sound out o’ any o’you, as you walue
your lives !’ muttered Hal. warningly. ‘ Back
to your posts!’ he said, as he stepped to the
loop-holes at the back of the dairy.
The bushrangers were within a hundred
yards of the dairy, and as Hal. looked out, old
Nell, the bulldog, was in the act of springing
at the throat of Nat Bryant. With a bound
aside the captain of the gang eluded his grasp,
and, at the same moment, a pistol shot from
Darby Gregson broke the dog’s leg. But,
though baffled and wounded, the determined
beast would not give up the contest, and in
another spring, fastened upon the outlaw’s
shoulder. Nat’s, pistol had dropped from his
band in the struggle, and he could not get at
his knife. He was consequently powerless,
but Jennings leaped forwaid, and by a blow
with the butt of his pistol, stunned the dog,
which relaxed its hold and rolled back ap-
parently, lifeless.


Ha}, turned to his little garrison. ‘ Mind
ladies,’ he Said, slowly, ‘if you don’t do ex-
actly what I tell you, and be cool, you’ll be in
the bands o’ the bushrangers in five minutes.
No faintin or screechin mind 1 Bertha pick
up two muskets and stand ready to hand ’em
to me. Jerry, you go to the furthest loop-
hole on this side and fire when 1 tell you.
And you, Marion, pick up the other two
muskets ready to give to Jerry. You, ma’am,
stand there by the ammunition, and you’ll be
ready to load the muskets. Janet, stand by
that loop-hole and tell me if they move past
the corner 1’
The cause of the bushrangers being in the
opposite direction to which they had disap-
peared, was, that they had returned further
along the range, and were approaching the
house mote to the right. They were now
standing facing the house ; and hoping that
they might pass on without noticing the re-
treat, Hal. determined not to fire unless the
enemy showed a disposition to attack.
‘Jerry,’ he whispered, ‘if they come past that
little stump about thirty yards away, you fire
at the big chap that old Nell flew at. Aim
at bis belt, and you’ll bit him somewhere.’
‘ All right, Perbly I’ the black boy replied,
‘Bale Jerry miss him.’
The bushrangers stood for a few minutes in
earnest conversation, and then started again
towards the bouse. They had only proceeded
about fifty yards when Hollingshed suddenly
stopped, and pointing to the dairy, said some-
thing to the captain. They were too far off
for the watchers to hear their words ; but it
was evident from the whole band turning back
and slowly advancing towards the dairy, that
they had been in reference to it. ‘Jerry!’
Hal. whispered again, ‘ Are you ready {'
‘ Yes, Perbly !’ replied the black boy, in an
undertone.
‘ Then fire at the big chap >when they pass
the stump ; and I’ll shoot the vagabond as
turned ’em back. Be brave, girls ; and ready
to help us, and we’ll save you yet!’ he con-
tinued to the girls, who, pale from terror,
were standing at their posts.
The bushrangers appioached to within fifty
yards, and halted again, as if undecided upon
their movements. ' Hollingshed again exerted
bis icfluence, and, after a few minutes energe-
tic persuasion, he succeeded in inducing them
to continue their advance.
‘Jerry!’ Hal. whispered again.
‘All right, Ferbly! Jerry know 1’ replied
the watchful hlack boy.
‘ Aim at his belt!'
They reached the fatal line. A loud report
that reverberated among the hills beyond, and
Hollingshed sprung high in the air, and rolled
over, dead, shot through the heart by the old
soldier’s deadly aim. Jerry’s shot had not
been so successful. Nat Bryant escaped with
bis life, but it was an exceedingly narrow es-
cape ; for the' young savage’s bullet had cut
its way through the outlaw’s ear. Both the
marksmen snatched another musket from the
girls behind them, and fired again.
‘ Cease firing, Jerry,’ cried Hal., ‘ reserve
your last shot till I tell you.’
Mrs. Shelley loaded the discharged musket
rapidly, while Hal, and Jerry watched the en-
emy through the loop-holes. As soon as the
smoke had sufficiently cleared away, the bush-
rangers were seen standing far beyond gun-
shot,engaged in an animated consultation. The
captain tied a rough woollen comforter round
his head, over the wounded ear, and then
turned to bis men, and addressed them with
great energy. He was out of hearing from
the dairy; but Hal. concluded, from his
vehemence and his*pointing at the fallen out-
law, that revenge for their comrade’s death
was the burden of his words.
‘ Now, ladies, it is war to the knife ! If you
don’t want to be carried off by the domed
wretches yonder to their camp, to be house-
keepers to ’em, just screw up your nerves,
and do what I tell you. Marion, get right
into the corner there, and then you can watch
two sides; and you, Bertha, into this corner,
to my right. You’ve loaded them right,
ma’am.’ Janet, you be ready to take the
muskets, as me and Jerry fires ’em, to Mrs,
Shelley, and hand the loaded ones back.’
Under most circumstances of, such great
danger, Hal.’s little garrison would have been
helpless from terror ; but he had inspired them
with so much of bis cool courage that even the
frail aud delicate Bertha watched at her post
with the quiet heroism of the maid of Sara-
gossa; and the trembling, stupified Janet


roused herself, and stood ready to hand the
muskets to Hal. and Jerry.
‘They are coming again, Hal.,' Bertha said,
in a steady voice.
The bushrangers were approaching again,
knives and pistols in hand. When just be-
yond musket-range, they halted, and extended
ready to take the dairy at a rush.
‘ Ready, Jerry V Hal. asked.
•All right, Perbly!’ replied the boy.
‘ When they pass the stomp, give ’em two
shots, as fast as you can. Here they come!
Fire!’ he cried, as the bushrangers made a
a dash. They were met, at thirty yards, by a
couple of bullets; but the lead taking no
effect, they rushed on. Scarcely a quarter of
a minute, and another couple of bullets met
them in fall career—one grazing. Foley's cheek,
and the other striking the trigger of Darby
Gregson’s pistol,
‘Take’em in che rear! Quick lads !’ Nat
Bryant shouted, and with a few springs
reached the front of the dairy, closely followed
by the others. The bushrangers were so close
that the besieged heard the order. ‘Quick,
Jerry, to the loopholes at the front I’
cried Hal. ‘ Fire right in their faces!’
Two more shots sprang forward to greet
the out-laws, but missed their mark in the
hurry of aiming.
‘ Curse them, they’ve drilled the slabs like
a honeycomb 1’ growled Jennings, as he fol-
lowed the others, who had beat a precipitate
retreat to a safe distance.
‘To the loopholes, girls. Now, Jerry, bear
a hand here to charge these muskets,’ cried
the old man, as be began rapidly reloading.
In a few minutes the firearms were ready
again.
‘Jerry, where’s your tomahawk!’
‘ Me got him, Perbly.’
‘You, Marion, take this pistol, and you
Mrs- Shelley, take this one; and .when they
come within range point at one of them
and pull the, trigger,’ Hal. said, handing them
the weapons.
‘Give me one, Hal.,’ Bertha asked, with
quivering lips. ‘ Give me one. I can help
to defend mamma.’
‘ That’s a brave girl! . Take this musket
and pull the trigger when I fire.’
‘ Oh, If papa and Mr. , Bertha began.
‘Silence in the ranks; there’s no time for
talkin’ !’ thundered the stern disciplinarian.
‘ They,are going back to the house again,
Hal.,’ said Marion.
~ Hal. looked out and found the bushrangers
in full retreat to the house. They went
straight to the tool shed, and were soon busily
employed in sawing and hammering some
ironbark slabs.
‘ What are they doing, Hal, Y Mrs. Shelley
enquired, anxiously.
‘ You’ll know soon enough,’ said Hal., who
saw through their intention. ‘ When they
attack us agin, we’ll have to fight at closer
quarters, that’s all. It’s a long time, ma’am,
since I was a little boy sayin my prayers by
my mother’s knee, but I can remember it as
if it was only yesterday,’ Hal. continued, his
eyes moistening at the recollection. ‘I re-
member the last time I ever saw her—it was
the day after I ’listed. She said to me then,
as she laid her bands on my curly head,
’ Henry, says she, you’re goin’ to where there’s
heaps o’ danger; but God is there, too, and
whenever you ate in danger pray to him.’ We
are all in danger now, ma’am ; and though I
don’t care very much for myself, yet I am
afraid for the sakes o’ all o’ you. I can’t
pray. It’s so long ago since I did, that I’ve
forgotten how j but, if- God will answer any-
body’s prayers, He will Bertha’s. If there
ever was a angel on earth, she’s one.’
‘We will all pray, Hal.,’ Mrs. Shelley said,
kneeling. The girls’clustered around her, and
deep and earnest were the supplications offered
to the throne of mercy by-the helplees ones for
deliverance from the hands of the bushran-
gers,
‘ Look, Perbly, here day come!’ cried
Jerry, excitedly, as the bushrangers, their
work concluded, emerged from the toolshed.
Each man was carrying upon his shoulder
a broad ironbark slab about six feet long, on
the under side of which they had nailed strips
of green hide. Hal. watched them for a mo-
ment, a bitter smile upon bis withered fea-
tures. He could not but admire their inge-
nuity, though a strong presentiment suggested
that it would prove fatal to him. With a
muttered curse upon the heads of the ap-
proaching bushrangers, he turned from the
loophole. He regarded the helpless ones at


prayer with a pitying gaze. No hope of sav-
ing them now. The outlaws would be enabled
to force their entrance, and, at close quarters,
what-could a battered old fragment of hu-
manity do against such odds? ‘Jerry, give
me your tomahawk, and you watch ’em while
I knock out the bottom o’ one o’ these slabs,’
he said, turning to the blackboy.
Jerry handed the weapon to Hal., and then
turned again to the loophole. Hal, limped.to
the side of the dairy, opposite to where he
expected the bushrangers would direct their
attack. The old soldier loosened the lower
end of a slab by a few heavy blows of the
hatchet, so that it could swing upon its upper
fastening, and be pushed aside at the bottom
wide enough to allow anyone to crawl through.
While he was so engaged, Jerry snatched
up the auger, and, knocking out the handle,
made a good substitute for a waddy, or black-
fellow’s club.
‘ Look here, Jerry,’ said Hal., pointing to
the displaced slab, ‘ if the bushrangers take
us by storm, they’ll only knock me on the
head. They’ll take the ladies back with ’em
to their camp in the mountains. When I
sees no chance left, I’ll whistle, and then you
slip out here and away into the brush. When
the master comes home, you can track ’em and
lead him to the rescue.’
Though not fully comprehending Hal.’s
words, the brave young savage, under-
stood sufficient to know that on Hal.’s signal,
he was to escape into the brush, and track the
‘wild whitefellers ’ to their camp; and be
grinned in anticipated triumph, as be pictured
to himself the ‘cobbon fight’ there would be
when the master and ‘ Misser Sinlar’ should
catch the wild whitefeller. ‘All right, Per-
bly; Jerry know I Bale Jerry lose him
track I’ he said, confidently.
Old Hal.’s words to the blackboy awoke
Mrs. Shelley to the probable nature of their
terrible fate. Till now she had looked upon
death as the inevitable sequence of the tra-
gedy, should the bushrangers but obtain pos-
session of their stronghold. Now she realized
all the horror and degradation of the fate sug-
gested by Hal.’s order to Jerry. With ashy
lips, and face rigid in its death-like whiteness,
she rose from her knees, and confronting him,
asked, in a tone of deepest anguish, ‘What?
Could they, would they dare to outrage ns?’
‘ Whoso to prewent ’em, ma’am, if they
once get hold o’ you ?’ Hal. replied, as he
turned to the loophole to conceal his tears.
The expression of agony upon her features,
and the pleading eyes of his beautiful young
mistress, quite overcame him, as he thought
of their being, perhaps, in a few minutes, in
the hands of the cruel and pitiless outlaws.
She laid her hand heavily upon his arm,
and said, in a low, husky voice, ‘Hal., we are
face to face with death ; you could not break
a promise made to us now? Promise that
you will do at once, and without question,
whatever I may ask of you 1’
Hal. hesitated a moment, and then turning
to her, he replied., piteously, '* Don’t ask me,
ma’am; I couldn’t!’
‘Promise me, Hal. You have acted nobly
in risking, perhaps sacrificing, your life in our
defence ; crown your generosity by snatching
us from their power.’
‘I couldn’t, ma’am!’ he replied, gloomily.
‘I know what you want me to do, but I
couldn’t.’
‘ What! Would you allow my darling to
live to be outraged by those wretches V she
exclaimed her eyes flashing with indignation
at the thought. ‘ Would you permit tha
innocent child to live to be made the comt
panion of the vilest scum of the land ? No,
Hal., you cannot, when one stab with that
sword will place her out of their power for
ever ! When you think it impossible to hold
out longer, kill us both; and if you escape,
tell my husband we preferred death to dis-
honor.’
The girls clustered around Mrs. Shelley,
weeping in their terror and despair. The
manner of Hal. told them plainly enough that
hope was at an end. Prayer may have made
them fitter for death ; but it is beyond the
power of ordinary humanity to meet it with
passive stoicism.
‘ No, ma’am, I can’t! so it’s no use askin’/
Hal. replied, after a moment’s - reflection.
* And another thing: Jerry ’ll escape, and
lead the master on the track of the bnshran-
gers; and you may be saved before long.’
‘ No, no ! It’ll be too late then! Better
death now, than to fall into the hands of the
bushrangers !’


‘ What do you day, girls 1* Hal. asked inde-
cisively.
Bertha and Marion Macaulay both cried
eagerly, ‘ Yes, yes, Hal. Better die than be
taken away with the bushrangers !’
Janet Wilkins, in her bewilderment, could
not comprehend the situation, and begged
hard that her life might be spared.
Hal. limped up and down the dairy a
couple of turns, unable to decide how to act.
He stopped suddenly before the vigilant
Jerry. ‘Are they half-way yet?’ he asked
abruptly.
‘Yes, Perbly. Day along big anthill now,’
the black boy replied, without removing bis
watchful eyes from the approachiny outlaws.
‘ You are brave girls,’ Hal. said, turning to
Bertha and Marion, ‘ but I can’t do what
you ask. If you aren’t afraid to die rather
than go with the bushrangers, don’t be afraid
to fight to save yourselves from their clutches.
They haven’t got us yet, and there’ll be more
blood shed afore they do. They’ll likely
burst in the door ; so each o’ you girls take a
musket, and the moment they spring in, fire
into their faces. You take the pistols, ma’am,
and you, Jerry, take two muskets and stand by
the loose slab. The moment the door gives
way, fire among the wretches, and then slip
away through the slab and away into the
brush ; and if the bushrangers do carry the
ladies off, just watch which way they go;
then you can lead the master to save ’em.’
‘Couldn’t wo all escape into the brush, as
well as Jerry ?’ Marion inquired eagerly.
‘ They couldn’t help seeing you, and then
they’d catch you without much trouble,’ Hal.
replied.
‘ Oh, it is dreadful to die or be carried
away, and never see papa again,’ Bertha cried
wringing her hands in her despair.
‘Stop! Not another.word 1 1 can’t stand
it!’ cried Hal., desperately. ‘ We’ve too much
else to do to waste time in screecbin’. Where
are they now, Jerry 1’
‘ Bight along dat hollow stump,’ said Jerry,
who was acting sentinel/
‘Take up the position I gave you, Jerry!
I’ll watch ’em now,’ Hal. said, taking Jerry’s
place.
The bushrangers were about a. hundred
yards distant, and still carrying', their slabs.
At about fifty paces they halted, and, holding
their slabs before them in the form of shields,
and presenting nothing to the aim of old Hal.
but the upright faces of the slabs, they con-
tinued their advance. Ha), stayed at his
post till they reached the front of the daily,
and, coveting the loopholes with the slabs,
commenced battering the door. Then he re-
tired to the farther corner, from which he
would have better aim, and motioning the
others to follow his example, levelled his
piece at the door. In less than two minutes
it was forced open, and the captain of the
gang sprang in, closely followed by the other
desperados. A blinding volley met them as
they entered; and Nat. Bryant fell back
wounded in the side. In a moment he was on
his feet again, and fired at Hal., shooting him
through the fleshy pait of his right arm, as
the brave old fellow was levelling another
musket to fire again. The piece fell from Hal.’s
powerless grasp ; but he snatched up the sword
in his left hand, and prepared to continue
the struggle. He made a furious lunge at
Nat. Bryant, as that worthy incautiously ap-
proached within arm’s length; but Nat was
too quick, and sprang back in time to avoid
the thrust. Before Hal. could recover himself,
Jennings knocked his wooden leg from under
him, with the butt end of a discharged mus-
ket, and the old man fell over on his side!
In a moment the bloodthirsty wretch was
upon him, and wrenching the sword from his
grasp, ran him through the chest with it;
and Bryant, pointing a pistol at the old
hero’s head, and saying, ‘ You’ve done us
mischief enough for one lifetime, old fellow,’
pulled the trigger, and he, who had figured
as hero in so many fictitious adventures,
fell back, desperately wounded in the defence
of helpless women,
‘Don’t! Oh, don’t kill poor old Hal.,’
pleaded Marion Macaulay, earnestly. ‘ He
fought so bravely for us : do spare his life !’
‘ Couldn’t think of it, my beauty; He shot
the best man I had,’ Nat. Bryant replied.
‘ And look here (pointing to his wounded
side), how nearly he cheated me of you.
Another half-inch higher, and I’d have gone
to glory first. No, no! my darling; he’s as
dead as a door nail, so wipe your eyes, and
let’s see how you look when yon smile,’ he


replied, as he and his companions tied their
hands.
With sinking hearts, they submitted to be
pinioned.
‘ Now, lads,' said Nat. Bryant, as he
lightly fastened Bertha’s hands, and attached
her to the other three prisoners, by means of
a long cord tied to the wrists of each ; I’m
Captain, so I’ll choose first. This little
angel of brightness will be mine. There’s
just one apiece for the rest of you, so draw
lots at once, and let’s get away up the moun-
tain as quick as possible. Its getting late,
and the men’ll be home soon.’
‘ Have you a mother orasiatei V Mrs. Shel-
ley asked, turning to the wretch, who had sig-
nified his intention of keeping possession of her
daughter. <
‘ I suppose I had a mother, returned Nat.
Bryant, grinning, ‘or how I came into this
wicked world was a miracle. And I had a
sister too ! What about them 1’
* Think what would be your mother’s feel-
ings, were her daughter in the position of my
darling now ! If you have any respect for a
mother’s feelings, spare my child !’
‘ After all the trouble we have had in get-
ting her? No, no, my dear 1 There’d be an
odd number, if I let one go; and then we
might quarrel,’
Seeing no hope of prevailing upon their
captors to release any of them, Mrs. Shelley
determined to watch closely, and to allow no
opportunity to pass that might offer a chance
of escape. While his comrades were noisily
engaged in allotting their prizes, Nat. Bryant
turned to collect the arms and ammunition
scattered about the floor; and as he was so
employed, she managed to step over and con-
ceal by her dress, a knife, one of the bush-
rangers had dropped, and taking advantage of
a moment when his back was turned, picked
it up with her fettered bands, and slipped it
unobserved into her pocket. With a lightened
heart she now watched the proceedings of the
bushrangers. She had now in her power the
death for herself and child that should snatch
them from the hands of the bushrangers, if no
other alternative for dishonor presented itself.
i Well, lads, haven’t you settled whose is
whose yet V asked the captain, as he laid the
collected arms by the door.
‘ Yes, captain,’ returned Darby Gregson,
‘lt’s all cut and dried now. I’m to be your
father-in-law, and Jennings bas won the dark-
eyed lassie. Here’s Foley swearing that
we’ve cheated, ’cause he’s let in with the fat
little scullerymaid. He’s as savage as a My-
all, he didn’t get first pick !’
‘ Well, escort your better halves, and come
along!’ said Nat. Bryant, leading the
way. They led their unresisting prisoners
out, and commenced their march up the
ridge, and after an hour’s slow climbing
reached its summit, where they had previously
left the-stolen provisions. The sun was just
setting behind the hills, and the prospect
along the river and the hills beyond was ex-
tremely beautiful, the topmost branches of the
trees being tinged with the delicate hue of the
peach blossom.
‘ D—— it 1 I came away without the
muskets !’ said the captain. ‘ I meant to fetch
them away with us. We would have had less
to fear, if we had taken all the arras with us.’
‘ Shall one of us go back for ’em, captain ?’
one of the men enquired.
. ‘ No, Foley! You’d only meet the hands,
and give them a clue to our track. It can’t
be helped now. Have we rations enough for
supper ?’
‘ Yes 1 But not much to spare,’ replied
Jennings.
‘ Then we will leave this stock here for a
couple of hours! Cut the ropes that bind the
women together, and each man look after his
own. Be careful, or you’ll break their necks
getting them down the hill.’
The bushrangers cut assunder the cords as
directed, and began the hazardous and diffi-
cult descent. It was quite dark by the time
they reached the wooded glen at the bottom
of the range ; and the, outlaws, each firmly
grasping the hand of one of the prisoners,
groped their way along the narrow path
through the brushwood. .When they entered
the clearing the moon was shining down upon
the peaceful and lovely scene, clothing it in
silvery splendour.
‘ Now, lads, tie the ladies’ hands, and fasten
them together again, and then show them into
the hut,’ the captain said, throwing himself
upon the soft grass, ‘ and set to work getting
supper. This wound in my side makes me


stiff and sore, so I’ll lie down here a bit.’
The orders were promptly obeyed ; and soon
the prisoners were confined in the rude hut of
the bushrangers, and the quart-pots of tea
boiling merrily. The damper and corned beef
were brought out and spread upon the grass.
‘Shall we fetch the ladies out, captain, or
send ’em their supper in the hut V asked
Darby,
‘‘Let them have their right hands free,
Darby, 'and give them their suppers where
they are,’ said the captain.
With very poor appetites, the helpless pri-
soners began the meal.
‘Eat all you can,and slip anything you can
hide into yourpockets,’ Mrs, Shelley whispered,
when Darby was absent a moment at the fire.
‘ We may escape, perhaps, and be —.’ Darby’s
return prevented her from finishing the sen-
tence ; but Bertha and Marion Macau.ay
caught her meaning.
‘ Make yourselves comfortable, ladies, while
we’ie away. We’ve got to fetch home the
rations from the plant on the mountain direc-
tly after supper ; but, when we’ve got every-
thing housed and snug, you’ll see what faith-
ful spouses we’ll make. We’ll not leave you
again while the grub lasts,’ said Darby, while
filling their pannicans with tea.
By a great effort Mrs. Shelley succeeded in
steadying her voice, and asking ‘ How long do
you intend staying here ?’
‘Oil can’t say to a day Mrs. G. (you know
you’re Mrs. G. now.) Till the honeymoon’s
over, I suppose 1’
The wretch’s words made her blood run
cold ; but, suppressing her emotion, she en-
quired in a careless voice, ‘ Dues this little
creek run into the Hunter 1’
‘ Ha, ha ! Is that your little game V he
asked, derisively. ‘ Well, don’t try it on :
that’s all! If you were to bolt, you’d be
catched again in no time. Nat. Bryant, the
captain’s as good as a blackfellow at tracking.’
Mrs. Shelley asked no other questions j the
quickness with which Darby had guessed her
meaning, and his boast of his captain’s o'ever-
ness in tracking, dispelled for the moment her
hopes of escape. ‘At least, I have the knife,’
she mentally soliloquised. ‘That avenue of
escape is still open !’
Darby left them, and retired to the fire,
where the other outlaws were getting their
supper, and consulting about their future
movements.
‘ Perhaps papa and Mr. Sinclair are back
from Newcastle, mamma. If they are, Jerry
will track us, and shew them the way hete.
Then they could rescue us I’ Beitha said in
a low tone.
‘ Don’t speak, darling, they may over-
hear us. Wait till they have gone up the
mountain, and we will try to escape into the
bush, and hide till papa comes. If we get
away we can walk down the creek in the
water part of the way. They can’t track us
then. Fill your pockets, girls; we may be
days before we are found, if we are fortunate
enough to escape.’
‘ Now, lads,' said the captain, as the
others rose from the grass, ‘ if you’ve
finished your suppers, get ready for
fetching the rations down the moun-
tain. It’s best to get them down as
soon as possible. If there’s a party out after
us, and they found them we’d be likely to
starve, before we could lay in another store.
Take ropes with you, or you’ll find the beef
casks rather awkward to manage. I’ll stay
behind and look after the ladies,’
The three subordinates took ropes with
them, and started on their errand, and the
captain bent his steps to the hut. Entering
the door, he bowed gallantly, and apologised
for bis intrusion. ‘ You must forgive m e
ladies, for subjecting yon to the indignity o
being tied in your future home; but the
truth is you’re hardly reconciled to the change
yet, and might want to escape. As I’m
rather fagged, 1 might drop off to sleep; so
you will see the great necessity for securing
yon. I don’t think you’ll be so anxious to
leave us though, after to-night. We’ve some
capital rum here, and when the other fellows
come back we’ll brew some punch, and en-
joy ourselves grandly.’
While he was speaking, he was dexterously
pinioning their hands together and to a chain
that was fastened into one of the corner posts.
‘ Would you like to know, Beauty, what this
chain is doing here ?’ he asked, noticing Ber-
tha's terrified gaze. ‘ One of my men once
turned informer, and I chained him here and
left him to starve- and rot. Ha, the little


tragedy frightens you, does itl Well, if any
of you try to escape, I’ll use that chain for
the same purpose again.’
Having secured them to his satisfaction,
Nat. Bryant returned to the fire, and, rolling
himself up in an opossum rug, lay down up-
on the grass. The terrible words of the cold-
blooded wretch tingling in their ears, it was
some time before any of the prisoners spoke
again. At last Mrs. Shelley roused herself
and whispered, ‘ We must escape before the
other men return, or die ! Marion, you can
put your hands into my pocket; draw out
the knife I have hidden in it. Don’t speak
any of you !’ she entreated, as Janet Wilkins,
shuddering at the naked blade, gave a slight
scream. ‘ Now, Marion, cut my ropes.’
Marion Macaulay succeeded in severing the
thongs that bound her mistress, and Mrs.
Shelley crept to the door and looked through
a crevice. All was as still and silent outside
as the grave. The ruffian acting as sentry
was lying before the fire, ‘ Asleep, or in
deep thought V that was the momentous
question, upon which hinged their escape.
She watched him anxiously for ten minutes.
He lay as still as if in a deep sleep. Fer-
vently hoping that he bad dozed off from the
fatigue and loss of blood, she turned to the
girls, and whispered, ‘ Now is our. only
chance. He is lying down now with bis back
this way. If he rises and begins to pace up
and down before the door, this knife
alone can save us from their power.
Don’t speak ! Keep your hands, still,
or you may rattle the chain, and I will libe-
rate them.’ She cut their thongs, and then
bade them take off their boots, setting the
example herself by pulling off her own. She
then carefully examined the walls to discover
some opening other than the door, by which
they could leave the hut. Finding none, she
turned to the girls again. * Not a word, as
you would value your lives ! If we ean once
get the hut between us and the bushranger
yonder, we may, perhaps, escape into the
brush before he misses ns. Listen!' I will
creep up, and stand behind him, while you
steal ont. If I can but reach him unobserved,
you are saved. Not a word, darling. Get
behind the hut as quickly as possible, and then
g tep into the creek, and walk down the stream
for a few hundred yards. If lam not with
you in half an hour, or if you fancy you are
pursued, escape into the brush. Silence,
Bertha! I know what you would say I You
all know what to do now. Walt till I
beckon to you, and then go ; and may
heaven help you 1’
She silently embraced her child, and then,
grasping the glittering blade tightly in her
resolute hand, softly opened the door,
which fortunately was unfastened, and crept
cautiously along the velvet turf, till she stood
close behind the unsuspecting sentry. She
found to her dismay that he was not asleep;
but ho was evidently in deep thought; for he
was aimlessly plucking up the blades of grass,
and laying them in heaps. With a nerve none
could have expected a delicate woman to pos-
sess, she crushed down the terror this dis-
covery occasioned; and, bending over the
reclining bushranger, held the point of the
weapon to his left side, and beckoned to the
girls to steal away. They obeyed the signal
with beating hearts, and noiselessly leaving
the hut, reached the creek, where it was con-
cealed by the shadow of the cedar tree, the
noble woman the while standing ready to
plunge her knife into , the sentry, should he
rise by so much as a hair’s breadth. With
an icy feeling at her heart, and features rigid,
in her intense excitement, she waited till the
girls should have escaped,far enough down the
stream to be out of sight and sound from
where she stood. As she stands, death in her
resolute eye for the wretch at her feet, should
her child’s safety demand it, who shall accuse
her of acting other than as a noble and heroic
woman t Deeds of blood and violence ill associ-
ate with the sacred name of woman ; but if the
verdict of twenty centuries acquits of murder
the hot-headed Brutus, who played traitor to
friendship, and stabbed to the heart the aspir-
ing Caesar, how much more shall we acquit
her who slays to rescue an only child from the
most awful fate misfortune could have in
store for her ? For herself she would shed no
blood—unless, indeed, her own, to escape from
insujt and outrage—but for her darling, her
only child, there was no limit to the deeds she
would perform, or the dangers encounter.
The tedious minutes crawled by with leaden
feet, as she waited in an agony of suspense for


the girls to reach a safe distance. She had
just resolved that they must have passed the
edge of the brush where the creek entered it,
and that she might safely steal away, when a
sudden gust of wind rustled her dress. The
quick ears of the bushranger caught the slight
sound and he glanced up in surprise ; but be-
fore he could speak or rise, her knife sank to
the haft in his brutal heart. With a scream
of horror the homicide sprang away, and fol-
lowed the steps of the girls, who were
anxiously waiting, for her a short distance
down the stream.
CHAPTER XIV.
To th’ rescue! Draw each bright steel blade,
And follow, where I lead !
For bloody vengeance have I prayed ;
For death, it is their meed.
The young, the fair, the innocent
Are captive in their den!
Then draw your blades, on vengeance bent,
And ’quit yourselves like men.
Authoe’s M, S.
* We must pull up here, Sinclair, or the
horses will never carry us home; mine is
trembling under me now. If they do knock
np, we loose our only chance of reaching home
early,’ said Mr. Shelley, as they were gallop-
ing down a slope, their horses flecked with
foam, and all but winded.
‘We will be compelled to walk them up
the long rise over the flat yonder.- for
heaven’s sake, sir don’t let us loiter upon level
country,’ cried Percy, urging his jaded horse
with the spur, and leading the way, in head-
long career, across the flat. On reaching the
foot of the rise, they reined in, and com-
menced slowly climbing the long, though not
steep, ascent.
‘ We shall be home in an hour, if the horses
hold out,’ said Mr. Shelley, hopefully ;’ and,
I dare say, Bertha will laugh heartily at our
mad baste.’ ,
* I trust she may, sir,’ was all Sinclair
could answer. His torturing imagination
was busy picturing every possibility of danger
to his heart’s idol, that could present itself in
his absence. He could ill brook the tardiness of
their progress, and longed to dash on at every
hazard. But for the cooler judgment of the
elder gentleman, the horses must have given
in at half the distance—so recklessly he rode.
The horses rested by their slow ascent of
the hill, Percy touched the gory flanks of his
again with bis spurs, and led the way down
the opposite slope at a racing pace. At the
foot of the slope they encountered Davy Col-
lyer, the overseer, who was riding at the top
of bis speed to meet them. Dragging his
horse back upon its haunches by the force of
reining him in, he shouted ‘ The bushrangers
have carried off the ladies, and killed old
Hal,’ Deep into their quivering flanks the
spurs were driven, and the horses dashed on
at increased speed, Percy, with lips com-
pressed and heart on fire leading the way.
No thought had he to question for particu-
lars. She was in the power of the cruel and
remorseless ! He would rescue her, or die!
The feelings of the husband and father were
none the less acute; but they were held under
by judgment, and the rough experience of a
soldier’s life. . Grasping the rein of the over-
seer’s horse, so as to keep abreast of him in
their headlong gallop, he learnt all that Davy
could tell—that on going up to the house at
sundown, he found no one there but Jerry,
who told him of the fight in the dairy, and
the escape of the bushrangers to the moun-
tains with their victims.
Davy Collyer could tell nothing more ; for
directly he had heard Jerry's brief version of
the fray, he had sent him on to the huts for
the men, who had just returned home, and,
spiinging again into the saddle, had galloped
off to meet Mr. Shelley.
Nothing further was said during the re-
mainder of their homeward race, each being
too intent upon his own thoughts for conver-
sation. Half an tours ride brought them in
sight of the homestead, which suddenly burst
upon their view as they turned the corner of
the brush. The serenity of the beautiful
scene, as it lay bathed in the cold rays of the
silver moon, appeared little suggestive of the
wild and lawless deeds that bad been com-
mitted during the last few hours; but the
riders had no leisure to moralize upon the
contrast of the calmness of silent nature and
the turbulence of human passions.
‘To the dairy, sir !’ shouted Davy Collyer,
dashing on by the back of the house towards
the scene of the struggle.


Mr. Shelley and Percy urged on their
jaded horses and followed as fast as the beasts
could carry them. The overseer, being moun-
ted on the freshest horse, reached the dairy
first, and sprang from the saddle among the
men who were waiting outside.
‘ Did you meet the master, Davy 1’ asked
Jack, the boy, rising.
• He and Mr. Sinclair’s just behind. Are
you all here ?’ answered and enquired Davy,
in a breath.
‘ There be all on us here, zir, except poor
old Tperbly; he be dead as a red herring,’ said
Giles, from the top of a stump upon which he
was perched.
At this moment Mr, Shelley galloped up.
He was greeted by a cheer as he hastily dis-
mounted. ‘Where is Jerry?’ he asked,
abruptly.
Jerry stepped forward from the shadow of
the hut, where he had been waiting as pa-
tiently as a young Indian.
‘ Quick ; tell me what has happened ?’ cried
the grief-stricken gentleman.
‘All dat many bushranger kill old Perbly,
and steal Missie Berta and everybody!’ an-
swered Jerry, sententiously, as he indicated
the number of bushrangers upon his fingers,
‘ Get a light, Jack,’ the overseer said to the
shepherd ; ‘ the master will want to go into
the dairy.’
The men had brought a bush lamp with
them from the huts, and Jack lit it by a fire-
biand from a burning log close by. Mr.
Shelley snatched it from him and entered the
dairy, followed by the men. A sickening
spectacle met their gaze; the floor to the left
of the door was slippery with gore, and poor
old Iperbly, the favorite of all, lay in a dark
pool of his life’s blood.
1 Look here, Misser Selley, dat old Perbly
murry budgary teller ; bale dat frighten bush-
ranger. Him fight like it warrigal 1’ said
Jetry, pointing in admiration to the prostrate
veteran.
; Mr. Shelley regarded Hal., silently for a
'moment, and then, turning to the men, said,
hurriedly, ‘The poor fellow is dead ; but the
living claim our first thought. Arm your-
selves and follow Cie. We may rescue them
yet, if we waste no time.’
The order was unnecessary; for the men
had already distributed the arms Nat. Bryant,
the captain of the gang, had forgotten to take
away, and only waited to be led against the
marauders. The wife and daughter of their
kind master were so great favourites, that
there was not a man on the station who would
not have risked his life in their defence.
‘ Where is Mr. Sinclair?’ asked Mr. Shelley,
missing him, as be was about to leave the
dairy,
‘ Here he is, sir,’ replied Davy, as Percy
approached on foot.
* My horse stumbled over a dead man—one
of the bushrangers, I think, from his appear-
ance—and fell with me,’ he said, in explana-
tion of bis delay. ‘ I had some difficulty in
getting on to my feet again, as the brute lay
heavily upon my right leg.'
‘ Are you hurt V asked bis master, anxi-
ously.
‘No • it's nothing. A mere bruise,’ Percy
answered, snatching at the same moment, a
musket and sheath knife from the shepherd.
‘ Thai's fortunate j get him another horse,
Davy. Which way did the bushrangers go,
Jerry V
‘ Bale dat horse no good, Misser Selley!
Bushranger no got him horse. Dat go down
dother side range. Get him tunder gun, and
Jerry track him !’
* Lead on then, Jerry, as quickly as you can.
Keep well together the rest of you, and follow
the blackboy close. Be silent 1 We may per-
haps take them by surprise, and shall then
have a better opportunity of rescuing my wife
and child.’
Mr. Shelley spoke with as little visible emo-
tion, as if he were giving orders to a company
on parade. He had learnt by experience, and
in a stern school, that action, not sentiment,
is of service in such a dire extreme. Plenty
of time for thinking of their danger, when the
time for action had passed.
Jerry required no second bidding, but leav-
ing the “ tame whitefellow” (as he called the
squatter and his men, when talking of them
to his own dusky countrymen) to follow as
best they could, he struck off in a direct line
up the ridge for the point of the mountain
where he bad seen the bushrangers descend
the opposite side with their fair prisoners.
Mr. Shelley and bis men followed the eager


young savage in silence, and in a short time
reached the summit.
‘ Look here, Misser Selley, dat wild white
feller steal him 100 much plenty beef!’ cried
Jerry, turning back and pointing to a beef-
cask the bushrangers bad left on the moun-
tain. ‘ Bale date wild blackfeller steal him
too much plenty beef like a dat!’
Disregarding Jerry’s insinuating contrast of
the black and the white freebooters, Mr.
Shelley asked abruptly, “ Can you see the
tracks in the moonlight, Jerry V.
‘ Bale dat much light enough !’ replied
Jerry, shaking his head negatively.
‘ Good heavens, then, how can we track
them 1’ exclaimed Percy, turning savagely
upon the startled blackboy. ‘ If you do not
track them, I’ll’—■—
- ‘Control yourself* Sinclair,’ interrupted
Mr. Shelley, ‘ Too much depends upon our
coolness and judgement, to risk anything by
rash excitement! How can you find the
rangers, Jerry V he asked, quietly, turning to
the blackboy,
‘You see him brush along bottom dare ?
Jerry asked, in reply, pointing down the dark
side of the mountain. ‘ Blackfeller got him
path along dare. Wild whitefeller can’t
help him go along dat path. Come along,
Jerry find him!’ saying which, Jerry cut
short further discussion by swinging himself
down the precipitous face of a huge rock to a
shelving ledge by means of a young and pliant
sappllng. ‘Come along! Dat no break him?’
he shouted from below, and disappeared in the
gloom of the long and steep descent. Grasp-
ing their weapons firmly, the white men slowly
and. cautiously followed, ■ They found the des-
cent extremely difficult and dangerous; but,
after twenty minutes toil and exertion, they
reached the brush at its foot. A low cooee
from the blackboy directed them, to the en-.
trance of the brush, where the imp was reclining
lazily, uppn a fallen tree. ‘Bale dat w,hite
feller can murry-make-baste down mountain I’
exclaimed Jerry, in conscious superiority, as
his master and Percy came straggling up,,
followed,by the men.
‘Lead on, Jerry! There is no time, to
lose;’, whispered Mr. Shelley to.the blackboy,
whp immediately rose'and dived into the dark
path- me, my,men; and remember
—a steady hand and a still tongue !’ said Mr,
Shelley, following Jerry into the heart of
the brush. Percy was close behind him ; and
they hurriedly groped their way along, closely
followed by the men. They had some diffi-
culty. in keeping up with their guide; but
Jerry considerately waited for them every now
and then; and so, when he reached the
bushranger’s camp, they were close be-
hind.
‘ Here camp belongin to bushranger !’ be
said, in a whisper, as he drew back into the
shadow of the brush.
‘ Halt! Not a sound, any of you !’ com-
manded Mr. Shelley in an undertone. Percy
with difficulty, restrained bis impulse to rush
into the outlaw’s camp, and strike dead at his
feet those who had carried off his idol.
‘ Don’t move, any of you, while I go for-
ward to reconnoitre,’ Mr. Shelley whispered,
and then stole cautiously to the edge of the
clearing. Jerry, who fully realized his own im-
portance, and did not consider himself in-
cluded in the order, kept close behind him.
The three wretches, who had been despatched
up the mountain for the provisions, bad just
returned. Their burdens were heaped by
the fire, and they were standing by the corpse
of their dead chief,
* Don’t wake him, Darby; he’s tired after
our work this afternoon. You know bis
horse knocked up yesterday, and he walked
pretty near all the way from the Lake,’
Foley said to his comrade.
‘ Tired, be d——! If he’s been and gone to
sleep, and let them women escape, I’ll cut his
throat, before he wakes again,’ muttered
Darby Gregson, in a threatening voice. * See
if he has Jennings.’
The miscreant addressed entered the but.
‘ Stick your knives in him mates! He’s let
’em escape!’ shouted he, excitedly, fas he
rushed out again.
With a gleam of ferocity upon his repul-
sive features, Darby prepared to execute his
diabolical threat. He drew his keen sheath
knife, and wiping it upon his coat sleeve,
knelt down by the side of his fallen chief.
‘By Judas, what is this?’ ha exclaimed,
springing to his feet'again, and looking at the
knees of his canvas trousers.


‘ Blood !’ cried his comrades, in surprise and
consternation; and the intending murderer
drew back in horror,
* He’s saved you the trouble, Darby, by
cutting it himself,’ said Foley shuddering.
‘ No, he hasn’t: look here!’ Jennings ex-
claimed, pointing to the handle of the knife
embedded in their captain’s heart. The three
bushrangers looked at the rugged bone haft,
for a few seconds, in dismay,
‘ Look here, mates, we’d better clear out.
The women have been traced and rescued;
and, now they know our camp, the sooner we
quit it the better,’ said Foley.
During this brief conversation, Mr. Shelley
had conceived a plan of attack. The bush-
rangers were too far off to admit of his hear-
ing them, and, consequently, he was unaware
of the escape of his wife and daughter, and he
concluded they were confined in the hut. It
was impossible to fire upon the bushrangers
from where be stood, as they were in a direct
line with the hut, and a bullet reaching them
would be likely to pass and enter it. He
turned to Jerry, the blackboy, at his elbow,
‘Jerry, keep under cover of the brush, and
creep round, till you get on the other side of
the hut yonder, and then cooee."
The boy, without reply, turned to execute
the order, and, keeping in the dark shadow of
the brushwood, stole along, as directed. He
was not alone. Percy Sinclair had heard the
order, and, weary of inaction, determined to
follow. They crept along, unnoticed by the
bushrangers, who were standing by their dead
chief, undecided whether to stay or to retreat
to their horses and escape. Jerry know the
position of the path that led from the lower
side of the clearing, through the brush, to the
gully below, where the bushrangers kept their
horses, and he hurried along to reach.it, be-
fore the wild whitefellec should turn to it.
But the wild whitefellers were so stunned
and paralysed by the mysterious death of
their captain, that they, did not know where id
turn, or what to do.
‘ I think we’d better get out of the brush
the way we came in, Darby.’ There’s no
telling how many’s, on our track, or which
way they are hiding. I vote you should be
captain,. What do you> say Foley 1’ asked
Jennings.
‘ Two of us gone out of five I That’s quick
work,’ said Jennings, meditatively; and then
starting, he replied to Foley’s question —‘ i es,
Gregson’d better be captain now. There were
four to vote for Bryant, and now there’s only
two left to choose—just half.’
‘ The coast is clear the way we’ve come,
lads; let’s escape at once, I’d rather face
’em in daylight,” the new-chosen captain said.
‘ Let’s get back through the brush, and away
up under the face of the mountains.’
Before Foley or Jennings could reply a pro-
longed cooee from Jerry caused them to spring
round in teiror, and to dash off towards thespot
where Mr. Shelley and his men were waiting
for them. Mr. Shelley ordered his men to hold
fire till the flying bushrangers were within
thirty yards. At about that distance a sudden
blaze illuminated the entrance to the path and
revealed the avenging party to the terrified
outlaws; and a volley of lead was poured Into
their faces. The foremost of them fell forward,
pierced by several bullets; but the other two,
who had been shielded by the body of the one
that fell, escaped unscathed, and turning back
fled for the other opening from the clearing.
Here they were met by Percy and Jerry'.
Percy shot the newly-elected captain in the
neck, as he dashed past, and Jerry sprang
upon the miscreant Jennings, and tried to cap-
ture him. Poor Jerry had overrated his power,
A blow on the head with his tomahawk would
have laid the ruffian dead at his feet; but
he. was ambitions of catching a. wild white :
feller singlehanded; so dropping, his weapon
and throwing his arms around the bushranger’s
neck, he shouted to Percy that he had ‘ yarded
wild whitefeller.’ • Directly Jennings found
himself attacked he struggled fiercely to free
himself, and shaking the blaokboy’s , puny
grasp from his throat, be gave him a couple of
heavy kicks on the bare shins (a very tenderpoint
with Jerry) and then dashed .an ay through
the scrub after his comrade, before Percy could
inteicept him; while the unfortunate blaokboy
rubbed-his bruised shins and howled. ■
1 Paying no attention to the suffering of poor
Jerry, Percy hastened towards the hut, where
he expected Bertha was' held a prisoner., A
strange and contradictory 1 emotion filled hip
breast, as.he.approached the hut He copld
save her even at the expense 1 of his' Jife; buf


he, a convict, could not hold her to
his heart and tell her of the lore that
would count it a privilege to die in
her defence. While her safety was a
matter of' doubt, no thought had he but of
her rescue ; directly he looked upon her safety
as assnrred, the gloomy thoughts that had
made him miserable for months past, returned ;
and he felt again how far above him the fair
and beautiful Bertha was. He entered the
hut to tell her and her amiable mother of their
rescue, but to his horror no voice replied to
his eager words, ‘Thank heaven we have saved
you 1’ He spoke again, and receiving no an-
swer, a wild terror tilled his heart, as he
groped his way round the contracted extent
of the hut. ‘My God 1 they are not here !’
he cried wildly, when the terrible truth be-
came apparrent.
‘ What ? Not here !’ exclaimed an
anxious voice at his side; and Mr.
Shelley entered the hut, carrying a
blazing brand he had snatched from the
fire outside. The torch shed a flicker-
ing light around the hut, and showed that the
ladies had occupied it, but were gone. ‘ See/
cried Percy, picking up a small pair of boots,
* these are Bertha’s 1 They have been here,
and are gone. Have they escaped, or—— ’
‘Or been murdered? We must examine
the dreadful [alternative, Sinclair. There is
too much at stake to allow our feelings to
usurp sway over our actions/ said Mr. Shel-
ley, calmly. ‘ Light that lamp on the shelf in
the corner, Davy.’
Davy did so; and Mr. Shelley minutely
and slowly examined everything in the rude
unfurnished room. * Yes; they have been
confined here, Sinclair, and that quite re-
cently, for these boots are as warm as if only
just taken off. Now, what were they taken
off for 1 The answer to that question might,
perhaps, throw some light upon their move-
ments.’
‘ There’s one of the bushrangers dead along-
side of the fire, sir, with a knife stuck in him/
said Jack, the boy, entering the hut.
‘ Then they have quarrelled, and the ladies
escaped into the bush the while,’ suggested
Davy Collyer.
‘Where is Jerry?’ Mr. Shelley asked,
turning to look for his trusty black boy.
‘Jerry murry sick belongin’ to legs, Misser
Selley 1’ whined the poor fellow, ruefully
rubbing bis barked shins.
‘ Giles, hold this lamp close to the ground
outside, and Jerry will see if he can find the
tracks of Mrs. Shelley and Bertha 1’
The mention of ‘ Missie Berta’ caused Jerry
to forget his sick legs at once, and he set to work
diligently to discover her tracks. ‘ Here
Missie Berta track, and plenty track belong*
ing to Missie Selley and dother white lubra,’
—[woman] —cried Jerry, delightedly examin-
ing the evidences of the recent presence of bis
young mistress. ‘ Halloa, dat Missie Berta
go along dis way, and tree or two more track ;
and Missie Selley go along dat way belongin’
to fire. Bale dat no got any boots.’
‘ Follow Mrs. Shelley’s track first, Jerry;
hold the light low, Giles I’ said Mr. Shelley,
quietly. Jerry slowly followed the faint foot-
prints, and reached the side of the fallen out-
law. ‘Dat Missie Selley stand still here!’
Jerry explained, as he pointed to the well-
defined outline of her footprint, where she
had stood waiting behind the doomed sentry.
‘ And a knife 1 I see it 1 1 see it! Her
hand drove that dagger home !’ said Mr. Shel-
ley, with a shudder. ‘ Follow up the track,
Jerry 1’
‘ Dat Missie Selley run along here,’ Jerry
explained, following the track to the brink of
the shallow creek.
‘Jack, stand by the footprints where they
enter the creek. Now, Jerry, go back to the
hut, and follow Bertha’s track,’ Mr. Shelley
ordered. Jerry easily traced them down to
the creek; and Mr. Shelley stood for a few
minutes in deep thought, endeavouring to de-
cide upon the next step to take.
All the time these wise precautions occu-
pied, Percy Sinclair was pacing impatiently up
and down, anxious to dash off at once in search
of the gentle girl, who, his imagination hinted,
might even at that moment be lying cold and
dead, perhaps within a short distance of
where he stood.
‘ Davy, stand by these tracks. Now, Jerry,
cross over and examine this bank/ Mr, Shel-
ley said, stepping across the stream.
Jerry examined the- bank minutely, but
found no trace of their having left the water
on the farther side.


‘ The creek runs down from the mountain
we just descended, sir. Don’t you- think
they would be most likely to follow the water
up V asked Davy Collyer.
‘ And pass the fire, Dave 1 Not over likely,
I should say, with a bushranger, perhaps a
dozen,' skulking about. I guess they went
down the creek,’ the stockman said,
‘ I think, from the appearance of the dead
bushranger, and Mrs. Shelley having left the
others and gone to him, that all of the gang
were away, when they escaped, except the one
left to guard them, and that he dropped off
to sleep, and she stabbed him to assist
Bertha to escape. If so, there would be no
one to watch them walking up the creek;
and I believe they have gone up. Get into
the creek, Jerry, and then you can examine
both banks, and see where they left the water.’
Jerry stepped in, and the party slowly
made its way along in an opposite direction to
where the prisoners hadleft the clearing. Half
an hour’s weary and tedious walk brought them
to where the water bubbled up through a
chasm in the rock too narrow for a human
being to creep through ; and Jerry, finding
no trace of tracks, it was seen at a glance that
they were searching in the wrong direction.
* There is no help for it, Sinclair; we must
return to where the tracks enter the water
and wait for daylight. It is impossible that
they scaled these heights, and the brush is too
dense here for them to have penetrated it,’
Mr, Shelley said, sadly. Now that action was
suspended, now that they could do nothing
but hope and wait, his pent-up emotions burst
through his hitherto iron will, and he fairly
broke down.
‘ What] give up the search, and they, per-
haps, perishing from hunger and cold V asked
Percy, bitterly!
The sorrowing husband and father
heard him not. -Now that he could do nothing
more to rescue them from exposure to the
dangers of an unsheltered night, he surren-
dered himself a prey to the direst forebodings.
‘ Oeuld those delicate home-flowers survive the
chilling damps of a night in the bush 1’ was
the burden of his torturing thought.
The baffled seekers slowly returned along
the .stream to the.clearing, and in a few min-
utes the men had transferred the bushrangers’
camp-fire to the part of the bank where the
fugitives’ footprints entered the water. Mr.
Shelley threw himself upon the damp grass,
and silently gave way to his grief; while
Percy Sinclair paced the distance between the
hnt and the fire, restless and wretched that
bis darling was in danger, perhaps dead, and
be unable to do anything but think of her.
Though the men were deeply grieved at the
loss of their amiable mistress and her daughter,
and participated keenly in the sorrow of their
master, they were too hungry to give way to
theirfeelings. The discovery of the bushrangers’
attack upon the station had prevented their
getting their suppers. They accordingly set
to work to make up for lost time, by prepar-
ing a meal at the expense of the freebooters.
About a quarter of an hour after they had
returned to the clearing, Percy stopped sud-
denly in his walk, and laying his hand upon
the young savage’s shoulder, whispered, ‘ Come
this way, Jerry, I want to speak to you !’
Jerry rose and followed him to the shadow
of the cedar tree.
‘ Jerry, it is very cold for Missie Berta to
be in the bush,’ he said, slowly, and watching
the expression of the blackboy’s features as
the moon, peering through the boughs of the
cedar tree, revealed them.
‘Too much murry cold!’ Jerry returned,
reflectively, an expression of pain flitting over
his dusky features.
They can’t be far, Jerry, Let us take the
lamp and try to track them. They have gone
down the creek, I believe.’
Jerry looked wistfully towards the fire,
where the shepherd was busily engaged fry-
ing some beef; but, muttering to himself,
‘ Never mind, Jerry, dat Missie Berta too
much murry hungry to,’ turned to Percy, and
said, ‘ All right, Misser Sinlar, come along;
we find him.’
- They took the rude bush-lamp with them,
and stepping into the creek, followed its course
downward, examining the banks' every step
of the way. When, a few minutes after they
started, the men had prepared supper, and
their absence was discovered, it caused great
consternation among the party, as there was
no trace where they had disappeared to.


CHAPTER XV.
A Peiest,—Blood on her hands, my Lord 1 Is it not
murder t
Count Eandolph.—What! murder I thus to snatch
an only child ,
From foul dishonour ? No! weak sophist 1 No!
And if it were, more glory to be damned
For such a murder than, by craven fear,
To win salyatiou!
(Author'edrama.) The Vendetta.
The girls reached the stream, as Mrs.
Shelley directed, and waded down it nearly
two hundred yards, when Bertha stopped sud-
denly, and refused to proceed another step till
her mother overtook them. The housemaid
begged her to hurry on, lest the bushrangers
should pursue them ; but her young mistress
was resolute. ‘.No, Janet, I’ll not forsake
mamma ! Not even to save my life 1’
The bed of the little creek was formed of
fine gravel; and the water being only a few
inches deep, they had no difficulty in wading
down the stream ; but the brush was so dense
on both banks, that it was impossible to leave
the water. They had waited, barely five
minutes, when they discerned Mrs. Shelley’s
white dress, as she fled down the stream to-
wards them.
‘ Don’t speak, Miss, or the bushrangers may
hear us, if we are pursued,’ Marion Macaulay
urged, as Bertha turned to call to her mother.
As Mrs. Shelley reached them, she observed
that one of her hands had a deep, crimson
stain upon it. With a shudder she stooped
and washed it ofl in tfie clear stream at her
feet. ‘Mamma! Oh, I’m so glad, I
thought you were never coming 1 If you had
not come very soon, I would have gone back
again. I could not escape without you,
mamma 1’
‘ My darling, you are saved if we can only
find our way home !’ said Mrs. Shelley, em-
bracing her child. ‘ But' we must hurry on,
or the other wretches will be back soon, Do
not speak any of you. There may be other
bushrangers about, that we have not seen.*
She held her daughter’s band in hers, and
pressed rapidly forward, closely followed by
her two maid servants. For nearly a quarter
of a mile they found the water as shallow, and
the bed of the stream as firm; but then their
progress became impeded by the large boulders
that were embedded in the gravel, and by the
deep cavities between them. They succeeded
with extreme difficulty in. continuing their
flight, by stepping from one slippery stone to
the next, till presently further advance was
barred (by a precipitous fall in the bed of the
creek. The stream fell a depth of about
twenty feet into a large basin, or waterhole,
which was brim full, and flowing over on the
lower side. Nothing could be seen by the
terrified fugitives but a yawning black abyss,
and the splash of the falling waters fell dis-
mally upon their ears. Further advance was
impossible; and it was equally impossible to
penetrate the brush on either side of the creek.
Nothing remained for them but the alterna-
tive of passing the night ankle-deep in the.
chilling water, or returning to the bushranger’s
camp. '
‘ We might be able to find a path down the
precipice, mamma, if we search about,’ Bertha
said, as she approached the verge of the abyss
and peered over into the darkness below. At
that moment, they were startled by a loud
volley from the direction of the bushranger’s
camp, and, in turning abruptly round, Bertha
lost her balance, and with a wild shriek for
help, fell over into the pool below.
With a scream of horror, Mrs. Shelley and
her two maid servants approached the verge
of the precipice, over which Bertha had fallen.
Not a sound, save the incessant splash of the
falling water, broke the awful silence ! and
nothing but black darkness was visible in the
depths of that yawning gulf,
‘ Merciful heavens, she is killed—a retribu-
tion upon me for shedding the outlaw’s blood 1
And yet, and yet, Oh God, could I leave her
to such a fate 1 But we will not be separated
even in death !’ As she spoke, she attempted
to fling herself over the precipice, but
Marion Macaulay interposed, and, by a
strength unusual in so slight a frame, dragged
her-back from the dangerous edge of the cata-
ract. Mrs. Shelley struggled wildly 'to
break free, but the slow witted Janet had pre-
sence of mind enough to fasten upon her hands
and assist in holding her back. ‘ Let me go to
my darling! Let me go 1’ the frantic mother
cried, struggling to free herself. With great
difficulty the girls dragged her out of the
stream on' one side, where the dense brush
had left a few feet of land clear; and holding
her down, prevented her from destroying her


self in her frenzied grief. They sat cold and
silent upon the damp ground, holding their
heart-stricken mistress between them, their
limbs stiff and frozen from their long immer-
sion in the stream, and their hearts numbed
with grief and horror at Bertha’s terrible fate,
and aching in the utter hopelessness of des-
pair. For nearly an hour no sound broke
the stillness of the wild scene buc the moans
of the miserable mother, when Janet suddenly
exclaimed, ‘ Oh, Marion, look ! Here comes
a light 1’ Marion called at (ho top of her
voice ; and the girls were overjoyed at hearing
Jerry’s answering cooee. In a few minutes
Percy Sinclair and the faithful blackboy were
among them. ■ At a glance Percy noticed the
absence of Bertha. ■ ‘Where is Bertha 1
Speak ! Did she not escape ? Have they
carried her off?’ He cried, as he beheld with
dread anticipation the terrible anguish of her
mother.
Janet pointed to the precipice, or. cataract,
and said, ‘The dear young lady fell down that
rock, and is killed.’
‘ My God 1’ was all Sinclair could utter.
He sprang to the verge of the silent and dark
abyss, and peered down its gloomy depths.
Love,' as true, deep, and unselfish, as that of a
generous and noble-hearted man, waits to
make no calculation of cost or consequence in
the service of the being it adores 1 He would
cave her, or]die. ‘ Without the hesitation of a
moment, he leaped into the darkness, and fell
full twenty feet into the deep and icy pool.
As Percy Sinclair disappeared over the verge
of the waterfall, Jerry put down the lamp
upon the bank, and turning back ran up the
stream to the bushranger’s camp at his ut-
most speed.
Percy fell heavily into the deep pool at the
foot of the waterfall, and its iey waters closed
over him, as the impetus of his headlong des-
cent caused him to sink below the surface.
As he rose again, he found himself in total
darkness; and the extreme coldness of the
water almost froze his blood, and for a few
. moments took away his breath. Recovering
- himself, he swam several times round the dark
pool, in eager search of the object of his peril-
ous leap; and in doing so, got severely cut
and bruised by striking, himself against the
sharp rocks, that projected over its margin.
Unconscious' in his feverish anxiety of the
wounds indicted upon him by the jagged ed-
ges of the stones, be carefully examined the
abrupt wall of rock, and discovered nothing,
but that it was too steep on all sides, except
at its lower edge, where the water flowed away
in its new level, to admit of his leaving the
water. He had hoped that Bertha had
fallen upon a brush-clothed bank, which would
have broken the force of her descent; but the
iron of despair chilled his heart, as he discov-
ered that the position of the banks of the pool
made it impossible for her to have fallen upon
them, and that, bad it been otherwise, she
must have been dashed to pieces upon their
bard and rugged surface. ‘ She has fallen into
the pool, and is drowned !’ he ejaculated in de-
spair, as the terrible idea took possession of bis
mind; and though the pool was covered with
the gloom of night he dived down into its
icy depths, in the melancholy hope of dis-
covering the body of the gentle and lovely
girl whose safety and happiness he would have
thought cheaply purchased at the cost of his
own life. Again and again he dived, till his
limbs were numbed by the freezing water, and
hisstrength all but exhausted, when suddenly, a
low moan caught his ear. With renewed hope
he set to work to search the banks again, but
be (found nothing [but the cold, slimy rocks,
that be had already examined inch by inch.
He paused, and listened with breathless anxi-
ety, and had just concluded that the sound he
had heard must have been only an echo of his
own beating heart, when another moan distinct
and unmistakeable came from above him, and
appeared to have proceeded from about half
way down the cataract. He swam to the
upper side of the pool, and vainly attempted to
scale the face of the precipice. Foiled in this by
its perpendicularity, he groped his way round
to the. lower side, where the water escaped,
and, after great exertion, succeeded in climb-
-ing to the top of the rocks between which it
flowed. From this position. he slowly
crept upon his hands and knees round
the edge of the ; pool till he reached the
front, and found himself right under the face
of tho cataract. Here he was stopped by the
acclivity becoming too steep for climbing. He
waited and listened in an agony of suspense.
Thrice he distinctly heard a low moan. It


seemed on a level with him, and only a few
feet from where he knelt. The rock fell ab-
ruptly to the water between him and the spot
from whence the moan came, so thathe was un-
able to approach nearer; and it was so slippery
that several times he narrowly escaped falling
over in his fruitless attempts to proceed further.
He strained his eyes to no purpose. The wan-
ing moon was low, and whatever little light
she gave was withheld by the dense brush.
The wild scene was shrouded in the thick dusk
of the tomb. It is impossible to describe the
emotions that thronged his tortured breast, as
he knelt upon the sharp, cold rocks above the
black pool, listening to the moans of the poor
girl he had risked his life to save, and unable
to reach or help her—his quick fancy prompt-
ing every possible danger, ‘ Was she lying
bruised and mangled upon a shelving ledge of
rock, or impaled upon the upturned point of a
broken root 1’ As her pitiful moans emote upon
bis aching ears, his senses seemed to leave him
—his heart was maddened with despair. Oh,
that a death, the cruelest ever devised by the
most fiendish ingenuity of bigotor tyrant, could
have saved her ! Joyfully would he have offered
his life as ransom for her safety on any terms!
Had the torture of his situation been continued
many minutes longer it is probable that he
would have lost his reason for ever—no human
brain could have long withstood so great a
strain—but a light appearing oyer the top of
the cataract, fanned his expiring hope into a
feeble flame, as he recognised the features of his
master and the blackboy peering over into the
darkness. His drooping energy was revived in
an instant. ‘ Fasten a loop in a strong rope,
and lower it gently down!’ he shouted.
‘All right, Misser Sinlar, Jerry come along
by-byl' cried the blackboy in reply, as the
overseer set to work to prepare a rope he had
providentially brought from the bushrangers’
camp.
‘ Is she safe, Sinclair—is she safe 1’ the an-
xious father called in grief-stricken accents,
* She is alive, sir ; that is all I can say yet/
Percy returned. * Lower a rope as quickly as
possible/
In a few seconds the rope was let down over
the edge of the rock, and Percy perceived that
the quickwitted Jerry was seated in the loop,
bolding the bush lamp in one hand, and with
the other guiding his descent and protecting
himself from the jagged edges of tbe rocks.
‘ Steady/ Percy shouted, as he noticed the
line beginning to sway backward and for-
ward. ‘Steady, or the rocks will fray the
rope 1 Suspend him a couple of yards more to
your right/
The men, who were paying out the rope
that Jerry was descending by, altered its posi-
tion and let the black boy down slowly and
cautiously.
‘ Holloa, Misser Sinlar, where dat Missie
Berta T enquired Jerry eagerly, as he reached
the rocks upon which Percy was kneeling.
‘ Ha 1 you hear him V he exclaimed, as a low
moan reached his quick ears. ‘Dat along
here, Jerry find him ; you hold him rope 1’
He slid out of the loop as he spoke, and, hand-
ing the end of the rope to Percy, held the lamp
above his head, and peered through tbe dark-
ness in the direction from whence the sound had
come. The flickering light revealed to Percy’s
view a narrow ledge upon the face of the pre-
cipice that had been concealed by the gloom.
Though the ledge appeared in the indistinct
glimmer, too narrow even for a goat to find
footing, Jerry crept along its dangerous way
as nimbly as a chamois. He was suspended
above the dark pool, and had nothing to sup-
port him but tbe insecure footing of the ledge,
yet he moved on wholly unconscious of the
peril of his position. He had only proceeded
a few yards when he uttered an exclamation
of surprise and horror, as tbe light of his lamp
fell upon a heap of drapery'caught in the
branches of a large tree, that had recently
fallen from its upright position in the brush be-
low, and bridging the pool was leaning against
the face of the precipice some distance from the
top. ‘ Here dat Missie Berta 1’ he shouted, a»
he hurried along tbe ledge to the head of tbe
tree. He stopped short as he reached it, and
examining its position attentively for a few
minutes, cautiously attempted to descend a
limb to where his young mistress lay,
A creaking sound caused him to scamper
baek to the more secure footing of the ledge.
His experience in bush craft suggested the
danger of adding his weight to a leaning
tree that had little to prevent it'from sliding
down into the pool. Baffled in his attempt
to reach his young mistress, by crawling down.


to her, he scratched his woolly head in great
perplexity. Jerry was as shrewd and obser-
vant as his race usually are, and lost no lesson
impressed upon him by experience; but he
lacked the ingenuity, that enables Europeans to
deyise or invent, and when he found himself in
a position where experience failed him, he
was thoroughly paralyzed,
* Is she safe 1’ cried Mr. Shelley, from the
top of the waterfall.
‘ Yes, dat all right! Jerry find him by
by 1’ the black boy answered; and then, ob-
serving Percy preparing to follow him, he
shouted, ‘Bale you come, Misser Sinlar!
White feller can’t come along dis way.’
Seeing the truth of Jerry’s words, and de-
termined to reach him at any hazard,
Percy called to the men holding the
rope to fasten its upper end securely directly
over where Jerry was standing ; and when
they had done so, he firmly grasped it in both
hands, and, springing off the rocks upon which
he was kneeling, swang himself over the pool.
‘ Where is she, Jerry 1’ he asked the astonished
black boy.
‘ My word, you murry clever belongin’ to
rope !’ he exclaimed, after he had gazed upon
Percy for some seconds in silent admiration.
Bale blackfeller can do like it dat 1’
‘Where is she, Jerry? Where you see
Missie Berta 1’ Percy repeated impatiently;
but another low moan immediately below him
answered the question. At the moment Jerry
held the lamp so that it threw its, feeble light
upon the branches of the fallen tree.
‘ Lay hold of the rope all of you, and when
I speak again, haul it slowly up,’ Percy
called; and then stepping upon the tree, and
supporting his weight upon the. rope, he
slowly descended to where Bertha lay. He
found that she had fallen among the branches
of the tree, and had thereby been saved from
otherwise inevitable death. But she was in-
sensible; and the moans that continually
escaped her, were proof that she had sustained
serious injury by the fall. He tenderly lifted
her delicate form from the entanglement of
the branches, and had barely time to fasten
the rope around her, when the tree began,
slowly to slide down the face of the rock.
Taking a double turn of the rope round his
left wrist, and clasping the loved one tightly
to his side, he shouted to them to haul away.
The anxious watchers above had scarcely
drawn up the slack, when the sliding tree in-
creased its pace downwards, and falling with
a splash into the pool, left Percy and his
precious burden suspended in mid air.
‘ Pull away, Misser Selley ; murry make
haste 1’ cried Jerry, excitedly, as the tree
sank from under Percy’s feet. Fortunately,
the distance to be hoisted was not great, or it
is hardly possible that Percy could have held
on, supporting his own weight and that of
the insensible girl upon his one hand,
Bertha’s head rested helplessly upon his
shoulder, and her soft hands clung trustingly
to his neck. She was slowly reviving from a
stunning blow upon the head, she had re-
ceived from a projecting rock, in her fall.
She was alive, and clinging to him for protec-
tion ; and Percy felt repaid a thousand-fold
for all the danger he had encountered in her
rescue.-
Their perilous position was noted with hor-
ror by the anxious father; but, ever cool and
self-possessed in the presence of danger,' he
calmly directed the men, who were drawing
up the rope, and lay prone upon the rocky
bed of the shallow stream, leaning over the
edge of the fall, ready to assist his child
and her preserver. Mrs. Shelley was still
seated upon the grass, and detained by Marion
Macaulay and Janet Wilkins, The quiet
heroism that had sustained her, while Bertha’s
safety depended upon her vigilance and judge-
ment, utterly forsook her the moment her
child fell over the precipice; and, had she not
been forcibly held back, would have thrown
herself over the rocks in her grief and despair.
• Slowly the rope was drawn up, and in a
few seconds Percy and his charge were on a
level with the top of the precipice. It was
found impossible to draw them both over to
gether, without cutting their faces against the
sharp edge of the rocks. ' ‘Steady, a moment 1’
Mr. Shelley was compelled to order, though
he was fearful Percy’s strength could not hold
out much longer. ‘We must contrive'to_lift
them over separately,’ -
‘One of you hold on to me, while the rest
draw her up!’ Percy said quickly. ‘The rope
is fastened to her ; remove her hands from
my neck. Quick! my'fingers are numbing.’


Mr. Shelley did so, and Percy relaxed his
hold, and was held suspended over the abyss
by the frail strength of his coat collar, while
Bertha was carefully lifted out of her danger-
ous position, and laid upon the grass by her
mother’s side. Directly she was in safety the
grateful father turned to assist her preserver
from his critical and uncomfortable situation ;
but Davy Collyer and his subordinates had al-
ready landed him safely upon the bank of the
stream.
Mrs. Shelley’s revulsion of feeling at the
unexpected and wonderful escape of her child
was so great that she could not speak—she
could only press her to her breast, and weep
tears of joy.
‘ Holloa, Misser Selley, send dat rope down
here belongin’ to Jerry ! Bale dat want camp
down here all night!’ shouted the black boy,
impatient at being left upon his cold perch
upon the face of the precipice. The men
lowered the rope over the rocks again, and in
a few seconds hauled him and the lamp safely
up., ‘ Where dat Missis Berta now?’ he de-
manded as soon as he regained his feet, Davy
Collyer had taken the lamp from him as he
appeared up the side of the precipice, and was
standing with it where its flickering beams
fell upon the group on the bank; and the
black boy uttered an exclamation of delight,
as he recognised his young mistress lying
dreamily upon her mother’s breast, her eye-
lids half closed, and a faint smile upon her
pale features. Mr. Shelley was kneeling by
her side, examining a wound on her temples;
. and the servants were , standing around,
anxiously waiting to learn the extdnt of her
injuries. Percy was standing in the back-
ground, silently regarding the,fair young face
with a gaze of yearning solicitude and devo-
tion. He had saved her I Her precious life
had been snatched from the jaws of death by
his reckless courage, and he felt a firm convic-
' tion that she would recover—that she had ex-
perienced no further hurt than the blow that
had stunned her.
The group would have formed an excellent
study for an artist, each figure around the
beautiful centre betraying upon its features
the same emotion of anxiety, yet with such
variety of expression. Not the least interest-
ing part of the picture would have been the
faithful young savage, who loved his young
mistress with the fidelity of a Newfoundland
dog.
‘Jerry murry glad dat Missie Berta get him
all right by by,’ he joyfully exclaimed, as he
pushed unceremoniously forward, and threw
himself on the grass at her side. -His voice
seemed to bring back her wandering thoughts,
and, raising herself upon her arm, she looked
enquiringly, from one to another of the group
around her, and, recognising the familiar faces,
said, in a low tone, * Then we really are saved
from the bushrangers! But didn’t I fall
down a deep hole in the creek, or have I only
dreampt it ?’
‘ My darling, we are saved I ■ Oh ! I thought
you were killed !’ murmured her mother.
‘ Yes, my child, you did fall over the preci-
pice, but our brave friend, Mr. Sinclair, has
again laid iis under a lifelong obligation by
rescuing you,’ replied Mr, Shelley, ■ tenderly
kissing her.
‘ But where is Mr. Sinclair 1 Surely, he
didn’t get killed in -saving me?’ Bertha
anxiously asked. ,
‘ No, my child.’ God'has permitted your
life 'to be caved without that sacrifice-,’ her
■father answered, reverently.
‘ But where is he, papa 1 If he is safe, he
ought to be here.’-
- Percy stepped forward, and Bertha, holding
out her hand, said sweetly, ‘I am very grate-
ful for your rescuing me. Mamma and papa
would have been so grieved had I been killed.
But, oh! look papa,’ she exclaimed, as the
light fell upon his features, ‘Mr. Sinclair’s
face is covered with blood!’ •
-‘lt is nothing,’ he said hurriedly, as all
eyes were turned anxiously to him, ‘ Merely
a few scratches from the rooks, lam only
too happy in having been in time to save you,
Miss Shelley. . Do not think any more of-it.
There’s not a man here who would not have
done the same had he been fortunate enough
to have reached the precipice first.’
‘lt’s true enough, sir, that we’d any of us
be ready to risk our lives for you or yours at
any time, for you’ve been a good master to us;
but such a leap in the dark as Mr. Sinclair
took, I’m afraid is more than any of us would
have been game for; so it’s no use pretending
we would,’ said the overseer, candidly.


‘ Bale dal Jerry plenty game enough,’ said
that individual ingenuously, ‘ Dat Misser
Sinlar budgery game feller,. like him Old
Pertly.’
• If-Miss Bertha is sufficiently recovered,
would it not be better to get back to the bush-
rangers’ camp at once,’ Percy interrupted, to
change the subject; ‘lt is cold for her here,’
and without giving time for reply, he beckoned
to the shepherd to follow, and hurried away to
prepare the hut for her reception.
Mr. Shelley took the hint, and the whole
party left the scene of the late adventure, and
retraced their steps to the camp. When they
reached it, all trace of the recent struggle had
been obliterated, and the bodies of the dead
out-laws removed.
‘ Where is Mr. Sinclair?’ Bertha enquired,
as they reached the fire.
‘ He’s gone home to look after Old Hal.;
and he told me to tell the master everything
is ready for the ladies to pass the night in the
hut, if he thinks it would be better than to
climb the mountain in the dark,’ answered
the shepherd, as he threw another handful of
tea into the boiling pot.
‘ Strange that he did not wait till we came
up,’ said Mr. Shelley, in surprise, ‘ Has he
gone alone ?’.
‘ Yes, sir! He went away directly he made
the hut comfortable like for the ladies.’
‘ But .he cannot find his way through the
brush' and up the mountain in the dark,’
doubted Mrs. Shelley. ‘ The moon has gone
down.’
‘ Oh! if he should get lost after having
risked so much for me! The thought is ter-
rible 1’ Bertha exclaimed, shuddering.
‘ldon’t think that’s likely, Miss,’ said the
shepherd. ‘He can’t lose the path through
the brush; and though the mountain’s a bit
steep, when he’s once at the top, he can see
the fires in the burning off.’ .
■ ‘ Then you do not think he can lose himself ?
‘ No, Miss; 'he can’t well do that. The
mountain’s right, before . him, and it’ll be
lighter climbing it than in the brush. He’ll
get home right enough, never fear,’ replied the
shepherd.
‘ Well, take Giles with you, and go after
him. I don’t like the idea of his going alone,’
said Mr. Shelley, thoughtfully.
‘l I don’t think— I don’t like to, sir!’
said the shepherd, uneasily. ‘ He’ll find his
way all right, sir 1’ ,
‘lt be too dark, zir 1’ supported Giles.
•We be froighten. There moight be ghosts
an’ things.’
Mr. Shelley saw it would be useless to urge
the superstitious fellows further. Though
they were brave men, and would encounter
real danger without flinching, they would not
risk a meeting with imaginary ones. ‘ Come,
Jerry,’ he said, turning to the blaokboy, who
was close at his elbow, ‘ you are not frightened
too ?’*
‘Bale Jerry can find him,’ returned the
blaokboy, hastily. He was determined not
to leave his young mistress again till she was
Safely home.
‘Why you know the way well enough,
Jerry. No fear of you losing yourself,’ said
the overseer.’ .
- ‘Bale Jerry can find him tract,’ he reitera-
ted doggedly. ‘Bale Jerry no want to go!’
‘Never mind, Davy. If Jerry will not go,
and the others are frightened, Mr. Sinclair
must manage without them. He is not
likely to lose his way., I am sorry he
went. It was thoughtful of him, but I am
afraid he can be of no service to old Hal.
The poor fellow seemed quite dead when we
left him 1’
‘Do you ’ really think that he is dead V
.Bertha asked, the tears gathering in her eyes,
as she remembered the brave old man’s gal-
lant defence of their retreat.’
‘I am afraid he.is, my child,’ Mr. Shelley
replied. ‘ But come along, we must repair to
the hut at once. The night air is damp, and
yon have already been too much exposed.’ ,
‘ If ever there was a hero, Hal. is one,’ said
Mrs. Shelley. ‘He could easily have escaped,
instead of going to our assistance; he volun-
tarily sacrificed his life in our defence.’
* Poor fellow 1 But if we are hot careful,
more lives may be sacrificed; for we all have
wet feet, and must get them dry, or we risk our
death by colds. Bring us some tea into the
hut, Davy.’
‘ The shepherd found some capital rum in
the hut, sir. Wouldn’t a pannican of hot
rum and. water be the best thing to prevent
the ladies catching cold ?’ ‘lt isn’t right for


ladies to take it as a general rule, but there’s
a time for all things, sir,’ said the overseer.
‘ Yes, perhaps it would. Mix some Davy,
and make haste.’
Davy turned to prepare the spirits; and
Mr. Shelley led his wife and daughter to the
shelter of the outlaws’ abode. They found
everything carefully prepared for their recep-
tion. Percy had made a comfortable couch
for Bertha and her mother, by spreading a
quantity of twigs and leaves upon the bare
floor, and covering them with a large opossum
rug, and a new pair of blankets, recently
stolen from a store on the Hawkesbury, was
spread over it for a coverlet. He had also
laid some blankets out for the maidservants
to sleep upon.
‘ How thoughtful Mr. Sinclair is,’ exclaimed
Mrs. Shelley, as she noticed how carefully
everything was prepared.
‘Yes, Grace; but we will leave further
conversation till to-morrow; lam anxious for
you both to get to rest at once, or the chill you
have received from wading down the stream,
and the excitement you have undergone dur-
ing the last few hours may lay yon upon a
sick bed. Here comes Davy with the hot
spirits. Give Bertha and the girls a. good
pannican full each, and take as much yourself,
and then wrap yourselves up in these blankets
and get to sleep.’
Mr. Shelley tenderly kissed the dear ones
he had so nearly lost, and left them and re-
turned to the fire, while they drank the
warm mixture Davy had prepared, and then
lay down upon their primitive couches.
They lay for a few minutes,- thinking over
the strange and exciting incidents of the
eventful day; but the mysterious spell of the
spirit soon enveloped their faculties, and, in a
<short time, they were deeply folded in the
‘arms of health-giving sleep.
‘Davy, you and I must take turns to
watch during the remainder of the night, as
it is quite possible the bushrangers may be
lurking about.. We have no idea of the num-
bers of the gang; and we must not al-
low them to take us unprepared,' Mr. Shelley
said to the overseer, as they finished their hot
spirits, and lay down by the crackling fire.
‘ I will keep watchi for the first turn, if you
like sir,’ replied Davy.
‘1 could not sleep, if 1 tried, Just now,
Davy; sol may, as well watch first,’ said Mr.
Shelley, rising.. ‘Each of you keep your
musket by your side ready for use, if we are
molested ; and 1 will keep watch for the first
couple of hours.”
The men all begged to be permitted to
mount guard in his stead ; but Mr. Shelley
refused, and began to pace up and down be-
fore the hut, where the dear ones were sleep-
ing. Jerry had already chosen his post—he
was lying, coiled up upon the grass before the
door. He raised his head as his master pass-
ed him—‘Bale dat- dam bushranger can get
him Missie Berta nother time,’ he gaid, de-
fiantly..
‘That’s right, Jerry, yon mind him,* Mr.
Shelley replied, smiling at the faithful guard.
The hours slowly past, but Mr. Shelley
did not call Davy to relieve him; the sleepers
in the hut were too precious to leave to the
charge of any eyes but bis own; and the grey
dawn broke before any of the men around
the fire awoke.
CHAPTER XVI.
Oh, I defy thee, Hell, to show,
On beds of fire that barn below,
An humbler heart, a deeper woe !
Edqae Allan Pob. -
Percy Sinclair found liimself on the top of
the range overlooking Field Place, without
having any very definite idea of how he had
reached it. Wrapped in the cloud of his own
gloomy thought, he had mechanically traversed
the dark passage of the brush, and ! climbed
the steep ascent of the mountain, totally un.
conscious of his movements. A curious medley
of emotions held possession of his breast—
gratitude to heaven for the deliverance of his
heart’s mistress, and fear that her long ex-
posure to the chilling damps of night might
even yet prove fatal, were mingled with-regret
that it had not been another who had saved
her. , Sweet though it was .to feel that'she
must again owe her life to him, he knew only
too well the danger of his situation. Had he
been a free man, and thereby her equal, he
would have rejoiced at any accident through
which -he • could have 'proved, his
devotion, blit an his position every, new
service that he . rendered her but added, to


his love—and his despair. That morn-
ing he had decided upon leaving Field
Place, if he could prevail upon his master to
allow him to do so; and the events of the last
few hours had made it the more urgently ne-
cessary that he should do so at once. He felt
that the new claim he had made upon their
gratitude, would cause her parents to treat him
with increased confidence and kindness ; and
that, unless he escaped, he might in some un-
guarded moment be betrayed into giving ut-
terance to his passion. Shame and sor-
row must, then, follow whether she
returned his affection, or treated it
with scorn, still shame and sorrow 1
He, a convict, could never win her hand j
and, if it were possible to win her heart, he
would only be casting a dark cloud of trouble
over her young life. No! With, or without
her father’s consent, he would go!
He rested upon the summit of the
range for a few moments to calm bis
thoughts, and then began the descent
towards the homestead, the burning
stumps near the dairy directing his steps.
As he glanced at the distant fires, his thoughts
reverted to the brave old man lying upon the
cold floor of the dairy. ‘ Poor Hal. 1 I
wish it had been my hap instead of yours to
have died in her defence 1’ he apostrophised,
as he hurried down the hill.
' As he neared the house, he was startled by
the number of fires between the dairy and the
house. The land being burnt off was at the
back of the dairy, and there had been but
one fire before it—that of a burning stump—
and ha now counted six or seven. This dis-
covery thoroughly roused him from his
reverie; and, fearing that the outlaws, driven
from their den in the mountains, had returned
to the house in the absence of its defenders,
he approached with great caution, A strong
breeze was blowing; and, being to leeward
(to use a nautical term) of the fires, he was
enabled to advance to the cover of the dairy
unheard; He stood in its shadow for a few
moments, undecided how to act. He noticed
several strange dogs lying around the centre
fire, and he began to doubt the correctness of
his first supposition—dogs forming no part of
a bushranger’s train —when a low whining
within the dairy suddenly set them on their
mettle, and a furious baying resulted in a
dozen black heads rising simultaneously from
behind the fires. Percy Sinclair saw at once
that the blacks, who usually hung about the
station, hacl returned from their recent visit
to a tribe on the Yiraming (Patterson River).
He walked boldly up to their camp, although
the persistent attention of their dogs would
have daunted a less resolute man, and was
greeted by the hoary-headed monarch, Bony,
with, * Holloa, Misser Sinlar, where you
come from i Where Misser Selley and all
dother whitefeller 1’ while Enringa and the
rest the darkies exerted themselves to
pacify the dogs.
As soon as order was restored, Percy ex-
plained to his eager audience what had oc-
curred during the day.
* Where dat my piccaninny 1 W here
Jerry V demanded an old gin, anxiously.
‘ Dat dam bushranger shoot him too V
• ‘ No, Dolly, Jerry’s all right. He tracked
the bushrangers for us, or we should never
have been able to find them,’ replied Percy.
‘ Dat Jerry murray budgery piccaninny,
belongin’ to me !’ exclaimed Dolly, with ma-
ternal pride. ‘ Bale dat no jerran [frightened]
anything ! What dat Missie Selley pialla
dat cobbon budgery good job Jerry find him V
‘Yes, Dolly ; she says Jerry is a brave
fellow. They will all come home in the
morning, and then she will tell you all about
him.’
‘ Where all dat bushranger yan [gone to] V
asked Euringa, as interpreter for one of the
other blacks, whose stock of English was not
sufficient to enable Percy to understand him.
■ ‘ Some of them are' shot, and the others
have escaped into the bush.’
‘Hal’ exclaimed Sing Bony, eraphatf-
cally; and the profound observation was
echoed by his dusky followers.
‘ Dat poor old Perbly very near dead, too 1*
said Dolly, with feeling. ‘ Bale him can
pialla [speak] dis long time 1’
‘ Holloa, Misser Sinlar, you murry wet!
Where you bin I 1 interrupted Enringa, sur-
veying Percy’s drenched clothes.
He satisfied the blackfellow’s curiosity up-
on the subject, and then turned to Dolly.
‘ Where’s old Hal, now 1 In the dairy J’ he
asked.


Dolly led the way to her own fire a few feet
from where they were standing, and pointed
to a blanket as dark as herself; ‘ dat poor old
Perbly ; him got it marry deep cut here!’ she
continued, throwing back the blanket, and
pointing to his breast, ‘ me word that marry
deep cut.’ '
‘ Poor fellow,’ said Percy, stooping over him
and feeling his pulse. ‘ There is not much life
left in him.’
Hal. was insensible, and the gin had care-
fully bound up his wounds with slips torn from
an old gown Mrs. Shelley had given her. The
bleeding was stanched ; and though his pulse
was weak from loss of blood, Percy began to
hope that with care he might rally and recover.
‘ I will be back in a minute or two, Dolly.
You mind him till I come back,’ he said to
Ha.l’s self-appointed nurse and then hurried on
bo the house, Dolly the while calling back with
a shrill voice the dog?, who seemed bent on
accompanying him. Percy went to a small
chest in the diningroom, where he knew Mr.
Shelley kept a small bottle of spirits ; and not
finding the key in it, burst the chest open. He
found what he was in search of, and returned
to the camp with it. Knowing their'propensity
for rum, he ordered all the blacks,' who had
gathered round old Hal., except Dolly, to re-
turn to their own fires; and he then poured a
small quantity of the spirit down the wounded
man’s throat. It partially Tevived him, and
Percy waited for a quarter of an hour when he
repeated the dose. The spirit seemed to infuse
new life into the old man. The colour re-
turned to his cheeks, and his pulse became
firmer and more even,
‘ Look here, Misser Sinlar, you catch him
cobbon feller cold, ’spo’ you keep all dat wet
tings on!’ said Dolly prophetically. ‘You drink
him cobbon pannican .rum, and den lay down
along bed.’ '
Percy saw tije truth of the black woman’s
words, and though'caring little.in his gloomy,
mood what became of him, be decided upon
following her advice. ‘ ‘ Will , you mind him
till daylight, Dolly, and give him a little'of
this every now and then T he said, handing
her the bottle. , ' '
‘ All right, Misser Sinlar, me give It; bile
Dolly drink it,’ she replied proudly. ‘Dat
oder blackfeller drink it; bale Dolly drinkit.’
" Percy left her in charge of old Hal. and the
bottle ; and though the struggle was bard,
she bravely resisted the temptation of sharing
it with her patient; but gave him his dimin-
utive doses at frequent, if not regular, inter-
vals Percy "retired to his little room off the
kitchen, and soon got to bed. His limbs were
aching with the cold, and the cuts and bruises
about his face and hands were smarting
acutely; but the large dose of spirit he bad
taken soon soothed him into forgetfulness.
Directly dawn had penetrated the dark
hollow of the brush, Mr. Shelley called the
men ; and before half-an-hour had passed, the
quarts were boiling for breakfast, and a good
meal was prepared from the outlaws’ larder.
‘Davy, we must contrive a litter of some
kind to carry., the ladies up the mountain.
Thpy can never dimb it by themselves,’ said
M*. Shelley, thoughtfully. ‘You may find
some tools in the hut when they rise.’
‘ I’m afraid the mountain’s too steep for
that; but we’ll try, if you like, sir. The
ladies' are coming now. I will look for the
tools at once,’ replied the overseer, as Mrs.
Shelley and Bertha left the hut, and, followed
by Marion and the housemaid, approached
the fire. ■ -
‘ My darlings, how are you this morning,*
Mr. Shelley exclaimed, delightedly, as he ad-
vanced to meet them.
‘ I feel quite well, Walter. 1 think Davy’s
receipt last night preserved us from the ill
effects of our wet feet.’ •
‘I am quite recovered from my terri-
ble fall, papa, and I am intensely anxious
to get home to see how poor old Hal. is, and
whether Mr. Sinclair reached home safely.
‘Make haste, then, to get your breakfast
over. Davy is looking for tools to make a
litter to carry you up the mountain.’ •
‘To carry me I I would much rather walk,
papa. All that I wanfis to make haste.' But
for Mr. Sinclair’s bravery I should have been
dead before how ; and I am anxious to ascer-
tain if he is safe.’
The party took breakfast hurriedly, and
then began their long walk home. Mr.
Shelley left the overseer and Giles to bury
the fallen bushrangers, and with the remain-
der of the party pushed on through the brush.
The ascent of the mountain was not nearly so


difficult*in daylight; and' Jerry was able-to
paint out a path that wound along among the -
rocks, and was not so steep as where
they had descended. 1 About nine o’clock they
reached the house, and found the blaekfellows
holding a feast-in the verandah. They were
greeted with a wild shout of pleasure as the
darkskins recognised them. -
‘Holloa; here dat Missie Berta! Here dat
Missie Selley 1’ shouted the blacks in chorus,-
as they approached.
After a few words of welcome to - the tame
blacks, as those frequenting the station were
called, Mr. Shelley enquired of Dolly where
Mr. Sinclair was. ‘Dat Misser Sinlar. gone
sleep in him room,* she replied. ‘ Where dat
Jerry V
‘ Gone to the dairy with the overseer to see
if Hal. is alive. Ha,-here he comes I’
Jerry approached with an expression of pain
upon his honest black face.
‘ Bale dat old Perblv in dairy, only old
Nell,’ be said anxiously. ‘ Where dat old
Perbly go to V
‘ Dat all right; Euringa and Minnighi
biing him in kitchen., Dat get all right by
by,’ answered Dollv.
‘ Then the brave old man is not dead,’ ex-
claimed Beitha joyfully. * Come mamma, let
us go to him.’ They entered the kitchen, and
found that old Dolly bad made him a bed by
the side of the fire. He was sensible, but so
weak that hecocld not raise a hand.’ Be looked
up as they entered, and whispered fervently,
‘ Thank God you are ■ saved. ; It was your
prayin’ to Him in the dairy that saved us all.’
‘Don’t speak; Hal., you ate too weak yet.
We have great cause indeed for gratitude to
heaven for the wonderful preservation’of you
all-; and I‘.trust we may never forget-the
mercy that has been extended to ns. - I have
learnt your gallant defence of my wife and
child; accept my deepest gratitude for your
heroism,’ Mr, ’ Shelley said, as his wife
and Bertha- knelt by -the old man’s side, too'
much overpowered by pity and gratitude to
■peak, '- •
‘ You have bin a kind master, sir; and I’d
hav* freely died to serve you; and the Missis
and Miss Bertha has always had a kind word
for us prisoners ; an*-there isn’t one o’ us that
wouldn’t do anythin’ for ’em.’•
1 * I believe you, Hal.'; but you must : speak
no more now; you : must rest’and try to get ’
round again. I will examine your wounds in
a few minutes, and in the meantime, Dolly,
you kill a fowl, and Janet will make some
broth for Hal.’
‘ All right, Misser Selley. Me wring him
neck,’ answered Dolly, pleased at receiving an
Older from the master.
‘ Dear old Hal., we shall never forget your '
bravery,’ said Mrs; Shelley rising, and brush-
ing a tear from her eyes. ‘ WaUer send a man '
to Newcastle for a doctor.’
‘Take your horse, Davy, and start at once,*
Mr. Shelley said, turning to the overseer, who ”
had just entered the kitchen,
‘Yes, sir! I can’t well get back with one
before dark though ; for if I push the horse
going, he will likely knock up coming back,’
‘ Lose no time, Davy. You can get a fresh
horse from Meredith.-' ’ I wouldn’t risk the
chance- of losing- Hal. for the 'price of a
thousand horses.’
Davy started for the doctor, -and Mr. Shel-
ley saying - ‘ Make Mr. Sinclair a bed in the
parlor, -Giace .; we must give his room to
Hal. for the present,’ entered Percy’s room ;
Mrs. Shelley went into the house to prepare
the parlor for Mr., Sinclair-; and Bertha knelt -
by old Hal.’s side; waiting* anxiously to leam
how her other preserver was,: •
Percy awoke’as Mr. Shelley entered." ‘Are
all home safe,' sir !' he asked. *
. ‘Yes, thank heaven! the wetting "in the
stream appears to have done them no harm
and Bertha’s fall over the rocks‘has left 'noth-
ing more than a small contusion upon the left'
temple. Sinclair, I can not express my gratitude 1
for your reckless daring in leaping down that
precipice to her rescue. It was a leap that a'
brave' man- might-have recoiled from !’ said
Mr. Shelley wringing Percy’s hand, ‘ It is the
second time we have to owe her life to you.’ -
* You - would wish to repay me for saving
Miss Shelley?’ Percy- asked,’ gloomily. ;
‘ Can you doubt it ?’
‘Then promise me two things—first, never
to mention the subject to me again while I
remain here; and, second, to excbangh me-
with some one upon the Hawkesbury River, or
to send me .back to the central depdt.


Mr, Shelley rose from the seat, he had'taken
by the bedside, and stared at Percy in surprise.
‘ What have we done to offend you, Sinclair V
he. asked after a few seconds. ‘ Something
must have happened that I know nothing of,
to cause you to wish to leave us. I recollect
now, you said something about this yesterday
morning.’
‘ I hope you will believe me, sir, when I say
that, so far from wishing to leave Field Place
through offencs of any kind, I feel that I have
always received the utmost kindness from you
and your family, and that I can never hope to
be treated so well anywhere else I may go'.
The reason that urges me to leave is one that
I cannot tell you ; and, as a gentleman, I am
certain you will not press me to divulge it.
As you value my service in saving Miss
Shelley’s life, promise me that you will grant
my request!’ .
Mr. Shelley could hot help feeling annoyed
and hurt at Percy’s strange wish to leave him
and be had a suspicion that something must
have happened to have offended him. Yet, in
the face of-his late service, he could not well
refuse a request so urgently made. * You may
go,- Sinclair,’ he said, slowly, ‘ but remember
that our home is always open to you; and,
as . soon as you grow tired of the reality of
your new life, I will contrive to get you back
again. When yon recollect that last night
you again restored to us the one flower that
brightens our home, you will not be surprised
that-JMrs. Shelley and . myself will both be.
grieved at your going.’
•If I could tell you why 1 go, I am afraid
yon would be only too pleased!’ Percy thought,
but he kept hisjtbought to himself, and thanked
his master for his permission to leave.
‘You have several ugly cuts and bruises
about the face, I am sorry to see,’ said Mr.
Shelley, ‘ I will bring something to bind them
up in a.few minutes. I have to go now and
examine old Hal. He is dreadfully wounded,*
but I think he will recover.’
‘ I shall get up directly, sir; I feel none the
worse for. ray wetting,’ replied Percy ; and
Mr. Shelley left the room, pondering over his
servant’s determination to . leave— ( Bertha,
Mr. Sinclair is going away in a few jdays 1’
he said, as he approached Hal.’s side. 1 1
‘ Going away !’ exclaimed Bertha, rising,
the color leaving her cheeks. ‘ Going away
Why V
‘ Why, I have no idea. Yon remember he
said something about it in the barn yesterday
morning, before we started for Newcastle.
Be must have some reason, though what, I am
utterly at a loss to know. lam very sorry
indeed that h'e wishes to leave us; but I can’t
well refuse to let him go, since he is so urgent,’
her father replied.
‘ Going to leave us ! Why ?’ she repeated
to herself, as if the Intelligence came npon her
so suddenly, that she could scarcely compre-
hend it. ‘ Going to leave us 1 Surely he
cannot mean it!’.
‘ He is serious, Bertha ; and considering the
obligation we are under to him, for having
twice saved your life, you may be sure your
mother and I will both regret bis unaccount-
able determination. He will be out in a few
minutes,’ so .go and see about breakfast for
him.’
Mr. Shelley turned to Hal., and Bertha
left ’ the kitchen and repaired to the parlor,
speculating upon the cause.of Percy’s wish to
leave her father’s service, ‘Mamma, Mr.
Sinclair is going away, papa says,’ she ex-
claimed, as she entered the room, ‘1 wonder
what is his reason !’
‘ Going away ? Nonsense, Bertha !’ said
Mrs. Shelley, incredulously, He could not
be so unwise !. We. treat him like a gentle-
man, as he deserves; but he would find bis
position very different among strangers. He
would he used by most masters, as other Go-
vernment men are, with more rigor than
justice.’
• ‘ I don’t believe he ever did anything to
deserve being transported, mamma 1’; Bertha
exclaimed, decidedly. ! ’
‘ Perhaps not, Bertha! But, whether or
not, be is a convict, and would be treated
simply as such by. most masters.’.
‘I wonder what he was sent out for!’. said.
Bertha.
‘ I don’t know. It is a subject he always
avoids.’
‘ I expect it is because, if guilty, he nature
ally wishes to forget it, and, if innocent, he
feels. that f no one would believe him, if he
were to tell them,’..suggested Bertha..


‘ Perhaps so 1 But' Innocent or guilty, he
shall not leave us, if I can prevent it. After
his saving you again last night, Bertha, I
shall not allow him to risk his peace by such
a mad act. How is be this morning V
‘He is getting up; so I expect he has es-
caped catching cold. I must set Marion to
get his breakfast ready,’ replied Bertha.
‘Doyou know, Bertha, I sometimes fancy
he is in love with Marion. Perhaps he wishes
to leave because he is fond of her, and, being
only a convict, sees no prospect of marrying
her,’ said Mrs. Shelley.
‘ I dare say that is just the very reason,
mamma !’ exclaimed the fair girl, with en-
thusiasm. ‘ I dare say that is the very rea-
son 1 I have noticed lately, that he spends a
good deal of bis leisure time in talking with
her. Sometimes when they are conversing in
the kitchen, and I disturb them, he goes out
until I return to the house. It must be terri-
ble to be in love, and have no prospect of
winning the object of ’ ,
‘Terrible to be in love? What can you
know about the subject, Bert.?’ interrupted
Mr. Shelley, laughiug, as he entered. ‘Have
you experienced that terrible ordeal ?’
‘Me, papa? No!’ replied Bertha, blush;
ing crimson at her father’s question. We
were speaking of Mr. Sinclair’s leaving us.
Mamma thinks he is fond of Marion |,
‘ls it true that he really dues wish to leave
us, Walter ?’ Mrs. Shelley enquired;
* Yes, Grace; he asked me to allow him to
go, and I cannot well refuse.’
1 I believe he is in love with Marion, and
being in no position to marry, I expect, is the
reason why he is anxious to leave,’ replied
Mrs. Shelley.
‘ If that is the cause, and they are fond of
each other, Grace, I can see no obstacle to
their union,’ said Mr; Shelley, thoughtfully.
* I will give him good wages as superintend-
ent, and a cottage to live in ; and be will be
more comfortable than half the free men.’
‘Do, Walter ; it would be, after all, but a
small payment for what we owe him. We
should never miss his wages,’
‘ Oh, papa, I am so glad ! I was afraid we
should never have an opportunity of showing
him our' gratitude, and here is one ready at
our fingers’ ends. It will make him so happy,
1 and there is no one more deserves happiness \
! he is so brave and good !’ said Bertha, warmly.
‘ But what if we are wrong in our supposi-
tion, and be should persist in wishing to
leave?’ Mr. Shelley asked.
‘Then refuse to permit him to 1’ Mrs.
Shelley replied, with decision. ‘lt would be
a poor return'for his services to allow him to
commit such a mad act.’
‘ I cannot, if he persists in his determina-
tion, Grace/ returned Mr. Shelley.
‘What? Allow him to make himself
miserable for* life, Walter 1 There would be
no kindness in that. If he leaves Field
Place, he may be sent to work on the roads,
or assigned to some brutal master,’ pleaded
Mrs. Shelley, determined upon restraining
the deliverer of her child from the unhappy
position he was bent upon running into.
‘ Even if that were certain, I could not re-
fuse him now, Grace, for I have promised,’
her husband replied, sorrowfully. ‘You can-
not regret bis wishing to leave us more than
I do; but I hare promised, and I cannot
break my word.’
‘When is he going, papal’ Bertha en-
quired, anxiously.
* I don’t know, my child ; I shall not think
of letting him go until l ean exchange him to
a good master. It will not be until after
mustering, as I shall stipulate that he stays a
month longer, in the hope that he may change
his mind and remain altogether.’
‘ Well, I shall bo sorry enough if he does
go,’ said Bertha, with a sigh. ‘ I would do
anything to make him happy and contented 1
Perhaps, if he knows that he will have a
prospect of winning Marion, he may stay.
May I tell him what you propose, papa 1
Marion is a good girl, and well deserving of
such a noble, generous man.’
‘ Yes, Bertha but here he comes 1 See about
his breakfast,’ Mr. Shelley said, as Percy eh-
tered. ‘We are all very much hurt and dis-
appointed at your resolution to leave us, Mr.
Sinclair,’ he continued, turning to Percy;
• and we have decided to claim a month’s no-
tice. If, at the end of that time, you are still
of the same mind, I will endeavour to arrange
to place you with a friend of mine, who is a
gentleman in every sense of the word, and
will know how to appreciate you.’


* Thank you, sir ; I would prefer leaving at
once, but I thank you for giving me permis-
sion to go soon,’ replied Percy, smiling faintly,
‘ Bertha and I are determined that you
shall have time to reconsider your determina-
tion ; and yon mast, of coarse, allow ladies to
have their own way.’
‘Certainly, if you wish it, ma’am,”.Percy
replied, resignedly. ‘ I would rather not wait
so-long, as 1 am certain not to alter my mind;
but I will cheerfully do so if yon wish it.’
‘You have several bruises about the face,
Mr. Sinclair; go . with Mr. Shelley, and be
will cover them with sticking plaster, said
Mrs. Shelley. ‘ Ate they painful ?’
‘ No, ma’am; they are nothing, but a few
scratches. I had forgotten them, till you
spoke,’ replied Percy. .
‘ Come this way, Mr. Sinclair, and we will
attend to the braises at once, while your
breakfast is being prepared,’ said Mr. Shelley,
opening the door into an adjoining room.
.Percy followed him, and Bertha hurried
away to the dining-room, to prepare his break-
fast, while her mother returned to the kitchen
to attend to old Ha'.
Marion was in the dining-room when
Bertha entered, and she was so distressed at the
news of Percy’s projected departure that
Bertha felt the mote certain she was correct
in her. surmise of the probable cause of
Percy’s wish to leave,
‘ Surely, Miss, he cannot be serious 1’
Marion exclaimed. ‘ He appeared - so happy,
and comfortable here, that it seems impossible
he ca?really mean to go. Oh, I should be.so
sorry if he did leave us,’
‘We are all grieved Marlon, very much
grieved; but papa says he cannot well refuse
to let him go, if he presses it; so I am afraid
we shall lose him. ■ Marion, I very much
wish to ask you a question, which I am afraid
yon will take as impertinent. Yon need not
answer it unless yon like, yon know ; but it
is a desire to befriend you and Mr. Sinclair,
that induces me to speak. .1 hope you will
not be offended, and think me inquisitive; I
owe so much to Mr. Sinclair—he has twice
saved my life, you remember—that my first
thought is naturally his happiness; and you,
too, have been-so good and. kind, that 1 could
do nothing which would give! me ' greatet
pleasure than to assist yon.
Marlon gazed at Bertha; with’ amazement,'
as she- made this rambling attempt to Intro-
duce the subject of her benevolent Intentions.
‘I really don’t understand ;yon,; Miss,’ she
said, in a tone of pained surprise, as a faint
glimmer.' of her young mistress’s meaning
flashed upon her.
‘ Nay, don’t blush so, Marion 1’ Bertha ex-
claimed, smiling at her heightened colour. - ‘ I
think any girl might be proud of the love of
so brave and noble a man.’
Before Marlon could reply, Percy entered,
and she hurried away to hide her confusion.
Percy approached the table, and took his
seat in silence. He felt ill-at-ease, at Bertha’s
presenee—so strangely inconsistent is love—
and unable to commence a conversation.
‘I expect you are very hungry, Mr. Sin-
clair, Did you haye tea last night?’ Bertha
asked, sweet'y.
‘No, Miss Shelley, I have eaten nothing
since I had dinner at Rouse’s Hotel, in New-
castle, yesterday, ’ he replied, turning to her.
‘You must be dreadfully hungry, then,’she
said.
‘ No ; I am not hungry,' Miss Shelley J but
I would like a cup of tea.’
1 Mr. Sioc’air, I shall feel hurt if yon call
me Miss Shelley again. After wbat you
risked for me last night, you ought to be sure
that we all look upon you so much as a friend
that this distant manner is unnecessary. Call
me Bertha. 1 shall never forget that, but for
your noble courage yesterday, it would have
been too' late for any. to call me at all.’
Percy’s face grew warm as she bade him to
call her by the dear name, that to him had
more , music in its sweet, simple sound, than
lay in the mystic chords of the wild iEolian
Harp. He made some confused and scarcely
audible reply, to the purpose that he was only
too happy in having had an opportunity, of
serving her, and that so long as he had sucj
ceeded in saving her, it mattered very little
to his own useless life.
■ *1 do not remember much about it, Mr.’
Sinclair, as I must' have been stunned in the
fall; but I have an indistinct recollection of
your holding'me in your arms as they were;


drawing us up. And that terrible fight in the
dairy ! I shall never forget it!”
‘ I think you owe more to Hal. than to me,
Miss Bertha. It requiies courage of a far
higher class to face danger for so many hours,
than to act upon impulse. And, besides, Hal.
saved your mamma and the two maidservants
as well as you, while 1 cm only lay claim to
having rescued one,’ said Percy.
‘ Whether or not, Mr. Sinclair, there are
few men who would have dared the leap;
and, though I am grateful indeed to poor old
Hal., for his share of the dangers encountered
yesterday, you must permit me to feel grate-
ful to you too. Now, it is no use to say any-
thing more,’ she said, in mock reproof,
‘ because I shall have my own way, and be
grateful, whether you like it or not! I feel
hungry, too; for the long walk up the moun-
tain has sharpened my appetite; so I will sit
down and breakfast with you.’
She poured out the tea, and served Percy
and herself to the cold meat and damper,
chatting the while about the exciting adven-
tures of the previous day, and then took a
seat on the opposite side of the table. She
chatted on for a few minutes, altogether for-
getful of her sharpened appetite, and striving
to repress her eagerness to dive at once into
the subject of the little cottage and her father’s
proposal. Unable to restrain herself further,
she abruptly exclaimed, by way of preamble,
‘ Do you really intend to leave us, Mr. Sin-
clair T
‘ Yes, Miss Bertha, I must go, I am sorry
to say,’ he replied sadly, but firmly.’
‘ Will you not stay just to please mamma
and me, Mr. Sinclair 1 We shall be so very
sorry, if you go!’
‘ I think I have given you proof that I
would do much to serve you, Miss Bertha.
As you are grateful to me, repay me for what
I have done for you by not pressing the ques-
tion further,’ said Percy gloomily.
A few minutes, silence followed, when Ber-
tha suddenly startled Percy by'exclaiming,
‘ I know your secret, Mr. Sinclair; but there
is no necessity for your leaving Field Place.
Papa says some arrangement can be made
that shall be mutually agreeable.’
Percy gave her a glance of keen enquiry;
and as her clear blue eyes met his unflinoh-
ingly,, he had great difficulty in controlling
his emotion. Know his secret ] Impossible!
or she could never sit talking so freely with
him, a convict! He bit his lip, as he figured
to himself with what different feelings she
would receive his secret, were he to reveal it
there! He said, as a bitter smile flitted over
his pale features,' * 1 don’t think you do know
my secret, Miss Bertha.’
‘ Promise that you will not be angry or
offended' with me, and I will tell you what I
think it is,’ she said, smiling,'
He felt inclined to seize her hand, and de-
clare that .nothing she could do or say could
displease him ; but he restrained himself, and
said simply, ‘ I promise !’
*ls not the cause of your wishing to leave
us that you love some one you feel you have
no prospect of marrying f
In his surprise and confusion at this unex-
pected question, Percy dropped his cup of tea.
' Whatever can she mean 1’ he thought. ‘ Can
she have discovered that I love her—have
read the secret I have guarded so jealously,
and now upbraid me with my presumption
and ingratitude to her father V
Bertha accepted bis emotion as a further
proof of the certainty of her supposition.
Seeing that he did not immediately answer,
she apologised sweetly for the bluntness of the
question; and assured him that it was his hap-
piness alone that urged her to ask it. ‘ You
are so determined to go; and lam sure none
of us have in any way given you occasion to
be dissatisfied with us, that yon must hare
some very strong reason for your strange de-
termination,’ she said. ‘ And if 1 have guessed
the cause Correctly, I may tell you-that it can
be removed. Papa knows<your secret, and
sees no reason why it should drive you away/
Percy was perfectly dumbfounded. ‘ Know
his secret, and see no reason why it should
drive him away ? For a moment the delight-
ful.thought possessed him that, perhap, egrati-
tude would compel her father to overlook the
foul stain upou his name; but common sense
(an attribute that usually lies dormant in the
breast of a lover) came to his rescue, and
warned him of the absurdity of such an as-
sumption, and he dismissed it. - Another
thought, equally absurd, suggested itself to his
excited imagination— ‘ Perhaps she loved him.


and, reading his heart, bad herself spoken to
her father on his behalf.’ He drove this idea
from his mind in shame—he would not for
one moment tarnish the bright .image im-
pressed upon his heart by a thought so un-
worthy of the sex, whose chiefest claim to
homage is its coyness and reserve.
Bertha saw his confusion, and thinking to
set him more at ease, told him of her father’s
offer of the cottage and regular wages as
superintendent of the station, unfortunately
omitting to mention Marion by name, and
concluded by asking him to answer, plainly
and without reserve, if she was .right in her
conjecture of the cause of his hurry to leave,
and whether the arrangement her father pro-
posed would induce him to alter his determi-
nation.
Percy pushed his plate from before him, and
sat silent for a few seconds, gazing through the
open window, then, slowly rising, he turned
to the bright, eager face that was bent enqui-
ringly upon him. ‘ Miss Bertha,’ he said, in
a faltering voice, 1 it is impossible that yon
could have guessed the motive that drives me
from Field Place. If you could have done
so, and your kind words are not prompted by
gratitude alone, you are a very different girl
from what I have taken you for,’
Bertha rose instantly. ‘ You are angry
at my interference, Mr. Sinclair, and think
me impertinent,’, she exclaimed, sorrowfully,
her eyes filled with tears at the thought of
having offended her preserver. ‘Pray forgive
me, and believe that I am only actuated by a
desire for your happiness. 1 may have been
; unwise in speaking, but—■’
‘ Forgive me, Miss Bertha!’ Percy inter.
. rupted. ‘ It is I who need forgiveness fqr
speaking so; I did not mean to hurt your
feelings—l scarcely know what I am saying.’
. ‘You are not angry with me then, Mr.
Sinclair V she asked, eagerly.
‘ Angry with you 1 Impossible!’ he an-
swered, impetuously; and, checking himself,
he continued, ‘ I must leave you, Miss Bertha,
or I may be tempted to tell you something I
am in honor bound to conceal!’
‘Wait, one moment, Mr. Sinclair!’ she
said, laying her hand upon bis shoulder as he
turned to leave the room, ‘ My dearest wish
is to promote your happiness; and, if you are
really not angry with me, I would like to
settle the matter we have been talking about.
Am I right in thinking that your unfortunate
and, I am certain, undeserved position as a
Government man appears to you as an obsta-
cle‘to your fondest hopes! lam sure papa
does not think it so.’
Percy Sinclair’s heart beat fast, as the
sweet voice spoke so hopefully of his future,
and the beautiful face, flushed with excite-
ment, was lifted to his. Her clear, blue eyes
were fixed upon him, as if she was striving to
read his inmost thoughts in his averted eyes.
Honor, discretion—all fled from him in the
ecstacy of the moment; and, totally misun-
derstanding her meaning, he seized her hand,
and, carried away by his excitement, exclaim-
ed, ‘ Do you—can you mean what you say 1
May 1 dare to hope that I, marked with the
daik brand of felony, may yet win ’
‘ Jerry, tell Davy to come to me for a note
before he starts for the doctor 1’ shouted Mr.
Shelley, from the verandah, unconscious of
interrupting a scene, and then opened the
door and entered the room. ‘ Finished break-
fast, Sinclair!’ he said, as he entered. ‘lf
you have, we will take a walk across to the
dairy.’
I have finished, sir, and am at your ser-
vice,’ Percy replied, while a glow of shame
spread over his pale features, as the entrance
of his master brought back vividly to mind
the terrible truth of his position, and the de-
grading consciousness of having, even for a
moment, forgotten his honor.
. ‘ And I will go and attend to Snowflake.
I expeft the poor old fellow is getting hungry,
for I bad no time to think of him yesterday
afternoon,’ said Bertha, leaving the room.
‘ Take a seat, Sinclair. As we are alone,
we may as well talk over this matter here,’
said Mr. Shelley, taking a chair himself.
Your determination to leave us cannot be the
result of a mere love of change; and I should
like to know what is your motive. I will
not ask yon again to confide in me, but I
think that I have discovered it; and I shall
ask you, as man to man, whether I am right/
Percy took a chair, and sat down, and
waited in silence for Mr. Shelley to explain
himself fully. He could scarcely credit the
evidence of his senses, when Mr. Shelley be


can in the same strain that Bertha had been
talking in ; and he half believed that he must
he dreaming, or have been more seriously
hurt by the blow upon the head he had re-
ceived in the pool the night before, than he had
imagined. ‘ Mrs. Shelley, Bertha, and I have
been talking the matter over; and we fancy
that you may perhaps be fond of Marion, and
wish to leave because you can sea no prospect
of marrying her. If such is really the case,
you may rest assured that we shall put no
obstacle in your way. Jf she loves you, you
may marry her ; and we will give you the
new cottage to live in, and a regular salary.’
■ With lips compressed, and face pale from
emotion, Percy listened to his master’s gene-
rous proposal. His short-lived hopes, which
had been raised by a breath, were as quickly
dissipated. Her words, that he had madly
taken as referring to himself, had reference to
another. How grateful he was now for the
unspeakable service his master had uncon-
sciously performed in interrupting him, and
saving him from the intolerable shame of be-
traying his true sentiments to her.
1 1 am very grateful indeed, sir, for the
great interest you and your family have al-
ways shewn in my welfare; and I am es-
pecially grateful for this new expression of
your kind solicitude for my happiness. But
I assure you, that great as the friendship is
that we entertain for each other, neither
Marion nor myself ever thought of each other
as anything more than friends?
‘ Hem !’ said Mr. Shelley, meditatively,
‘ in that case it is useless to pursue the matter
further! Well, I ask yon, as a personal favor,
to wait contentedly till the end of the month,
when Meredith will return to his station;
and I will arrange with him, for you to spend
six months in his service. At the end of that
term, we can reconsider the subject, before
applying to Government to cancel your assign-
ment papers,’
‘ I will stay, sir, with pleasure, if my doing
so will please you. Mustering will be over
by then,’ replied Percy, with resignation.
* Thank you. You will oblige us very much
by staying. I must go now, and write a note
to the police magistrate, to acquaint him with
the movements of our late aggressors. I see
Davy is mounted, so I must hurry,’ said Mr.
Shelley, rising.
‘And I will'go and see poor old Hal.
again,’ Percy said, as his master left the room ;
but instead of doing so, he stood leaning upon
the mantlepiece, and gazing gloomily into tho
fire, his brows contracted in deep thought.
To have been mad enough to mistake her
words, and to think them a confession of love
on her part; to so far forget his position, and
the debt of gratitude he owed his master, as
to take advantage of that supposed confes-
sion to lay bare his heaft, and plead his
cause, was an act that smote his sensa-
live and" noble nature with shame and re-
mprse. Grateful he felt to providence that he
had been interrupted, and grateful, now that
cooler judgment had tempered the bitterness
of his disappointment, that her heart was free
from the feverish touch of love. His position
now was a painful one ; but how would that
pain have been aggravated by the conscious-
ness that her future, as well as his own, was
darkened by the cloud of despair. Little
dreamt the ruthless Clayton of the full
measure of anguish his cowardly vengeance
would heap upon the head of his hapless
victim !
‘ Mr. Sinclair, Miss Shelley says you have
something of importance to tell me,’ exclaimed
Marlon Macaulay, entering tne room. ‘ls it
true you are going to. leave us T
* Sent her to hear a tale of love,’ thought
Percy, bitterly, as he handed her a chair. ‘ I
am to leave Field Place at the end of the
month, Marion,’ he replied, as he took a seat
opposite. ‘ Miss Shelley is under a slight
mistake as to the cause of my wishing for a
change of scene; and as you have honoured
me with your confidence in reference to your
engagement to Mr. Edgar Baby, I can speak
the more freely. She fancies that'l am in
love with you, and wish to leave on that ac-
count. Mr. Shelley is under the same im-
pression, and has made the generous offer
of paying me regular wages, and giving ns the
new cottage to live in? . «
‘ How good of him. There are not many
masters, Mr. Sinclair, who would offer to pay
wages to their Government servants. But
what can have led them to look upon us as
lovers, I wonder !•’


‘ They think that, seeing no prospect of
marrying you, I wished to leave the place.
What gave them the idea of my regarding
you as other than a friend 1 cannot tel!,’ he
replied.
‘ But do you really mean to go, Mr. Sin-
clair 1 You can. find no home in the colony
so comfortable as this for those in our position.
Most Government servants are treated as
slaves. Do- think over the question again,
and change your mind. 1, for one, will miss
you terribly.’
‘ No, Marion ! If I could tell you my
motive you would admit that I have no other
course before me. I must go. Mr. Shelley
wishes me to stay till after mustering next
week, and, of course, I must do so; but I
shall have seen Field Place for the last lime
on the first of next month.'
CHAPTER XVIII.
AUs, the love of woman ! it is known
To be a lovely, and a fearful thing j
For all of her’s npon that die is thrown !
Eyeqn.
lor a brief period, we turn from the excit-
ing events and scenes at Field Place, in our
sunny land of New South Wales, to the
shores of merry England, to the fair domain
of Elmsdale, where the cloud of trouble—bred
of the hate and cowardly vengeance of one,
who possessed of man nothing but the form—
still hung like a pall upon the hearth-stone.
Time had, it is true, somewhat blunted the
keen edge of grief, and shown the mourners
that, for all human sorrow, the bright sun
still sheds his genial rays, and the moon her
silvery splendour—-that, though “ man is born
unto trouble as the sparks fly upwards,” yet
each fair season, in its appointed turn, contri-
butes its full measure of blessings to his hap-
piness—still there were moments when each
member [of the bereaved family felt all the
torture of the first pangs of their separation
from the innocent one (they would as soon
have doubted the justice of heaven, as his in-
nocence !) whom 'Fate’s ruthless instrument
had torn from their midst.-
Other troubles, too, : had fallen upon the
family of the unhappy',exile. A private bank,
in which Dr. Sinclair,had invested two-thirds
o’f his fortune, and in which he, had placed
.the whole of the dowry of his orphan niece,
suddenly collapsed,* leaving Anne Egerton
penniless, and himself but a fraction of his
former effluence. In comparison with the
heavy trials he had already endured, this was
as nothing; but it added gall to the bitterness
of his brimming cup of sorrow ; for the conso-
lation, which had hitherto supported him, that
his family was well provided for, was rudely
snatched away by the catastrophe, and he could
see nothing before his daughters and niece
but the cold reception the short sighted, hard-
hearted world offers to those, who must work
for their bread or starve. And the cherished
hope, that he could give pecuniary assistance
to his son, as soon as he received his ticket-
of-leave, was also dissipated by the great com-
mercial crash, that had resulted in the failure
of his bankers. Elmsdale bad, fortunately,
been settled on bis wife; so that a home was
always open for hisffamily ; and sufficient was
saved from the wreck of bis fortune to buy a
joint annuity of a few hundreds a year for
himself and her. This income he was em-
ploying to prepare his niece and daughters
for the situations of governess, the only field
in which they could in future hope to move.
On the afternoon, in which -we return to
Elmsdale, Dr. Sinclair was seated in bis
library with an old friend of his son, Mr.
George Darrell, Warm as was his friendship
for his old college fellow-classman, Percy was
far from Mr. Darrell’s thoughts just then.
‘ Do you think, sir, her affections are already
bestowed upon another J I have heard that she
was fond of Mr. Clayton, who went to New
South Wales two or three years ago !’ he asked
abruptly, after a few moments thought.
‘ I believe she was fond of Clayton at one
time, George; but I think that bis unfortu-
nate conduct weaned her affections from him.
1 have not heard her mention his name, sinee
be left England,’ replied Dr. Sinclair.
‘You are her guardian ; are you not I 1 Mr.
Darrell asked after another awkward pause.
‘Yes; she was the only child of my wid-
owed sister, who committed Anne to my
charge on her death, bed. As yon may natu-
rally suppose, I am as solicitous of her happi-
ness, as though' she were my own daughter.
Have you ever spoken to her upon the sub-
ject yeti’


‘ No, sir! I thought it prudent to make
certain enquiries of you first!’ Mr. Darrell
replied.
* I trust the enquiries you wish to make,
'George, are not prompted by a mercenary
spirit!’ said Dr. Sinclar, dubiously; a sus-
picious frown contracting his brows. ‘lf so,
you are not worthy of her.. I can hope noth-
ing more for my own daughters, than that they
may prove their cousin’s equal in every virtue
of heart and mind.’
‘ Believe me, sir, pecuniary considerations
form nojpart of the enquiries I wish to make,’
Mr. Darrell exclaimed, hurt by being thought
capable of such baseness. ‘ The subject is of an
entirely different riature. .{But it is one that
cannot be answered by any person but you. I
come to speak to you first as her guardian.’
‘ Most men leave the parent or guardian as
the last person to be consulted. You are act-
ing upon' my own vieW- of these matters,
George, and I honor you/ said the old gentle-
man, pleased at what he considered the
fine sense of honor, displayed by the young
man.
‘ I will be candid with you, sir,’ returned
Mr. Darrell, smiling at the old gentleman’s
words. ‘I do not deserve your good opinion
in this matter. : To'my mind, it is quite
time enough to consult a parent or guardian,
when the lady herself has consented ; and 1 as-
sure you, I should not have spoken to you
upon this subject,: until Miss Bgerton had ac-
cepted me, but for the question 1 am about to
ask of you.’
‘ Indeed!’
‘ You say she did love Hubert Clayton once;
perhaps she does still; but, I would never
.have accepted that as a reason for abandoning
;he pursuit of my dearest hopes ; nor would 1
haveallowed your opposition, were you pleased
to place an obstacle in my way, to deter me
from pressing my suit. What has bound my
tongue, when on many occasions 1 have been
sorely tempted to' speak, was the thought that,
.perhaps Percy loved her.’ '
. The frown that had been gathering upon
Dr. Sinclair’s features during the young man's
expression of. independent action, gradually
.gave way to a smile of satisfaction, as Mr.
Darrell avowed the generous motive of his
silence.
‘lt seems to me impossible/ Mr. Darrell
continued, ‘ That any man could have had
the uninterrupted intercourse with her that he
bad, and remain insensible to her unrivalled
charms. Had Percy been here to plead his
own cause, love her as he might, I should
have felt no compunction of conscience in
striving to wrest the prize from his grasp; for
in love as in war, fair rivalry is both legiti-
mate and honourable. It is because be is away
and in trouble, that 1 would rather lose the one
star of my hope, than try to supplant him in
her affections. Tell me, then, honestly—-
does he love her T
Dr. Sinclair rose from his seat, and taking
Mr. Darrell’s hand, exclaimed, ‘Darrell, my
words were but empty compliments, when I
said just now, I honor yon. Now I do so with
all my heart. You have shewn a noble instance
of generous friendship ; and I am glad indeed
to be able to relieve your mind of any appre-
hension on Percy’s account. He loves her as
a sister, nothing more—but on his behalf I
thank you for the generous solicitude you
have shown for his feelings. It was his.
mother’s and my wish to see them mar-
ried ; but they never appeared to think of
each. other but as brother and sister, and
we allowed matters to take their own course.
Your noble conduct is an additional reason
for my believing that Anne’s home will be a
happy one, should you win her heart/
‘ Thank you for your kind words/ said
Mr. Darrell, pressing the old gentleman’s hand
gratefully. ‘ Now that lam assured I shall
not be acting ungenerously by Percy, I will do.
my utmost to win the only girl I ever cared
anything for.’
‘Of course you distinctly bear in mind,.
George/ Dr. Sinclair said, resuming his seat,.
‘ That we exert no influence in your favour;.
she is at perfect liberty to judge for herself.
If she consents to marry you, we will raise no.
obstacle in your way ; but you have proved
yourself too generous to expect us to attempt
to influence her.’
‘Should she reject my unsupported suit, !,
would not marry her, if she consented through
pressure. I want to win her heart. If she.
would marry me in deference to your wishes, !•
should only win her hand/ Mr. Darrell .said;,
with feeling.


‘ There is one matter I must explain to you,
George, before you speak to her. I may as well
do so at once. You are aware that at her
mother’s death a fortune of ten thousand
pounds was left to her, I being appointed sole
executor.’
‘ My dear sir, as her fortune is not the ob-
ject of my pursuit, I am not at all anxious to
learn its extent,’ the young man interrupted.
■ ‘ I believe you, George; nevertheless, I
must explain everything to you now. Six
months ago, her dewry was nearly eleven thou-
sand pounds—to-day, she has not a penny,’
Dr, Sinclair said in a low voice, as he watched
•with keen enquiry the effect of the intelligence
upon the young man. For a few seconds he
stood gazing upon the carpet as if weighing
the unwelcome news. Then looking up, he
exclaimed, ‘Are you serious, sir,or only trying
to test my love for her ?’
‘ But too serious, George ! But too serious!’
replied the old gentleman sorrowfully. ‘ Six
months ago, her dowry was nearly eleven thou-
sand pounds—to-day, she has not a penny—
all lost in the failure of my bankers.’
‘ For her sake I am veiy much grieved to
learn this, sir; but I hope you do not think
so meanly of me, as to believe that the. state
of her bankingaccount has any influence upon
my sentiments. Of course, for both our sakes,
the more fortune each contributes towards a
settlement, the better for each; but I have
enough for both. It is the priceless jewel I
covet —not its golden setting.’
* I am glad indeed, George, to hear you
speak so !’ replied Dr. Sinclair, with visible
emotion. ‘lt shews me even more unmis-
takeably the noble disinterestedness of your
nature. Now, that we fully understand each
other, yon have my consent to your suit, and
my earnest hope that you may win her. In
doing so, you will earn a prize above rubies.
If she prove as good a wife as she has a ward,
he is favored indeed of fortune, who wins
her T
‘ Will she be at home this afternoon, do you
think, sir? Mr. Darrell enquired.
■ * Either in the house or the park, George.
She employs her leisure time in sketching the
gems of nature, as she calls her favorite nooks.’
‘ I will endeavour to see her this afternoon
then, sir,. It is, but. natural that I. should be
anxious to learn my fate at once,’ said Mr.
Danell, rising, ‘ Now that I know 1 shall
not be playing traitor to Percy, I will not lose
the prize through delay.’
Dr. Sinclair let his young friend out at a
side door, and then returned to the library.
He sat for some time brooding over his late-
financial reverses. Bitterly he reproached
himself now for not having invested her money
in consols, as he had originally intended. In
his attempt to secure her higher interest, he
had lost her all, and left the beautiful daugh-
ter of his brother-in-law, Colonel Egerton, a
pauper, dependent upon his bounty, and
when heaven should remove him, to her own
exertions for bread, . The loss of her fortune
made it the mote necessary that she should
make a good match. He examined the pros-
pects of his niece from-every point of consider-
ation, and had just concluded that she could
not refuse so eligible an offer, when he me-
chanically opened a little volume of Waller’s
poems, that had been left upon the table, and
his eye caught the insctiption on the fly leaf
— 1 To Anne Egerton, with the changeless de-
votion of Hubert Clayton.’ ‘ Silly girl! Silly
girl!’ he muttered, as he lingered over the
words., ‘ She loves the scoundrel still; and
being the embodiment of truth and constancy,
she would rather work her fingers off iu her
own support, than marry a better man !’ .
Dr. Sinclair’s reverie was here disturbed
by the entrance of bis daughter Florence with
the morning mail.
‘ Three Australian letters, papa ! Two for
you, and one for Anne !’ she said,, as she han-
ded them to her father. ‘ One of yours is ad-
dressed in a strange hand, the other is from
Percy. Do open it quickly, papa. lam cer-
tain there is a note in it for me!’
Dr. Sinclair took the letters eagerly, and
broke the seal of his son’s epistle.
‘Give me Anne’s letter, papa;:and I will
take it to her. at once. You told me yester-
day to cultivate patience a little more. I am-
terribly anxious to read dear Percy’s letter;.
so here is a fine opportunity to exercise the
virtue I have so little of,’ said the merry girl,,
'snatching up her cousin’s latter,, and bounded
away with it.
‘lmpetuous as a fawn, and gentle as a.
dove!’ exclaimed her father, gazing affection


ately after her retiring form. ‘ A beautiful
character, when a little softened by time 1’
Dr. Sinclair gave his spectacles an extra
rub, and then turned to his son’s letter. It
appeared to please him exceedingly; for a
smile of satisfaction spread over his features.
Percy was in a position of far greater comfort
than fell to the lob of most prisoners, and had
the prospect of getting a fair start in life, as
soon as he was due for his ticket-of-leare. He
wrote that he could never return to England,
until the crime for which he bad been trans-
ported was cleared from his name; but
he would have an excellent opportunity of
winning a fortune in the new southern world,
after he had received his .ticket. He conclu-
ded a long and sanguine letter, by assuring
his father that he should not require his share
of the parental fortune, as his master had pro-
mised to start him on a small station; and
therefore he would like it divided equally
among his sisters and cousin.
* Poor boy ! his share will be small indeed 1’
the old gentleman said, with a sigh, as he re-
placed the letter in its.envelope, and took up
the second. At this moment blue-eyed Alice
burst into the room. * Have you got a letter
from dear old Percy V she asked, eagerly, as
she threw her arms about her father’s neck.
‘ Flo. says you have.*
‘Yes, darling, I have’
• Did he say anything about me V the eager
little girl enquired^
‘ Yes, Alice. He asked how his little sister
is, and whether she is always a good girl,’ re-
plied her father.
‘Did hel Well, papa, you mustn’t say I’m
always good, because I’m not—it’s so hard to
be good always, you know—but yon may tell
him I try very very hard to be ! May I try
to read his letter,, papa 1 Governess teaches us
to read writing hand every day now.’
‘ Here it is, darling. I think you bad let-
ter take it to mamma, and ask her to read it to
you. She is in the drawing-room,’ replied her
father, handing her the letter.
‘No, papa! Mamma is in the. nursery with
poor Maudie. She is so sick. Nurse thinks
she has been eating some berries in the shrub-
bery,’said the sympathizing Alice.
‘Tell mamma I will be with her in a few
minutes!’ Dr. Sinclair said, as the bright little
damsel ran off with the letter ; and he then
opened the one her entrance had interrupted
him from looking at. 11 was from a clergyman
in Sydney, an old friend of bis own—one who
had gone to the Antipodes a few years before
in the fervent hope of being permitted to do
service to. the Lord in that distant and neg-
lected part of the vineyard. He wrote to beg
Dr. Sinclair to procure him a respectable
young person to fill the position of governess
to the family of a wealthy squatter, ‘ The
very thing Anne wanted,’ he said to himself,
as he folded the letters, and put them in his es-
oritoir. ‘ However, if she is wise enough to
accept young Darrell, she will escape the trials
inseparable from such a situation.’
Florence hurried to Anne’s boudoir with the
letter, and found her cousin looking over the
contents of her writing desk. ‘A letter for
you, Anne, and from Percy !’ she exclaimed,
tossing the missive into her cousin’s lap.
Anne stooped over it, as she picked it,up,
in a manner to conceal her face; but she was
.not quick enough to escape the quick eyes of
Florence.
* What is the matter, Anne ? Your eyes
are red, and you have been crying,’ said
Florence,, with concern.
* Nothing is the matter, dear,’ protested
Anne, in confusion, ‘ I have a headache,
and the excitement of looking over some old
relics has made me nervous.’
As Anne spoke, she put a faded letter in-
to her pocket ; Florence caught sight of the
initials ‘H. C,’ in one corner, and, guess-
ing the true cause of her cousin’s nervousness,
left the room. Anne went into her dressing-
room, and, after bathing her eyes, returned to
read her letter. It was written in a very
different strain to her uncle’s, and on a later
date,
“ Field Place, Hunter Eiver,'
“New South Wales,
“ September 18th, 1837. 1
“ Dearest Anne—You asked me in your last
to be candid,' and tell you truly whether I am
happy in my southern home. I know that the
question was dictated by your gentle heart, and
that no one feels a deeper interest in ray welfare
than you do; accept my grateful thanks for
your kind solicitude on my behalf! I will re-
spond without reserve to your invitation, and
.tell you everything that concerns me. lam not


«o thoroughly happy here as you would wish mo
to be ; but the ‘ terrible realities of convict life,’
which you allude to, are not, even indirectly,
the cause of my discontent. If you could see
me here, you could not possibly guess, from ap-
pearance, that I am a prisoner. I am treated
with the utmost kindness by my master and his
wife and their angelic daughter (heaven bless
her 1) and with respect by the men. You re-
member the account I gave you of the snake ad-
venture just after I arrived here P From that
day I have been treated more as a guest than a
seryant, so extravagantly have her grateful
parents overrated their obligation to me.
“ I have every cause to be happy and conten-
ted ; yet, dear coz., I must confess to being the
most wretched man in the settlement —more
miserable even than the unfortunates, who rarely
pass a week without receiving their customary
fifty lashes. You will naturally conclude that
the cause of my lowness of spirits is separation
from the loved ones at home, and the dark stain
of infamy that clings to my name. Bitter as
these sorrows were at first, the magician Time
has, in a measure, soothed them; but there is
one sorrow that is beyond the power of Time to
assuage. I could not, had I the choice of all the
masters in the colony, find one, who would treat
me with a tenth of Mr. Shelley's kindness ; yet I
have determined to leave Field Place. To be
plain, dear coz., I, a convict, am mad enough to
love my master’s beautiful daughter—to love the
daughter of one, whose proudest boast is, that
the taint of crime never polluted his name. It
is, of course, impossible that I can ever hope to
win her; and equally so to see her, I would
shed my heart’s blood to save from a mo-
ment’s disquietude, and not to love | I know
that she likes me, next to her parents, above all
else besides. She has shown her preference in a
thousand guileless ways. I feel that I could
easily fan that liking into love, and that, once
loving, she would be true to me, despite all op-
position (in truth and constancy she is your
counterpart, as she is in many other of your
rare virtues); and I know that, though the
shame-would break their hearts, her parents
would sacrifice themselves rather than the hap-
piness of their only child. But I could not re-
pay their kindness to me by such base ingrati-.
tnde, nor cast a cloud of trouble over her young
life by enlisting her affections. As lam fearful
that, in some unguarded moment, when we are
Wandering alone on the bank of our beautiful
river, I may lay bare my heart to her gaze, I am
determined to hazard hardship and ill-treatment
at the hands of another master, and escape from
the torture of my present position. 1 shall beg
of Mr., Shelley to exchange me to som» distant
station, where I shaU never hear even Her namtn-
If he refuses,-1 will leave Field Place without
permission, and take to the bush. I would pre-
fer death, even by lingering starvation, to risk-
ing her future happiness by remaining longer'
here 1
“ Here comes the overseer for the letters, to
take to Newcastle, so I must conclude. I would
read this over before closing it, if I could wait;
perhaps, if I did, 1 should burn instead of send-
ing it, for 1 do not know what I have written—
my brain seems on fire.—With cousinly love,
“ Peect.”
Anne Egerton’s tears fell fast upon her
cousin’s sad letter, as she realised the painful
situation he was placed in.
‘ Poor fellow ! His is indeed a sorrowful
case! Snatched from his home, and trans-
ported for a crime he is innocent of; and then
to be unfortunate enough to fall in love with
the lady, of all he ought not to !’ the gentle-
girl murmured. ‘ But I will go out to Aus-
tralia at once ; for if his honor drives him to
take to the bush, as he says, there is no fore-
seeing what misery it may occasion him !’
Feeling deeply grieved by the tone of her
cousin’s letter, and npc having overcome the
emotions roused by Igoking over the relics of'
the earlier days of her ; young life, Anne went
out for a ride round the grounds ; and in a few
minutes Fairy, her favourite pony, was canter-
ing swiftly along with her through the oak
avenue and round by the rippling brook, that
skirted two sides of the park. The bracing,
morning air and the healthful exercise soon
restored the roses to her cheeks, and the bright-
ness to her eyes, and when she met the family
at luncheon all traces of sorrow were removed
from her sweet face—if not from, her heart*.
CHAPTER XIX.
Thou wast that all to me, love,
For which my soul did pine,
A green isle in the sea, love,
A fountain and a shrine,
All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers*.
And all the flpwers were mine.
Ah, dream, too bright to last!
Ah, starry hope that didst arise
But to be overcast!
A voice from ont the future cries,
On ! on!” —but o’er the past
(Dimgnlf!) my spirit hovering lies.
Mute, motionless, aghast!
Edoae, Allan Poe
After luncheon, Anne Egerton passed b few-
restless hours in the library, vainly trying to.


shake off the sadness her cousin’s letter had
cast upon hei. The excitement of her brisk
ride through the bracing air of early Spring,
and the animated conversation at the luncheon
table, had for the time dissipated her melan-
choly, but it returned with increased intensity,
directly she was left alone with her own
thoughts. She took up the prized volume of
poetry, that she had accidentally left in the
library the day before, and attempted to banish
care by committing to memory one of Waller’s
exquisite little poems, commencing with— •
“ Go. lovely rose.
Tell her that wastes her time and me,
That now she knows
When I resemble her to thee,
How sweet and fair she seems to Be.”
While she was so engaged, her uncle en-
tered the library. He sank feebly into his
accustomed chair, saying, ‘ Percy is in high
spirits, poor boy. He talks of having an op-
portunity of making his fortune as a cattle
farmer, when he gets his ticket of leave. Con-
sidering the extent of our losses, it is most
fortunate, Anne! I hope he is not too san-
guine.’
Anne received the assurance of Percy’s high
spirits, with a smile of pleasure. Though her
cousin’s letter, to herself, proved that his mood
was far from being as hopeful as his letter to
her uncle would indicate, she was glad he had
dissembled, rather than add fresh pangs to his
father’s present sorrows.
'I have decided to go out to Sydney as a
governess, if I can obtain a situation,’ she
said, ‘ And then shall be able to see him
He would be much happier if one of us was
near him,’
‘ Going to Sydney, Anne 1 Surely you can-
not mean it 1’ her uncle exclaimed aghast.
‘ Must my mad neglect of your interests drive
you into exile V
‘ It is but railing at Providence, uncle, to
complain at what has occurred ! You thought
yon were acting for my good when you placed
my money in that unfortunate bank ; and you
have nothing to reproach yourself with. Don’t
you think it would be better for him, if one of
us was near him V
‘ Yes, Anne ; much better. And if it was
not for the duty we owe to the younger ones,
his mother and I would have gone long since.
But I do not think you are called upon to
make the sacrifice, unless, indeed, you love
him well-enough to share his fortune—or mis-
fortune, rather,’ Dr. Sinclair answered, ear-
nestly.
‘ We love each other, uncle, as tenderly as
brother and sister ; but neither of us ever re-
garded the other in any other light,’ said Anne,
softly.-
‘ We will talk over this matter to-morrow,
if you wish it, my dear girl. For the present
I have to look through some law papers con-
nected with the loss of our respective fortunes.
Are you going out anywhere this afternoon V
No, uncle, excepting to the fir copse near
the river; I want to finish my sketch of the
long reach. I shall finish it this afternoon if
possible, as I wish to send it to Percy,’ she
replied.
‘Very well, my girl. But be in before sun-
down ; the night air is not good for you. You
are scarcely over your cold yet,’ said her
uncle, professionally.
‘ 1 can’t leave ray work till after dusk,
uncle, for I want to represent the scene of a
‘Sunset at Elmsdale,’ and of course I can only
do so by a study of Nature at that hour,’
Anne answered. ‘So don’t be uneasy at my
absence till then.’
‘Well, do as you like, my girl! Do as you
like I Only be careful of good health while you
have it,’ the old gentleman said, as his niece
left the room.
Dr, Sinclair turned to the study of the
law 'papers before him, and Anne took her
sketching apparatus, and, accompanied by her
faithful attendant Brontie (a spaniel that
Clayton had given her years before), walked
on to the scene of her artistic labours.
She had not been at work more than an hour
when Brontie’s quick ears caught the sound of
approaching hoofs. He gave a warning bark
to his young mistress, and scampered through
the copse out into the park to reconnoitre.
‘Ha ! Brontie, my boy ! Keep quiet, old
fellow, and let me steal upon her unawares!’
said George Darrell,, springing from his horse,
and patting the spaniel's curly back. Brontie
seemed vastly pleased at being noticed by the
young man, aud stood wagging bis tail in mute
satisfaction, while the horse was being hitched
to the broken bough of a young fir tree. But
he was no traitor to be bought with a smile ;.


and directly Mr. Darrell showed a disposition
to penetrate the copse, be stood his ground like
a trusty guardian, as he was, and strove gal-
lantly by Uis ceaseless growls and the menacing
exhibition of his glittering teeth, to hold the
path against further advance.
‘ It’s no use, Brontie! A brigade of infantry
should not drive me from my purpose !’ Dar-
rell said, smiling at the faithful creature’s de-
termined opposition. ‘But you might have
permitted me to reach her unobserved, old fel-
16w !’
Inch by inch Brontie contested Mr. Darrell
progress through (the fir copse, and by his ex-
travagant noise frightened his young
mistress, who stood by her easel waiting in
terror the solution of her spaniel’s uneasiness.
‘ I must beg Brontie’s pardon, Miss Egerton
for I have seriously offended him by disturb-
ing you !’ said Mr. Darrell, as he reached
Anne’s side, and much to the dog’s evident an-
noyance, shook bands with her. ‘ You have a
fail liT.il protector in Brontie.’
‘ Yes, Mr. Darrell. But the foolish fellow
ought to have known better than to bark at
you. Brontie is no respecter of persons;
and those whom he allows to approach me
without question at the house, must not pre-
sume to do so when I am out, without first
consulting him,’ she said smiling.
‘Brontie appears filly to appreciate the
importance of his charge, Miss Egerton ! He
is*i ertainly a most intelligent dog.’ Darrell
replied, ‘ Come, old fellow, let us be friends 1’
he continued, turning to Brontie; but the
distrustful spaniel would not respond to Dar-
rell’s overtures of peace, and growled menac-
ingly.
It’s no use attempting to conciliate him
while I am present, Mr. Darrell !’ said Anne,
laugt ‘ He is obstinacy itself.’
As if to verify her words, the dog lay him-
sel f down in front of where they were standing,
and kept a close and unremitting watch
through his half-closed eyes upon Mr. Dar-
rell’s movements. A rustic seat was placed
beneath the boughs of a large beech tree, im-
mediately behind where Miss Egerton had
been engaged in giving the finishing touches
to her picture ‘A Sunset at Elmsdale.’ Up-
on it they seated themselves ; and entered
into a general conversation upon every pos-
sible topic, but the one that had drawn Dar
rell to the fir copse. The introduction to her
guardian of the subject of his wishes was a
matter of little difficulty ; but it occasioned
him considerable embarrassment to determine
how to approach his declaration to herself. Af-
ter disposing of music and the drama, poetry
the last published novel, anecdotes of the fidelity
and intelligence of dogs (the latter occasioned
by Brontie’s unwearying vigilance) and half a
score of other themes, in a ‘ disconnected and
cursory conversation, painting was introduced;
and Anne invited Mr. Darrell’sjudgment upon
her view of the Long Beach. He pro-
nounced the picture perfect; and though a
connoisseur of high art might have discovered
blemishes in its outline or colouring de-
fects unseen by the ordinary observer, who
receives the greater pleasure in beholding with
uncritical eye the beauties of a fine painting—
to the amateur it was perfection itself. The
landscape represented, and which lay spread
before them under a flood of glorious evening
sunlight, was a beautiful specimen of English
rural scenery; and she had transferred it to her
canvas, in all its rich variety and freshness.
In the background ran a low range of hills,
partially wooded, and along its base lay a
broad stretch of meadow land carpeted with the
tender verdure of Spring, and dotted with
sheep. To the right of the hills could be dis-
tinguished the city of York, with the setting
sun burnishing the windows of its ancient
cathedral. In the mid distance stood the
church of a village, that was hidden by a swell
of the undulating meadow-land. Its pointed
spire rose tall above the grove of yew trees sur-
rounding it; and the rank ivy, so closely as-
sociated with the sacred edifice of an English
church, clung with its accustomed tenacity to
its mouldering abutments, and concealed all
save its diamond-naned windows. In the fore-
ground was the long reach of the river. It
stretched from an abrupt turn in the extreme
distance to the left of i,he scene to where the
fair artist stood ; to the right of which it
swerved from its straight course, and flowed
at an acute angle away towards the city.
Anne had fastened the beauties of li: is calm
and lovely scene upon her canvas, as'naturally
as though it were bat a painted shadow of the
bright original.


‘ How great a difference the warm rays of
the setting sun makes upon the scene,’ said
Darrell, as he gazed musingly upon the glow-
ing landscape. ‘ Indeed, we may almost at-
tribute the whole beauty of nature to his
beams.’
‘Yes,’ replied Anne, regarding his pie-
occupied manner with an enquiring smile.
‘You are right, Mr. Darrell; under a clouded
sky, the scene would lose much of its attrac-
tiveness. Each individual feature of beauty
would still he there, but it would want the
mellowing and harmonizing influence of the
glorious sunshine.'
‘ And is it not so with our lives, Miss
Egercon ? What avails power, wealth, fame,
if our existence be not brightened by the
sunshine of life—the love of a true and gentle
heart ? Without that one and only influence
of beauty, life, even in its most favored as-
pects, is like a landscape undtfr a clouded sky
—like a body without a soul. Sweet Anne,
be my sunshine! I have loved you long and
dearly. The brightness of your smile is to me
of more worth than aught else this world can
give, the sunshine of your love more precious
than aught that heaven can offer!’ said Darrell,
seizing her band in his excitement. * I love
you devotedly ! May I dare to hope that you
can return my love, that I may yet win the
lodestar of my hope ?’
Darrell’s impetuous wooing was interrup-
ted by a warning growl from Brontie, who
had risen to his feet, and was glaring at him
with resentful eyes.
Anne was in tears. ‘I am very sorry in-
deed, Mr. Darrell, that you have spoken to
me so. 1 never had the slightest idea that
you regarded me in such a light,’ she said,
gently withdrawing her hand from his grasp.
‘Has my vehemence startled you, dear
Anne? Forgive me for distressing you. I
would rather suffer any pang than causa you
one moment’s uneasiness! But, perhaps,
your uncle is deceived, and you do loye Percy
Sinclair If so, forgive me; and I will keep
my passion secret in my breast, though it
gnaw my heart out!’
‘ I love Percy as a sister would, Mr. Dar-
rell ; nothing more. But, I beg of you, never
mention this subject to me again.’
‘ Nay, but if your heart is free, there can
be no wrong in telling you how passionately
I love you,’ exclaimed Darrell.
‘ I know it, M•. Darrel 1 , I know it! lam
grateful for your high opinion of me; but if
you really do value my happiness, promise
never to speak to me upon this subject again,’
Anne pleaded in distress.
‘ And leave my future drear as a world
that knows no sun? You could not be so
cruel as to expect it. I would freely make
any sacrifice that would conduce to your wel-
fare, Anne ; but in this I should sacrifice my
only hope, without adding to your happiness.’
‘ Are there none that could brighten your
future as well, nay, better than I, Mr. Dar-
rell ? Among your friends are many good
and beautiful girls. Emilie Beaumont and
Ada Gordon are both better suited to make
you happy, than ever I could be,’ said Anne,
with trembling voice.
‘ Happy must be they, who win them,
Anne. But you, and you alone, could find
the way to my heart. It is you, or none.
Tell me, then, do you consign me to a lifetime
of misery, or brighten my future with the
promise of your love V Darrell asked with
emotion.
After a few seconds pause, Anne looked up
into his face, and said, timidly, ‘ I will make
yon my confidant, Mr. Darrell. My heart is
not free. Four years ago, and on this very
spot, I plighted my troth with Hubert Clay-
ton. I thought him, then, the best and
noblest of men; and I loved him as fervently
as ever man was loved. J have since learned
that be has no claim to such qualities—that
there are few who less deserve to be loved—
yet my heart has never changed. I love him
to-day as devotedly as I did on the day of our
betrothal; and though I will never marry him,
unless he sincerely repents, and forsakes for
ever his evil way, I would die to change his
nature to what I once thought it—to what I
yet hope it will be ! Yes, Brontie,’ she con-
tinued, addressing the spaniel, who had
thrust his head into her hand, ‘ you were a
witness of my vows ; for it was on that day
he gave you to me.’
Darrell saw at a glance it was useless to
press his suit further. But that she loved
another, he would not have relinquished hope,
even though repulsed with scorn. He would


ave patiently waited, in the hope of Hying
own her objections, and earning her love by
his devotion. As he gazed sadly into her
earnest truthful eyes, he read only too un-
mistakably, that her heart was sealed to all,
but the one so unworthy of her. His disap-
pointment was as deep and acute, as only
they may know, who have undergone a simi-
lar ordeal; but he determined to bear it
with fortitude.
‘ My disappointment in learning this secret,
Anne (permit me still to call you by
that sweet - little name, though I
may only do so as a friend), is
increased tenfold, by the knowledge of the
utter worthlessness of the object of your affec-
tions. Had it been your cousin, Percy Sin-
clair, bitter as my borrow at losing all hope of
winning you must be, I should at least have
had the consolation of feeling that your choice
was an honorable man, who, despite the ver-
dict that exiled him, was woithy of your de- I
votion. But as it is, I cannot— ’
‘ Do not say anything unkind of Hubert
Clayton, Mr. Darrell, I beg of you! His
own conscience must be severe enough j for
the wicked are never really happy,’ interrup-
ted the gentle girl, pained at hearing a word
uttered against the reprobate. ‘ And try if
you can forget that you ever thought of me as
other than the dear friend, which I shall ever
hope to be. It may be hard to do so at first,
for our affections are not always in proportion
to the real worth of those we love ; but you
will soon learn to think of me as I do of you,
as the truest of dear friends.’
*T will try ; but, dear Anne, it will, as you
have said, be hard, very hard, to school my
heart to regard yon as other than the dear
girl, whose love I prize above all earthly con-
siderations, and, I fear, heavenly ones too. I
must submit, without murmur, to the cruel
fate that withholds from me the only blessing
I ever coveted,’ Darrell replied, bitterly.
‘ 1 think we had better return to the house
now, Mr. Darrell; the air is growing chilly.
My picture is scarcely finished, but I can com-
plete it to-morrow,’ said Anne, anxious to
terminate the embarrassing interview.
• Darrell took up the easel, and, drawing her
arm within his own, led her through the copse j
to where he had left bis horse. Both were
busy with their own thoughts, and they
walked on in silence, till they reached the out-
skirts of the little grove, when Anne suddenly
said, ‘ Mr. Darrell, will you please ride on
up to the house, and I will follow alotie. You
may carry my easel, if you will oblige me by
doing so. I will see you again at dinner, but
I would like to be alone for a little while now.
The subject of our conversation has made me
feel nervous; and I have a slight headache.”
It was impossible for Darrell to refuse the
request; so he rode on, leaving the fair girl
to the company of her own thoughts, and the
protection of her faithful spaniel.
‘Poor Mr. Darrell! I am very sorry he
loves me; for I know by my own experience
how hard, how seemingly impossible it is to
tear from the heart a true and passionate love,’
she soliloquised ingenuously. ‘ This is ano-
ther reason why I should go out to Austialia.
I will do so as, soon as possible ; and'he might
then forget me, and transfer his love to ano-
ther. Perhaps it was a wise dispensation of
Providence to deprive me of fortune, that I
should be compelled to go forth and earn my
own bread.’
Full of projects for a speedy departure, she
hurried on, and by the time she reached the
house, her mind was fully made up to leave
the land of her birth, .and seek her fortune in
the almost unknown southern world.
CHAPTER XX.
And woman: Beauty was the power
That with angelic grace
Breathed love around her glowing form.
And magic in her face ;
She twined the tendrils of her hair,
And on that brow—her throne is there.
Ebv. E. Montgomery.
All was bustle and stir at Field Place, for
the sun had risen upon the duy that mustering
was to begin. Mrs. Shelley and her servants
were busy preparing breakfast for all hands
in the kitchen. The stock horses were at the
door saddled and ready, and the men and dogs
lounging about upon the grass before the
door waiting to dispose of their early break-
fast.
‘ Well, Davy, 'did you find the white bull
yesterday afternoon, that is missing V Mr.
Shelley asked, as the overseer entered the
kitchen, stockwhip in baud.


1 No, sir ! Mr. Sinclair and me scoured the
whole of the country at the back of the brush
for three or four miles; but we couldn’t find
him ; and the stockman tells me this morning
that a score of young cattle are missing too,’
replied Davy Collyer.
* Gone with him most probably. Where
do you imagine they have rambled to V
‘I think they’ve strayed away up the river
towards Mr. Blair’s station, sir! We found
tracks late last night leading that way ; but
it was too dark to follow them up.’
* They can hardly have reached Blair’s yet,
Davy; for I saw the bull, myself, the day be-
fore yesterday. The first thing to do to-day,
is to have another search for the truants. If
you don’t begin to fetch the cattle in till to-
morrow, it will not matter much.’ said Mr.
Shelley.
‘ We’d better separate into three parties, I
think, sir. We’d have a better chance of drop-
ping across the missing cattle. It’d be as well
to send Giles and the stockman down the
river. "stou and Grey could search the ridges
between the station and the top of the'range,
and Mr. Sinclair and me could ride up the
river. We could hardly miss them then,
sir, if they are anywhere get-at-able at all,’-
suggested the overseer.
‘ Very well, Davy ! We will follow your
advice. I don’t think they are likely to have
crossed the range.’
‘ No, sir, it aren’t at all likely. It’s too
steep in most places. And they can’t well
know the passes,’ replied Davy.
‘Breakfast is ready, Walter!’ said Mrs
Shelley, from the foot of the table.
‘Call the men in, Davy!’ By-the-bye,
where is Mr. Sinclair V asked Mr. Shelley.
‘ Him and Miss Shelley’s in to see how
Hal. is getting on this morning,’ the overseer
replied, as he left the kitchen to call the men
in to breakfast.
Percy Sinclair and Bertha found the veteran
much better. His wounds were slowly heal-
ing; and the old man was in high spirits at
the prospect of being able to quit his bed in a
few days. He was weary of the monotony of
the sick room; for he was of necessity quite
alone the greater part of the day. Being un-
able to read, .and having no audience for hit
marvellous ‘ yarns,’ he found slow-paced
time drag heavily.
‘ Good bye, Hal. ! I will come in and read
to you directly after dinner. I would do so
this morning, but I am going out for a ride,’
said the pitying girl, who was grieved at see-
ing the brave old man confined so long to his
room;
‘God bless you, Miss, for your condesension
to a poor, useless, old fellow like me! I would
be glad, if you would just read a chapter out
o’ the Book my“mother used to read, when
I was a boy !’ said Hal., gratefully.
‘ The best Book that you .could have read
to you, Hal.! You must try to remember
what it teaches, and learn to live by its golden
rules,’ said Percy.
‘ If you would teach me a paragraph, sir, I
could say it over to myself, and learn it, when,
I am lyin’ here.’ Hal. euggested.
‘ A text he means, Mr. Sinclair ! I will
tell him one !’ said Bertha, eagerly. ‘ Repeat
this Hal.— ‘ What shall it profit a man, if he
gain the whole world, and lose his owu soul T ’
Hal. had a tenacious memory ; and after
saying it over a couple of times, was perfect
in it.
‘Thank you, Mias ! Now I can think over
that paragraph as I lay here, and not feel
lonely,’ said the old man.
‘Very well, Ha!.! I will see you again
directly after dinner! Come along, Mr. Sin-
clair ! Breakfast must bo ready by this time.’
saying which, Bertha led the way out of the
room.
‘ I think you had better not go out riding
to-day, Miss Bertha !’ Percy said, as they
were walking across the yard to fthe house.
‘ It will be hardly safe for you, as we shall be
driving the cattle about; and they may get
irritated.
‘O, but I must, Mr. Sinclair ! The air is
so bracing that i long to he in the saddle and
galloping across the bush. The cattle can’t
be so very dangerous, and Snowflake is too
fleet for them to overtake us. Besides, Jerry
will be with me,’ Bertha pleaded.
‘ Would it not be better to refer to your
papa 1 He will not forbid your riding, if you
can go safely, Miss Bertha. A wild bullock
is a far . moreiformidable beast than you ap-
pear to imagine,’ said Mr. Sinclair, sorry to


throw any obstacle in the way of her plea-
sure, yet fcar.'al [that harm happen to
her, shou'J she go.
The matter was referred to Mr. iohelley;
but as he had determined to spend ihe earlier
po ;>jn of the day in searching for the missing
cattle, he decided that Bertha might take her
morning ride in safety.
Breakfast over, the squatter and his men
moun.eu their, horses, and, dispersing, rode
away after the truants, each party taking
the dhec'ion previously agreed upon. The
extent of stations in the days we are
wii : ng about, was much leas than now; and
the number of cattle depastured was pro-
jiortioiidieiy smaller ; consequently the opera-
tions of mustering and branding were on a
stale of less magnitude than at the pressnt
time. Paring from, the other horsemen at
the stockyard, Percy and the overseer rode
leisurely along through the open bush, search-
ing evc:y gir’y and nook where the stray
ca.tle could possibly be bidden, but to no
purpose. After a couple of hours unsuccess-
ful search Davy proposed that they should
separate ; one looking through the lower ends
of the gullies along the brush, the other ex-
anrV Jg the upper portions on the slope of
the' range. Percy took the suggestion, and,
leaving the overseer to scour the higher
ground, rode along the low country by the
brush. He had not proceeded more than a
mile after parting from the overseer, when he
came upon the tracks that Davy had found
the evening before, and forgotten again.
Kot being an adept in the bush art of “ run-
ning a track,” he dismounted, and putting
his arm through the bridle-rein, slowly fol-
lowed the trail on foot There were hoof
prints of several beasts; and Percy felt rather
proud of the acbievment of finding them.
‘ If I can only succeed in yarding the cattle
alone, it will be quite an adventure,’ he
thought, as he plodded along the track. He
was aware of the danger of attempting to
drive the bull unaided, but was determined
to hazard it for the excitement of the chase.
It wanted but a week of the day upon which
he was to leave Field Place, and enter the
service of Mr. Meredith, the gentleman with
whom Mr. Shelley had arranged for him to
stay; and though the choice yf leaving was
entirely his own, though his honour forbade
his remaining longer, the near approach
of bis separation from the beautiful
cause of his unrest increased his discontent
and made him desperate and miserable. To
an experienced stockman the encounter, he
meditated, would have been as safe as most
hazardous enterprises, where success owes as
much to good fortune as skill. But to him,
who knew so little of practical bushriding, it
was madness to attack single-handed the bull,
who had often defied half-a-dozen good horse-
men, and had never been- yarded without the
assistance of dogs. But to Percy life had lost
its value, and no thought of consequences
crossed his mind, as he pressed on, eager for
the fray.
The tracks crossed the high road, and passed
down a long slope, and through a gap in the
brush into the open plain beyond. As Percy
entered the plain, he discovered the missing
cattle grazing quietly upon the banks ot the
Broad Lagoon—the place to where, on a
former occasion, the blacks had carried off
some sheep. He turned to his horse and
tightened his girths, then mounting, he un-
wound his heavy stockwhip, and, taking a
firm seat in the saddle, rode slowly along the
edge of the brush, for the purpose of prevent-
ing the cattle from escaping at the lower end
of the lago6n. Cautiously as he rode, he
failed to reach the opposite side of the brush,
unobserved. The runaways heard the crackle
of the dry twigs under the horse’s hoofs, and
stood with beads erect waiting for him—the
bull to the front, as if determined to fight for
his liberty. When Percy had approached
within a hundred yards of the little herd, the
bull stepped forward, lowered his head, and
with a bellow of defiance, charged full at his
daring antagonist. The practised stookhorse
knew his work, and waited for no signal of the
rein. With eyes and nostrils dilated, and
flanks quivering with excitement, he stood his
ground tiil the bull had all but reached him,
when he suddenly swung himself aside, turn-
ing upon his hind legs, as upon a pivot. As
the baffled beast dashed by, Percy dropped
the heavy lash of his • stockwhip upon its
hide with the fnll force of his. strength,
and the weapon—a terrible one when wielded
by a strong and steady arm—sank into its


hide like mcmlten lead. With a bellow of
rage and pain the bull turned again, and pre-
pared to renew .the conflict. The battle had
now fairly begun !
While Mr. Shelley and his men were em-
ployed in searching for the missing cattle,
Bertha, mounted upon her pony Snowflake,
and accompanied by her faithful attendant
Jerry, was riding slowly along the Maitland
road, buried in deep thought. The weather
was delightful, and her pony in excellent
spirits ; but neither the beauty of the wild
scenery, the exhilirating influence of the
bracing air, nor the mettle of her pony, could
rouse her from her reverie. Snowflake seemed
determined to break off into a gallop, but she
checked bis repeated attempts. ‘ No, no,
Snowflake, lam thinking; and you must pot
disturb me !’ she exclaimed, as the pony, im-
patient at the slow pace, tried to jerk the
reins out of her hands. She was worrying her
little head by striving to discover the motive
of her preserver's unaccountable determina-
tion to leave Field Place. -Little dreaming of
the noble sacrifice he was making in his de-
voted solicitude for her happiness, she natu ;
rally concluded that it must have been caused
by some misunderstanding—that he had been
offended at something one of them had said or
done, and, consequently, the wish to leave.
As she strove to call to memory any cause
she herself might have given, she felt hurt and
annoyed that he would offer no opportunity
for apology or explanation by telling them
candidly what had occurred. Jerry watched
her quiet movements and thoughtful features
with concern. He had never before seen her
in other mood than light-hearted mirth. Her
ringing laughter was wont to startle the echoes
as she rode merrily albng, and her bright
smile, as she chatted with Jerry, or sang some
of her beautiful songs, always appeared to him
too sweet and lovely to belong even to a
“ mnrry budgery white lubra.” He was
seriously of opinion that she was one of the
angels he had heard Mrs. Shelley speaking of;
and he was more than half inclined to believe
that she had been stolen from the
skies. Indeed, he accepted the bright colour
of her eyes as a proof of relationship to the
blue heavens above him.
‘ What for you murry coula [very angry]
belongin to Jerry, Missie Beta?’ he asked,
after they had riduen a couple of "i 3, : i
silence. ‘Bale da- Jerry murry bad fellow,
like it Myall.’
* Angry, Jerry? I’m not anyy with yc ;
so don’t bo silly enough to fcV 'k so, - c
don’t talk to me just nb (here’s a gor 1 fti-
low ; I am busy thirkinj,’ Her '.ba icjd'ed,
and sank back again into Lor reve'
] orbidden to speak, Jerry rack; - ' : s k’ains
to think of something else to rouse his yc (vg
mistress. ‘My, word me get it! Uis-sie
Berta like it little ’possum !’ he
mentally exclaimed, as the brilliant
idea struck him. He let Lis - 1 o.se
drop behind Bertha’s pony, while hh v. ied
to solve the important problem. ‘ V 5 iio.o
dat plenty ’possum get to now V After a few
minutes intense cogitation, Jerry toucheu his
horse with the spur, in delight at having
found a satisfactory solution of the n, e o Jon,
and was by Bertha’s side in a mome.it.
‘Look here, Missie Berta, you like it lit le
’possum ?’ he exclaimed, forgetting in his
anxiety to please her, that silence was the
best way to do so.-
‘A little ’possum? ye 1 ? Jerry,’she replied,
dreamily, and without looking Up.
‘ Dat plenty in wild apple tree scrub, along
Broad Lagoon, Missie Berta; you come V he
asked.
* The Broad Lagoon ? Where is that;
Jerry ? Away through the cedar brush, isn’t
it ?’ she replied.
‘ You know where all dat wild blackfeller
man, jumbat, dat long time ago? 1
‘Yes, Jerry, I remember. Well, lee.d on
anywhere you like, only don’t speak
I am too busy thinking to care about tali’ ug,
Bertha said sadly.
‘ What good dat too much think V 3 errr
asked philosophically, but receiving no reply.—
—Bertha had relapsed into her brown Suody,
and was being rescued again from her terrible
fall down the precipice—he pressed forward,
and led the way towards the gap that opened
through the brush to the plain of the Broad
Lagoon.
Bertha’s reverie was presently broken by
an exclamation from Jerry, who was a little
distance in front; and rousing herself, she
found she was riding through the gap that she


had passed with her father two yeais before,
when going to meet her friend Edith Blair.
Jerry was waiting ifor her at the further
opening of the gap, shouting and gesticulating
like a madman. Bertha loosened rein, and
was up with him in a few seconds. The spec-
tacle that met her gaze, blanched her cheeks
with terror. The conflict between Percy and
the white bull was raging.fiercely. As the ter-
rified girl caught the first glimpse of the
struggle, the bull was in the act of charging.
The hollow thud of the heavy lash, as it cut
its way through the brute’s bleeding hide,
shewed that the horse had safely wheeled from
the bull’s path. Bertha understood at a
glance the imminent danger of her preserver’s
position ; and her blood ran cold as she saw
the bull stop short in his headlong rush, and
with head lowered and tail erect prepared to
charge again upon his imperturbable antagon-
ist, who, firmly seated in his saddle, and, with
reins held short, calmly awaited the onset of
the infuriated beast. With a bellow of baffled
rage and defiance, the bull dashed again at the
wary horse, as he stood watchful, waiting for
the moment to wheel aside. The merciless
lash again descended upon the quivering
flanks of the bull, as he missed his aim through
the dexterity of the old horse, who again foiled
him by swerving aside; and loud the report
of the stockwhip resounded through the encir-
cling brush. As the bull sprang forward to
the charge, Bertha slackened the rein she had
tightened in her horror, on first encountering
the terrible sight of the struggle, and, but that
Jerry was quick enough to seize her bridle,
she would have rushed to Percy’s rescue, and
the arms of certain death.
‘No, no, Missie Berta! dat Misser Sinlar
all right! Bale dat bull can catch him ! Dat
old Captain murry good stock horse. You
stop here along a Jerry. Dat bull get him
too much plenty stockwhip by-bye !’ said
Jerry, springing from his saddle, the more
effectually to restrain his young mistress from
riding nearer.
After vainly striving to free her rein from'
the black boy’s determined hold, Beitha sat
silent and motionless upon her pony, gazing
with aching eyes upon the fearful scene, her
very breath suspended in dread anticipation,
In view of his pressing peri!, who had twice
risked his life in rescuing her, and unable to
do anything to save him ! Percy was too
intently engaged to observe there were
witnesses of the combat; and long and fierce-
ly the struggle continued, the bull charging
furiously upon him, and, before he could be
well prepared, round and upon him again.
‘Ch, -Jerry, let me go; I will save him !’
the excited girl exclaimed, desperately endea-
vouring to wrench her rein free.
* Bale dat no good, Missie Berta! Bale
Jerry let him you go, Dat wildfeller bulljsoon
kill him you!’ replied Jerry, as he took'
another turn of the reins round his wrist.
‘ Then go you, Jerry! Surely you can do
something to save him !’ she pleaded with,
tears in her eyes. But Jerry shook his head
doggedly, and refused. ' Bale me no got it
stockwhip,’ he replied. ‘ Misser Sinlar can
beat him fight by-by !’
Jerry’s estimate of Percy’s power was over-
rated ; and the horse too was beginning to
show signs of distress. It was in a perfect
lather of sweat. The poor beast had done a
severe day’s work the day before, and was,
consequently, far from equal to the prolonged
.strife. It was beginning to tremble under its
rider, and had narrowly escaped the horns of
the hull during the last two or three charges.
Percy’s arm, too, was losing its steadiness ;
and as his blows fell lighter upon the bleeding
hide of the bull, the latter seemed to acquire
fresh courage and endurance. • The contest
had been a fierce and'savage one, but it was
speedily drawing to a close. ."As the bull
lowered his fatal head, and rushed forward
on his last charge, the horse stumbled, and
before he could recover his feet, the brute was
upon him ; and man, horse, and bull fell to-
gether in one confused heap.


As the horse went down, Percy was thrown
to a short distance, where be lay bruised and
partially stunned by a blow he received
from the stump of a burnt tree. Before
the bull could rise again, tbe horse was up,
and making a feeble attempt to escape; but
it had been so shaken by the fall, that it could
with difficulty limp along at a trot. . In a
second or two its relentless foe bad scrambled
to its feet. Missing sight of its human assail-
ant, the bull gave chase to tbe retreating horse,
which, spurredjby terror, strove desperately to
avert its doom by escaping to the cover of the
brush ; but the injuries it had received were
too great to allow it any chance against its
determined pursuer. It was quickly over-
taken, and in a few minutes lay at tbe feet
of its destroyer, a ■ mangled and bleeding
corpse. •
As Percy and his horse fell together before
the terrible onset of the bull, Jerry, in his
horror, relaxed his grasp of Bertha’s rein ; and
without a word—without pausing a second,
even to weigh the danger of the act—she
urged her frightened and restive pony to the
rescue. Well for her the gallant old stock-
horse bad had strength left to stagger away
to a little distance, or her fate had been sealed.
As she reached Percy’s side, the maddened
bovine was in tbe act of goring the horse to
death. ,
‘Quick! Jump up behind me 1’ she ex-
claimed, as she reined her pony in by Percy’s
side.
With , a great effort he rose to his feet,
and gazed slowly around, as though waking
from a dream.
‘Quick, Mr. Sinclair! For heaven’s sake,
be quick, and jump up behind me! If that
dreadful bull looks this way, we are both lost!’
she cried wildly in her terror and excitement.
* Murry make haste, Misser Sinlar! Bale
you be big fool! You murry make haste, and
jump up along Misser Berta!’ cried Jerry,
who had run after his young mistress, without
waiting to catch his horse.
The familiar voices completely roused Percy
from the drowsing influence of the blow he
had received from the stump; and glanc-
ing from the impatient, imploring eyes of the
young girl, to tbe scene of the stockhorse’s
death he comprehended their terrible situ-
ation in a moment.
‘ Gallop away to the|protection of the brush
yonder, Miss Bertha!’ he urged. ‘Jerry and
I can escape on foot, or catch the other horse.
Quick, or it will be too late 1’
‘ Spring up behind me 1’ she exclaimed in
an agony of fear—more on her preserver’s ac-
count than her own—‘We will escape to-
gether.’
‘ I cannot T he replied, firmly. ‘ To do so
would only sacrifice you ; for the pony could
not carry us Jioth. My life is not worth a
thought! Go at once, I implore you 1 For
your parent’s sake, escape immediately,’
‘Mr. Sinclair, get up behind tte - at once,
and let us escape together, or I will leap from
my saddle and let tbe pony go; and then we
will die together 1’ she said, hurriedly, but
in a tone of calm determination that there
was no mistaking.- ‘ You saved me twice. It
is my turn to rescue you now P she continued,
with a faint blush tinging her pale features.
‘ Quick, or I jump down at once 1’
Seeing it useless to contest the point fur-
ther, Percy attempted to mount' to tbe back
of tbe saddle, but he was unable to do so, and
a groan escaped his lips, as the exertion gave
him an acute twinge. He had been severely
injured by the force of the fall. He felt a keen
pain in his chest and side, which caused him
intense agony when he moved. ‘ It is useless;
I cannot mount, even if 1 would 1 Fly 1 In
a moment it may be too late 1 The bull will
turn upon us directly S’ he exclaimed, ear-
nestly.
Before Bertha could reply, Jerry cried,
‘ You get along top of dis stump, Misser
Sinlar 1 Murry make haste P
‘ At once, or I dismount I’ Bertha said
determinedly.
By Jerry’s assistance Percy contrived to
clamber to the top of the burnt stump. The
moments were precious; but Snowflake was
restive and frightened, and could not be
coaxed to sidle up to it, for Percy to
mount him. With a muttered ‘ Dam dat
murry big fool Snowflake 1’ which was, per-
haps, excusable under the circumstances,
Jerry shoved the pony up to the stump by
sheer strength, and held him there till Percy
had mounted safely. The exertion nearly


■caused Percy to faint with pain ; and the cold
-perspiration stood upon ‘his clammy brow in
beads. Bertha, fortunately, held the rein
short up ;■ and, before Percy was well seated,
the pony, terrified at the unusual double bur;
■den, broke from Jerry’s grasp, and .dashed
away at a gallop. Bertha was a splendid
horse-woman, and kept her saddle well, but
the pony tfas too excited for her to‘have any
-control oyer him. He galloped right past the
bull, who was intently engaged upon its san-
guinary work of goring its victim, and made
for the opposite, or river side of the brush
Every bound of the pony pierced Percy with
-excruciating twinges; but 'he tightly set his
teeth, and submitted to the agony.
As Snowflake galloped off with its double
burden, Jerry turned to his own horse, and 1
found him grazing composedly a few yards
away. He caught him and had just mounted/
when ho observed the bull look up, and, no-,
ticing the flying pony, turn and give chase.
Snowflake had fully two hundred yards start
of the bull, but, being so heavily loaded, it
was not, possible for him to hold out in a long
race. Jerry’s first and natural impulse was
to increase the distance between himself and
the formidable enemy by riding off in an op-
posite direction; but his fidelity to “ Missie
Berta” prevailed over all selfish considerations,
.and, determined to protect her, he turned his
horse towards'the unequal race, and drove his
spurs into its flanks. The horse, who looked
upon cattle as its natural olject of pursuit,
needed no other inducement, but pressing for-
ward at its utmost speed, strained every nerve
to overtake the bull. For a few minutes they
were racing along over the plain in line,
Snowflake to the front, hotly pursued hy the
bull, who was decreasing the distance between
it hem at every bound; and behind, Jerry’s
horse, that was visibly gaining'upon the bull.
'Bertha glanced over her shoulder every few
seconds, and saw, with sinking heart, the bull
gaining upon them. As she beheld the chance
-of escape for both diminishing so rapidly, She
determined that, if their pursuer should over,
take, them before they reached the brush, she
would leap from the saddle, so that the pony,
with the lessened weight, might be able to’
carry Percy off in safety. The same self-
denying thought was occupying the minds of
Iboth. They had still nearly three 'hundred
yards to go to reach the protection of (he
brush, and the bull bad shortened the distance
between them to a tenth of that space, when
both of Snowflake’s riders prepared to fling
themselves from his back—each with the no-
ble object of sacrificing their life to save the
other— when Jerry’s horse overtook the bull
and drew up alongside of it.; and the daring
black boy per formed -a which, for cool
courage-and skill, has few equals, ©rawing
out of a rough ”possum-skin sheath a keen,
sailof’s knife—one that Percy had given him
a few days before—he let go the reins, and
freed his feeffrom-the stirrups. Then, seiz-
ing the bull firmly by the tail and swinging
himself to+he ground, be drew the edge of the
knife across one of the brute’s hamstrings, just
above the hocks, and disabled it; and with a
bellow of baffled rage, the bull fell to the
ground. Beforeit could rise, the blackboy’s
knife had pierced its tough bide and entered
the heart; and with a groan, the discomfited
bull rolled mver' dead at the feet of its
subduer.
CHAPTER XXI.
High heaven, I pray thee this delicious calm
May last till death, and that the healing balm
Of peace so soothing and profound, that now,
Like Zephyr’s wing, doth fan my fever’d brow—
A calm of trusting hope, that my wrung heart
. Doth sweetly solace, and allay the smart
Of my bruised spirit—may dispelled be neper ;
But wrap.my soul in-dreamy joy for ever !— Anon.
The room -was darkened ; and with noise-
less tread, and words spoken in subdued
whispers, Mrs. "Shelley and the doctor moved
about. It was two days after" the terrible
adventure at the Broad Lagoon, -and -Dr.
Simpson, from Newcastle, had just a few
minutes before arrived. He was the only
medical man available,- ae the surgeon - in
Maitland had -been called away up the Pat-
terson River, to attend the wife-of a squatter
there. Dr. , Simpson’s delay- in reaching
Field Place was due to an accident-in the A.
A. Company’s coal-mine, which had maimed
two men the previous day, and kept him in
attendance upon the spot. Mr. Shelley bad
gone down to tha huts to 'give some orders -to
the overseer, and Bertha was snatching a few
minutes rest from the almost incessant watch
she had kept by her preserver’s bedside.


“What do yon think, Doctor? Is he seri-
<ously injured ?’ Mrs. Shelley enquired in a low
■voice, as Dr. Simpson turned from the bed.
4 When do you say the accident happened V
be asked thoughtfully.
The morning before last.’
•* How long has he been delirious V
‘ He got very feverish within a few hours
•of the accident, und has been getting worse
■ever since,’ she replied, ‘and yesterday after-
noon he was quite light-headed. Do you think
there are-any bones broken S'
‘ Tw® of his ribs are broken; but
I fear the most serious injuries are
internal,’ Dr.>- Simpson replied, as
he laid his case •; of surgical instruments
•upon the table. ‘1 must bleed him
■to allay the inflammation. Where is Shelley V
4 Gone down to the huts. He will be back
in a few minutes. I sent Jerry to call him
.gust now. Do you’ think there is any danger
of his' injuries proving fatal ?’ she asked
anxiously.
‘I cannot say with certainty, madam, but
I think not. If I ain ■ not deceived, careful
■nursing will bring him round in time. It will
•be a long time, though, I fear.’,
-‘lf he can be saved by care, there is no
danger; for he shall have every care taken
■of himbere!’ she replied earnestly. ‘We owe
too much tohim to allow him to suffer through
•neglect?’
4 1 heard of hit reckless daring in leaping
down a cataract to rescue Miss Shelley, when
the bushrangers were here the other week. He
is a brave man certainly, and deserves a better
fate, than to be killed by a treacherous bull,’
said Dr. Simpson.
4 Indeed he does!’ exclaimed Mrs. Shelley
fervently. 4 There are few who would have
■encountered what appeared to be almost-cer-
taih death, and for those who have no [claim
upon him.’
4 1 often say that masters cannot treat their
Government men too well; and bere Is’a
proof of my words—lf this poor fellow had not
been animated by gratitude for past acts of
•kindness, be would never have risked bis life
for you or yours ; for convicts, as a rule, have
no love for their taskmasters. And, you may
■depend upon it, madam, that gratitude alone
•was the motive that led -him to -take that
perilous leap,’ said the doctor, as confidently
as though he had minutely analysed the heart
of the subject of their whispered convecsa-
tion.
* Shall you require warm water or anything
else, that I can get for you ? I see Mr.
Shelley crossing the yard,’ said Mrs. Shelley.’
‘ No; I don’t think so, madam. Ah, yes 1
perhaps it would be as well to have a basin
of warm water bandy,’ Dr. Simpson replied ;
and she hurried off for it.
As Mrs, Shelley and the doctor were can-
vasing Percy’s- chance of recovery, he was
lying upon his bed totally unconscious of their
presence. He was delirious, and kept talk-
ing incoherently, in a low and scarcely.audible
voice, mixing the past and present in a very
confnsed|manner. One momenthe was rescu-
ing Ada Darrell from the folds of a boa con-
strictor, the next standing upon the deck of
the Southern Cross, as the transport was
foundering, and clasping Bertha to his heart,
not to be separated, even in death.
Had Mrs. Shelley any suspicion of his sen-
timents, she could easily have confirmed
them by listening to the pathos of tenderness,
with which he uttered Bertha’s name,
and the ardent terms of endearment with
which <he addressed her in these imaginary
scenes. But she had none; and catching
only an occasional word of his rambling
speeches, she did not learn the important
secret they bore.
'But ready -ears had caught every
word he had uttered, while she was watching;
and, though only attributing them to the un-
settled state of his brain, and taking them as
no index of his true feelings, she experi-
enced a strange sensation of pleasure at hear-
ing herself addressed in terms of such pas-
sionate devotion, His words struck no an-
swering chord of love in her own breast.-
She was a stranger to that self-sacri-
being passion, which draws all thought into'
its exhausting vortex. Her only sentiments
■towards Percy were gratitude, for having
saved her life at the risk of his own, and ad-
miration of his reckless courage—two senti-
ments that in the heart of women closely
border on love—yet a new sensation of joy
stole into her gentle heart,' as she noted the
reverent tenderness with which he breathed


her name, and listened to bis vows of undy-
ing devotion.
Mrs. Shelley soon returned with the warm
water, and then went out to hurry her hus-
band. . In a few minutes Mr. Shelley entered
the room. As he passed the door, Dr. Simp-
son motioned him to speak softly. ‘I am'
glad you have come,' he said. ‘He needs
bleeding as quickly as possible. His principal
injuries are internal; and lam afraid inflam-
mation has set in.’
‘ No bones broke, I hope V Mr. Shelley en-
quired. ■ •
‘ I’ll tell you better in a few minutes; I
think two ribs are broken,’ the doctor replied,
as he turned to examine tba sufferer. ‘He
has a slight scalp wound, I see,’ be continued,
noticing an abrasion upon the 'bead, ‘ but it is
nothing.’
The doctor examined him thoroughly, and
then took out his lancet.
1 Well! what is your opinion T Mr. Shelley
whispered, impatiently.'
- * His ribs are not broken, but they are
fearfully bruised; and, as 1 said before, his
most serious injuries are internal.’
‘ Ishe in danger?
‘lt is impossible to say for a few days, till
I can learn the actual extent of his injuries ;
but I think there is hope.’
Percy was bled, and after administering a
restorative, and leaving some medicine. Dr.
Simpson held out-his hand, saying, ‘I must
away now, Shelley, for I’ve a couple of awk-
ward eases in town.’
, ‘You are not off directly, doctor! 1 told
Mrs. Shelley to have a, room ready for you,
so that you could stay a few days,’ returned
Mr. Shelley, in surpiise. ‘I shouldn't like
yon to go before he shows some , signs of im-
provement.’ . . ■ ,
‘I can be of no use to him for a day or
two, till I have time to judge the result of
this operation; and . I am urgently required
in Newcastle.. A couple of -men were par-
tially crushed by a fall of coal yesterday
morning; and the other medical man is away
in Sydney. You have nothing to do but dress
his side every morning, and give him a table-
spoon full of this mixture every six hours.’
‘ In water 1'
‘ No, j ust as it is ! I will rest my horse by
staying to dinner. By-the-by, you may
give him a feed of corn 1’
. ‘ Jerry has already attended to him, doctor.
We may as well go into the dining-room and
take a glass of spirits. Dinner will not be
ready for an hour yet,’ said Mr. Shelley, open-
ing the door.
‘ It you hare coffee,handy, I’ll feel obliged
to you for a cup; but I never touch spirits,
unless in extreme cases,' said.- the doctor, as
they passed out. ‘I am sorry to,say there
are too many of my profession who trifle with
their ownheallh by tampering with: and swal-
lowing what they know to. be one of the
subtlest and most certain poisons,’ replied Dr,
Simpson, with energy.
. ‘You do not believe in the nse of
then,’ asked Mr. Shelley, with surprise.
‘lf you mean as a beyerage or stimulant, I
answer most emphatically “ No !” '
‘ 1 have seen times when it has saved life ’
said Mr. Shelley. ‘ I believe it was the hot
spirit and water, thatl gave my wife and child
when they were cold and wet on the night of
our busbranging adventure, that saved them.’
* Yery likely it was, my friend t There is
nothing on earth but what has its nse, if re-
stricted to, the. proper time and place. 1
saved a patient’s life the other day by a judi-
cious dose .of prussic acid; but you' would
hardly advance that, as an argument, for the
indiscriminate' use of. that deadly drug !’ said
the doctor.
‘ Ah, well, .1 can’t see any harm' in a glass
occasionally, doctor.; But come in, and the
coffee shall be served in a trice.’
They entered the dining-room, and had a
chat over the prospects of the'colony and
other topics of common interest'while waiting,
for the coffee. As the doctor was sipping a
cup of the fragrant beverage, and expatiating
upon his favourite doctrine of total abstinence,
Mr. Shelley suddenly recollected old Hal.!
•-0, I say, doctor, there’s another of your
patients, whom we had both forgotten !—You
haven’t been in to see how thehntkeeper is
progressing,’ exclaimed he, rising.
‘I haven’t forgotten him though, my dear
fellow,’ the doctor replied warmly, hurt at be-
ing suspected of forgetting a case.' 'Mrs. S..
told me when I came in, he was doing very


•■well. I intended seeing him before I started
back ; but if you like we will go to'his room
at once.’
‘ Perhaps it may be as well, while we are
waiting for dinnet,’ replied Mr. Shelley, tak-
ing up his hat from the table. They repaired
bo Hal.’s room, and after dressing his wounds,
the doctor pronounced the old man out of
danger, and promised that he should be able
to leave his bed in a fortnight. ‘lt is a mir-
acle, Hal., that you have survived this thrust
in the side, for it was an ugly and dangerous
stab,’ said the doctor, as he adjusted the ban-
dage over the wound. 1 1 have never seen a
narrower escape.’
‘ 1 remember seein’ a closer shave, doctor,’
Hal. declared with an air of great simplicity.
‘There was a sergeant (in my company that
was always pokin’ about where he hadn’t no
business. He used to usually get me to go
with him, when we -could get away from the
•camp without bein’ catched, and many’s the
Spaniard’s garden we’ve robbed together. In
one o’ our undertaking, Dick introduced him-
self to a lone widow, whose husband had been
shot by the French a few months before. I
don’t know how they used to do thecourtin,’
’cause they couldn’t, neither o’ them," under-
stand one another. Howsomever, one night,
when Dick was goin’ to see his haraoratas, he
takes me him, and away we starts just
as the old convent clock, over the river, was
strikin’ twelve. The night was as dark as
a nigger, and by some blunder we lost our
way. In-about half an hour, Dick calls softly
■to me; ‘ Hal.,’ says he, ‘ Here’s the little dar-
lin’s crib; I can see the candle buruin’ in
her window.’ .1 knowed very well it wasn’t
the place we was lookin’ for, and I told him
so; but he was pig-headed, and would know
best; so says I, ‘ All right Dick, old man, go
if you’ve a mind to, only don’t blame me if you
get your fingers burnt.’ Dick only laughed,
and scrambled over the garden fence. O’
course, I couldn’t see Dick rushin’ into the
lion’s jaws without goin’ too—specially when
he was blinded by failin’ a prey to the tender
passion. Dick was over the fence and out o’
eight in the dark, before I had made up my
mind to follow, and by the time I reached the
•door o’ the cottage, Dick had lifted the latch
and walked in. I had just laid my hand, on
the door to follow Dick, when there the
greatest ecreechin’ and sweariu’ inside you
ever heerd in your life. I couldn’t under-
stand a word o’ it, as I didn’t know Spanish;
but fearin’ there might be foul play goin’ on,
I dashed the door open and rushed in. 1
nearly bust my sides a laughin’, as I caught
sight o’ the fun. There was Dick with his
left arm round a lady, who was strugglin’
with all her might to get away, and with his
right he was fightin’ a hungry-lookin’ don.
Dick had his bagonet; and, if he hadn’t been
hamper-fed with the lady, would soon have
passed the Spaniard’s sword, and struck the
bagonet between his riba, I saw Dick’s mis-
take in a minute. He was mad with jealousy,
or whatever you call it, and thought the Span-
iard had gone courtin’ his sweetheart, when
all the while it was Dick himself, who was
takin’ the don’s wife by force. I couldn’t
do anything but hold my sides and laugh, for
it looked so comical. But all in a moment I
sees the Spaniard’s eyes glitter like devils, and
springin’ forward he lunged his long sword
right at Dick’s chest, and before Dick could
parry it, the blade entered his body with such
force, that it passed right through, and the
point, striking against the wall doubled round,
and entered the back close to where it bad
come through, and then came out again in
front, and cut one of the Spaniard’s,fingers.’
* Come ! Compj Hal. Be a little reason-
able !’ said his master, laughing. * You
surely don’t expect us to swallow this !’
‘ Its all true, sir, every word o’ it! you
may pound your life on it!’ asseverated Hal.,
and then continued, ‘ Dick fell back with the
sword bent double, and sticking through him
two ways; and the lady ran screaming away
to the village close by. You may guess, ihe
Spaniard didn’t live to see daylight again/ I
just drove my bayonet clean through him, and
four inches into a oak post behind'; and there I
left him, howlin’ for all the saints in the cullen-
der. I had only just time to snatch up poor
Dick, and slip out into the garden, when I
heerd a swarm o’ jabberin’ Spaniards cornin’
up the road. I got safe back to camp, and
carried poor Dick to the hospital. It was a
week before the doctors extracted the sword
out o’ his body. They had meetin’s after
meetin’s to find out how to get the sword out;


and I don’t believe they’d have done so to this
day, only I gave ’em a hint I’
'lndeed!’ cried Doctor Simpson, eagerly,
Lis curiosity thoroughly aroused. * How was
it removed 1 It seems to me impossible !’
‘ Why, you see, doctor, I carried him down
to the forge, and held him over the anvil
while the blacksmith cut the sword right in,
the double; and then the doctors had no
trouble in pulliu’ the pieces out separate 1’
Mr. Shelley could not restrain his merri-
ment, but burst forth in a hearty laugh. Dr.
Simpson was forced to join, though he was
far from certain that there might not be some
truth in Hal.’s impro.bal.lo tale.
' Come along, doctor, or old Iperbly will let
loose another of his adventures. He is the
most inveterate hand 'at a yarn I ever met
with. Good bye, Hal., I’ll call in and see
you again by and bye/ he said, kindly, turn-
ing to the old man.
‘ Astonishing man !’ exclaimed Dr. Simpson
as they sat down to dinner. ‘ I can scarcely
believe his story, it seems so improbable ; and
yet there is an unmistakable air of truth about
him.’
The idea of there being an unmistakable air
of truth about old Iperbly, proved too much
for Mr. Shelley’s gravity ; and be fairly roared
again. Mrs. Shelley, too, could not refrain
from joining in the laugh. ‘My dear doctor,’
she pleaded, afraid that their hilarity
might have offended him, ‘ pray, forgive our
rudeness in laughing. Old Hal.’s impossible
adventures are so notorious, that no one ever
thinks of believing a word he says.’
‘ What, madam, does he stoop to the mean
practice of lying V asked the doctor, incredu-
lously.
‘Not in the ordinary affairs of life, doctor!
In matters of importance he is truth itself;
but when he delivers himself up to the whims
of imagination he tells some of the most atroci-
ous lies,’ replied Mr. Shelley, in explanation,
‘ I dare say that, when he is relating his
marvellous adventures, he fancies they really
did occur 1* said Mrs. Shelley in palliation of
Hal.’s want of veracity, * When people in-
dulge in such exaggeration and invention, they ,
often lose themselves in the maze of their
fancy/ I
Dinner over, Dr. Simpson started on his re’
turn to Newcastle. He was so anxious about the
injured miners, that he resisted all attempts of
Mr. Shelley to prevail upon him to stay till
the morrow. But he promised to visit Field
Place in the course of a couple ot days to see
his patient again.
Bertha slept till late in the afternoon, when
she rose, and learning the doctor’s opinion of
Percy from her mother, she went out for a
ramble by the river side. She paused, as she
passed the log, where two or three years before
Percy had saved her from the fangs of the
snake at the expense of his mutilated hand,
and seated herself upon it. The event, which
memory pictured so vividly, gave birth to a
train of thought'connected with the last few
months of her life ; and, as usual, Percy’s un-
accountable determination to leave her father’s
service formed the chief part of her reverie.
She was puzzling herself with the difficult
problem, and repeating the terms of tender
endearment, which in his delirious uncon-
sciousness Percy had applied to her, when she
observed a sheet of note paper, neatly folded,
and lying on the grass at her feet. She me-
chanically picked it up, and without any de-
finite motive opened it. Seeing that it was
in her preserver’s handwriting she examined it
closer, and discovered that it, was some verses
written in pencil. Her curiosity being awak-
ened, and feeling that there could be no great
breach of honor in perusing poetry, which she
supposed he had copied from a book, she read
them through. The lines were as follows, and
addresed
To B
’Tis not thy lovely azure eyes—
Tho’ in those orbs rare beauty lies—
Nor tby red lips, whose hue outvies
That blushing gem—
The jealous ruby—whose rich dyes
Would rival them !
Nor is’t thy wealth of nut-brown hair.
Nor pearly teeth—so- passing fair
Nor thy dear mouth, that aye doth wear
Bright, sunny smiles!
No! ’Tis a treasure yet more rare
That mo beguiles.
A gem more rich than beauteous face.
More priceless than bewitching grace!—
'Tis the rare virtues, that have place
In thy dear breast.
That win my heart, and make me trace
These rhymes love drest I


The virtues of thy heart and mind—»
So sweet, endearing, and refin’d—
Have with thy loveliness combined
My heart to moye ;
And, vanquished by them, I’ve resign’d
That heart to love I
I love thee. Peerless, ah ! as true
As poet can I Then, darling, do
that love by loving too !
I ask but this:—
Thy love to light life’s journey through
With changeless bliss !
:*«***
Ah, why, oh memory, taunt me thus
As hopeless, and beneath a curse
More bitter than is death, and worse
Than dull despair ?
Ob, that the grim, death-driven heai-se
Would end my care!
I love, but dare not woo! And dark
As is a soul without one spark
Of cheering hope to light its bark
On life’s rough waye,
I bear my curse —the felon’s mark—
Unto the grave!
Beitha read the verses over several timesi
and was ranch affected by the last two stan
zas. The utter hopelessness and despair por-
trayed in them touched her gentle, sympathis-
ing heart, and melted her to tears. Who the
lady was he ‘loved, but dare not woo,’ she did
not pause to speculate, but ingenuously con-
cluded she was some fair English maiden,
whom he had loved, perhaps, from boyhood.
■‘Poor Mr. Sinclair! I wish I could efface
the ‘ felon’s mark’ from his name, and aid him
to win the lady he loves !’ she solloquised, as
she tenderly folded the paper up, and placed
it in her pocket. ‘ I wish it was in my power
to make him happy ; I would do so, iff could,
at any sacrifice. How proud must the lady
be, who could win the heart of such a good
and noble man!’
CHAPTER XXII.
1 pant for the music which is divine;
My heart in its thirst is a dying flower.
Pour forth the sound like enchanted wine j
Loosen the notes in a silver shower.
Like a herbless plain for the gentle rain,
I gasp, I faint, till they wake again !
Let me drink of the spirit of that sweet sound.
More, oh more !—I am thirsting yet!
It loosens the serpent which care has bound
Upon ray heart to stifle it!
The dissolving strain through every vein,
Passes into my heart and brain 1
Percy Shelley,
Four months tale of the sands of time had
trickled through the frail measure of their
lives, and Percy was reclining upon a couch ia
the diningroom,|listening in rapture to the ‘sil-
ver shower’ of melody proceeding from the
parlor, where Bertha was pensively ‘ thinking
in music.’ The enchanting strains rose and
fell like the swell of a mystic sea, and his
soul was bathed in a flood of liquid sound.
Percy had often heard her play set pieces, and
had admired her brilliant execution, and the
ease, with which she rendered the difficult
passages of even the most eccentric and dreamy
of the, great composers; but, restrained by the
shy reserve of (her sensitive nature, the gifted
girl had never,before allowed him an oppor-
tunity of bearing her rare improvisatory
powers. Like the warbling queen of night, the
melancholy nightingale, she could only pour
forth her soul in music, when communing with
herself in solitude ; and had she known a liste-
ner was drinking with greedy ears her dulcet
strains, she would have fled from the piano in
dismay. Percy lay for an hour entranced, lost
in a maze of delighted surprise. She was evi-
dently in a subdued and pensive mood, and the
low, sweet strains, so suggestive of a calm, twi-
light scene, with the dusk of night thickening
around, when
So still is all that you
May hear the evening dew
Fall on the flowers
In pearly showers,
thrilled his soul with every pleasing emotion.
A sweet melancholy enwrapt the fair player ;
and from her inspired fingers flowed a wayy
stream of music sorrowful, tender, peusive, as
if she were indulging in ‘ the luxury of woe.’
And her music was a fair reflex of her
mood. Slje had been reading the verses she
had picked up by the river, and the mournful
lines,
I bear my curse—the felon’s mark—
Unto my grave!
had set her musing, and tinged her sombre
thought with sympathizing melancholy. She
now realised painfully the terrible position of
one, an exile for ever from his home and
friends; and the confidence that he was un-
justly so, made her gentle heart yearn the
more tenderly to soothe his sorrow. She
pictured to herself the home he had lost, and
the maiden he * loved, but dared not woo.'
‘ I wish It had been Marion Macaulay !’ she
thought earnestly, as her fingers drew a low.


plaintive strain from the keys ; ‘he might
have been so happy, and the “ felon’s mark ”
would have been no obstacle to their nnion,
for she bears it, as well as he !’
Presently she remembered that her doves
had not been fed ; and rising from the piano,
she closed it, and left the parlor. She was
passing through the dining-room, on her way
to the dove-cot, when Percy startled her by
exclaiming, in a tone of unfeigned admiration,
‘You have given me a great treat, Miss
Bertha! I had no idea you had such wonder-
ful powers !’
‘What? Did you hear me?’ she asked,
with a frightened look, ‘I was only amusing
myself—in fact, I was thinking, and was
hardly aware that I had been playing at all,
until I left off!’
‘ Your thoughts must have been sweet in-
deed, if your music was an echo of them !’
Percy exclaimed warmly.
‘ They were sorrowful rather thau sweet,
Mr. Sinclair-; I was thinking of you,’ she
replied, softly..
.‘ Indeed !’ he exclaimed, a warm flush
mounting to his temples. It was swett to
form the subject of her thoughts, and Hope,
never wholly dead in the heart of the most
abject, suggested a tender motive for her medi-
tations.
■ f l was thinking of those mournful lines of
yours—
“ 1 love, but daro not woo! And dart
As is a soul without one spark
Of cheering hope to light its bark
O’er life’s rough Wave,
I bear my curso —the felon’s mark—
Unto my grave !’.
With a glance of dismay, Percy exclaimed,
‘ Surely you did not Gnd those rhymes ! I
lost them months ago ; and, as I could not Gnd
them again, I hoped they were destroyed or
obliterated by the weather/
‘ I found them down by the river, a few
days after our escape from the Broad Lagoon,’
she replied, handing him the paper. ‘ I think
them very pretty, especially the last two
verses/
Percy glanced at his writing, and then
folded the paper up and put it into his
pocket, saying, ‘ I ought to have put them in-
to the fire when I wrote them ; or, better,
never have written them at all/
‘ Give them back to me, Mr. Sinclair ! I
should be sorry to part with them now !’ she
said, eagerly.
He returned them to her in silence, grieved
that she had found them, and fearful that she
should divine who was addressed, or ask him
to- tell her.
As if reading his thoughts, she enquired,
abruptly, after a few seconds embarrassing
pause, ‘I should so much like to know who
the lady is your lines are addressed to ? B. !
One of my initials! Is she a namesake of
mine V
He saw from her artless manner, that she
had not guessed his secret > and, smiling
faintly, he replied, ‘ Yes, Miss Bertha, the
lady is your namesake.’
1 Will you tell, me all about her, Mr. Sin-
clair?’—l would so much like to hear ! She
must be very good and beautiful too, for you
to love her so much !’ Bertha said with enthu-
siasm, as she took a vacant chair near the
couch.
* And she is very good and very beautiful
tool’ he replied ; ‘ but I cannot tell you any-
thing about her now, Miss Bertha, Perhaps I
may some day.’
‘Well, as I have discovered the secret of
yoar writing poetry, will you show me some 1’
‘ Yes, Miss Bertha; but I would prefer
reading to you from the works of some recog-
nized poet.’
‘You must read some of your own to me,
to atone for my disappointment in your re-
fusal to tell me anything about the lady you
addressed those verses to 1’ she replied smiling.
‘ I have a piece here, Miss Bertha, that I
have just finished; but it lacks the only re-
deeming quality of the piece you found.’
‘ What is that ?” she enquired, glancing up
wonderingly.
‘ Brevity !’ he replied, taking some
sheets of paper feSm his breast poc-
ket. ‘ These verses form the prelude
to a poem, I intend writing some day.’'
The scene lies in the bush near Sydney, and
the writer is supposed to be teacher of the
village school, who, fagged and weary with the
labors of the day, takes a walk into
the bush to read and meditate. You must tell
me at once when you tire.’
‘ You may "be sure of that, Mr, Sinclair 1 I


am not used to being a martyr to cold polite-
ness/ she replied, laughing. ‘ Commence at
once ; or I shall tire before you begin/
Percy unrolled bis M.S. aud read in a clear
and flexible voice—
FRANCES.
[A pastoral poem—prelude to 1 * Circass a.”]
One summer’s eve, ray daily labor done,
My little flock of laughing pupils all
To their far homes dispersing, and the sun
In the red west suspended like a ball
Of liquid, golden flame—his course high run—
I to the stilly woods, where echoes call
To the shy bellbird’s silvery tinkle, went
Musing in gloomy mood of sullen discontent.
And to a sweet, sequester’d vale I came,
Where Hows a crystal brook. The wanton flowers
(Those children ot the wild, who aye did claim
A place by river’s bank and sunny bowers)
Press’d to its very brim, as tbo* their aim
Was in its depths to scan their tinted dowers.
To other eyes than mine the lovely scene
Was but the bush - to me a paradise terrene !
Beneath a gumtree's scanty shade I threw
My weary self, and gazed with growing joy
On nature’s soften’d charms, that did endue
My soul with peace, which soon without alloy
Into a sweet and pensive sadness grew ;
And then the time I idly did employ
In quaffing deep of Wordsworth’s soothing balm,
That to my settled peace did add a superealm.
With strange delights the homely tales I read
(Sosimply sweet in their pure Saxon dress)
Of gentle Lucy’s death, and how she led
Her wand’ring parents forth in sad distress,
And of the hapless maiden, who did wed
One of •• impetuous blood”—and wretchedness.
But ’twas his touching story of the “child,
Of beauty rare,” that me with pleasure most beguiled
Fast fell the shades of evening round me, still
Unconscious of the thick’ning gloom I lay
Musing upon the pleasing picture, till
Night’s pall was thrown upon the form of day.
An ecstacy then seized me, that did fill
My mind with clearer light, yet stole away
All memory of the Past. It was, perchance,
A waking dream I had—a bright and glorious trance.
A light, resplendent as a summer morn,
Yet, as serenest moonbeams’ silvery glow,
Subdued and chill, d : d on the landscape dawn.
Investing all the varied scene below
With mystic beauty, as is never worn
By sober nature, but when fanes show
Their midnight pageant, and upon the green
Disport the hours away with Mab, the elfin queen.
In raptnro on the dazzling scene I gazed;
Yet did I marvel not|! —The lethean spell.
Had from my vacant mind the past erased.
That’twas a prospect strange I could not tell,
Nor at its awful splendor feel amazed!
But with such joy I view’d each flowery dell
And woody height, as only they may feel
To whom the jealous Nine the Beautiful reveal,
Upon each tiny leaf and grassy bkdo
The falling dew in glist’ning pearl.drops hung.
And flash’d, and sparkled, when the breezes sway’d
Each yielding stalkleb, as if there were flung
Earthward a melting rainbow, that was made
Its rarest hues to lend. The while among
Those dewy gems there sprang such gorgeous flowers—
Too purely, fairly bright for this dull earth of ours!
Around I gazed! Around, on every side,
Above, below, turn where my rape eyes might,
There were warm nature’s charms intensified—
The else-time dull now wore a radiant light;
And e’en grey stones and rotting timber vied ,
With all by nature fair to please the sight.
There was not found in all the scene one spot
(So perfect was the change) where loveliness was. not I
That which me most did please of all the scene
(Ah, long I gazed, and drank with greedy joy
Its calm, ethereal beauty, its serene
And silent grandeur), was that wondrous sky. •
In far-famed Italy hath never been
At cloudless, summer noon, as tint so high
Of glowing sapphire, as above was shown—
Never till then nor since was sky so beauteous known.
And in that blue expanse, as in a sea,
Tho starry host like golden islets gleam’d,
Of wondrous size they shone and brilliancy j
And from tho river’s silvery breast there seemed
A myriad lights to burn in dancing glee.
All earthly sound was hush’d, as if I dream’d.
So mute was nature, that with ravish’d ears
Those heavenly strains I heard—the music of the spheres
Bath’d in a flood of splendor, steept in joy
(A joy of feeling, not of thought) I lay.
The lapse of time did work me no annoy;
Its wing upon the Present seem’d to stay.
No thought of Past nor Future did destroy
Tho glory of the Now I I could not say
If in that still repose of calm delight
A fleeting hour I lay, or half the ling’ring night !
Adown the vale at length my eyes I turn’d.
And there, approaching with her fleecy charge,
A young and lovely shepherdess discern’d.
She slowly came along the river’s marge,
Close followed by her gentle flock, nor spurn’d
Their eager pressing, as they strove, with large
And wistful eyes upturned to her sweet face,
A kindly glance to win, or Jier soft hand’s embrace.
I watched her, as she came, with such delight
As should a form of Beauty all inspire ;
Normarvell’d who she was, nor if she might
Be a stray member of Euterpe’s choir.
Flora, Proserpine, or Dian, bright ,
From the dread world unseen, who wander’d
nigher
To view tho earth those heavenly beams reveal;
For, as I passive lay, I could not think, but feel.
She nigh had reach’d me, when she, pausing, stood
Some moments still, and gazed upon the stream.
Her woolly people round, “ Sweet maidenhood,
The fairest vision of a summer’s dream,
Oh, could I paint thee thus in pensive mood
Gazing upon the flood, with eyes that seem
Of angel birth —so fathomless and clear—
A feat I should achieve, that hath no earthly peer!


“Butnol.'Tic vain! With my weak pen ’tis vain
Such wondrous loveliness as thine to hope
Upon my poem’s fading page to chain !
With task so Titan-great I could not cope !
And yet thy dazzling charms I can again
At will recal!”—A crimson, silken rope
Close binds her filmy robe of silver beams ;
And in her star-bright hand a crook all golden gleams.
The amorous breezes her fairy locks caress.
And drooping boughs bend low her lips to meet ;
The flowers, in haste to touch her trailing dress.
Their mirrow’d charms forget, and sweetly greet
Her with a sign of welcome, as they) press,
In love’s solicitude, around her feet;
For in that lovely face and pensive smile
No human vice there lurks, nor mortal’s venour’d
guile.
Butfor that bright transparency of skin,
AVhose warmth betrays thg mantling blood
beneath,
And heaving breast, which tells of soul within.
And musing eyes, and balf-disclosed teeth —
But for those signs unerring, that her kin
Was not with marble, but with forms that
breathe,
1 might have ta’en her for—so fair, so still—
That Venus statue rare—the sculptor’s highest skill.
As’.he in whose high soul the genius lies
To snatch a fading landscape or a face
From changing nature, and in native guise
On canvas rude its charms secure to place.
So that its painted shadow yet defies
Time’s with’ring hand to alter or erase
As he in transport rapt would fixtly gaze
•On Beauty’s nonpareil, my eyes I could not raise,
But on herdazzling features bent them still,
Note-takingof their every witching charm
In speechless admiration lost, until
A lamb espiedme, and in quick alarm
Its warning bleated loud. She turned. A thrill
Of liquid joy sped thro’ me, as her calm,
Heaven-tinted eyes met mine. With joy’s excess
trembled as the leaves, when zephyrs soft caress.
A moment’s space she paused, then forward sprang
With outstretch’d arms of welcome, and a smile
Of joyous recognition ; and her tongue,
In accents silvery sweet as Arion’s viol
Cried : “ Little thought I, Willie, here among
The moonlit woods, to meet thee, and beguile
An hour in tender converse!” As she spoke.
Came memory slowly back, as to one new awoke.
It was! it was! I knew her by the glances
Of yearning, quenchless love from speaking eyes,
And by that rippling voice, whose music dances
In liquid melody! O, Paradise !
It was! It was my hope, my|darli ng Frances!
Into my arms she sprang in glad surprise;
But, horror! —As I caught her to my breast
In eager joy, ’twas but a shadow that I press'd!
I backward reel’d aghast in shrinking awe 1
Her aspect immaterial did perplex
My doubting cense past telling I—There, before
Me stood the best and brightest of her sex
In lifeful semblance; yet I, trembling, saw
As thro’ a form of mist, the bright reflex
Of all the scene beyond. My curdling blood
Froze in its icy fount, and stay’d its crimson flood.
At my dismay she smiled, and gently said
“ Nay, fear not, love ! A disembodied soul
Hath neither will nor power to work thee dread.
And least'of all has hers, whose earthly goal
Is in thy heart to live ! Hast thou not read
How fair lanthe at queen Mab’s control
Eos® from her slumb’ring body, which she left
Awhile without a soul, tho’ not of life bereft ?
“ And upward borne by Mab’s pellucid car
Thro’ fields of azure light unto the verge
Of highest heaven, saw from thence afar
The distant earth, and heard the fairy urge
Some strange and startling truths (if truths they are) ?
Like her did I at Mab’s command emerge
From my still breathing form—tho’ not like her
To list the teachings of that august sophister.”
“What, what!” I cried, “Ait thou then but tho ghost
Of her I lave far more than words can tell ?
And is thy beauteous outline at tho most,
To eyes so perfect, but a vision’s spell ?”
“I am thy Fannie’s soul,” she said, “and boast
No higher power ; so do thy terror quell!
I am in truth no other than you see, —
The deathless part of her, whose love is dear to thee!”
I gazed with wonder on her loveliness,
As there she stood—a disembodied shade
Dress’d in ethereal beauty. You may guess
To see the stars shine thro’ her me dismay’d !
But, tho’ all unsubstantial, from fair tress ,
To fairer feet, her charms were all display’d
In richer, rarer, brighter traitsjpt grace.
Than can in normal life bo seen in form or face.
And I can now aver (all must admit
Me witness of the mystery) that when
From crumbling clay a spirit rises, it—
(As doth a diamond thro’ the crusts, that pen
Its glories in, burst from its grave of grit
Aglare in living splendor) it doth then
In native form from its rent prison spring,
Intensified its charms past ad imagining !
“An 1 who are these thy flock ? Are they, like thee.
But immaterial essences, or aro
They sheep in verity ?’ “My guards they be,
Each one a trusty fairy sent to bar
From me all hurtful things, that wander free
Thro’ boundless space from floating star tostar.
Bright Mab their queen draped them in this disguise, ,
And bade them guard me well with jealous, watchful
' eyes.
’.And many a time do they at her behest.
When flings the moon a silvery radiance o’er
The sleeping woods, roam with me far in quest
Of Echo’s lonely cell moss-grown and hoar.
O’er hill and dale our chequer’d way we’ve press’d
In eager, nightly search, yet fruitless ; for
Our gaze it still escapes, tho’ oft so near,
That her wild, joyous notes, do mock our lisf’ning car.
II And when the Fairy Queen can leisure find
From regal cares herself awhile to rest,
In her swift car, whose coursers leave behind
The lagging lightning-flash, she takes me, dresi
In garb invisible to mortals, blind
By earthly dross of clay, upon the crest
Of ocean’s boundless waves to distant climes.
And to my gaze reveals all places and all times.


“ Sometimes the earth she shews me ere the date
Of its ablution, sometimes takes me where
Met Jew and Gentile in unyielding hate.
With her I’ve hover’d where the angels bear
Their ransom’d charge thro’ heaven’s effulgent gate ;
And where lost spirits sink in mute despair
To endless woe, we’ve stood— from ere the fall
Unto the consummation Mab has shewn me all 1”
To hear her thus discourse—her whom I knew
A peasant girl (tho’ in rare beauty deck'd,
A simple rustic still I)—did me indue
With’speechless awe. She noted it, and check’d
Her tongue’s swift melody, and gently drew
Her shadowy arm thro’ mine, as to direct
My tottering steps (I saw, yet felt it not) i
And slowly led the way down to a moss-grown plot.
There sate wo down, hid by umbrageous gloom,
While bright around the magic splendor shone.
Fierce love and terror did my heart consume
In wild emotion ; yet would I not own
My passion’s strife, but murmur'd faint, “ Resume
Thy tongue’s melodious flow, that hath alone
Of earthly things the balmy power to soothe
My mind from troubled thought, or my rough fate to
smoothe.”
And leaning on my breast, her beauteous face
To mine upturned in love’s sweet confidence,
She whispered soft —“ What, can my accents chase
Dull care from thy dear brow, as can thy glance
Corroding trouble from my heart erase ?
Then will I tell thee, love, where we did chance.
Friend Mab and I, last night to wander forth—
In her bright car of pearl we started for the North.
‘‘ Swift as a thought our eager coursers sped.
And, in ten seconds, reached the Caucasus.
The Fairy check’d their flight, where lifts its head
Pale Elburz’ haughty mount, that seems to press
The clouds to its cold brow. The way she led
To a Circassian vale—a wilderness
Of lonely beauty—and her magic wand
Made sceues to pass my eyes, all other ken beyond.
“ Ah, sad it makes me, loye, to trace again
The anguish of the scenes I there beheld !
Oh, that a fading dream was all the pain
Of breaking hearts, and dying hero’s quelled.
But by stem Death"omnipotent I—the1 —the slain,
So numberless and noble, but compoll’d
By a distemper’d vision 1 Vain the thought 1
’Twas real as the woes by rash Ambition wrought 1
“ But lake this pen, and, ns I tell thee, write—
A tale I will narrate shall make thee blush
To own thy country England! Her, whoso bright
And glorious mission is to save, not crush—
Yea, her. the vaunt of freedom, I indict
That she stood by accessory, when the flush
Of sanguine war thro’ fair Circassia spread,
And made its children slaves, or laid them with the
dead 1”
I took the pen she offer’d. 'Twas of gold
With point of crystal, and within a well
Of crimson ink—l shudder’d to behold 1—
“ It was,” she said, “ the blood of one who fell
In guarding home and kindred 1” Icy cold,
Yet curdled not, it seemed awitch’s spell.
With trembling hands I seized it, and, as under,
Wrote from her paly lips this ta'o of [grief and wonder!
‘ls that all ?’ asked Eertba, la a disap-
pointed tone, as Percy folded the papers and
put them back into his pocket.
‘Yes, Miss Bertha, I have not yet written
the story these verses are to form the prelude
to,’ he replied.
‘I hope you will do so soon then, for I ana
anxious to know what it is about. When
will you begin it ?’
‘ I cannot say, Miss Bertha. Perhaps never. r
‘ Ah, but you must! Did you name the
shepherdess after a friend of yours 1 I wonder
you did not call her ‘ Bertha,’ [after my
namesake.’
* The lady is only an ideal, and named after
no one that I know,’ he replied shortly.
* What a strange fancy for the soul of the
lady to walk about by moonlight, attended by
a guard of fairies. fcWell, it is very pretty, al-
though it is impossible to be true.’
‘ Divested of the jingle of rhyme, it would
appear simply absurd, I expect, Miss Bertha,
How long have you been in the habit of com-
posing music as you play f
‘ Only a few months. I always felt that I
could, but I was afraid to try at first,’ she re-
plied. ‘ Have you been out for a ride this
afternoon T she enquired, noticing his paleness.
* No; I have felt a slight pain in my chest
since dinner, and was afraid to go.’
‘ That terrible ride from the Broad Lagoon 1
Shall you ever forget it, Mr. Sinclair!’ she
exclaimed, as the mention of his pain remin-
ded her of its cause. ‘ Wasn’t it a wonder
Snowflake brought us home safely, especially
as I dropped the rein?’
‘lt was indeed, a miracle! And I can
never forget that I owe my life to you,’ he re-
plied fervently.
‘ And Jerry ! Don’t forget him, Mr. Sin-
clair ! He saved ns both! ’ she said, as she re-
collected the blaokboy’s gallant conquest of
the white bull,
‘Jerry deserves our warmest gratitude;
for he did what few, even good bushmen,
could have done. But it was you, Miss
Bertha, who saved my life ; and I thank you
as sincerely as if it was of value to me.’
‘ Did you not twice save mine, Mr. Sinclair 1
I would do anything to show you how deeply
the recollection of those noble acts of yours
have impressed me. Your happiness and


comfort are of greater consideration to me
than my own!’
‘ May 1 bog of you one thing ?’ he asked, in
trembling accents j for her words were stirring
hopes he had long endeavoured to crush.
'When I have left Field Place,you will some-
times think of me, not as I am, but as you
might, perhaps, have done if the degrading
brand of the felon had never been affixed to
my name.’
‘ When you leave Field Place ? Surely you
•do not still intend to go?’ she asked eagerly.
‘ I must, Miss Bertha ! There is a stern
duty that commands me, and I dare not stay,’
he replied bitterly. ‘But when 1 am gone,
try to forgive my seeming ingratitude in leav-
ing your papa’s service against his wish !’
‘Tell me this envious duty, that would rob
ns of you, Mr. Sinclair! 1 have often tried
to discover' what it can be, that makes
your absence from here so imperative ; but I
cannot, and 1 won’t believe it is necessary
unless you explain bow !’ she exclaimed im-
petuously.
Percy was but human. It was beyond the
power of man to pass safely through such an
ordeal. Again, as on a former occasion of
similar temptation, he seized her hand. ‘ It
isuseless ! I cannot keep my secret longer !
Bertha ! Ever since I have known you, I
have madly ”
A step in the adjoining room recalled him
to his senses; and, maddened by the humilia-
tion of having again so far forgotten himself,
he hastily left the room. Bertha stood for a
few moments where she was, motionless as if
changed to a statue. The warm blood suf-
fused her face, as his meaning flashed suddenly
upon her. He loved her ! Now the cause of
his determination to leave was plain enough !
Now she understood the secret he had uncon-
.sciously betrayed to her, as he lay lost in the
mazes of delirium ! And with the knowledge
of his love came the consciousness that she
had deceived herself in her sentiments towards
him. What she had regarded as friendship
only, she now discovered to be a deeper and
tenderer emotion. Born of gratitude for past
services, and admiration for his noble.and ,
reckless courage, it had, unknown to herself,
ripened into a love. And now that she had
learnt the state of her own heart, and had dis-11
) covered that their love was mutual; now tliat
a vista had opened to a bright and happy
i future, he was going away ! •No thought
; crossed her mind of the inequality of their
positions. He loved her, and was going to
leaye ! Cause enough in that for the hitter,
scalding tears that fell in a pearly shower upon
the paper, which lay upon the table before her.
‘ He shall not go !’ she said passionately, as
she turned towards her own room. ‘He
shall not go! If he is consigned to another
master, he may be treated brutally ; and he
shall not go! My heart would break, if he
goes away !’
She passed on to her own roonj, and sink-
ing upon a low stool by the window, sat for
hours musing mournfully upon the discovery
Percy’s interrupted declaration had forced
upon her.
‘ Just what I have feared for months past!’
said Mrs. Shelley, entering from an adjoining
room, as Bertha left it. ‘ Ah, what is this]’
She picked up the paper Bertha had dropped
upon the table, and forgotten. It was thelines
Bertha had found at the river. Mrs. Shelley
noticed with agitation that the verses were ad-
dressed, “ To B—.” Pale with annoyance and
sorrow, she went out to seek her husband, to
impart the unwelcome intelligence, that their
child was loved by a convict servant—a noble-
hearted gentleman she knew from so long as-
sociation with him, but a convict servant
still. She found Mr. Shelley in the garden
superintending the mending of a broken panel
of fencing. He saw from the agitated manner
of his wife, that something was amiss, and be
left his work and hurried to her side. ‘ What
is the matter, Grace V he asked, anxiously.
‘ You seem ill!’
They were standing close by the sum-
mer house, and hidden by it from the obser-
vation of the fencer.
‘ Ham well enough, Walter ! But Bertha—’
What of her?’ he exclaimed in terror, fearful
from his wife’s manner that some terrible
calamity had fallen upon his darling.
‘ Mr. Sinclair loves her ! I accidentally
overheard him telling her so!’ she replied,
weeping.
‘ Has he, a convict, dared to talk of love
to her V Mr. Shelley exclaimed, hoarsely,
his eyes glittering with rage.


‘He has! or rather, hearing my step, he left
his declaration unfinished. But he said
enough to reveal his sentiments to her.'
‘And Bertha?’
‘ Returns his affection, or I am strangely
mistaken I It is indeed a bitter misfortune,
Mrs. Shelley replied mournfully. ‘An end now
to the bright future we have pictured for our
darling. I know her faithful nature too well*
to believe, that if she once loves Mr. Sinclair
she will ever accept the most brilliant offer
that could be made to her. She would refuse
to marry him in deference to our feelings,
but she would never marry another, while
she loved him.’
‘ The base ingrate! Has he taken advan-
tage of our kindness to betray our confi-
dence, and repay us by treacherously and
clandestinely stealing our daughter’s affec-
tions 1 Curse him ! It was an unlucky day
that fas. first set foot upon this place!’ Mr.
Shelley exclaimed fiercely.
‘ Could he not retort, Walter, that if he had
not come, we should have no Bertha now to
grieve about V his wife said, gently.
‘I would as soon see her in the grave, as
the wife of a convict 1’ he returned, gloomily.
* We did not think so when her life was in
danger, a few months ago, Walter 1 Although
the disgrace of such an alliance would break
my heart, yet, if she should love him, I would
rather sacrifice myself than her. They could
wait until he gets his ticket of leave, and we
could then set him up on a new station, or
take him into partnership on this one,’ said
Mrs. Shelley, w.ho, woman-like, saw that it
was useless to contest the inevitable.
‘I suppose, you are right, Grace ; but it
will be hard. There has never been one of
my family or yours either, ever marked with
the brand of a felon; and it will be hard to
bsar the introduction of one now. But, of
course, our prejudices must not be allowed to
stand in the . way of our darling’s happiness,
if she should be unwise enough to love him !’
he replied, in a tone of reluctant resignation.
‘ He wished to leave Field Place some time
ago, - How unfortunate that we placed any
obstacle in . his way,’ Mrs. Shelley said, re-
gretfully.
*lt is indeed ! Where is Bertha ?
‘ Don’t speak to her just yet, Walter ! It
may be better to wait a while. I think it
wonld be best to say nothing about the mat-
ter, but just send her to Sydney for a time.
Her aunt Alice has wanted her to spend a few
months with her for a long time past. It will
be hard to spare her, but we must submit to
the trial.’
‘ It will be a bitter trial, certainly, Grace,
to miss her for so long ; but it will be for the
best. It is a most perplexing situation to be
placed in I We owe her iife to him, for he
has twice snatched her from the. jaws of the
grave; yet, it would almost be as hard to
lose her in death, as to have her the outcast
from society she must become, if she marries a
convict. I wish to heaven we bad let him
go away, when he first asked permission to !
But let us go in, Grace! I feel too much upset
by this news to be fit for anything for the rest
of the day!’ Mr. Shelley said, anxiously, as
he drew his wife’s arm within his own, and
led her back to the house.
* Fool that I am !’ exclaimed Percy, bitter,
ly, as he stumbled out of the summer-house.
‘ Why could 1 not go without causing this
misery to my generous benefactors 1 But
they shall not have to bear separation from
their darling on my account. To-night, I
will, leave Field Place for ever! Would that
I had done so before I was mad enough to
tell her of my love !’
He bitterly reproached himself for his'folly
in unveiling his heart to her ; and he accepted
his master’s epithet of a base ingrate as justly
earned. He walked hurriedly away from the
summer-house, to avoid their discovering that
he had overheard them; and reached his room
from the side verandah. Ashe entered the
door, he saw Marion Macaulay passing
through the yard. He beckoned her to him*
‘Why, Mr. Sinclair, what is the matter?
You look as pale as death,’ Marion exelaimed,
in consternation, observing his haggard ex-
pression.
‘ Can I have a few minutes’ conversation
with you in private, Marion V he asked, with-
out noticing her words.
‘ Yes, certainly, Mr. Sinclair. I have
something to do in the kitchen now, and we
can talk there without interruption,’she replied


They entered the kitchen in silence, Marion
wondering at his strange manner, and he
brooding over his folly.
‘ Marion,’ he asked, after a few moments’
pause, ‘ will you promise not to mention to
anyone what I am going to tell you ?’
‘ Yes, Mr. Sinclair, I promise !’ she replied,
her wonder increasing.
‘ I am going to leave Field Place to-night ?
and I want you to get a few of my things
ready for me.’
‘ Going to leave Field Place to-night ? Sure-
ly you cannot be serious?’
‘ I am !’
‘ What does Mr. Shelley say ? Surely he will
not allow it, and you not recovered from your
fall yet.’
‘He will know nothing of it till 1 am gone,
Marion. You recollect some time back Miss
Bertha conjecteured that the cause of my wish to
leave here was, that 1 loved some one whom
1 saw no prospect of winning ? She was nearer
the truth than she expected. I have loved
her from the first moment of seeing her; and
I guarded my secret carefully till half an hour
ago, when 1 was mad enough' to tell her.’
1 Surely not! Ob, Mr. Sinclair, whatever
could you have been thinking of?’ I have
known your secret ever since the night you
leaped down that terrible precipice to save her
and 1 have often wondered how her parents
could have been so blind as not to see it. But,
oh, how unfortunate that you have betrayed
yourself!’.
‘ I was overheard by her mother; and a few
minutes after, when I was in thesnmmer house,
I heard Mr. Shelley curse the day I ever set
my foot in the place. I deserve whatever he
can say or think of me. Marion, I put it to
you—can I remain longer V
■' ‘ No, Mr. Sinclair! I shall miss you sadly ;
but I cannot advise yon to remain. Where
will you go to ?’ •
. ‘ I shall start to-night. I don’t know where
Ij shall go to yet, but I shall borrow one of
the horses to carry me as far as possible in the
night, and then let it free, so that it may re-
turn. Get me what provisions you can, and
au old blanket, and I shall start-directly it is
dark,’ he said, resolutely.
• ‘Can runaway convicts get employment,
Mr. Sinclair ? You ought to be sure of that
before you go,’ Marion suggested.
At this moment Jerry entered the kitchen.
‘ Jerry, what horses are in the stockyard V
Percy asked him, in as careless a voice as he
could assume.
‘ Dat big pumpkin-head Giles leave biih
slip-rails down, and all him horses get out, ’
replied Jerry, indignantly.
‘ Try if you can run old Surrey in for me,
J erry.’
‘ Allright, Misser Sinlar, me catch him !
replied Jerry, obligingly, andean off to execute
the order.
‘Marion, I shall be compelled to take Miss
Bertha’s pony, for the other horses are all out;
and Jerry cannot possibly run one in on foot.
Snowflake was bred on this station ; so there
will be no fear of his not returning. I shall
turn him 1 oose as soon as I get a few miles
above Maitland. Hero comes Mrs. Shelley.
You have promised to keep secret what I
have told you, and to have the things ready
directly it is dark !’ saying which Percy slip-
ped out at aside door of the kitchen, as Mrs.
Shelley entered at the front. Half an hour
after dark, Percy Sinclair saddled Snowflake,
and upon him left Field Place—a step that
caused him more trouble and misery in the
lowering future, than auy previous or subse-
quent act in his eventful life. Could he have
foreseen the inevitable consequences of that
rash act, he could never have been mad enough
to have made the venture.
CHAPTER XXIII.
X stand amid the roar
Of a surf-tormented shore ;
And I hold within ray hand
Grains of golden sand:
How few! yet how they creep
Thro’ my fingers to tho deep,
While I weep—while I weep !
Oh God, can I not grasp
Them with a tighter clasp ?
O God, can I not save
One from the pitiless wave ?
Is all we see or seem
But a dream within a dream ?
Edgar Allan, Poe.
The night was dark. The late moon did not
rise until three o’clock in the morning ; and
tho clouds obscured what little light the
stars offered. Percy Sinclair led the pony
from the stable to the road. He was on foot,


; the easier to pacify the dogs, who showed a
strong disposition to accompany him.
‘Go home, Nell !’ he said, softly to the
bnll-dog, who appeared determined to go with
him.
Nell seemed to doubt the propriety of being
sent back ; but, accustomed to instant obedi-
ence, he slunk off to his kennel, and lay down
in great ill-humour. Safe from the dogs,
whom, he had feared, might frustrate him by
barking, Percy walked on to the road, and
then mounted. Snowflake was very restive,
being unaccustomed to any other rider than
his beautiful young mistress ; and his excited
plnnges caused Percy intense pain in the
chest; for the internal injuries he had sus-
tained in his fall at the Broad Lagoon were
far from cured yet. After a few minutes,
Snowflake reconciled himself to his new rider,
and went away quietly; and Percy was fairly
started upon the momentous and unfortunate
ride, that was to cause him such dire trouble
in the future. Cold was his heart, and dark
his thoughts, as the desolate scene around, as
he rode slowly along the dreary way, that,
like the course of his unhappy life, showed no
guiding ray to lead him onward.
He had not gone half an hour before he
was missed.
A furious barking of the dogs aroused Mr.
Shelley, as be sat in his armchair, apparently
poring over a late number of the Sydney
Gazette, but in reality brooding gloomily over
the embarrassing position his wife’s discovery,
and Percy’s claims upon him, had placed him
in.
‘Some one coming, Grace!’ he exclaimed,
as he rose from his seat, ‘ The dogs would
hardly bark so savagely, unless it was a
stranger. I expect it is Meredith ; he was to
call on his way up.’
Mrs. Shelley glanced up from her work as
her husband left the room, but did not reply.
Her thoughts, too, were occupied by the
trouble her discovery occasioned her. Her
great ambition was, that her daughter should
make a brilliant match; and that ambition
seemed now likely to be disappointed. A few
months before, a young, English gentleman
had visited the colony, partly from a curiosity
to observe the discipline of the penal settle-
ment, and partly to discover and assist a col-
lege chum, who had been transported for
manslaughter, having, in a moment of passion,
shot through the head a heartless libertine,
who had offered insult to a lady acquaintance.
The homicide, who so much more deserved
commendation than punishment for what, in
the balances of Justice,. could be no crime,
was living in Maitland, a ticket-of-leave man.
After setting his school-day friend up in the
world, Lionel Courtney returned to Newcas-
tle, for the purpose of embarking for Van
Dieman’s Land; and, on his way down from
Maitland, he spent a week at Field Place, by
the invitation of Mr. Shelley, who had made
bis acquaintance. During his brief stay, Mr.
Courtney fell in love with Bertha, and for-
mally proposed to her parents for her hand,
and applied for permission to- declare himself
a suitor. They refused to allow him to
speak to her upon the subject for a year, by
which time he would have returned from his
visit to the Van Dieman Land, and
Norfolk Island penal settlements, Soon after
Mr. .Courtney, who, by-the-way, travelled
under the pseudonym of John Broadrick,
had gone, they discovered from a paper he
had accidentally dropped in his bedroom, that
he was the son of an English earl and heir to
an immense fortune. They had never men-
tioned the discovery of the stranger’s rank to
Bertha, nor his wishes in reference to her-
self; but believing that it was a splendid
chance for their darling,, they were waiting
anxiously for his return. The declaration.
Mrs. Shelley had overheard in the dining-
room a few hoars before, appeared likely to
dissipate Bertha’s brilliant prospects, and na-
turally occasioned her parents great uneasi-
ness. Mrs. Shelley’s meditations upon this
subject were presently interrupted by the en-
trance of her husband and two strangers.
She rose as they entered, and Mr. Shelley in-
troduced them—Mr. James Musgrave, police
magistrate, from Newcastle; and Mr, Hubert
Clayton, of the Cowpasture River.
< ty e were en route for Maitland, madam ;
but were detained a few miles down by oar
pack-horse breaking away. And the night
being dark: and stormy, Mr, Musgrave sug-
gested that we should crave hospitality at
Field Place,’ said Hubert Clayton, bowing. .
‘You are welcome, Mr. Clayton, to any.


thing our poor house can offer,’ replied Mrs.
Shelley, kindly. Turning to Mr. Musgrave,
she enquired after his wife and family.
‘ By-the-bye, you did not say whether you
caughtthe horse again, Musgrave!’ interrupted
Mr. Shelley.
‘No! We lost him abont four miles back.
He got away in the direction of the river. I
must try to find him in the morning; for in
the saddlebags there are some documents con-
nected with a robbery case on the Patterson the
other day,’ replied the police magistrate,
‘Grace, tell Mr. Sinclair to send a couple of
men to look for Mr, Musgrave’s horse, when
the moon rises,’ said Mr. Shelley,, turning to
his wife.
Mrs. Shelley left the gentlemen to their
cigars, and went out to the kitchen to order
supper for the visitors, aud to deliver her hus-
band’s message.
‘ Where is Mr. Sinclair, Marion V she en-
quired, after having first attended to the ar-
rangements for supper.
■ Marion turned her face away to conceal her
emotion, and steadying her voice replied eva-
sively, ‘(I cannot say, ma’am ! I have not seen
him since teatime.’
‘ Perhaps he has gone to bed. Knock at
his door, and tell him to send two men the
first thing in the morning to look for a horse
that was 0, never mind. Carry supper
in; and I will go myself—saying which Mrs.
Shelley left the kitchen in search of Percy*..
‘How is Miss Shelley? Mrs. M. commis-
sioned me to invite her to spend a few
weeks with her in Newcastle!’ said Mr. Mus-
grave, removing his cigar from his mouth for a
moment.
‘Bertha is unwell this evening, and has
gone to bed. I will deliver Mrs. Musgrave’s
message to her in the morning,’ replied Mr.
Shelley in a preoccupied air.
‘You must endeavour to spare her for a
few weeks, Shelley. The change will do her
good. As. Simpson says, sea air is the best
restorative, and is one of nature’s own pro-
viding.’
.‘Spare who for a few weeks?” enquired
Mrs. Shelley, catching Mr, Musgrave’s words,
as she entered the rpom.
‘,Misa Shelley, madam. She is unwell,
your husband says, and my friend is prescrib-
ing sea-air/ said Clayton, smiling.
‘Mrs. Musgrave wants her in Newcastle
for a month,’ replied the police magistrate.
‘ I cannot part with her just now, Mr. Mus-
grave. Perhaps I may let her go some other
time,’ replied Mrs. Shelley, and turning to her
husband, she continued, ‘ I cannot find Mr.
Sinclair, Walter; but! picked up this note
on his bedroom table,’
Mr. Shelley started as his eyes fell upon
the address of the letter his wife handed to
him. It was directed to himself, and the
thought flashed upon him that the writer must
have either absconded, or committed
suicide; or why the need to write. He re-
cognised the handwriting at a glance. He
tore open the envelope, and bit his lip till the
blood came, as be ran his eyes over the brief
contents of the letter. His face became
ashy pale. ‘ Grace, take a candle and go into
our room ; I will be with you in a moment,’
be said, in a quivering tone, and with a faint
apology for a smile. She obeyed in silence, a
dread anticipation of coming trouble seizing
possession of her heart, as she anxiously noted
her husband’s emotion.
‘ 4 Nothing'the matter, I hope, Shelley !’ ex-
claimed Mr. Musgrave, in concern, while Hu-
bert Clayton looked on in silence, wondering
whether the Mr. Sinclair he had heard named,
and his victim of the forged cheque, were one
and the same. 1 1 met him in Newcastle a
few weeks ago; most likely it is the same.,
By Judus, I’ll not forget him, should I ever
have the opportunity of paying another instal-
ment of an old score!’ he muttered savagely,
a grim smile flitting over his handsome, but
repelling, features.
1 No, no 1 Nothing at all, sir! Nothing
at all!’ replied Mr. Shelley, nervously.
‘ Merely a little private business, I want to
speak with Mrs. S. upon. I trust you will
excuse our absence for a few minutes. Here
comes some refreshment. Help yourselves,
and make yourselves at home 1’ saying which,
Mr, Shelley hurried after his wife.
‘Our host mentioned the'name of a Mr.
Sinclair. What is he ?’ Clayton asked, di-
rectly Mr. Shelley’s back was turned,
‘One of his government hands. He isji
fine fellow; and Shelley treats him well. He


34 ’his overseer or superintendent, or something
•of the sort'!’ replied the police magistrate,
helping himself to some cold bam.
‘ 1 knew him at home. He may appear a
-very fine fellow, as you say, Musgrave ; but I
•shall be surprised, if he doesn’t cause you
some trouble yet. To judge from appearance,
■you would think he couldn’t do a wrong action
to save his life.; but he is the most cunning
and unscrupulous villain you ever set eyes on.
What would you think of a man, who, while
•studying for the pulpit, ruined his own
father by forging his name to cheques to twice
•the amount'of his fortune?’
‘ That he was the d nest-villain unhung !’
•exclaimed the police magistrate with his
•mouth full, and his eyes glittering in indigna-
tion.
‘ His father never discovered the treachery
■of his hypocritical son, till the last cheque was
dishonoured for want of funds ; and his bank-
•er wrote to him in consequence,’ said Clay-
ton, watching narrowly the effect of his lying
‘insinuations.
• And they ’never hung the unnatural
wretch! By heavens, I’ll not forget what
you tell me, Clayton, if ever he comes up be-
fore me'!’
‘Pass the cruet, Musgrave 1 Thank you:
and the bread!’ said the blackhearted traitor,
•purposely disregarding the other’s exclamation.
This is really prime ham. The best I’ve
tasted in the settlement!’
Mr. Shelley followed his wife into their
room. 4 What on earth is the matter, Walter! 1
she inquired eagerly, noting his emotion.
‘Read this letter, Grace. It can explain
•quicker than I could do,’ her husband replied,
handing her the note. She took it, and read
in silence :
“ My kind but-injured Benefactors —
You have just cause for thinking me the basest
wretch who ever repaid unmerited kindness by
gross ingratitude i but I now make the only re-
paration in my power, I leave your house—that
has been even more,than a home to me—for ever.
Before this shall be found in the morning, and’
reach your hands, I shall have quitted Field
Place. If my dishonourable action has not can-
•celled all claims to , your consideration, for my
having saved her life at the bushranger’s camp,
I adjure you, by your gratitude to heaven that
she still lives, t» let me go unmolested to the
vast bush I shall escape into! 1 go, that you
may be relieved from the painful separation from
your daughter, which you both meditate. In
judging of my baseness in repaying your un-
parallelled kindness by trying to steal away your
daughter’s heart, I pray you to remember how
often -I have begged you to send me away! To
see her, and not to love was impossible; and
I would have fled from the temptation of ex-
posing ray passion. Had you let me go, what
pain and humiliation had we all been spared ! I
do not mention this in extenuation of ray fault,
for it is inexcusable ; but that you may not deal
too heavily with my memory, when I am gone.
I pray that the best blessings of heaven may fall
upon you and yours, and that your good
and beautiful daughter may soon forget even the
existence of
Your gratefal but unfortunate convict,
Peecx Sinclaib.”
‘ Convict, and all as he is, be is a noble-
spirited man !’ exclaimed Mrs. Shelley, hand-
ing the note back to her husband, ‘lt was
to spare us, then, that he was so anxious to
leave!’
‘ If we could have only known his motive,,
how readily we would have allowed him to
go! 1 really don’t know what to think,
Grace 1 As he has hinted, we owe her life to
him ; and ’
‘ He must be brought back at once Walter!
interrupted Mrs. Shelley. ‘He must not be
allowed to stay out on such a night as this. He
has not recovered yet from the injuries he re-
ceived from his fall; and a night’s exposure
may cost bis life !’
4 I’ll go at once, and send all the station
hands in search of him. Send Jerry to me,
while I get my great coat!’ replied her hus-
band.
Mrs. Shelley went for the black boy, and
returned with him in a few minutes. Jerry
had been asleep by the kitchen Are, and fol-
lowed his mistress into the room, rubbing his
eyes and yawning.
‘ Here he is, Walter!’ Mrs. Shelley said,
‘ Yon bad better speak to him at once, before
be drops off to sleep again 1’
‘ Jerry, I want you to go with me to the
huts. What horses are in the stockyard V
said Mr. Shelley, as he buttoned up his over-
coat.
“ Dat little feller Wallerie murry Jbudgery


lubral’ replied Jerry, scarcely yet out of the
realm of dreamland.
Mr, Shelley gave him an impatient shake
that speedily roused him. ‘ Wake up, Jerry !
What horses are in ?’
Jerry stared stupidly about him for a mo-
ment, and exclaimed in bewilderment, ‘ Ug 3
What dat you say V
‘ How many horses are there In the stock-
yard 3’ reiterated his master.
‘Ha! Dat pumpkin-head Giles let him all
slip rail down, and ebery one horses get out!’
‘ How unfortunate 1 You must cateb Snow-
flake then,’ said Mr. Shelley,
‘ Bale Jerry can ketch him Snowflake!
Datj Misser Sinlar got him,’ returned Jerry
decisively.
‘ Did you see Mr. Sinclair take him 3’
‘ Yes! dat take him dis long time, Misser
Selley!’
‘Hem! Then you may go back to the
kitchen, Jerry. It is useless, Grace* We
can do nothing for him till to-morrow.’
‘ Can we not borrow Musgrave’s and Mr.
Clayton’s horses?’ Mrs. Shelley enquired
eagerly, dreading the effect of the night’s ex-
posure,
‘By leaving us without permission, and
escaping into the bush, he becomes in the eyes
of the Jaw a bushranger ; and the innocent
crime is, aggravated by his taking the pony.
So you. see, Grace, the necessity there is of our
keeping the.fact of his going a secret from the
police magistrate, whose 'duty would be to
have him captured, and sent to Newcastle for
trial for bushranging and robbery !’‘ Mr.
Shelley replied gravely.
‘What! for only going away ? Couldn’t
we shield him by saying we lent him - the
pony?’ asked Mrs. Shelley eagerly.
‘ Mr. Musgrave would hardly believe that,
if we tell him he has bolted, and ask for his
horse to follow him upon !’
‘ Can nothing be done then? Oh, Walter,
he must perish with cold, if he stays out such
a night as this! Can we leave him to his
fate, after his having twice rescued our child
from death ?’ Mrs. Shelley exclaimed in great
emotion.
Mr. Shelley stood for a few moments si-
lently revolving in his mind the question,
vjftat could be done for the runaway ? ‘lt is
useless, Grace, for youdo fret over the impossf-
bility of our bringing him back to-night! It
is so dark, that the men could not track him;;
and, being on foot, they could have no chance
of overtaking him, as he is mounted, and has-
had a long start. - I cannot borrow our visi-
tors’ horses, for we must not let the police
magistrate get an inkling of his escape. I
will be up, and have the men out directly the
moon rises; but that will not be until two or
three o’clock in the morning. You get to bed
at once, for you are too excited to return to
the parlaur; and I will go and try to enter-
tain Musgrave and his friend for an hour..
Don’t say a word to Bertha about Mr. Sin-
clair’s absence!’
‘No, Walter! I will not! Marion will
get their beds ready. Mr. Musgrave can-
sleep on the sofa in the dining-room ; and'his
friend can take Mr. Sinclair’s room. Tell'her
to change the sheets upon Mr. Sinclair’s bed.
I shall not be able to sleep to-night, Walter,-
thinking of him out in the cold and rain 1’
‘Poor fellow! Well get to bed at once,
Grace! I will attend to your instructions,
and follow you, as soon as I can get rid of our
visitors. I wish Musgrave was a thousand
miles away. The night of all nights he is-
least wanted 1’
Mrs. Shelley retired to bed in the vain hope-
of bridging the tedious night by sleep; and
her husband proceeded on his mission. He
excused his wife’s absence from the parlor on-
the plea of a headache, and within the hour
had bis visitors comfortably abed.
Little thought Percy, as he rode sorrowfully
along the dark way, the concern and grief his
abrupt departure was causing his friends at
Field Place, Marion Macaulay was sitting
by the dying embers in the kitchen, sorrow-
ing over the bitter trials of the refugee. The
convict’s master, who could have had him
punished severely for absconding, was as much-
concerned and grieved, as if he had lost a son ;
and Mrs. Shelley, though cruelly disappointed
and vex£d at the discovery of his love for her
daughter, was as anxious on Percy’s account
as her husband. Bertha, too, was tossing
about on ber sleepless pillow, one moment in
ecstacy at the discovery that he loved her, the
next weeping over the prospect of his going
away. In the words of a modern dramatist,.


she ‘ loved, and was a womanand there
opened before her unaccustomed gaze, the
chequered vista of hopes and fear*, grief and
Joy, that distinguishes thq.troubled course of
life, from the unruffled calm of the golden
■period of childhood. '' • „ .
Percy Sinclair had not ridden more than
two or three miles,, when'the rain, which had
been threatening all day, began to ‘fall, and
added to the discomfort of bis situation. In
a few minutes he- was thoroughly drenched.
The pain that he had felt in his chest all day,
had been much aggravated by the restiveness
of the pony on his first mounting, and was al-
most unbearable. This, added to the cold and
wet, and the acute mental agony he was en-
during, made his .position one of the most un-
enviable and unfortunate that can be well
conceived. He passed a dray encamped by
the roadside, and was afraid he should be dis-
covered through the barking of the bullock-
driver’s dogs; but the gusts of wind were too
■strong, and the blinding rain too cold ior them
to leave the warm shelter of the tai paulin,
tinder which they had crawled ; and they per-
mitted him to pass without further challenge,
than a few warning growls.
His meditations, as he rode wearily and
painfully along, were of the darkest 1 and
gloomiest character. He knew that by the de-
sertion of his master alone, he was in the eyes
■of the law, a bushranger, and liable, if taken,
to be punished by the lash ; and that in bor-
rowing the pony, he could be held guilty of
robbery or theft, and sent to Norfolk Island,
or, perhaps, hung. But in his desperation he
cared nothing for consequences.
He passed through the silent street of Mait-
land without meeting any obstruction, and
travelled slowly onward, till he had left that
village ten miles behind, when Snowflake sud-
denly stumbled over the trunk of a tree, that
bad.fallen across the road, and went lame.
The jolt of the pony’s stumbling nearly caused
the unhappy rider to faint from the excruciat-
ing pain it occasioned. He dismounted,
•and tried to press on by leading the pony, but
■Snowflake had so severely injured his near
forefoot, that he could scarcely put it to the
.ground. Percy was just on the point of let-
ting the pony go, when he observed a camp
sflre at a little distance from the road, and in-
stead of doing so, he slowly led him to it. Ho
was rather afraid to risk meeting anyone, but
being so far from home, he thought he could
hardly be recognised by the bullock drivers,'
he concluded were encamped by the fire.
Asbeapproached the earap, he wasohallenged
in a gruff voice, with, ‘ Who comes there V
and at the same moment the rising moon, ap-
pearing through a rift in the clouds, revealed
to his startled gaze several mounted constables.
He would have turned and fled, but they were
too near for him to escape on foot, and the
pony was too lame to carry him off in safety.
Unable to get away, hedeternffnedtopalm him-
self off, if possible, as a,traveller from Scone.
‘Good-night, gentlemen,' he .said, lifting his
dripping bat, as he spoke. ‘ May I beg the
favour of warming myself at your fire V
‘ If you call'this a good night, you must be
an|amphibian !’ growled an old constable, with
whose creaky joints the merry fiend Rheu-
matics was playing sad. havoc.
‘ You are welcome, sir, to share what little
warmth the fire throws out; but.the water, is
running under it in a stream, and gives it no
chance,’ replied the constable who had first
spoken. . ..
‘ Which way have you come ?’ asked the
chief constable, eyeing Percy suspiciously.
It struck him as strange that anyone should
be riding alone at that hour of the morning,!
Percy hesitated a moment before answer-
ing. It was his first experience in telling a di-
rect falsehood, and he could not do sojglibly and
off hand; but, overcoming in his desperation
his repugnance to the vice of lying, he replied,
‘ I am going to Newcastle. I was up about
Scone looking for land, but I can’t see a block
to suit, so I think I’ll try what I can get on
the Hawkesbury.’
‘Aren’t you the chap I locked up in New-
castle, a few months ago 1 ’Cause if you’re
not, you’re as much alike as two peas!’ said
one of the constables, drily.
‘ Looked me up ? What do you mean, sir J’
Percy asked, in well-feigned astonishment.
‘ Now, its no use you trying to come over
me that way! Why, that’s Shelley’s pony
you’ve got now !’ returned the constable,
triumphantly. ‘ As sure as a gun, sir,’ he
continued, turning to his chief, ‘ this cove’s
been and bolted from his master j or what’<j


he want to try to gammon us, as he was a
gentleman for?’
‘ Look here. Mister, it’s no use prevaricat-
ing. Just answer honestly. Are you a free
man, or a convict ?’
Percy saw it was useless to attempt further
deception, and was silent.
‘Have you a pass with you?’ the chief con-
stable continued.
‘No!’
‘Then, in the first place, I must take you
back to your master. How did you come by
the horse ?’
‘lt is superfluous to catechise me now!
You know your duty. Do it 1’ gloomily re-
plied the unfortunate and baffled escape.
‘And you have been mad enough to bolt
from the best master on the river ? Well,
you have put your head in the halter this
time ; for horsestealing is a hanging matter !
Why the devil couldn’t you run away on foot,
if you must bolt? You’d have escaped hang,
ing then, and now 1 wouldn’t give a straw for
your chance!’
CHAPTER XXIV.
Hope,—
The icicle that melts e’en in the ray
In which it glitters !
Eev. George Crolt.
Bertha rose from her sleepless couch soon
after daybreak, feverish and unrefresbed, and
went out for a walk iu the bracing, morning
air. The storm had passed off, and the sky
wore the deep blue of the Australian summer,
varied by the rich crimson tints thrown by
the rising sun upon a bank, of clouds on the
eastern horizon ; but the unhappy girl walked
on without thought for the beauties of nature.
At the stock-yard she found Marion Macau-
lay, who had also risen from a restless night.
‘ What, Miss, out so early?’ she exclaimed,
as Bertha came upon her. .
‘You here, Marion?’ said Bertha in sur-
prise.
‘ Yes, Miss! I came for a walk, my head was
aching so !' Jerry said he would call me,
when the kettle boiled! But what is the matter
miss ?’ you have been crying!’ said Marion,
noticing the redness of her young mistress’s
eyes.
* Nothing, Marion! Yes, I must tell you—
Mr. Sinclair is going away L’ she replied sadly.
‘ He is delei mined' to go as soon as be is strong:
enough.’
‘ Dat feller kettle belonging- to boil, now,,
Mallyun !’ shouted Jerry fiom half-way to the
house.
‘ Call him, Marion 1 I want him to come to
me at once!’
Marion did so and in a few seconds rhe was
before ‘ Missie Berta.’
‘ Go and saddle Snowflake, Jerry ! 1 shall
go for a ride before breakfast 1’
‘Bale me can no saddle him, Missie Berta!'
Dat Misser Sinlar take him last night!’ Jerry
said.
‘Mr. Sinclair took him last night! What,,
in all that storm 1 And hasn’t he returned
yet?’ Bertha asked anxiously, an idea of the-
truth flashing across her mind-, and Ailing her
heart with dread.
Marion Macaulay glanced pityingly upon-
the pale, eager face other beautiful young mis-
tress, ‘She must know before long;’ she
thought to herself, ‘ and suspense is worse to-
bear than certainty.. I will tell her now. The
sooner the blow falls the sooner she will re--
cover from it.
Not comprehending the question, Jerry
stood with his month open,, waiting for Missie
Bertha to enlighten him.
‘ Why do you not speak, Jerry,. Marion ?•’
Where is Mr. Sinclair?’
‘Jerry, run back to the kitchen. I will tell
Miss Bertha all about it!’ Marion said,.turning;
to the blackboy. Jerry, however, failed to see-
the necessity of obeying. ‘ Dat Misser Sinlar
all right! Dat come home by-by,’ he said, sooth-
ingly. Bertha saw that her maid bad something
to tell her, which she appeared not to wish-
Jerry to hear. ‘Go along back, Jerry ! I will?
be up directly!’ she said, earnestly, and Jerry
reluctantly obeyed.
‘Now, Marion!’ Bertha exclaimed wildly,,
directly Jerry was out of hearing. ‘Bor
heaven’s sake, tell me at once!’
Marion broke the tidings of Percy’s going
away, as gentle as possible.- She bad long
known his secret, and had suspected the at-
tachment to be mutual; and her own unhappy
experience in love affairs, gave her a keen
sympathy with the sorrows of others.. Her
gentle heart was torn with the deepest com-
miseration and grief, when, after listening,


eagerly to her brief account of Percy’s depar-
ture, Bertha, pale from suppressed emotion,
turned away without a word, and pressing her
hand upon her aching heart, staggered back
towards the bouse.
‘ Poor young lady 1 Hers is indeed a hard
case ; and yet was it possible for her to avoid
loving her preserver ! Ah, me, the world
seems full of trouble-for those who least de-
serve it 1’ mused Marion, as she followed after
her mistress.
It was eleven o’clock before Davy Collyer
and Giles returned with the police magis.
trate’s missing pack-horse, and Mr. Shelley
was constrained, much against his will, to in-
vite Mr. Musgrave and his friend to dinner.
Excepting the two whom he was compelled to
send for the missing horse, ‘ he had sent
all his men in search of his 1 runaway convict.
Jerry found the tracks leading from the stable
to the road, and they were so plainly marked
that he was enabled to follow diem at a smart
pace. They left Field Place about half-an-hour
after sunrise ; and in three hours met the
prisoner, returning in custody of two mounted
constables. < '
Mr. Shelley and his wife were seated at the
dinner table endeavouring to entertain their
unwelcome guests, when the door was suddenly
burst open, and the blackboy Jerry rushed
into the room in a state of intense excitement,
‘Dat Misser Sinlar cornin’ along a sogers!
Dat got him big feller handcuff!’
At the mention of soldiers and handcuffs,
Mrs. Shelley and her husband turned pale,
and the police magistrate rose from his seat,
‘Go down to the huts, Jerry,and stay there
till I send for you !’ Mr. Shelley said, sternly;
and the astonished ' black boy slunk off
wondering how he had offended his master.
* Grace, see how Bertha is. Her headache
may be better, and she may like something to
eat! Just see !’
Mrs. Shelley caught a significant glance
from her husband, and left the room.
‘ Gentlemen, pray excuse me for a few
minutes; I shall be back directly 1 Make
yourselves at home, and help yonselves to
anything before you!’ said Mr. Shelley, his
hand upon the door.
At this moment, the company escorting
Fercv Sinclair, came within aisht from the
window; and seeing the constables the police
magistrate replied, *1 will go with you,
Shelley. See, yonder comes a. prisoner in
handcuffs 1’
Mr. Shelley saw it was too late to prevent.
Mr. Musgrave from learning of his servant’s
absconding, and led the way out without re-
ply. The escort drew up before the door;
and seeing his superior officer, the chief con-
stable explained to him the particulars of the
capture. ' Shall I take him on to Newcastle,,
or hand him over to his master, sir ?’ he asked.
Clayton recognised Percy, and turning to
the police magistrate, whispered, ‘ This is the
fellow who ruined his own father by forgery.
You remember what I told you last night?’
A dark frown gathered upon the police
magistrate’s brow, as he answered, curtly, * I
do!’ and turning to the chief constable said,
‘I shall be in Maitland for a few days, so you
had better return there with him. Are your
horses fresh enough ?’
‘Yes, sir, we can return at once, if you
wish.’
*Do so, then. The Judge will be up on
Thursday; and, if the prisoner is committed,
he can be tried at once, and save the trouble
of sending him to Sydney.’
‘ Can we not arrange to prevent that ne-
cessity, Mr. Musgrave ? Ido not prefer any
charge against him 1’ said Mr. Shelley,
anxiously.
‘ Perhaps you prefer to leave the constable
to do so,’ replied the police magistrate, drily.
‘ I am sorry to say my duty compels me to
have him tried for absconding and horse-steal-
ing.’
A grim smile of triumph flitted across Clay-
ton’s features.
‘ There is no need of your taking him
with you as a prisoner, Mnsgrave. I will go
bail that he appears,’ said Mr. Shelley.
‘ Perhaps the trial could come on this after-
noon, if we were up in time; in which case
letting him go on bail would only cause un-
necessary delay. As the judge will be in
Maitland in a day or two, it is essential for
the Bench to have all cases of committal ready
for him,’ the Police Magistrate replied.
*ls it in your power to take bail in’ such
an irregular manner?’ enquired Hubert
Clavton.


The police magistrate received the question
with an impatient shrug; and, turning to Mr.
Shelley, asked if he would give the constables
and their prisoner some refreshment.
‘ Certainty, sir ! Send the constables into
the kitchen, where they shall be attended to;
and take the handcuffs eff Mr. Sinclair, and
he will come into the dining-room.’
‘ Mind be dosen’t slip tnrough your fingers
and escape,’ Clayton suggested.
* You appear to take a great interest in the
security ef the prisoner, Mr. Clayton!’ Mr.
Shelley said, sternly,' turning abruptly upon
his visitor.
‘ My dear sir, had you even suffered at the
hands of convicts, who have escaped into the
bush, a tenth of the annoyance and loss that
I have done, you would be equally anxious to
see incipient bushrangers nipped in the bud!’
replied the designing but plausible villain.
The prisoner and one of the constables in
charge of him were standing at a short dis-
tance, awaiting the orders of the police magis-
trate. Mr. Musgrave beckoned them to ap-
proach, and then ordered Percy’s handcuffs to
be taken off, and the constable to go to the
kitchen for his dinner.
‘ You, Mr. O’Neil,’ he said, addressing the
chief constable, ‘ and the prisoner may go with
Mr. Shelley, and get some dinner.’ Turning
to Mr, Shelley, he continued, ‘ Believe me,
Shelley, no one regrets more than I, the pain-
ful duty I have to perform. 1 would accept
bail for the prisoner’s appearance, if I could ;
but, under the circumstances, I am compelled
to refuse it.’
Without reply, Mr. Shelley led the way
into the house. They sat down in silence, all
save the heartless Clayton, depressed by the
unfortunate event. Marion Macaulay, while
placing a plate before Percy, whispered a few
words of comfort; but free conversation was
prevented by the presence of strangers. Percy
however, learned, and with increased trouble
that his departure had caused intense sorrow
to her, whom he would have gladly died to
shield from a single care.
* Will they take you back to Maitland V
Marion whispered anxiously.
* Yes, Marion I expect so! But whatever may
be my fate, I shall at least remove my baleful
presence from here. I have caused trouble
enough already ; and.it will be a fortunate day
for my kind benefactors, when I turn my back
upon Field Place for ever.’
‘ Would you like to see her again, before you
are dragged away?’ Marion whispered, while
pretending to be busily engaged in piling up
some cups and saucers ready for removal.
‘ No, no Marion, I dare not! Better for’
her had 1 never seen her !’ he replied bitterly.
Marion could not restrain her tears, as she
noticed his distress. Snatching up a handful
of knives and forks she hurried from the room.
Mr. Shelley approached his unfortunate ser-
vant. ‘ How could you have been so mad as
to leave us in this way, Mr. Sinclair! Your
recklessness has got you into a terrible trouble ;
so terrible indeed, that I dare not look it
straight in the face! I bad rather have lost
all my fortune, than this should have hap-
pened !’ he said.
* Whatever trouble I have got myself into,
lam alone to blame, sir.’ Percy replied, ‘ I
deserve it all, for repaying your unceasing
kindness by ingratitude ! And yet, 1 solemnly
protest to you, sir, I could not help it! I em-
brace ray fate, whatever it may be, with glad-
ness ; because it will remove me from all chance
of ever again causing you anxiety. Miss Shel-
ley cannot possibly reciprocate my sentiments;
and she will soon have forgotten her father’s
convict, if the friendly gallows should remove
him from his cruel fate, or the shores of Nor-
folk Island receive him 1’ he continued in a
tone of concentrated anguish.
At this moment, a low moaning strain came
floating from the parlor. It sounded a very wail
despair, a hopeless, heartbroken dirge, as
though some lost spirit passing from the upper
world were dissolving in music’s wild stream,
sweet and sorrowful as the swan’s death-song.
Every tongue paused, and each of the eager
iisteners held his breath, as the marvellous
performance, now slow—as it bore heavily
along its burden of woe unspeakable, now
sharp and quick like the muffled sobs of a
broken heart—enchained their wondering and
delighted ears. Alter a few minutes it melted
slowly away, like the murmurs of a dying
breeze. As the music ceased, Percy’s head sank
upon his arm on the table. He understood the
meaning of that grief-burdened melody. Her
heart was aching in sympathy for his trouble,


she was sorrowfully ‘ thinking in music.’ Bit-
terly he reproached himself for not having left
Field Place, when he first awoke to the
danger of his further stay—left before her
gentle heart had learnt to feel for him.
‘By heavens, Shelley, I never heard sncii
music before,’ exclaimed Mr. Mnsgrave.in
wonder and delight. ‘lt was more like an,
air from dreamland, than anything I ever re-
member hearing before.’
‘ Rather a melancholy composition, Mus-
grave; has a decided air of the churchyard
about it,’ said Clayton.
‘ It is only my daughter amusing herself at
the piano,’ replied Mr. Shelley. ‘ When she
is in a thoughtful mood, she often sits for an
hour at a time playing with the keys.’
‘ Playing with the keys 1 Has she not the
music for it ? If she has, I would very much
like to borrow it for Pollie.’
‘ She cannot oblige Miss Musgrave with it,
for the simple reason that she has not got it
written. When she is in her present hu-
mour, she merely plays any musical passages
that occur to her.’
‘ If the music she has just played was im-
promptu, she has a wonderful genius,’ re-
turned the police magistrate, incredulously.
* Mr. Musgrave, is it a fact that you intend
to take . Mr. Sinclair to Maitland?’ asked
Mrs. Shelley, who had just returned to the
room.’
‘Duty: demands it, Mrs. Shelley ! I know
that he has given you good cause to take a
great interest in, him ; and I am very sorry
indeed that I cannot gratify your natural wish
to set him at liberty. I wish I could pass his
folly in deserting, as easily as you would do ;
but the Governor is making strenuous efforts
to put down bushranging, and is determined
to make an example of the next man caught
absconding,’ said Mr. Musgrave.
With lips trembling in her emotion, Mrs,
Shelley begged the police magistrate to over-
look the trifling fault, as she called it, of
Percy’s riding away. She pleaded eloquently,
and urged that it was the first time'that he had
ever caused any trouble to the authorities. But
the vile insinuations of the black-hearted Clay-
ton had worked their effect. Mr. Musgrave
was prejudiced'against the prisoner, and being
a cold and obstinate man, he could neither be
moved by arguments cor entreaties. It was in
his mind, much against the prisoner, that Clay-
ton’s prediction of his causing trouble was
so soon verified.
After her unsuccessful attempt to prevail
upon the police magistrate to liberate the
prisoner, Mrs. Shelley sorrowfully bade him
adieu and returned to her room ; and Mr.
Musgrave, and Hubert Clayton, went out to
see to their hotses, leaving the chief constable
to guard the prisoner.
‘ Cheer up, Sjnclair 1 Everything looks dark
now, but remember that the darkest night
passes away at last, leaving the presence Of the
glorious sunshine I I will do all 1 can to save
you. You maycomfprt yourself with the as-
surance that even if [you are condemned to-
be hung, or to be forwarded to Norfolk Island,
my friends in Sydney hare influence enough
to get your sentence] cancelled,’ said' Mr.
Shelley encouragingly.
‘ You sre too kind, sir, after my causing
you the annoyance I have. lam truly grate-
ful for all the benefits 1 have received at your
hands !’ Percy replied.
‘ Don’t mind the annoyance yon speak of
now, Sinclair; your present difficulty is of
far greater consequence. Musgrave seems
determined to diag you to Maitland, so you
must go. I shall go up with you, and try to
bail you out. Nothing can prevent your be-
ing committed ; and, as the evidence of your
absconding, and of your taking the pony, is
so clear, I expect you will be convicted.
But have no fear for the final result.’
‘ I thank you, sir, for your kind solicitude
on my behalf; but for my own part, I care
nothing what becomes of me !’ replied the
despondent prisoner. ‘ I hare no hope in life,
for, if saved from my present danger, I shall
remain a convict still!’
Mr. Clayton entered the room and inter-
rupted further conversation. ‘Musgrave is
ready, O’Neil, so you will remove the prisoner
to his horse ! t he said, officiously.
Mr. Shelley felt much annoyed at the un-
warrantable interference of bis new acquaint-
ance, but he said nothing, and Percy rose pain-
fully from his untasted dinner. The exposure
and fatigue be had endured during the last
O O
eighteen hours, together, with the shock ho
received when the pony stumbled with him,


completely overpowered him; and, as he
clung to the chair to steady himself, in rising,
the perspiration stood in beads upon his pale
forehead.
‘ We had to leave your pony in the bush,
about ten miles above Maitland, sir. It was
dead lame when we apprehended the pris-
oner,’ said the chief constable to Mr, Shelley,
as he stepped up to Percy, handcuffs in hand.
‘There is no necessity for that, O’Neil;
Mr. Sinclair is not likely to attempt to escape 1’
exclaimed Mr. Shelley, indignantly.
Clayton seemed about to say something,
but thinking better of it remained silent.
‘ Well, no. I don’t see that there is any
particular need for them. I don’t suppose
Mr. Musgrave will object to my leaving them
off,’
‘Where is he? I must, I will see him !’
exclaimed a voice, trembling with suppressed
anguish; and steps were heard approaching
though the passage.
By a strong effort Percy roused himself,
and staggered through the door to the veran-
dah, where a horse was waiting for him. ‘No,
.no! Better that we meet no more !’ he mur-
mured. ‘My memory can on!y : be a cloud to
dim her future; and the sooner she forgets
me the better 1 !’ , , '
The constable, holding Percy’s borsa, as-
sisted him into the saddle; and, saying to Mr.
jShelley, who had followed; ‘Do not let her
come; she will the sooner forget me !’ He
turned his horse’s head, and rode away to a
little distance, accompanied by the constable.
In a few minutes the whole company was
mounted, and pursuing its way to the local
gaol.
As they were disappearing round the corner
of the brush, Bertha, from her window, caught
a glimpse of their retreating figures, and with
.a cry of agony, fell upon the floor insensible.
CHAPTER XXV.
•‘Darker still the heavens lower,
Ahd yet nearer looms the storm.
Now is there no human power
That may shield his hapless form !”
’ 1 Anon,
The unfortunate prisoner and his escort
reached Maitland too late for bis case to have a
hearing that afternoon. The court had been
busy all day with several serious cases, and had
just adjourned. There was no alternative,
therefore, but to be locked up; and Percy was
led through the yard of the gaol and locked
in a small cell, barely large enough for him to
lay down in. There was no bench, nor stool,
nor furniture of any kind ; and, as the harsh-
creaking door swung to and bolted, Percy sat
wearily down upon a litter of damp straw
that lay piled in one corner. He was so weak
with pain and fatigue, that he sank down
upon the rude couch, and covering his face
with his hands, he lay long into the
dark, cold night, racked by the acute, double
agony of mind and body. He tried’hard to
compose himself to bear bis miserable condi-
tion with resignation, but the terrible pain
in his chest was more than enongh to distract
his thoughts from the only theme that could
afford him consolation in bis dire need. His
heavy trials appeared to have rendered him so
utterly hopeless, that his early aspirations were
crushed within him ; and, instead of submit-
ting to the anguish of his situation in Christian
patience, he abandoned himself to despair.
Job may have set a fine example of pious for-
titude under affliction, but it is almost beyond
the possibility of ordinary human nature
to act as is recorded of the ancient patriarch.
At last, when thoroughly overpowered by
fatigue, he dropped off to sleep; and but for
the occasional starts, caused by the sudden
twinges in his chest, he slept sound and
peaceful as an infant. ' As his victim dozed
off on the damp straw in' his eel),
Hubert Clayton was tossing about on his
feather bed in the best chamber of the best
hotel in the village, vainly courting the ob-
livion of sleep. It was not that an outraged
conscience was tormenting him with its
scorpion stings. His conscience, if he bad ever
had one,, was long dead. Without a shadow of
compunction or remorse, he could perform the
cruelest and wickedest action. Crushing a
fellow man to the earth gave him no second
thought, either of pity or exultation. But—a
strange contradiction, a remarkable anomaly—
this apparent incarnation of all evil, had one
good and noble quality of heart. He was not
a drunkard or an open breaker of the law,
because his game could he played without those
cards; his hands were innocent of blood, be-
cause he had tog much discretion to risk a


murderer's doom. But no crime, save one,
did he abstain from through the dictates of a
worthy motive. He could, without hesita-
tion, commit any deed, no matter how black,
if reason showed it to his advantage; yet, in
a heart so devoid of good, there lurked one
sentiment that would have done honor to any
man. Never had he been heard to say one
word against a woman, no matter how lowly
her position, nor to suffer anyone in his pres-
ence to do so. And knowing how vindictive
and unscrupulous he was, few dared attempt
to speak lightly of a woman’s name when he
was by. In this, the only redeeming point in
his character, Hubert Clayton set an example
that better men might follow. There are
many who, though they would not do any-
thing to injure the fair fame of one of that
sex, that, as gentlemen, it is their privilege
and duty to protect, yet, forgetting that a
breath may tarnish the spotless reputation,
even of a Diana herself, they think it no shame
to speak disparagingly of those of whom they
can know no wrong.*
Hubert Clayton, base, conscienceless, and
cruel as he was, loved one with a passionate
and changeless devotion, that, united with a
better nature, would have been an anchor to
hold him from evil; but, strange anomaly,
though his love for the gentle Anne would
have led him to sacrifice his life in her defence,
had danger at any time threatened her, and
he was by, it was unable to soften that heart,
which, save for her, had no feeling nor pity for
any human being. His love, like an oasis in
the desert, kept green and fair the one bright
spot, but was powerless to reclaim the harsh
and barren sands around. Great as was his
love was his hatred for him, through
whose instrumentality the gentle object
of his love had steadily refused to
share his fortunes. “ She would have
married me but for his d d interfer-
ence, curse him ! and I’ll never rest till I can
stand on his grave,’ he muttered between his
set teeth, ‘lt’s a hanging matter for a convict
to steal a horse, and take to the bush, or its
Norfolk Island at the very least. Death for
him in either instance, for prisoners do not
live long after setting foot upon that useful
little island.’
Percy’s preliminary hearing came on at ten
o’clock next morning. On his way through
the jail yard, from his cell to the court-hoose,
something in the peculiar appearance of the
warder struck him as familiar. The man was a
queer figure, with a shambling walk,' and a
generally odd aspect, that it was not easy to
forget after once having made hisacquaintance.
It would have puzzled any person to deter-
mine within twenty years, the age of this ex-
centric-looking object, *
The warder watched the prisoner narrowly
while thev were passing through the yard.
‘ Yes, it’s you 'l’m sartin,’ he muttered as
they entered the door. ‘ It’s not the fust
time I’ve saw you in a court before.’
The evidence against the prisoner was so
clear and simple, that the bearing lasted only
a few minutes, and he was committed for trial at
the court to be held in Maitland in the course
of a few days. Mr. Shelley applied for bail,
and bis friends Blair and Meredith, offered to
join with him as security; but the Bench re-
fused to grant it, • on the plea that the Judge
was expected daily, and that giving bail would
only occasion unnecessary delay. The deci-
sion of the Bench was much influenced by the
police magistrate from Newcastle, who had
been prejudiced against the prisoner. Percy
was, therefore, removed back to his cell, and
heavily ironed. Mr. Shelley spent an hour
with him, striving to comfort him, and then
left to carry home the unwelcome intelligence
of the committal. ‘ Dr. Sloan,’ he said to
that gentleman, as he met him on passing
through the gaol gate, ‘ You are the surgeon
of this melancholy establishment, I believe.’
‘ Yes, Mr. Shelley, I have that honor,’ re-
plied the doctor.
‘ You will confer a lasting obligation upon
me, doctor, if you will see to a prisoner here
named Sinclair. He is very ilk’
‘ Sinclair !• One of your Government men,
isn’t he i I heard something about him at
the Currency Lass. He’s the man who res-
cued Miss Shelley, from the bushrangers V
* Yes. He had a severe fall a few months
ago, and he hasn’t recovered from its effect),
yet. He seems to me to be very ill.’ „ .
‘ I will see to him this afternoon,’ replie t
Dr. Sloan, as they separated. Before aftci ■
noon, however, he forgot the promise, and
rode off to spend the rest of the day with a


friend who lived a few miles from the village,
leaving • the miserable prisoner to pass the
night without medical relief.
In the morning, when the gaoler brought
Percy his breakfast of hominy, or maize-meal
porridge, he endeavoured to enter into con-
versation with him. ‘lt’s a pity you was
copped so smart, sir! There’s no stirring a
inch for them constables ! They’re getting as
sharp as dingoes.’ i
Percy did not reply. He was thinking of
his boyhood’s home, and contrasting bis bright
prospects, when he entered coljege, with his
present forlorn condition. ‘ I will beg ofMr.
Shelley to write and tell them I am dead 1’
he thought, gloomily. ‘ Better that jthey
should think me, so, and forget me, as'they
would do after the first emotion of grief had
subsided, than that they should learn the
. truth.’
‘ Here’s your breakfast, sir!’ the
gaoler, respectfully, as he set down the' meal;
‘lf you’re' offended like at my being so bold
as to speak, I begs your pardon, sir !’ he con-
tinued, taking Percy’s absence of mind for si-
lent reproof. '‘ 1 wouldn’t have spoke,' sir,
only I knowed you never forged that cheque ;
and if you hadn’t have been sent out fbr it,
you wouldn’t have £ot into this fix. It’s
them as sweared your liberty away, as is ex-
ponsible.’ Percy, however, did not look up' 1 ;
his thoughts were too 'deeply bent ifpbn the’
consideration Of 'his misery, to hear or heed
anything the jailor might say. Afraid that he
had offended the prisoner by what he fell to
be his-impertinence, the'jailor left the cell.
‘ Poor 'young gentleman,’ he soliloquised as
he passed through the yard,i ‘'l ! ve never
knowed a minute’s peace since 1 swore agin
him at York. Our being copped so quick in-
breaking into ■ Ark'right’a house was just a
judgment on us, and nothing else. I knowed
when' they brought him in ‘Guilty;’ we’d
never have no luck after, nor more we didn’t!
And yet here’s that sneaking villain Clayton
here, as bold as a tmkey. Some people can
do anything, and be lucky all the same, and
others, if they on’y 'do 1 one thing wrong,
they're done for for ever/ 1 can’t understand
how it is ; but it is. One man mustn’t look
crooked ; and another may break all the com-
mandgients the chaplain'talks about: " Well,
anyway,' I’m glad this villain didn’t see me
If ever I meet him alone, I’ll stick a knife in
him!’ n • ; ’ •
Had the object of the gaoler’s threat been
near enough to have seen the expression' of his
face, he would have found good cause for
apprehension. An implacable hatred, and an
ardent thirst for revenge were unmistakably
marked upon his features. If good cause for
hatred and revenge were alldwed to influence a
jury’s decision, no twelve men could be found
who could bring him in guilty of murder,
.had hie performed that sanguinary threat. In
the eyes ofeimpatt'al justice, the killing of
Hubert Clayton by that strange-looking
gaoler, could only be ‘ justifiable retaliation.’
To return to 'Field Place—As the police
magistrate was leaving the station with the
prisoner and his escort. Bertha learnt that the
piisoner had been brought back by the con-
stables. , She hurried'through the dining-room
to the verandah,' but, as she reached the front
door, her father locked it from the outside.
She tried to wrench it opten, and, failing, re-
traced her steps and reached a door at the side
of the bouse opposite the kitchen. Here she
was met by Jerry; who,- all excitement, narra-
ted how, where, and when he had found ‘Misser
Sinlar ;’ and, with more zeal than discretion,
be repeated the opinion the constable had just
expressed upon the prisonei’s position— ‘ Dat
sodgers hunt him Misser Siqlar to Norbok
Islan’, and den string hiHV.up.’
Bertha stood gazing, wildly, upon the eager
face of the young savage, as he proceeded with
his story. 'l'When he finished, she reeled back-
waid, as if'Struck-by a bullet, and staggered
back to her room. Catching a glimpse of the
retiring fighre'of her preserver, who Was being
borne away to gaolj perhaps to death, she fell
insensible to the floor. It long after dusk
'when she recovered consciousness, and then she
was so weak through the great strain the excite-
ment of the last two hours had been upon her
nervous system* that shei Jay upon her bed
subdued and powerless as an infant. ' Lost to
all but the presence of her wild grief, she lay
heedless of her mother or Marion Macauley,
who strove tenderly to soothe ,her.—her iOne,
alUabsorbing thought being, “ He loves me,
and they will kill him !” • < i •
The judge ,did not reach .Maitland , for


several days after the prisoner’s committal.
He was delayed in leaving Sydney by a heavy,
southerly gale, which ihe captain of the
Hunter River steamer wisely declined to
encounter. Several barristers accpmpanied
the Judge; and Mr. Shelley retained' the
cleverest one amongst them, to defend his un-
fortunate servant, Mr. Mortimer, the bar-
rister in question, shook, his head, as Mr.
Shelley explained, the nature of the case.
‘ His absconding makes him, in the eyes of
the law, a bushranger; and his taking your
horse aggravates the charge by adding horse-
stealing to it. Yap admit that nothing can
appear in the defence to disprove either
act; therefore, al? that we can do is to loqk
for extenuating circumstances. Are there
any that you are aware of?’ the, .barrister,
gravely said.
‘ Couldn’t I declare that 1 lent, him the
pony ? That would remove the most serious
portion of the charge,’ Mr. Shelley asked.
‘ Lent your assigned servant a horse to take
to the bush upon ? The Court would regard
that as hardly probable/ replied Mr. Morti-
mer, smiling.
‘ Hem! perhaps you are right 1’
‘ You are spoken of as an exceptionally
kind master. It seems to me strange that
any of your men should attempt to leave you,
unless prompted by some very poweiful mo-
tive. Recollect, Mr. Shelley, that, to have
any chance of winning the case, I must be
'thoroughly informed of every circumstance in
connection with it. Hide nothing from me
that can throw any light upon' his action.
Was he to have been flogged for any offence ?
If he absconded to escape a severe punishment,
that motive might have some i weight with
the Judge in passing sentence.’
‘ He has never been punished since he has
been with me. Yes, Mr. Mortimer, he had a
very powerful motive for leaving Field Place.
,It is one that I would rather lose .five thou-
sand pounds than have to make public ; but,
as I owe him a debt of gratitude that 1 shall
.never be. able to pay, I will give .it for you
to use in his defence. He could give it you
himself; but I believe be would .rather sub-
mit to any sentence than mention it by so
much as a word.”
‘Whatever it is, Mr. Shelley, you must
give me every particular relating to it, if you
wish me to have any chance of being of ser-
vice to him,’ replied the barrister, decidedly.
Mr, Shelley briefly narrated the history of
his acquaintance with the prisoner from the
day he received him from the Government to
the present time, concealing nothing that
could, in any way, serve to explain his con-
duct. Mr. Mortimer listened attentively.
‘I see! I see!’ he said, as Mr. Shelley
ceased speaking. ‘He loved the young lady,
and she, unwisely, and probably led by grati-
tude, returned-his affection. It was only na-
tural. We cannot expect much wisdom to
be exercised in affairs of the heart. How-
ever, this is,enough for my .purpose. No
.J udge can deny that the prisoner acted nobly
in risking so much to spare her i from the
danger of his love. Most convicts, under
similar circumstances, would have traded
upon your gratitude for past services, I
honor the young fellow—upon my word, I
do.’ ,
‘Do you think the explanation will have
much weight,,with the Judge?’ Mr. Shelley
enquired eagerly.. i
‘ Well, unfortunately, bushranging is
greatly on the increase, especially in the
northern district, and the Governor’s temper
is considerably ruffled in consequence. But
I think the motive you show, will, at least,
have the effect of saving the prisoner’s neck.’
‘Sinclair will not say a word in extenua-
tion of his actions. Will you think it neces-
sary, to call upon me to depose what I have
just said ?’
‘lt will be as well,’ replied the barrister,
rising. ‘ I will now see the prisoner myself,
and learn what he has to say. Do you go with
me?’ » . *
‘ No ! I have seen .him this morning, and I
must gallop back home at once, to make ar-
rangements for my absence in Sydney for a
few days.. If he is condemned to death, or
Norfolk Island, I shall go down, immediately.
I have some very influential friends in Sydney,
who may, perhaps, succeed in persuading, his
Excellency to mitigate the sentence. , The
steamer starts back directly the court: closes
this evening, and Sinclair’s is the last case,’
replied Mr, Shelley,


‘ Well, Mr. Shelley, I will not detain you,
as it is nearly nine o’clock. Be back by three
o’clock at the latest; for I shall require your
evidence. By-the-bye, do you know Fuller-
ton ? His influence wouldbe worth having.’
‘Fullerton is my father-in-law! I count
chiefly upon him in my endeavour to sa/e my
servant. And I have several other friends who
may have some weight with the Governor.’
‘ Fullerton your father in-law ! Well, he is
my uncle ; so we are relatives. This is ano-
ther reason why I should do ray best; though
I doubt if any consideration can spur me to
action more than the prisoner’s own noble act
in leaving your house under the circumstances.
Well, good bye 1 I am only.detaining you !’
The gentlemen separated, Mr. Mortimer
going to the prison to talk over the detail of
defence with the prisoner, and Mr. Shelley
hurrying back to Field Place to settle matters
for his projected departure for Sydney.
As his master predicted, no argaraent could
prevail upon the prisoner to speak of the mo-
tive that urged him to quit Field Place. That
was a subject be would discuss with none-
On being pressed for his reason for his per.
sistent silence, he replied, gloomily, ‘ I have
no wish to escape the extreme penalty of the
law ; and, therefore, 1 decline to say one word
in my defence. lam satisfied with the con-
sciousness that I have never committed any
act to injure a fellow man. Life has no hope
for me; for, were the judge to liberate me
now, I should still remain a convict —an out-
cast from society, I wish to die, and be for-
gotten. I dare not commit suicide, for
it is contrary to the law of heaven ; but, if I
am fortunate enough to have an opportunity
of ending my misery, and hiding my shame in
the grave, I shall not hazaid that opportunity
by the utterance of a syllable !’
Mr. Mortimer’s admiration of Percy’s
courage and fortitude was somewhat modified
by his gloomy despondence ; but he felt that
the young man’s regard for the happiness of
the lady was one great cause of his silence,
Mr. Mortimer did not thirk it well to men-
tion Mr, Shelley’s proposed visit to Sydney,
lest he should raise hopes that might be dissi-
pated ; and, after half-an-hour’s consultation,
he left the prisoner, and repaired to the court
to attend as counsel for the defence in another
case.
Mr. Shelley reached home in a much shorter
time than he had ever before travelled the
same distance. His wife met him at the door.
‘ls the trial over, Walter V • she asked,
hurriedly.
‘lt does not come on fill two o’clock!’ he
exclaimed, as he sprang from his horse, and
threw the reins to Jerry, who had run up to
learn the news. ‘Jerry, saddle Surrey at
once; and bring him to me!’ he continued,
turning to the blackbuy ; and, without wait-
ing to reply to Jerry’s’eager enquiry, ‘ Where
dat Misser Sinlar now! Bale dat string him
up yet!’ he hurried into the house. ‘ How
is Bertha!’ he asked, abruptly, as he flung
himself into a chair.
‘She was asleep a few minutes ago. Poor
child ! She is very much affected by Mr. Sin-
clair’s misfortune,’ replied Mrs. Shelley.
‘ Get my portmanteau packed, Grace. i
shall hold myself in readiness to take the
steamer at Morpeth directly the trial is
finished, and start for Sydney, if he is found
‘guilty.’ lam in hope that your father and
a few of his intimate friends may interest
themselves with the Governor, to obtain a re-
mission of Mr. Sinclair’s sentence.’
‘Woman-like, Mrs. Shelley concluded at
once that they would so interest themselves,
and that to do so was to succeed. ‘ Ob, do,
Walter ! lam sure papa will exert himself to
the utmost for Mr. Sinclair. He feels almost
as grateful to him for saving Bertha at the
bushrangers’ camp as we do. But, Walter, be
careful to say nothing about this unfortunate
attachment between Mr. Sinclair and out-
darling. It would be sure to prejudice papa
against him.’
‘ I will not mention it; but when we have
pulled Mr. Sinclair through this difficulty, I
will ask your father to get him employment
at Parramatta; and when he gets his ticket-of-
leave, we will set him up in a small station on
the Cowpasture or Hawkesbury Bit-era. Per-
haps Bertha may forget him, if he is away for
a time, and accept Mr. Broadrick, or Courtney
rather—l am always confusing his two names.
—lt is a chance she may never have again.’
‘ No, indeed ! ‘ She is the 'first girl in the
colony, and may be the last, who will have


the prospect of becoming a countess. But,
Walter, if Mr. Sinclair was a free man, I
would rather see her marry him.’
‘ What! And lose her chance of wearing
a coronet?’ Mr. Shelley exclaimed, in un-
feigned surprise.
‘ Happiness is better than wealth, Walter !
If Bertha loves Mr. Sinclair, as 1 fear she
does, she will never forget him. She is too
constant and true-hearted to change. She
may, perhaps, marry Mr. Courtney, if we
wish it; and should she do so, 1 am certain
she would be a good wife to him ; but, where
the whole heart is not given with the hand,
there cannot be any true happiness!’
‘Well, well!’ Mr. Shelley said, irritably,
‘ Get me something to eat, Grace. I have
only a few minutes to spate ; for the counsel
I have engaged wishes me to give evidence,
and I sha|l be called upon about three o’clock.
By-the-bye, Grace, I must publish in court
this unfortunate attachment. Mortimer says
that conviction is inevitable; and that the
sentence will be a heavy one, unless something
in extenuation can be produced. Of course,
much as I dislike the idea of our affairs be-
coming the common property of the rabble, I
could not refuse to explain everything to
Mortimer ; and, as he believes the explanation
of Mr. Sinclair’s motive for absconding will in-
fluence the judge in passing sentence, I have
consented to state it on oath !’ said Mr. Shel-
ley, with the air of a man whose inclination
and duty were at variance.
‘ It will not be pleasant to become the
general theme of gossip, certainly; but you
surely are not sorry to have to make this ex-
planation, Walter. For ray own part, 1 am
glad we are called on to make a sacrifice of
our feelings for his advantage It will prove
to him that we are really grateful for his past
services,’ replied Mrs. Shelley, whose gentle
heart was pained by the reluctanea with
which her husband appeared to have consen-
ted to speak on their servant’s behalf.
‘ Grace, whatever the sentence may be, I
want Bertha kept in ignorance of it,’ said Mr.
Shelley, after a few moments’ pause. ‘She
is too weak to bear much excitement; so lead
her to believe that his sentence can only be a
trifling one. I shall take no one with me;
so as she cannot learn the result of the trial;
but Mnsgrave will tell you, when he calls on
his way back to Newcastle.’
‘ I would rather wait in suspense, than hear
the result from him. If he had not insisted
upon taking Mr. Sinclair to Maitland, there
need have been no trial at all, Walter; and,
if Mr. Mnsgrave speaks of calling, give him
my compliments, and tell him that I have no
wish to see him,’ returned Mrs. Shelley.
‘You are unreasonable, Grace. The con-
stables having arrested Mr. Sinclair, it was
beyond Musgrave's power to prevent the trial.
Perhaps he might have allowed bail, though
I am afraid he cduld only do so from the bench’
replied Mr. Shelley.
‘ He might have taken bail if he liked—
other police magistrates do so, and no one
questions their right. But, whether or no, I
don’t want to see him again ; so don’t tell
him to call!’ exclaimed Mrs. Shelley, warmly.
‘ Come into the dining-room, and we shall
have some lunch ready in a few minutes,’ she
continued, leading, the way.
In a quarter of an hour Mr. Shelley was in
the saddle again, and galloping at full speed
back to Maitland.
Jerry had overheard Mr. Shelley, as he was
mounting, say that the trial would be over by
dusk ; and not fully comprehending the words,
he applied to Marion Macaulay for explana-
tion. Jerry listened attentively while she
enlightened him upon the subject; and ( then
said thoughtfully, ‘ Dat Missie Berta murry
sorry belongingjto Misser Sinlar. Me tell him
all about it!’
||‘ No, no, Jerry 1’ earnestly exclaimed
Marion, who had heard Mr. Shelley forbid the
trial being mentioned before Bertha, ‘ You
mustn’t tell Miss Bertha! I’ll never speak
to you again, if you tell her anything about it.’
Jerry gazed cunningly at Marion for a few
seconds, and then enquired innocently, ‘ Spo
dat Jerry bale tell him Missie Berta, you give
it me dat old frock ?’ pointing to a bright co-
lored dress Marion had on.
Marion could not help laughing heartily at
the oddity of the question ; though the cloud
of trouble that lay upon the household, made
her in no humour for merriment. ‘Why,
Jerry, what could you do with this gown ?
Boys don’t wear -such things It would be
of no use to you,’ she said.


‘ You know him little Wallerie ! Dat rturry
budgery lobra ! Bale dat got him no old frock
like a dat!’ replied Jerry insinuatingly. ‘ You
give it little feller Wallerie dat old froqh ; den
bale Jerry tell him Missie Berta !’
‘ I can’t give you this dress, Jerry j but if
you promise not to tell Miss Bertha what I
have told you, I will give you another for your
little favourite.’
‘You give it me now?’ asked Jerry, who
acted upon the proverb that a bird in the
hand is worth two in the bush.
Marion smiled at his'eagei'ness, and handed
him an old dress but little the worse for wear,
Jerry received his bribe for silence with many
protestations of gratitude, and then carried it
‘off to the stable, and concealed it beneath
a heap of straw. ‘ Dare 1 When dat budgery
little Wallerie come, Jerry give him dis ! Dat
little Wallerie murry glad get him new, old
frock like a dis.’
Having secreted to his satisfaction the offer-
ing for his dusky inamorata, Jerry left the
stable. He watched the kitchen closely fora
few minutes, and not .seeing Marion he crept,
cautiously round to the garden, and up to
Bertha’s window. He succeeded in reaching
it unobserved ; and, glancing ( hur-
riedly round to see that Marion ■ was not
patching, he tapped gently on the pane, mut-
tering to himself as he did so, ‘ Dat Missie
.Berta want to know all about Misset Sinlar.’
.Mallyun., say ‘Bale, you tell him, Missie
Berta. Bale Jerry caret; Jerry will tell him.’
Bertha was sitting at the .window, vainly
trying to divert her.thoughts from her trouble
by readiqg the pathetic story of ‘ Paul and
Virginia.’ , She raised the sash as Jerry
knocked. ‘ Well, Jerry, what is the matter?’
she asked,, .in a languid, absent tune.
’ Dat Misser Sinlar be tried belongin’ to
court, by-by," he said, with 1 an air of great
importance.’
‘Tried! and —apd—perhaps hung!’ she
said, slowly, as,if communing .with her own
thoughts. She pressed her hand.to her burn-
ing temples. The terrible thought seamed. to
set her brain on fire. ‘Jerry,’ she, said, in a
quivering voice, ‘can you saddle one,of the
horses for me ? Do so as quickly as possible.’
, ‘ Bale you can ride him any horse on’y
Snowflake and old Surrey, Missie Berta,
Dat Snowflake no come home yet; and Misser
Selly got him old Surrey.’
‘ What,! is,there none thatl can ride!’ she
exclaimed in a tone of bitter disappointment.
‘ Can’t I ride the bay colt ? He is quiet.’
‘Bale you can ride him, Missie Berta!
Dat buck like a bandicoot.’
‘ Saddle him, Jerry, and let me try,’ Bertha
asked anxiously.
‘ You link him Jerry murry big fool, Missie
Berta?’ theplackboy asked, bluntly. ‘ What
for me get him you killed like dat ?’
‘ Do saddle him, Jerry, and be quick.’
‘ Bale me saddle him, Missie Berta,’ re-
plied Jerry, with decision. ‘ Spo you like me
go and see them string him up, and come
back and ,tell him.you how ?"
‘ Do go, Jerry, and learn what the result of
the trial is; and then come back, at once,
and tell me. Be quick ; for 1 shall go mad,
if you are not back to-night.’
‘All right,’Missie Berta, me go! Jerry
murry good, feller.’
‘ Don’t let papa see you Jerry ; he mightn’t
let you come back and. tell me 1’ Bertha said
hurriedly.; ‘ X must know to-night.’
Jerry thought for a moment, and then
exclaimed, ‘ Bale you be frighten, Missie
Berta : dat nobody can see Jerry, Me go
now!’ and without waiting for further in-
structions he ran off to prepare for his jour-
ney. . While saddling the bay colt an idea
suddenly struck him. He took the dress he
had so fraudulently obtained,and rolling it into
a bundle, strapped it across the pommel of the
saddle. . Mr. Shelley had half an-hour’s start
of him, but, .knowing a short cut through the
bush, Jerry reached the jail half-an-hour be-
fore his master was expected.
The sun had risen upon the day of Percy’s
trial fair and beautiful, but as the hour for
hearing drew on, the sky became obscured by
masses of clouds, and when the crier called'
the case, the heavens looked as dark and
lowering as the prisoners own gloomy pros-
pects. Before the trial was half through
the rain fell a perfect deluge.
The adventure of the prisoner at the bush-
rangers’ camp, some months before, bad caused
quite a sensation throughout the district, and
bad been a standing topic of conversation ever
since. .Every one held his, or her, own private


opinion of the rotative of the'prisoner’s taking
that terrible leap; and, as there was an
air of romance surrounding the case, public
interest' was thoroughly aroused. Froin all
the farms or stations within miles of the
court-house'poured the sensation-loving crowd.
There was not standing retain ?n the ball. All
kinds of improbable rumours as to 'cause of
the prisoner's taking to the bush had obtained
currency, and added not‘a little to the public
excitement. -
'The evidence against the prisoner was very
brief; and it was so crushing and conclusive
that the prosecuting counsel declined to take
up the time of the court by addlessing’ the
jury. Fortunately for the plan of defence
followed by the prisoner’s couilsel, the taburt
had been occupied a couple taf hours longer
than was anticipated in dealing with the pre-
vious case. Mr. Mortimer kept the witnesses
for the crown in the box as long as he pos-
sibly could, in hopes of delaying the proceed-
ings, until he should receive the preconcerted
message,, that his witness bad returned. At
last the judge felt called Upon to rebuke him
for trifling with the time of' the court, and to
tell him to call hi's witnesses, that the trial
might proceed.
The crier called, ‘Walter Shelley 1’ the
usual number of times, but to Mr. Mortimer’s
consternation, and the prisoner’s evident satis-
faction, no one answered to the name'.
‘ls Mr. Shelley your only witness, Mr.
Mortimer?’ the judge enquired of the priso-
ner’s counsel. ’’
* He is, your- Honor. Hetaarae to Maitland
this morning, to give evidence in the defence;
but pressing- business called him’ back to his
home. He - is sure to be her'e presently.’
‘ And; in the meanwhile, the court is to be
delayed ?’■ the judge Said, frowning.
‘ It was'Very pressing business that deman-
ded his attention !’ the baffled Counsel re-
turned: ' '
‘Can’any'business be more pressing than
attention to a base in which a ’raan‘ is being
tried for his life?’ the Judge asked sarcasti-
cally. ‘ Wds this Witness subpoenaed T !
* No, your Honor ; he appears voluntarily.’
seems to tne, J sneered the’croWn prose-
cutor, ‘ That he doesn’t appear at all.’
1 ‘ With your permission, your Honor, I will
address the jury now, and afterwards support
my assertions by the testimony of my witness,
who, I doubt not will soon appear,’ said Mr.
Mortimer,
The Jfidge raised no objection to the pro-
posal, and Mr. Mortimer made a long and
powerful appeal to the jury. He admitted
th 6 action of the prisoner in the two counts,
of absconding from the assigned service of
Mr. Shelley and taking the horse; but
be urged upon the jury that the motive im-
pelling the action was the proper standard to
the prisoner by. ‘ Surely none of you
’are so dull of apprehension,' he said, ‘ as to
fail to perceive the vast inequality of the guilt
of a convict who steals a horse and takes to
the bush for the purpose of robbery and mur-
der, and that of one whose intentions are
peaceable, and who would rather starve than
turn highwayman!’ He gave the jury
a highly-colored account of the prisoner’s at- ■
tadhment ’to the beautiful daughter of his
master; of his saving her life at the bush-
rangers’bamp, at the imminent riskof his own ;
of by'repeated requests to be sent back to the
central depot, or that he might be reassigned,
with the secret, yet noble, purpose of escap-
ing from the temptation of telling his love ;
and he drew vividly before the jury the pic-
ture of the convict’s interrupted declaration,
and ot his subsequently over-hearing the sorrow
his rash act had occasioned his benefactors.
He asked the jury could they possibly send
to the gallows, or Norfolk Island, a man,
who had embraced the danger and
of a bushranger’s life for the noble purpose of
tearing’himself away from the presence of the
lovtfd one, that she might forget ; him and
marry Another 1 ' ‘’Remember, gentlemen, ( this
he knew —that, for the sake of their daughter’s
happiness, her parents would have consented to
her marrying him il she had wished it!’ he ex-
claimed. ‘ Most men, under such circum-
stances, would hive traded upon their mas-
ter’s gratitude, and pressed tfceir suit. A man
who could act so generously, , so nobly, aa
the prisoner has done, deserves reward rather
than punishment.’
Mr. Mortimer spoke for £wo hours, so
eloquently and earnestly that no one noticed
the passage of time; but at last the Judge’s
eyes fell Upon the olodk; and, taking advan


tage of a momentary pause in the counsel’s
speech, he suggested that it would be as well
to swear the witness he had spoken of, as it
was getting late.
The prisoner's counsel oould not well ob-
ject ; for he had worn the defence threadbare,
and reiteration of the same arguments could
do no good. He had been talking against
time, in hope of receiving a message of the
return of his witness. He had not received
the message, and he felt and looked anxious
and careworn on resuming his seat.
Again the crier called the witness ; but, as
before, to no purpose.
‘Mr. Mortimer, we cannot have the time of
the court wasted in this way,’ said the Judge,
gravely, after he had waited several minutes,
and no appearance of the witness seemed
probable. ‘lf your witness does not attend
within five minutes, I shall be compelled to
sum up upon the evidence before the court.’
Mr. Mortimer rose slowly, with a troubled
expression upon his features. He glanced
anxiously towards the prisoner, and then ad-
dressed the Judge; ‘I submit, your Honor,
that this is a matter of life and death to the
prisoner! A delay of a few minutes cannot
cause the court much inconvenience, and it
may be the means of saving the life of a fellow
man. It can never be said that, in a civilized
country, the dry rules of court are of more im-
portance than human life!’
‘I will give you ten minutes further to
produce this witness, Mr. Mortimer. 1 can-
not allow you longer. If cases were permitted
to stand still through the absence of witnesses,
there would be an end of all judicial proceed-
ings.”
Percy Sinclair had listened with great sur-
prise and annoyance to the speech of his coun-
sel. He had purposely refrained from any
mention to Mr. Mortimer of the reason of
his absconding from Field Place, and was
unaware, until he heard the pleading on his
behalf, what line of defence would be set up.
His heart swelled with indignation as he
heard her name uttered again and again before
the excited crowd in the body of the court.
As his counsel resumed his seat to wait with
what patience he could for his expected wit-
ness, Percy turned to address the judge.
‘ May I beg, your Honor, that the court may
not be delayed on account of the absence of
the gentleman who promised to appear in my
defence, but who has wisely changed hia mind.
I assure you, your Honor, nothing he can say
can disprove, that I took the horse and de-
serted.’
‘ Are you mad !’ exclaimed the prisoner’s
counsel, springing to his feet.
* No, Mr. Mortimer ! I am truly grateful
for the great interest you take in my misfor-
tunes, and the zeal and ability you ’
* I cannot permit this discussion. Prisoner,
you will have an opportunity afforded you
directly of saying all you wish to. Till then
you must remain silent!’ said the judge, in a
tone of assumed severity.
The ten minutes passed, and no witness
appearing, the judge summed up. The evi-
dence was so brief and distinct that it took
but a very few minutes to lay it clearly before
the jury. The judge bade them carefully to ab-
stain from considering anything but the evi.
dence before them. Upon that, whatever
their feelings might urge to the contrary, must
be based their verdict. Five minutes’ serious
consultation resulted in a verdict of “ Guilty.”
To the judge’s invitation to plead cause why
sentence of death should not be passed upon
him, the prisoner gave no answer, further
than thanking him for hia kindness in delay-
ing the court for the witness, who was to have
given evidence in bis defence.
The terrible sentence of death had barely
been passed upon the prisoner, when there
was a commotion among the crowd, and Mr.
Shelley rushed into the court, breathless and
excited. .
‘ Thank heaven, you are too late!’ ex-
claimed the prisoner, fervently.
4 Too late ! Surely not!’ Mr. Shelley ex-
claimed in consternation, as soon as he had
recovered his breath.
‘ You promised to return by three o’clock ;
and it is now five. A queer way of paying
the debt of gratitude you spoke of 1’ said the
prisoner’s counsel in contempt. Put of course
the life of a convict is as nothing in the
balance against the ease and convenience of a
master.’
4 Too late!’ Mr. Shelley repeated to him-
self, as though unable to comprehend to the


1 Do not distress yourself on my account,
sir!' said the prisoner ‘ I am
glad that the trial ends as it does. Your de-
lay was the kindest act you could have done
me!’
‘Are you the witness who had it in his
power to prove extenuating circumstances in
the prisoner’s favour, and who failed to ap-
pear?’ enquired the Judge.
‘ Yes, your Honor 1’ replied Mr. Shelleyi
in confusion.
‘ Hem ! Well, sir, I can assure you, that
I would not occupy your position for the
wealth of the universe! If it be his Excel-
lency’s pleasure that the extreme penalty of
the law be carried out, and you know that the
prisoner’s life is saciiiiced through your ab-
sence, the reproaches of your conscience should
be a terrible punishment for your criminal
neglect!’
returned the Judge.
‘My horse fell with, and threw me, your
Honor, and then broke away ; and my un-
fortunate delay was caused in catching him
again. Can I not give my evidence now ?’
‘ The case is settled. I cannot now hear
further evidence on either side !’
Mr. Mortimer rose. ‘Your Honor, I beg
to submit that you can hear my witness
prvalely, and, though it is too late for his
deposition to be used as evidence, it may
influence you in deciding whether you can
justly recommend the prisoner to mercyi
Hubert Clayton, who occupied a front
seat, and had till the present moment been
smiling blandly, and chatting with
a squatter from the William’s River —a man
notorious for his coarse brutality and unfeeling
cruelty to his assigned servants—heie sprang
to his feet, and exclaimed, ‘ Your Honor, I
beg to submit that this is a most irregular
pro ’
‘Silence in the court!’ interrupted the
Judge sternly; and turning to the prisoner’s
counsel he continued, .‘Attend me at my
hotel in an hour with your witness, and I
will hear him on oath. If he proves the ex-
tenuating circumstances you mentioned in
your address to,the jury, I may perhaps make
them the subject of a recommendation to
mercy.’
Mr. Mortimer thanked the Judge; and the
court then rose.
As the prisoner was being led to the con-
demned cell, he encountered Hubert Clayton
and his new acquaintance, in the gaol yard.
‘ Look, Clayton, do you see that chap with
the darbies on ? He’ll swing as sure as he’s
a d convict! Talk about pampering a
lag. It only spoils ’em, and makes .’em dis-
contented. Look you. I’ve never had a lag
try to bolt from my place for the ten years
I’ve been on it. Cause why? They’re kept
under as they should be! Do you want to
know the secret That keeps my lambs at fold ?
Cause if you do, I’ve no objection to tell yon 1’
said the swaggering bully, whom chance had
set as master over a score of better men.
‘ Tell me, Rugby! We live and learn, you
know, 1 have just lost a couple of the best,
bands 1 had ; and a hint, that may save ms
from a like misfortune in the future, is cer-
tainly worth having,’ replied Clayton, as he
watched the prisoner approaching.
‘ More work and less rations! that’s my
motto. I remember the last chap that tried to ;
bolt. It was about Christmas time two years
ago. He had luckily been on short allowance
for a fortnight before, so he could not travel
very fast; and I caught him before he had
got three miles away. I gave him fifty and
a day’s hoeing. That cured him of bolting. -
He never tried it on after.’
‘ Fifty and a' day’s hoeing ! Mere child’s
play I could call that.’
‘ What, twelve hours in the middle
of summer, and working between two log fires
only twenty yards apart ? I tell you there’s
no cure for bolters like it. . They never try it
on again!’
‘Didn’t your man evjr try it on again?’
‘No ! He found it too warm, and took a sun-
stroke and died ! There’s nothing like setting
conyicts to work between fires on a sweltering
day. It cows ’em, if nothing else does 1’
Percy caught Clayton’s eye as he passed ;
and the expression of vindictive triumph,
that the arch .villain cast upon him, too
plainly showed the depth of his hatred.
‘ (Sinclair,’ he hissed, as the prisoner passed.
‘ I congratulate you upon your pro-
motion ! You were always ambitious ; but
I never thought you would rise so high in the


world. Your father and Miss Egerton will be
proud of you, when they receive my letters.
Have you anything in the “ last dying speech
and confession” line, you would like me to
tell them V
Percy’s eyes flashed scorn and contempt as
the heartless villain, gloating over the n.isery
he was the primary causa of, spoke his insult-
ing and unmanly sneers; but at the threat to
send the shameful intelligence of his execution
to the dear ones at home, bis eyes fell, and a
cold perspiration stood upon his brow. For
a few seconds he could not articulate a syllable,
but, recovering himself by a desperate etlort,
he exclaimed, ‘Clayton, when I saw you in
court, J felt I had one friend present, who
knew that I was incapable of doing any wrong
to my fellow man ! By your words I can
only look upon you as my bitterest foe ! What
have I done to deserve that'you should insult
me thus. ■ It is ungenerous, it is cowardly !’
‘ Fine sentiment for a fellow who, though
he barely escaped the gallows at home, learnt
no lessen from experience, bnt must rob the
best master on the liver, and turn bushranger !’
said Clayton, turning' to Rugby, who was
standing with his hands upon his hips, re-
garding the prisoner with a stare of amused
curiosity.
‘ He’ll he the prettiest spectacle, dangling
from the gallows, that the hawks have bad a
look at for this many a day!’ said Rugby,
with the air of a eounoiseur.
‘ Come along, sir ; I’m choking !' to be at
him!” whispered the gaoler. ‘There’ll be
two on us for the gallows, if we stay
another minnte !’
‘I beg of you, for the sake of heaven, do
not destroy my parents with the intelligence
of my shameful fate. The dishonor would kill
them !’
‘I shall tell them more,’ laughed the cold-
blooded wretch, turning upon his heel. ‘ I
shall tell them, that you repaid the unceasing
kindness of a too weak and generous master by
insult offered to his beautiful daugh ’
The gaoler had taken Percy by the arm, to
lead him on; but before Clayton could com-
plete the sentence, he shook off the gaoler’s
hand, as though it had been but the
grasp of an infant, and, manacled and
ironed as he was, sprang forward and
felled the wretch to the ground. The,
fallen man’s friend, Rugby, not feeling called
upon to run any risk upon his behalf,
speedily made and a warder crossing
the, yard at the time, ran up and dragged the
assailant away. The blow was a severe one,
and Clayton was carried off insensible.
‘ I hopes you’ve killed him, sir f the gaoler
in charge of the .prisoner whispered, as fas
conducted- him into the condemned cell.
‘ They can’t touch you for it, that’s one con-
solation ; for they can’t hang a man twice!.
The devil never deserved roasting more nor
he does !’
The unhappy prisoner did not reply ; and
the jailor locked him in the cell, and left him
to the companionship of his own thoughts.
‘lt is criminal to wish it; and yet, if he
recovers, he will destroy my honored parents
by the false and cowardly report he will send
of my death !’ he thought, bitterly, as be threw
himself upon the straw in one comer of his
cell. ‘ Better be a murderer—though, God
knows, I meant it not, when I struck him—
than that he should live to cast a blight upon
my childhood’s home.
The jailor, standing on one leg in the corri-
dor outside the cell in an attitude of deep
thought, muttered sadly, ‘l’ve always knowed
it—it’s a sort of presidement—that I’ll be
hanged yet! If that vagabond aren’t killed by
that ctack on the bead with the prisoner’s
darbies. I’ll stick a knife into him some of
these days. To think that him, as gived
Darby Gregson and me fifty pounds to swear
that Mr. Sinclair forged the cheque, when he
didn’t, should have the cheek to talk to his
victim like that! It licks me boiler thinking
of it ,
CHAPTER XVVI.
O, how her eyes and tears did lend and borrow !
Uer eyes seen in her tears, tears in her eye ;
Both crystals, where they view’d each other’s sorrow, —
Sorrow, that friendly sighs sought still to dry ;
But like a stormy day, now wind, now rain,
Sighs dry her cheeks, tears make them wet again,
Variable passions throng her constant woe,
As striving which should best become her grief;
All entertain'd, each passion labors so.
That every present sorrow seemeth chief.
But none is best; then join they all together
Like many clouds consulting for foul weather.
Shakespeare.
The Judge received Mr. Mortimer and his
witness with great gravity. In entering the


parlor they had encountered Rugby, who had
just given the Judge a high-colored account
or the prisoner’s ‘ unprovoked and murderous
attack upon his generous friend Clayton and
his Honor looked perplexed and, annoyed.
Motioning his visitors to be seated, ho en-
quired if they had heard of Jthe act of the
prisoner in leaving the court.
. ‘I questioned the warder who had charge of
the prisoner ; and from what he says, it ap-
pears that Clayton spoke to the prisoner in a
grossly insulting manner, aud threatened, not
only to write home and tell the
friends, whom, it appears, he knows,
of hik unfortunate fate, but to aggra-
vate the disgrace by falsely stating that he
was hung'fur offering insult to the daughter
of his generous master !’
‘More extenuating circumstances, Mr.
Mortimer ?’ said the Judge, with a smile.
‘ There’s no man, your Honor, who could
tamely submit to such outrage ! If any man
spoke to me as this fellow did to the prisoner,
I’d strangle him, even if I was to be flogged
to death directly after I’ exclaimed Mr.
Shelley, growing excited in his indignation,
‘ There is an error somewhere, gentlemen !
The public had no right of access to the priso-
ner.’ said the Judge, thoughtfully. *1 must
speak to theg overnor of the gaol.’
‘ I submit, your Honor, that as these fel-
lows, Clayton and Rugby, were permitted to
insult the prisoner, he should be held excused
from the consequences of his act !’ Mr. Mor-
timer urged.
‘That does not follow, Mr. Mortimer.
However, 1 will learn all in connection with
this unfortunate occurrence, and make a note
of it. And now for the evidence in support
of a recommendation to mercy.’
Mr. Shelley was sworn, and gave the Judge
a full account of the prisoner’s conduct
since he had first known him, and of the
heroism and devotion he had on several occa-
sions displayed, and ended by briefly narrating
his recent discovery, of the attachment be-
tween his daughter and the prisoner.
The Judge listened patiently, and, on Mr.
Shelley’s concluding, ‘ remarked that the
matter of the attachment was all that he
needed to have spoken upon, as it was the
only part of the evidence, that could be con-
‘sidered ia mitigation of sentence. ‘ And nov,
gentlemen, you may rely upon my giving the
subject my most serious attention,. 1 can
promise nothing. . This assault in the jail
must be considered also in dealing with the
matter.’ ,
‘ You will not lose sight of the great provo-
cation, I ’
‘ You may rest assured, Mr. Mortimer,
that I shall act justly,’ interruptedjthe Judge,
rising, as a signal that the interview was at
an end. ‘ I must now wish you both good
evening, as my-time is fully occupied, till I
start for the steamer at Morpeth. Are you
going back to-night, Mr. Mortimer?
‘ Yes, your Honor.’
‘Then I shall see you on board—good
evening.’
In leaving the hotel, the gentlemen were
followed by a black gin, who appeared deeply
interested in their conversation. They stood
for . nearly a quarter, of an hour,
in the varandah discussing the
all-absorbing llieme of the prisoner’s
attack upon Hubert Clayton, and tbcn they
separated, Mr. Mortimer going to a public-
house a short distance down the road, and
Mr. Shelley returning to the jail to see tha
prisoner, if possible, before he started for
Sydney,
On bis turning round, Mr. Shelley stumbled
over the black, who bad been standing
directly behind him, ostensibly engaged in
fastening a hook upon a fishing line. ' Get
nut of my way, you imp of darkness!’ Mr.
Shelley exclaimed, impatiently, and the gin
stepped back, without reply. When Mr.
Shelley leached the prison-gate, he was much
surprised to find the black standing at a littlo
distance, intently watching the proceedings of
a bullock-driver, whose team was stuck fast
in the mud. ‘ Halloa, dusky ! Vvhat you 1
want?’ he called to the black, who, without
approaching nearer, replied, in a doleful tone,
‘Me lose him my little feller piccaninny [
you got him V ’
‘ No, you black idiot! You’d better be off
and look for it,’ he replied impatiently. Tha
gin took a step closer to the mud-embedded
dray, and appealing to forget her domestic
bereavement, watched, with increased interest,
the troubles of the unfortunate bullocks.


Half an hour later, Mr. Shelley mounted,
his horse,'and galloped away in the direction
of Morpeth, and the black ran off into the
bush to the place where the bay colt had been
* planted,’ and in the excitement, forgetting
to take off the disguising dress, leaped into
the saddle, and, in bis eagerness to ‘tell him
Missie Berta,’ never drew rein until, foamed,
splashed and reeking, be sprang to the ground
by the back fence of the garden at Field Place.
All had letired to bed. Jerry hastily snatched
the bridle off the colt, and the beast, hot and
fatigued by its quick journey, lay down to
roll; and the saddle that Jerry had in his
eagerness forgotten, was broken and des-
troyed.
The blaokboy was too intent upon the ful-
filment of his mission, to observe the effects
of his carelessness, and, nimbly climbing the
garden fence, crept cautiously up to Bertha’s
■window. He raised his hand to tap upon the
pane, but the silent watcher required no sig-
nal that her messenger had returned. ‘Oh,
1 am so glad you are back again, Jerry 1* she
startled him by exclaiming, ‘ I have been
waiting for you, oh, so long, so very, very
long I’
■ She had been sitting at that window near-
ly the whole of the time that Jerry had
taken to go and return upon his mission. She
could draw no consolation from the tender at-
tention and solicitude of her mother or Marion
Macaulay, but had mourned for her preserver
as dead. To their repeated attempts to com.
fort her, she had but one reply— ‘ They will
kill him, and I can do nothing to help him I
Oh, that 1 could die in his stead !’ Hoping that
she would lay down and take some rest, they
had left her to herself since tea time, and
through those long hours till Jerry’s return,
she had watched at the window in silence and
tears, waiting to learn the result of that terri-
ble trial—one moment almost persuading her-
self that all must see his innocence and noble-
ness of soul, and set him free—the next a
prey to despair and agony.
Poor girl 1 Her life , had hitherto been all
sunshine; but now she had entered a
season of darkest gloom. Shall she ever
pass safely through it to the happy light be-
yond, or shall its sombre cloud for ever shroud
her gentle life?. Heaven is good ! Let her
I hope and wait, and remember that ‘every cloud
has a silver lining.’ If she sees not that silver
lining from here, she shall from another stand
point—from above.
The window was open, and Jerry, leaning
upon the window sill, glanced into the dark-
ened room, revolving how to break the un-
welcome news to his unhappy young mistress.
‘ Tell me at ence, Jerry I Tell me at once !’
she cried, terror-stricken by bis silence,
‘ Don’t keep me in suspense ! Is he acquited
or have they I —have they’—
She was unable to conclude the terrible
question; and stood leaning against the win-
dow in anxious suspense. Jerry fidgetted
about, and scratched his head, not knowing
what to say. Young and untutored as he was,
he keenly felt the pain his words must inflict.
‘Tell me at once, Jerry I You will kill me,
if you keep me in suspense!’ she exclaimed
piteously.
‘ That damn judge only string him Misser
Sinlar up!’ Jerry blurted out in a tone of
deep commiseration. ‘Dat Misser Sinlar
budgery game feller!' Dat smash dat bagabond
feller Misser Cayton like a jumhuc!’ he con-
tinued ; but Bertha answered not. She bad
sunk back insensible upon her couch as the
terrible truth flashed upon her. Receiving no
response to his words Jerry concluded that
‘ Missie Berta was murry. busy belonging to
thinking,’ and crept off to his bed—not for-
getting, however, to make a raid upon the safe
in the kitchen, to make amends for the loss of
his supper.
We must now leave the unhappy pair,
whose future lay as wrecks upon the troubled
course of love—leave them, the one peace-
fully asleep upon the damp straw in the con-
demned cell, while the avenging arm of the law
holds bare above his devoted head the sword
of Justice) the other laying insensibl eupon her
couch, her gentle heart rent by the awful fate
threatening him she now loved so well.
Mr. Shelley reached Sydney after some de-
lay in the river, from the steamer grounding
upon its flats or mudbanks, and lost no time
in setting Mr. Fullerton and his other influen-
cial friends in motion. The day after he
reached the capital, he called at Government,
House. He was accompanied by his friends.
The Governor received them graciously, and


listened with courtesy and attention to the
representations made to him on the prisoner’s
behalf. 4 1 have received no communication
from the Judge on the subject yet; but I will
send my aid-de-camp to fetch him at once, if
you can spare time to wait. I can decide
better what course to pursue after seeing
him,” the Governor said thoughtfully.
The aid-de-camp was sent for the Judge,
and meeting him in George street, returned
with him in much shorter time than was ex-
pected. 4 1 was coming to Government
House, your Excellency, when your aid-de-
camp met me,’ the judge said in reply to the
Governor’s expressed hope, that his summons
caused him no inconvenience.
Half an hour’s consultation resulted in the
Judge’s strongly recommending the Governor
to cancel the sentence.
4 There is quite an air of romantic interest
surrounding the case,’ said the Governor.
4 You do not intend the prisoner for a son-
in-law, I presume ?’
4 By no means, your Excellency,’ replied
Mr. Shelley, while Mr. Fullerton’s face
darkened. 4 1 should like to get him a com-
fortable situation, where he may have no
chance of meeting my daughter.’
4 Well, I will see your wishes attended to.
The sentence shall be cancelled in the mean-
while. Do you return to the Hunter by the
first boat ?’
4 Yes, your Excellency, I am anxious to
get back as soon as possible.’
4 1 will send you the necessary papers in
the morning.’
The gentlemen thanked the Governor and
withdrew, leaving him to attend to the Judge,
who had a report to submit.
On their way to Hyde Park they encoun-
tered the Rev. Arthur Rosburg, a friend of
Mr. Fullerton’s; and, reinforced by the addi-
tion to their numbers, they repaited to a
neighbouring hotel to dinner.
4 Did you hear of the death of Mr. John
Beresford?’ the Rev. Mr. Rosburg enquired
of Mr. Fnllerton, as the party sat over their
wine after dinner was disposed of.
’Beresford dead? This is the first I’ve
heard of it!’ replied Mr. Fullerton in surprise.
4 1 thought he would live for the next twenty
years. He’s an old man certainly, bat as
sound as a bell. What did he die off
4 Is that the Beresford from Bathurst?’
asked Mr. Shelley.
4 Yes!’ replied the reverend gentleman.
4 He was one kangaroo hunting ; and his horse
fell with him, and broke his neck !’
4 Poor fellow ! He leaves a young wife too,
doesn’t he!' said a gentleman present, a friend
of Mr. Fullerton.
4 Yes, Mr,- McDermott, and a couple of
children !’ replied the clergyman.
4 They are well provided for : and I expect
he will soon have.a successor ; for the station
will fall to his wife—that is worth the encum-
brance of a charming young widow I’ said Mr.
McDermott, laughing.
4 His death places me in rather an awkward
position. I sent to England for a governess
for him a few months ago. She arrived this
morning by the Wild Wave, and he is dead,’
said the clergyman.
’Cannot the widow taka her?’ She will
require a companion,’ suggested Mr. Fuller-
ton,
4 No. She is going to Tan Dieman’s Land,
to stay with some friends for a few months.’
’Just the thing for you then, Walter!
Bertha needs a companion; and this go-
verness being brought out by Mr. Rosburg
is a sufficient guarantee of her respectability.
You should secure her at once.’
4 If you think it werth your while to en-
gage her, I can arrange this afternoon, Mr,
Shelley,’ said the clergyman. 4 She is a vir-
tuous and educated lady, and as such would
snit you well, if you need a companion to
your daughter,'
4 You may engage her for me at once, Mr,
Rosburg T want to get back by the schooner
that sails to-morrow. If she cannot go with
me, you can see her on boaid the steamer on
Friday.’
4 1 have no doubt she will go at once. Sho
was much disappointed at the loss of the situ-
ation she came out to, and begged of me to
get her another as soon as possible.'
4 1 think, under the peculiar circumstances
of the case, this opportunity is one not to be
lost. We will go and see her this afternoon
if Mr. Rosburg can spare time to accom-
pany and introduce us 1’ said Mr. Fullerton,


At threeVclook accordingly, Mr. Shelley,
with his father-in-law and the clergyman
visited the Wild Wave, and had an interview
with the young lady. Mr. Shelley was pleased
by her appearance, and gentle, unassuming
manners, and offered her a liberal salary to go
as companion to his daughter. The clergyman
strongly advised her to accept it, and, after a
few moments thought, she did so.
At eight o’clock next morning, the Frown-
ing Beauty spread her canvas, and sailed down
the harbor. The scene was, as it is, and al-
ways shall be, one of the most beautiful the
world has|to show ; and the young lady, as she
sat on the deck gazing upon it, soon forgot her
troubles in admiiation. The extreme beauty
of the landscape soothed her into a pensive
melancholy; and she mused on uninterrupted
until the little schooner reached the Heads,
and the fairy scene changed to the vast
prospect of the Pacific, when a roughlook-
ing sailor touched his cap, and, offering her the
day’s paper, said respectfully, ‘ Would you
like to see the news, Miss? Here’s this
morning’s Gazette, It’ll be company for you !’
She took the paper, and thanking the
man for his thoughtfulness, settled herself to
read. The first item of news that met her
gaze, was the report of the Criminal Court
just concluded in Maitland. Without any
other aim than whiling away the time, she
waded through tbe long and uninteresting ac-
counts of the different trials. She read on
mechanically to tbe end of tbe cases,
her thoughts far away from the subjects before
her. She was folding the paper to lay it
aside, when the name of Sinclair suddenly
caught her eye. She had just read tbe whole
of the trial, but was so absent-minded that she
did not notice the name of the prisoner before
‘Sinclair! Percy Sinclair! It must be he!’
she exclaimed excitedly. ‘ Sentenced to
death ! Oh, my poor cousin, my poor cousin !’
She read the case through again with in-
tense interest. ‘ His noble consideration for
the lady’s happiness will cost him his life!’
she exclaimed, in anguish, as she finished
reading tbe account of tbe trial,
‘ Looking at the report of the Maitland
trials, Miss?’ asked Mr. Shelley, who had
unobserved, approached her.
‘Oh, sir, can it be true that Percy Sinclair
is to be hung V
‘ He is pardoned, Miss—the Governor has
cancelled his sentence ! Do you know him T
‘He is my cousin. Thank heaven he has
escaped !’
, ‘ He was my servant, and the business that
brought mo to Sydney was to endeavour to ob-
tain his pardon. I have succeeded ; and he
will be released from prison as soon as we get
home.’
‘ May heaven reward you, sir, for your
generous efforts on his behalf!’
CHAPTER XXVII.
I love, and am a woman!
Bulwer Ltttok.
The cold, grey dawn was breaking, when
Bertha recovered from the swoon into which
Jerry’s vivid report of the trial had thrown
her. With returning consciousness came the
sad memory of her preserver’s position. Sen-
tenced to death ! With his awful fate impend-
ing before her eyes, and filling her heart and
brain with agony and grief, she slowly rose,
and stood for a few minutes leaning by the
still-open window, gazing, hopelessly, out
upon the star-spangled sky, half-wondering
whether those myriad eyes of heaven ever
looked down upon such bitter, bitter sorrow
as hers. As the darkness slowly faded before
the growing light of day, her musing eyes ob-
served a white object just beyond the garden
fence. She saw it indistinctly, and through
the opening of the rails. She watched it
closely for a brief space, an eager hope kind-
ling in her numbed, chilled heart. ‘ltis ! it
must be him! the dear, little fellow to come
back now !’ she exclaimed ; and, throwing a
cloak over her shoulder, she hurried out into
the dim morning. A low neigh welcomed her,
as she passed through the gate, and in another
minute Bertha was weeping, with emotion, her
face bidden in the mane of her pony. Snow-
flake seemed almost, as much affected by the
reunion as his young mistress, and stamped
and neighed with evident satisfaction. ‘Where-
ever have you been all this time, you wicked
little fellow to keep away so long ?’ she said,
caressingly, as she wiped her eyes, and tried to
compose herself. The pony rubbed his neck
against her, and neighed softly. She stood
in deep thought for a few moments, twin.


ing her fair fingeia, in his silky mane. ‘Stay
here, Snowflake ; I’ll be back directly. Don’t
go away old fellow,’ she said suddenly,
her expression of hopeless agony giving place to
a glance of film resolution. ‘ Don’t go away ;
I shall want you directly.’
Bertha turned and hurried off to an out-
house, where Jerry slept. Snowflake had not
the slightest intention of going away; but
seeing his young mistress walking in the direc-
tion of the stable, he docilely followed her to
the out-house, and waited at the door, while
she entered.
The dim light proceeding through an open
shutter, revealed the faithful blackboy, asleep
upon his bed, his spurs still on his naked
feet. The poor fellow was so thoroughly
tried, when he lay down a few hours before,
that he forgot to undress, and fell off to sleep,
munching his damper and beef.
Bertha gently shook him, and called him
to get up at once; but Jerry was a heavy
sleeper, and hard to wake. After a few
minutes’ unsuccessful effort, she was so dis-
heartened, that she felt inclined to give up the
attempt, when Snowflake, who was expecting
his morning’s allowance of corn, scented a bag
in one corner of the shed,and walked ceremoni-
ously in, and, in reaching over the bed,
touched Jerry’s face with his cold nose, and,
not being able to get at the corn, gave a loud
and impatient neigh.
Jerry leaped out at the open window, with-
out waiting to rouse himself, he was so
startled. ‘ What de debil belongin’ to
dat I 1 he exclaimed, when he found himself
safely out of the shed ; and half fancying he
had been dreaming, he cautiously stole round
to the door and peeped in. His amaze-
ment, in seeing his young mistress and her
pony in his private bedroom, was unbounded.
Halloa 1 Missie Berta, dat you ! Where
you find him Snowflake,' he asked, as soon as
he had recovered from his surprise.
‘ He just came home ! Jerry, saddle him at
once. I want you to take me to Maitland !'
she said, with a tone of quiet determination.
‘ But bale you got him breakfast yet,
Missie Berta 1’ Jerry answered.
‘ I will take the pony down to the back of
the stable; and you get my saddle out of the'
kitchen at once. Marion will be up directly*
and may see you.’
Jerry looked as though he would have pre-
ferred to argue the expediency of going before
breakfast; but he ran off to the kitchen without
reply, and Bertha led the pony under cover of
the stable. Jerry had taken the saddle down
from the peg, and was balancing it upon his
head, when he heard steps approaching. Ho
had no time to leave the kitchen unobserved,
so he slipped his burden out of a back window,
and then stepped to the door with the greatest
unconcern. ‘ Well, Mallyun,’ he said, as
Marion Macadlaey ntered, ‘you get up murry
early dis morning.’
‘ Not earlier than usual, Jerry ! But where
did you get to yesterday ? Old Hal wanted
you to help him to strip some bark !’
‘Dat old Perbly want me? All right,
Jerry go now !’ said the artful young savage,
and slipping out, he snatched up the saddle
and was behind the concealment of the stable
in a few seconds. Snowflake was quickly
saddled, and Bertha mounted. ‘You murry
make haste, Missie Berta, and gallop along a
brush. Mallyun in kitchen now. Bale dat
can see him you,’ urged Jerry, who had just
caught a glimpse of the bay colt, decked out
in the wreck of the saddle, and was anxious
to hide the result of his carelessness from the
eyes of his young mistress.
‘ But you must come too, Jerry !’ said Ber-
tha decisively. ‘I may want you.’
‘ All right, Missie Berta, Me going to
come. You murry make haste first. Me
catch you murry quick.’
‘ Yon might help me to get Mr, Sinclair
out of the jail, Jerry!’ she said, in animation,
her eyes sparkling and her pulse beating high
at the exciting thought of saving her preser-
ver’s life, ‘ I will ride slowly on, while you
catch a horse ; but be as quick as you can.’
• You gallop till you along a back a brush.
Den you wait. Jerry catch you by-by 1’
Bertha relaxed the reins, and prepared to
start, but Jerry, seeing Marion Macaulay pass-
ing from the kitchen to the house, dragged the
eager pony back, and held him under cover.
‘Dare! dat Mallyun go in now,’ he whis-
pered, as Marion entered the house. ‘ You
murry make baste now. Me catch him you
by-by.’


Snowflake waited for no urging. Directly
Jerry released the reins he sprang forward, and
guided by Bertha’s skilfulhand.soon carried her
round by the back of the brush, out upon the
Maitland Road and out of sight of the house.
Bertha then reined him in, and kept him at a
walk, while waiting for her guide, Hope,
that bad for days been as dead within her
heart, was again asserting its supremacy; and
she smiled as she pictured to herself her pre.
server, rescued by her forethought from the
deadly power of the law, living in peace and
security in some lovely forest glade, his every
want supplied by her faithful attendant Jerry.
The only bitterness in this delicious cup was
the thought that she could never see him then.
But all selfish considerations gave way before
the supreme joy of the anticipation of saving
him ; and her pale featuies wore something of
her old smile, as she rode slowly forward weav-
ing bright airy castles. ‘Not so fast, Snow,
flake 1 We must wait for Jerry !’ she said,
patting her pony’s neck. * You must not be so
eager. There’s plenty of time 1’
Snowflake’s patience was not long tried.
Jerry soon caught the bay colt, and fixing
the broken saddle as well as he could, gal-
loped away, and speedily overlook his young
mistress.
‘ Is the sun np yet, Jerry V Bertha enquired
as he drew rein at her side.
,‘Yes, Missie Berta! Only you can’t see him
cause a dis brush !’ he replied.
‘Lead the way, Jerry, and lose no time, I
will follow you !’ she said ; and Jerry stuck
spurs into the bay colt, and went ofi at a gal-
lop. - They kept up thesevere pace the whole
of the way, except in places where the road
was very rough, and in a eouple of hours
reached the village of Maitland. Jerry cast
longing eyes in the direction of the inn, where
he usually put up, when in town with his
master. . ‘ Dat murry budgery beefsteak be-
longing to old Mother Kenny’s, Missie Berta !’
he said insinuatingly. ‘Spo we get him
breakfast j what you say? Jerry murry hun-
gry.’
‘ No, no, Jerry ! We must see him first!’
Bertha replied impetuously, ‘lf you won’t
go with me, I must go by myself! We can
get break ”
Bertha’s words were interrupted by her
pony shying at a man passing on the opposite
side of the road. She was a good rider and
was able to keep her seat; but she had a nar-
row escape. She dropped her quince switch
as the ponysprang aside ; and the man politely
shuffled across and picked it up for her. ‘ I
aren’t much to look at, as your pony seems to
think, Miss; but you’ve no cause to be
afeared of me ! It’s generally your smart-look-
ing fellows, as thinks it only fun to break a
girl’s heart, or neck either, for the matter of
that, that you’d best give a wide berth!
Them’s the chaps that’ ud just play with a girl
till they’re tired of her, and then fling her
away, and never care a d whether she
goes to heaven or hell !’ said the man, hand-
ing her the switch.
Bertha looked timidly at the strange object
before her, half afraid that he was mad, he
spoke with such earnestness. He had the
oddest appearance of any man, she had ever
seen; and, but for his government uniform,
she would have taken him for a bushranger.
‘ Thank you, sir, for picking up my switch ; I
am much obliged to you,’ she said, taking it
from his hands.
During the brief colloquy, Jerry had sat
upon the wreck of his saddle, regarding the
stranger with a gaze of intense amusement,
and stuffing his knuckles into his mouth to
smother his laughter. But here he burst out
into a roar of merriment. In a few moments
he subsided sufficiently to exclaim
‘ Ob, my jingo ! Dat muriy queer belong-
ing to legs ! Dat like it two feller booma-
rang !’ and then laughed again, till he set in
roars all the ‘laughing jackasses’ within
bearing.
‘Jerry!’ Bertha exclaimed in reproof,
‘ How dare you 1’
‘ O, never mind him, miss,’ said the man.
‘l’m just as God made me; and if people
laugh at the work, they laugh at the Maker.
I dare say, if he was in old England, some of
the young ’uns ’u’d laugh at him, and call him
‘sooty,’ and ‘blacking brush,’ and all sorts
of such names. But never mind him, Miss ;
let the nigger, laugh. Do yon see that chap
riding along there on the black horse f he
asked, pointing down the road. ‘ Look ! he'»
just passing that leaning gumtree.’


Bertha glanced in the direction indicated.
* Yes, sir ! I see him,’ she replied.
‘ That’s the sort of fellow you girls ought’er
be wary on. Coves as looks as handsome as
gentlemen, and aren’t got no more heart than
a wolf 1 That same feller —I’ll never be con
tent till I sticks a knife into him—is just
stopping in Maitland for no other cause only
to see a mao hung next week, as he was the
cause of lagging.
At the mention of hanging, Bertha drew
up the rein she had just loosened. ‘To he
hung next week ! Who is he 1 What is his
name ]’ she exclaimed, eagerly.
What] That fellow riding there, Miss?
His name is Hubert Clayton! And may
•he be ’
‘No, no!’ she interrupted. ‘ He_ who is
to to ’
She could no articulate the awful word ;
but the stranger understood her.
‘ He’s a gentleman, Miss, although he’s a
lag ; and he’s name is Sinclair.’
By a strong effort she crushed down her
emotion, and, though all colour fled from her
face, she spoke calmly. ‘ What day is ’
‘ We don’t know when, until the Governor
sends word, Miss ; but it’ll be next week, I
expect.’
Bertha paused a moment in thought, and
then asked, abruptly, ‘ Who are you, sir ?
Did you know Mr. Sinclair in England?
‘ Me, Miss ? My name’s Bow. I never
seed Mr. Sinclair, till I went as a witness agin
him, and swore the lie that got him lagged !’
‘Oh, how could you be so wicked !’ Bertha
exclaimed, her eyes, flashing in indignation.
‘ Think of all the shame and misery you have
caused.’
‘Tain’t no use to think now, Miss ; though
I do think on it a deal more than I like ! But
may I ask you one question. Miss ?’
‘ Yes.’
‘Are you the young lady as Mr. Sinclair
saved from the bushrangers? Don’t think me
impertinent like ; but I thought you was
when you first spoke.’
‘ Yes, yes, I am ! And if you were so unjust
to him in England, as you say, you ought to
be willing to make some amends here. You
look honest; and I think I can trust you.’ j
Bow muttered under bis breath, ‘ I’d a
never bin nothing rise, only I’d a starved
many a time, if I hadn’t.’
' I want to save hine, from being hung. Can
you help me]’ Beitha continued.
Bow stared at her for a minute in silence.
‘ Well, now, that’s what I call presiderment !
You had a presiderment to let him slip out
of jail ; and so had I!’ he exclaimed in
triumph. ‘ Some people’s too ignerent to be-
lieve in presiderments, but I do !’
‘ I want to see him if I can, and then we
could change clothes ; and he could escape, and
gallop away to a place of safety, before the jailor
found out bis mistake.’
‘ You see. Miss, I’m a jailor ! But you’ve no
causb to be frightened,’ he hurried on to say,
seeing hei glance of dismay. ‘ I shan’t split
on you ! But I’ll help you if I can. Let me
see,’ he continued, reflectively, ‘ Mr. Sinclair’s
a good trifle taller than yoa. No! ’twouldn’t
ibe no use. The constables ’u’d bowl him out
' for sartin, if he tried to pass the gate in your
clothes. If you was of a hight you might, but
it aren’t no use a trying it.’
‘ Oh, dear ! what can we do, then ? I was
so certain I could save him, that I never
thought of the difference in our height ! We
must do something at once, or the dreadful
warrant may come first. Can’t you think of
anything! Oh, do try !’
Bow stood leaning upon a stump, racking
his brains for an idea.
‘ If you brought this trouble upon him by
falsely swearing against him, you ought to try
to save his life !’
‘That’s the very idea that’s brought me out
for a tramp in the bush this morning. You
see, Miss, I’m one of the warders of the gaol,
though I’m a lag; and I’m just a tbinkin’
whether 1 oughtn’t to help him to bolt, as a
recompensation like for swearing agin him at
York,’ replied Bow, meditatively.
‘ Oh, do, sir ! It would be terrible to die so
young !’ replied Bertha, with deep emotion ;
bitter tears of sorrow chasing each other
(down her cheeks.
‘You see, Miss,’ said Bow, who seemed
bent upon giving her a full and complete ex-
planation of his position and history, ‘ I was
assigned to the police magistrate, and I earned
a pretty good character with him ; so when
Dick Brown, one of the warders, died with


the fever, a month ago, I was made tempor-
ally waider—that, means, till, they send an-
other un. My.time ’ll be up on Tuesday; for
there’s .one. coming . from the Sydney gaol
;to take Dick Brown’s place ;■ and then I’ll
have to go back to Air. Bartell’s Now,
this is what, I’ve bin thinking—if.lean Jet
him night, and have a horse ready, he
could escape into the bush !’ , i
• ' ‘The Very thing 1 Let him oat to-night !•
*1 can’t to-night! I’m not on the lockrto-
night To-monow night I’m on !’ •' ■
Jerry, whose merriment had evaporated, as
his quick apprehension caught the significance
of the conversation, here came a step forward.
‘ Look here, Missie Berta, your murry sorry
belonging to dat Rodgers string biro up Misser
Sinlar! Jerry get him horse tomoller night;
anddis feller with him boomerang legs can let
him out of dat jail, and me take Misser Sinlar
plenty miles long way.’
‘ You’re the smartest darkie I’ve seen !’ said
Bow, admiringly.- ‘He can bring a horse,
Miss,’ he continued to Bertha ; ‘and we will
let Mr. Sinclair clear tomorrow night!’ 1
. ‘ Thank yon ! Oh, thank you ! Do you think
I could see him before he goes? Could I see
him this morning ? 1 must get home as soon
as I can; or papa and mamma will be, un-
easy !’
• ‘ Yes, Miss ; I think so ! You go to. the
jail at ten o’clock, and I’ll tell the governor
before.' He’ll be sure tf> let you see him. The
governor of the jail isn’t half a bad sort,' be
isn’t!’
‘ Dat Misser Selley bale go home last night,
Missie Berta I Dat go to Sydney along a Mor-
peth ; dat go last night!’ said Jerry.
‘To Sydney! Why?’ '
* Bale dat me know !’ said Jerry slowly,
ashamed at having to confess ignorance, and
more than half inclined to invent a cause to
rest his credit on.
* Then 1 must go back as soon as I can;
mamma will be so uneasy 1 . I will be at the
gaol at ten o’clock. What time is it now,
ir V
‘ Net much over eight, Miss,’ returned Bow,
first taking the measure of, bis shadow, and
then noting the height of the sun.
* Two long hours I’ How slow time passes I’
* Look here, Miss ! You’d best go over to
the pub. across there. You must a* started
early, and ohghter be a bit peckish by this!’
Jerry seconded and supported the resolu-
tion with great' energy ; and thanking her
new friend Bertha reluctantly turned Snow-
flake’s bead in the direction of the hotel at
the corner of the street. As she loosened
rein, Hubert Clayton cantered past, and re-
cognizing . Jerry, guessed who Bertha was,
and gallantly raised his hat.
, Bow sprang forward, and caught Snow-
flake’s bridle. ■ ‘ Do you see that fine feathered
chap, that looks as if he was a gentleman t
That’s the man as got Mr. Sinclair lagged !’
he whispered hoarsely. 1
Bertha glanced at the retiring figure, that
she bad not before observed.
‘ Who is he, air 1 Do tell me how he did
so 1 Tell me all you know !’ she said eagerly.
Bow narrated the story as briefly as was
possible in his roundabout style, and conclu-
ded by a solemn exhortation, almost ludicrous
in its earnestness, ‘ not to trust ‘any of them
sleek, smiling chaps, ‘ that’s as handsome as
diamond snakes and asdangeronsl’ '' • ■
Bertha did not reply to the wellmeant warn-
ing—probably she did not hear it—but, giv-
ing her pony the rein, rode slowly on to the
hotel; the burden of her reverie being—‘He
is innocent; and Mr; Clayton knows it I I
will a’sk him, I will beg of him on my knee»
to prove it!' He cannot'refdse me, when ho
knows how unhappy I ain 1*
Dream on, weak girl 1 ‘ Take what fleeting
comfortthou canst from thy bright vision of in-
nocence vindicated, of the bond made free 1
Knewest thou the bard, cold world, as experi-
ence shall yet teach it thee, Hope in thy sweet
breast,would not rise again so lightly ! ’Twere
as well to ask the, tiger for his prey; : or the
grave for the mburned-for'dead, as him for
one pitying thought. And if thou couldst
achieve the impossible, and melt him to'tears
of remorse, still it were vain to hope, that—he
would change places with the'criminal! No 1
Sorrows, yet keener than all then ' hast yet
known, are before' thee; and black
is the horizon of thy future, as is
the heavens when the Storm-fiend brings
the hurricane from the south 1 " Heavy,,
crushing is thy Cross 1 ', Fray for strength to


bear it! Pray—and then a glimmer of tho
Hope, now warm within thy breast, may
light thee through the storm to the still
heaven beyond ! )
Tbe garrulous landlady of the ‘ Black
Swan’ received Bertha with noisy protesta
tions of welcome, and poured out her ques-
tions and opinions in one gushing' torrent,
and, fortunately for Bertha, neither expecting
nor waiting for a reply —Must have started
early this morning, Miss Shelley ! 1 I’m glad
to see you looking so well! Yet not so well
as when I seen you last I A shade paler, I
think! That’s a long' time since you were
in Maitland last! Leastway a long time
since 1 seen you. Ah well, 1 hnow you
wouldn’t come to town without coming to see
me! But I’m forgetting!' Haven’t had
breakfast yet 1 What a silly question, to be
sure! Well come into the dining-room ; break-
fast’s on the table now, There's nobody 'par-
tic’lar there, only Mr. Blair and Mr. Clayton.
You don’t know them, I expect I' O, yes,
let me see, Edith Blair is a great friend of
yours ; and Mr. Clayton has just finished
bis breakfast, so there is only one.’ , ‘
. The landlady paused for a moment to take
breath, and Bertha took the opportunity to
ask her for a feed of corn for her pony. i
‘Certainly, Miss Shelley, and the blachboy
too.’
Here Jerry, who was holding the horses at
the door, gave a grunt of decided disapproval.
‘ No, 1 don’t mean the black boy, I mean
his horse. , And that’s tbe dear little pony
the convict stole J Well, he’ll get hung for it,
that’s a, comfort! Come down to see the
execution 1 expect ? It aren’t a very nice
sight for a.young; lady certainly, but young
people is apt to be-curious. It’s only nat’ral,
aren’t it 1, Many’s tbe neck I’ve seen twisted
in my time. 1 ' And he’s the man
that pulled _ you out of the water
tit the. Bushrangers’ Gully? Well, if convicts
will turn cut-throats, nip ’em in the bud, 1 say ;
nip ’em in the bnd ! . I’d hang——- What,
iniaa I Are you ill 1’
Bertha was holding'to the verandah post
for support, her face the colour of ashes. 1
‘La! the child’s' fainting P the old woman
exclaimed in consternation. " ‘Take her other
arm you black devil, and don’t stand grinning
there; and help me to lead her into the par-
lor.' ’ i - i
‘Nevermind; it’s nothing ! Jerry, get me
a drink of water,’"Bertha said, recoiling with
a shudder from the old woman's touch." ‘I
shall be better directly.’ ; I
Mr, Blair, who, fibm the dining-room, had
overheard the landlady’s unfortunate remarks,
hero stepped'out upon the verandah, and say-
ing, ‘I will attend to Mias Shelley, Mis.
Kenny; yon are wanted in the bar, I think !’
Bertha.led into the hotel ; and the landlady
muttering something about some people al-
ways pushing* themselves where they wasn’t
wanted, retired sulkily to the bar.
, -‘ Do not pay any attention to Mrs. Kenny,
Bertha; her tongue always runs too fast,’ Mr.
Blair said soothingly.
Bertha did not reply, but sank down upon
a sofa, and burst into tears.
•A-few minutes silent weeping will relieve
her 1’ thought Mr. Blair, as be poured her.out
a cup of tea. ‘ The old fool’s tongue ha 9
harrowed her feelings cruelly !’. ,
Bertha sobbed ds if her heart was broken,
and pushed the proffered cup from her in all the
wilfulnessof grief; but Mr Blair insisted in a
kind, fatherly way upon her taking it., The
exhilarating beverage soon,worked a soothing
effect upon her nerves; and when she, became
a little composed, Mr. Blair gently led her to
speak of the object of her visit to Maitland.
At tho time the prisoner so gallantly rescued
her at the Bushrangers’Oamp.Mr. Blair formed
a shrewd conclusion of the cause of his reck-
less daring ; and he now guessed her tnotive in
coming to towni > Bertha was at first unwil-
ling to speak upon the subject, so fearful was
sbe tbat anyone should leatn of the projected
scheme for Percy’s escape ;■ button Mr. Blair
telling her that he guessed her mission, and
offering to use his influence with the governor
of the gaol to obtain an interview for. her with
the prisoner, sbe related her troubles,. i ‘ Do
not be afraid to trust. me,' • Bertha,’
he said, kindly, . .‘1 i may . guess: i wrongly,,
but 1 believe, you came to.'Maitland this
morning to see Mr. Sinclair.,. It is bat natu-
ral you should feel anxious:on. behalf of one
to whom you owe your life. » I will do.-what
1 can to procure yon an interview.


Bertha thanked him warmly, and tears of
gratitude fell upon Mr. Blair’s band as she
pressed it. She admitted her wish to see the
prisoner, but carefully avoided any allusion to
her hope of bis escape; and by a. strange
fatality, Mr ; Blair failed to speak of her
fathei’s business in Sydney. Neither' Jerry
nor Bow, either, had been fortunate enough
to recollect the matter, though both knew
that he had gone expressly to obtain mitiga-
tion of the prisoner’s sentence. Had Bertha
learned the exertion her father was’making
on Percy’s behalf, it is possible she might
have hesitated before persuading the prisoner
to forfeit all claim to the Governor’s clemency
by attempting escape from jail. But
whether she would have thought the
chance of. his obtaining remission of
the capital sentence too small for him
to hazard his life by awaiting it, and still urged
him to immediate escape, or not, certain it is
that she knew nothing but that her preserver
was condemned to death, and that sht! would
save him at any, at every cost. Percy, too,
by a strange coincidence, had not been told
of his master’s visit to Sydney. The gaol
chaplain, who was endeavouring to prepare
the prisoner for his probably speedy end, pur-
posely withheld the intelligence, lest be should
raise hopes he was not very sanguine would
be realized ; and Percy, feeling death inevit-
able, believing himself standing upon the dim
brink of eternity, strove hard to turn his time
to good account. / From boyhood he had been
religious, but his religion had been of the head
rather than the heart, a religion of conviction
rather'than feeling; and now, when he stood,
as he thought, face to face with the dread
mysteries of death, he found little of the com-
fort and consolation that he had been accus-
tomed to expect from the sublime truths of
Christianity. He needed yet greater trials to
break through the barrier of cold intellectu-
ality, and warm his heart with the heavenly fire
oj regeneration.
Mr. Blair paced the room a thrn or two,
deliberating whether he was justified in aiding
Bertha to see the.prisoner. ‘l’m not certain
that I am acting judiciously 1’ he said men-
tally. ‘ I’m afraid I Well, right or
wrong, I’ll risk it! It would be hard, if she
cou<d not see her preserver to bid him fare-
well, before be is launched into eternity ; for
there is npt much chance of his sentence being
cancelled !’ ,
He pressed her to take some breakfast, and
directly she had finished, he went out In ar-
range for her visit to the jail; and Bertha
turned to the window to wait with feverish
impatience for the sobergoiog old clock over
the mantelpiece to.reach the hour of ten.
She sat by the open window gazing vacantly
out upon the road, and thinking of the sad
changes that had happened within the last
few days—changes that had thrown a dark
shadow over her young life, and banished,
perhaps for ever, her peace and happiness. Her
gloomy reverie was abruptly interrupted by the
entrance of Jerry, who, in an aggrieved tone,
exclaimed, * Bale yon think it, Jerry mnrry
hungry, Missie Berta 1 Dat me too much
mnrry hungry altogeder !’
Bertha started, and turned her large, en-
quiring eyes upon the disturber of her sombre
dreams.
‘ Dat me been holding him horses all dis
time, Missie Berta. Bale dat Mother Kenny
no give me any breakfast!’
Bertha felt sorry for the > troubles of her
faithful attendant, and gave him permission
to sit down and get his breakfast at the table,
upon which his eyes rested longingly; and
the blackboy’s doleful voice soon gave place to
the clatter of places and dishes, as be most
expeditiously made up for lost time. And as
Jerry sat revelling in.the delights of the
‘ murty beef steak belonging to Mother
Kenny/ Bertha relapsed into her reverie.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
But now shine on, and what care I,
Who in this stormy gulf have found a pearl
The countercharm of space and hollow sky
And do accept my madness, and would die
To save from some slight shame one simple girl;
Would die ; for sullen-seeming Death may give
More life to Love than is or ever was
In our low world, where yet ’tis sweet to lire.
Tennyson.
‘Time flies fast’ is a saying, the truth of
which is never so well understood as when,
time has flown; and eternity steps forward in
its stead > When the days are numbered, and
man, counting his few remaining boms,
stands watching the last grains swiftly falling


to the lower globe of his time-measure, then
the full significance of the aphorism, that
should be charactered in letters of flame upon
the minds of all—‘time flies fast!’ —flashes
upon his awakened gaze, and tills him with
wonder that be did not till now feel its im-
mortal truth I '
" Percy was standing by the grated ‘ window
r f bis cell on the morning after the trial, revie w'
ihg his short life. Very brief seemed the few
years be had passed.‘ He had scarcely passed
through the golden age of boyhood, and
entered the arena of real life, when'the black
cloud of disgrace and shame fell upon him.
And now how brief seemed .the three
years he had spent since 1 that first trial,
when he was torn from home, and sent,
a' branded outcast, from bis country ! His
time had ' come! In a tew days, a week at
• be latest, the cold grave would close over
him ; he felt, and he waited with no dread for
the fatal boor. He prayed for grace to
touch his cold heart, 'to feel the exceeding
preciousuess of the great atonement,'but no
grace came ; he read the Holy Word in the
hope of profiting somewhat by the soul-pene-
trating truths of salvation ; bur, strive as he
would, be couli only know, he could not feel
the great riches . of religion ;.. and he now
waited in. almost sullen anticipation for the
hour to arrive that should, however hopeless
it might leave his dim future, free her from
the baleful shadow of his existence.
The door behind him . grated heavily
upon ’ its hinges, as - it was bslowly
swung open ; but he heard it not, and a slight
figure glided noiselessly into the damp, dark
cell. The harsh grating of the hinges passed
unheeded by his inattentive ears; but that
subdued sob, scarcely audible in its depth of
concentrated sorrow, which shook the delicate
frame of the gentle bring who had come, daring
all for his dear sake, to risk even .reputation
to save him, instantly roused him’ from
thought. He turned— 1 ‘
‘ Oh, Percy !’ exclaimed, a low, sweet voice,
and in a moment she was in his arms.
Percy {Sinclair almost doubted the evidence
of his senses. She, whom to save from the
baleful influence of bis love, he had sacrificed
liberty,perhaps life; she, who, for her own dear
sake, he had hoped, would learn to foigct his
very existence, was hete clinging to him,
| and weeping tears of bitter grief for bis trouble,
I her gentle heart torn by dread anticipation of
’ his impending fate. For one brief moment
his passionate/yearning love triumphed, and
be pressed her to bis. heart ; the
next, the warning voice ‘ of honour
recalled discretion ; and, gently disen-
gaging her hands, he said calmly, almost
coldly, .‘I since)ely thank you, Miss Bertha,
for your kind interest in the convict’s fate I
But 1 doubt tlje wisdom of your visiting him
in his cell. The world is censorious; and it
is better to give it no shadow of cause for.
conjectuiel’ ' ,
It cost him a great effort to speak so unfeel-
ingly to her, for whose happiness he would
have pawned his soul. He turned his too-
fond gaze from her tearful, imploring eyes; he-
could not bear to. look down, into .their blue'
depths of sorrow-fraught love. He knew now.
a truth, that, under other considerations,'
would have thrilled his heart with joy, but
which now added only wormwood to bis
bitter cup of fate—he knew that she loved
him, that in her pure.heart bis image reigned-
supreme. And be knew that he could never*
win her, that her love for.him could only
blight her otherwise happy future. They who’
love in vain .have probable cause for sorrow
but they who win the heart of the adored ‘
one only to cast a shade of trouble over
her future life, who but they way,
tell with wbat a concentrated anguish such
a terrible calamity fills the soul [ His heart
suspended its movement, and grew' icy'
cold as be spoke] Alive to nothing but
his danger, and her scheme for his escape/
Bertha did not observe bis chilling manner,
but exclaimed in a low whisper, casting at the
same moment a frightened glance around, lest
she should be overheard, Oh, Percy, they •
will kill you ! Fiy from this dreadful place,
while there is yet time! Escape before it is
too late I‘
Regaining his composure,' be begged
her to return . home, and not -to
distress ' herself on account of ■ his
fate. ‘lt.is best as it is, Miss Bertha !’ be .
said, quietly. * I can not expect happiness in'
this world; in the next, perhaps, 1 may find it.
Can you really begiieved at my chance of cx


changing positive misery for possible felicity T
He spoke to her, as he would to any person,
who expressed sorrow at. his position. , Not a
sign did he.show by look or tone, that her
solicitude,was any more'to him than the com-
monplace regret of strangers ; but her love Was
too intense, too deep for any thought but of
his safety to cross’her mind. ‘ Positive misery
for possible felicity !’ she repeated, catching
his glance at the,moment, with her sorrowful,
enquiring eyes, ‘ Are you sure you would gain
that possible happiness 1 When death is so
near, it compels one tp ask whether it would
bring cerlaln happiness. If there can be any
doubt, how“terrible to think of! Percy,
1 have arranged with the jailor for your es-
cape tb-morrow night., He, will let you out at
midnightijj and Jerry will take you right
away into the bush, where they can. never
find you again.’ ; • * ,
‘ Escape ! That is impossible, Miss Bertha.
No jailor'would be so mad as to risk the gal-
lows by : saving, mo. , The jailor who, has
charge of me, is a convict too ! Those, ,who
belong to our miserable class, must he
doubly careful;’ they are hung for‘what a
free man would scarcely be reprimanded. It
is useless to raise hopes in your gentle breast,
of my escape. ,A few days more, knd my
time will have passed, and I shall be at rest.
It is but natural that one so kind and good,
as you have ever been, should feel sorrow at
my misfortunes; hut remember, Miss Bertha,
my seeming affliction is but an ill-disguised
blessing.. When there is no hope in this
world, it !s a great consolation to feel that
there is hope in the next.’ .
‘ Hope ? Percy, unless there is certainty,
there can be no hope! Are you sure of ex-
changing by death the woes of earth for joys
of heaven? Forgive my speaking so boldly
upon a subject that I am ashamed to admit
1 have'thought so little about, till” the last
few days! ‘ The troubles we have had lately,
seems to have changed me strangely, and I
think of it now. But, Percy, there is no time
to talk. You must escape to-morrow night !
The jailor has promised to let you out.’
‘And to suffer iby sentence in my stead?
No'; Miss Bertha, it is impossible 1 No
jailor could be found so unwisely generous as
to act so.’
• But yon must! The jailor will help you
to escape', for he has promised me to. He
knew you in England, and was one of the
false witnesses whose evidence caused you. to
be, transported! Do promise me you, will
avail yourself of his assistance, and escape !’ !
' ‘ Knew me in England, Miss Bertha 1 'l.
fancied that I had met him before some-
where 1’ .
‘ His name is Mr. Bow he told me every-
thing about you 1 It would have made me so
happy . a few days ago to have
learnt ' you were innocent, though,
that 1 never ; for a , moment doubted,
but this terrible calamity has so numbed
my heart, that I feel I can never be happy
again !’ i She broke down in saying this, and,
leaning, against the wall of the dark cell,
sobbed piteously. His escape, her . one
thought, she had striven to speak and think
calmly, and repressing the tears that bad burst
forth on her entering the cell, she had for a
few minutes succeeded; but the struggle was
too great' the excitement too severe, and she
was completely overpowered. ■ Percy had
been able to conceal bis emotion, while she
controlled hers • but to see her weeping for
his sorrow, and remain firm, was beyond his
power. ; The/considerate Bow had left his
hands free. Tenderly supporting her fragile
form in his strong arras, he begged in heart-
wrung tones, that she would not distress her-
self for his misfortunes'; ‘lt will soon be
over, and— :— ’
‘You must, not; you'shall not die!’ she
exclaimed passionately, interrupting him. ‘lt
would kill me to lose you ! Ob, that I could
die to save you ! You must escape !’
‘lt is impossible ! I sincerely hope. Miss
Bertha, that you may forget me, and re-
member only this, ‘God knows bestf”
‘ Forget you ? Impossible 1 I would be
unworthy of the life you twice offered yours
to save ; if I ever '
She could not complete the sentence, and
reclined npon his arms, overpowered by her
emotion. Percy did not immediately reply,
his heart was too full for words. He longed
to tell her that her sympathy was dearer to him
than all the woild beside, but he felt it wisest,
kindest, to hide bis love. ‘ She loves me, and
will find it a hatd and long struggle to forget


me, when I lay low, with the damp sod above
in} bead; but if she knows how dear she is to
me, she will linger over my memory, and
waste the best days of her life in mourning,’
he said mentally. ‘ Ho, she .must not know
how I adore her !’
After a few seconds she became sufficiently
composed to renew the subject of his escape.
Looking up imploringly, she exclaimed, ‘ But
you will let the jailor assist you to get out of
prison i Jerry will be waiting outside with
horses, and then you can. all escape.’
‘ By doing so, I would be compromising
the jailor. He would be most certainly hung,
if he aided my escape. I could not purchase
.safety at the expense of another man’s life,
even if mine was worth the sacrifice,’ Percy
teplied, firmly and gently. . ,
' 4.nd you will be hung, if yob don’t!’ she
x.' bed. . ' • . ;
' , ‘ Miss Bertha—it wouid be dishonorable of
me to accept life on such terms. , For my own
sake I, would prefer to die ; but as my fate
causes you some uneasiness, I would escape, if
I could do so without hazard to another,. I
should loss all self-respect were I to accept
the warder’s,proposal! No, I must meet my
doom!' '■ . ,
f ‘ What! You will not escape?’ .she ex-
claimed in consternation. ‘ You must 1. It
would kill me, if yon were to die! You must
for ray sake !’ ~ ~
Gently and. tenderly he endeavoured to
soothe . her, and spoke eloquently of the
mercy of the Lord chastening,whom he loves.
But the burden of.her cry was still, .‘You
must escape! It would kill me,- if you were
to die!’, .
• Her tears and entreaties only made him the
firmer in his resolution. ‘ No, no !’ he thought,
Her love .is the one great reason.against.my
escaping! • For her sake I wilLremain and
.die ! Time will soon assuage the intensity of
her grief; and, forgetting me, as she must
'soon learn to do, a happy future may . yet be
before her!’ , .... ■ , , ,
‘ Tell me I . ’Promise me that you s will
escape !’, she pleaded. , . ..
‘ No, I cannot 1’ he replied, firmly. ;
. She threw herself upon her knees before him
and, clasping his hands in the agony of her
grief, implored him piteously to avail
himself of the jailor’s offer; but he
remained constant to his resolve. - •
* Oh, Percy, it would be but hypoc-
ricy , now in this terrible ; time ; to
pretend not to understand each other,!
I know you .love me! The danger
you encountered in saving me at the Bush-
rangers’ camp proved it; and the ■ noble
sacrifice yon would now make—l understand,
your motive,, proves,; you worthy .. of
the love I must- confess; for ..you.
But for the awful position you are in, I would
rather break ray. heart than tell.you this se-
cret. ■ But, 0, Percy, for my sake escape !, !
could never be happy again if,you die ! never,
never !’• ... j. ■ ~,, v \ , :
In his emotion Percy paced his cell > for a
few minutes, bis brain on fire, his heart-full
to bursting. She watched him closely, an
eager, yearning expression upon,her features.
Suddenly he paused and stood-before her, all
traces of emotion gone. Taking hands in
his he said, gently, ‘ Were I in a different posi-
tion nothing could give me greater happiness
thau to know that I had won the heart of the
only girl l ever lovvd ;. but, as I am,.to learn
this gives me; the greatest'pain, for Tkuojv
that for you to love me, a convict, is to h« un-
happy till .you can forget me. .-No, Miss
Bertha, I cannot! Let .me;beg of, you tore-
turn home, and.allow my.fate,to- slip from
your mind.’ ,> .. .. ,
She begged, him passionately to yield, and
take advantage of ;the opportunity of .escape
that was offered him ; but/ lie remained .firm.
Better cause her, the present' and"transient
grief, poignant. as it was, thap- cloud her
whole future life by,his unfortunate existencej!
She stood apart for, a moment, as jf stupified
by his; refusal then,, turning her, tear-
dimmed, eyes upop him, .she .exclaimed,
‘ You will not escape ! , Then hear, gap—l will
not survive you,. . If. you . ,:r|:fuse ,to
leave this prison ■ to-morrow .night, .I. will
leain. when the fatal; day comes, and then,- at
the very,hour.that you are to die; I .will die
too.J I knowrit ,is ;wicked,- that perhaps my
act may .post-me the.future;, but I cannot, I
will, not survive you !•; Promise, me now,!
Promise me pt once, that you will ' save your
life, or I swear by my; Maker, to die by,,my
own hand!' She stood erect, her dark blue


eyes dilated and sparkling in her excitement,
and her right arm held aloft, as if invoking
heaven. ‘ At once, or I swear; and then no
earthly power shall make me break my vow !’
Percy hesitated. To escape was to live,
and to live was to blighther whole future; but a
glance into those resolute eyes showed him the
depth of her will, and determined him. She
would take the vow if he did not comply at
;once. * I promise!’ he said reluctantly. ‘I
1 would rather die, for your sake as well as
mine, but I promise 1’
The terrible excitement that had sustained
her through the long and painful interview
suddenly failed her, and with the cry, * Thank
Heaven, he is saved 1’ she fell forward, faint-
ing. He caught her in his arms, and, as sjie
lay, her beautiful head resting upon his shoul-
der, hope feebly strove to reassert itself.
How cruel did fate torture him ! It was
almost beyond human power to be patient and
contented under such atrial. With what a
bitter halted might he not have justly regarded
the monsterin human guise, who hadcaused all
his misery, and who was now lingering in
Maitland for the fiendish purpose of witness-
ing the climax of his victim’s disgrace—to
see him hung—had be known his true charac-
ter!
Bertha’s features were ashy pale, and she
looked so death-like in her swoon, that Percy
became fearful : that the strain had been too
great, and bad snapped her fragile thread of
life. His cup of misery had long seemed
full to the brim, yet was it ever being’ added
to drop by drop. With a foreboding of evil, he
gazed upon the dear face, so lovely in its still
repose. There was no place in that damp
cell,’ where he could lay her, while he
called the jailor, and he carried her across to
the door, and then knocked at it loudly.
There was no need for much noise to
attract Bow’s attention. He was sitting on
the opposite side of the passage, quietly wait-
ing for the termination of the interview, and
'whiling away the time in speculating,
whether his action in aiding the prisoner to
' escape and thereby forfeiting bis own life, if
he should be caught, would make him quits
with the prisoner, for the deadly wrong he
had done him at home. He had, after long
and patient consideration, just arrived at the
wise conclusion, that it was a problem ha
could not positively solve, when Percy’s
knocks dissipated his brown-study, and acting
with the force and expedition of gunpowder,
raised him to bis feet, and burled him against
the door. He shoved it open and
rushed in, almost overturning Percy in bis
haste. ‘Ah! the young lady! What’s'up
with her T he exclaimed.
‘ Same water, quick !’ said Percy ; and
without waiting to close the 'cell door after
him, the excited jailor dashed out; In a
couple of minutes he returned with a jug of
water, icy-cold, as if just taken from a well.
Bertha was beginning to revive, when Bow
returned. Percy sprinkled the water gently
upon her face, and soon brought her to. Open-
ing her large, blue’eyes she looked wonder-
ingly round, and, comprehending her position
at a- glance, she hastily drew herself from
Percy’s arras, and blushing painfully,
said, glanciug from one to the other, and wip-
ing the water from her face, ‘Water! What
is the matter) Surely 1 was not so weak as
to faint 1’
‘Yes, Miss Bertha, yon fainted; hut the
swoon only lasted a few minutes. You re-
covered directly the jailor brought some wa-
ter,’ replied Percy, gently.
‘ You looked as white as a new-sheared
lamb a minute ago, miss; but the color’s all
come back now, and you looks as beautiful
agin as a garden full of red roses 1’ said Bow,
admiringly; and, then fancying that he had
been too bold, the honest fellow stammered
his apologies, and begged the young lady to
forgive his rudeness. Without replying to
his words' Bertha said joyfully, ‘Oh, Mr,
Bow, he will go with you to-morrow night!
I had such trouble to persuade him ; but he
will go now;’
‘ You had trouble to persuade him V said
Bow, incredulously. ‘ Why if he don’t escape
to-morrow night, he’ll never get another
chance; for I shan’t be on the lock ' again at
night till after he’s hung.' ‘
‘ Miss Shelley tells me yon are willing' to
let me escape. Have you taken into consid-
eration the risk you would run by doing sb.T
Percy asked turning to Bow, -
‘They’d only hang me for it, sir; I’ve
thought of that ; but I’ll save you, if they


hang me a score of times. I’ve done yon
more hurt than 1 can ever undo; for if 1
hadn’t been the wickedest wretch alive, and
swore agin you at York, you wouldn't be here
a prisoner now ! But there’s no more time
for talking; so I’ll just go into the pas-
sage agin, while you bid the young lady .good-
bye !’ Saying which, and without waiting for
reply, he stepped out, and drew the door to be-
hind him. '
‘ Miss Bertha, I have promised to escape,
as yon so much desire it; and I. want you now
to make me a promise also!’ Percy said slowly.
‘ Oh, I will promise you anything !’
‘Tiy to forget me!’
. . Forget you, Percy 1 Never!’ she ex-
claimed. ‘ I love yon, and you alone 1 And
if we never meet again on earth, J shall wait
impatiently for the lime when we may meet
above! You will escape? Jerry shall be
waiting for you with a horse. I would give
you Snowflake; but Mr. Bow is afraid the
pony is too well' known, so Jerry shall bring
one of the young horses.’ •
Bow here opened the door a few inches and
whispered through the aperture, ‘ Excuse me,
air 1 It’ll bo time for the chaplain to be round
directly!’ and then drew back,
‘ I will escape as I promised, Miss Bertha ;
and my hourly prayer shall be that you may
forget me, and learn to love some one who
may be better able to make you happy!’
* Forget you ! Never 1 But farewell, I
shall know no moment’s peace until I learn
yon are safe 1 '
Percy pressed her hands—he would have
folded her to bis breast bad he dared—and in
a moment she was gone. He staggered back
to the grated window, and stood for hours
leaning against the wall, gazing vacantly
through the dingy panes, in bitter thought.
CHAPTER XXIX.
Thine eyes* bine tenderness, thy long fair hair.
And the wan lustre of thy features —caught
From contemplation—were serenely wrought,
Seems Sorrow's softness charm’d from its despair— ~
Have thrown such speaking sadness in thine air.
That—but I know thy blessed bosom fraught
With mines of unalloyed and stainless thought—
J should hare deemed thee doom’d to earthly caret 1
—Loud Byron.
As Bertha, , leaning for support upon the
«troug arm of the warder, tottered out of the
gaol yard, Snowfhko, who with Jerry by
his side, was awaiting her, neighed impa-
tiently ; and the black hoy called to ' her,
‘Ontne along, Missie Bertha! Dat ,Misser
Bair go along to Field Place by-by !' Dat
waiting at Mother Kenny’s. Bale, you go
before dinner time 1 Eh!” , j
- ‘Don’tbe afraid, Miss, about Mr. Sinclair,’
said Bow, trying tp re-asaure her, ‘ Jerry
and roe’ll get him off to-morrow night, as
right as ninepence. He’s—that Jerry, 'J
moan—’s to have horses at the cross roads,
about a mile on the Newcastle road, at twelve
o’clock; and Mr. Sinclair and me’ll walk
there and meet Him. Once in the saddle,
there’s no constables in Maitland ’ll catch nsj'
‘ Thank you ! oh. tliank you ! I can never
forget your goodness! Jerry will be there with
the two fastest horses I can get 1’ •- 1 '
‘ Don’t bother about a horse for me, miss,
I know a good un here that I can borrow.!’
said Bow, narrowly risking his new title to
honesty, by explaining too minutely how he
intended procuring it, ' .
Bertha again thanked him; and then
mounting her pony rode rapidly hack to the
hotel for Mr. Blair, who Jerry had said was
going back with her. Mr. Blair was not at
the 1 Black Swan,’ but had left a message that
he would be ready to start, soon.
‘Jerry, you stay for Mr, Blair for a few
minutes. Tell him that my head ached,, .and
I lode on !’ Bertha said to the blackboy.., >
‘ You got it murry . bad headache 1” Jerry
asked anxiously, ,
• Yes, Jerry, very had 1’ .
.‘What for yon no stop, and have him
dinner} Dat murry good, stop it headache,’
advised Jerry, to whom a good dinner was a
panacea for all complaints.
‘ No, no, Jerry, I roust go !’ ~,.
‘Dat me stop him few minutes, for Misser
Bair? How many dat few minutes? Dat
fiver ,
‘ Yes, Jerry, yes 1’ ‘ Good-bye Mrs. Kenny,*
this to the landlady,' who just appeared at
the bar door ; and Bertha turned her pony’s
head homeward, and gave him the rein. ,
‘ Queer girl that)’ mumbled the old land-
lady, who was disappointed sf a long ' yarn,’
by Bertha’s abrupt departure. ‘Thinks a
deal too much of hetself I I’ve seen ’em


As proud, come low enough in ray time, and
may again!* with which brief and unintelli
gible soliloquy, she turned upon her heel, and
re-entered , the bar, to finish to an eager
crowd of a lively account of some
of her early adventures in the. black slums of
London, , . She .had been interrupted ,by
Bertha’s' coming, in a narrative of a body-
snatching case, in which she had figured as
chief aotor.'and in which ‘by the treachery of
a jealous rival in the trade, , her bright career
had been cut short.' t
:ii, Jerry kad learned how to read the clock,
and bitching his horse to a verandah post, he
■peeped through the window to* watch the
■passage of the five minutes, to which number
he had limited the time, he bad received orders
to wait for Mr. Blair, The fifth was three-
fifths past,, when the landlady suddenly -ap-
peared again upon thetscene. : . . . ■ . : !
• Noticing the black boy standing,before the
window, Vrith hisnose flattened agairlst the
pane, peering closely into "the robin, and con-
cluding that he was prying into her private
' business, she stepped softly up to the unwary
young savage, who received the first intima-
tion of her presence in the form of a sound-
ing box upon each ear, that made. 1 a dozen
young comets dance before his eyes,' “ You
black d l — : !’ but’ perhaps 1 it. udjl be . as
'well'to suppress the forcible, though liardly
lady-like epithets she treated him with. There
'was'-'in her, at the best'o'f 'times, little of the;
‘angelic simplicity and sweetness,’ thq. halo
poets delight to cast about their ', beautiful
/ideals; and riow’th’at her ire was thoroughly
roused, by.what she termed,' ‘the niggers inipi-
‘ dent cur’osity, drathim I’' she appeared to the
disgusted Jerry a very termagant,' ‘ Jerry.did
not wait for a second attack; but recovering his
surprise and his feet (she bad knocked hi,m con-
siderably out of the perpendicula’r), at the
same.time, he slipped through her fingers, sis
she made a’ clutch’ at his . woolly ' hair;
' with the unmistakeable intention of ‘‘ taking
'it out of him," and darted to!his horse. !In a
Second he was in, the saddle,'from which emi-
/nehce he gave f‘Dat tnurry big fool_.old
Mother,Kennyl’ 1 a piece of. his mind,; and
then tarning' ( his. horse’s heid tbwards'.hpme,
‘ he raced off to overtake his young ‘mistress,
leaving the infuiiated landlady shaking her
red fists at him, in impotent rage,
Bertha had started at a gallop, and, giving
her pony his head she had gained so great a
distance that Jerry did not overtake her fora
couple of miles. When he reached her side
he commenced an excited recital of the un-
provoked assault that be hadbeen subjected to.
‘Not now, Jerry, hot now ! Tell .me an-
other time, I can’t listen do you now ! .Gal-
lop on. I want to get home soon !’
Jerry used the spurs, and led the way; and
after a long and hard ridedhey reached home.
At the verandah' Bertha sprang from the
saddle and hurried into the house. She knew
she must have been missed; and she was afraid
her mother would be very anxious about her.
Marion Mkcaulay met Herat the door. ‘ Oh,
wherever have you been, . Miss?. We all
thought you were lost!’ she'exclaimed. ‘The
men have been’searching for you everywhere.
Come along, your nlarama is in a terrible state
about you !’
, Bertha, followed Marion, into her mother’s
‘room,'and gently opening the door, passed in.
Marion guessed where Bertha had been, now
that she had returned mounted ; and feeling
that she might have explanations to make
to her mother which 'she would not wish her
to hear, 1 returned to the kitchen. j
. Whpnßertha,entered the room, Mrs. Shelley
|Was sitting- in, ,a low chair, overpowered by
grief and anxiety. Bertha had not been, missed
until breakfast time'; and as Jerry was away
too, it .was supposed she had ; gorie for a walk
by the river, and taken him with her for com-
pany. But wherj'an hour after breakfast, and
then two passed without".her returning, Mrs.
Shelley began to'feel so uneasy,-that she sent
Marion to the huts for the men to,search for
her’.-The men’wete all'at hbine'except the
shepherd ; andthey turned out and searched
diligently, arid eagvrly, but to no purpose; and
just before Bertha returorq they gave up, un-
der the impression that she must havedrowned
herself.' The trial,bad made Bertha’s love for
Mr.’Sinclair so public that they ,knew : of It,
and all believed that 1 she committed suicide
in consequencb of the sentencepaased upon
him., ;; .., . „ ~; ;; •
I. ‘ Mamma !’ Bertha,cried springing forward,
and falling on her knees try her mother’s chair.


.‘My darling !’ was all Mrs. Shelley could
say, and mother and daughter were locked in
each other’s arras.' ' ,
‘I went to see him, mamma! Don’t be
angry with,me, I couldn't help it!’ He was
sentenced to death .you know V . .*
‘ My darling child, I. have beep in great
sorrow-, about you ! I thought you, had wan-
dered away, and were lost, or that-you had
thrown yourself into the river. Thank heaven,
you are safe!’ exclaimed Mrs. Sjhelley,. too
overjoyed at finding her daughter safe, to
think of the cause that had. led her away, ‘You
must never leave me again Bertha, ■ I' could
not live without ray child !| ; ,‘ • i M
They sat together for hours, till the warm
sun shine melted into twilight,'and that in
its turn gave placed to the softened rays, of
the moon, talking of Percy, and‘what the
jailor had told of him, of the brightdiome he
bad lost in dear old England, and of.the terriale
calamity that, bad now befallen him. And
they spoke of tne-future, that to;the young
promises,"such wonderful and inexhaustible
stores of pleasure,' but to’Bertha, as she now,
looked upon-it, offered nothing.but a cold
dark blank. ‘ Don’t speak so hopelessly, my
darling; you will soon get over this trouble.
Time soothes care much better than you
think now. A few years past, and you will
be able to look back upon these dark days
with composure 1’ said Mrs! Shelley, though
she felt afraid that upon Bertha’s gentle and
sensitive nature, her present sorrows would
work too lasting an effect, '
‘ Never can I be happy again, mamma, un-
til I know he.is; then, perhaps, I may!’ re-
plied Bertha, whose thoughts, were running
upon Percy’s projected escape,, which she did
not dare to breathe even to her mother.
‘lf it is God’s will that he should die my
child, think’how little he has to lose, and how
ranch to gain ! ■ A honorable gentleman, con-
victed and punished for a great crime, he
could never be really happy, till his innocence
is’ proved ; and that is not likely ever to be.
His death would be a blessing to him ; for it
would end bis troubles. Could you then be
so cruel, as to wish him to live when life to
him must always mean unhappiness,’
‘Ah, mamma, it is easy to think like that,
when those in trouble are strangers to us, but
it is very, very hard to.feel so, when it is
those we love !’ said Bertha with a sigh.
Marion Macaulay : here interrupted - their
conversation by rapping at the door; and en-
quiring if they would like a cup of tea., The
usual teatime bad long passed, but, Marion
had not called them before, feeling it better
not to disturb;, them, , ‘ Take us each , a cup,
into the parlour* Marion {’ said Mrs. Shelley, ;
and, rising led .the way there.,. j p;;
The tea • was brought; and seemed much
to, revive them.. ‘.They sat .talking : for > a
while, . and presently . Bertha; stole[ to*
her piano. The, wild,.,passionate outburst
of grief, and the low wailings' of . ,dea- ; .
pair that, responsive ;to her- own ~feelings,
welledfrom the sympathetic, keys were,!
occasionally varied by the cheering, voice pf,
hope, as, her, thoughts, wandered, forth'
with him on his flight from prison; pnd she,;
pictured him, baffling all ipursuit,-standing,
safe upon the. deck pf some proud ship, bound’
for the exile’s.refuge—America.;, r..,, ;■
An hour or.two; and in Field Place all was,,
still- and dark as the. grave. All'were in ,
peaceful sleep, biit one, who lay upon. her ~
restless bed, making and rejecting plan after
plan for her preserver’s future guidance. ;At
last her busy, brain too was overpowered by the
blessed influence of sleep ; and for a few fleet-f
ihg hours she was free from her waking care;;
Three, days had elapsed, and Bertha was
walking alone by the liver in the afternoon,
dreaming of the first time she bad seen, him,.-
who now seemed a . part of her ■ very,
existence. Passing by the log, -where she had.,
picked - up the poetry a few weeks before,, she;.
sat down, and her thoughts wandered back tp ,
the day when they first met. ‘ Ah, better for
ns both had he not been quick enough to save
ice from the snake! He would not be
now in bis awful position, and 1 should be at
rest in the grave 1’ . .
Old Hal.- Brown, the lint-keeper, or old
Iperbly, aSjhe was usually called on the;,
station, bad been out stripping bark; and it
not being one of his industrious days—he had
occasional -attacks of industry; hot at very
unfrequent and irregular intervals—he had .
roiled himself up in his coat, and laid down
in the 'shade, under a!wattle tree,. ‘to think ,
a bit,’ as he called it. Bertha’s exclamation


—for she had been thinking aloud—roused
him from a reverie, and looking up, he found
her sitting close by! ‘ Hallo, Miss !’ he ex-
claimed with delight, ‘lt does a old fellow’s
heart good to see you ! 1 ' Why, I haven’t set
eyes on you afore'this week !’
‘'•'What, Hal., is- it yon; I am very glad to
she you I, I have been too busy'to think of
you lately; but do not believe I can forget you,
Hal. I must forget that dreadful fight with
the bushrangers first,’ she replied, kindly.
' ‘And so you went to see Mr. Sinclair,
Miss! Well, I hope the Governor will give
him a free pardon. He has pardoned many a
wns un.’ 1
• * Do you think he will be pardoned,' Hal. f
Bertha asked, turning her beautiful eyes en.
quiringly upon the old man.
1 Hal. hesitated ; He did not wish to destroy
the hopes his kind young mistress appeared
to entertain, but .he bad serious doubts of
Mr. Shelley’s-mission proving of any avail.
Bertha’s quick glance noticed his indecision ;
and she said anxiously, * Hal., I will trustyou
not to deceive me; tell me, honestly, what
your opinion is.’ 1 ' ■
' Thus appealed to, Hal.-felt compelled to'
speak truthfully ; and be reluctantly admitted
that be was not sanguine of any good insult-
ing from his master’s intercession, ‘ You see,
Miss,’ he said, in explanation, ‘The Governor
aren’t a bad sort o’ a chap, takin’ him alto-
gether ; and he wouldn’t hang a dingo only
for the moral effect, as be calls it.' But it’s
necessary to hang now and agin to .strike
terror into the rebels. Unfortinately for
Mr. Sinclair, there’s bin a good many priso-
ners took to the bnsh on the other side lately,
about Richmond, and they’ve committed some
acts so very bad—murderin’and house-burn-
in’ and the like—that the Governor swore
he’d hang the very fust bushranger as was
caught, in spite of the devil.’
• ‘Have they all been caught yet?’’ she asked,
shuddering at the possibility of Percy’s en-
countering the blood-thirsty wretches.
“ All of’em caught 1 No, worse luck, that’s
were the rub is I Not one of ’era's bin
nabbed‘since he swore he’d bang the fust, ex-
cept Mr. Sinclair.' No, he’ll hang Mr. Sin-
clair, sine as its daylight now I He wouldn’t
break his word to save his' mother-in-law !
So Mr. Sinclair d better read his Bible while
he can ; for he’ll not have much time to do
so in!’ said Hall, rubbing his eyes with the
end of his axe-handle.
Bertha smiled in triumph, as she thought
how she had baffled the Governor by pro-
viding for Percy’s escape. ‘ He’ll be safe away
before the message can reach Maitland for bis
execution I’ she thought, proudly ; then turn-
ing to the old man, she asked, unguardedly,
‘ How far is it to Sydney across the busb,
Hal, Would it be possible for an escaped
prisoner, to reach Sydney without being recog-
nized, and to leave tbe colony by any means V
Hal. looked at her attentively for a moment
before replying, and she, fearing that she bad
betrayed her secret, turned pale, and waited
in great uneasiness for him to speak. If Hal.
bad guessed the drift of her question, he did
not show it, but after a short pause, answered
that it was * rather a ticklish job, hut he had
known a couple of smart fellows to get away.'
His words set her at ease again. ’lf anyone
can manage to escape, he can, he’s so clever,’
she thought, smiling again. ,
‘ I never saw a young fellow I liked better,
miss. He’s a real gentleman, all one for he’s
a lag; for he’s always ready to do a good
turn, or say a kind word to any one,’ said
Hal., unconsciously winning golden opinions
for himself by bis heartfelt praise of the un-
happy Percy. .
‘And Hal., he really is innocent. I saw
a man in Maitland, a warder at the gaol, who
knows all about him. He was accused of for-
gery, and two men were hired to swear be was
guilty. Tbe warder I met was one of them.
You saw that man, Mr. Clayton, who was
here with Mr. Meredith the other day 1 he’s the
wicked man who paid the wretches to perjute
themselves, and transport Mr. Sinclair.’ . .
Hal., who bad been reclining upon tbe
green sward at full length, his head resting
upon his arm, here raised himself to a sitting
posture, and gazed at Bertha with eyes wide-
stretched in astonishment. ‘Well, if that,
isn’t better ’an a play !’ he ejaculated, after
he bad revolved the. startling information in
his brain for about twenty seconds. ‘ The
very man as swore agin, and the d—d—tbe
infernal scoundrel—l beg your pardon miss,
I must say somethin,’ —that paid him to, to


meet here together. It’s really somethin’
marbelous !’
‘ It is very strange, Hal., isn’t it ; but do
you think we ought to tell the police magis-
trate ? Mr. Sinclair would be pardoned if the
Governor knew.’
Hal. took double the former time to decide
this knotty point, and assisted the operation
by thoughtfully scratching his head. Having
at length arrived at a conclusion, he said with
an impressive solemnity, that, but for the
gravity of the subject, would have been
ludicrous. ‘No, no, Miss Bertha!
you haven’t no witness to prove it, on’y the
one that told you, and one isn’t enough ; for
one man’s word is as good as another; and it
aren’t likely, but the villain ’ud swear it
weren’t true. No, miss, don’t say a word till
your father comes home. He’ll know best
what to do 1’
This advice exactly coinciding with what
she had alreadyjdecided to do, she considered it
excellent, and promised to act upon it. ‘ Is it
not strange, Hal,’ she said, thoughtfully, after
a moment’s reflection, ‘ how the innocent are
allowed to suffer such' terrible wrong, while
the wicked seem to be blest, and prosper in
everything they do ! I often wonder how it
is! It seems hard to reconcile the justice and
mercy of heaven with such strange contradic-
tions !’
‘ We don’t know nothin’ about them things
Miss ; so the on’y way’s jest to believe it’s all
right! Talkin’ about the good bein’ punished
when they didn’t ought to, reminds me o’ a
little adventure that once happened to me,
and will serve as a illustration like. If you’re
not above listenin’ to a old man’s yarn, I’ll
jest tell it you.’
Bertha was in no humour to listen to his
improbable stories, but she kindly consented to
become what Hal. dearly loved, passive audi-
ence, and replied, ‘ Very well, Hal. I shall be
very much interested in it, I dare say!’
‘ It’ll keep you from thinkin’ o’ the troubles
that’s worryin’ you, Miss! Well, to begin,
when I was .about twenty years old, I was in
the seventy-fourth regiment o’ foot, and one
day me and one o’ the other privates—he was a
quick-tempered quarrelsome chap, when he’d
got a glass in him—got leave o’ absence for
a -week; and ■so we took a walkin’ tour through!
the counties. We got along famously for a
couple o’ days, when Mick Finnigan and me
had a bit o’ a row about a pretty lass, that we
met in a meadow down in Sussex, early one
bright.mornin’, when we was fishin’. We’d
been anglin' away as patient as a brace o’ Jobs
for nearly an hour, without hookin’ nothin’
when Mick gets tired o’ the monotony, and
flings down his tackle. ‘Bedad, Hal,’says he ‘it's
a livelier game nor this I’ll he after afore long,
or be the powers o’ whisky, I’ll jest get as
mouldy sittin’ here as a live skeleton !’ and
up be jumps, ahd throws his line, rod, and all,
splash into the river. Well, as bad luck
would have it, just then up comes a pretty
little milk-maid, with cheeks as rosy and eyes
as bright, as the clouds in the risin’ sun. Mick
was jest in humor for a spree, as be called a.
bit o’ audacious foolery; so he says, as bold as
a Frenchman, and they’re about the most im-
pident out, ‘ Well, me purty colleen’ (or some
other outlandish name), ‘the top o’ the mornin’
to yer; an’ may the blessed Virgin smile
down on yer, as long as she lives !’ There
was’nt nothin’ pertic’lar in that, on’y I
thought it’ud bin quite enough'for him to ha’
lifted his bat to her, like I done—l never sees
no good come o’ them smirkin’ chaps, as jest
speaks to a girl right off, without knowin’ em,
—-hut as the lass was passin’ by, and lookin’
at us from under her hat, like a dove peepin’
at you through the leaves round its neat,
Mick whispered to me, he’d bet me drinks he’d,
kiss her. I thought be on’y meant to ask her
for one, and bein’ pretty sure she was too
timid and shy to kiss anybody but a doll or
her mother, 1 made the bet. Well the long
aud the short of it was, that Mick
ups and seizes the girl round the waist.
O’ course, she struggled and screamed,
as biave as a little heroine, and called on me to
help her. She wasn’t a bad judge o’ charao-,
ter, and she knowd I’d help any woman in
distress. Well, 1 sprang to my feet, and be-
fore you could say ‘ knife,’ I jest knocked him
down. O’ course, I didn’t kill him, and be ats
me agin, as savage as a buffalo. He couldn’t
use bis fists, so be jest runs in and gripps me
round the body, and then we ■ pulled and
tugged like a pair o’ alligators, till, like
those ramping, asquiverous animals, into
the river we goes, head fast and away


runs our little ‘ causus bellows,’ as
Mr. Sinclair would call it, and -startles the
village bard by, by tellin’ ’em we was mur-
derin’ each other in the river. In five minutes
every man, woman, child, and dog within ten
miles o’ the spot was on the bank, layirt* their
heads together, and axin’ one another ‘ What’s
,up V Well. I can tell you, Miss, I thought
my last hour had come, for Mick Finnigan ’d
got me by the throat, and hung on like a leach.
There was no shakin’ him off, and
he kept my head so far under water
that I must a’ swallowed pretty nigh
on three quarts, when I found I’d
have to do somethin’ desperate, or jest go to
the bottom like a dead mullet. You know,
Miss, self-preserwation is the fust law o’ na-
ture ; so I jest drew back and let him have it,
one, two, three, right atween the eyes ; and
you’d better believe it, he jest let go my
throat like ahotpotatoe. ‘Halloa, Hal.,’ says
I, ‘You’ve cooked his gooso this time_ old
man ! You’d better slip off afore them how-
lin’ villagers up there on the bank gets a hold
o’ you !’ And without sayin’ another word,
I jest dived down another twenty yards and
crawled along the bottom, till I got around a
corner o’ the river, where I was hid by the
banks, and then I comes up and looks
cautiously round. ‘ Ha, I’ve given ’em the
slip! Now’s for off!’ says I, and takin’ off
my heavy coat and boots, I swam to the next
town, about fifteen miles up the river. It was
near dinner time when I reached it, and I was
a bit peckish, so up 1 goes to the nearest pub.,
and gets my dinner.’ ‘ Hollo, piaster,
says the barmaid, ‘ Why you look about
as damp aud uncomfortable as a drowned
kitten. Hid you tumble out o’ the
Ark, of have you been takin a lesson in fell in-
de-sea V * Jest get me somethin to eat, lass,’
says I ; ‘ and I’ll tell you one o’ the most
marbelons adwentures you ever clapped eyes
on—Sinbad the sailor was a chicken to it!’
Smilin’ all over like a field o’ buttercups,
she led the way into the kitchen, and gave me
a good hot dinner, and a bottle of the best
Jamaica to wash it down with. I recovered
from the effects o’ the accident mortal quick
after I’d had the Jamacia ; and off I starts to
tramp back to the barracks. I didn’t half like
the idea o’ facing the red-nosed old Colonel
without Mick Finnigan with me; I was
afeared o’ bein’ shot for desertion, or I’d jest
a’ started for America. Howsomeever, I
got back to head-quarters afore my furlough
was up, and reported myself 1 Well, Hal.,’
says the captain o’ my company, ‘ back agin,
I see ! You’re a matbel o’ punctuality,
Hal! I wish the rest o’ the brigade ’ud
on’y take after you, in that partic’lar 1 But
where’s your comrade, Mick Finnigan?’ You
may guess, I was as shaky as a cat with the
palsy, when he axed after Mick; but
jest hitchin’ myself together, I says as
bold as a parson—l don’t believe in
tellin’ a unnecessary lie. Miss, ’tareu’t in me!
but it wasn’t no use to get hung, when a word
or two, that couldn’t hurt nobody ’ud save my
neck—l says, ‘ I blush to own it, captain, that
a man in the British army, and specially in
the old Seventy-fourth, should V done it;
but he has !’— ‘ Done what, you— ’ but I
won’t tel! you what he said, ’taren’t fit for
ladies’ ears ! —‘ Gone and deserted, captain,
and turned Methodist’s preacher !’ The
captain stormed and swore, and went on, as
if'he’d like a straight jacket, and wouldn’t be-
lieve a word o’it. ‘ Look here, Hal.’ says he,
as soon as he got quiet enough to hear himself
speak, ‘ Mick’s a Homan Catholic, and would
as soon a turn Quaker ; and as you’ve told me
a lie, you must’nt be sui prised at my thinkin’
there’s somethin’ wrong somewhere. I must
keep you in close anest until Mick turns up.’
Well, Miss, to show you how easy it is for the
innercent to be punished for what they never
done, I was kept under arrest for near a
month ; when one fine’ mornin' jest when I
was beginnin' to think I’d a’done better to ’a
made a clean breast o’ it at fust. But I’m
afore my story, Miss. I’ll jest have to take you
you fyo the village again.—Mick swam ashore
when I got loose from him, and when he
found I didn’t show up, he jest give himself
up to the constable for drownin’ me. He was
a proud fellow, Mick was, and though be did’nt
mind bein’ hung, he didn’t want to get the old
regiment into disgrace, so he refused to give
his name, or tell who I was; aud the night
after he was locked up he managed to escape,
and bein’ afraid to go back to the barracks,
on account o' drownin’ me ; he speculated in a
donkey and cart, and turned pedlar. Well you


may guess the stir there was in the village when
the prisoner escaped. Everybody swore a mur-
der had been committed, and as neither o’ us
could be found, you may be sure there was
ttemendous excitement. But I must tell
you Miss, that Mick and me was as much
alike as a coople o’ twins, In fact, we was
So exactly alike, that we’ve often taken each
other’s clothes by mistake, and never found
it out till the bills came in. Well, a dts
criptiono’ Mick was sent round among the
police, and they was on the alert to-capture
him, so that the poor fellow had to keep close.
The description just tallied with my
appearance, and one day I was called before
the Colonel, and there before me stood the
constable who had locked up Mick for drown-
in’ me. ‘ That’s the chap, your honor, as
committed a breach o’the peace, by wilfully,
and o’ malice aforethought, killin’ and mur-
derin’ one o’ his Majesty’s subjects, name un-
known !’ said the lying knave. I swore on
ray honor I hadn’t, but it was no use, and ofl
I was took to stand ray trial for ray own mur-
der. Well, I was tried and sentenced to death
1 felt rather uncommonly flurried when
the rope was put round ray neck, and I shut
my eyes just as——’
‘ Oh look; Hal 1 here comes a schooner.
Perhaps papa’s on hoard '* cried Bertha, notic-
ing the ‘ Frowning Beauty ’ turning an angle
of the river. ,
‘ Yes, very likely, MissJ Well, I’ll finish
my yarn another time, when you’ve more
leisure like.’
* Oh, look, Hal.! Look ! The schooner is
ashore 1’ exclaimed Bertha, excitedly, as the
little vessel nearly lost the wind in turning
a sharp bend in the river, and narrowly
escaped fouling the bank.
‘ She's right again, Miss ! Captain Suther-
ton’s a good sailor, and can handle his little
craft either in fresh water or salt, with any
man on the coast; hut he’s a fool to bring her
up the river, for it’s not once in a twelve
month the wind can be depended on ; and the
tnrnin’s are a deal too sharp to be safe 1’
Bertha and her excentric old attendant,
walked leisurely down to the wharf; she re-
straining herimpatience lest she should tire old
Perhly's wooden leg. A few minutes walk
brought them to the river; and in a
shot t time the Frowning Beauty was alongside.
Mr. Shelley and a young lady were upon the
diminutive deck, and Mr. !»helley waved his
hand to Bertha, as he led the stranger to the
impromtu bridge the sailor’s laid from the
bulwarks to the rude wharf. Bertha opened
her eyes in astonishment as she noticed the
lady, { Whoever can it be! Aunt Alice I
expect 1’ she said to herself, as the passengers"
waited by the planks, while they were being
properly secured. ‘ Her veil is down. I shall
be so glad if it is dear Aunt Alice !’ She had
not observed either her father or his companion
until the schooner came in close to the wharf,
they having been concealed from her view by
some deck cargo; and she had felt disappoin.
ted, as the vessel sailed up, thinking
her father had stayed for the ordinary
steamer. While the plank was being fixed,
she stood waiting, with her pale features
lit up with one of her sweet, bright smiles, and
her large blue eyes glancing at her father in
fond recognition.
1 What a singularly beautiful girl, Mr.
Shelley !’ exclaimed the lady by his side, in
unfeigned admiration, ‘ but how very pale !’
‘ She is my daughter—Bertha. She is indeed
pale! I never saw her looking so before!’
replied Mr. Shelley, in consternation at the
great change he observed in her. He was
too excited over the trial on the day of
leaving fur Sydney, to perceive the visible
effect of the grief, that he, felt was consum-
ing her; and the few days since then had
worked a sad alteration in the hitherto
buoyant and healthful girl.
‘ Home again at last !’ exclaimed Bertha,
with somewhat of her old impetuosity, throw-
ing her arms about her father’s neck.
‘ Yes, darling, home again at last, and
earlier by a day or two, than I expected to
be,’ replied the father, noting painfully, the
unwelcome hectic flush upon her transparent
cheeks. Then noticing her enquiring glance
towards the lady by his side, he turned, and
formally introduced them.
Bertha glanced curiously at the face of her
new acquaintance for a moment, as she threw
back her black veil, and, taking her hand con-
fidently, she said, ‘ I always know whom I
shall like, when I first see them. I’m certain
11 shall like you 1’


Anne replied to the warm-hearted welcome!
with a few scarcely audible words of response,
and said to herself, gazing in dreamy admira-
tion (aS true artists ever regard the
beautiful) upon that fair, young face.
‘ What ethereal, what angelic loveliness 1 And
this is the girl Percy loves! Poor Percy, you
tiuly say, * To see her and not to love, is impos-
sible.’ Yet to love in your terrible position
must mean the bitterness of disappointment,
of despair ’
‘ And Mr. Sinclair, papa? Did the Gov-
ernor forgive him ?’Bertha turned and asked
eagerly.
‘Yes, my child. I shall go to Maitland
this evening, and bring him home. I have
his Excellency’s order for his instant release.’
Bertha staggered to a log close by, and
leaned upon it for support, her lips as pale as
her snowy handkerchief. Her father and
Anne both hurried to her side. ‘ Nothing is
the matter, papa. Miss Egerton ! Nothing
only a spasm. 1 will go home; I shall be
better directly 1’ she said, as they wiped the
perspiration from her cold brow, and
hung in anxious solicitude over her trembling
form. '
‘ Overjoyed at learning of Mr.'Sinclair’s es-
cape.' 1 She has a tender heart, and has fretted
much since his condemnation !’ whispered Mr
Shelley.
Anne also guessed that to be the cause of
Bertha’s emotion, and replied in an under-
tone, ‘‘ Had we nod better take her up to the
house at once V
‘ Perhaps, sir, I could run up and jest bring
down the dog-cart,’ suggested Hal., forgetting
for the moment his inability for expeditious
movement.
‘ No, no, Hal. thank you ! I am better
now, said Bertha, slowly rising from the log
and turning towards home. ‘ I can walk.
Come, papa !’
Mr. Shelley took her arm and led her
gently up to the house, she refusing Anne’s
proffered assistance, ' protesting that it was
only a spasm and that she was better again.
She was pale when she met her father a few
moments before —she was white now; and,
though she maintained that she was better,
her strength had left her weak as a child, and
she leaned heavily on her father’s arm for
support. She walked on in silence, unmind--
ful of Mr. Shelley’s words as he, thinking to
rouse her by the narrative of his voyage, told
her sundry items of news about some of her
young fiieocls in Sydhey. She passed on, too
deeply buried in her own thoughts to hear or
heed aught around her.
1 Strange way of showing her gladness at
Percy’s escape from death!’ thought Anne
Egerton, wonderingly. “One would almost
think from her. manner that the intelligence
caused her pain, not pleasure.’
The same thought struck her father; and,
finding her paying no attention to his words, 1
he pursued the rest of the way in silence.
‘Home again, Grace, you seel' he said to.
his wife, who met them on the verandah.
‘This young lady is Miss Egerton, whom I
have engaged as companion for Bertha,’ he
continued, introducing Anne;.* and now get
get me a little sal volatile, Bertha is siightly
indisposed, as the doctors say when a fair pa-
tient is a little out of sorts.’
Although her husband tried to make light
of Bertha’s indisposition, Mrs. Shelley saw at
a glance that something serious was the mat-
ter, and without waiting to speak hurried to
her room for the stimulant (a far safer one
than brandy for very obvious reasons, and
one that should always be within reach, in
every household) while her husband led
Bertha to the sofa. Bertha sat silently for a
few seconds, gazing, with a hard stony
stare out of the window; and then
burst into a Hood of passionate tears.
Mrs. Shelley returned at the moment
with the sal volatile ; and all gathered round
the weeping girl. For a time they vainly strove
to soothe her, and prevail upon her to speak of
the cause of her emotion. Presently she
pressed back the luxuriant brown tresses,
that had fallen about her face, and rising from
the sofa, she asked in a .voice thrilled with
anxiety and terror. ‘ Papa, what would hap-
pen to a prisoner who escaped from gaol ?
What would the law do with him, if he was
caught?’
‘ Hang him J’. replied Mr, Shelley, puzzled
at the odd question. ‘ Why do you ask ?’
Bertha was several seconds before she re-
plied, and stood as if unable to realize
the awful significance of the words. Then,


falling back upon the sofa, she fran.
tically exclaimed ‘ Ob, then I have
murdered him! I thought the Governor
would hang him, and 1 persuaded him to es-
cape. And now hr has forfeited his pardon.’
*My God, surely not!’ said Mr. Shelley,
anxiously. ‘ Grace, tell someone to saddle a
horse for me at once 1 When did he escape,
Bertha 1 Quick for the horse, Grace !’
Mrs. Shelley hurried to the kitchen to see
to the order; and, kneeling by his daughters
side, her husband said to the half-frenzied
girl, ' There is no time to lose, Bertha; per-
haps , we may do something for him yet.
Tell me when did hb escape, and where was he
to go to V
‘Last night! Jerry and the warder were
to lake him away in the night!’ she almost
shrieked, in her.intense excitement.
‘ Pray God he has been foiled in the at-
tempt ! I- will go at once, and dp what I can!’
Mr. Shelley said fervently, and stooping
down and kissing her cold brow, and leaving
her reclining upon the breast of Anne, .he
rushed from the room. Snowflake was at the
door, . He hastily threw a saddle upon him,
and in five minutes was galloping toward
Maitland at top speed.
CHAPTER XXX.
Ah, cruel fate ! Ah, cruel, cruel fate !
Why on her hapless head dost wreak thy bate ?
Why all the terrors of thy wrath dost hurl,
On her an|iunocent and gentle girl ?
Hast thou no heart nor eyes to feel nor see ?
Is her celestial beauty naught to thee ?
May not her sorrows wild thy pity more ?
Cans’t thou thus crush and bruise, whom all do love.
Hence fate, avaunt! Upon the chastniog rod,
1 read in words of fire, “ The love of God ?”
Author’s JI.S.
* Might as well be hang for a sheep as a
lamb.’ I’ve often heard ’em down in York
say that, and I suppose it’s about true. How.
somever, I’ll be bung for a sheep, if I’m
hung at all; for if ever I said a thing and stuck
to it, I’ll stick to this—l’ll have Clayton’s life
before I’m a year older!—lt’ud be no use to
die before I’d killed him ; I could’nt rest in
my grave unless I knowd he was in his'n ; so
I’ll just settle matters before I’m hung,.aud
send him to bell first, to show me the way!
He’s lived long enough to do more mischief
than a thousand better men could do in twice
the time; but he’ll do no more after I
get my hands on him 1’ So muttered poor,
misshapen, honest hearted, but light-flngeied.
Bow,, as he stood, lamp in hand, before the
cell door, at twelve o’clock sharp on the night
arranged for Percy Sinclair’s escape, his
rough hand on the key, and the, key inserted
in the door. ‘lf it hadn’t been for his fifty
pounds curse him!—l’d very likely a’ got
square, and set up dealing or peddling, and
Mr. Sinclair’d be in old England among his
friendSj instead ofhere with a rope round his
neck ; and the beautiful young lady from Field
Place ’ud been saved all the trouble she’s been 1
put to! Ah, well. I’ll be hung for this night’s
work, if ever I’m catched ; but they’ll not
hang me for nothing, that’s some comfort.’
Bow pushed the heavy, creaking, door gently
back, and entered the cell. He glanced
rapidly round ‘ Sound asleep as a
baby!’ he said in surprise, as the rays of the
lamp foil upon the sleeping form of the pri-
soner upon a litter of straw. He carefully
shaded the light from the sleeper’s face with
one hand—a rather unnecessary precaution
under the circumstances—and called softly,
“ Mr. Sinclair, it’s time to be off! We must
be away before they change the lock!’
Percy was a light sleeper, and was awake
in a moment. ' ‘ Ha ! twelve o’clock already ?
I wish I was not engaged upon the, at the very
least, dishonorable expedient of flight! be said,
rising,
‘You promised the young lady sir! You
can’t break your word to a woman!’ suggested
Bow.
‘Your appearance seems familiar to me;
and Miss Shelley told me you were one of the
witnesses against me at York. Will you
be kind enough to explain why you
you are willing to make this immense sacrifice
on my behalf? Remember your life will be
forfeited, if you adhere to your determination
to aid my escape !’ said Percy, regarding his
gaoler with a glance, half of inquiry, half ad-
miration for his disinterested generosity. ,
‘ Look at me, sir, and see if you can’t re-
collect me now !' said Bow, removing his rough
cap from his head, and gazing straight into
his prisoner’s eyes. "I’m not one, as is easily
forgotten, if I’m seen once. Don’t you mind
the couple of villains that you bought that bay
col) off?’


Percy hesitated a moment, and then held
out his hand, ‘ Yes, 1 remember now ! You
did me a great wrong—ruined me for life—
hut I forgive you 1’
‘No, no! Not yet!’ replied Bow in a
husky voice, his lips quivering with emotion,
you mustn’t forgive me yet, nor shake hands
with a wretch, that could sell a fellow man
for fifty pounds—though that’s a big lot of
money—till he’s earnt your forgiveness. If I
can get you-out of the country, and them come
hack, and get hung for saving you—that’s the
time to forgive me. Not before!’
Percy’s admiration for this noble ‘child of
misfortune’—more noble, justly condemned
convict, and all as he was, than nine nut of
ten of our ordinary humanity—was increased
tenfold by this heroic determination, and he
replied kindly, ‘I freely forgive you now, for
all the misery you helped to bring upon me;
and, hut for the promise Miss Shelley wrung
from me, I would most certainly refuse to
allow you to endanger your life for mine. If 1
escape, you must escape with me !’
‘ Bed as me and Darby Gregson was, sir,
wejwasu’t the worst in that wicked plot. You
know, Mr. Clayton.
.Yes]! Why V
‘ It was him that gived Darby and me, the
fifty pound to swear again you; and it was him
that really forged that cheque,” replied Bow.
For some momenta Percy was unable to
speak, so unexpected had this information
fallen upon him. At last, somewhat recover-
ing himself he said incredulously, ‘ ‘‘ He
bribed you to swear falsely against me T Im-
possible ; what motive could he have had
for such atrocious tie.ichery.”
* He told Darby and me it was ’cause of
your interfering between him and some young
lady—Annie Eggleton, I think her name
was,’ replied Bow.
Now the riddle that had puzzled him for
so long, was solved. Now he understood the
motive of the arch-traitor’s threat, to cast
infamy even upon his memory. Without
reply to a question, Bow asked, he motioned
him to lead on, and he followed his conductor
silently through the corridor, out into the
open air, and across the jail yard. They had
some little difficulty in passing through the
gate ; but it. being quite darlc, and a cold,
mistling rain falling, the sentinel was not
keeping a very vigilant watch, and they es-
caped without challenge. Bow spoke to
Percy again as soon as they were beyond ear-
shot of the guard, hut he did not reply, and Bow
led the way to the cross roads in silence.
The -topic that kept Bow’s busy brain at
work, was the probable route, which Jerry
would take them, and the safest way for
Percy to reach Port Phillip. Percy, deeply
wounded by the late discovery, was brooding
upon his position, and the irreparable wrong
Clayton had done him, “ A part of the
cross I must bear,” said he, striving, but not
very successfully, to fedl resigned.
‘l’ll never rest till I’m revenged on him !’
muttered Bow, whose thoughts had veered round
to his own injuries. He had learned the hand
Clayton had had in the failure of his attempt to
rob Mr. Arkright’s house, in York, and in
his own arrest, and he clenched his teeth and
gripped with a nervous clutch the dagger he
held in his hand, “ I’ll pay him for all, before
I crawl into a coffin.’
‘ Holloa, Misser Sinlar, me link ityou neber
goin’ to corue !’ cried Jerry from the summit
of the bay coil’s back where he had sat perched
forthe last half hour, waiting forthe appearance
of the fugitives. .‘You bin murray long time
cornin’, and dat too much murray cold alto-
gether, sit down in the rain like a dis.’
Jerry spoke in a tone of mild reproach ; and
really the poor fellow had much to complain
of. He had been punctual—a most rare pro-
ceeding for one of his nationality—and had
sat shivering in the rain more than long
enough to try his patience severely. Jerry’s
familiar voice roused Percy from his reverie,
and, looking up, he dimly discerned the form of
thefaithful blackboy. ‘Ah Jerry! waiting I’he
said,taking the rein of tbeled horse, ‘ Old Sur-
rey ? Poor fellow, I little thought ever to ride
you again !’ and, turning to Jerry again, he'
continued, ‘ How is Missie Berta, Jerry T
‘ Dat tell me say Missie Berta, murray
glad you bolt. No, bale dat; dat say
dat say bodder it! Me forget what dat
say !’ Jerry was so crest-falleu'at having, for-
gotten the message, that he fairly cried with
vexation.
Never mind, Jerry ; it can't be helped
now; perhaps you may lecollect presently,’


said Persy, in a tone of great disappointment.
‘ Dat Jerry murray big fool ; dat want ’t
kickin’!’ the black boy replied savagely, ‘Dat
murray much perticklear, Missie Berta say,
What Jerry want to be dat mnrry big feller
fool for and forget him like a dat V
Jerry had asked a question beyond Percy’s
power to solve ; so he did not attempt it, but
turned to speak to Row.
1 Dat feller, with hini crooked legs gone
away !’ explained the quick-sighted Jerry, as
Percy missed the jailor.
‘ Gone away ?’ said Percy, in consternation
the idea flashing through his' mind, that the
jailor had planned his escape, for the pur-
pose of betraying him back into the hands of
the law.
‘ Pm all right, sir ! You needn’t be afraid
of me !’ said a voice at his elbow ; and turn-
ing about,- Bow was standing by, holding a tall
grey horse by the bridle rein. ‘ I planted this
feller jest inside of the brush, and slipped off
to get him while you was talkin’. When the
police magistrate hears we’re off, he’ll be as
savage as a Rooshun at missing his horse.
There isn’t a horse on the river can come with-
in a cooee of him, when he’s let out.’
‘ You are risking too much for me !’ said
Percy, who felt more than half inclined to
return to the jail to screen the noble fellow.
‘ I’m risking nothing, sir ! Pm as certain
to be hung as the sun’ll rise to-morrow ; for
I’ll be revenged on Clayton, come what will,
and that’ll mean hingin’. But-let ns mobnt
and off. We mtist be far away'before day-
light.’
They sprang into their saddles, and Jerry
leading the way, struck off the road to the
right, and into the brush. For the first half
hour they beguiled the time with conversa-
tion, Percy joining mechanically in the
different subjects Bow of, Jerry introduced,
but as the brush grew denser, and the slopes
eteeper and more difficult, ’ the conversation
began to flag, each having quite enough to do
to feel his way, and keep up w.ith the others,
and soon the silence was ‘broken only by
the snapping of dry sticks under the
horse’s feet,: and the mournful dirge of the
cuilew or the distant bowl of the native-dog.
A long and tedious ride btought them to the
■bed of a deep gully, banks pre-
vented further progress in the direction Jerry
wished to lead them.
‘ Look here, Misser Sinlar, bale we can
climb dis hill ? Me miss him track jest now,
and get him too much down de creek. We
must camp till daylight. You got it match V
• I’ve got a flint and steel; but it’ll be no
use in the rain !’ replied Bow.
‘T have none, Jerry. We shall be com-
pelled to do without,’ said Percy.!
clock do yon think it is, Bow.’
Bow didn’t know, and while Jerry was cal-
culating the time by a process entirely his
own, some birds in a nest close by, ■ began to
twitter.
‘ Holloa, dat birds get up by-by! Dat
neatly mornin’ !’ said Jerry.
‘ We’d better rest the horses a bit, I think,
sir ; they’ve a long run before ’em before we’re
safe ; and we’ll push ’em quicker when it gets
lighter,’ said Bow, thoughtfully.
‘ Let us dismount then, and let them feed a
little if they will,’ replied Percy, springing
from his saddle.
Bow and Jerry followed his example. The
ground was too wet for them to sit upon,
and they had nothing to light a fire with ; and
so, tired as they were with their long ride,
they were obliged to stand up in the rain
holding their horses’ bridles.
‘ Not a very comfortable situation this, sir,’
said Bow, his teeth chattering with cold ;
‘ but it’ll be daylight presently, and we’ll be
all right then. How far are you going with
ua, Jerry ?’
‘ D’other side Wollorabi creek, along dat'
back track to de big river. You know him
dat back track V ,
‘Yes,’ answered Bow, shuddering at the
recollection; ‘I got speared by the Mangrove
blacks, along the top of the range between the
head ofthe Wollombi and Brisbane Water.’
‘ Dat Mangrove blackfeller too much wild
altogether! Bale dal Coonanbara [Hunter
River] blackfeller wild, like him Mangrove
blackfeller,’ insinuated Jerry, who, being him-
self a Coonanbara blackfellow, felt called
upon to uphold the character and dignity of
his race.
Percy’s thoughts were wandering back to
the earthly object of his devotion, and he
heard little of what his companions were talk


ing about: but it .was too dark for
Bow to observe his inattention, and,
believing that Percy was listening to
his tale, he endeavoured to while away
the tedious minutes by narrating an ad-
venture with the Mangrove blacks a few
months before.
‘ The police magistrate was out along them
ridges with a company of mounted police,
looking for three men who’d murdered their
.master op near the Chain Ponds, and then
took to tjie bush, and came over on this side
the river. It was jest before Christmas.
One of the troopers got a sunstroke in Mait-
land the day before the police magistrate
started ; and knowing the bushrangers were
desperate fellows, and that he couldn’t well
spare a man, he took me with him. 1 was
riding this same grey horse at the time, to
quieten him a bit; for he was rather skittish.
We’d been riding from the head of the Wol-
lombi, along the ridges down towards the river;
for the police magistrate got wind that the
bushrangers were hiding out there somewhere,
when by some unlucky mistake I lost the rest
of the party. I wandered about, till the grey
knocked up, and I had to let him go, I got
off the mountains down into a little flat, where
I saw fires, and seeing a lot of blacks’ camps,
and never before having seen any blacks, only
the tame ones about Maitland, I wasn’t afraid,
but jest walked right down among ’em. They
were regular Myalls 1 hadn’t seen a live
white man before, most of ’em ; and the whole
boxendice of ’em came swarming round me
like locasts, and jabbering like mad. I spoke
quite friendly to ’em : but they only jabbered
the louder; and on looking close I saw ’em
making ready their spears, 1 had hardly
time to think what to do, when 1 saw a tall
wiery nigger taking aim at me, I had only jest
time to duck, when the spear came wizzing
past, and stuck into the tree behind me. I
seen it was getting rather too warm, so 1 made
a dash for it, and off I went like a hunted kan-
garoo with the whole tribe of niggers howl-
ing at my heels. I had no show against ’em,
for they ran like racehorses, and caught up
with me in a few hundred yards. A knock
on the bead with a waddy soon laid me on
the grass, and the savages was jest holding a
palaver over me whether, they’d roast me
alive, or flay me, when fortinately up gal-
lops the troopers, and saved my life !’
‘Baledat Coonanbara blackfellow do him
like-adat!’ protested Jerry.
The dawn slowly broke, |and with day-
light came a change of weather. The clouds
clear away, and . the sun rose warm and
bright.
‘We’d best press on, I think, sir!’ sug-
gested Bow. ‘ We’re not a safe distance yet.’
‘As you will,’ replied Peicy, who cared
very little for his own safety.
‘ Look here, dat me got it plenty beef and
damper,’ said Jerry opposing the idea, ‘ Dat
Miasie, Berta put it plenty tea, sugar, and
everything in saddle bags?’
Bow received the intelligence with great
pleasure, and set to work immediately, to
assist the black boy to remove the provisions
from the saddle bags to the top of a large
flat stone (hat would serve as a table for
them. Percy watched them dreamily, think-
ing of the gentle girl to whose thoughtful
solicitude they were now indebted for the
much needed meal before them.
‘Bale dat tea no good without him fire?
You take him things out Bow and I rub
him stick, and make a light fire muny quick:’
Jerry’s suggestion being followed, a fire was
soon made, and the quarts which Bertha had
been careful to strap to the saddles herself,
boiling merrily,
‘ Here’s a letter for you, sir !'JJ said
Bow, handing Percy a note he had found in
one of the saddle-bags.
‘ If we are to rest awhile, we may as well
hobble the horses and let them feed,’ Percy
.said, taking the note.
The horses were set at liberty and the fugi-
tives sat down with keen appetites to their
breakfasts. Percy opened his letter with
trembling fingers; it was, as he expected,
from Bertha. She wrote a short note to say
that she had something of very great impor-.
lance to tell him, but ’that she bad spent so
much time in packing up the things she was
sending him that if she delayed to write it
Jerry could not reach the rendezvous punc-
tually, and so she had given him the message.
‘ Jerry.’
Jerry stepped across, leaving his beef and
damper with evident reluctance.


What did Missie Berta tell you to’_tell
me ?’
’ Jerry stood for fully five minutes, striving
to lecall the message that he bad forgotten,
but to no purpose. ‘ Bale me cau forget 1’ he
exclaimed, hopelessly. -‘ Bale me know any-
thing at all!’
Percy bit his lip with vexation. She had
sent him a message—perhaps an important
one—and through the carelessness'of the con-
science-stricken blackboy before him, be could
not learn it. A severe reprimand rose to his
lips; but, • remembering the past services of
his idol’s-faithful attendant, he repressed his
anger. and said mildly, ‘ It is a bitter disap-
pointment to me, Jerry,’, your having .for-
gotten Missie Berta’s message, loti must try
to recollect it. It may be something very
important.’
' Jerry readily-promised to recollect every-
thing as soon as he could, and returned: to the
tire to chew the cud of reflection'and finish his
beef and damper at one and the same time. He
accomplished the latter portion of his taCk with
success and evident satisfaction ; but he could
not recollect a word of the message, though
he brown-studied over it vigorously. ■
‘ Thought of it yet, Jerry V Percy inquired
anxiously, rising at the moment from the
boulder, upon which be had beeu seated.
‘ Bale dat me can think at all, Misser Sin-
lari’ replied Jerry, hopelessly,
i ‘I think we’d better be making a: start,
sir. We may lose some time in the hlackboy’s
finding the track again,’ suggested Bow.’
Percy acquiesced in the wisdom of making
an early start, and in a quarter of an hour
they had passed out of sight of the gully
where they had spent a few very uncomfort-
able-hours, The morning was fine, and . a
crisp, bracing wind was blowing. Every,
thing around seemed to vie in -leading, their
thoughts from ■ their forlorn condition ; but
the wet clothes, that felt icy cold in the fresh
breeze, were more than a match for the beauty of
nature’—and the swaying of the tall trees, or
the chatter of the- magpies and “laughing
jackasses” could not draw the attention' of the
drenched and shivering fugitives from the
extreme discomfort of their situation. No
incident :of importance occurred -during the
day’s ride through the dreary forest of
gum and ironbatk. Their route:lay , through
tangles of brushes and gullies,!over gentle
bills, and up almost inaccessible, mountains,
their , view now bounded at half ,a dozeu
yards 'by dense barriers, of underwood, and
anon from the towering tidge of a steep hill,
extending over miles of swelling undulations,
elotbed. with the dull green of the Australian
forest trees. There was no road, path, nor
mark of any sort perceptible to civilized eyes,
although Jerry assured them they were on
the “ back track yet the black boy led them
on with.the unerring precision of an Indian,
with the faultless instinct of,savage life. At
noon they found themselves upon the summit
of a.'large bill, but sparsely clothed with
timber, and ■ having an area, of several acres
as level as the “ fiat” they had crossed at its
base.
• Here’s a stunning camping ground, sir 1*
observed Bow, reining in and glancing found,
approvingly,,' ‘ We’re far enough off now to
sleep safe for one night anyhow 1’
Bow’s proposition being approved of, they
dismounted, unsaddled and hobbled their
horses, and, then Set about preparation for
dinner. Jerry’s plan, of igniting wood >by
rubbing two sticks together again proving
successful, snd a plentiful supply of water
being found in'a hole in some rocks close by,
the tea was soon boiling and , the hungry
travelers seated round at their raid-day meal.
‘This is about the best place for a camp
that I’ve seen,’ said Bow, noting the peculiar
advantages of the situation for that purpose, and
startling Percy from a reverie. ‘.The soldiers
couldn't sueak upon us unawares here. We
cau see down the clear 'slopes on both sides
for half a mile, and there’s scarcely a tree
along the ridge either way.’
Percy not replying to the observation, .and
Jerry having.been asleep for at least five
minutes, Bow did not care to keep up the
conversation alone, and emptying his quart-at
half a dozen gulps, he rolled himself up in bis
’possum cloak, and was soon snoring in chorus
with the tinkle of the horse-bells, leaving Percy
to the company of bis ever present and crush-
ing grief. An hour passed, and all subduing
fatigue had overpowered even the , wakeful
sorrows of the - miserable Percy. His head
diooped upon bis breast, and he sank back


upon the cold earth, freed for a few short I
hours from the agony of existence.- I
Three hours more passed, and the three
were still asleep by the dying embers' of their
lire. The son was sinking behind the'dense
brushes by the distant river, and shedding in
its departing glory a peachblossom mantle
over the opposite bills. The calmness of the
still evening scene was suddenly disturbed by
the dull thud of horses’ hoofs galloping along
the ridge, from the directionof the Hawkes-
bury. -At a few hundred yards from the camp
the riders abruptly pulled up and rode
along at a walking pace. ‘ Fifty miles since
six o’clock last night 1 Not a bad run, that,
Darby,’ said a tall, wiry fellow, with long;
shaggy, black hair and beardless face, “ If the
horses hold out, we’ll reach the Hunter to-
morrow-night. I wouldn’t .mind standing a
quart they’re poking about looking for us yet
among the settlers, within five miles of Wind-
sor 1 If we could only get away out of the
settlement with what we’ve picked up one
way and another in the last three months,
we’d have enough to set us up for life !’
‘Ah! get away! -That’s the difficulty I’
said a little, bushy bearded, round shouldeted,
red faced, old man, whoso generally awkward
aspect on horseback pointed him out as an
ex sailor. ‘ If we could only slip our cables
and leave this sun-blasted, God-forgotten, and
generally smashed up colony in onr.-wake!
But how ? That’s where we’re grounded I’ ■
‘ One thing at time, gentlemen!’ said
Darby, who, since his election to the cap-
taincy of his band, had grown' wonderfully
courteous in' his manner. ‘ Let’s settle one
thing at a time! Shall we make our debut
[great stress on the “ t’ ] at the top and work
down the river, or bag our game first at the
Newcastle end 1’
All replied to the question at once, each of
the band of worthies feeling himself specially
called upon to support his own private judge-
ment upon the subject with as much energy
as possible. •
‘ One at a time 1 One at’a time I’ exclaimed
Darby, angrily.' ‘ What do you say,-Davis V
The tall man—he of the lantern jaws—
who had first spoken, advocated beginning
their depredations at the more distant stations,
and the others all falling in with his view, of
the case, it was settled to rnh the ‘ place' of a
Mr. Elward Fairing several miles above Mait-
‘land.
‘By George, Qregson, look there!’ exclaimed
Jennings, reining his horse in, and pointing in
the direction of the camp. ,‘ Three men lying
upon the ground 1’ All eyes were anxiously
turned towards the spot in anticipation of see-
ing a hand of the dreaded mounted patrols.
‘ Halt! 'Just wait here and I’ll ride nearer and
see ! ! said Darby in a whisper. He cautiously
approached the sleeping fugitives, and in a few
minutes returned,- Touching his lips to mo-
tion forailence he slowly dismounted. The
others quietly followed his example. When
all were upon their feet, he said in an under-
tone, ; ‘ There’s two,. men and a blackboyp
they’re all asleep ; and, as I didn’t see no arms
of any sort upon them, I think they must be
runaways.’
■ ‘One of’em a- black boy 1 Then he’s a
tracker. I think we’d better turn tail while
we’re safe. They’re police in disguise as sure
as fate. There’s more of ’em about too. or they
wouldn’t sleep there so securely,’ said Jenn-
ings.
• You .he hlowed !’ exclaimed the ex sailor,
his valour getting the better of bis discretion,
and making his face glow with excitement.
‘You be blowed ! Talk about turning tail 1'
If we had you aboard the old Invincible we’d
tie a fifty-six pounder to your heels and heave
you overboard. Look here, Captain,.if it’s
the devil himself, . we’ll fight it out. I
wouldn’t turn tail for any man afloat!’'
* Constables or runaways, they’re asleep;
so we’ll take them as they are,’ replied Darby,
resolutely. ‘ Slip off your boots, and spread
out, so as we can come at’em from every side-.
Take out your knives I don’t want pistols
to.he used if we can avoid it; and if we
can’t-secure ’em alive, without-noise, we’ll
just stick a few inches of cold steel between
their; ribs.. But we’ll;take -’em alive if wo
can.’
Wholly unconscious of the proximity of
danger, the tired fugitives slept on, while the
bloodthirsty: wretches who formed the band
of outlaws,- approached noiselessly from every
side, their savage faces gleaming with cruelty
and hate, and their ruthless hands,, so deeply
stained with blood, clutching tlie rugged hafts


of their daggers, A few moments later, and
a keen blade was being held above the throat
of each of the sleepers, while they were being
manacled securely with thongs of greenhide.
So thoroughly worn out were the sleepers, by
the fatigue of their long and rough ride, that
they were nut aroused by being pinioned. As
soon as they were firmly secured, Darby
Gregson woke his prisoners op- by roughly
shaking them. , ‘ Halloa, what dat matter t'
asked Jerry, attempting to rob bis eyes, and
finding his bands fast. ■. *
‘Jest shut up, nigger, or you’ll walk the
plank in a crack I’ said the ex-sailor, with a
malevolent grin,
Jerry shut up immediately, as advised ; but
he fully made up for .it by opening his eyes to
their fullest extent and staring at the speaker
in astonishment. ■
Percy’s first thought on finding himself a
prisoner was, that,he had been pursued by
the constables and recaptured; and recollecting
the sacrifice the jailor had made on his behalf,
he was filled with remorse at haying permitted
the noble fellow to encounter so great . a
danger; and without looking up he sullenly
resigned himself to his fate.
‘ Well, hang me, if I havcn’t,Been this cove
before!’ exclaimed the captain of the gang,
recognizing Bow, as their eyes met.
‘ You needn’t be troubled. about that
Darby! You’ll be banged right enough yet,
see if you don’t, r returned Bow, gazing un-
flinchingly into the eyes,of his captor. . ,
‘ Bow I Hem 1 Well, I’m, glad to meet an
old pal, anybow !’ exclaimed ; Darby, giving
Bow an unpleasant poke in the ribs by way of
emphasis. , ,
Bow did not auswer for a few,minutes. . He
felt inclined to say something that would be
sure to displease Darby, , but feeling bow com-
pletely they were in the power of that cruel
and unscrupulous villain, he( repressed the
words of defiance that rose to.hia lips. ‘ Yesj
Darby, it’s me, r he said at last,, ‘ .We haven’t
met befote, me and yon, for rather a longish
stretch of time.l- suppose... we’re friends,
though, for the sake of old, times,’
Bow shuddeied at the recollection of those
terrible “old times” of crime anc),dissipation ;
but he prudently concealed bis ■ abhorrence
of past associations,; and tried.: to. con-
ciliate the desperadoes into whose hands,they
had fallen, as the only prospsct of saving the.
lives of himself and companions.
‘ Yes, Bow; we meets as old friends as you
say—at least we do if you aren’t above joining
us—but this nigger here we’ll hang up as a
warning to other blackskins not to, go
in for “.tracking,” And this other cove—.-’-
He paused, and looked at Percy at-,
tentively for a second.or so. ‘ Yes !’ he con-’
tinned, ‘lt’s him I „ It’s the ehap that fired a-
bullet into me a few months ago at the camp
over , the mountain by the Hunter River.
Well, I’ll have it out of his bide now, or
ray name • isn’t Darby Gregeon’ -There’s
plenty «f dry wood hereabouts.’
CHAPTER XXXI.
There was a Being whom my spirit off-
Met on its visioned wanderings, far.aloft
In the clear golden prime of my youth’s dawn
Upon the fairy isles of tunny labor, '
Amid the enchanted mountains, and the eaves
Of divine sleep, and on the air-like waves
Of wonder-level dream whose tremulous floor :
Paved her light steps. On an imagined shore,
Under the.grey beak of some promontory, ;
She met me, robed in such exceeding glory,
That I beheld her not. Jn solitudes
Her voice came to me through the whisp’ring woods,
And from the fountains, and the odours deep
Of flowers, which, like lips murmuring in their sleep.
Of the sweet kisses, which had lulled them there,
Breathed bat of her to the enamoured air ;
And from the breezes, whether low or loud,
And from the rain of every passing cloud.
And from the singing of tbs summer birds, 1
Anil from all sounds, all silence. In the words
Of antique verse and high romance—in form,
Sound,-color —in whatever checks that storm
Which with the shattered present chokes the past- -
Andinthat best philosophy, whose taste. .■ ■ .
Makes this cold, common hell, our life, a doom
As glorious as a fiery martyrdom’ -
Her spirit was the harmony of truth 1-
. < ■ , Peeoy Bysshe Shelley.
, Snowflake, was trembling..iu. every limb,.,
as’ he. gallopped up the street of Maitland’
towarda-the jail. "He. was a powerful little
fellow,. , and,’ when .not overweighted; able to
endure great; exertion; and .fatigue ; but he
was not able to parry so heavy a ; burden as
Mr.,Shelley so far,.at such d headlong pace.
‘Halloa Shelley !•, , Whither, ~away V.
shouted, a familiar-' , voice, as i Mr,;
Shelley was , passing the “ Black
Swan,” and on; looking, round; be-saw his,
friend Blair.upon the,verandah. .He.hastily
turned ,Snowflake’s bead towaids the. hotel*


and galloped to the door. On (reaching it,
and stopping, the poor little pony shook him-
self feebly, and staggering on a few paces,
fell to the ground, his rider narrowly escaping
a broken neck.
‘Are you hurt, Shelley!’ inquired Mr,
Blair anxiously, as his friend scrambled to bis
feet.
‘No, no; I’m all right, thanks. Try and
help me to put the pony on his legs again,’
replied Mr. Shelley.
‘ And help you hold him there, eh T He’ll
never stand alone again.’
‘Poor little fellow! Bertha will be in a
great way about this,’ said -Mr. 1 Shelley
gazing sorrowfully upon the dead pony. * It
will break her heart, poor child; and she has
trouble enough just now, without this.” ■
‘I thought, when I saw you turn the
corner, and cross the bridge down yonder,
that he’d scarcely carry you this far. If you
rode all the way as you came down the road
from the corner, the only wonder is that he
didn’t drop dead before. Why, he isn’t
half up to your weight, even if you walked
him all the way.’
‘ Poor little fellow ! It is a matter of life
and death I am upon, or I should never have
ridden him as I did; and he has acquitted
himself nobly. Did you hear anything of
Sinclair’s breaking jail I’ <
‘ Yes ! I'm glad to be able to say that he
has cheated the hangman. He got away last
night sometime. My horse is in the stable
here, getting a feed, ready for a run down to
Field Place 1 I was going down this evening
to let you know.’. •
Mr. Shelley, standing leaning against a
verandah-post, did not immediately reply.
He was considering carefully what to do next.
‘ I would have gone down and told you
directly I beard of it; but I thought good
news would keep, said Mr. Blair.
‘ I would to heaven you had! ' Yet it
could have made no difference. I am only
just back from Sydney.’
‘ Ah, I forgot for the moment You went
down to see if Gipps would mitigate the sen-
tence ! I hadn’t much faith in the attempt;
though there could be no harm in trying.’
‘ The Governor has pardoned the unfortu-l
nate fellow; and he has forfeited the pardon
by escaping from jail. 1 There can be no mercy
for him when they capture him again ; it
would be useless to ask for it,’'said Mr. Shel-
ley, dejectedly:
*Theyhaven;t caught them yet, and are
not likely to, I hope,’, said Mr. Blair,
* Beitha is nearly mad with grief; for it ap-
pears she visited’the jail white I was away, and
persuaded him to escape. Now that she finds
by following her advice he has lost his
pardon, she is fretting herself to death about
him!’ '
Mr; Blair’s brow darkened. He remembered
the scene in the parlor, of the “Black Swan”
a few mornings before, and be could not but
reproach himself as being in a ; great measure
the cause of the present'trouble, ‘lf I had
not aided her to.see him,’ he thought, ‘she
could not have persuaded him. to escape, and
all this trouble would have been spared.’ He
did not, however, speak of the, part he had
taken in bringing about the unfortunate
train of circumstances. ' '
‘ Poor girl! Ah, - here comes the : police
magistrate now—just returned from an un-
successful search, I should say, from bis
generally dilapidated appearance,’ -he said
pointing to a number of horsemen rid-
ing leisurely up the road. . :
In a few minutes they reached the hotel,
and the police magistrate, dismounting, threw
his biidle-rein to a constable, and stepped
upon the verandah, followed by Mr. Hubert
Clayton. The magistrate waved his hand to
his men, and they rode on to the barracks.
‘Good morning, Mr. Bartell. You have
not caught him, I see,’ said Mr. Blair, shak-
ing hands with the police magistrate'.'
‘ Ah, the old pony down ! What is the
matter with him 1’ Mr. Bartell said, observ-
ing the departed Snowflake. '
‘Yes, Mr.’Bartell! T rode him up from
Field Place rather too fast, and it has knocked
him over, poor little fellow ! ’You’ve not
taken Sinclair then V
‘No. We’ve been out since daylight, but
have not been able to find his track even. We
followed the footprints for a few hundred
yards along the Newcastle road, but a heavy
shower coming on, they were soon obliterated
< We are completely at fault, and have no clue
I even to the direction they have taken.’


‘They? What, is theie more than one
away?’ asked Mr. Shelley in surprise,
* Yes. One of the warders has gone too, and,
what’s worse, taken my grey with him,’ re-
plied Mr. Bartel),
‘You do not know which way they have
gone ?’ enquiied Mr. Shelley, taking at the
same moment some papers from his breast
pocket.
‘Not the slightest my dear sir! We are
completely at fault 1’ replied the police magis-
trate.
‘He escaped last night. Well, you will
see by this document that he had received his
Excellency’s pardon the day before ; and that,
consequently, you have only to enter him as
released, by the Governor’s command,’
said Mr. Shelley, handing the papers to the
police magistrate,
Mr. Bartell read the instrument slowly
through, and replied, ‘ If the fact of bis escape
before we received this could only be kept
dark, we might contrive to screen him; but
the whole town is aware of it by this time, and
should the governor of the jail and myself
act upon this, as you wish, we would only be
compromising ourselves.’
‘ And besides,’ said Clayton, stepping for-
ward, ‘there being two convicts at large, the
danger of condoning with one of them is in-
creased, It would be decidedly unwise to
make any exception in favor of either.’
‘ I think so too,’ replied the police magis-
trate, and turning to Mrs. Kenny, who here
appeared upon the scene, he ordered refresh-
ment.
‘ What will you take sir?’ the obliging
hostess enquired, smiling.
1 1 don’t want anything to drink, Mrs,
Kenny, It is dinner I mean, if we’re not too
late.’
Mrs. Kenny assured Mr, Bartell that he
was not too late, and led him and Mr. Clay-
ton into the dining-room, where the inevit-
able damper, beef, and tea, were soon placed
before them.
‘ I must get home now. Do you know
where I can borrow a horse V asked Mr. Shel-
ley, looking ruefully at the prostrate pony.
‘ I’ll lend you mine, You must keep a tight
rein,though,for he shies viciously,’ replied Mr.
Blair, leading the way to the stable.' ‘ You
need not bother about Snowflake; I will havy
him disposed of, and when I ride your wau
again we can exchange the saddles an t
bridles back. I hope Bertha will soon ges
over the shock this unfortunate affair ha
given her. I should be sorry, indeed, to hear
of the young fellow being taken.’
A few words of parting courtesy, and Mr.
Shelley was on his way home. ' He rode
slowly, bis thoughts troubled with the question
how would Bertha receive the con Urination of
her fears that her unhappy act had caused
such irreparable injury to her preserver.
A week passed slowly away. It was even-
ing, and the family at Field Place were seated
in the parlor, Bertba communing with her
piano (she cared little who heard her now),
and her parents entertaining Mr, Blair and
Mr. Clayton, who had called in on their way
to Newcastle. Anne Egerton was sitting
talking to Marion Macaulay in a distant corner
of the room.
* Marion, .where are my scissors? Have
yon seen them ?’ Mrs. Shelley asked suddenly,
laying down her work, and looking hurriedly
among the things upon the table.
Hubert Clayton looked np, and glanced
across to the corner where the young girls
were sitting. Marion rose, and taking a can-
dle, went into the dining-room to search for
the article.
‘ Who is the young lady in the corner oppo-
site, Mrs. Shelley ?' Clayton enquired.
‘Miss Egerton, a young English lady,
whom we have lately engaged as companion
to Bertha,’ Mrs. Shelley replied.
‘ I thought it was she. I knew her in
England. By you leave, madam, I will sted
across and speak to her.’
Mrs. Shelley had no objection, and he
crossed the room to Aune’s side. ‘1 thought
I could not be mistaken/ he said with bis
old, fascinating smile. ‘ There could not
be another upon earth how I could mis-
take for you.’
Her cheeks burned, and her heaft> almost
ceased to beat, so great was her agitation.
Shehad hoped he wonldnotbavn recognised her,
and had. kept in the back ground to avoid
him ; but he was now before her, and there
was no escape. She tried to calm herself, and
speak with indifference, butshe could notsteady


tier voice, and remained silent. He, whom she
had loved so well* through good report and
evil report, was gazing reproachfully upon
her with his soft brown eyes, and she fairly
lost her self-possession.
‘ What? Refuse to speak to me now! Must
my evil deeds follow; me here to the. land of
my exile, where the remembrance of your
loved name is spurring me to endeavour to
alone for my wasted past, by a reformed
life in the future. Do not drive me back to
reckless desparation by -your scorn. May I
see you to-morrow for a few moments, where
we may speak without uninterruption. Dp
not refuse me this little request!. May, I see
yon V i • i
He pleaded so earnestly, and looked so
truly repentant, that her gentle heart was
touched with the deepest pity, ‘ Yes, yes, I
will see you to-morrow ! lam both glad and
sorry I have met yon. Oh, lam.!’
She could say no more, but bursting into
tears, hurried from the room, .
Clayton returned to his seat in a thoughtful
mood. His love for the gentle girl, who bad
just left the apartment, was deep and sincere;
and conscience strove feebly to convict him of
being his own enemy, and having no one but
himself to blame for her refusal to marry him.
Fora moment he felt touched with a sting of
remorse, and wished that he had led a differ-
ent life; but the next he impatiently silenced
that ‘ still small voice ’ —the wisest and most
faithful adviser a man can have—and mut-
tered, with concentrated hate, that he who, by
hisinterference,bad caused theestrangement be-
tween the beautiful Anne and himself, should
have bitter cause to rue his folly. • She loves
me still I’- he soliloquised ;, ‘ I could see it by
her agitation. I will marry ; ber yet, and live
happily -here ■ with my darling; while
he—a curse upon his memory! shall
eke out a miserable existence skulking
about the bush, half his time with-
out ftod and water; or, coming back to the
settlement, be retaken and hung !’
It would have been difficult to decide from
his features which prospect —his own happi-
ness or his victim’s misery—occasioned him
the greater amount of pleasure, so intimately
for a few seconds were the expressions of gen-
tleness and ferocity mingled upon his face.
Mr. Clayton’s meditations were soon inter-
rupted by Mrs. Shelley looking up from her
work and saying ‘What! where’s Miss Eger-
ton 3 I thought you were talking to her.’
• So I was. for a few minutes, Mrs. Shelley.
But she has a severe headache, and has left the
room. I can.have a chat with her to-morrow
about old times,’ he replied, absently.
■ Mrs. Shelley smiled. ‘ A love affair, I see!
It is strange how people meet together again
after being at opposite ends of the world, per-
haps, for years!’ she said to herself. Her
thoughts upon the subject were soon termin-
ated |by a burst of melody that awoke Mr.
Shelley from a doze, and caused Mr. Blair to
drop the Gazette and glance tpward the instru-
ment at which the gifted, unhappy Bertha was
sitting. Her theme was a wild and stormy
one,', A succession, of startling crashes, in-
tervalled. by low wailings like the mur-
muring'sighs iof a dying breeze, held all
enchained by . the weird, solemnity of the
wondrous performance. 1t.., was. as .the
agony of a . mighty heart pouring forth its
woe in a of melody—a grief,
too great to be human,- too intense in its
awful sublimity to have place in a mortal’s
breast. All held their breath as the.broken,
passionate stream rolled on.
. Oh, music, flowing through the fingers of
heaven’s favoured few, how for above the petty
things of earth thou soarest; how . seldom
art thou beard by mortal ears 1
Presently the painful suspense (painful, for
the deepest emotions of her eager
listeners, were , enlisted , and held . as
by a magic spell), was broken, by
the ceasing of the uneven tide, and in a , few
fitful murmurs it died away. ■ All breathed
more freely, as the music paused, and looked
at each other; in mute astonishment. Before
they had sufficiently recovered from their
astonishment to speak, Bertha, pale and
trembling, and with eyes gazing vacantly be-
fore her, as if peering into futurity, glided from
the room. .
‘Wonderful!’ ejaculated Mr.'Blair,, rising
from his chair, and pacing the room.
The word dissolved the spell, and - the
stream of-conversation, held back by the
weird and grief-laden melody, rolled on again
increased animation.


* She plays like that without learning the
music, you say V (Jlaylon asked, incredulously.
‘ Yes !’ Mrs. Shelley laconically replied, as
she rose to follow Bertha.
‘ It seems incredible,’ Mr. Blair exclaimed j
•and yet there must be such genius upon
earth, or whence the grand music we have 1
The magnificent creations of the great mas.
ters must'each in turn have had' birth in a
moment of inspiration.’ '*
‘She never played like that before,’ said Mr
Shelley; ‘ she. must (rave been brooding
over her grief intensely to have called forth
such it wonderful outburst of-of-of what we
might call the music of despair.’
1 Grief J’ said Hubert Clayton, glancing
enquiringly at Mr. Shelley.' l ■'* I was not
aware that Miss Shelley bad any special cause
for grief.’ • ’ ■ •
! i Mr. Shelley felt a strong aversion to Mr.
Clayton, and not choosing to dismiss with him
the subject of Bertha’s attachment to the un-
fortunate escapd did not reply.- -i ’
‘Theyouug lady is unhappily attached to
the poor fellow Sinclair, who’has just escaped
into the bush ; and she feels his misfortune
acutely,’ whispered Mr. Blair. < I think
we had better ride on,’ he continued, in the
same tone; ‘the moonisjnp, : and the family
are so deeply afflicted bf the indisposition of
Bertha that our presence must he an intrusion.
We will call on our way back, and enquire if
she is better.’
Hubert Clayton’s plan for meeting Miss
Egeiton on the morrow would > have been
upset by riding on to Newcastle then, as
Mr. Blair advised, but he - was saved the
trouble of opposing the- idea by a dazzling
flash of lightning, immediately followed, by
a deafening crash. ‘Ah !■ a thunderstorm ?’ be
said, as he held aside the blinds and looked
•out. ‘That prevents our riding on. The moon
must be down, too, for it is quite dark !’;
Mr. Blair admitting the impossibility of
proceeding further until next day,- conversa-
tion flagged, he and Mr, Shelley sitting read-
ing, or affecting to do'so, and' Hubert Clayton
standing by the window-pane, thinking.of
the beautiful mourner whose melodious anguish
had touched even his adamant heart. ‘ And
she loves him!’ he soliloquised thoughtfully.
* If I had thought crushing him could have
caused such misery to a young and beautiful
girl' I would have deferred ray revenge. It
is too .late, though, now ! The arrow has left
the bow, and is beyond the archer’s control!
Fate is irrevokable j it must be as it is V
Leaving the three gentlemen to their
thoughts, we follow Mrs. Shelley to Bertha's
room. When she entered it Bertha was
kneeling by the window, weeping bitterly, her
head buried in her arms, and her fair
tresses floating like -a silken mantle over her
neck and shoulders. ■
‘ Come, eome,, my darling, you must not
give way in this silly manner 1’ Mrs. Shelley
said soothingly, . ‘ He is safe now, or be would
have been taken before. Trust to God my
child. He orders all for the best.’
. * Orders it for the best that I, who would
freely give my life to. save him the
merest trouble, should destroy him, as I have
done by persuading him to escape from jail ?’
she said, raising her head. ‘lt may be so,
mamma; 1 try bard to think so, hut 1 can-
not. If it had not been for me, Percy would
now be free and happy, and now, through my
mad interference, he must starve in the dismal
bush, or, escaping from it, bo captured and
b ung 1’ ■
She could say no more. The fearful pic-
ture, , her excited imagination drew of the
loved one’s forlorn situation, overpowered her
completely, and sinking back, she gave vent
to.her emotion in a torrent of bitter tears.
. Her mother knelt beside her, and gently
taking her head upon her lap, tenderly sup-
ported it, while she gave way to the paroxysm
of grief. , ,
CHAPTER XXXII.
And, ah, for a man to arise in me.
That the man I am, may cease to be !
■ • Tennison.
In the little summer-house Hubert Clayton
stood next morning waiting for Anne Eger-
ton, who had premised, as she passed him at
the breakfast table, to meet him there. ■ Half
sighing,-die muttered to himself, ‘ For her dear
sake I wish 1 had led a different life 1 If she
will overlook my past, and marry me, I will
most certainly.turn over a new leaf. If there
is under heaven a being who can reform me—
as the canting parsons call it—it is the gentle
Anne 1 And by the heavens above me, I swear


that for her dear sake I will be a better man for
the future ! Ah, here comes my bright, par.
ticular star —God bless her !’
Anne approached the arbout with a firm
step, and without a trace of the agitation
she had exhibited in his presence ou the
previous evening. Her face' was pale,
and the brightness of her eyes betrayed
her excitement, but she retained her self-
possession, and met him with a smile of
recognition. From bis appearance, and the
company he was with, she was led to believe
that he bad for ever forsaken his evil ways,
and become a respectable member of society ;
and the delusion made her feel for the time a
calm happiness she bad long been stranger to.
‘ I was afraid your better judgment had
induced you to change your mind, and avoid
meeting so incorrigible a sinner as me 1’ be
said, softly, a touch of sadness in his voice.
‘Not incorrigible, Hnbeit! You are try-
ing to live differently now. You cannot re-
call the past; but a bright future is before us,
if you continue yonr effort for good. It makes
me so happy to find you are striving to. make
atonement for the past by living a better life
now !’ she said, tenderly, the great love of her
pure, young beait beaming from her lustrous
eyes.
* You can7orget the past in the future ? Love
me as you used to, before the black cloud of
disgrace came between us T he asked in a
low tone, gazing dreamily into the azure
depths of her speaking eyes, and thinking
how mad he must have been to let any temp-
tation draw him from the only being for whom
he bad ever felt either sympathy or love.
‘I forget everything, but that you will
redeem the past! The years, since we were
all in all to each other, have passed; We will
remember them only as a painful dream that
we have awakened from, never to relapse into
again ?’ ■
‘ And you will keep your promise now, my
darling ? I have a good home down on the
Nepean River, and we can forget the dreary
past in our happr future,’ be said, taking her
hands in his.
‘Not yet, Hubert!' she replied blushing.
‘ If you will wait for a year, §nd still remain
firm in your resolution, to live a changed life,
1 will fulfil the promise I have never fur-
gotten. Besides, ray cousin Percy is in such
dreadful trouble, I could not possibly think
of marrying until be is saved.’
‘ Wait a year ? Do you then doubt ray sin-
cerity, Anne 1 My punishment for ray early
errors is bitter indeed, when even you Cannot
believe me 1’
The tone of real pain in which Hubert
Clayton spoke, touched her heart; and Anne
burst into tears. ‘ Forgive me, Hubert! 1
did not mean to doubt you, or hurt your feel-
ings,’ she sobbed. ‘ 1 know yon are earnest
in your determination to redeem the past; but
I cannot marry you till poor Percy is out of
trouble. A year is not so Very long to wait!’
* You do not doubt me, then 1 I will wait
one, ten, twenty years to please you. You
are the only one whom 1 have ever loved, and
to feel that you do love me as faithfully as of
yore, is happiness enough for me—more, in
deed, than 1 deserve. It puzzles me new bow
I could be so blind as to ’
‘ Let the dead past bury its dead !' she said,
interrupting him. * I never loved you less
than Ido now, Hubert. I have always loved
you, perhaps, more than I ought to have done ;
. but sit down, and let us talk about my cousin,
his danger is so pressing, and we shall have
plenty of time to talk of our future. 1 wish
his was as bright 1’ *
They sat down upon the rustic seat—a huge
root of a tree coiled and twisted into the grot-
esquest of forms—and reviewed Percy Sin-
clair’s situation from every aspect, Clayton al-
most wishing, as he listened to Anne's heartfelt
lamentings on Percy’s troubles, that he bad
forbore his ruthless vengeance. Half-an-
hour’s unrestricted conversation in* the sum-
mer-house and they returned to the parlor, the
dark gulf that had so long separated them,
bridged, and their ties of devotion but the
closer woven by their so long estrangement
Bertha was sitting apart, as was her wont
now, and leaning upon the window-sill, gaz-
ing with a purposeless eyp upon the mountains
across the river. Mr. and Mrs. Shelley were
engaged in a discussion with Mr. Blair, upon
the possibilty of the Governor’s still pardon-
ing Percy Sinclair, after bis breaking jail.
Anne stepped across to Bertha’s side, and
Clayton joined the group at the further end of
the room.


‘ I can hardly believe it possible that he
can have been guilty of any criminal act at
home,’ said Mr. Blair; ‘he has always
seemed to me the very soul of honor,’
‘ Another of those cases of erroneous con-
viction, I believe,’ replied Mr. Shelley, ‘He
would never speak of the past, however; so
that we know next to nothing of his antece-
dents.’
‘ I beliave he is as innocent as the babe
unborn of any thing deserving such a heavy
sentence!’ Mrs. Shelley said, with energy.
‘ If ail the juries in the universe convicted
him, I should still believe him innocent!’
* I wish 1 could believe him so,
Mrs. Shelley,’ said Clayton. 1 1 was
intimately acquainted with him at
home, and consequently know everything
connected with the unfortunate case. He
was found guilty upon a charge of forgery 1’
‘ Forgery I If so, I expect he was in some
strait for the want of a little ready money,
and used the name of a friend to raise it,
honestly intending to repay the forced loan I
A very injudicious proceeding, but certainly
notdeserving so heavy a punishment as our too
severe laws meted out to him,’ said Mr. Blair,
A strange smile flitted across Clayton’s
handsome features, as he turned to reply to
Mr. Blair. ‘Such was not the case, I am
sorry to add 1’ he said ‘ Percy Sinclair forged
the name of a friend for a large amount; and
he had no excuse, fur bis father is a wealthy
man 1’
Bertha slowly rose and approached Clayton,
her face almost ghastly in its awful paleness,
and her eyes sparkling in her intense excite-
ment, He did not observe her, but cootinued,
* At the trial it was proved that be not only
forged the cheque, but mined a needy horse-
dealer by passing it off upon him in payment
for a horse, he ’
* ’Tis a falsehood I—a cruel, vindictive false-
hood, Mr. Clayton 1’ exclaimed Bertha, con-
fronting him, and casting upon him a wither-
ing glance of scorn and loathing. ’ ‘ It was you
who forged that cheque ! It was you, who iu
your paltry, cowardly hate, bribed that needy
horse-dealer to perjure himself to bring ruin
and disgrace upon one, who is imraeasureably
your superior in everything. I charge you, Hu-
bert Clayton, you, the meanest reptile that en-
cambers the earth by its baleful presence, with
planning and executing the crnelest and most
despicable revenge that was ever bred of mal-
ice and cowardice I Because Percy Sinclair in
his earnest desire for the happiness of his cou-
sin Miss Egertoo, warned her of the danger of
trusting her future with you, you worked his
ruin in England ; and even faeie, while the
weight of his troubles is crushing him to the
earth, you follow him with your relent-;
less ’
She could say no more, but, overcome by
the intensity of her excitement, sank back
into the arras of her father, who sprang for-
ward and caught her.
‘ ’Tis false I ’Ti* a lie !’ exclaimed Clayton
hoarsely, his face dark with suppressed pas-
sion. ‘’Tis a base and treacherous inven-
tion !’
‘Then why lose your temper about it 1*
sneered Mr. Blair.
The random shaft shot home, and for a
moment Clayton was dumbfounded.
‘ Can this be true, Hubert i Is it possi-
ble, that, while professing to love me, yon were
platting to bring ruin and disgrace upon my
cousin V Anne asked eagerly, ‘ Oh, say that
it is some terrible mistake! That you could
not be guilty of anything so cruel and
wicked !’
* It is a mistake, Anne, an unaccountable
mistake !’ Clayton replied, recollecting him-
self. ‘Forgive my abruptness, sir,’ he con-
tinued, addressing Mr. Shelley. ‘ The charge
came to sudden, and is so totally without
foundation, that I may be pardoned for losing
my temper. And I most humbly crave Miss
Shelley’s forgiveness also, for I- spoke both
rudely and rashly.’
‘ Oh, I'm so very glad it is a mistake !’ said
Anne, fervently. ‘ Such an act would be
almost too wicked for the vilest upon earth to
commit I’
‘As you are aware, Anne, Mr. Sinclair
and I seldom met, for our habits and tastes
were so different; but we were never enemies.
At that melancholy trial I did my utmost to
save him; but the evidence was too clear,
and he was convicted. If Mr. Sinclair tells
Miss Shelley anything different, he is guilty
of untruth 1’
* Mr. Clayton,’ returned Bertha, from the


sofa, in a low, weak voice, and fixing her]
searching eyes upon him, as if she
would read his very soul, * The wretched
dupes, ' whom you first bribed to swear
falsely, and afterwards betrayed, are
both here in the colony. It was not Percy
Sinclair ; it was one of your false witnesses,
that told me. 1 It is impossible that there can
be any mistake. The man has proved the
truth of the charge by risking his life in
helping Mr. Sinclair to escape !’
‘The warder? I thought I had seen him
before !’ Clayton said unguardedly ; and then
noting the significant glances interchanged
between Mr. Shelley and Mr. Blair, he con-
tinued, correcting himself, ‘ This is a singular
conspiracy ! I fancy I have seen the jailor
before, who has escaped with Mr. Sinclair;
but lean see no motive for bis strange charge.
It must be a case of mistaken identity ; it is
. quite possible some one may have acted as he
says, for Mr. Sinclair is the last man on earth
I would have suspected of such a crime !’
‘ When did you bear this, Bertha ?’ Mrs.
Shelley enquired. 1
* When I went to see Mr. Sinclair, the
warder, Mr. Bow, tcld me; and I am certain
ho told the truth !’ she replied resolutely.
‘And I, who ought to know best, am cer-
tain that be is untruthful in what he says that
relates to me!’ replied Clayton, smiling. He
had now thoroughly regained his self-posses-
sion ; and turning to Anne, he continued, ‘ I
can hardly stay here longer, being charged as
I am, with a base crime, which, though I am
innocent of, I can have no direct and imme-
diate means of disproving. Yon, at' least,
will believe me innocent I’
‘ It is, it must be a mistake ! Though the
whole world turn from yon, Hubert, I will
never believe you capable of such atrocity !’
said the faithful Anne. Ah, trusting, inno-
cent heart! draw what brief happiness thou
canst from thy sweet trust in thy lover’s tardy
reformation. Too soon shall the mask be torn
away, and his true nature be revealed in all
its naked deformity!’
Clayton pressed Anne’s cold hands; and
whispering, ‘Darling, we shall soon meet
again! Remain faiahful till then !’ bowed
himself from the room. ‘ They must die,
both Sinclair and the fool who hasn’t
learnt to keep" a still tongue in hie head,’
he mattered, as he strode towards the stable
for his horse. * I’na not safe while they are
in the land of the living. How can I clip
their silver threads!—a subject for considera-'
tion that; but clip it I will or an exposure must
follow, now that they have met!’ He mounted
his horse, and turning his head towards New-
castle, rode slowly forward; conceiving
rejecting plan after plan for the extirpation of
‘ the nest of vipers,’ as he termed the victims
of his hate and treachery. ‘Ha ! I have it!’
he exclaimed, after half an hour’s deep cogita-
tion. ‘An excellent idea ! I’ll find them that
way; and if they live twenty-four hours
after, they shall have my full'permission to
proclaim to the world my action in the matter
of the trial !’
‘This is a serious charge yon bring against
Mr. Clayton, Bertha,’ said Mr. Shelley, as
the gentleman alluded to left the room. ‘ \
very serious charge; and lam sorry you did
so. The person who told you this story is a
convict, and therefore not to have very much
eliance placed in him. You should have told
me privately, and not have spoken so indis-
creetly.’
• ‘lt is true, papa 1 I made my blood
boil to bear him standing there insinuating
that Mr. Sinclair was all that was wicked,
when he knew that he was the unhappy
victim of his own cowardly and treacherous
plot 1’ Bertha answered, excitedly.
Anne, who had till now stood by without
entering into the conversation, exclaimed—a
vibration of deep pain in her sweet voice—
‘Do not say so, Miss Shelley ! It may have
been some one else who treated my poor
cousin so cruelly. Do not condemn Mr.
Clayton upon the word of one, who may be
mistaken ! Think how dreadful it must be to
be accused wrongfully, and do not believe
him guilty till you learn more about it 1’
Bertha observed the expression of pain upon
Anne’s features, and restraining her impulse
to repeat the proofs she had, said gently,
‘ You love Mr. Clayton 1 Then, for your sake,
dear Anne, I will hope that it is some one else,
and not he, who so treacherously destroyed
Percy’s prospects in life 1 Yes, it is dreadful
to be accused and condemned wrongfully; and
such is Percy’s miserable fate, whether his des


tmyer bo Mr, Clayton r.r another! But I
can’t talk any more now ; my head is throb-
bing and aching terribly !’
"Anne Egerton pressed her hand lightly
upon Bertha’s hot temples, and whispering
softly, ‘You must try and sleep for. an tour
or two; you are feverish and excited !’ left
the room, Mr. Blair taking the hint, fol-
lowed her on to the verandah, leaving Bertha
alone with her parents.
‘ Leave us for a while, Walter! I will re-
main with her !’ whispered Mis. Shelley to
her husband, as she placed upon Bertha’s
feverish forehead a handkerchief damped
with scent. Mr. Shelley, hoping his daughter
would doze off, and be refreshed by sleep,
stole noiselessly from the room. Bertha lay
with her eyes closed, her thoughts far away io
the dreary bush, with the unhappy fugitive ;
and thinking she was asleep, her mother sat
by silently, waving away the busy little flies,
and dreaming of the bright future before her
darling, if she would consent to marry Lionel
Courtney, the future Earl of Upraore.
Whatdoyouthink, Mr, Shelley, of Bertha’s
accusation? The way Clayton took it, made
me feel it was true, and yet it seems ira.
possible,’! said Mr. Blair, as Mr. Shelley
joined him on the verandah,
I really don’t know what to think !’ he
replied, ‘ There’s truth in the fact that some
one did as she says; but I cannot believe it
was Mr. Clayton. Although, to tell you the
truth, ‘ I don’t altogether like the fellow.’
‘ The same here. I always feel chilled
whenever be is by; bat we mustn’t condemn
him on that account,’ returned Mr. Blair, as
he and Mr. Shelley walked on to the stables.
Anne Egerton overheard the brief dialogue,
and retiring to her room, sat down, and re-
solved the matter in- her fair bead, till it
grew dizzy and ached. ‘ Ah, I fear it is true,’
she said, as she rose after an hour’s close
meditation, to go and inquire if Bertha was
better; ‘ I fear it is true ! Poor Percy, it was
in striving to protect my future, that you
drew down upon your innocent head his
revenge! And I bad loved him all these
long years, in despite' of his wickedness!
Never will I see ,br speak to him again, until
it is pioyed, that he did not treacherously
destroy you by this wicked plot. And yet
lie may; be innocent! , It ; may be a. mistake I
No, I will trust him still until ha is proved*
to be guilty !'
CHAPTER XXIII.
Another day is added to the count
Of buried ages, Le! the beauteous moon,
Lika a fair shepherdess now comes abroad
With her full flock of stars, that roam around
The azure' mead of heaven.
Kev. R. Momtsouxbt.
Percy Sinclair's wish to live was not strong
enough to induce him. to beg for his life ; and
he beard with gloomy satisfaction Darby
Gregson’s dark hints about burning him to
death. Jerry, however, looked unfavourably
upon the prospect before himself and Percy,
and remonstrated vigorously against the pro-
posal being carried into effect. The poor fel-
low had no ambition to be held up as a pub-
lic warning' to his race, and he could not
appreciate the warmth of his savage captor’s-
intentions towards ‘Misser Sinlar’—‘What
for you burn him like dat, dat no good burn
him anybody !’ he argued, after having made
a powerful, and, he thought, successful pro-
test against his own sentence, ‘You let
him Misser Sinlar go, den we get him you
plenty beef, plenty eberyting. ?
Jerry’s undisguised offer of bribery rather
amused Darby and his brutal associates; and'
the ex-sailor advised their letting the nigger
go. * He’s only a boy, Dai by,’ he suggested,
‘ and it would be a pity to snuff him out so
early. Let the little devil go.’
‘ To bring the constables down upon our
tracks! Not if I know it, Sam ! He’ll be
of no use, and once out of our sight y’ad be off
like a shot, and split to the police magistrate
where we are, and where we’re off to. No, no,
my boy, I know a game worth two of it!’
The other ruffians saw the point of Darby’s
argument, and offered no further opposition
to the poor blackboy’s elevation on the cord of
fate. Percy.had silently attended to the dis-
cussion, upon his own late, too careless or too
proud to speak a word to save himself from
the agonizing and lingering death the bush,
rangers proposed for him ; but when he savfr
that they had determined upon murdering
his darling's faithful attendant, he pleaded
anxiously for his life. ‘You are men and-
Englishmen,’he said, thinking to rouse their
better nature. ‘ Surely you will never stoop


to murder aninoffensive boy! You may in your
wanderings sometimes have occasion to shed
blood in defence of your lives and liberties ;
but none of you can be so base as to wantonly,
and without cause, take the life of a defenceless
lad. It would be more than cruel—it would
be cowardly!’
Darby saw that his prisoner’s words were
likely to work upon the blunted feelings of the
other freebooters, and so, to remove the danger
of any further appeal, he stooped down, and
forced a roll of bis woollen comforter into
Percy’s mouth, and thus effectually gagged
him, saying as be did so, * Yon see, mates, we
must bang the poor, little nigger on the score
of self-preservation. If we le,t him go free,
he’d run a line straight back to Maitland, and
turn out all the constables on the river after
us. So you see, there’s no help for it! We
must hang him !’
No further resistance was offered to the
proposal, and the grim preparations were made
in silence—Percy, laying bound and gagged
upon the ground, being unable to interfere,
and Bow being apparently too busy with his
thoughts to notice what was going on around.’
‘Poor Jerry,’ Bow muttered to himself,
when he had worked out his mental problem
to his satisfaction, and could conscientiously
spare the time to take note of the events tran-
spiring around. ‘PoorJeny! I wish I could
save you ; but I’ll find it hard enough to res-
cue your master ; and I’d only risk my chance
of saving him if I interfeie.’
The prisoners watched thesavage Darby with
intense interest, as he flung a rope ever the
projecting arm of a gum tree, and made it fast,
Theother outlaws stood passively by, leaving to
theircold-blooded captain, who was well able to
perform it, the work of execution. The rope
secured. Darby stepped back to the wretched
Jerry, who fully understood his terrible posi-
tion, and was blubbering like a baby.
* Come, dusky, stop that now ! What the
deuce have you got to whimper about? he
said, giving Jerry a rough kick in the ribs.’
‘ Jump up ! We can’t be kept here all day
waiting for your convenience.’
Jerry begged so bard for bis life, that even
tbe stony-hearted sailor had some trouble in
repressing bis tears; and Bow required all bis
firmness to remain silent.
* Now, Jennings, bear a hand !’ he said,
dragging Jerry beneath tbe projecting arm of
tbe tree, and fixing the rope round his neck,
‘ bear a hand, and let’s get this job over.
You pull in the slack while 1 bold tbe nigger
up, and then tie the end of the rope to that
dead limb behind you.’
Jennings did as be was ordered, and quickly
drew the line taut, .while Darby Qregson
lifted the young savage a couple of feet from
the ground. * Got tbe end fastened V Darby
enquired, as he was about to let the blackboy
swing.
‘All’s secure! Hadn’t you better tie his
bands first ? He’ll die easier 1’ said Jennings.
‘ He’ll be as dead as a red herring in ten
minutes!’ replied Darby, letting his victim
go, and stepping backward a pace or two
to watch his death struggles with better ad-
vantage. Darby had acted with less than his
usual forethought in neglecting to pinion
Jerry’s bands; and the shrewd blackboy,
though trembling with fright, was alert
enough to perceive his opportunity. Watch-
ing Darby closely, he waited for the mo-
ment of being cast off, and, catching the rope
with both hands, a little above his bead,
just as tbe bushranger was about to launch
him off the stage of life, and swinging himself
free, he kicked Darby full in the stomach,
knocking him down by the blow, and then,
before the discomfited villain could regain his
legs, he climbed the rope hand over hand till
he reached the branch over which it was flung.
The unexpected and daring feat drew an in-
stantaneous and hearty burst of applause from
Bow and the bushrangers ; and Percy smiled,
as he saw tbe gallant blackboy seated in tri-
umph across the limb, and nimbly unfastening
the rope from his neck ; but tbe uncomfortable
gag in his mouth held him silent., Darby rose
to his feet with an oath— ‘ You black spawn of
h ,' he exclaimed, savagely, * I’ll make
this the worst day’s work for yon yon ever did.’
No, I’m blowed if you do, Capt’n,’ said the
ex-sailor coming forward, and bolding his sides.,
‘ That darkie’s about the sharpest young ’un
I’ve seen this cruise; and I’m blowed it you
shall have another chance at him ! What do
you say, mates 7 he continued, turning to the
remainder of tbe gang. All deciding that
Jerry had fairly earned his reprieve, bis pro


lector shouted to him to come .down from
aloft; but Jerry bad no confidence in the
benevolent old salt's assurance that “ he
wouldn’t eat him," and flinging the rope aside
he scrambled up the tree, not pausing for a
second until he reached its topmost branch,
from which eminence he gazed down upon the
scene in triumph.
‘And now about this other chap,’ said Jen-
nings, after all eyes had been directed upon
Jerry for about ten minutes. ‘Our gang is
none too strong ; and if these fellows are run-
away convicts, 1 propose they shall join ns.
Let’s put it to the vote!’ Darby knew it was
useless to oppose the idea, if put to the yote,
and knowing that to lead any body of men it
is necessary to give way occasionally, con-
sented with as good grace as be could, to foi-
give the ‘ shot in the neck’ that Percy had
given him in the camp by the Hunter some
months before .
‘ I think you're right, Darby, in taking my
matein/said Bow, giving Peicy at the moment
a significant glance, which the latter, however,
did not understand. ‘ "Son’ll find him quite
an haxquisition; but I wouldn’t take-tbe gag
out of bis mouth for an hour. It’s best to let
him feel what you could do with him, before
you let him loose!'
Darby thought so too; and so Bow was
liberated, and Percy Sinclair kept still in his
painful position, the rough and irritating wool-
len coil in his month.
1 More wood for the fire, lads,’ said Darby,
throwing himself upon the grass, ‘some of
you gather some—look, there’s the head of a
dead tree down the ridge there—and you take
the billies, Jennings, and fill them at the water-
holes we passed a couple of hundred yards
back.’
' The men hurried off on their commissions,
leaving Bow and Darby together by the
embers of the dying fire. ‘ Queer things have
happened since me and you met last, Bow!’
observed Darby Gregson, settling himself
down for a yarn about old times.
* ‘ Do you know that slashing grey colt be-
longing to Mr. Bartel), the police magistrate I’
Bow enquired, disregarding Darby’s observa-
tion.
‘ Bart ell’s grey ) I should rather think so!
There’s not a bushranger this side Parramatta,
who hasn’t had a narrow shave with the colt.
Only he fell into a hole, when he was after me
once, I’d have been nabbed as neat as you
could wish,’ replied Darby, rising, bis large,
red nose glowing with excitement at the
recollection of the never-to-be-forgotten race.
* I’d give a trifle to shake that horse 1’
‘ That’s him down the ridge yonder, Darby,’
said Bow, pointing down the slope to where
the three horses were grazing, ‘ I’ll swop him,
if you like,’
‘ Done ! Come along down, and let’s have
a look at him 1’ cried Darby, delighted at the
prospect of obtaining the coveted horse.
‘ You can catch him alone, Darby. He’s
as quiet as a sheep. I’m too tired to care
about stirring, if 1 can help it.’
‘ All right, Bow, I’ll catch him myself.
He’s a beauty; I wouldn’t give him for the
pick of the Governor’s stables,’ returned
Darby, starting down the ridge.
1 Good 1 Now we can have a few minutes’
consideration,’ Bow muttered, as Darby bur-
ned down the bill, and then turning to Percy
Sinclair, who lay close by, bound hand and
foot, he stooped down and removed the gag
from bis mouth. ‘ I expect, sir, you thought
it strange of me my asking them to leave you
gaggedbut I knew you would be sure to
refuse to join the bushrangers, and perhaps
offend them by speaking too openly; so I
thought it best to keep you silent till after I
could get a chance of speaking to you,’ said
Bow.'
‘ I turn bushranger 1 No! They may
burn me a thousand times first!’ Percy re-
plied, angrily.
‘I knew that’s what you’d say ; but just
listen before yon make up your mind. These
wretches are going now to the river. If we
are with them, and they attack the place
where that young lady lives, we can protect
her. Stop! don’t speak ! Here’s one of
the .villains coming back j Keep the com-
forter in your mouth, as if it hadn’t been
moved.
Percy Sinclair’s drooping spirits rose at
Bow’s words, and his eyes flashed at the pros-
pect of another attack upon Field Place.
‘ Welcome even life itself, if it remain with a
chance of serving her!’ he mentally ex-
claimed. ‘ Better, far better to lose it in her


defence, than to die here for no greater pur-
pose than the sport of a herd of brutal men 1’
He was now thoroughly reconciled to the idea
of turning bushranger, or anything else that
would preserve his life until he could rescue
her from the anticipated danger.
Leaving Percy to his thoughts. Bow returned
to the fire, and applied hiraselfvigorouslytofan.
nlng the dying embers with his hat, as Jen-
nings returned with the water for the tea. In a
few minutes Darby came back leading the
grey colt. * He’s mine then, Bow V be said,
patting the horse’s arched and glossy neck.
‘ You take my roan filly, and 1 take this cove.
It’s a fair swop. You’re witness, Jennings.
Come, shake hands, Bow !’
Hands were duly shaken in presence of the
witness, Jennings; and the bargain concluded.
‘I say, Darby, on second thought I fancy you
might free that poor"beggar there now !’ said
Bow, pointing over hisshoulderto where Percy
lay bound. ‘By-the-by, Darby, I never thought
to tell you before. He’s the yonng feller, that
devil Clayton run me and you to swear against
at York. You recollect the young Mr. Sinclair
that got lagged for forging a cheque V
‘Young Sinclair of Elmsdale 1 Yes, I re-
collect him right enough ! That’s him, is it ?'
‘Yes, Darby, that’s him! And as it was
owing to me and you, that he got lagged, we
oughter to be easy with him.’
‘ I haven’t no faith in them white-livered
coves, Bow, as is afraid to wink for fear of
the ten commandments. Howsomever, we’ll
try him for a while. Slip his cords off nowl
and let’s see about supper.’ ,
■Bow obeyed the order with alacity, and
whispered, as he was untying the green hide
thongs, from Percy’s wrists. ‘ Don’t say
anything to offend that vagabond, Darby,
sir. ‘ For the sake of the young lady it’ll be
best to keep sweet with him. Here’s a slip
of paper and a pencil, I picked up in the
gaol yesterday. If you’ve any message
for her, watch your chance and write it, and
then give it to me. I’ll manage to give it to
the blackboy up the gum tree,, and he’ll get
away back when it is dark.’
Percy was liberated, and admitted into the
honorable brotherhood offoresters. The scene
around the fire as the deepening dusk gave
p'ace to the silver radiance of moonlight, was
singularly wild and grotesque. The bright
flames of the huge pile of blazing logs shed a
ruddy light upon the ferocious and bronzed
features of the outlaws, presenting a picture
that a slight stretch of imagination might
easily have transformed into a scene among the
farfamed, banditte-infested Appennines.
. The bushrangers sat by their fire long after
they had taken supper, “ yarning” of their
various adventures in the past, or laying plans
for the future, and occasionally diversifying
their “yarns" by anecdotes of different “ gangs,”
who had long kept the country in terror till
shot, or captured and hung. With their nat-
ural inquisitiveness, the outlaws demanded to
hear Percy’s and Bow’s history. Percy was
abont to peremptorily refuse, when Bow
interrupted by volunteering to relate what he
knew of both ; and in his quaint and amusing
way he detailed the part of his own and
Percy’s lives, which were so inseparably as-
sociated, not omitting to explain Darby Greg-
son’s share of the villainous plot, by means of
which Percy had been transported. During
Bow’s story, Darby watched Percy closely,
and when Bow was relating what he had heard
of the attack of the bushrangers upon Field
Place, Darby interrupted him by exclaiming,
with a coarse laugh, ‘ You most have been
awful sweet on that little beauty, Bertha, Sin-
clair ! She was to have fallen to Nat Bryant’s
share, if that she-devil cf a mother of hers
hadn’t stuck a knife into him, and earned
her off. But when we get_hands on her again,
and we shall before the turn of the moon, I’ll
make her my wife without waiting for priest or
parson. -There no man, woman, nor devil
shall take her away from me, when once I get
my hands on her.’
Percy had to exercise great self-conti ol to
keep from striking the outlaw dead at his feet.
In all probability he would have done so, and
provoked the vengeance of the remaining bush-
rangers, had not Bow forcibly held him down,
and 'whispered, “If you’d save the young
lady, you must be there, when they attack
the homestead ; and you can’t you know, if
you offebd these devils !’
Percy saw the necessity of forbearance, and
biting his lips remained silent.
‘ Well, let’s turn in mates!’ proposed
: Darby. ‘ We’ve had a long run to-day ; and


we’ve a long journey before ns in the morn-
ing.’
• One of us'll have to watch the horses
capt’n, or they’ll slip their cables,’ suggested
the ex-sailor.
* You’re right mate,’ replied Jennings, ‘ and
it’s your turn now. You haven’t had a watch
for a week.’
‘ I’ll take the first watch, Darby I’ said
Bow, stooping down to light his pipe at a
smouldering branch, ‘ I’ve had a long sleep
this evening, so a watch or two won’t hurt
me.’
Darby and bis gang readily consented to
Bow being sentinel; and rolling themselves
in their blankets were soon snoring in con-
cert, Percy and Bow lay apart, each occu-
pied with his own thoughts; and poor Jerry
from the elevation of the topmost branch of
the gum tree, watched the camp scene with
mingled feelings of exultation and regret—the
former sentiment occasioned by the kick he
had administered upon Darby in escaping, the
latter by his inability to join in the attack upon
good things he had seen spread so
temptingly before him. A couple of
tedious hours rolled by; and all being
silent and still, Jerry thought that
the decisive moment for escape had ar-
rived. ‘Now me get along back raurray
make hast**,’ he said to himself as he stretched
out his cramped limbs, ‘ Dat grey colt can
gallop like it lightning ! Bale dat bush-
ranger horse can catch him!’ Full of the
project for escape, he had narrowly watched
the movements of the famous giey, and knew
just where he was grazing; and slowly des-
cending the tree he reached its base with-
out'accident; and laying himself prone upon
the damp grass he crawled along noiselessly
till he reached the cover of a large tree, and
then, rising to his feet and keeping the tree
between himself and the camp, walked
briskly to the waterhole by the side of which
the horses were grazing. Being all well, used
to “ camp,” the horses permitted Jerry to ap-
proach without their moving, and he was
about to place his hand upon the silvery mane
of the grey, when he received a fright great
enough to excuse him for the incautious ex-
clamation of terror he gave utterance to.
‘ Hold your tongue, you little fool, or I’ll
pull it out of you !’ growled Bow impatiently
from the other side of the horse.
Jerry breathed more freely when he found
who his mysterious neighbour was. * My word,
you make it metoo much raurry frighten, altoge-
ther Misser Bow ! What for you do like a dat 1’
muttered Jerry, his knees knocking together
in his fright.
‘You take this note and give it to Miss,
what’s-her-name and tell her that Bow’ll stick,
to Mr. Sinclair, through thick and thin ; so
she needn’t have no fears about him,’ said Bow,
Jerry took thejiote; and, before hecould reply,
Bow had vanished into theshadow of a thicket,
and was cautiously hurrying back to his post
at the fire,
‘ Hollo, Bow !’ saiil Darby, as he took his
place by the fire, ‘ What’s up V
‘ Didn’t you hear the horses just now, ?’
asked Bow evasively.
‘No ; I’ve only just woke. Was anything
wrong with them V
‘JNo, I don’t think so, Darby. They were
frightened at a curlew, that was screeching
down the ridge.’
‘Well, goodnight! I'm too jolly tired to
stop yarning now,” saying which, Darby
turned over, and relapsed again into the
sleep of excessive fatigue.
‘Jerry found that the grey was bridled
He was just about to mount, when an idea
suddenly sir uck him, and hurriedly hitching the
bridle to the branch of a tree, he caught the
remaining horses in succession, and un-
hobbled them. ' ‘ Ha, ha !’ he chuckled,'
‘Dat bushranger won’t catch him horse, too
much murry quick now ! . Dat gallop away by
and by !’ The horses, hownver, grazed quietly
around, not seeming at all to appreciate the
blessings of liberty! just conferred upon
them ; and Jerry, disgusted and disap-
pointed, mounted the grey, declaring, as
he did - so, that he would never unhobble
them again, - Astride the grey, he drummed
its sides with his heels, and in a few minutes'
the hollow thud, of its retreiating hoofs upon the
greensward was heard fardown the slope. Bow
anxiously watched the outlaws around, fearful
lest their accustomed ears should catch the tell
tale sound. They were too sound asleep, how-
ever, to .be aroused; • and after
waiting until the last echo had died away,


Bow noiselessly approached Percy’s side, ‘ I
gave the black boy the note,’ be whispeied,
‘I saw him slipping down the gum, and
guessing what he was up to, I took a bridle
and met him at the horses.. He’ll be back to
the station by to-morrow night.’
‘ The poor boy had a narrow escape. You
told him to give the note to Miss Shelley.'
said Percy in the same tone-
‘ 1 forgot the name, sir,.but he’ll give it to
the young lady, never fear. He knows as
well as 1, do, who it’s for. It won’t do for
that suspicious vagabond Darby to wake up
and find us, talking so I’lljusttellyouonething,
sir, before I got onething you must remember—
whatever they may say about robbing any of the
stations, don’t say a word agin it. You must
pretend you’re on for anything. Look, there
is the chap they call Sam, moving, so we’d
better separate 1 Good night, sir !’
‘Good night Bow, and may heaven bless
your disinterested faithfulness 1’ returned
Percy, gratefully pressing his hand, Bow
crept back to the fire, and prepared to while
away the rest of the night by carving the
handle of a tomahawk, he picked up by Dar-
by's side. He had recently examined with
interest a stockwhip handle, which one
of his acquaintances had carved with great
skill; and although he had never learned the
names of the letters he observed upon the
handle, he lelt ambitious of reproducing
them from memory, and set to work with
great diligence to do so. He bad promised to
call Percy at midnight to take his plaee; but
he was determined to watch the whole night
himself, that Darby could on the morrow have
no opportunity of blaming Percy for Jerry’s
escape with the grey colt; and so he sat hour
after hoar patiently cutting away at his task.
Percy lay for hours in a bitter reverie, think-
ing of bis wretched past, and future ; too ut-
terly hopeless for him to have heart to plan
for its amelioration—his prospect in life was
indeed gloomy: To remain free was to starve,
or join in robbery: To be captured, death.
In each instance he was separated for ever
from those he loved. Food enongh in that for
his aching brain to Terminate upon till it was
fed with misery almost to bursting. A little
before daylight he dozed off for a few minutes
leaving the indefagitable Bow still bent over
the tomahawk handle, carving away with all
bis might.
Three weeks passed away as swiftly as
though “Old Time " was too busily occupied
with his own affairs, to' pause to
take heed of human misery.- The
gang were still hovering about the set-
tlements upon the Hunter River, the
captain undecided in bis movements in conse-
quence of the vigilant attitude of the police.
With the exception of the robbery of a dray
loaded with provisions, the gang had done no-
thing, Darby waiting for the watchfulness of
the police to abate through the sense of
security, that would be sure to succeed, if the
gang kept out of sight for a time. Jerry’s es-
cape with the Police Magistrate’s horse bad
given the clue te the movements of the fugi-
tives ; and the blackboy’s report of the pres-
ence of the notorious Darby gave the local
authorities increased motive for putting forth
extraordinary exertion to take the whole gang.
A large body of mounted police was collected
at a camp between the villages or ‘townships’ of
Newcastle and Maitland, ready to move in any
direction danger might threaten. Bertha
watched with dismay the preparations proceed-
ing for the capture of the bushrangers. Percy’s
brief note had filled her gentle heart with a
new dread. He wrote that as the bushrangers
meditated attacking the stations upon the
river, he would remain with them, that he
might be by to save her if Field Place was-
molested. ‘ And they will find him with the
bushrangers, and punish him —hang him 1’
was the burden of her thoughts day and
night. She had consoled herself for the mis-
fortune of his escape from jail at such an un-
fortunate juncture, by the hope that he would
escape from the colony, and thus get free alto-
gether. But this vain hope was now com-
pletely dissipated. By his determination to
protect her he was rushing into the arms of
capture and death, she thus again being the
direct cause of his rnin. Hubert Clayton
viewed the preparations with a very different
eye. As they grew more and more complete
his spirits rose in proportion; and be took no
pains to conceal bis satisfactson, He did not go
near Field Place, but he beard from others the
fact of Percy Sinclair having joined tho bush-
rangers; and on meeting Mr. Shelley one


morning in Maitland, he asked, triumphantly.
‘ Can you believe in Sinclair’s innocence
after this new move of his, or give credence
to the wild stories Miss Shelley has been im-
posed upon with ? A man who can turn
bushranger, and join such notorious ruffians
as Darby Gregson, is quite capable of even
blacker crimes than forgery. No, sir, take
my word for it, yon may consider yourself
fortunate in so easily getting rid of a cut-
throat in disguise !’
‘ I have yet to learn, Mr. Clayton, that Mr.
Sinclair is a cut-thioat!’ Mr. Shelley replied,!
haughtily. He felt a strong inclination to
knock the scoundrel down, who had not
decency enough to conceal his exultation at
the fugitive’s misfortunes; but restraining
himself, he continued, sarcastically, ‘1 judge
every one as I find him, and contrasting you
with Mr. Sinclair I can assure you the com-
parison is very much to your disadvantage,’-
saying which Mr. Shelley passed on, leaving
Mr. Clayton standing, white with passion at
the unmistakeable scorn with which he had
been treated. At the moment two rough-
looking men approached. They were tieket-of-
leave men, who had volunteered to assist in
rooting out the nest of outlaws, that the pub-
lic mind felt was forming among the moun-
tains.
‘You both understand the compact! If
you shoot him dead when we come upon the
gang, I shall advise the Governor .to grant you
both a free pardon. No winging mind ! It
must be a dead shot, or you don’t earn the
recommendation,’
‘ All right,, captain, we’re on ! He’s as
dead as his grandfather’s ghost, if we only set
eyes on him,’ replied ..one of Clayton’s ac-
complices.
* When d’wa start, yer honor ? Be the piper
that played the Rogue’s march, when St. Pat-
rick was kicking the varmant outer old Ire-
aud, I’ll,knock him into a coffin as nate as
you plase, if I can only get inside o’ a wink o’
him !’
‘ The day after to-morrow, Tony. You’ll
get your orders from Bartell. There’s to be a
desperate effort to take the wliole gang ; but
you know your especial mark. Good-bye,
now. I’ll see you to-morrow night,” replied
.Clayton, as he mounted his horse.
The atrocities, that had recently been com-
mitted by the notorious Darby Gregson on the
other side of the range, roused the whole pop-
ulation of the Hunter to exert themselves to
take him, dead or alive ; and taking advantage
of the general excitement Clayton was plan-
ning to have his new associate, Percy Sinclair
murdered under the cover of ‘justifiable homi-
cide.’ The plot was deep, and well laid. In
the straggle, when the bushrangers were at-
tacked, what was easier than to shoot him
down !
CHAPTER XXXIV.
Love is supreme,
And, master of the heart, an alchemist
Turns all to gold—sheds o’er the darkest crime
The rosy colours of self-sacrifice.
Anon.
It was midnight, and the outlaws lay around
their camp-fire discussing their plans. Acting
upon Bow’s judicious advice, Percy Sinclair
had pretended to enter, with zeal, into all the
vile schemes proposed, and was regarded by
the captain of the gang as a very promising
pupil.
‘ It’s ’stonishing, Bow,’ Darby Gregson ob-
served one day,as the two worthies were riding
together, ‘ How quick them Methodist chaps is
at laming ! I’ve often noticed that when a
chap, as couldn’t eat his dinner without prayer-
sauce, turns out, he licks them holler, as has
been at it all their lives!’ to which shrewd
observation Bow assented with a grin, which
spoke volumes.
The particular plan that was under -con-
sideration of the bushrangers was one
for the sacking of Glen Blair, the estate
or farm of Mr. Blair, in a brush contiguous to
which the outlaws were concealed. The at-
tack had been decided upon, and the matter
at debate was merely the how and the when.
‘ I think we’d better board ’em at the mid-
dle watch,’ Sam Ford, the ex-sailor suggested.
‘We’ll catch them in their hammocks, then,
an’ll have less trouble about it.’
‘ Yes, Sam,’ said Darby, ‘ That's a matter
e’ course. It’s all settled but one thing, and
that is, what we are going to do with old Blair.
We'll not touch any of them but the old fox
himself; but he shall die. Now what I pro-
pose is that Sinclair should try his hand
at ’


' Oh, never mind that now Darby !’ inter-
rupted Bow, anxiously. ‘ You'll find him
staunch as a bloodhound when the time comes.
Wait till we’ve got old Blair in our bands.
We’ll soon contrive how to knock him on the
head ! 1 think we’d better arrange now about
the next move . What do you say to taking
a run first right down to Field Place, where
that young lady is you’re wanting to capture.
Now’s the time you see while the police is
above Singleton.. We can easily slip up here,
and settle old Blair any time.’
Percy looked at Bow in mute surprise.
He, who had all along appeared so anxious to
shield her from.harm, to be advising a raid
upon the station, because it was left unpro-
tected ! He could scarcely believe his ears.
Bow noticed his expression of astonishment,
and gave him a significant glance, which,
though Percy was sorely puzzled to account
So r Bow’s apparent inconsistence, in a measure
reassured him. After an animated and noisy
discussion, Bow’s proposal was rejected, the
majority deciding upon an immediate attack
on Glen Blair, or Euawinga as the blacks
called the farm.
‘ I’ll keep watch for an hour my lads, and
then rouse you ; so you’d best take a sleep
till then !’ said the captain, laying his pistols
upon the grass preparatory to reloading them.
The outlaws, well used to snatching a few
minutes repose at such odds and ends of time,
as they could with safety do, obeyed the order
at once, and were soon asleep. Bow contrived
to throw himself upon the grass beside Percy
Sinclair, without Darby’s noticing the move-
ment ; and keeping an eye upon the ferocious
captain of the gang, who was at the moment
busily employed in drawing the charges from
his pistols, whispered hurriedly ‘Don’trefuse
to do anything the wretches want you to.
Remember, if they knock you on the'head, sir,
before they attack Field Place, the young
lady’s lost,,as sure as fate !’
‘And yet you were advising them to go
down and attack the station, now that the
constables areaway! I am half inclined to
think you are a traitor ; and yet ’
‘Don’t think that, sir!’ Bow interrupted,
with.emotion. ‘l’d lay down my life for
you, or the young lady either; but I’m bound
to scheme a bit to save you. If these d d
wretches attack Blair’s place and catch the old
man, I. expect, from what I heard ’em saying,
that they’ll want you to murder him, just to
convince ’em you’re true ! Now, think, sir,
whose life’s the most precious—his’n, or the
young lady’s J You’ll have either to kill poor
Blair, or they’ll hang you for a traitor, and
then whose to save the young lady ? So you
see, sir, it’s a choice between killing Mr. Blair
or Miss What’s-her-name being run away with
by that cussed Darby. I know which ’ud
suffer if I’d the choosing !’
Percy was several seconds before he could
fully realize the horror of his position. ‘ And
I must be Blair’s tnurderer; or she, the
purest angel on earth, the outlaw’s victim !’
he said, slowly, after he had fully grasped bis
terrible situation.
There’s no help for it sir !’ replied Bow,with
philosophical resignation. ‘ But I’ll just go to
sleep for an hour while you thinks over it,’
saying which he cautiously crawled to a little
distance and lay down' He had barely done
so, when Darby Gregson, having attended to
his pistols, rose, and began pacing about.
For nearly an hour Percy lay, brooding
over the sickening alternative before
him. There seemed ho escape. To shed
the blood of an old man, who had
always treated him—convict though he was
—with kindness and courtesy ! The idea was
too horrible to admit of consideration. Yet
refusal to obey the brutal mandate would ex-
pose her, he loved as no mortal was meant to
be, to a fate to which the cruelest death were a
mercy. With clenched teeth, and brow damp
with the perspiration of mental agony, he lay,
vainly endeavouring to decide how to act.
Presently, as the restless Darby was passing
in his untiring watch, his eyes fell upon the
ghastly features of his new comrade, as he re-
dined, with the flickering glare of the fire
upon his face.
■ ‘ Don’t like the idea of cutting old Blair’s
wizzen, eh?" he muttered, as he approached
Percy, and threw himself down by his
side. ‘ Well, the lesson’ll do him tha
world of good! We’ll take a run down to
your old place, Sinclair, after we’ve settled
accounts with Blair.’ Ha continued, ad-
dressing Percy, ‘ That’s a charming little
piece that you’re sweet on. Upon my word


I must compliment yon upon showing excel-
lent taste. But there’s two lessons you’ve to
learn before you can fairly cal! yourself a
bushranger; and that’s, first, obedience to
orders, and second, to forget all feelings of
pity for the masters and-all belonging to ’em
Now you’ve got two good chances to practice
both. Knock old Blair on the head, and
hand the wench over to me. If you can
swaller both of these bitter pills, without
grinning, I’ll call yon a brick.’ -
With clenched fist, and eyes flashing with
passion, Percy sprang to his feet; hut the
watchful Bow was too quick for him, and, in
a moment was between him and the brutal
captain.
‘ What the devil’s- the matter with you,
Bow?’ roared Darby, who had not observed
Percy’s menacing movements through Bow’s
agility.
* Look here, Darby, you're the biggsst fool
I ever set eyes on!' Bow answered, locking
steadily at the captain. ‘ A black snake al-
most touching your ear, and you lying there,
as quiet as if you’d a return ticket to heaven
in your pocket!’
Darby glanced uneasily around.
‘ 0, it’s gone into that holler log now ! It’s
no use looking for it,’ said Bow carelessly;
‘ A return ticket to heaven ! Why wouldn’t
a single one do ?* Darby enquired, after he
satisfied himself there were no more black
snakes about.
‘ ’Cause you’d not care to stop there long ;
you wouldn’t ifeel at home like !’
Darby laughed heartily at what he thought
a very good joke, and then walked back to the
fire, and made it up,
‘ Look here sir, you’re brave enough for
anything; but it’s scheming and contriving,
not pluck, as'll help you out of this trouble,
if anything will. Don’t say or,do anything
to offend the captain, whatever he says—
words are as light as feathers It’s the
young lady you’ve got to think about.’
‘You are tight, Bow; and I understand
yon at last 1’ exclaimed Peicy, seizing the
faithful fellow’s,hand, and pressing it grate-
fully, ‘ I will follow your sensible advice, and
not doubt you again,’
‘ Cut old Blair's throat, if they tell you to.’
- ‘ Yes, yes 1 For her sake, I’ll risk asaurred
damnation !’ Percy replied excitedly.
“ Well, lay down and try to sleep. And
if yon can’t, pretend to ; so that you’ll not
get talking again with that devil yonder.
Percy lay down, as advised, but no sleep
came to his eyes ; and, in half-an-hour more.
Darby Gregaon roused the whole band for
their raid upon Euawinga.. The moon was
just disappearing below the western horizon
as the bushrangers left their camp, and turned
their steps towards the scene of their medi-
tated robbery, The path through the brush
was too narrow for two to pass abreast; and so
they moved along in single file, the captain
leading the way, and keeping a sharp lookout
to avoid surprise from any of the several
parties of constables who, he knew, were ac-
tively engaged in searching in the neighbour-
hood for him and his gang. Bow kept close
to Percy’s side, but the presence of the out-
laws prevented conversation. A quarter of
an hour’s walk brought them to the skirt of
the brush; and, shrouded by the : thick veil of
darkness, Euawinga, or Glen Blair, lay before
them. ‘ Halt!’ commanded Darby, in a hoarse
whisper, not unlike the hiss of a serpent. The
outlaws instantly paused, and clustered around
their chief, waiting for further orders.
‘ Now, my lads,’ said Darby, after a few
seconds cogitation. * Keep close together.
The house is just over the fence yonder, not
two hundred yardsoff," We will divide into
two bands, when we reach thebdck verandah,
and so cut off the old fox’s retreat, I don’t
care who else escapes, so ’long as I can hab
Blair himself! Sinclair, you keep near me.
You ail know your work, so there’s ho need of
a confab, lads. Come along !’ saying which, be
led the way on through the’ darkness. Cau-
tiously they approached the house, and had
completely cut off every avenue of escape
when the dogs, who had been away’possum
hunting on their own account, returned,
and gave aiv alarm. Their furious barking
soon roused the inmates ;' and Darby, seeing
no possibility : of silencing them, it being too
dark to see, kicked rudely, at the door, and
demanded admittance;
Mr. Blair leaped out of bed and threw
open a shutter and looked out. He glanced
uneasily about, and in a few seconds discerned


tire dim forms of several of the bushrangers in
the starlight. He needed no second glance to
assure, him who his nocturnal visitors were.
He drew back, and noiselessly closed and bolted
the shutter. 'Bushrangers, and the men all
away !’ he exclaimed in dismay, as he turned
to his wife, who was sitting up trembling in
the bed.
‘Jump up and dress yourself at once, Clara 1
It is the bushrangers; and I shall have to de-
fend the place as well as I can,’ be said, at the
same time feeling under the pillow for his
pistols. Mrs. Blair needed no second bidding,
but sprang out of her bed and into her dress
in a very few seconds, saying, as she did so, ‘Oh,
what shall we do 1 It is impossible for one to
defend this place long, and they will murder
us 1’
Her words were drowned in the noise
Darby’s heavy boots made against the door ;
and, not hearing them, her husband thought
rapidly over his plans of defence. He knew
it was useless attempting to escape, as he was
certain the bushrangers would keep too good
a watch to allow an opportunity of getting
away into the bush, and he felt their only
chance was to hold the place till daylight,
when they might, perchance, be rescued.
‘This way, Clara!’ he whispered to his
wife, as he dragged her from the bedroom to
the outer, or dining room, ‘ Yon will be safe
in the cellar ; they’ll never dream of looking
there for you ; what a blessing Edith and the
boys are away 1’
‘ Hide with me, Robert, or I will not stay
in the cellar 1 It is useless for you to expose
yourself to danger; and 1 will not escape
alone !’
Darby’s kicks at the doors, and orders to
open it, were becoming louder and more deter-
mined ; and, fearful that the frail woodwork
would give away, and admit the bushrangers.
Mr. Blair shoved his wife forcibly down the
ladder into the cellar, and, closing the trap-
door, bolted it. Then, turning to the front
door, he called to the men outside to be warned,
as he would shoot down anyone attempting
to enter. A laugh of derision followed his
caution; and Darby’s efforts to force entrance
were ' redoubled. After a few moments the
door burst open, and Darby sprang in, closely
fallowed by Percy and Bow, and several of
the outlaws. At the same moment the bush*
rangers, who had been told off, to prevent
escape from the rear, smashed the back door
open, with an axe they had found close by.
‘ Strike a light, Sam 1’ Darby cried to the
ex sailor, who was never without his Hint and
tinder. ‘ And let’s have a glimmer upon the
subject 1’
The brimstone match was soon applied
to the spafli in the tinder, and a can-
dle was lighted that happened to stand upon
the table.
‘What! only one of you!’ exclaimed
Darby, seeing no one in the room but Mr.
Blair. ‘ Where’s tho rest of the birds flown
to?’
‘Down the river, visiting, I expect!’ said
Bow, in order to give the captive a hint.
‘Yes! down in Maitland staying a few
days with some friends,’ replied Mr. Blair,
who was sharp enough to catch the cue.
Bow was standing upon the trapdoor, and
in stepping forward struck his foot against
the bolt. His quick apprehension caught in
a moment the meaning of Mr. Blair’s appeal-
ing glance. ‘ Look here, Captain, I’m not
going to be smothered in this hot room.
Bring the prisoner out into the open air, and
let’s see what’s to be done with him there !’
he said, wiping his face and neck as industri-
ously as if he were in the temperature of the
Torrid Zone.
‘ Well, yes, Bow, it’s develish hot in here.
Tie his hands, Jennings, and fetch him out
onto the grass in front,’ said Darby, falling un-
suspiciously into the scheme Bow was setting,
to allow whoever the cellar concealed to
escape. The whole band repaired to the front,
and sat down upon the damp sod to consider
what was to be done with the prisoner,
‘ I’m not at all particular about your people
being away at Maitland,’said Darby. ‘ Cause
it’s you, and not them I want. I’ve got you
now; and cuss me, if ever you get away again,
while you’ve a head on your shoulders.’
‘ What, you'here, and a bushranger, Sin-
clair ?’ exclaimed Mr. Blair, as the flickering
beam of the candle (they had brought from the
bouse) fell upon Percy.
Bow gave Percy a warning nudge,; and, act-
ing upon the mute advice thereby conveyed.


Percy replied bluntly, ‘ Yes, I’m a bushranger
now, as you see !’
‘Sinclair, here’s a knife! Now try your
hand. I don’t suppose you’ll make a very
neat job of it; but I won’t mind > a • little
bungling at first.; We’ve all ns got to
learn ! Sam and Saunders just you tie our
fiiend Mr. Blair neck and crop ready for
Sinclair’s first lessonin practical bushranging !’
Percy turned sick at the thought of obey-
ing ; but something Bow whispered gave him
resolution; and he silently .took the knife
offered. The captive looked from the fero-
cious and threatening features of the blood-
thirsty ruffians,, to the pale but resolute face
of their recruit, in silent dismay.
‘Hadn’t we as well leave this for daylight;
Darby 1 Sinclair ’ll need more light than a
candle can give, to see what he’s doing.’.'
Daiby smiled grimly. >‘Oh, never mind,
Bow ! I shan’t expect him to do it as cleverly
as you or I would,’ ■ 1 .. .
‘My God, you cannot mean to murder
me in cold blood 1’ exclaimed Mr. Blair in con-
sternation.
‘ If he don’t like it in cold blood, let’s warm
him a bit over a fire!’ said Bow, with the
double purpose of causing delay, and of still
further throwing the outlaws off their guard
by impressing them with a yet stronger belief
in his own villainy.
‘lt’s hot enough to suit anybody but a Hot-
tentot, Bow ; and we aren’t going to waste
time to please Blair’s whims. What the deuce
can it matter to him whether he dies in hot
blood or cold, so long as he does die J
‘ There’s no help for it, sir !’ Bow whispered
to Percy ‘it’s just a choice between killing
the poor gentleman, and letting the young
lady fall into the hands of these wretches.’
Without answering, Percy stood for a full
minute gazing into the dark forest in front of
the house, then whispering to Bow, “ Be
silent, and watch! A thought strikes me!’
he stepped forward, and stooped over the
unhappy prisoner, who, though trembling with
dread, was too proud to beg fur-
ther for life, The outlaws clustered round,
and looked on with the curiosity of connois-
seurs criticising an interesting surgical opera-
tion. Bow' stood' aloof, closely watching
Percy’s movements, and wondering what his
strange words had meant. Percy drew the
keen edge of the weapon across his sleeve, to
test its : edge, , and 'them, with one,
quick 'movement of the ' glittering blade
he severed the thongs that : bound the
prisoner's i' legs,' and ; dragging him to
bis feet, sprang away into the brush before
the' bushrangers could realize- what ■he had
done; > Bow and Mr. Blair instantly followed,
and before Dai by and his infamous comrades
could draw their weapons, the three were lost
in the darkness, and out of all danger of im-
mediate pursuit. A volley of pistol shots
awoke the mountain echos, but, for the pre-
sent at least, Percy was free. ;
CHAPTER XXXV.
Ye stars, which are the poetry ot heaven!
If in your bright leaves we could read the fate
Ot men and empires,—’tis to be forgiven
That in our aspirations to be great
, Our destinies o'er leap their mortal state
And claim a kindred with you; for ye are
A beauty and a mystery, and create
In us such love and reverence from afar.
That fortune, fame, power, life have named
themselves a star.
■ ■ -■ '■ ' Bybon.
The midnight hour was'swiftly winging its
way on towards the haven of eternity ; and
from her chamber window a fair maiden, with
aching heart, was gazing, and thinking
bitterly, ay,'how bitterly,'of the too heavy
trials it washer lot to bear. The heavens
were arrayed in their diamond-spangled robe,
and appeared as calm and beautiful in their
silent grandeur, as if they never looked down
upon aught but happiness and contentment.
‘ Ah, unsympathetic skies, ye live on in your
eternal beauty, regardless of human weal or
woe!’ "’’ ' - ■'
Bertha’s heart was heavy. She had, during
the afternooncaughtsigbt of the Gazette, which
her father had lately kept out of her way, and
in it she had read an account of the strenuous'
efforts the Government was making to capture,
or exterminate the band of bushrangers, who
had recently crossed the mountains from the
Hawkesbnry River; and the feowledge that;
for her sake, Percy had joineqithat gang, and'
ran all the danger of capture, Spade her gentle
heart sad: She was sitting pi|turing to her*
self every possible peril that would threaten
him, and making her head ach| in unison with
her heart, by the excitement sjie was working


herself into. Presently a hand was placed
lightly upon her shoulder; and, turning
round, she found Anne standing by her side.
‘What, Miss Bertha, not undressed at this
hour ! Why, it must be midnight!’ exclaimed
a sweet voice in unfeigned astonishment at
finding the sorrowful girl up so late. The
clock at this moment striking one, testifled to
the lateness of the hour, but, taking no heed
of its hint, Bertha replied, sadly, ‘ Sit down,
Anne, and let us talk a while, if yon are not
sleepy. I cannot go to bed yet, I feel too
unhappy.’
- Taking a seat by the mourner, Annedrew her
to her side ; and they sat for a full hour talk-
ing of the fate of him, so dear to them both,
Anne tried l«rd to lead the unhappy girl to
look hopefully upon the future, dark as it
might then lower ; but all her efforts were
unavailing. The future, to Bertha’s sorrow-
laden heart, felt hopelessly dark and drear.
* But, Bertha, if in this world we are not as
happy as we would wish, we can, at least,
find comfort in the reflection that God knows
best,’ . said Anne, after an unsuccessful
attempt to comfort her young mistress, ‘We
have all trials, each thinking his own the
heaviest; but it is the band of mercy that
deals out our bitterest grief.’
‘ Ah, if you had so much cause to love him
as I have, and to feel grateful, you could not
speak so calmly, It is my fault, too,
that he is in danger. But for ray rash interfer-
ence, he would have been back again amongst
us now, and safe. : When I remember how
often he impetilled his life for me, and that
through ray act he is likely to be destroyed,
I feel that I must go mad ! That terrible fall
down the precipice 1 I can see it, oh so
vividly, every time I close ray eyes. If I
could save him by dying for him, I could die
happily,’ wailed the broken-hearted girl.
Anne appreciated but too fully Bertha’s
feelings, and not knowing what to say to
assuage her grief, remained silent for a few
minutes, gazing out upon the calm depths of
night, and thinking sadly of the dark and
eventful fortune of her cousin. Her brief
reverie was soon broken by a dim form pass-
ing the window , and both girls drew back in
terror.
‘lt’s only me, old Iperbly, as the master
calls me, so you needn’t be afraid, ladies/ said
a deep, gruff voice, and the dark figure turned
back and approached the sash, ‘.I couldn’t
sleep, Miss Bertha, so I took a stroll round,
and seeing your window open, I thought
something might be the matter, and so I came
across the fence to shut it.’.
‘ Could you see the window open in the
dark, Mr. Brown 1’ Anne enquired incredu-
lously. She did not know the faithful old
man very well, and was suspicious that his
words were only an excuse for his presence at
such an hour.
‘ I could see by the reflection of the candle
through the window that the shutter was
open, and so I just came over to see if any-
thing was the matter,’ replied old Hal res-
pectfully.
‘ What makes you . stay op so late, Hal V
Bertha asked him kindly, the presence of the
old man bringing back to mind the terrible
struggle in the dairy, ‘lt, must be nearly
morning.’
‘I couldn’t sleep. Miss Bertha, and so I
took a walk round to get rid of the uncom-
fortable thoughts that kept coming into ray
head. I’ve got it into my head, and can’t get
it out, that I’m going to die. It’s a sort o'
presodiment, you know,’ said Hal sadly.
In spite of her own grief, Bertha felt
interested In the old man’s trouble, and en-
couraged him to talk of it by begging him to
tell her what it was he had a presentiment of,
‘ I feels, you see, Miss, that I am going to
die. I can’t tell how or why. I’m as sound
as a bell, and I’m not going to commit
suicide. What gives me the notion, I can’t
tell, but I’m certain as I’m standing here,
I’m going to die.’
‘ Nonsense, Mr. Brown. It is only some
whimsical fancy you have got in your head.
The Almighty does not tell people in such an
obscure and unintelligible way what His divine
will is. Presentiments and dreams, and all
such superstitions are wrong lam sure !’ said
Anne decidedly.
‘ Perhaps it is with some people. Miss Eger-
ton ; but we old soldiers always have presed-
iments, when anything is going to happen,’
contested Hall, ‘ I could tell you of a hun-
dred cases where a poor fellow has said, when
he buckled on his accoutrements in the morn


ing, that he‘d never take them off; and sure
enough before sunset an ounce o’ lead or half
a dozen inches of cold steel has knocked him
over. No; believe me, both of you young la-
dies, there is such a thing as real presediment I’
‘Do you think then Hal,’ Bertha asked
thoughtfully, that people always have a pre-
sediment of impending trouble V
‘As sure, Miss, as there’s always a warning
given when there’s a storm coming on ! When
a heavy storm is coming everything gets dark
and lowering, and you can see with half an eye
what’s going to follow.’
‘ And yet I was as happy as could be right
up to the day my hitter troubles began! No
shadow of the dark cloud of misery, that was
coming upon me so fast, was thrown over me;
tiU the grief itself camel’ Bertha'said in a
low tone, as if talking to herself;
‘You don’t believe in presediment, Miss
Bertha? Well, I can tell you what happened
to me once, after I had a presediraent, and
that ought to convince you, I was taken up
and tried on,suspicion of being the murdered
man, and was nearly hanged through it, too 1
I had a very strong presediraent that time 1”
said Hal, looking round as if fearful of seeing
a real live “ presediment” at his elbow.
‘ Taken up for being a ' murdered man,
Hal? I don’t understand you !’
‘ Well, Miss Bertha, if you don’t mind my
telling you the adventure. I’ll do so; that’s if
you’re not going to bed just yet.
‘On, do tell me by all means!’
Hal. stood for a moment in deep reflec-
tion ;• then leaning upon the window sill to
rest himself, he began the recital of his ‘yarn.’
‘ Well, yon see, ladies, I was always a wild
young fellow, and ready for any adventure
that ’nd turn up ; and one day me and a
mate of mine named Barney Callaghan got
into a bit of a scrape, through my - unfortu-
nate turn for fun. There had been a murder
in a city in the north of England, and as
there was a great deal of mystery about the
affair, and nearly all the country round was
going to the inquest, of course me and
Barney got leave from the sergeant, and
went too. The poor fellow, that had been
killed, was a stranger to the parts, and after
the jury sitting on him for two days and
three nights, they came to the nanimus
conclusion they didn’t know anything at all
about the matter, and couldn’t find a verdict
until' they found out who the un-
fortunate victim was. So.'after a long
consideration they made up 'their minds
to advertise a reward for - the appre-
hension of anyone that could give any in-
information about who the dead man was,
or who knocked him'on the head. ‘Fifty
pounds reward for any information that will
lead to the discovery of the person found
murdered upon Ross Common, on the 27th
December last!’ said Barney to me, the
morning after the inquest, «s he staggered
into the barracks, holding a paper in his
hands. ‘ Bedad, then, Hal., it’s me an*
you’ll- just go shares over that same fifty
pounds 1’ I couldn’t well understand what
he' was aiming at ; but as' Barney was
a rough customer, when he’d had a glass or,
two of whiskey, I just asked no questions,
but waited to'hear what he was going to say.’
‘Look here Hal.’says he, ‘its fifty pounds
the Government’s after givin for the dis-
covery ; and it’s just me and you’ll discover-
him !’ ‘But they’ve' got him; Barney.
Didn’t we eee the jurymen sitting on him !’,
I said. ‘ Now look here Hal., you’ve got no;
more brains than ray sister Bridget’s roan,
milker! Just do what I tell you, and we’ll
share that fifty pounds as nate as smuggling,’
said Barney, rubbing his hands at the thought.
1 told him I . was on for any-
thing for - a spree. ‘ Then don’t ax no 1
questions, Hal 1 but leave me to do it. There’s
more brains in ray head for schaming, than"
you - know nothing about,’ says he. ‘Wait;
till the middle of the night, and then I’ll tell
you my idea ; and in the mane time read this
disoription of the dead - man’s appearance.’ I
read the paper through two or three times,
but couldn’t think what game he could be up
to. * Never you mind, Hal, you’ll see by-and
bye !’ says he, as he tumbled into bed without'
undressing. Well about twelve o’clock he
wakes me, and up we both gets, and starts off
for the public-house where the dead body was'
lying, I didn’t like the idea of getting through
the window of the dark room the dead body
was in, but I wasn’t going to show the white
feather so I followed him. When we were safe'
inside Barney turns the ball’s eye lamp round


the room, and there was the body lying in the
clothes that was on it, when it was first fonnd.
My hair stood bolt upright, and my teeth
rattled like dice ; but I never said a. word,
but just watched Barney’s preceedings. First
he took everything off the body, that was
mentioned in the advertisement, and tied
them up in a bundle, andgthen put on it some
other things he’d got with him ; and then he
began to enlighten me about his sebame, as
he called if, ‘ I’m jest going to play a joke
upon a boy I’ve a down on, Hal.; and I think
we can get the fifty, too. You know some of
my countrymen are as soft as buttermilk, and
the spalpeen I’m going to sell is the softest
I’ve seen. I want you to dress up in these
things I’ve taken off this poor fellow, and
then we’ll go to the next township, where
he’s a constable, and give yon in charge,’ he
said, almost bursting at the idea, ‘ Give me
in charge, Barney; What for 1’ I asked,
‘ Never you mind, now, Hal. j” he says,
‘ I’ll tell you when we get there.’ Well, we
started for fiedbank—that’s the name of the
next town—and when we got to a meadow
about a quartes of a mile from it, Barney
told me to peal off, and put on the things he
had in the bundle—the clothe’s he'd taken off
the dead man. I swore I wouldn’t; for I’d
had a presediment for two or three day’s be-
fore something wrong was going to happen ;
but he persuaded me, and I changed
my clothes for the dead man’s. ‘ They’re
rather damp, Barney, and I don’t like the
smell of ’em,’ I said; but he only laughed,
and said nothing. • ‘What’re yon going to do
now, Barney V I asked, ‘Why Hal, my
boy, all I want you to do is to stop here till
I come back, I shant be ten minutes.’ Barney
left me in the meadow, and jumping over
the hedge, ran off to the town. He soon came
hack, and brought the constable with him.
Winking to me to hold my tongue, Barney
says to the constable, ‘Look here, Miles,
You’ve seen the description of the man found
murdered cn Ross Common last week. Well
there’s a reward of £SO for his discovery.
What do yon say to my putting you on the
scent V ‘ Bedad Barney, I’d say a
dozen masses for the pace of your soul
I would 1’ answers Miles, his eyes glittering
like as if he was just clutching the money.
‘ All right, Miles, it’s a bargin ! Do you see
that individual there shivering like a dog in a
‘bog 1 Look at him 1 Height, size, colour of
hair, clothes and all tallies. Look ! here’s
the place they stuck the knife, through the
back of his jacket,” and Barney just caught
hold of me, and turned me round for the
constable’s inspection, the while whispering for
me to be mum as a mouse-trap. ‘ Bedad, then,
Barney, the identity is established,’ said
Miles r wbo’d got hold o’ a bit of legal lingo,
‘and I’lljnat apprehend him, 1 may as well
have the reward as any one else !’
Bertha here whispered to Anne that she
was in no humor for listening to Hal,, and
wished that he would go back to
the huts, and get to bed again.
The words were not intended for the old
man’s ears ; but he caught them, and replied
apologetically, ‘1 beg your pardon, Miss
Bertha. I oughter a’ known better than to
a’ bothered you with my yarns at this time o’
night.’
‘lt is not that, Hal. Your stories are very
interesting, I have no doubt; but my head
aches, and I feel so miserable, 1 hardly know
what to do with myself. Had you not better
get to bed again V
‘ I’ve a presediment, I’ll never go to bed
again in this world, Miss Bertha !’ answered
the old man despondingly. ‘ I don’t know
why, but I feel sure I’ll never see the sun
rise again 1’
• Oh, nonsense, Mr. Brown 1 You are ner-
vous, and unwell. You should try to shake off
these silly fancies,’ said Anne soothingly.
At this moment a young dog, that bad been
tied up near the dairy, and felt lonely
through the absence of its companions, who
were away in the brush ’possum bunting, set
up a most dismal and discordant howl.
• There!’ exclaimed poor Hal. triumphantly
‘ listen to that I Dogs never howl in that tune,
unless they have a presediment! That dog
knows as well as I do, I’ll never see daylight
again; and that’s why he’s howling. It’s
wonderful how they know these things ; but
they do! I never heard a dog howl like that
but the undertaker wasn’t far off,’
Hal was here interruputed by the ttamping
of horse’s hoofs, and the loud and boisterous
merriment of their riders.


‘The bushrangers by George!’ exclaimed
Ha), as the girls cowered back into the room.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
1 dare do all that may become a man !
He, that dares, more is none !
Shakespeab.
‘ It’s use follering them, lads !’ said Darby,
as Percy, Mr, Blair, and Bow disappeared in
the direction of the brush. ' We coulJ’nt
track them in the dark ; and they know the
country about here too well for us to have a
ghost of a chance of finding them, even if it
was daylight.’
The other outlaws saw the force of their
captain’s words, and admitted the folly of at-
tempting to pursue the fugitives.
‘ What’s the next step, Darby ?’ asked Jen.
nings. ' It’s no use standing here with our
fingers in our mouths, looking at each other 1
I vote for a search in Blair’s kitchen, to see
if there’s any grub knocking about.’
* We must get back to the horses, and gallop
off to Field Place at once, before old Blair and
the others reach it and give the alarm,” said
Darby decidedly.
‘ We’ve grub enough at the camp to last
us another feed,’ put in one of the bush-
rangers. ‘We’ll boil the quartswhilet.he
horses are getting ready, and have a go in
before starting.’
‘Now then, lads, waste no time yarning!
Follow me; and we’ll reach Shelley’s station
before Blair can get there to give the alarm.
Come along !’
Darby started off at a smart walk to retrace
his steps to the camp ; and the others closely
followed. As they were entering the
brush they were startled by a shrill
sound as of someone calling; but the
wind, which had risen, and was beginning to
blow strong, prevented them from hearing it
distinctly.
* It’s only a curlew, Darby!’ said Jennings
to the captain, who had paused to listen.
‘ Not it! That’s a woman’s voice; or 1 never
beard one !* Darby replied.
' Woman, or no woman, I’m off !* said the
ex-sailor, increasing his speed. “ I’m not go-
ing to wait to be boarded by a lubberly lot of
constables.’
The scream or whatever it was,
was repeated, and thinking that it
might indicate the approach of assistance,
Darby decided to harry on, and gave orders ac-
cordingly. When the outlaws reached their
camp they found the fire still in j and they
soon had their quarts of tea boiling.
‘ Now then my lads, into your saddles I'
said Darby, as they finished their hasty meal.
‘ If we ride hard, we’ll reach Shelley’s now be-
fore sunrise. Recollect, you share all you
find. All I want is the girl Sinclair’s so
sweet on.’ Darby leaped into the saddle, and
dashed off at full speed through the bush ; and
in a few seconds his men were in full career
after him towards the scene of their meditated
violence.
The last echo of the sound of the hoofs of
their galloping horses had hardly died away,
when a dozen horsemen galloped up from the
opposite direction.
‘ Holloa, a fire!’ exclaimed Mr. Bartel),
the police-magistrate, as he sprang from the
saddle- * Then we’ve come across the camp.
They cannot be far off, See, Musgrave, there
is some tea still warm.’
The riders all dismounted, and examined
the spot.
‘ Pistol wads 1 and here’s a tomahawk I’ said
a trooper, picking up a hatchet one of the
bushrangers had dropped. ”111 be bound
they’re at Blair’s place.’
' Let’s push on, Bartel), said Mr. Musgrove,
remounting.
‘I think it likely?’ replied Mr, Bartell,
leaping into bis saddle. ‘ Follow me 1’ He
drove spurs into his horse’s flanks, and, regard-
less of the danger of riding at full speed
through a brush in the dark, hastened on to-
wards Guawinga, closely followed by his men.
All was as still and peaceful as the grave, as
they emerged from the brush and entered the
clearing.
* Look, sir, the door’s open 1 whispered a
constable, as they turned the corner of the
house,
‘ Halt I Two of you hold the horses,’ or-
dered Mr. Bartell in an undertone. ‘ Mus-
grave takeStenhduse, Grey and Maloney round
to the hack to cut off retreat that way, while
we operate in front 1’
‘ What no one about 1’ one of the men ex-
claimed. when, after entering unchallenged; he
struck a light and found the place deserted.


■‘ Here?s a trap-door. ' Perhaps the rats are
in the cellar!’ suggested another. ‘At any
rate here goes for an investigation,’ saying
which he disappeared down the ladder. In a
few seconds he reappeared, ‘ There’s nobody
down .that well; they’re somewhere else J
spect, if they’re anywhere,’ he said as he scram-
bled to his feet. ,
‘ Perhaps they may be hiding behind some-
thing or other, Sandy,’ said Mr. Bartel),
looking down the dark opening in the floor.
‘ There’s>no.room to hide in, sir, the place
is so small, that if you were to swing a mid-,
dling-sized cat by the tail, it wouldn’t be well
for its ears,.l guess.’
‘ Hand me a light, Dawson, I will see for
■myself,’ said Mr. .Bartel), thoughtfully. ‘Jf
the bushrangers have been here, it’s most
likely we’ll find some trace of them in the
■ cellar,! Ah! I thought so! Look, Sandy! A
woman lying upon the damp floor behind that
cask !’ he said, as the .flickering glare of the
bush lamp revealed the form of Mrs. Blair,
crouching behind a large barrel.
Mr. Musgrave gently raised the -cold’form
of the lady.; and, motioning the trooper to
light the way, carried it up the ladder, and
laid it tenderly upon a rough settee or couch
under the window.
‘The lady is asleep!’ exclaimed a constable
■in surprise. ‘ A strange place Tor a nap, 1
should say!’
MrjJßat tell looked grave, and shook his head.
He felt her face and hands, and then hurriedly
tearing open the gown she had thrown over
her night-dress, he placed his hand over the
region of the heart. ‘ Yes!—a sleep she will
never wake' from in this world, Henderson !
She is cold and dead 1’ he said-solemnly.
‘ Surely not !’ said Mr. Musgrave anxiously.
‘ It’s Mrs. Blair. She has been ailing for some
time past; but I never thought she would
have died so suddenly.’
‘Them.cursed bushrangers has had,a hand
in this !’ said Sandy emphatically, ‘They’ve
murdered the lady,and, most like, Masterßlair
too, and then robbed the.place and decamped.
It’s not likely Airs. Blair would lay down and
die like this without any visible cause.’
‘lt is all a mystery, Musgrave! No one
about but Mrs. Blair, and she dead:!’-said
31 r. Bartel),stroking ibis beard thoughtfully.
‘lf the bushrangers have been here, there
ought to be some trace of them ; and, if not.
it is unaccountable how the lady can have been
left here to die ! lam completely in a fog. It
is the strangest episode in bush life.l have
ever seen:!’
‘ I’ve searched the out-houses thoroughly,
sir.; and there’s no one about,’ said a trooper,
entering from the back premises.
M believe we’re on the trail of. Darby Greg-
son and his desperate gang, Bartell. What
do yon say to our pushing on towards Alaii-
land, I expect they’re ahead of us.’ Mr.
Musgrave suggested.
'.I do not like the idea of leaving this place
till daylight, Musgrave ; for I feel .convinced
the bushrangers are lurking about somewher-e
near,’ replied Air.Bartell reflectively. ‘ And
besides we must do something with this poor
lady.’
You stay here then, and ! will take a couple
of men and hurry on. 1 fear mischief is brew-
ing somewhere,and I|am anxious least Gregson
should attack any of the stations lower down,
while we are dallying here. Aly impression is
that they’ve robbed this place and
this unhappy lady, every one else being away;;
and hearing our approach have galloped off to-
wards Maitland. Anyway our best.plan is to
separate; and while you watchdiere in case of
their return, I will follow up the way, I
expect they have gone',!’.urged Mr. Musgiave.
‘Doso ! I will remain until daylight; for I
believe the gang -is coucealed in the vicinity.
But,l may be mistaken.; so it may be wiser
for you to push-on,’ replied the other Police
Magistrate.
Acting upon this arrangement Air. Alns-
grave and his troopers were soon in their
saddles again,and dashing at top speed through
the Bush towards the township of Maitland.;
while Mr. (Bartell .with the rest of the party
remained behind to attend to the deceased lady,
and ravel the mystery of her death.
■Half an hour’s ride, and Mr. Musgrave came
upon Percy and his companion, who were
■ hurrying on towards Maitland to give the
alarm and send succour to Field Place.
Hearing'the approaching horsemen, and fear-
ing that the bushrangers were after them, the
fugitives concealed themselves to avoid being
seen,; as the three horsemen.dashed by, they


recognised the policenniformsin the dim star-
light, and by cooeeing soon arrested their
course and brought them back.
‘Where are you going?’ Percy asked
abruptly, as they letnrned to bis side.
‘To Maitland. We are on the track of the
bushrangers. You are one of them, I-believe.
Jtimp down Smith, and handcuff him.’ Mus-
grave said in rapid accents, at the same mo-
ment covering Percy with a pistol.
, ‘The bushiangers ha/e gone to attack Field
Place,’ exclaimed-Mr. Blair..
‘ Lend me a horse ; and let me ride with
you 1’ said Percy eagerly. ‘ When we have
saved the ladies at Field Place, I will give my-
self up to you. Lend me a horse, and let us
hurry at once, or they will fall victims to
Gregson and his-gang,’
‘ Mr. Blair, take one of these horses and
ride back to your house. You will find
Bartell there. Jump down, Smith, and give
Mr. Blair your horse, and then look after
these prisoners, thers’s two of them I see.’
said Musgrave, bastly drawing up his reins.
‘Field Place,.you say Ms Gregson among;
them ?’ asked one of the troopers.
‘ Yes, Yes! In heaven’s sake let me go with
you 1’ Percy pleaded eagerly.
Without waiting to reply, Mr. Musgrave
cast a rapid glance at Mr. Blair, who was in
the act of mounting the constable’s horse, and
then spurred his- own to- a gallop, leaving
Percy standing in 'an attitude of despair.
‘ Jest you slip off* into- the bush, and then
tramp to Brown’s place. It isn’t more than
a mile,’ whispered Bow, who had kept in the
background, while the Police Magistrate was
about. ‘ You can shake a horse there, and
reach Mr. Shelley’s almost as quick as Darby
can. I’ll try if I’cannot persuade this con-
stable to get a couple of horses, and then wo
will gallop down too.’
Percy took the hint; and by the time Smith
in his methodical way had got his brace of
handcuffs ready, one of the anticipated wearers
had disappeared.
CHAPTER XXXVII
With jealous wings
The fearful mothersbird doth hide her brood,
And, roused by danger from her timid mood.
Quick glances flings
Upon the eagle, and with bated breath,
Prepares herself to fight e’en to the death, Anon.
Hal; rolled'in through the bedroom win.-
dow—how he did not know—and hurriedly
closed and fastened -the shutter,. He had
hardly done so, when the marauders reached
the front of the house, and loudly demanded
admittance. Hal; knew the position of Mr.
Shelley’s bedroom, and leaving the girls to
take care of themselves,- limped off thither.
When he reached the room, however, he found
bis master already out of'bed, and slipping on
his clothes;-.
‘ Them d d bushrangers again, sir
Where are the arms and ammunition ?’ asked!'
the old man* excitedly.
' ‘Open that chest,. Hal. !’ replied Mr.
Shelley, pointing to a box in a corner with
one hand, while he buttoned his braces with
the other. Flinging some of Mrs. Shelley's
clothes upon the floor, Hal. wrenched up the
lid, aud discovered an array of pistols and
swords, which Mr. Shelley, prompted by the
experience gained by the bushrangers last at-
tack, had purchased.-
‘ Don’t be alarmed, Grace !’ said Mr. Shelley
quietly, as his wife, aroused by the noise of
opening the chest,, sat up in bed in great
terror.
‘ What is the matter Walter, Hal. ?’ she
asked uneasily. ‘ Pistols ?• Are the bush-
rangers here again ?’-
Without waiting to reply to his mistress’s
question, Hal. began loading the pistols, say-
ing as he drew out the ramrod of the first,
‘Qniok, sir, and see if the doorsand windows
is all fastened !’
‘Very well!’ replied Mr. Shelley, snatching.
up a sword. ‘ Now Grace, dress yourself
quickly, and look after Bertha, while I see to
bolts and bars Keep a brave heart, my darl-
ing 1 Fainting and hysterics are of little use
in this extremity!’
Mrs.-Shelley roused herself by an effort fronr
the terror that had seized her; • and was soon
ready, as on a memorable previous occasion, to -
confront peril with fortitude-.
‘ Don’t’fear for me, Walter;’ she said firmly
through her white, compressed lips,- ‘lf we
must die, we will sell our lives- dearly. See
to the pantry shutters. They are unbolted ;■
for one of the hinges is broken !'
Mr., Shelley left the room, and soon had all
the back doors and windows secure j.and his


wife, throwing a loose wrapper around her
night-dress, hurried to Bertha’s room. There
she found the timid girl bravely assisting
the thoughtful Anne to shove the heavy bed-
stead against the shutters.
‘ Oh, mamma, the bushrangers are here
again; and all the men away, tool’ she ex-
claimed excitedly, as her mother entered,
‘ We have papa and Hal. to protect us,
love,’ replied Mrs. Shelley, folding her
daughter to her breast.
‘ And God, mamma 1’ suggested Bertha, re-
verently. ‘ He saved us last time, remember.’
‘I am glad you recollect that, my child.
Nothing can harm us without His —’
The conclusion of Mrs. Shelley’s words
were drowned in the din made by the bush-
rangers, who redoubled their exertions to
burst the front door in. The door, fortun-
ately, was very strongly fixed, or it could not
have long.withstood their determined attack.
But the weight of half-a-dozen strong men
operating against it was beginning to tell, and
its tough hinges creaked ominously.
‘ Now, my lads, a shove altogether, and
we’ll be in the dove-cot in a twinkling !' said
Darby, placing his shoulder against the door
ready for the final effort,
‘No, I’m d d if you will]’ muttered
old Hal, who, haring loaded all the fire-arms
available, had limped up to the front door,
and was peeping through the keyhole, a brace
of pistols in each hand. ‘ Take this; and to
h—l with you 1’
A loud report-—a scream from the girls
within, and a shriek from one of the bush-
rangers withont--and for a moment all was
silent again as the grave 1
‘ Curse it—the devil knows how to protect
his own!’ exclaimed Hal., in disgust, as, putt-
ing his eye to the keyhole again, through which
he bad just fired, he discerned in the starlight
Darby Gregson, standing upright and unhurt,
while the ex-sailor lay upon the hard veran-
dah boards, writhing in his death struggles.
* Has that shot taken effect, Hal. V en-
quired Mr. Shelley from behind the old man.
‘ Stand aside a moment and let me see.’
Hal. stepped back to reload the discharged
pistol; and Mr. .Shelley took bis place, and ap-
plied his eye to the keyhole. The bushrangers
had cautiously drawn back out of
range of fire; and were consulting about the
speediest method of seeming their prey with-
out exposing themselves to danger.
While they were so engaged ; and Hal. and
his master were discussing in undertone the
best plan of defence, Mrs. Shelley was arming
herselt and the girls with the spare pistols.
‘ Here Marion, you take one too I* she said, as
the maid-servant slid into the room. ‘We
must all light for our lives 1’
At this moment a scream from Anne star-
tled the trembling group; and the black boy,
Jerry, scrambled down the chimney, and
landed himself head first among them, ‘ Bale
dat no matter! Me all right!’ he exclaimed,
as he regained bis feet. 1 Blackfellow head
plenty murry thick !’
‘ Oh, it’s only Jerry!’ exclaimed Bertha, re-
cognising her faithful attendant.
‘ Dat dam feller bushranger wake him me
up!’ explained Jerry slowly. ‘ Dat murry
bad feller Darby there too !’ he continued,
pointing in the direction of the gang outside.
‘ Open the door or we’ll set fire to the
the place,” shouted the captain of the gang.
‘ We can’t be kept here in the cold all night.’
Mrs. Shelley and ,the three girls stood
in the centre of the room, pistol in hand,
with cheeks blanched and eyes sparkling in
their terror and excitement. Mi. Shelley was
kneeling before the door and peering through
the keyhole, while old Iperbly was thought-
fully polishing the pistols upon his sleeve, and
the blackboy was standing on one leg glanc-
ing enquiringly from one to the other. The
group, us it stood revealed by the fitful
glimmer of the thick-wiukt, tallow candle,
would have formed an interesting subject for
a picture. ‘ Suspense ; or, Awaiting the Ban-
ditti I A study among the Appenines”—a scene
of modern life. Such a production painted to
the life would at once stamp the artist as one
of the gifted few.
‘ Open the door at once.[or we’ll smoke you
out like dingoes 1’ demanded Darby again.
‘ Here, Jerry, stand on the table, and keep
a sharp look out through that wide crack,
said Hal., pointing to a crevice between the
slabs. ‘l’d get up myself, only one of my
legs isn’t steady 1’
Jerry obeyed with alacity; and from the
eminence of the table vj’as able to watch the


movements of the bushrangers. Dawn was
breaking, and in the increasing light Jerry saw
with consternation several of the buahrang-
ers busily engaged in cairying a quantity
of dead boughs from a felled tree at a little
distance, and piling tbem up against the end
of the bouse, Before he could communicate
the unwelcome intelligence, however, to the
anxious inmates, Darby Gregaon issued his
ultimatum. * Third and last time of asking !
Will you open the door i If you don’t we’ll
fire the house in five minutes 1’ he ehouted t>|
savagely.
The only response was a pistol shot from |
Jerry ; who, to his mortification, saw the arch
villain turn round and step back, as erect and.
nonchalant as if the blackboy had only fired
a dried pea at him out of a penny popgun,
‘Struck my belt buckle and glanced off,’
Darby muttered, as be retreated out of range
again. ' Lucky i kept that belt on. I was
going to leave it off J’
‘ We are to be driven out.by fire, or burnt
alive, if we do not come to terms,’ said Mr.
Shelley, turning to his wife. ' Perhaps if we
yield they may spare our lives. It is im
possible to hold out long against fire. I
wouldn’t care fur myself, but we must save
you and Bertha at any cost.’
‘ But would they spare us} Would they
not be likely to cany her off to their mountain
den }’ objected Mrs. Shelley doubtfully.
‘ Don’t open the door, papa 1 They will be
sure to kill us!’ pleaded Bertha; and Anne
and Marion joined in the protest against com*
ing to terms.
‘ But dat dam bushranger burn us every-
body like it wild cat in holler log 1’ sug-
gested Jerry, ruefully,
‘ You may take my advice, or not, as yon
like, sir; but I’d rather see the ladies roasted
to a heap of cinders, than the bushrangers to
take’em alive i’ said Hal., decisively.
‘Dat bushes along side here,’ said Jerry,
pointing to the end .of the house. ‘ Look out
hole and shoot him through 1’
Hal. understood Jsrry’s meaning at once,
and limped to the corner to examine if there
was any crevice through which be might resist
the diabolical attempt of the bushrangers to
fire the house. The match had been applied
to the heap of dried twigs and bushes, and'
the whole mass was in one raging flame by
the time Hal, bad come to the unhappy con-
clusion that there was no possible means of
cutting a loophole through the hard iionwood
slabs.
‘ No,’ he muttered, ‘ We must be roasted
alive or try to cut our way thiough the enemy.
Nothing but a sally can save us now-; and
that’s cussed risky I’
Mr, Shelley saw with painful anxiety, the
smoke and flames issuing through under the
eaves between the rafters,• and the same
thought of escaping occurred to him by cutting
their way through the bushrangers; or, better
still, getting into the bush unobserved, by slip-
ping out of the house on the side opposite to
where their beleaguers were then collected.
‘ Hal. can yon hold this place long enough to
enable Jerry and I to take the women into
cover of the brush by the back way V be asked
the old man, who, he knew, would encounter
any peril in their defence. ‘As soon as we get
them safe, we will return to youi {assistance.
‘lf you can gel away, sir, I’ll keep the
bushrangers employed the while. You’d best
slip round behind the garden fence, and get
into the gully that runs up through the Apple-
tree brush. Be quick in starting, or they’ll
be sending some of their men to the back to
prevent escape,’ replied the faithful Hal.
But fate was adverse ; and, as if divining
the intentions of the beseiged, Darby, who was
standing watching the progress of the flames,
as they leaped upward in the morning breeze,
and caughtfirmly hold of the roof of the doomed
house, turned suddenly round, and ordered a
couple of the men to cut ofl escape by the
back of the premises. ‘ It’s no use smoking a
nest of wild cats out of one end of a holler
log, if you leave the other end open 1’ he con-
cluded philosophically.
Unaware of Darby Gregson’s precaution,
Mr. Shelley prepared to let his wife and
daughter, with Anne Egerton and Marion
Macaulay out at the back door. ‘ Don’t
speak, any of you, but grasp your pistols tight,
and follow me 1’ be whispered, as be
cautiously removed some heavy furniture,
that had been piled against the back door.
With the assistance of Jerry, who had dis-
mounted from his post of observation, upon,
the bushrangers lighting the fire, he noiselessly


lifted the furniture back. ‘ Now !’ he ejacu-
lated under bis breath ; and softly opened the
door. A' derisive laugh, and a shout of ‘ No
you don’t my schemer !’ met him ; and he
found two or three bushrangers on the look-
out. Hastily shutting.and securing the door,
Mr.'Shelley turned to his wife. ‘l*fear the
worst has come, Grace ! There is no escape.
We are watched on every side !’ His words
were calmly spoken ; but his heart was heavy.
For himself he feared nothing. He had faced
death too often to dread it now. But those,
so near and dear to him ! His heart sank with-
in him, as the awful fate in store for them
rose vividly before his imagination.- His wife’s
voice trembled a little, asshereplied eagerly, ‘ls
it not possible, Walter,.to suddenly open the
door, and rush through them 1 Some of us
might escape,.and if we were all to fall, it
would be better than dying by tire or our
own hands. Before Bertha shall fall into
their power, I» will stab her to the heart
and kill myself afterwards. Let us
try to rush through them !” With suspended
breath the three girls watched the progress-of
the flames,- and waited - for Mr. Shelley’s
reply. After a few seconds pause, he turned
to Hal., and said shortly, Hal.,, what
is your opinion 1”
‘To stay where we are, sir, now !' If you
could have got a start of them, you might
have been lucky enough to escape. But now
they’re on the lookout, it would be just mad-
ness to try it!’ answered Hal. decidedly.
‘ You think we could not possibly escape?
‘ No ma’am, that’s out of the question
now. The d d skulks outside ’ve got
horses, and ’ud run you down in ten minutes.
No ; we must fight it out'!’
‘ Papa, if we can’t escape, you must kill us !
Mamma is right; and L would rather die a
thousand times than be taken by the bush-
rangers !’ said Bertha,- with heroic resolution,
her voice, however, faltering in her emotion.
At this moment'several rafters, which were
burnt through by the fire the outlaws had lit,
broke down, and let fall a quantity of the
battens and shingles. Through the openings
thus made, the smoke rolled in columns;-and
nearly stifled the inmates.
‘We can’t hold this sir!'We must retreat
to tbeskillion !’ said Hal. despondingly. The
hint was taken in silence ;and tire ladies fol-
lowed Mr. Shelley to the back room, Hal. and
Jferry bringing up the rear.
‘ Jeiry and me can hold this door against
’em, sir, if they come through the hole they’re
burning in the wall; Yarn can talk to the
ladies, and comfort them the while,’- Hal. sug-
gested;
: •* ThereVno possibility of-hoi ding out long,
Hal. unless we can pievent them filing the
house in other places, or if we are not. rescued
within ten minutes 1' In a fight with men, we
might have a chance, but no human
effort can withstand the power of fire. Let'
us spend our few last moments in prayer,
Walter! If any hope exists, it can only be
through Him He may save us, and if it is
His will, we must, we shall be the better pre-
pared !’
‘ You and the young ladies can do the
praying, ma’am, while we are fighting for
you V interposed Hah, and turning to Mr.
Shelley, he continued, ‘We are old soldiers,-
and must leave the praying to women and
children, sir. God ’ud be more likely to hear
them too, they’re not likely got so much to
answer for, as me and you may have, sir V
Reveiently and humbly the terrified
females knelt, and earnestly supplicated the-
God of mercy to save them, For a few
seconds their guardians watched them, and’
silently joined in their prayers r but soon the
bushrangers diverted their attention by
knocking out a burned slab, and entering
through the opened apace. A* double volley,
at close range, from the little garrison’s pistols
wounded two of them severely, and compelled'
the gang to retreat precipitately, ‘ Smash in
the- back door!’ ordered Darby,. savagely,
‘ and we’ll take them at once,’
With sinking hearts the party within heard
the order. Three of the bushrangers proceeded
to execute the command of their leader. A-
few heavy blows from a short log smashed the
door from its hinges, and dashed it in upon
the blackhoy, who precipitately clambered up
to the rafters. Another volley met the out--
laws; as they attempted to rush through,
which caused them to retreat as before. As
he sprang back again. Darby fired a pistol
among the group within, muttering- as he did'
so


‘‘'By Judas, ;I’ll roast ’em alive, every one
■ of ’em !’
‘ Banin™ the women, Darby!’ exclaimed a
bushranger at his side. ‘ Baning the women.
We’ve to share them, you knowi’
‘D it, rny lads, we’re not going- to be
baulked like this.l Let’s dash in through the
breach, neck or nothing ! They can’t knock
us all on the head.; and the survivors ’ll have
the more to share. Come along'!’ saying
which, the excited'Darby turned to repeat the
attack. ‘Altogether, my lads. Now;!’ he
shouted / and, followed by half-a-dozen despe-
.rate wretches, .sprang in again through the
• shattered door. Again they were met by a
volley, and one of the bushrangers fell back,
mortally wounded, the others escaping almost
-miraculously. The - onset of the bush-
rangers w.as too impetuous to be effectually
held in check ; and, despite the determined
resistance of the little garrison,-in.a few sec-
onds the fierce, but unequal, struggle was
over, and the outlaws masters of the situation.
>But, though victorious, the outlaws had paid
dearly for their triumph. As they rushed
■through the opening Jerry, from the elevation
of a tie beam, upon which he was perched,
aimed a blow with his tomahawk at Darby
tJregson’s head ; and, though he missed his
mark. Darby did not escape unscathed.
Tbe~keen edge of the weapon struck Darby’s
right shoulder with great force, and almost
severed his arm from his body. ' ‘ You
cursed old cripple,’ shouted Darby in fury,
■ his disabled limb falling helpless by
his side, as his eyes met old Hal., standing
pistol in hand before Bertha.’ ‘ By hell you
shall die for that!’ and before the old
man could pull the trigger, Darby fired
right into the brave old veteran’s face. The
ball entered between the old man’s eyes, and
passed through the brain, and old Perbly fell
back into the arms of his young mistress,
dead.
‘ Take dat too, yon dam white feller,’ cried
Jerry excitedly, maddened by the fate of his
friend, Hal.; ‘Take dat nother chop !’ and
again the terrible weapon fell. There was no
missing the mark this time, and the
daring outlaw fell, mortally wounded, across
the corpse of his victim. Mr. Shelley, too,
.was not id!?, while Jerry’s hatchet was doing
such good service. His pistol had been
knocked from his hand by Hal. in his fall,
but grasping his sword firmly, he lunged
right and left, and drew blood from more than
one of their ruthless assailants. Number?,
however, and the rapidity of the onset
carried the day, and in less time than it has
taken to narrate‘the fact, the gallant-cap-
tain lay upon the slippery floor, -bound hand
and foot, deep stained in a pool of his own
blood. -Poor Jerry, too, received a severe,
though not fatal wound from a pistol shot.;
and seeing the day lost, he clambered along
the tiebeams, and -dropping down upon
the floor of the burning room, sprang
boldly through the opening made by the
falling of burning slabs, and escaped.
* Now, Jennings, my idea is to secure the
lassies,and cut sticks’! said one of the outlaws.
‘ I wouldn’t waste time in roasting these
devils, as Darby talked about. The po-
lice’ll be here directly, I shouldn’t wonder.
There’s four of us left, and here’s four women.
VYhat say to drawing lots for first pick ?’
‘Anything, Dick, so that we make haste'!
What about our wounded ! We can’t carry
them off, that’s flat.
‘ They’d have left us to swing, if it’d been
our luck instead of theirs to get nipped. I
say do unto them, as they’d have done unto
us —thatfs teligioo, isn’t it V
‘Let’s settle the matter then this way !
Anything to be quick ! The constables ’ll take
care of our mates, if they don’t die before
they’re bung’ ! said another of the desperate
gang. .
‘ Take me with you/ begged one of the
wounded men in a husky voice. ‘.Don’t let
us stop to be taken and hanged’!
Without deigning reply,the callous wretches
proceeded to draw lots,; and -the allotment
being concluded, turned to lake each his prize.
The scene that met their, glances as they
turned to their -victims, -might have
melted the hearts even of wolves. It had no
effect-upon them, men though they were. His
wife and Bertha were kneeling by Mr. Shel-
ley’s side, bathed in tears, and vainly striving
to loosen the thongs, that almost cut into his
flesh by their extreme tightness. While Anne
Egerton and Marion Macaulay stood aloof,
trembling in terror and dismay.


* Now then, my pretty one, you’re mine for
better or worse 1* said Jennings triumphantly,
as he turned to Bertha, * Come with me, my
sweet; we must not hang about till the con-
stables come, or one of us at least ’ll about
hang somewhere else!’
‘Oh, spare us, spare ns! You could not
be so wicked as to kill,ns T exclaimed Marion
pitifully.
‘ Nothing is farther from my thoughts, my
lambkin! Yon wouldn’t be much use to us
then, you know !* returned one of the outlaws
at the same time, taking the trembling girl
in his arms ; ‘ Now don’t struggle, or you’ll
rufflle your pretty feathers, birdie !’ he con-
tinued in a soothing tone, as he stroked her
curly tresses.
Laughing at his comrades gallantry,
Jennings turned to Bertha, and placed
his arm around her waist, with the purpose
of leading her away, Bertha and her
mother bad been too occupied by their terror,
and their efforts to relieve Mr. Shelley from
his painful position, to notice the movements
during the last few seconds, but they were
roused at once by Jennings’ action. The out-
law had hardly taken hold of the weeping
girl, before he had to release her, and spring
back, to avoid the lunge Mrs. Shelley made
at him, with a swoid she snatched up.
‘ Well upon my life, if this doesn’t beat
cock-fighting!’ he exclaimed, laughing;
* Why, old girl, I shant eat her f Come, put
that plaything down, or I’ll just put a bullet
through the prisoner’s head ! I’ve no time for
fooling ; put it down at once, or I fire 1’ and
the cold-blooded wretch, finger on trigger,
covered Mr. Shelley with a pistol. There was
no mistaking the determination of the outlaw
to carry his diabolical threat into execution ;
and reluctantly the resolute woman had to
surrender the weapon. •
‘ Now ladies, we must be off at once, before
the constables return. Not a word must be
said, as we tramp along, for we ranst get over
the mountains as quiet as possible, and ’
‘Over the mountain, Jennings?’ inter-
rupted one of the outlaws.
‘ Yes; the only retreat open for us now is
through the brushes on the other side of the
range. We shall have a look at the spot,
where Bryant, our last captain was killed,’
‘ Ah 1 that reminds me, it was you that stuck
the knife into him, wasn’t it,’ he continued,
turning to Mrs. Shelley, who shuddered per-
ceptible at the recollection of that terrible
time, and remained silent.
‘Now then, each man escort his fair one,
and follow me T ordered Jennings, cutting
short further conversation by dragging Bertha
by force from the room. The three other sur-
vivors of the fray each took one of the trem-
bling females, and between dragging and
carrying removed them from the room to the
open air.
‘ Let me go back to Pupa!’ Bertha cried
wildly ; but the ominous clicking of her cap-
tor’s pistol, and the threat, hissed between his
set teeth, that if she spoke again he would
send a bullet through her mother's skull,
quietened her.
Without a word spoken by any, the hush-
rangers commenced their march up the ridge,
Jennings, who had, unopposed, assumed com-
mand of the gang, determining to retreat to
a well stored mountain cave that lay between
the head of the Wollornbi and Brisbane Wa-
ter,and which, when belonging to a gang, since
disbanded by the gallows, he had assisted to
stock with provisions.
From the summit of an outhouse Jerry
watched their departure, a satisfied grin upon
his dark features, ‘ Holloa 1 You go along
Mother side range V he exclaimed triumphant-
ly. ‘Mo find you ranrry make haste by-
bye P but in a moment his eyes fell upon the
figure of his young mistress, who was being
led away; and, conscience-stricken, he slid
down a pole leaning against the wall. ‘Jerry
dam coward!’ he exclaimed savagely, giving
himself at the moment a vindictive knock
upon the head. ‘ What for dat roe run away
like a dat, and let him dam bushranger take
him Missie Beita 1 Me will bring him back!’
Animated by the heroic determination to re-
trieve his cowardice in escaping, the blackbcy
ran into the room where the last struggle bad
taken place, to find his tomahawk, which he
had dropped in escaping. ‘ Hollo, Misser
Selley, bale you not go too 1’ he cried as he
stumbled over his prostrate master.
Seeing at a glance Mr. Shelley’s situation,
Jerry severed the thongs with his tomahawk,
and the prisoner sprang, to his fcet free to


rush to the rescue. They both armed them-
selves in silence, Jerry taking half-a-dozen
pistols under his arm, and grasping bis inevi-
table tomahawk with characteristic energy.
The experience of his old, campaigning days
restrained. Mr. Shelley’s natural impetuosity,
and he did not leave the room' till he had
loaded the pistols that had been fired off in
the struggle.
‘ Now, Jerty, for Missie Berta’s sake prove
yourself a man !’ he said, turning logo, as he
drove home the last charge, ‘ and follow
me.’
The fire had completely mastered one end
of the house, and the smoke was beginning to
pour into the room in dense volumes, as they
stepped over Darby Gregson, in reaching the
door. Mr. Shelley’s natural impulse was to
leave the villian to his fate ; but his better
nature revolted at the idea; and he -hastily
diagged the wounded outlaw from the burn-
ing room and left him upon the grass outside.
‘ This way Misser Sellev !’ shouted Jerry,
as his master started off in a wrong direction,
and the two turned up the range in pursuit.
They had not gone a hundred yards when a
pistol volley, a short distance in advance,
caused them to double their exertions to over-
take the outlaws.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
With brow deep knit,
In vengeance dire,
And red lips bit
In fierce desire '
Kevenee to wreak.'
The coward stands.
With ready hands.
His blood to spill.
Who. innocent
Of all intent
To do him ill.
Doth of him speak;
As friend full dear.
And count him as
His actions glass.
In love sincere. AlfON.
Mr. Musgrave and his troopers urged their
horses forward at top speed, and never drew
rein until they entered' the boundary of
Field Place, a distance of at least fifteen miles
from where they had passed Percy Sinclair.
‘ Pull up, my lads! We must give the
horses blowing time!’ ordered Mr. Musgrave,
reining in. ‘ The bushrangers must have
travelled fast, or we are on the wrong seeiit.’
‘ It’s not likely, sir, they’d have taken this'
road. They know too many short cuts through-
the bush. They’d save five miles by going
at the back of Paddy Murphy’s place 1’
* You got it plenty bacca ?’
The question, spoken in a shrill, squeaky
voice, arrested the attention of the horsemen ;■
and, glancing in the direction from which the
sound proceeded, they discerned an old black
woman sitting under a bark gunyah. Her
fire was nearly out, but the faint light from
its dying embers revealed her shrunken
features and dingy covering.
‘ Holloa, Dolly ! What have yon done with'
your fire?’ asked Mr. Musgrave, surprised at
seeing it so low—-the aborigines being so par-
ticular about keeping their night fires aglow
to scare away evil spirits.
‘ Dat go nearly out when me fast asleep.
You got it bacca V
‘ Here you are, Dolly ! Where all other
blackfeller go tof said one of the troopers,
throwing the gin a fig-of tobacco.
‘ Dat go over range to-morrow day : dat
come back bv-by 1 Dat nother blackfeller
along that camp !’ she replied, eagerly snatch-
ing up the coveted prize, as it fell at her feet,
and then pointing to a smouldering heap of
embers near.
‘ You see anyone ride by here since supper
time, Dolly 1* enquired Mr, Musgrave'
thoughtfully.
‘No. Misser Musgy !' Bale dat nobody
pass!’ mumbled Dolly with her pipe stem in
her mouth. ‘My word dis mnrry good
bacca !’
‘Cut it up, Dolly ! You can’t smoke it
that way !’ said one of the troopers, laughing'"
as the gin untwisted the tobacco with her
fingers and tilled the pipe with it.
‘ No one passed here ! Well, ray lads, we are"
on the wrong track for a certainty. If they
did come along the back way, they were bound
to take the road here, if they have gone on to •
Shelley’s.
‘ I expect they’ve attacked Pgddy M'mphy’s-
place instead !’ suggested one of the troopers.
‘ That’s about three miles back on the river!’
‘Well, then, right about face ! We’ll gal--
lop across and see !’ said Mr. Musgrave turn--
ing his horse’s head, and- urging-him into- a*
troti ■


**Good night, Dolly ! Pleasant dreams to
.you !’ shouted one of the men, as he turned to
'follow his officer.
In a few minutes they had to leave the
xoad, and press their way through a dense
-brush. There was only a narrow path wind-
ing among the trees, and the men had to drop
into line in Indian fashion, and ride in single
file. The way, too, was encumbered with
twisted roots and vines, that, like writhing
.serpents, lay tangled upon the crumbly soil;
and the party could not proceed faster than a
.foot pace. An hour was spent in reaching
Paddy Murphy’s dwelling of sapplings and
baik, so slowly they had to travel.
‘ Here we are at length!’ said a trooper,
rousing the Police Magistrate from a reverie.
‘Paddy’s up early ! See. he has a light!’
If Paddy was not up early his dogs were ,
.and made so much noise that the worthy
himself soon slipped into his clothes, and went
out to discover the cause of their disquietude.’
‘ Lay down Tiger, and bad scran to yer!’ he
shouted to his vigilant cattle-dog, who was
surveying the early visitors with distrustful
eyes, and barking furiously. ‘ Where did yer
,lam yer manners ,lrom, . yer spalpeen !’
Tiger slunk off to the hut, and took his place
by the fire, much abashed by the rebuke .; but
.the two younger dogs, not being so susceptible
of reproof, stood at a safe distance, and barked
and yelped till their sides ached.
‘ Never mind them unmannerly cubs, yer
honor.! They’re not civilized yet!’ said
Faddy apologetically, as soon as he could be
heard.
‘ I thought the bushrangers were here
Paddv! That’s what brought me over so
early !’ replied Mr. Musgrave in a disap-
pointed tone, ‘ but you seem all right.!’
\ ‘ Bed ad, thin, you’re all mighty hard on
.tbim bushrangers,’ said Paddy, who had long
been suspected of being in communication with
that interesting fraternity. ‘ There's Mr.
.-Clayton and a,couple of strapping boys down
here now on the same errant.
* Mr. Clayton V
‘ Yes, yer honor ! Jest step inside my
cabin, if .you aren’t above going into a poor
.man’s places, and you’ll,find him there.’
‘ You need not trouble yourself on my ac-
count Musgrave, for here I am. What’s the
newsl Heard anything V said H übert Clay -
ton, stepping forward from the shade of a
dense tangle of bushes, from the cover of
which he had been observing the horsemen.
‘ We went to Eaawinga, Blair’s place, last
night, and found that the bushrangers had
been there and murdered Mrs. Blair. We
are now ’
‘ Was Sinclair with them t interrupted
Clayton, eagerly.
‘ We came upon him and the man called
Bow, and apprehended them.’
A bitter curse escaped through Clayton’s
compressed lips, at the idea that his victim
had escaped him.
‘The other bushrangers have ridden this
way. I thought they might be here, but I
am afraid they have gone on to Field, Place,
and I must hasten there at once;’
‘I will go too! Are these two all the
constables you have with you V asked Clay-
ton.
‘ Yes.’
‘l’ve a conp|e of volunteers with me, who,
with me, will make up half-a.dozen. That
ought to be enough to meet all that we are
likely to find.’
‘ Get them into the saddle then, Clayton,
and follow. We must lose no time in reaching
Field Place!’ Mr. Musgrave said .hurriedly ;
and, turning his horse around, and ordering his
men to follow, struck again into the brush.
The ride back through the brush was te-
dious, and Mr. Musgrave could scarcely
control his impatience as his horse kept
stumbling over the entangled roots aud
concealed stumps in the path, At last,
however, the open road was reached. It was
now nearly daylight, Driving his spurs deep
into the quivering -flanks of his horse, the
police magistrate struck off through the bush
in a -direct line for Field Place. His men
were close behind him, and in a few minutes
Clayton emerged from the brush, and the
whole party galloped through the bush at a
racing pace. -Fifteen minutes hard ride
brought them in view of the house.
* Smoke, by heavens! See Clayton, the
house is on Are! Drive your spurs up to
their necks, my lads! We may yet be in
time to save the Shelley’s !’
‘Het’s take a short cut this way, sir;’


•(shouted one of Clayton’s confederates, rushing
his horse to a fallen tree that lay in the path
and clearing it. ‘ We’ll save time this way.’
The whole party followed, and in a few
•seconds came upon the bushrangers and their
prisoners.
‘Surround them, and cut off escape!’
■shouted Musgrave, as he rode, down right
upon the gang.
His followers spread out, and almost before
■the bushrangers were aware of their danger
had surrounded them.
• We must fight for it, lads. Curse our
folly for leaving our horses!’ said Jennings,
with an oath.
‘Thank heaven, we are saved!’ exclaimed
Mrs. Shelley, fervently, while the girls
watched the approach of their rescuers with
wistful eyes.
‘ Reserve your pistols till they’re well in
range !’ ordered Jennings.; and the desperate
outlaws, seeing escape impossible, stood grimly
prepared to sell their lives dearly. The cause
.of their having been taken by surprise, was that,
a gentle undulation of the ground to their left,
had hidden the approach of the constables until
they were close upon them. For a few seconds
previous to their appearing in sight, the bush-
rangers had heard the sound of their horses’ hoofs,
but were unable to decide in which direction
-the sound proceeded from, until they appeared
over the rise, and almost upon them. Directly
the police came in sight, the outlaws re-
linquished hold of their prey ; and, finding
themselves released, Mrs. Shelley and the
girls ran to meet their preservers. ‘ Keep out
of the range of fire !’ shouted Mr. Musgraye,
.as he gallopped past them; and the trembling
females stood in a group, watching the issue
of the .fight, as their friends bore down upon
their captors. A volley from each side broke
'the calm stillness of the morning, and one
trooper's horse gallopped down the tidge with
an empty saddle.
‘ Every man to a tree!’ shouted the captain
of the gang; and, acting upon his own words,
.be slid behind a huge ironbark to reload his
pistol. The other outlaws quickly followed
bis example, and each sought the coyer of a
separate tree. This manoeuvre at first seemed
to baffle the police magistrate and his men.
Bv beinc undercover, and at short distances
from each other, the bushrangers were enabled
mutually to assist each other, as whoever at-
tempted to attack one of them placed himself
immediately within range of the others.
After several unsuccessful attempts bad
been made to dislodge them, and several
very narrow escapes experienced by
the men, Mr. Musgrave thought of a plan
that would rob the outlaws of the advantage
of their position. ‘ Mr. Clayton we must take
the ruffians seriatum. You lead a couple of
your men round at a safe distance till you get
opposite .to the bushranger behind that stringy
bark, and then bear down on him. He’ll then
be between two fires, and must surrender at
discretion. Holloa! whose this? reinforce-
ments for one side or the other, from the rate
they’re coming at!’
Clayton’s eyes glittered with savage exulta-
tion as he recognised Percy Sinclair followed
by Bow, coming over the ridge at racing pace.
‘ Two more of the scum, Musgravel You and
your man hold these in check while 1 intercept
that pair of cut-throats !’
Without waiting for the police magistrate’s
reply, Hubert'Clayton beckoned tohisconfed!
erates, and galloped to meet his victim. ‘What
so sweet as revenge !’ he exclaimed triumph-
antly, as he hurried on closely followed by his
men, and sanctioned by law, to the murder of
the unfortunate Percy.
‘ Aim low, my lads! Don’t let the bullets
.fly over his head !’ said Clayton quietly, as his
men, at a signal from himself, bad stopped and
drawn up their horses a little to the left of
the path Sinclair was taking. ‘ Never mind
.the last one. Eire low and at the man in'
front!’
The report of the three pistols, as they were
fired simultaneously, rung among the hills,
awaking loud and prolonged echoes, and Percy
and his horse fell together. * Good Lord, he’s
killed 1’ cried Bow, pulling his own horse back
npon its haunches, to avoid riding over his
prostrate companion in misfortune.
‘ Thank heaven he’s done for!' exclaimed
Clayton, excitedly. ’
• Thank heaven for killing a man !’ said
one of his confederates in surprise. ‘ For my
part, 1 think the less heaven has to do with
one in these matters the better, I don’t be-
lieve heaven interferes J’


Heaven had; however, interfered; A small
blind stump being in the path had thrown
Percy’s horse over, and thus saved its master’s
life;, and, probably, its own too. To Clayton’s
consternation, and Bow’s delight, the horse
recovered itself by a prodigious effort, and re-
gained its feet, Percy still in the saddle..
‘What, Glayton, you try to-murder me?’
Percy said, in surprise and horror at the das-
tardly act.
‘Yes, why not? We shoot dingoes and
bushrangers wherever we find ’em !: Come,
lads, at him again !’ the cowardly arch-villain
said in reply, suddenly raising his undischarged
pistol, and covering Percy with it.
‘ No 1 I'm d d if I will!’ returned one of
the two ticket-of-leave men. ‘ Talk about hea-
ven helping one man to kill another; I’m not so
black-hearted as to talk like that though I
have cut more throats in my time than Hike to
think on at night [1 and he turned his horse
round to ride back to where Mr. Musgrave
and his solitary constable were holding un-
equal contest with the four bushrangers, who,
thinking Percy and Bow were coming to their
assistance, had giown bold enough to take the
aggressive. A fiendish smile passed over Clay-
ton’s features. ‘So you’ie fool enough to
think I’ll let you live to tattle !’ he hissed ;
and turning in his saddle he tired right at the
back of the retreating man, who fell from
his horse without a groan. This piece of cold-
blooded atrocity cost the cowardly wretch
dearly. Before he could turn again to the
attack, Bow had recognised him. ‘I-knew I’d
be hung for him,’ he said through his clenched
teeth, as he sprang from his horse; and, drop-
ping his pistol and clutching his knife, heseized
Clayton by the throat ;. and by almost super-
human exertion dragged him from his horse.
The unexpectedness and impetuosity of
Bow’s attack took Clayton by surprise, and
before he could recover himself,, he was
dragged from his horse, and lay upon the
ground at the mercy of his assailant.
‘ Get up,.Clayton!’ said Bow, in a terribly
calm and deliberate tone. ‘ T will have your
life, or you mine; but Pm not mean enough
to take an unfair advantage. You bribed me
to swear falsely against Mr. Sinclair, in York,
when I. was trying, to break from my. wicked |
ways ; and Pll have my revenge now,, or die
for it!’
Clayton saw- the danger of his position at
a glance, and in scramming to his feet, con-
trived to fire at his generous antagonist. The
bullet passed through the fleshy part of Bow’s
arm, but, fortunately,, missed the bone.
‘You d d viper!’ shouted Bow, bis
blood fairly boiling at the dastardly act, ‘ I’ll
give yon no chance again !’ and the exasper-
ated fellow sprang at Clayton’s throat like a-
bull-dog. With great difficulty Clayton
managed to get at his dirk (a beautiful little
weapon given him some years before by an old'
Scotch laird) and in the furious tussle Bow
received several severe wounds from it. The
men were of nearly equal strength, Clayton
being rather taller and more wiery in form,
while what advantage Bow lost in statue, he
gained in compactness of build. Both
knew it was a struggle for life, and no
word was spoken, as each, with brows knit,
lips compressed, and a look of quiet resolve and
quenchless hate tugged and grappled with the-
other. Now prone upon the ground, fast held-
in an iron embrace, now standing erect face to
face, the inexorable grip never relaxed, the
desperate combatants strove for several
minutes, neither appearing to gain any advan-
tage.
‘ Good heavens, he’s down !’ cried Percy
Sinclair, as Bow, stumbling over a large stone,,
was pressed down upon his knees. Bow, by.
a grand effort, regained his feet; but, in doing,
so, freed the hand in- which Clayton held the
dagger, and, in springing aside to avoid a stab,,
lost his balance, and fell forward. Clayton
seeing the advantage pressed it, and, in less-
than half a-minute, bad his intrepid assailant
at his feet.
‘ Hold ! You shall not murder him 1 Cow-
ard that you are !’ cried Percy, springing for-
ward to the rescue of- his faithful companion..
‘Pair play’s- bonny play.. Jest let ’em
alone 1 They can settle it between ’em !’ said
Clayton’s confederate,.stepping between Percy
and the struggling, panting men upon the
ground. ‘ It’s a bargain, mate. I won’t help-
my man, and yon won’t help yours !’
‘ Stand aside !’ shouted Percy in excitement,,
trying to thrust the fellow,, who inteicepted-
him,away..


•It's no use, mate I I’ll see fair play I* said
the ruffian, forcibly holding Percy back. ‘ And
look, let this prove that I will see it. You
dropped your pistols, when your horse fell;
I’ve mine here. If you move a finger to help
your man, I’ll put a bullet through your head
Let ’em have fair play; and the best man win.
That’s my sentiment!’
The death-bearing little weapon, was
pointed directly at Percy’s head ; and he was
compelled to stand passively by, and see ‘ fair
plav.’
Bow down, It was easy for Clayton ■ to
spring upon him and hold him there; and if
be could have got-bis dagger free, would have
made short work of him.. But he could not
get command of his weapon; and, in strug-
gling to do so, was thrown back upon his side
by Bow, who knew his danger and struggled
hard. In the terrible contest of strength, they
together regained their feet; and, as they
strove, Clayton gradually got his sword arm
higher and higher, until he held it ready to
plunge his dagger into his adversary’s throat
the moment his grip relaxed, even in the least
degree.
The struggle was something' fearful to wit-
ness, each man’s countenance exhibiting the
unrelenting- resolve to take the life of the
other—Bow animated by a revenge that was
justified, if ever revenge can be, and Clayton
by the determination to remove a dangerous
man from his path; for he had recognised Bow.
The keen glittering blade of Clayton’s dirk
was within an inch of Bow’s throat, anti it ap-
peared to the horrified Percy impossible for
the brave fellow to escape its threatening point;
but by a movement rapid as the spring of a
panther be let go Clayton’s arm and seized the
weapon by the haft. Each saw that death
was between, them, and ready for the first that
relaxed his strength even for a moment, and
each strainedevery nerve to turn the fatal point
against the other. From side to side they
swayed, like trees bending beneath the varying
force of a hurricane, in their efforts to over--
power, each other. They appeared so evenly
matched in strength and endurance that it
seemed to Percy that nothing but an accident
could decide the struggle.
• Let go, and Pll give in,’ said Clayton, in
a hoarse whisper r but Bow, who knew that
the other would drive the dirk into his heart
the moment he loosened his hold, smiled
grimly at the transparent manoeuvre, and re-
doubled his efforts. For full five minutes the
terrible, unrelenting struggle lasted, before
either coaid claim the least advantage, and!
the while Percy Sinclair was compelled to
stand by and see ’’fair play,” as the ominous,
click of the trigger every time he showed any
disposition to interfere warned him of his
powerlessness to help his faithful friend.
At last by a feint, Bow was put off his guard
for a moment; and before he could recover
himself, Clayton pressed him back to a log be-
hind him, and ha fell over, dragging Clay-
ton with him. The struggle was prolonged
for several minutes upon the ground, both of
the combatants receiving some severe wonnds
the while, and then Bow, by an almost super,
human exertion succeeded in getting upper-
most. Seizing bis enemy by the throat, Bow,
a smile of triumph passing over his blood-
smeared (features, raised aloft the diipping
blade, and with the velocity of a serpent dart-
ing’at its prey, the terrible steel descended.
Percy shuddered as he saw th» blade fall, and
the blood spurt over the sleeve of the avenging
arm.
‘ That’ll learn you never to tempt a poor fel-
low, again to-sell a fellow man for fifty, pounds!
And may you be well masted where such devils
as you;go- to!’ said Bow, as ho deliberately
wiped the blade upon his sleeve, and rose.
The words were barely out of his mouth,
however, when Clayton,- who- had not been
killed by the hideous - wound Bow had im-
dieted upon him, sprang up, and, snatching
the dagger drove it to . the hilt in
Bow’s breast; and with a laugh' of fiendish
exultation, fell backwards to the ground.
Percy forgot the menacing pistol of the*
sentinel so- determined' 'to see fair
play, and sprang' to' Bow's side,
‘ I’m done for, sir, sure' as a gun; and I’m
glad on it, too; for I shouldn’t like to be
banged.- But there’s some comfort, sir, that-
d: d cold-blooded wretch, who’s caused all
the trouble you and I’ve had, ’ll die too 1’ said
true-hearted, misguided Bow, as Percy leaned
over him, his heart too full for words.


CHAPTER XXXIX.
Virtue triumphs ever! Dark the cloud.
Her fair and radient features dimly shroud.
O’er all exalted she shall soon appear
A conquerer.hereafter,.if not here !
Anon.
The bushrangers, wbo were held in check
by Mr, Musgrave and his solitary .comrade,
kept their position bravely ((seeing that they
were two to .one) till the police magistrate’s
attention was drawn by the trooper to the
.desperate nature of the struggle further up the
slope; but the moment he turned his horse to
gallop to the spot, they seized the opportunity
to slink away; Jennings, as be gave the or-
der, observing ' that they had best slope while
they had the chance.’ The outlaws had
reached the summit of the ridge, and were
about to dive into the ail but impenetrable
brush on its further declivity before they were
observed by the police magistrate, who had
reached the scene of the death-struggle.
‘ Clayton murdered :!’ he exclaimed, spring.
Ing to the ground at the wounded man’s side.
‘No, sir, enly killed for all the mischief
he’s done in his day !’ replied Bow, feebly but
resolutely.
Mr. Musgrave gazed upon the prostrate
men in silence for a few seconds ; and then,
turning to his trooper, ordered him tohandcuff'
Percy.
‘ You stay with these wounded men,
Archer; and you, Saunders, see to poor
(Gregory, He lies under those wattles yonder,
with a bullet in his throat. I must away
to the house to see after the ladies. They are
■our first thought !’
‘ Where are they ? Have you saved them ?’
asked Percy, eagerly, as the handcuffs were
being locked.
‘ Yes. They escaped back to the bouse just
before you appeared over the ridge. ’ I will be
•back directly, Archer; but I must see after
them before even these wounded men .can be
attended toj* and with the true .chivalry of
mediaeval times, Mr. Musgrave made the
safety of the ladies his first consideration,
and rode off to look after them.
Percy sat by Bow’s side, and spoke in soft
and anxious tones the great truths of salva-
tion—truths that he had known for years;
but which he had never felt till recently, till
•.the .bitter cpp of adversity had been filled .to
the very brim. He saw only -too unmista'ke-
ably that the poor fellow’s wounds were fatal ;
that he could not last many hours; and he
strove hard to lead him to look to the cross
tor protection, and succour in passing through
the dim valley of the shadow of death.
4 But do you really believe that He could
pardon me) me that sold a fellow-man for
money to buy a peddler’s cart with?’ enquired
Bow, eagerly, gazing upon Percy with a
glance of implicit trust.
‘ You were wicked, very wicked in doing
so ; but He forgave even those who nailed Him
to the cross; and no one can doubt that their
sin was greater than yours.’
‘What? Forgive them that murdered
him ?’ the simple fellow asked, in astonish-
ment.
‘Yes, Bow; and He has said, “Though
your sins be red like crimson, they shall
become white as snow,” ’ Percy replied, .quot-
ing the spirit, if not the letter, of the divine
and glorious promise that has been balm and
comfort to so many a turbulent death-bed.
‘But do you really believe, sir, that a poor
wretch like me ’ud be fit for heaven even if I
was forgiven, being always about as wicked
as I well could he ?’ Bow asked, dubiously.
‘We must not doubt.it, Bow,; for He has
said, who cannot lie, ‘.‘ He that comelh unto
me, I will in no wise cast out 1’”
‘ But I have, been such a awful sinner !’
Bow contended.
‘ More sinned against than sinning J’
Percy said mentally, and replied aloud,
‘ Would you have nailed the meek and gentle
Saviour to the cross as His murderer’s did ?’
‘ No, no ! I would have believed Him, and
followed Him to the,end of the earth, if He’d
let me!’
‘ If He forgave those who put him to a
shamefnl death, you or I have no cause for
doubt, Bow, If you would have believed
Him then, why not now? Do you believe Je-
sus ever did come upon earth, and die for
sinners i*
‘ Yes. My mother told me so ! I don’t re-
member her, but I’ve never forgotten what
she taught me in my prayers,’ replied Bow
earnestly ; and added regretfully, ‘lt’s many a
day since I prayed though, I’m sorry to say !’
•' If you believe that, you must believe that


you will be saved, Bow ; for it was to save
such as you and me He came upon earth to
die !’
‘ Can yon get me a drop of water, sir, I’m
a’most parched to death!’ Bow said eagerly,
after a few minutes’ silence.
‘ I’ll try,’ replied the sentinel; and, regard-
less of breaking his orders by leaving his
■prisoners, he ran down to the creek at the
bottom of the ridge and filled his canteen.
‘I do believe, sir! I do believe that Jesus
died for me*!’ Bow said, feebly, after laying
for a few minutes apparently asleep. ‘I do
believe it, else what ’ud He want to die for at
all!’
The poor fellow’s face beamed joyfully as
theblessed truth broke inupon bis understand-
ing; and he lay thinking over the comforting
discovery until the constable returned with
■the water.
‘ Here, take a drink, my poor fellow,’ the
■constable said, putting the water to Bow’s
Hp».
He drank eagerly of the cool, pure beverage.
‘ Give him a drink tool’ Bow whispered,
■pointing to Clayton, who lay a few feet off.
The constable went to Clayton’s side, ■ and
found him in a swoon from loss of blood. ‘ He’s
dead, or fainting!’ he replied, returning to
Bow. ‘ There’s a man under the tree down
■there. I’ll go and see if he’s dry too, poorfel-
low. Ah, here comes Mr.Musgrave I’
In a few seconds the police magistrate was
among them,
‘l’ll send the man who’s down with poor Gre-
gory, to help you to carry the wounded men
to the house. Archer. He’ll be here directly.
Take them as gently as you can; and take the
must desperately wounded first,’ ho said, hur-
riedly springing from his horse to examine
them.
‘ls Bertha. Is Miss Shelley, safe.?’ Percy
asked eagerly.
‘ Yes, yes; Here my man., take this poor
fellow first ; for he may .recover, though he has
but a slender chance. Mr. Clayton appears
dead now.’
In an out-house—for the house itself, ex-
cepting the room where Darby and Hal. had
fallen, was nothing but a heap of burning wreck
—sat Mrs. Shelley, Bertha, and Jerry by the
side of a rough, wooden’ bench, upon which
Mr. Sbe'ley, lay.
‘ Are you much hurt, Walter V the anxious
wife asked, in a faltering voice.
‘ No, Grace; it’s a mere nothing. I shall
be alt right in the morning. Don’t distress
yourself on my account, my darting.’
‘But are yon really so little hurt as you
yon say, papa ! You could scarcely walk into
the shed.”
‘ At the worst, Bertha, it is only a sprain.’
‘ But, papa, how did you escape from the
house! Did good, brave Jerry help you?’
Bertha asked, glancing enquiringly at the
black boy, who grinned with pride and plea-
sure till every gleaming tooth appeared in
full view.
* Yes, darling! Jerry cut the thongs that
bound me ; and we were going to your rescue ;
when 1 sprained my ankle in jumping over a
log, and lay there till Mr, Musgrave found me.
I could hear the shots exchange between your
captors and the police ; and It was bard to
lay there inactive while the struggle was go-
ing on ; and your rescuers perhaps in need of
help. I was angry with Jerry for not going
on ; but he wonld’nt leave me.’ .
* What for dat me go along dare; and
’nother bushranger come and kill him, Misser
Selley ? Dat can’t fight on him ground !’ ex-
claimed Jerry, exculpating himself, excitedly,
‘ Faithful fellow 1 He was afraid you would
be exposed to danger, if you were left alone,
when helpless through the accident I’ said
Mrs. .Shelley, looking with tears in her eyes
upon the glossy black face of the boy. '
‘ Where’s Anne and Marion! inquired Mr.
Shelley, abruptly. ,
‘ They, are seeing if they can do any-
thing for the wounded bushrangers, papa.
Isn’t Anne brave! Marion was frightened.;
but Anne coaxed her; and they have gone
round at the back of the house where Darby
lies, the man Jerry cut down J’ Said Bertha.
‘ Here day come now, Missie Berta!’ broke
in Jerry, putting his head out of the window
to reconnoitre.
* Well, Anne, any of the rascals alive V
‘ Yes, sir 1 The one that Jerry chopped with
bis tomahawk. The others, poor fellows, are
dead !’ Anne Egerton replied in a tone of


sympathy. ‘ The wounded man is conscious,
and asks for a clergyman.’
* Here comes Mr. Musgrave. A magistrate
will suit him better than a priest!’ replied
Mr. Shelley, vindiotivelv.
* They are carrying some one, papa 1 Some
one else has been killed in this terrible fray !’
‘ Nonsense, my child ! It’s only one of the
rascally bushrangers; and shooting them is
conferring a benefit upon society!’ said Mr.
Shelley with energy, forgetting for the mo-
ment bis pain in exulting over the probable
death of another of the wretches, whose de-
predations had cost him so dear; and, but for
the timely appearance of the police, had cost
him and his all they had in the world. ‘ Any
more of the knaves knocked on the head,
Musgrave ?’ he asked eagerly, as the police
magistrate entered the shed.
‘ Yes; and what’s worse, Mr. Clayton is
desparately, perhaps fatally wounded,’ he
replied moodily. He had no great friendship
for tbe handsome, sneering and talkative “ vo-
lunteer,” who had been so eager to take partin
the struggle with tbe bushrangers ; on the con-
trary he cordially detested him ; but he felt
jealous of the outlaws’having the satisfaction
of wounding any of bis party.
‘ Mr. Clayton wounded T Anne asked anxi-
ously, her large sympathetic eyes swimming in
tears, ‘ Where is he 1 let me go to him/
‘ He’s up the mountain yet.’
‘Up the mountain, sir 1 Who are they
carrying this way, then 1’ Anne asked
eagerly.
‘A bushranger named Bow. He is the
man who was temporary jailor in Maitland,
and escaped with Sinclair to the bush.’
‘ Is Percy with him I Oh, tell me, is he
safe, or have you killed him tool’ cried
Bertha, in an agony of dread anticipation.
* Percy 1 That’s the man Sinclair : isn’t it ?’
‘ Yes, yea ! is ho safe f’
*Heis up the ridge in custody. I believe
he is unhurt. It was the man Bow who
wounded Clayton,’ replied Mr. Musgrave.
4 Oh, papa, may I go to him V Bertha
begged earnestly.
‘ Certainly not, my child ! His presence
here proves —Yet no, 1 can’t believe
iiusgrave, or how came he here" He was act
with the gang when they were attaching nsT
‘No! He came galloping over the ridge
after we bad engaged with the other bush-
rangers.’
‘ Then,’ said Anne and Mrs. Shelley in a
breath, “ He and Bow were coming to our
help I’ and Mrs. Shelley continued, ‘ Bring
him down here, Mr. Musgrave, We owe too
heavy a-.debt of gratitude to him for us to al-
low hinAo be kept out in the bush cold and
hungry, especially when he is certain to have
risked capture himself is coming to protect ua
against the bushrangers!’
Where is Anne 1
‘ There she is running up the hill as swift
as a kangaroo I’ said the police magistrate
pointing to the retreating figure of tbe brave
girl, who was hastening to tbe side of him,,
whom she had loved so long and so well, and
who so little deserved even her respect.
Bow’s bearers brought him to the door of the-
shed,- and Mr. Musgrave beckoned to them to-
bring him in.’ As they entered, the group in
the shed stood around the rough makeshift
stretcher in deep sympathy. ‘ Is your name
Bow I* thundered Mr. Shelley from the bench
on which he was reclining.
* I don't know, Sir, whether it’s my name.
Anyhow, that’s what everybody calls me 1*
replied Bow sturdily, not in the least discon-
certed by Mr. Shelley’s abruptness.
‘ And you’re oue of the wretches who came
here to rob and pillage.'
1 It’s a He !’
‘What is a He, my poor fellow f said the po-
lice magistrate, smiling at Biow’s blunt repu-
diation of tbe charge.
“ That we came here to rob Mr, Shelley.
Me and Mr. Sinclair’s been riding all night to
get here in time to .” But the poor fel-
low’s strength failed him, and his concluding
words were too low to be beard. He was very
weak from loss of blood; and the energy
which Mr. Shelley’s imputation evoked, caused
the blood to gush with fresh violence from his
wounds.
‘ Poor Bow ! Toil have met this terrible
fate through being so faithful to Percy ; and II
can never forget you 1’ said Bertha, soothing-
ly, wiping the cold perspiration from his
forehead. He seized her hand, and kissed it
fervently, saying in a low but distinct tone ‘I


knowed it must be you—the young lady, Mr.
Sinclair was so fond of. No one else could be
so sweet and beautiful.’
Bertha’s tears, that had been gathering
slowly, began to flow freely; and she turned
away with a heavy heart—Percy a prisoner
again, and Bow, his humble and faithful com-
panion, dying before her.
* Brandy !’ Bow whispered.
The Police Magistrate put his own pocket
flask to the dying convict’s lips, and the poor
fellow eagerly swallowed a few mouthfuls.
Much revived, he looked anxiously at Mr.
Musgrave. ‘You’re a magistrate, Sir, Will
anything I tell you now I’m dying be believed 1’
he asked eagerly.
‘ Your dying declaration will hold good in a
court of law, if tnat is what you mean. Bow.’
replied Mr. Musgrave, kindly.
‘Papa, I’m going to see Mr. Sinclair.
Jerry will go with me,’ interrupted Bertha.
‘ No, ray child, you must not go !’ returned
her father, firmly.
‘ But, papa, I will go! Shall Ibe ashamed
to speak to my preserver, because he is in
irons, especially when 1 remember the double
cause of his being where he is !’ she exclaimed,
her beautiful eyes flashing with scorn and
recklessness. •
‘ God forbid that we should • forget what he
has done and suffered for you ! It’s not that
that I mean. But ’
‘ But I will see him, papa! He is more
than all the world to me; for is he not now
a prisoner solely through me 1 No, I will go
to him 1’
‘One moment, Miss Shelley,’ interrupted
the Police Magistrate, who, pencil and pocket-
book in hand, was preparing to take down
Bow’s dying declaration. ‘ I will send for the
prisoner, and you may see him here.’
CHAPTEK XL.
“All the world’s stage!” In life or fiction,
Reality or fancy on they'come
Those puppet actors- flagrant contradiction
’Tis to the worn fable, “man’s freewill.” There’s
some
TVould punish as a serious dereliction
The seeming errors of each puppet dumb—
The creature of the heated-brains affliction—
Or of the boasting mortals, who at best
Are but the passive tools of fate, and rest
Their mighty deeds and small on it; and so
A» actors only, do they come and go, A NON.
The day, that had been ushered in by deeds-
of blood and violence, had passed away, and
the principal actors in the terrible tragedy
were seated in the only room the fire had left
in the late goodly house of Field Place.
The Police Magistrate sat moodily writing at
the table a long report to the Governor, of the
proceedings of the last eight and forty hours ;
and on a rough, bush sofa Hubert Clayton was
lying, the cold dews of death on his clammy
brow; the last moments of bis misspent life
passing swiftly through the frail measure of
his days. Bow and'Darby, the weak tools of
his vile and cowardly revenge, were both dead,
each having, by hisdyingdeclaration, established
Percy’s innocence, and.the double-dyed guilt
of the miserable wretch now dying so hard—
breathing his last with all his sins upon his
dishonored head, ready to sink him beyond all
hope of succour in the “ slough of despond,”
to cast him into the pitfall of eternal destruc-
tion, that lies in the dim valley of the shadow
of death. Anne sat by the traitor’s side,
gently wiping the chill beads from bis
aching brow, and tenderly striving to soothe
his Ipain. The Police Magistrate had tried
hard to persuade him either to deny the
charges the dead bushrangers had preferred
against him in their dying declarations, or to
confess everything'; but he had sullenly re-
fused to do either, and to Anne’s urgent appeal
to tell her all, he had obstinately refused.
He would not by so much as one
word, so deep even in death, was his unreason-
ing bate, say aught to hasten the period of
Percy Sinclair’s misery. His vengeance
should follow his victim, even beyond the
grave. Anne sat beside him, her gentle
heart sorely pained. But for the un-
fathomable devotion of a woman’s love, she
must have recoiled from him with horror ; for
now his fiendish and unnatural treatment of
her cousin was revealed in all its revolting re-
ality. But love and womanly tenderness and
pity prevailed over her natural horror at his
crimes, and she tended him as anxiously as if
he deserved her care.
Bertha was sitting in the further corner of
the room, her head nestled in her mother’s
breast, and her thoughts away in the
dark, cold cell, where he, she now


Joved so dearly, lay a piisoner, awaiting trial
for breaking gaol, and turning bushranger.
.Bitterly she reproached blind fate in her im-
patient wilfulness, for the hard and protracted
trials heaped upon her young life. Around
her all, all but she and these she loved, seemed
to live beneath the smile of heaven; and hard
and rebellions thoughts thronged her aching
brain. ‘ Mr. Musgrave,’ she asked suddenly,
after a long pause, during which nothing broke
the painful silence but the scratch of the police
magistrate’s pen, ‘ What good can come of
the dying words of poor Bow and the other
bushranger? Will the Governor be sure, posi-
tively sare, to pardon Mr. Sinclair?’
‘ I cannot say, Miss Shelley 1 His Innocence
of the crime for which he was transported has
been proved, but, guilty or not guilty,! in the
first place, he had no right to break from jail
and harbour with bushrangers !’
A. bitter smile flitted across Clayton’s palid
features.
‘ No ! he ought to have stopped in jail and
got hung first; and trusted to bis generous
country to do him justice afterwards J said
Mr. Shelley, contemptuously,
‘ Nevertheless I think the Governor will,
all things considered, grant him free pardon
immediately on everything being explained,’
continued Mr. Musgrave, not noticing Mr.
Shelley’s bitter sneer.
‘ Bale dat any more string him up!’ ex-
claimed Jerry, from the hearth-rug, which he
was sharing with one of the cattle-dogs.
Mr. Shelley was in no mood to look favor-
ably upon anything or anybody, so severe was
the pain in bis sprained ankle, and consequent-
ly he differed from Mr, Musgrave in shee:
ill humour ; and an animated discussion upon
Percy’s prospects, and the probable action of
the Governor followed, during which Bertha
stole off to bed to dream of the blight future
before her, if the Governor would only pardon
him. ‘ I will go to Sydney and ask him V
she thought naively, as she passed. from the
room to the outhouse that had been prepared
as a bedroom for her. Half an hour later, a
terrible scene ensued in the room she bad left.
Terrible at all limes is a death bed scene, hut
how much more so, when there is remorse
without repentance, terror deep, and hopeless
Strong is the instinct of life, and strongest
in those least prepared to die. Clayton’s lust
hour had come; and strong was the struggle
before the dark spirit left its wiithing frame.
Suddenly raising bimselfupon his elbow, a look
of wild terror in bis eye, he begged that a
doctor might be sent for at once. ‘ Quick,
quick, or you will be too late I’ be almost
shrieked, as the dread reality of his position
flashed vividiy upon his imagination. Till
the cold band of death was laid unmistakably
upon him be bad refused to believe his end so
near.
Mr. Musgrave hurried to his side; and
Anne Egerton, her tears falling thickly upon
the dying wretch’s face, as she leaned in love’s
solicitude over him, strove to soothe him, by
the divine truths, that had been poweiful to
smoothe the rough path of death for poor,
faithful, trusting, misguided Bow. ‘ Stop,
stop, Anne 1 There’s no time to talk of heaven
to me now ! Get a doctor, or I shall die at'
once 1 Oh ray God, I cannot, will not die !’
‘Hush, Clayton!’ said Mr. Musgrave rever-
ently, shocked at the helpless horror of the
terrified man, ‘ Don’t talk so 1 If it is God’s
will, that you die, it is madness to oppose if
Try and listen to Miss Egerton. As she tells
you, it is never too late to repent. Strive
hard to make your peace with your Maker ;
for your time is shoit !’
‘ Make my peace with the God I have in-
sulted, ridiculed, and-.outraged ? No, no]
Now it is His turn for revenge ; and He’ll
not let it slip. No, no 1 Get a doctor, can’t
you ! . It’s my only chance 1 I cannot 1 1 dare
not die !’
But we will throw-a veil over the last, ter-
rible scene in Hubert Clayton’s dark career.'
Half an hour’s frantic raving, and the excited
frame was still, the burning, throbbing brain,
cooled by the damp hand of death.
A week after the burial of Hubert Clayton,
and Bow and Darby —the two weak tools of
his malipe—the Police Magistrate returned
from Sydney with 3 free pardon for Percy
Sinclair ; and by the same vessel in which
Mr. Musgrave returned came a visitor for Field
Place, who was little expected.
‘ Cap you oblige me by telling me where I
can hire a horse V asked a voice at
Mr. Musgrave’s side, as he was step-
ping off the landing-stage at New


castle. He turned round, and found a
singularly prepossessing young man at his
elbow. “'That depends upon how long you
will require.it. You may get a horse at any
of the public-houses for a ride about the settle
ment; but for a ride up the country is another
thing.”
* I’m going to Field Place!’ returned the
young man, smiling, ‘ And, if my memory
serves me faithfully, I believe I have met you
there before.’
‘ Indeed, Sir ! You have a decided advan-
tage over me then ; for I cannot recollect your
features!’ replied Mr. Musgrave, doubtfully.
‘ Perhaps not, for I have allowed ray beard
to grow ; and that alone is sometimes sufficient
disguise to baffle a detective. You do not
remember Mr. BAadrick, then, vvho stayed on
a short visit with Mr. Shelley some time ago V
‘Yes, yes! I recollect now! lam going
up there directly. I can get you one of the
police horses, if you like to ride with me !’
‘ I have business with a friend whom I hear
is somewhere about the Lake. Do you know
where a squatter named Keough lives —
“ Hungry Jack,” they call him.
‘Away near Brisbane Water, I think.’
‘ One of his men —a college friend of mine,
poor fellow —is dying; and I must see him
first; so that I shall not be able to visit Field
Place for a couple of days. Can you get me
a horse to ride south upon V
‘ Serjeant Maloney starts this evening over-
land, for Broken Bay. Your best plain is to
ride with him. Come along, and I’ll get you
a horse.’
An hour later the stranger was travelling
with the constable across country towards the
broken and mountainous land between 'the
Hunter and Hawkesbury rivers, and Mr.
Mnsgrave was hurrying to Field Place with
the welcome and expected documents. He
reached the farm, his horse specked with
foam, and panting with exertion } and he de-
cided to stay until the morning before pro-
ceeding to the jail to give the unhappy priso-
ner the joyful news that he was free, Bertha
urged him to lose no time, but to press on at
once; but Mr. Musgrava being a very poor
sailor, had had a severe attack of sea-sickness,
and felt too ill to ride further.
‘How exceeding vexatious!’ the fair girl
exclaimed pettishly, 4 and papal's ankle too; ie
too bad for him to ride. Ha I—yes, I will,
papa !’
‘Well, lovel’ Mr. Shelley replied, wonder-
ing what her quick, disjointed sentences could
mean. ■
‘Jerry and I will go to Maitland at once,
and take these papers.—Go and saddle the
horses, Jerry.—The warder always lets us see
Percy now without question.' '
Jerry, who had just appeared on the thres-
hold with a broad grin tomahawk in hand,
disappeared in a second, before Mr. Shelley
could countermand the order.
‘ But, my dear child, it is so late now ; it
will be dark before you could- reach the
jail.’
4 Never mind, mamma! We can ride home
by moonlight! Oh. that will be glorious!
Many a sad, weary day has passed since we
last had a moonlight ride together !’ she re-
plied, laughing and clapping her hands hys-
terically,
4 But ’
4 1 can manage it, Shelley 1 Give these
papers to Mr. Bartell first, Bertha, before you
go to the jail ; and all will go right!’ said the
police magistrate, writing a pencil note at the
bottom of one, and handing them to her.
Full of delightful anticipations Bertha started
on her mission Through the black cloud of
trouble, thatlhad so long shrouded hera rift had
burst, and the bright sunshine of hope fell in
golden showers upon her gentle heart; and a
contentment and joy, she had not known for
many sad, eventful days, took possession of
her soul. >,
‘ You murry much glad, Missie Berta f
asked Jerry, struck by the unusual sparkle of
her eyes, and the sweet expression of happi-
ness upon her features. -
4 Glad Jerry ! Why are we not going to set
him free! Is that not happiness enough to last
a life time!’
They reached Maitland without mishap,
and found Mr- Bartell at home.
4 All correct, my dear !’ he said after look-
ing carefully through the papers. 4 We will
go at once. 1 see you are anxious J’ ■
‘ Ob, 1 am so anxious to sea him free again.
He has saved my life so often, that I am so
grateful!’ V


Mr. Bartell smiled. ‘ Something more than
simple gratitude, I should say !’ he thought,
as ho watched the bright, eager features of bis
visitor, •
‘ Dare dat Misser Bair, Missie Berta !’ said
Jerry, pointing to a horseman crossing the
road.
4 Boor fellow [ The loss of his wife was a
terrible bereavement! Dr. Sloan believed it
was an attack of heart disease brought on by
fright that killed bet !’ said Mr. Bartell
thoughtfully.
Bertha shuddered. The allusion to the
death of Mrs. Blair revived the horror of that
terrible day, and she felt sick and faint,
Mr. Bartell noticed the effect of his words,
and hastened to change the subject. “ Come
along : I will go with you : Jerry can mind
the horses.’
Passing the trembling girl’s arm through
his own, Mr. Bartell lead the way to the
jail, which stood a short distance down the
road. He tried to lead her to enter into con*
versation, but the sight of the dark building
in which Percy lay a prisoner, and the
blissful thought that she herself was convey,
ing to him the joyful intelligence of his pardon,
made her oblivious of all other considerations,
1 Dat Misser Qartle link it me stop along
horses ! Dat murry bjg fool altogether 1 Jerry
atop belongin to Missie Berta!” and fob
lowing at a safe distance, the faithful black
boy was not far of! when his young mistiess
entered the prison yard.
At the door of the cell, Mr. Bartell drew
back, “You need no assistance, I persurae,
Miss Shelley, in telling young Sinclair of bis
good fortune in being a free man once more,’
he said, gently throwing back the door, and
motioning hrr in.
The excitement, that had buoyed her up
during the ride to Maitland now failed her, as
she was about to enter the cold, dismal place
of bis confinement; and she felt sick and dizzy.
Strong emotion whether of grief or joy, has a
strangely paralysing efiect. She felt that »he
was fainting ; but by a strong rflort
overcame the sensation of weakness, and step-
ped into the dark room. Percy was sitting
with bis back to the iron-ribbed door, busy
writing letters (his last, he bitterly thought),
(o the dear ones at home. For a few seconds
Bertha stood motionless, gazing wistfully up.
on the loved form of her preserver.
Hearing the door open, and believing it to
be the jailor approaching, be did not look
round, but continued bis melancholy task.
4 Percy !’
He was on his feet in a moment. ‘My darl.
ing ! I knew you would come and see me
again, before 1 go !’ he exclaimed, folding her
to his breast; 4 I could not have died without
seeing you again !,’
She burst into a flood of happy tears.
4 Percy, Ob, I have such good news for you 1
You have been forgiven by the Governor ;
and are free again,’
4 Forgiven, Bertha ?’ he said incredulously
“1 broke from jail, when he pardoned me be.
fore. He would hardly betlikely to do so
again.’
4 I have kept the secret from you, Percy,
because I was afraid to raise hopes, that
might be dashed to the ground 1’
4 What secret, darling V he asked anxiously,
wondering what her strange words might
mean.
4 It was hard to keep the secret, Percy,
when vou seemed so low-spirited ; but 1 did ;
and I made Mr. Bartell guard it from you,
too 1 But there’s no need to keep it longer.
The Governor says you are really free now.
His pardon removes the stain of having been
a convict!’ she said, with the air of one who
was disclosing an important state secret.
(What affair of state could equal in her eyes
the grand secret she had the happiness to
break to him.)
' The governor’s pardon remove the stain of
my having been a convict? It is impossible !
He may tree me from this prison ; but not
from penal servitude ! No, it is madness to
expect that, Miss Bertha J’ he said coldly, hi*
old reserve coming back as the recollection of
their relative positions forced itself upon his
memory, 44 1 am a convict; and, bard as it is
to realize it,-X must remain so !’
4 Ah, hut you are not a convict now ! See !
a full pardon and permission to go to England,
or anywhere else you like 1 You are really
free, for Bow and Dary Gregson confeseed that
you were innocent of whatyou was transported
for !’
He took the documents, she handed to him.


in silence, and glanced rapidly through them.
‘ Thank God!’ he ejaculated when their joy-
ful significance struck him.
* And that cruel, wicked, Mr. Clayton was
the cause of all your trouble 1 Can you ever
forgive him f
‘ Yes, and bless him for his villainy ; for but
for him should I ever have known you,my darl-
ing ! Free, I am your equal, and may say now
what I have had a hard struggle to keep from
saying before. Bertha, I love yon better than
my own life ! May I hope to win the brightest
treasure this earth has to give—your gentle
heart!’
Her answer was in too low a tone for us to
hear,, but that it was satisfactory to the
gentleman it was intended for, the long and
ardent embrace it occasioned was ample
proof.
‘ And you will marry me, and go with me
back so merry England! Ah, darling, little
did I dream when I was torn from my. home,
an exile for life, that I should return again so
soon, and be so well compensated by heaven
for all my misery.’
The course of true love does not always run
smooth, and troubled indeed had been Its
stream in the instance of the pair, swearing
their troth in the dark prison cell; but a
change bad now eorae over the spirit of their
dream (what is life at the best but a fitful,
excited dream), and calmly now it promises to
glide on, till the happy pilgrims hand in hand
leach the blessed portals of heaven,
conclusion.
A week later and Mr. Broadrick was
standing on the makeshift wharf, in conversa-
tion with a friend. He had just returned
from his visit to his college-ohum, whose last
moments be had been in time to soothe; and
be was now making arrangements with his
friend, Captain Roche, in whose brig he in-
tended to sail for Europe shortly, to attend to
soma business of his, while he took a run up
to Field Place.
‘ By the way, Roche, keep me two state
rooms ! It is just possible I may not return
alone!’
* Ha, ha! Going to find an Australian
lily and transplant it to the old country,
eh,’ asked the sailor, noticing tbe abruptness
of his friend's manner, and guessing its cause.
'Holloa, we must step back and make room.
Here comes quite a procession !’
The young man cast a rapid glance in the
direction indicated.
‘ The Shelleys 1’ he said, in surprise.’ ‘And
who is that gentleman upon whose arm Mias
Shelley is leaning ?’
* Mr, Sinclair! Haven’t you heard the
news, Broadrick 1 It’s quite a chapter of
romance in real life. After saving the
young lady’s life half a dozen times,
and winning her heart to boot, he turns out by
the confession of a couple of dying scoundrels,
to be an innocent man in disguise; and that
fact being known gets a free pardon, and the
heroine of half-a-dozen adventures at the same
time. They are off to be married in Sydney,
and will go back to England in ray trim little
brig. Why, man, what the devil is the mat-
ter with you T
* Nothing, nothing! only that I shan’t go
home with yon this trip!’ and he added uuder
his breath, ‘ And I would have made her a
countess!’
‘ Hem! a love aflair !’ said the sailor to
himself, regarding his friend with an amused
smile. ‘ Well, I’d better leave the coast clear,
and walk off.’
Mr. Broadrick did not hear the remark, nor
observe the retreat of his friend, so intently
was he engaged in watching the approaching
party.
‘You are late, sir, but we’ve a boat here to
put you off to the ship in !’ said the first
of the little steamer lying in the stream, toMr.
Shelley, as the party stepped upon the wharf.
Not one of them recognised Mr. Broadrick, as
he stood back keenly watching them; and his
features grew pale as he observed the maiden,
whose image had never left his heart, leaning 1
upon a rival’s arm, and gazing with looks of
trusting love into his face.
‘ And, oh Percy, to think that Anne should
have had aletterfrom Mr.Darrellalmostdirectly
that wicked Mr. Clayton died. Do you think
she will marry him now, after his waiting for
so long V Bertha said in her musical voice,
while the lovers stood for a few seconds lean -
ing against a pile of timber waiting for the
boat. Little dreampt tbe fair girl how the
strange man who stood a few paces off, his hat


shoved down over his eyes to hide his face
from her view, drunk in her rippling accents
with greedy ears, and gazed wistfully upon
the beautiful form that could never now be his.
‘ Let us hope so, Berdie! The base object
of her unreasoning love is dead ; and now her
strange infatuation should be broken. I fancy
she will grow to love George 1 He is the
dearest fellow, and the truest friend I ever
bad 1’
* And Marion too! Just fancy, her inno-
cence being proved the very day after yours 1
Well, I hope she will find her true-love as
faithful as Mr. Darrell has been!’
‘ Now gentlemen, this way please!’
The party entered the boat and were soon
comfortably settled aboard the little steamer,
which no sooner received her late passengers
than she steamed out to sea. Long and wist-
fully did the young nobleman watch the les-
sening form of the vessel, and not before the
dull outline of Nobby’s intercepted the view
did he turn sorrowfully away from the spot.
There remains little more to narrate. A
week later the late convict and bushranger
led to the altar the beautiful * lily of the
Hunter,’ and after the ceremony, which was
performed in the old Church of Saint James,
embarked with her, and the gentle Anne, in
Captain Roche’s little brig the Dancing Wave.
After a splendid run of one bundled days
they reached the white cliffs of Old England,
and a few hours after Percy, presented to
his surprised and delighted parents their new
daughter, whom he had gone so far, and
suffered so much to win. The news of Percy’s
pardon only reached England by the same
vessel as himself, and consequently the sur-
prise was as great as it was joyful.
After a few months Mr. Darrell’s patient
devotion was rewarded by the hand of the kind-
est, gentlest, fairest girl in all England ; and'
Anne became the happy wife of one fitted i&
every way to make her so.
THE END.
