



BIANCA CAPELLO
A tragedy
BY
G. W. L. MARSHALL-HALL.
[all rights reserved.]
MELBOURNE:
McCARRON, BIRD & CO., Printers, 479 Collins Street.
1906.


Bianca CAPELLO
A tragedy
BY
G. W. L. MARSHALL-HALL.
[all rights reserved.]
MELBOURNE:
McCARRON, BIRD & CO., Printers, 479 Collins Street.
1906.




Persons of the Drama:
The Duke of Florence.
Cardinal - Brother, and heir to the Duke.
Leantio - - - - Husband of Bianca Capello, and
favourite of the Duke.
Fabricio - - - A nobleman.
Bianca Capello - - A Venetivm lady, wife of Leantio;
afterwards Duchess of Florence.
Nurse - Servant of Bianca.
Usher; Captain; Servants; Soldiers; Citizens; Quests;
Musicians; Dancers; &c.
The Scene is laid in Florence in Act I. and II.;
in Act 111. at Careggi.
Period : 16th Century.




ACT I.
SCENE I. —An apartment in the Palazzo of Leantio. On the
wall a portrait of Bianca.
Enter Leantio.
Leantio. Ho, there!—attendance!
Enter Servant.
To St. Mark’s; and tell
My lord Cardinal I shall attend him there.
[Exit Servant.
(Leantio paces agitatedly up and down.)
No other way but to go on, from lie
To slippery lie, even to the stumbling-point;—
Or kneeing the Duke unbosom me of all:
Ay! but I fear that all too much for pardon,
Seeing that pardon, though it cloak up the wrong,
Leaves naked still my gain, his injury.
Hath a lie life, that it can move, and breed,
And multiply? No means to make it die?
Easier hind up quick waterdrops, or put
A chain about the beams the sun lets fall! . . .
{Approaches and gazes at picture on the wall.)
Bianca! . . . O that her beauty, my sole plea,
Is my deep condemnation ! I must think
That if but Art’s imperfect counterfeit
Could stir the Duke to such an ecstasy
Of adoration, as of a shrined saint,
How would it be, knew he my false play?—His subject,
Fortuned by him ; his friend, beloved by him :
That yet, —O fortune! friendship ! gamed away
My all of honour for this trinket bliss.
Why! if he could forget those perjuries
That reft him of so worshipped a bride,
He never could the affront of her being mine.
And Bianca:
The leash that checks her, chafes her; glued to this
Her crooked use unbared annuls me quite.


It must not be! —and yet—l see not the end—
O to be shuttlecock ’twixt doubt and fear!
Enter Bianca.
Bianca!
Bianca, (coldly) What is ’t, my lord?
Leantio. So little kind!
(She shrugs her shoulders.)
My queen of swans!
Bianca, (pettishly) Yours! —no queen—nor yet no swan,
Or ’twould have spread its sails, and long ago
Forgot to hate this petty pool tis anchored to.
Leantio. The wished for, being had, ’s yet less than wished;
Wishing being less, the having is the more;
Then let your fancy flit with curtal wing.
Bianca. So you intend to keep your liberty
Giving mine check? At your sweet will frequent
The town, the Court, and make your bachelor-sport,
While I’m content to home-keep for you ?
Leantio. Patience!
Bianca. Oh! patience! ’tis the fool’s privilege.
Leantio. Well, well!
Bianca. Why am I barred up from all company? —
Denied to set foot in the street?—to look,
Speak, hear, —as though each simple natural act
Were freighted with some tragic consequence ?
Leantio. Why! so it were, if the Duke reached our marriage.
Bianca. Well to him together, and I’ll find a tongue
Shall charm away all memory of offence.
Leantio. Madness! —You know him not; —would you de-
stroy us?
Bianca. Aye! better so, than ever to be sprited
By this hobgoblin fear.
Leantio. Hear me, Bianca:
Thou knowest how precariously I sail,
How close upon the reef—
Bianca. I nothing know
But what you choose me to.
Leantio. I’m at that point
When one tack more will bring me safely through,
Or wreck me quite.
Bianca, (turns away) Pshaw!
Leantio. Content the© then,
This fasting to-day runs to your feasting morrow.
Bianca. Oh!
Enter Servant.


Servant. Sir, the lord Cardinal waits.
Leantio. Directly.
[Exit Servant.
Let me not from thee thus.—One word!—Bianca!—
(She turns her hack on him, he hesitates, makes a
gesture of despair, and goes.)
SCENE II.
Bianca. Why, to this prison, and to this my gaoler,
My father was a gipsy, a free tent
My convent-home. He trusts me not, and yet
Would have my trust. Why mutters he in ’s sleep?
And starts, and checks ? Sometimes upon his quiet
I unobserved have stolen, and seen him pace
Distracted to and fro, and bite his lip,
And curse between his teeth. Then at my sight
Smooth his rough looks, and coo of love—Pshaw!
I doubt there’s more behind I’m not to see, —
But will yet, if my wit be woman-born.
Could every maid change eyes with every wife,
There’s many a wife that would be still a maid.
And so would I: the worst of my then ill,
Bedded, by this were too much happiness! (Weeps.)
Enter Nurse.
Nurse. My pretty one —weeping again?—come, come.
Nay, if thou must, why I must make one too.
(Weeps, Bianca embraces her.)
There, there. I’m an old fool.
(Trumpets without.)
Bianca. What’s that?
Nurse. The Duke
Goes in procession with the States of Florence
To St. Mark’s Church—it will be a brave sight —
And my lord Cardinal with him.
Bianca. Nurse! sweet Nurse!
Nurse. You tickle-brain!
Bianca. Nurse, there’s a project here;—
Nurse. ’Twill out, I see.
Bianca. We’ll to the square, and mix
Unseen with all the seers. Well wear our veils.
Nurse. A thought indeed !
Bianca, (coaxingly) Nay, Nurse, but why not?


Nurse. ’Twill anger m’lord.
Bianca. Not if he knows not of it.
Nurse. I dare not.
Bianca. We’ll be scarce an hour away.
Nurse. No, no.
Bianca. O once again to be from hence!
Nurse. Have patience.
Bianca, (angry) Patience?—’tis the second time,
The second? nay, the hundred millionth time
I hear that sick-cat word. I’ll not have patience
(stamping).
Go you, or stay, Nurse; lam for the Square.
(She rapidly veils herself.)
Nurse, (helping her mistress) O deary, deary! What will
come of this?
My old head after th’ young one! —Dear, O dear!
(Curtain falls as they go out.)
SCENE III.
The Grand Square in Florence. A procession with banners
passes through.
Crowd. Huzza! Huzza! See where they come! —Where?
Where?
They round the corner now; —There’s the lord
Cardinal!
A gallant troop —a splendid cavalcade !
Huzza! —huzza for the lord Cardinal !
(Nurse and Bianca press through the crowd .)
Nurse. Come back, —come back; there’s the lord Cardinal.
Bianca. Aye! and my husband, —sucking in his poison—
I wonder what they say.
Nurse. We shall be seen.
{They retire.)
Card. Ah?—she grows restive? —That’s not good. Did you
In every point fulfil my dispositions?
Leantio. I did, my lord.
Card. She’s safely housed to-day?
Leantio. Quite safe.
Card. Thou’rt sure of her?
Leantio. Most certain-sure.


Card. The Duke goes hence to-morrow. I’ll provide
For you elsewhere employment on some matter
Of weight.
Leantio. I thank your Eminence.
Card. Look to her :
The devil is no match for woman’s cunning;
I’ll see thou art no loser.
(Leantio hows and ivithdraws.)
A weak tool!
Her beauty blunts his edge: —There lies the danger.
The morrow must not out ere the sea build
Betwixt the Duke and her fair-devil face.
[Exit.
Crowd. Way for the Duke ! make place, make place; Huzza!
Long live our noble Duke! Florence for ever !
Enter Duke. (Nurse and Bianca press forward again.)
Nurse. Is’t not a gallant gentleman, our Duke,
I warrant you,—and handsome ? Only see!
Bianca. I think he has a noble countenance,
And open.
{Just as the Duke turns in their direction, an
awkward movement hy one of the crowd
displaces Bianca’s veil. She quickly covers
herself, the Nurse alarmed drags her away.)
Ah ! —my veil—your pardon, Sir !
Duke. O most enchanting ! By St. Mark, I think
Angels of heaven cannot be more fair.
Nurse. We are undone! The Duke observes you. Quick!
Duke. (To Bianca, who withdraics with a curtsey.)
Your servant, lovely Lady ! —She is frighted,
Being unused to our more grosser fabric.
Did’st mark her, my Fabricio ?
Fabricio. Ay, my lord,
But for a moment only.
Duke. O, that moment
Knocks on my heart to claim admittance there.
Quick ! After them ! Without discovery
Find, who, where, whence, she is; and bring me word.
Bianca, (as they disappear, followed hy Fabricio.)
Why do you tremble ?—Dearest! all is well.
Nurse. O me! Come, come, come.


Bianca, (aside) What was it he said?
His voice is pleasant in my ears as music
Whose airy eloquence makes vanity
Of words,—Farewell sweet life, sweet air, sweet
dream, —
And brief as sweet, —I must to prison again!
[Exeunt.
Duke. Bid the procession on—it is my will
To dally here awhile.
(Procession moves on.) Enter Leantio.
Leantio. My dearest lord !
Duke. I think in Florence there are faces fair
As any in the world.
Leantio. Surely, your Highness.
Duke. Were’t not that lam vowed eternally
To one you know of, —to a fancy, a dream (fingering ■
locket)
I were sore tempted.
Leantio. But that scarce would please
My lord the Cardinal!
Duke. Why, my good brother
Has this one failing, in and out of season
He’d be worm-hunting f’ Holy Mother Church.
’Ud stuff me, city, dukedom, people, all
In her huge paunch. He means to outlive me,
And drive my dukedom to heaven for me; ha, ha!
He tells me as much t’ my face. I love him for it 1
Re-enter Fabricio.
Well, sirrah, your news?
(Fabricio makes an expressive movement.)
Leantio. Why do you smile ?
Duke. You have some secret?
Fabricio. Ah!
Duke. Well, speak, Leantio may hear.
Fabricio. Bid rather
Leantio answer—else he’ll dub me ferret.
Leantio. My understanding’s deaf.
Duke. Your mystery?
Fabricio. From here you may see where the lady lives.
Leantio. (astounded) My house ?—O death !
Duke. His deafness mends t
Her name?
Fabricio. Fair as her face, ’tis Bianca.
Leantio. Bianca!


Duke. Ha! have we run the fox to earth?
Nay, look not so abashed, man; ’tis no crime
To dote on a fair face. By heaven! I think
What little I could see, I ne’er saw fairer.
Leantio. I do protest—
Duke. Pooh ! We all must answer as much.
Leantio. My lord—
Duke. Not a word more.
Enter Cardinal.
Ho ! ho! good brother,
Some sport is toward thou must take part in too.
Leantio, we do invite ourselves
This very night to sup with thee, and after
We will beg leave to worship those fine stars
Whose momentary sparkle almost seemed
To change day into night. Come—no excuse.
Ha! ha! he is quite flustered. Come, Fabricio.
(Duke and Fabricio exeunt laughing.)
Leantio. The ghosts that vexed my dreams, now walk by day-
light.
Card. How came you by this sudden rub ?
Leantio. I know
No more than you, my lord.
Card. Well, I can guess:
This wife of yours, this guinea-hen, has fooled you:
Her woman’s curiosity has pecked
Quite through your foolish-soft authority.
She came to see, and was seen ; happily
Not known.
Leantio. It must have been so: I am lost!
Card. Piff ! Nothing’s lost, if you obey me better.
Leantio. How so?
Card. It is a point of honour with the Duke
His whims shall hold more than his stern’st resolves;
He’ll have his jest to-night at any cost.
Then there’s but one way out: This evening
Your lady keeps her chamber: and lock, lock, lock.
Ay, doubly, trebly, fourfold, bolt her in.
Leantio. And in her place?
Card. A substitute; ’tis simple.
Leantio. This puts me in confidence again.
Card. Beware!
You must be stone t’ her beauty and her tears,
For she’ll make use of both.
Leantio. I will, I will.


Card. Do: strong as tears and beauty of woman are,
Necessity is stronger.
Leantio. I’ll see to it.
[Exit.
Card. Each implement to its natural use: The Church
By the true alchemy of her sanctity
Converts such things from their inherent baseness.
This dolt—Leantio —what becomes of him
Not matters, this his marriage I set on,
Must hold. The follies of the Duke my brother
Would know no limit did I slack the curb.
And though I love him, I esteem him fitter
For a more private station. That high dignity
That sits so giddily on him, on me
Could not but show more awful-reverent.
(Curtain.)
SCENE IV.
An apartment in the Palace of Leantio. Bianca sits near
a large casement overlooking street. In her lap her needle-
work, she gazes before her, taking no notice of Leantio
when he enters. He looks at her hesitatingly, puts down
his sword, &e., takes a few steps, stops as if to speak,
makes another movement, hesitates, finally makes up
his mind.
Leantio. You are alone?
Bianca. Yes.
Leantio. Was not someone with you?
Bianca. No.
Leantio. Was not my lord Fabricio here?
Bianca. No.
Leantio. But you have made acquaintance ?
Bianca. No.
Leantio. Well, he’s seen, and knows, and speaks of you.
{She shrugs her shoulders.)
Why then, the inference: you have been out
To-day.
Bianca. Yes.
Leantio. Against my strict injunctions?
Bianca. Yes.


Leantio. ( harshly)
You brave me?
Bianca. (with sudden anger)
Is not your catechism ended yet?
Why should I lie to you?—Yes; I walked out:
What of it ? Do you think me a wild beast
T’ be caged up, and viewed at feeding-time?
Leantio. (with a gesture of despair)
The Duke has seen thee.
Bianca. Well? lam no' Gorgon
To freeze him into stone.
Leantio. He will sup here
To-night.
Bianca. (starts ) Ha! (aside) —Is it so? Then he shall have
A royal welcome.
Leantio. He must not see thee here.
Bianca. Why not?
Leantio. For many reasons of great potency.
Bianca. For reasons greater and more potent still
See me he shall.
Leantio. I will not have it so.
Bianca. Indeed?
Leantio. Beware!
Bianca. You threaten me?
Leantio. Fortune and life upon this thread I adventure.
Bianca, (retreating)
What d’you do?
Leantio. You must to your chamber, which
For this slight brief of time shall mure you in.
After, thou shalt be freer than the birds
That sail upon the uncontrolled waves.
Bianca, (as he advances)
You’ll dare to handle me?
Leantio. Force me not to it!
(She springs to the casement, pushing it open)
Bianca. Take but another step: I’ll make such stir
Shall bring all Florence, and the Duke himself.
Leantio. (aghast)
How ?—Art thou mad ?—Come down ; I was in jest.
I meant not that I spake.—O Bianca,
Doubt and despair are at such grievous work
In me, that I no longer can contain myself.
(Makes gesture of entreaty)
Bianca. No nearer! Though I fear thee not, —no nearer!


Leantio. Trust me!
Bianca, (aside) I trust you even as you trust me.
That’s little.—Believe me, Sir, some gentleness
Will do more with me than your loud intemperance:
I am the lady of this house, your wife;
No strumpet to be privately enjoyed,
And shamefully put by in company.
If there be cause for this your singularity
I have a right to know it.
Leantio. I see I’ve erred, to' be so private from you.
Bianca, (aside) Aye! wider than’s to think.
Leantio. Henceforth shalt he
Repository to my nearest concernments.
Bianca. Surely, my lord, some strangest accident
Has moved you so much from your gentleness?
Leantio. 0 ! I’ve been worser plagued than Pharaoh was,
And stand to founder in as angry a sea..
Bianca. Why ? What’s to. fear ? The most of your offence
Cannot have trod so hard upon the Duke’s
Good nature, but he’ll wince, and laugh it off.
Leantio. It is no laughing matter.
Bianca. Then if he rage,
We’ll kneel to him until his rage blow by.
Leantio. Your sight will blow his gale into a hurricane
Whose wanton vent will spring me overboard.
Bianca. I have but seen him once, and then methought
More kind and debonair a gentleman
Might never be. Why should he then pursue me,
A stranger, a woman, with such malevolence?
You do him wrong.
Leantio. (aside) True, I have done him wrong;
There, there’s the hazard.—Though you knew it not,
O many many times the Duke has seen thee,
O many many times held thee in converse—
Bianca. What, me?—the Duke? —It is not possible.
Leantio. Possible? Nay, credit me, ’tis certain.
Bianca. You make me wonder.
Leantio. There’s a history to' it
I’d fain have blotted. But the logic of time
Will not be contraried. The lesser ill
Yet fends a greater off. O you will learn,
When you have heard my strange eventful story,
What sheer necessity it is curtails
You your missed rights, which galls you so; and why
This visit of the Duke is full of peril;
What quicksands we are wavering on: nay, more, —


How by incurrence of these heaped up ills
I’ve shielded thee from others wilder yet,
Which, but for my preventive carefulness
Had clipped thine honour, smudged thy maiden fame,
And left thee an untitled castaway.
Bianca, (aside) There’s something bids me fear at what’s
approaching ;
For all that I will hear it, be as it may.
Leantio. The end of that’s to dread, which in beginning
Was so fantastical; listen, —t’ be brief, —
There came one day to the court a certain goldsmith,
The Duke being fond of th’ craft, and brought with
him
A locket of rare-curious workmanship,
Which yet not so much won th’ Duke’s admiration
As that which it concealed, a portraiture,
In which it seemed that Art and Nature! 'd striven
Each to outdo the other, so fair, so wondrous fair,
So beyond utterance fair, this soul of it was.
Bianca. But what, whose, was it?
Leantio. A woman’s face—unknown.
Bianca. Well, and what said the Duke to this much fairness ?
Leantio. He was as one bewitched. That day
tie ate, nor drank, nor slept not. Presently
He sends for me, being one deep in his counsels,
Bids me by any means, but there and then,
Seek out the original, and make compare.
For as his fantasy was sudden, strange,
And violent, so was he nice in tendering it,
And rather feared to lose his phantom-bliss,
Than hoped to find its earthly archetype.
Bianca, (aside) Methinks I dreamed long since of such a man.—
What did you ?
Leantio. I set out for Venice.
Bianca, (aside, staHled) Ah !
And found?
Leantio. Thee!
Bianca, (slowly rising, to herself) Me?—
Leantio. (not observing her) It was thy very image, and yet
not thee,
For thou wert O how much beyond all excellence
That skill may attain through endless years of toil.
Bianca. (agitated ) What next? —Be briefer.
Leantio. Partly thou canst guess.
I loved thee.


Bianca. So ? was’t so ?
Leantio. Yet not at first
Had any hope of thee.
Bianca, (aside) 0 villa,inons !
Leantio. Then came the Cardinal, who keeps all in ’s eye;
And strongly urged the interests of the State,
Of th’ Duke himself; forbade more prosecution
Of this strange passion; forced me to despatch
So formal a collection of chill phrases
As should disedge him quite.
Bianca, (aside) And thy blade had no edge to chill his
heart!
Leantio. ’Twas he, my wishes peeping through my diffidence,
First pushed my married thoughts toward thee;
Implying, by no other way than this
Thy precious cargo of honour might steer through
So dangerous besetting rocks and shoals:—
For in th© honourable way of love
His Greatness looked not on thee; nor thy innocence
Had ever known to shun his cunning lust.
Bianca, (aside) Devil!
Leantio. What there’s more’s to guess.
Bianca. And the Duke?
Leantio. Ha ! ha,!
He humorously swore 'twas like himself
To start to play fool amorous to a shadow;
Made a wry mouth, shrugged, laughed, —so passed
it off.
By this some newer whim engrosses him.
Bianca. Is’t really so ? (aside) Down thoughts: —like wing&d
shapes
Ye flutter o’er the abyss which was my heart. —
The Duke comes here to-night?
Leantio. Infallibly.
Bianca. And what if he should see the original ?
The body of his shadow?
Leantio. He will kill me !
Bianca. Ay, I think he will!
(Long pause.)
(Laughingly turning to Leantio) Why, then! I
will wear Fortunatus’ cap.
Leantio. Bianca!
Bianca. (aside) Oh !
Leantio. You must be invisible, —
There is no other way.


Bianca, (aside) No other way ?
But if the Duke send for me, as is like ?
Leantio. You shall appear by proxy.
Bianca. That were dangerous ;
Either you must impair our secrecy,
Or ’t must be taken for jest, and you blabbed on.
Leantio. True, true! That needs to be considered.
Bianca. But I’ve a better plan,—for we Venetians
Are subtle in disguises,—l’ll appear,
But in such shape I vow that you yourself
Shall hardly know me again.
Leantio. Is’t possible ?
Bianca. Be sure it is. Leave all to me. The event
Shall make us laugh.
Leantio. Wife, I am ever your debtor.
Believe it, never again I’ll piece thee out
With so shrunk trust.
Bianca. Is’t so ?
Leantio. The Cardinal
Would have it women were all demi-devils.
Bianca. The Cardinal again? I hope to thank him.
Leantio. Eor my late madness, Bianca, why! thou must
Forgive it me.
Bianca. Ay ? thou shaft see to-night
How a woman can forgive.
Leantio. Dear; we must in.
Bianca. You first,—l’ll gather up my things.
Exit Leantio. ( She gases before her.)
The Duke—
The Duke comes here to-night!
(Curtain.)
End of Act I.


ACT II.
SCENE I.
Banqueting hall in Leantio’s palace. Hie Duke, &c., &c.,
feasting. Servants remove the last dishes. At the
hack a handsome staircase. At the side a stage, curtained
off. Leantio mooes from guest to guest. '
Leantio. (aside) Not all the mad win© I have drunk tonight
Can mitigate this chill that’s round my heart.—
(A servant makes an announcement to him.)
May ’t please your Grace to hear the madrigal-
singers ?
Duke. There is no excellence in speech to equal
Dumb Music’s all-in-nothing suasiveness.
Let them come in.
(Musicians enter preceded hy dancers.)
Dancers too ? —ls’t not strange
Music, the metaphysics of the soul,
Should be so sensual in potency?
Singers, (while the others dance)
Soft the air blows here as the sighs of lovers
Lip to lip entranced in the purple twilight,
When ’twixt sleep and wake nodding wavelets droop and
Drowsily murmur.
Forms grow formless, shadows are lost in shadow,
Hectic night peers forth, as a shame-faced maiden
Fearing, peers, and towards the Beloved’s chamber
Noiselessly glxdeth.
Lo ! the heart of slumbering ocean trembles,
Feeling her eo near, and her mouth’s full sweetness
Poured on his, and o’er his her eyes’ deep violets
Dreamily shadowed.
(They finish and boic.)
Duke. A matchless entertainment, were it not
For that which is to follow, and we thank you.


Now, good Leantio, th’ pick and pith of the evening!
Our expectation runs on pin-points, lightly,
Toward the moon-rise of thy Arabian Wonder.
Fabrido. Look, your Grace:
Your wish is here ere you have finished wishing.
(Ladies troop down, all masked, amid them Bianca.)
Duke. It is the Masque of Beauty. Gentlemen, rise!
{Guests all rise.)
Leantio. (aside) If he, with love’s fine penetrative eye,
Should shoot our mystery through! O now! now!
now!
Fabrido. Through the gates of paradise
Emptying the legioned skies,
Flocks of angels earthward streaming
Down the air that lies a-dreaming
Dart, in gleaming
Wayward mazes
Silvering the twilight spaces:
At the rain of angel feet
Every sinner’s heart ’gins beat.
(As Bianca appears.)
Last and Loveliest of all
At thy feet we bow, we fall.
(They all kneel, then with merriment mingle together.
The Duke advances to Bianca, gallantly kissing
her hand.)
Ditke. Lovely our lady hostess, —thus we seal
Our thanks for your ingenious visitation.
We do respect your masked modesty,
That our bold curiosity rebukes
While it provokes.
Bianca. Your Grace deigns to prevent
My meditated plea.
Duke. Leantio!
If ever thou hast known a jealous pang.
Take heed: For of thy gentle lady’s grace
I grow so deep enamoured, that meseems
In all the world there is but one her equal.
Leantio. My Prince is pleased to claim what is his own.
Bianca, (aside) Most false, most true; but yet more tVue
than false.
Leantio. (aside) He knew her not. ’Tis past: dreadful sus-
pense !
O I am as a soul unleashed from hell!


Duke. Dear lady, I must carry you away.
I have a trespass to acquit me of:
This morning’s salutation was too rough
And too surpriseful. Like a wounded goddess
You flashed, you fled, you vanished from our ken.
Bianca. Nay, rather say, my lord, ’twas Semele
That gazed on Jove, his majesty, and perished.
Duke. {trying to penetrate her mask)
Well turned; and yet it shall not serve your turn :
For see, the plot’s reversed—’tis Jove that pleads.
And Semele is coy.
Bianca. (cleverly out-manoeuvring him ) Let her he so,
Lest he his wish repent, and she her favour.
{They withdraw, threading the Dancers who begin
a minuet.)
Leantio. Come, ladies: though your faces be invisible
Let not your heels be so. Strike up there, music !
{After a while Duke and Bianca advance.)
Duke. Speak on ! speak on !
There is a subtle enchantment in thy voice,
And when thou speakst, my soul, as ’twere, divines
A melody unheard and yet remembered.
Bianca. Rather, my lord, it is your ardent fantasy
That out of nothing builds a world of beauty.
Duke, {striving to get sight of her face)
A treasury of wit thou mak’st my hearing,
Mine eyes defraudest of their lawful tithes.
Bianca, {eluding him) Nay, naked poverty still claims her right
To hide her barrenness beneath a mask.
Duke. But what if ’neath that traitor mask she hatch
Conspiracies against her Prince's peace?
{They retire, Leantio follows.)
Leantio. Their too long commune now begetsi in me
New care. I’ll seek means presently to break it.
{Retires. Duke and Bianca advance. During their
conversation the dance ends. The dancers
break into groups.)
Duke. If she I love
Had breath, and being, voice, and potency
To use’t, I think she would be sister to thee.
Bianca. Then is she dead?
Duke. Not so ; yet she not lives.


Bianca. What means your Grace?
Duke. It is a pretty riddle,
Which, if you solve, I’ll no more importune you;
Nor you deny me, if you guess it not.
Shall ’t be a wager?
Bianca. I cannot guess, my lord, it is too hard.
Duke. I win ! I win ! But I’ll be generous
And shew thee first a face superlative
As that which after you shall shew to me.
{Gives her loaket.)
Look on this pictured wonder. This is she
To whom my soul for evermore is vowed:
But as this is, so never yet was woman.
Some spirit of more subtle earth than ours
Did fashion this fair thing ;
The uttermost recesses of my being
Enforcing of their secret formula
To build those all-too-perfect lineaments.
Bianca. Most beautiful! Methinks had I that face,
Those eyes, those lips, and were I loved like her,
So long, so fondly, and by such a lover, — (pause)
I could not other than return his love.
Duke, (passionately) O say you so? No longer then deny me
To make the rare comparison.—l entreat thee!
(He attempts to unmask her.)
Bianca. Not now, not now !
I pray thee leave me now !
Duke. Wouldst thou elude me?
Bianca. I promise,—ere the evening’s out.—Ah !
Duke. That pledge I’ll hold thee to, whatever fall.
Lcantio. (who has watched them, approaches.)
I fear your Grace grows weary.
Duke. Never yet
Was I so happy in my entertainment.
Lcantio. Our merry ladies have some choice surprise
To tickle us with, if you be so inclined.
Yon curtain is their screen. They but await
Your Highness’ favour, and your partner here,
That is to be the chief performer in it.
Duke. And what may be the nature of their sport?
Lcantio. It is the Masque of Florence. (He is drawn aside.)
Duke, (to Bianca) And our hostess ?
Bianca. Meanly personifies that wonder-world.
Duke. We’ll think the goddess Flora come again.


Bianca. I’ll take my leave, my lord.
Duke. 0, I’ll not part
Till thou redeem that pledge thou gav’st. I have,
I know not why, but only that I have.
This great desire to look upon thy face;
One look, but once, and having looked
I will for evermore be satisfied.
Bianca. They wait for me—
Duke, (detaining her ) Speak !
Bianca. My lord Prince,
Florence am I, and Florence it is thou:
What Florence wills then, Florence shall obey.
Duke. The masque of Florence shall be Florence unmasked !
(aside, as Bianca withdraws) O sweet hallucination!
Whiles thou lastedst
I was in heaven. Almost I repent
The over-curious subtlety that shuns
Not to profane thy delicate enigma.
Leantio. Your Grace will think me too unmannerly.
(Leads Duke to his place.)
Bianca, (aside) I wander, fatuous, on a path that leads
I know not whither, —and I care not neither,
So that it take me far from whence I came.
O my heart tells me he is good, and gracious,
And full of that I cannot live without.
The lamp of love that flickered in my bosom,
Now, like a beacon, lights me on to fortune. [Exit.
(Enter before the Curtain, Fabricio as Prologue.)
Fabricio. I am the Prologue, and I speak for them
That cannot for themselves, seeing their tongues
Are pistils, leaves their limbs, mouths petals, themselves
All flowers, and sleeping. And they signify
This our fair flower of Florence. And that she
That is the fairest flower of them all,
Flora herself.
(Curtain unfolds. Ladies as flowers sleep on the
steps of a vase-like throne, above them Bianca.
All veiled.)
Duke. A flowery Prologue.
Leantio. How he stalks aside—
Duke. His pistol being discharged—
Leantio. He’s lief to leave.
(Fabricio comes forward again,)
Duke. Here’s what to stem your wit.
Cry: St! Amen !


Fahricio (as Prologue.) Now see.
How all this sleeping loveliness shall unfold
And shed its fragment lustre o’er the world :
Shine forth thou morning-star, and let thy beams
Kiss into perfect life thy radiant bride.
(A croumed figure, representing the Duke, approaches
Flora, kisses her hand, and raises her. The
Ladies awaken, unfolding their petals. Bianca
dowly advances, her veil falling away leaves
her unmasked. The Duke with a cry falls
back a few steps. Leantio is thunderstruck.
General admiration. Long pause.)
Duke. If you be she I take you for, and not
An idle conjuration of the brain
Of all too momentary brief effect,
Thou lovely image of desire —speak to me !
Speak, speak!
Bianca. O Prince, thus I redeem my pledge :
Thy portrait’s come to life. How this could be
Seek there. (Pointing to Leantio.)
Duke. Was this so ? Can it be so?—Oh !
Wonder perplexes speech. I lose myself!
Are my wits crazed, and with my wits my eyes,
That they see that which is not, and what is
Distort from its true being, even as those globes
Wherein boys use to make fantastic mows ?
Is this thy wife, Leantio ? Or if she be,
Why, is this likeness hers? Or being mad
Do I but dream it is so? Yet it’s like
As is the face in yonder mirror to mine.
Resolve me this. Will you not give an answer ?
By heaven! How guilty-like he turns away.
Doubt, blacker than death, more fiendish-importune
Than fear, or hate, or ignorant despair,
Lays whip to dangerous thoughts within my soul:
Her close immurement, —his tell-tale confusion, —
This secrecy, —is ’t not apparent proof,
Most palpable, and not to be denied ?
(Shewing to Bianca the portrait.)
O look on this! Were you not she that said
That hadst thou features, eyes, and lips like this,
So loved, so worshipped,—love for love thou’dst give ?
Bianca. O Prince, did I say so?
Duke. Deny it not,
For thou art not less mine, nor yet more his,
Than is the pilfered jewel his that snatches it.


O this thy rarity I was plundered of,
Which now’s restored again, the robber caught,
And I’ll henceforth safe keep thee next my heart.
Bianca. Kill me, —I am content —by thee to die.
Duke, (to Leantio)
O infinite liar ! Art thou suddenly tongue-tied ?
Not one lie left to caulk this hole in thy honour ?
Leantio. It cries against all denial. —I loved her—
Duke. Thou!
Bianca. Even as the gaoler loves his prisoner;
And as the prisoner his gaoler, I, him.
Duke. It must be so. I will believe it so:
Love and dishonour pull not in one coupling
O natures there are, inapt for anything
O’er love’s brute adjunct, blind and wolfish lust,
That recks not of those honourable parts
Which are love’s pride and ornament,
As truth, faith, duty, and the subtle bond
That brother links to brother, man to man.—
And such are beasts, dangerous, unsociable,
As thou art —
Leantio. I will stay to hear no more.
Guests. ( confusedly ) Is this part of the play ?—What does it
mean ?
Why, this is strange.—There is no counterfeit here.—
The Duke’s offended. —See ! —There’s more in this
Than’s known. —Some plot against his Highness.—
Draw!
(As Leantio attempts to withdraw, he is hemmed in
hy the Duke’s followers, who have pressed round
with drawn iceapons.)
Duke. Put up your swords. There’s no more need of them.
Gentlemen, leave us. Ladies, by your leave.
Let no one stay behind. Shut all the doom
(Exeunt all hut the Duke and Leantio. Bianca, who
has moved hesitatingly after the others, lingers
at the hack, agitated }
The wound that thou hast dealt me is so mortal
As may not but with blood of one of us
Be healed. Remembering how thou hast been my
friend,
Admitted to the inmost privacy,
The sacred seat, the very throne itself,
Of my too-credent soul; its counsellor,
Co-heir, and spouse-elect-, —0 how couldst thou


Prove shameless renegade; make so- ill-use
Of that illimitable credit I thee gave?
For shame, —for shame !
Draw, Sir! Though I might hang thee, felon-like,
To thine own chimney, I’ll not do so ;
The offence against his state your Prince disdains;
But that envenomed ulcerating breach
In friendship’s honour, bates not otherwise
But by most hazardous-mortal surgery.
Then draw. Sir, draw! This last grace at our hands.
Leantio. Since chance has willed this so, so let it be!
For bitter taunts here’s bitter deeds. Take that!
(They fight. Bianca looking on with terror. The
Duke trips, Leantio makes a lunge for his heart.)
Bianca. Ah!—help the Duke!—help! —help!
{The Duke catches Leantio’s sword in his sleeve,
passing his own through him. Leantio falls.
Cardinal and other's rush in.)
Thou’rt hurt, —0 let me see to it, —quick! thou
bleed’st.
Duke. ’Tis nothing. He scratched me as I stumbled. See!
He’s bitterly paid for it.
Card. What new madness, this?
You, Brother, wounded?—and Leantio, slain?
{To Bianca.)
Is this your doing? Guilty woman, hence;
You do mistake your duty. This is not
Your husband. There your office lies. Look to him.
Leantio. OI am hurt to death. Raise me t and let me speak.
Prince, I repent too late the ill I did,
Since when I’ve nothing known but poisoned hours,
And bitter dregs of time, finding that sweet,
That coveted sweet, for which I stained myself,
Even by that stain polluted and annulled.
You were revenged or ere your wrong you knew.
Your pardon—
Duke. Take it freely.
Cardinal, —
’Twas you brought me to this.
Card. Impudent botcher!
Leantio. O thou playedst midwife to' the unborn wish
That lay inform incognisable in me,
And broughtst it crying to light. Like an adept
You glozed the wickedness you urged me to ■,
Till it seemed almost honest, fair, and good.


Card. He raves.
Leantio. Nay ! Dying eyes see deep.—Bianca,
Trust not the priest. He’s conscienceless, false, cruel.
He hates thee, and he’ll have thee by and by,—
Body and soul. She’s beautiful, Prince, —beware;
There’s fate, and sin, and death within her beauty. —
Air, —give me air. You’ve killed me among you;
and you
Shall answer it.—Oh ! (dies).
Card. He’s dead.
And for these lies let him go lie in hell.
Bear out the body. (They take it away.)
Duke. Brother Cardinal,
Thy dealing in these matters is suspect.
Card. Suspect! —Why, thinks your Highness I’ll be tardy
To avow my legitimate acts ? That which he did,
Yon senseless fool did at my bidding, and suffers
For that which was neglected, not performed.
Duke. By heaven ! You lay much on our brotherhood.
Card. And ever may, I hope. Must I consent
Our ancient house be aproned by yon trumpery,
Yon slyly baited pink-faced piece?
Or ere our noble father’s memory
Be slurred by such a gaudy tainted gnat,
I’ll thumb her—by my hopes of heaven I will!
Duke. ’Tis treason, manifest treason. —
Card. Treason, indeed !
To step between a fool and his folly; to snatch
The lunatic-hand back from its sweet-tooth poison.
Why, what irreverence had it been in me
To see thee gulled, decoyed, mocked, scorned, and
shamed,
By a worthless minion, fit —
Duke. This is too insolent. -
So dearly tender we this lady here
That we renew in our own proper person
That prayer which erst our proxy, at your instance,
Lord Cardinal, and to his own undoing,
So infamously prevented. This my hand,
Bianca, that with it bears my heart', my honour,
My dukedom, all I have, I proffer thee.
If thou’lt take this, and these, thou yet wilt take
What’s less, O how far less, than thy deserving.
Be Florence’ Duchess, and woe him betide,
That wags at thee or me a scurril tongue.


Card. Now, widow, —dry your cheeks! How happily
That selfsame hand which cut untimely off
The first, assists you to a second, husband;
And wipes away the tears it made you weep.
’Tis fair amends. Yet hold, —let fetch a basin, —•
Thou shouldst not take this second lover’s hand
Or ere a little water have it purged
Of those discomfortable bloody drops
It took so rudely from thy husband’s neart.
Duke. Be silent; or, by heaven, I’ll make thee so!
Bianca. Such bitter malice becomes your Holiness
As little as those your other boasted exploits
Which men less reverend call by grosser names,
As falsehood, baseness, fraud, dishonour, treachery,
That on their users leave a brand of infamy
Hard to be hid even ’neatih my lord Cardinal’s robes.
Duke. Discreetly spoken ! Cardinal, you’re rebuked.
Bianca, (kneeling to the Duke)
Your Grace, my honoured lord, your pardon for
This seeming sauciness. Indeed ’tis true
This slain man was my husband, and you know
How this came so. I loved him not, —or loved
As one that’s never known what ’tis to love;
And what at first I suffered doubtingly
I grew full soon to loathe, despise; and shun.
O then that frayed and rotted cord being loosed
That buoyed my maiden-faith, I fed my heart
On mutable and insufficient dreams,
Yet never knew, until that blessed hour
That gave you to my unexpectant sight,
What ’twas to live, to breathe, to feel, to see.
Duke. My soul’s a bee hangs on thy stored words.
Did you not say that you could love me ? Say t
Again, and you shall say all I would hear.
Bianca. Did I say so?
Then what I said I’ll swear to; what I swear
I’ll lay my life upon. The meanest beggar
May love his Prince, yet not be deemed presumptuous.
The sun that triumphs in palatial heaven
Turns not his face from the adoring slave.
Be thou my sun; I covet no more than falls
To the common lot, —unknown, unseen, unthought of,
To feel from far thy warmth and gladness round me—■
As much as this I would, and more I may not.
Card. (aside) She angle®—she angles: and I laugh to see
How nimbly this fish will gulp down the bait.


Duke. Nay, more if thou would take, you may, and shall.
For since my heart’s election’s fall’n on thee,
No mightier opposite shall disfranchise it.
Care not for my lord Cardinal here; already
His license overpasses his discretion.
Let him beware ; although not soon incensed,
Being so, he’ll find I’ve means to make him feel it.
Bianca. No, no ! dear lord, —a thousand worser plagues
The gain of me shall bring you than the want.
Must your friends be my enemies ? My love
Their discontent? The precious boot of marriage
Converted to discomfortable spite?
Duke. Not so; not so; you shall not find it so.
I’ll not. take this for answer.
Bianca. These events
Flow too precipitate, too dangerous rash, —
Beyond my following—give me leave, dear liege,
To countervail you still. . . O leave me, Sir, —
Leave me! —l grow confused—what would I say ?
Card. See to her, ladies. Brother, what I spake
Set. down to choler, not unbrotherliness.
This lady shews a gentle disposition;
There’s sense and seemliness in her. ’Twere more fit
Your suit to her were urged another time,
And in another place,
Duke. Be it so, then.
But here ’tis fit she be not left. Fabricio,
To your charge I commit her. Look to her
As to your own soul, —Bianca, I’ll see thee soon,
Till when, take thou this ring. It is a pledge
Betwixt us.
Card. Lady, fare the© well! So long
As thou’rt deserving, count me in thy friends,
Bianca. Lord Cardinal, thee and thy friendship both
I’ll ever value even at their full worth.
Card. {aside) Hum!
She has a devil in her that I’ll lay
By hook or crook, ere she fires out my dukedom.
Duke. If thou in anything shouldst lack my service,
The token that I gave thee send to me,
For I’ll be thy true knight. Thus, —thus, —farewell.
(Kisses her hand)
Bianca, (in a low tone) O, in my eyes read what I cannot speak.
(Curtain.)
End of Act 11.


ACT III.
SCENE I.
A room, in a wing of the Ducal Palace, opening from
Bianca’s deeping apartment.
Enter Duke, and Bianca clinging to him.
Duke. See how the ungentle day drives weeping forth
His amorous lagging consort; so once the angel
Did with his flaming sword from paradise
Fright forth that first enamoured pair that sought
More than God’s bliss within each other’s arms,
And set the world aflame with sweet desire.
Bianca. O yet they fled together, and no envious sprite
Could rob them of their joy, as me of thee.
Duke. When I stole on thee yesternight, and found thee
Bedewing thy pale pillow with thy tears,
Such joy gave not unto Odysseus’ eyes
The sight of fair Penelope, who, weeping,
Yet knew not him beside her whom she wept.
Bianca. Nor fond Endymion, when beneath the sea
He fell a-dream, and dreaming to him clasped
In amorous fantasy her he so longed for,
Woke with more bliss at heart, or more amaze,
Recounting o’er again his doubtful joy,
Than I, who being a-dream was fain to wake,
And waking feared indeed to lose my dream.
Duke. Sweet love, I may not longer linger out
The passionate minutes. There’s many miles to ride
Or ere the jealous Sultan of the east
Mounts his high throne, and angers on my flight.
Bianca. With love’s strict indefatigable needle
I’ll thread, like beads, the hours; and as a nun
At orisons, I’ll tell them piously o’er
Again when thou returnest, one by one,
And for each one a prayer.


DuJee. And for each prayer
A kiss (kisses her). See, see! how potent are thy
prayers,
That ere they’re made, they’re answered.
Bianca. Nay ! I fear
I’ll tire thee out, I shall grow so devout.
Duke. Why, if the lips of all the world could speak
In one, at once, all pouting in thy lips,
I’d still reply thus, and forever thus.
Bianca. When shall I see thee again ?
Duke. I hope to-morrow.
There’s no one, for I’ve trusted not a soul,
That knows me now in Florence. Not the Cardinal,
For all his spies—l’ve hoodwinked them so- deftly.
He thinks me with the Court, that’s forty mile
From hence, and I must be so too ere breakfast.
(Approaches hidden door in the wall.)
The gate of paradise, this secret door,
Opens to none, is known to none but us.
’Twas built by the old Dukes in troublous times,
And leads to where are means of swiftest passage.
See ! Touch the spring: this hungry-yawning mouth
Shall swallow you, and you shall percolate
As ’twere the arteries and veins of Florence,
Till ’t vomit you upon the general world.
Bianca. Was’t so you came ?
Duke. It was. But after th’ morrow
Well leave’t alone. For this our private marriage,
Which only for thy sake and shamefacedness
Is so, well publish. And necessity
No more’ll constrain us to this loathed divorce.
Bianca. Close it again. It looks too like a grave.
My heart —there’s something here —that smiles not.
Duke. Fie, fie! I’ll chase’t away.
Bianca. ’Tis gone, sweet love.
Duke. (Plays with her hand and notes ring.)
Why! this reminds me, now; this ring I gave thee:
I’d have it back again. Look, —I’ve another
That’s richer, and more precious, worthier
To be cincture round this delicate pillar of love.
Bianca. O let me keep it. It was the first gift
I had of thee: to change it were ill-omened.
Duke. O more than love’s self, Love, thou’rt superstitious!,
’Tis but a fancy,—when I gave it thee


I thought not of it, —within the signet’s hid
A little hollow, in the hollow a. poison,
Of instantaneous and deadly effect;
I like not, stooping to kiss thy charming finger,
To know that in yon circlet there’s a, darkness
Wherein the figure of lean chuckling Death
Still dances to himself.
Bianca. Thou’rt more than I
More superstitious, that didst chide me for it!
Yet let me keep it still, and you shall know
If ever thou shouldst come to hate love so
That leaving her, and me, thou ghostly wander’st
To those dim shadowy fields o’ the other side,
As Orpheus fled towards his Eurydice,
Kissing these lips of death, I’ll fly to thee.
Duke. Dear Heaven! . . . We talk, and talk, —and
silent time
Moves on.
Bianca. Yes, yes! do thou begone.
Duke. Farewell.
Bianca. O, like a jewel in a. famous setting,
I’ll leave this heart’s-kiss ’twixt thy lips, dear love!
Duke. And it shall keep there till thou claim’st it again.
(Noise within.)
Bianca. There’s someone stirring. Good my love, good bye !
(Duke exit. Bianca extinguishes light, looks
round and shivers.)
How wan and corpse-like shudders in the morn,
Coffined in cloud. ( Distant clashing of doors, &e.
Ah ! —what strange noise was that?)
Listen, listen, listen!
(Heavy footsteps. Knocking at inner door.)
’Tis my fate—
And I must go to meet it.—l’m afraid ! (Knocking.)
Nurse. (without ) Madam! madam! mistress! open! open!
(She goes, opens, and returns with Nurse. The
tramping becomes louder and nearer.)
Do you hear them ? Oh! we’re dead, we’re dead,
we’re dead!
Bianca. Who? Say who?
Nurse. Assassins, murderers, —
The Cardinal, —a hangman’s voice he has, —
He is among them. Oh! they come to kill us.


Bianca. Nurse, quiet thee. Thee at least they will not harm.
{Loud knocking.)
Go, ask who ’tis that so unseasonably
Comes to disturb our rest, and wherefore.
Nurse. My knees shake. Oh !oh!oh ! I die of fear.
Bianca. Stay you, and I will go.
Nurse. « Nay! that thou shalt not.
What matter my old life? {lmpatient knocking.)
Coming! coming! [Exit.
Bianca. Who should hurt her ? . . . The Cardinal ?
While there’s time
I’ll to the secret way, and overtake
My lord secret door and pauses}. —Hum!—
they of his coming ?—may be
’Tis he they’re after.—They must deem he’s here,
Till he’s beyond their malice. Villains, villains !
I’ll stay and face it out.—O my dear love.
Speed, speed ! good speed ! I’ll play my life for thine.
{Cardinal enters, he remains motionless in the
doorway, he is, in riding-dress. Pause.)
Bianca, {with ironic , curtsey) MTord Cardinal does us
unusual honour
Curtailing his repose unnaturally
To give its a so courteous surprise.
We thank him, and should do so the more gratefully
Had mTord but deigned us so much preparation
As changing of a gown demands. His Eminence,
Being ignorant of our quaint feminine ways,
So nearly took us sleeping in our beds
As must excuse the something slenderness
Of our attire, unmeant for masculine eyes,
And least of all for holy reverend ones.
Card. This mummery cease ! Suffice’t the time and manner
Of this strange visitance were policied.
Bianca. I pray you, sit. Your reverence must be weary,
So early out. The whole day long’s before us,
Indeed my lord took car© not much was lost.
Card. I’ll stand. {lmpatient.)
Bianca. But not on ceremony, I hope;
O not on ceremony, I beg your Eminence.
Not ceremony, —no ceremony at all!
Card. Hear what I’ve to propose, which if you accept,
’Tis well; if not, you’ll rue it miserably.


Bianca. What, what! I see*you will not be persuaded,
But you’ll be still so ceremonious.
Your reverence looks quite put out of face.
Nay, see! Your lordship’s flurried, —’fe this
ceremony :
You gentlemen of Adam’s lineage,
You are of so fine breeding that you cannot'
Feel, breathe, exist, but by this eye oi prescription.-
Card. (strides forward angrily and grasps her roughly)
Woman, be still!—You fore© me to. this usage.
Bianca. Your hand is wittier than your tongue, my lord:
Your heart speaks sooner in it. Are you always
So vacant among women'l Or is’t a virtu©'
Occasipnal that only safely engages!
These civil proofs of yours shall to in'lord Duke
Card. Thou’lt never see him more.
Bianca, (startled,advancing upon him) You’ve murdered him 1
Card. Murdered? The Duke my brother ? Psh^w! What
rave you ?
You, that would tarnish him, ’tis, must be slipped.
Bianca. O happy tidings! (aside: half drawn dagger from
her hosom.) Had’t been otherwise,
Why, I’d a little inquisitive prick should have
Explored those reverend ribs of yours, ilty Holiness!
Card. Well, Mistress Malapert, you must hastily hence,
And quietly. There’s no help. And will you so,
- You shall have money, friends, all, more than you
Can ask, or wish, or think; and that,
Wherever you choose, so it be not in Italy,
From which, on pain of sudden death, thou’rt
banished.
Bianca. What if your so much condescension fail
In my too indiscriminate appraisement ?.
Card. You go. ( shrugging ).
Bianca. But may return.
Card. Never!
Bianca. Is’t so ?
Then life or death ?
Card. Aye! life or death.
Bianca. Be it death !
Malign, usurping, Priest! let sycophant slaves
Help swell thy wolfish belly, I’ll not take
Thy orders. I defy thee. Her© I stand,
A woman, friendless, that am only armed
With innocent tears—would they were poison
To burn thee up. — Call in your ruffians then,


And kill me now, —now, now, now! cowardly dog!—
Now while you may: By God his majesty!
Dead or alive, it shall b© life for life.
{Buns across. Cardinal stamps, soldiers enter
and seize her. After a struggle she submits.)
0 villains!—dregs of men ! —What! had you mothers?
Card. Adulterous witch! Since thou art bound for hell
I’ll not frustrate thee. Better thus, than if.
As settles a stone upon a putrid carcase
And anchors it unto the weedy bottom,
Thou drag down with thee thy hag-ridden paramour.
Bianca. Spit forth thy venom, toad! I laugh at thee.
Card. Fabricio! (Fabricio enters.)
Bianca. Thou too a mongrel o’ the same litter, Sir?
Card. Your prisoner! —In half an hour you start;
The means provided; the direction known.
(Fabricio hows assent.)
If she cry out, or make disturbance, why!
Stay not to reason it, but slit her throat,
And with no more compunction than a beast’s.
She shall have half an hour to champ upon
The bit. If then she’s tractable, use her gently
As safety warrants; if not, why!—as may be.
But till she’s bricked and mortared, leave her not —■
Not while you kill a fly. She’s trickish.
And has a thousand unsuspicious japes
To tilt you off; and courage to her wit.
Bo therefor© apprehensive. You, sirs, learn
To act without ©yes or ears, that what you enact
You blab not. To give’s more blest than to receive !
(Sardonic gesture across throat.)
Fabricio ! All being done, bring me report.
1 shall be with the Duke by then. In this
I am invisible.—Lady, be advised !
[Exit with Fabricio.
Bianca, {aside) The secret passage! —ha!—once there! —
I’ll temporise! {She hums carelessly. Enter
Fabricio.)
Fabricio. (aside) How great a spirit, set in how much beauty!
I marvel not the Duke’s so passionate.
Bianca. Your pardon,—you, Sir ! Must my throat be cut
For humming? Is’t against the law?
Are you the butcher, Sir ? I gratulat© you!
How long is’t since this honourable promotion?


Fabricio. Madam, believe me! I abhor this office.
I pray you, yield. The malice of the time’s
At flood against you. Bide the ebb. Be friended.
Bianca. Tell me, Fabricio, —I’ll find ways for thanks, —
What means the Cardinal to do with me?
Fabricio. He promises no more than he’ll perform.
Bianca. He’ll kill me then?
Fabricio. Forbid!—Lady, I swear
He’ll not shed blood, as contrary to his office,
But you’ll have leave to famish in his dungeons.
Bianca. He is religious in his difference, —
It is a point of exquisite piety.
Why does he hate me?
Fabricio. You’re a knot i’ the grain.
The Duke dying childless, he becomes the Duke
This jumped-in marriage slenders much his hopes.
Bianca. But when the Duke learns—
Fahrido. It will be too late.
Bianca. You mean ?
Fahrido. Aye!
Bianca, (remains in thought) Well! The Cardinal’s thrown
two fives.
I’ll go with you. —Maybe I’ll overthrow him.
Fabricio. You better what’s all bad by doing so.
Bianca. Your leave. Sir, to withdraw: for, as you see,
These are no travelling weeds.
Fahrido. Hum! I have orders
To leave you not alone.
Bianca. Will you not put
Your ruffians to the blush if you command them
They are preferred to be my waiting-women?
Fabricio. Your pardon, madam !
Bianca. Let them hold without.
Fabricio. My orders!
Bianca. Why! I cannot fly in the air;
Nor through these thick walls creep, an atomy;
Nor hang upon a skein of gossamer
Spun, like a spider, out of mine own entrails.
Fahrido. I grieve to use thee with discourtesy.
Bianca. Such usage never yet was meted out
To woman. Why! the very prostitute
That from the midnight tavern’s haled to prison,
Is by the uncivil officer allowed
The gaudy trimmings that her shame hath hired.
Fabricio. 0 curst dilemma!


Bianca. I see you are abashed.
And you are right to be: this is such work
As cut-throat rogues would scorn to undertake.
Fabricio. By God! Lady, I know not what to do.
Bianca. Let it not vex you, Sir; the fault’s not yours.
’Tis not past remedy: —I have it! —yon screen—
Against the wall here, —I’ll make shift to do.
Fabricio. You hear, knaves? Bring the screen.
Bianca. Here; so! Enough !
Good fellows, thanks! You’re better than your
betters.
’Tis a strange tiring-room. By your good leave!
{She goes behind screen, finds spring, and opens
the panel. Aside.
Where is it?—ha!—The very wall doth writhe
Its rocky jaws in sullen mockery.
Now guide me, love; and spur me, my revenge!
[Exit.
Fabricio. Ha, \—heard you that?—a latch snapped, —which of
you did it?
Look to the prisoner! ( They overturn screen, and.
remain standing aghast.) Gone ! fled ! vanished
away!
’Tent with your swords the walls. Tear up the floors.
Fooled, cheated, cozened, miserably outwitted!
This must post-haste to the Cardinal. I’m ruined !
{Curtain.)
SCENE II.
A room in the Palace at Careggi. The Cardinal and
Secretary busy with papers.
Card. This treaty with Genoa set aside:
It cuts deep and deserves our leisured care.
The claim of Montefeltro may be allowed:
See to it. That petition of the States
Anent these novel taxes must be answered
Equivocally, denying not, yet reserving


The ducal rights and power. Our principle:
That every stream proportionately be drained,
None sensible of his contribution: So!
Enter Fabricio, hurriedly, in disorder.
How now?
P abrteio. My lord . . . {catches sight of Secretary.)
Card. (to Secretary) Despatch! Let the Duke know
I wait upon him presently. [Exit Secretary.
Your news, Sir?
Fabricio. The prisoner—
Card. Well?
Fabricio. Escaped!—
Card. Escaped f Incredible!
Fabricio. She foundered ’fore our eyes, even as a ship
Slips down the broad back of a mountain billow
And’s no more seen.
Card. False varlet! With this tale
You’ll patch your negligence.
Fabricio. I swear
Card. Pooh, pooh!
The worst, —in fewest words.
Fabricio. Sir, you being gone
My lady questioned of your true intendments;
I re-assured her one way, and the other
Laid bare her worst of fear. She grew submissive:
Curd. Subtle jade!
Fabricio. Craved leave to change her habit:
Card. And you . . . ?
Fabricio. Opposed—my orders. Whereupon,
To avoid the immodest scrutiny of my fellows,
She begged a screen, which was suspectless granted.
And ere one might count ten, with no more stir
Than the faint snapping of a latch, she’d vanished;
Nor our most diligence could hit a clue.
Card. O ass! O fool! dolt! most egregious gull!
To be stale-mated on the winning-move,
And by a chit of a miss, one that but yesterday
Left her short frocks. St. Peter 1 but I’m mad
That my deep-intricate far-studied plans
Are baffled again by such a scarecrow knave.
(Strides up and down agitatedly.)
(aside) O fool! to have forbore, when one sharp tug
Had cured me of this toothache evermore:


The daringest way is oft the safest; neglected.
A many thousand worsen harms accrue.
When the Duke hears of this preposterous deal,
And from the lips of her ’twas aimed at, —why!
’Twill make him mad. And in his fit of madness
God knows what deadly mischief he may brew.
I must build up a buttress to uphold
This brother’s love against this mistress’ hate.
(Seats himself and writes.)
Fabricio! I have seen thee not to-day,
Nor know thy news. If, as thou postest hither
—And thou must take good care it shall be so, —
Thou’rt met, and searched, this order’s found upon
thee,
Which notifies thee thy commission’s cancelled ;
My purpose changed; this act repented of;
The duchess t’ be, brought with all deference
T’ the Court. Dost understand?
Fabricio. I do, my lord.
Card. Convey thyself invisibly from hence.
Fabricio. I will do so.
Card. Away, away, away! [Exit Fabricio.
I’ll to the Duke. For I more than suspect
This broody hen is hatching out an egg
Wherein there lurks an ugly-grinning devil.
That must be exorcised ere he nose through
The shell. I’ll to ’t with bell and candle. [Exit.
SCENE III.
Grand hall in the Palace of the Duke.
Enter Duke and Bianca.
Duke. These your brief-storied injuries dumbfound me.
What must you for my sake, dear love, sustain
From these bad men, these wicked, wicked men:
What dread, what shame, what cruel insolence,
Gross, 0 ! most gross, most heinous, most intolerable !
The thought of’t chokes me.


Bianca. Let it not move thee thus.
My lord, —your brother, for what cause I know not,
Hates me, and never will be satisfied
Till he hath breached our vows, and ousted me.
He is too high exalted powerful a prince
For such a puny thing as I to oppose.
Then let this misliked marriage he annulled,
Return me to the lowly nothingness
You deigned to raise me from. Thus shall you assure
My safety, and deserve his approbation.
Duke. How ! safety ! —approbation !
Bianca. He’ll be angry
To learn my evasion, and I fear he’ll come
And drag me hence by force, and dungeon me
Where never never again I’ll see thy face.
Duke. To hell with the Cardinal!
Bianca. Hush ! he might hear you,—
For he is everywhere, hears everything.
Duke. Hear me ! Ha ! He shall hear me to some purpose.
God’s death upon it. When we’ve dealt with him,
As presently we mean, he’ll dare not after
So much as wag his finger at thy spaniel.
By Christ his Passion! Cardinal or no,
He’ll satisfy me for this villainy, or
I’ll hang him up in’s Cardinal’s robes.
Bianca. It grieves me that my petty cause should be
A ghost to haunt betwixt your brotherly loves.
When you have heard his balanced evidence
I’m sure you’ll be persuaded my strange usage
Springs from his deep solicitude, and your
Too scrupulous and honourable care.
And yet he should not so have handled me,
Nor any lady either. A common stale,
As he indeed to his rude myrmidons dubbed me.
Would scorn to be so hustled from her bed,
And nakedly shamed before lewd customers:
O that was foul!
Duke. A thousand curses blast him !
Bianca. Pardon! but my remembered infamy
Makes me forget my argument: I’m sure
He’ll give you good sufficient reasons why
All these sad miserable things were so.
Duke. No more, no more. ’Tis gall and wormwood to me.
(Enter Usher.)


Usher. M’lord Cardinal awaits your Highness’ pleasure.
Duke. We will receive him. (To Bianca, shewing her an
alcove) Do thou wait here, unseen.
The Cardinal doubts not you’re far enough.
I will feign ignorance; put him to question;
And when the plot grows ripe, you shall confront him.
(Stamps. Enter Guard.)
Take your stand there, behind the arras. When
I stamp my foot, arrest me my Lord Cardinal. (Seats
himself.)
Enter Cardinal.
Card. Good morrow ! good my brother.
Duke. You say so,
But you good-brother me not in your deeds.
Card.. Your meaning is, that I have disallowed
Your benefit in this brief-purposed marriage,
And that displeases you. But let it not,
For I have come to recant that heresy.
Duke. Ha!
Bianca, (aside) Fox, fox, fox!
Card. How often it befalls
The statesman needs must censure in his prince.
What brother in brother haply may condone.
Duke,. You stretch out your prerogative too far.
Card. ’Twere strange indeed if I should hold the balance
In secret grave importances of State;
Decide, allow, annul, even as yourself
In things of deep concernment, and in this
Be as a feather to your inclinations.
This were to abate your princely dignity,
Which on your published minister devolves.
Duke. Well, well!
What miracle, for you churchmen on occasion
Are sly therein, what miracle topsy-turvied you?
Card. Though in your fortunes lat first discovered
Too great discrepancy; not that alone,
Nor the interests and policy of State,
Determined me adverse; but I discerned,
Or seemed to, in this Beauty’s rich-cut stone
So most unbeauteous flaws, as made ’t unfit
To gem a prince’s hand.


Duke. Not. in the stone
The flaw, but in thine eye the slubbering mote.
Card. So much the worse. But as the searching acid
Through hardest metal eats, so proof surmise:
I’ve learnt in her since such blest ingredients,
Such noble and high-disposed parts, and these
So graciously commingled, I now affirm,
Which I could not before, she’s a princess
Dowered beyond what fortune can, or policy.
Blanca, {aside, with an ironic curtsey) Ahem! He does it
handsomely. I think
His Eminence means to marry me himself:
This sudden commendation is suspicious.
Dulc. Why! so the butcher eyes the sheep he slaughters,
And reckons up its nice and juicy parts.
How long is ’t since this! wonderful discovery ?
Card. Even yesternight.
Dule. {springing up in a fury) Ha! What of yesternight?
Card. {aside) The plummet has found bottom ;he has seen
her. —
I see my plain sincerity's suspect.
But shall not be, when you have heard me out.
Dul e. Well, well!
Bianca. What fly is this he’s angling with ?
(The Duke strides more and more agitatedly up and
down, gnawing his lip with groioing passion.)
Card. When yesterday I saw my battering seas
Of strong expostulation broke in vain
Upon the constant rock of your resolve ;
And that this bastard marriage must proceed,
I with myself took counsel, which were better;
To see, by an alliant so ignoble,
For, by your pardon, so I deemed her then,
Our gracious father’s fame brought in repros ch ;
Our ancient blood contaminate; our honoiu
Set in the common stocks, a scoff and scorn
For every marketwoman’s ribald tongue;
My prince in this promiscuous spousal lamed
Before the insolent gaze of all the world;
And I, a silent shamefaced onlooker,
Abettor and participator in it:
To see all this, and thus, and suffer it,
Or by one soaring high-audacious act,
Prevent.


Duke. Prevent ? Aha! How could you so ?
Bianca, {aside} Insolent Priest!
I’ll turn thy cassock to a shroud for this.
Duke. Beats your ambition ’gainst so high a wind?
’Tis time these gaudy feathers of yours were plumed.
Card. Who risks all’s likely to accomplish much ;
This morning I visited the lady suddenly.
Duke. Ha! By my life! and shak’st not to avouch it 1
Card. I laid before her certain propositions.
Duke. Better and better !
Card. To wit; that she should presently
And secretly relinquish hopes of you:
Quit Florence, Italy; and in return
Take safety and a princely maintenance.
Duke. O insolence beyond all reach of thought!
Bianca, (aside) Bold, hold ! It is a master-general!
Card. She, in a wonder-worthy spirit of greatness,
Blew moistful hurricanes of scorn at me,
And was in that wild frenzy of disdain
Beyond the beggary of words, most admirable.
Bianca, (aside) 0,1 must laugh ! I think he’s madly in love —
So his descriptions beggar lover’s rhapsodies.
Duke. What! Stays the executioner to admire
The blush of shame upon the neck he strikes
’Tis monstrous.
Card. Seeing my gentler counsels not availed,
I laid my arrest on her.
Duke. (in ungovernable fury) You did so? Ha!
(stamps) And for that damnable act, thou art thyself
Arrested. (Guard issue and arrest Cardinal.)
Am I so indulgent grown
That you could hope to strike at me so near,
And that unnatural crime rest unavenged ?
Or by what novel devilish contrivance
Would you have staved off instant retribution ?
Bianca, (aside) The Queen-trump leads, my lord; ’tis you
to play.
Card. Prince! I’ve already said, and so it is.
From reach of thy rash folly I had meant
To save thee, not myself. Why ! I had done
What I have done, even were it otherwise
Than as it is.—Your eyes blaze death on one
That meets it smilingly, since in the path
Of honourable loyalty it lies.


Duke. ’Fore God! beneath this churchman’s cassock’s hid
The spirit of a man.—My father himself
Looks out upon me from beneath those brows,
And grieves me to the soul.—Take him away!
Nay, hold! What's this?
Enter Guard lending Fabricio as prisoner.
Bianca, (aside) The Duke relents, —I read it in his looks.
Dear soul! How should his unsuspicious eyes
Detect the lightning-fang of this sleek reptile ?
Card. (aside) I read him well; the storm is past its height;
Now is the moment come—and, win or lose,
Upon this last cast I have ventured all.
Captain. Prince! by your orders. Here’s
My prisoner, and this writing found on him.
Duke.. (reading) How? What? “My purpose changed;
this act repented;
The duchess with all honour to' be brought
To th’ Court.”—(toCardinal) The meaning of it? —
Nought of this
You spake.
Card. But had, —had you but stayed to listen.
Duke. Explain.
Card. When you laid this dishonour on me.
I was in act to touch upon that point
Towards which I first set out, the when and wherefore
Of my so sudden-seeming inconformity; —
Mark now ! the bursting storm ’tis, puts to trial
The worthiness o’ the ship, and so it was
The high courageous spirit of this lady,
Which shone so constant in adversity,
Enjoined me pause; pause, doubt; and doubt, re-
pentance.
O then I was all as precipitate
To undo th’ wrong, as I had been to do it.
So that, Prince-brother, hither I repaired
With my most diligence, having already
Despatched that order which was found upon him,
To bid Fabricio bring this wronged lady
Into your presence, meaning to acquire
Your mutual pardons by my hearty penitence,
Or failing that submit me to your judgments.


Duke. O ! 11l it is, when men act ill, although
The motive of that action be distilled
Of purity’s self. There is no grace in heaven
To sweeten that which in itself is blemished.
Yet, yet! This timely penitence of thine
Chimes graciously upon my heavy soul.
Bianca, (aside) O hypocrite! cunning devilish hypocrite!
’T seems thou win’st now. Wait! They laugh best,
laugh last;
I’ll even it with thee ere very long.
Duke. O ! I was in a monstrous passion, Brother !
Card. Where is thy duchess ? lam sick at soul
Until I have entreated her forgiveness.
{to Fabricio) Where did you leave her, Sir?
Duke. Why! even where
He found her. Your intents went not beyond
Themselves. Tiie net you cast had in’t a flaw
To let her through. (Pulls aside curtain. Bianca
steps out.) See! —You are lost in wonder.
Card. Lady, I see you have heard all.
Bianca. Aye! all: —
(aside) And more than ever I believed, sly Priest! —•
Card. I throw myself upon thy clemency:
I have no right to wage against thy wrong,
But that it was not personal to thee,
But ventured wrongly in my prince’s right;
What was ill done, was yet not done for ill.
Bianca, (after fixing her eyes on Cardinal, slowly turns to
the Duke.)
My dearest liege!—As I sate listening there
To this most strange relation of yon man,
I must confess a natural indignation
Made my heart bitter. So that, when your wrath
Burst on him sudden, I said within myself —
Well! I could do it now, —now, with a word!
But then, —I know not, —something whispered me.
As thus; —my lord Duke, being so enraged,
Will work quick justice on the Cardinal,
And he deserves no less. But in his death
His fault will partly die; and then my husband,
For he is simple, and in his affections
Touched easily, will grieve, and from his sorrow
Educe a thousand pithy memories


And brotherly rites, such petty noteless trifles
As mothers treasure of their dead sweet babes
Long after they’re forgotten by all else.
These things he’ll ponder, till they palliate.
And quite obscure his present injury.
O ! then when he shall turn on me love’s eye,
Will’t not grow glazed, seeing within my face
The intelligence and evermore renewal
Of a loved brother’s death ? It must, it must .
Duke. How prettily have you accused my love,
To acquit my brotherly weakness. —Cardinal!
You must yet do a penance for thy sins
So sweetly here forgiven :—Know you, then,
That this our Duchess was so yesterday,
But those our secret rites shall o’er again
Be openly performed by thee to-morrow.
(To the Guard.)
Take hence the prisoner. For his faulty faith.
We banish him for aye from our dominions,
Wherein if he be found, be it death. Away !
[Exeunt Guard with Fabricio.
O the high passion of this momentous scene
Hath bred in me a marvellous kind of faintness.
Let wine be brought. —Come! We will o’er again
Pledge one another, in blessed sweet renewal
Of everlasting amity and love,
To celebrate this glad auspicious day.
Bianca. And I, my Jove, will be thy Ganymede.
(Goes to side-table where wine is set.)
Duke. My heart grows light as a fresh-primed bridegroom’s.
Card. {aside) And mine more dark-suspicious than a grave.
{They converse aside.)
Bianca, (aside) I saw it in his eyes;—his hate shot out
Like lightning flickering through a fatal cloud
Of a summer’s day. lam not safe from him,
Unless I make him safe. He’ll cast about
To drop his poison in our cup of love,
Which is so sharp-delicious to my taste
That rather I’d forego the rest of life
The which without it were but vacuum.


The "whole huge world hath not sufficiency
Of space to harbour two such hating souls
As we are. ’Tis my life, or his; —then his !
Why not?—Then here! —and now! My finger grows
A deadly flower of safety and revenge:
I’ll do it! —So ! —Drink this, and drink thy death !
(Poisons the wine with the ring, and hears it in.
She gives a glass to each, and takes one herself.
Duke. Here will we sit like gods, and quaff that nectar
Which everlastingly makes young the heart.
(Duke and Bianca drink. Cardinal 'puts his to
his lips, but refrains.)
Card. (aside) Timeo Danaos! ... I will not drink.
A woman ne’er forgives but where she loves,
And she’s no cause to love me or forgive.
But rather to be speedily revenged.
Verbum sat sapienti!
Duke. You drink not, Brother !
Card. I durst no more than taste it with my eye,
A vow of abstinence keeps me fasting still.
Duke. Then I’ll drink for thee ; for thou must not hold
Without the pale of gentle fellowship.
(He takes the Cardinal’s cup. Bianca endeavours
to snatch it from him. He playfully
avoids her.)
Bianca. Thy Ganymede not brooks her Jove should lip
The cup unconsecrate, that meaner mouths
Have pressed.
Duke. No, no! No, no! (drinks.)
Bianca, (aside) The poisoned cup !
Duke. Henceforth, sweetheart! thou shalt make no dis-
tinction ;
Thy love must learn to value us equally.
(He rises and with the Cardinal approaches
the window.
Bianca, (aside) Too late!—O deadly error!—What have I
done ?
All, all’s at end: remains now but to die!


Duke. See how this golden disc whirls through the air.
Hurled from the hand of Jove, and in his passage
Confers a sudden momentary splendour
Upon this pretty bauble, this tinselled toy,
This most ingenious plaything-world of ours.
Card. Indeed it is a noble prospect, Prince.
Duke. We’ll wash our souls in’t every morning, love.
Bianca. It is a dream within a dream, dear liege.
(aside) O ! —hut the waking ’tis I fear, I fear!
Duke. What of yon glorious silver avenue ?
Remember you the day we bare our father
In death’s slow solemn pompous triumph through ?
I know not why I think of it, —but I see,
Even as ’twere yesterday, the purple pall
Rich with the sadness of unending night.
Sombre against yon beeches.
Card. ’Twas a day
Not unlike this.
Duke. Nay! very like. Methought
I felt its shadow fall across my heart.
Bianca. (suddenly bursting out ) O no, no, no ! I will not have
it so ! ( restrains herself with an effort.)
Duke. Ho, ho! I meant it not in all seriousness.
Why! Dear, thou tremblest like a frightened dove.
Bianca. O ! for my sake, no more such jests, sweet love.
(aside) I must leave him; I shall betray myself.
May not this devilish drug have lost its potency,
Being so long subject to the cleansing air
Which all things purifies of ill effect?
’Tis not unlike. O, I must watch, and watch
That little spark of hope. I fear to go blind.
Duke. How were it, sweetheart, if yon plumed pines
Which grave-like gape amid this fairy bower,
Were taken away? Were’t not more wholesome,
think you ?
Bianca. Indeed, they’re something heavy. (Aside) Yet my
heart
Is heavier, —with that may never, never,
O ! never any more be taken away.
(The Duke makes a movement of fain.)
Look, look, look! —Is he not a little pale?
Card. What is’t, good brother?


Duke. A sudden heaviness
Is fallen on my spirits. I look back
On all my long long road of life, and wonder
What ’twas I travelled for. Those silly wits
That are content through all the day to sweat,
Eat, drink, their brains contract to bellies, and
When evening comes snooze by their snug firesides,
Untroubled by thought’s wild imaginings,—
The fever of unsatisfied desire;
The tedium that alternates with knowledge
That is too eagerly sought, too deeply sounded ;
The sense of infinite beauty, ever mad
To enjoy more than mortality safely can; —
O; they’re the wiser, the better off, the nearer
Solution of the problem natural
To this weak animal, man.
Bianca, (aside ) The words he speaks have all a different sense
Within my brain, to what is purposed.
They’re driving me mad, mad, mad! I’ll stop my
ears.
Card. Nay! but the soul ?
Duke. It is a peacock’s plume stuck in our caps,
And we strut under it like puny gods
And snort upon Creation: naked, abed,
We peep as fearful round as any, —aye!
And o’er our heads pull up the silly bedclothes.
Card. You fish in too deep waters: nothing’s there
To catch but shadows of yourself, my lord.
’Tis a preserve of Holy Mother Church.
Bianca, (aside ) My brain begins to reel! and this his speech,
Though all distinction in its meaning’s lost.
Is as an awful sounding adjuration
Evoking dead men from their guilty graves.
(Slight noise.)
O what was that? —Methought I heard a fall!
Duke. To-morrow there’s a hunting party forward,
And you must make one too.
Card. That will I, brother.
Duke. And as we ride we’ll overlook the park:
There’s that plantation to be determined on.
Card. I have the plans drawn out; I’ll bring them with me.
Duke. Do.—l’m giddy.
Card. What is’t, Prince?


Duke. ’Tis nothing.
Bianca, (aside) See, see! That shadow—there! —although
I know
’Tis nothing but a creature of my frenzy,
Yet —Oh ! oh ! oh !—lt moves !—it moves towards
him!—
I will prevent thee! ( turns as the Duke falls, and
rushes towards him.)
Duke. Help me ! —I fall! (falls.)
Bianca. ( screams) O, O! My life! love! husband! —speak
to me! ( falls wpon him.)
Card. Help ! —Help the Duke! —Bring a physician.—Haste!
I fear! I fear! Here’s some dark business.
How is it with thee, brother ?
Duke. Oh!—’Tis dark, —
I cannot see, —
Card. Make room there. Give him air.
Duke. Death! thou com’st to me in so lovely a form
That I must welcome thee; —Thus ! —thus ! —thy lips !
Oh! (dies.)
Bianca. Gone, gone, gone, gone! ’Tis thou hast poisoned
him —
The poison that he drank was meant for thee! —
O sacrilegious murderer ! ,
That did’st not drink: —for that thy wicked soul
Shall go athirst in hell a million ages,
- And long in vain for some infectious drug
To still its bitter anguish. God, I pray thee!
Shake him with some malignant fell disease
To linger out his days in agony.
Card. O wretched, wretched woman! Call’s! thou on God ?
Bianca. Why not? Think’st thou God cares? No! not
although
A million creeping vermin such as thou
Were hourly quit; it were a merciful deed.
(Turns to the hody.)
O! O! O! O!
I’ve lived too long, my Dear, that lived to see
Pale Death encroach upon thy precious scarlet.
Why should I haunt the world where thou art not ?
Thou being hence, I have no more to do.
Come then ! —This ring, my marriage-ring, that dipt
us
In that first sweet delirious dream of bliss,


This second time, beyond all change of chance,
Shall marry us now everlastingly. (Sucks ring.)
Card. Hold ! Let her not add guilt to guilt. Arrest her!
(They rush towards her.)
Bianca. See how these jackals gather round, and gaze
With hungry eyes on me, and lick their chaps!
She draws dagger and stabs herself.
O! O!
Sweet poison, thou art kindlier than these,
That thou so speedily tak’st me from their hate,
And render’st me again to my dear love.
I come ! I come! —Upon the brink of chaos
0 ! stay for me, that we together take
The irretrievable plunge. O ! 0 ! (dies.)
Card. O ! fearful are the judgments of high Heaven.
And I, that by this tragic loss have gained
What most I wished, yet wished it not gained thus.
This heavy sight makes dark my soul within me.
1 will to meditation, and to prayer.
{Curtain.)
The End.


MELBOURNE:
M‘CAREON, BIRD & CO., PRINTERS,
479 COLLINS STREET.
