

BIBLIOGRAPHY
AUSTRALIA
JOHN ALEXANDER FERGUSON,
8.A., Ll.B. (Syd.)
Fellow of the Royal Australian Historical Society
VOLUME 1: 1784-1830
Limited edition of 500 copies
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON LTD
SYDNEY :: LONDON
1941


Limited edition of 500 copies
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON LTD
SYDNEY :: LONDON
1941


The appearance of the first volume of Mr Justice J. A. Ferguson’s
Bibliography of Australia (1784-1838) is an event of major impor-
tance in the history of Australian literature. The product of twenty-
five years’ research, this great work will undoubtedly remain the
standard authority on early Australiana; and, as such, it will be
indispensable to collectors, librarians, book-sellers, and all serious
students of the subject.
ft has long been a matter of complaint that no complete biblio-
graphy of Australia was to be found. Attempts were made in the
past to compile a bibliography giving a description of all books,
pamphlets, broadsides and newspapers relating to Australia or pub-
lished in Australia. The results were either partial and incomplete,
or the attempts were abandoned owing to the magnitude of the
task. The only feasible way of carrying through so vast an enter-
prise was to attempt the task in sections. This the author has done;
and the work contains a bibliography, as complete as possible from
1784, when the plan to establish a settlement in Australia was for
the first time seriously mooted, to the end of 1838.
The present volume completes the work to 1830— a second volume
bringing it up to 1838 will be issued later.
Mr Justice Ferguson is a recognized authority on all matters relat-
ing to Australiana, and his fine collection is well known to students
of the subject. Nor will there be found any account of Australian
literature comparable to this—listing, as it does, every known publi-
cation, wherever printed and whatever its subject or language, hav-
ing Australian reference.
Apart from its bibliographical value and interest, the book pre-
sents from a new angle a fascinating picture of the history of Aus-
tralia from its first settlement.
The volume has 540 pages set in Baskerville type, printed on the
finest quality British esparto paper and is attractively bound in
red buckram with gilt lettering. There are 32 illustrations clearly
reproduced on art paper.
Hie two sample pages reproduced here show the typography,
layout and size of the book.


io-h -"73
INTRODUCTION
The formative period, 1784-1838, of Australian history has been
chosen for this, the first part of what may become a more extended
Bibliography of Australia. In or about the former year the first
proposals were made for a penal settlement in New Holland. These
were due to the closing of the seceding American Colonies to the
reception of British convicts. The still earlier period of sea explora-
tion and discovery from De Quiros and Torres, Dampier and
Tasman to Cook, has already been fully treated in easily accessible
bibliographies. The other extreme of the chosen period (1838)
seemed to be a convenient halting-place, being exactly one hundred
years prior to the intended year of publication, the sesqui-centennial
year of Australia. Books, pamphlets, broadsides and periodicals, in-
cluding newspapers, have been described. Maps, charts and prints
(unless issued in book form) have been excluded as deserving
separate special treatment. Articles or papers appearing in periodi-
cals have also been omitted unless they were subsequently issued
as independent publications. Every effort has been made to describe
fully and accurately each item falling within the above-mentioned
limits—that is, every publication relating in any way to Australia
printed anywhere outside Australia as well as every imprint made
in Australia. Items which have no Australian reference and were
not printed in Australia, though the authors resided in Australia
either before or after the date of such publication, have not been
given the status of Australiana by inclusion unless they throw some
light upon Australian affairs. Such publications have usually been
mentioned, however, in footnotes and so have been included in the
index.
Sources of general reference such as The Annual Register, The
Parliamentary Debates, The Times and other English newspapers
of the period have been omitted. Publications relating to New
Zealand or the South Seas have been excluded unless they contain
some special reference to Australia. This rule, however, has been
infringed to some extent where the work in question relates to
some person prominently identified with Australian history, whose
career cannot be studied intelligently or fully without reference to
such sources. For example, books and pamphlets relating to La
Perouse, including the voyages made in search of him, and pub-
lished within the stated period, have been inserted. For the same


reason works relating to William Bligh, his voyages and the mutiny
on the Bounty have been included. Items relating to Captain James
Cook, R.N., and his voyages have been excluded because the events
recorded were antecedent to the chosen period, and all relevant
publications have been described in the Bibliography of Captain
James Cook, R.N., F.R.S., Circumnavigator, prepared and published
by the Public Library of New South Wales, Sydney, 1928 (a supple-
ment to which work is now in preparation), and in An Introduction
to the Bibliography of Captain James Cook, R.N., by Sir Maurice
Holmes, C. 8., London, Francis Edwards Ltd, 1936.
It is obvious that, despite careful research and checking, titles
will be found to have been omitted. It is hoped that such defects
may be remedied in a supplement. It seemed more expedient to
proceed to press with the work, such as it is, than to await indefi-
nitely a greater approximation to ideal completeness.
The present Bibliography is modelled on the lines followed in
Evans’s colossal American Bibliography and Hocken’s Bibliography
of the Literature Relating to New Zealand, the arrangement being
chronological with author and subject index in addition.
Within this first part fall subjects of the highest importance, in-
cluding, for example, the foundation of the settlements in New
South Wales, Tasmania, Western Australia, Victoria, South Aus-
tralia, and North Australia; the transportation and management
of convicts; immigration; exploration by land and sea; the earliest
descriptions of objects of natural history; the aborigines and their
treatment; the establishment of the first Australian institutions and
industries; the administration of justice; the first claims for self-
government and the early agitation for the abolition of the convict
system; land settlement; the first printings or incunabula; and the
gradual development of an Australian literature.
In addition to a precise description of each work, historical and
bibliographical notes have been introduced where they seemed to
be called for. The title-pages of many of the more notable or quaint
imprints have been reproduced as illustrations.
It is possible, with the aid of the cross-indexing system supplied,
to ascertain without delay all the titles touching any one subject or
the works of any author published up to and including 1838.
The extensive geographical range of printings relating to Aus-
tralia published within the period 1784-1838 is interesting.


Bligh, William— continued.
substituted a copy of the original “Narrative of the Mutiny,” with title-
page dated 1790, and separate pagination. Pp. 154 and 245 are left blank.
Francis Edwards Ltd, Cat. 560 (1933), No. 213.
Copies: M.L. !26
A | Voyage | to the | South Sea, | undertaken by command of [
His Majesty, | for the purpose of ( conveying the Bread-fruit
Tree to the | West Indies, | in His Majesty’s Ship the Bounty, |
commanded by j Lieutenant William Bligh. [ Including an ac-
count of the | Mutiny on board said ship, J and the | subsequent
voyage of part of the crew, in the ship’s | boat, from Tofoa, one
of the Friendly Islands, to | Timor, a Dutch Settlement in the
East Indies. | j Published by permission of the | Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty. | = j Dublin: | Printed by
H. Fitzpatrick, | for Messrs P. Wogan, P. Byrne, W. McKenzie,
J. Moore, J. Jones, W. Jones, R. M'Allister, | and J. Rice.
MDCCXCII.
Bvo. Pp. [xiv], 376. Frontispiece: Captain Bligh; one other plate:
Sections of the bread-fruit, facing page i.
Copies : M.L.
Voyage | a la Mer du Sud, | Entrepris par ordre de S. M. Britan-
nique J pour introduire, aux Indes Occidentales, j I’arbre a
pain, et d’autres plantes utiles; | Par le Lieutenant G. Bligh.
Avec une relation de la revoke a bord de son I vaisseau etc.
Traduit de I’Anglais pa. F. Soules. | | A Paris | Chez
Garnery, Libraire, rue Serpente. | Buisson, rue Haute-Feuille.
Desenne, an Palais-Royal, j Blanchon, rue Git-le-coeur. | =
1792.
Bvo. Pp. [iv], 372. Two folded maps and plate of the bread-fruit
plant. Issued in paper wrappers.
Copies : F.C.; M.L.; N.L. 128
Engelske Capitainens | Wilhelm Blighs j Resa, | Genom Sddra
Wcrlds-Hafvet, j tolf hundrade Sjomil | i open bSt, [ frSn
Tofoa till Timor. | [Printer’s emblem] | Upsala, ( Tryckt hos
Direct. Job. Edmans Enka, | pa egct lorlag, 1792
i2mo. Pp. [iv] (title, verso blank, preface), 120.
A Swedish translation of the Mutiny on the Bounty and subsequent
boat voyage from Tofoa to Timor.
Copies : Kroepelien Collection, Oslo, Norway; M.L. 12 g
William Bligh’s Bericht von dem Aufruhre an Bord des Schiffes
Bounty.
In Magazin von merkwilrdigen neuen Reisebeschreibungen, vol. IX.
See White, John. Tagebuch einer Reise . . . (1792), No. 145. \


Bounty, H. M. Ship.
An | Account | of the j Mutinous Seizure of the Bounty. | With
the succeeding | hardships of the crew. | To which are added,
Secret Anecdotes of the Otaheitian Females. ] === | London:
Printed for Bentley and Co., No. 22, Fetter Lane; and sold
| H. D. Symonds, Paternoster Row.
Bvo. Pp. [iv] (title, verso blank; reference to the principal incidents,
verso blank), [2] (both blank), [9]-72. Frontispiece: The Pirates seizing
Captn. Bligh. Codings del. Barlow sculp. N.D. [c. 1792].
An anonymous narrative. The account of the Mutiny is based on
Bligh’s book; the “Secret Anecdotes of the Otaheitian Females” are ex-
tracted from Hawkesworth.
Copies : D.C.; M.L. igi
An I Account I of the | Mutinous Seizure of the Bounty;
with the succeeding I hardships of the Crew. | To which are
added, ] Secret Anecdotes of the Otaheitean Females.
London: | Printed for E. Bentley, No. 22, Fetter Lane; | And
sold by Bell and Taylor, Royal Exchange; Rusted, Shoe Lane;
Parsley, | Surrey Side of Blackfriars Bridge; Roach, Russel
Court; Serle, corner of | Warwick Street; Simpson, Parliament
Street; Beilby, Pall Mall; and all ] other Booksellers.
Bvo. Pp. [iv] (title, verso blank; Reference to the Principal Incidents,
verso blank), [9L76. N.D. [c. 1792]. Apparently an error occurred in
numbering the pages. Frontispiece: The Pirates seizing Captn. Bligh.
Codings del. Barlow sculp. Light blue paper wrappers.
Copies: D.C.; M.L.; N.L. lg 2
[D’Entrecasteaux, Bruny.]
Extract uit de Notu- j len van het geresolveerde j in Raade van
Indie, | op j den 10 April 1792, ( . . .
Fcap folio. Pp. 4 (last blank). No title-page.
Publication of the letters received from the Staaten Generaal in Hol-
land commending to the Council of the Indies and all functionaries in
the Dutch East Indies M. D’Entrecasteaux, who had been despatched by
the French Government in search of the Astrolabe and Boussole com-
manded by the ill-fated La Perouse.
The pamphlet was printed at the Castle in Batavia, 1792.
A copy, fortunately preserved in Landsarchief, Batavia, the official re-
pository of the archives of the Government of the Dutch East Indies, was
discovered there in January, 1939, by the compiler. 133
Dupetit-Thouars, Aristide Aubert.
Memoire adresse par la famille Dupetit-Thouars aux action-
naires et a Fequipage du “Diligent” expedie au mois d’aout
1792, pour aller a la recherche de La Perouse . . . sous les
ordres d’ Aristide-Aubert Dupetit-Thouars.
4to. Paris: Imprimerie de Gueffier, N.D. [1792].
See Centenaire de la Mort de Laperouse, Paris: Societe de Geographic,
1888, p. 182 (Bibliographic), No. 71. 134


No. 358
NEW SOUTH WALES GENERAL STANDING ORDERS
The excessively rare first book printed in Australasia. The printer was
George Howe, the second Australian printer
From a copy in the Mitchell Library, Sydney


AUTHENTIC and INTERESTING
NARRATIVE
Of THE LATE EXPEDITION
BOX AN YBAY,
ASF E&f O R BMC D B Y
COMMODORE PHILLIPS,
The Fi,cit or the SEVEN TRANSPORT SEEPS
under ha Command:
CouTAimno
A cJrcirrfhmhl Account of thc»r perilous VovACB
SMtkmom on Barrel znd life A Kbit a L
ON the COAST of NEW HOLLAND.
with **aricui*4* uiictirrtws or
Jackfon’s Bay & Lord Howe’s IflaaJ,
The Reception they rret with from she Natives, rhe.’r
Cuftonw and Manner*; Pragrc&of s ticSctien#n£, and Law*
»ad Government tiUbli&ed for their further latprowcmcat.
Written hy an Officer jtift returned in the Pimct of Walsif
Traofport. who v sited that Spot *nh &/(«« C<*i, and
/)r. SeimJrr, tnUteir celebrated Voyage* round ilt« world.
ABEII D £ E N
rhated far ALEXANDER JtEIIH,
No. 44
AN AUTHENTIC AND INTERESTING NARRATIVE OF THE
LATE EXPEDITION TO BOTANY BAY
A rare ebap-book, printed in Aberdeen, 1789
From a copy in the Ferguson Collection
3 1508 00010564 8
