

BIBLIOGRAPHY
OF
TERRA AUSTRALIS, NEW HOLLAND. AND NEW SOUTH WALES,
TO 1820.
[For a considerable portion of the matter published in this section, the Author is indebted to Mr.
Edward Augustus Petherick, F.L.S., F.R.G.S., compiler of the Catalogue of the York Gate Library,
and publisher of the Torch and Colonial Book Circular.]


BIBLIOGRAPHY
of Terra Australis, New Holland, and New South
Wales, to the year 1820.*
The earliest references to the colonisation of the country formerly
known as Terra Australis, appear in the shape of certain pro-
posals made to the British Government in the sixteenth century.
Early in the reign of Queen Elizabeth the subject of colonies was
discussed in England, and papers were laid before her Majesty on
the advantages likely to accrue from new discoveries of lands not
already taken possession of by the Portuguese, Spaniards, or French,
and especially of those countries lying beyond the Equinoctial, f
A later project, in Secretary Walsingham’s handwriting, for estab-
lishing a company to trade beyond the Equinoctial line—Drake
to be Governor for life—still exists in the Record Office. This
was prepared in 1580, just after Drake’s return home from his
voyage round the world.
Terra Australis was supposed to reach from the south towards
and beyond the tropic of Capricorn, nearly to the Equator, and its
coast-line to extend all round the South Pole. It is so delineated
on old globes and mappe-mondes (1530-66), and described in an
introduction to the account of Frobisher’s First Yoyage (1578);
those parts best known lying over against Cabo di Buena Esperanza,
whither the Portuguese in their voyages to India had been driven
out of their direct course by storms.
The only English colonies settled or attempted to be settled in
the reigns of Elizabeth and her successor, were those in North
America and Guiana.
* “The discoverie, traffique, and enjoyeuge for the Queens Majesty and
her subjects of all or anie lands, islands and countries southewards beyond
the equinoctial, or when the pole Antartik hathe anie elevation above the
Horissn, and which landes, islandes, and countries be not already possessed
or subdued by or to the use of any Christian Prince in Europe as by the
charts and descriptions shall appere.”—Landsdowne M.S., C folio 142-6.
This manuscript, which is endorsed by Lord Burleigh, A discovery of lands
beyond the Equinoctial, 1573, has been printed in the Hakluyt Society’s
edition of Frobisher’s Voyages, 1867, pp. 4-8.


In the meantime, Pedro Fernandez de Quiros, who believed he
had discovered Terra Australis, had petitioned Phillip the Third
of Spain to colonise that country lest it should be taken possession
of by the English. All the known memorials of Quiros have been
recently published (Madrid, 1877—82), together with the narratives
of his two voyages (1595 and 1606), preceded by that of Mendana
to the Solomon Islands (1567). One of the Quiros memorials
falling into the hands of G-resley, Secretary to the English Embassy
at the Spanish Court, was by him forwarded to his Government in
1610.*
Raleigh’s first colony in North America (1587) had not succeeded;
but other settlements in Virginia and New England, despite Spanish
protests, were now being founded with some measure of success.
Sir James Lancaster, who had made voyages to. the East Indies
frequently, proposed to have a ship sent through the Straits of
Magellan to the Solomon Islands, but without result. James the
First was not favourable to colonies. In the last year of his reign,
1621-5, an eminent London merchant—probably the most enter-
prising one of his time —Sir William Courteen, desiring to extend
his trade to the Terra Australis, petitioned the king for the privilege
of establising colonies there. Sir William, who was joint owner
of more than twenty ships of burden, employing four or five
thousand seamen, already carried on an extensive trade on his own
account to Portugal, Spain, Guinea, and the West Indies. The
following is a copy of his petition :
To the Kings Most Excellent Ma tie .
The humble petition of Sir William Courteen, Knt., most humbly sheweth
unto your Ma tie , —
That all lands in y e south parts of y e world called Terra Australis Incognita,
extending eastwards and westwards from y e Straights of Le Maire together
with all ye adjacente islandes, &c., are yet undiscovered or being discovered
are not yet traded unto by any of your Ma ties subjects. And your petitioner
being very willing att his owne charges which wilbe very greate, to indeavour
y e discovery thereof and settle Collonies and a plantation there which he
hopeth will tend to ye glory of God, ye reducing of Infidells to Christianity,
ye honour of your Ma tie , ye inlargem 4 of your Ma ties Territories and Do-
minions, ye increase of your Ma ties Customs and revenue, and ye Navigation
and imployment of your Ma tIH subjects :
Your pet r therefore humbly desireth y r Ma tie to bee pleased to grante to
him his heires and assignes all ye said lands islands and territories, with
power to discover ye same to erect colonies and a plantation there and Courts
of Justices officers and ministers for ye settling and governinge of ye said
colonies and plantations, and those which are or shall inhabit or be there,
and power to administer justice and to execute marshall law by land and
sea, and for your pet 1 ' and those whom hee shall employ to defend themselves
* An English translation was printed in London, 1617; reprinted 1723.


and offend such others as shall oppugne or hinder the said discovery or
plantation of your pet rs shippes in going or returning. And with such other
grantes and landes and privileges as in cases of discovery or setlinge of
colonies or plantations is usuall or shall be fitt. And to directe your Ma ti,s
Attorney-Generall to prepare a grante accordingly fitt for your Ma ties royal
signature. And your pet r (as in duty bound) shall ever pray for your
Ma tics long and happy raigne.
Having lent large sums of money to the King, Sir William
Courteen had some claim upon his Majesty’s consideration. But
it does not appear that “ all ye said islands and territories ” were
granted to him. He seems to have been satisfied with a bad title
to the island of Barbados ; where he sent (1626) fifty settlers, who
built a fort and remained there till it was taken from them in
1628. He then sent eighty men and retook it in the name of the
Earl of Pembroke. Sir William died in 1636.
The next proposal for the colonisation of Terra Australis bears the
name of Captain Welbe, datel7l6. One copy only of the original is
known to exist, and that is in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. In
the light of present knowledge this document is of great interest;
especially in connection with the reference to the gold and silver
mines, and the name of “New Wales.”
Captain John Welbe’s
Proposals
for
Establishing a Company by the name of the London Adventurers
for carrying on a Trade to (and settling Colonies in) Terra Aus-
tralis, and working and improving the Gold and Silver Mines
which there abound.
Whereas ’tis well known that there is no nation that do Trade from the
South Seas to the East Indies but the Spaniards, whose India Trade is from
Acapulco (on the coast of Mexico in the South Seas) to the Phillippine
Islands in the East Indies, which ships, in going, keep always in the north-
east Trade wind ; and in coming back they run to 40 or 45 degrees north,
to meet a westerly wind, to run them to the eastward, for which reason
those southern parts are not yet fully discovered, nor any part of them
settled by any European whatsoever, they lying out of the way of all
trading ships.
If we look back and trace the course of those European Ships Voyages
that have sailed round the Globe, it may be easily seen how far they were
from making any Discoveries in those southern parts, the course of their
voyages not giving them any opportunity for so doing.
Magellanus, the discoverer of the Streights called after his name, the
first that sail’d west from the South Seas to the East Indies, sailed along
the coast of Peru and Mexico, till he came to California, and thence took
his departure for India, keeping in the north-east Trade wind.
2 p


Sir Francis Drake, said to be the first Commander that sail’d round the
Globe (Magellanus being killed by the Indians at Mindanao Island), kept the
coast of Peru and Mexico, and sailed west for India, in the north-east Trade
wind.
Sir Thomas Cavendish the same.
Captain Swann, one of the Buccaneers of America, with whom Captain
Dampier sail’d the first time round the Globe, kept in the north-east Trade
wind from California to India, and was killed at Mindanao, as Magellanus
was.
Captain Rogers in the Duke and Dutchess, with the Acapulco ship, kept
likewise in the north-east Trade wind.
It is here to be observed that from the coast of Peru West, to the East
Indies, is upwards of 2,500 leagues, to, the southward of the Line is
undiscovered to any European (Captain Welbe excepted), who, in the course
of his voyage round the world with Captain Dampier, in the year 1703,
1704, 1705, 1706, having many extraordinary opportunities of satisfying and
informing himself what discoveries had been made, by order of the Viceroys
of Peru, for 150 years past: was thereby well assured, that the islands,
named by the said Captain Welbe St. George’s Islands and New Wales,
and some other islands thereabouts, which abound with mines of gold and
silver, belong to no European Prince or State, and are therefore free for the
first Discoverer to take possession of, which mines the undertaker doubts
not to prove, will enrich the British Nation upwards of 50,000,000 sterling,
if taken possession of, and colonies settled, which is not half what the king-
dom of Peru has produc’d to the Spaniards since their first settlement there
under Francisco Pizaro, the first Viceroy.
It is therefore proposed that a Joint Stock, not exceeding 2,500,000, be
raised to fit out ships, and settle colonies forthwith, that the improvement
and advantages of such valuable discoveries may not be lost. And in order
thereto, the said Captain Welbe is now ready to grant permits to such
persons who are willing to be proprietors and adventurers in this said under-
taking. On grant of which permits the proprietors are to pay in Is. on every
share, viz., 10s. for I,OOOL to enable the undertaker to apply for and obtain
a patent, and defray other charges ; and no more is to be paid in until at
a general meeting of, and by the proprietors, directors, and treasurers be
chosen ; and then no more on each share than what the directors, at such
meeting, shall agree on, and find necessary for carrying on effectually so
valuable and advantageous a trade.
N.B.—The proposer has no sinister ends, nor self-interest, in view, and
expects no pay, nor any reward, but such part of the neat produce of profits,
as the directors themselves shall think fit, and agree, to allow him.
Among the Sloane MSS. in the British Museum is an earlier
proposal by Captain Welbe to the British Government for a full
discovery of the Terra Australis. Burney, vol. iv, p. 517, gives
the following account of it :
In 1713, John a person who had been in the South Sea with
Captain Dampier, offered a plan to the British Ministry for a voyage to
make a full discovery of Terra Australis. Welbe was an ingenious but


distressed projector, and it appearing that his proposals were made princi-
pally with a view to his own relief, they obtained little attention. They
were referred to the Admiralty, and afterwards to the South Sea Company,
a Committee of which Company examined and “ found the matter out of
their hounds.” The heads of Welbe’s scheme were, to give them in his own
words, as follows :
“ For a good fourth-rate ship of the navy to be equipped for the voyage,
to carry 180 men, having only her upper tier of guns mounted, leaving the
rest ashore for the convenience of stowing additional provisions, and for the
ease of the ship. The cooking copper to be hung like a still, so that when
water is wanted, we can distil salt water and make fresh. Also a brigan-
tine tender to be provided. To go round Cape Horne to the Island Juan
Fernandez ; thence to the Solomon Islands, discovered 150 years ago by the
Spaniards, but the Court.of Spain did not think lit to settle them by reason
they had not entirely settled the main land of Peru. On arriving, to search
and discover what that country abounds in, and to trapan some of the
inhabitants on board and bring them to England, who when they have
learnt our language will be proper interpreters.”
He proposes afterwards to sail to New Guinea, which he supposed to be a
part of Terra Australis, and there to make the like examination.
Welbe several times renewed his proposals. His plan and application
have been preserved in the Sloane collection of Manuscripts, and his last
application is dated in the latter part of the year 1716, from Wood-street
Compter, where he was then confined for debt. He complains in it that he
was brought to distress by fourteen months’ attendance, having in that time
presented three petitions to the King, besides petitioning the Treasury and
the Admiralty Board, without receiving any definite answer.
Purry :—A few years later a little volume, in two parts, advising
the settlement of colonies in South Africa and South Australia,
was published in Amsterdam, bearing these titles :
Aanmerkingen ; Betreffende de kust der Kaffers, en het Landt van Pieter
Nuyts: Ten opzigte van de nuttigheit, die de Oostindische compagnie, van
dezelve voor haarenkoophandel zoude konnen trekken [emblem with motto,
“ Terrae dum prosim ”]. 18mo., pp. 114. t’Amsterdam, by R. en G. Wet-
stein, 1718.
Tweede Aanmerkingen; Betreffende de kust der Kaffers; en het landt
van Pieter Nuyts : Dienende tot opholdering der voorstellingen in de eerste
gedaan, tennutte van de oostindische compagnie [emblem], 18mo., pp. 116.
t’Amsterdam, by R. en G. Wetstein, 1718.
This work was issued in French in the same year ;
Memoire sur le Pais des Cafres, et la Terre de Nuyts. Par rapport a
utility que la Compagnie des Indes Orientales en pourroit retirer pour son
commerce. 18mo., pp. 83. Amsterdam, 1718.
Second Memoire sur le Pais des Cafres, et la Terre de Nuyts, servant
d’eclaireissement aux propositions faites dans le premier, pour Futility de la
Compagnie des Indes Orientales. 18mo., pp. 77. Amsterdam, 1718.
The first memoir was originally addressed by Jean Pierre Purry, a Batavia
le 20 de mai 1717, to S. E. Mons. Christophol van Swol, Gouverneur-Generale
des Indes Orientales des Pais Bas. It is here printed in the author’s
mother-tongue, and addressed to Messeigneurs les deputez a des
dix-sept., representant la compagnie generate des Indes Orientales, des pais
bas : k Amsterdam ce 23 juillet 1718, —to whom the second memoir was
also addressed, 1 September, 1718.


In the British Museum there are two other tracts by the same
author :
I. Memorial of Jean Pierre Purry of Xeuchatel in behalf of the Coloni-
sation of South Carolina. 4t0., pp. 12, London, 18th July, 1724. [Reprinted
in Carroll’s Historical Collections, vol. ii, 1836 ; in Force’s Tracts, vol. ii,
1836, and separately in 4t0., Augusta, Georgia, 1880.]
11. A method for determining the best climate of the Earth, on a principle
to which all geographers and historians have been hitherto strangers. In a
memorial presented to the Governors of the East India Company in Holland,
for which the author was obliged to leave that country. By John Peter
Purry. Translated from the I’rench. 12m0., pp. 4-60. London, 1744.
Collation : Title, Advertisement [Sketch of Author’s Life], Address
to my Lords the Deputies to the Assembly of Seventeen Representatives
of the General Company of the East Indies of the Low Countries,
Method, &c.
The advertisement is as follows :
John Peter Purry, the Author of the following memorial, was born at
Neufchatel in Switzerland about the year LXX of the last century, who
having engaged for some time in the wine trade, and meeting with mis-
fortunes in it, contracted himself to the Chamber of Amsterdam for the
East Indies in Batavia about the beginning of 1713 ; where by his plan-
tations and by being Reader to the Reform’d Church in that city, having
pretty well repair’d his fortune in the year 1717, he presented to the
Governor-General of the East India Company, a proposal for Settling a
Colony in the Land of Nights, not far from the Island of Java, which not
having the good fortune to be approved of, he obtained leave to return to
Europe.
In doubling the Cape of Good Hope he was so taken with the admirable
colonies he found there, that he was more and more confirmed in the Thought
of Immortalizing his Name with some Settlement of the 33rd degree, either
of Northern or Southern Latitude. Arriving at Amsterdam in 1718, he
presented there in French the Memorial we nojv give to the Reader in
English, to the Lords the Directors of the Dutch East India Company, who
determine all matters relating to it. Neither this Memorial, nor another
which accompanied it, were well received insomuch that a friend of his told
privately he had best get out of the Way for that some Things had been
observed in both Papers which ought not to be made public.
He took the advice and went into France ; from whence he made a tour
into his own country. But returning to Paris in that fatal year, 1720, he
lost in the Mississippi Company what he had got in the East Indies. Here
his former scheme reviv’d, and, having modelled it to the French Settle-
ments, he presented it to some of the Prime Ministers, who referred it to
the Royal Academy of Sciences. Mons. Fontenelle return’d this cautious
answer that they could not pass a judgement on a country which they had
never seen, and that therefore it would not be advisable to make expensive
settlements in places they were unacquainted with. This was all the deter-
mination that could be got from him. The Journal des Sea vans, however,
took notice of the Proposal, and gave a fair representation of it. Rejected
a Second Time, Mr. Purry came into England, and printed his proposal here
for establishing a Colony on the English coast of America, southward enough
for his favourite degree. It was presented to the Duke of Newcastle as he
was walking with the king at Kensington in 1721. But neither here could
his scheme boast of the expected approbation. I remember, however, that
Sir Isaac Newton, to whom I communicated it, agreed in general to the
Principles of it, with a proviso that the Nature of each Country and Soil
should be first examined before settlements were attempted.


But about this time Georgia beginning to be talked of, Mr. Purry, at the
request of some Merchants, who wanted to know the condition of that
country, went thither. At his arrival, he first took a general survey of it,
then passed into Switzerland, and brought from thence enough of his country-
men to establish a small Colony, at the extremity of Carolina, just upon the
river which divides it from Georgia, where he died about ten years since, in
an advanced age : having first built a Town as a Monument to himself,
which still bears the name of Purisburg.
Fictitious Voyages: —Works of this description began to make
their appearance early in the seventeenth century. The first on
the list appears to be Bishop Hall’s :
Mundus Alter et Idem, sive Terra Australis, ante hac semper
incognita, longis itineribus peregrini Academici nuperrime lustrata.
Auth. Mercurio Britannico, Josepho Hall.
12m0., pp. viii, 224. Hannovise, 1607.
I can only produce two books by English authors in the first part of the
seventeenth century which fall properly under the class of novels or
romances, and of these one is written in Latin. This is the Mundus Alter et
Idem of Bishop Hall, an imitation of the later and weaker volumes of
Rabelais. A country in Terra Australis is divided into four regions,
Crapulia, Viraginia, Moronea, and Lavernia. Maps of the whole land and
of particular regions are given ; and the nature of the satire, not much of
which has any especial reference to England, may easily be collected.
Hallam, Literary History of Europe.
The next work of the kind was written in French :
Les Avantures de Jacques Sadeur, dans la decouverte et le
voiage de la Terre Australe, contenant les coutumes et les moeurs
des Australiens, &c. 12m0., pp. 10, 341. Geneva, 1676.
This work went through several editions ; Paris, 1692; Amsterdam,
1692 ; London, 1693; Paris, 1705. It was translated into German under
the title Neu Entdecktes Sudland, Dresden, 1705, and published in a collec-
tion of Voyages Imaginaires. Some curious particulars about the work and
its author may be seen in Bayle’s Dictionary, art. Sadeur. The author’s
name was Gabriel Foigny. A notice of his works will be found in the
Biographie Universelle.
This was followed by a similar production—
Histoire des Sevarambes, peuples qui habitent une partie du
troisieme continent, La Terre Australe.
Two parts. 12mo. Amsterdam, 1702.
Attributed to Isaac Vossius, and also to Denis Vairasse d’Allais.
Translated into English with the following title :
The History of the Sevarites or Sevarambi, a nation inhabiting part of the
third continent, commonly called Terrae Australes Incognitse. With a
further account of their admirable government, religion, customs, and lan-
guage. Written by one Captain Siden, a worthy person, who, together
with many others, was cast upon those coasts, and lived many years in that
country. 12m0., pp. 140. London, 1679.


Another edition was published, with a different title :
The History of the Sevarambians ; translated from the Memoir of Captain
Siden, who lived fifteen years among them. Bvo. London, 1738.
Another French publication of the same kind was published
with the following title :
Voyage de Robertson auxTerres Australes, traduit sur le Manu-
scrit Anglois. 12m0., pp. 474. Amsterdam, 1766.
“ Robertson ” represents himself as the lieutenant of a ship called
the Elizabeth, in which the Chevalier Drake sailed from the Thames
in 1585 to discover the Terres Australes.
Early Voyages: —The literature relating to the discovery of
Terra Australis has been collected and discussed by R. H. Major
in his Early Voyages to Terra Australis, published by the Hakluyt
Society in 1859. In the introduction the author summarises the
different voyages of discovery to the South Sea made by French,
Portuguese, Spanish and Dutch navigators, and examines the
evidence on the question of priority among them. The introduc-
tion is followed by translations of documents from the Spanish
and Dutch Archives, and extracts from published voyages, as
follows :
A memorial addressed to his Catholic Majesty Phillip the Third, King of
Spain, by Dr. Juan Luis Arias, respecting the exploration, colonisation, and
conversion of the Southern Land. Translated from the Spanish original.
Relation of Luis Vaez de Torres concerning the discoveries of Quiros as
his Almirante. Dated Manilla, July 12, 1007. A translation nearly literal
by Alexander Dalrymple, Esq., from a Spanish manuscript copy in his
possession, reprinted from appendix to vol. ii of Burney’s Discoveries in the
South Sea.
Extract from the Book of Dispatches from Batavia, commencing January
the 15th, 1644, and ending November the 29th following. Reprinted from
Dalrymple’s Collections Concerning Papua.
The Voyage and Shipwreck of Captain Francis Pelsart, in the Batavia,
on the coast of New Holland, and his succeeding adventures. Translated
from Thevenot’s Recueil de Voyages Curieux.
Voyage of Gerrit Thomas Pool to the South Land. Translated from
Valentyn’s Beschryvinge van Banda.
Account of the wreck of the Ship De Vergulde Draeck on the South
Land, and the expeditions undertaken, both from Batavia and the Cape of
Good Hope, in search of the survivors and money and goods which might
be found on the wreck, and of the small success which attended them.
Extracted from MS. documents at the Hague, and translated from the
Dutch.
Description of the West Coast of the South Land, by Captain Samuel
Volkersen, of the pink Waeckende Boey, which sailed from Batavia on the
Ist of January, 1655, and returned on the 19th of April of the same year.
Extracted from MS. documents at the Hague, and translated from the
Dutch.
Extract translated from Burgomaster Wisten’s Noord En Oost Tartarye.
Extract from the Sloan MS. 3236, entitled The Adventures of William
Dampier, with others [1686-87], who left Captain Sherpe in the South Seas,
and travelled back overland through the country of Darien.


Some particulars relating to the voyage of William De Ylamingh to New
Holland in 1696, extracted from MS. documents at the Hague, and translated
from the Dutch.
Extract from the journal of a voyage made to the unexplored South Land,
by order of the Dutch East India Company, in the years 1696 and 1697, by
the hooker De Nuptang, the De Geelvink, and the galiot De Wesel, and the
return to Batavia. From the MS. documents at the Hague : translated
from the Dutch.
Account of the observations of Captain William Dampier on the coast of
New Holland, in 1699, being an extract from “a Voyage to New Holland,
&c., in the year 1699.”
A written detail of the discoveries and noticeable occurrences in the
voyage of the fluyt Vossenbosch, the sloop D’Waijer, and the patsjallang
Nova Hollandia, despatched by the Government of India, anno 1705, from
Batavia by way of Timor to New Holland. From MS. documents at the
Hague : translated from the Dutch.
The Houtman’s Abrollios in 1727, translated from a publication entitled
De Houtman’s Abrolhos, by Captain P. A. Leupe, of the Dutch Navy.
Supplement, “ On the Discovery of Australia by the Portuguese
in 1601,” Archseologia, vol. xxxviii.
Purchas, his Pilgrimes:—
Hakluytus Posthumous, or Purchas, his Pilgrimes, in five
bookes, &c. By Samuel Purchas, B.D. Maps and illustrations.
5 vols.. folio. London, 1625.
The fourth volume contains :
Delation of the new discoverie in the South Sea made by Pedro
Fernandez Giros, Portuguez, 1609, with his petitions to the King,
one Englished, another in Spanish : p. 1422.
The copie of a petition presented to the King of Spaine, by
Capt. Peter Ferdinand de Quir, touching the discoverie of the
fourth part of the world, called Terra Australis Incognita : and of
the great riches and fertilitie of the same. Printed with license
in Sivill, an., 1610: p. 1422.
A note of Australia del Espiritu Santo, written by Master
Hakluyt: p. 1428.
This appears to be the first use of the word Australia in print.
Thevenot :—Relations de Divers Voyages Curieux, qui n’ont
point este Publiees, et qu’ on a Traduit ou tire des Originaux, <fec.,
donnees au public par le soins de feu Mechisedec Thevenot. Nou-
velle edition. 2 vols., folio. Paris, 1696.
The first volume contains :
Decouverte de la Terre Australe, par le Capt. F. Pelsart, 1628,
traduite de FHollandois. Carte de cette Cinquieme Partie du
Monde, 1663.
The second volume—
Route d’Abel Tasman autour de la Terre Australe, avec la de-
couverte de la Nouvelle-Zelande et de la Terre de Diemens, 1642-3.


Valentyn:—Oud en Nieuw Oost-Indien, ifcc., Door Francois
Valentyn. Folio, 5 vols. Amsterdam, 1724-6.
Vol. iv (p. 194) contains a fine portrait of Antonio Yan
Diemen, Gouverneur General von FTederlands Indien.
Dampier:—A Collection of Voyages. In four volumes, con-
taining Captain William Dampier’s Yoyage Hound the World, &c.
Illustrated with maps and draughts : also several birds, fishes, and
plants, not found in this part of the world : curiously engraved
on copper-plates. Bvo., 4 vols. London, 1729.
This edition contains several other voyages in addition to
Dampier’s.
Another edition of Captain Dampier’s Yoyages, with con-
siderable variations in the text as compared with that of 1729,
appeared in Harris’s Yoyages (Navigantium atque Itinerantium
Bibliotheca), vol. ii, p. 865. London, 1705.
The geographers of the early part of the eighteenth century con-
tinued to describe the Terra Australis after the manner of their
predecessors, adding from time to time the names given to new dis-
coveries, chiefly those of the Dutch. Occasionally the philosophers
discussed the subject:—
Dissertatio Physica de Terra Australi, quam inclut* Facultatis Philoso-
phic* consensu eruditorum disquisitioni subjicit d. iv. Aprilis mdccxvi
M. Johannes Augustus Rivinus, Lips. Respondente Friderico Wilelmo
Prevsero, Nebra Thuring. S.S. Theol. Stud. Lipsi*, small 4to, pp. 24.
Of this period is a tract in the British Museum :
Terra Australis Incognita, posteritati relicta, Yestigiis ix Mon-
stratis. 8 pp. folio. Helmstadii, 1741.
Enterprise at home and abroad was too stagnant at this time
for the encouragement or support of any colonising schemes. But
the learned de Maupertuis having accepted an invitation from
Frederick the Great to settle in Berlin, he there addressed his
Letter to the King of Prussia on the Progress of the Sciences.
Among the sciences which stood in need of the support of a
sovereign were those connected with foreign discoveries, and first
of all, that of Terra Australis.
In the Terra Australis, the eminent savant believed there would be found
species different from those contained in any other parts of the world, be-
cause they never could have gone out of their own continent. Near it
were islands in which navigators assure us they have seen savages, men
covered with hair having tails ; a middle species, between a monkey and a
man. “ I would rather,” he writes, “have an hour’s conversation with one
of these than with the greatest wit in Europe.”—See English translation in
Appendix to The Schemer ; or, Universal Satirist, by that great Philosopher,
Helter Van Scelter, London, 1765, pp. 249 et seq.
Maupertuis’ suggestion was not to be lost. It was taken up by
an able advocate, Charles de Brasses, President of the Parliament


<s-^.
ScccA' ' / yY
s&a~/C ■ J"x ti- / V'*z7^/\
<y (~<KSL-Y JVt.
/o- , fy J j
/7£<. V <7^
/y i/\ £-*A~ /■ <>2/ < <-*
<r>C «-,
/y^-jy* —
r
/5 7 '
i y<_ //-<%. /
7 v j^yJ.
YYy% f%f ( /£-*- *Y«y '
Y% % — cx^t^tsY*-*— '
<l*ty e//cT ^ '-«-•-* G ‘' '*
<«.<* ( A-
j AYjGsY /Sca-*. Y- ( C\. — <Y<2-S ft-i. d. '
/ £oc»_J r C t«.A. y-Ay ir-r
<?<*-£&
t/]s y4wi/
C *A /Tv
—^*pct~Y< —% r *-*. S'* £~4~c
(isvxYC —<— . ({
»a -L lYrxj /*Y~>Y<. (xsx^ef/"
/ ( 4-tW YistryYL Y/I^LYa.
/a .
o 7


of Dijon, who collected in two quarto volumes the accounts of all
the voyages which had been made to les Terres Australes. De
Brosses divided his work into three sections, viz. : Australasia,
Polynesia, and Magellanica.
De Brosses: —Histoire des Navigations aux Terres Australes.
Contenant ce que l’on scait des moeurs et des productions des Con-
trees decouvertes jusqu’ a ce jour ; et ou il est traite de 1’ utilite
d’y faire de plus ample decouvertes, et des moyens d’y former un
etablissement. 4t0., 2 vols. Paris, 1756.
In his preface, de Brosses explains the origin of his work by saying that,
shortly after the publication of the letters of de Maupertuis, he was present
at a private meeting of literary men at which the letters were discussed ;
that he spoke for half-an-hour on the proposal for making further discoveries
in the Terres Australes ; and that, finding himself au fait on the subject,
he was led to undertake the task of collecting the Voyages.
Speaking of the discoveries in the southern seas made subse-
quent to the publication of his work, the Biograpliie Universelle,
in its notice of de Brosses, says—
Ou ne sait pas assez en Prance que de Brosses a eu, pour ainsi
dire, l’initiative de ces decouvertes ; qu’il les a pressenties et pro-
voquees; que la lecture de son livre, en donnant Bougainville a
la marine Francais, a donne l’eveil a l’amiraute britannique, et a
Cook lui-meme.
Burney, referring to the work of de Brosses, preface to vol. i,
p. x, says—
It is very evident that the principal object of de Brosses was to explain
the advantages of distant colonies, and to recommend the settlement of
land discovered in the southern hemisphere.
His volumes were preceded and followed by others dealing with
the subject. See especially—
Harris’s Voyages. Edited by Dr. Campbell (2 vols.), vol. xi,
sect. 20. London, 1744.
Terra Australis; or a History of the Southern Continent [Book
xiv, chap, xii, of Universal History], being vol. ii of Modern His-
tory, pp. 273-553. London, 1759.
The writer (probably Harris’s Editor) suggested that the African Company
should be invested with the exclusive right of making discoveries and settle-
ments in the Southern Continent. If neither the African nor the East
India Company should think it expedient or consistent with their interests
to establish such settlements, he thought the duty should then devolve
upon the South Sea Company, who by their charter had the power to
do so.
Harris :—Navigantium atque Itinerantium Biblotlieca. A
Complete Collection of Voyages and Travels, &c. New edition,
revised and continued [by John Campbell, LL.D.]. Maps and
Plates. 2 vols., folio. London, 1764.


The first volume contains :
The voyage of Don Pedro Fernandez de Quiros;
The voyage and shipwreck of Captain Francis Pelsart, on the
coast of New Holland ;
The voyage of Captain Abel Jansen Tasman for the discovery
of southern countries.
Callander :—Terra Australis Cognita ; or, Voyages to the Terra
Australis, or Southern Hemisphere, during the Sixteenth, Seven-
teenth, and Eighteenth Centuries. Containing, &c.
Bvo., 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1766-8.
This work was an English translation of de Brosses, with addi-
tions. At the end of the third volume (pp. 715-745) there is a
chapter—“Of the method of forming Colonies in the Terra Aus-
tralis, and the Advantages that may be expected to result to Great
Britain from such Establishments in that Hemisphere.”
The writer, following de Brosses, advised the settlement of New Britain
in Australasia, as being the most advantageous situation with respect to the
countries where commerce was already established. Another advantage,
he added, “ that distinguishes it, is the climate, as lying not far from the
Equator, where (according to Dampier) we may always expect to find more
materials for commerce than in higher latitudes. Van Piemen’s Land and
New Zealand lie far to the south and are little known. The coasts of New
Holland are of very difficult access, and the parts that lie next the South
Sea absolutely naked and barren. Carpentaria labours under the same
disadvantage. None of these places ever appear fit for the first attempts,
though they may be settled afterwards, and perhaps to advantage.
Both Roggewein and Dampier agree in giving preference to New Britain.
The ingenious French editor of the Voyages aux Terres A usf.rales, tome 2,
p. 385, thinks there is no place so proper as this to fix on. He proposes to
settle it by sending three ships from Pondicherry.” (pp. 742-43.)
From this time forward voyages were made for the sake of
science rather than plunder. In 1764-68, three expeditions—in-
cluding vessels under the command of Byron, Wallis, Carteret,
and Cook—were sent to the South Sea.
Alexander Dalrymple, who had been in the East India Com-
pany’s service, and had returned home to advocate Southern
discoveries, hoped to receive the command of the expedition sent
out under Cook, the object of which was primarily to observe the
transit of Venus in the island of Otaheite. He published—
An Account of the Discoveries made in the South Pacific Ocean
previous to 1764.
Part I, Bvo., pp. xxxi, 103, with charts. London, 1767.
Historical Collection of the several Voyages and Discoveries in
the South Pacific Ocean, with maps. Translated into French and
German. 2 vols., 4to. London, 1770-71.
To the three divisions of de Brosses, Dalrymple added a fourth —
Australia —thus reviving a name used before, but which had
lapsed for more than a century.


Cook: —A Journal of a Voyage Round the World in H.M.S. ]
Endeavour, in the Years 1768, 1769, 1770, and 1771. Containing £
all the various occurrences of the voyage, "with descriptions, &c.
4t0., pp. ii, 130. London, 1771.
This work contained a short account of Cook’s voyage in the
Endeavour. The publisher in his dedication expressed his con-
viction that “ it is the production of a gentleman and a scholar
who made the voyage.”
„ —An account of the Voyages undertaken by the prder of
his Present Majesty for making Discoveries in the Southern
Hemisphere, and successively performed by Commodore Byron,
Captain Wallis, Captain Carteret, and Captain Cook in the Dol-
phin, Swallow, and the Endeavour. Drawn up from the Journals
which were kept by the several Commanders, and from the Papers
of Joseph Banks, Esq. By John Hawkesworth, LL.D.
4t0., 3 vola London, 1773.
“ The Run from New Zealand to Botany Bay ” will be found in
vol. iii, pp. 481-649.
Forster A Voyage Round the World in H.B.M. sloop Reso-
lution, commanded by Capt. James Cook, during the years 1772,
3,4, and 5. By George Eorster, F.R.S.
4t0., 2 vols. London, 1777.
The author was the son of John Reinold Forster, who accom-
panied Captain Cook as naturalist on the voyage. In his pre-
face the author mentions that his father had published the “ first
specimen of his labours ” in a work entitled —Characteres Generum
Plantarum quas in Insulis Maris Australis colleg., &c.
4to. Lond., 1776.
Another work by the same author was published in 1778 under
the title—Observations made during a Voyage Round the World
on Physical Geography, Natural History, and Ethic Philosophy,
by John Reinold Forster, LL.D., &c. 4to. London, 1778.
The great field for colonisation in the southern part of the world
foretold by Quiros —long forgotten, but afterwards revived by the
works of de Brosses and Dalrymple—was made manifest by Cook’s
voyage. He had discovered the insularity of New Zealand, and
sailed along the east coast of New Holland. The advantages
"which had thus been secured for Great Britain were emphasised
in—
Political Essays concerning the Present State of the British
Empire. 4t0., pp. 3, 463, 464. London, 1772.
This may be considered the last word of the advocates of Aus-
tralian colonisation, prior to the Expedition under Governor
Phillip. In 1776 the Declaration of Independence by the Thirteen
Colonies of North America stopped the transportation of English


criminals there, and loyal colonists began to seek new settlements.
Some removed to Canada and Nova Scotia; others thought of
emigrating to the Southern Continent.
James Maeia Matea, of Frome, proposed to the Home Govern-
ment that New South Wales should be set apart for their reception,
where they might repair their broken fortunes. August, 1783.
Sir George Young, TIN., submitted another plan in January,
1785, which was printed. Folio, pp. 4. London, 1785.
A fac-simile of this pamphlet was published by Messrs. Angus and
Robertson, of Sydney, booksellers, in 1888.
These schemes were duly entertained, and resulted in a deter-
mination on the part of the Government to utilise New South
Wales as a penal settlement. The plan met with considerable
opposition. John Howard considered the “ Botany Bay scheme
expensive, dangerous, and destructive.” Others advised the
establishment of penal colonies nearer home, or in smaller islands
in mid-ocean, such as that of Tristan D’Acunha.
A Serious Admonition to the Publick on the intended Thief
Colony at Botany Bay. [By Alex. Dalrymple, Hydrographer to
the Admiralty.] Bvo., pp. 52. London, 1786.
Dalrymple recommended the island of Tristan D’Acunha as
more suitable for a penal colony than Botany Bay. The pamphlet
(written in September and October, 1786) includes a letter (dated
July, 1785) addressed by the author to the Directors of the East
India Company, advising them against a project for settling Norfolk
Island, which was then within the limits of the Company’s Charter,
Marion: —Nouveau Yoyage a la mer du Sud, commence sous
les ordres de M. Marion et acheve sous ceux de M. Duclesmeur;
on y a joint un extrait de celui de M. de Surville dans les memes
passages. Bvo., charts and plates. Paris, 1783.
Parkinson: —A Journal of a Yoyage to the South Seas in
H.M.S. Endeavour; faithfully transcribed from the papers of the
late Sydney Parkinson, draughtsman to Sir Joseph Banks, Bart.,
in his Expedition with Dr. Solander round the World; and em-
bellished with twenty-nine views and designs, engraved by capital
artists. 4t0., pp. xxiii, 353. London, 1784.
Histories :—The determination of the Government to colonise
New South Wales led to the publication of several works on the
history of New Holland. Among them are :
An Historical Narrative of the Discovery of New Holland and
New South Wales, containing an account of the inhabitants, soil,
animals, and other productions of those countries; and including a
particular description of Botany Bay. With chart.
Bvo., pp. 54. London, 1786.
Another edition. 4t0., pp. 36.


Copious Remarks on the Discovery of New South Wales ; with
a Circumstantial Description of Botany Bay, and the Islands,
Bays, and Harbours, &c., lying near it: with enlarged observa-
tions on the natural productions, and the Face of the Country.
To which are added, Prefatory Observations [By the Right
Honourable Wm. Eden] on Transportation, &c.
Bvo., pp. iv, 52. London, 1787.
The History of New Holland, from its first discovery in 1616
to the present Time, with a particular account of its Produce and
Inhabitants, and a Description of Botany Bay ; also a list of the
Naval, Marine, Military, and Civil Establishments. To which is
prefixed an Introductory Discourse on Banishment. By the Right
Hon. William Eden [First Baron Auckland], with two charts.
Bvo., pp. xxiv, 254. London, 1787.
Second edition (re-written and enlarged).
Bvo., pp. xxxv, 254. London, 1787.
An abridged edition of this work is added to the second and
third editions of Phillip’s Voyage.
Twenty-one years afterwards this work was issued with a new
title-page:—
The History of New Holland, ifcc. With a discourse on Banish-
ment by the Right Hon. William Eden. By George Barrington :
The Second Edition, Illustrated with Maps. London : Printed
for John Stockdale, Piccadilly. Price, 6s. 1808.
It is perhaps needless to note that Barrington had no more to
do with this than with other works bearing his name.
The History of Botany Bay in New Holland, containing a full
account of the Inhabitants, Description of the Soil and Produce of
the Bay—of the Animals, Fish, and Fowl—to which is added the
number and equipment of the fleet sailed there and the Nature of
the Establishment, with which it is to commence, and the Regular
Government of the Colony. Likewise the names of the respective
Governors, &c., Names of the Ships, and Number of Convicts
embark’d on board each ship.
12m0.,pp. 24. Printed by L. Naylor. Bristol [1787].
Proposals for Employing Convicts within this Kingdom, instead
of sending them to Botany Bay, &c., by G . R .
Bvo., pp. iii, 70. London, 1787.
Gesciiichte oder Beschreibung der Botany Bay, und der Ein-
wohner von Siidwallis. [With seven coloured and one large
engraving.]
Gesciiichte Der Hinciiex De Bott. 4to. [l7BB].
An Authentic Journal of the Expedition under Commodore
Phillips to Botany Bay, with an account of the Settlement made at
Port Jackson; and a description of the inhabitants, &c. With


copies of letters from Captain Tench and others, and a List of
the Civil and Military Establishments. To which is added an
Authentic Narrative of the Discovery of New Holland or New
South Wales. By an Officer. With chart. Bvo., pp. 40 and [an
Historical Narrative, &c. See above] pp. 54. London, 1789.
The History of Botany Bay in New Holland, containing a full
account of the inhabitants, &c. 12m0., pp. 23. Bristol, n.d.
Apparently published shortly after the sailing of the First Fleet.
Tench: —A Narrative of the Expedition to Botany Bay; with
an Account of New South Wales, its Productions, Inhabitants, &c.
To which is subjoined a list of the Civil and Military Establish-
ments at Port Jackson. By Captain Watkin Tench, of the Marines.
Bvo., pp. xii, 146. London, 1789.
Second edition. Bvo., pp. xii, 146. London, 1789.
Another edition. Bvo., pp. xii, 146. Dublin, 1789.
Third edition, with Postscript, dated Sydney Cove, Ist October,
1788, pp. xii, 148. London, 1789.
Dutch translation : —Beschrijving van den Togt naar Botany
Baaij ; van de oprecliting der Engelsche Volkplanting aan Port
Jackson Bvo., pp. x, 212. Amsterdam, 1789.
French translation : —Voyage a la Baie Botanique, par le Capi-
taine Watkin Tench, a laquelle on a ajoute le recit historique
de la decouverte de la Nouvelle Hollande & des differens Voyages
qui y ont ete faits par les Europeens.
12m0., pp. viii, 266. Paris, 1789.
Another French edition : —Voyage a la Baie Botanique, a la
Nouvelle Holland, et au nouveau pays de Galles Meridional, traduit
de l’Anglais. 12m0., pp. ix, 154. Maestricht, 1791.
• Swedish translation : —pp. iv, 285. Stockholm, 1797.
An Authentic and Interesting Narrative of the late Expedition
to Botany Bay, as performed by Commodore Phillips and the Fleet
of Seven Transports under his command : Containing a Circum-
stantial Account of their perillous voyage, Dissentions on Board,
and Safe Arrival on the coast of New Holland : With particular
descriptions of Jackson’s Bay and Lord Howe’s Island, the Recep-
tion they met with from the Natives, their Customs and Manners ;
Progress of the Settlement, and Laws and Government established
for their further Improvement. Written by an officer just returned
in the Prince of Wales Transport, who visited that spot with
Captain Cook and Dr. Solander, in their celebrated voyages round
the World. Bvo., pp. 43, and plate—“ The Sirius and Supply in
Jackson’s Bay ” ; Price, Sixpence. London, 1789.
Another edition. 12m0., pp. vi, 32. London, 1789.


Phillip: —The Yoyage of Governor Phillip to Botany Bay, with
an account of the Establishment of the Colonies of Port Jackson
and Norfolk Island, compiled from authentic papers, which have
been obtained from the several departments. To which are added
the Journals of Lieutenants Shortland, Watts, Ball, and Captain
Marshall, with an Account of their New Discoveries. With fifty-
five plates. 4t0., pp. xl, 298, lxxiv. London, 1789.
The work contains twenty plates of birds, ten of animals, four
of fishes, two of natives, one of plants, one of weapons, also eight
maps and charts, one vignette, five views, and three portraits.
Some copies have the plates of natural history coloured.
Second edition, corrected and re-arranged, with an abridgment
of The History of New Holland, and Lord Auckland’s Discourse
on Banishment.
4t0., pp. xxiv, 258, clxxv, and plates ; London, 1790.
Third edition, with twenty plates, roy. Bvo., pp. xxiv, 520 ;
London, 1790.
Another edition, pp. xiv, viii, 352, lxxiv. Dublin, 1790.
Another edition :—The Yoyage of Governor Phillip to Botany
Bay, with an account of the Establishment of the Colonies of Port
Jackson and Norfolk Island. Appendix to Cook’s Voyages, New-
castle edition ('2 vols.), 1790, pp. 871-976.
Another edition :—Pelham’s Voyages, vol. i, p. 640.
Another edition [abridged]:—The Pocket Navigator series.
18mo., pp, 58, and plate. London [lBo7].
French translation : —Yoyage Du Gouverneur Phillip a Botany
Bay, avec une description de l’Etablissement des Colonies du Port
Jackson et de File Norfolk, &c. Bvo., pp. 443. Paris, 1791.
German translation (abridged):—Kommodore Phillip’s Reise
nach der Botany-Bai auf Neu-Holland.
12m0., pp. 86. Stuttgart, 1789.
German Translation : —Arthur Phillip’s Reise nach der Botany
Bay, aus dem Englischen von M. E. Sprengel.
Bvo., pp. xiv, 264, map and illus. Hamburg, 1791.
Another German translation : —Phillip’s Reise nach Neu Slid.
Wales.
2 vols., 12m0., pp. xvi, 224: vi, 194. Nurnberg, 1791.
The plates of the preceding edition were issued separately :
Abbildung einiger Landschaften von Neu Siid Wales nebst
verschiedenen seiner Landesh bewohner und ihrem jezigen Be-
herrscher. [Eight plates from Phillip’s Yoyage, with descriptions]
oblong 4to. Nurnberg, 1791.
Another German edition :—See Hunter. Berlin, 1794.


Callam: —A letter from Mr. James Callam, surgeon of his
Majesty’s ship Supply, to his brother, Mr. Alexander Callam, of
East Smithfield, London; containing an account of a Voyage
from the Cape of Good Hope to Botany Bay, &c. With a short
description of the inhabitants, and settlement of the colony.
Svo., pp. 21. London, 1789.
This letter was published as a sixpenny pamphlet, and was noticed in
the Monthly Review for December, 1789, as follows : —“ Well enough for a
private letter ; but too crude and trivial for publication ; especially after
the variety of more important details which have appeared relative to this
new and very singular attempt at colonization.”
White: —Journal of a Voyage to New South Wales. With
sixty-five plates of nondescript animals, birds, lizards, serpents,
curious cones of trees, and other natural productions. By John
White, Esq., Surgeon-General to the Settlement, &c.
4t0., pp. xvi, 299. London, 1790.
The Journal is followed by an Appendix containing plates and
letterpress illustrating the natural history of the country, and
another containing a Diary of the Winds and Weather on the
voyage.
Some copies have the plates of natural history coloured.
French Translation: —Voyage a la Nouvelle Galles du Sud, a
Botany Bay, au Port Jackson, en 1787-89, par John White,
traduit, avec des notes critiques et philosophiques sur l’histoire
naturelle et les moeurs, par Charles Pougens.
Bvo., pp. xii, 208; (Notes) 260. Paris, 1795.
Riou: —Journal of the Proceedings on Board H.M.S. Guardian,
commanded by Lieutenant Biou, bound to Botany Bay, from
Dec. 22, 1789, to 15th Jan., 1790, with copies of Lieutenant
Riou’s Letters. Bvo., pp. 45. London, 1790.
Phillip: —Extracts from Letters from Arthur Phillip, Esq.,
Governor of New South Wales, to Lord Sydney ; to which is
annexed a Description of Norfolk Island, by Philip Gidley King,
Esq. An account of expenses incurred in transporting convicts
to New South Wales. 4t0., pp. 26. London, 1790.
~ —Copies and extracts from Letters from Governor Phillip,
giving an account of the Nature and Fertility of the Land in and
adjoining to any Settlement in New South Wales ; and of the
probability of raising any and what Provision thereon ; and of the
Behaviour and Employment of the Convicts sent there ; and which
have been received since the last account was laid before the House
of Commons ; to which are prefixed Copies and Extracts of Letters
from the office of Secretary of State for the Home Department,
bearing date since the last accounts relative to the Transportation
of Convicts to New South Wales, and providing for the same.
4t0., pp. iv, 127. London [1792],


Bligh: —A Narrative of the Mutiny on board H.M.S. Bounty,
and the Subsequent Voyage of Part of the Crew in the Ship’s Boat
from Tofoa, one of the Friendly Islands, to Timor. Written by
Lieut. William Bligh. Illustrated with charts.
4t0., pp. iv, 88. London, 1790.
~ —A Voyage to the South Sea, undertaken by command of
his Majesty, for the purpose of conveying the Bread-fruit-tree to the
West Indies in H.M.S. Bounty, commanded by Lieut. William
Bligh. Including an account of the Mutiny, and the Subsequent
Voyage of Part of the Crew in the Ship’s Boat from Tofoa, one of
the Friendly Islands, to Timor. With charts.
4t0., pp. 264. London, 1792.
Bentham: —Panopticon, or the Inspection House; containing
the idea of a new principle of construction, applicable to any sort
of establishment in which persons of any description are to be
kept under inspection. By Jeremy Bentham, of Lincoln’s Inn,
Esq. 12m0., pp. 232. Dublin, 1791.
At page 225, Bentham points out the advantages of his plan as
compared with transportation to New South Wales.
Mortimer: —Observations, &c., made during a Voyage in the
brig Mercury. By Lieutenant Mortimer. London, 1791.
Captain Cox, in the brig Mercury, discovered Oyster Bay, on the east
coast of Van Diemen’s Land, in July, 1788.
Anon: —Discoveries of the French in 1768 and 1769 to the
South-east of New Guinea. By M. , formerly a captain in
the French navy. Translated from the French. With charts.
4t0., pp. xxiv, 323. London, 1791.
Johnson, Rev. Richard: —Address to the Inhabitants of New
South Wales and Norfolk Island.
12m0., p. 74. London, 1792.
“ The first Australian author,” according to Mr. Bonwick, Curious Facts
of Old Colonial Days, p. 7 —where the pamphlet is noticed.
Hamilton: —A Voyage Round the World in his Majesty’s
frigate Pandora, performed under the direction of Captain Edwards
in the years 1790, 1791, and 1792. With the discoveries made in
the South Sea; and many distresses experienced by the crew from
shipwreck and famine, in a voyage of eleven hundred miles in
open boats between Endeavour Straits and the Island of Timor.
By George Hamilton, late surgeon of the Pandora.
Bvo., pp. 164. Berwick, 1793.
Smith: —A Specimen of the Botany of New Holland, by James
Edward Smith, M.D., F.R.S. The figures by James Sowerby,
F.L.S. Vol. i, 4t0., pp. viii, 38. London, 1793,
2 Q


The author states in liis preface that the figures (which are hand-painted)
were taken from coloured drawings made on the spot and communicated
by Surgeon White, “ along with a most copious and finely preserved collec-
tion of dried specimens, with which the drawings have in every case been
carefully compared.” The waratah is described as “ the most magnificent
plant which the prolific soil of New Holland affords.”
Hunter: —An Historical Journal of the Transactions at Port
Jackson and Norfolk Island, with the Discoveries made in New
South AVales and the Southern Ocean since the Publication of
Phillip’s Voyage; including the Journals of Governors Phillip
and King, and of Lieutenant Ball; and the Voyages from the
Pirst Sailing of the Sirius in 1787 to the Return of that Ship’s
Company to England in 1792. By John Hunter, Esq., Post-
Captain, R.N. With seventeen maps, views, &c.
4to. London, 1793.
Another edition, abridged. Bvo.,pp. xxiv,17,525. London, 1793.
German Translation :—John Hunter’s Reise nach Neu-Siid-
wallis; Arthur Phillip’s Tagebuch wiihrend eines Aufenthaltes
eben daselbst; und Lieutenant King’s Nachrichten von der Nor-
folk-Insel. Mit Anmerkungen von Professor J. R. Forster. Bvo.,
pp. 328, and maps. (Magazin von Reisebeschreibungen, vol. xi.)
Berlin, 1794.
Hunter’s Voyage occupies pp. 1-IG6.
Another German translation :—Hunter’s Historische Nahricli-
ten vonden Merkwurdigsten Ereigniszen auf Port-Jackson und der
.Norfolk’s-Insel. Maps and plates.
Bvo., 2 vols., pp. xxxiv, 480, xxiv, 57G. Nurnberg, 1794.
Abbildung einiger Landschaften von Neu Slid Wales nebst
verschiedenen seiner Bewohner. [Nine plates, from Captain John
Hunter’s Journal with descriptions.]
Obi. 4to. Nurnberg, 1794.
Swedish translation: —Johan Hunter’s Resa til Nya Sbdra
Wallis, uren 1787 af Capit. Tench cch King, Samt Cap. Edvards,
Resa, 1790, 1791, 1792. Sammandrag.
12m0., pp. iv, 283. Stockholm, 1797.
Tench :—A Complete Account of the Settlement at Port Jack-
son, in New South Wales, including an Accurate Description of
the Situation of the Colony; of the Natives ; and of its Natural
Productions. Taken on the spot by Captain Watkin Tench of
the Marines. 4t0., pp. xvi, 212. London, 1793.
German translation :—Capitain Watkin Tench, Geschichte von
Port Jackson in New Holland, von 1788 bis 1792. Nebst einer
Beschreibung der Insel Norfolk mit ihrem Unbanein eben diesem
Zeitraume. Aus dem Englischen.
Map, Bvo., pp. vi, 244. Hamburg, 1794.


Shaw: —Zoology of New Holland. London, 1794.
Dr. George Shaw (1751—1813), the author of this work, was a
popular lecturer in London on natural history, and assistant
keeper of natural history in the British Museum. In his work
on the Zoology of New Holland, he makes use of the name
Australia on several occasions.
Watling: —Letters from an Exile at Botany Bay to his Aunt
in Dumfries ; giving a particular account of the Settlement of New
South Wales, with the Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants.
By Thomas Watling.
12m0., pp. iv, 128. Penrith, printed by Ann Bell [1794],
The writer, who styles himself “ Principal Limner in New South
Wales,” was extremely anxious to deserve better of his country,
and proposed, with due deference under the patronage of an Im-
partial Public, the execution of a Picturesque Description of that
Colony in a highly finished Set of Drawings, done faithfully upon
the Spots, in Mezzo, Aquatinta, or Water Colours.
Thompson : —Slavery and Famine, Punishments for Sedition;
or, An Account of the Miseries and Starvation at Botany Bay,
from the Journal of George Thompson, who sailed in the Royal
Admiral, May, 1792. With some Preliminary Remarks by George
Dyer, B.A. Bvo., pp. viii, 48 and 23. London, 1794.
Second edition: —Slavery and Famine, Punishments for Sedition;
or, An Account of New South Wales, and of the Miserable State
of the Convicts. By George Thompson. Including a Sketch of
the Character of Thomas Fysche Palmer.
Bvo., pp. viii, 48, 23. London, 1794.
Parker : —A voyage [to Sydney and] Round the World in the
Gorgon man-of-war, Captain John Parker, performed and written
by his widow, for the advantage of a numerous family.
Bvo., pp. xxxii, 149. London, 1795.
The Gorgon carried Philip Gidley King, Lieutenant-Governor
of Norfolk Island, and Mrs. King, Mr. Grimes, and others, to the
new settlement at Port Jackson in 1791.
Barrington: —A Voyage to New South Wales, with a Descrip-
tion of the Country, the Manners, Customs, Religion, &c., of the
Natives in the vicinity of Botany Bay. By George Barrington,
now superintendent of the convicts at Parramatta. Bvo. Title
and dedication, dated Parramatta, 1793.
4pp. and pp. 13-140. London, 1795.
Second and third editions. London, 1796.
Another edition. Roy. Bvo., pp. 32. London [Preston], 1795.
Another edition (a few paragraphs omitted at the end).
Cr. Bvo., pp. 48. Manchester [1795].


Barrington: —Another edition. A Voyage to Botany Bay,
with a description of the country, <fcc. By the celebrated George
Barrington. 12m0., pp. 139, two plates, n.d.
Another edition. With Barrington’s Life and Trial.
12m0., pp. 120. London [1795].
French translation : —Voyage a Botany Bay, avec une Descrip-
tion du Pays, des Moeurs, des Coutumes, et de la Religion des
Natifs. Par le celebre George Barrington. Traduit de I’Anglais,
sur la troisieme edition.
Bvo., pp. xvi, 192. Paris. An vi. [1798].
The Voyage is merely a compilation from preceding works,
especially those of Phillip and Tench.
~ —A Sequel to Barrington’s Voyage to New South Wales,
comprising an interesting Narrative of the Transactions and
Behaviour of the Convicts ; the Progress of the Colony ; an Official
Register of the Crimes, Trials, Sentences, and Executions that
have taken place; likewise Authentic Anecdotes of the most
Distinguished Characters and Notorious Convicts. By the cele-
brated George Barrington, Principal Superintendent of the Con-
victs. Bvo., pp. 116. London, 1800.
Another edition. 12m0., pp. viii, 94. London, 1801.
Barrington’s History of New South Wales, including Botany
Bay, &c. No. 1, to be continued weekly. By George Barrington,
an Officer of the Peace, Parramatta. To be completed in twelve
numbers, elegantly printed in octavo, illustrated with elegant
engravings of views and customs, and subjects of Natural History,
coloured from nature. “ The proprietors beg leave to assure the
public that nothing can impede the regular publication of the
work, as the manuscript has all arrived, and the plates are in
great forwardness.”
The work was dedicated to his Majesty and duly completed in
fourteen parts, with twenty coloured plates and engraved title, and
afterwards issued in one volume with the following title :
The History of New South Wales, including Botany Bay, Port
Jackson, Parramatta, Sydney, and all its Dependencies : from its
Foundation to the Present Time. By George Barrington.
Bvo., pp. [xlii], 505. London, 1802.
Upon the conclusion of this work in parts, it was followed by a
new edition, in twelve parts, of—
An Account of a Voyage to New South Wales. By George
Barrington. To which is prefixed a Detail of his Life, Trials,
Speeches, &c. With two letters, dated Parramatta, Nov., 1793,
and March, 1802.
Bvo., portrait, and 11 coloured plates. London, 1803.


Both volumes were reissued in 1810. Pages 467 to the end
of the Voyage are rearranged, and include descriptions of several
plates from the History, to which readers had been referred for
accounts in the first edition. There is also a preface to the latest
edition of the Voyage and an Account of Barrington’s death, and
of the property he left in the colony. To the new edition of the
History a supplement is added, bringing that work down to 1809,
with a new index, making altogether 548 pages.
Another edition of Barrington’s Voyage, to which is added, his
Life and Trial. Bvo., pp. iv, 184. New York, n.d.
These works were compiled in London. A comparison with the
works of Collins and other writers of the time will discover their
true origin. In an anonymous work on New South Wales [by
G. Paterson] the writer says (pp. 390-391) that—“ For a con-
siderable time previous to his death, Barrington was in a state of
insanity, brought about by his serious and sorrowful reflections on
his former career of iniquity. He expressed a very considerable
degree of displeasure, when he was in a state of sanity, at his
name being affixed to a narrative which he knew only by report
as being about to be published.”
The celebrated Prologue, said to have been spoken at a perform-
ance in Sydney, 16th January, 1796, including the lines—
True patriots all, for be it understood,
We left our country for our country’s good,
appeared in Barrington’s History, edit. 1802 and 1810, pp. 151—
153 ; but not in the earlier “Barrington” of 1800. The details of
the performance, even to the names of the principal performer's,
are evidently taken from Collins (vol. i, pp. 448-449) ; but he
says nothing about the Prologue.
Other works relating to Barrington :
Memoirs of George Barrington, from his birth, in 1755, to his
last conviction at the Old Bailey on Friday, the 17th of September,
1790. A new edition, greatly improved.
Bvo., pp. 91. London, 1790.
These publications differ only in the title. The former contains,
in addition, an heroic epistle from George Barrington, Esq., to
Major Semple, on his sentence to transportation to the coast of
New South Wales.
The Genuine Life and Trial of George Barrington, from his
birth, in June, 1755, to the time of his Conviction in Old Bailey
in September, 1790, for robbing Henry Hare Townsend, Esq., of
his gold watch, seals, <fec. Bvo., pp. 48. London, 1791.
The Life, the Times, and Adventures of George Barrington, the
Celebrated Thief and Pickpocket. With engravings.
12m0., pp. 74. London [1839],


George Barrington; or, Life in London a Hundred Years ago.
By the author of Edith the Captive. Malcolm J. Errym— i.e.,
Malcolm James Rymer.
Illustrated; roy. Bvo., pp. ii, 171. London, 1872.
A Hew and Correct History of Hew Holland, with a Description
of that Part of it called Botany Bay, and particularly Port Jack-
son, where the convicts from this country are sent and the British
Settlement formed. Together with an Account of the Manners
and Customs of the Inhabitants, ancl also of the Climate and Soil
of that Country. Collected from Authentic Authors and Original
Papers. By a Society of Gentlemen.
18mo., pp. 72 and frontispiece. Glasgow, 1796.
Palmer :—A Harrative of the Sufferings of T. F. Palmer and
W. Skirving during a Voyage to Hew South Wales, 1794, on board
the Surprise Transport. By the Rev. Thomas Fyslie Palmer, late
of Queen’s College, Cambridge. Bvo. pp. 74. Cambridge, 1797.
Second edition. With Copies of Letters to Gov. Hunter, dated
October 14, 1795. Bvo., pp. 79. Cambridge, 1797.
Palmer, Skirving, and Muir were transported for sedition. A
conspiracy to seize the ship was said to have been discovered on
the voyage, and they were charged unjustly with having been the
chief instigators in the plot. Disappointed in their appeal for
an investigation into all the circumstances, their statements were
published in this pamphlet. Muir afterwards escaped from Sydney
to America.
A critical account of the trials may be found in the late Lord
Cockburn’s Examination of the Trials for Sedition which have
hitherto occurred in Scotland, 1888, vol. i, pp. 145-292.
„ —[Letter from Thomas Fyshe Palmer], Sydney, Hew South
Wales, June 13, 1795. Folio, one page. [Ho place or date.]
Another letter from Palmer, dated from Sydney, August 14,
1797, was published in folio, pp. 2. [Ho date or place.]
A letter from Palmer, dated Sydney, September 15, 1795, was
published in the appendix (Ho. xi) to the Memoirs of the late
Rev. Theophilus Lindsey, London, 1877.
King: —MS. Journal of Commander Philip Gidley King, R.H.,
Lieutenant-Governor of Horfolk Island from 1791 to 1796. Heatly
copied, with Marginal Hotes and Additions by the Governor’s own
hand. 4t0., pp. 311.
The Journals of the first period of Lieut. King’s Government,
1788-90, and of his Voyage to England, were printed as supple-
ments to Hunter’s Journal, pp. 287-448. 4t0., London, 1793.


Vancouver; —A Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific
Ocean and Round the World, 1790—5. With atlas of plates and
maps in folio. 4t0., 3 vols. London, 1798.
A new edition, in six volumes, published in 1801.
French translation published in Paris, 1800.
Muir:—Histoire de la Tyrannie du Gouvernement Anglais
exercee envers le celebre Thomas Muir, Ecossais ; Sa Deporta-
tion a Botany Bay, son Sejour dans cette tie, son Evasion, son
Sejour a Bordeaux, son Arrivee a Paris; avec une Description de
Botany Bay, des Renseignemens acquis par Thomas Muir sur la
fin tragique du Voyage de La Pe3 r rouse, et une Notice sur le
Continent appele Pays de Galles Meridional.
P2mo., pp. 60. Paris, 1798.
The Life of Thomas Muir, who was Tried for Sedition and
Sentenced to Transportation for Fourteen Years, with a full
Report of his Trial. By Peter Mackenzie.
Bvo., pp. xliv, 64.. Glasgow, 1837.
Collins: —An Account of the English Colony in New South
Wales : with Remarks on the Dispositions, Customs, Manners, &c.,
of the Native Inhabitants, to which are added Some Particulars
of New Zealand, compiled by permission from the MSS. of Lieu-
tenant-Governor King. By David Collins, Esq., late Judge-
Advocate and Secretary of the Colony. Illustrated by engravings.
4t0., pp. xx-xxxviii, 619, two charts and twenty-two plates.
London, 1798.
Of the plates, eleven are views of Sydney Cove and the settle-
ments at Parramatta, &c. These were engraved after water-colour
drawings made by Edward Dayes, from a series of rough sketches
brought home from the colony.
„ —An Account of the English Colony in New South Wales,
from its First Settlement, in January, 1788, to August, 1801 :
to which are added, Some Particulars of New Zealand, &c., and
An Account of a Voyage performed by Captain Flinders and
Mr. Bass ; by which the existence of a strait separating Van Die-
man’s Land from the Continent of New Holland was ascertained.
Abstracted from the Journal of Mr. Bass. By Lieutenant-Colonel
Collins, of the Royal Marines. Illustrated. Chart and nine
plates. Vol. ii, 4t0., pp. xvi, 336. London, 1802.
Some copies have the plates of Natural History coloured.
As to the authorship of this volume, see ante, p. 257.
~ —An Account of the English Colony in New South Wales.
Second edition [abridged and edited by Mrs. Maria Collins],
1 vol., 4t0., pp. xx, 562, plates and portrait, London, 1804.


On the title-page the author is styled Lieutenant-Governor of
Port Phillip—an appointment he received while this abridgment
was in preparation.
Duff: —A Missionary Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean,
performed in the years 1796, 1797, 1798 in the ship Duff, com-
manded by Capt. James Wilson. Compiled from journals of the
officers and the missionaries; and illustrated with maps, charts,
and views, drawn by Mr. William Wilson, engraved by the most
eminent artists. Bvo., pp. c, 420. London, 1799.
In the chart of the Duff's track in the Pacific Ocean, the countries
included in that portion of the globe are divided into Greater
Australia and Lesser Australia, the former including New
Holland. These titles are explained at p. 88 of the preface as
follows :
On the general chart that describes Captain Wilson’s track, those countries
of the Pacific Ocean, which lie within or southward of the tropics, are
comprehended under the general name of Australia, after the example of
foreign geographers. As they appear to be divided into two distinct races
of inhabitants, one of which almost wholly possesses the more extensive
countries situated in the south-western part of the ocean, these are dis-
tinguished from the rest by the title of the Greater Australia; the numerous
small islands inhabited by the fairer race being included under that of
Lemer Australia.
La Perouse: —Voyage de la Perouse autour du monde. Redige
par M. La A. Milet-Mureau, General de Brigade.
2 vols., 4t0., with atlas. London, 1799.
English Translation : —A Voyage Round the World, performed
in the years 1785, 1786, 1787, and 1788, by the Boussole and
Astrolabe, under the command of J. F. G. de la Perouse.
2 vols., 4to. London, 1799.
La Perouse’s notes of the run from Tongataboo to Norfolk
Island and Botany Bay will be found at page 1744, vol. ii, of the
translation.
D’Entrecasteaux :—See Labillardi&re and Rossel.
Labillardiere :—Relation du Voyage a la Recherche de la Per-
ouse. Par le Citoyen Labillardiere.
4t0., 2 vols., with folio atlas. Paris, 1800.
„ —Voyage in search of La Perouse, 1791-94. Translated
from the French. Bvo., 1 vol., plates. London, 1800.
„ • —Novae Hollandise Plantarum Specimen.
4t0., 2 vols. London, 1803.
Pennant: —Outlines of the Globe. [By Thomas Pennant.]
4 vols. 4to. London, 1798-1800.
The fourth volume contains an account of New Holland, which the
author introduces with the following remarks:—“Little history is to be
expected of the land I now visit; brief accounts of the various discoverers
is all that can be given till we arrive on the eastern coast, which the


unfortunate acquaintance with in 1770 has peopled with the profligate out-
casts of our country, cruelly redeemed from the gibbet to undergo a
lingering life of nakedness and. famine in this most distant land. ”
Hunter : —Biographical Memoirs of Captain John Hunter, late
Governor of New South Wales. With portrait.
Naval Chronicle. Vol. vi, pp. 349-367. London, 1801.
Pinkerton: —Modern Geography. A Description of the Em-
pires, Kingdoms, States, and Colonies ; with the Oceans, Seas,
and Isles; in all Parts of the World : Including the most Recent
Discoveries, and Political Alterations. Digested on a New Plan.
By John Pinkerton. With Numerous Maps.
4t0., 2 vols. London, 1802.
The map of New Holland, at p. 467 of vol. ii, represents the
southern coast from “ King George 111 Harbour ” to Western
Port, as a blank.
The opinions of contemporary geographers with respect to New
Holland are stated as follows :
Some suppose that this extensive region, when more thoroughly investi-
gated, will be found to consist of two, three, or more vast islands, inter-
sected by narrow seas ; an idea which probably arises from the discovery
that New Zealand consists of two islands, and that other new straits have
been found to divide lands in this quarter, formerly supposed to be con-
tinuous.
Pinkerton suggested Notasia as a better name than New
Holland :
While the term Australasia may be justly applied to what is called New
Holland and the circumjacent lands, the name of that large island itself, so
absurdly joined with New South Wales, might perhaps be aptly exchanged
for that of Notania —from the Greek word Notos, the South; vol. ii, pp.
433-4.
His definition of the boundaries of Australasia, from the
geographer’s point of view, includes the following territories :
1. Notasia, or New Holland, with any isles in the adjacent Indian Ocean
twenty degrees to the west, and between twenty and thirty degrees to the
east, —particularly
2. Papua, or New Guinea ;
3. New Britain and New Ireland, with the Solomon Isles ;
4. New Caledonia and the New Hebrides ;
5. New Zealand ;
6. Van Diemen’s Land.
The southern boundary of Australasia “ extends to latitude 50°
or even 60°, where the islands of ice begin to appear ” ; vol. ii, pp.
466-7. The boundaries to the north and east are also defined,
but at too great length for quotation.
Howe: —General Standing Orders: selected from the General
Orders issued by former Governors. From the 11th of February,
1791, to the 6th of September, 1800. Also, General Orders


Biblio-
graphy.
issued by Governor King, from the 30th of September, 1800, to
the 30th of September, 1802.
Sydney, printed at Government Press, 1802.
Howe: —Continuation of General Orders from the 30th Sep-
tember, 1802, to the 13th August, 1806. Part 11, small 4t0., pp.
iv, 206. Sydney. Printed at Government Press, 1806.
Appendix to New South Wales General Orders: containing
Orders omitted under their respective dates [from March 17,
1804, to August 2, 1806]. Small 4t0., pp. 17.
These Orders are bound up in one volume with the Continuation and
Appendix issued in 1800. Inside the cover of a copy now in the British
Museum is written :
“ First book ever printed in Sydney, and believed to be the only copy
extant and complete.”
A broad-arrow, stamped upon the cover, indicates that it was an official
copy. Small 4t0., pp. xii, 122.
Blake :—View of the Town of Sydney, in the colony of New
South Wales. Taken from the rising ground near the Court-
house, on the west side of the cove. Dedicated to Captain John
Hunter, late Governor, by W. S. Blake.
Mezzotint. London, 1802.
Dayes: —View of Sydney Cove, New South Wales. From an
original picture in the possession of Isaac Clementson, Esq.
Drawn by Edward Dayes, from a picture painted at the colony ;
engraved by F. Jukes. London, 1804.
Some copies of this engraving are coloured.
Anon: —A Concise History of the English Colony in New
South Wales from January, 1788, to May, 1803, describing the
Wandering Unfortunate Natives of that Antipodean Territory,
with some Cursory Remarks on Convicts and Free Settlers. Also
Tables of Provisions, &c., allowed to Settlers and Convicts by
Government. Bvo., pp. ii and xcvi. History of the Natives of
New South Wales, pp. 40. London, 1804.
Tuckey: —An Account of a Voyage to establish a Colony at
Port Phillip in Bass’s Strait, on the south coast of New South
Wales, in his Majesty’s ship Calcutta, in the years 1802-3-4. By
J. H. Tuckey, Esq., First Lieutenant of the Calcutta.
Bvo., pp. 239. London, 1805.
Turnbull: —A Voyage Round the World in the years 1800,
1801, 1802, 1803 ; and 1804; in which the Author visited the
Principal Islands in the Pacific Ocean, and the English Settlements
of Port Jackson and Norfolk Island. By John Turnbull.
3 vols., 12mo. London, 1805.
The author visited New South Wales twice during his voyage (in 1801
and 1803), staying in Sydney on both occasions several months. His account
of the colony occupies pp. 39-125, of vol. i, and pp. 130-204, of vol. iii.


A second edition, re-arranged, in which the history of the colony
was continued to the year of publication, appeared in 1813, ini
4t0., pp. xvi, 516. The matter referring to New South Wales
occupies pp. 67-101 ; 402-467. An abstract of Peron’s account
of the colony, as recorded in his voyage, is given in an appendix.
Peron :—Voyage do Decouvertes aux Terres Australes execute
par ordre de sa Majeste l’Empereur et Roi, sur les corvettes le
Geographe, le Naturalisle , et la Goelette le Gasuarina, Pendant
les Annees 1800, 1801, 1802, 1803, et 1804. Public par Decret
Imperial, et Redige par M. P. Peron, Naturaliste de l’Expedition,
Tome Premier. 4t0., pp. xv, 496. Paris, 1807.
The second volume was published in 1816, Peron having died
in the interval. His work was continued by Freycinet, who was
in.command of the Gasuarina.
Peron’s description of Sydney and the neighbouring country
appears at p. 368 of vol. i.
The Atlas, published in a separate volume, contains many fine
charts and drawings made during the expedition. Plates xxxvii
and xxxviii contain two sketches of Sydney as it appeared in
1803—very finely drawn and engraved.
Smith, Sydney :—Review of vol. ii of Collins’s Account of the
English Colony of New South Wales. This article appeared in
the Edinburgh Review for April, 1803.
An article by the same author on Botany Bay was published
in the Review for July, 1819, pp. 28-48. It was founded on the
publications of O’Hara, Bonnet, and Wentworth.
MacarthlU' : —Statement of the Introduction and Progress of the
Breed of Fine-woolled Sheep in New South Wales, delivered at
the Right Hon. Lord Hobart’s Office, 26th July, 1803. By John
Macarthur.
This statement may be seen in Bischoff, Comprehensive History
of the Woollen and Worsted Manufactures, and the Natural and
Commercial History of Sheep, vol. i, pp. 366-369. It is referred
to in Peron’s Voyage, vol. i, p. 401.
Howe :—The Sydney Gazette and New South Wales Advertiser.
“We hope to prosper thus.” Published by authority.
The first number was published 5 March, 1803. This was the
first publication in the shape of a newspaper which made its
appearance in Sydney. It was printed, published, and edited by
George Howe, for the Government.
Grant: —The Narrative of a Voyage of Discovery performed
in his Majesty’s Vessel The Lady Nelson, of sixty tons burthen,


with sliding keels, in the years 1800, 1801, and 1802, to New
South Wales. By James Grant, Lieutenant in the Royal Navy.
Illustrated. 4t0., pp. xxvi, 195. London, 1803.
Burney:—A Chronological History of the Discoveries in the
South Sea or Pacific Ocean. Illustrated with charts. By James
Burney, Captain in the Royal Navy.
4 vols., 4to. London, 1803-1816.
The first volume contains an inquiry concerning the earliest
discovery of New Holland, pp. 377-383.
The chart prefixed shows the outline of Terra Australis Nondum
Cognita, as it was supposed to be previous to 1579.
The second volume contains several chapters relating to dis-
coveries in the South Sea :
c. xvi: Preliminary to the Discoveries of de Quiros.
c. xvii: Voyage of de Quiros.
c. xxi: Pirst Certain Knowledge Obtained of the Great Terra
Australis.
The appendix contains—
I. Relation of de Torres concerning the discoveries of Quiros
as his Almirante, dated Manila, July 12th, 1607.
11. Information collected from the natives of islands in the
South Sea by de Quiros in 1606, and inserted by him in his
memorials, concerning undiscovered lands situated in the neigh-
bourhood of the Australia del Espiritu Santo.
The chart prefixed shews the discoveries of de Quiros under the
name Australia del Espiritu Santo.
The fourth volume contains :
c. vii: Voyage of Captain William Dampier, in the Roebuck,
to New Holland and New Guinea.
c. ix : Voyages of the Dutch for the further discovery of New
Holland and New Guinea.
c. xii : Plan for a Voyage of Discovery to the Terra Australis,
proposed by John Welbe. [Ante, p. 568.]
Howe :—New South Wales Pocket Almanack and Colonial
Remembrancer for the year of our Lord and Saviour 1806.
12m0., pp. 58. Sydney, 1806.
Contains, in addition to the tables of months, Observations on
Gardens, Agriculture, and Sheep; Chronology of Many Local
Occurrences, Remarkable and Interesting; Arrival and Final
Departure of Vessels at Port Jackson; Abridgment of General
Orders ; and a General List of Officers, Civil and Military.
Anon : —An account of the English colony at Botany Bay, and
other settlements in New South Wales, from their establishment to
the present time ; with remarks on the manners, customs, disposi-


tions, &c., of the natives, interspersed with anecdotes of the
convicts and free settlers, their treatment, conduct, &c.; with some
particulars of the exiled delegates. By a gentleman just returned
from the settlement, who held an official situation there.
12m0., pp. iv, 80. London, 1808.
Bond: —A Brief Account of the Colony of Port Jackson, in
New South Wales, its Native Inhabitants, Productions, &c. With
an Interesting Account of the Murder of Mr. Clode, as communi-
cated by the Reverend Richard Johnstone, late Chaplain of the
Colony. By G. Bond, late Lieutenant of Marines and Ensign,
New South Wales Corps. Bvo., pp. 18. [n.d.]
Fourth edition. pp. 24. Oxford, 1806.
Fifth edition. Bvo., pp. 24. London, 1809.
Sixth edition. Dublin [lBlO ?].
Rossel Yoyage de D’Entrecasteaux. Redige par M. de Rossel.
4t0., 2 vols. Paris, 1808.
Hodges :—Portfolio of Sketches by William Hodges and James
Webber (who accompanied Captain Cook on his voyages), and a
series of water-colour drawings, by Edward Dayes and other artists,
of scenes in New South Wales and Norfolk Island—l77o-1808.
Two studies by Hodges : Heads of Australian Aborigines, in oil, on sail-
cloth. When the ship was stranded, the artist’s materials were destroyed,
and his canvases lost, so that he was obliged to use a piece of sail-cloth to
paint upon.
Pencil figures of South Sea Islanders, Hodges.
Two studies by Hodges. Pen and ink sketches of New Caledonians.
(See plate xxxix, Cook’s Second Voyage.)
Pencilled sketch : Head of a New Zealand Chief (tatooed), from life, by
Webber.
Kamsehatka Family, by Daniel.
Australian scene; Aboriginal and his Wife, by J. W. Lewin, 1808.
Water-colour drawings, by Edward Dayes. This collection of
sketches, which includes those drawn for Collins’s Account of the
Colony, is now the possession of S. W. Silver, Esq., 3, York Gate,
Regent’s Park, London.
Neu Holland: —Nach den besten Quellen geschildert.
Bvo. Crefeld, 1810.
Eyre : —[Views in] New South Wales. Two large coloured
Panoramic Views of Sydney, drawn by [the Rev.] John Eyre, and
engraved by Clark. London, Ist June, 1810.
1. View of Sydney, from the West Side of the Cove.
2. View of Sydney, from the East Side of the Cove.
Subsequently produced with Mann’s New South Wales, 1811.
Shortland :—Memoir of the Public Services of the late Captain
John Shortland, R.N., with Portrait.—Naval Chronicle, vol. xxiv,
pp. 1-21. London, 1810.


Nee; —Yisite des Espagnols it la. Nouvelle Galles Meridionale
(1793), par Don Luis Nee.
Annales des Voyages, vol. x, pp. 340-355. Paris, 1810.
Fragment of the Voyage (unpublished) of the Descubierta and Atrevida,
under the command of Don Alexandra Malaspina and Don Jose de Busta-
mente y Guerra ; Collins, Account of the Colony, vol. 1, pp. 273, 278.
Zimmerman, E. A. W. von :—Australien . . . Darstellung
des Grossen Oceans, 1810.
Paterson:—Tlie History of New South Wales . . . to the
Present time, comprising an Accurate and interesting Description
of that Vast Country, and of the Persons, Manners and Customs
of the Natives, with a succinct detail of the Establishment and
progress of the English colony ; including every important par-
ticular relative to the situation and conduct of the Convicts. To
which is added a description of Van Diemen’s Land and Norfolk
Island; with reflections on the Importance of the Southern Con-
tinent. Compiled from the Best and most Recent Authorities.
By a Literary Gentleman. Bvo., pp. vi, 624. Map and foul-
engravings. Newcastle-upon-Tyne [lBll].
Re-issued, with new title-page [containing compiler’s name] ;
History of New South Wales, <fcc., by G. Paterson, M.A. [no
date].
This work was compiled from preceding publications—Tench, Phillip’s
Voyage, Hunter, Collins, Labillardiere’s Voyage, Tuckey’s Port Phillip—
with plentiful extracts from the Trial of Colonel Johnston for deposing
Governor Bligh.
Johnston: —Proceedings of a General Court-martial held at
Chelsea Hospital, which commenced on Tuesday, May 7, 1811,
and continued to Wednesday, sth of June following, for the Trial
of Lieut.-Col. Geo. Johnston, Major of the 102nd Regiment, late
the New South Wales Corps, on a Charge of Mutiny, for deposing
on the 26th of January, 1808, William Bligh, Esq., Captain-
General and Governor-in-Chief of New South Wales.
Taken in shorthand by Mr. Bartrum, of Clements’ Inn, who
attended on behalf of Governor Bligh, by permission of the Court.
Bvo., pp. 484. London, 1811.
Mann: —The Present Picture of New South Wales,, illustrated
with four large coloured views, from drawings taken on the spot,
of Sydney, the seat of Government. With a plan of the colony
taken from actual survey by public authority. Including present
state of Agriculture and Trade, Prices of Provisions and Labour,
Internal Regulations, State of Society and Manners, late Dis-
coveries in Natural History, and other Interesting Subjects, .with
Hints for the further Improvement of the Settlement. By D. D.
Mann, many years resident in several official situations. .


The four large coloured plates were drawn by John Eyre, and published
in 1870. They have been recently reproduced in chromo-lithography, with
letterpress description, 4to, pp. 6, and republished by William Dymock,
Sydney. [Edinburgh, litho’d] 1884.
], 3.—View of Sydney, from the East side of the Cove, two plates.
2, 4.—Sydney, from the West side of the Cove, two plates.
Alton: —Fragments for a Future History of Botany Bay, or
New South Wales. Bvo., pp. xiii, 323. London, 1812.
The essays and fragments collected in this volume were gathered
together by a commercial gentleman, whose business relations
brought him into connection with travellers, merchants, and ship-
owners.
The essays having reference to New South Wales arc :
1. Remarks on reading in Phillip's Collection (June, 1810), a
French Voyage to New South Wales [on floods in the Hawkes-
bury, ifcc.].
2. Present State of the Colony in New South Wales, related to
me, February 14th, 1805, by the Rev. Mr. Marsden, the Chap-
lain—pp. 180-186.
3. Copy of a letter, dated Sydney, May, 23, 1805, received
October 10th, 1805—half a year ! —from an officer’s wife, Mrs.
Hartley, to her sister in Beverley, Mrs. , pp. 186-188.
This is the letter referred to by West, History of Tasmania, vol. i, p. 30,
and by Bonwick, Port Phillip Settlement, p. 79. Much to Mrs. Hartley’s
regret, Lieutenant-Governor Collins settled his colony at the river Der-
went, in Van Diemen’s Land, in preference to Port Phillip. “My pen,”
she writes, “is not able to describe half the beauties of that delightful
spot. Port Phillip is my favourite, and has my warmest wishes. During
the time we were there (three months) I never felt one ache or pain, and I
parted from it with more regret than I did fA>m my native land.”
4. Occurrences of the year 1798. September 14. A letter; pp.
188-191.
5. From a letter in 1796 or 7 ; p. 192.
6. From an officer, Captain Bertram, who passed two days on
board a convict ship about 1800 ; pp. 193-196.
1 4t0., pp. vi, 99. London, 1811.
Pinkerton :—A General Collection of the Best and Most Inter-
esting Voyages and Travels in all parts of the world. By John
Pinkerton. Illustrated with plates.
4t0., 12 vols. London, 1812.
Volume xi contains Pelsart’s Voyage to Australasia (from Cal-
lander’s translation of De Brosses), Tasman’s Voyage (from
Harris, vol. i, p. 325), Dampier’s Account of New Holland,
Captain Cook’s Voyages, and Peron’s Voyage.
Phillip : —Biographical Memoir of Arthur Phillip, Esq., Vice-
Admiral of the Red. With portrait.—Naval Chronicle, vol.
xxvii, pp. 1-9. London, 1812.


West: —January Ist, 1813. Publication, Dedicated (by per-
mission) to his Excellency Lachlan Macquarie, Esq., Governor of
New South Wales, <fcc., &c.
A. West most respectfully begs leave to acquaint his friends
and the public that his select collection of beautiful views in New
South Wales are now ready for delivery. The size of the plates
are 12 in. by 18. Subjects as follow :
1. Botany Bay Harbour, with a view of the Heads, taken from Cook’s
Point.
2. Port Jackson Harbour, with a distant view of the Blue Mountains,
taken from South Head.
3. First Part View of the town of Sydney, taken from Bennelong’s
Point.
4. Second Part View of the town of Sydney, taken from Bennelong’s
Point.
5. Hunter’s River, near Newcastle, taken from Prospect Hill.
6. Newcastle, with a distant view of Port Stephens, taken from Prospect
Hill.
7. North Harbour, with a view of South Head, taken from Belmouth.
8. Native Camp, near Cockle Bay, with a view of Parramatta River,
taken from Dawes’ Point.
9. Third Part View of the town of Sydney, taken from Dawes’ Point.
10. Fourth Part View of the town of Sydney, taken from Dawes’ Point.
11. First Part View of the town of Parramatta, taken from the north
side of the river.
12. Second Part View of the town of Parramatta, taken from the north
side of the river.
Price of the Set, Three Pounds. To be had of the proprietor,
A. West, Dawes’s Point, Sydney.
Plates 1,2, 3,4, 7,9, 10, and 11 are engraved by W. Presston, from
Drawings by J. Eyre ; Plates 5 and 6 engraved by Presston, from Drawings
by J. R. Brown ; Plates 8 and 12 are engraved by P. Slaeger, from Draw-
ings by J. Eyre. The series was continued in 1814.
Clark: —Field sports, &c., &c., of the native inhabitants of New
South Wales ; with ten coloui’ed plates by the Author [John
Heaveside Clark], Dedicated, by permission, to Rear-Admiral
Bligh.
4to. [Title and Descriptive Text, 9 leaves.] London, 1813.
This work is also bound up as an appendix to another work :
Foreign Field Sports, Fisheries, Sporting Anecdotes, &c., &c.
From Drawings by Messrs. Howitt, Atkinson, Clark, Manskvich,
&c. With a Supplement of New South Wales. Containing 110
plates, coloured. 4to. [unpaged]. London, 1814.
Another edition. Royal 4t0., pp. 168. Text and 110 plates
coloured. London, 1819.
The ten plates composing the New South Wales section are : —Smoking
out the Opossum, Hunting the Kangaroo, Throwing the Spear, Climbing
Trees, Fishing (two plates), The Dance, Warriors of New South Wales,
Trial. All are drawn by J. H. Clark, and engraved by M. Dubourg.


West: —September 12th, 1814. Publication, Dedicated (by
permission) to his Excellency Lachlan Macquarie, Esquire, Go-
vernor of New South Wales, &c., &c.
A. West, Hunter-street, Sydney, most respectfully begs leave to
acquaint his friends and the public in general that he has now
ready for sale an extra collection of twelve beautiful views of
New South Wales, in addition to the twelve already published,
drawn and engraved by artists of superior abilities resident in
this colony. The subjects are as follows :
13. Woolloomoolla House, near Sydney.
14. Ultimo House, near Sydney.
15. A view of part of the town of Parramatta, taken from the south side
of the river.
16. A view of Shark’s Bay, taken from Vinegar Hill.
17. First part view of the River of Sydney, taken from the Church yard
of St. Phillip’s, Sydney.
18. Second part view of the River of Sydney, taken from the Church yard
of St. Phillip’s, Sydney.
19. A view of the town of Windsor, on the River Hawkesbury.
20. A view of the banks of the River Hawkesbury.
21. A view of the native burial of Baggara, a native of New South Wales,
with remarks thereon.
22. A view of the Blue Mountain Pheasant [Lyre Bird, Menura superba].
23. A view of Campbell and Co.’s Mercantile House, Sydney.
24. A view of the Red-house Farm, Windsor.
To be had of the proprietor, A. West, as above. Price of the set
of 24 plates, nine pounds.
Plates 13, 14, 15, and 10 are engraved by Presston, from drawings by J.
Eyre ; plates 17 and 18 are without artists’ or engravers’ names ; plates 19,
21, 22, 23, and 24 are drawn and engraved by Slaeger ; plate 20 is engraved
by Presston, from an original painting by J. W. Lewin. The British
Museum possesses a complete set of the twenty-four plates, the broadside
“announcements,” here reprinted, serving as title pages to the folio volumes
in which they are bound.
Kittle : —A Concise History of the Colony and Natives of New
South Wales. By Samuel Kittle.
12m0., pp. 252 and plate. Edinburgh, 1814.
Lindler, Dr. L. : —Der Funfte Welttheil, oder Australien, &c.
1814.
Flinders : —A Voyage to Terra Australis, undertaken for the
purpose of completing the discovery of that vast country, and
prosecuted in the years 1801, 1802, and 1803, in his Majesty’s
ship The Investigator, and subsequently in the armed vessel Por-
poise, and Cumberland schooner. With an Account of the Ship-
wreck of the Porpoise, Arrival of the Cumberland at Mauritius,
and Imprisonment of the Commander for Six Years and a Half
in that Island. By Matthew Flinders, Commander of the Investi-
gator. 4t0., 2 vols., with Atlas. London, 1814.
2 R


Flinders :—Biographical Memoir of Captain Matthew Flinders,
It. N., with portrait.—Naval Chronicle, vol. xxxii, pp. 177-191.
London, 1814.
See also Quarterly Review, vol. xii, pp. 1-46. London, 1814.
Anon :—An Accurate List of the names of the landholders in the
colony of New South Wales, pointing out the number of acres in
each district as granted from the Crown. Corrected to 1813.
London . . . price 2s. 6d. the book, or 10s. 6d. with a coloured
map of the colony. Bvo., pp. 55. Dec., 1814.
Valo, Rev. Esnjamin :—Report of the Proceedings on a Trial by
Court-martial of the Rev. Benjamin Yale. London, 181 G.
O’Hara: —The History of New South Wales. Printed for the
author. [James O’Hara.] Bvo., pp. xi, 469. London, 1817.
A second edition was published in 1818, each being anonymous.
The work is a compilation from Collins’ Account of the Colony and
other authorities of the same kind. It contains extracts from the
Sydney Gazette, 1806-1812 (pp. 255-388), and a Parliamentary
Rep>ort on the Colony, issued in July, 1812.
McKonochie :—A summary view of the statistics and existing
commerce of the principal shores of the Pacific Ocean. With the
advantages which would result from the establishment of a central
free port within its limits. By Captain McKonochie.
Bvo., pp. xxii, 366, and map. London, 1818.
The description of New South Wales occupies pp. 153-189. The central
free port in the Pacific should be fixed, according to the author, in the
Sandwich Islands.
Walkenaer, C. A.: —Le Monde Maritime c! Australie, etc., 1818.
Wallis : —Views in New South Wales—
First set: A Corrobora, or Native Dance, from Life ; View of
Sydney, from Dawes’ Battery ; Sydney, from the North Shore ;
Sydney, from Bennelong’s Point; View on the Hawkesbury, near
Windsor ; View of Newcastle. Price, £3.
Second set : A View of Hunter’s River ; Dawes’ Battery, from
Anson’s Point; View of Yaucluse ; the North and South Heads;
Black Swans, with a view of Reid’s Mistake ; Pair of Kangaroos,
with view from Seven mile Hill, Newcastle. Price, 30s. Both
lots, if taken together, £4.
Now published, and on sale at the Gazette Office (Sydney, January t),
1819). These views were afterwards re-issued in a volume.
Vaux :—Memoirs of James Hardy Yaux. Written by Him-
self. 2 vols., 12m0., pp. xx, 247 ; vii, 227. London, 1819.


Vaux was twice transported to New South Wales, and this work gives
minute accounts of his occupations and services under the public officials,
Governor King, and others.
To the second volume (pp. 147-227) is added, “ A New and Comprehen-
sive Vocabulary of the Flash Language,” compiled and written by Vaux,
during a temporary banishment to Newcastle.
Another edition, without the Vocabulary, forming a volume of
a series of “ Autobiographies,” bears the following title :
“Memoirs of James Hardy Vaux, a Swindler and Thief, now
transported to New South Wales for the second time, and for
life. Written by Himself.”
18mo., pp. xxiv, 288. London, 1825.
Re-issued in 1827 and 1830 ; also, a large paper issue in
12mo.
In French : —Confessions de James Hardy Vaux, gentilhomme
voleur, escroc de Londres, deporte a la Nouvelle Galles du Sud,
ecrites par lui-meme.
Three articles in the Revue de Paris, by Philarete Chasles.
Bennet: —A letter to Viscount Sidmouth on the Transportation
Laws, the state of the hulks, and of the colonies in New South
Wales. By the Hon. Henry Grey Bennet, M.P., dated December
27, 1818. Postscript, January 29, 1819.
Bvo., pp. 137. London, 1819.
A letter from the Rev. S. Marsden to Governor Macquarie, dated Parra-
matta, 19th July, 1815, is printed in an appendix, pp. 126-137.
~' —A letter to Earl Bathurst, Secretary of State for the
Colonial Department, on the condition of the colonies in New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land, as set forth in the evidence
taken before the Prison Committee in 1819. By the Hon. H.
Grey Bennet, M.P. With Appendix. Letters from Rev. S.
Marsden, Ac. Bvo., pp. 144. London, 1820.
Wentworth :—A Statistical, Historical, and Political Description
of the Colony of New South Wales, and its dependent Settlements
in Van Diemen’s Land. By W. C. Wentworth, Esq., a native of
the colony. Bvo., pp. xi, 466. London, 1819.
Second edition. 1820.
Third edition. 2 vols. 1824.
A Map of the Settlements in New South Wales, prefixed to vol. ii of the
third edition, marks the “Broken Bay of Captain Cook” some miles to
the south of Broken Bay—corresponding with the latitude given by Cook,
33° 42'; Hawkesworth, vol. iii, p. 507.
Kingdom:—America and the British Colonies : An abstract of
all the most useful information relative to the United States of
America, . . . Canada, . . and New South Wales, October,
1820. Exhibiting the comparative advantages and disadvantages


each country offers for Emigration. Collected from the most
valuable and recent Publications. To which are added a few
notes and observations. By William Kingdom, Jun.
Bvo., pp. viii, 359. London, 182.0.
The sections treating of New South Wales occupy pp. 229-286, 303-314,
318-319, &c., and are mainly composed of extracts from the works of Mann
and Wentworth.
Bellinghauser : —Visit to Sydney, March-October, 1820.
Oxley :—Journals of Two Expeditions into the Interior of New-
South Wales, undertaken by order of the British Government in
the years 1817-18. By John Oxley, Surveyor-General of the
Territory and Lieutenant of the Royal Navy. With maps and
views of the interior, or newly discovered country.
4t0., pp. xv, 408. London, 1820.
Other miscellaneous publications relating to
New South Wales: —Report of the Select Committee on Finance,
ordered to be printed, 26th June, 1798 :
This document is quoted in Colquhoun, Police of the Metropolis, pp.
472-4-6, for the purpose of shewing the number of convicts sent to New-
South Wales and Norfolk Island from 1787 to 1797 inclusive ; the expenses
of the first establishment of the settlement; and also the number of live
stock, and quantity of land in cultivation in 1796.
~ —Parliamentary Return of the number of persons
transported as convicts to New South Wales, from 1789 to 1794,
ordered to be printed, 15 th February, 1810.
~ ■ —Report from the Select Committee of the House
of Commons on Transportation [and upon the Affairs of New-
South Wales] ordered to be printed, July 10th, 1812.
Contents Formation and general description of the Colony, Trade,
Administration of Justice, Iteligion, Morals and Education, Manner of
Transportation, Selection, and Treatment in the Colony.
Appendix 29 and 30 contains a return of persons transported to New-
. South Wales from 1795 to 1810. Similar returns for later periods were
published in subsequent blue-books.
This report was reprinted by O’Hara in his History of New-
South Wales, 1817, pp. 389-425.
~ —Port Jackson, and a Description of Sydney Town.
With Plate.—Naval Chronicle, vol. xxii, pp. 385-390, 477-481.
London, 1809.
~ —Rules and Regulations for the Conduct and
Management of the Bank of New South Wales, framed by a
committee appointed for that purpose.
12m0., pp. 13. Sydney, 1817.


Articles on New South Wales, New Holland, Botany Bay, and
Australasia, will be found in the following works of reference :
Encyclopaidia Britannica: Supplement, 1816, contains articles
on Australasia and Botany Bay.
Encyclopedia Britannica. Third edition. Supplement, vol. ii,
pp. 758-763. Edinburgh, 1801.
Brewster’s Edinburgh Encyclopedia.
Vol. iii, pp. 119-134 ; iv, 356-359. 1810.
Encyclopedia Britannica. Fourth edition.
Vol. x, pp. 561-573. Edinburgh, 1810.
See also fifth edition. Vol. x, pp. 561-573. Edinburgh, 1817.
Brewster’s Edinburgh Encyclopedia. Vol. xi, pp. 85-88. 1816.
Wilkes’s Encyclopedia Londoniensis.
Vol. xvi, pp. 768-783, 4to. 1819.
ADDENDA.
Bougainville: —.Voyage autour du monde, par la fregate la
Boudeuse et l’Etoile, en 1766-69. 4t0., plates. Paris, 1771.
Another edition, Bvo., 2 vols., with supplement containing a
journal of a voyage round the world by Banks and Solander,
translated from the English by la Freville. Paris, 1772.
English translation, 4to. London, 1773.
Kerguelen :—Relation de deux Voyages dans les mers australes
et des Indes, faits en 1771-73, pour la verification d’une nouvelle
route ala Chine. Bvo. Paris, 1782.
