

C. D. KEMP
big
business
-men
FOUR BIOGRAPHICAL STUDIES
A study of the characters and methods
of four men who achieved great promin-
ence in the business life of Australia,
The author, C, D, Kemp, Director of the
Institute of Public Affairs , knew the
subjects well and at one time or another
worked closely with them,
All four men played a big part in great
events that have had a determining
influence on the shape of present-day
Australia,
Little is known of Australia’s great busi-
nessmen and this book helps to rectify a
serious deficiency in national understand-
ing.
Published by
INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS


SIR HERBERT GEPP (1877-1954)
Born in Adelaide in circumstances of almost extreme
poverty, Gepp, by iron will and exceptional abilities,
lifted himself from junior chemist to industrial
statesman and confidant of governments. He
packed into his life a half-dozen careers, any one of
which would have satisfied most men.
Gepp was the man who proved the commercial
feasibility of the De Bavay flotation process for the
recovery of the zinc ores from the rich Broken Hill
mines—here were the birth pangs of the Australian
industrial revolution. He was the prime creator of
the Electrolytic Zinc Company at Risdon, Tasmania,
the third largest works in the world for the manu
facture of refined zinc.
For a decade he was the senior adviser to the Com-
monwealth and State Governments on national
development and other problems. Among many
other positions, he was Chairman of the Develop-
ment and Migration Commission and the Wheat
Commission and Director of The Aerial Geological
and Geophysical Survey of North Australia.
Gepp returned to private enterprise in the middle
1930’5. As Managing Director of Australian Paper
Manufacturers he built a great national enterprise
based on the manufacture of paper from native
hardwood eucalypts.
Something of a rebel and a non-conformist, Gepp
was always a man far ahead of his fellows. The
author writes, “He was, I believe, the greatest
industrial leader and industrial statesman of his
time ... a man of large dimensions, brilliant, unpre-
dictable, restive, moody, magnetic, a seeker after
perfection, always dissatisfied and not least with
himself. He was too restless to know serenity, but
then serenity was something he would not have
equated with bliss.”
SIR WALTER MASSY-GREENE (1874-1952)
Descendant of distinguished English families, both
on his father’s and mother’s sides, Massy-Greene
came to Australia in 1889 and worked in the Tas-
manian forests and as a farm labourer. He rose to
become one of Australia’s outstanding statesmen
missing the Prime Ministership by a hair’s breath.
Comparatively late in life he turned his attentions to
business and became perhaps Australia’s leading
company director. He held about forty directorships,
many of them in some of the largest and most
important industrial enterprises in Australia. Among
other things he was the father of the great enter-
prise, Associated Pulp and Paper Mills, at Burnie,
Tasmania. He shepherded many other of Australia’s
best-known companies through the difficult war
and early post-war years.
In his life as timber worker, banker, farmer,
politician, statesman, financier, industrialist and
government adviser, Massy-Greene saw Australia
grow from a predominantly rural to an industrial
economy. Along with Gepp he made an outstanding
contribution to this development.
Of Gepp and Massy-Greene, the author writes,
“They were men of a massive all-round comprehen-
sion . . . Probably no other Australians have known
more about their country.” While both men of
immense achievement there was a wide disparity in
their characters, methods and attitudes to life. “To
Massy-Greene the world was a sea, full of dangerous
currents and threatening reefs, periodically beset by
terrible storms. The wise navigator accepted this
and did his best to keep the ship afloat and to safe-
guard the passengers. Gepp wanted to tame the sea,
to dynamite the submerged rocks out of existence,
to bring the passengers at top speed into the won-
derful harbour he had constructed out of his fertile
imagination.”
SIR LESLIE McCONNAN (1887-1954)
Appointed Chief Manager of the National Bank of
Australasia in 193 5 at an exceptionally young age,
McConnan played a dominant role in the formu-
lation of the financial and monetary policies of two
stormy decades. Within a year of his appointment as
Chief Manager he was immersed in the contro-
versial Royal Commission on the Monetary and
Banking system as a leading spokesman for the
private banks. During World War II McConnan
as the recognised leader of the trading banks, was
plunged into difficult negotiations with the Govern-
ment and the Central Bank.
Then came, in 1947, perhaps the most crucial
political issue since Federation—the attempt by the
Chifley Labor Government to socialise the private
trading banks. The resounding defeat of the bank
nationalisation coup and the survival of the private
banks was largely due to the astute, tenacious
Scotch fighter who acted as their leader —a banker
with an almost uncanny political sense.
GEOFFREY GRIMWADE (1902-1961)
Unlike Gepp, Massy-Greene and McConnan who all
worked up from lowly beginnings, Grimwade, as
grandson of the founder of the firm that eventually
became Drug Houses of Australia, was born to a
director’s chair. But he would not have needed a
running start in life to make a successful career for
himself.
Indeed he might have done better without the ad-
vantages of inherited wealth such was his tough,
determined, combative disposition and far-above
average abilities.
No Australian businessman did more in helping to
work out and gain acceptance for a new modern
concept of the role of private enterprise in national
affairs. He stood firm for liberal, progressive notions
at a time of great crisis for the private enterprise
system in Australia.
An outstanding sportsman and prominent club-man,
he was determined also to show that he was as tough
and able as the next man in the serious pursuits of
life. The author writes: “To many people he must
have appeared gruff, curt, unfriendly, even bad-
tempered. Yet his straight-forwardness and his en-
tire lack of any suggestion of deviousness made one
feel that there could be few men with whom it
would be more satisfactory to have dealings.”


THE AUTHOR
C. D. Kemp, has been associated
with the Institute of Public Affairs
since its inception in 1942, first as Eco-
nomic Adviser and since 1948 as
Director. In this capacity he has had a
great deal to do with Australian
business leaders and has seen the I.P.A.
develop into an influential organisation
in the economic, educational and busi-
ness life of Australia.
Mr. Kemp undertook these bio-
graphical studies on his own initiative
and the views expressed are, of course,
entirely his. The I.P.A. Executive
Committee decided that the Institute
should bear the costs of publication in
the belief that more should be known
of the characters and ideas of outstand-
ing businessmen who have contributed
to the progress and development of
Australia.
For over twenty years the I.P.A.
has been concerned not only with in-
fluencing national policies and public
opinion on great issues, but in achieving
a wider understanding of the role of
business in the total life of the nation.


ORDER FORM
The SECRETARY,
INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS,
289 Flinders Lane,
Melbourne, C.l, Victoria.
Tel. 63-6558
Please supply copy/copies of
BIG BUSINESSMEN at 27/6d. each.
(post and package included).
Enclosed is cheque/money order
for £
Name
Address
State
192 pages, BV2 x SVz, Jacketed 27/6d.
Published by
INSTITUTE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS
