

BIGGER THAN BOMBERS
Hockman of Abyssinia
•fiTi
•Wiv




Eagle
Books, No. 35
BIGGER THAN
BOMBERS
P. J. DOHERTY
First Published
January 1941
November 1941
July 1942
July 1944
Second Impression
Third Impression.
First Australian Edition
London:
EDINBURGH HOUSE PRESS
Melbourne;
THE BOOK DEPOT
288 Little Collins Street, C.l
1944
»


"True stories of real people”
ROBERT HOCKMAN
1906-1935
808 AND HIS PALS
FROM ONE OF THEM


BIGGER THAN BOMBERS
HI! Look out, Bob!”
“Don’t fall and break your neck, Ginger!”
A chorus of exclamations floated up to Bob
Hockman’s stocky, red-haired figure. It swayed against
the sky-line on the top of a narrow wall. The wall ran
along the crest of hills that enclosed a bay on the North
China coast.
“Maen-maen tso!” called out one of the watchers,
punning on the Chinese words for “walk slowly”
which also meant “good-bye.” The others laughed,
then held their breath. Bob had slipped for an instant,
and twenty feet might be a nasty drop.
“What’s the idea, Fruz?” they asked a tall lad
who sat waiting for him on the top of a gate that
spanned the highway.
“One of Bob’s notions. He vowed he’d do it before
he left school.”
At last Llockman reached safety. “Hallo, Pat,
Soda, Toby, what an age you’ve been! Hurry up,
Peanut. Come on up here.”
The rest of the gang climbed the steps —the more
usual, way to the gate-top. Here they could look down
not only on the highroad that wound down the hillside
to Chefoo, but on the whole bay spread out below.
They gazed at the sweep of the beach from the Rocks
to Consulate Hill, at the brown curve of the break-
water in the blue-green sea, over to the heights of the


Bluff, and then across to Lighthouse Island, scene of
unforgettable picnics.
In the distance, on the landward side again, the
grey roofs of the Chinese city clustered round the
harbour. The stone houses of the foreign settlement
were dotted along the nearer shore. Among them the
school building stood out clearly, rows of windows
overlooking the quad at the back, its front facing the
sea.
"Don’t know whether I’ll be glad or sorry to leave
the old place,” said Toby. (His nickname came in
some remote way from his having a nose like Punch's.)
The rest of the gang were silent for a minute with
the same mixed feelings.
"No more Latin, anyway,” said Bob in a tone of
relief. I T
"Thought you were going to be a doctor,” Peanut
reminded him. "You’ll need Latin for that.”
“Forget it.” Bob struck up one of the school songs.
Soon they were all singing lustily:
“Parent comes to Chefoo
With his little chick,
Wants to come and see who
Will his darling lick. . .
They broke off as Pat, another red-head, had an idea.
"Race you down the highway, Bob,” he said. These
two were the best runners in the school. At the sports
they had divided the events between them.
All the gang were soon sprinting along the dusty
road, swerving past wheelbarrows, dodging caravans of
mules, avoiding the heavy shafts of litters. Chinese
carters cracked their whips and joked at the mad
foreigners in such a hurry.
Bob and Pat drew ahead, running neck and neck.


Then Pat caught his foot for an instant in one of the
deep ruts that scored the road. Bob raced on alone.
He was just passing a laden wheelbarrow when the
coolie swung into his path. Next moment they collided
and the contents of the barrow were flung in all
directions. Cabbages, sweet potatoes, melons rolled
about the road.
The barrowman gave a shout. He looked as though
he meant to stand and swear. But he stopped in
surprise as he saw the "red-haired devil’’ stooping to
pick up the spilled produce, and then a number of
others join him until the barrow was reloaded.
"There, that’s the lot," said Bob, and he added in
Chinese, "Sorry."
"No matter," replied the barrowman, acknowledging
that the fault had been his own as much as anybody's.
"He seemed quite surprised and grateful at our
picking up his goods for him,” remarked Bob. "Did
he think ‘foreign devils’ upset things for fun?"
Presently Bob and his chums struck off from the
main road towards their school. They descended the
paths between terraced fields.
"Look," cried Peanut. "There's a flotilla of
destroyers coming into port.”
They stopped and watched a dozen long, low grey-
hounds of the sea slide into the bay and take up their
stations. These ships were units of a Pacific fleet that
visited the port each summer.
"Wonder when they’ll be in real action," Soda
speculated.
They all began to discuss which sides they would be
on when the next war came. It was four and a half
years after the Armistice of 1918.
"It’ll start in the Balkans. They always do,"


declared Pat, the journalist of the party. “I’ll be be
there in the first month. Make a rendezvous with me,
Fruz?’’ He turned to the tall Scottish lad.
“Aye. Here’s my hand on it.
“And mine.’’ “And mine.” “Me, too,” others
said.
“Then, when the U.S. joins in and Hockman comes
along ”
“Oh, yeah?” Bob flushed. “I’ll be there, all set
with surgical instruments to carve you chaps up when
you arrive. You see.”
The sound of a bell reminded them they would have
to hurry to be in time for prep. As they entered the
quad they met a master and appealed to him on a
point. “We were just talking about the next war,
sir, and as you know about the last ”
“The last. That’s right,” said the master. “It
was fought so that there should be no next for lads like
you.” Seeing their faces fall, he added, “Don’t
worry, there’ll be plenty of battles of other sorts ahead
of you. Carry on, Hockman.”
When schooldays were over Bob travelled with his
sister and his brother Charlie, to his parents’ home in
the West of China. Mr. and Mrs. Hockman worked as
missionaries in a city that lay a thousand miles up the
Yangtze. The first part of the journey from the
treaty port in the north lasted three days on a coastal
steamer. Then there was a long trip by river steamer.
They changed at Shanghai. In that wonderful anchor-
age they saw shipping from all parts of the world:
tankers from Mexico, sailing ships from Vladivostock,
C.P.R. liners from Vancouver. Bob and his brother
and sister were particularly thrilled by the sight of a


fleet of American destroyers and their battleship
escort. They saluted the Stars and Stripes as they
passed.
“We saw warships of other nations at Shanghai,
but none equal to ours,’’ Bob said in telling his father
and mother.
“Of course not,’’ replied his father. He went on,
“There are other ways of keeping the Stars and Stripes
flying, too. We’ll appoint you to haul up the flag every
day on the Mission compound, Bob. You'll find the
mast near the hospital.”
“Sure, Dad,” Bob agreed. Something in his father’s
words set him thinking.
Just then the youngest of the family came toddling
in. “ ’Elio!” he greeted them.
“Hallo, Don!” “How’s Don?” “A reg’lar
feller, aren’t you, Don?” They jostled about him.
Down on his hands and knees went Bob. '‘Jump on!”
he cried.
Mr. and Mrs. Hockman smiled at one another. It
wasn’t every year that their children could get home
for the vacation. They were glad to see them enjoying
this last holiday before they all sailed for the States.
For a fortnight Bob had a glorious time, working
away at carpentry, playing rousing hymn tunes on the
cornet —an old one of his father’s—and chumming up
with young Chinese.
He, Charlie and their sister went for walks to a
Buddhist temple on a hill half a mile outside the city
gate. After a look into the dim, incense-laden hall of
idols, they were glad to get back to the open air and
stroll around the shallow pool where goldfish swam,
fat and lazy as some of the priests, or to chase one
another between the stems of the bamboo grove.


One day the results of the final exam, were published.
Bob read them eagerly. Peanut—passed; Soda—
passed; Pat, Fruz, Toby. The gang were all there—
except himself. His name did not appear. He had
failed. ( ■] I€|
j ! I M. j
“It's that Latin,” he said as he flung the paper into
a corner, and slammed the door behind him.
His mother warned the others. “Leave him alone
for a bit; he’ll get over it.”
One afternoon Bob casually remarked to Charlie:
“Had a spot of holiday Latin to do, didn’t you?
Can you lend me your Grammar?”
“Here it is,” replied Charlie. “Rather you than me.
Going to swot the stuff?”
“Uh-huh.” Bob marched off with the ‘Blue Allen’
under his arm and sat under the whispering bamboos
for a couple of hours. There his father found him.
“I shall get through next time,” vowed Bob,
standing up. “They’ll see.”
“Who?”
“Our crowd; Fruz, Toby, Pat, and the rest of the
gang.” He jumped at a branch high above his
head. ! 1 .
“Like to come and sec where that battle took place
I was telling you about the other day?” Mr. Hockman
asked.
“You bet.”
They crossed the stream that fed the fish-pool and
climbed another spur of the hill. Here, a number of
mounds told of Chinese ancestral graves. Skirting
them, Bob caught sight of a bit of metal glinting in
the soft earth. “What’s that?” he cried. “Looks
like an old shell.”
“Quite likely,” replied his father, coming up to


examine it. “I’ve found plenty near here. Spent ones
and duds. Scrape the earth away very gingerly.”
Presently the shell lay exposed. “It’s still intact!”
Bob exclaimed.
“Yes, and a danger to any farmer who chances to
knock his mattock on it. Carry it carefully and I'll
show you how to draw its sting.”
On the way Mr. Hockman recounted the story of the
engagement between marauding troops and the local
forces. He told of the Red Cross work for the wounded
that he’d done.
Bob’s eyes glowed. “That’s the sort of work I mean
to do,” he declared.
He began to plan with his father how he should
prepare for it. The first step was to pass with sufficient
credits the exam, he had failed in.
“You shall try again, in America,” his father
promised him. “And so long as you do your best,
I’ll not be disappointed.”
On the evening of 4th July, three years later, a group
of freshmen were swaggering back to Muskingum
College, Ohio. They had been to an air display and
were returning for the fireworks on the campus. They
chewed and drawled laconic remarks in imitation of
the air-force boys they had seen on the flying-field.
‘l’ll say them chasers was hot!”
‘Nuthin’ on Shaddy’s circus.”
‘Aw! Give me the bombers. What say, Red?”
“They sure looked smart,” agreed Bob Hockman,
answering to his new nickname. “Grand to sec them
fly in formation. Makes you feel—oh, I dunno.”
“Like a Sousa march played by a silver band, eh,
Red?” I I I


Just then Bob felt that if he only had his cornet with
him he could blow a tune that would set all the people
of Concord marching after him. He swelled out his
chest a little and added a swing to his walk.
“Gee! Fd like to keep the Stars and Stripes flying
in the air,” exclaimed one of his companions. “Be a
bomber pilot. All set? Let her go. Zoom!”
“Why don’t you apply to be one of Uncle Sam’s
air boys, Red? You're just the build. They’d pass
you Al.”
For a moment it seemed to Hockman a brilliant idea.
Power in his hands. Control of a huge machine. Easy
flight. Wings over everything. Popularity. A tough
guy among a gang of he-men. But the words about
the “Stars and Stripes flying’’ awoke a memory in
his mind. He laughed the suggestion off. “Oh,
bombers might be fun,’’ he cried, “but Pm in for a
bigger thing.”
“Bigger than bombers!” cried his companions.
“How d'ya mean, Red?”
But Bob felt he had said enough and refused to add
any more.
It seemed very tame, however, to have to grind
away at books on chemistry and physiology. But he
kept at it, even when he returned between terms to the
family home in Wheaton.
“Remember how we used to wake up an hour before
the rising-gong in order to swot for the Oxford Senior?’’
he wrote to Peanut. “I get up at five now, and study
for a couple of hours before breakfast. Latin’s coming
more easily, though it’s still a bit sticky. When do you
have your commencement exercises? Graduation, I
believe you call it. What news of the rest of our
crowd?”


At home he could get on with his carpentry, making
a work-bench, mending chairs. He concreted the
paths and the foot of the porch-steps. His cornet went
home with him.
“Say, Kath, come and accompany me,” he would
call to his sister on Sunday evenings. She left her
drawing, and sat at the piano. The others clustered
round, and even Don joined in singing their favourite
tunes. j I
Back in the lecture rooms of the college, Bob was
far from being a central figure. His answers to
questions on the assignment were still slow, though
they were no longer short and scrappy as at the
beginning.
During the long vacations Bob turned to harvesting,
lumbering and other jobs to earn money for the course.
One summer he and several of his college pals became
organizers in a forest camp for high-school students.
The leaders squatted round the fire in the evenings,
and by the light of the blaze chatted over the happen-
ings of the day. There had been a general sing-song
led by Hockman’s cornet. Now that the rest of the
camp was safely tented, they were enjoying the smell
of the log fire and its light among the dark trees.
A big fellow, newly arrived, called out to the figure
next to Bob, “Hey, black trash! Put another log on
the fire.”
Hockman jumped up, eyes ablaze, fists clenched.
“Were you addressing my chum?” He walked over
to the man who had spoken.
“Your chum? A nigger?” He rose and sneered
down at Bob.
“Just by way of apology you’ll put that log on
yourself.”


For a tense moment they stood confronting one
another, the only sound being the falling of the ashes
in the fire beside them. Then the man who had made
the taunt mumbled, stooped, and did what he was
told.
“Now meet Malaku, a nobleman of Ethiopia," said
Bob. ■ i ; -I I . ■
The campers stirred. “Where in the heck’s that?"
“Thought it was a place in a book."
They looked at Malaku. His high brow and straight
nose gave him an aristocratic appearance. His hair
was slightly frizzy but his skin was more of a coffee
colour than black.
“It is Queen of Sheba’s country," he announced
proudly. “I, relative to now Emperor of Ethiopia,
Lion of Judah."
The circle was impressed. Someone whistled and
made a remark about a fairy prince.
“Don’t talk rot," rejoined Bob. “Malaku is pukka.
We call the country Abyssinia. His folk call it Ethiopia.
I’ve heard a bit about it from him."
“Let’s hear!” clamoured the others. “Go on
Malaku, tell us. Do you have real lions there? What
sort of houses?"
As the young Ethiopian spoke, his eyes flashed.
The group saw a wild land, strange and thrilling.
Great mountains were cut by gorges in which lions
roamed. Broad rivers dashed down rocky defiles and
widened out into shallows where crocodiles lurked.
Malaku took them in imagination across plains burning
under the hot sun. Here stood groups of huts made of
wattle, and thatched. He told how the villagers
organized hunts for a hippo or a wild boar.
“Grand country for game, I guess,” interposed one
12
BIGGER THAN BOMBERS


bf his hearers. “Wouldn’t you like to get the sights
of your ‘point four’ on it, Red?’’
“Sure.” But Bob was thinking more, just then, of
what he’d heard of the people of the country. They had
a hard life. According to Malaku nearly everything
was marvellous: but he let fall occasional stories
which showed that many of his countrymen lived in
extreme poverty. When they fell sick they resorted
to primitive cures, such as hanging amulets round their
necks. A terrible number died.
When he got him alone in the tent that night, Bob
asked Malaku. “You’ve come over to learn to be a
doctor, haven’t you?”
“You’re right. I’m going to practise in Ethiopia.
Sure, I’m proud of my own country, but I’ll say they
do need doctors, modern doctors.”
Slowly Bob found the words to tell Malaku that he
had always wanted to be a medical missionary, “And
from what you’ve told me,” he added, “I think I’ll
apply to be sent to Abyssinia.”
“Now isn't that swell?” Malaku was delighted.
“I shall give you introduction to Haile Selassie, that is,
Emperor. He sure will take great interest in hospital.
Yes, sir.”
Bob laughed. “Say, you’re in a cast-iron hurry,
Malaku. Don’t know I'll be accepted as a candidate
by the mission board, yet. A grand job— to be a
medical missionary, but it takes a lot of training.”
Having set his heart on becoming a doctor, Hockman
forged ahead steadily on that line. After his college
course he must spend another four years at the Chicago
medical school. The fees for that were high. Like
other students, Bob raised money for them by borrow-
ing from State grants. This could be paid back when


he had graduated and started a practice of his
own.
Letters from Fruz at a Scottish University told of
the same purpose. They spurred Bob on, and he began
to exchange “shop” in his correspondence—questions
of anatomy, the experience of having a blood trans-
fusion taken, the methods of surgeons.
When the final exam, drew near, discussions as to
prospects and future practices became more frequent
among the students. A group was chatting after a
surgical demonstration as they removed the masks
from their heads and slipped off their long white gowns.
‘What about you, Red?”
Til probably practise in Africa.”
How d'ya mean? Oh, as a missionary, eh?
There was a short silence, and then one of the others
drawled, “Can’t stand the competition on the home
front, huh?”
Bob said nothing; he meant deeds to speak for him,
not words.
A few weeks after the exam., for which hundreds of
candidates had entered, the same group gathered
again. Someone burst in with the news that the results
had been posted.
“Who’s passed?” “What mark did I get”—
“What grade did I make?” the questions were fired
at him.
He answered the student who had sneered at Bob,
“Just scraped through, buddy, by a quarter of a
mark.”
“And who’s come first in our year?”
“Hockman has.” There were whistles of astonishment.


Then a series of slaps on the back for Bob.
“Congrats, Red!” “Pretty work!’’ “You dark
horse!”
“Guess you’ll have to take back what you said
about his not standing the competition,” the discomfited
student who had been so cocksure of himself was told.
“He’ll get the pick of the partnerships in Illinois.”
“Which offer will you take, Red?”
They all began to speculate. Bob staggered them by
saying he meant to hold by his previous decision.
“You're not going to stick to that idea, now?
’Course, if you couldn’t pick up anything else. But
here is the chance of a fortune, it’s a cinch. Don’t say
you’re throwing it way on being a missionary.”
“That’s not how I look at it,” rejoined Bob. “There
is plenty need out there. Africa for me, if I can make
it.”
He went off to write about the news of his success
to his pals. They were now scattered about the
world: Peanut in England, Soda in Sweden, Pat in
Canada, and Toby in business in China.
There was also somebody else he particularly wanted
to share the news with, a jolly girl called Winnie
Thompson. He had met her at college and they
planned to get married as soon as he passed his final.
Now they could do things together.
“That’s grand, Bob,” said Winnie when he told her
the result.
“We’ll reach Abyssinia this year, yet,” declared Bob.
“When did you say Malaku was sailing back to his
own country?”
“In October,” Bob replied. “Wouldn’t it be O.K.
if we travelled at the same time?”
That summer they attended a conference of young


people. They listened to talks about other lands,
played tennis, joined discussion groups. Bob’s cornet
was in big demand. At the same time they were
thinking about their application to the mission board.
Towards the end of the conference they appeared
before it.
In answer to a question as to when he had decided
to become a medical missionary Bob replied, “I think
I’ve always wanted to do what my father did. He’s a
missionary, as you know, and in China he healed the*
wounded. Our school in Chefoo helped me to keep to
that purpose. In my last year there I decided to become
a doctor if possible. Now I want to go to Africa as a
missionary doctor, and especially to Abyssinia.”
Both Winnie and Bob were accepted by the board.
Things did not immediately become easy for them,
however. Besides the passage-money there were the
fees of the medical course to be paid. They put together
the money they had saved and prayed and worked for
the rest. In time it came and they set about making
their preparations.
The Rhinoceros express panted heavily up the
gradient as though it were affected by the heat like its
passengers. In its white-painted carriages they sat
and fanned themselves with pith helmets, screwing up
their eyes to look across the shimmering landscape.
They saw a dry countryside, varied a little by mimosa
scrub, and in the distance clumps of bushes which
threw sharp shadows on the sandy soil.
‘‘So we’re really in Abyssinia, at last?” Winnie
said.
Bob turned to his wife and smiled. ‘‘Looks like it.”
Malaku, however, who was sitting opposite, corrected


him. “This, I think, not real Ethiopia. We come
there more later. Flat land on top of mountains: what
you call ”
“Plateau. When do we reach it, Malaku?”
“ ’Nother day. More cooler there/'
“Thank goodness for that,” declared Winnie. “I
nearly melted in the Red Sea and at Jibuti, although
it’s November. What could you do to an ice-cream,
Bob?”
“Don’t! As it is I can’t help thinking what it
would be like to be swimming in Chefoo bay. To be
racing a mile, say, with Fruz and Pat.”
They gazed across the arid plain, wondering if they’d
catch sight of zebra, hyenas or gazelle. For a long
time they could see no sign of movement. Then Bob
remarked, “Look, the line's going to cross a river. It's
a fair size, though it’s a bit brown. What’s its name,
Malaku?”
“That is Awash.”
They burst out laughing. “Wish it were, for us.
You don’t have a swimming-pool at Addis, by any
chance?”
This gave Malaku an opening to sing the praises of
the capital. “Proper name is Addis Ababa,” he told
them. “This has meaning, ‘New Flower,' because so
beautiful. Haile Selassie makes it like Western city.”
“The same as Jibuti?” Winnie asked mischievously,
for Malaku's glowing description of that port had not
tallied with their experience of its stifling, crowded
streets. Malaku was saved from answering as the train
drew into a station.
Immediately a crowd seethed round the cars. There
were men of all shades of skin, from dark black to a
light coffee colour. They spoke half a dozen dialects.


Leaning out of the window, Bob and Winnie caught
the word ferentshi as curious eyes stared at them..
“Seems to be the local name for us.’’
Malaku explained it meant “red man.’’
“You see you can’t get away from your nickname,
Red, even here,’’ Winnie chaffed her husband.
They looked with interest at these people whose
skins showed up in contrast against white chammas
(robes). Bob noticed a couple linked together by a
chain. He appealed to Malaku for an explanation.
Malaku reluctantly told them one was a debtor who
was thus bound to his creditor till the debt was paid.
Seems a bit hard on both,’’ Bob commented. The
sight suggested other possibilities, and when he saw
a group of ragged men with black skins, driven by an
Abyssinian on a horse, he pointed them out and said,
“Surely you don’t have slaves in your country?’’
Malaku shrugged his shoulders. “Those just Galla
niggers,’’ he said.
Bob gained the impression they didn’t count for
much with the real Abyssinians. He found that the
Amharis or aristocrats lived in the mountains around
Addis Ababa while the Galla folk belonged to the plains
of the south. Wonder if I'll get a chance of travelling
among them,” he thought.
Dr. and Mrs. Hockman looked eagerly at Addis Ababa
as Malaku escorted them out of the terminus into the
chief city of Ethiopia. The New Flower was set eight
thousand feet high, in a cup of the mountains. They
saw white buildings against the dark green eucalyptus
trees in a golden haze of sunshine different from the
harsh glare of the plains. The houses seemed an odd
jumble. There were native tukuls or rounded huts
made of wattle plastered over inside and out with clay.


“Just like beehives,” said Mrs. Hockman. In the
centre of the city stood Westernized houses of stone
in which the richer Abyssinians lived. These were
often two storeys high; all the houses had tin roofs.
Malaku beamed as he showed them the sights of his
city. He pointed out a new road made under the
Emperor’s personal direction. They admired it but
could not help noticing a beggar with sores sitting
beside it.
There were sudden shouts, and the passers-by all
withdrew to the sides of the road. Bob and Winnie
ran back too, their hearts thumping with the sudden
exertion at such a high altitude. Along the cleared
roadway a maroon Rolls-Royce swept by. High on a
special seat at the back sat two attendants dressed in
red, green and gold, the imperial colours.
Malaku turned to them in great excitement. “That
is Haile Selassie and Empress.”
“You said he was interested in hospitals and
Western ideas generally, didn’t you?”
“Yes, sure. Number one man.”
Bob and Winnie had to wink at one another. So
many of Malaku’s enthusiasms had proved excessive.
He continued, “And I soon get you interview with
him.”
“I shall be very grateful for that, Malaku, old man,”
Bob replied. “Good-bye.”
With the missionaries who had come to welcome
them they made off for the George Memorial Hospital,
glancing at the outstanding landmarks as they went,
especially at the great pile of buildings that was the
Emperor's palace. At the compound gates, in the
outskirts of Addis Ababa, a Galla servant met them.
He was short, with woolly black hair clustering in curls.


“Hallo, old sport, and what may your name be?”
Hockman asked him.
His white teeth gleamed in a grin, and he stammered
in English, “Name—Fiesa.” He took their hand
luggage.
“Fuzzy, I’ll call you, if it’s all one to you.’’
They walked up a long drive to a group of foreign
buildings of grey stone. Behind these stood the
rounded tukuls of the servants. Fiesa put their baggage
in one of the bungalows. Bob and Winnie crossed the
verandah and explored each room.
“Our own home, at last,'* breathed Winnie. “I am
glad. Bob.” I
“Great, isn’t it? I’ll be able to fix up a work-
bench over in that corner and shelves for you here.”
As they crossed the compound an hour later to the
house of another missionary, for their first meal, they
passed the long line of the hospital. Looking at it,
Bob said, “Glad I’m a medical missionary 'and can get
to work right away with my hands.”
At once he was in the thick of it, doing three or four
operations a day. Although he was a stickler for detail
he never grew angry or flustered in his work. The
nurses liked his calm control. In the wards the native
patients looked for the ferentshi doctor’s cheery voice
and smile.
“Blatta,” said one, giving him the title of “wise
man,” “You can make the blind to see.”
The doctor took the opportunity to tell him, through
an interpreter, of a great Healer who used to do the
same for the eyes of the soul as well as for those of the
body. “I must learn Amharic quickly in order to be
able to tell them that wonderful story myself,” he


thought. For although Abyssinia was a Christian
country in name, he found that few of the people knew
the stories in the Bible.
When he got home in the evening, he settled to
learn the lists of Amharic words the teacher set him.
Then he practised them with his wife, who had already
begun to take a class of children during the day.
“Whew! Wish I could fit these words together like
a dove-tail joint,” he declared.
“Stick it, Bob,” Winnie encouraged him, and she
repeated the list with him. At last he knew itv For
relief he fetched out his cornet, and standing on the
verandah, played Day is dying in the West. As the
notes rang through the compound a figure in a white
chamma crept out of the shadows to watch and listen.
It was Fiesa. Presently he put out his hands in imitation
of a cornet. Bob rushed indoors and shouted with
laughter.
“What is it?” Winnie wondered.
“Fuzzy. He’s making the funniest noise. But it’s
given me an idea. I’ll get some trumpets and start a
band. Why not? One of the missionaries was saying
that the boys about the compound need something to
occupy their spare time.”
A native quartette of trumpeters was formed. Bob
insisted that every member must be a Christian and
must learn his scales. It took Fuzzy a long time to
accomplish the latter, but he was eager and at last
qualified. The noises the quartette made at their
practices were a constant source of jokes against their
leader and conductor. The other missionaries soon
found,-however, that at practical jokes Hockman was
more than a match for them.
His grin became famous. In the streets of Addis


the people came to recognize the new ferentshi, His
reputation spread, for the Abyssinians respect a strong
man who is straight and a good sportsman.
His own comments were as outspoken as ever.
“Pouf! Smells in Chinese streets haven’t much on
those over here, I reckon,’’ he said as he and his wife
took a stroll in the capital. They passed smoke-filled
tukuls where families sat eating raw meat on the mud
floor: before long they arrived at a part of the town
where shops were displaying Paris models. 'lt was a
curious mixture.
“Look at that beggar with the dreadful leg, swollen
to twice its natural size.’’ Winnie clutched his arm.
“Oh, Bob, couldn’t something be done for him?’’
“One of the worst cases of elephantiasis I’ve seen;
even worse than many in China.’’ Bob walked over to
the beggar, who held out a bowl and whined for alms.
“Would you like to come to the foreign hospital and
be healed?’’ Bob asked him.
The beggar cried, “Yellem; yelleml” and shook his
head, in an emphatic “No, no!”
“I can make your leg so much better that you’ll be
able to walk again. No need to be afraid.” Bob
stooped and put his hand on his shoulder. Still the
beggar looked reluctant, until Mrs. Hockman put a
coin in his bowl. Then he consented. Bob had him
admitted to the hospital and operated on him
successfully.
But one evening, six weeks later, Winnie received a
very depressed husband home. “Misunderstanding’s
the hardest thing to face in our work,” he said. “I
don’t mind fighting against difficulties, but lack of
response gets me down. You know that fellow whose
leg we put right?”


“The one you had to teach how to walk, step by
step?”
“Yes. Besides the treatment, we gave him a neto
set of clothes. Then he groused because we'd taken
away his filthy rags! Said we ought to pay him for
them, and even compensation for spoiling his trade.’’
“But surely he could find a better job to do than
begging, now he’s whole again?”
“So the nurses pointed out. But he wasn’t having
any. The evangelist gave him an arm half-way down
the drive. Then the fellow deliberately collapsed on
his knees and crawled out of the gate.”
“Hard lines. Bob. All that care gone to waste, it
seems,” said Winnie.
“Malaku was telling me the other day of a case he
had. He was called to a patient who was nearly
dead. The man had a pain in the chest and went to a
priest. The priest told him to drink a cup of petrol!”
Bob whistled. “Like the patient who told me last
week he’d expected to get well because a priest had
instructed him to write his name on the bark of a
magic tree. . . . But there are the more understanding
ones, too.” Bob went on to tell her of one who had
entered the out-patient department that very morning
to say he’d been trying to tell his fellow-villagers the
good news he had learned in the hospital, and was
bringing along a group next Sunday to hear the
doctor for themselves. “So I shall have a try at
speaking without an interpreter,” Bob ended. He
caught a twinkle in his wife’s eye. “Oh, I know what
you’re thinking: that I’ll make a howler or two.
Never mind, so long as they get the idea.”
Some months later, Bob and Malaku came bursting


into the bungalow together. “Winnie! The Emperor’s
coming to inspect the hospital. I’ve just had that
interview. Malaku was right about him. He's a top-
notcher.”
Malaku was beaming all over his face. He pumped
Bob’s hand up and down, repeating “Congratulations,
congratulations! Ver' big honour.’’
“Glad the equipment in the operating theatre is
completed,’’ Bob said. “Wish we’d got on further
with the new nurses’ training home.’’ Much of the
equipment was Bob's own handiwork.
“When is he coming?’’ Winnie asked when she
could get in a word.
In two days. Reminds me, I must set Fuzzy and
the rest on to scrubbing the place as clean as a whistle.’’
And off he rushed.
The Galla boys scrubbed the floors and cleaned the
paintwork while the doctor exhorted them, “Tolol
tolo!” (Hurry). All this fuss about having things
spick and span surprised them. They much preferred
the moments when they had to practise the national
anthem, with flourishes, on their trumpets.
When the great day came they stood to attention,
note perfect, their trumpets sparkling and their chests
bursting with pride. Crowds of Abyssinians lined the
route from the Emperor’s palace. The imperial car
drove past to cries of “Habetl Habet I” which was
their way of saying “Little Father!”
The band began to play its welcome. The car sped
up the drive. In a sudden silence there stepped out the
Emperor’s slight figure. Cheers greeted him. His
manner was courteous and regal.
Dr. Hockman escorted him through the hospital and
was astonished at the remarkable knowledge Haile


Selassie revealed of mechanism and organization.
The keen dark eyes and quick mind missed nothing.
At the end of the inspection the Emperor promised
a generous donation to the hospital and he made a
short speech of thanks to the staff for their service of
healing his subjects. He added, “It may be that
many wounded Ethiopians will need your aid soon.’'
To Dr. Hockman and his wife he said, “It is my wish
that my daughter, the princess, shall come to your
nurses’ training home.’’
“There’s a practical compliment to you. Doctor
Bob,” Winnie said afterwards. “Makes what you’ve
been doing worth while, doesn’t it?’’
“Rather. We must push on to the completion of the
training home, and there are lots of other plans I have
in mind as well.’’
“But what did the Emperor mean when he talked
about many wounded Ethiopians?”
Bob’s face fell. “I’m afraid a European power
intends to invade this country—soon,” he replied.
“It’s part of the game of power politics and empire-
building. Politics!” he exclaimed bitterly. “I
believe Soda plans to become a diplomat. I must
write and ask him why politicians can't arrange things
better than they do.”
It was the autumn of 1935. Bob and his wife had
been in Abyssinia for only two short years. But already
they had many friends, and they felt a loyalty to this
land which prided itself on having been for fourteen
centuries an island of Christianity. Abyssinia had never
been conquered. But its days as a free country were
coming to an end. For the drums of war were beginning
to beat.


In December of the previous year there had been an
“incident" on the southern boundary. This bordered
land controlled by a European state which had long
cast jealous eyes on the whole of Abyssinia. Trained
troops were moved up to “protect" a well inside
Abyssinian territory. Shots were fired. That started
the frenzy of war preparation.
“Just look at these pictures!" Bob handed an
illustrated weekly to his wife. They gazed together
at the scenes of troops mobilizing, guns, rallies in
city squares, crowds of cheering people, military
bands. Then more troops. Transports. More guns.
Tanks.
“And these are all bound here, to attack this
country? Whatever for?" Winnie asked.
You 11 see in the reports of the leader’s speeches
talk about a civilizing mission to backward people,
and the rights of an ancient empire," Bob replied.
Sickening, isn’t it? I’m going out for some fresh
air."
But in the squares of Addis, on the race-course, in
every open space, he saw native troops drilling. These
soldiers were bare-footed, or warriors carrying spears
and shields.
It s pathetic!" Bob declared to Malaku, whom he
met watching troops drill on the race-course. “Does
the Emperor really put much hope in this?"
He also appeal to League of Nations many times,"
Malaku replied.
“Ah, perhaps there’s an opportunity in that," Bob
said. “If public opinion were roused, it should stop
this war. It s bound to, once people know. And
writers in Western papers will see to that. Did I tell
you a pal of mine, Pat, is on a Canadian paper? He


and others like him will put this affair in its proper light,
believe me. Cheer-oh, Malaku.”
Bob returned home with fresh optimism. In the
following days it oozed away as he saw more pictures
of mobilization, crammed troopships, accompanying
destroyers and cruisers, squadrons of planes. News
came through: alarmist, “War! war! war!’’;
cynical, “Only a European power sending an expedi-
tionary force against a lot of ‘niggers’’’; heedless,
“Not our war.” Commenting on it to Winnie, Bob
said, “They don’t see it may become war for them
before long.”
One day an excited Malaku rapped on the door of
the Hockman’s bungalow. “Important news. The
enemy invade Ethiopia. This I hear from palace.
There is a radio message.”
The Emperor had his own wireless station, they
knew. Malaku supplied them with further details.
Troops had marched across the frontier in the North-
East. A squadron of bombers had flown over a post
in Ogaden and bombed it heavily. There were a number
of wounded.
“Ogaden—that’s the Galla district,” said Bob.
“Where I went for a trek last year. Lucky that I
made that trip and learnt some of the Galla language.”
“Why, Bob?” asked Winnie. “You’re surely not
planning ”
“Yes. This fighting means that these people will
need Red Cross service. And not simply back here in
the capital, but on the spot. I must go to the
front.”
Bob and his wife looked at one another.
“Must you?” she said.
He nodded. Then he faced Malaku. “Will you go


with me as soon as I can get an ambulance unit
prepared?”
"Sure, yes.” The Amharic youth was elated at the
prospect. “I make petition to Haile Selassie. When
our army have defeated enemy ”
‘ Steady, Malaku. Don’t count your chickens
before they arc hatched.”
“But we have defeated them before under Menelik.
At Adowa. So again, I think.”
The American doctor shook his head. He compared
the forces of an up-to-date fighting power equipped
with bombers, machine-guns, tanks, artillery, with the
few thousand half-trained Abyssinian troops.
Bob and Winnie planned that if she must leave the
country, as other foreign women were being asked to
do, she should go to Egypt, not far away.
“I'll come and see you at Christmas, at the latest,”
Bob promised her.
His offer of service with the Ethiopian Red Cross
was gladly accepted by the Emperor.
“Well, I’ll be the first white doctor to go to the
front, he told his wife. “Wonder if some of the gang
of schooldays remember the rendezvous we talked
about. Wish they were here."
Even before the official permits reached him. Dr.
Hockman had gathered together the equipment for
his unit: packages of bandages and dressings: ropes,
tubs, tables and buckets; great spreads of canvas
marked with the red cross, many of them tents he had
made himself: and a party of men, Fiesa among
them.
The Red Cross camp was pitched in an advanced
position at Daggah Bur, a short distance behind the
front. Dr. Hockman chose a place on the Ogaden plain


where a clump of trees gave slight shelter. Malaku
assisted him to improvise an operating theatre.
They had hardly got their instruments arranged one
day early in November when they heard a burst of
firing in the distance. For hours it grew in intensity:
then there was a break, and again it broke out,
spasmodically. Night fell.
Suddenly there sounded the loud thump of hoofs.
A troop of Abyssinian warriors galloped up to the camp.
In the darkness Hockman could just see that each had
a limp form huddled across the front of his saddle.
“Where is the ferentshi, the foreign doctor?"
they cried, beginning to help down their wounded
companions.
“Lights!" Bob ordered. “Fuzzy, run the truck
to the back opening of the tent; and turn its head-
lamps on. Start bonfires out here. Malaku, pick the
most urgent cases, will you?"
While he donned his overall and mask, he heard
excited accounts of the battle. The enemy, using
trained Somali troops (Dubats) had advanced with
light tanks and machine-guns, and, above all, bombers.
The Abyssinians suffered terribly. They brought men
with riddled chests, smashed joints, broken bones.
For hours Bob operated until the nurses could hardly
stand.
In one case of a broken thigh-bone he had four men
to assist in dragging the leg into place. “Pull steadily,"
he commanded. Suddenly the operating-table collapsed.
Down fell the patient. The staff dropped anxiously
beside him. “He's all right; still sleeping soundly
under the anaesthetic.” They finished the operation
on their hands and knees.
At night, listening to the hideous laughter of the


hyenas, Bob was reminded of bones he had seen picked
bare, and thought with a shudder of wounded men
crawling over the plain. He organized expeditions
by truck to bring them in. Frequently he came across
unexploded bombs and rendered them harmless in
the way his father had shown him, lest they explode
and kill any Abyssinian who found them.
The natives had no reply to the enemy bombers.
These raids were the beginning of the practice of
bombing undefended villages. ' ‘ Scientific warfare!”
Hockman exclaimed bitterly. “Wings over Africa.”
Fortunately the Abyssinians learnt to scatter. In
one raid the single casualty was a chicken. Malaku
was exultant as he brought it into camp. But as day
followed day in hard and weary work, with little
relaxation, his spirits drooped. The camp had to send
a hundred miles for its supply of fresh water. Dust
storms swept over it. The company's nerves were on
edge.
Attacking planes chose just that time to take a
course over their tents. Down they roared until the
air pulsated. Twice the bombers circled low.
Fiesa and the other boys were terrified. Some slunk
off into the bush and failed to return to camp. Others
found that urgent business called them back to Addis
Ababa. Seeing they would be useless, Dr. Hockman
announced that anyone might leave who wished to.
He returned from meeting a supply caravan to a
comparatively deserted camp. The missionary assis-
tants remained at their posts but not a native helper
could be seen.
Where’s Malaku?” Hockman asked.
“Gone back to Addis.”
Bob nodded glumly, ‘‘The war took a very dis-


appointing turn for him.” He thought how Malaku
and Fiesa were the two people in the country he counted
among his best friends. Despondently he entered his tent.
“Sir, wut and angira ready.” It was Fiesa’s cheerful
voice announcing the meal of native food.
“What! you still here? And the others of the
quartette? Good old Fuzzy!”
Bob felt in better heart to read his mail. It brought
him letters from home and welcome news of his baby
daughter in Egypt. Sitting on a camp-stool he wrote:
“Pray that this war will soon be over and that peace
will again reign.”
At the beginning of December, 1935, fresh ambulance
units arrived at the front, and Bob looked forward to
a period of leave. He planned to join his wife in Egypt
and spend Christmas with her.
When he reached Addis he found the Red Cross
H.Q. upset at the thought of losing him even for a short
spell. They asked him to return to the front.
Back on the railway he travelled, and out across the
desert again, feeling a little blue at the change in his
plans. When he reached camp the sight of Fiesa
cheered him, and he resumed his old routine of healing
men hit by war.
On a trip with the truck he found another live bomb,
half-buried in the sand. He dug it up and carried it
carefully to. his tent. Then he started to make it
harmless, as he had scores of others, by removing the
cap and emptying the shell of powder.
A call came to him to attend a patient. When he
returned he picked up the bomb again. It exploded
in his grasp. His side and chest were torn open.
Looking down in horror, he saw his right hand mangled.
“My hand!” he cried, in agony.


Helpers came running, but it was impossible to save
his life. One of them read the twenty-third Psalm
to him. He remembered, in a last flicker of thought,
how he had often sung “The Lord’s my Shepherd.’’
Before the reading came to an end he was “ ... in
the house of the Lord for ever.’’
Acknowledgment is made to Doctor Bob, Surgeon of the Cross,
by his sister, and The Real Abyssinia, by C. F. Rey.
W. A. HAMER PTY. LTD., 208-217 PEEL STREET, NORTH MELBOURNE. N.t




EAGLE BOOKS
True Stories of Real People
No. Comprising episodes from the lives of great men end wemes.
1. IF ONLY I HAD A SHIF (John Williams of the South Seas), ly Basil Mathew.
2. ROLL ON, WAGON WHEELSI (R. Moffat of South Africa), ly H. F. Frame.
I. IN CONVICT CELLS (Mathilda Wrede of Finland). By W. 6. Wilson.
4. THE MAN WHO DISAPPEARED (Sundar Singh of India). By J. Reason.
5. MY FRIENDS THE CANNIBALS (John Holmes of Papua). By Cecil Northcett.
4. UNARMED AMONG OUTLAWS (Theodore Pennell of India). By I. Underbid.
7. STORM OVER MADAGASCAR (David Jones). By J. Reason.
I. TEMPERATURE 1241 (Henry Martyn of India). By Hugh F. Frame,
f. ON THE ROOF OF THE WORLD (Samuel Pollard of China). By A. G. Castfetoe.
10. COOLIE-SAHIB (C. E. Tyndaie-Biscoe of N.W. India). By Pat Yates.
M. BLIND EAGLE (Father Jackson of Burma). By Stanley Sowton.
12. WHERE THE SAFE WAYS END (Clifford Harris of Iran). By R. W. Howard.
13. YOUNG MAN—SIT DOWNI (William Carey of Indie). By L. H. Dalton.
14. ON TRAIL WITH THE REDSKINS (James Evans of Canada). By Mary Entwistle.
15. MARY AND THE BLACK WARRIORS (Mary Slessor of Africa). By M. B. Rh,
14. THE BRICKLAYER AND THE KING (Henry Nott of the South Seas).. By J. Reaaoe.
17. TO ISLAM I GO (Temple Gairdnar of Cairo). By I. Smith.
11. ALWAYS ON THE GO (Thomas Comber of Africa). By L. E. Co*.
19. LAUGHING PIONEER (Ephraim Alphonse of Panama). By Darmott Monahan.
20. ELIZABETH UNDAUNTED (Elizabeth Newman of Kashmir). By B. Underhill.
21. HERO OF THE HOTTENTOTS (John Vanderkamp of South Africa), By Cad
Northeott.
22. FRIENDLY FOREIGN DEVIL (David Hill of China). By Pat Yates.
23. GET THROUGH OR DIE (David Livingstone). By Hugh F. Frame.
24. THE MAN WITH ONE THUMB (J. Hannington of Uganda). By L H. Daltoe.
25. WINGS OVER CHINA (The Chiang Kai-sheks). By Basil Mathews.
24. THE BOOK IN THE PILLOW (Adoniram Judson of Burma). By Pat Yates.
27. SOLDIERS' HEROINE (Florence Nightingale). By W. G. Wilson.
28. THEY THOUGHT HE WAS MAD (A. Schweitzer of Africa). By R. HenrfcK.
29. APOLO IN PYGMYLAND (Canon Apole of Uganda), By Pat Yates.
30. THE WITCH OF NINGPO (Mary Aldersey of China). By J. Reason.
31. ALL GOD'S CHILLUN (William Wilberforce). By Cecil Northeott.
32. TWO SWORDS (Joseph Hardy Neesima of Japan). By L. H. Dalton.
33. GREAT WIZARD (Mackey of Uganda). By Basil Mathews.
34. ALONE TO THE CITY OF BLOOD (Birch Freeman of Africa). By M. R. BielVy.
35. BIGGER THAN BOMBERS (Hockman of Abyssinia). By P. J. Doherty.
34. PADDLE YOUR OWN CANOE (W. H. Brett of British Guiana). By Ruth Henrieh,
37. AFRICAN EAGLE (Aggrey of Achimota). By W. R. E. Clarke.
38. SEND ME AMONG SAVAGES (Chalmers of Papua). By Cecil Northcett.
39. WHERE WHITE MEN DIED (Bishop Crewther of Africa). By M. Entwistle.
40. DEEP-SEA DOCTOR (Wilfred Grenfell of Labrador). By J. Reason.
41. DOCTOR APRICOT (Duncan Main of China). By P. J. Doherty.
42. SHE WENT ALONE (Mary Bird of Persia). By C. Savery.
43. TOMAHAWK TRUCE (William Penn). By M. R. Bielby.
44. ROUGH. TOUGH AND FAR AWAY (Edgar of Tibet). By A. G. Castleton.
45. TOM TIDDLER S GROUND (Bishop Bompas of the Arctic). By M. Entwistle.
44. FORBIDDEN CITIES (Josiah Cox of China). By Pat Yates
47. LADY IN PRISON (Elizabeth Fry). By M. R. Beitby.
48. GO AND FIND IT (Kendall Gale of Madagascar). By J, Reason.
49. HE SET BRITAIN AFLAME (John Wesley). By McEwan Lawson.
50. I’LL HIT IT HARD! (Abraham Lincoln). By Cecil Northeott.
Additional volumes will follow at regular intervals.
EDINBURGH HOUSE PRESS, 2 Eaton Gate. London, S.W.I.
