

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE
BILHARZIOSIS
I.
Bilharziosis, and the Danger of the
Disease becoming Endemic
in Australia
By
MAJOR THOMAS CHERRY, M.D., M.S.,
Australian Army Medical Corps,
11.
Early Clinical Features of the
Disease
By
CAPT. F. B. LAWTON,
A. A, M. C.
?8p Sutfjoritp:
Albert J. Mullett, GoTernment Printer, Melbourne.




Reports on “Bilharziosis” are issued for the
information of the Medical Profession in Australia by
direction of the Honorable the Minister for Defence.
As it is possible that some of the patients may not have
been treated in Egypt, any medical man meeting with a
suspicious case of the disease is requested to communicate with
the P.M.O. of the Military District in which the case occurs .
R. H. FETHERSTON,
Director-General, Medical Staff.
Department of Defence,
18th June, 1917.
C. 9307.


BILHARZIOSIS,
AND THE DANGER OF THE DISEASE BECOMING
ENDEMIC IN AUSTRALIA.
(INTERIM REPORT.)
By Major Thomas Cherry , M.D., M.S.,
Australian Army Medical Corps.
This disease has been present in Egypt from ancient times. In the
Middle Ages the Arabian physicians had many remedies for the cure
of “ him that passeth blood with his water,” and refer to the greenish
“ bilious ” urine which marks the last stage of the disease. In the
Ist January, 1910, Buffer describes the eggs and tissue
changes indicating the presence of Bilharzia in Egyptian mummies
of the Twentieth Dynasty (1250-1000 b.c.). The worm was dis-
covered by Bilharz in 1851, but it is only since the researches of Lt.-Col.
Leiper, R.A.M.C., in 1915, that the life-history of the parasite has
been worked out and the mode of infection made clear. These
researches show that the worm passes through one stage of its existence
in a fresh-water mollusc before it is capable of infecting man or other
warm-blooded animal. Its life-history thus falls in line with that of
many parasitic trematodes, and very closely resembles that of the
ordinary liver fluke in sheep (Distomum hepalicvm).
The disease is endemic throughout the whole of Africa and Mada-
gascar and the outlying islands. It extends through Arabia, Mesopo-
tamia, and Persia to India. It has also become established in tropical
and sub-tropical South America, and several West India islands. A
disease caused by an allied worm is found in China and Japan
Imported cases have been recorded from England, Australia, and most
other parts of the world, but the disease does not appear to have
established itself along the northern coast of the Mediterranean, or in
other parts of Europe. As the intermediate host of the larval stage
is now known the peculiar geographical distribution of the disease is
probably due to the concurrence of two sets of essential factors—
(a) The presence of the necessary mollusc.
(b) A special seasonal distribution of the rainfall.
1 2


LIFE-HISTORY OF THE TREMATODE WORM BILHARZIA
HJEMATOBIA.
1. The sexually mature worms are found in pairs, usually in the
sub-mucous tissue of the walls of the bladder or rectum. The eggs
find their way into the interior of these organs, and are characteristic
of the heematuria which is the symptom that first attracts attention
to the disease. The life , cycle of the parasite is dependent upon the
excreta containing the eggs reaching water in which suitable mollusca
are living.
2. If the eggs reach fresh water soon after being discharged from the
patient, they hatch within a few hours, or even in warm weather in
a few minutes. Each one produces an. embryo or Miracidium.
This is a very active ciliated organism, which swims near the
surface of the water and is attracted by certain species of mollusca.
On reaching a suitable mollusc it penetrates the tissues, usually
making for the liver. It there develops into a sporocyst, and in
the course of about a month the sporocyst begins to discharge
immense numbers of larvse or cercaricE.
3. The cercaria swims in the water in the search for a suitable warm-
blooded host. In the case of man it penetrates the skin or mucous
membranes during bathing, paddling, or even immersing the arms in
infected water. Experimentally the disease has been conveyed to
monkeys by drinking such water. The cercaria lose their tails, find
their way into the veins of the portal system and develop into mature
worms in from four to six weeks. They select the tissues of the bladder
or rectum as their favourite sites, although they may occasionally be
found in the neighbouring or even distant organs. The sexually
mature worms may produce eggs within four weeks of the cercarise
entering the patient.
The irritation caused by the worms lying in the sub-mucous tissue
leads to a patch of epithelium being shed, so that the worm is separated
from the cavity of the bladder only by a layer of granulation tissue.
On microscopic section great numbers of eggs may be found embedded
in this tissue. As the bladder becomes distended this granulation
tissue is stretched to a thin layer, the capillary vessels may rupture,
and some of the eggs reach the interior of the viscus. In the urine the
eggs are always accompanied by red corpuscles and a variable number
of pus cells. As the symptoms subside these three constituents generally
disappear together.


In addition to a temperature approaching that of the body, the
hatching of the eggs is favoured by the lowering of the specific gravity
of the fluid in which they are immersed. When placed in tap water in
Melbourne during the summer months, the first of the embryos escape
in about fifteen minutes, and most of those capable of hatching get
free within an hour. When the density of the fluid is raised, hatching
is retarded or prevented altogether. Normal saline solution, sea water,
or the urine of the patient are all unfavourable media in this
respect.
In this life-history the intermediate host is essential, and in its
absence the embryo quickly dies. All attempts to infect animals by
means of eggs or embryos have uniformly failed. On the other hapd,
the disease is very easily communicated by water containing cercarise
to rats, mice, guinea-pigs, and monkeys.
Up to the time of Lt.-Col. Leiper’s investigations, the non-discovery
of the intermediate host had led many authorities to regard the life-
history of Bilharzia as a special one, differing from all other known
parasitic trematodes in passing both stages in a single host, viz., man.
The failure to infect other animals experimentally was regarded as
proof of its exclusive association with man. The new discoveries
have shown that this is not the case, and confirm the earlier generaliza-
tions in regard to the habits of such trematodes. Its life-history
resembles that of the sheep fluke in all respects, except the mode of
entry of the cercarise. In the sheep these encyst themselves on the
grass growing in the water, and wait for some animal to eat the grass,
when they enter the liver by the bile duct instead of penetrating the
skin or mucous membrane. The Distomum hepaticum has been found
in sheep, horses, deer, cattle, pigs, rabbits, kangaroos, and man.
It is characteristic of both organisms that once the sporocyst is formed
in a snail it may become a source of infection for long periods. A
single mollusc has been observed to discharge large numbers of Bilharzia
cercarise every day for more than three weeks. In fact, the propagation
of the parasite takes place as much by internal budding from, the
asexual sporocyst which produces the cercarise as by the
egg from the sexually mature worm which produces the embryo’ So
that, by means of daughter cysts and redise, a sporocyst may
produce countless cercarise, the number being limited only by the
life of the mollusc in which it is living. When free from the
sporocyst the cercarise move actively in the water for perhaps 48
hours


(Figs. 1-4 from Leiper.)


[To face page 4.


THE INTERMEDIATE HOSTS.
The intermediate hosts in Africa are a number of species of fresh-
water molluscs belonging to the three closely-related families Ltm-
N-asiDyE, and ln Egypt the cercarise have
been found in a variety of small periwinkle-like molluscs in the Nile,
the irrigation canals and the swamps caused by the overflow of irrigation
water. In South Africa the host is Physopsis Africana, the most
common fresh-water mollusc. The African genera Planorbis and Buli-
nus are closely related to common Australian forms, but, unfortunately,
the determination of the species amongst the Australian genera has
not yet been fully worked out. In reference to our commonest mollusc,
Professor Tate remarks, “ The differentiation of the Australian and
Tasmanian species of Bulinus is fraught with the greatest difficulty,
as an extensive study of numerous so-called species leaves no doubt of
their extreme mutability” {Pep. Horn Scientific Expedition 1896,
p. 212). The matter is further complicated by the use of Isidora as
a synonym for Bulinus. Formerly most of our shells were referred
to the family Physiol apparently on the evidence of the dry shells.
It is now believed that this family is not represented in Australia-
I also notice that there is a difference of opinion as to whether one of
the Egyptian hosts, Bulinus Dyhowski, is not identical with Physa
Alexandrina ( 8.M.J. , 18th March, 1916).
In Victoria the sporocysts and cercariae of Distomum hepaticum have
been found in representatives of both the genera Bulinus and Manorbis,
and the vast majority of our fresh-water surface mollusca are included
in these two genera.
In reference to the intermediate hosts, the older view was that the
larval and mature forms of the flukes were both restricted to special
species of animals, in the absence of which they were unable to exist.
Thus the intermediate European host of the liver fluke was supposed
to be a single species of Limncea ; but experience shows that it can
adapt itself to allied but different species of mollusca in all parts of
the world (Europe, North America, South America, Sandwich Islands,
and Australia). In a similar way the Bilharzia was looked upon as a
specifically human parasite ; but experiments show that both the
African and Japanese forms readily infect and cause the death of many
herbivorous animals if the opportunity for infection occurs.


CLIMATIC CONDITIONS FAVOURING THE PARASITE.
The most noteworthy point in the incidence of the disease is its
general 'distribution throughout Africa and the adjacent islands. In
the tropics the presence of the parasite seems to be independent of the
total rainfall. Equatorial Africa, the east coast of Brazil, the West
Indies, and the coast of Venezuela are all regions of heavy tropical
rains. On the other hand, the disease appears to be far more common
and more severe in its effects in very dry areas, notably Egypt, Arabia,
and the Middle East as far as India. On reviewing the literature of
the geographical distribution of the disease in the light of the recently
discovered life-history of the parasite, it appears that the essential
climatic condition is the concentration of the water supply at a warm
period of the year. In the heavy rainfall tropical regions infection
probably takes place during the dry months of the year. In these
regions a few weeks of dry weather is sufficient to transform flooded
areas into arid deserts, and as the water disappears the pools and
swamps present all the necessary conditions before they finally dry
up. Thus an Englishman who contracted the disease in one of the
West Indies writes of the conditions under which he had been living ;
In Antigua “ the water, which was obtained from cisterns (iron) and
ponds, was often stale,” and minute organisms could often be seen in it.
In St. Kitts “ water for the bath, &c., came from an open mountain
source (very unsatisfactory at times), passing through a village, and
used by everybody ” [B.M. ,J 2oth December, 1902).
In regard to South America, parts of tropical Brazil have less than 25
inches of rainfall. In the extensive tropical lowlands of Venezuela, which
are regularly covered by the annual floods of the great rivers, the
dry season destroys the pasturage completely, dries up the small
streams and lagoons, and compels many animals of semi-aquatic
habits to aestivate ” ( Encyc . Brit., 1911, Vol. 27, p. 989).
Similar conditions prevail in many parts of tropical Africa,
throughout the whole of which the disease appears to be distributed
in a patchy manner.
In Cape Colony, Algeria, Egypt, Syria, Mesopotamia, and Central
Persia we have dry hot summers and cold winters. The scanty rainfall
comes in the winter, so that in the hot weather there is little water,
and, where exposed to natural conditions, the activity and concentra-
tion of invertebrate life in it becomes very great. These conditions
favour the spread of Bilharzia by concentrating the molluscs, making
it easier for the embryo to find them ; by concentrating the cercarise


Distribution of Bilharziosts.
Daik outline Infected Continental Areas. Black dots —Infected Islands. Small dotted areas —Regions of Winter Rains and Dry Summers.
[To face page 6.


per cubic foot of water, because water is limited in amount; and,
finally, by concentrating human activities around the limited amount
of water. Australia offers exactly the same conditions of winter
rainfall in the southern half of the continent combined with the hot dry
summer. Queensland and the Northern Territory have the necessary
warmth combined with a dry climate during their winter months.
Tasmania would appear to be the part of the Commonwealth least
likely to become infected.
A large body of water, as in a river or rapid creek, cannot become
so heavily charged with cercarise as to constitute a serious danger,
although they may be found in the still water among the vegetation
along the banks.
The northern coasts of the Mediterranean have never become
infected. This is explained by the summer rains, which are experienced
in all parts, except the southern extremities of Spain, Italy, and Greece.
Even in these localities there is seldom a marked concentration of the
water supplies, because the streams are maintained during early summer
by the melting snows, and when the winter rains begin the temperature
rapidly falls. In the Eastern Mediterranean are the islands of Crete
and Cyprus, about equal in area, and both of which experience winter
rains and very dry summers. Crete is free from the disease, presumably
because the very lofty mountains provide perennial streams in
abundance. Cyprus is infected, although it lies within 350 miles of
Crete. This, I assume, is due to the lower rainfall and the comparatively
insignificant mountain ranges. In many districts water is very scarce
in the summer. These two islands have been in constant intercourse
with Egypt, Syria, and Greece for at least four thousand years, so that
the risks of infection would appear to be equal.
Williamson (, 9th November, 1907), writing of cases in an
affected village in Cyprus, describes the local conditions as under
“1. Marshes with water drying up in early summer ;
2. A river with holes in its bed, which even at the end of
summer contained enough water to bathe in.”
In Algeria it has long been noticed that cases appear among the
French troops with increasing frequency as the stations which they
occcupy approach the drier conditions of the hinterland bordering on
the Sahara. On the opposite side of the world a new centre has
recently been noted in South America. A case is reported as coming
Irom Peru—a dry country with winter rainfall—by Brayton 'Jour.


Amer. Med. Ass., 30th April, 1910) who concludes his paper with the
words—“ This widespread distribution of bilharziosis in America
indicates that it is another pandemic tropical disease, though
fortunately at present it is of slight economic importance.”
As indicating the extent to which surface water may become charged
with cercarise of the trematodes, I may mention that some years ago,
when investigating sheep fluke in \ictoria, I found that some of the
water-holes along a small creek in a badly-infested district were literally
swarming with cercarite. On an average a specimen could be seen
moving in each pint-beaker of the surface water. Such a fact may
explain the readiness Ajnth which some of our soldiers were infected
in Egypt. Most of them bathed more than once in the Fresh Water
Canal; but one of the returned men states that he merely washed his
hands and arms in the water. Captain F. B. Lawton, A.A.M.C., in a
paper embodied in the present report, refers to such cases as
follows :—“ Most of the men had been fully immersed, having swum in
the water, but one man had merely washed his hands and another had
washed cooking utensils in it. In the last two the infection was quite
as severe as in the others.”
IMPORTANCE OF THE DISEASE.
The chronic ill-health caused by the disease in men who have been
exposed to infection and then removed to a country where there is no
chance of re-infection may be realized from the after history of the
cases which arose during the South African War. In the year 1911
the pensions paid by the War Office to the survivors of 625 soldiers
then affected with Bilharziosis amounted to £II,OOO ( Journ ., R.A.M.C.,
XVIII., p. 434). In Egypt the disease appears to be more virulent
than the variety endemic in South Africa, and the proportion of the
native population affected is estimated at over 50 per cent. The
severity of the disease may be partly due to the frequency of re-infection
with the cercarife, and paitly to the virulence of the variety of the worm.
It is possible that the worm varies somewhat according to the inter-
mediate host in which the cystic stage has been passed. The eggs
have long been classified by the terminal or lateral position of the spine,
and Leiper has adduced evidence to show that this feature, as well as
the selection of the walls respectively of the bladder or rectum by the
adult worms, are due to the species of mollusc which acted in any
given instance as the intermediate host ( 8.M.J. , 18th March,
1916). Provisionally, the worm producing lateral spined eggs is known
as Bilharzia ( Schistosomum ) mansoni.


The intractable and formidable nature of the disease may be realized
from the paper by Professor Madden in the Ist October, 1910.
In progressive cases the cystitis leads to purulent infection of the
ureters, kidneys, and even of the urethra. In the intestinal form of
the disease the clinical manifestations are those associated with chronic
dyspepsia, enteritis, and colitis.
Apart from the question of re-infection the disease cannot be treated
lightly from the point of view of prognosis. We may, perhaps, expect
the majority of the returned cases to clear up within five or six years.
But the fact that, as we shall see, men from the South African War
apparently spread the disease six or eight years after their return to
Australia makes the future development in Australia a matter of grave
concern. Guillemard in Allbutt’s System refers to a case persisting for
eighteen years.
THE DISEASE ALREADY ESTABLISHED IN AUSTRALIA.
Imported cases of the disease were occasionally met with in Australia
prior to the South African War. One of the earliest to be diagnosed
was a native of Mauritius, who died in the Melbourne Hospital in 1892.
Since that time the disease has become more common, because a
number of soldiers who went through that campaign contracted the
disease, and in at least two instances they appear to have set up foci
of infection on their return to Australia. The following is the evidence
which points in this direction : —•
A. —ln the Aust. Med. Gaz., 20th July, 1907, Col. B. J. Newmarch
(at present C. 0., No. 3 Australian General Hospital, Cairo) reports the
case of a man who had been twelve years in New South Wales, and who
had come direct from England to Sydney. He had never been in any
other country. Col. Newmarch had been through the South African
War, and says that this was not a relic of the war. He states that he
knew of one similar case in Newcastle, but does not give further par-
ticulars.
B. —Dr. W. H. Nelson reports the following cases in Western Aus-
tralia {Aust. Med. Gaz., 9th November, 1912) :
(1) F.K., an ex-soldier from the South African War, was known
to be suffering from Bilharzia. He became storeman at a
saw-mill at Greenbushes in 1908, and was still living there
in 1912. The small number of houses in the saw-mill
settlement makes it almost certain that the subsequent
cases arose from this patient.


(2) In July, 1911, a married woman living at tlie saw-mill exhibited
symptoms of the disease.
(3) In March, 1912, a railway employe who had never been out of
Western Australia, and whose usual place of residence was
12 miles from Greenbushes was found to be suffering from
his second attack of haematuria. The first attack had
occurred less than twelve months previously. He had been
living for a fortnight at Greenbushes early in 1910 (“ more
than two years previous to March, 1912 ”).
C. Since beginning this inquiry into Bilharzia, a friend introduced
me to the brother of F. 8., formerly employed in the timber trade in
Western Australia, who died in Melbourne in February, 1916, aged 43.
The cause of death is registered as (a) Pyelonephritis ; (6) Uraemia.
Two of the medical men who attended this patient at different times
are at the war, so that the full history of the case is not available*
Dr. Hungerford, of Geraldton, Western Australia, informs me that this
patient had an attack of haematuria in January, 1909, and that he told
him that he had had another attack about six months previously.
The brother of the patient states that he had never been outside of
Australia, that he suffered from haematuria and symptoms of cystitis
for several years before he came to Melbourne, and that he lived for
some time at Greenbushes, “approximately six or eight years ago,”
but he is unable to give precise particulars. This history makes the
case an exceedingly suspicious one in the light of the other cases at
Greenbushes.
In reference to these cases Dr. Nelson remarks that the water for the
mill is brought from a creek through about a mile of piping, and that
bathing facilities in the settlement are nil. Dr. Cumpston, Director
of Quarantine, who has visited the place, informs me that there were
several pools of water in the creek not far from the mill. As this water
would probably be used for laundry purposes, it is easy for a woman
to have contracted the disease. Greenbushes has 35 inches of rainfall,
but usually five months’ dry weather every summer.
From these five cases it is almost certain that the disease has already
been contracted in Australia, or in other words, that the embryo has
found some invertebrate form of life suitable for the intermediate host.
It is also noteworthy that the cases were first observed several years
(from six to ten) after the return of the South African soldiers to Aus-
tralia. It is quite likely that these are not all the cases, for others may
not have come under treatment, or they may have been treated but
not reported in the current medical journals. The return of infected


soldiers therefore constitutes a problem which should be faced at once,
from the double aspect of the control of the disease in the patient
and the prevention of the spread of the disease in the community.
How easily the disease may be established may be judged from the
following facts. . In a creek, within 400 yards of the terminus of each
of two lines of electric trams, I collected many hundred specimens of
Bulinus and Ancylus during the present autumn. The water holes
in the creek are full of boys bathing during the hot afternoons. At
frequent intervals along the banks there are remains of recent human
faeces. All the conditions here are very favourable to the formation of
a centre of infection in one of the outer suburbs of Melbourne. Doubt-
less, similar conditions obtain elsewhere in many parts of Australia.
The present position is totally different from that after the Boer
War, because the number of infected men is very much greater,
and we now know from laboratory experiments that sheep, rabbits,
and cattle may harbour similar worms as well as man. Our rainfall con-
ditions are very similar to those of the Middle East and Northern
Africa, and the readiness with which the sheep fluke has adapted itself
to our conditions indicates that the risk of permanent infection is a grave
one. In Africa the habits of children and adults alike make it easy
to see how the water becomes infected with eggs and human beings with
the cercarise. Among ourselves the danger would be comparatively
slight if adults alone were affected, as they are able to realize their
responsibility. But as soon as children become subject to the disease
the matter of control will be very much more difficult. It is most
important therefore to take full precautions from the first.
In this connexion it is of interest to know that a specimen of Bulinus
{? tenuistriatus) was taken not far from Melbourne in January, 1911,
by Mr. J. Searle, the President of the Microscopical Society of Victoria.
It contained very large numbers of a fork-tailed cercaria. As Mr.
Searle could find no record of such cercarise in Australia he mounted
some of them in formalin for future reference. An examination of this
slide shows that they are about one-fiftieth of an inch in length. Com-
pared with the drawings of the Bilharzia cercarise in Lt.-Col. Leiper’s
papers in the R.A.M.C. Journal, it is seen that they correspond in size
and in the absence of both the muscular pharyngeal bulb and of pigment
spots. But they differ in the greater length of the tail and in the
posterior sucker being a little nearer to the centie of the length of the
head. Their identity will therefore be a matter of opinion, but the
diagnostic importance attached to the presence of two suckers
the absence of pharynx and pigment spots makes this a most interesting
find. {See Journ., R.A.M.C., September, 1915, p. 259-60.) '


In the Victorian Naturalist, 4th March, 1896, there is a paper by the
late Rev. W. Fielder, Demonstrator of Histology at the University,
on cercariae found in molluscs near Melbourne. These were gathered
in the previous January. Cercarise indistinguishable from those of
D. hepaticum are recorded from species of Bulinus, Limn cea, and An
cylus, and it is noted that an unknown forked-tail cercaria was found
in a species of Planorhis.
EXPERIMENTAL INFECTION OF MOLLUSCA.
Attempts to infect specimens of Bulinus, Ancylus, or Planorhis
with the embryos of Bilharzia were commenced in March. About'SOO
snails have been exposed to infection, but, so far, without success.
This negative result is of little value in view of the positive evidence
availab'e from Western Australia. We may have begun the experi-
ments too late in the season. The probability is that both the cercariae
and the molluscs have their special season each year, and it is note-
worthy that the Egyptian mollusca were kept under close scrutiny
by several observers from 1893 to 1914, in the full expectation of finding
the intermediate host, bu t without this being discovered. Leiper says that
in his experiments (carried out apparently in April and May, 1915)
there were four species of molluscs which attracted the embryos of
Bilharzia, and “ the attraction was stronger in young specimens ” of
the molluscs. ( Journ . R.A.M.C., July, 1915, p. 38.) April in Egypt
corresponds to October in Australia.
Judging from my former experience with sheep fluke, infection of
the snails takes place early in the spring. In a paper read 12th
December, 1895 ( Proc. Royal. Soc. Victoria, Vol. VIII., p. 183), I
stated that examinations of fresh-water snails had been carried out
during the preceding six months, but “ nothing of importance was
revealed by the dissections made during the winter, but about a fort-
night ago a large specimen of B. tenuistriatus was found containing
a very large number of rediae and cercariae.” This specimen came
from the north of the Dividing Range. And the following note is
added :
“ Since the above paper was read I have observed the same rediae
and cercariae in specimens of B. tenuistriatus from all the
southern and western parts of the colony.”
As Dr. Cobb is reported to have discovered larval forms in New
South Wales before the end of October, it appears that the development
of D. hepaticum marches south each season with the approach of summer.


This conclusion is confirmed by the observations of Fielder already
referred to. He found cercariso in Bulinus and Planorbis in the vicinity
of Melbourne in December and January, and promised to read further
monthly notes at the next meetings of the Field Naturalists ( loc. cit.,
p. 140); but no further notes were forthcoming, because, as I suppose,
no more affected snails were found that season.
These observations point to a seasonal activity as far as the cercarise
are concerned. A special season for the molluscs is indicated by the
following facts :
Species of Bulinus and Planorbis are common throughout Australia
and Tasmania. In Victoria they are often numerous in “ crab-holey ”
country and in shallow swamps. Such places are usually dry for at
least six months each year, so that either the snails or their eggs must
live in the mud and subsequently in the dry soil until the depression
is again full of water. Many of the waterholes in the creeks generally
dry up completely by the middle of January, and yet the molluscs are
abundant next spring. My experience since February has been that
they have been progressively diminishing in numbers each week or
two. In places where they could be gathered at the rate of one in
two minutes they can now scarcely be discovered by a prolonged
search, and the creeks in the eastern suburbs have had more water
than usual this summer. I conclude therefore that there is a seasonal
variation in the numbers present in any given locality. Probably
their life-history has been adjusted to the fact that nearly all the swamps
and waterholes in which they abound, say, in October have dried up
by January, so that the vast majority of the adult molluscs must
perish each year.
DATA FOR CONTROLLING THE PARASITE.
In view of the facts which have been set out, I think the following
may be accepted as data for our guidance in dealing with the disease
under Australian conditions of climate and settlement: —
(1) There are three critical periods in the life-cycle of the parasite,
each of which must be passed within 48 hours, or else the
organism perishes at that stage —
( а) The hatching of the eggs after they leave the body
of the patient.
(б) The finding of a mollusc by the embryo after it has
left the egg.
(c) The finding of a human being by the cercaria after it has
left the mollusc.


(2) In the case of sewered towns there is no danger in the presence
of returned men.
(3) The methods usually adopted for dealing with the excreta in
towns, villages, and country dwellings render the risk of
dissemination comparatively slight; but urinals discharging
into street gutters are dangerous.
{4) The chief danger lies in the creeks and water-holes in the suburbs
of cities and in the neighbourhood of townships and other
settlements.
(5) In irrigated districts the danger of direct contamination is
great, because the channels and pools contain molluscs, the
water is used for household purposes and bathing, and the
w'orkmen often have their boots full of water when attending
to the work of irrigation.
(6) Infected urine or fseces deposited on dry ground are probably
rendered harmless.
(7) There is little danger during the winter in the southern half
of the Commonwealth, because water is abundant and there
is no open-air bathing. The rainy season in the tropics is
probably safe in spite of the high temperature, because
water is abundant.
(8) When all the men have returned the danger will diminish from
year to year. But the experience after the South African
War should warn us not to be too sanguine in this respect.
PRESENT AND FUTURE CONTROL OF THE DISEASE.
In view of the above considerations the following methods have
been adopted in dealing with affected men :
1. The men have been detained in hospital during the summer, and
symptoms of vesical irritation treated with urotropin. The men have
been made familiar with the special danger they carry about with them ;
they have been shown the eggs under the microscope in the process of
hatching; their future prospects have been discussed, and in some
cases they have been persuaded to change their place of abode.
E.g. —One man, a carter, has come from an irrigation area to Mel-
bourne ; a railway employe has been transferred from a
country station to Spencer-street; a third man living in a
country township with a water supply which might be easily
infected has been found employment in the city.


On their arrival in Australia all affected men will be supplied with a
copy of the Memorandum of Instructions which is printed as an Ap-
pendix to this Report.
2. In regard to the future, the safety of the whole community depends
on cordial co-operation between the three authorities—the Federal
Quarantine, the State Departments of Public Health, and the Com-
monwealth Defence Department. There must be co-operation also
between the medical and administrative officers.
(a) “ Heematuria ” should be proclaimed a notifiable disease
throughout the Commonwealth.
(b) Special arrangements should be made to keep in touch with the
returned men. This is made a more easy matter when a
pension is being paid, and I would suggest that Bilharziosis
should be regarded as entitling a man to a pension even if
it is apparently causing no incapacity to the patient. The
amount of the pension might be modified and the question
of its continuance considered in the light of each half-yearly
examination. A check would thus be provided in each
case on the movements of the men. If no payment is con-
tingent on the patient’s reporting himself for examination
it -will be increasingly difficult in a few years’ time to keep
in touch with the soldiers after they have received their
discharge.
For these reasons the oversight of the patients should
continue in the hands of the Department of Defence.
This will secure uniform administration as well as uniform
regulations, thus avoiding the formulation of varying
and perhaps contradictory instructions to the men at the
outset of the campaign against the disease. The experience
thus gained will furnish the means of guidance to the State
Departments in case the civilian population becomes
affected.
(c) Guidance should be given to the men as to their future mode of
life and place of residence. Co-operation is therefore re-
quired with the State and Federal Government Departments,
with the Soldiers’ Employment Bureaux, and with the
permanent organizations for settling returned men in the
different States.


(d) In special localities (such as the outer suburbs of the chief
cities, towns in which affected men are living, and irriga-
tion settlements) an attempt should be made to reduce the
numbers of molluscs living in the local creeks and ponds.
Municipal co-operation is here necessary. Arrangements
should be made to keep large numbers of ducks for com-
mercial purposes, and the birds must be protected against
dogs, sportsmen, and land-owners by stringent regulations.
It may, on further inquiry, be necessary to prohibit the
destruction of wild water-fowl throughout the settled parts
of the Commonwealth for a period of, say, ten years. In
February, I found that the lake in the Melbourne Botanical
Gardens was quite free from the ordinary gastropods which
were common in the pools and creeks around the city.
J. his, I take it, was due to the presence of large numbers of
water-fowl in the lake, although in all other respects it
appears to be an ideal place for such molluscan life.
In this regard it is of interest to note that a grazier in the Western
District of \ictoria told me some years ago that from experiments he
had carried out on his property he had come to the conclusion that the
use of lime at the rate of about a bag to a thousand cubic yards of
water had had a decided influence on the numbers of the common
mollusca found in the water-holes. He thought this was the main
factor which had enabled him to graze his “ weaners ” on the paddocks
which he had always previously regarded as the most flukey.
My observations when formerly working at the life-history of the
liver-fluke, and again during the past three months, have led me to
think that our fresh water mollusca are easily killed by alterations in the
amount and character of the organic matter in the water in which they
are living. It is not an easy matter to keep them alive in small quanti-
ties of water for a period of several weeks. In the creeks they are
often taken infested with a very small nematode worm, but I cannot
say if this is pathogenic to them or merely a case of biological com-
panionship. Ihe proportion of the snails harbouring the worms has
increased with the advance of autumn.
In concluding this interim report it will be seen that the remaining
step is to identify the snails capable of acting as intermediate hosts.
Even if unexpected difficulty be encountered in doing so, the importance
of the above recommendations will in no wise be lessened. My
generalizations explain the presence of the parasite in many eastern


lands far removed from the tropics ; whereas, in the past, Bilharzia
has been regarded as essentially a problem of the tropics, because of
its absence from Europe and North America, But, from the foregoing
account of the conditions essential to its spread, it will be seen that the
parasite may pass through all its stages outside the human body in
the course of six weeks. Any country, therefore, may be invaded,
provided there are a few weeks’ hot dry weather each year. The
abundance of the snails and the habits of the people are the factors
which determine the proportion of the population attacked.
Australia, with its hot, dry summer, presents conditions totally
unlike Europe and North America. Investigations into the diseases
of the workmen engaged on the Panama Canal unexpectedly showed
that there were several foci of Bilharzial infection in America. In
the past the slow spread of the disease from Africa has been assisted
by the fact that the natives of the Dark Continent have had few
facilities and little inclination for travelling. But, in contrast with
this state of affairs, it is probable that in the course of a few years our
affected soldiers will have visited all parts of Australia.
I have to express my obligations to Messrs. J. Searle and C. J.
Gabriel for assistance in connection with Victorian mollusca, and to
Dr. Cumpston, Federal Director of Quarantine, for help in tracing the
cases of Bilharzia in Western Australia,
It is hardly necessary to say that, with all succeeding workers at
the problems of this disease, I must acknowledge my debt to the
epoch-making work of Lt.-Col. Leiper. Although the publication of
his results is not yet complete, the bibliography attached to these
papers makes easily available all the earlier literature on the subject.
APPENDIX.
ADVICE AND INSTRUCTIONS TO MEN OF THE A.I.F.
AFFECTED WITH BILHARZIA DISEASE.
Infection with the parasitic worm, usually called the Bilharzia
disease, may in most cases be traced to bathing in the Fresh Water
Canal while in Egypt. In man the most common symptom of the
disease when it has become chronic is the appearance of blood in the
urine. This is due to the fact that the worm is generally located in
the walls of the bladder. In the case of a person who is no longer
living in a country in which the disease is common, the symptoms,
in the majority of cases, gradually disappear. The patient himself


may be the innocent cause of the disease becoming established in a
new locality. The following facts are therefore placed in the hands of
all members of the A.I.F. who are known to be affected, with the object
of enlisting their care and constant attention in the effort towards
reducing the risk of introducing the disease into Australia to a
minimum.
All those who have returned from Egypt with the disease have, up
to the present, steadily improved in health. I know that the men in
the Melbourne hospitals have uniformly shown a diminution in the
number of eggs in the specimens examined. Unfortunately, this
does not necessarily indicate that the disease is being rapidly cured,
because we know of no means by which the worms may be killed. Many
of the symptoms may be relieved by appropriate treatment, and after
a year or so there may be so little blood in the urine that only the last
few drops are stained. In the meantime the best advice we can give
a patient is to live a ‘ sober and quiet life,” and if the symptoms
become troublesome apply for treatment. It is by maintaining the
genera] health that the ultimate cure is brought about. As the only
means by which the disease is transferred to other people is that which
is described below, there is no reason for leading the life of a hermit.
But anything which lowers the vitality makes the symptoms worse,
such, for instance, as alcoholic and other excesses. In particular, the
condition of the bladder and adjoining organs is likely greatly to
increase the severity of an attack of venereal disease.
LIFE-HISTORY OF THE WORM.
Africa is the original home of the parasite, but it has spread to many
parts of Asia and America. It is found only in countries where ia
limited water supply is combined during part of the year with a fairly
high temperature.
(1) The adult worm, nearly an inch in length, lives in the human
body and produces eggs which are barely visible to the naked eye
These eggs are passed in immense numbers in the urine or with the
faeces.
A few hours after being discharged, the eggs hatch and give rise
to a minute “ embryo,” which swims freely in water. The embryo
must pass the next stage of its existence inside some species of fresh-
water mollusc. These little shell-fish resemble a small periwinkle in
size and shape, and are common in all creeks and swamps. The three
kinds which are known to serve for the development of the embryo in
Egypt are similar to varieties found in Australia.


(3) In these fresh-water snails the embryo goes through a stage of
development which results in the production of the larval stage of
growth. A single embryo may give rise to great numbers of the larvae,
so that large bodies of water easily become infected. When the larva,
leaves the snail it swims in the water seeking a suitable warm-blooded
animal in which it may take up its permanent abode. In the case of
man, the larva attaches itself to the skin, and makes its way through
into a small blood vessel. It then wanders in the blood stream until
it reaches the wall of the bladder or other organ. The larva is just
visible to the naked eye, but in the course of a month it may grow into
the full-sized worm. The pricking sensation often noticed by soldiers
after bathing in Egypt was probably due to the larva boring through
the skin. Once the worm reaches its permanent location it may
remain alive for many years producing great numbers of eggs all the
time.
This history shows the different stages in the life of the parasite to be
nearly the same as those of the well-known liver-fluke in sheep, and
may be compared with the stages of the silk-worm—the egg, caterpillar,
chrysalis, and moth in succession. The extent to which water may
become charged with the larvae of such parasites may be seen from the
fact that in the case of sheep-fluke in a badly affected district, I have,
on one occasion, found them in every pint of surface water taken
from a water-hole in a small creek in the month of December.
PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY.
From the foregoing account it will be seen that the risk of the intro-
duction of the disease into Australia is due to the fact that the eggs
may easily reach creeks and water-holes in which the snails are living,
and the worm may then pass through all its stages. But the eggs are
derived from only one source, viz., from patients who have already
been affected. That this danger is not an imaginary one is proved
by the fact that fresh cases have already arisen in New South Wales
and Western Australia. In the latter case it is known that a soldier
who acquired the disease in the Boer War was living for years in a
small township in which three fresh cases occurred five or six years
ago.' It is therefore the duty of every person who has ever had the
disease to do all in his power to prevent the district in which he is
living from becoming affected. Once the snails are invaded it is easy
to see that there is risk of a rapid outbreak occurring from the extent
to which bathing is carried on all the summer.


DANGER OF THE EGGS REACHING WATER.
As the eggs only reach the water when they have been discharged
by a patient who has the disease the greatest care is necessary in attend-
ing to the calls of nature. The urine should never be passed in proximity
to standing or running water, and this rule applies also to the faeces.
When the urine is discharged on to the dry ground, so that it is at once
absorbed by the earth, the eggs which it contains quickly perish and
the chances of the spread of the disease are reduced to a minimum.
In a town with a sewerage system, there is no danger, and there is
little risk in a patient using the ordinary closet in a town or country
house because the contents of the pan seldom find their way into a
creek or water-hole direct. On the other hand, a urinal leading to a
street gutter may gain access to a creek, and therefore should be avoided.
It will be seen that the danger of contamination is greatest near towns
and in the suburbs of large cities, and especially in the irrigation
districts. In such places there are more people about, children bathe
and paddle in the creeks and channels, and the wild-water fowl which
feed on the snails have all been killed off. In the summer the volume of
water in a creek becomes restricted, all forms of aquatic life are con-
centrated in the smaller quantity of water, the snails are likely to become
infected with the embryo of the worm, and the larva is more likely to
come across the boys while bathing.
CONCLUSION.
It will be seen that the risk of introducing the disease is greatest in
the dry season of the year. That is, from October to March in the
southern half of Australia, and from March to October in Queensland
and the Northern Territory.
The danger is less in proportion to the abundance of water in any
district.
Heavy rainfall parts of the Commonwealth or else cities with a
sewerage system should be selected by patients as their place of residence.
ihe irrigation settlements should be avoided, because these districts
not only have a low rainfall, but also because the work of irrigation
often leads to wet feet, and, in addition, all the water required for
household use is derived from the channels. Some men appear to have
been infected in Egypt who never bathed in the canal. They merely
used the water for washing purposes. It is easy to see, therefore,
how great is the risk of introducing a new and formidable disease into
unless each patient recognises his responsibilities
in the matter.


SCHISTOSOMUM* MANSONI.
EARLY CLINICAL FEATURES OF THE DISEASE.
By F. B. Lawton, Captain, A.A.M.C.
In August and September, 1916, twenty-four cases were admitted
to No. 3 Australian General Hospital in Cairo suffering from some or
all of the following symptoms :
Abdominal pain, enlarged and tender liver and spleen, pyrexia,
bronchitis, urticaria, and diarrhoea.
All the patients were Australians who had not travelled before
enlistment. At first, it was not clear what was the matter with
these men, and blood cultures were made and other investigations
were carried out with negative results, but the blood picture afforded
the key. In evei’y case a striking eosinophilia was present. This led to
prolonged examination of the stools for parasites, and resulted in the
discovery of the lateral spined ova of Schistosomum mansoni. The
ova were found ultimately in the stools of all. The ova were scarce
at this stage of the disease, as presumably the majority of the paired
WO rms had not yet found a suitable home in the veins draining
the rectum.
All of these patients had been in camp at Tel-el-Kebir during the
three months preceding the onset of symptoms, and it was there that
the infection was apparently contracted. Near the rifle range used
by the men in this camp is a fresh-water canal, in which the water
flows sluggishly, and the infected men had either bathed 01 washed in
the canal. b Most of them had been fully immersed, having swum in
the water, but one man had merely washed his hands, and another had
washed cooking utensils in it. In the last two the infection was quite
as severe as in the others. Some of the patients had swum more than
once. None of them had washed in any other fresh water in Egypt
except the shower baths and the water provided for ablution.
Itchiness of the skin was observed by several on coming out of the
water. None of them had used towels. None of the patients could
remember having drunk the water.
* Schistosomum is often used as a synonym of Bilharzia.


CLINICAL HISTORY.
Following are notes of three typical cases :
Case 1.
Admitted August 18th.
Past History. —Was overseer on a sheep station, New South Wales—
had had no sickness. Arrived in Egypt, June, 1916.
Bathed in fresh-water canal at Tel-el-Kebir about July 18th.
Present Illness. —This began with a cough about a fortnight ago.
He says that his sputum was stained with blood. At the same time
he had a headache and loss of appetite. These symptoms continued
till four days ago, when he had sharp pains in the upper abdomen
extending round the right side of his back. On admission the pain
was general all over his abdomen. He had retching but no
vomiting. His bowels were normal till two days ago, when he had
diarrhoea, which continued till this morning. To-day there has been
sweating and shivering.
On Examination. —He looks sick, and is flushed and has a hot, dry
skin. Tongue moist and slightly furred. Chest, scattered rhonchi.
There is a little mucoid sputum, which is not blood-stained.
Abdomen. —Distension and tenderness all over. Good movement.
The maximum tenderness is in the right iliac fossa and over the spleen
and liver, which are enlarged and palpable. Urine normal. Blood
culture was made on the night of admission. The result was negative.
August 19 th. —Leucocyte count, 20,000.
August 20th • —Shiver. Blood film made and examined for
malarial parasites. No parasites found, but high eosinophilia was
revealed.
August 21 st. —Blood films made for differential white count.
Result: Polymorphonuclears .. .. 22 ’5%
Small mononuclears .. .. 15 -5%
Large mononuclears .. .. 2‘0%
Eosinophiles .. .. .. 60'0%
August 24 th. —Urticaria on body and limbs Present for 7 days.
Complaining of discomfort after food.
August 29 th. —Feels better—has no pain.
August 31s£. —Stool examined by pathologist. Large and small
amoebae of coli type and coli cysts and Blastocystis hominis were found.
September 2nd. —Stool again examined Same result.
September 6th. —Headache, slight shiver, abdominal pain.


September 11 th. —Shivered during the night, complaining of headache,
abdominal pain, and fulness after food. Pain most severe and tender-
ness most marked in left lower abdomen. Has a little diarrhoea. Stool
again examined, and lateral spine bilharzia ova were found.
September 13 th, —Abdominal pain during the night. Discomfort
after food this morning.
September 20 th. —Has improved, but abdominal pain and discomfort
after food are still present. Liver and spleen are enlarged and easily
palpable.
September 23rd. —Discharged to Australia as cot case.
Case 2.
Admitted August 28th.
Past History. —Fitter in an iron foundry in Western Australia, No
illness before enlistment At Gallipoli three months. Sent off with
dysentery, and was in hospital in England three months. Returned to
Egypt, February, 1916. Swum in canal at Tel-el-Kebir at end of May
and beginning of June.
Present. —Illness began on August 12th, when he felt hot and giddy
and had headaches and pains across lower abdomen. He had shivers
and night sweats. There was no cough and no vomiting. He was
constipated. Micturition normal. He was sent to a Field Ambulance
and was transferred thence to a stationary hospital, where he remained
for about a fortnight before going to Cairo.
On Admission. —Does not look sick, and is lying comfortably on his
back. Tongue moist and slightly furred. Chest normal.
Abdomen. —Good movement, no distension. Tenderness in right
iliac fossa, and enlargement and tenderness of liver and spleen.
August 30 th. —Urticaria present for two days.
September ls£. —Leucocyte count, 17,000.
Differential white count—
Polymorphonuclears .. .. .. 16 *O%
Small mononuclears .. .. .. 25 *5%
Large mononuclears .. .. .. 3 *5%
Eosinophiles .. .. • • .. 55 *5%
September sth. —Diarrhoea. Stool examined by pathologist.
Report: Stool liquid, no mucus or blood. Heavy lamblia cyst
infection. No other parasite found.
September 6th. —Severe pain in upper abdomen. Tender over upper
part of right rectus, which is rigid.
September 9th. —Stool examined. Same report as on the sth.


September 11 th. —Stool examined. Lateral spined bilharzia ova
present.
September 20 th. —Improved, but still has severe attacks of abdominal
pain, and much discomfort after food. Liver and spleen enlarged.
He is very wasted.
September 23rd. —Discharged to Australia as cot case.
Case 3.
Admitted August 25th.
Past. —Farmer, Victoria. No illness before enlistment. Had
measles in camp in Australia, and recovered completely. Arrived in
Egypt, February, 1916. Influenza, March, 1916. Good recovery.
Swam in fresh-water canal at Tel-el-Kebir at the end of May.
Present Illness. —Onset at the end of June with weakness, headache,
dizziness. He reported sick on July 9th with these symptoms, pains
all over, and feverishness. He was sent to a Stationary Hospital
and remained there for three weeks, during which time he had headache
and pyrexia. In hospital he developed a cough. He was thought to
have an enterica infection, and was sent to an infectious disease
hospital on July 31st. There the same symptoms continued. The
cough became worse, and was very troublesome at night, and he had
night sweats. Blood examinations for enterica were negative. His
urine was sterile and faeces negative for organisms of the enterica
group.
August 18 th. —Leucocytes, 18,000.
August 20 th. —Sputum negative for tubercle bacilli.
August 25 th. —Transferred to No. 3 Australian General Hospital.
Examination. —Looks sick. Is pale and wasted. Tongue moist,
white fur in centre, teeth very bad, severe pyorrhoea. Signs of
bronchitis in chest. Liver not felt, but dulness extends to the fourth
rib in the nipple line. Spleen palpable. He states that he had a rash
about a fortnight after the onset. Urine normal.
August 26th. —Differential white count —
Polymorphonuclears ~ .. .. 15%
Small mononuclears .. .. 14%
Large mononuclears .. .. .. 3%
Eosinophiles .. ~ ~ 68%
August 29 th. —Stool examined. Report: Liquid stool, blood, and
mucus present. Trichomonas intestinalis and lamblia cysts present.
No amoebae or amoebic cysts’ seen. Many Charcot’s crystals.


August 31si.—Stool examined. ’ Similar results.
September Ith. —Ditto. Ditto.
September 10th. —Ditto. Ditto.
September 1 1th. —Stool examined. Lateral spined ova of Bilharzia
rnansoni present, and living miricidia seen.
September 20th. —From August 29th there was considerable improve-
ment. But the cough continued to be very troublesome, especially
at night, and caused loss of sleep. There was sometimes abdominal
pain and discomfort after food, and his bowels were often loose. He
had frequent night sweats. He was discharged to Australia as a cot
case on September 23rd.
INCUBATION PERIOD.
The period of incubation was not, as a rule, easy to fix accurately,
for the date of exposure to infection could not generally be given
definitely, and, when the symptoms had appeared some weeks before
the patients were transferred to the Base, the exact time of their onset
was, in some instances, unknown. The shortest incubation period was
four weeks, and the longest was about three months. Most often it
was between four and eight weeks. This is shorter than the incubation
period in vesical bilharziosis, and none of the patients had signs or
symptoms of that condition, and ova were not found in their urine. It
is possible that symptoms of vesical bilharziosis may have become
manifest later, for both types of bilharzia exist in the water where the
rectal disease was acquired, for a patient who swam in the same water
was admitted to No. 14 Australian General Hospital with vesical
bilharziosis.
SYMPTOMS (GENERAL).
Onset. —This was sometimes abrupt, but more often the patients
felt out of sorts for a few days, with loss of appetite, persistent head-
ache, pains in the back and limbs, and dizziness. There was usually
a cough in the early stages. Sometimes cough was the first symptom.
Vomiting was uncommon. These symptoms were followed by abdominal
pain, which was often accompanied by diarrhoea. At the onset the
pain was usually in the lower abdomen, but in a few cases pain in the
upper abdomen was first noticed, and later in the illness the most
troublesome pain was in the right upper abdomen. During the first
week of illness there was pyrexia, with hot, dry skin and dirty tongue.
In some instances, however, the illness appeared to have been mild
from the beginning. The temperature was remittent, with an evening


rise to 102° or 103°. The temperature remained high for about ten
days and then descended, and sometimes it did not rise again above
99° or 100°, but in other cases, after seven to ten days, another pyrexial
period ensued. In a few cases the period of pyrexia extended over
several weeks, the longest being about eight weeks. Shivers and
sweats were frequent. The latter generally occurred at night, and
were sometimes severe. Headache was usually a troublesome symptom.
Notwithstanding the temperature the pulse was slow. Dicrotism was
observed once. Later there was invariably an evening rise to 99° or
100°, either daily or at intervals of two or three days, as long as the
patients were under observation.
Urticaria. —Urticaria was always present at some stage of the
disease, and in patients who were seen soon after the onset it appeared
in the second or third week. Its duration was variable, being from
12 to 48 hours as a rule, but, in some cases, it remained for seven or
eight days. Its distribution was general, large wheals being scattered
over the body and limbs. Often it had come and gone before the
patients were sent to the base. In one case the urticaria recurred
several times.
Blood Changes. —The red corpuscles were counted, and the haemo-
globin estimated in only two cases, and these showed departure from
normal. There was always a leucocytosis. It varied from 13,000 to
22,000 and was usually about 18,000. Differential white cells counts
invariably gave a high eosinophilia. This was never lower than 36%,
and was most often about 50%. The highest was 76%.
In cases of bilharzia haematobium previously reported, the eosinophilia
was generally lower.
Coles (1) found 20%, and Balfour (2) 14 to 18%.
Douglas and Hand (3) in 50 cases found the eosinophilia was less
than 5% in one case, less than 10% in thirteen, less than 15% in
twelve, less than 20% in eleven, less than 30% in ten, and greater
than 30% in three. .
Kautsky Bey (4) reported no leucocytosis and red cells not diminished,
and haemoglobin 50% to 80%.
In 22 cases the eosinophilia was in—
-5 cases .. .. .. 5 to 1 %
12 cases .. .. .. 10 „ 20%
2 cases .. .. .. 20 „ 30%
2 cases .. .. .. 40%
1 case ~ ~ .. 53%


Catouillard and Gober (5) described the following blood picture :
Red corpuscles .. ~ 3,000,000 to 5,000,000
White corpuscles .. .. 8,525 „ 10,850
Eosinophiles .. .. 5% „ 26%
Nathan Laxrier (6) estimated the eosinophiles to be from 5% to
25%.
Zweifel (7) gave the blood picture as —
Red corpuscles ~ .. 2,700,000 to 7,780,000
White corpuscles .. ■ ' .. 4,500 ~ 17,500
Eosinophiles .. .. 3% „ 35%
ABDOMINAL SYMPTOMS.
The abdomen was often distended. At first it was tender all over,
but the maximum tenderness was over the descending colon, and in
the right upper quadrant, and in the latter area the muscles were held
on guard. The tenderness was very marked in the beginning, but
gradually diminished. It never entirely disappeared, some tenderness
over the descending colon and over the liver remaining. The liver
and spleen were enlarged, easily palpable, and tender. Enlargement
of those organs was found, without exception, in the first weeks, but
though the liver continued to be palpable, the spleen after three or
four weeks could not in many cases be felt. Attacks of pain in the
upper abdomen were frequent and often severe, but the most distressing
symptom was a feeling of fulness in the epigastrium after taking any
nourishment. This was a constant and persistent symptom, and was
the cause of much discomfort. Attacks of diarrhoea occurred, but
were not very common and not severe, and rarely were present for
more than 24 hours. During such attacks blood and mucus were
often passed. With the diarrhoea tenesmus sometimes occurred, but
gave little trouble.
Diarrhoea, however, was in a few cases the outstanding feature of
the illness, and continued from two to three weeks. When this was
so, blood and mucus were abundant in the stools and tenesmus was
marked. In the absence of diarrhoea, or when the diarrhoea was
present only for a few days and had passed off, a little blood and mucus,
often insufficient to attract the patient’s attention, was the only
abnormality seen in the stool. Often the stool appeared normal. In
every case the stool sooner or later contained the lateral spined ova
of Schistosomum mansoni. Usually the ova were found at this stage
of the disease only after prolonged search. Sometimes they were
more readily found in mucus removed from the rectum.


Pulmonary Symptoms.— Cough was sometimes the most prominent
symptom, and, in a few instances, it was present during the whole of
the patient’s stay in hospital. In the chest there were signs of
bronchitis, and in some cases there were also patches of consolidation.
These signs usually cleared up fairly quickly, but in one case they
were present for more than ten weeks, and were still present when the
patient was discharged from hospital. Generally, the chest symptoms
did not cause great inconvenience, but in some patients the cough
was worse at night, and resulted in loss of sleep.
Course of the Disease.— ln most of the cases observed the
tendency was for the symptoms to moderate after a varying time, in
which the patients were acutely ill. When the earlier stages were
severe, and the pyrexial period protracted, there was considerable
emaciation and weakness. Though the symptoms moderated, in no
case did they clear up completely. All the patients remained weak,
but improved a little, and their weight increased. They were troubled
by frequent headaches, occasional attacks of abdominal pain and
diarrhoea, and the feeling of fulness after food. Sometimes the
condition of the bowels was normal, and sometimes there was con-
stipation. In some cases the acute stage had been passed before the
patients reached the Base, and they were in this chronic condition
when first seen.
Parallelism with Katayama Disease. — The early symptoms in
these cases of rectal bilharziosis resembled, in a general way, the early
effects of infection with Schistosomum japonicum. The symptoms
and course of the illness in some of my cases were very similar to those
in cases of Katayama disease, as reported by Bassett-Smith (8) and
Edgar (9). Though resembling it in a general way the illness was less
severe than that described in the Katayama disease, for neither ascites
nor oedema of the legs nor cerebral symptoms were present, and there
were no deaths.
A search of the literature showed an absence of any record of these
early symptoms in infection by Schistosomum mansoni. All state
that the first symptoms are those occasioned by the presence of the
worm in the mucus membrane of the intestine. Sandwith (10), in
1905, stated that “ No symptoms are known to show when liver and
lungs are affected.”
The only observation indicating any recognition of an earlier febrile
state set up by the development of the embryos in the liver is a note by
Archibald (11), who describes three cases of pyrexia of unknown origin
which, at post-mortem, were found to have intestinal schistosomiasis.
He emphasizes the fact that in these cases there was no eosinophilia.


DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS.
No. 1. Dysentery. — When the illness began with diarrhoea, accom-
panied by the passage of blood and mucus, and by abdominal pains
and tenesmus, there was a close resemblance to dysentery. In such
cases dysentery was excluded by examinations of the stool for protozoa
and dysentery bacilli.
No. 2. Enterica. —The early symptoms sometimes were suggestive
of an enterica infection. This was always excluded on further investi-
gation.
No. 3. Urticaria. —ln some cases men first reported sick with
urticaria, and when they were not very ill the condition was regarded
as the result of some intestinal toxaemia, and they were not sent to
hospital till other symptoms appeared. In a few cases the first
symptoms to attract attention were painful swellings of the eyelids
and lips, and on the lips, and on the limbs, and in the absence of other
symptoms a diagnosis of angioneurotic oedema was made.
No. 4. Pulmonary Tuberculosis. —When cough was the most pro-
minent symptom, and there were also wasting, evening rise of
temperature and night sweats, together with signs of bronchitis and
consolidation, pulmonary tuberculosis was suspected. Several patients
were admitted to hospital with this diagnosis, and repeated examina-
tions were made of the sputum for tubercle bacilli, but none were
found.
No. 5. Hepatic Abscess. —ln two cases this condition was thought to
be present. In the first, the liver was explored with a large needle,
and pus was not found. This man had a history of dysentery of few
months previously. The second man came in after a diagnosis of
bilharziosis had been made in a number of other cases. A blood film
showed an eosinophilia, and bilharzia ova were found in his stools.
No. 6. Ulcerative Endocarditis. —One man presented a clinical picture
very suggestive of this condition. Two blood cultures were made,
and both were negative. A blood film showed a high eosinophilia.
I wish to thank Colonel B. J. Newmarch, C.M.G., V.D., Commanding
Officer of No, 3 Australian General Hospital, for permission to publish
these notes.
To Lt.-Col. C. J. Martin, Pathologist to the Hospital, I am deeply
grateful for much help.
My thanks are due also to his assistants in the laboratory, Captain
Kellaway and Sister Williams, and to my colleagues on the Medical
Staff, under whose care many of these cases were, for opportunities of
studying their cases. '


REFERENCES.
1. Coles, British Medical Journal, 1902, p. 1137.
2. Balfour, Lancet, 1903, 11., p. 1649.
3. Douglas and Hands, Lancet, 1903.
4. Kautsky Bey, l re Congres, Egyptienne Medicine, Cairo, 1905, IT., p. 61.
5. Catouillard and Gobert, Arch. Institut. Pasteur, Tunis, 1908, 111., p. 128.
6. Nathan Laxrier quoted in an article on Bilharziosis, by Mathias Noc and
Leger in Grail and Claracs Traite, pratique de Pathologic exotique clinique,
and therapeutique, 1913.
7. Zweifel, Arch. f. Schijf. und Tropen. Hygiene, 1911, p. 73.
8. Bassett-Smith, British Medical Journal, 1912, 11., p. 1208.
9. Edgar, Journal of State Medicine, Sept., 1913, Vol. 21, No. 9, p. 542.
10. Sandwith, The Medical Diseases of Egypt, 1905, Part 1., p. 225.
11. Archibald, British Medical Journal, 1914, 11., p. 297.
By Authority : Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
