

ir mik
BUjIBRARI^S'


<






BILLY PAGAN
I,
-


,
.


$
" k?
A*
. t
: t


mm '???,
***?*!*??
?
? FILL ?EM UP AGAIN, MISSUS PUBLIC ?OUSE.?
Billy Pagan
Page 113


BILLY PAGAN
MINING ENGINEER
RANDOLPH BEDFORD
With Four full-page Illustrations by Percy F. S. Spence
SYDNEY
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL 00.


OF tyg
-
Copyrighted, 1911, by Alfred Cecil Rowlandson, ? Montana,?
Harbour Street, Mosman, and 476 George Street,
Sydney, Australia.
Websdale, Shoosmith Ltd., Printers, 117 Clarence St., Sydney


26550
CONTENTS
No. I?THE BARDOC FINN 1
No. 2,?THE MAN WHO HELD THE WIRES ... 22
No. 3.?THE LOSSES OF THE LOCH LONG 43
No. 4.?THE PEGGING OF THE SOUTH REPUBLIC 65
No. S.?THE FLUKE OF SUDDEN JERK 88
No. 6.?THE FIFTY OF McCAW 110
No. 7.-THE SALT OF GAM. MACCOUN 130
No. 8. ?THE CLERKS OF DARBY BATES 148
No. 9. ?THE BOOMING OF LOT?S WIFE 168
No. 10.?NINETY-SIX MILES SOU?-EAST 184


ILLUSTRATIONS
?Fill ?ism up Again, Missus Public ?Ouse? ...Frontispiece.
?I Climbed the Tree and Cut the Wire? 42
?We Entered the Water? 84
He Set Spurs to His Horse 167


No. 1. ?The Bardoc Finn.
In the frequent changes of place that are the lot of
the man who, as speculator, engineer, or prospec-
tor follows mining, and especially so in a country
only half-discovered, I had not seen Billy Pagan
for five years. I met him first on the road to
Broken Hill in ?B6, and almost at sight there sprang
up a great friendship between us. At that time he
made friends as easily and naturally as the sun
rises; I defy any man not utterly misanthropical to
be proof against the attraction of the merry boy he
was, and his sometimes unpleasant frankness did not
seem to affect the people who were so attracted. Yel-
low-haired, blue-eyed, of medium height and great
breadth of shoulder, a little inclined to fleshiness ?
that was the outward man; the pleasant exterior
held a strong, kindly, shrewd and honest person-
ality, and these held the friends once attracted. I
am one of those who believe that you can tell a book
by the cover, and in Billy Pagan?s case the real man
was faithfully represented by appearances. He
laughed at everything in those days, especially the
privations of the track and the trials of penniless-
ness. He laughed as he showed me his bleeding
foot at our camp the night before we reached


Broken Hill. He had walked four hundred miles
from beyond Bourke, and the greater part of the
soles of his boots had disappeared.
?They took me for a new kind of animal when
they saw my tracks in the dust at Wilcannia,? he
said, still laughing. ?There was the heel all right
and the sides of the sole showing, but there was the
deep print of the ball of the foot and part of the toes,
too. It must have looked like the tracks of a bear
in the keeper?s old boots.?
?And you walked all the distance like that ??
said I.
?No?'Only about half of it. I had six bob when
I started and I?ve got two left.?
?How did you do it ??
?Perch and blackfish out of the river?and the
Chow?s gardens at Tilpa, and I earned five bob at
a sale-yard, and a few fowls ?I found.?
?What sort of fowls ??
?You know ?chookies. I found ?em roosting in
trees.?
?Whose were they ??
?I don?t know ?they weren?t branded.?
We were mates for two years; and I found his
strengths and his weaknesses quickly. His
strengths were tirelessness in pursuit of anything,
a marvellous capacity for detail; the foresight of a
great chess-player; and the analytical mind of a
scientist ?qualities marvellous to find in a man so
impulsive whenever his emotions were touched; his
great weakness was a belief that he could write.
This belief lost him many opportunities and much
money. I have known him to refuse good money
at mining and seek for a newspaper engagement at


starvation wages. He was a good enough journal-
ist, but that didn?t suit him?nothing but the best
ever suited Billy Pagan. Sooner or later he left his
journalistic post of the moment to devote all his
time to his ?great book?? ?a book which has not
yet been written, and, judging by the samples 1
have seen of it, will never find a publisher. Then
when came the pinch of poverty or the more inevit-
able thing?the lust for the wilderness and new
ways?back he went to mining, content so long as
it was mining on a new field. -
At Broken Hill my future existence was decided
for me?Henry. Fleet the clerk became Henry Fleet
the speculator. But lam not the man who has the
qualities of a mining adviser. I can see far in
finance; I know markets by instinct; but I am no
good as a mining authority. A few years of loss
in Queensland had proved that for me; I had de-
cided to never again trust my own judgment, in
technicalities.
And now after six years I met Billy Pagan again
?but now aggressively moustached, and his fair
skin hardened by years of strong suns, the eyebrows
heavier and the eyes apparently deeper set and more
steadfast in their unshrinking gaze ; the aquiline nose
more pronounced?not with the predatoriness of the
eagle, but suggestive' rather of the nobler eagle.
I came up to Siberia Soak late in the afternoon,
and found a mad tangle of camels and horses and
men struggling for water. The dust, red and pun-
gent as cayenne, fine as flour, arose in clouds where
It had been milled by many feet ?a hundred yards
away a four-horsed buggy had halted and the horses


screamed as they tried to break out of the harness
in the madness of thirst.
A diversion was suddenly created by a young
man, dressed like any score of the other men ?in
a shirt of many pockets and open at the breast;
dust-marked tweed trousers, tucked into old
wrinkled, travel-worn, brown leather leggings, fast-
ened with leather loops and only one buckle; boots
heavy as to sole and light as to upper ?so serving
to show the extraordinary delicacy of the man?s
feet; a soiled Terai hat very wide in the brim ; the
trousers supported by a leather belt that held watch,
compass and aneroid pouches, and knife and pipe
sheaths. He advanced, leading a riding camel
whose very form spoke of grace and swiftness, to
the crowd around the soak ?edged himself between
the drinking beasts and brought his camel?s neck
after him; beat back the selfish animals that had
already had more than their share, watered his camel
and led her out again?audaciously calm in the
babel of vituperation and insult his action had ex-
cited.
I had been by the Soak for two hours, having
watered my camel and filled the water-bags before
the rush came; and I had decided to camp at the
Soak for the night and fill up again next morning.
The audacious stranger passed me, evidently look-
ing for a camp, and, as he did, some old memory
stirred, and I cried in pleased surprise :
?Billy Pagan!?
He turned! ??That?s me ! And what?s your
name? Stop a bit, I know ?you?re Harry Fleet.?
?You?ve got it, Billy. Shake.?


He camped with me that night and we exchanged
yarns. He had been forced to the business he un-
derstood ?the work that paid the best.
?I got married, you see. Splendid girl ?the best.
We?ve two babies now . . . And literature is so
badly paid.?
?Literature.? I smiled, but not outwardly, for
his unwinking, unmoving gaze was on me.
"It's a pity spoil a first-class literary man to
make him a second-class mining engineer, Harry?
but it?s done . . . Where are you off to??
?Coolgardie. I?ve seen nothing good enough,
North.?
?I?m going down, too. I?ve got to cable on a
report on a mine away out there? He waved
his hand to the westward.
Late that afternoon we were riding through a
scrubby plain scarred with many ?blows? of white,
hungry and valueless quartz, when Billy Pagan, who
had been gazing intently westward, forced his camel
out of the track and said :
?There?s a shaft over in that gulley. I can see
the boughs over the shaft. Let?s have a look at
it. . . . Come on. We might as well camp here till
to-morrow. ?
There were yet three hours of daylight and I was
minded to object, but I had noticed before that when
our inclinations clashed mine had to suffer eclipse,
so I turned my camel into the wake of his and fol-
lowed through the sap-green saltbush and the thick-
ets of scented broom to the alluvial gully between
the iron-hills. Iron-stained quartz studded the
plain and the gully and two monstrous outcrops of
quartz of distorted shape, so that they looked like


drunken men suddenly frozen in the act of falling,
stood out on each iron rise, flanking the valley as if
they guarded it.
We rode up the gully and Billy Pagan drew rein
at the shaft in the alluvium. The bough shelter
over the windlass had fallen at one corner and trail-
ed on the dump. The windlass was in place only
as to one bearing ?the shaft fallen in and filled al-
most to the surface.
Pagan said: ?Hooshtah? to his camel and she
knelt for his dismounting?my camel followed the
example, but in such a hurry that I was almost
thrown over the animal?s head.
?Where?s the sense of camping so early in the
afternoon?? I asked, but Pagan did no treply.
This was my first experience of his now obsessing
passion of inquisitiveness. His concentration on the
uninteresting details of that ruined shaft was sug-
gestive of no one thing; but as I watched him 1
thought that I had never before seen manly hope?
the patience of the bloodhound and the sagacity of
the collie ?so centred in the look of a man.
?What?s up, Billy??
?Oh nothing?l like to find out things, and this
interests me. May be nothing?but look. These
men must have been new to the game. Why sink
here on this loose stuff and not on the ridges? Why
put up a logging that would give them a dump for
fifty feet of sinking and then stop in twenty??
?How do you know they stopped in twenty feet??
?Look at the dump!?
?But the shaft may have fallen in so that the)
had to abandon it.?


?Can?t you see at a glance that some of the dump
has been taken away? And where is it? Why?
down the shaft . . . But why did they do it??that?s
what puzzles me.?
?We?d better find ?em and ask ?em.?
?It?s a good idea,? said Billy Pagan, looking at
me as if he didn?t believe anything of the kind?
?and failing them, we?ll look at their work again.
Will you make camp, Harry, and I?ll look around.?
I agreed of course, and led the camels further up
the gully where a brilliant patch of green promised
a belt of quandong trees. After unloading the cam-
els I led them to the trees ?nature having provided
stall, manger and fodder all in one?and I had made
the camp and filled the quart-pots for the tea before
I again thought of Pagan. Before dusk I walked
down the gully and coo-eed, but got no reply; and
the deep, violet, starlit, Australian night had closed
in before I heard the swish of leather leggings
against dry saltbush, and my friend stopped in the
glare of the fire. He did not speak until, after hav-
ing swept, with a broom of bushy shrub torn up by
the roots, a space clear of stones, he spread his
blanket, lay down on his side, and with his hip
moved the sand under the blanket into the shape of
comfort.
Then he took his tin of meat and the Jack Shea
of tea, ate for ten minutes?beer, damper and onion?
with the thoroughness he brought to everything.
The meal finished, he put the meat-tin on the fire
where it sizzled and spluttered; for he gave more
than his usual thoroughness to the prevention of dirt
at a camp and burned all waste ?leaving not even a


baking-powder tin to attract insects, reptile or other
scavenger life.
?Well ?did you find the mare in the nest, Billy??
?There?s no mare, old man. It puzzles me ?al-
though I found out things.?
?What things??
?The shaft was filled in only ten days or so ago.
But there?s more than half the dump still on the sur-
face.?
?That may mean that there were drives below
which the collapse did not fill.?
?Or it may mean that dirt was taken from else-
where to fill it. And that?s what occurred. Oh!
It?s been cunningly done ?but why? Did you notice
a lot of patches of half-withered scrub near that
shaft??
?Yes?what of them??
?Only they were once little hills. Earth has been
taken from them and hollows left; and those were
filled up or apparently filled up with living scrub
carried?roots, soil, and all?from further up the
gully.?
?But why did they do that??
?To put the dirt down the shaft .... But they
didn?t leave quite enough dirt on the dump. That
excited my suspicions first. Then the half-withered
scrub.?
?Why was that suspicious??
?I don?t exactly know. But I seemed to smell a
man doing something crooked when I saw it . , , and
the bough shelter over the windlass hadn?t fallen ot
itself ?it had been carefully lifted down to give the
appearance of abandonment, but not quite destroyed


because complete destruction always calls on some-
body to investigate and try again.?
?But why??
??lt?s human nature. The idea that the first man
was a fool and therefore failed, and that the second
man can reverse the failure .... But the most sus-
picious of all is, why sink a shaft there? .... Why
fill it up again? .... Why try to disguise the filling
up? . ... That stopped me for a bit.?
??Not for long, Billy?if I know you.?
?1 walked up the western 'rise ?the alluvium s
covered all over with quartz and iron slugs
There?s gold here all right. ... I specked a two-
pennyweight bit midway between the shaft and their
camp .... The tent?s gone, but there?s a bough
eating-shed there . . . They were no bushman . . .
they came from a cold country .... they had been
hard-worked for little money . . . they were
mean, horribly mean .... and very dirty .... I
should think they were sailors.?
??Why, how can you pretend to know that??
??They were not used to axe-work, but they were
to ropes. They had not used ridge-poles for their
tents ?they had been fastened between trees; all
rope work.?
? How do you know they came from a cold coun-
try??
??Because they were not used to flies. There was
half a pot of jam in a tucker-box blackened with
flies, or rather with their corpses, because the jam
started business as a cemetery a fortnight ago . . . .
you could see they had been hard-worked for starva-
tion wages because of their meanness. There were


two tucker-boxes hanging in the bough shed.
Each man had his own salt and pepper and con-
densed milk .... What does all that mean? It
means sailor-men from a foreign sailing ship, prob-
ably a lumber boat from the Baltic .... two-
pounds-a-month men, brutalized with hard labour
and bad food.?
??And of course that would show they are dirty.?
??No, ?of course.? We?ve a specific proof for
even that. When did you see goannas round a
camp of mine??
?Never.?
And why? Because there was never any offal
or dirt about to attract them. But there were no
burnt-out tins around the camp of these men and
there were a dozen big goannas. So these men
were dirty.?
?And where does it all lead to??
?Somewhere. . . I don?t knowi ?but somewhere
interesting ... I want to pan a few dishes of dirt
to-morrow. . . Where were these fellows working?
What gold were they on? If they worked in the
shaft, why did they put their camp a mile and a half
from their work??
?It is interesting,? said I??let?s look Into it at
daylight. ?
Billy Pagan was undoubtedly pleased. ?Good
man,? he replied, ?I wanted to stay, and I hardly
cared to ask you. Shall we see it through??
?I?ll make one, Billy.?
?Good business, then. At daylight.?
We smoked a few pipes in silence?the ghostly
forms of the camels showing against the gloom
of the quandongs, the bulging masses of the blue


and silver night seemed to approach our faces; the
light which is not starlight, nor moonlight, but a
light that seems to belong only to the vast planes
of sea or desert sank upon us; I put my pipe safely
away from my blanket and slept.
* * * *
When I awoke Billy Pagan was making a rapid
and perfunctory toilet with a few palmfuls of water
poured from a water-bag. In that thirsty land
where men are guiltless of washing for many days
at a time Billy?s habit of the morning wash had
gained him a reputation for extravagance, especially
among men who would have been careless of clean-
liness even with the sea for a bath-room.
?Hurry up, Harry,? he said. ?You carry the
water-bag and shovel; I?ll take the pick and the
dish.?
The dawn was but an hour old when we set off
down the gully, and then up the gradual slope of
the western rise until we stopped at the bough
shed which had been the dining-room of the men
who had disappeared. Billy showed me the tucker-
boxes and the places where the tents had been.
Then a scrap of paper by a tree trunk attracted
him, and he picked up a letter. He read it silently
and resumed, ?I like the look of this ridge,? said
he stopping and looking back at the collapsed shaft.
?All the ground behind us ought to have good gold,
and yet these fellows don?t work it. And that shaft
is a mile and a half from their camp.?
I did not immediately reply?the bough shelter
was very familiar to me, and my memory groped
for light. And suddenly, as I turned to the con-
tinuation of the ridge, I saw a mound and cried:


?Why, I had a drink at this camp a week ago!
There was a man digging at the end of the ridge,
and I saw him from the track and asked him for
a drink, and he brought me here.?
Pagan looked up sharply. ?What sort of a
man??
?A big ginger-bearded chap
?What sort of beard??
?Very long and forked. He spoke like a Dutch
man. ?
Pagan made a sound of mingled pleasure and
excitement. ?1 knew it. What was he sinking?
a shaft??
?Yes?about six feet by three. He was down
only four feet or so. He stopped work at once and
brought me here and gave me the drink and I went
back with him into the track again; but I didn?t see
that other shaft.?
?And you didn?t see his mate??
?No?he might have been in the tent.?
?So he was ?he was lying dead there.?
?Dead!?
?Yes; his mate killed him and was digging that
grave for him when you rode up.?
?Oh! Surely not.?
?Surely yes. We?ll go on to the place where you
saw him digging. . . It?s all clear now.? He
strode on vigorously for a few minutes and then
slackened his pace to that of indecision, and said,
?No, it?s not all clear yet. Why did they sink that
shaft, and why is their camp so far from the
work??
His attempt to answer his own questions kept him
silent till we reached the peak of the rise where


native lilac and red amaranth crowded each other
in the quartz-strewn soil. He stopped at a
mound of ominous shape and said, ?Puzzle No. 3.
Here?s a grave, as we expected.?
?But no murder proved?except that the Dutch-
man didn?t tell me that his mate was dead.?
?There is certainly a great deal against the mur-
der theory now- ?because there?s the headboard; and
no murderer would dig a grave in the most con-
spicuous place on a hill and then carry the body
three-quarters of a mile to it.?
?I looked at the mound?the head-?stone? was
the half of a kerosene can and the name of the
deceased was made by a series of nail-holes punched
in the tin and representing letters. And I read
thus:
? IN MEMREY
OF TOM POCKY
DIED OF TIPHOYD
22 JANY 1893.?
?That disposes of the murder idea, Billy??
?Well, does it? It doesn?t explain the im-
probable, anyhow. See here? ?he squatted on his
boot-heels and drew with his forefinger in the dust
??Now that No. 1 place is their camp; No. 2 is the
grave where we are; No. 3 is the shaft that?s col-
lapsed?now it will take a lot of graves to explain
the reason why any one of these three places is
where it is with any relation to the others.?


Ouftj-JCAMfi
I looked at the rough chart and was as puzzled
as my friend. Here are the positions :
COLLAP3eO
Shaft
D'C
One Deserted
Camp
--O
//i Miles
One Crave / Fps r l3^^'
?What do you think of it, Billy??
?I?ll soon know what to think. Give me the
water-bag. ?
He took a shovelful of earth from the slope six
feet below the grave, washed it, panned it off and
held up the dish to me. I saw a thin tail of gold.
He nodded hopefully, washed the gold out of the
dish, took another shovelful four feet above the
place of the first sample, panned it off, and showed
another tail of gold.
?Ladies and gentlemen, come to supper,? said
Billy Pagan. ?We?re getting warm.?
He panned a sample from the top of the slope
five feet above the grave and laughed as he showed
but one or two colours of the metal. I stared.
?There?s no gold above the grave, you see,
Harry. We?ll sink on Mr. Tom Locky, who died of
typhoid, with the bad spelling, on January 22, 1893,
and we?ll see what he?s made of.?
?You mustn?t interfere with the dead, old man,
no matter what?s there,?


?I?m not going to interfere with the dead. What?s
the date??
??The 14th February.?
??So it is?the 14th of blessed memory. Well,
as his lying tombstone says he died on January
22, and you saw this grave being dug on February
7, Tom Locky can?t be below, can he??
?But the inscription??
?Stolen from the real Tom Locky?s grave. He
was a Dutchman, was the murderer ?he wouldn?t
give himself away by trying to write a tombstone-
in English, and yet he wanted it to be protected by
a tombstone; so he stole Tom Locky?s. That?s
plain?so far as it goes, but it doesn?t go far
enough.?
He moved quickly, as if actuated by sudden
resolve, to the head of the grave, tore out the tin
plate ?tombstone,? took up the shovel, and cleared
the mound to the level of the original surface.
?It?s all right, Harry; give me a hand. Will
you? We?re going to strike a sensation and hang
our friend the Dutchman.?
?You think the man below us has been mur-
dered??
?I think lots of things, old man. Give me the
pick.?
He dug rapidly and easily; the mixture of sand,
loam, quartz and iron slugs not yet having had time
to consolidate. Then there was the sound of rend-
ing linen as the shovel point caught a hole in the
wrapping of whatever the grave held.
?What is it?? I asked, trembling with excite-
ment. ?The man??


?No; it?s a big heap of calico. Give me a pull
on it ?away now ?again again ?right. What is it??
?It?s a tent, Billy,?
?A tent? The tent of the murdered man??
He shovelled again, but more carefully. The
point of the shovel struck and rang on massive and
unshattered rock.
?Hallo,? said I, smiling; and, to tell the truth,
much relieved ??the murder theory is disproved.?
?No, not yet.? He threw another shovelful to
the surface and said: ?That was heavier,? I
turned over the rubble with my hands and found
many little nuggets of waterworn gold; and then
Pagan?s shovel threw up a dark, bloated, heavy
object that, proved to be a sock filled with small nug-
gets and tied together with a boot-lace.
I was half mad with excitement by this time, but
Pagan?s usual impulsiveness was just then sub-
ordinated to the problem in hand, which seemed to
become more and more obscure as we proceeded.
He cleaned out the hole and used the pick on the
solid rock. Then he Handed to me, as he stood in
the cutting, two fine specimens of gold in quartz,
leaped out of the hole, and said, as he stood on the
dead man?s tent:
?Mr. Tom Locky, who died of typhoid sixteen
days before this hole was sunk, turns out to be a
three-foot reef worth all of four ounces.?
?But what about the tent and the sock full of
gold??
?The Dutchman who put them there had all he
could carry. He?ll be in Coolgardie selling the al-
luvial gold and trying to sell the lease this reef?s
on. We?ll go on to Coolgardie and take a hand.?


?Shall we fill up the hole???
?No, leave it as it is.?
?But someone may see the reef and jump the
lease.?
?No, protect it with your pegs and apply for the
lease when you get to Coolgardie. The Dutchman
won?t want it any more.?
?Now, how can you know that, Billy??
?The Dutchman will be hanged?sure.?
?But he killed nobody?it was a blind to keep
people off the gold.?
?But he has killed a man, all the same. Look at
this. I found this letter by the tree trunk, the place
of the tent that belonged to the younger man. Now!
no more objection. I know it belonged to the
younger man, because the ground was cleaner than
by the Dutchman?s, and because there were signs
that the owner of it was an Australian. This letter
is from the young fellow?s wife. She?s very young,
too, as she tells him she has cut up one of the
frocks he used to admire when they were courting,
because it?s too short for a married woman; and
she is going to make pinafores for the baby out of
it.?
?But how do you know he?s young??
?Because she calls him ?dear boy? in the letter.
And I know he?s dead, because this was the last
letter he had from her, and letters are not so com-
mon round here that a man would leave his sweet-
heart?s last words by a salmon gum and walk
away. No; he?s dead?the Dutchman killed him,
covered up the reef and buried all the gold he
couldn?t carry, and steered out to Coolgardie. We?ll
find him there.?


?But where did he bury the man??
?Let?s think a bit. . . Yes ?I think the positions
are explained now. Neither of these men were
miners. . . The sailor would be more used to hard
work; and the young- fellow evidently came from
Melbourne or Sydney. He was not a miner, any-
how?the letter hints at that when it speaks of his
pluck in trying a new occupation. They got gold
near their first camp and traced it along here. Then
you have seen what a mean hound the Dutchman
was. As the older man, you may be sure that his
word was law in the camp. The young chap?s kind-
ness ?it?s hinted at in the letter ?would cause him
to give way and consent to the mean suspiciousness
of the separate pantries. Such meanness belongs
nearly always to a greedy nature that has known
long privation. The Dutchman decided he would
have all the gold. He pursuaded the young man
to help him sink that utterly unnecessary shaft in
the gully, and that shaft is a grave.?
?You think the Dutchman murdered and buried
him there??
?I?m sure of it. The Dutchman said nothing
about tracing the hidden reef ?he had killed the
young man and drawn the timbers out of the shaft
gully ?he had seen it collapse, and then filled up
the shaft partly from the dump?partly from new
holes he afterwards masked with transplanted
shrubs. It was the withering of it that gave him
away.?
?Then he had done that before I saw him??
?You may be sure that the gully shaft had been
allowed to fall in two days before you came along.?
?What?s the game now? Open that shaft??


?No, we?ll leave that to the police. Our game Is
to make Coolgardie while the Dutchman sta} S there.?
I was on fire with impatience now, and cried, ?I?ll
know him ?I?ll know that forked red beard any-
where.?
?And I?ll know him by the fact that he has lost
his beard, because he?ll have shaved clean; but the
big wide jawbones that grew the forked beard, and
the white skin where the sun and the sea have not
touched him ?they will put Mr. Dutchman away to
me.
?We?ll clear now, old man. We won?t wait a
minute. ?
?Put your pegs in, and I?ll look to the camels.?
Here was a new characteristic of him. Interested
so much in the pursuit his observant eye had begun,
he had no desire of acquisition.
I duly pegged the lease alone, returned to the
camp, and found my friend almost ready for depar-
ture. In a haste almost feverish?so great is the
human desire to chase something for its life, to
catch something that is to be killed when caught?
we loaded the camels and mounted.
Billy led the way, putting the cow he rode im-
mediately to a speed that was almost incredible to
me. Through the last hours of the waning after-
noon, and far into the night, we rode at a speed
that, used as I was to camel paces, left me strained
and sore and blind with aching ; and just after mid-
night we drew rein in Bailey-street, and found, to
our surprise, that Coolgardie had gone to bed early,
respectable and sober.
?About fifty miles on the Siberia-road,? said
Billy Pagan to the sergeant next day, ?there?s a


big gully going north, and, flanking it, two stony
rises with big blows of quartz here and there.
?I know it,.? said the sergeant; ??it?s got no
white man?s name. The niggers call it Bardoc. ?
??Bardoc it shall be, then,? said Billy. n Now 1
want you to listen to the story of Bardoc.?
He told it to the accompaniment of a running
fire of comments and ejaculations from the sergeant;
and, as he finished and they talked ways and means
of opening the collapsed shaft, I walked to the door
and looked out on the busy, dusty street with its
alignment broken by the graceful salmon gums,
which the axe of settlement had spared.
And there I saw the man Billy Pagan?s mind had
constructed of such slight materials?the foreign
sailor; meagre, vulture-necked, rolling of gait, with
the tell-tale whiteness of face and throat that had
long been shielded by a beard; the low, broad
jaws flattened near their hinges; and the retreating
chin that had produced the forked beard I seemed
still to see, though it had fallen to the barber?s
shears.
I waited till he came abreast of me, and looked at
him closely that I might be sure. He was the man
who had given me the drink at Bardoc; as he passed
he looked in my eyes and saw recognition there, and
in a flash he knew me. He hurried on.
I called quietly to Billy Pagan and the sergeant.
??Here?s our man; don?t alarm him.?
They came to the door, and I saw that the sailor
had turned round to see. He found my gaze still
on him, and turned away, increasing his pace.
?Hello,? shouted the sergeant, ?I want you for
a minute.?


The man walked on as if he had not heard
?Cocking a deaf ?un, is he?? said the sergeant.
?Hullo! Dutchy?l want you.?
As he spoke he drew his revolver and began to
run. The sailor put his hand into his jacket and
ran also. The sergeant fired over the head of the
fugitive; and at the sound of the shot every man in
Bailey-street dropped whatever he had in hand.
They ran, converging to the centre, which was the
Dutch sailor man; and he, seeing escape impossible,
drew a revolver from his jacket, -put it to his head,
and blew his own brains out, a second before the
sergeant?s hand touched his shoulder.
The Law had arrested a corpse.
?It was just as you told me,? said the sergeant
a week later. ?We sunk another shaft and holed
into the old one, and found the man as you said we
would, Mr. Pagan. But how did you know his age,
and that he?d been a clerk, and didn?t know any-
thing about mining, puzzles me.?
?Observation,? replied Billy Pagan. ?It was
all true, wasn?t it??
?True as gospel. We wired to his people in Syd-
ney and got back the description of him. This
was his first job as a prospector, poor chap. It?s a
wonder he was ever discovered.?
?If criminals would only be natural they?d be
safer,? said Billy Pagan.' ?The Bardoc Finn gave
himself away by being unnatural. He had a great
little mind, and it made his scheme over perfect.
The idea of replacing salt bush hummocks with
growing scrub was flat, fragrant art.?
That night we took the outward track again.


No. 2.? The Man who Held the Wires.
A willy-willy blowing over Coolgardie filled with
dust our camp on the twenty-five mile road. We
ate dust, breathed dust, and wore it as our most
intimate garment; we wrote in a mixture of
organic matter and mud.
?Twenty-five per cent, moisture, twenty-five per
cent, dust, and fifty per cent, dead blowfly,? said
Billy Pagan as he de-coded the cable from London.
?What does it say?? said I, when he had closed
the code-book.
?It?s from Harmer. There?s a show at English
Flag under offer to him, and his option expires in
four days. Did you ever hear of a big mine there,
Harry??
?No,? I replied. ?Is it supposed to be big??
?Judging by the price, yes. Harmer says it?s
under offer to them for fifty thousand pounds, and
that other people are ready to take it up when his
option expires. He?s had a report on it, and it?s so
good he wants me to confirm it.?
?Whose report was it??
? Manning?s ; he says it?s a two-ounce show with
unlimited quantities of ore proved.?
?Do you know Manning??


?Only by reputation, and that says he?s very
straight but not very smart.??
?And you?ve got to confirm in four days??
?Yes. Do you feel inclined for a trip? It?s not
a nice day, but there?s only fifty miles of it.?
?I?ll come, certainly.?
?Right, old man. I?ll get the buggy round.?
Late that night we drove up to the mine?a mile
or so beyond the grog-shop of galvanized iron-roof,
salmon-gum wallplates and rafters, and hessian
sides ?having been directed to the track to the mine
by the owner of the shanty. A great blow of quartz,
a mountain in size and of precipitous steepness,
loomed grey and mysterious at our right; but the
light of a camp to the left bore us away from the
mammoth outcrop. At the sound of buggy wheels
the door of the camp opened, and the white rays of a
kerosene lamp invaded the darkness, except where
it was broken by the figure of a man who appeared
in the doorway.
?All right, Mr. Pagan,? said the man. ?Jim ?ll
take care o? your horses.?
?H?m,? said Billy Pagan to me; and I saw that
he was not pleased at the meeting, although he
rqplied, ?Hullo, Swainger; wha't are you doing-
here??
?Just come along to measure up for the contrac-
tor to-morrow, Mr. Pagan.?
?H?m.? We had alighted and entered the hut
when Billy Pagan spoke again. ?Sinking the shaft
on contract, are you?? he said.
?Yes, Mr. Pagan. Sit down here. I?ve got a
bunk ready for you. Didn?t expect your mate.?


?Never mind troubling about the bunk,? said
Billy Pagan. ?We?ve got our blankets, and I?d
rather camp outside.?
There were three men at the rough table ?two of
the usual type of young Australians, very tall and
spare, very silent ?their faces wrinkled by blinding
suns to the semblance of middle-aged men, whereas
they were little more than youths. The third man
was short, broad and black-bearded ?every hair of
him gave the impression of the immense strength
of their owner. He received us sullenly, as if we
were men he was forced to meet and would be glad
to part with. Peculiar glances as of enquiry on one
side and of warning in reply passed between this
pocket Hercules and Swainger.
?Have a drink, mates,? said the Hercules almost
commandingly, and, although neither of us desired
it, we could not be guilty of a refusal ?which is a
serious infraction of bush law; but after we had
drunk the whisky and the hot water, which proved
that it had known the condenser only a few minutes
before, Billy Pagan said that we were tired and
would talk in the morning. Without waiting for a
reply, he said ?Good-night,? and led the way out to
our buggy; and I followed him.
In silence we spread our blankets near the buggy,
filled the last pipe for the night, removed our boots,
and turned in. We smoked for a few minutes in
silence ?a silence broken by the first of the ques-
tions that tormented me.
?Why don?t you like Swainger, Billy??
?S-s-sh ?not so loud. . . I don?t know anything
against him except indefinite hearsay; but I don?t
like him on sight, and I trust to my instinct.?


?But how can your likings affect this business??
?He was in Coolgardie when we left. He was
loafing about the post-office when I drove down
Bailey-street . . . looking as if he were at rest and
likely to stay so. Yet he turns up here to receive
us.?
?How could he know where we were going??
?A cable from whoever is trying to sell this mine
in London, or leakage in the telephone office here.?
?I see; but ?
?S-s-sh ?
A quartz splinter cracked under a heavy boot. 1
looked in the direction, of the sound and saw two
figures so indefinite as to appear mere shadows.
They had approached from the back of the camp.
now they stood motionless.
Billy Pagan?s whisper came to me, ?Talk?laugh
?so they can go away again.?
I took the cue.
?Hang this pipe. . . It?s foul. Got your knife,
Billy??
?No,? replied he as loudly. ?There?s saltbush
growing near you?get a twig.?
He continued talking advice as to pipe-cleaning
while I turned over to pluck the saltbush, and I
heard the quartz splinter crepitate as if its broken
edges were relieved of weight. I looked up, and
the two shadows had vanished.
The midnight winds sprang up and ruffled the
plain; the night showed fever stars and darker
than usual.
?What?s their game, Billy??
?S-s-sh?no more talking to-night. , . It?s
risky.?


There were sounds as of shovels being moved
from the ground behind the camp; then the noise
of retreating footsteps.
?But what are they doing??
?They?re going to the shaft. It?s none of our
business, though.?
?What shall we do then??
?S-s-sh. When in doubt, keep quiet?go to
sleep. ?
He rolled over, his face set from the dawn; in a
few minutes his deep and regular breathing told me
that he had followed his own advice; for myself, I
was too excited by the mystery I felt afoot, and by
turns dozed and awakened to every sound from the
camp, the shaft and the plain.
Morning showed us the great outcrop of quartz
that had been grey mystery in the starlight, a white
crystalline mountain glaring and eye-wearing in the
sun. In the centre it had weathered to fragments
that strewed the plain?rising again in towers and
pinnacles of whiteness, showing only the infrequent
discoloration of millions of years of moss.
?H?m,? said Billy Pagan, chipping a boulder as if
with his prospecting hammer ??hungry as a
swamper.?
Swainger interpolated hastily, ?She?s not all
brick quartz like this. She?s better below ?and
she?ll get richer with depth.?
?H?m,? said Billy, as Swainger and the sullen
Hercules walked before us to the shaft. ?Same old
lie, Harry?the stone will get richer with depth.
Will it? I?ve never known a reef that did?it?s
always the other way.? We reached the shaft, and


the engineer, addressing Swainger, said, ?What?s
the depth???
?Two hundred and twenty; we?ve opened out and
driven at the hundred and the two hundred. I sup-
pose you? like to do the sampling alone??
?Yes, my friend and myself wifi go.?
?Right you are ?we?ll lower you, then.? As he
spoke he looped and knotted the end of the windlass
rope as a foot-hole.
?No thanks; we?ll go down the ladders. Wil'
you lower the sample bags, Harry, after I?ve got
down? There?s a connection between the hundred
foot level and the two hundred, isn?t there, Mr.
Swainger??
?Yes, there?s a winze through and ladders in
it.?
?Right; is your friend here??he indicated the
sullen Hercules ??the leaseholder??
?I?m one of ?em, mister,? replied Hercules,
answering for himself, and truculently, as if he
expected opposition and wanted to anticipate it.
Swainger silenced him with a look.
?And you, Mr. Swainger?? pursued Pagan imper-
turbably, as if he had neither heard nor seen the
truculence nor its correction.
?I?ve got the option,? replied Swainger, flushing
uneasily.
?And who has given the option to my people??
?Coakley ?
?He?s in London, I think??
?Ye-e-es?he?s in London.?
?H?m. . . Lower away when I call, Harry.?
I sat in the hundred foot level, looking at a glis-
tening mass of quartz; Billy Pagan?s candle burned


steadily in its spider-socket driven into the soft slate
of the reef-enclosing rock. I held my candle in my
hand and the tallow guttered to my fingers.
He had spread a long sampling sheet of canvas on
the floor of the drive and drove the pick at random
into the quartz that stood up well, although it was
shattered in all directions.
We had sampled the drive in sections of ten feet,
had then roughly quartered each sample, packed it
in its bag?numbered for identification?and sealed
When he had finished every section of the level
Billy walked back into one of the crosscuts and
measured the width of the lode.
?She?s a beauty for size,? he said. ?Thirty feet
if it?s an inch. . . Let?s go down the winze. . .
Wait a minute. What about a sample from the
floor ? ? ?
?But you didn?t knock it down. All you knocked
down fell on the sapling sheet.?
?Never mind that. We?ll see what it?s worth.?
He scraped away half an inch of the surface and
smiled as he saw moisture in the debris below.
?Who would have expected water? Eh! hold the
bag, Harry. That?ll do. . . Now to No. 2.?
I climbed down the hundred feet of crazy Jacob?s
ladder and Billy Pagan lowered the tools and
sample bags, threw down the sampling sheet, and
followed slowly?holding the candle to the white
w'alls around him, scanning each point and crevice
of the rock.
?Won?t you sample the winze??
?Yes,? he said loudly?and then whispered,
?S-s-sh, this place carries sound like a railway tun-


nel. . . No; it?s not worth the smell of gold to the
acre.?
??But it?s the same stone as in the level.?
??S-s-sh?what if it is? We?ll sample number
two now, and then we?ll get away.?
The reef at the lower level showed the same char-
acteristics as the upper stone, but with fewer of the
laminated veinings that had distinguished the reef
at shallower depths. He sampled it quickly; and
then he took a sample of the floor, which the sampl-
ing sheet had hidden, bagged it -and sealed the bag,
enclosed the samples in two gunny bags and sealed
them. We carried them along the drive and to the
shaft; and as he prepared to ascend by the ladders
he handed me the last, half inch of his candle?
guttering tallowand sealing-wax, and nigh extinction.
?I?ll climb quickly and lower the rope for the
samples. Don?t take your eyes off the bags, Harry
?not for a moment.?
??Why?there?s no one here??
??There?s always somebody everywhere. . . keep
one eye on each bag. I won?t be long.?
He climbed out of the circle of candle-light and
into the half gloom of the shaft.
I looked at the bags as he had bidden, but the
eye wearied of them, and I must have been looking
at the candle-flame for some minutes when I was
conscious of the nearness of a man. There is a
sensation something approaching horror at the sud-
den consciousness of the espionage of an enemy;
and at the moment I must confess I was at least
disagreeably startled.
I turned swiftly, and there, in the entrance to
the drive, stood the sullen Hercules?his black


beard and piercing eyes more commandingly sinister
than usual; his left foot arrested suddenly in the
act of taking another step towards me.
?Hallo!? said I, astounded at finding him behind
me. ?How did you get here??
?Same way as you. Down the ladders to the hun-
dred foot and then down the winze, and along this
level.?
?But in the dark?? For I saw he had no candle.
?Yes; I know every stone in this show. . . You
finished sampling pretty slick.?
I did not immediately reply?l felt a new dislike
to him. This man who went wandering through a
mine and down crazy Jacob?s ladders in the dark
and then showed that he wished me to Believe that
he had taken the risks carelessly, motivelessly and
merely to pass the time, was not at all to my taste
or understanding.
?You got through the sampling in quick time,?
he said again.
?Yes,? I replied; then, ?Mr. Pagan is a quick
worker.?
?It isn?t fair to a mine to jump through it like
that,? he replied, plainly showing that the rapid
sampling had not been anticipated by him and had
disarranged his plans.
?Mr. Pagan doesn?t scamp his work,? I replied
with some warmth.
?More haste ?less speed, I think,? he said dog-
gedly; and then his eye suddenly flamed as he saw
the sampling sheet folded up, with all Billy Pagan?s
finnicky orderliness, on the bags. I saw the glance,
shifted the candle to my left hand, and prepared for
war.


??Under below,? called the voice of Billy Pagan
cheerily, and with feelings of relief I heard the
hook on the windlass rope strike metallically against
the walls of the shaft. There were two slings on
the hook. I slung the two bags of samples, called
to the men on top to ??haul away,? and as soon as
the samples were out of reach took the sampling
sheet over my shoulder, put the prospecting ham-
mer in my belt, blew out the candle and started for
the surface.
I expected Hercules, maddened- by his black and
silent rage, to wrench me from the ladder; and I
climbed through the half gloom with only one sensa-
tion, and that, the instinct to reach the good earth?s
surface quickly; but I had no need for fear. Her-
cules warred in no such open ways; I could hear
him muttering curses in the blackness of the drive;
but I was on the last ladder before he began to
climb.
Billy Pagan stood on guard over the bags; at the
mouth of the shaft Swainger, looking furtively
depressed and making his anxiety more apparent
by affecting an air of good-fellowship, deprecated
an immediate departure.
??Give the show a chance, Mr. Pagan,? he said.
??There?s another reef further over there.?
??But no work done on'it??
??Not as much as on this one ?just pot-holes.?
??Well, I don?t trouble to see them,? replied Billy
Pagan. ??My instructions were to sample a mine,
not pot-holes.?
?But you?d better wait and drive back in the cool.
Your horses are getting a bit of green feed, too.?


Billy Pagan smiled?he knew how much ?green
feed? there was in that drought-stricken wilder-
ness ; and then he suddenly snapped rather than
said, ?Green feed! Much more likely poison plant.
. . . Hallo! What?s that fellow doing with my
horses??
I looked in the direction of his gaze and saw one
of the over-tall youths stoning Pagan?s two greys.
They had halted to browse on the ridge'three hun-
dred yards from us, and the lanky youth attempted
to drive them on. Another minute and they would
have been driven down the ridge and out of our
sight in the gullies.
?Hey, you! Leave those horses alone,? Bi L
shouted; and at the sound of his voice the lanky
youth dropped behind a boulder and disappeared;
and the horses resumed feeding on the scanty salt-
bush.
Billy Pagan?s eyes glittered, but he. said no word
to betray the fact that his suspicions were aroused
to their highest pitch.
?Will you bring my horses back here, Harry,?
he said, quietly; and I threw the sampling sheet
on the bags. At sight of it Swainger?s eyes were
filled with murder.
As I turned to go the sullen face of Hercules ap-
peared at the mouth of the shaft.
* *
When I returned with the horses the group of
three at the shaft mouth were waiting in silence;
Hercules, with his strong, sullen head bent, reliev-
ing his passion by pulling fragments of stout chip
with fingers that seemed to be made of steel?so
hard and irresistible seemed their grip upon the


wood. Swainger, in doubt, glaring at the sampling
sheet; Billy Pagan, cool, calmly smiling his super-
iority in the struggle.
As I came up he said, ?Will you put the horses
in, Harry? The harness is in the buggy?; and, as
I* nodded acquiescence, his tone became stern as he
hailed the second lanky youth who hovered round
the buggy with an axle-nut wrench.
??Hey, you! What are you doing?
?Coin? to put a drop o? neatsfoot in the axle-
boxes,? replied the youth sulkily.'
??Well, why don?t you?? I, who knew him,
detected irony in the question ?irony that was sure
of the weakness of its opponent.
?Our wrench won?t fit,? said the youth, even
more sulkily than before.
?Won?t it? Well, there?s a wrench in the box
under the seat.?
The youth started towards it.
?Wait a minute?the box is locked.?
The youth stopped with an oath.
?Never mind?l?ll oil the axles myself. I like
greasy work. . . Come here, my lad.?
The youth slouched to the mouth of the shaft.
?Fake one of these bags, will you? I?ll take the
other.?
?I?ll carry one,? said Hercules with a little
badly-disguised eagerness in his voice.
?I won?t trouble you,? said Billy, soothingly, as
if he were merely careful that Hercules should not
overtax his strength. ?But you may carry the
sampling sheet.?
Hercules snatched up the carfvas and cursed in
a whisper as audible as a stage aside.


The little procession came to the buggy. Billy
Pagan stacked the bags in the front of the vehicle,
took his seat and put a foot on each bag. I handed
him the reins as Swainger came from the camp with
a bottle and glasses.
?No thanks,? said Billy; ?I never drink before
twelve. ?
?But it?s after twelve now,? said Swainger.
?I mean before twelve midnight, then.?
Swainger scowled, but affected to laugh off his
disappointment.
I fastened the traces to the bars and mounted
to the buggy beside the engineer.
He bore upon the reins to feel the mouths of the
horses and let them know the journey was begin-
ning. Then he shook hands with Swainger, thank-
ing him for the hospitality of the camp in the usual
set terms, and concluded to the lanky youth.
?Good-bye, sonny?l take the will for the deed
in the matter of greasing the axles. . . Good-b? ?
Hallo! Where?s your mate, Mr. Swainger??
Hercules had disappeared.
?In the camp, I think,? replied Swainger con-
fusedly.
?All right. . . Well, good-bye.?
He put the horses up to the collar as he spoke, and
the buggy moved.
?Good-bye, Mr, Pagan. . . Hey! You?re left
the sampling sheet.?
?Never mind. , . I?ll give it to you. You?ll find
it handy next time.?
If Swainger made reply he never heard it; the
beautiful team took us swiftly past the spurs of


gleaming quartz into the deep-milled dust of the
main track.
?So the mine?s a fraud, Billy??
?Fraud?s no name for it. . . And those fellows
would stick at nothing. That black scoundrel
sneaking after us in the dark; the murder in the
eyes of both of them when they saw the sampling
sheet, and knew that the little game of salting the
bottom edges of the drive was no good to them. . .
I knew when I saw the stone it was N.G. . . They
sunk that shaft on the strength of little rich leaders
that I could see at the surface had been payable. . .
Then they say, Well, here?s a boom. We?ll be in
it. We?ve got any quantity of stone, and we?ll
make the quality good enough. ... I don?t
grumble at them doing that. . . It?s all in the game
?their game; and it?s all in my game to crab them
if I can.?
?What are you hot about, then??
?Because they?ve done things that are not in the
game. They?d have thrown us both down that shaft
and the samples after us, only they hadn?t quite
enough courage for it. If we had shown the least
sign of fear we were done. But they couldn?t un-
derstand a man having sufficient front to laugh at
?em. And what clumsy liars! Swainger had come
along to measure up the work of the contractors,
and there?s no contractors there and not a foot of
work has been done for months. They tried to lose
our horses, didn?t they??and that long-necked
young thief wjio was monkeying round with a
wrench?trying to kindly grease the wheels and lose
an axle-nut or two. . . They?ve put my back up.


We?ve only two days to stop Harmer paying the
money to the other thief in London?less than two
days, because Australia is nine hours ahead of Eng-
land.?
??And where did the black ruffian go to??
??Did you see a cloud of dust away to the right ?
two miles back??
??Yes.?
??Well, I?ll lay a wager that was Mr. Hercules
rounding up his horses and galloping them back
to the English Flag.?
??They?ll follow us, then??
??My colonial oath they will. The game?s just be-
gun, but we?ll win it.?
??We! What do you get out of it, Billy??
His face hardened at that, and he replied almost
coldly: ??My fee?and so far as actual inspection
goes, it?s the easiest two hundred and fifty I ever
earned. ?
??But you?ll get it whether you beat these fellows
or not??
??Harry,? said Billy Pagan severely, ?I?m sur-
prised at you. You?re no sportsman!?
?Now, Mr. Manning,? said Billy, the night after
our arrival in Coolgardie, you please tell me
how you took your samples??
?In the usual way,? replied the older man, but
deprecatingly-??all along the drive diagonally in
six feet sections.?
?But you didn?t use a sampling sheet. All the
stone you broke down fell to the .floor and you
shovelled it up from there and then .quartered it.?
?Yes; but ?


?And the result is this. I?ve crushed and panned
all my samplings, and I can only get a few grains to
the ton. But I took a special sample of the broken
stuff along the side of the drive and I got twelve
ounces to the ton for one sample and fourteen oun-
ces for the other.?
?Good heavens! Then I was salted?
?You were.?
?I?m ashamed of myself. lam sick of myself.
I might have known by the character of the rock,
but I don?t trust my eyes, as I?m shortsighted.?
?It can?t be helped?you got an average of two
ounces for all the stone in sight, didn?t you??
?Yes ?two ounces.?
?Then we?ve just got time to stop the swindle. . .
Now don?t be downhearted. Nobody could doubt
your straightness.?
The old man smiled sadly.?? But I doubt my
own ability now, Mr. Pagan.?
?We must go now . . . Good-bye. See you
later . . . Off to the telephone office, Harry.?
The terminus of the telegraph line was twenty
miles further west, and from Coolgard?e telegrams
were sent by telephone to the operator at the ter-
minus at Pink Rocks.
Billy Pagan coded a cable that was translatable
thus : ?? Refuse to complete. The mine is an absolute
swindle?
We walked to the Post Office feeling very suc-
cessful and confident, but Billy Pagan stopped at the
entrance as Swainger?s figure disappeared within.


?They?re here, Harry?but they?re later than 1
thought. And what?s the good of them being here
now and cabling??
We entered. Hercules leaned against the wall
of the inner office and glared at us, drunkenly truc-
ulent.
Billy rapped at the wooden shutter of the telephone
room, and the clerk appeared and demanded our
business.
?I?ve got a cable I want sent right away.?
?Can?t send it till I?ve got this message through. ?
?And how long will that be??
?About two hours.?
?Two hours! Man, it must go through at once.
I?ll pay urgent rates.?
?It?s an urgent I?ve got on now, and it?s a long
message. ?
Billy thought a moment and then replied: ?All
right, I?ll come back in two hours. You must
arrange to break the long message if it?s not through
then.?
The clerk said ?All right,? and closed the shutter.
The telephone bell rang again?the voice of the
transmitter spoke again.
We left the office, Billy leading me into the scrub
beyond the office, and then by a detour back to the
Post Office, but at its side and not its front.
?Quiet,? he whispered; ?keep out of the ray of
the lamp. Now .. . crawl behind me.?
We crawled through a little belt of scrub and past
the piles of a building ?built, as usual, high from
the ground on zinc-covered piles to delay the rav-
ages of white ants.
We were under the Post Office


?Listen?Harry?what is it??
We listened and heard this :
?In the last summer number of The Clarion we
reviewed the Westralian discoveries by sea ? Have you
got that 2 eh. . . . IS'ever mind whether it?s rot or
not?this is the message and I?m being paid for it ??
By sea. Inseparably connected with the land discoveries
are the travels of John Forrest, Alexander Forrest , Eyre
Austin and others whose 'names we know and of that
great and nameless legion of explorers and prospectors and
adventurers who have beaten the ways for the little men of
the cities in all countries and at all times. And if there
is one thing that calls for the adventurous Australian s
gratitude it is ? Got that ?? ?
?Come away quietly,? whispered Billy, and know-
ing the uselessness of questioning him I backed out
silently after him.
He did not speak until we were well clear of the
scrub and near his camp again.
?What?s the game, Billy ? What does it all
mean? What is it they are telephoning?
?You?ll laugh at the idea. That was an article
out of the ?Clarion.? They are probably telephon-
ing the whole paper.?
?But what for??
?To hold the line, man. While they pay they
hold the wires, and I can.?t get my cable through.?
?But the cost??
?They cut that down by waiting until they saw me
leave Manning?s house. They?re probably only
telegraphing it as far as Fremantle, and what?s a
penny a word to fifty thousand for a shicer??
?So you?re beaten??


?Not yet ?the horses have had a day off. We?ll
yoke ?em up.??
?Where away now??
?To the telegraph station at Pink Rocks.
Can I ever forget the romance of the track that
night ?the beauty of the bush lying under the star-
light without a breath to ruffle it; the smoke of our
pipes curling up as incense; the ghostly track lying
coiled and mysterious through scrub and forest;
the horses enjoying their own rapid motion through
the cool air; the only sounds the occasional clicking
of shoe on shoe, the straining of the harness and the
silky rustling of tyres in the sand.
As we sped through the divinely soft air, he told
me my part of the programme.
?I?ll drop you at twenty miles out, drive the other
ten alone, get my cable away and drive back to
you.?
?But if the operator has started on the long mes-
sage he won?t stop it for the cable.?
?I won?t ask him to, but as there?ll be a sudden
interruption of communication with the place we?ve
come from, he?ll take my cable all right.?
I looked at him, and in the half darkness could
just see that he was smiling.
?You mean to cut the telephone wire??
?I mean that you shall. It?s half past twelve
now ?you mustn?t cut it till a quarter past two. I?ll
be in the office at Pink Rock then.?
?I see?that gives you an alibi.?
?Of course ?they?d suspect me at once if I first
cut a wire and then drive to the next office to get
a cable through.?


?I see ?all right, old man. How do I get up
the poles??
?There are no poles. Civilisation hasn?t come
along yet. The insulators are spiked to trees.?
?Good. And what do I cut the wire with??
?This.?
He pressed a fencing wire cutter into my hand,
and we drove on in silence and I dozed.
A touch brought me to consciousness, and I found
he had stopped the buggy.
?There you arc, old man. There?s the wire.
What?s your time??five minutes to one! Right.
I can do the ten miles by twenty past two, easy.
Cut at twenty past. Good luck, old man ?I?ll be
here again at four thirty, but it will be best for you
to walk west, and I?ll meet you sooner.?
?Good-bye, Billy, and good luck.?
We clasped hands. I lit my pipe and settled
down to waiting ?the buggy disappeared in the long
perspectives of the aisles of salmon gum.
?Can?t do it?l?ve got a long message,? said the
operator.
?All right, I?ll wait,? replied Billy Pagan, with
one eye on his sweating but still strong team at the
door, and the other on the telephone.
?It won?t be much good waiting unless you?ve
brought your blankets,? said the operator, laugh-
ing. ?Some crank up on the field has taken a
ninety-nine years lease of this ?phone. He?s sent
half The Clarion up to now?all except the illus-
trations?and I suppose when he?s through with that
he?ll start on Johnston?s Dictionary and poor Doctor


Watt?s hymns. Sorry to keep you, but I can?t help
it.?
?I know,? replied Billy; ?it?s not your fault.
Fire away. Give that lunatic asylum at the other
end another chance.?
?All right?you take it easily, anyhow'?Hello!
Are you there? Yes. Go on. What?s my last?
?Repeat? did you say? All right? Here you are ?
?Governor Denison writing to H. Labouchere of the
Colonial Office, respecting the formation of the first
New South Wales Ministry, said???
?Can you hear that? . . . Can you hear that?
Hello! ?Shake your battery . ? ? Oh, damn!?
Billy Pagan looked at his watch. It was fifteen
minutes past two.
At that moment I had climbed the tree and cut
the wire.
* * * *
In the early dawn I met him driving gaily through
the dewy bush, and he stopped the buggy to pick
me up, and laughed; and when he had me in the
buggy he laughed again, as at an excellent joke;
and called me his good mate and his blood brother
and many other pleasant things.
?Swainger will be on our track when they know
of the broken wire. I?m game to bet that he?s been
admiring through my window a dummy in the bed,
supposing it to be me.?
The wire must have been repaired the next day; for
twenty-four hours after we reached Coolgardie came
a cable for Billy Pagan and Its de-codation said this:
? Many thanks. We were on the point of paying.
'"Please make complete examination Jindahine mines and,
cable report.?


wL
W&mSSZL* ? ' w-fe ? OT
Hb ' n|
?I CLIMBED THE TREE AND CUT THE WIRE ?
Billy Pagan
Page 42




No. 3.? The Losses of the Loch Long.
It was on one of those memorable nights at Billy
Pagan?s house in Melbourne that I first heard of
Loch Long. Away from the strenuous fights of the
new rushes, but in almost as natural surroundings,
we sat in the glass-house that was conservatory and
quadrangle in one ?the electric lamps half hidden in
the palms and in the tree and elk-horn ferns gave a
tropical luxuriance to this house in the untropical
southern city; softening shape Into the indefiniteness
of shadow, and bringing with it half the silence of the
bush.
As we sat enjoying a fragrant weed, the maid an-
nounced a visitor.
?Who is it, Annie?? said Pagan to the maid.
?Can?t they leave me alone even at night? . . . Mr.
Lewson ?. . . Oh! All right. Ask him to come
here.?
A moment later there entered a slight, short man ?
old, certainly, but his face had preserved the defin-
iteness and strength of his prime.
?Glad to see you, Lewson. . . This is Mr. Fleet,
my old mate ... Sit down . . . Annie, the whisky
? ? . Don?t talk yet . . . Mrs. Pagan is singing.?
The last pure contralto note died away, and Mrs.


Pagan rejoined us, and after the introduction, Billy
lit his pipe anew and said to Lewson :
?Well!?
?I wouldn?t have bothered you to-night if the
matter had not been urgent. It?s about the Loch
Long.?
?You?re a director??
?No ?but I hold nearly a quarter of the shares,
and I?ll be on the board after next general meeting.
You know the mine?
?Only by hearsay?up in East Gippsland, isn?t
it??
?Yes ?on the eastern face of the Dividing
Range.?
?Big poor reef with rich leaders in it. Said to
be worth, with the specimen stone, an ounce all
through.?
?More! Bulk samplings made on my account gave
two ounces. That?s what decided me to plunge on
it.?
?And what do the crushings give you??
?A few pennyweights only?just payable. Cer-
tainly we get practically nothing of the rich leaders
that are being worked now.?
?The miners are stealing it then??
?They must be ?but we can?t drop on them.
We?ve sacked every man in the mine twice over . .
we change the men in the faces every week . . . but
it?s no use.?
?The gold wasn?t stolen from the battery, then??
?We are sure not. . . The manager of the mine <s
more a mill man than a mining man, and we?ll shift
him when I go on the board . . . The present direc-


tors are a set of fossils . . . but the manager is above
suspicion; he?s perfectly honest.?
??But not too smart??
??No ?he?s a slow coach and a very dull one at
that... You sec, the gold occurs in bunches in the
leaders. You might strike a bunch to-day and anoth-
er to-night, and then no more for a week, so as wc
don?t know when we?re coming on it we never know
when to guard it.?
??l sec . . . Anything else??
??Nothing?we?ve sent a detective up there. He?s
been there three months and discovered nothing.?
??l see.. .Well! What do you want me to do
about it? I?m no thief catcher.?
??Well ?I know how interested you get in any-
thing off the beaten track, and I thought you?d take
a commission to report on the mine for rpe.?
?And incidentally to find who the thief is??
?Yes?will you do it??
?I will?l?ll start to-morrow.?
?Oh! Will?going away again,? murmured Mrs.
Pagan, reproachfully.
?Only for a week, dear. ..and it?s all in the
game.? He regarded this argument as unanswerable,
and from long habit she had come to so regard it,
too.
?You?ll name your own fee, Mr. Pagan?? said
Lewson, rising to go. ?It?s a. very serious matter
for me. I?m up to my neck in it.?
?All right. I?ll call on you to-morrow and ar-
range it. Good night, Mr. Lewson.?
W hen Lewson had gone Billy walked to his wife?s
chair, and put his hand on her shoulder.
?lt?s only for a week, dear girl.?


?But I?m tired of all this, Will. Am Ito go the
next trip???
?Yes, you shall.?
?No matter where it is??
?No matter where it is ... as long as it?s reason
ably ?where.? ?
?There you are! As long as it?s ?reasonable?
again.?
?Reasonable or unreasonable, you shall go, then
. Will that do??
?Yes, dear.?
?Then it?s a deal.?
Two days later we halted our horses in the night
mists on the winding track at the summit of a pre-
cipitous mountain and looked down on the clouds
that hid the valley, the mines and the township of
Loch Long.
?And the gold still goes, Mr. Sweet??
The manager, a dark, thin-necked man, played
nervously with a piece of 'string as he replied :
?Yes, Mr. Pagan. We?ve tried everything. It?s
not stolen at the mill?it never gets that far. And
I can?t see how any of the underground men can
steal it; we?re very particular about the searching. *
?What do you do? Strip ?em of their mine togs
in one room and march ?em naked into the other,
where they keep their town clothes.?
?Yes, they walk fifteen feet naked; so the gold
doesn?t get out that way. . . You see the way the
gold occurs is favourable to the thief.?
?How does it occur ?in thin leaders running
across the reef??


?Yes, running diagonally. You may say that
when you get a leader in the low-grade quartz you
get rich gold?but it?s not always so. Sometimes
you get it stringing right through the leader; other
times in bits alone in the leader-like plums in a
pudding.?
?So that you can?t swear for two minutes to-
gether whether the gold is continuing or not??
?Y-e-es ?like that. Of course, we get some
specimen gold or I wouldn?t be able to pay expenses
?but we don?t get much of it. I?ve been below
and seen the leader in the face shining like a jewel-
ler?s shop; and I?d go away for an hour, and when
I come back they?re through it.?
?Well, give the thieves their due ?even an honest
man would come to the end of it in time.?
?I don?t mean that?but there?d be nothing to
show for it. We?ve searched the men and sacked
them; but we don?t get the gold.?
?What?s become of the men you?ve discharged??
?Most gone away ?some stayed in the town.?
?What doing??
The manager started.
?Gone into business, some of them?keeping
stores or hotels.?
?I see. Well, you?re sure the gold doesn?t pass
the searchers??
?I?ll swear it. I?ll eat all the gold the men get
away with.?
?H?m. . . I was told of a detective you had
here. Who is he??
?He was a miner before he joined the police,
and knows his business all right ?so we made him
shift boss. But he can?t catch them.?


What sort of a man is he??
??Very decent, quiet man. His name is Wilkin-
son.?
??Wilkinson; lives next door to my pub., doesn?t
he??
??Yes: do you know him??
??No. What shift is he on??
??Night shift this week ?day shift next week.?
??And you stop work from midnight Saturday to
midnight Sunday??
??Yes; no work in mine or mill for twenty-four
hours from to-night.?
??Then we?ll go through the mine this afternoon.
As we had yet two hours until lunch-time, we
crossed the creek; and Billy led me away up the
gorge until I called for mercy; and then we sat on a
great flat rock and looked down on the busy scene
of mine and township ?on crashing battery and on
head gears in almost continuous motion.
Billy pointed to the many buildings in course uf
erection in the crooked alignment of the main street
?to glaring white excavations for foundations on
the escarpment of the mountains.
??There are the losses of the Loch Long.?
?Where??
??All those buildings, the hotel we live in, have
been built of Loch Long gold. That paunchy pub-
lican used to be a tucker in the mine.?
?And are there others??
?Yes; and the game must still be going on.
They?re all in it.?
?Do you know whom I suspect, Billy??
?Whom??


?The manager.?
?The manager? Nonsense, man. Why suspect
him??
?He?s nervous and furtive, and he twiddled that
bit of string and thought before he answered us.?
?Sure proof of his innocence. This is a very dis-
quieting position for a manager. Supposing you
were a murderer ?do you mean to tell me that the
chances of detection would not so constantly occur
to you that you?d be prepared to be accused at any
moment? Whereas?if you were innocent', mere
surprise and sense of Injustice at being wrong-
fully accused would take all your self possession
away.?
?Yes?maybe.?
? Maybe? Is! No, the manager is as straight
as a die, but a bit of a fool. So we won?t let him
know that we?re going into the mine to-night after
they?re stopped work till to-morrow night.?
?Are we going below??
?We are, old. man. We?re going to find the
gentleman who is looting the Loch Long. Between
Saturday midnight and Sunday midnight is the only
time he has a chance to get away with the gold.
Other times no man is allowed below except miners
and they are searched whenever they go off shift.?
Our knowledge of the workings gained in the ex-
amination of the afternoon stood us in good stead
as a saver of time when, an hour after midnight, we
stood in the three hundred feet level of the Loch
Long and heard the dripping of water in the cross-
cut below us?five hundred feet from the surface.


?No good going down there,? said Billy as he
re-lit his candle at mine??they?re not on to the
lode yet, but they?re near it judging by the water
falling.?
?Where are we going now??
?North of the shaft. I had no excuse to go into
it this afternoon. And I?ll swear the south end will
tell us nothing.?
?What are you specially looking for??
?I?m looking for the hiding place of the week?s
gold, and, incidentally, for the gentlemen who are
coming to-night to bring It away.?
?To-night??
?Dead sure. The searching doesn?t give them a
chance to get rid of it, so they must hide it some-
where until Sunday morning. And they hide it
north of the shaft, where there is little work doing.
The other end is too busy for them to trust it there. ?
?Is it a certainty that there is any quantity of
gold to steal??
?Yes; this afternoon you saw rich gold in the
face of the two hundred level, didn?t you??
?Yes.?
?And when we returned on some excuse it was
still in the face, wasn?t It??
?Yes.?
?And yet not half the specimen gold represented
while we were there has come to the surface so far as
we know. And so they are all in the stealing. Other-
wise the show would have been given away long
ago.?
While talking we had advanced along the drive
south of the shaft. The light of the candles showed
us in drive and cross-cut a big body of hungry


quartz ?very little iron-stained or shattered ?solid
white and unvcined.
?A good place to hide gold in?this,? said Billy
??s-s-sh!?
From near by and overhead there came the sound
of a falling stone not much bigger than a walnut;
but in that dead silence it made a noise ridiculously
disproportionate to its size as it leaped from timber
to timber of an old winze we had just passed.
?The thieves, Billy?? I whispered. -
?No, I think not. Stones fall in mines like that
for no reason just as trees fall in the night.
S-s-sh?out with the light.?
We blew out the candles as other stones fell--
unmistakably caused by a human, this fall was?we
could hear the sliding c-r-r-r-eesh of a nail
studded boot as the man lost his footing on the
quartz splinters in the levbl above. In that silent
gloom it was blood-curdling. I thought of the
stealthy footfall of an assassin in the dark.
?Quick ?hold my coat,? whispered Billy.
I obeyed, and we walked noiselessly to the winze.
And, refracted from a light still further north, there
shone a little ray.
?Good business,? whispered' Billy. ?This is a
difficult job, Harry. There are no ladders in the
winze?but I told the manager to pull a tim-
ber out here and there in every winze where there
wasn?t a ladder. Feel for the gaps; and for the
love of Heaven, don?t fall. Now?climb.?
We began climbing in the corner of the winze
furthest from the ray. The gaps in the timber made
the climbing fairly easy. We had climbed almost
 the next level when my pipe slipped from m^


waistcoat pocket, bounded from timber to timber
and clattered into the level we had left. The light
vanished.
?Damn!? said Billy Pagan in a whisper. ?Quiet,
Harry?not a word?don?t move for a bit. S-s-sh,
hear that??
Far away I was conscious of a half-hard, half-soft
sound as of clothing drawn across living rock.
?Climb,? whispered Billy Pagan again.
* * * 
We stood in the two-hundred foot level, a wall
of glistening and unbroken quartz ?except for the
piercing of the drives and the winzes?below us,
about us ?north and east of us.
Billy held his candle at arm?s length and looked
disappointed. The chase had brought us to a dead
end. Before us was a cross-cut that had at last
come to the use of many cross-cuts that fail to show
payable ore. A rough padlocked door had been
fitted to it.
?What about that?? said I.
?No good, old man ?it?s a dead end, and they?ve
put a door on it and used it as a powder maga-
zine.?
And then, as I pointed to a candle-end still smok-
ing, there came again the sound of that sliding
c-r-c-reesh of iron and leather slipping on rubble;
and Billy Pagan cried, ?In the magazine.? He
ran to the door and opened it ?the padlock and
staple came away in his hand. The magazine was
empty.
He looked around for a moment and rushed to
the extremity of the cross-cut. In the southern
corner was a great hole leading almost vertically


upwards; the approach made easy by a talus of
quartz that had been broken out of it.
As we entered the opening and looked above we
were conscious of a shadow above us ?half climb-
ing, half running.
?That?s the man,?? shouted Billy. ?Stop or I
fire.?
There was no reply. But something black swoop-
Ed on us, extinguishing the light and leaving us
s truggling and almost terrified by the -suddenness
of the onslaught.
?Steady! Steady!? said Billy. ?He?s dropped
chaff bag on us, that?s all. . . Never mind the
lights?climb. It?s easy. This is a soft dig on
the footwall, and we can almost walk up it. Why,
the fellow has lit a candle again! Look at it??
A hundred feet above us gleamed a steady light.
We climbed to it rapidly, and then, in a moment, the
cool air was on my face and we were on the moun-
tain side, the masses of the bush around, and of the
night above, and the mysterious candle materialised
into a great star above the Loch Long.
?But we climbed three hundred feet down and only
two hundred feet up, Billy.?
?Easy enough. Look north ?the mountain rises
like a precipice behind us. A quarter of a mile off
?north of the shaft ?it?s three hundred and fifty
feet to the surface; here it?s only two hundred. . .
These thieves made the rise to the surface. They
wouldn?t have done it if that soft dig hadn?t been
there. . . Anyway, our man?s escaped. . . But
we II spoil his game for the night if you?re not
tired.?


I was not tired, and we smoked and watched till
daylight and then rolled boulders down the mouth
of the irregular shaft until we had it blocked by a
great stone caught in an angle eight feet from the
surface.
There was an indistinctly beaten track from the
hillside to the township. Peculiarly enough, it led
us to the stable of the Southern Cross Hotel.
A week of inaction passed, relieved only for Billy
Pagan by his long talks with Elsie Wilkinson, the
little daughter of the detective. He had bought
many books for her and had written to a book-
seller in Melbourne to send ?Alice in Wonderland.?
Pending its arrival, he had aroused her curiosity to
its highest pitch, refusing even to tell her the name
of the book and deepening the mystery with many
nods and smiles.
Her father, a bluff, outspoken, hearty sort of
man, seemed to regard the new friendship with
kindly eyes.
Meanwhile the work of detection had apparently
failed utterly. No man had since used the half-
blocked and Illicit rise to the surface from the old
magazine?our daily visits proved that. And still
the mill crushed on for its few pennyweights to the
ton, and the gold still disappeared.
?I?m at a dead-end,? said Billy Pagan to me one
afternoon, and then his face brightened as he saw
Elsie Wilkinson say ?good-bye? to her father, who
immediately descended the shaft he had climbed to
give her the two billy-cans she brought to the shaft
every day with his dinner.
?Hallo, Elsie.?


?Hallo, Mr. Pagan.?
?The book will be here to-morrow, Elsie.?
?Oh! Will it? I?m so glad. Where is it
coming from??
?Melbourne, Elsie.?
?I know Melbourne, Mr. Pagan?l was born
there. Mother often goes down now to see friends
of hers?but she never takes me.?
?She?s a nasty thing, isn?t she, Elsie?. . . Do
you bring all that for father to eat every day??
?Yes, Mr. Pagan; and sometimes he takes a bit
of lunch with him in the morning.?
?He must eat a lot, mustn?t he, Elsie??
?No, not at home. He eats very little at home,
and sometimes he sends back nearly all the bread I
bring him.?
?Does he? Well, trot along, dear, and you shall
have the book to-morrow.?
?What do you say to going below, Harry??
?I?ll go with you, certainly, old man,?
?Come along then?the shifts will change in half
an hour.?
In the southern end of the mine the three hun-
dred feet level, there was a silence broken by the
rattle of wheels as a loaded truck ran down the
grade to the shaft?the trucker crouching on the
coupling plate at the rear of the truck, gripping it
with hands and feet as an opossum grips a bough.
Near the end of the level was Elsie Wilkinson?s
father working with another man before an ore
pass. The drive was blocked by a great heap of
quartz fragments and fines that had come from the
ore-pass, and this heap Wilkinson and the miner
weie shovelling into trucks to be sent to the mill.


The iron door of the ore-pass was raised a little.
From within came the sounds of a bombardment
as ore fed into the shoot fifty feet above plunged
through the emptiness and struck the iron door.
Billy?s irritable thoroughness could not bear the
neglect that produced this result.
?That?s bad mining,?? he said to Wilkinson.
Why don?t you work that ore-pass full? As
you?ve got it now you?d tear the timbers to pieces
in a week.??
?She got jammed,? replied Wilkinson; ?I had
to let it all out, but I told these fellows above to
stop using it till I had her mended.?
?What do you want to mend??
?The inside of the door; it got bent so that i
wouldn?t work.?
?I see ?so long, Wilkinson.?
?Good-day, sir,? said Wilkinson, as he returnee
to his work.
Billy Pagan, on leaving the drive, seemed to hav
lost the semi-apathy of the past week.
?Up to the two hundred feet level now, Harry
We?re near something, I think.?
Arrived at the second level, he sent a note to th
manager asking that the damaged ore-pass shoul'
not be used again that day; received a reply tha
it had not been used for days; and then we climbe'
down through the stopes to an intermediate level
where was the opening of the ore-pass.
?S-s-sh, Harry. Go quietly. . . We have
teen minutes before the change of shift.?
We sat in the darkness by the mouth of the 01
shoot ?then there was a movement as of a m
climbing the timber; deep-drawn breathings of ardi


ous endeavour ?a halt, silence, the sound of a match
being struck; and then a shaft of yellow light cross-
Ed our vision.
?Don?t 100k ?lie close,? whispered Billy Pagan.
There was the sound of timbers being displaced,
then the climbing re-commenced, a hand swept over
the timbers not two feet from us, the sounds of
descent succeeded; then my companion threw a
small piece of quartz into the ore pass, evidently
with the intention of frightening the mysterious
visitor. It had this effect; there was the sound of
timbers being forced back into position; the light
was extinguished in an instant; we heard the re-
treating noises of descent; fifty feet below us the
iron door of the ore pass sank home in its grooves;
and the footsteps in the three hundred feet level
retreated to the shaft. At that moment many steam
whistles blew the signal to change shifts.
?Four o?clock,? said Billy. ??Let?s go up to the
No. 2 and then to surface. Strike a light, Harry.
We?ve got the plant, I?ll swear.?
As I lit the candle he put his hand into the mouth
of the ore shoot and felt carefully in the corner op-
posite to that the stranger in the ore-pass had
searched. He uttered an exclamation of pleasure
and withdrew his hand.
?Look, Harry! I knew there was some in the
other corner?that is why I threw the stone in to
frighten him away. ?
I looked and saw three specimens of golden
quartz and less of quartz than gold.
What?s the idea, Billy? How do they work the
scheme??-


?The manager says this ore-pass is not in use with
his knowledge. All the gold that Wilkinson
doesn?t get ??
?Wilkinson??
?I suspected him this afternoon when he made
that excuse about working the ore-shoot loose and
backed it up with a lie. .. . The gold he doesn?t
get is planted in the top of this shoot by
his accomplices. Every man in the mine may be
in it, for all I know. His plant is somewhere in the
shoot. We?ll find that later, and it?s protected in
the best way; for, unless he has emptied the ore-
pass to get at the gold?to take it away or add to it
?he keeps the shoot full of ore. . . She?s a mine all
right, if the Company got all the gold. There?s
fifty pounds? worth in this little lot.?
In the changing room we watched the solemn
farce of searching?the naked men walked gravely
from one room to another; the virtuous look of the
manager at the conclusion of the searching, as of a
man whose duty was nobly done.
And after dinner that night we descended to the
intermediate level and entered the ore-pass, and
found a chamber in the roof masked by timbers that
easily slipped aside and gave us entrance. The
chamber was big enough for two men to sit in, and
its floor was covered with a beautiful costly carpet
of gold ?gold in nuggets; gold hingeing fragments
of quartz together; gold in crystals; and, most won-
derful of all, a thirty ounce piece in the shape of a
pig, even to the ears, but without a tail.
?The golden pig,? said Billy Pagan; ?isn?t it a


beauty. There?s five thousand pounds here and
more, Harry.?
?Five thousand??
?Sure ?not a penny under it. Be careful; leave
no marks to show them the plant is known. We?re
not finished yet. . . ?
?What?s the next thing??
?To find how they take the gold out of the mine
since that little rabbit burrow of theirs has been
discovered. And now I?ll put my considering cap
on. . . .?
Next afternoon Billy came to me smiling the smile
of a man who is able to say, ?I told you so.?
?Anything new??
?Yes, it all works well. That ore-pass was filled
again early last night.?
?What??
?Yes; and it will be empty again at half-past three
this afternoon. And it?s three now. Hallo, Elsie!
Come in.?
?Did you get the book yet, Mr. Pagan??
?It will be at the post office now, Elsie. . . Just
going back with father?s dinner things??
?Yes. . . If I run home quick and come back,
will the book be here then??
?We can do better than that, Elsie. Leave your
billycans here and go to the post office and get my
mail and the book. And when you bring the letters
here I?ll give you the book.?
The comely face flushed its excited gratitude?
she placed the billycans on the office table, and,
without waiting to say another word, ran off through


the scrub along the foot-track that led to the main
street of Loch Long.
As soon as she had disappeared Billy Pagan took
the lids off the cans and said as he looked intc
them ;
?A marvellous tricky appetite, Mr. Wilkinson has,
and a nice stomach. He keeps bread and sausage in
billycans to protect them from heat and dust, and
then he can?t eat and sends all the tucker back as it
came. ?
He lifted the top of the loaf and it came away in
his hand ?he gave me the can and I saw that the
loaf had been hollowed out and filled with gold;
from the other can he took a German sausage and
broke it in two, finding it only a skin filled with
small nuggets of the size of beans.
?The skunk ?using the little child to run the
blockade for him.?
?She doesn?t know, you think??
?I?ll swear she doesn?t; the scoundrel has used
her without her knowledge to get the gold away
safely. That child has been taking away eighty
pounds a day under our very noses.?
?What?s next, Billy??
?I?ll call the manager . . . there he is . . Mr.
Sweet, I think I can bowl out the thief to-day. . .
Will you send for that detective you have working
below, Wilkinson??
?Certainly ?you don?t want me do you?? enquir-
ed the manager with ill-concealed anxiety.
Amusement flickered over Billy?s face, but he
replied, ?No, if you?d rather not,? and, with a ges-
ture of relief, the manager disappeared.
?Is he in it, too, Billy??


?No; not for a pennyworth. But he?s a nice
quiet old gentleman, and he doesn?t like any noise
or unpleasantness ?so he keeps out of it. I don?t
blame him. He?s built that way. But he?ll have
to resign. He?s too neglectful in the matter of
billycans. And every man in the mine shall go as
well. They?re all in it.?
Wilkinson entered, smiling?then he saw the two
cans on the table before Billy, and his face went
livid.
?Now then,? said Billy sternly??you?re a detec-
tive, and you?re given a special screw and only ask-
ed to play at working while you?re catching gold
thieves. And you can?t go straight ?you?re the
worst thief of the lot.?
?I?m sorry I did it,? replied Wilkinson. ?This is
the first I took, and I?ll never take another ounce.?
?Don?t lie to me. You?re the man I chased up
that burrow from the magazines at No. 2. . . You
needn?t look innocent. . . Make a clean breast of
it, man.?
?I never took an ounce except this.?
?Tell me that lie again and I?ll force you to take
those cans and carry them from the changing room
when you?re stripped. And I?ll bowl you out before
everybody in the show.?
?This is the first I took anyway,? persisted Wil-
kinson stubbornly.
?Man! Don?t lie. What do you think has saved
you so far? Only the little girl you?ve used to help
you in thieving . . . you skunk, to try to dirty a
little angel like that ... it?s no use denying any-


thing. I was at the mouth of the ore-pass from the
intermediate South when you were in the pass. . . .
That makes you change your tune, doesn?t it? Is
the shoot empty yet??
??Just emptying,? replied Wilkinson sullenly.
??What are you going to do with me??
?I think gaol, Mr. Wilkinson.?
All the sullenness left the detected thief
??For God?s sake don?t jug me, Mr. Pagan,? he
pleaded. ?I?ll give you all the gold. It?s in the
hole over the ore pass.?
?That?s very good of you. I know about it al-
ready. . . I want the gold that?s in your house.?
?I have none there.?
?You have ?you?ve a big swag there. . . You
make me tired, man. . . You haven?t got rid of it
yet, you know. . . . Your wife hasn?t been to see
her friends in Melbourne for seven weeks.?
?All right ?I?m licked. . . I?ll give It all up.?
?And leave the mine to-day??
?All right, sir.?
?And resign from the detective force to-morrow.
I don?t believe in setting a thief to catch a thief.?
Wilkinson winced, but he recovered himself quick-
ly and with some triumph, as having been able to
anticipate his adversary in something.
?I sent in my resignation last week.?
?Ah!? said Billy Pagan slowly ?You?ll prob-
ably find hotel-keeping more profitable.?
Wilkinson winced again.
Elsie danced in with the package of letters and
the book; and Billy having written her name in it
kissed her again and dismissed her with her father.


?Go home with her, Wilkinson, and thank your
stars that she protects you. . . . No funny busi-
ness about the swag?every pennyweight mind
you.?
?There?ll be no funny business, sir.?
?Take him away, Elsie; and tell him that when
men are given little girls like you, it?s to bribe them
to be good.?
?My daddy is good now,? said Elsie, kissing the
hand of the depressed thief. ?And so are you, Mr.
Pagan.?
?Good-bye, Elsie. I want the swag to-night,
Wilkinson. Read ?Alice? to-night, Elsie, and
we?ll talk about her to-morrow.?
We had stored the gold of Wilkinson?s cache in
the office safe; and that night he brought over four
hundred ounces to Billy?s bedroom.
?You?ve compounded a felony, Billy,? said I.
?I know. . . . but I?ve got nearly seven thousand
pounds worth of gold that the Company might not
have seen the lot of had I prosecuted.?
?I pity him in a way.?
?Pity nothing. He was sent there as a detective
and he organised a conspiracy of thieves. He must
be three or four thousand pounds ahead on it. You
know that pub they are excavating foundations for
near the Loch Long West??
?Yes.?
?Well?that?s the property of Mr. Wilkinson.
Esquire. But if I had followed him for all I?d have
got nothing.?


?And there was Elsie,? said I with some slyness.
?Oh! hang it. I?m only human . . . and she?s a
nice kid, Harry.?
?Nice kids should not prompt the compounding
a felony.?
?I love kids,? said Billy Pagan reflectively, look-
ing at the solitary star that cut the darkness in cruci-
form above the burrow on the Loch Long.


No. 4. ? The Pegging of the South
Republic.
?So the warden gave the decision against us to-
day, Billy,? said I, as we sat on the verandah of his
house at the foot of the Dividing Range.
?Not exactly against me,? replied Billy Pagan?
?it?s an open verdict. He couldn tdo less than he
did 6n the evidence, but he showed that he didn t
believe Blackett; and, as 1 admitted the informality,
he could do nothing else but throw open all the
leases in dispute.?
?The blocks are to be thrown open again at mid-
night on the fifteenth. Aren?t they, Billy?
?Yes ?sixteen days from now.?
We were riding-slowly along a rain-swept road
of clay slate that made an almost continuous slide
for the horses on the descending grades.
The packhorses, laden with camp guar, sagged
ahead, exhibiting the cunning of a wilderness of
monkeys in their attempts to break away into the
bush, outflank us, and return to their stables.
Billy Pagan galloped through the bush in pur
suit of the loiterers, and drove them back to the


business of the track with hair-raising blows of the
terrible stockwhip.
?There you are,? said he, pulling his sweating
horse into a walk beside mine, when he had left
his home three miles behind. ?They?ll settle down
to it now.?
?They ought to, Billy, They?ve had the father of
a beating.?
?They deserved it. My word, it?s hot, isn?t it?
The rain seems like molten lead.?
He threw open his oilskin cape as he spoke. But
for the oilskin we were dressed as for the dry sea-
son, skirt, pants, leggings and boots ?the weather
of the monsoon made us wish to ride naked. We
camped in the rain, and slept it in, buf for an oiled
calico roof and fence we carried on the packhorses;
and every morning were wetted to the skin by rea-
son of hunting the horses through long, rain-drench-
ed scrub and spear-grass.
?It isn?t pleasant,? said Billy, who never grum-
bled at anything the track might bring him. ??Wet
through by hot rain from the outside and cold sweat
from the inside?there?s not much joy in this.?
On the second day we left the mountains and des-
cended to long, heavy clay plains, where a
horse hoof made a hole as big as a bucket bottom ?
and every horseshoe accumulated a wad of mud and
leaves until the animals walked as if they were web-
footed.
In the afternoon we came to a swollen river-
dangerous as much by reason of snags and boulders
as for its depth and swiftness, and there we dis-
mounted, and tightened the packstraps over the


burdens of the packhorses, already protected from
the rain by their waterproof covering.
Then in the driving rain we stripped, fastened
clothes and boots and revolver In the waterproof
capes, binding them tightly to keep the water out.
Billy Pagan drove the packhorses Into the water,
swimming to them when, quivering their fear of the
flood, they took refuge on an island, and flogging
them into the water again. When they had safely
reached the other side he swam back to me, shook
himself like a water dog as he landed and laughed.
?Enjoying it, Billy???
?My oath! The struggle was fine. But there?s a
bad snag down there. Keep above the island.?
We four took the water together, each man swim-
ming with one hand holding the bridle on his horse?s
crest ?the water boiled round us at the eddies, but
we swam on without a break and landed safely. The
contents of the oilskins were not wetted ?the rain
fell unceasingly, and Billy, after filling and lighting
his pipe, said : ? Fine to be naked in the rain, isn?t
it ??
I answered affirmatively, but without warmth. I
had not the wonderful capacity for enjoyment of
sensation that my friend had.
?You get every minute out of life, Billy.?
?I know I do?l try to, anyway. And look here,
Harry, there?s a big swamp ahead; and the oilskins
are stuffy wearing. Let?s ride naked and keep the
clothes dry for camp to-night.?
I agreed to the extent of riding in trousers, leg-
gings and boots ?stripped to the waist; but Billy
rode on in the ?altogether,? his clothes strapped
to the pommel before him, the horse enjoying the


rain after the cold of river as much as did his rider.
They careered along joyously, rounding the pack-
horses back to the track, splashing through the
little pools in the long grass and covering both beast
and man with mud wheneve? the galloping hoofs
found a puddle.
I rode after the centaur and the packhorses, and
caught them In twenty minutes. Billy turned in the
saddle and laughed in sheer boyish joy of living.
His hair and moustache were sodden with water;
he blew a straggling cloud from a pipe that splut-
tered in the moisture of the air; the rain fell un-
ceasingly ; the horses covered the plain at an rasy
canter ?it was all very merry. And then we met
the swamp.
It lav between two gentle rises of spewy country,
deceptively grassed, but betraving its real character
by the frequent belts of wild apple trees ?so cal?ed
because the trunk and leaves are something of the
apole kind, though It grows never an apole nor any-
thing like an apple. Before us lay this morass?
grassed in hummocks, to deceive the stranger Into
a belief of the existence of firm ground. The pack-
horses entered it, began to sink In the black, steam-
ing, evil-smelling stew; struggled for a foothold, and
sank deeper.
Billv slipped from the horse, took his boots and
leggings from the swag at the pommel, and put
them on. I dismounted also and tied the horses
to an apple tree; and followed my mate into the
swamp. The ground held until we were within ten
feet of the horses ?then Billy shouted a warning to
me and disappeared.


I threw myself flat on the hummocks By the stink-
ing mud bath and, as his head came above the surface
of the centre of the hole where was the water, I held
out my hand and he clutched it, drew himself to the
hummocks, dashed the mud from his face, and
laughed again as if it were all a joke.
?A glue-pot, isn?t it, old man? We?ll have to
get to them another way. I ought to have known
but I went out of the Republic by the Lead Valley
track last time.?
?You?re as black as a nigger, Billy.?
?You?ll be black, too, before we?re finished. Bet-
ter strip and we?ll get these horses out.?
We made for the firm ground again, and I strip-
ped. We took the horses? neck ropes and fastened
them to the nearest shrub and entered the swamp in
the way the packhorses had gone, sinking to our
middle in the ooze.
It was weary work; but Billy laughed through it
all, and swore cheerfully at the horses, and, after
we had unloaded them and carried or thrown the
gear and stores piecemeal to the firm ground, we
fastened the neck ropes to one packhorse after an-
other, and encouraged and flogged and bullied and
cheered them until they plunged out of the swamp.
It was a long detour to skirt the spewy ground,
but it was done at last, and we were camped before
dusk on the right side of the barrier.
In the little township sponsored by the Republic
Copper Mine there were alarums and excursions and
whisky ; rain, mud, niggers, pretending anxiety to
cut regulation pegs for the new pegging out order-
ed by the warden; intending peggers boasting of the


success they knew would be theirs; threatening
jumpers relying on existent illegal rights; whisky;
drunkenness; steaming men arguing in the rain ;
steaming melancholy horses standing on three legs
in the attempt to rest the fourth; waggons bogged to
the axles; profane teamsters; and again ?whisky.
?It wants some sorting out, doesn?t it?? said
Billy Pagan to me, as, from the little room off the
bar, we watched the wild displays of the energy of
the men ?accentuated by the comparison of the des-
pairing attitudes of the leg-wearied cattle.
?You?re only going for one block, Billy??
?Yes; it isn?t mine. I?ve got Jepson?s power of
attorney. He pegged the Republic South but didn?t
post his notices on the lease in the statutory time;
and on the strength of that and the perjury of Blac-
kett, who tried to jump Jackson?s application, there
are disputes all over the field. The warden is quite
right from his point of view?but it?s too strong
throwing all the disputed leases open again for peg-
ging.?
?I sec. The Law has failed, and now each man
is his own law.?
?That?s it. You know the Queensland regula-
tions? They?re the same as any of the other States.
You put in a regulation sized peg?six feet high by
three inches diameter?at each corner of your lease
and dig a trench like an L at each corner, using
the peg as a centre. Then you stick a notice on
the datum peg of intention to apply for the ground,
and ride to the warden?s office and make the applica-
tion.?
?I know. But in ordinary applications the first
pegger is given plenty of time to apply; the ground?s


his if he can prove he was the first man to put his
pegs in, even if he isn?t the first man who applies.?
11 1 hat?s all right under ordinary conditions, old
man, but these are different. There?ll be a dozen
men waiting for midnight to-night, each one of them
with his trenches dug and his pegs ready to drop in;
and when pegging is as close as that the man who
gets to the warden?s office first and puts in the first
application will be the man who gets the ground.?
?I see. And what?s our programme??
??Our pegs are ready and our trenches dug. But
that?s nothing. I was over on the leases this morn-
ing, and the whole country is furrowed like a field.
But I don?t expect many to trouble our lease. The
principal trouble will be on the north endbecause
township rumor, which knows very little, says the
north end is the most valuable. Our principal
trouble will come from one man.?
Blackett??
??l don?t think he?ll come here. He?s afraid of the
other leaseholders. It?s really his perjury which has
caused all the leases ?except, of course, the Repub-
lic itself?to be thrown open, and all straight men
hate the jumper as they hate an informer. No;
Blackett won?t turn up?but he?ll send somebody,
and the man he sends will stop at nothing?that is.
if I know Blackett.?
??And what am I to do, Billy??
??We?ll go together and do the pegging, leaving
our horses tied up, I want a witness, but once
you?ve seen me put the first peg in and take the
time, you go to the horses and wait.?
??All right; anything else??


?Not now ?I?m in the dark, too; I don?t know
how things will go.??
The landlord entered, bringing with him a grosa.
good-humoured man ?wonderfully agile of thought
and speech and movement for his weight.
?This is Mr. Pagan,? said the landlord.
?Mr. McCaw wants to talk to you, Mr. Pagan.?
The new-comer wasted no time. He advanced,
shook Billy?s hand warmly, and then mine, but
not quite so warmly ?as if he recognised at a glance
my comparative unimportance.
?Very pleased to meet you, Mr. Pagan,? said
McCaw in a strong Yankee accent, ?Just?s well
to tell yew that I represent Mr. Blackett. We?re
going to fight yew, but we?ll fight yew fair.?
?Very glad to see you, Mr. McCaw,? replied
Billy. ?You talk fairly, but I don?t expect fair
fighting from Blackett, It is his unfair fighting
that makes this re-pegging necessary.?
McCaw answered loudly, as if he had been drink-
ing, and his words proved the supposition. ?Yew
and your friend will have a snifter ?long o? me, Mr.
Pagan ?now ?no details. ?Tain?t the fashun of the
country. Hey, Landlord! Rye for me an? Scotch
for me friends ?I guess Scotch??
?Yes,? said Billy, and I nodded.
?It?s a strange country this, Mr. Pagan. I been
out West in God?s country ?the States, yew know ?
I been out in the sagebush country ?I been out in
the alkali country an? never lorSt myself?though
there was a plain there as big as the Atlantic
an? ?bout as same. Not a tree ?not a stone ?not a
landmark . . . and I didn?t lose myself, no! By
Christopher, I didn?t . . .but I got bushed twice


down on them plains by the Big Scrub. . . There?s
forest one side of yew an? primeval forest on the
other side. . . and it?s just like travellin? between
fences; an? yet I got lost there ?couldn?t see myself
any morc?n yew could see a little dorg in tall grass.
Here?s another thousand a year, Mr. Pagan.?
?Good luck,? said Billy, and drank.
?But I got a horse?s big as a locomotive an? as
fast as the Noo York express. So I?m fittin? fair,
Mr. Pagan, an? I guess my horse ?nil carry me home
to Dixie where the warden lives before any other
man has passed Lead Valley.?
?I?ve got a fair mount myself,? said Billy care-
lessly. ?I won?t be far behind when you?re at the
warden?s office.?
?We?ll see ?Mister ?we?ll see.? He lit a big
cigar and nodded his head oracularly.
?I think I?ll write a bit before tea-time,? said
Billy, rising.
?Right yew are, Mr. Pagan; I?ll take a camp my-
self.? He smiled as he said it, taking it for granted
that Billy?s excuse of letter writing covered a desire
to sleep as preparation for the work of the long
night.
But when we were alone my mate showed that
McCaw?s guess was as far from the truth as his
own excuse.
?What?s up now, Billy??
?Well, what do you think of McCaw??
?I don?t like his frankness.?
?Nor I. His brag about the horse I believe in.
I heard that Blackett had the quickest thing in
horseflesh of all the North. But he mentioned Lead
Valley. Now Lead Valley?s the longest road.?


?Well, if he means to take the Apple Tree Swamp
road we?ll take it too; it?s the shortest, even with
that detour round the spewy country.?
?And lose time in the hills blundering about in the
dark to find a track? No, old man ?the long road
for us. He means to take it too. He said that he?d
go by Lead Valley so that we might try Apple Tree
Flat. Well, if he likes racing in the wet season he
shall have It.?
The rain-blurred night was stained by the red and
molten slag that flowed In broad ribbons down the
dumps by the smelters of the Republic. An arc-
light, surrounded by whirling moths, shimmered
above the smelter floor; the half darkness was
barred by the dull red stream of copper flowing into
the fore hearth ; along the black and level floor the
slagwheelers wheeled the slagpots through the tepid
rain, dim as shadows, except for the circle of the
miniature lake of red in the slagpots ?a lake that
became a cataract of metallic fire as it plunged down
the dump.
We skirted the dump?our horses going gingerly
on the vitreous splinters?Billy?s chestnut snorting
in fear of every discharge of slag.
?Steady, Oxide! Steady!?
?Is the Republic a big mine, Billy??
?Not a big lode. About six feet wide?but a
beauty for quality. They?re putting through two
hundred tons a day of ten per cent, copper. And
there?s good silver value, too.?
?Has Jepson done any work on the show we?re
re-pegging to-night??




I ffvjgy l?y ?? ? '
I 'MEsS 'afeii?fvr /$*<<? ,;V ' ? KJi^H
iM IdMBb * i|JH-V l t '? \ .JijLjA&f m ?
VI ? iBil
? WB ENTERED THK WATER.?
Billy Pagan
Page 84


?Nothing- much?a shaft down fifty feet in a big
lode ?but very poor quality !?
?Then it mightn?t be worth all this trouble??
?Mightn?t. But it might. And, anyhow, on its
position alone its worth a few thousands. . . Steady,
Oxide! What?s up with you? You?d shy at your
shadow to-night.?
It was as if the horses felt the strange presence
of man through all those humid solitudes ?not the
familiar man who sits in his camp at night; but of
a man abroad at the work of the day. The heavy
saturating rain could not disguise it. We felt, with
the sharpened senses that belong to the men of the
bush, the subtle sensation of being nigh to an army
or an army?s work.
And then my horse stepped on a rounded pole that
slid from under him; and, as his near forefoot
slipped into a trench, he sweated the terror of his
surprise.
?Pegs and trenches,? said Billy??there?ll be a
potato field here to-morrow. Twenty men are peg-
ging the one lease at different angles.?
?Will there be many pegging the South Repub-
lic??
?A few men who will peg for blackmail without
any intention of applying, but we are only fighting
Blackett. ?
?Or McCaw??
''''And McCaw. . . Stop here, Harry?we?ll tie
the horses up; and as soon as I?ve got a peg in
you streak back here and hold the neddies ready.?
We dismounted and tied up the horses to a gum;
then Billy, guiding himself by the direction of the
bght on the headgear of the main shaft of the Re-


public, walked west and I followed him. In a hun-
dred yards he stopped, struck a match, and lit the
candle of a lantern made of an inverted brandy-
bottle with the bottom knocked out of it.
?Here we are; there are the pegs and here?s the
trench. Let?s see your watch, Harry. Five min-
utes to twelve. . . You can put this peg in, in the
dark, can?t you??
?Yes.?
?Well, on the stroke of twelve drop in the peg
and go back to the horses. Tie the notice on now.
Here?s the string. . . There?s McCaw?s trench
nearly overlapping ours. . . And look at the others!
Why, it?s a potato field, not a mine.?
He held up the bottle lantern, its candle splutter-
ing as a raindrop caught the wick; there was
McCaw?s trench by ours, and as far as the eye could
reach were other pegs and other trenches?showing
whitely between the scrub and gum belts ?scarring
the bush like livid wounds.
Billy?s gaze followed the candle ray back to its
source. He looked on the ground immediately be-
neath him and said :
?It?s more than I hoped. I have a better start
than I thought.?
?How??
?McCaw will make his datum peg here too, so
that, if we start level to the minute, I can beat him
in the pegging, because I start at the south-western
peg and you at the north-western ?and the north-
western is our datum.?
?But where are they all, Billy?. . . It?s two min-
utes to twelve.?


?Ours is standard time?post office time and war-
den?s office time, isn?t it??
?Yes ?to the tick.?
He laughed. ?And they?re all going by the pub-
lic house clock. It?s comfortable and dry in the
pub., and they won?t turn out till they?re forced. . .
McCaw will find it out when he looks at his wa?tch.
?Find out what??
He laughed again. ?The public house clock is
twelve minutes slow. . .?
Good for us!?
?But I didn?t mention it. . . I?m too modest to
go through the world correcting everybody?s clock.?
I laughed at that; and he continued, ?Time?s up.
Drop the peg in as soon as I?ve gone.?
I took the peg in my hands ?he walked away with
the flickering lantern ?the darkness and the rain
closed on me. The mine whistle sounded the signal
for the change of shifts. I felt the peg for the
notice of application, found that it was tightly bound
to the peg and secure though wet with rain, dropped
it in the hole and drove it home with McCaw?s toma-
hawk, and, with the same well-found tool, piled the
dirt from the trench round it and rammed it hard.
I stood for a moment tomahawk in hand, and in
that moment the bush was full of men hurrying
north, south, east and west ?curses, shouts, revolver
shots fired in the air as signals tore the quiet of the
rain.
There were men still hurrying up the hillside?
slipping men cursing at the rain?frightened horses
snorting at the madness of efforts around them; the
new shift began trucking ore from the main shaft
to the smelters and an arclight on the high, raking


tramway hummed for a moment and showed the
great outcrop of garnet rock in the centre of our
re-pegged lease, blackened by the shadows of swiftly
moving men. Then the light was extinguished; the
men settled down to driving pegs furiously and rak-
ing out trenches with the energy of madmen; the
irresistible bulk of McCaw drove against me out of
the darkness, cursed me and threw me staggering
over the furrows. I made a misstep in a trench; and
as I lay on my back the arclight shone again; and
McCaw, wrenching from the ground the peg I had
driven home, threw it at me. Even in that moment
I felt inclined to shout my thanks that he had thrown
the peg at me, and not into the darkness of the bush
behind him, where I might not easily have found it.
1 rose, carrying the peg. He came to meet me,
grinning malevolently; as if, by reason of his super-
ior strength, he suspected an easy conquest.
I struck at him with the peg, and he choked down
the pain, but dropped his arm as if it were paralysed ;
and while I hesitated to strike another blow, Billy
Pagan?s voice said:
?Put the peg in again, Harry, . . No funny busi-
ness, McCaw, or I?ll shoot.??
Under cover of the revolver, I rammed the peg
again while Billy talked.
?I haven?t got this revolver drawn to stop you
pegging, Mr. McCaw, only to protect my mate. . .
You?ve got a right to peg as well as we have, and
I?m not big enough to interfere with the law.?
He lowered the revolver as I stepped away from
the peg and said, finally: ?You can pull that peg
out as often as you like now, Mr. McCaw; two of
us can swear to the pegging.?


?Damn you,? said McCaw!??you put the clock
back.?
?You lie. . . 1 don?t play those games. . . 1
leave them to you and Blackett. Take your gruel
kindly, man?you?re beaten.?
?Am I?? said McCaw. ?Am I? By the Holy,
I?ll lick you yet!?
We laughed at him as he drove home his own
datum peg; and then we turned back to the place
of the horses.
?You got round the pegs quickly, Billy.?
?I ran all I knew. . . I think I ran while I was
putting the pegs in. . . I?m caked with mud from
my eyebrows to my boots. . . Fell into holes and
fell out again. . . Tumbled over rocks and scarcely
stopped to pick myself up. . . broke the bottle lamp
over the first rock and then barked my shins even
unto seventy times seven.?
?Good man. You?re a jewel, Billy.?
?Where are the horses??
?I left them tied up here,? I replied in hopeless
bewilderment.
?McCaw has planted them. This is his trump
card. Shall we go back to him??
?No fear ?they can?t be far away. We?ll try
every belt of trees in Queensland. We won?t be
licked.?
We walked thirty yards or so west and entered
the first belt. And at the sound of our footsteps on
the fallen bark Billy?s chestnut welcomed us softly?
the welcome a horse in his stall gives to the man
who comes to feed him.
?He?s a bungler, is McCaw. I suppose he
thought we?d rush five ways at once and search for


an hour before we found ?em ?we?ll let him think
so. . . We?ll lead them, old man. Keep in the belt
as long as we can, then go to the back of the smel-
ters ?it?s dark there.?
We led them, slipping and sliding, through the
darkness; and when we had regained the road be-
yond the smelters, remounted and cantered almost
silently over the saturated sand to the township.
?We?ll play McCaw?s own game on him, Harry.
We?ll have a drink at the pub. and pay the bill.
Don?t say which road we are going to take ?pre-
tend to evade the question; then we?ll mount again
and ride away down the Apple Tree Flat track.??
?I understand. . . and change to the longer road
a mile or so out by going across country??
?That?s it. It?s risky work doing it in the dark;
but we?ll do it, and after that we won?t touch a girth
till we reach the warden?s.?
At the hotel we paid the bill, evaded?or seemed
to evade ?all enquiries as to our route, and were
in the saddle again and away with the loss of but a
few minutes. At half a mile out of the township
we broke off suddenly to the east; and for an hour
thereafter floundered in creeks and wallowed through
quags until the horses felt a hard and beaten track
beneath their feet and found new energy and courage.
The thick curtain of rain lifted a little, a pale star
showed ahead; Billy shook the bridle of the chest-
nut and Oxide broke into a long, sweeping canter
and threw the miles behind.
?I could go to sleep here,? said Billy, swaying
slightly to the motion of the horse ??it?s like riding
in an armchair. Glad you came??


?Very glad,? I replied; ?this is real living.?
The speed and the smooth, but irresistible, surge
of the horse on that hard and level track, lulled to
sleep all but pleasurable sensations ; and even they
were half dulled as if it were all done in a dream.
And then, suddenly, the horses stopped in terror
and almost unseated us. The road ended in a
chasm?the rains and a turbulent river had engulfed
acres of earth and swallowed the roads; we looked
down into a voraginous darkness. Below swelled
the water, roaring over rocks, murmuring silkily
around snags?at every obstruction the foam shone
like milk through the darkness and the rain.
?That was a let off, Billy??
?Yes; my girl was nearly a widow. If we h' l " 1
got in there we?d have had Buckley?s chance of get-
ting out.?
?Shall we wait till morning??
?No fear; let?s coast it down till we get a cross-
ing.?
We found a gentle descent to quiet water, strip-
ped, fastened the clothes on the protecting oilskin to
the pommel and put the horses to the crossing,
though they snorted with terror; and, when the
water began to deepen, and they heard the noise
of the flood on the distant shoals, refused to move.
We brought them aland again, unfastened one
bridle rein, tied the loose ends and led them.
In a moment the flood had us, and the horses
tried to break away; but once the stream caught
them they had to follow. Whether we would or no,
there was no complete crossing for that night; a
wooded island loomed ?luck brought us to a gap *n
the surrounding wall of submerged and living trees;


we landed and found the island two feet deep in
water; the horses sobbed in the agony of the last
effort to reach firm ground.
The rain was warm ?the flood ice-cold. I held
the horses while Billy piled water-logged driftwood
against a tree trunk so that we stood out of the
coldness of this dead water; then we dressed and
had a little nip of whisky from Billy?s microscopic
flask.
?I?m sorry it doesn?t hold a quart, Harry?al-
though whisky doesn?t make you warm. It lowers
temperature, really.?
?It puts heart into a man, though.?
?Yes; It?s good to do things 0n,.. .Are you ready
for another try? We?ll keep our clothes on. . ?
We can?t keep dry to-night. We?ll ride hard and
warm ourselves that way.?
?I?m ready, old man.?
We led the horses to the water again and mount-
ed. Billy rode first, but at a foot from the shore his
horse slipped, as if he were going to the bottomless
pit, snorted his fear, and plunged back to the reek-
ing shore.
Billy dismounted, and I followed ftiis lead as
usual.
?It?s no good, Harry; we can?t get through to-
night. . . It?s dangerous, and I won?t take mad
risks for my girl?s sake.?
?All right, old man. I thought you were wrong,
but I didn?t like to say so.?
His hand closed over mine. fr And yet you?d have
followed me? You?re a good mate, Harry. . . the
best mate a man ever had.?


?The pot calling the kettle black. . . S-s-sh ?
listen!?
Along the firm track on the side of the river
we had quitted half an hour before came the sound
of hoofs of many galloping horses, sudden cries of
surprise, and wheelings to safety.
Then half a dozen men rode down to the river bank
loudly cursing the flood and the delay. There were
attempts to light fires of the soddened timber; more
cursing, and then the quiet tones of men who re-
cognised the inevitable and were patiently waiting
for the dawn.
All night came reinforcements to the waiting
crowd; we did not doubt that McCaw was among
them ; but the unforeseen contingency of that wide
and sandy-bedded river that had never seen such
state in the memory of man had brought a new ele-
ment into calculations and we made no new plans
and did not remember the apparent failure of the
old one. Circumstances had taken control of the
game. We pulled grass from below the water and
the horses refused it; we found edible scrub that
had not been submerged, and they ate.
With the first streak of watery dawn we mounted,
looked at the stream before us, and gasped our as-
tonishment. It was but three feet deep, and ran
over a smooth bed of sand and gravel.
?Bilked,? said Billy, and laughed. ?We?ve been
sitting all night saving our precious lives from a
plateful of water. See that long strip of bark with
the horse-shoe mark*on it??
?Yes.?
?That?s my horse?s bottomless pit. He slipped
on it and thought the Pacific was below him; and


we?ve been sitting here all night in water when we
could have been twenty miles away. We get into
the habit of allowing proverbs to boss us. These
are still waters, but they don?t run deeper tnan
thirty inches.?
??How far have we to go now??
??Fifty-two miles. It?s half past four now. We?ll
talk to the warden before two.?
We entered the water, splashed through its quarter
of a mile of shallowness, reached firm ground?and
were trotting ourselves back to warmth before the
contingent on the southern bank had begun the pas-
sage of the deep channel.
At three o?clock that afternoon the warden?s clerk
had accepted Billy?s money and posted the notice of
application for mineral lease No. 871, known as the
South Republic; at four o?clock, when the office
closed for the day, weary men on tucked-up horses
came hopping into the township, cursing the first
river for the great delay and the second river for a
detention which had done them no harm beyond
postponing their applications till next day. That
second river had blocked us for an hour of anxious
crossing, but, as Billy said, ?it was only a little
chap ?the second river; the other was a first-class,
old-man flood.?
?Those fellows won?t lose their blocks ?at least,
I hope the right men won?t,? said he, ?because
priority of pegging is a better title than priority of
application; but we?ve got the Republic South by
both.?
?But where?s McCaw??
?He took the Apple Tree Flat track after all,?
said Billy gravely. ?I hope he isn?t drowned ?


THE PEGGING OE THE SOUTH REPUBLIC 85
We had eaten as befitted our long fast; the lamps
were lighted, and we sat before a great fire in the
little office off the dining-room of the Miners? Rest
Hotel. We were warm as an old maid?s cats, and at
peace with all the world.
From the bar came the chorus of the Song Ap-
propriate :
? Put in regulation 'pegs
And then move your horse's legs,
And we'll race you to the Warden's in the morning."
?Stop yewr dam row! Give the dorgs a chance??
It was the voice of McCaw. I laughed ; but
Billy, all his merriment in his eyes, held up a warn-
ing finger.
?Hyar, landlord! Take that horse o? mine away
and kill him. I led him two thousand miles since
last night!?
?How was that, Mr. McCaw? Hey, Bill; you
shut up that singin? ! Take Mr. McCaw r ?s horse
round to the stable. How did you get on, Mr,
McCaw ?? ?
?How did I get on? I didn?t get on ?that?s the
trouble. Give me a whisky! No, not that stuff ?-
gimme rye. How did I get on? That fellow
Blackett?dam his sister?s cousin?s boots ?he gev
me a horse, an?, said he, ?lt?s a good horse.? Well,
I heard how a galoot I had some business with went
along Apple Tree Flat road, so I went too ?in the
dark, mind yew! Gimme another rye ! My throat?s
like a lime-kiln. Lordy! I?ve eaten more watter
these last twenty-four hours than I thought I?d ever
degrade myself by doin?. I started ?dark as the in-
side of Jonah?s whale It was. Rainin?! How it did
rain! Never saw a more onnecessary lot of watter


since I wore short pants. An? cold ! Why, I sneez-
ed the eyelet holes outer me boots. Bimeby, I come
to a morass. . . .?
?Apple Tree Flat??
?Yes; I was told all about it affter ? affter, mind
you. I didn?t want no tellin? then, I found it out
for myself. . . Gimme another rye! . . My big,
beautiful, proud Arab horse! Mind you, he was a
gentleman to ride ?he has a back as broad as a pal-
liasse. He went on walkin? in the morass, collectin?
mud on every foot until he was walkin? on four
Saratoga trunks instead of feet. Bimeby, he lifted
one foot up and stopped and held it up so for about
half an hour, like a lame dorg ; an? I says, ?Great
Caesar! he?ll never put his foot down again. He?s
holdin? it up for keeps!? Putty soon he puts his foot
down again, affter I had welted him with my cane
good and strong; and then he steps into a glue pot
about the size of a drug-store, an? ?most drowned
me with mud.??
?Hard luck,? said the publican, trying to stifle
his laughter.
?Hard luck? Yes,? replied McCaw, sourly.
?Gimme another rye! ... I led him out of that
morass and then I found I couldn?t get on him
again. No, sir! that horse is seventeen feet high.
I led him ?bout haf way round the world before I
could find a fallen tree to mount him from, and then
we came to another river, an? I had to climb down
off him again. It was like escapin? from a castle. .
. After we swum the river I had to lead him again
most all the way into town. . . He?s more like a
shot tower than a horse.?


>?
-
THE PEGGING OF THE SOUTH REPUBLIC 87
?Hard luck! Did you do the business you went
out on, Mr. McCaw??
?Me? I never went out on no business. .. I
vvus?er ?travellin? for pleasure. . . I was seein?
the country.?
The publican laughed.
?I hope you saw it all right??
?Saw it? I?ve seen the whole world ?these last
two days. . . all the worst parts of it, anyway. . .
Whatcher laughin? at?. . . Have a snifter yourself,
an? gimme another rye.?
I could bear it no longer. I laughed long and
loudly; but Billy Pagan was incapable of sound ?-
internal laughter shook him till the tears of mer-
riment ran down his cheeks.


No. 5. ?The Fluke of Sudden Jerk.
When Ned the Prodigal with much wealth of slang
and told me the whole story, I felt that
his endeavour was as great as it appeared common-
place to him, and that it dwarfed Billy Pagan?s work
in the case, important though it was in its influence
on Ned?s fortunes. Ned the Prodigal?se'f-styled
(Edward Hoskins as his parents named him) is
known from Heemskirk to Torres Straits, and from
Cue to Mount Morgan, as r ?a hard case.? Big,
fleshy, of immense strength, fair as a Scandinavian
?a man gluttonous of everything?of work and
rest; a man of excess in asceticism ?living for months
on the tinned meat and damper of the bush, and
then riding hard to the nearest township, intent on
dissipating in a wild spree the strength that made
him restless.
Billy had not accompanied me on my trip to the
Combo Lagoons, as he had much to do at Main
Range.
?T?ve got these options developing, Harry,? he
said, ?and there?s a big leeway of office work to
make up and the family say there are arrears at home,
too. You?ll find there?s nothing to this Combo
Hill business ?the reports are too incoherent to admit


of any substantial fact in the story of a big discovery
in a country already proved to be a duffer.?
?Well, I?ll go, old man. Anyhow, I?m spoiling
for a change.?
?All right?and if there?s anything of truth in it
worthy of a detailed examination send me a message
and I?ll be with you in a week.?
We were not the only men who had been im-
pressed with the wild story of a tin lode averaging
fifteen per cent, of tin oxide. When three days later
I rode into the prospector?s camp at the Combo
Lagoons I found there four experts ?Bailey, a slight,
little and clear-skinned man with a pointed ginger
beard; Frith, a very tall, very thin, very bald, and
clean-shaven man whose specialty was copper; Hol-
der, a man almost the replica of Bailey, and looking
greater and bulkier than ever by reason of the pre-
sence of Bailey and Helder as foils; and McCaw, our
friend of the incident of the Pegging of the South
Republic.
At a roadside shanty sixty miles from Main Range
we met Ned the Prodigal. At tea that night the
talk was all of mining and that drew him into the
conversation.
?What would you say,? he asked, addressing the
experts, ?if I told you I had a copper show thirty
feet wide worth fifteen per cent, all over it??
?I should ask you how many inches you?d sunk on
it,? said the professional pessimist Helder.
?I ain?t sunk much on her, cer?ny,? replied Ned
??but I?ve stripped her a hundred feet long and
that ought to be good enough for anybody.?
?Have you got a plan?? asked Bailey.


?No?but I can dror it now.? As he spoke he
dipped his finger in the tea, and with it drew a series
of lines and blots on the tablecloth, re-wetting his
finger every moment, while the little, faded woman
who was cook, waitress, housewife, and publican,
looked at him with anger in her dull eyes.
?Y? see,? said Ned ??she?s outcroppin? here, an?
then ?ere she?s covered by drift an? that?s where 1
stripped her. There?s a porphery dyke??ere, wait
till I get some more ink.?
He dipped his forefinger in the milk jug, and the
faded woman uttered an exclamation of annoyance,
swooped down on the milk jug and bore it safely
from the Prodigal?s reach.
?Ha! A prophyritic dyke,? said Frith, with the
greedy anticipation of a gourmand, and as if he
would like to eat it.
?I stripped ?er all the way along ?ere, an? she?s
shown good ore all the way ?Wait a shake! 1
want some more ink.?
He extended his hand for the milk jug and found
it not, whereat the faded woman smiled. The Pro-
digal was helpless without his means of illustration.
He stammered in his embarrassment; but at the
right moment he thought of his fork, took it as if
happily relieved from difficulty and with one tine of
the fork continued the design on the tablecloth.
?I think she runs all across the velley because I?ve,
got good stuff ?ere an? the same kind o? stuff there;
an? it?s worth fifteen per cent.?
?How far away is it??I asked.
?Only five mile out of y?r track,? replied the Pro-
digal. ?I?m goin? there to-morrer mornin?.?


?Is it a good road?? asked Frith, who hated dis-
comfort.
?Yes, good an? level all the way, ?cept the last
three miles. There?s a bit of hard scratchin? there
I mus? say.??
?No morasses??? asked McCaw.
?What?s that?? asked Ned.
?Oh! You?d call them swamps here, I suppose.?
?Swamps! Water! Lord love a duck! I?d
like to see water there. Why! man, there?s been
a drought here three year. I?ve got to cart the
water six mile for my camp. I?m near perish!
there for water.?
?And what?s the name of your claim?? asked Bai
ley.
?The Sudden Jerk.?
?Sudden Jerk ?bit of Arizona about that,? said
McCaw. ?Whatcher call it that for ??
?Y? see, it was this way. The drought?s been so
long out here, near every tree?s dead an? all the
scrub?s gone. I wanted a switch for the pack ?orse,
to keep ?im moving, so I see?s a thin sheoak ?only
a baby tree it was ?growin? in the ground near a
great boulder. I tried to pull it up by the roots, as
it wasn?t any too long. So I heaves at it and pulls
and pulls, an? all of a sudden I jerk the tree by the
roots outer the ground. It come up so sudden I fell
on my back, an? then I found that a stone had come
away with the roots. An? what d?yr think that stone
was, Mister??
?I don?t know,? repeated Helder, to whom he
had appealed.


?It was malachite?big slug of malachite. So
then I prospected the ground, and I found the lode
outcroppin?, an? I?ve been workin? these eight weeks.
So I call her the ?Sudden Jerk.? ??
?And you want to sell it??? said Bailey.
?I want workin? capital, an? a few ?undred pounds
for meself, and I want three-quarter interest.?
?You?re too easy goin?, I guess,? said McCaw,
?wouldn?t you like to keep all the mine, besides
sellin? half of it for a million dollars??
?No,? replied Ned Hoskins sturdily. ?What f
say, I mean. I want workin? capital an? a few hun-
dred pound to keep me goin,? an? three-fourths o? the
shares.?
?It?s ridiculous.?
?Out of the question.?
?And it can?t be true ?there?s a pain in it some-
where,? said Helder.
?I can pick out where ?somewhere? is in one,? said
McCaw. ?The pain?s in the price. He wants to drink
his whisky, and have it in the jar, too.?
?What I said I want I want,? persisted the Pro-
digal??Anbody who knows me knows I don?t tell
fairy tales. The Jerk?s as good a show as I say
she is, an? anybody that wants her, by cripps! he?ll
have to pay for her.?
?Well, it?s no use us going to see her if you talk
of prices like that. And I haven?t seen your plans,?
said the draughtsman expert Bailey.
Ned Hoskins lost his temper.
?My grief! d?ye think a man draws pretty plans
first and makes a mine after. Y? want a flamin?
pretty mine, with the crosscuts all In vi?let an? the
shafts in flamin? red, an? the drives as yeller as a


orangeman ?Weill Go an? get that with some o?
the duffers at California Creek. I?ve only got a big
mine ?ere, an? no flamin? plans. If there was one
good man here he wouldn?t ?um an? ha. He?d look at
the show first an talk about buyin? it after,? he Con-
cluded, addressing me ???Will you come an? see it,
mate??
??All right?l?ll go, if you?ll arrange to leave at
daylight to-morrow.?
??Good iron!'? replied the Prodigal. ? I?ll go with
you whenever you like. I?m glad there?s one white
man in the crowd.?
??l guess I?ll go,? said McCaw, hastily???lt?s only
five miles off the track an? there ain?t no morasses.?
I could not resist saying, ??Neither are there any
horse blocks.?
The geologist-expert and the draughtsman-expert
and the professional pessimist came over to our side
immediately; jumping suddenly as sheep do because
they were given a lead. The Prodigal was to guide
all of us to his prospecting claim at daylight..
* * *
When I paid my bill at daylight next morning, Ned
the Prodigal trailed around shamefacedly and made
many advances to the bar, where the faded woman
sat at the receipt of custom, but lost his courage
always at half way and retreated to the verandah
again.
We were all in the saddle, excepting Hoskins; and
Frith Bailey, Helder, and McCaw were already pac-
ing their horses in the wake of the jogging pack-
horses, but the Prodigal interested me, and I waited
for him to mount. He had been fussing about his
horse, doing useless things in the way of girth tight-


ening, which surprised me in such an old bushman.
But as the others rode off I saw he had been gaining
time. He did not seem to object to my presence,
but hitched up the horse to a verandah post and walk-
ed into the bar. The first few questions spoken
and answered ?lowly and deprecatingly by the man,
and with shrill harshness on the part of the woman
?explained the Prodigal?s desire to wait our depar-
ture before talking.
?When are you goin? to pay me, Hoskins??
?It?s all right, Mrs. Andrews. I ?
?No, it ain?t all right. You owe me seven pounds
?When am I goin? to get it? That?s what I want
to know ?? ? ?
?It?s all right, Mrs. Andrews. I?ll sell an interest
in the Sudden Jerk to one of these blokes, an? I?ll
pay you.?
?D? ye think any o? them men ?ull buy into the Jerk
at the price you ask? No fear. You owe me five
?orse-feeds an? three beds an? nine meals. I?ve got
to pay twenty pound a ton for chaff. How d?ye
think I can keep goin? with you owin? me seven
pounds??
?Well, Mrs. Andrews, I??
?Well, Mrs. Andrews, you what? Don?t you come
here no more till you pay. An? you?ve got six tins
o? meat an? ?arf a bag o? flour, an? spuds an? onions
in the pack now, an? you didn?t tell me you had no
money till after you had ?em on the pack-horse. You
even waited till the pack-horse was gorn away ahead
o? them other fellers.?
?Well, Mrs. Andrews, I had to have tucker for
these fellers, as they are goin? out to my camp. But
I?ll pay you all right,?


?Don?t you ever come back here without the
seven pound, anyway.??
?I?ll pay you, Mrs. Andrews. Good-bye, Mrs.
Andrews. ?
There w r as no reply. She had evidently turned
her back on him?he came out crestfallen and said
in an anxious whisper, so that the faded woman
might not hear him, rehabilitating his financial stand-
ing.
?I was payin? the bill?sorry to keep you.?
He mounted and we rode away together over the
drifting sand, that had already lost its grayness and
shone golden in the first beams of the rising sun.
The camp of Ned the Prodigal was made on
steeply-rising ground in the centre of a valley, sur-
rounded by a system of concentric hills. In the
bough eating-shed before his tent was a rough table
made of the cover of two gin cases nailed to four
legs driven into the ground and rammed tight with
clay. There was a rough stool for the owner, but
he brought two cases also from his tent and placed
them for the visitors. ?You sit here, Mr. Fleet,?
he said finally, throwing a bag over a water cask
lashed to a rough sledge.
?Do you have to go far for the watel?? I asked.
?About six mile ?but it?s worse than thirty mile
on a beaten track. This is a bad drought?y? know.
There ain?t no water nearer than the Six Mile, so
I harness my horse to that sledge once a week
and drive him over to the Six Mile an? fill the cask.
First and last, goin? an? cornin? back it?s a day?s
trip. Once I was away four days. I lost the first


two casks o? water by break-downs half way from
the spring, but I brought the third here safe.?
??Are you playin? a lone hand?? asked McCaw.
??Yes,? replied Ned. ??You?re the first man be-
side meself that ever came here.?
??How long have you been here?? questioned
Frith.
??Near three months at least. I found the show,
an? I?ve built the sledge, an? made the camp, an?
found the water, an? did all the minin? that has been
done here on my own.?
??Good man,? said I warmly, for I admire above
all other things courageous effort.
?Y? got plenty o? sand, Mr. Prodigal,? said
McCaw.
Ned turned away in embarrassment, but recovered
his self-possession as he brought samples of the
ore of the Sudden Jerk from the little heaps in the
tent and the shed and laid them on the table.
??First, here?s this bit o? malachite,? said the Pro-
digal. ??That is the Sudden Jerk. I pulled up that
bit when I pulled up the little she-oak.?
He held up a half-section of the great piece of
fibrous malachite ?the beauty of its silky greenness
flashed in the sun rays filtered through the roof of
dead leaves.
?That?s putty fine,? said McCaw; ?it looks
too good to smelt. Better make table tops of it.?
The geologist took the heavy specimen and cut
it with his pocket-knife, paling the emerald of the
natural surface to sap green.
?Ha!? said he, ?botryoidal or stalactitic masses,
almost opaque, streak light green, degree of hard-


ness, say four; specific gravity about three point six
?it?s malachite.?
Ned Hoskins grinned. ?We know that without
all that rigmarole. A man can?t mistake malachite
any more than he can mistake gold. ? ?
??ls this all the mine?? asked the professional
pessimist, taking the sample from Frith, and holding
it in one hand with difficulty.
??No?tain?t,? snapped Ned. ??Here?s another
bit. Ain?t that pretty?? He held up a broken no-
dule of red oxide of copper, it?s core of crystals of
calcite.
??Yes,? said Bailey???it is. I wish you had plans
of the property, we could get on better.?
McCaw and I grinned at his humorous display of
idiosyncracy, but Ned the Prodigal turned impati-
ently from the carpers, saying :
??lf you want to see the show you?d better come
on.?
We followed him, and he stopped at an irregular
excavation ?half costeen, half shaft. On all its
sides and in the bottom we saw the sub-metallic
lustre of red oxide of earthy occurrence at the end
of the costeen, but massive all around the shaft.
The outcrop was dull except where Ned the Pro-
digal had broken a stone ?then it showed the satin
lustre of malachite, the green and blue incrusta-
tions of copper carbonate.
?That?s putty fine,? said McCaw. ?See that big
rock there? The one with the green carbonate on
it? It?s the map of Ireland, dead sure.?
There was no doubt of the value of the Sudden
Jerk, considered as a prospecting show. The Pro-
digal had stripped the ore for sixty feet wide, and


had proved its continuation laterally for four hun-
dred feet. He led us through the sapless, drought-
burned thickets, and over baked rocks whose sole
life was represented by frilled lizards, and lower
down the valley, a quarter of a mile from the shaft
and the costeen, he showed us a small hole sunk on
a black metallic clay so dry that our boot-heels pow-
dered the heap of ore by the side of the hole.
?D? ye know what that is, Mr. Fleet??
?No.?
?It?s black oxide o? copper.?
Back to the camp we went, and on the way Ned
the Prodigal was constantly being drawn into con-
versation by one of us singly. When my turn came
I took him aside and said :
?Mr. Hoskins?l don?t know much about the
game, but I like the Sudden Jerk. If you can talk
fair terms I?ll take an option on it. What do you
want??
?A few ?undred pound, an? a fair working capital,
an? three-quarters of the shares.?
?That?s ridiculous, Mr. Hoskins ?you can?t get
d. Say a thousand pounds and a fifth interest.?
?Not me! Look here, Mister, I?ve put in all this
drought, trampin? up an? down these ranges, pros-
pectin? duffers, ?ard up as a crow in good seasons. I
done all this work single-?anded. There?s not one
of you fellers would have stuck to this. Bringin?
the water on that sledge would have broken your
hearts, an? ye?d have slung the game up. Well, I?ve
got through with it, an? I ain?t goin? to give the
Jerk away with a pound o? tea. Y?know the terms
?them?s mine.?


?No business can be done, Mr. Hoskins, then.
But I hope now that you?ve refused me you?ll deal
the same with the other people.?
?I?ve dealt the same already. All on ?em asked
me except the geologist bloke, an? I suppose he will
when we get back. But he won?t get me to bite at
nothin ?on a hook.?
We found Frith walking up and down, quietly
excited, chipping rocks with his geologists hammer.
As we arrived he walked forward with some eager-
ness and beckoned the Prodigal.
They walked away through the scrub, and we
heard only an occasional word of their conversation,
but it was enough to give us the knowledge of Frith?s
business with the Prodigal. It was the same as
ours ?the purchase of the Sudden Jerk, and Frith
had the same answer.
Then McCaw led us all away into the scrub, ex-
cusing the action to Ned the Prodigal with the plea
of business. And there, surrounded by the dead
and wiry trees, dessicated also by the long drought,
McCaw' offered observations.
?We?re here, boys, an? the show?s a good show
an? the crank won?t sell ?cept at his own impossible
figger. Now, I pur-pose this. We?ll make a little
syndikit right here. So?s we?re all In it. There?s
five of us. We?ll make a Sudden Jerk Option
Syndicate of twenty-five shares of the hundred
sterling?twenty shares to us, that?s four each, an?
five shares we?ll sell to outsiders to put up the cap-
ital to sink a deep shaft. If we can prove this lode
to a couple or three hundred feet, I guess we?ll put
up for ballot to Rockefeller?s Club.?


?But Hoskins won?t take a decent figure,?? said
the pessimist.
?He?ll have to, I guess. He?s done all this sin-
gle-handed, he?s got no mate and no money. He?s
got only one man?s ground here?about five acres?
an? no money to apply for a lease.?
?Shall we peg around him, then?? asked Frith.
?No. What?s the good o? that? He?s got the
key-block, an? if we pegged around him it ?ud stif-
fen his back more.?
?Well, how do you propose to work it?? I asked.
?Fust?are we agreed on standin? in togeth"
We all agreed, and I supplemented: ?That is?if
you manage to arrange a contract within a reason-
able time. I don?t want to tie myself up for long.?
?For sure,? replied McCaw. ?If It doesn?t come
off quick, it won?t come off at all. But it?s sure to
come off. Who?s got a fifty pun? note??
?I have,? said the Pessimist, producing the opti-
mistic paper.
?Hand it over, then,? said McCaw. ?Thanks!
Hoskins is so stiff, that if Orient liners were sellin?
at two and a half dollars he ain?t got enough pieces
to buy a gang-plank. I guess he?ll see reason when
we show him this putty bit o? paper.?
They all agreed to the probability, but I was not
so sure as they. The work the lonely man had done
in defiance of all difficulty; the way he had fought
the drought with the sledge and cask?losing two
casks of water by capsizing the sledge on stumps
when the horse had broken away from him, and
yet returning unbeaten to the spring and bringing
the third sledge-load safe to camp ; the pluck of the
man that never owned defeat, showed me he was


not the man to vacillate and weaken. I followed
them to the camp, prepared for struggle and defeat.
?We?ve arranged to deal as a syndicate for the
show, Mr. Prodigal,? said McCaw, ?an? our best
offer is fifty pounds down, two ?undred when we?ve
got the lease, six months? option to sink a shaft, a
thousand at the end of six months if th? lode goes
down all right, an? one quarter share in the company
formed to take her over, with a big working capital.
An? here?s the fifty to bond the option.?
Ned Hoskins paled as the note was waved before
his eyes, but the hesitation lasted not a second.
?Y? know the terms, Mister McCaw ?say two
?undred down an? three-quarters of the shares
when you think she?s good enough to float.?
They all talked at once, showing him that cap-
ital always insisted on having a controlling interest
in its investments, but he replied :
?You talk of capital! Well, I?m capital and labor
too. Findin? the lode was labour; bringin? water
on that blasted sledge was labour; strippin? the
lode was labour; but ,the lode itself is capital.
Capital is goin? to have the controllin! interest, but
it?s my capital that?s goin? to do it.?
They showed him that he was interfering with tra-
dition; that fifty pounds was a large sum, and that
they could peg leases around him.
?Well?peg away! An? you?ll find me harder to
deal with. See that???he held up a heavy speci-
men of the ore from the shaft ??Look at the stuff?
fifty per cent, copper. That ain?t labour ?that?s
capital. Forty feet of red oxide.?


?That?s chalcotrichite,? said the geologist, losing
sight even of the necessity of acquiring the mine in
his finnicky stickling for terms.
?Oh! Don?t chuck long words at me,? replied
Hoskins, ?it?s red oxide o? copper.?
?Ah! Yes,? said Frith, ?but what kind of red
oxide? See the fine hair-like structures of the crys-
tals. It?s a capillary crystallisation of red oxide,
and so its real specific name is chalcotrichite.?
?All right,? said Hoskins impatiently, contemp-
tuous of the unnecessary correction. ?l?ll keep the
mine, an? you can name the ore. Call it coprolite, if
y? like.?
McCaw waved the fifty pound note again. His
manners in the matter of that money were not nice.
He reminded me of a particularly gross bookmaker
whom I had seen flashing money in a Melbourne bar.
The demeanour of the penniless prospector, who
stood apparently unmoved amid the implied taunt of
his poverty and the temptation of the money, was so
manly and reserved and dignified, that I found my-
self hoping that the prospector might defeat the syn-
dicate, although I was a member of it. McCaw
waved the note again, dropped it, picked it up, ex-
postulated, pleaded, raved, dropped the note again,
and again recovered it.
?It?s no use,? said Hoskins, ?them?s my terms.?
?You?re a sap-head, then,? said McCaw. ?The
drought ?ull force you to abandon the stakes, ?an
we?ll get it for a smile, I guess.?
?I?ll take my chances,? said Hoskins.
We all moved towards our horses; Hoskins fol-
lowed us and assisted in the saddling of the pack-
horses.


?We?ll be at Puffin? Billy?s to-night, an? at the
Main Range t?-morrow,? said McCaw, as he shook
hands with Hoskins when we were all mounted, ?so
if you think you have played the greenhorn you can
foller us. But you?d better take the fifty and sign
an option now.?
He did not flaunt the note again, and I was mo-
mentarily surprised at the suddenly acquired deli-
cacy ; but Hoskins shook his head in negative, and
we rode away.
?So long,? said Ned to all of us, ?keep yer quids
an? I?ll keep the kal ?what d?yer call it?ite??
The track led downwards, but when we reached
another rise I looked back and saw Hoskins still
standing there?a brave, obstinate man, daring
drought and starvation, but holding tightly to his
own.
We had a rough, dry track to Puffing Billy?s
shanty, thirty-two miles from the Sudden Jerk, and
a long blistering day brought exhaustion to Frith,
Helder, and Bailey, and the irritability of weariness
to McCaw and myself. So next day we slept late,
and decided on two days? rest there, as with the long
fortnight of hard riding and long thirsts that had
preceded our meeting with Hoskins, our horses were
leg-weary and distressed.
That night McCaw and Bailey succumbed to the
distractions of the bar, and Helder and the geologist
were merry before bedtime. They kept the spree
going next day, and I had decided to leave for Main
Range next morning?-alone if need be. But there
came the unexpected to hurry the departure. *
The actual happenings at Sudden Jerk after I left,


I have pieced together from the fragmentary infor-
mation given me by the Prodigal himself.
After the party left, Hoskins, very much distress-
ed, but still determined to hold his price, wandered
disconsolately about his five acres, which, though
stuffed with wealth, was for the time valueless.
The little debt at Mrs. Andrews shanty pressed on
him In a measure utterly disproportionate to the
amount; there was water for a week in the cask, but
food for only three days, because the visitors had
developed astonishingly large appetites during their
examination of the lease.
?That bloke that wanted to find out what was the
pain in everything,? said Ned to himself in depre-
ciation of the professional pessimist, ?he ate enough
to find a pain in his inside. . . An? that lanky chap
that talked about red oxide bein? kal ?what d?yer
call it, ite??he wolfed a tin o? meat on his own.?
He went into the bough shed, still talking to him-
self, knocked the lustrous ore from the table, almost
contemptuously swore, and stooped to pick it up
again?for the contempt was assumed, and he had
borne too much for the sake of the mine not to
respect every ounce of ore In it?and then stopped
dead, his mouth hanging open, in the shock of his
surprise.
He had found the expert?s note ?the note for fifty
pounds which McCaw had waved at him ?the money
whose temptations he had withstood.
He did not waste time in speculating how it came
there. It was there?he was satisfied of the miracle,
not inquire into its methods.
His resolution was quickly taken. He took his
axe and shovel, cut four pegs, and dug four tren-


ches, and pegged an eighty acre lease, posted his
application as by Mining Regulation made and pro-
vided, ate a hurried meal, and was then confronted
with the fact that he had turned his horse out un-
hobbled, and the catching of the horse might lose a
precious day. And time was the essence of this con-
tract. He determined to walk. That energetic opti-
mist seriously proposed to walk thirty-five miles?
much of the distance through sand ?and beat four
well-horsed men in the race to the warden?s. But
he had this advantage ?the other side knew ' no
necessity for hurry; he alone knew it was a race at
all. He put two tins of meat, a big segment of dam-
per, a scroll of salt and four onions in a bag, with
the few specimens of ore, and slung the bag over
his shoulder with his ancient, blackened quart pot;
filled the water-bag from the cask, and, holding it
by the bar, after tightening his belt, lit his pipe,
and walked away down the stony track gilded by the
sun of waning afternoon.
Puffing Billy?s shanty was silent at noontide next
day, but for the flies. The professional pessimist,
wearied of demanding of Puffing Billy that he might
be shown a mine that knew no pain, had discovered
pain in himself to wit, in his own head ?
and now lay in a darkened room, sleeping
off the effects of his potations. .The geolo-
gist was afield tapping rocks and giving to in-
offensive stones names which were insultingly long
and involved; the draughtsman was afield also, mak-
ing unnecessary contour plans of the surrounding
hills, and giving much time and effect to the con-
sideration of non-essentials. McCaw, who had been
drinking unwisely also, lay in the darkened room


of the pessimist, occasionally breaking out into ir-
relevant and incoherent discourses on Sudden Jerk
and the folly of the man who refused fifty pounds
down, and then relapsing into insensibility and
breathing like a strandard whale.
I wrote, and read a <f North Queensland Register?
two months old, and dozed when the flies permit-
ted, and determined to leave for Main Range to-
morrow ?alone if need, but certainly to leave.
Suddenly from the little sun-blistered dining-room
I heard the voice of Puffing Billy evidently in con-
versation with a newly-come customer.
??Yes ??aven?t got much ?but I can give yer a bit
o? beef an? punkin. What?ll yer drink?tea?
Beer? All right?l got some. I?ll ?ave to go down
to the cellar an? open a noo case. The experts
has drunk all the beer I ?ad in the bar.?
He came out of the dining-room, passed on his
way to the bar, and by-and-bye I heard the sounds
of his descent on the ricketty ladder to the cellar.
McCaw half awoke again, muttered incoherencies,
and suddenly said, loudly :
??l guess a man that passes a fifty pound note don?t
want money.?
The noise of Puffing Billy breaking open the beer
case in the cellar drowned McCaw?s voice, and he
relapsed into Insensibility again. I was conscious
of a stealthy movement as of a man walking on
tip-toe?of clothing rubbed against wood, and then
the weariness of the afternoon closed my eyes. I
made a curtain of the ancient newspaper, and slept.
I was awakened by Puffing Billy calling me to sup-
per ?the thick night had fallen, the lamps were


lighted, and the great white scrub moths played
around the flame.
?They?re all mad to-day, I think,?? said Puffing
Billy. ?Mr. Frith and Mr. Bailey hain?t turned up
yet, an? Mr. Holder?s kickin? up a row with the
Yankee bloke about a fifty pound note, and the
Yankee says he lost it here. They?re both gone to
sleep again. Lost it here, by crumbs! they can
search me.?
?It?s very unpleasant to have that said about your
house, certainly,? said I.
? ?Course they didn?t lose it here. But they?re all
mad. This afternoon while you was asleep, a big
bloke of a chap came here; walkin?, he was. No
horse and no swag. Asks me to get him beef an?
punkin an? a bottle o? beer, an? I goes to the cel-
lar an? opens a case an brings the bottle here, an?
then I finds he?s done a guy. Couldn?t find him
anywhere, an? me goin?t? the trouble o? opening the
bottle. I ?ad to drink it meself. ?
I thought of that' stealthy movement in the dining-
room that Jaad followed immediately on the sound of
McCaw?s voice, and a sudden suspicion came to me.
?What sort of a man was he??
?Big chap, blue eyes like gimlets, a ginger mous-
tache ?fleshy kind o? chap. Stranger to me.?
I was certain of it. The man who had left his
meal and the prospect of a cool drink as soon as he
heard the voice of McCaw was Ned the Prodigal.
I was quite in the dark as to his reason for the sec-
recy, but I felt that he had gone to the Main Range.
It would not do to hurry away immediately, but at
nine o?clock, an hour after Frith and Barry had
returned, I proposed to take advantage of the cool-


ness of the night and ride to Main Range before
dawn, and asked them to accompany me. As I had
expected, from their wearied condition, they excused
themselves, and went to bed; and then I had my
horse saddled, and paid my bill, and rode off through
the beauty of the cool star-spangled night?north-
east, in the track of Ned the Prodigal.
It was nigh midnight before I overtook him, al-
though I had made good use of the infrequent bits
of hard track. He did not appear greatly surprised
to see me, refused to ride the horse while I walked,
although I said I was tired of the saddle; he said
that he was going to Main Range to order stores
and explosives. I am thankful that the night hid
my face when I smiled at this despairing lie.
?You were at Puffing Billy?s, Ned??
?Was I??
?Yes ?Puffing Billy was surprised when he came
back with the beer and had found you had cleared
out. ? ?
?Was he??
?Yes ?why did you go??
?It?s a free country, ain?t it??
?Yes, of course ?but the day was very hot, and
you were walking, and you must be worn out. ?
?No fear, Mister. It ?ud take a lot to do that. ?
?It?s fifteen miles and more from here into Main
Range. When will you get there??
?About daylight.?
?You?re a wonder, Ned,? said I in admiration.
?Me! No. I only just keep goin?.?
?Will you stay long in the township??
?Me! No. I?m off back to the Jerk?l?ll stay
long enough to buy what I want.?


?Good-bye, Ned,? said I, leaning out of the saddle
to shake his hand.
?Good-bye, Mr. Fleet.?
?I?ll see you again, I suppose??
?Not likely. I?m goin? out to the Jerk again as
soon as ?I?ve ?-ordered the stores.?
?Good-bye, Ned.?
?Good-bye.?
I rode on, but looking back at him I saw that he
had immediately turned back to the warden?s office,
apparently to find the office?s opening hours. Then
I determined to ride at once to Billy Pagan?s house.
I had believed the story of the Sudden Jerk was
over. Now I knew it had only begun, and that my
friend must take his cards and join the game.


No 6.? The Fifty of McCaw.
The day was well advanced towards noon, when I
told Billy Pagan of the fluke that had given to Ned
the Prodigal the fifty pounds that meant salvation
to him for the time; and as the story proceeded his
eyes shone in appreciation of the prospector?s cour-
age which, I could see, dwarfed the slight immoral-
ity of the concealment of the dishonest finding of the
note.
?What a man!?? he said pacing the wide, creaking
verandah of his house, surrounded by the usual in-
tangible wall of rain, falling in a condition between
mist and powder. ?What a man! Sticking to
it single-handed, and carting water on a crazy
sledge all through the drought.??
?And having the pluck to refuse the fifty, Billy.??
?My word, yes. And the luck to find it?and
then the pluck to walk and the foot to beat you
fellows who were mounted.?
?I admire him more than ever when I think of
him coming to Puffing Billy?s, hungry and worn out,
and taking the track again hungry when he heard
McCaw?s voice and knew we were in the shanty.??


?Yes; a man had to be full of grit not to see the
game was up then. He?s too good to lose. We must
save him.?
?Save him from what??
?Do you think that a cold-blooded precisian like
Helder will lose fifty and not make a song about
it??
?I expect he won?t?but he gave the note to
McCaw and he can force McCaw to make it good.?
?Well, if he does ?is McCaw the man to stand it
easily? Not much. Mac will put all the police in
Queensland on to it as soon as he gets into the
township, and by this time to-morrow, if they haven?t
found it, he?ll make the sergeant?s life miserable with
tales of what Pinkerton?s men could do with such a
case in Noo Yark. Your friend Ned the Prodigal?s
in for a bad time, and we must pull him through
it.?
?But how? f ?
?Well, first, what do you think he?d do as soon
as the warden?s office opened??
?Apply for the lease??
?Yes ?and after??
?Go down to the coast and try to float ?the Jerk?
or at least sell a bit of it.?
?If he?d do that, he?s done it already and we can?t
help him. You see ?neither McCaw nor Helder
know how the note was lost. They?ll go to the
police and give information. Ned was flat-broke?
we know that much from his apologies to Mrs. An-
drews. He?d cash the note here. Helder must have
the number of such a big note ?he gives the num-
ber to the police; they warn everybody; the note
is traced; Ned is arrested in apparent flight and


with the balance of the change in his pockets.
Why, it?s as plain as daylight. A year in Towns-
ville gaol.?
?Then you think that he?ll appreciate all that and
stay in the town??
?I don?t think he?ll think anything about it ?but
he?ll stay in the township because he?ll be too drunk
to go away.?
?Too drunk??
?What?s your description of the man. Big,
strong, tireless, a child to lead and a bucking mule
to drive??
?Yes ?that?s the Prodigal.?
?And after that wonderful walk of his and the
reaction from poverty to security do you think he?s
so superhuman that he hasn?t looked for distrac-
tion and found it? Depend upon it he?s in the post
office bar, shouting for everybody and laying down
the law.?
?Well, if that?s so we?d better look him up and
put him on his guard ?I wouldn?t like to see him
come to any harm.?
?The grit of the man has made me soft-hearted
too. Wait a minute till I get my horse ready, and
I?m with you.?
We rode ?Billy Pagan and I?down the saturated
mountain and up the hill where clung the township.
?Where to first, Billy??
?To the warden?s office ?to see if Ned?s applica-
tion is posted up.?
We had not even to dismount. The notice-board
already bore a flapping, soddened paper of official
blue with the straggling signature of Edward Bosk-


ins to the declaration that he had that day applied
for eighty acres, situate about thirty-seven miles
east-south-east of Puffing Billy?s shanty, on the Coo-
cooroo road; and that he had lodged the application
money, survey fees, and surveyor?s mileage money
therefor.
?For better or worse he?s melted the note,? said
Billy gravely. ?We?ll put up the horses in the Post
Office Hotel yard, and walk in the back way. It
will attract less attention.?
Ned the Prodigal we found careless of how much
attention he attracted. His drunkenness was of a
superlatively generous kind. Not content with pay-
ing for drinks for every man in the bar, he had
descended on the tradesmen and gathered them in by
threats, persuasion and force.
?Fill ?em up again, Missus Public ?Ouse,? he
shouted to the elephantine lady behind the bar ??it?s
my shout.?
Then, turning to us, he regarded Billy Pagan
searchingly, turned his gaze to me, laughed uneasily
In recognition, and extended his hand.
?How are yer, Mr. Fleet? Drink along o* me an?
bring your friends.?
I introduced Billy, and we drank; and then, in
obedience to Billy?s glance, I said:
?We want to have a talk with you, Ned?Mr.
Pagan and myself. I?ve told him all about the Jerk,
and he?d like to hear more.?
?Right O! Come along into the little room.? He
led the way, staggering a little as he walked; but
once seated in the little bar parlour, and the door
being closed, the shrewd, almost suspicious, glance
that accompanied his first question, showed that ho


was not yet quite off his guard. Seeing that he
looked at me to begin, I said ;
?Mr. Pagan knows as much about the show as I
do, Mr. Hoskins; perhaps you can tell him a little
more.?
?It ain?t no use anybody cornin? t? me ; f they ain?t
prepared for my terms,? replied the Prodigal ag-
gressively. ?I?ll sell a quarter o? the mine, an? not
a damn skerrig more.?
Billy Pagan was not used to this manner of open-
ing a negotiatory conversation; he was accustomed
to having his own way, and he objected to Ned?s
tone from the first.
?You must know, Mr. Hoskins, that you?re talk-
ing absolute bosh. How can you expect anybody
to invest capital without controlling it??
?That?s what the other coves said?the Yank, an?
the kal ?what yer call it ?ite bloke ; an? the loonatic
that wanted pretty plans first an? a mine after.??
The alcohol secured the ascendency for the moment,
and his eyes glazed as he concluded : ?But the Jerk?s
mine; an? mine she?ll be.?
?I don?t want her, Mr. Hoskins,? said Billy.
?And buying her is not in my mind. I didn?t come
to see you as a buyer.?
?Oh! Yer can?t get over me. Never mind what
yer came to see me about. She?s mine, an? mine
she stays. I?ve done too much for her to lose her
easy.?
?I know you have,? said Billy meaningly, but the
meaningness was lost on the fuddled Prodigal.
?I?ll go down to the coast an? find an honest man,
an? sell him an interest for the money to sink on her.


My grief! I won?t be licked. I?ll go t?-morrer?s
coach.?
?I?d advise you to do nothing of the sort,?? said
Billy.
The Prodigal?s eyes brightened at the opposi-
tion.
?Eh! What! What! You?d advise? Who the ?ell
are you? My grief! Y?d better say next y? won?t
let me go.?
Billy knew his man?the child to lead and the devil
to drive. He laughed??lt would be little use me
saying that to a man like you. You?d have your
own way in spite of everything. ? ?
Hoskins arose delightedly and laughed. ?I would
that, Mister ?there?s nobody can ?old me, once I
take the bit atween my teeth. My grief! Look
?ere.? He took a half-crown from his pocket and
bent the coin flat between finger and thumb, and
laughed proudly as he did it ?this peculiar mixture
of strength and weakness, manliness and childish
self-consciousness, blushing at the publicity he had
purposely excited.
?I know! I know!? said Billy. ?And that?s
why I?m sorry to see you threatened by trouble.?
The Prodigal?s demeanor changed utterly?he be-
came gravely anxious.
?Me, Mister? There?s no trouble t? come t? me.
I?m all right. There?s the lease applied for, all right
an? rumbo, an???
?Yes ?but what money paid for the application??
The Prodigal was plainly frightened, but attempt-
ed to bluff himself out of his awkward corner.
?What money? Why?my money. Who yer
gettin? at???


?Yes, your money?or as much as anybody?s, ac-
cording to finder?s right ?but what if the number of
the note were known??
??The note? My grief! I don?t know nothin???
??lt?s no good, Mr. Hoskins. You picked up the
note at the Jerk. You walked to Puffing Billy?s?a
brave walk it was, too ?and you ran away
from your beef and beer when you heard
McCaw?s voice. . . Now, why not make a
clean breast of it and let me help you?
Those fellows will be here this afternoon at latest;
they?ll give information to the police, especially after
they hear you?ve applied for a lease over the mine
they were disappointed in being unable to buy; and
once the fifty is traced to you, a jury will as easily
believe you stole the note as that you found it.
Now, let?s see if we can?t get you out of the mess.
I?m your friend ?straight out. I admire grit above
everything, and you?re too good a man to leave in a
hole. What do you say??
Ned the Prodigal said not anything. Instead he
gripped Billy Pagan?s hand for a moment, and then
he turned out of his pockets notes, gold, silver and
copper.
??That?s what?s left of it.?
??Count it, Harry. . , Now, Ned, where did you
melt the note??
??Here in this pub. . . I changed it just before the
warden?s court opened.?
??Good job you didn?t melt it at the warden?s of-
fice.?
??Why, Mister??
??Because it would have been harder to get It back
again.?


?My grief! ?Ave we got to get it back again???
?We have?that identical note has got to go
back to its owner again. You can?t tell me that a
precise little maker of plans like Helder didn?t keep
the number., . . How much is there, Harry???
?Fifteen pounds two and ninepence,? said I.
?There was twenty-four pound odd for the lease,?
said Hoskins in explanation ??an? a few drinks,
an???
?What did you do with the other??
Ned flushed a dark crimson under the sunburn.
?There was seven pound for postal notes,? he said
slowly.
?But what for?? ?asked Billy Pagan.
?To send to Mrs. Andrews,? I replied for Hos-
kins.
?Is that so, Ned??
?Yes?though how the ?ell Mister Fleet knoo
I can?t make out. . . ? He proceeded apologeti-
cally. ?Y? see, she?s a widder, and I promised
her the first greed I got me hooks onto I?d send
her.?
?It?s all the more reason for saving you,? said
Billy Pagan warmly. ?Do you know the number
of the note??
?No?l see she was a fifty an? that was enough
for me. ?Come along o? me, y? beauty,? says I, an?
along she come.?
?Do you know what bank it was on? ?
?Yes ?the Capricornia.?
?That?ll do then.? He took out his cheque-book
??Harry! You try to cash this at the bar. If she
still has the fifty the job?s easy. You want a fifty-
pound note, mind you?nothing else will do.?


He wrote the cheque hurriedly, and I went to the
bar to cash it, while Hoskins rang the bell to order
drinks as a means of keeping up appearances.
I returned to the parlour defeated. The elephantine
lady had parted with the note.
?Paid in, Harry??
?No ?paid out to the brewer?s traveller.?
?And where does he bank??
?Down on the coast ?he rode off tw?o hours ago ?
she said, and he?d lunch at Desdemona.?
?What?s his name??
?Graham.?
?I know him?l?ll get it.? At this, Ned the Pro-
digal, who had become gravely troubled at the diffi-
culty, brightened up again.
?What?ll y? do, Mister??
?Ride after him.?
?But he?s got two hours? start??
?He had?but he?s stopped at lunch at Desde-
mona. He?d take over an hour to ride there?l can
do it in half an hour.?
?Those hills will break your neck, Billy.?
?They shan?t break Ned?s liberty; and I?m in the
game now; and it?s for the game?s sake. You stay
here, Ned, or, better still, go to the other pub. Get
a book and lie close. Don?t be seen by Helder and
McCaw?they may be in the township at any
minute.?
?Can?t I go with you, Mister?? pleaded the Prodi-
gal, afraid of inaction, and scorning the proposed
study of literature.
?That you can?t ?you mustn?t be seen with me till
this is over . . . Harry! You keep McCaw and the


others quiet. You slope, Ned, to the other pub
I?ll be back in an hour.?
Hoskins objected weakly, but while he objected,
Billy Pagan was going. Two minutes later we heard
the click of a horse?s hoofs on the cobbled water-
channel ; then the noise of iron on timber as the horse
galloped over the bridge and up the further hill
The chase for the fifty of McCaw had begun.
The waiting minutes dragged as slowly as the
last days of a long voyage to a sailor-man ?Hoskins
waiting feverishly at the Miners' Rest , whose name
must have seemed an elaborate insult; time could not
have gone more slowly than with me.
After a quarter jof am hour of 'waiting, I went to the
Miners' Rest and found the Prodigal gazing moodily
at the clock. Wc drank together and pretended to
converse, but the study of the clock fascinated us.
??Arf an ?cur ?he?s there, Mr. Fleet??
?Yes, Ned.?
?We?ll have another drink on the strength of it ?
?All right.?
?Two whiskies, Miss . , . put ?em down t?
me. ? ?
?Oh! I forgot, Ned ?here?s your money.? I
handed him the balance of the misappropriated fifty,
and he winced as he took it.
?Here?s luck, Mister Fleet
?Good luck, Ned.?
?Thirty-five minits. He?s askin? Graham t?ave a
drink.?
?Yes?Ned.?
?Will y?ave a cigar, Mister Fleet??
?Don?t mind if I do,?


?Right-o ... a cigar, Miss, please . . . the best
in the ?ouse. Here?s a match, Mister Fleet
Good luck t? yer.?
?Good luck, Ned.?
??Twenty minits to! He?s ?avin? a drink with
Graham. ?
?I suppose he is.?
??l seen in the paper they?re goin? t? open up the
old Great Western again.?
??Ah!?
??Yes . . . they?ve sold a arf of her to a Brisbane
syndicate for puttin? up enough money t? sink a noo
main shaft. They?re a mean lot o? blokes what
owned the Western. They took fortchins out o?
that mine, an? starved the poor thing. Wouldn?t
give her no pumps, an T the water beat ?cr an? she
lost her shaft. It?s a dam shame to treat a mine like
that. Live an? let live, I say. If a mine?s bin good
t? you, be good to her, 7 say.?
?You?re quite right, Ned.?
?Oh! I can?t stand waitin? . . . Ten minits to!
He?s got the note . . . an? he?s started back.?
The hoofs of a horse moving at a slow tired trot
made irregular sounds in the badly metalled street.
?An? there he is??
?Impossible,? said I?? Your anxiety Is making
you jumpy. He couldn?t be there yet. And that
horse is broken-winded. I can hear him.?
?I tell yer it?s ?im.? He rose and walked to the
door, but started back at once and returned mutter-
ing to his chair. I rose in my turn and walked out-
side to see the new-comer, who had already passed.
The horse was dejected and foot-weary; the man
rolled his bulky figure from side to side like a ship?s


cargo shifting in a gale. It was McCaw. I followed
the weary horse and reached the Post Office Hotel
as McCaw, cursing the road and the horse, began the
serious and involved labour of dismounting.
?Shall I help you, Mister McCaw??
?Hallo ! That?s yourself, I guess, Mister Fleet.
No?don?t trouble to help me ... I don?t want no
help this end o? the journey ...?
He alighted, gaspingly??l can fall off] an? if it
warn?t for the interferin? laws o? gravitation I could
fall on to a horse, also ?an? that would save me a
peck o? trouble, I guess.?
?Did you have any trouble this trip??
?No?because I took monstrous care I didn?t get
off that critter once I got on him. Didn?t give the
laws o? gravitation a chance since I boarded that
craft at Puffin? Williams?s . . . But d?ye notice the
most indecent noise that boss makes as he travels??
?He?s broken-winded. ?
?Broken-winded? I guess he ain?t no boss?he?s
a whayal?the identical whayal what swallcred Jonah
an? he ain?t got rid o? Jonah yet. Yew can hear
Jon rattlin? about inside of him.?
?You?re a bit knocked out, Mr. McCaw?Come in
and have a drink.?
?I guess I will. The last drink I had was at
Puffin? Williams?s. ?Twas a bottle o? beer, an? I
was so hot that when I drank you could hear the fust
haf of it hiss, an? the second haf splashed.?
We sat in the parlour that had so recently heard
the deliberations of Pagan and the Prodigal; and
there, by long-drawn-out drinks and long-drawn-out
talk, I held McCaw to gain time. He made many
attempts to go to his room; but I held to him closely,


knowing that until he had bathed and changed his
clothes he would not think of enquiring of the note
nor of informing the police ?for although a careless
man enough while in the bush, he was in his heavy
gross way something of a rough dandy when in a
township.
?Wall Now I mus? go . . . No! not another
drop o? rye till I?ve had a batth. ? . For sure . . .
No! I won?t this time. I must get mesel pretty,
an? get on the trail o? that two hunderd an? fifty dol-
lars.?
?Man! I feci mad over that two hunderd an? fifty
dollars ...?
?If anybody gets at me an? I can?t get level with
him I?m mos? like to cry like a teething infant.?
?Do you know the number of the note??
?No ?but Holder has it, I think. Anyhow, we
know it?s Bank of Capricornia. Well! I?m off to
sluish,?
I heard the quick hoof-falls in the street that I
knew were the sounds of Oxide returning, and this
time I allowed McCaw to go.
?You?ve got the note, old man?? I said interro-
gatively, as he dismounted from the reeking chest-
nut.
?No?Graham banks here as well as at the coast ?
he paid it into the Capricornian agency this morn-
ing.?
?What?s the next move then??
?You bank there, too. Draw a cheque for fifty
pounds and see if you can get the note for it. Has
McCaw arrived yet??
?Yes?he?s in the bath by now.?
?Then there?s not a moment to lose. As soon as


he?s ready he?ll think about visiting the police, and
if Helder comes in in the meantime it will only hurry
matters. ?
I went to the bank and cashed the cheque ?re-
ceiving a fifty pound note. It was a Bank of the
Barrier note.
?Another difficulty, old man,? said I??it?s the
wrong note.?
?Good Lord ! It must be raining fifty pound notes
in this camp. After to-day and for a year the chances
are that there won?t be a note of this denomination
nearer than Townsville.?
?But meanwhile??
?Meanwhile we must have that note somehow?
I?ll draw a cheque for a hundred and fifty and cash
it myself.?
We returned to the bank together. ?Three fifties
please,? said Billy Pagan to the teller.
?Can?t do it,? said the teller ??I can do two and
that cleans me out.?
?That?ll have to do then,? said Billy, glancing at
me reassuringly. We were certain to have the in-
criminating note in a moment.
The teller handed over two fifties ?again on the
Bank of the Barrier?and five fens of the Capricor-
nia.
?Sure you can?t do the other one?? asked Billy
Pagan, disappointed, but apparently careless.
?Quite sure ?I cashed a fifty for Mr. Fleet ten
minutes ago, and the warden?s clerk got two fifties
for a heap of gold and silver he didn?t want to hold. ?
The warden?s clerk ?-worse and worse. Detec-
tion was now absolutely certain ?the tracing of the
note in its travels beyond doubt. Cashed at the


Post Office Hotel, and the change used to pay the
warden?s office fees, paid in by Graham, paid out
to the warden?s clerk ?the chain was more than
complete.
We returned to Ned Hoskins and told him of our
discomfiture.
?I?m at a dead end,? said Billy Pagan??it?s up
to you now, Ned. If the fifty is to be got from the
warden?s clerk you?re the man to do it.?
Then the Prodigal brightened unaccountably--
?If I get the note will that be the end of it, Mr.
Pagan?? '
?I think so. I think we can say almost certainly,
can?t we, Harry??
?Yes ?if Ned can bring me the note I?ll find a way
to get it back to McCaw.?
?Then the question is, Ned, how are you going to
get at the warden?s clerk?s cash safe??
Ned thought awhile?thought hard ??I c?d belt
him one between the eyes?only he?s a little bloke and
I wouldn?t hit him.?
?Man! Man! You mustn?t think of such a thing
Great Scott! You?d hang yourself if we left you
for a moment. No ! he must show you the cash of
his own free will, and you must find a means of
changing the notes.?
?Right-o?that?s square an? all, sure enough . . .
I know. Before he?ll show me his cash I?ll have to
want change for something??
?That?s it,? said Billy Pagan in a flash ??Go and
apply for a water right on the Sudden Jerk.?
Ned Hoskins stood up excitedly. ?My grief!
Yes ?that?s the ticket . . . Wait a minute. Gimme
a fifty . . . Gimme two.?


?Why two??
?So that if the worst does come, and I get lum-
bered, I?ll have the two fifties on me when the police
search me; an? that?ll mystify ?em more . . . You
can trust me, Mr. Pagan??
?Of course. Trust you with more than that.
There?s the two fifties! . . . But we?ll come with
you. ?
?Better not, Mr. Pagan. I wouldn?t like to get
good men into trouble, and if I do fall in it might
hurt you a bit to be there with me.?
?Hurt us? ?not much. Wc want to see the fun
Come along, Harry. Now then ?Quick march to
the warden?s. The office closes at half past three ?
we have just twenty minutes. ?
In the warden?s office Ned the Prodigal wrote out
the application for the non-existent water rights at
the Sudden Jerk, and tendered a fifty pound note
in payment.
?By George! this country?s raining fifties to-day,?
said the warden?s clerk??l don?t think I can change
it.?
He opened his safe, took out the cashbox and
brought it to the counter where we stood, removed
the upper tray and searched the gold compartment.
?No ! I haven?t enough?wait till'l see if the
warden has a tenner.? As he passed from the office
into an inner room he looked back at the empty cash-
box, decided it was quite safe, and disappeared.
Trembling in his excitement, but acting not a whit
too quickly to effect the successful changing of the
notes, Ned the Prodigal removed the cheques that
topped the notes, then three ten pound notes, lifted
the lower note of the two fifties, and substituted for


It the fifty-Bank-of-the-Barrier note he held in hi-
hand.
We came close together to look at it. It was *he
note of the Bank of Capricornia. I wanted to cheer
in my excitement and relief.
?Steady! Steady!? said Billy Pagan, as if divin-
ing my desire ??He?s coming back.?
?I can?t do it,? said the clerk. He replaced the
cash tray in the box, locked it and returned it to the
safe.
?Oh! Well?l can do it in cash if you like, but
I?d like t? have got the change,? said Ned the Prodi-
gal.
The clerk again said he was sorry, accepted the
cash, and wrote a receipt for the application money
for the water rights of Sudden Jerk, a property in
which we had suddenly lost all interest.
I returned alone to the Post Office Hotel, taking
with me the incriminatory note, and Billy Pagan and
the Prodigal followed slowly after.
At the hotel door I met McCaw, spruce and shaven
and shining. I evaded his invitation to drink, and
ran upstairs to my own room, which was next
McCaw?s. I had located it by seeing his dusty
riding boots at the door. I waited a moment to be
sure that I was alone on that floor; then, feeling like
a hunted criminal, I ran into McCaw?s room, stuffed
the note into the breast-pocket of his coat, which
was already bulging with papers, and ran down-
stairs again.
And there were Helder and Bailey, dismounting
under the verandah, and McCaw talking excitedly to
them; and at that moment Billy Pagan and the Prod-
igal turned the corner and joined the group.


?Hallo!? said McCaw ?? Here?s the saphead what
wanted to be asked twice to two dinners on the one
day. How are you, Mister Horskins???
?I?m good an? strong,? replied Ned ?and I ad-
mired the composure of the man, for there had sound-
ed suspicion and menace in McCaw?s words, and 1
looked at him reassuringly to tell him that the cover-
ing of his tracks was complete?? How are you,
Mister McCaw? Did yer have any more funny ?orse
rides??
'
?Yes, I did,? replied McCaw, also on his mettle ?
?An? the lasst ride I had was from Puffin? Williams?s
to a fio- lice station lookin? for a note.?
?A note what your girl wrote to the sergeant, was
it?? asked the Prodigal, grinning at his opponent.
?No? Sirr, it was not. It was a fifty pound note
with a message on it to the sergeant, askin? him to
give the man that held it two years.?
?Well ?why don?t you go an? take your two
years??
?Me? I ain?t got the note?that?s the trouble.
Might you have seen two hundred an? fifty dollars
goin? round the town, an? sayin? to a big saphead
fr?m Sudden Jerk, ?Eat me, please?? ?
?Was your note anything like this?? asked Hos-
kins, taking from his pocket the note Billy Pagan
had given him, and flaunting it with a slight imita-
tion of McCaw?s manner at the Jerk two days before.
They were dumbfounded, and McCaw as silent as
a parrot in a thunderstorm; but Helder broke in
with ?
?Well, that?s all very fine and large ?but fifty be-
longing to me, or rather to McCaw, because I hold


him responsible, has been lost or it?s been lifted, and
I want to know where it is.?
?Well?ask McCaw.?
?I tell you I ain?t got no fifty,? growled McCaw ?
??lt was lifted fr?m me at the Jerk or Puffin? Wil-
liams?s.?
??Have you looked in your pockets?? asked Billy
Pagan.
??Looked in my packets? I tell y? I?ve looked in
the button holes. She ain?t there.?
??Well, it?s pretty serious starting the police on a
thing you?re not sure of,? said Helder???Look in
your pockets, again.?
??Oh ! I guess you make me tired ... I tell y? I
have looked . . . An? I didn?t have these clothes on
either. ?
??Where are the clothes you wore then ? ? asked
Helder.
??Why?in my room ?d?ye think I put ?em in the
ash-barr?l??
?Well ?look for the last time before we go to the
station. ?
?Oh! Hell! All right?anything for peace.?
He climbed the stairs swearing grumblingly?he
came down again swearing disgustedly?taking
three steps at a bound to the danger of his own neck.
He ran to us in great anger, disgusted at finding the
note.
?What son of a gun planted the note in my packet?
Tell me that! What second storey man?s been at
work on my wardrobe? Who put the note in my
packet??
?It?s no use playing the Joseph and Benjamin


game here,? said Billy Pagan. ??You?ve got the
note ?that ends it.?
??The fact is,? said Helder, with a very superior
sneer, ?You were a bit full at Puffing Billy?s and you
didn?t look through your pockets thoroughly. You?ve
given a lot of trouble, but it?s been mostly to your-
self, so there?s no harm done.?
?No harm done? An? you say I was full at Puffin?
Williams?s? I tell you that greenback was smuggled
int?r my parket ?I ain?t -never seen the note for two
days?there?take your blassted paper, an? don?t let
me see it no more . . . No thanks ?I won?t drink . . .
I have been mortal hurt by this ongentlemanly idea
that I was drunk and onable to look through my own
clothes for two hunderd an? fifty dollars . . . No! Sir
. . . Mr. Horksins, I?m sorry I thought you had
annexed that note.. .Gentlemen ! A good afternoon
to you all.. .No, Sir. ..1 will not drink.?
He walked away through the hotel, still protest-
ing ; and there were three of the group who from that
hour admired McCaw ?and one of the three was my-
self.


No. 7.? The Salt of Gam. Ylaccoun.
My friend had been commissioned to report on the
New Paris, which had been developed by a small
Tasmanian syndicate and offered to Pagan?s prin-
cipals in London. The syndicate wanted three thous-
and pounds cash for two-thirds interest in
the property, and it wanted the three thous-
and pounds very badly?so that its estimate of one
hundred thousand pounds? worth of gold in sight was
very much discounted in consequence.
We had been loafing very luxuriously at Hobart
when the cable of advice came to Billy Pagan, and,
as usual, I had joined him in the expedition because
at starting I was in happy ignorance of the awful
wilderness we had to cross. From the King River
it was all compass work ?not a track anywhere, and
in places not even foothold for a horse, so that we
had to carry our swags through the jungle, up the
razor-sharp crags and across the great expanse of
vegetable sponge.
The long tramp ended not a moment too soon for
me ?we were both so weary that little was said till
after tea, when we sat in front of the prospecor?s hut
at New Paris?before us a black plateau sloping
away to the horizon, behind us the great crape-black


mass of the funereal mountain with but two reliefs ?
the dead white dump of quartzite at Maccoun?s tunnel
on a leading spur, and Maccoun?s mill-house ?its
galvanised iron roof crackling and shining like a
lake of silver in the setting sun.
Tunks, the mate of Gam. Maccoun, passed us with
a dishful of embers from the fire. He went into his
tent, and through the open fly we saw him pass the
dish across and along the tent roof at a distance of
a few inches. There was an angry buzzing for a
moment,and a smell of burning insects, and'then
Tunks came out of the tent again, and we saw the
ceiling white where it had been blackened by hordes
of flies.
?Good idea, that,? said Billy Pagan, with his
usual ready admiration of resource ??Mr. flunks is
inventive.?
Tunks had heard the words and responded with a
man?s natural love of praise showing in his tone ?
?Oh! That?s nothin? ?a man?s got to wipe out flies
or he?d get et.? . . . He seemed glad of the opening
for conversation, and proceeded ??I s?pose you?ll
start samplin? the show t?morrer??
?Yes ?unless you want us to wait for Mr. Mac-
coun. ? ?
?Gam.? There?s no sense in doin? that. .. Me
and Saddles can do all y? want. But he?ll be here
before you?re finished the contrack . . . Won?t he,
Petey??
Saddler, a little, round barrel of a man who seemed
to live in a condition of perpetual grin and was very
slow to words, had been sitting on his heels cleaning
his pipe with a button grass stalk, grinned very
broadly, and replied that Gam. Maccoun had never


been known to stay longer than three days at the
Settlement when he went there to buy rations, and
that he could safely be expected at the end of the
week.
?All right,? said Billy Pagan?We?ll go on with
the sampling, although as he?s the principal he might
have been able to save me some time and trouble
had he been here. How long will it take??
Tunks looked at him for a moment, and then said
?About three days if you?re slippy.?
In the mine the next day Billy Pagan showed
plainly enough that he was convinced of the little
value of this latest and most difficult gold proposition.
As we stood by the glaring dump of quartzite that
starred' the blacknes of the mountain, Tunks ap-
proached us and offered a score of sample bags.
Billy Pagan smilingly refused them, saying??No.
thanks ?we?ve brought enough bags?we?ll pan off
the samples of each day at the finish o? the day?s
work.? Tunks went forward of us towards the
tunnel mouth and somewhat discomfited I thought.
?You won?t take any samples away then, Billy??
?No ?only samples I can carry in my waistcoat
pocket. It?s enough for a man to carry his own
body out of these awful hills, and anyhow there?s no
necessity for It.?
Saddler scrambled up the dump, which rolled back
on him. He grinned in mingled welcome and en-
quiry, and we entered the tunnel. It was very
shallow-driven at a depth of more than a hundred
feet from the top of the outcrop, although there was
another thousand feet of mountain below.
?This your only working?? asked Billy Pagan of
Tunks.


?Yes ?at least the only one we put in. There was
a crank before us put in a tunnel five ?undred feet
lower down, but there?s nothin? in it. Here?s the
real Mackay. ?
He struck the shining white wall with the en-
gineer?s hammer he carried as we turned into a drive,
but Billy Pagan apparently did not hear him. He
lingered in the tunnel a dozen feet or so in the rear,
and seemed to be deeply interested in the examina-
tion of the country rock.
?Here?s the real Mackay,?? repeated Tunks, and at
that Billy Pagan advanced; and we followed the
motions of Tunks?s arm, as he raised or lowered his
candle to show us the reef of the New Paris.
From far back in the tunnel the voice of Saddler
was heard hailing his mate, and Tunks, with a hur-
ried word of explanation, passed into the tunnel
again, leaving myself and Billy Pagan alone in the
drive.
?What do you think of it, Billy???
?What can any man think of it? Surely, they must
intend to salt us. Why, on sight this stuff is dog
poor?-it?s worth only a few weights.??
Certainly it looked very hungry?a close white
quartzite, dense and fine-grained as lump sugar.
?Then you think it?s a salt??
?Almost sure ?they can?t hope to have me other-
wise. If they intend salting they?ve done it already.
That smiling gentleman had probably prepared for us
yesterday, and Tunks was anxious that we should
use his bags this morning.?
?They?d salt the bags, you think??
?They?d salt anything, Harry. They?d salt birds?


tails ?that is, they would if they are what I think they
are, and, if they are not, they are prize idiots.?
?I see ?to think that a show like this can impose
on you??
?Or any man. Here they come. ?
Tunks and the smiling Saddler entered the drive,
and now Billy gave instructions.
?I want you to cut a groove, every six feet, over
the roof and down each wall.?
Saddler agreed, grinning as usual, and Billy spread
the sampling sheet and ordered them to begin.
While they hammered on the drills working single-
handedly, Billy asked for information.
?Who?s the biggest shareholder in the syndicate
that owns this show, Tunks??
?We are, Mr. Pagan ?me an? -Saddler an? Mac-
coun. We?ve got nearly ?arf the shares, an? Gam.
owns as much o? the ?arf as me an? Petey put to-
gether.?
?So that you three hold nearly a half and Maccoun
owns half of it??
?Yes.?
?What sort of crushings did you get out of this??
?Oh, ounce, fifteen weights, ounce an? a quarter--
varyin?, y? know.?
?And how long is it since you ran the mill??
?Six weeks ago, then we had to stop on account
of ?avin? no water ?water?s our trouble. It ain?t
stone, you can see.?
All day we sampled the tunnel workings, and at
dusk, very weary of the long, molten day in that
windless grave, we walked down the tunnel and out
to the black hillside.


?S?pose another day ?ull do you, Mr. Pagan??
asked Tunks.
?Might,? replied Billy, carelessly; ?I?ll have a day
looking round when I?ve finished the show.?
At that I thought Tunks and Saddler looked dis-
appointed, but Tunks replied immediately and cheer-
fully :
?All right ?just?s you like. . ?. There?s a big lot of
stone proved, isn?t there, Mr. Pagan??
?Yes?does it go to the surface??
?Yes, there?s stone showing in an open cut on the
top of the mountain.?
?Well, we?ll have a look at that to-morrow, too.?
He stopped suddenly on the edge of a sudden fall in
the ground masked by the waves of button grass, and
said, ?There a hole here.?
?Yes,? said Tunks, ?the chap who was here before
us put the tunnel in there. It?s a different sort o?
stuff to what we?re working on. Nearly all pyrites
an? a bit o? copper in It.?
From the decomposing pyrites dump below us
came the stench of sulphur, and in the half dark
a smoke seemed to rise from the heap.
?Smells pretty strong, don?t it?? said Saddler.
?Yes,? said Billy, ?it?s stronger after rain, isn?t
it??
?My oath,? replied Tunks ??stinks like a box o?
wait-a-while matches then, it does.?
Billy Pagan had stowed the bags of samples under
our bunks in Gam. Maccoun?s tent for safe keeping,
and early next morning we crushed the samples with
pestle and mortar and panned them off.
I dried the pannings, and Billy collected them in


numbered slips of paper, saying, as he put the results
in his belt pouch :
?A salt, sure enough.?
?Is it, Billy??
?Dead sure. But they?ve done it well. It?s only
just a little overdone. These samples average about
an ounce to the ton, but the ore is no ounce stuff ?
I say that on face value.?
?What will you do, then ?throw up the whole
thing and go??
?Not much ?it?s too interesting to abandon. No,
I?ll wait till Maccoun comes, and we?ll sample the
show again to-day.?
?But why??
?Well, for one thing, it will keep Mr. Tunks from
feeling lonely, and the smiling gentleman can exer-
cise his ingenuity on divising other ways of salting
a mine. I daresay he knows nearly all the two
hundred and forty-nine ways there are,?
?Coin? to the open cut first thing this mornin???
asked Tunks of my friend.
?Yes ?and after that we?ll sample the tunnel work-
ings again.?
?Sample ?em again!? echoed Saddler. ?Wasn?t
yesterd?y?s samples O.K. ??
?My own carelessness, I suppose,? said Billy
smiling benevolently on him. ?I think I missed
some of it, so I?ll take a check sample.?
It was nearly eleven o?clock when we at last crawl-
ed wearily to the summit of the mountain.
Billy Pagan walked through the open cut, which
was a very small open cut of a dozen feet square and
a few feet deep, the work evidently of a madman,
considering the hungry, barren nature of the quartz-


ite and the inaccessibility of that summit which would
have made an otherwise payable reef unpayable.
Tunks evidently read our thoughts, for he said,
?Fair loonatic, Tommy Abbot was, used to go round
sayin? there was no gold here ?it was a copper
show.?
?And why did he give it up if he was a lunatic??
asked Billy. ?Madmen don?t give up easily any-
thing they believe in.?
?The button-grass burned his camp out year be-
fore last, an? it seemed to finish him. He comes
down to Maria?s Landing an? he says, ?l?m done.
When?s the next boat East?? he says. ?l?m done,?
he says?just like that.?
?And he was the man who made the lower tun
nel??
?Yes, same cove. . . You?re not goin? to sample
this, Mr. Pagan??
?No ?just wanted to have a look at it. We?ll go
back to your tunnel for the check samples now.?
To me the proceedings that day were farcical.
Billy Pagan had, with a rare thoughtlessness, left
his own sample bags at the camp, and I confess that
I marvelled at his carelessness in accepting the bags
handed him by Saddler, who grinned even more than
usual, and, I thought, offered the bags wtih badly-
concealed eagerness.
When we came to the last sample Billy Pagan re-
jected a bulk sample that had been broken out before
us and represented a fair average of the whole, and
chose, instead, two lumps of particularly hard quartz
which the hammer and drill of the samplers had not
shattered.
The day?s work was done much more quickly than


that of the first, I wondered at my friend?s per-
functoriness. At the lower tunnel he betrayed a care-
less interest in the decomposing and rotten-smelling
dump; and Tunks, noticing this, said :
?I?ve got a bit o? candle in my weskit, Mr. Pagan.
Would you like to see in ole Tommy Abbot?s tun-
nel??
Pagan answered carelessly that we might as well,
and we entered, walking ankle deep in the yellow
ooze of the mine waters.
Billy shed the rays of the candle on the black-
green tunnel wall and tapped it with his hammer.
In a few places where struck it sounded as if it had
been shattered by dynamite, and thin flakes fell away
?in one or two projections of more massive pyrites
it rang like metal, the faces remaining the same.
?That?s harder to work than in your tunnel,
Tunks,? said Billy. ?I don?t think you could drive
many feet a week on that.?
?/ could, mister,? said the hitherto silent Saddler;
?I?m the best drillman between ?ere an? the landin?.?
?I?ll bet you half a sov. you can?t do half the work
here you would in the upper tunnel.?
?I won?t bet you, Mister, because you?d lose y?r
money, and I ain?t got a drill with me ?but look
?ere.? He swung the hammer on the bosses of rock,
finding the lines of weakness as if by instinct, and, in
five minutes, he had twenty pounds weight of solid
pyrites lying on the floor.
Billy told him if he was as good with the drill as
with the hammer he must be a ringer, and Saddler
grinned at the praise as he led the way out of the
tunnel and down the springy mountain.
In our tent that night I noticed that Pagan was


careless as to the disposal of the samples, and this
prompted me to revert to his carelessness of the
morning in accepting from Saddler bags which had
probably been salted. As reply, he laughed, select-
ed the bag containing the last sample taken that day,
and said, as he untied the string :
?I put two pieces of quartz in this, didn?t I??
?Yes, old man. ??
?There were no broken bits and fines, were there??
?No.?
He withdrew from the bag two pieces of quartz,
tore two leaves from his pocketbook, turned the bag
inside out and carefully dusted its contents on to the
paper, giving special attention to the corners and
seams of the bag.
?Look at that?what is it??
?One ?two ?three ?four ?seven strong colours of
gold.?
?Which was put in the bag by Saddler before he
gave me the bag.?
?But you knew he?d salt the bags.?
?Yes ?but I wanted to be sure. And I put big
pieces of hard rock that wouldn?t splinter into the
last bag, so that, having proved it to be a salt, I
needn?t trouble to crush and pan all the others.?
T see ?and what are we going to do now??
?Sample her again.?
?Sample her again? What for??
?Because I?ve made up my mind to wait for
Maccoun.?
?But why??
?Oh, I?m curious to see what manner of man he
?That isn?t the reason, Billy.?


He laughed. ?It is the reason for to-night,
Harry.?
?But they?ll think you think the samples have been
salted ?if you ask for another sampling.?
?I intend they should think so. And I?ll take all
sorts of imaginary care over the next sampling.?
?Imaginary care??
?Pure imaginary. But I won?t do the next samp-
ling till Maccoun is here. . . He?s expected to-mor-
row night.?
Tunks seemed surprised and disappointed at our
determination to sample the New Paris for the third
time, but he disguised his feelings fairly well and
was apparently more satisfied when Billy Pagan stat-
ed his intention of waiting the arrival of Maccoun
before proceeding with the sampling. Maccoun, he
said, would surely return by next nightfall, and Billy
stated in reply that he would loaf for the day of wait-
ing.
His idea of ?loafing for a day? translated itself
next morning into a careless wandering over the
mountain side with me. While we remained in sight of
the camp and an nergetc examination of everything
doubly noticeable by the contrast with his early
morning pose of laziness as soon as we a/ere free
from observation.
We skirted the mountain, turned its eastern foot-
hill and found a sullenly glowing furnace. The
button-grass had burned itself out for half up the
foothill, our feet sank into the deep featheriness of
spent ashes, the rocks below still glowed; and where
the burnt out places had been exposed to the wind the
rocks showed below fire-blackened, but clean of but-


ton-grass, and, for the first time in many centuries,
open to the day.
?The fire knew we were coming to prospect,? said
Billy Pagan, who accepted everything that happened
in his favour as having been done by design, ?and it
has cleaned up just the bits of a mountain I wanted
to see.?
?It must be almost impossible to prospect this
country when it?s covered with three feet or so of
this peaty stuff,? said I.
?Almost! It?s quite impossible unless a man took
on the awful job of stripping the button-grass, and
then it?s ten to one he?d strip it in the wrong place.
But good old Missus Nature has done it for us at
the right time. ?
?Very obliging of her. But what has the fire un-
covered??
He was moving quickly from place to place strik-
ing the denuded rock with his hammer and breaking
it away in flakes and splinters, and, as I followed
him with the enquiry, he replied :
?Not sure yet ?but Tommy Abbott wasn?t any
madman. He drove that lower tunnel just at the
right point and, if a button-grass fire didn?t show it
to him, he had a genius for nosing it out.?
It was early afternoon before we returned to the
camp, and there we met Gamaliel Maccoun. He
was a tall man. of a spare and big-boned strength
that gave me at once an impression of his tireless-
ness. His long, loose-skinned neck suggested to me
something vulpine, and that suggestion was strength-
ened by the greedy mouth, the thin scalp covering of
the retreating high forehead, the hawk?s nose and the


great ragged red moustache that slightly disguised
the cruel rapacity of the mouth.
He agreed with apparent cheerfulness to the pro-
posal to re-sample the mine next day, although at
heart I believe he liked it as little as did Saddler
and Tunks.
The fire in the button-grass showed in appalling
proximity that night?a wind sprang up and drove
the smoke towards us. The points of light that had
been separated like the watch fires of a besieging
army were now formed in a ring of fire ?it lit the
distant plateau with a furnace glare now and paled
the angry moon.
We went through the solemn farce of sampling for
the third time, Billy examining every bag, breaking
every sample, quartering it, bagging it, and sealing
it with an exaggerated carefulness that annoyed the
prospectors and amused me. At two in the after-
noon we carried the samples to the camp fire down
a lane of half a mile in width, as yet clear of the
fire.
Tunks was ordered to crush the samples and
Saddler to pan them, and Billy Pagan, Maccoun and I
stood by the man with the dish and watched. Two
of the bags Billy put aside, saying he would not pan
them on the mine, but would take them to the coast
as a check on the other samples. Maccoun and his
mates seemed pleased at this. The work of crush-
ing and panning went on cheerfully.
?Do you chew tobacco, Harry?? asked Billy
Pagan in an undertone.
?No. Why on earth do you ask that??
?Look at Maccoun ?I never say him chewing be-


fore, nor Tunks either. Now both of them are at it
Quiet, old chap?don?t let them think you?re watch-
ing.?
Tunks and Maccoun were both chewing; as Tunks
whirled the dish of crushed dirt and water he spat in
it at intervals; Maccoun, standing by Tunks, looked
at us furtively, and, as Billy Pagan studiously averted
his gaze Maccoun spat in the dish.
Then Saddler arose from the mortar in which he
was crushing the next sample, strolled leisurely and
grinning to the other two, looked about him in his
turn, thought he was unobserved, and, as solemnly
as if it were a religious rite, spat in the dish in his
turn.
??Even Saddler is such a gentleman that the wide
world isn?t good enough for him ?he has to have the
cuspidor,? said Billy, and then the meaning of it all
flashed on me. They were chewing gold dust with
the tobacco and spitting it into the sample.
I had half started, forward, but Billy?s hand re-
strained me, and he led the way to them instead.
??lf you spat on the pavement in Melbourne like
that you?d be be fined a pound, Maccoun,? he said.
??What d?yer mean?? demanded Maccoun, all
the ill blood in him mounting to his face.
??But it wouldn?t matter how often they prosecuted
you, because you could spit the gold to pay the fine. ?
??What are yer getting? at?? said Maccoun again,
but fiercely this time.
??Just what I say. Think of a smart man like
you, Maccoun, taking a man like me for a fool.
Those tricks were old before the first new chum
struck bottom on Ballarat.?


Maccoun was wordless at that?Saddler forgot to
grin; only Tunks found a voice.
?I don?t b?lieve in doin? things crook,? he said.
?There?s gold in the show ?honest.?
? I know there is, and it might be good enough as
it is, but these salt tricks would put a man off buying
it even if it were a good show.?
The credulity of these knaves was wonderful to
behold ?they thought that, after all, the mine might
be valuable, and that a better man than they might
have so found it, and they Immediately disclaimed
any intention of a sympathy with salting as if they
had never tried to salt.
Billy Pagan smiled. ?Now look here,? said he,
?this show is under offer to us ?or two-thirds of it is
for three thousand pounds. It?s not rich enough to
be worked on a small scale, and for a big scale it?s a
gamble. Well, if the two bags of samples I?m tak-
ing away with me give anything like decent value,
I?m on for the gamble. And I won?t take the gamble
unless I take your interest in the two-thirds that?s
left. Who besides you has any interest in the
mine??
?Simpson ?the Hobart chap who?s been paying
for the development; he owns a quarter.?
?He put up all the money??
?Yes.?
?Poor Simpson ?he?s gone broke over it, hasn?t
he ?? ?
Maccoun grinned, so did Saddler; Tunks appear-
ed sorry for Simpson.
?And who owns the other bit??
?Brett.?


?He?s the man who offered us them in London???
?Yes.?
?Will he sell? I won?t let anybody in with me
on a dice game if my people are to find the money.?
?Oh, yes,? replied Maccoun, ?Brett ?ull sell all
right. He?s stiff, too.?
?All right. Then you give me a two months?
option over your interest for four hundred pounds
and I?ll go on if I think the gamble?s good' enough.?
?Four ?undred ?but you?ve got to pay three thous-
and for the two-thirds that?s under offer to you now.?
?And if we don?t get all we don?t want two-
thirds. And that price was agreed to on lying reports
and I hadn?t seen you spit in the dish till to-day, you
know. ?
Shame called upon them to agree and so make
their attempt at salting covered up and forgotten ;
want and greed and the fear of losing all by haggl-
ing turned the scale in the affirmative. In half an
hour they had jointly and severally transferred their
interests to William Grey Pagan, his heirs, execu-
tors, administrators and assigns, subject to the
pavment of four hundred pounds within two months
of that date; and Billy bound the agreement with a
deposit of a sovereign to Gamaliel Maccoun.
They were very tender to the two bags of samples
Billy proposed to take to the coast for testing,
depositing them almost reverentially in his tent, at
which my friend smiled the smile of a man in the
bliss of a good joke.
For the first three-quarters of a mile in our march
to Maria?s Landing that day we passed many out-
crops of pyritic rock Billy Pagan had showed


me in the lower tunnel and on the other face of the
mountain. We walked at a little distance behind
the prospectors of New Paris, and, as Saddler cursed
for the hundredth time at the weight of the samples,
Billy Pagan laughed heartily.
?Don?t keep it all to yourself, old man,? said I.
?What?s the joke??
?See those samples Saddler is carrying??
?Yes.?
?Why is he carrying them??
?Because he hopes they?ve got gold enough in
them for you to buy the mine.?
?I suspect he has seen to that. He has salted
those samples as he did the others.?
?If you know that, why are you carrying them
to the coast for testing??
?I?m not; Saddler Is carrying them. But he?s not
carrying quartz from the upper tunnel ?he?s carry-
ing pyrites from Abbott?s workings.?
?How do you know??
?I ought to. At daylight this morning I took
those two bags down to the lower tunnel, emptied ?em
out and filled ?em up again with samples of the
pyrites body.?
?You must have had a rough trip. . . Any fire
there??
?Yes ?blazing a bit at the tunnel mouth, and I just
missed falling into a hole filled with live ashes.?
?But why did you do It??
?D?yer mean to tell me you don?t see the game
yet? This is one of the biggest, probably the biggest,
pyritic propositions in the world. Abbott knew what
he was doing. It?s outcropping all over the moun-
tain, and there?s silica in any quantity capping it?


Copper
Sulphur
Silver
Gold
so there?ll be no trouble about flux. . . These fools
who can only salt a mine clumsily think that Abbott
made that open cut on the mountain to get ore for
the battery. But it?s not an open cut at all ?it?s
a natural depression, and Abbott stripped the button-
grass off it and broke a few stones to get an idea of
the extent of it.?
??Then it?s a big thing??
??Big is no name for it. I know there?s enough
sulphur in the ore to act as fuel, and if there?s one
or one and a half per cent, of copper the New Paris
is a world-beater.?
??So you got the sample early this morning to keep
them in the dark??
??That?s right. And there?s Saddler carrying
pyrites and cursing the weight of quartz.?
Then we both laughed together.
I gather from a note received from Billy Pagan
a month or so ago that the efforts of Mr. Saddler
were not all in vain. The tests of the replaced
samples produced this
And at the moment of my reading of that letter they
were stripping the half-burned button-grass to find a
cold foundation for camp buildings; and other men
with chain and theodolite were pushing trial railway
surveys through those cruel breakneck hills.


No. B.? The Clerks of Darby Bates.
?It isn?t mining?it?s comic opera,?? said Billy
Pagan, as wt stood under the shelter before the
shingle office of the Pudding Hills mine.
The daily rains of the Tasmanian West Coast had
already made runnels of black water over the quartz-
ite rubble of the paths cut through the peaty button-
grass, the water taking its coaly tint as it filtered
through the decayed vegetable matter of the peat.
Mists and jungle topped by ash and honeysuckle
trees, with a wall-like undergrowth of King Billy
ferns, half-hidden by musk-scrub and hazel, closed
the outlook before us ?behind and to the right were
heavily-timbered mountains whose crests held the
showers in the afternoons and discharged them regu-
larly between midnight and noonday; and, at our
left, was the great conglomerate outcrop that gave
?the Pudding Hills Copper and Gold Mines Limited??
their name.
?I can?t get the hang of mining, somehow,? I
replied, ?but even I can see the thing?s an utter
fraud.?
?It?s more than utter ?it?s funny.?
?I don?t expect the shareholders would see the
humour of it.?


? No. . . Yet probably at this moment there is a
beautifully-dressed gentleman in London addressing
the shareholders, and all of them bleating, ?Yer!
yer!? whenever he stops to think of another lie.?
??But how can It have lasted two years without
discovery??
?Easily. The company has a very big working
capital, and the value or valuelessness of a mine is
rarely held to be proved until the capital is exhausted-
When the wrong kind of manager knows that his
salary Is safe for a few years ahead, he takes'an
optimistic view of the most discouraging develop-
ments. It is the manager of the no-liability company
that is making penny calls who looks gloomily at the
two inches of reef on the hanging wall.?
?But how did this man get the management?
He?s the most ignorant and conceited ass I ever
met.?
?Easy enough. There?s the Westralian boom
and the Queensland boom in full blast, and there are
more mines in Westralia than there are competent
managers in the continent. . . Darby Bates, who is
managing this show, doesn?t know enough to be a
shift boss. The big salaries have taken most of the
good men off this field, and this chap, only six
months in the country, and believing that Cornwall
is the only place on earth worth mentioning, holds
the job in default of a better man.?
?But a man who can neither read or write,
Billy!?
?All the better that a good man isn?t thrown away
on such a show. Look at it! A big body of silicious
iron with a trace of mineral in it. It?s such a hope-
less fraud that even a man with ?consulting engineer?


to his name, and M.A.1.M.E., and R.A.T.S., and
F.U.D.G.E., and other affixes, would be puzzled
to say anything good and cheering to his directors,
and yet be honest. How much more, then, ought
this blatant fool feel the difficulty of the position,
handicapped by his book ignorance!?
??His ignorance saves him.?
??Yes?he?s honest enough. He believes every
word he says. Told me as seriously as a judge that
the mine was a big smelting proposition with good
gold values.?
I laughed with him. ??How did he imagine the
gold into the thing, Billy??
??Oh, somebody panned a prospect in a creek a
mile away and got two colours of gold in the dish,
and Darby swears it?s derived from this hill. He
told me he had written to the London office last week
that the whole mountain is ?cupiferous, auriferous,
argentiferous and ferriferous.? ?
??Where in thunder did he find the words??
??A clerk before this one gave them to him; and
I?m told in the township that Darby wouldn?t use
them while the clerk was here, as it would stain his
dignity to accept the suggestion of an underling;
but once the man left, Darby remembered the words
and dictated them to the clerk who?s here now. He
uses them every mail, I believe.?
??He?s a good clerk, is that chap.?
??He knows more of mining than Darby. And he
tries to make the reports guarded enough; but he?s
fond of Darby, although Darby?s always bullying
him.?
??But he needn?t write exactly as Darby says.?


?Needn?t he? Darby insists on Grainger read-
ing out the letter, and Grainger is honest.?
?But how has the little beast hypnotised Grainger?
He bears insults that another man would answer with
a blow.?
?He?s fond of Darby! Strange, I grant ?but you
can no more explain friendship than you can explain
Love or Luck. But Grainger doesn?t hamper Darby
or make him uncomfortable with respect. Do you
notice how nobody says ?Mister? to the manager?
Even the whim-boy calls him ?Darby.? ?
?S-s-sh! Here he comes.?
Darby advanced, rolling in his gait like a drunken
sailor, though he was a teetotaler. His short, squat
body spoke of brutal strength, his bull-neck ana red
face and small, characterless features spoke of mon-
strous ignorance and equally colossal vanity. ?Hello,
bo,? said he to me and to Billy. ?G?d mornin?, Mr.
Pegrum??avin a look at the houtcrop??
Billy laughed. ?No ?I know it by heart, Darby.?
?You must be smart, then ?seein you only come
yestiddy. She?s a great mine, ain?t she??
We laughed at one another.
?Oh! Larf away! Larf away! Come in outer
the damp. Charley Grainger?s waitin?, for me. It?s
the day for me to write the Henglish letters. Come
in outer the damp.?
We followed him into the office, laughing at the
seeming solicitude for us ?and knowing that he only
wanted us as audience.
?Are yer ready, clerk??
The quick, spry youth at the table showed that he
did not like being called ?clerk,? and I could see
that Darby Bates called him ?Charjey? except be-


fore an audience. The clerk tried to recover his dig-
nity by a pretence of familiarity with us.
?All right, Darby,? said he. ?Hello, mates!?
The ?Darby? before strangers irritated Darby, and
the implied equality of ?Hullo mates? prompted him
to show his superiority.
?Getter pen??
?Yes,? said Charley
?Well, get ready.?
?I am ready.?
?None o? yer lip?got the hink??
?Yes.?
?An? the paper??
?Yes.?
?Gotter good pen??
?Yes?yes.?
?Well, put the hink on it.?
?Oh! All right.?
?Put the hink on it.?
?There! Will that do??
?Now put down ??Hover burden.? ?
?What else, Darby??
?What else? W?y, yer pup?am I managin? the
mine or you??
?You are ?it?s all right, Darby.?
?Well, then! Write ?Hover burden.? ?
?I?ve written it.?
?Ave yer wrote it big??
?Oh, big enough !?
?Arnster me ?Ave yer wrote it big??
?Oh, yes! Oh, yes! I?ll write it with a broom
handle If you like.?
? ?Go?s the manager ?you or me? Hamster me
that??


?You are! You are! I??m nobody. I?m dead.
You?re the manager.?
?That?s right, then, boy. Now write ?No. 1
level.?
Grainger flushed at the word ?boy.? He was
not old enough for the term to have lost its sting,
and Darby Bates knew it.
?Don?t I say anything after ?Overburden.? You
know, like ?removed a thousand cubic yards,? or
something like that??
?Go on! Go on! Yer cheeky pup. Will yer
learn me?? (Then in a voice of terrible calm): ?Put
down ?Number one level.? ?
?Oh, all right?there! It?s down.?
?Now put a semi-comma hafter.?
?You mean a semicolon??
?Oh! I do, do I? Put down a semi-comma, or
I?ll sack yer.?
?Anything for peace. I don?t know what it is, but
I?ll put it down.?
?Yer can?t if yer don?t know what it is. I?ll show
yer.? Darby handled the pen as if it were a shovel,
grunted, took a great dig of ink, made a blot, licked
it off and spat it out, grunted again, and then drew
a new animal, which looked something like a broken-
backed snake, and had also a suggestion'of a crippled
crab.
?There,? he said triumphantly??that?s a semi-
comma.?
Grainger wearily agreed by his silence, and waited
for orders.
?Now put down??Winze from Number one
level.?? '


?But don?t I say anything about the level being
extended north??
?Oh, Lord! Oh, Lord! Do what I tell yer.?
?All right! All right\ All Right! Goon.?
?Winze fr?m Number one level? ??nother semi-
comma.?
?Yes,.?
?Gotter ?nother semi-comma??
?Oh, yes!? said the clerk, drawing an imitation
of the ravening and profane beast invented by
Darby.
?Gotter ?nother semi-comma??
?Yes, I told you.?
?Well, put it then.?
?I?ve done it!?
?Well, put another.
?What do you want two together for??
?What do I want??ain?t I the manager??
?Oh, yes! Oh, yes! Anything!?
?Well, I?m general manager, an? bein? so, I?ll have
a ?undred semi-commas if I want ?em. You do?s yer
told if yer want ter stay with the ?Pudden? ?lll Cop-
per an? Gold Mines Limerted.? which she ain?t, bein'
a great pyryritic proposition.?
?All right! All right\ What?s next, Darby??
?Put ?Reserves hof hore.? ?
?Yes! I?ve got it ??ore reserves.? ?
?What I said was ?reserves hof hore??put it the
way I said.?
?Oh ! There you are ??Reserves of ore.? ?
??Nother semi-comma.?
?Oh! Hell! I?ve got it.?
?Now put ?One million four ?undred thousand
tons.? (Grainger whistled and we grinned.) Up to




? r? ?? ? ? ?-T ? ?
' ' r ' "*h ?
- ? ?? ' ' . . !
HE SET SPURS TO HIS HORS!
Page 167
Billy Pagan


that moment we had consumed our own laughter,
though suffering greatly.
Then said Grainger, ?Well, I?ve not seen ten tons
in the whole show. Isn?t that too strong??
?Too strong ! Why, yer flamin? cub, I?ll say what
I like. Ain?t I the general manager? Ain?t I??
?Oh ! yes?you?re the manager and the main shaft,
and the tunnel, and the poppet heads ?you?re every-
body. ?
?That?s all right ?you remember it, and ? n?t
hamster back. Now, then, put ?conclusions? and
two semicommas. ?
?Oh! Hell! Again? All right, I?ve got it.?
?Now go back to ?hoverburden. ? Say??The hov-
erburden is on top of the lode, excep? what we ?ave
shifted, a matter o? twenty ton for the week. The
quartz prophery ?
?I can?t get that in?l?ve only got half a line be-
fore ?Number one level.? ?
?Well! You are a cuckoo. W?y didn?t yer leave
plenty o? room??
?Yer never told me to.?
?Never told yer! Can?t yer do anything without
me??
?No ?you?re the manager.?
?Ham I? Ham I? I?ll show yer who?s the man-
ager, yer cub ?you can clear outer this t?morrow. ?
?That being so,? said Grainger, ?write your re-
port yourself.? He tore up the paper with the
?semi-commas? on it, and walked away to his own
camp.
Darby Bates gasped in surprise at the sudden de-
fiance. He had presumed on Grainger?s friendli-


ness, had irritated him beyond bearing, and now the
worm had turned.
?The d?rectors sha?n?t ?ave no report at all this
week,? he said in a loud tone of determination to
cover the loss to his precious dignity, due to the in-
dignant clerk?s speech of retreat.
We followed the clerk, and found him in a white
heat of indignation; and even though we laughed
ourselves to weariness, the humour of the situation
never appealed to him. He had been wounded by
the hand of a friend, and the humour, to him, was
tragic.
He packed his belongings in ten minutes, and left
the mine in half-an-hour, walking through the rain-
beaten bush, oblivious to the wetting, stunned by the
ingratitude and presumption of the man whose ig-
norance he had cloaked.
For the three months that followed, Billy Pagan
and I were in Victoria ?working a little and loafing
a great deal. And then, early one morning, while
I sat on the verandah of my hotel at St. Kilda, look-
ing at the lazy waves of Port Phillip Bay tumbling
on the long shoals, I heard Billy?s voice enquiring
my whereabouts of the hotel porter, and I arose and
leaned over, the balcony rail and called to him.
?Come up, Billy.?
He raced up the stairs, two steps at a time, and
stood before me, smiling his friendliness ?a pink,
clean-skinned man, radiating strength and energy.
?What?s up, Billy? You?re early abroad.?
?Yes. A cable came this morning while I was
playing with the youngsters. So 1 got into clothes


when I saw it was serious, and raced down here on
the bike.?
?What?s it about??
?It?s from Harmer. Here you are.?
I took the cable and read ?
?Paludosas Lucry Jamroll Silence Ex-
iguous.?.?
?What?s the decodation, Billy??
?Shares rising rapidly?on glowing reports from
Pudding Hills?examine and cable report ?advise
whether we shall immediately close our bear ?even
at a big loss.?
?So Harmer has sold a bear of Pudding Hills??
?What do you think? I reported Darby Bates?s
letter-writing fully, and Harmer wrote me that it
was the most humorous mining report he had ever
seen.?
He was full of self-consciousness as he said this,
and I remembered that humour was to be a great
feature of Billy?s never-to-be-written great book, and
at the recollection and its inductions I smiled. He re-
garded the smile as being caused by reminiscences
of Darby Bates, and laughed gleefully, so that he
looked more than ever like a moustached and merry
boy.
?And on the report he made his bear?
?Yes ?he?s sold ?em by the thousand, and they
were dropping slowly every settlement. But five
weeks ago they began to move upwards. Here's
Harmer?s last letter. It came yesterday. This is
what he says :
? ?To our surprise, Pudding Hills moved upwards
over par during this week. We have sold them
down to sixteen shillings. As you know, the mine


has been practically inoperative for a long time, and
it was so lifeless that we figured on selling right away
to vanishing point. Gregory said only a fortnight
ago that we needn?t talk of buying orders until the
stock was in the vicinity of a shilling or two. We
are, therefore, a little anxious to know if there is
anything in the rumours of the mine really striking
a payable ore body. We anticipate nothing else than
the refutation of these rumours by the collapse of
the people who are buying. We certainly believe
that the next few weeks will see the stock at three-
quarters or so, and we arc consequently continuing
the bear, but of course with caution. If we have not
cabled you by the time you read this you need not
bother about the matter, as in that case and by then
it will have answered itself. But should we cable
you, please understand that it will be sufficiently
urgent for you to put out of your mind all ideas
formed from the first visit, and to make a thorough
re-examination. In anticipation of this, we have
already secured, through a third party who Is friendly
with the board, permission for our engineer (name not
stated, as they probably know you advise us) to ex-
amine the property.?
?You are going, then??
?And you too, if you will come.?
?I?ll go like a shot, Billy. I was thinking of a
trip on my own account, if this hadn?t offered. I?m
tired of this place for the time, anyhow.?
?We can?t get the lust for change out of us,
Harry. I?m off now to book the berths. The ?Pat-
eena? sails to-night at six.?
?Right, old man, I?ll be ready.?
?Good business. . . But it?s a wild-goose chase.


If there?s the making of a mine in Pudding Hills I?ll
eat . No! I won?t make any promises. Any-
thing is possible with mining.?
??Till to-night at six, then. I?ll meet you at the
wharf. ?
?Righto! So long, old man
He ran down the stairs and out into the road, the
frayed tyre covers of his ill-treated, travel-worn bicy-
cle cracked over the wooden pavement. I watched
him till he disappeared behind the plantations, his
back bent to the handle bars, the high gear taking
his swiftly to his preparations for yet another Ad-
venture of the Spoil.
We reached the Pudding Hill late in the after-
noon of a Friday?Darby Bates?s mail day?the day
that had been Grainger?s Waterloo. Darby was fat-
ter and more florid and more aggressive than ever.
He availed himself of our services as audience, and
swaggered like a comic opera emperor before us?
walking the floor of the office with his old air of dig-
nity and Importance ludicrously exaggerated. But
in his new clerk, who called him ?Mister Bates,?
and whom he in turn called ?Mister Bloom,? he
found a willing slave. Bloom was a dandy of dan-
dies ?his clothes cut in London West End fashion,
his bright yellow leggings spotless as- those of the
West End youth who wears Norfolk suits in
the city and talks his sport instead of do-
ing it. He was slight and dapper, and had a fine
taste in decorative Japanese neckties. His small
black moustache was waxed flat and curled stiffly
upwards in semi-crescents. I thought I detected in
his politeness something sardonic and mocking, as


if his demeanour to Darby Bates was a private joke
of his own.
?Me noo clerk,? said Darby?? Mr. Pegrum?
Mr. Fleet, Mr. Bloom. This gentleman was sent
out by the directors, Mr. Pegrum, when they knoo
I wanted a clerk. ?Ave a smoke, Mr. Pegrum.
Light up, Mr. Fleet! Rather ?ave yer pipe? Now,
then, Mister Bloom.?
?Ready, Mr. Bates.?
?Put the pen in the hink.?
?Yes, Mr. Bates.?
?Put down ?Hoverburden.? ?
? ?Overburden??l?ve got it, Mr. Bates.?
??Ave yer wrote it big??
?Yes, Mr. Bates.?
?Put a semi-comma??
?Yes, Mr. Bates.?
He drew the maniacal hieroglyph invented by
Darby as seriously as if nothing foolish were im-
plied by the order. His impassive face showed no
amusement, and watching him, I felt no amusement
either. Billy Pagan leaned back in his chair and
smoked luxuriously, as if his mind was quite blank
of thought or speculation, but I knew that already
the game was begun. Yet here only the cards were
dealt and the players strained for the tricks?the
stakes were all in London.
?Put down ??Main shaft sunk to three ?undred
fcet.? ?
?Yes, Mr. Bates.?
?Winze fr?m Number one level.?
?Yes, Mr. Bates.?
?Number one tunnel.?
?Yes, Mr. Bates.?


?Put down TWO semi-commas.??
He said it triumphantly, as if none could doubt
the dignity of a man who used two of these wild
animals of scrivening at once.
?Yes, Mr. Bates.??
?That?ll do for it now. I?ll give yer the measure-
ments after we?ve been through the mine.?
?Yes, Mr. Bates.?
The clerk leaned back in his chair, his pale face
still impassive; his white hand, beringed certainly,
but moderately and in good taste ?smoothed his
black hair outwards from its central parting.
?How do you like Tasmania, Mr. Bloom?? asked
Billy.
The pale face flushed a little. He had not expect-
ed the sudden interest in himself.
?Oh! very well, thanks?although the climate is
worse than London.?
?You don?t like London??
?No ?not for its climate?my lungs are weak, I
think.?
?Ever been out of England before??
?Yes, in South Africa.?
?You had better health there??
?Yes. I?m as hard as nails in a dry climate.?
?There?s too much rainfall for you here. Well,
Mr. Bates, I?ll go below now.?
?All right,? said Darby, rising. ?I?ll get the
shift boss to show you through after he?s given me
the footage for the week.?
Darby detained the shift boss halfway through the
tunnel, and we walked on through the long drive that


showed country rock everywhere, and never a sign of
ore.
?Going to sample her, Billy??
?There?s nothing to sample. But we?ll take
samples of the country.?
?Why give yourself that work??
?So as to find out what Mr. Bloom knows??
?Do you think he knows anything??
?Why not? He?s been in South Africa, he?s in-
telligent, and he?s got a fine nerve. Do you notice
how he takes all that Bates says as if it were gos-
pel??
?He?s been here two months, nearly. He?s used
to it by now.?
?Has it occurred to you to wonder why a dandy
like that should be here clerking in a climate that
doesn?t suit him, and keeps him ill; working under
an ignorant brute like Bates??
?It did strike me as strange.?
?And a clerk with a diamond ring! He?s here for
loot.?
?But how does he manage it??
?I don?t know yet, but I will. Look at all this
mad work. Cost thousands, and there?s not a pen-
n?orth of metal in all of it. We?ll go to the surface
and get the sample bags and let the clerk see we?re
going to sample her.?
Darby Bates was in his office, talking to Bloom,
as we entered.
?Can you give me two men for the sampling, Mr.
Bates?? said Billy, but looking out of the tail of his
eye at Bloom. I looked at Bloom also, and saw that


he was surprised, and also that he felt some slight
hope.
?Certn?y?certn?y, Mr. Pagan. You?se got sam-
ple bags??
??Yes. We want nothing but the men.?
??Come along o? me.?
As we followed him from the office a telegraph
boy dismounted from his rain-weary horse and hand-
ed Billy a telegram. Billy read it, and said ?
??Nothing in it! All?s well at home ?
Then he put it in his pocket, and we walked to-
wards the tunnel again. As we marched in single
file, Billy said to me in a low tone;
?When we get to the tunnel look round and see
if Bloom has called the telegraph messenger.?
At the tunnel mouth I faced about carelessly and
saw Bloom give a letter to the messenger.
We brought the bags that held the results of the
farcical sampling to the surface, and Billy sealed
the mall in two larger bags. Bloom looked on at the
very solemn operation of sealing, and I could see
that he was divided between surprise and hope?-
with no strong dependence to either.
In the office that night Darby Bates finished the
dictation of his report; it was copied in the letter
book by Bloom, and enveloped with the same por-
tentious solemnity that all the players in the game
were using?as if in emulation of Darby Bates, the
only unconsciously solemn and dignified potentate of
us all.
?Does the postman come to collect the letters, Mr.
Bloom?? asked Billy of the clerk, who was now
stamping the letters. The clerk started, and inad-


vertently tore a stamp in two, but gummed the
pieces on the envelope as he replied:
?No, I take them to the post office myself. It?s
exercise for me, and a change to go to the township
once a week, you know.?
?I se'e?but you?d get a better ride if the distance
were longer. Eight miles isn?t much of a ride.?
?I don?t ride. I walk. I prefer it.?
Darby laughed coarsely. ?He can?t ride, Mr.
Pegrum ?he?s afraid of a horse.?
?I see,? said Billy, and he looked at the pale
clerk with, I thought, a gaze of pity.
?She?s rainin? worse?n ever to-day,? said Darby
Bates next morning, as we prepared to mount.
?S?pose you won?t wait till it lifts??
?No, thanks ?we can?t?the train goes out at
twelve and picks up the Melbourne steamer to-
night.?
?All right?all right. Will you take the letters
down to the post orfus for us??
?Doesn?t Mr. Bloom take them??
?He can?t t?-day. He?s laid up.? A fit of cough-
ing shook the man in the next room.
?Hear him,? continued Darby. ?It?s a grave-
yarder, isn?t it? He wanted to get up, but I told him
not to. He?ll be all right to-morrow.?
?I?ll go and see him,? said Billy gravely, and when
he had disappeared into the room beyond, Darby
handed me the letters, and I put them in my poc-
ket.
Billy reappeared at the door of Bloom?s bedroom,
saying, ?Good-bye, Mr. Bloom. I?d advise you to
leave this country ?the climate doesn?t suit you.?


?I?m sorry I ever saw the cursed place,? replied
Bloom. ?I?ll clear as soon as I can move.?
His voice told of more than physical illness ?there
was disappointment in it, too. We shook hands
with Darby and mounted ?the packhorses, loaded
with the samples, sagged down the track before
us.
?Well, Billy??
?Harmer?s cable that I received yesterday after-
noon said that Pudding Hills had risen to two and
three-quarters, and that he was still selling.?
?Yes!?
?And Bloom sent a cable to the Loudon directors
saying that Harmer?s engineer was on the mine.?
?How do you know that??
?You can bet that was in the message he gave
to the telegraph boy. Then the sampling fogged
him, but he half saw through my game last night.?
?Then he?s in with the directors who are putting
up the shares on rumours of ore in the mine that
doesn?t exist??
?Yes ?but on more than rumours, on actual re-
ports from the manager.?
?But there was nothing ?absolutely nothing?in
Darby Bates?s report. We heard Bloom read it
last night.?
?But Darby Bates?s reports don?t go to London.?
?Bloom writes a false report every week, then??
?Yes. He writes ?a glowing report which the
directors can publish, and he destroys Darby?s idio-
cies and posts his own lies. That?s why he ?a deli-
cate man ?walks through the rain once a week for
exercise. He has to post the right report with his


own hands. You have the letters, Harry. Let me
see them.?
I handed him the letters. He took the one ad-
dressed, ?The Secretary Pudding Hill G. and C.
Mines, Ltd., Austin Friars, London, E.C.,? and
returned the rest.
?I knew it. Here is the faked report.?
?But how do you know, Billy??
?Don?t you remember that Bloom tore the stamp
in two when he w r as stamping Darby?s report letter,
yesterday??
Yes.?
?This stamp is intact.?
?But he may have put on the good stamp after-
wards, on the same envelope??
?No ?the broken stamp was gummed on, right
up the outer edge of the envelope. If he had chang-
ed the stamp after there would be the gum mark
of the old stamp to show. This stamp is stuck on
half an inch from the edge, and there is no old gum
mark. Consequently this is a new envelope, and
therefore there?s another report in it.?
?Will you open it and see??
?Not much. We?ll post it as in honour bound,
and when the directors get it in five weeks it will be
a new sting to the defeat. There?ll be cursing in the
office when that letter arrives.?.
?The market will be collapsed by then, you
mean??
?It will be collapsed in two days. I?m sending a
cable through for Harmer to publish. He?ll continue
the bear. In a week Pudding Hill will be a shilling,
or less. I?ll cable it substitution of the re-
ports, and all.?


?I?m sorry for Bloom, who has grit.?
?So am I. I hope he?s away from the mine be-
fore Darby Bates finds out about the reports.?
?Think there?ll be a big row??
?When Darby Bates finds that his semi-commas
have been suppressed he?ll be madder than a wet
hen.?
? I?m sorry for Bloom.?
?So am I. But he has come into the game and
taken the risks, ana he can?t expect anything but
damage?poor little dandy. Let?s catch the pack-
horses, Harry, and relieve them of that fine assort-
ment of road metal we took for samples. Dump it
anywhere in the bush. Oh ! Mr. Darby and his semi-
commas.?
He laughed as he set the spurs to his horse and
galloped through the mud to head oft the pack-
horses.


No. 9. ? The Booming of Lot?s Wife.
A ship on a crystal sea took us both within the Bar-
rier Reef two months after the wet summer, along
fifteen hundred miles of the East Australian coast;
and on one perfect morning in June disembarked us
at Cairns in time for the train bound West and up-
ward to the plateau above the Barron Fails. The
perfect beauty of the North Australian warm and
sensuous winter made every breath we drew a con-
scious joy?the little narrow-gauge train, its wheel-
flanges squealing on every curve, drew us through a
beauteous tangle of wild banana, paw-paw, and fig-
tree, past pineapple fields on the rich and steaming
flats, and up to the Barron?tumbling its quarter-
mile wealth of water down eight hundred feet of
black and glistening rock.
?Glad you came, Harry??? asked Billy Pagan of
me, noting my pleasure in this new country at this
new season.
?I wouldn?t have missed it for anything,? I re-
plied. ?But the plateau, as I remember it, hasn?t
much picturesqueness on it. When do we arrive??
?About to-morrow night, Harry.?
?It?s a new mineral we?re on this time, isn?t it??
?Yes?wolfram. You know it??


?I know it: used for hardening steel.?
?That?s it?that and scheelite. ?
?Well?what?s this story??
?Heydon saw the claim we?re going to see, and
said it was the finest wolfram show in the world.?
?Did he know much about the stuff??
?Nothing?except that he had been for a fort-
night looking at the wolfram claims sixty miles from
here. A four-ton parcel was bought for Somers;
then Heydon told him what he had seen for quantity,
and then Somers bought the mine.?
?Of course there was something against it, or you
wouldn?t be here, Billy. What?s the pain??
?The pain, as far as I can gather, from the mine
manager?s telegram and Somers?s instructions, is
that this is a wolfram mine without any wolfram in
it; although on Heydon?s statements to Somers the
big face of metal must be still there for all the min-
ing Somers has done, and unless somebody has stolen
it.?
?Heydon is reliable??
?Beyond the shadow of a doubt. And while Som-
ers had the mine on offer he had two tons of the
real Mackay mined and sent to Melbourne. So that
he had six tons in all.?
?What?s the stuff worth ?and how does it occur??
?It?s worth eighty pounds a ton now, and it was
much higher when Somers bought the shows. Gra-
nite is the usual rock for it ?although you can get
a wolfram shoot in greisen, felsite, chlorie, schist, or
slate. Its matrix is usually quartz, but it occurs
also in muscovite, fluor spar, and topaz rock.?
?And it occurs in big lodes??
?It occurs anyhow?lodes, gash veins, lenses, and


irregular bodies, and where it Is there it is. Usually
associated with molybdenite and bismuth?often with
tin, iron, zinc, and copper. ?
?And so far as you know, this disappointing show
of Somers?s was represented to be a big valuable
deposit in quartz???
?Yes ?with a great outcrop of buck quartz flank-
ing it ?a big outcrop twice as high as a man, and
roughly shaped like one. That?s why they call the
claim Lot?s Wife.??
?And Lot?s Wife was boomed???
?Yes. And Lot?s Wife has slumped.?
We dismounted at the uninviting door of the Bis-
muth Hotel ?the least uninviting of the dilapidated
hostelries of Tungsten Camp, and speedily were on
such terms of friendship with the publican and his
customers as permitted us to pay for drinks for the
crowd ?an act which is the best letter of Introduc-
tion. The publican?a lanky, fair man, who was to
us as humble as a waiter expectant of a tip, and
to his gossips as absolute as a Czar and as insult-
ing as a New York policeman?made the gossips
known to us by name.
The only man who had not been Introduced ?thus
showing by the publican?s contemptuous treatment
of him that he was not a pensioner, for he had paid
for his own drink, but an enemy ?advanced as he
heard Billy Pagan speak of being interested in mines.
He was a tall man, with a long thin neck, and a face
and head so red that It might be said to burn.
?Lookin? for noo shows, mister?? he inquired.
?Might,? said Billy, ?if there?s anything good
enough.?


?My name?s Dunphy,? said the Red One.
?Thanks! I don?t mind- .. Y? ought t? been here a
year ago. . . them was the times. . . in the early
days. . . Here?s a match, Mister. . . Wolfram
was six quid a ?undredweight then. . . I got five
?undredweight in four days. . . we got wolfram pure
then ?in slugs.??
?The days of the slugs have gone,?? said Billy.
Dunphy?s face was suddenly convulsed with grh
maces intended to show a deep and exclusive know-
ledge of the falsity of the statement; then he jerk-d
his head in the direction of the door, and we followed
him to the clay verandah. He spoke in a whisper.
?I was cornin? in from Lot?s Wife with another
chap this mornin? ?he was walkin on the road, an
I was walkin? in the grass. An? I nearly fell over
a outcrop that looked like wolfram if it wasn t. I
didn?t say nothin? to the other chap, because he
might turn dog on me an collar the lot. . . Now
you?re a gentleman, Mister Pagan ?Y? wouldn?t
take a man down. If you did anything with it you?d
give a bit of an interest or a few quid to a mah
who?d put you on to it.?
?Lou would be quite safe in my hands,? said
Billy Pagan.
?I?ll take your word, Mister Pagan. An? I?ll
show you this thing I found?to-day, if.y? like. It?s
on the road to Lot?s Wife.?
?I?ll go as soon as I have seen Mr. Robins.?
?Well, I?ll Walk on ahead then, as you?re mount-
ed.?
He walked away down the winding and park-like
track with the uncertain gait of a man more used to
a bar than to exercise in the open air.


Then, within sight of the turn off of the bridle
track to Lot?s Wife, he sTopped and walked ahead
into the long grass, and we followed and stopped
over a heap of metal ?black and brilliant. But
Billy Pagan did not trouble to dismount.
?What d? think of it??? said Dunphy.
?Do you happen to have a bit of wolfram with
you, Dunphy??? asked Billy.
?Yes,? replied Dunphy, fumbling in his hip poc-
ket. ?I?ve got a ounce bit ?ere I keep for luck.?
?Well?look at it and then look at your lode ?
that?s titanic iron, about two tons of it, and appar-
ently dropped from the clouds. . . Look at it, Harry
?can you understand any man mistaking one for
the other? Pass a small bit of the titanic iron up
here, Dunphy.?
Dunphy did so, and I examined the two specimens
before I replied: ?I can understand any man mis-
taking one for the other. There?s the weight in both,
and a very similar lustre.?
?But not the construction?not the cleavage.?
?No! I see the difference; we?ll see you later,
Mr. Dunphy,? said Billy, holding out his hand. ?I?m
sorry you?ve had the trouble for nothing.?
?So?m I,? said Dunphy ruefully. ?But I?ll tell
you this?if this ain?t wolfram here, there ain?t no
wolfram at Lot?s Wife.?
And there wasn?t. Robins, the manager, met us
with the same tale, and enlarged on it as we stood
before the fact of metal in the excavation which had
enraptured Heydon and decided the purchase of the
claim by Somers.
?You see, Mr. Pagan,? said Robins, ?there it


is. Titanic iron, and not a trace of wolfram. Where
did they get the ten tons of wolfram from? For ten
tons it was, and four tons Heydon bought for Som-
ers, four tons taken out before, and two ton sent to
Somers when he had it under offer.?
??That hole there is just about ten tons measure-
ment, allowing for the contents of that spoil heap.
But the wolfram never came away from there unless
it was the biggest geological freak on earth.?
??But allowing they did funny business, how do-you
account for the two tons Mr. Heydon sent away?
Mr. Heydon told me in Melbourne that he had seen
two tons of solid wolfram broken out of the blow.?
??lt?s a mystery, isn?t it, Harry??
??Yes,? said I, adding a saving clause???for the
present.?
?This is a small lease, Mr. Robins??
?Nine acres.?
?Then the big quartz blow isn?t in it??
??No ?it?s about a hundred yards outside the west
boundary. ?
We stood on a little barren hill, and on its sum-
mit the black outcrop of titanic iron glistened funere-
ally?on a similar rise immediately to.the west was
the monolith known as Tot?s Wife ?a great outcrop
of living quartz, with some grotesque likeness to
a cloaked woman, bright and crystalline wherever
some prospector had napped it with a hammer and
weathered dull on all its old surfaces.
??Have you prospected all the lease, Mr. Robins??
??Every bit of it, Mr. Pagan ?and a good bit of
the country outside. You know ?this stuff s a freak
in the way it occurs, and I don?t believe there?s any


wolfram nearer here than the hills behind Tungsten
Camp. ?
Billy nodded, and led the way down the rise?
across the chain-wide depression, and up the other
rise to the base of Lot?s Wife. There the height
of the outcrop proved greater than had earlier ap-
peared; it was more than twice the height of a man,
and dwarfed us all. Billy Pagan napped it with his
prospecting hammer, but broke no mineralised face;
then with the hammer handle he cleared away the
alluvium at the base of the outcrop, and napped there.
Still the crystalline quartz showed to the hammer.
He cleared the soil along the eastern side, and nap-
ped again and yet again, and with the last scale there
showed a nodular splash of unmistakable mineral?
very flat and clean in face, a metallic yellow in col-
our, and at its extremites a spot of wolfram, never
by me again to be mistaken.
?She?s worth prospecting,? said Billy Pagan.
?That?s a nice-looking bit of bismuth, Isn?t it, Mr.
Robins??
?Yes?-it?s worth going on at.?
?Will you peg a lease for Mr. Somers, then? ?but
don?t apply for it yet. Shepherd it.?
?I know?l can re-peg it every day. But what
for??
?I want to know how a wolfram quarry suddenly
changed to titanic iron as soon as Somers paid
2OO for the claim. Who was the vendor??
?Larkin, the publican at Tungsten Camp, sold
it to Mr. Heydon, who bought on Mr. Somers? ac-
count.?
?Larkin! Larkin! I smell mice!. . . Larkin!
Well, that?s the finest thing that ever happened.?


?Why, Billy?? I asked.
?It narrows the inquiry. I think I see daylight.
Mr. Robins, this morning a man named Dunphy
took us to see his wolfram show. It?s about two
miles from here ?near the junction of the pack track.
There?s what he calls an outcrop there ?but it isn?t
an outcrop, is it, Harry??
?No ?I thought they were floaters.?
?They were floaters of a peculiar kind ?they were
b?ought there ?about two tons weight, I should'say,
by eye measurement, and they were two tons of ti-
tanic iron.?
Robins? eye became suddenly full of interest. Two
tons! The two tons of stuff Heydon saw packed
from here.?
?The two tons that never went to Melbourne??
I shouldn?t be surprised. But we?ve got to find that
out first. And we can only be sure of that by find-
ing the other eight tons or so that came from that
hole and have been dumped somewhere else on the
road.?
?If that?s so, then this is a straight-out fraud,
and you can recover,? said I.
?True bill?but we?ve first to find the other eight
tons, and then find the packer who changed the
loading.?
We found the two tons of iron again in little con-
fused heaps as it had been emptied from the pack
bags at the junction of the bridle track to Lot?s
Wife and the road from Tungsten Camp to the rail-
way ; but though we beat the grass along both tracks
for half a mile there was no trace of the eight tons


of iron which would have made Billy Pagan?s theory
a fact.
?There?s just a chance,? ? said he, at the end of the
search.
?What?s that, Billy???
?I won?t say now; I might be wrong. But we?ll
ride back to Lot?s Wife.??
We cantered the short two miles in a few min-
utes, the horses seeming to feel all the pleasure we
had in the splendid day, and the good mounts and
the perfect track, and my friend told Robins to trench
the old lease between the opening of the cutting of
titanic iron and the western boundary of the lease.
And then we turned our horses to Tungsten Camp
and found Dunphy at Larkin?s Hotel; and, after a
little delay to deceive the enemy, carried Dunphy off
ontensibly to see another show, but really to fish
for information.
?I think we can trust you, Mr. Dunphy,?? said
Billy Pagan.
?You can ?dead right, mister ?what?s the matter
with Lot?s Wife? Somethin? crook??
?I think so. Something dirty in the sale.?
A gleam of pleasure flashed into Dunphy?s eyes.
?That waster Larkin, eh? Well, what is it??l?ll
tell you. All there is to it?that I know.?
?Do you remember when Mr. Heydon was here??
?Yes ?know ?im well.?
?You were never at Lot?s Wife much then, were
you??
?I never see Lot?s Wife till a week ago ?an? seein?
that funny lookin? wolfram there made me think that
stuff in the grass was wolfram, too.?


?Do you remember any talk of wolfram being
sent from Lot?s Wife??
?I heard of two lots?or might be three. One of
the lots was packed by Jim McCord the time Mr.
Heydon was here.?
?McCord! That?s the bent, curvy man with the
bushy whiskers, and the gunpowder marks in his
skin??
?That?s him ?-he?s not a bad sort, I don?t think.
Now y? might tell me somethin.? Can y? make Lar-
kin ante up over this??
?We?ll be able to, I think, by the aid of the law.
. . . but a man does not always desire publication
of the fact that he?s been taken down.?
?Well, never you mind the law. Shake it out of
him. Scare him, and he?ll cough it up.?
?Is that big hulking chap a coward??
?If he ain?t he?s the most peaceable speakin? man
in the wide world.?
?And in a fighting camp like this he?s never been
known to have a fight??
?Never ?he?s too mild. They say he once hit a
bug, but the bug struck him first. . . Don?t worry,
mister. If you?ve got him, squeeze him, an? he?ll
cough it up.?
On our return to the hotel we came across the man
named McCord, whom we knew to be ?in the know?
regarding Larkin?s little games, and we determined
to sound him.
We found him uncommunicative, but inclined to
drink, and fortune favouring us with the temporary
absence of Mr. Larkin, it was not long before Mc-
Cord had ha<J his third drink of square-faced gin,


and that was the beginning of garrulity. But there
was much chaff for the little wheat.
?There?s pecooliar ways of makin? a livin?,? said
he?his little eyes twinkling in the mazes of his wil-
derness of whiskers??l once knoo a wolfram buyer
here wot bought the same four ton o? wolfram five
times over an? didn?t buy it once from the real owner,
neither . . , Ho! ho . . . Tom Larkin ?ere ??e
knows ??e knows. Bloke ?ud come in ragin? for a
drink and no money in his clothes. ?No fear,? says
Larkin ??go an? bring me a billyful o? .wolfram an?
I?ll give y? a drink?. . . See??
?Yes?I see.?
?Off goes the thirsty bloke?brings back a billyful
o? wolfram worth about two bob an? gets a drink
for it. . . Why, Tom Larkin, ?e sends out more
wolfram than all the rest o? the field.?
?Have yoa packed much for him, Mr. McCord??
The hairy one?s eyes were raised suspiciously for
a moment, but he replied??Me and Tom Walsh
has.?
?Did you ever pack anything from Lot?s Wife??
?Yes ?I packed two ton from there about four
month ago.?
?When Mr. Heydon was up here??
?Yes?about that time.? Suspicion was in his
eyes and his voice again?he did not know what he
had said, and hastened to correct himself ??No ?
I didn?t pack no wolfram while Mr. Heydon was
here.?
?Yes you did, McCord,? said Billy Pagan, in a
tone low, but full of menace. ?Don?t tell me you
didn?t take two tons of ore from Lot?s Wife, and


empty it at the Junction, and take on two tons of
other ore from Tungsten Camp.?
The man became sulky, and I knew that the true
story of two of the ten tons at least had been told.
So, seeing that we could get no more from him,
we let him and sought Walsh. There was nothing
of secretiveness in him, and I felt that he had no-
thing to conceal.
?I?ve shifted a lot o? the world in my time. A
few thousan? tons o? stuff I?ve lifted in criks wfuen I
was tin scratching an? a few ton at this ?packin?
game.?
??Did you ever take any wolfram from Dot?s
Wife?? asked Billy Pagan of him point blank, and
knowing his man.
?T took eight ton, mister?in two lots o? four ton
each. It took me six days with twenty ?orses to
pack in each four ton.?
??Where did you pack it to??
The man?s manner showed the irritation of ex-
perience at persistent stupidity as he replied :
??Pack it to? Why, to the railway. Where the
?ell else would a man pack it to??
?I thought you might have exchanged loads on the
road,? said Billy Pagan, looking him full in the eyes,
but the man returned the look with a wondering
stare, as if he thought his cross-examiner were mad.
??What th? ?ell would I do that for? No, mister,
once on a short track like this, once a bag goes on, : t
doesn?t come off unless a mule falls down.? He
half-turned away, as if resentful of the enquiry, and
we left him and went to the bedroom we shared.
??A long day, Billy.?
??Yes, and a fruitful one. There?s only one thing


)
now. To find whether the eight tons really came
from the claim. Then it?s all clear ?the two-ton
parcel was a fraud.?
?Larkin sent it away as from Lot?s Wife, in order
to sell the claim??
?Of course?the other eight tons was either carted
to Lot?s Wife and loaded from there, or it really
came out of the claim from some pocket now covered
up.?
?And meantime there?s nothing to be done till
morning??
?Nothing, Harry?the morning and Mr. Larkin
that?s what we want.?
Not more than an hour after daylight we were
awakened by a messenger from Robins. We were
to ride to Lot?s Wife without delay, and we were
dressed and ready for the road in five minutes from
the time of waking.
?What is it? A development?? asked Billy Pag-
an, of the youth who waited.
?Yes ?struck something, I think,? replied the
messenger. ?All Mr. Robins told me was to ask you
to come and see the show before 3 011 did anything?
if you understand that.?
We understood. Something had happened to
prompt Robins to send for us before Billy Pagan had
irrevocably broken with Larkin. It was a sudden
ride, suddenly ridden. We did not draw rein in that
mad gallop until we raced up the rise to Robins?
camp.
?It?s pretty good, then?? interrogated Billy Pa-
gan, as he dismounted. ?
?Good?s no name for it,? replied Robins. ?It?s


the best wolfram shown in the north so far as it
goes. ?
We walked to the irregular costeen that extended
eastwards from the great quartz blow. Robins had
stripped it for a length of twenty feet eastwards to a
width of four feet. And before us was a bonanza of
tungsten ?molybdenite and wolfram in massive seams
and heavy splashes; veined irregularly by glistening
bismuth, and all this black and silver-grey and metal-
lic yellow bedded in their matrix of glittering spar.
And all this beauty and value had been but a foot
below the surface, traceable from Billy?s discovery of
the bismuth vein at the base of Lot?s Wife, but for
ever unfindable by the lazy men, who wouldn?t pros-
pect, and the men with eyes that sought not, and the
crooked men who went to much trouble with titanic
iron, when wolfram and molybdenite cried out for
discovery.
?It?s the real Mackay,? said Billy Pagan, ?and
that fluor spar teaches me things. That?s the dan-
ger of thinking over a first impression until it be-
comes a fixed idea. We all got into our heads the
theory of quartz being the only matrix here, because
of Lot?s Wife. Let?s see what you?ve done with the
costeening in front of the titanic iron.
?It?s as good as this, I think,? said Robins. He
led us up the eastern rise, explaining as we walked.
?We struck quartzite, and then a bit of spar and
a nodule of titanic iron, and then more spar ?
?And then wolfram,? said Billy.
?Yes ?that?s rght?look at her; opening up good
she is.?
?I?m satisfied,? said Billy, looking down at the
almost lustreless blackness that filled the sink.


?Somers?s money is more than safe. It?s well in-
vested. He?ll get a few fat dividends at least from
this. And now for Mr. Larkin.??
That big, fair man, who played the despot behind
the bar, and could look so fierce on occasion, was
not more dangerous than a scone and butter once
he was decisively handled.
?We know the lot, Larkin,?? said Billy. ?I could
put you in the logs for fraud.??
?Y? think y? could,?? muttered Larkin, his terror
rising fast, and threatening to overwhelm him.
?I know I could?and if you want to save your-
self you?ll have to give me straight answers. . . .
You took two tons of titanic iron from the blow
while Mr. Heydou looked on. Mr. Heydon marked
it ?Somers, Melbourne.? At the Junction you threw
the iron out of the bags, brought the bags here, fill-
ed them with real wolfram, and sent them on. I
found the two tons of iron near the Junction. Then
you sold the claim.??
?But there was ten tons o? wolfram sent away,??
said Larkin, with an appearance of rising hope. ?If
the two tons was faked, and you found the two tons
o? iron, where?s the other eight tons o? iron that
should be there if it was a fake??
?The other eight tons weren?t faked, and you
know it. It was eight tons of genuine wolfram came
out of that hole. The barren quartzite came in on
one side; and barren spar, which gave place to ti-
tanic iron, came in on the other. Then being a
fool?as a man has to be before he can be a little
knave ?you abandoned prospecting, and started fak-
ing titanic iron. Is that true??


?Yes?lt?s true enough. What are y? goin? to
do??
?I should prosecute you for the money Somers
paid you.?
Then Larkin felt his one flicker of defiance ?had
his one moment of triumph.
?Y? couldn?t get it. I ain?t got a bean in me
own name.?
?I thought that, and so I had intended to prose-
cute you criminally.?
Larkin became abject in the twinkling of an eye.
?But the mine has saved you ?the mine you didn?t
believe in.?
?The mine??
?Yes. We?ve stripped a pocket that if it goes
down for a bit as good as it?s proposing to will give
Mr. Somers big profits.?
?Where?s the pocket??
?This side of the iron. And I?ve taken a lease
of Lot?s Wife itself, and there?s as big a bonanza
of wolfram and molybdenite and bismuth as ever the
world knew. . . You?ve got your pill, Larkin. For
a man who?d grub through crime to get a shilling,
the fact of there being a few thousand pounds prac-
tically in sight there is sufficient punishment.?
We left Larkin sitting there stupefied; to a man
like him the pain of money missed or los't is as poig-
nant as bereavement is to a nursing mother.
The day was blue and gold, the air the colour of
wine of Capri, and tasting like it; the horses went
better than ever. We rode down the red track
that goes south and east to the railway at the pla-
teau to the coast ?there to sit down and wait the
south-bound mail.


No 10.?Ninety-Six Miles Sou? = East.
Our transport was the usual Westralian buggy, a
long buckboard drawn by two horses, with one high-
springed seat, wide enough for three men, and a
great rattling, springless tray below, which carried
camp-gear, tucker, and compressed fodder for the
horses..
Since leaving Coolgardie there had been much
talk, but every line of speculation in this, the latest
problem, brought us to a dead end. We had studied
the puzzle from all approachable sides, and in the at-
tempt to solve it we only succeeded in addling it the
more.
For the fifth time Billy Pagan summed up : ??The
Golden Lake mine is floated in London by one Tho-
mas Llewellyn, in a boom so mad that the public sub-
scribed IOO,OOO cash m a 250,000 company, to
acquire from Llewellyn, the vendor, the mine which
had been reported on only by Llewellyn, the expert.
He reported 50,000 tons of ore worth 40Z. gold, or
BOO,OOO gross, in sight. He got 50,000 cash,
and 40,000 shares out of the float, and those shares
went to 3 each; but he couldn?t know they would
do that, and therefore he sold an alleged 700,000
worth for a sure 90,000, and is therefore either


a lunatic or a rogue. His story is so implicitly be-
lieved, or the directors wanted so badly to make a
market for the shares by bustling, and pretending
great energy, and the early arrival of dividends, that
when they appointed a manager, they bought the
reduction plant?a twenty head battery and engine
power for sixty, and sent it out with the manager.
The manager is a decent chap, with experience in
gold in Colorado and Mexico. He arrives here
with the plant, winding engines, pumps, and ge#r;
and all of it?s in the funeral that?s just behind us.?
??Funeral you think it is, Billy??
??Look here, Harry. The whole thing is so fishy
that it smells like a dead whale to me. First of all,
this Llewellyn fellow is a very ignorant man. Had
he made the slightest enquiry while he was in Aus-
tralia, he?d have recommended the purchase of all
Australian-made machinery. Our mill builders and
engineers know the thing to suit Australian condi-
tions, and the English' engineer mostly doesn?t.
Duty, freight, and quality, all considered, if Llewel-
lyn wasn?t quite a fool he?d have ordered in Aus-
tralia.?
?But supposing somebody on the board in London
got a commission from the English engine-builders,
and couldn?t get it from the Australian ?what
then.?
?That?s always on the cards, and nearly always it
happens, and I allowed for it. The commission was
probably paid; but Llewellyn knew Australia so little
that he told the board there was no good timber in
West Australia; and all the time there arc millions
of jarrah trees between the Darling Ranges and the
Leeuwin; and those fool directors were walking over


Australian hardwoods in the Strand and up Cornhi'l
every day, and didn?t know it.?
?But how can you know that he told them there
were no good timbers in Australia??
Billy Pagan pulled up the horses, turned in his
seat, and pointed with his whip at the dust-encircled
waggons. ??See that fourth team? They?re draw-
ing Columbia pitch pine?great baulks of pitch pine
all the way from British Columbia, because there
were no timbers in Australia fit for bed-logs for a
battery. ?
??British Columbia? Great Scott!?
??They were in such a hurry to get on to the
three-quarters of a million?s worth of gold, and
stamp it into divs., that they hustled that pitch pine
across the Atlantic in a liner, and then sent it from
England to Fremantle through Suez, because they
couldn?t wait to send it round the Cape.?
?But how do you know Llewellyn told them the
lack of Australian timbers??
?It doesn?t take Edgar Allan Poe to systema-
tize deductions in order to find that out. Cargill,
the manager of this mine that has been misled, told
me that he remonstrated with Llewellyn for ordering
the pitch pine. Cargill hadn?t been in Australian be-
fore, but he?s a man who keeps his eyes open, and
he reads; and he went round the Australian Agents-
General?s office in London and found out.?
?And when he objected?what then??
?Why, this bounder Llewellyn flatly contradicted
him?posed as the great Australian explorer, and
shouted him down before the other directors. I
know these great explorers from England. They


stop exploring as soon as the sleeping car is taken
off the train.?
?I see. And now poor old Cargill comes out With
enough plant for the Great Boulder??
??Yes, and can?t find his alleged mine. It?s comic
opera. If Llewellyn tells the truth there?s a mine
with 50,000 tons of 40Z. ore hiding from Cargill,
and running away when it sees him coming.?
??But hasn?t it ever been surveyed by the Govern-
ment??
??You know that the survey staff has so much to
do that it is often twelve months behind its work.
No; the title the mine was taken over on was merely
the prospector?s receipt for the rent, the certificate
of application and the certificate of exemption from
labour for six months.?
??The prospectors sold to Llewellyn direct??
??Yes, and the company took over his liability,
paid the balance of purchase money?you
know that Llewellyn paid them deposit when
he took the option?and lifted the documents of title
?such title as it was?from the bank.?
??The prospectors were named Horton and Grimes,
weren?t they??
??That?s it, and from the time the gs was
paid over, Horton, and Grimes have never been seen
by anybody who can tell. Of course* that?s not sus-
picious?not much, at least. This is a big country,
and a man goes out on the wallaby again, and finds
another show, and isn?t seen in a township once in
a blue moon. . . . Funny thing, isn?t it? Harmer
didn?t like the vendor reporting on his own float, and
in the absence of any corroborative report he began
to bear the Golden Lake. They hardened a bit, and


he covered and cut his loss. But he wasn?t satis-
fied, and he cabled to me. Then I met Cargill back
in Coolgardie almost broken-hearted with looking
for the mine and not finding it.?
?It?s a big address.?
?I should smile! Ninety-six miles south-east of
Coolgardie, near Lake Lefroy?which the same Lake
Lefroy is ninety-six miles or so long.?
??lt?s cruel work for a good man to be put at.?
??My oath. They float the show first, and then
give the manager a battery, and say to him, in ef-
fect, ??Here?s a map of Australia, go and find the
mine!? Find a mine in a country bigger than
Europe, and the one clue is about ninety-six miles
south-east of Coolgardie, near a hundred mile long,
dry, salt lake, peppered with islands. . . ?
?Have you wired Harmer??
?As soon as I met Cargill and got his story ?he
gave it to me because he was off colour, and wanted
to confide in somebody?l cabled Harmer to sell till
I advised him otherwise.?
?But the mine may be all Llewellyn represented
it??
?It may be; but, even if it?s a Mount Morgan,
nobody has found it yet, and there?ll be time enough
for Harmer to think about making a loss when Car-
gill finds the mine to start his million. But I doubt
he will. ?Eye hath not seen it, my gentle boy.? It
isn?t between Butterfly and Tiger Bay, because Car-
gill tells me he?s raked all that country with a fine-
toothed comb. ?-Not there, not there, my child.? ?
?I see. Cargill has been ahead of the teams all
the time??
?He?s been six weeks ahead of them. We ought


to pick him up soon. . . Get up, horses! we?re out
of the heavy sand now,?
We drove at a quick trot through the long pink
aisles made by the shafts of the salmon-gum, and
at five miles further on we sighted another buckboard
drawn by two horses, bearing one man, and at a
sandhill in the bend of the track.
?That?s Cargill,? said Billy Pagan, and shook
the whip over the quickly-responsive team.
* * * *
Cargill?s anxious face softened to a smile of wel-
come as we pulled up. He was a medium-sized,
grizzled, fine-skinned man of fifty?his face splashed
on the cheeks and above the eyebrows with pink
suffusions which spelled gout. I had seen this im-
mediately, and to my own surprise; for I was not
yet used to the fact that association with Billy Pag-
an had made me his understudy in rapid observa-
tion. And in those swift blue eyes of Billy?s, which
seemed to see below superficialities, and translate
his impression into expression immediately, I now
saw shining also, a very youthful kindliness. He
was in this game for business, but his manifest
liking and sympathy for Cargill had sharpened his
appetite for discovery.
?By Jing! I?m glad to see your face again, Mr.
Pagan.?
?Glad to see you. Any luck yet??
Cargill?s anxious look returned to him In an In-
stant.
?Nothing?absolutely no luck.?
?That?s bad, but it?s not hopeless yet. I?ve nar-
rowed down the area of search considerably. If we
find a show near here it?s probably yours. I?ve


searched the warden?s court books, and there are
no other leases applied for in this district, and I
couldn?t find any miner?s right claims registered
either.?
??But a man can hold a claim on a miner?s right
without registering.?
??l know he can, but with 50,000 tons of 402. ore
in sight he doesn?t take the risk.?
??Fifty thousand devils,? said Cargill impatiently.
??lt?s a lie?a wicked lie of that thief, Llewellyn.?
??l daresay it is?as to tonnage anyhow.?
??lt?s wicked?it?s cruel, Mr. Pagan. Think of
the good shows there are that can?t get a couple
of thousand pounds to open them up, and then look
at this waster with all this machinery ready for it.?
?I?ll look at the waster when you?ve found it,?
said Billy.
?It?s murder,? said Cargill vehemently. ?Murder
of good hard cash. D?ye know what that damned
mill and engines and gear have cost up to now in
freight alone, mind you??
?Couldn?t say ?five thousand??
?Eleven thousand pounds.?
?Tall!?
?Tall! it?s murderous. And on top of it I can?t
find the mine.?
?You never will find the mine as it?s described.
Let us go into figures. . . The usual prospector in
this waterless country, and in such a boom as this
is, wouldn?t go in for developing a mine on a great
productive scale, or for blocking out big quantities
of ore, would he??
?Catch him,? said Cargill, grinning, and forget-
ting his troubles for a moment.


?And if he had the money to develop ;Boo,ooo
gross worth of gold, he?d have the money to put
a mill on, wouldn?t he???
?That?s gospel,? said I.
?And if he didn?t have the money he?d have mill
engineers, and foundry men falling over each other
to get a chance of putting up a battery for a share
in the mine or on bills??
?That?s a moral,? said I.
?But Horton and Grimes never had that quantity
of ore in sight, and never said they had either.?
?How can you Know that??
?Would they have asked only ten thousand for
such a mine in such a market? No. The thing?s
out of the question.?
?Well?? said Cargill.
?Well, they had a shaft down forty or fifty feet,
the prospector?s usual limit of sinking. Between
the time they put it under option to Llewellyn and
the time the prospectus was published in London
with his report, about the 50,000 tons in sight, only
four months elapse.?
?I see,? said Cargill slowly. ?It would be im-
possible to do the development in the time??
?Naturally, premising we iare right about the
small quantity of development done before the be-
ginning of the option. Another thing, the mine; or
the supposed mine, has been under exemption from
work ever since the option was begun. It?s the mad-
dest story. Llewellyn?s report says that the aver-
age width of the lode is ten feet ?a very respectable
width. Had he said it was forty feet wide they
mightn?t have believed him, but he selects a modest


width to lie on, and then spreads himself in his ex-
aggeration of values.?
?Yes; that?s so.?
?Well, with a width of ten feet, that mine, to give
50,000 tons in sight, would need to have developed
a shoot of ore 300 feet long, and proved to a depth
of 170 feet or so.?
?It?s impossible. It?s impossible,? cried Cargill,
excitedly. ?The prospectors have sold him.?
?I wouldn?t be sure of that. I won?t pronounce
on Horton and Grimes ?not yet- But what sort
of a man was Llewellyn??
?A little dapper fellow, pale in the face till he was
contradicted, and then he flushed as red as a beet-
root.?
?Physically strong? No??
?No. Weak, I should say. And he talked about
exploring and privations, and said he thought, at
the time, that he would never survive the coach
journey from Southern Cross to Coolgardie.?
Billy Pagan and I looked at one another and laugh-
ed.
?Essentially a townsman, you would say, Mr. Car-
gill??
?Essentially. He?d never been out of the old
country before. He had some little experience on
some very little lead mines in Wales somewhere
near Snowdon, and as poor as a church mouse.?
?Anything else??
?No. Stop a bit. Yes! He was very perky and
self-assertive when he thought he had me, and very
apologetic when I got to talking technicalities, be-
cause the directors cross-examined me into talking


them, although I knew it was double-Dutch to
them.?
?Well, then, I?m sure of one thing. Llewellyn
never saw this Golden Lake. He bought the option
without seeing it, and wrote the report as his belly
guided him.?
?Do you mean to say that it?s worse than exag-
geration ?this 50,000 ton estimate, Billy?? said I.
?It?s not exaggeration ?it?s invention. He never
saw the show.?
?Oh! that?s absurd, you know,? said Cargill.
?Why, as soon as I found I was fogged I cabled
to London, and Llewellyn started for Australia three
weeks ago to take me on to the mine. Why, he?ll
be here next week or so. What do you think of
that??
?I think that Mr. Llewellyn?s gall is the biggest
in the Southern Hemisphere?that?s what I think,?
said Billy.
Cargill smiled as if indulging a wayward infant.
?You?re on the wrong road, Mr. Pagan; and wrong
roads won?t help us to find the Golden Lake.?
?We?ll find it if it exists,? replied Billy Pagan.
?But I don?t think it does. Another thing ?who
paid over the to Grimes and Horton when
the company floated in London??
?The bank did.?
?Yes, but who has acted as attorney for the com-
pany since? Who got the exemption extended and
registered the company in Australia??
?A man in Coolgardie ?what?s his name?oh!
what?s his name? Bathgate, that?s it. But there?s
nothing in that. When Llewellyn came out the sec-


ond time, four months ago, he relieved Bathgate of
the job.?
?Oh! So Llewellyn has been here since he floated
the mine??
?Of course, he was here for a fortnight.?
?What recalled him so quickly to London??
?Business, I suppose. I don?t know. The other
directors cabled him that tEey?d like him to wait
here till I arrived from England.?
?Ah, ah! and what then??
?He returned to England at once, and I met him
there a week before I left for Australia. I?d been
detained, overlooking the construction of the mill.?
?Don?t you see, man? Don?t you see? He was
determined not to meet you here?he sent you out
alone to find the show.?
?But why should he come out now? He?ll be here
next week??
?Because there?s something new happened. We
don?t know it yet. He must be desperate when he
faces you here.?
Candidly, I thought this was going too far. ?See
here, Billy,? said I, ?all appearances are capable
of at least two explanations. Why shouldn?t he have
been called away on business before, and now be com-
ing out to show his bona fidcs, and maybe make us
all look foolish, the bears included??
?You can?t get two explanations of one little
fact,? replied Billy imperturbably. ?Harmer has
found a way to see the accounts, and there?s an
item, ?To remittance to Australia, mines develop-
ment, and working expenses, lOOO. ? And if the
money has been spent as it should there ought to be
a mine to show for it, and there isn?t.?


?It?s all mixed up,? said Cargill, wearily. ?Let?s
get on to the condenser and camp. I?m as thirsty
as a camel, and I want to see the billy boiling.?
?Good enough,? replied Billy Pagan, cheerily.
Cargill led the way?the two teams drew us swift-
ly and almost silently through the impalpable dust.
Through salmon gum and cane-grass, spinifex
and scented broom, over little plains slugged with
iron and great table-like outcrops of flat granite, we
searched for two days, and found but two outcrops of
buck quartz, glaring white, and valueless.
Cargill had made permanent camp and built his
condenser at the lake side, and we followed the
dejected man to the bough shelter by his tent. Car-
gill opened tins of meat, and brought the great billy
of steaming tea. As we ate the sun went down,
framing the camp in a glory of rose and chrome, and
drawing a blue darkness over the lake so suddenly as
to make the night seem as tangible as a cloak. Fur-
ther down the lake side was the great encampment
of men, waggons, and horses ?a noisy army, full of
chain rattlings and horse neighxngs, and big, reson-
ant voices of men calling to one another.
Immediately south of the camp the lake narrowed,
and in the half darkness the eastern, shore showed
for a moment against the white lake-bed like a
smear of ink on a clean page, and utterly disap-
peared as Billy Pagan spoke?
?It?s only about three miles across the lake at
that neck, Cargill.?
Cargill responded listlessly?? Yes, about that.?
?Well, you?ve drawn blanks on this western shore
every try. Why not search the eastern shore??
?That?s no good,? replied Cargill. ?The dcs-


cription in the prospector?s application was about
ninety-six miles south-east of Coolgardie, and the
furthest point of this lake is ninety-seven miles
south-east. Cross the lake and it would make it
one hundred and two miles.?
??All right, but why should Horton and Grimes
underestimate the distance? They might do it by
accident?if they walked it, it would seem a hundred
and fifty miles away; and if they rode it on good
camels it would seem no more than a hundred.?
?We?ll try the other shore if you like,? said Car-
gill. ?But I?ve no faith in it.?
As he spoke a point of wavering flame as of a
match lighted in the wind, glowed through the dark;
the deceptive night' for a moment brought it appar-
ently within a yard of us. Then our eyes found
themselves, and the flame went away to its true
position.
?There?s somebody there, anyway,? said Cargill.
?That fire?s burning on the other side of the lake,
and whoever?s camped there might put us on to the
show. We?ll try to-morrow, if you like.?
?I like,? replied Billy Pagan. ?It?s a mile or two
the other side of the lake, too; judging by the glow
and little flame there?s a belt of thick scrub between
the other shore and that camp. Take the bearings
of it, and we?ll steer to it at daylight. ?
?East sou?-east,? said I, locking the point of
the compass.
The beautifully soft dawn saw our departure. The
buckboards rolled noiselessly over the lake bed ?a
delicate French grey in tint, resilient as asphalt,
level as a billiard-table, excepting on its entrances


from the shore, which had the slope of a fruit plate
from its edge. There was no sound of wheel, and
but a thin rcverberance of hoof-fall. Islands of
diorite blue in distance became golden as we ap-
proached, and an illuminated blackness, as we passed
them. Airy islands that were not, filmy silver water
that was not, unsubstantial trees that did not grow,
showed themselves and their exaggerations for a few
minutes, and ran away from us as we drove nearer;
each fading to make a new mirage on the great
saucer of this Devil?s Sea. And in twenty minutes
or so we reached the eastern shore, drove up the as-
cent of the fruit plate again, and into deep sand.
The horses wearily dragged us through heavy scrub
that was already beginning to crackle with heat ?
never having cooled from the sun of the day before.
We drove through this pathless wilderness for a
mile, and then came out on another arm of the lake.
Still keeping on the compass direction the fire had
given us overnight, we coasted the lake shore, driv-
ing swiftly on the lake bed for a mile and a half ?
rounded a scrubby promontory, and
?Eureka,? cried Billy.
At the head of the space embayed by the lake were
the square tanks set diagonally over the fires, and
the long zinc piping of a condenser. Five minutes,
and we had tied the horses short to the buggy
wheels, and were standing by the condenser ?its
foundation and tanks tressed with stalactites of salt
?white as new wool. The ashes of the fire were
still warm ?a track that had trampled the whiteness
of salt and gypsum into crackling filth led past the
condenser-pipes and into the scrub.
Billy Pagan took this track without hesitation. The


scrub ended as suddenly as it began. We saw be-
low us a shallow valley dotted with salmon-gum
and strewn with quartz and iron slugs; the log-
gings of a shaft, and by it a small dump that told
us the depth to be forty feet or so; a bough dining-
shed and two tents.
?Found!? said Billy.
He climbed the logging of the shaft and called,
?Below there.? No voice answered him from the
shaft, but a man came from the tent, and another
from behind it. Fair-haired young men, with good
eyes, and burnt brick-red by the sun ?fine speci-
mens of the Australian, both of them.
?Hello, mate!? said the man who came from the
tent.
?Good morning, Mr. Grimes,? said Billy.
The man looked his surprise, but did not utter it,
He only said ??That?s Grimes ?I?m Horton.?
?This is the Golden Lake mine??
Horton looked more puzzled now. ?Golden
Lake? Never heard of it. It?s not within coo-ee
of here, is it, Bill??
Grimes, evidently a very silent man, cleaned his
pipe with a twig, and mumbled that he?d ?Never
heard of the Golden Lake, either.?
?This is the Cocktail,? said Horton. ?Come
under the shed. We?re just goin? to have a bite o?
breakfast.?
?But you sold the Golden Lake to Llewellyn, didn?t
you??
Grimes looked at Horton, and both laughed.
?That?s the toff name he gave it, is it?? asked
Horton. ?We sold it to him as the Buster. Is his
company smashed, then??


Cargill replied to Horton this time. ?No, it isn?t.
I?m the manager, and we want the mine. I demand
possession at once.?
Grimes looked at him curiously, tantalisingly.
?Oh! Do you? Well, why don?t you take it?
It?s there over the rise waiting for you. We thought
the company was dead. There?s never been one
man near it to our knowledge.?
?The company is floated all right,? said Billy.
?The Golden Lake Limited, they call it.?'
??Well, why haven?t they sent somebody here??
Cargill flushed. ?You?ll laugh, I know,? said
he, ?but It?s not my fault. I?ve been looking for
the dashed mine for two months.?
Giimes laughed again. ?Them English,? said
he. ?They?re wonders. Buy a mine without see-
ing it, or at least Llewellyn paid a deposit without
seeing it. An expert might been here while we
were away. We never thought about looking for
tracks. We took it for granted they?d been here
before they paid the last of the ten thousand.?
?The English,? said Horton, ?are wonderful. Buy
a pig in a bag, and then lose the bag.?
?But we couldn?t find you anywhere,? said Car-
gill. ?Where did you disappear to??
?We disappeared to here, and on our own busi-
ness. This ain?t Russia. A man hasn?t to tell a
policeman where?s he?s going before he starts, has
he??
?I understand,? said Billy. ?You were on good
gold here, too.?
?That?s right, Mister. That?s right. We know
of this, too. So after we sold the Buster to Lle-
wellyn, we went to Hannan?s and grafted a bit there,


and when we knew the money was in the bank,
back we went to Coolgardie and lifted the nine thous-
and five hundred. Then we had a month in Perth,
and then my mate got sick of houses; and back we
come here.?
?When a man?s on good gold,? supplemented
Horton, ?he don?t go round with a brass band givin?
his show away to all the world. He slips away quiet,
and sits down with his dolly pot. We?re doin? four
ounces a" day. ?
?Don?t mind telling you that,? said Grimes, in
explanation of the confidence. ?You?re not dig-
gers. ?
Then Cargill took a wrong turning. ?If you have
taken any gold off our lease,? said he, ?you?d better
return it.?
Grimes gave hfrn a glance of amused pity. ?You
can see how much we?ve taken by comparing your
expert?s report with the mine as it stands.?
?What?s the use of talking like that?? demanded
Cargill, hotly. ?You know very well that no man
but yourselves has ever visited the mine.?
?I?ve been thinkin? that since you come here,?
said Horton. ?Oh! you English?you?re wonder-
ful!?
Grimes spoke; but seriously this time. ?When
I met that little Welsh draper in Coolgardie, I told
him he was too soft for the country, and he said he
couldn?t face the journey to the mine; but he?d pay
a deposit and send a man. I never thought he?d
do this. As for you, mate,? he continued, address-
ing Cargill, ?make your mind easy. Since we sold
the Buster, or the Golden Lake, or whatever you
call her, we haven?t taken an ounce out of her.?


?Too honest, eh??? sneered Cargill, still nettled.
The big man flushed under the sunburn. ?I?m
as honest as any Englisher that ever breathed; and
maybe that?s not much. But we didn?t touch the
Buster because the Cocktail is a better show. We
dollied two ounces a day in the Buster. We?re do-
ing four in the Cocktail.?
We looked at one another. ?A better claim??
said Cargill. ?Why, you can?t be down forty feet.?
?We?re down forty-two feet, mate, and we?ve
driven twelve feet on her. She was poor from the
ten feet down to thirty-five?only milling stone, and
we didn?t do any dollying of that, bet your life.?
?Forty-two feet of a shaft and a drive for twelve
feet,? said Billy. ?How did you represent the claim
to Llewellyn??
?We told him we were down fifty-one feet, and
crosscut her three feet, and drove on her eighteen
feet ?that?s what we told him. We told him it was
pretty poor stuff, with rich bands in it, and that
nearly all the band stuff was dollying stuff. Then
he offered us ten thousand, and we snapped it.?
?My oath!? that came very complacently from
Horton.
?Take me to the mine,? said Cargill. ? ?I?m sorry
for what I?ve said. But this thing has been used as
a swindle, and I lost my temper.?
?That?s nothing,? replied Grimes serenely. ?I?ve
got no edge against a man because he gets his hair
off now and then. A man who can?t fire up is no
dashed good of a man, anyway.?
We saw the Golden Lake, alias the Buster; and
in a moment the worth of gold and the
shoot that should have been three hundred feet long,


ten feet wide, and a hundred and seventy feet deep
to make good the figures of Llewellyn, became an
irregularly excavated shaft fifty-one feet deep, and an
eighteen foot drive as curly as a rabbit warren.
?And there?s no body of ore or promise of it,
either?? said Billy, interrogatively of the prospec-
tors.
Grimes answered ??You see there isn?t. These
are all poor man?s shows. There?s no body of
crushing stuff. These little ironstone leaders
running into the hanging wall ?they carry the
gold; all this steatite around the veins is barren, and
I don?t think there?s enough of the vein stuff to pay
a company.?
?I can?t help that,? said Cargill, through his
teeth. ?I?ve got that nightmare of a mill here, and
I?ve got to put the mill up and spend thirty thousand
pounds to give the Golden Lake shareholders a run
for their money.?
?Well, I?m off to Coolgardie,? said Billy, ?to see
Bathgate and get at the bottom of all this.?
?You?ll be in time to welcome Llewellyn,? Cargill
said, with a grin, in anticipation of the humour of
the meeting. ?Send him out to me when you?ve
done with him.?
?You?ll stay here??
?My orders were to find the mine and put up the
mill, and I?m going to do it unless they cable other-
wise when I send the news. Will you take the cable
for me, and send the answer, Mr. Fleet??
?I will,? said I.
?And send me a dozen miners out, if it?s not
troubling you, Mr. Pagan.?
?No trouble. I?ll do it.?


?While I?m waiting for them, I?ll get that luna-
tic machinery over this side of the lake, and when I
get my miners I?ll sink that shaft on to something
or bust the company.??
?You?ll bust your company, then,? said Grimes.
?We know these rich leaders. They?ll never make
into a big ore body till water runs up hill.?
* * * *
Two nights later we were in Coolgardie,and after
Billy had sent a reassuring cable to Harmer, and I
had despatched Cargill?s message to his directors,
we went on the quest of Bathgate, mining agent,
and one-time Westralian attorney for the Golden
Lake Limited.
We found Mr. Bathgate in the bar of the Reefers?
Rest; and we found Mr. Bathgate three-parts drunk,
and very merry. He was a sallow, lean man, with
beetling black eyes, and a black moustache tinged
with grey. The accountant of the Bank of the West
introduced us, and from that moment the gaining of
the information was easy; as Bathgate?s drunken-
ness had so exaggerated his native vanity that he
advertised his cleverness outrageously.
?There have been some queer floats in London of
leases on these fields,? said Billy. ?There was the
very appropriately-named Black Flag, floated by
pirates, and the Golden Crown, and- the Golden
Group, and the Golden Pike, and lots of other Gold-
ens without a skerrig of gold in any one of them.?
?Did y?ever hear of the Golden Lake?? said
Bathgate, gravely intoxicated by this time.
?Golden Lake? Yes. I met the manager, Mr.
Cargill. He told me there was some difficulty in
locating the lease.?


Bathgate chuckled. ?I should think there was
And there will be.?
??Will be I He?s found it, hasn?t he??
??Neither he nor any other man will ever do that,
Mr. Pagan.?
?Why??
Bathgate became suddenly almost sober. He
leaned forward, and said impressively:
?Because there?s no such mine! Oh, it?s no goou
you looking like that. Who has ever seen Horton
and Grimes? Not me ?nobody has seen ?em. Lle-
wellyn never went out of Coolgardie to see any mine.
He?s got the constitution of a milliner, and the trip
from Southern Cross wiped him out. No! There
was never any mine, nor any Horton, nor any Gri-
mes either, and Llewellyn invented that mine out of
his head; fixed up application papers for country no
man had ever prospected; made a contract of pur-
chase with himself through a dummy, and paid him-
self that deposit, and the company paid him the
other nine thousand five hundred.?
?But, Mr. Bathgate, this is preposterous! Why
I ?
?Never mind, Mr. Pagan. I was a bit skewwhiff
just now, but Pm as sober as a gaol this minute. You
don?t know the kind of man Llewellyn is. After
he?d floated the Golden Lake, and the nine thousand
five hundred had been paid over ?to somebody?Lle-
wellyn sent me a cable to see the prospectors; fix the
further exemption till he arrived, and act as attorney
for the company, to register it in West Australia,
and do things like that. The company cabled me a
thousand quid to go on with.?
?I see. And you didn?t see the prospectors??


?I didn?t, and for a good reason?there are no
such men in the world, I tell you. Well, I did my
bit. Registered ?em, stuck up a brass plate, got
the exemption extended ?even took a trip out-to Lake
Lefroy to find the thing, and put in three days for
nothing. About a month after that out comes the lit-
tle Welshman. He asked me for accounts.?
"And, of course, you gave them??
Bathgate laughed loud and long, and seemed to
become drunken again before our eyes, as if only his
seriousness had held his intoxication in check.
??l gave ?em, and he said he?d take over the at-
torneyship and the bank balance, and I showed him
the accounts. I?d charged my own services as at-
torney at a thousand guineas, and so he owed me,
with registration, and cables, and travelling ex-
penses, and things, a hundred and eighty odd.?
??Pretty strong,? said Billy, ??and .what did he
do??
??Offered me a hundred guineas for my services,
and demanded seven hundred and twenty pounds,
or, he said, he?d prosecute me. Prosecute me! Ho!
ho!?
??And what did you say??
??Me? I said to him only a dozen words or so.
?Taffy,? said I, ?you give me a cheque-for a hundred
and eighty-two pounds ten, or I won?t tell you where
your blasted mine is.? ?
We all laughed at that, and Billy pursued???And
what did he do then??
??He gave me a cheque for the balance, and then
he says ??Now, where is the mine?? And I says to
him, as soon as I had the cheque safe ??Go and find


Horton and Grimes, and they?ll telljou.? Ho! ho!
Pretty neat that??
??l don?t know,? said Billy Pagan, regarding
Bathgate with much disfavour. ?What then??
?Well, right inside a minute that little Welsh
draper chap looked as old as if he was his own father.
He knocked about here for a week; but he never
went out ?too scared of the track. And I see by
the ?Financial News? that he hadn?t drawn his plun-
der In London up to then. Some shareholder had
asked at a meeting for some expert to check Llewel-
lyn?s report, and Taffy put up a good bluff.?
?As how??
?Said if his honour was doubted he?d be ready to
leave his price?money and shares?in the directors?
hands for three months. He thought they?d refuse
the offer as an insult to himself; but somebody mov-
ed his offer be accepted, and the bally meeting carri-
ed it unanimously, and he didn?t get a bean.?
?And he hasn?t lifted it yet??
?He must have. That?s more than three months
ago. So the directors must have paid over.?
We left Bathgate as quickly as decency would
permit, and as we walked down Bailey-street, I
asked Billy Pagan \\diat his next move would be.
?I?ll hunt up a file of the ?Financial News.? I
want to see when that three months expired, and 1
want to find it out at once, because the German boat
arrived at Fremantle the day before yesterday.
Llewellyn came out on her, and he?ll be here in a day
or two.?
?But the money is certain to be paid by now.


Bathgate says that the three months expired long
ago.?
??l say Llewellyn hasn?t got the money yet. If he
had would he be out here, where he can be bowled
out? No ?the money isn?t paid over yet, and he?ll
make for Coolgardie and send a glowing report by
cable, perhaps in Cargill?s name.?
?It must be that way, Billy. Let?s find the ?Fin-
ancial News.? ?
It was the hunt of days. We did not find a file of
the journal until two hours before Llewellyn arrived
in Coolgardie; and in the nick of time we read
enough to show us that the three months had expired
three days before.
??Beaten, Billy.?
??l can?t think so. Let?s send a cable to Harm-
So we sent a cable asking if the money had yet
been paid, and the scrip handed to Llewellyn?s
agent; and further advising that Harmer?s should
become a large and more terrible animal than ever;
and went to bed thanking the geography that placed
Australia nine hours forty minutes ahead of London,
so that the cable we despatched on the evening of
the seventh would be answered on the morning of
the same day, and the reply delivered to us at break-
fast on the eighth.
??lt?s as I thought,? said Billy Pagan, successive-
ly engaged in eating his breakfast and decoding
Harmer?s reply at the same time. ??He hasn?t got
the money yet.?
?But the three months has expired??
?Yes, and owing to three directors being out of
London, there was no quorum, and the board meet-


ing which was to pass the payment to Llewellyn was
adjourned for a week.?
?Hooray, Billy. Good luck.?
?And that week is up to-day. But if we send a
cable to-night it will strike London in time this morn-
ing. Now for Llewellyn.?
?But if he hasn?t been paid, how did the company
get the transfer??
?Because Llewellyn hadn?t any ten thousand
pounds to pay Horton and Grimes, and when the
company paid that they lifted the titles.?
We found Llewellyn?a weary-eyed spruce little
man ?at his hotel, and Billy introduced himself and
me.
Llewellyn, flushing and paling alternately, said
that he had heard of Mr. Pagan.
?Well, Mr. Llewellyn,? said Billy, plunging into
the business of the meeting, ?we?ve found the
mine.?
Try as he would, the news affected Llewellyn
strangely. He looked as if he were about to weep
tears of relief; but he controlled himself sufficiently
to say that he would be glad to have the opinion of
such an eminent authority on the property.
?Thanks?? said Billy drily. ?Now, Mr. Llewel-
lyn, I?ve seen that mine. There?s no fifty thousand
tons of 4 oz. ore there. There?s not a hundred tons
of any ore to swear by.?
?Really, Mr. Pagan ?
?Mr. Llewellyn, there?s no use in talking. You?ve
never seen the show.?
?Sir, I reported on the mine for the prospectus
I ?


?That doesn?t matter. You?ve never seen the
mine, and she?s only good for a small party of men.
Cargill?s out there with enough plant to crush Cape
Otway, and that plant has cost eleven thousand in
freight alone. It?s a crime, Mr. Llewellyn.?
?How dare you, sir? How dare you??
?I dare lots of things. It isn?t too late to turn
back, Mr. Llewellyn. Cable your board that you
have been grossly deceived about the mine. Let
yourself down as lightly as you like; but forego all
your right to the forty thousand pounds and' the
shares now in the company?s hands on your ac-
count, and I?ll say not a word. You can?t get the
money; take the honour and glory of giving it up.
It?s a splendid advertisement.?
?I?ll have the money,? said Llewellyn, stubbornly.
?That you shall not, Mr. Llewellyn.?
The Welshman laughed; but he was very ill at
ease as he spoke his last bluff. ?I?ve had the money
?it was paid to my brokers in London yesterday.
Recover it if you can.?
?It was not paid yesterday, Llewellyn, and you
know it. The adjourned meeting of the board is
for to-day?will you abandon your claim??
?No,? said the Welshman, ashen pale now. ?It?s
mine, and I?ll have it.?
?Save yourself the trouble, Llewellyn,? said Billy,
as we met Llewellyn on the steps of the Post Office,
he entering and we leaving it. ?I?ve said nothing
about you, but I?ve cabled the facts of the mine to
my principals, and to your board. If you give
trouble I?ll take a few newspapers into my con-
fidence.?


?Damn you!? said the little Welshman, ?I?d like
to kill you.? '
And our breakfast present next morning was a
cable from Harmer:
?During last five days Golden Lakes have been
sold down to par, and yesterday they were sold to
seven &nd sixpence closing, three-eighths?seven-
sixteenths. Others must have had information.?
?That little Welshman,? looking up from the
code book, ?made a bit after all. He stood to win
both ways. He made up for the risk of discovery and
the consequent withholding of the money, by selling
a medium-sized bear on his own. It?s quite true.
Taffy was an insignificant Welshman, but a very con-
siderable thief.?
[The End.]








K>>.
?
fSi i
