





MR. JOHN PRI
Inspector-General of Penal Establishments for Victoria
WITH AN ACCOUNT OE THE
ASSASSINATION, INQUEST & FUNERAL;
AMO, A FULL REPORT OP
C| t trial rf % prisoners,
&c., &c.
PRICE TWO SHILLINGS & SIXPENCE.
MELBOURNE:
/W> FAIRFAX AND CO., 78, COLLINS STREET, EAST;
.L AND CO., & G. ROBERTSON.
GEELONG: T. BROWNx. & FRANKS & JACKSON. SYDNEY: SANDS & KENNY.
HOBART TOWN: WALCH & SONS. BALLARAT: A. C. BRUNIG.
BEECHWORTH: CURLE & LYON. CASTLEMAINE: R. CURLE.
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


MURDER OF MR. PRICE.
W The following remarkable letter, signed by one hundred and four prisoners, Con-
fined in the Pentridge Stockade, has been presented to Mrs. Price. We learn on
reliable authority that this expression of sympathy with Mrs. Price was the result
of a purely spontaneous movement on the part of the prisoners :
“ Madam, —We, the undersigned, prisoners at Pentridge Stockade, beg respect-
fully to request your acceptance of this letter as an offer of our sincere condolence
for and sympathy with you and your family in your present deep distress.
“ We have heard with much indignation that public rumor attributes to us the
cognizance of the intended attack upon the late Inspector-General. This we beg
in the most emphatic manner to deny, and to state that we had not the most
remote knowledge of the dreadful event. And also to add, that had we been on the
spot, we should have made every exertion to save his life.
“We are aware of many instances in which you have personally shown kind
offices to the sick, by providing them with comforts not otherwise attainable.
“ We beg once more to offer you our united and sincere condolence.”
“ Penal Establishment, Pentridge,
“ 9th April, 1857.”
MONUMENT TO MR. PRICE.
The officers and men connected with the Penal Departments have subscribed
the sum of £270, for the purpose of erecting a monument to the memory of the
late Inspector-General of Penal Establishments, Mr. John Price. Mr. Heald is
now engaged in its preparation. The monument will consist of a column of granite,
with an appropriate inscription, and is to be erected in the New Cemetery.
MR. PRICE’S SUCCESSOR.
Mr. Champ, we understand, has been “ sent for” by Sir Henry Barkly to super-
intend the Penal Establishments of Victoria, in the room of Mr. Price, murdered by
convicts whose condign sentence is recorded in another column. The mail which
brings the intelligence of the conviction and sentence of these brutal malefactors
has brought, we hear, despatches from the Governor of Victoria appointing William
Thomas Napier Champ, Esq., to be Inspector-General of Penal Establishments,
Master of the Stockades of Collingwood and Pentridge, of the Hulks of Hobson's
Bay, and the chain-gangs of the quarries at Williamstown.—“ Tasmanian Daily
News.”


3 1508 00016001 5
E. JOHN PEICE.
A'J 3355 jr ■ 3
7
Mr. John Price, the gentleman whose murder has just been the subject of judicial
investigation in the Supreme Court, was the son of the late Sir Pose Price, Bart., of
Cornwall, and brother of the present Baronet, Sir Charles Price.
The family, besides being an ancient, is a wealthy one. In addition to extensive
landed estates in Cornwall, Sir Rose Price enjoyed a large West India property, the
London agents for which were the large mercantile firm of Barkly &Co —the family
of which Sir Henry Barkly is a member. Upon the death of Sir Rose, his will was
disputed by his eldest son/ and the whole estate thrown into Chancery. Mr. John
Price, dissatisfied with the uncertainty of his prospects, and the delay that threatened
to intervene before he reaped any advantages under his father’s will, resolved to
male an independent start in the world, and carve out his own fortunes. W T ith
this object he applied to, and readily obtained from his father’s agents, a sum of
a thousand pounds, which was the capital with which he began life.
From a hoy, Mr. Price had been distinguished by great physical strength, active
habits, and a love of adventure and enterprise. He now looked round for a more
open field of exertion, and one better adapted to his peculiar tendencies of character
than his native country presented, and finally determined to become a settler in
Van Diemen's Land, where he arrived about the year 1835.
The island of Tasmania, as it has been called since it ceased to he a penal
establishment, for the sake of more completely severing its present from its ancient
associations, —was at that time the great receptacle of England’s crime. Of rare
physical beauty, with an extremely fertile soil, and a climate both salubrious and
delightful, it might have been foretold that it was destined one day to become the
site of a flourishing free colony. It was not, however, for the purposes of free
colonisation that it was first settled. The necessity of providing for the deportation
of her criminal classes, was a problem that pressed more heavily at that time on the
statesmen of England than the expediency of opening up new fields of enterprise
for her free hut overcrowded population. It is not our province here to discuss the
philosophy of transportation as a punishment, or an agency for the cure of crimes
But it is impossible not to condemn the want of forethought that selected the very
fairest and most inviting of England’s possessions beyond the seas—possession,
whose native attractiveness would inevitably draw to them, as soon as they becaera
popularly known, a stream of free immigration— to be the receptacle of the very
dregs of society. And it is impossible also not to regret, as we witness the


extraordinary development which these colonies have undergone, that so pregnant
an element of social mischief was thus needlessly thrown amongst them in their
infancy.
In Van Diemen’s Land the convict system attained its most perfect development.
It is part of the philosophy of this method of dealing with crime, that whilst the
labor of prisoners shall he rendered in some measure useful in conquering the
ruggedness of a new country, they shall have, amid fresh scenes, at a distance
from their old temptations, the opportunity and the inducement to enter upon a
new course of life.
It was never contemplated that transports should he required, under ordinary
circumstances, to serve out the full term of their sentences in actual bondage
There were a succession of gradations towards a kind of conditional freedom,
through which they were permitted to pass with a rapidity regulated hy their own
good conduct or otherwise. After a certain brief period of government service, it
was customary in the first place to assign these men as servants to private settlers,
Avho undertook, in consideration of their labor, to relieve the government of the
cost of their maintenance. At a further stage of indulgence they were presented
with conditional pardons, which rendered them virtually free in the colonies, to
labor for wages at will, to enter into any kind of business, and to acquire property,
without permission, however, to return to their native country. Many desperate
men, careless of obtaining indulgence by good behaviour, disliking the restrictions
by which under any circumstances it was narrowed, and smitten with a love for the
wild unlicensed life of the bush, broke loose from custody and roamed at will, un-
scrupulous free-booters, supporting themselves by depredations.
It is necessary, for the understanding of our story, to explain these facts to those
of our readers who coming here in later days have only a vague notion of Avhat con-
victism was, and can form but little idea therefore, of the circumstances by which
John Price, a remote settler of Tasmania, found himself surrounded three-and-
twenty years back, when transportation was at its height.
Mr. Price established himself on the banks of the Huon river, Avhere he bought
land, had convict servants assigned him, and engaged himself in felling timber.
From the remoteness of this locality from the more settled districts, its inaccessi-
bility, and the comparatively secure covert it afforded therefore to refugees, it
became a favorite place of resort to the hardened desperadoes who had escaped from
custody, and having filled up their measure of crime, had everything to dread if they
again fell into the hands of the law. A class of men more thoroughly steeped in
vice; of more utterly abandoned character; of greater recklessness in the pre-
sence of dangers, it were hard to imagine than the Yandemonian Bushrangers.
The following statistics exhibit the numbers of the convict population of the
Island at different periods since its use as a penal settlement, and the proportions
they bore to the free inhabitants :—-
In 1804 there were in the island 400 convicts to 80 free people: in 1825 there
Avere 6,800 bond to 6,800 free ; in 1838, 13,000 to 10,000 ; in 1835, 22,000 to 17,000.
At the beginning of 1883, there were 11,062 male prisoners to 1,644 female. In that
year arrived 2,643 males and 35u females; in 1827, 841 males and 222 females; in
1825, 687 males and 188 females. In October, 1832, out of 11,000 prisoners, there
were 6,400 in private, and 1,645 in public services ; 1,160 had tickets-of-leave, 543
were iii chain-gangs. 182 at Macquarie Harbour, and 240 at Port Arthur.


JOHN PRICE. 9
iect to were of the severest kinds, their food of the
The labors these men were subject to were of the severest'kinds, their food of the
coarsest, and their punishments the most severe and brutal. 1 hey were at the
mercy of convict overseers, whose cruelties furnished, perhaps, the strongest of all
inducements to attempt at escape. Mr. Bonwick, speaking of the settlement at
Macquarie Harbour, says:—
“ The double-twisted and knotted cords applied to the excoriated back lashed forth
the usual evening music. The brutality and injustice of convict overseers were the
chief cause of such inflictions, and the exciting motive to escape from the cruelties
of man to the heartlessness and horrors of surrounding natives.
“That the punishment was rigorous enough, and life unindurable,the records of
the Settlement furnish abundant proofs. Of eighty -five deaths only thirty were from
natural causes. In three years two-thirds of the felon residents had received 6,280
lashes ; hut in the dreadful season of 1822, out of 182 men, 169 were punished to the
fcightful amount of 7,000 lashes. During the ten years of occupancy, 112 men had
the hardihood to elope; of these 62 perished. At one period 350 were at the station.
If anything could possibly add to the sufferings at Macquarie Harbour, beyond the
venom of self-reproach, and the life of cruel servitude and tyranny, it was the
wretched treatment of each other. Too degraded to sympathise with sorrow, too
persecuted to temporise with feeling, they deadened their nature to every appeal of
intellect or moral sentiment, and cursed alike their fellows, themselves, and their
God. Priding themselves upon stoicism in receiving punishment, and indifferent
to the continuance of their existence, they cared for nothing. When w'e remember
that these slaves of ill-governed passions were thrust in herds of misery and vice,
without one redeeming feature in their circumstances, one solitary expression of
kindness, we wonder not at the phrase of ‘ The Hell of Macquarie Harbour.’ We
are not astonished to hear of men, anxious for some change, however dreadful,
tossing up for life. The gambling was to determine who was to be murdered, who
was to be the murderer, and who were the witnesses. The blow would be struck, f
one sufferer would be released from the Hell, one would be hanged, and two or three
would exchange for a few weeks the pine shore of one prison for the stone floor of
the Hobart Town Gaol. ”
It was of course the object of the Tasmanian authorities to bring as many as
possible of these reckless deperadoes, once more under the restraints of penal ser-
vitude, and where new and murderous outrages had been committed against society,
to deliver them over to the penalties of the law. It was the extraordinary sagacity
and aptitude displayed by Mr. Price at this time, in recapturing the Bushrangers
who infested his neighbourhood, that first recommended that gentleman to the
notice of the authorities, at whose hands he received some minor official appoint-
ment not necessitating his removal from his own district.
In the year 1888, when Mr. Price had been only some three years in the
Colony, a vacancy occurred in the Police Magistracy of Hobart Town, and by this
time his peculiar qualifications for dealing with criminals had .been brought so
prominently under the notice of the government by the services he had rendered to
society on the Huon, that he was chosen to fill that office, and at once entered on
the discharge of its duties. Mr. Price continued in this post for a period of eight
years, until 1846, and it is only in justice to his memory to say that his conduct on
the Bench was so little characterised by the capricious cruelty that has freely been
attributed to him here, that he won universal respect and esteem. It was felt that
no man could be better fitted for the very peculiar and often trying as well as
responsible duties he had to discharge. His almost intuitive knowledge of the crimi-
nal class ; a singular facility in divining the exact characters of the men brought
before him ; and the exactness with which he was accustomed to discriminate the
degrees of criminality; his skilful appreciation of evidence, his calmness of deport-
ment, coupled with great firmness and decision of character : made him a magis-
A 2


trate from whom the innocent had nothing to fear; to whom the guilty could look
for fairness of treatment; and in whose wise and prudent administration of the law,
society could feel safe. Without prejudging the question whether a subsequent and
more intimate contact with almost every phase of human depravity, developed other
elements of character at that time dormant, and made the man who was an equit-
able and not an unmerciful magistrate, an unduly and capriciously stern disciplin-
arian, it is certain that during the eight years he sat on the Bench at Hobart lown,
his conduct commended itself to universal approval. The writer states this from
varied and reliable information he has received at the hands of persons who were
the eye-witnesses of facts and possessed therefore of a personal knowledge of that
portion of Mr. Price’s career to which he does not himself pretend. The demon-
C ' stration of regret that was made, however, at his removal in the year 1846, is cn
- itself sufficient proof of the public estimation in which he was held. Owing to
circumstances to be narrated presently, Mr. Price was appointed to succeed Captain
M‘Conochie in the Chief Superintendency of the Convict Establishment at Norfolk
Island. When the fact of his nomination became known, a large public meeting
\ i was held at Hobart Town, attended by most of the influential citizens of that
place, at which a memorial was adopted praying Mr. Price to retain the office he
then held with so much satisfaction to all parties, and guaranteeing him a salary
raised by public subscription, equal to the stipend attached to his new promotion,
HUk together with free house-rent. So much was it felt that the removal of Mr. John
N Brice from the Hobart Town Bench would be an irreparable loss. He saw fit*
'S M however, to decline these overtures and accepted the offer made to him by the
'i, xjp Government. A service of plate, valued at £BOO, was presented to him.
It was whilst residing in Hobart Town that Mr. Price married the lady who is
|{®now his widow, the daughter of Major Franklin, and niece of the late Sir John g
lt will thus be seen that the statement which has appeared in some offlv
A*- the Melbourne papers, to the effect that Mr. Price was indebted for his
ijr appointment under government to his marriage with Miss Franklin is an error.
vfLl He was indebted for it purely to his own display of qualities that pointed him out
9 as a man likely to be efficient in a very peculiar line of service, and it was whilst
enjoying the promotion these same qualities procured for him, that he formed the
connection which resulted in his marriage.
It is necessary now to advert to the circumstances that occasioned Mr. Pri ce ’ s
removal to Norfolk Island. That spot of exquisite natural beauty had long been
known as the “ Ocean Hell,” being made the receptacle of the very worst class of
criminals. “An old Norfolk Islander ”is still the designation that suggests to the
mind the idea of a man inured to blood, both callid and ferocious. What Van
Diemen’s Land itself was, a transport ground to England, Norfolk Island was to
the convictdom of Van Diemen’s Land.
Such was the condition to which this beautiful but dishonored island was
reduced when M'Conochie was superseded, and John Price sent to supply his place.
On his arrival he found it in a state of scarcely suppressed rebellion. Twelve men
were under sentence of death for murders committed during the outbreak, and they
were shortly afterwards executed. Of Mr. Price’s administration on the island
many different stories have been current, but those who may perhaps be regarded as
the most reliable witnesses, declare that he effected nothing iess than a moral


revolution. It is certain that during the whole term of his residence there only
two men were hanged, in addition to those who were sentenced for crimes com-
mitted before his arrival; and it is proved, on the authority of official reports, that
the numbers flogged for breaches of penal discipline, were some hundreds per cent,
in his time lower than during the reign of his predecessor. These are two facts
that stand out prominently in face of any allegations that may he made against
Mr, Price’s official conduct as Commandant of Norfolk Island. Another fact of a
different character, but equally significant, is found in the testimony borne by the
convicts themselves, and the general feeling of respect, and in many instances of
absolute partiality, with which they regarded him. Several of these men are now
in the stockades and hulks of Melbourne. And it is pretty certain that if they had
had the opportunity, they would not have joined the rush upon the late Inspector
General. In the midst of the new punishments they have brought on themselves
by subsequent offences against law < they have looked back with regret to the days
when they were subject to a penal discipline not evidently unbearable, whilst it
removed them effectually from the temptations to crime that beset them on their
liberation, and have often said to the man now murdered, “ Ah, Mr. Price, I wish
you and we were hack on the island once more.’’ We are told that these veterans
in vice were actually moved to tears when they heard how brutally the Inspector
General had been battered to death. It would be absurd to ascribe to these men
any great tenderness of susceptibility. But one only inference can be drawn from
the fact, —which has itself been communicated to us on authority which we cannot
question,—that whatever might have been the stern severity which John Price
practiced, there waif an habitual love of fair play; an indisposition to be harsh
when harseness seemed unnecessary; and an anxiety to encourage any latent seeds
of good— SO LONG AS THE CONDITIONS OF THE PENAL SYSTEM HE HAD TO ADMINISTER
rendered it possible— that made an impression upon these rugged natures, and
made the Commandant of Norfolk Island, although he was their taskmaster, an
object of their good will.
The testimony against Mr. Price’s administration has been borne chiefly by clergy-
men. From their statements it would appear, undoubtedly, that Mr. Price’s system
of management was one of absolute and relentless terrorism; that he indulged in
both a severity and capriciousness of punishment, calculated only to make the bad
worse, and to eradicate from any heart not utterly depraved, what remnants of
good might yet be left in it. That this is the tenor of the report made by more
than one resident chaplain on the island, appears from the representations given in
some of the public journals, A document, the production of a Norfolk Island
clergyman, is said to exist, which would fully sustain the charges made against the
deceased. With a view, not to a eulogy or a defence, but an impartial record, the
writer courteously applied for access to the document, under any restrictions as to
the use of its contents that might be imposed on him. But his application was
unnoticed, and he is thus precluded from consulting what is understood to con-
stitute the chief evidence against Mr. Price’s administration.
With reference to the existence of these charges, it must be borne in mind
that throughout his career on the island there was something like a feud
between himself and the resident chaplains. The systems and predilections
of the two clashed. Mr. Price may have been unduly jealous of much that


he regarded as interference with his legitimate functions, • little disposed to
allow any one to infringe upon an authority that he believed to centre in himself
only. with fixed ideas of his own duties, and a strong attachment to his own
system. He was undoubtedly self-reliant, and looked, perhaps, upon everything
approaching to a co-ordinate authority in his own department as an impertinence.
On the other hand, it is not at all improbable that the Chaplains on the Island
conceived their own rights and duties to go beyond a mere oversight of the spiritual
instruction of the prisoners. It is not difficult even to understand that they looked
on the Commandant as the mere instrument of punishment in the establishment,
and themselves as the leavening element of mercy, by whose presence that punish-
ment was to be tempered. It may have been that Mr. Price, with a strong consti ■
tutional disposition to act for himself, resented every attempted interference v,xtn
his own will and his own sense of what was proper, to an extent that in many
instances turned a natural prompting of mercy aside. He was jealous, too, of
influence gained by others over the minds of his prisoners, that was not purely of a
religious character. It would have been unnatural if clerical susceptibilities had
not taken offence under a condition of things so little calculated to flatter and
gratify them; and although we have spoken on these matters only conjecturally,
we submit that the case, as we have put it, has quite sufficient probability about it
to induce some caution in accepting the unfavorable statements which one or two
of the Chaplains have made respecting Mr. Price’s Norfolk Island administration.
It is certain that a feud, such as we have adverted to, did exist, and one cause
of it is known. During the time of Mr. M‘Conochie the convicts^were allowed to
work for the Chaplains, in the manufacture of boxes and other articles from the
native woods, and in the cultivation of cayenne pepper and other articles of pro-
duce, which these gentlemen were accustomed to make articles of export. Mr. Price
on his arrival forthwith put an end to this system. He maintained convict labor
to be the property of the Crown, and refused to allow it to be privately used
without an equivalent paid. It is said that by this he kindled a feeling of resent-
ment which lasted throughout, and indeed survived, his residence on the island.
After Mr. Price had held the position of Commandant of Norfolk Island for seven
years, he obtained leave of absence on account of ill health, and returned to Yan
Diemen’s Land to spend his vacation. It was whilst he was a temporary resident
there, that a vacancy occurred in the Chief Inspectorship of the Penal Establish-
ments of Victoria by the promotion of Mr. Barrow. Mr. Price was at once nominated
as his successor, and accepted the appointment. He sustained its responsibilities
from the year until the day of his murder, and fell whilst in the discharge of his
duties. The circumstances of his death are minutely detailed in the pages which
follow ; and we have no occasion here to repeat the melancholy narrative. Until
the trial of Melville and his associates, the public, perhaps, universally regarded
Mr. Price as an able and efficient officer. Since the statements made on that
occasion, opinion has been divided on his merits. If we may be permitted to saiy
so much, it appears to us that the actual position he held, and the nature of the
work he had to do, has been somewhat lost sight of in the public discussions on
his character and his system. He was neither an Educator, nor a moral Reformer.
He was not a party to the chain of influences that ended in connecting these men
with the most repulsive forms of crime. They were given to his care, and he had


just to deal with them as they were. In other circumstances Mr. Price might have
been an apostle of education, and inspected schools instead of hulks. But that
was not the work we gave him to do and expected him to do, here, As has been
remarked:—
“We bought his strong resolution and courage, his energy of character, and
such other attributes of mind and body as he possessed, not to train up children in
the way they should go, but to keep a body of desperate ruffians in such control as
would give the colony a measure of security against bloodshed and murder. Price
might have been a criminal reformer, and devoted himself to the reclamation of law-
breakers like Manchester Wright. Admitted —under a like proviso. But the coun-
try did not look for that. The country did not make any provision for that.
Price found the Hulk system, and had to deal with it. He was not its advocate.
He maintained resolutely that crime in Victoria required to be otherwise treated.
He wanted a goal such as they have in England. It was denied him. We have
more gold than any other people in the world, and more crime. But we cannot
spend so much money in this direction as those who have less gold and less crime
So, with insufficient accommodation, and an insufficient staff, the Inspector-General
had—not to occupy his mind with theories of reformation, and his time with
philanthropic experiments—but simply to save us all from being murdered, by
holding in check, by as stern measures as the desperation of the case demanded,
the elements of mischief of which he was the custodian. He had to deal with
these men under circumstances the most adverse to any good moral result what-
soever. And he had to deal with them under a system of which he was not the
originator, and against which he protested. Could he do anything but adopt a
system of stern repression?”
Yet he himself had confidence in the friendly feelings of the majority of the convicts
towards him. Only an hour before the murderous assault, he said to a friend in
the unreserve of private intercourse, —“ I know I shall be murdered some day. I
have, however, one ground of confidence. I know if there should be any outbreak,
I should have as many friends amongst them as foes.” One of the circumstances
by which this feeling of confidence was induced, was undoubtedly the conscious-
ness of efforts made to secure a reversal of sentence in cases where he believed men
had been unjustly condemned. If he once entertained this conviction, he is known
never to have spared time or trouble in his endeavours to procure a pardon. At
the very time when the fatal assault took place, he was speaking to a man, whom
he believed innocent, of the exertions he had been making to establish that fact to
the satisfaction' of the authorities.
A remarkable paper was published in the number of Household Words for
April, 1842, written by a free visitor to the Island, conveys the impression made
on the mind of an eye witness, by such portions of Mr. Price’s discipline, and the
. effects of it, as was patent to a casual observer; —
“ The dark scenes of convict life, of which I have already given spme examples,
do not now fill Norfolk Island with their ancient horrors. Here also the good old
times have given way to. better new times. Captain M'Conochie, under all the diffi-
culties against which he had to contend when he was governor, utterly broke down
the old ferocious system. Under the temperate, strict, and judicious control of Mr.
Price, the present commandant, a system of discipline has been established, which,
while it does not make the probation of the convicts other than a term of punish-
ment, accords to them such wholesome management, and such fair treatment, as
has humanised their conduct among one another, and towards those set in authority
over them. Formerly, in the blaze of noonday, it was dangerous for any one to
walk alone beyond the precincts of the settlement. Violent crimes and murders
were common among the gangs while at their work—convict quarrelling with con-
vict. The resident was clouded with a daily sense of insecurity, a dread for the
safety of his wife or children when they left his sight. For then the incessant lash
made hard hearts harder ; and wretches made to grovel in dark cells, chained by
ring-bolts to the floor, and wearing sixty pounds of iron on their arms, were
degraded even lower than they had been forced at home below the feelings of


humanity. Then convicts were driven at night-fall, besmeared and dirty with the
day’s toil, into the barrack, and were locked up till morning in neglected rooms, to
prey upon each other, No officer who ventured there among them would come out
alive; hut in front of the open grated windows sentries paced, whose orders
were to fire promptly into any room from which the sound of tumult or the cry of
murder should proceed, if the disturbance did not cease at his command. Whether
the shot went into the body of the right offender, was a lottery which rendered it
the interest of all, if possible,—but among men so brutalised, how was it possible, —-
to check the violent.
“ Now this is all changed for the better. Still the discipline is very strict; and
so works that it is to the most hardened the most severe in punishment, The
sleeping-rooms are now well lighted and well ventilated. The two hours between
supper and rest have been spent in the school, and the day has been closed with
prayers. The two clergymen, Messrs. Batchelor and Kyan, one Protestant, one
Eoman Catholic, each in his sphere, work without intermission. The schools
are well conducted; and where they awaken, as they do in most, a desire for
knowledge, they beget a mutual confidence between the well-conducted, who
now form by far the chief proportion of the convicts. Locks and bolts are
falling out of use upon the doors of the residents; and, because there are few
female servants, pretty children—children thrive and look unusually pretty in
a climate such as this, —may be seen carried on the arms of housebreakers,
or drawn in their small carts through the lemon groves and gardens by the brown,
rugged hands that had grown hard in deeds of violence.
“It is no miracle that has been here performed ; men bred to crime in England
by the ignorance and filth we cherish, are bred out of crime again in Norfolk
Island, by a little teaching and .a little human care. Almost all the men who
return to Hobart Town after fulfilling their term of probation here, are in demand
as servants, and are preferred to fresh arrivals from the mother country. Step-
mother country she is, to an immense proportion of her children!”
In the j r ear 1824, Brady, called the “ Prince of Bushrangers,” and a numerous
party of prisoners, succeeded in effecting their escape from Macquarie; and the fol-
lowing proclamation from Lieutenant Arthur, whilst it shews the serious apprehen-
sions that were entertained from the fact of this gang being at large, will also
indicate the nature of the services which Mr. Price at a later period occupied
himself in rendering to society :
“ The Lieutenant Governor feels it necessary to announce that the party of
prisoners who escaped from Macquarie Harbour, have again passed into the interior.
His Honour begs, in the most earnest manner, to -call upon all settlers, in their
respective districts, to enter with increased zeal and determination, into measures
for the apprehension of these robbers. To the most common understanding, not
labouring under the miserable depression of personal danger, means will be pre-
sented after a robbery has been committed of tracing the movements of the
depredators ; and it must he understood to be the positive duty of any settlers to
spread the information immediately; and to adopt the most prompt and energetic
steps for closely pursuing these miscreants, until they are fairly hunted down.
“ All Crown servants are to be immediately assembled by their masters, and
apprized that the Government expects every man shall give all possible informa-
tion ; and that a pardon is offered to any prisoner who may give such intelligence
as may lead to the apprehension of these bushrangers.
By command of His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor.”
Of the exploits of these desperadoes, Mr. Bonwick says :
“ The first robbery was attended with great personal violence. A servant of
Lieut. Gunn, a retired officer, was stopped and plundered. His master, a man of
distinguished courage, gigantic stature and strength, and a most untiring energy,
had previously offered his services to the Government for the repression of Bush-
rangers, and had received the charge of a few soldie's.' When, therefore, he was
apprized of the outrage upon his servant, he promptly and successfully followed the
fugitives, and captured five of them. These were, with the least possible delay,
brought to trial, and they were executed with Pearce, the cannibal. The remnant
continued their depredations. According to custom, the objects of a burglarious
attack were obliged to remain two hours without attempting to move from their
places, with a view to give notice of the outrage, under penalty of incurring the


future vengeance of the visitors. It was to this practice that the Governor alluded
in his proclamation. Although it might he ‘ the miserable depression of personal
danger,’ few liked to run the risk of disobeying the orders of the Bushrangers.
Again, a settler could not always rely on his own servants; they might not only
be indifferent to the attack and spiritless in the pursuit, but often active con-
federates in the plan, and the receivers and disposers of the plunder.
Brady was once threatened with danger from the treason of a confederate, he
escaped, and afterwards got in his power. Mr. Bonwick tells the rest:
“ I give you a few minutes to say your prayers,” said Brady. “ A curse on your
prayers,” replied the heartless man. Then placing his own head against the door-
post in the most convenient form, he called upon the robber to shoot him. Ihe
trigger was pulled, and the recreant dropped. That shot was the death-blow for
Brady. A shocking story is told by Judge Burton of a man who offered to join the
gang, but was suspected of being a spy. Tried by the Bushrangers, he was con-
demned to death by poison; the cup of laudanum was drunk, and the wretched
man was left behind. Strange to say the man recovered. Again falling into the
hands of these implacable banditti, they shot him so effectually that he never
troubled them more. Tradition says that Brady once cropped the ears of another
spy-” , , .
“ The audacity of this wonderful gang,” observes the same writer, “ seemed to in-
crease with their success. Sometimes as many as twenty five horsemen were seen
following the standard of Brady. The brilliant feats, the daring attacks, the
astonishing escapes, produced such an ‘eclat,’ that a thorough bushranging mania
seized the community. As many as one hundred armed criminals were out at once,
each emulous to exceed even Brady himself. The constables and military were
dreadfully harassed ; but the chief burden of care rested on the responsible head of
the Governor. He entreated and threatened ;he wrote and rode; he lavished re-
wards, and severely punished ; but Brady’s mob still burnt, plundered, terrified. In
sheer sport they were cruel. It was usual for them to select a person I to carry the
swag,’ and then dismiss him after making him drunk. One day they got thus hold
upon a poor fellow, and presenting a large vessel of rum, swore that he should drink
all the liquor. The man dreaded the consequences, and pleaded hard with these
rough bush monsters. A pistol was put to his head, and with bitter curses he was
told to take his choice. The rum was swallowed, and the stupified creature was left
with shouts of laughter. Next morning some persons were out seeking for him,
and found him lying where he had fallen the day before, with his noble dog fondly
licking his face, as if entreating him to rise and return home. They raised the
body from the damp earth; the poor fellow opened his eyes, cried ‘Water,’ fell
back, and died.”
Though the circumstances thus referred to belong to a period anterior to Mr.
Price’s arrival in the Island, they convey an equally accurate idea of the state of
things during .the period of his residence.
Mr. Price’s authority over the convicts appears to have been mainly sustained by
moral influences. He had been accustomed for years to walk amongst them unarmed,
and if recent circumstances had not broken the charm, it is improbable that the
catastrophe at Williamstown would ever have taken place. There was not only an
absolute faith in his personal resources, but an equally implicit belief that he was sup-
ported by public opinion, and was therefore armed with the absolute power of the State-
The convicts declared he knew everything, and believed he could do everything. They
never doubted that he was sustained and seconded by sufficient though unseen
resources. He had the happy art, for a man in his situation, so to impress them
as to make them fear him as they would a being of some superior powers. A simple
incident singularly illustrates this. Once in Norfolk Island he was seen with a
brace of pistols in his belt, and a new hand proposed to some other prisoners a rush
to possess themselves of them. The reply was, “ Don’t you believe Price is such a
fool as that. They are only dummies outside; the real things are in his pocket.”


It was a saying amongst the men, “ Price was sent by God Almighty on purpose to
manage us.” Doubtless this “ belief ” in Mr. Price was a consequence, to a great
extent, of the wonderfully accurate knowledge he displayed at all times of the
convicts’ circumstances, acts, and habits. They had long found out that they
could not deceive him, or hide anything from him. He seemed to have either
an intuitive knowledge, or some extraordinary means of getting at the truth.
It is not for us to make any remarks upon the sources from which a good deal of
his information was derived. It was part of his plan, we understand, to distribute
some of the lighter class of offenders amongst the more hardened, and from
these he learned much of what was going on. But much more perhaps might he
traced to his own extraordinary quickness of observation and his retentiveness
of memory. It is said that he never forgot a face, and though the expression may
be an exaggerated one, it is a fact that he had no difficulty in remembering men who
had formerly been under his charge, though it might have been many years ago. He
has been known at once to recognise, and call by his proper name, a prisoner, whom
he had not seen for twenty-two years previously, and who was brought before him
under circumstances not at all calculated to suggest his identity. On another
occasion he applied for a batch of prisoners undergoing their first sentences, to
enable him to carry out a system of classification. Twenty reputed first-sentence
men were accordingly sent to him from Geelong, and on their first muster he picked
out fifteen of the number as old offenders, who had been with him either in Yan
Diemen’s Land or Norfolk Island.
The attributes almost of omniscience and omnipotence that were thus ascribed
to him by the whole convict class, gave him a prestige that enabled him long to
move amongst them unarmed with impunity, and made him an absolute terror to
the convictdom of Victoria, both in and out of the penal establishments. We have
received such positive information of the effect on the minds of the prisoners of
recent events, that it is impossible to doubt they seriously weakened Mr. Price’s
moral influence. The knowledge the convicts by some means or other obtained
of what was transpiring beyond their prison walls, led them to believe that they
were mistaken in supposing Mr. Price to be hacked in his authority, and in its
exercise, by the strong arm of public opinion. They received the impression that
the public were disposed to back their cause against the discipline that had hitherto
held them in check; and from that moment unmistakable symptoms of insubordi-
nation appeared, which increased until the day of his murder.
Mr. Price was killed by being beaten on the head with stones and a shovel, on
the 26th day of March.
T. L. B.


WILLI AMSTOWN.
“ Extracted from the Argus."
On Thursday afternoon, March 26, 1867,
me of the most danng attempts to obtain
heir liberty was made by the convicts of the
renal hulk Success. For some time the
greatest insubordination has existed among
the men known as the ‘ long-sentence'’ men,
and the patience of the wardens has been
sorely tried. When insubordinate, the felons
have dared their custodians to punish them,
and have been in the habit of throwing out
the taunt that the eyes of the Citizens’ Com-
mittee were upon them.
Owing to some complaints on the score of
provisions, Mr. Price, 1 he Inspector of Penal
| Establishments, visited the hulks yesterday,
and inspected the prisoners on the neck of
land on which they are employed during the
day. While discussing their grievances with
the Success men, who were working heavily
ironed, in a gang by themselves, he was
suddenly set upon and knocked down by
a blow from a shovel (some of the warders
say by a stone in the first instance), and was
immediately surrounded and attacked on
every side, the convicts jumping upon
him, and pelting him with stones. A
young man named Wilson, who rushed to
bis assistance, was similarly treated, and
their cowardly assailants then commenced
knocking off theii irons with a view to es-
cape, and rushed towards the town of Wil-
liamstown, leaving Mr, Price and Wilson ap-
parently dead on the spot. The ease with
which some of the irons were knocked
off indicated the possession by the
convicts of tools' adapted to the work.
The whole of the irons were cleared in an
incredibly short space of time, and about
thirty of the most daring ruffians made seve-
ral rushes with a view to break the guard
which surrounded them. The prisoners be-
longing to the other hulks were drafted off by
their warders in separate groups, and the in-
subordinate kept well separated from the
main body.
In the meantime Mr. Price had been re-
moved on a shutter in a state of perfect in
sensibility, and was gradually restored to a
sense of his dangerous position by medical
aid. Wilson was able to walk, with assistance ?
to a spot out of the reach of his assailants,
and he was subsequently conveyed home.
Mr. Price is dangerously wounded, but the
number of contusions about his heed and
body prevented the extent of his wound
DAEING ATTEMPT TO ESCAPE BY THE CONVICTS.
ATTEMPT TO ASSASSINATE MR. PRICE.
from being accurately arrived at by his me-
dical advisers.
The warders and keepers acted with the
greatest forbearance throughout, and although
urged by the inhabitants to attack the des-
peradoes, they preserved an excellent dis-
cipline. The convicts evinced < the greatest
determination to escape, and in the face of
their guards they deliberately took off their
clothes, turned them inside out, put them on
again, and stood in a compact mass, prepared
for a rush. Fortunately no boats were within
reach.
For about an hour and a half the ruffians
and their guards stood face to face, neither
party appearing willing to commence opera-
tions ; but as the warders, the police, and the
sailors from the Victoria steam-sloop, who
acted admirably under the command of their
officers, began to disclose their full strength,
the prisoners retreated towards some heaps of
shingle and ballast near the point, and the
warders were enabled to parley with them.
They ultimately, but with frequent stop-
pages, during which violent gesticulation
occurred among them, were conducted un-
ironed down the stone pier towards the hulks.
The greatest excitement prevailed at Wil-
liamstown, the entire body of the inhabitants
turning out to assist the authorities. For
some time past the insubordination has been
increasing on board the hulk, and a great
many papers containing the report of the
Citizens’ Committee have been found on the
convicts. How these men obtained possession
of these pamphlets in such large numbers is
not known- It is evident that the morbid
sympathy which has been shown by some
towards these unhappy criminals has had
the effect of rendering them rebellious in the
extreme, and the duties of the warders not
only irksome but dangerous.
At the time our report was despatched, Mr.
Price was, we are glad to be able to report,
considered out of danger,
A troop of the 40th Regiment and a large
body of the mounted police were being
landed at the Williamstown Pier, from the
Comet steamer, and were about to march to
the scene of the outbreak, as we left it.
Friday, March 27, 1857.
A closer inquiry into all the circumstances
attendant on this affair than we were enabled
to make on Thursday, reveals the startling


fact that this desperate outrage has not only
been for a long time planned by the convicts
themselves, but that it has been fomented by
persons not in any way connected with the
discipline or management of these desperate
men. It would also appear that the scheme,
although deliberately concocted, was not
known to more than 35 or 40 of the convicts,
These facts will appear from the following
narrative of the actual outrage, and the
details of the circumstances connected with
it:—
A complaint was made by several prisoners
that their rations were withheld from them,
and were bad in quality when given, and in-
sufficient in quantity. Mr. Price was ap-
pealed to on the matter, and was, when the
occurrence took place, making personal in-
quiries amongst the convicts as to the truth
of the complaint. He had walked
up the tramway leading from “ the
Point,” near the new battery, to
the “ smith’s forge,” where there were
about 200 men assembled. A convict named
Taylor, an old soldier, well known for his
savage and deter mined < character, was
speaking to Mr. Price, while Gleeson, one of
the special warders, was desired to convey
some of the convicts to the Success. On
desiring one to move, he received as a reply,
“ I will see you d d first. _ I shall have a
kick up before I leave, this time.” Hearing
this answer he went up towards Taylor, and
at the same moment observed Mr. Price step
backwards, as if noticing something unusual
amongst the convicts. He himself had barely
time to observe that there was something
unusual amongst the convicts when he was
felled by the blow of a stone, which struck
him on the forehead. At the same instant of
time Mr. Price was assailed by several men
and hastily retreated down the embankment
on which the tramway rests, pursued by a
c owd of convicts. He was felled by the
blow of a spade when he reached
the soft ooze near the edge of the
water, and while down was jumped on
by several men, and pelted with stones. The
head of the unfortunate officer was literally
driven half way into the soft ground by the
violence of the blows inflicted : the cavity is
now nearly filled with blood. The ground
around bears the marks of many feet deeply
imprinted, and two footprints near the head
have evidently been occasioned by most un-
usual force, as if a person had attempted to
jump on the prostrate figure and had missed
hisaim. Wilson,oneof the warders, attempted
to go to the assistance of Mr. Price, but was at
once knocked down and stunned. Mr. Mal-
com Smith, the superintendent of the hulk
Sacramento, was at the time within thirty
yards of the body of Mr Price, but could ren-
der him no help. Finding this, he went
amidst the larger body of the convicts who
had stood aloof, and told them that it would
be bttter for themselves to go on board
quietly. Several voices at once assented, but
nrged that they were not unlikely to be
shot by the guard around. Mr. Smith
assured them that they ran no such risk, and
issued the most positive instructions that
none of the warders or police should fire with-
out being ordered. On this the men went on
board quietly. Had they done otherwise, there
seems no reason to doubt that they would
have not only escaped, hut liberated others,
when the most disastrous consequences would
have ensued.
While this retreat of the main body was
effected, the belligerent portion stood firm.
They had, with a suspicious dexterity,
disencumbered each other of their irons.
This, it would seem, however, they did with
some tools they used in stone-working. They
dared not attack the armed band that stood
near them, and either would not or could not
retreat After some delay, they were all
secured without any great violence, and were
conveyed on board the Success. When the
muster-roll was there called over, two con-
victs were found missing, and a prompt and
vigilant search was instituted. The men were
captured about nine o’clock, within 100 feet of
the scene of the outrage, and were concealed
under the following circumstances:—A kind
of pit had been made in the ground by the
removal of earth or stone, and near the edge
of this, within about twenty inches, an open-
ing about two feet square had been dug.
From this excavation, which was about three
feet deep, a “drive” about seven feet long
and two widehadbeen formed. It mm-thave
been done with a short pickaxe or a chisel,
for there was room for the use of no other
instrument. In the side of the cave, round
air-holes were cut, and these dimini-hed in
diameter, as they approached the side of
the large excavation, and were altogether im-
perceptible outside. The mouth of the cave
was covered with slight boards, over which
the earth was spread after the men had
entered It was impossible that this could
have been done without assistance from tbe
outside, and equally so that such an excava-
tion could have been made in less than seve-
ral days. It seems wonderful how it could have
been done under the very eyes of the guard
without attracting observation. Here were
the two convicts King and Farrell found.
Long before the discovery of this ingeni-
ously contrived retreat, Mr. Price had been
removed to the house of Dr. Wilkins, and
was soon restored to a state of consciousness,
but was in such a condition as to preclude
any chance ot his recovery. He could not be
safely removed, and remained at Dr, Wilkins’s
house conscious, but speechless, and nearly
motionless. Wilson was soon restored to
consciousness, and the injuries he had sus-
tained are severe but not dangerous. Capt.
Blachford, who was near Mr. Price at the
time of the outrage, was hurt by a blow of a
stone on the neck, but the injury is trifling.
From careful and exact enquiries
find that tbe report of the Citizens’ Commit-
tee was disseminated amonst the prisoners.
How many wt re so circulated we are unable
to say : but we can speak positively to the
fact of two copies having been left on the line
of route by the tramroad which the prisoners
must follow from the Point to the place of


their occupation. A copy of the Age news-
paper, with published matter referring to the
last outbreak of Melville and his comrades,
was taken frem one of the convicts by a
warder.
That this affair was premiditated there can
be no doubt, and it is the belief of several that
the complaint of bad and deficient rations
was made to get Mr. Price to the spot. There
is nothing to confirm the opinion, or to give it
even a colourable foundation, beyond the
simple facts of the false assertion. A strong
feeling exists among the warders and con-
sfabulary. which will perhaps be best ex-
pressed by the woids of a constable, from
whom we had occasion to make an inquiry.
“ There would be nothing done, even if they
“ killed the whole of us,” We feel also
bound to s iy, that amongst the war-
ders, resignation has been determined on,
from a sense of ins ecurity, aud from a belief
that greater moral support has been given to
the desperate conduct of the convicts than to
the officers whose duty it is by coercive
means to prevent their being let loose again
on society.
There is one fact particularly worthy of re-
mark, as concerns the position of the c evicts.
They must daily, and under the guard of a
few men, pass almost within the new battery.
There would always be more convicts than
the garrison, and it is frightful to contem-
plate the mischief that would arise should
those men get possession of the guns, which
no doubt some of them would be able to
work.
Much praise is due to the promptitude of
the military and police, who turned out im-
mediately on the first alarm. The Volunteer
Artillery force also offered their assistance.
The conduct of Sergeant Conroy, and of Mr.
M. Smith, also deserves favourable mention.
Captain Stoney’s order arrived in barracks
at five o’clock, and by a quarter past six
seventy-six men were on the ground.
They doubled down from the barracks
to the station, and from Williamstown
Pier to the ground. The riot at that time
had been quelled. A party of soldiers was
immediately tailed off to superintend the
ironing of the more refractoiy of the con-
victs, which had not been done previous to
the arrival of the troops. A considerable
number of prisoners (as already reported) had
broken from their chains, and attempted to
escape. The notice that the military were
on the move, the prompt arrival of the police
of Williamstown, and the turning out of the
inhabitants under arms, intimidated the
rioters, and the authorities were enabled to
convey all but two (who had escaped) to the
hulks. The party of the 40th remained on
the ground lor an hour and a half, when
Captain Stoney received orders from the
Magistrate and Chief Commissioner of Police
to return to the barracks. Captain Price
was at that time at Dr. Wilkins’s house,
under his immediate attendance, and that
of Dr. Ciook, but from the numerous
fractures of the skull, and the internal
efltusioa of blood, little or no hopes were
entertained of his recovery. The agonies
of the unfortunate gentleman were excru-
ciating.
DEATH OF MR. PRICE.
Mr. Price expired a few minutes after four
o’clock on Friday afternoon. His recovery
had from the first been considered hopeless,
and the agonies of the unfortuate gentleman
weie so great that death must have been a
mercy to him. Mr. Price has left a wife and
large family to deplore his fate.
Saturday, March 28, 1867.
An enquiry into the circumstances under
which Mr. John Price met his death was com-
menced on Saturday afternoon before Dr.
Wilmot and a jury of twelve residents at the
Eoyal Hotel, Williamstown.
The inquest should have been held before
Dr. Youl, but that gentleman being a personal
friend of the deceased, and having, as we
understood, some evidence to offer, requested
Dr. VV ilmot to act in his behalf.
Captain Burrell having been chosen as fore-
man, the jury were sworn in the ordinary
formal manner “to present no man from
any hatred or malice, and to shield no one
from fear, favour, or affection.” This being
done, they proceeded to the residence of Dr.
Wilkins, in one of the upper rooms of which
the deceased lay. The body was extended on
a mattress on the floor, and covered with the
Union Jack. The face was not much injured
externally, and presented that tranquil and
placid appearance often observed in cases of
violent death from injuries to the head. The
left cheek was discoloured as if by a violent
blow from some flat stone, or from a spade.
The cheek bone was greatly shattered, and
the fracture extended completely through the
base of the skull to the other side. The back
of the head was greatly cut and beaten, some
of the scalp wounds corresponding with ex-
tensive fractures of the bone below. The left
shoulder was much contused and lacerated.
There was a wound on the left elbow, pene-
trating into the joint, and the middle finger
of the right hand was crushed to pieces. '1 he
injury to the arm would have necessitated
amputation. One half of the injuries to the
head would have precluded any reasonable
hope of recovery. The scalp wounds presented
a frightful appearance, but were in reality the
least of the injuries inflicted.
The jury then went to view the spot, which
we fully described in our issue of Saturday.
Many of the marks had been partially obli-
terated by the rain which had fallen, and the
blood in the cavity in which the head of the
deceased had lain was partially wa-hed away.
The dreadful indications of what had taken
place were, however, sufficiently evident, c n
their return to the inquest r o.n.
James Holies was sworn. He said :I am the
supeiintendent of the hulk Success, lying off
Williamstown, in the county of Bourke, I
have known the deceased for the last fifteen,
years His name is John Price, and I should
imagine his age to be about 45 years. He has
been Insp ctor General of the Ferial Servic".
On Thursday morning last, the prisoners were
brought oa show m usual. They were laud,*


ed from the Success to the number of eighty-
two. They were landed for the purpose of
proceeding to their labour on the public
works at Williamstown. I observed nothing
unusual in the manner of the prisoners as
they left the ship that morning. One man
addressed me in the boat. That man’s name
was Richard Taylor, and he complained to
me that a portion of his bread had been taken
away that morning by the Chief Warder.
He was excited at the time, and I
said to him “come on board, Taylor, and go
below,” I did not intend that he should go
to work, as I had written to request his re-
moval to Collingwood. He was only a little
excited in consequence of some of his bread
having been taken away. He was quite wil
ling to go on board—perfectly so. Nothing
more took place then. The remainder of the
men left the vessel’s side, and went on shore At
half-past nine, the overseer, Mr. Wilson, came
on board, and said that the men had refused
to work for some time. It was then half-
past nine, or twenty minutes to ten. Wil-
son is not the chief overseer of the works
but the chief overseer of one particular
gang. He said that the men had refused
to work, and that they wanted to see the
Inspector-General about the bread that had
been taken from Taylor. I then proceeded
to town, and made the Inspector-General
acquainted with these complaints. After I
had reported the circumstance to him
he said, “ Very well: I will return.” He
came as far as the railway station in Mel-
bourne, and returned by the next train. He
joi ed me with the Success gang, who
were then ashore. I met him on the
tramway, about fifty yards from the Suc-
cess works. He went along the tramway
until he came to a prisoner of the name of
Henry Smith. There are two Henry Smiths :
this one’s number was 1,794. He was at work,
and the Inspector-General asked him what
he had to complain of. He said he had to
complain of the manner in which Richard
Taylor had been treated that morning, in
having his bread taken from him. This was
nearly three o’clock. Mr. Price came down
by the half-past two train. Smith also said
he had to complain of the bread which had
been issued to them that morning, saying
“ here is a sample.” taking a piece out of the
bag of another prisoner named Paul Roach.
I saw the bread. I should say it was not fit
bread to serve out; it evidently appeared from
two to three days old, and was very different
to the article that had been issued chat morn-
ing. The Inspector-General said: “With
regard to Taylor’s bread, it is quite right,
for you know very well that no prisoner
is allowed to have two days’ rations in
his possession at once. He (Taylor) had
saved his previous day’s ration of bread in
his cell, and a portion of the next day’s rations
was withheld. The Inspector General said,
“You have a great many complaints to
make.” and Smith replied, “Yes, I have a
thousand.” Mr. Price then passed on up the
tramway towards the works, accompanied by
myself. A prisoner named Murphy then ad-
dressed him as to his indulgence. The
Inspector-General replied that he could not
do anything for him, as he was an absconder.
Another prisoner named Fee, then addressed
him, and asked him if there were ar y hopes
that any of his time would be taken off. The
Inspector said, “I have written with refer-
ence to a prisoner named Morris, who is of
the same sentence as yourself, and as
soon as I have received an answer I will
let you know.” He was a long sentenced
man. I observed nothing particular then.
After that a prisoner, named Kelly, came up
and asked if the three days’ sentence of “ soli-
tary” he received a week ago would affect
his applying for a ticket of leave, or whet her
he would have to serve six months m -conse-
quence. His sentence was three days on
bread and water in confinement. He was
just “ due” then, and wished to knowwhether
he would have to serve the six months ac-
cording to the regulations. After I had ex-
plained the case to the Inspector General, he
turned round to the prisoner and said, “ You
will have to do so.” Kelly then became very
excited, and as he went off the tramway he
turned round and shook his fist at the In-
spector. Kelly was then returning to his
work. When he shook his fist he said, “ You
b y tyrant, your race will soon be run.”
This was in his hearing. The Inspector
then ordered him to be sent on board. He
was not taken, as the rest of the men came
up at the moment. Only the *' cart party”
came up. They said that they would see
the Inspector-General. The Inspector was
at the moment talking to a prisoner named
Richard Bryan. The cart party consisted of
thirty prisoners. Bryan complained that he had
not received a proper allowance of soap—that
the soap that was issued was not the proper
allowance. The Inspector took the soap he
showed him, and marked it with a cross.
The cart party then came up, and surrounded
the Inspector nearly in a half circle. They
drew up their carts all at once, and seemed
very anxious to speak to the Inspector. Just
then the quarry gang, and also the excavators,
came up. The Inspector turned round and
asked by whose orders those men had left
their work. The overseer said “ They would
come: they would not be stopped.” The In-
spector said, “Oh, that’s it: they had better
be sent on board. You had better go onboard,
and I will hear what you have to say.” At
this time the men were gathering up, and I
was forming them in the ranks for the pur-
pose of maiching them down. I then saw the
same Henry Smith who fiist spoke, in a very
excited state. He said, “We will have no
officers.” He held his hands up, and repeated
“We will,” several times, “We will have
new or fresh officers.” Thomas Maloney and
another prisoner standing next to Smith
said, clenching his fist in the direction of the
chief warder “ That’s the or the
b y tyrant ” and immediately after two
pieces of dirt were thrown. The name
of the chief warder is Thomas Hyland.
The two pieces of earth were thrown at the
Inspector-General. These pieces were thrown


from the rear rank of the men—from amongst
those men who had come up in a body. It
was earth that was first thrown, not stones,
I think neither of these pieces struck him,
but immediately several stones followed.
The Inspector General held his hand up as if
to protect his hat, and turned round, I saw
nothing more of him. I should say one or
two of the stones struck him, for he put up
his hand, immediately. It was his right
hand, but I cannot say for a ceitainty. As
he turned round, his hand was at the back of
his head. I did not positively see any stone
strike him. He stooped down as he turned,
and came towards me, and the whole body
of the men rushed between hina and myself,
and stones were thrown at him, and in the
direction of myself and the chief warder. I
cannot recognise any who threw the stones.
I have perceived insubordination amongst
the convicts for the last five months —ever
since the last rush. It has been increasing
and getting worse and worse every day. All
the men belonging to the Success were coming
up the bank at the time. The discipline ob-
served has not been changed. From what I
have heard the prisoners say, and the remarks
they have made, they considered that there
was a great deal of sympathy for them out
side, and that they would get a great deal
done for them— so much so that one of the
men asked the Inspector-General about a
month ago, “ When are we going to have tea,
and sugar, and tobacco served out to us ? ’ I
checked him for it. We have been very
guarded in our conduct to the prisoners, as
we knew that the slightest thing would turn
the pivot one way or another._ We have
carefully avoided doing anything to irri-
tate them. There was no unusual leniency
shown, but we were compelled to be very
careful. Nothing of the discipline was re-
laxed, but we were cautious, for we found
that lately they would no more mind knock-
ing us down than giving us a civil answer.
Their excitement has gradually increased
lately. Mr. Price always went freely amongst
the prisoners, and heard what they had to
say, and we used to follow and take down
any directions he might give as to their iron s,
their writing to their friends, or seeing their
wives. He was under no particular threat
from the prisoners, and on Che last occasion
he went amongst them as usual. A man
named William Gharles Jones asked a ques-
tion about his irons, and he was told that
the order had gone up to have them shifted.
The Inspector told him this, and laying
his hand on Jones’s shoulder, said to me,
“ What a fine man this is.” Jones was a very
large man. This may have given rise to the
statement that he struck a prisoner. The
Inspector’s manner was particularly guarded
and mild throughout. All the prisoners were
not in irons; not more than forty of them
were so. There were papers found in the pos-
session of the prisoners containing reports of
the trial of Melville and his speech. One of
the overseers found near the tent a bottle of
Indian in. and a pen. The pen was a steel
one and K did not seem to have been used
Smith came on board by himself, and
Maloney was one of those who remained out.
I believe that Maloney threw stones, but I did
not see him or indeed any other prisoner in
the act to identify them. The rush was made
on Mr. Price by nearly thirty, and others ran
to me and the chief warder, and several
stones passed my head. I could not rt cognise
any prisoner as committing an act of violence.
Smith and Kelly came on board of their own
accord after the rest remained. The clothes
of some of the men were soiled, and William
Brown, one of the thirty-three who had
broken their irons came on board without any
jumper at all. The refactory came on board
about half-past five.
The Coroner directed the witness to go to
Dr. Wilkins’s house to see the body and iden-
tify it. Addressing the jury he remarked
that they could not hope to conclude the
case that evening, and probably they had
better adjourn. He had received a telegra-
phic communication from the Attorney-
General suggesting the adjournment to Mon-
day.
On the return of the witness he was again
examined. He said; I have seen the body,
and can identify it as that of John Price, the
late Inspector-General of Penal Establish-
ments in Victoria. There has been more ex-
citement amongst the prisoners since Thurs-
day last, and I think it advisable to remove
every one of the men implicated in the at-
tack—the thirty-three who stood out after the
rest. I sent eleven ot them to the President
hulk this morning. They can there be kept
in separate cells. When the death of Mr.
Price was known, there was cheering amongst
those on the Success. There were also cheers
from the President. . .
The Coroner having read the depositions
over to the witness, adjourned the inquest to
Monday morning, at half past nine o’clock.
TUB LATE INSPECTOR GENERAL.
It would appear from further inquiries that
we have made, that Mr. Price must have been
severely injured by one of the first missiles
thrown. His hat bears the mark of one very
heavy blow and ot having been trampled on,
but it must have been cut to pieces had it
been on his head when the latter injuries were
inflicted. It could not have been on his head
when the blow was struck with the shovel, or.
from the position of the mark made, the brim
of the hat must have been crushed, which is
not the case. Mr. Price’s coat was torn to
pieces. He was quite insensible when first
taken to Dr. Wilkins’s house, but about an
hour after he rallied for a few moments, re-
cognised the Doctor, and addressed him by
name. This was the last glimpse of human
intelligence that ever crossed his mind. He
became again insensible and remained so to
the moment of his death. A suggestion was
made to try an operation, but this Dr. Wilkins
very properly refused, as he felt that the pa-
tient would sink at once. In order to be sure
he telegraphed to Melbourne, and obtained the
assistance of Dr. Barker and Mr. Giilbee. These
gentlemen confirmed Dr. Wilkins’s judgment


There was no depression of the bones of the
Bkal), so no operation was there required, and
mo p iiiviii, must have died under rhe very
firm incision required to remove the arm.
All that skill could suggest was done, but the
murderers had performed their work too
Burely.
We may now slate that which we have be
fore affirmed, that there is a very general
feeling of personal insecurity amongst the
officers and warders having chai ge of the con •
victs, and many of them speak of resigning.
If tnis leso, a most useful hody will be lost
to the public service, and the danger of a rush
of the ruffians under their care will be greatly
augmented, if new and untried men are
placed on the hulks.
Serjeat t-Major Molloy, whose ability as a
drill-officer is well known marched down the
Volunteer Corps, and disposed them in a line
so as to preclude any chance of the convicts
gaining the town. The Crew of the Victoria
were also on the spot, the sailors having no
1 ime to put on their belts, and some of them
having their cutlasses stuck through their
pocket-holes. The greatest mercy was shown
to the convicts, who were captured without
violence, when they might have been and
well deserved being fired on without further
parley, after the murder of Mr. Price.
Monday March 30,1857.
The adjourned inquest on the body of the
late Mr. John Price was opened this morning
at the Royal Hotel, Wiiliamstown. After the
usual formal opening, and the names of the
jury having been called over, the Coroner ad-
journed his court to the Athenaeum, which
offered a larger space for the many witnesses
and reporters.
James Hendry sworn : I am one of the over-
seers at the hulk Success. I was present when
this matter occurred on Thursday last. I had
been on the public works ground since eig t
o’clock in the morning. I was present whe" l
tire prisoners arrived. I was with them. It
was the Success gang of eighty or eighty-one
men. I took them on shore that morning,
and remained with them. I was on the works
when Mr. Price arrived. I saw him come.
He came about three o’clock in the atternoon.
'J here was some excitement previously—in fact
all day. They had been expecting Mr.
Price. I understood the excitement to arise
from something that had happened on
board, and which I did not see.
‘t hey said they expected some one to see
them get justice. I understood that the cir-
carnet met s was something about rations, but
of my own knowledge I know nothing of that
circumstance. They expeettd that justice
would have been done by Captain Pri e. The
gang re'used to go to work in the morning
unless we would send word to Mr. Price to
come. They said, “If you will send for Mr.
Price we wiil work until dinner time.” I pro-
mised, and they went to work. After dinner
tney went to work. The dinner hour is from
twelve to one. The exitement still con-
tinued. It diil not increase. They expected
Mr. Price. We did nut think tney would
have gone to work. They seemed in a quiet
state, and as if resolved on some
thing. Their work necessarily brought them
very much in contact with each other.
They worked in two parties divided by the
tramway embankment. On the sea side of
the tramway there were thirty-four men, the
cart party and the wheeling party. The
remainder of the gang, nearly forty, remained
on the other side. They were more silent
after dinner. I imagined that they had
resolved on what steps they should .take.
They were disappointed that Mr- Price had
not come. I formed the conclusion that they
had resolved upon some settled purpose
before anything occurred. The sea side gang
near Which I was stationed was most im-
mediately under my eye. It was before any
outbreak occurred that I formed the idea
that they had decided on some after steps.
Nothing else took place until the arrival of
Mr. Price. I saw Mr. Price talking to
several small parties at different times
on the works. This was as he advanced
on the laud side. I did not overhear
any of his remarks. _ The prisoners
on the sea side seemed excited, and insisted
on tbeir all getting together. They struck
work at onetime. They did not leave work,
but stopped work, and insisted that I should
should lead them up to where Mr. Price was,
in a body. I told them 1 should go and tell
Mr. Price what they wanted. Mr. Price was
then standing at the place where the carters
were dropping their sand. While I was in-
forming the Superintendent, they all came up
with the carts in the usual course of their
work. There were five cares, containing five
men each. Whilst Mr. Price was talking to
these men I saw the body of prisom rs on the
land side coming up the slip-coming to the
same point. 1 tried to stop them and ordered
them to halt where they were. 1 am sure
they heard me, but no attention was paid to
the order. They then got all in a crowd.
The two parties joined, and there were about
seventy men in front of Mr. Price. They did
not surround him but stood in front of him.
The remaining eleven prisoners were scattered
over the works. I then observed particularly
Thomas Maloney and Henry Smith talking in
a particularly excited manner. There are two
Henry Smiths. This one’s number was 1,794
I heard Henry Smith say, “The fact ol the
matter is, we wiil not serve under such offi-
cers.” I saw Malouy gesticulating very vio-
lently. He said that is the b—y tyrant—let
me at him,” pointing to the chief warder
(Hyland.) Immediately after Maloney had
said that, that there were some lumps of clay
thrown from the rear. I only saw Mr. Price
struck twice. The clay came from the rear of
the Crown prisoners. I saw two of the lumps
strike him. Mr. Price immediately threw up
both hands, one to his hat, another to his
face, and (urned round. He placed the left
hand on his check and the right hand on his
hat. He turned towards the hulks. The pri-
soners then rushed on him in a body—
about thirty out of the seventy—headed by
the following prisoners:—Thomas Williams


Richard Jones, Francis Branlgan, John i
Young. John Williams, Thomas Maloney,
Henrj Smith (number 1.222,) Richard Bryant,
William Jones, and William Brown. These
headed a mob of about thirty. They led tne
others on against Mr. Price. I heard the
most obscene expressions used by the pri-
sioners. I cannot say by whom. Part of
the remaining prisoners went along the tram-
way after Mr. Hyland and Mr. Ga e. Some of
them remained in the embankment, and a
part of these attacked Captain Blachford
This party consisted of about twelve, but only
three attacked him. I then saw Mr. Price
pursued about half way down the slip of the
embankment. 1 was standing on a staging at
the time. There were about thirty who pur-
sued, led by the parties I have named. About
half-way down the slip I saw Thomas Maloney
throw a stone that struck Mr. Price on the
back of the head. That blow brought Mr.
Price on his knees. He got on his
feet again, recovering himself, and he was
then partly dragged and partly knocked by
blows down the rest of the slip to the
bottom of it. He kept his feet, but was
forced forward. I then saw Thomas Wil-
liams strike him on the head—the back part
of the head —with a shovel. Mr. Price then
fell upon his hands and knees. I never saw
him in an upright position after that; he got
off his hands, but was dragged forward on
one knee by several of the prisoners. He
was dragged about ten yards I should say. I
could not say by whom it was done —he was
quite surorunded by prisoners. I saw the ten
men whose names I have already given
round him. I could rot identify the shovel
with which he was struck. It was a common
one—we have dozens of similar ones in
use. Thomas Williams struck the blow.
The shovel now produced is a similar one to
that used. (The shovel was smeared deeply
with blood, and there was hair adhering to
the stain.) The blow with the shovel was
given at the foot of the slip, about sixteen
yards from where I was standing on a plat-
form at the top of the slip. I was on the
stage about four minutes from the time Mr.
Price turned to, when I lost of him.
When I went oh the stage the thirty men
were rushing him down the embankment.
He received the blows from the lumps of clay
before I-got on the platform. He was dragged
about ten yards on the level ground before I
lost sight of him. I left the stage where I
had been standing aud went down the
embankment on the land side and joined
the sentries. I saw Mr. Price’s body, I
believe, hut I could not say. It was
being carried along by prisoners. They were
about 159 yards from me then. They went
along the tram way. I could not say who were
the prisoners who carried him. I did not see
Mr. Wilson at all. When the prisoners ap-
proached Mr. Price there were with him Cap-
tain Blachford, the Chief Warder Hyland,
Mr. Gale, myself, and Mr. Hollis. We were
without arms. I was so myself, and I think
the rest were so. After Mr. Price’s body was
carried off the works I saw the prisoners strik-
ing off their irons. I saw them myself so en
gaged. They were on f he land side of the
embankment, where the irons still remain. I
did not hear Mr. Price say anytning when ha
was struck. I searched the ground after
dark. I did not find anything that night,
I had been previously engaged in removing
the prisoners to the hulks. I had much diffi-
culty, as thirty-one of the number refused
to come on board. These prisoners consisted,
partly of the cart party and partly of the
quarry patty. I went on board with those
prisoners who would go, and left the remain-
der on the works. I then returned on shore
and went on board again with sixteen of the
refractory ones. I again went on shore, and
searched in the quarries for two men that,
were missing, without finding them. I went
on board again and remained On
the following day, about midday I picked
up two pairs of trousers, with blood on them.
They were on the works on the land side of
the embankment at the quarry. They are
numb-red respectively. One corresponds
to Pvichard Jones, number 2,325. I have
forgotten the number of the other pair,
hut they are on board and can be produced.
I could identify them. I; m the only one who
could tell where they are to be found. These
things were all I picked up. I took sixteen
refractory on board. They all had trousers
on. They had changed their trousers in the
quarry. Each prisoner has two pair of
trousers—one in wear while the others are
washed. There were several pairs of trousers
at the quarry waiting to be washed, I could
not swear that the pairs of trousers with blood
on were those which Jones wore in the morn
ing. They appeared to be so, lor they were
wet and muddy, and the blood marks were
quite recent. The place where the last as-
sault was committed was out of the usual
place of duty of the ten men. There were
some of the convicts returning up the sli-
when I left the stage. I feared they
would stone me, and I believed they
would have done so. I did not see Mr.
Price strike or shove any prisoner. When be
was assailed he thiew up his arms, but had
no power of resistance. The clods of earth
seemed to stun him. There was a shower of
clods, but only two struck him. Some of the
prisoners who went on board qrffetly had
their irons off. Henry Smith, 1794, came
quietly on board. I could not say who struck
the blows except the one I have mentioned.
There were two shovels on the spot where Mr.
Price was standing, and these were afterwards
gone. The last I saw <ff Henry Smith, 1784,
was when he was speaking to Mr. Price in an
excited manner. I saw two men apparently
striving to keep Maloney back from Mr.
Price. That was befote anything was thrown
I saw them, but I cannot say who they were.
I saw Maloney and Williams strike Mr. Price.
I cannot say who else did so. I saw several
bio ws received by him. I cannot identify the
men who assailed Captain Blachford. I did
not see Wilson at all. 1 went on the platform
to get out of the rush. I could have given no
help to Mr. Price. AH the convicts round him


geemed anxio to get a blow at him. Mr.
Hollis received the prisoners on board that
evening. They were hand* d over to the war-
ders, and were searched. I cannot say which
of them, if any, had no clothing. I think the
two prisoners who were afterwards found
were concealed b fore the rush took place.
The portion of shirt produced belonged to
William Brown. It is 761 in number. The
figure 9 below the others indicates the month
in which it was issued. It was picked up near
a hand-cait next day. The shirt was stained
with blood spots, The trousers were washed
ashore. The prisoners had entire possession
of the quarry for some time. Ido not think
the indignation of the convicts was caused
by the rations being taken away from them.
Their conduct has been very insubordinate
for some time, and they were under the im-
pression that they would not be punished by
a visiting justice, and that the officers were
afraid of them. I think the discipline had
been lately relaxed. I have seen a part of the
Age newspaper taken from the prisoners at
different times which contained a report of
the trial of Melville. I cannot say what they
expected from the Citizens’ Committee. They
seemed to think Some great thing would be
done for them. They have frequently asked
me when they were to get this tea, and sugar,
and tobacco. Ido not think that a rush was
contemplated on that morning, nor did I
expect they would attack Mr. Price. On
taking the last batch of refractory prisoners
on board, I heard No._ 1,222, Smith, say, ad-
dressing another prisoner, “Did you see
Wilson how he could run, and the b y
coward called out, ‘ Mercy men, mercy,’ be-
fore any one touched him.” Thomas Wil-
liams asked me how Mr. Price was just before
going in the launch from the jetty. I an-
swered “He is not dead yet.” He said, “I
thought he was cooked.” That was all that
was said. There was discontent amongst the
prisoners, who wished to see their provisions
weighed before being served out.
James Cal well, sworn ; I am sergeant of the
shore guard at Gellibrand’s Point. I saw the
affray, but I could not identify any one. I
heard a cheer, and saw the parties running
down the incline. I was about 200 yards
distant. I saw the prisoners smash their
irons. I can identify Smith, Maloney, and
Anderson, as using threatening language to
Hyland, Maloney said he should like to do for
me, Tnere were thirty- one prisoners amongst
the “revolting party.” lam responsible for
the return of the prisoners at night. I must
account for all. There were Maloney,
Smith, Anderson, in the revolting party,
and one Williams, with light hair and
light eyebrows with the party. 1 cannot
give his Christian name or number; and
one wh >se name I believe was Norton.
There was one invalid, who bared his breast to
me to shoot him, saying, he “ would prefer
that to remaining with the gang.” I knew
he was an invalid, as he walked about for
exercise, doing no work. In the evening I
Went on shore with one of the prisoners and
Hyland. We had a dark lantern. The pri-
soner pointed out the cave, and Hyland began
to dig with a small pick. At the first blow
the prisoners at once shouted cut, and came
out. The men I have named called us“ b y
tyrants and assassins;” and I heard some of
the prisoners, and particularly Maloney, when
at the lighthouse, shout out the name of Hy-
land, and express a wish to serve him as they
had done Mr. Price. Hyland was then walk-
ing down the Williamstown railway. He
said, “ I should like to do for you as /, or We,
have done for Price,” I cannot say whether
he said “1”or “ We.” On searching on the
following day I picked up the piece of a shirt
I now produce. It was in one of the haud-
carts standing quite close to where Mr. Price
was talking to the prisoners previous to the
rush. The number was 761.
[The shirt was marked
P. H S.
broad arrow.]
It was spotted with blood ; the blood seemed
quite fresh. I searched for the rest of the
shirt, but could not find it. 1 also found
several stones marked with blood, They
were near the spot where Mr. Price was found.
[The stones were produced. They were ordi-
nary pieces of bluestone, about five pounds
weight the largest; the second about three;
and the rest varying from two pounds to four
ounces. All were stained with blood, and
the one weighing three pounds bad greyish-
brown hair on a sharp angle, stained
with blood.] There are six stones in all
—one of them had the nap of a hat on it
when I found it. It had since been accident-
ally brushed off. One of the stones was
steeped in blood and with hair adhering to
it. These stones were not lying in the blood,
but around it. They were close to where the
body of Mr. Price was found. I was not pre-
sent when the body was found; but I
saw the spot afterwards. There was not
more than five minutes between the first as-
sault on Mr. Price until I saw his body
brought up on the prisoners’ shoulders, on
some planks they had used at work that day.
I expected a rush every moment. Our orders
are not to fire unless the prisoners make a
rush. If they are ordered to stand and do
not, our orders to fire are imperative. On no
account must a prisoner come near an armed
sentry, and if he persists in doing so, after
being warned, we have imperative orders to
fire. I could hear no remarks from those
who carried the body. 1 was too far off. I
didj not see them assault Mr. Wilson, but I
saw Mr. Willson afterwards come up, with his
face all over blood. I saw the prisoners King
and Farrell taken out of the cave. We had
a dark lantern. Mr. Hyland told me that
he wanted me in the quarry, and I said “ It’s of
no use going up to search in the quarry with-
out a dark lantern.” We got a lantern,
and found the two men, King and Farrell, con-
cealed in a cave. Hyland told me their names.
I was not aware of the existence of this cave
before. On searching the cave the following
morning 1 found a bottle of water and several


rations of bread. Wilson and Hendry could
say when the cave was formed, if it was ever
formed by orders. The men surrendered at
once. They seemed quite exhausted, aud their
legs would hardly support them. As I walked
down with them handcuffed, all that they
said was that they had been betrayed and
“sold.” One used the word betrayed, and
the other the word “ sold.” I did not see
either of these men when the assault took
place. The overseers could tell whether they
had been long concealed, as the men are al-
ways counted at dinner time. Captain Nor-
man, of the Victoria , and Lieut. Crawford ex-
postulated with the prisoners. I was two
hundred yards, perhaps, distant when the
assault took "Place.
Thomas Hyland sworn : I am chief warder
of the Success lying off Williams-
town. I went ashore on Thursday
last, at three in the afternoon. I came incon-
sequence of a warden being sent off for a scale
and some weights, to weigh the prisoners’
bread, as there was a dispute about the allow-
ance of a prisoner named Taylor. I got on
the ground about three o’clock. When 1
reached I saw a prisoner talking to Mr. Price
about his bread. This was on the tramway,
near where the prisoners were stacking sand-
There was not much excitement. The pri-
soner said that they only got 15 ounces of
bread to the pound, and they should get 16.
A prisoner named Richard Jones complained
of not getting his soap, and said “We have
been treated like dogs.” He got very hot and
excited in his argument. He was backed up
by some three or four others —one of them
being a prisoner named Bryant. I can only
speak to Bryant, Roach and Jones. The
Inspector- General requested that an
allowance of soap should be sent for.
A prisoner went to the quarry for it.
While they were talking, in a very hot and
excited manner, some forty or fifty prisoners
marched up in tile from the quarry. Thej
went in double lines, headed by William
Jones, No. 2 333, and Thomas Maloney. They
fell in opposite to where Mr. Price was
standing. Maloney complained of tyranny.
The prisoners Maloney and Jones seemed to
be the spokesmen. A number of prisoners
opposite Mr. Price commenced speaking at
once, but what they said I could not distin-
guish. and Jones and another prisoner whom
1 could not see sang out “ We won’t serve
under them.” The two voices came from
nearly the same spot. Maloney shut his fist
and beckoned at me, and said. “ Thai’s the
b y tyrant.” The words “we won’t
serve under them ” were taken up
and passed through the gang. A rush
then took place, and four prisoners
ran forward and laid hold of Mr.
Price, and two clods were thrown from
the back. I cannot say whether they were
clods of earth or stone. Neither of them
struck him. The four who seized Mr. Price
were Maloney, No. 888, Richard Jones, No.
2 325 William Jones, No. 2,333, and Daniel
Donovan, No. 2,169. They took him by the
head and shoulders, Maloney struck him
with a stone, which he flung as he rushed on.
It struck Mr. Price on the head. Mr. Price
put up his hand to his head. The two clods
had been thrown previously. He only put
up one hand. *The stone struck him on the
right side, ahd knocked his hat on to the
left side of his head. He wrested himself
from the grasp of the four men who seized
him, and ran in the direction in which I was,
down a cart track leading to the beach.
As soon as he got away, Maloney shouted out
“ Lay hold of the Hyland.” Mr.
Price got away about four paces, and I ran
about ten yards towards the hulk. About
twenty or thirty stones were thrown at me
aud Mr. Price. I could not say the number—
quite a shower. One stone struck Mr. Price
on the shoulder or on the small of the back.
It seemed to be the upper part of the back.
It knocked him down against the bank of
tramway. He rose again and attempted to
run again, and he fell over into a gutter. I saw
Thomas Williams (433) rush alter him and
strike him with a shovel on the back of the
head. Mr. Price was getting on his elbows,
in the act or rising, when Williams struck
him. Williams raised the shovel
over his right shoulder, and struck with
the edge of it, as it seemed to
me. It prostrated Mr. Price, and I did not
see him move afterwards. I was, at this
time, about twenty-five yards from him on
the tramway. They shouted out again to lay
hold of me, and from twenty to twenty-five
pursued me and threw several stones at me,
I looked behind and saw a prisoner named
John Chesley foremost amongst my pursuers.
I got round the corner of the railway wall
without any of them overtaking me, and they
followed me no further. 1 went to the ward-
ers’ quarters and obtained a double-barrelled
gun, and returned to the guards. When Mr,
Price escaped from the four men he seemed
to be stunned. He ran very slowly
and looked wild. I took up a stone and
threw it at the man who was standing
over Mr. Price before he was struck
by Williams. The man at whom I threw it
seemed to me to be Maloney, but I cannot
swear to him. At the time Williams struck
Mr. Price he had on a grey jacket without
sleeves. On the gang being mustered at a
quarter-past four two were missing. As soon
as the prisoners were secured on board, and
from information I received, I found the two
missing ones secreted in a cave. I think the
cave must have been made on purpose. It
must have been worked out with a pick: it is
very well cut. These men must have been
secreted previous to the rush. Ido not think
Mr. Price was conscious when he rushed
down the slip. I saw the body afterwards
conveyed along the tramway. When the
prisoners were taken on board some of
them were deficient of clothing. John Wil-
liams (930) was deficient cf a jacket and
jumper. William Brown had changed his
clothing. He had on another man’s shirt and
trousers, and was deficient of a hat and
jumper. Henry Smith (1,222) was deficient
of a shirt, and had on another man’s jumper.


G 3 •■, LIFE AND DEATH OF
He had nomraces. I saw blood on the trou- qumrtly told by Young that I was not
sere of John Edwards (369). John Williams
(1,041) had another man’s jacket, and was de-
ficient of a jumper. The prisoner King’s
jacket and irons were found rolled up near
the shore, as if to lead to the belief that he
had swum away. Farrell was deficient of a
hat, jacket, and jumper. I did not find this
prisoner’s clothes. There were additional
suits on shore to be washed. I brand the
clothes before they are issued. The
trousers produced, numbered 369, be-
longed to John Edwards. There are blood
stains on the right leg. The jacket produced,
marked 1,041. belongs to John Williams : it
has marks of blood on the inside. He came
on board with another man’s jacket on. The
pair of trousers produced, marked 2,235,
belong to Richard Jones : they are stained
witn blood on the left leg. The jacket
marked 433 belongs to John Williams : it is
stained with blood on the back. The hat
produced is that of William Brown : it is
patched with a piece from another hat.
There is blood on the crown outside. The
jacket marked 1,222 belongs to Henry Smith,
and there is blood on the left cuff. The shirt
1,222 belongs to Henry Smith : the left front
is all torn away. There were a pair of
leather braces found with this shirt. I
see blood marks on them. There is
issued a pair of braces to each man when
he comes on board. These were found with
the shirt of Henry Smith, and he came on
board without any. There was a pair of irons
found close to this shirt and braces. There is
blood on the basic and chain. These irons
are worn on one leg only, as there is a loop to
trice up the spare basic. Brown, Jones, and
Smith had on such irons that day from the
doctor’s orders. These cannot be Jones’s irons,
as they had a wooden peg in the basle. They
must be Brown’s or Smith’s. When the pri-
soners came on board several remarks were
made about Mr. Price and myself. Williams,
(433) said, in reference to Mr. Price, that “the
b -y tyrant was done for.” They used
other bad language about me. The prisoners
have been insubordinate lately, but not so
much on board as on shore. I have found a
paper with one man in his cell. It was a part
of the Age, containing the report of Mel-
ville’s spt ech. These papers come, I believe,
from the Lysander hulk, where there are
chiefly short-sentenced men, and when they
are discharged they may come back and bring
paper-*, Several papers have been found on
the works, blown down from the township.
It is not possible that any of these papers
could have been blown on board, as the cells
are closely grated. No one from the Citizens’
Committee has been on board to my know-
ledge. The prisoners expected from the
Citizens’ Committee, a shortening of their
sentences, their discipline relaxed, and
an increase of rations, I believe
the report of the Citizens’ Committee had
some, and indeed a material, effect on the
prisoners. We were obliged to look over some
petty breaches of disipline, which we would
not have done in consequence. I was f,e
believed outside the hulk, and that I was a
b y perjurer, and several of the prisoners
expressed a wish to do something to get their
cases remanded to the Supreme Court, I
cannot say who carried the body. Ido not
think the Sacramento's men contemplated
any rush, although these men expected them
to j fin. They rushed several times to what
appeared to be the weakest point of the
sentries to break their line, and some of them
came on their hands and knees close to the
sentries. I expected a rush lately, but not
that they would murder Mr. Price.
By a Juror: Ido not consider the prisoners
at all safe when on shore under the present
guard, or on board either.
Samuel Wilson was then introduced into
the court. He is a tall powerful man, but was
at the time in a state of great weakness. His
head was bandaged, and his face was much
scarred. He said: I was present on Thursday,
on the tramway, when the assault was made.
When the Inspector-General was first at-
tacked I stood within seven or ten yards of
him. I first observed a shower of stones from
the prisoners. I could not identify any one
who threw a stone. I saw the Inspector-
General hurled down the slip by a number of
the prisoners. He was calling out
for help. I can name three prisoners,
but those three men attacked myself.
I can say I saw several in the mob, but did not
see any one of them strike him. I recollect
William Jones, Henry Smith, Thomas Wil-
liams, and John Williams. The number of
Henry Smith I saw, at least the one whose
number 1 know, was 1,222. There was another
Henry Smith, whose number I do not re-
member. There was also Richard Bryant
and John Jones. I saw a man named Taylor,
but I am almost inclined to think he did not
go down the hill, so I cannot speak with cer-
tainty. Those who rushed Mr. Price were
much excited. One of the Smiths is a fair-
complexioned man, the other a dark swarthy
man. I have had much trouble with thefair-
complexioned man. He has three or
four spots quite white in his hair.
His hair is mottled, as it were. These
men formed a part of those who rushed.
Mr. Price. They were not apparently the
leaders, but formed a part cf the mob. That
is all 1 saw. I rushed in and broke a part of
the mob. Three of them who rushed me I
snow, but others assailed me. I rushed down
the bank as the Inspector-General was being
hurled down. Henry Smith (1,222) seized me
by the right collar, I felt myseif grasped on
ail sides, and some one took me by the instep,
and threw me down. I received a couple of
blows before I regained my feet, and they
again attempted to throw me. I straggled
with Henry Smith, and got four or five blows
on the head from Thomas Williams, who
held a stone in his hand. I called him
by name, and asked for mercy
every time he raised his hand to
strike me. I then found myself at liberty. I
believe they left me as settled, but I jumped
up and ran. I was met by Bryant, who struck


me with a shovel he had In his hand. He
struck at my head, and I threw up my hand
to ward the blow, but received it on -both
head and hand, I did not fall, but was some
distance away before I knew what I was
about. I then felt a shoot of blood over my
face, and everything seemed to me as if 1
looked through a piece of scarlet cloth. I
stumbled on and was nearly going into the
new bathing-hole at the quarry. I never saw
or felt Bryant after he struck me. When I
again looked 1 saw the prisoners all together.
One man only, in new white slops, standing
apart from them. (The witness was so faint that
his voice was almost inaudibleand hisevidence
had sometimes to be repeated aloud to the
jury. He seemed much exhausted, and his
examination was not prolonged. After his
evidence was read over he added)—
James Kelly was speaking to the Inspector-
General about some sentence that had been
passed on him. Mr. Price called me and
examined me as to the circumstances. He
then said, “ Well, Kelly, you have been dealt
with by a magistrate; 1 can do nothing for
He then turned from Mr. Price and
used very bad language and threats against
him. There are two James Kellys. This
was the young man, a stonecutter. He was
then employed in cutting stone. He called
him “ a white livered ,” and said
that “his race was run.” I do not
remember seeing him afterwards. I was
desired to send him on board a close prisoner,
by Mr. Price’s directions. I told a warder to
take him in charge, and he took up a stone
of about 4 lbs- weight and refused to go, and
dared- us to take him. Seeing his excited
state I said to the warder “ Nevermind him;
go away,” and 1 turned irom him. Immedi-
ately after the rush took place. Kelly was
standing with about six other men, amongst
whom were Barry and Bussell. I think they
used some influence over him, or he would
have thrown the stone at me there and then.
By a juror: Mr. Pascoe was the visiting
justice who sentenced Kelly to three days’
solitary confinement.
The witness was then helped from the
room.
The witness Hendry was recalled. He
said. I have teen the second pair of trousers
I referred, to in my first evidence. The num-
ber is 369. They belong to John Edwards.
There is blood on one of the legs—the right
leg.
Bobert Mayne examined, said : I am an
overseer of the Ly sander gang. I examined
the works about five in the evening, and I
picked up the shovel produced, with blood
and hair on it. It is now in precisely the
same state as when I picked it up. The
blood has dried rather, and the hair is now
firmly adherent. The shovel was exactly op-
posite the blood, but on the land side of the
tramway. The hair adherent to the shovel is
similar to that of the late Mr Price. It has
been in my possession ever since.
James Watts sworn; I am overseer of
works. I picked up the hat I pro-
duce with the jacket on the ground.
I was searching for the two prisoners missing
(the hat was a chip one, and was literally tom
to pieces). I found the hat near a pool of
blood on the sea side, and the jacket about
eighty yards no the tramway, between the
Sacramento •, nd the Success. It was nearer
the Sacrameiuo quarry. The blood on the
hat was fresh, 1 saw blood on the jacket
al-o.
John Pierce sworn : I am a corporal of the
shore guard. I found the hat I produce about
half past four o’clock on Thursday last. I
was searching to see if any prisoners had
secieted themselves. It was about seven
yards from the pool of blood on the sea side
of the tramway. I had not been there long,
and saw nothing of the previous occur-
rence. It is Mr. Price’s hat, I believe. I found,
also, a pair of braces, a jacket, and shirt,
already identified by Mr. Hyland as Smith’s,
(1.222). I picked these up on the following
morning. I also picked up a pair of irons,
f produced). They were ordinary irons, and had
been broken on one end, apparently by the
use of a chisel. The blood on the end of them
was dried up.
John MacPoyle, sworn : I was on duty on
the works, as shore warder, on Saturday morn-
ing. I found the jacket I produce. It is
marked with bPod,and is numbered 1,041. It
has been identified as belonging to John
Williams. It was in the Success quarry.
John Gale, ship-keeper of the President,
sworn; I produce a pair of trousers, which,
within the last half hour.have been taken tiom
the person of the man Edwards. They are
branded 369. The trousers are stained with
blood on both legs, and an attempt seems to
have been made to wash them out. Tnis
man was transferred from the Success
to the President . and I believe these to be the
same trousers he came in. He was sent on
board the President on the day or the day but
one after.
At this stage of the proceedings, it being
five o’clock, the inquest was adjourned to
half past nine o'clock on Wednesday morn-
ing, when it was expected that some prisoners
would give their testimony.
THE CONVICTS.
Williamstown has been kept all day in a
state of continual excitement. The convicts
have not been allowed to land since the
occurrence, and, under the impression that
they are sympathised with outside, are in a
condition of complete insubordination. On
hoard the President and the Success the officers
dare not go between decks, and two
have sent in their resignations. Four
hundred rounds of ball-cartridge were
served out to the volunteers, and the shore
guard and police were kept under arms. 'I he
prisoners have threatened to make a general
rush, and the consequences of their attempt
may easily be foreseen. The police ship has
her guns turned on the Success, and the Vic-
toria is ready to act at an instant’s warning.
The conduct of the prisoners on board the
President all the day has been most alarming,
and about two o’clock, although a double guard


was on board, the signal was made for more
assistance. A party of volunteers and police
hastened to the spot, but up to the time
we left, no occurred. It is
impossible to over-rate the danger if a general
rusn be made, when the only alternative
would be to hre into one or more of the hulks
and sink them at their moorings.
Just before five o’clock, in consequence of
instructions received, the steam sloop Victoria
laid herself alongside the President with her
steam up. A detachment of the 40th came
down, under the command of Lieutenant
Bolton. They were accompanied by Colonel
Neill, and Captain Boyd, Assistant Military
Secretary. Very considerable apprehension
was entertained of a serious aflray.
[BY ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH.]
Williamstown,
Monday Night, IP4O p.m.
The Victoria is anchored alongside the
President hulk. Her guns are shotted, and
all preparations made. No later insubordi-
nation has appeared than that already
reported.
Tuesday, March 31,1857.
The very stringent measures which it was
evident the Government was prepared to
adopt to prevent, at any sacrifice, the escape
of the convicts, or the murder of their
warders, has had some good effect—not a last-
ing one, we fear, as the conduct of those on
the President still renders it evident that on
the removal of the force by which they are
overawed they will be as bad as ever. So much
are these men under the mistaken idea that
there is a strong tide of public sympathy
running in their favour, (hat they actually
cheered as they saw through the port-holes the
arrival of the military on Tuesday evening.
The necessity for the prompt conduct and de-
termined attitude assumed by the authorities
may be judged of when we state the fact that
at eleven a.m on Tuesday the men on the
President had, by united force, so far loosened
their doors that the warders were hastily
ordered on deck and the hatches secured, as
it seemed impossible otherwise to prevent
their escape. The arrival of the Victoria
alongside the President, and the evident pre-
parations made, had a little effect; and per-
haps that and the physical inability to sus-
tain longer the yells, efforts, and curses they
had made during the day, procured the
warders and military a quieter night than was
expected. Yesterday morning the tumult
recommenced, and efforts were made
to break down the doors, but not in the
united and preconcerted manner formerly
adopted. It is now known that “ six bells,”
or eleven a.m., on Tuesday, was the hour
fixed for the rush, and with a proper precau-
tion “ six bells” was never struck by the deck
sentry.
The state of insubordination in which the
men are may be imagined from the fob owing
circumstance, which occurred at noon yester-
day, the dinner-time of the prisoners. The
lower deck warder was giving to each man in
his cell his allowance, unlocking their doors
of course only one at a time. One of the pri-
soners took his allowance of soup—a pint—and
when his cell was re-loiked said, “Open
the door for a moment, sergeant.” The war-
der complied, and instantly received the
scalding liquid in his face. This was perhaps
rather too much for the man’s patience, and
using the constable’s truncheon he carried,
he felled his assailant, who received so severe
a scalp wound that medical assistance had
to be sent for. We understand that the man
injured is in no danger.
It may seem strange to those not acquainted
with the mode of life of these men, that any
one of them should wantonly sacrifice a part
of his rations to effect a purposeless injury.
These convicts, however, receive the same al-
lowance of rations as the troops. Their daily
allowance of meat is 1 lb., bread 1 lb, potatoes
1 lb., besides soup, gruel, &c. This is pronably
more meat than they can dispose of, for we
find that the convicts save it, and use it for
breakfast and supper —an arrangement never
interfered with by the warders.
The hulk President, it may be well to state,
never sends a gang ashore: the men are con-
fined in separate cells, and are put
to no employment whatever. They are
allowed the use of books. Those sent on
board this hulk are generally considered be-
yond reasonable hope of reclamation—long-
sentenced men—old convicts with minds far
more callous than the hands with which their
iniquities have been perpetrated. They are
allowed daily exercise on the deck—chained
in twos—but never quit the vessel unless for
removal elsewhere.
The hulk Success is appropriated to shorter
sentenced men, or long-sentenced men
from the President who have shown
reliable signs of reformation and con-
trition. In such cases it is not deemed ad-
visable to enforce the extreme discipline, and
the men are consequently removed to the
Success. Melville was, in consequence of his
apparent contrition, removed to the Success:
the bad result in his case, however, should by
no means cause the experiment to be discon-
tinued. It is to be hoped that all are not
Melvilles, although there are many of the
genus in the President
The hulks Sacramento, Lysander, and De-
borah are for far less culpable offenders.
These are “short-sentenced men and hence
their refusal to join the Success crew of mur-
derers. The Deborah has at this moment only
a ship-keeper on board.
A communication has been effected be-
tween the prisoners by means of transfers
from one hulk to another, and it is greatly to
be feared that the recent outbreak was
planned in this way. However this may be—
and there is little question of the truth of it
—we have to announce the startling fact,
that the murder of Mr. Price was premeditated
and planned. This is now beyond all ques-
tion, as the statement of one of the prisoners
reveals even the intended mode of death.
Mr. Price was to be hanged!


At the tipper end of the tramway, and far
removed from the Point, is a tent secured by
lashing to heavy ship’s spars. This is the
place where the convicts take shelter from the
weather. In front of this are two cross
poles, and above a small flagstaff, with
common signal halyards. The use of
the flag is to signal to the Success
when the gang need water. This
flag, which was flying when Mr. Price landed,
was lowered when he came. This circum-
stance, not remarked at the time in the
midst of more exciting affairs, is now ex-
plained by one of the prisoners, as we are
informed by a warder. The cross spars were
to have furnished a gibbet, and the rope
intended for use was indicated, and is now in
possession of the police. Had we any reason
to doubt this dreadful story, it should not
find a place in these particulars. We believe
that the inquest this morning will show the
truth of it.
In front of the tent remain the irons of the
prisoners as they removed them. Some of
them have been “ ovalled,” i. e. knocked by a
heavy hammer from a circular to an oval
form, so as to enable them to slip over the
heel. A large piece of bluestone and a long
sledge hammer were the implements employed.
Some of the heavier irons, viz., with three-
quarter-inch iron bar, are broken. A close
examination shows no marks of what is
termed the “ cold chisel ” (an instrument
used for cutting iron). The fracture is
perfect and unmistakeable, and how such a
solid ring could be broken without causing
the fracture of the limb it encircled, is a
pi. rblem not yet explained, and incomprehen-
sible to all who have seen them.
In consequence of the quantity of missing
clothing, a water-hole about 11 feet deep near
the spot where the murder was committed,
was yesterday searched. Mr. Watts, the chief
officer of the works, himself used the diving
dress and went down. No clothing was dis-
covered, but there were found at the bottom
several heavy hammers, picks, wedges, and
boring-rods—all implements in use at the
time of the murder. None of them appear
to have been used for any violent purpose,
but seem to have been thrown into the water
in mere wantonness.
A very singular circumstance which was
yesterday brought to our notice seems worthy
of being mentioned here. The Williamstown
cemetery is within a few yards of the tram-
way. and in it, facing the tramway, and dis-
tinctly visible from it, is a tall flat grave-
stone, very neatly cut, and bearing the fol-
lowing inscription :
“In memory of Owen Owens, aged twenty-
three years, who was killed by the prisoners
when in the performance of his duty as boat
man warder in the penal department, on the
22nd of October, 1856 ”
This stone and the inscription were cut by
the prisoners themselves, as a memorial of
the deceased man, and a part of the gang
actually concerned in the affair worked
on it.
The two men, King and Farrell, both long-
sentenced men, who were found in the cave,
were, it seems, placed there to facilitate their
escape, and thus to enable the rest
to load them with the blame of the murder.
This is stated by a prisoner. If this be true,
as no doubt it is—for the men could only
have been concealed by the rest of the
gang—the premeditation of the murder is be-
yound a doubt.
The Victoria still lies alongside the Presi-
dent and the police hulk is also close to her:
the latter vessel mounts very heavy artillery.
The guns are, we are informed, to be at once
placed in position in the new battery facing
the point, and a small battery en barbette to the
rear of the large- one could easily command
the whole tramway. The battery will be se-
parated from the tramway by a complete and
insuperable division.
An uneasy feeling still exists in the public
mind at Williamstown, but we hope the con-
victs, convinced of the hopeless nature of
their attempt, will soon cease their present
excited conduct. The remainder of the thirty-
three prisoners who rushed on Mr. Price,
twenty-two in number, were ordered to be
transferred to the President hulk yesterday.
Dr.Greeves, Mr. Duffy, Mr. Horne, and Mr.
Foster visited the spot during the day, and
carefully examined every trace of the murder
Many others, attracted by curiosity, also
viewed the spot.
Thursday, April 2,1857.
The inquest on the body of Mr. John
Price, the late Inspector-General, adjourned
from Monday, was resumed yesterday morn-
ing, at half past nine o’clock, at the Athe-
namm, Williamstown, b fore Dr. Wilmot
The names of the jury having been called
over—
Tbe first witness examined was Captain
Blachford. He said : I am superintendent of
the hulk Lysander, I was present on Thurs-
day last when the assault took place. I was
on the ground about ten minutes before Mr.
Price came. I was near the lighthouse, I
had seen the Success gang at a distance only
that morning. I observed nothing peculiar
in their manner, except that they worked very
slack. It was a quarter to three when Mr.
Price arrived. He proceeded up the tramway,
and I accompanied him. I did rot
remark any excitement amongst the
prisoners. They were doing little or
no wer k*. When we came to the Success quarry,
near the Lysander gang, first one prisoner
and then another addressed him. Ido not
know their names. One complained about
his time, another about his irons. They were
in the habit of making such complaints, and
Mr. Price always listened patiently. Mr,
Price himself then called up a man named
Russell, and told him the result of an appli-
cation he had made to the Government about
him, viz.,—that the Government could not
grant his request. He said he should still
continue to do what he could for him,
and asked him if he had no friends
to fee a lawyer to take his case up. Rus-
sell appeared satisfied and grateful, and
was allowed permission to write when he


could effect any arrangement about funds.
The next prisoner who spoke was a man
named Kelly. He asked the Inspector-Gene
ral if his application for an “ indulgence,”
i e., a ticket of leave, could not go in, as he
had kept out of trouble for some time, but
had lately got three days “solitary,”
for being away from his work and assisting
another prisoner at his stone bunker. Mr.
Price called tip overseer Wilson to ask him if
this was the case. Wilson replied “ No,” that
Kelly had been found with another man in a
tent, with writing materials. He could not
say that he was writing, but he was away
from his work without authority. Mr. Price
said, that under those circumstances he could
not permit it, and told Kelly to fall back to
his work. He refused to do this, and com-
menced a volley of abuse, calling us, “
wretches,” “ tyrants,” and, doubling his
fists, he said, “ your race is nearly run.” The
man was in a furious passion. Mr. Price said
that he was to be taken on board, but the man
backed into the gang and refused to go. This
conduct has been frequent since Melville’s
business, but I never saw it so bad to the
Inspector General. They have been generally
insubordinate to one officer orthe other Kelly
was not laid hold of—no warder could have
gone into the gang to fetch him by vio-
lence without great personal risk. Two
other prisoners addressed Mr, Price, about
saving their rations of bread from one
day to another ; but Mr. Price’s answer was
“You know very well what the orders are,
you know you must not.” All this time men
were gradually working up the tramway, and
were within a fiw yards of the Success quarry
and had reached the cart party. I then ob-
served Hyland, the chief warder, coming along
the tramway. He had been sent for by Mr.
Price to answer some complaint made against
him by the prisoners. He passed through the
gang. By the time he came up several
speakers were speaking at once. One man
said that Mr. Hollis had pegged their scales,
and thus issued short rations. 1 think a man
named Maloney, and another called Smith,
were there. I cannot say their numbers, I
know their faces. Mr. Price said, “ Remember
what you have said. You shall go on board and
see the scales tested, and if your com-
plaint is incorrect, you must be the
sufferer,” or “ you must be punished.” This
was to Maloney. ‘ I won’t go,” said pri-
soner. “ That’s no go.” Several voice* tied
out ‘Don’t go.” At that time I turned round
and said, “ How can the Inspector-General
listen to you? Depute some one, or half-a-
dozen, to state your claims.” I heard voices
say “ We will have new officers“ We will
have satisfaction;” “We will have our ra-
tions ; ” and “We won’t go in.” They pressed
forward to Mr. Price; but there was no rush
then. The cart party came up behind and
tilted their sand, and thus completely en-
closed Mr. Price. The prisoners on both sides
of the tramway came up About this time a
stone or some dirt fell between myself and
Mi. Price. I gave a half turn round to look,
and found that Mr. Price had made a hast
step down towards the hulks. As I turned I
got a blow on the neck, which sent me right
across the tramway. The blow came behind
the left ear. It was a blow from a fist, not from
a stone. I was nearly going down the other
side of the tramway. A yell then arose, and
some twenty men rushed between me and Mr.
Price. I regained the level of the tram,
sprung over the bibs of a cart, where three or
four prisoners were standing, and leaped
across the Success’s division wall. There were
four or five prisoners around me. I hailed
Mr. Crawford, who was at some distance, to
get out his for e, and struck out with ray
arms. Stones followed me, and one of them
struck me slightly on the elbow, cutting
through my coat. On coming to the line of
sentries I advanced them at the “ready,” for a
short distance, and told them to reserve their
fire and stand firm. I took the revolver of
Sergeant Calwell, of the shore guard, out of
his hand, and told him to go back and get
another. I then advanced to the Success
quarry, close to the blacksmith’s shop, and
hailed one of the Success to bring my hat,
which was knocked off when I was
struck. He did so. I do not know
his name at all. I had just got my
hat, when I saw some one’s body being
brought up from the sea-side of the
tramway in a hand barrow, held by two
men. There might have been from eight to
ten men round. Not five minutes had
elapsed during my absence. I passed quickly
along the line of sentries, telling them to fire
if the convicts rushed, and to club their
muskets as they closed with them I pro-
ceeded on the tramway, and found that the
body was that of the Inspector-General, who
was fearfully wounded. I accompanied it to
the lighthouse, sent for medical aid, and re-
turned to my duty ; ordering back the men
who brought him down except a man named
Russell, whom I saw in the quarry the whole
time. After that there was a great deal of
trouble in getting the prisoners in, and I saw
that there was a desire to procrastinate until
darkness, and then join. I determined at last
to fire if the men did not quit their quarry. I
first went to them myself, and warned them
of the consequences; at last they were
drafted off, making every possible delay,
about their clothing. The Success gang groaned
me when I went down, and their conduct was
so violent that I called to the Sacramento’s
gang to lie down, as I would, if the Success
gang rushed us fire over them. The conduct
of the Success gang was quite fearful, and
they manifested the same insubordination to
the last. Their language was frightful. I never
heard worse during my twelve years’ experi-
ence of the management of convicts, even at
Norfolk Island. They had no true courage—
they did not like to face powder and ball,
although there were only twelve to fourteen
armed men to face 170 of them. They feared
to rush even when they knocked their irons
oil. They were thus kept at bay for half an
hour until further assistance came.
By a Juror : I think we were fairly trapped,
an 1 that Mr. Price was sent for to be murdered


by the prisoners. I would take an oath of it.
About their complaint of provisions they
brought forward some mouldy bread, but not
that day’s issue. They have often served
me that trick. The excitement was far greater
than would have been concurrent with the
series of evils of which they complained. I
think Russell kept Kelly from striking the
Inspector-General. No convicts were drawn
up to seaward. They drew up so as to cut
him off from running. Had I been on Mr.
Price’s right hand I must have shared his
fate. Since Melville’s time we have been
making many concessions, as we could not
carry out the discipline. The sympathy ex-
pressed by the press and the public with the
convicts has been the cause of this disorgani-
zation. Discharged convicts often plant
papers where the other convicts under sen-
tence can get them. Mr. Price has recently
allows d the men half an hour in the morning,
and allowed them to strike work on a hot-
wind day. The convicts requested the for-
giveness of some men who had gone
away from their work. Mr. Price en-
quired whether they asked it as a for-
giveness or as a right, and when they
said as a “ favour,” it was conceded.
I always told Mr. Price to keep the long-sen
tenced men in their cells. There was a feel-
ing amongst the prisoners that Mr. Price had
“burked” the inquiry. We had Jong feared
an outbreak. We—it is rumored—were to
have been hung up at the tent of the Success,
if these ten men of Melville’s time had not
been forgiven. The men who brought up the
body were those concerned in the affray.
These ten men were forgiven two or three
weeks ago. It is impossible to keep the
knowledge of thrse facts from the prisoners.
With regard to the hole or cave, it is easily
accounted ffir. The men were quarrying
there, and could have made it easily. We
believe these men whose clothes were found
near the shore, and who were in the cave,
might have escaped. Then the prisoners
would have laid the murder on them, as in
Melville’s case. The prisoner Turner was
said to have leaped overboard, when, 1
believe, the man was shot in the heart
or head, and, as is usual, made a con
vu’sive spring, and went over. Afterwards
I transferred eleven men from the Success
to the President. They have shown no
contrition : they have cheered and expressed
satisfaction. The convicts, with the excep-
tion of those on the President, are now quiet.
These last continue to batter at their doors
to knock them down, which if they do they
will get shot. I visited the eleven men who
had been transferred after they were on
board. Home abused me and others turned
their backs to me and would not show their
faces. When I got on deck I found ten con-
victs exercising. They stopped their exer-
cise, bow o to me in m and said ‘ The
——t\rant is dead, hurrah.” Their feeling
is that I belong to his “ school,” as they term
it. In fact I do not ; I came out specially to
superintend convicts. The convicts, in fact,
wish to select their own officers. I cannot
swear, and I wish to guard against swearing,
that any blow that was struck was seen by
me so as to identify any prisoner.
The men on the Preddent are the worst.
They complain of deficient religious instino-
tion.
Simon Russell, a prisoner, No. 1,071, was
then sworn. He said: I am a prisoner on
board the Success. I remember on Thursday
last being on the Success ground. We got on
shore about seven oclock in the morning.
We were later than usual. I think it might
have been nearer eight than seven. That
morning we heard some murmuring about
the Chief Warder taking some bread from
one of the prisoners. They said they had
better see the Inspector-General about it, as
it was useless to complain to any one else.
Before they went to work they told Mr. Wil-
son that they wished to see Mr- Price about
this bread being taken from one of the
prisoners. I heard no more until Mr. Price
came on the ground. It might be then
getting towards three o’clock. I spoke
to him, but several did so before me. I
was waitina for my turn, and he called
me, and said that he had been trying
to convince the Government of my
innocence, but had failed to do so. He asked
me if I had any trends who could get a
lawyer to take it up for me. I said I had one
friend, but he had five children to support.
A prisoner named Kelly then spoke to the
Inspector. I could not hear what he asked,
but he seemed very much dissatisfied about
the answer by his manner. The overseer sent
for a special constable to take him on board,
and he refused to go. I spoke to him, and
tried to pacify him. I said to him that he
had but a short time to run, and why need he
make his case worse. I was instructing the
stonecutters at the time, and he was one, and
his bunker was wishin three yards of mine.
I did partly pacify him, and he remained by
my side until Mr. Price had nearly reached
the end of the Success ground, and he then
left me. The men that were drawing the carts
fell in opposite to Mr. Price, and the quarry-
men stnick work and fell in also opposite
the tent. They expected Mr. Price to
speak to them there, but as he
did not go, they said that they
would go up and fall in where the others
were. I saw them fall in, and went down to
a kind of carpenters’ shed. I heard an out-
cry, and saw a number of men running down
the brow I had last seen the Inspector speak
to George Price, a prisoner. Mr- Hollis stood
near the head of the prisoners, and then, as
two of them passed him, he ran towards the
sentries. I was for going up, but I heard the
cry of “ fire, fire.” from the guards. 1 made
the best of my way back to the bench where
I had been, for fear I should be mixed up with
it, and get shot. I remained there abc ut
three minutes. 1 saw Mr Blachford and Mr.
Hyland going towards the lighthouse, but I
could not see them for more than twenty yards,
as a large heap of stones hid the view. I
went up on the tramroad, and, from the noise
and shouts, I thought something had occurred


to the Inspector General. I was much agi-
tated, and hardly knew what I was doing. I
saw a hat lying down some thirty or forty
yards from the heap of stones, and imme-
diately noticed the body of the Inspector
General, as I believed. It was lying in a hole
where they had been digging sand. I went to
the body—there was then not a soul on that
side of the tramroad, as far as I could see. I
saw the face—the left side covered with
blood. The mouth was lying in the sand. I
turned the head a little, to give him room to
breathe, and he groaned fearfully. I saw
blood running from the back of the head. I
looked round and saw no one and sat down,
I got up again immediately, and saw a man
named George Ross —at least we call him so —
and called to him to come down and assist.
He seemed afraid, but afterwards came down.
Some others then came, and I got them to
take the body on the double-handbarrow, to
take him to the doctor as I thought he might
still do something for him. I have been two
years on board the Success Mr. Price has been
uniformly very good to me, and for three
years has done all that lay in his power to
convince the Government that I have been
transported innocently. Since I have been on
board the Success I have a change.
There has been some difference since Mel
ville’s case: they did not appear so willing to
obey orders as before- I do not remember
hearing them abuse the Inspector. I have
heard several abuse the Overseer, at times. It
has been only as individuals, and not when
we were working together in the quarry. I
have heard men shouting out bad names to
the officers when they had occasion to visit
the cells. I did not hear any threats used
towards Mr. Price on Thursday last.
By a Juror: I never heard Mr. Price com-
plained of for abusing the prisoners, but I
have heard complaints of him for not taking
th ir irons off when their term expired, and
not removing them to some more advanced
class. I did not know that this rush was to
take place. One of the men, named Berry,
came down to me, as I stood on the quarry,
He said the men were very foolish. He could
not have taken any part in it, as the rush
was going on when he came down. The men
in the rush were so thick I could not see any
of them. I cannot say who assisted me to
carry the body. Henry Fee is oue. William
Downs, John Gidney, and \lfred Berry—this
one brought some water in a pannikin, and
washed the lips of Mr. Price. There were
others there. I cannot say whom While we
carried the body I heard no remarks. I stood
between the legs ol the barrow. I supported
his head on my left hand. The barrow was
too short. When I called George Ross to
come, he said, “I am afraid; you had better
come away, too.” He came afterwards. We
went on board when the body was put at the
lighthouse. Mr. Price groaned as we carried
him, and tried to turn and to put his hand
back to his head.
John Gleeson said : I was a special warder
on duty on Thursday last. My duty would
be to take any, refractory prisoner on board.
I was called by Mr. Hollis to bring down
Mr. Hyland and Mr. Gale, the storekeeper;
and Mr. Wilson told me to bring the weights
and scales with me. I took them to the tent
of the Lysunder, and I was then ordered to
take Kelly on board Kelly took up a stone
in his hand, and said, “ You thief, 1 will
not go for you, nor any one. I will have your
life.” Mr. Wilson told me to take Kelly.
Kelly told mtnthat Wilson and I had better
“hook the jdlentirely, as it was too late.”
I do not know Kelly’s number —I know the
man. He had solitary confinement a few
days previously. When he used his threat
he held a stone of about 2 lbs. weight in his
hand, and, looking at Mr Wilson, threatened
him. Mr. Wilson told me not to mind him,
but go to my duty. It was then that Kelly
told Wilson to “ hook it in time, as it was now
too late.” I then received from Mr. Hyland an
order to take a prisoner named Taylor in
charge. I saw nim going up the bank
towards the Inspector General. I told him to
come back, but he took no notice of meat
all. He did not make any reply.
I followed him as quick as I could.
I got close to the Inspector-General, within
four or five yards of him, on the sea side,
Taylor was speaking to the inspector about
some rations, and as he was doing so there
were several voices crying out “We wont
serve under such officers.” Maloney pointed
to Mr. Hyland and said, “ That’s the
tyrant.” Some clay thrown then struck the
Inspector General’s face—he put his hands
up and endeavoured to get along the tram-
way towards the lighthouse, but was rushed
down the side towards the sea. i saw Maloney
throw stones, and Taylor was in the rush.
I cannot mention others by name, but I
know many of the men There were some
thirty or forty rushing Mr. Price. I had a
particular eye on Taylor. I can only speak
as to Maloney, for I knew him better than
the others, and had taken him on board a few
times before. I cannot say whether 1 re-
moved him for misconduct or sickness. X
rushed to the assistance of Mr. Price, and
was seized by a prisoner from behind, who
attempted to rush me down the
slip also. I turned round him,
and I then received a violent blow on the
forehead. I do not know who struck me, it
was in a crowd of people. I think it was a
stone that stiuck me. I fell on my hand,
but afterwards got up and ran for a gun. I
heard no remarks from Kelly before I at-
tempted to take him.
By a Juror: I did not see where Kelly went
when he went away. I cannot say who were
the leading men of the party who came up
the quarry bank. Taylor was an exciiable
man, he was excited when he spoke to the In-
spector-General. I am not sure I could
identify more of the men if they were brought
here, I would not swear to the men. I was
not armed when I went on the works. The
guard only is aimed. We expect to take
desperate men without arms. I found a
shovel with a broken handle on the works
next day. It had no blood marks on it,- It


was found near Richard Bryan’s work where
he was filling in clay.
Henry Fee: I am a prisoner on the
Success, No. 163. I have been cn board
the Success better than two jears. I
was on the ground of the Success gang on
Thursday last. I was there when the In-
spect r-General came on the work. I was at
the quarry. When Mr Price came up I went
and spoke to him, and asked him if he would
allow me to send into the Government tor a
mitigation of sentence. He told me that my
name was in bis office, going to be sent, and
when he had got an answer about me and a
man who was at Gollingwood, he would know
what to do with me. I “ dis-remember” that
man’s name. Mr. Price did not say his case
was similar to mine. He asked me if I
understood him. and I said that I did, and
went down to my work. I next heard a great
many voices call out, and the whole gang
fell in. I went up and fell in also. The
muster ground is in front of the tent. The
overseer came up and stood in front of the
men. and the prisoner Kelly and the overseer,
Mr. Wilson, got to high words. I do not re-
member Kelly’s number. Kelly wanted
Mr. Wilson to take off three days “soli
tary” he had got, and Mr. Wilson would
not. He told Kelly that he would have to
“do his time.” Kelly told the overseer
that it was all his fault—that he had pre-
vented him from his liberty, and that “he
would have him if he had to do all his time.”
The oveiseer seemed to see lhat he very
much enraged, and said to Kelly, “You may
knock my head off if you like.” He said,
“I won’t knock your head off, but I will
gnaw your heart out.” Mr. Wilson
then moved a little to the right, and the men
cried out, ‘ Let us go up on the railroad to
the Inspector General.” They went, and
Kelly went with them. All went with the
exception of two men whom I could see.
The name of one of them was Quin. Ido not
know the other. When the Inspector Gene-
ral saw them coming he asked the overseer
who fetched them there; and the overseer
replied that he could not keep them back.
He said to the men, “ Then fall in here.” A
prisoner of the name of Jones—l do not know
his number, his Christian name is John —
spoke to the Inspector-General about a state-
ment he had sent in as to the treatment he
had received. He told the Inspector-General
that he had partly acknowledged his state-
ment. and since then he had not heard any-
thing more about it. After these words a
man of the name of Smith, Henry Smith, I
believe, raised up his right hand, and said,
“ We won’t work under that bloody tyrant,”
pointing to the Chief Yarderof the Success,
After that some one threw either a stone or
a piece of dirt, 1 am not sure which, and
struck the Inspector on the left able of his
face. A man of the name of John Burns
threw another. It was a stone Burns threw.
It struck the Inspector-General on the left
side ot the face, just by the neck. I could
identify this Burns. A man named
W ilhams—John Williams, I believe, they
call him Bry Ninnis on the works—“choked”
the Inspector General, by putting his arm
round his neck. He got away, and said,
“ Don’t, don’t, men-” Maloney then
struck him in the face with his
hand. It was with his fist.
He had no stone in his hand. The Inspector-
General then struck several blows himself and
ran down the embankment towards the sea-
side. About twenty men, as near as I can
guess, rushed after him. Of these twenty, I
can remember William Jones, called by some
of us Bates. He struck the first blow. Wil-
liams was the next, and then the whole body
began to throw stones. I saw William Brown,
Thomas Maloney, Richard Bryant. I know
others by sight but not by name. I cannot
call their names to my recollection. Some of
them have three or four names amongst us.
I saw Chisley on the railroad, he was not
down on the bank with the others. He threw
stones and called out “ Come on.” He threw
the stones at the Inspector, I saw Dan,
Thomas run ahead of Chisley. He also was
throwing stones at the Inspector, and crying
out to the men to come on. I cannot recol-
lect any more names. I did not see Kelly
in the rush. He stood on the railroad, and only
looked on. There were other men with him.
I stood with this body myself. I know he
did not go down the hill at all, nor throw a
stone. 1 do not think he could have done so
without my seeing him. as I was within one
or two men of him. I saw several stones
strike the Inspector. He was partly knocked
down, but struggled hard to keep his feet and
get a-head. William Jones knocked him
down with a very large stone, and I did not
see any stone thrown while the Inspector was
standing. I am not sure that the Christian
name of this man is William. I believe his
true name is Bates. He is called Jones, He
is the one who threw the first stone. We
never called him William, and I do not
think his name is William. Mr. Price fell
down, and they began to beat him. They
rushed on him. I saw a shovel used. Bryan
took a shovel —it was a “ round-nosed” shovel
—and struck the Inspector about the head
and neck. He then said, as he walked aside,
“ Come on, he’s cooked, he wants ho more.”
They came up the embankment and left Mr.
Price lying on his face. I did not see more
than one shovel used. There were other
shovels there. I only saw one person use a
shovel. I was looking on all the time. I do
not think the shovel could have been used by
aay one else without my seeing him. They
went away. As they came up the embankment
I went down and stood alongside of the tent,
I saw Thomas Williams amongst these men—
this is the Williams we call “ Bryan Ninnis.”
He is a light complexioned man. His trousers
were all over blood. He had the body of his
jacket on but the sleeves were off. They
were cut off. I Maloney holloa out,
“ Now for the other gang.” He referred to the
Sacramento gang, I believe. When 1 saw the
road then clear I went over the tramway.
The men had rushed towards the Sacra-
mento ground. I went to the body of Mr.


Price, and found a man named
Russell sitting beside Mr. Price,
holding his head up. A man named Gidney
went for the hand-banow. and fetched it
with another man and placed Mr. Price uopn
it when they picked him up. We took him
along the tramway to the lighthouse. There
was a man called “ Downey” amongst us, and
also a man named Robert Roberis. I teld
them not to carry him on the tramroad in
sight of the other men, or they would come
and kill us. They turned and went along-
side of the tramroad. They were excited at
the time. We got on the tramroad again. I
heard the men say then “ the wretches
are carrying him down, let us go and kill
every one of them.” I kept looking round me,
but I saw no one coming, and we took the
body to the lighthouse. I stayed there. I met
Captain Blachford. I stayed about ten rni
nutes, and some one examined Mr Price’s
head, and washed the wounds with cold water.
Captain Blackford sent me to the gang, and I
returned to them. I saw a man named
Smiih, when I came back ne had
his shirt all over blood. He was running
about from one to another. He is a Welsh-
man and is known by the name of “ Shy-
lock.” He has light hair but is not the man
with the spotted hair. He went into the
blacksmith’s shop, and I heard him say he
had burned his shirt. He came out with-
out a shirt. He said, as I understood, that
he had burned his shirt with the blood on it. I
then went on to the tram-road again andstood
at the head of a large pile of stones. I saw
the men coming down towards me from the
Sacramento gang. They were a part of the
Success gang. I heard them say, “There’s F* e,
he has not got his irons broke, and has been
carrying John down ; we will go on and settle
him and Jack Smith.” Jack Smith was the
man who has white spots on his head. He is
called “ yellow Jack Smith ” I knew it was
no use running as I was in irons, sol waited,
Jones came up to me with a pick-handle
in hand, other men had pick-handles, and
one had a pick. He then turned to the man
named Jones or Bates, who was sitting at
the end of the pile of stones. He said to him.
You are the man who has done all this, and
now you are backing out of it.” He saw that
they meant hitting him with the weapons
they had in tbeir bands, and he said he
was not trying to back out, he was ready for
anything. They thesuall moved up the tram-
road towards the Sacramento, and we went
with them. I sat down behind the stones,
and I did not observe them coming down
again. I remained about three quarters of an
hour and then went on board. No induce-
ment has been held out to me to make this
statement; I have done so voluntarily.
By a Juror ; Quin and a new hand in the
gang were left down the quarry when
the aang fell in. I heard Kelly as
he was going to the closet say, “ Here’s the
big fellow coming : they are going to put him
through his facings, I believe.” I was within
two yards of the Inspector General when the
earth was thrown. Kelly said, “Believe they
are going to put the big fellow through his
facings.” I was sentenced to four years in.
irons. I have been in irons five I have
spoken to the Inspector, who always said he
could do nothing for me until I had served
five years. I received two sentences from two
different Judges, ten years each—the two first
of each in irons- This is felt to be a great
grievance amongst the prisoners. All long-
sentenced men are kept in irons unless
ordered by the doctor to he liberated. The
piisoners have often proposed to knock off
their irons, but I dissuaded them from doing
so, as I feared we would be kept altogether on
board.
Mr. Hollis, examined by the Coroner: The
order of the Executive Council is that the
men are to work in irons, irrespective of the
duration of the sentence of the Judge.
Witness: This has caused the greatest
grievance amongst us. There never were any
irons knocked off the men previous to this
affair of Melville’s. After that, knocked off a
great many. This has led to all the mischief
that has occurred.
William Downey, a convict on board the
Success, No. 2,456, stated: I was cn the
ground on Thursday last, when Mr, Price
came on He arrived about three, or a little
after. I saw him come. I saw the Impe Tor-
General come up with the Superintendent
and Captain Blachford. Three or four men
went out to speak to the Inspector-General.
They went out from their work at the quarry,
V hile speaking to him, I saw a man named
James Kelly, who appeared greatly vexed. I
saw the Inspector General put his hand on
his shoulder, as if to push him on one side.
The Inspector went on to another man,
a-d walked in the direction of the
Sacramento gang. Before we left our
works, there were four or five carts
which stood on the hill near the beach.
When the Inspector came up to them they
stopped to speak to him. The other mob of
men at work all sang out, “Come on,let’s goon
the muster-ground.” I was one of them. I
stood next but one to Kelly, and I heard
him say to the overseer, Wilson “You b y
murdering old dog, you’ll pay for it to-day.”
The men then sang out: “Come on let’s go up
to the Inspector-General.” On their up I
saw James Kelly pick up two stones. I
followed him on to the trams of the railroad,
where the Inspector-General was standing.
He tried to reason with the men, who were
greatly excited, and passed over each other-
three deep. I saw Kelly fling a stone and
knock the Inspector-General’s hat off. The
moment the first stone was flung, they all
shouted, “Give it to him,‘give it to him.’”
There were several stones flung after. I saw
Kelly only throw a stone, lire Inspecor
immediately “slued” round away from the men
and stooped. Two men hit him with st cks or
stone-hammers. They cried out to stop him. I
saw a man named James Anderson and a man
named Smith strike him with a pick handle.
Smith is called Shylock in the gang. I next
saw Mr. Wilson running away. He held his
hand to his head, and his face was covered


with blood. I went down the trams towards
the head of the quarry. I saw John Williams
fling a stone, and hit Captain Blachford on the
side. I think his number is No 1,091, but I am
not sure. The other men were almost all
gone in a few minutes. I saw the Inspector*
General lying in a sand-hole his face
turned sideways towards the railroad. I saw
a man named Mason go down, and I followed
him. There was another man there. I do not
know who he was. A man fetched a panni
kin of water, and proposed to wash the blood
from his hair, but I opposed this. We then
got a handbarrow and took him to the
lighthouse. As the Inspector was
going down the embankment he seemed
to make two or three efforts to keep his feet.
1 did not see any one in particular strike him
then, but Maloney was in the mob. I saw the
Inspector running along the side of the em-
bankment, and there were two or three men
holding him back by his coat tails, striking
him. He at first warned the men back, and
said he would give them every satisfaction he
could. When the Success gang were returning
from the Sacramento s, they saw a man called
“ Yellow Smith.” They asked him why he
had begun it, and then wanted to back out of
it. I believe his name was John Smith. He
is slightly pock marked, and has black hair.
He answered them “ No, he was ready to do
anything.” This was the man who stood by
the Inspector Gem ral saying "We wont have
him on the giound.” He had no stone in his
hand then. I did not see him then, for one-
half of us were marched on board. When we
got on board I informed the Chief Warder that
there were two men absent. I said that I
saw a man get into a hole, and another man
cover him up. This was done about three-
quarters of an hour before the Inspector-
General came on the ground. I did not see
the hole being prepared, but as the overseer
was away two or three days previously, it
must have been done then The Chief Warder
went and searched, but could not find them,
and I went with him and pointed the place
out. After the man was in I saw the other
cover up the hole and tread on it, and run a
wheelbarrow on it, as if the carts had been
over it. Anderson was the man who covered
up the hole.
By the. Jury: I saw no shovel used in the
murder. I have been promised nothing to
come hero to day. I do it of my own free
will. .
Thomas Quin: I am a prisoner on board
the Success, No. 541. I was present on
Thursday last when Mr- Price came on
the ground I was washing some clothes
about the centre of the works. When
Mr. Price came up a man named Kelly
went up and spoke to Mr. Price. He asked
him if he was to get his ticket-of leave. Ido
not know what Mi. Price said in reply. _ The
prisoner Kelly said , “ Are you not going to
send me away?” The Inspector-General
.shoved him away, and said, “ Now, go on :
that will do.” Kelly had one hand in his
pocket, and the other by his side. The In-
spector went away, on the rtulroad, from the
lower part of the works. The Inspector of
Hulks (Captain Blachford) and Superin-
tendent Hollis went with him. Kelly fol-
lowed him up. I believe Kelly said some-
thing about three days’ solitary he had had.
Mr. Wilson came up, and told the Inspector-
General how it was. Kelly said to the In-
spector-General, “ Here, I want to know, once
more, are you going to let me go to my free-
dom ? I have done three years now.” He drew
his hand from his pocket to strike the Inspector
when Mr. Price pushed him aside, and said,
“ There, that will do: go on.” Mr. Hollis then
shoved Kelly away, and he (Kelly) stepped
forward and said to the Inspector-General,
"You white-livered b—-y wretch, your race
is run.” I distinctly heard him say this.
Kelly came off the railroad, and the Inspector
went on towards the Sacramento gang I
heard Kelly say to the overseer, “ You have
been the instigator of this, you b y old
dog,” I then went to put some of the slops
on the line. I was in the act of hanging out
the slops when the overseer 'Hendry) calk d me.
I asked what he wanted me for, and he said
“ Go to the Inspector-General, and see what
he wants you for.” As I got up in front of the
men they were in a half circle. Several of
the men’s hands were working up and down,
and many of them cried out, “ We will not
serve another minute under him: down with
the b y tyrant: kill the b y wretch.”
The men then rushed forward, and I
saw Charles Jones strike the Inspector-
General on the left - hand side of
the head with his clenched fist. I do not know
his number. It is fourteen something. He
has sore ryes, and goes by the name of the
"Bugler.” They then rushed forward. I could
distinctly hear Charles Jones’s voice, saying
“Down with the b y wretch, kill the b y
tyrant.” I then saw the same Charles Jones
strike the Inspector-General with a stone at
the back of the head or neck. The prisoners
then threw several stones; and Charles
Chesley (I am not sure whether his name was
Charles or John ) take up a stone and strike
the Inspector about the back. This Chesley has
had a bad leg. When the men ruslu d forward
the Inspector pushed them off with both
hands, and told them to keep back. He was
knocked down, and then Kelly lifted a large
stone with two hands, and when Mr. Price
was on bis hands and knees, he took this
two-handed stone, and discharged it on the
back of the Inspector’s head, saying " Thera
vou y wretch, take that.” He threw it
downwards with all his force. This Kelly
was the one who first addressed the Inspector.
A man named amongst ‘‘ Bryan Ninniss,” I do
not know his other name, came up. Ho is a
80 years’ man. He was known in Van Die-
men’s Land by that name. His name may
be Williams.
I he witness Hendry here said that Williams,
483. was known as "Bryan Ninnis.”
i he Witness ; 1 saw the body of men rush
down, and Ninnis took up a shovel and
struck the Inspector-General two blows about
the head. I cannot say that he had a jacket
at all on him then. I saw a man named


Brown strike him three blows with a shovel.
He snatched the shovel out of Ninnis’s
hands, and struck the Inspector-Hi n?-
ral three blows about the back and head.
This Brown had a bad leg, and had his
irons knocked off of one leg. I saw a
man named Norton jump off the ground as
if he jumped on the Inspector General’s body.
I could not see whether he did so as there
were several others standing round. I ran
along the railroad and sang out murder
to the guard and ran towards the hulks. I
had rendered service to the Crown on a
former occasion, and 1 feared the men would
ill-use me. I saw Maloney. It was his voice
which uttered. “We will not serve another
minute under him.” I did not see him in
the rush, he might have been without my
seeing him.
By a Juror: I saw a man named Branagan
in the crowd. I saw nothing about the cave.
A month previously I gave information to
the chief warder about a rush they were
talking about. Since that I have kept aloof
from the prisoners and take my meals s narate
from them. I know a man named Taylor, but
did not see him amongst the rush.
I saw Bryan Ninnis. There are
men amongst the prisoners who have many
names. I saw a man called “Shylock”
amongst the body of prisoners, as was also a
man called “Yellow Jack.” A man named
Burns was amongst the body of men. I did
not see him turow anything.
Dr. John Wilkins seated: I am medical
officer to the hulks. About a quarter before
twelve o’clock on Thursday last I was called
on to see Mr Price. I found him at the
Point, on a hand barrow, lying at the foot of
the lighthouse. He was quite insensible. I
saw two large wounds on his head I had
Mm removed to my house at once. I made a
cursory exanrnation before he was removed
and thought he w is suffering from concussion
of the b ain b ought on by blows and wounds.
At my house he was lemoved up stairs. I
made a more careful examination of
him there, having removed the hair.
He did not rally at all at first.
I found the following wounds over his head.
One an inch and a half long over the right
ear, another two inches and a half just above
that, one also on the left side about two
inches long, one half an inch long a little
above that again; there was another
at the back of the head an inch
long. The whole of them extended to
the bone. There was a small cut on the right
ear. They all seemed to have been inflicted
with stones, as they were much jagged. The
wounds over the right ear seemed to have
been done with a shove], as their edges were
not jagged at all. There was a tumour also at
the back of die neck as if it were done by a
stone There was a contusion and abrasion
on the left cheek and discolouration of the
eye. There was a punctured wound on the
joint of the left elbow which allowed the
sinovia to escape. This had been done by the
narrow end of a stone or the point of
a hoop iron. There were contusions and la-
cerations on the forearm on the same side.
There were severe contusions and lacerations
on the left shoulder abrasions and contusions
on the left knee and leg, and small contusions
on the right thigh. His right middle finger
wascrushed. lattended him.but hegradually
sank He rallied slightly after being in bed,
but sank again, and died the next day about
ten minutes past four p.ra. I made a post
mortem examination, and found an extensive
clot of blood on the base of the skull on the
right side. On the left side was a smaller
clot. Underneath these clots ran an exten-
sive fracture, passing through the petrous por-
tion of the temporal bone, through the body
of the spheroid into the pe'rous portion of the
right temporal bone. The whole base of the
skull was fractured right across from one ear
foanotber. The archofthe malarhnne was ex-
tensively fractured. It was uncommonly shat-
tered The brain was considerably lacerated
I have seen some stones with blood on them.
They would be likely to producesueh wounds.
The fracture of the cheek wo* Id be effected
by a large flat stone or the back part of a
shovel. The cause of death was the fracture
of (be base of the skull and effusion on the
brain.
This closed the evidence.
The Coroner proceeded to recapitulate
the testimony, and comment on it; but the
hour was so late that our reporter was com-
pelled to leave.
THE VERDICT.
[by electric telegraph]
Williamstown, Ist April, 1857.
The jury having been locked up for one
hour and forty-five minutes at 7.25
returned a verdict of Wilful Murder
against the following convicts Thomas
Maloney, No. 8,882; Henrv Smith, No. 1,794 ;
Thomas Williams. No. 433; Richard Jones,
No. 2.825; Francis Rraragan, No. 2,326; John
Young. No. 2,359; John Williams, No. 1,041 .
Henry Smith, No. 1,v22; Richard Bryan. No
532; William Jones, No. 2,338; William
Brown, No 764: James Anderson, No. 2,244 ;
John Cbisley, No 396; James Kelly, No.
1,494: Daniel Donovan, No. 2,169; and re-
served for the ocinion of the Attorney-
General, John Edwards. No 369, and James
Burns; to which the subj oined rider was
added : —After carefully reviewing the evi-
dence brought before them, the jury cannot nut
expr ss their opinion that one cause at
least of the unfortunate occurrence has been
1 he misplaced sympathy exhibited by a portion
of the public, which has by some means become
known to the prisoners, and they concluded
that the guard had not been sufficiently
strong at the time to check the rising spirit
of ins bordination shown to exist amongst
the prisoners since the trial of William Mel-
ville in November last They also beg to ex-
press their approbation of the conduct of
the officers and warders of the different
hulks, and also of the alacrity displayed by
the military and naval forces in rendering
assistance and protection to the inhabitants


of this district when the unfortunate affair
took place. And the above is the opinion of
the jurors, with the exception of Messrs.
Perry and Clare, who consider it uncalled
for.
FUNERAL OF THE LATE INSPECTOR-
GEMERAL.
About twelve o’clock on Monday, the cap-
tain, officers, and men of the Victoria, steamer,
together with a number of the townspeople,
assembled at the stockade, Williamstown, to
which the body of the late Inspector-General
had been removed trom the house of Dr.
Wilkinson Saturday last. The body, which
had been in the first instance enclosed in
lead, was yesterday placed in a second coffin,
covered with black cloth and mountings, and
bearing a solid brass breast- plate, on which
was the following inscription :
John Price,
Ob. March 27th,
1857,
Mtat. 48.
The remains of the deceased officer having
been carried to Williamstown Pier, were put
onboaid one of the boats of the Victoria , and
conveyed to Sandridge. The coffin was there
placed in the hearse, and crossed the Prince’s
Bridge a little after two o’clock.
The procession was formed in the following
order: —
The Undertaker.
Three Mounted Troopers.
Mourning carriage, containing the Rev. Mr. Bardin,
Dr. Youl, and Dr. Martin.
Mutes.
The Body.
Mourning coach, containing three of the sons of the
deceased.
Detachments of Warders.
Members of the Volunteer Artillery Corps.
Citizens and others on foot.
Persons on horseback.
Privale carriages.
The funeral procession was very large, and
among those present were many of the per-
sonal friends of the deceased, and most of the
public functionaries. The Rt Worshipful the
Mayor of Melbourne and several members of
the City Council were also present. His Ex-
cellency the Governor sent his private car-
riage On arriving opposite the University
some of the students joined the procession.
The streets the whole way out of the city
were kept bj a cordon of the foot police.
The greatest order, decorum, and even silence
characterised the crowd during the precession;
all the principal shops were temporarily
closed, and the peculiar solemnity of the occa-
sion appeared to be universally felt.
On arriving at the gate of the Ceme-
tery, the coffin was carried by eight
warders to the grave, preceded by the
Rev. Mr. Bardin reading the simple
and impressive service foi the dead. The
pall was borne by the Honourable the Chief
Secretary, the Honourable the Treasurer, the
High Sheriff, Mr. Moore, Mr. Powlett, and
Mr. Duncan. Immediately behind the coffin
came the three sons of the deceased, whose
presence was perhaps the most painful
feature of the ceremony.


Old Court.
Monday, \2>th April, 1857.
Criminal Session.
(Before His Honor Mr. Justice Barry, and
Juries of Twelve, Summoned under Special
Commission.)
THE MURDER OF MR. PRICE.
This being the day appointed for the trial
of the prisoners for the murder ot Mr. Price,
the Inspector-General of Convicts, at Williams
town, on the 26th March last, the Court was
crowded at an early hour, end a large con-
course of people, many of whom remained
outside the building during the day, were un-
able to obtain admission. At ten o’clock pre-
cisely His Honor took his seat, and the panel
was called over. The prisoners, fifteen in
number, were then arraigned, tae whole of
them pleading not guilty.
The Attorney-General intimated his wish
that the whole of the prisoners should be tried
under the indictment. It not having been pre-
pared with a view to the trial of each prisoner
separately, he would prefer not running the
risk of adopting that course. The prisoners
were th m brought in, and the two back seats
in the body of the court usually devoted to the
use of me niters of the legal profession and
jurymen were appropriated to them. Tue
selection of the jury was being proceeded
with when eight jurors having been sworn,
the following wi re challenged;—William
Quigley, Macquarie-street. Williamstown,
labourer; D. C. Ricketts, Brighton, farmer;
William Rigg, Brighton, bootmaker; Wil-
liam Rose, New road, Brighton, publican;
George Robertson, Whittlesea, farmer.
His Honor now intimated to the prisoners
that it would be necessary for them to decide
whether they would exercise their right ot
challenge jointly or separately. In the former
case they would only be entitled to challenge
twenty jurors, whereas if they severed in the
challenge they could challenge twenty jurors
The prisoner Smith (alias Brennan) said that
it was the wish of the prisoners to exercise
their right separately.
The following jurors were then challenged
on tneir being called to be sworn: —Stephen
Ricketts, Brighton, farmer ; Thomas Ragg,
Heidelberg, farmer; Hugh Patterson, Coilins-
street east, bootmaker; George Petty, Eliza-
beth street, butcher; John Plaisted, Swan-
ston-street, grocer; George F. Potts, Swan-
TRIAL OF THE PRISONERS.
ston-street, draper; James Phillips, Lons-
dale-street east, merchant; John Patterson,
Madeline-street, North Melbourne, carter;
William Perie ; Thomas Padley, North Mel-
bourne, grocer; James Peck, Tyrone-street;
Richard Park, North Melbourne, wheel-
wright; William Preston, Stephen-street,
lodging-housekeeper. . ~ ,
The Attorney-General said that the right of
challenge was being exercised so extensively
that it would nerhaps be better to remove all
the prisoners but seven of them, viz., Thomas
Williams, Henry Smith, John Williams, Hen-
ry Smith (alias Brennan), Thomas Maloney,
James Kelly, and Richard Jones; otherwise
it wouln be probable that the panel might be
exhausted.
The folio wing jurors'were then challenged;—
William Plaisted, Philip Prior, Richard Pam-
plin, John Pinkerton, Robert Parkin, John
Philp, Matthew Potts, James Perkins, John
Purvis, John Powell, Richard Parker, Richard
Packer, William Prteble, Solomon Pierman,
E Pearce, 0. 0. Roberts, James Rawlings, R.
Redout, L. Paton, S. Ruddy, G. Robinson,
David Rouse, Andrew Rogers, Michael Ryan,
William Rooke, Thos. Read, John Robinson,
W F. A. Rucker, Wrn, Read, Thos. Ricketts,
Thos. Rostrom, John Russell. Thos. Robinson,
George Robinson, John Ross, George Ross,
John James Rule. Wm. Ryan, Thos. Quail,
Thos. E- Quinn, J. Quirk, F Quarrell, T.
Quinn, John Quinn, Augustus Robinson, John
Quick, J Proud, Stephen Price, Wm. Ragg,
John Quigley, John Quartetman, James
Quelch, Robert Porkiss. Joseph Pickering,
W. Proud, Wm. Pulling, C. G. Pratt, W. Quig-
ley, George Robertson, Wm. Rose, W. Rigg, S.
Ricketts, T. Ragg. G. F. Potts, J. Plaisted, J.
Patterson, Hugh Patterson, W. Preston, D.
0. Ricketts, W. Perie.
The prisoners challenged, one or other or
them, every juryman who presented himself.
Tiiis mode of procedure at length exhausted
the panel The Attorney-General then
called the attention ot the Court to a case in
Piowden’sreport, page 100 a, wherein several
prisoners having been put upon their trial
and having, as in the present instance
severed in their challenges, and using their
right to challenge twenty persons each, thus
exhausted the panel, it was de-
bated among the judges, whether
the same might not sever the panel, that is
whether the same panel might not be made
between the Queen, and each of the prisoners
by himseh only, so that the same men might
serve for several inquests,” and it was held
that the panel might be so severed. The


Attorney-General said he would, now move
the Court to “ sever the panel.”
Two of the remaining seven prisoners,
James Kelly and Richard Junes, were there-
fore removed, and five men only retained
upon their .trial. All the jurymen who had
been challenged by the two men thus re-
moved were again called over subject to the
challenge of the five who remanded upon
th-ir trial.
Man by man as they were called the jury-
men were again challenged by one or other of
the prisoners. In this manner the panel was
again exhausted.
The Attorney-General again removed two
of the prisoners, and the prisoners upon trial
were thus reduced to three, viz’, Thomas
"Williams, Heniy Smith, John Molloney.
The jurors woo had been challenged by the
prisoners last removed were then once more
called, subject to the challenge of the three
prisdhers who still remained. These jurors
were again challenged, each man as he was
about to be sworn, by one or other of the
prisoners; but this time the number of
prisoners was not sufficient to the exhausting
of the panel, and a jury was at length
obtained.
The jury sworn was as follows Messrs.
James Phillips, Lonsdale-street east, men
chant (foreman); Samuel Row, Richmond,
joiner; William Patterson, Elizabeth-street,
merchant; James Ross, Cape street, Heidel-
berg, carpenter; Edmund Ross, Toorak,
farmer ; David Ross, Toorak, farmer ;
Patrick Read, Yan Yean, farmer; Thomas
Row, Whittlesea, farmer; Thomas Abel
Parker, Little Collins street east, ac-
countant; John Philp, Little Collius-street
east, agent; John James Rule, Richmond,
carper ter ; and Thomas Read, Brighton,
farmer.
Mr. W. F. A. Rucker had been sworn, but
the Attorney-General called his Honor’s at-
tention to the circumstance of his being only
a naturalized, and not a natural-born subject
of the Queen which, under the Jury Act. llth
Victoria, sec 20, was necessary to qualify
him for service on the jury. His Honor the
discharged Mr. Rucker fro n attendance.
The prisoner Smith applied to the Court
for counsel for the defence of the prisoners.
Mr. Justice Barry said, he had no power to
coerce any member of the profession.
The Attorney General said, he was aware
that in the etiquette of the pr fession, there
was a delicacy which made gentlemen reluct-
ant to volunteer their services, but if the
Court expressed a wish to that effect, he had
no doubt some gentlemen would be willing to
undertake to waich the case for the prisoners.
He believed his learned blend Mr. Barton
would not be unwilling to do so.
Mr. Bart .n said that he had hoped that a
counsel senior to himself would have been
prepared to undertake the defence, and he
would have been happy to have acted
with him. He had reason to believe
that a counsel of great experience in
criminal cases was in court, and possibly if
he were asked he would give his services out
of respect to the Court, if from no other mo-
tive. For himself he shrunk frcm the responsi-
bility of undertaking so heavy a case without
either attorney or senior counsel. He had
taken some pains yesterday to prepare himself
to assist senior counsel if any such should
appear to defend the prisoners. He knew
(hat one at least of the prisoners had hoped
to have been able to retain him in the ordi-
raiy way. He had hirnstlf been in the prison
yesterday, and had been given to understand
that at the time of conviction some of the
prisoners had money. This might perhaps
enable them to employ other experienced
counsel without depending upon counsel who
felt themselves unequal to undertake alone
the weight of so heavy a case.
His Honor inquired in what capacity Mr.
Barton was addressing the Court.
Mr. Barton: Not as undertaking the de-
fence, your Honor, but merely as a person
who was in the prison yesterday.
His Honor declined to hear Mr. Barton
except in his representative character.
The Attorney-General, in addressing the
jury, said that he appeared before them to
prosecute the prisoners for the murder of Mr.
John Price, late Inspector General of convicts
at VVilliamstown, and in the discharge of his
painful duty he would keep a strict guard
upon himself, in order that he might not use
any expression which would be unsupported
by the evidence, as it did not appear that the
prisoners were defended; yet he could only
put it to them as a case of barbarous and
cruel murder, a statement which he believed
would be fully borne out by medical test!*
mony which would be adduced. The prisoners
stood before them at present, so far the
humanity of our law provided it, as innocent
men, and so they would remain until they
were found guilty by the jury. It would be
impossible that the minds of the
gentlemen of the jury should not,
from the lengthened way in which the evi-
dence already taken had been reported in the
newspapers, have received some strong im-
pressions, but they were bound to find their
verdict solely upon the evidence which the
Crown could produce, and upon no other,
and that evidence the Crown was bound to
bring before them. If, however, that evidence
broke down, it was their duty to give the pri-
soners the benefit of any doubt they might
feel.—not every matter of doubt which in the
progress of the trial might arise, but if after
the whole of the evidence had been
adduced there remained upon their
minds any substantial doubt, then it
would be their duty to do so. He believed
thrt the evidence with which they were pre-
pared would leave no such doubt. He ex-
plained that it was not necessary in order to
establish the crime to prove that the pri-
soners had had a length of time for delibe-
ration of their plan, so long as malice afore-
thought was proved in their having
deliberately struck the blow. Neither was it
necessary to find that any one person struck
the blow, or to find their verdict against that
one person individually. It was sufficient to


sustain the indictment to show that they had
acted in concert, although it would be found
that the throwing of a stone would be traced
to one of the prisoners now in the dock
(Maloney), and a blow with a spade to the
prisoner, Thomas Williams. The learned
gentleman then proceeded to give a narrative
of the events connected with the murder,
and produced a plan accurately prepared in
the Survey- Office of the spot which was its
scene.
The prisoner Smith objected to the plan,on
the ground that it was incorrect.
The Attoroey-G-eneral said that he would
prove its correctness.^
The prisoner persisting in his objection,
his Honor suggested that the learned pro-
secutor shou d proceed without further re-
ference to it. The Attorney General adopted
the suggestion, and proceeded to describe
the spot. He would be able to prove by the
evidence of Hendry, who occupied a more
elevated position on the ground, and saw the
onslaught, that the two prisoners now in the
dock committed the specific acts to which he
had referred, and that witness would also
describe the attack afterwards made upon
the deceased, which would account for the
frightfully lacerated c mdition of the
murdered man, to be explained to them
by’ the medical gentlemen who would be
called before them. Of course there would be
degrees of participation in the crime of the
prisoners who would be brought before them
in the course of these trials, but he believed
the identification of Maloney and Wiliams
would be as complete as to leave no doubt
on their minds.
Thomas Williams requested that all wit-
nesses in the case might be ordered out of
court, which was accordingly directed. At
the conclusion of the address of the learned
Attorney-General,
Mr. Thomas Forbes was called, who proved
that he was a survey r, and made the plan
produced from actual survey by himself. It
was a correct plan of the place where the mur-
der was committed
John Wilkins, Esq., M.D., was then called,
and having bt-en sworn, wasexamiued by the
Attorney-General as follows;—I am district
surgeon of Williams’own. I recollect the
26th March last, on which day, at about a
quarter to four, 1 saw Mr. John Price lying
on a hand barrow, at the foot of the light-
house. I knew him well, and had known
him four years. He was quite insen
sible when I saw him. his clothes saturated
with water and covered with mud. _ There
was a great quantity of blood over his head.
I saw two wounds on his head. I had him
removed to my house, which was about a
quarter of a mile distant. He was placed on
a plank and removed by some of the pri
soners. I had his hair cut off when he got to
my house, where 1 had him put in one of the
upper rooms. I then saw five or six large
wounds on his head, two of them being on
the right side and two of them on the left
side, just over the temples: they were from
two to two and a half inches in length, one
on the back of the head and one at the right
ear. A large contusion at the back of the
neck and also one on the left cheek, with
severe fracture of the cheek-bone, severe con-
tusion on left shoulder, a punctured wound
on the left elbow-joint, apparently made by a
piece of iron. One of the fingers on the right
hand was crushed. There were several
scratches, abrasions, and contusions on the
b <dy besides the wounds I have specified.
Those were all I saw before the post mortem
examination. Mr. Price continued insensible
with the exception of a few seconds until the
time of his death, which took place on the
following day at 5 minutes past 4. The.pos£
mortem examination took place on the Sa-
turday morning, and was performed by my-
self accompanied by five or sixoth r medical
men. (The witness referred to a memoran-
dum written to his dictation at the time of
the examination.) One wound was 2£ inches
long by the right ear; and one about IJ-inch
on the same side ; one on the left side 2 in-
ches long; and one above it \ an inch long; also
one on the back 1 inch long ; a cut on the
right ear, contusion on left cheek, and disco-
loration of the eye. The fluid in the elbow-
joint oozed ; the upper part of the skull was
taken off, and the large clot of blood seen on
the middle hem sphere of the brain ; one
also on the left side; the skull was fractured
completely across the base of it. Did not
open the body. Those injuries were quite
sufficient to cause death. From the appear-
ance of the fracture of the skull I should say
it must have been done from a heavy instru-
ment, either on the back of the neck or the
blow I have referred to on the cheek. They
were both very heavy blows. (The shovel was
here produced.) The fracture might have
been produced by such an instrument as that.
I think it more likely to have been done by a
blow from a stone. I think a blow by the
shovel would not have produced the fracture,
hut I think one of the scalp wounds was pro-
duced by the shovel. The frac ure of the
cheek-bone was so severe that it was broken
up into twenty or thirty pieces; some parts
of a man’s cheek bone are hard there. The
fractures were apparent on my first exami-
nation, but I ha i no idea then that it was so
extensive. I thought it was done by the back
part of a shovel, or a flat stone. There were
bruises over the whole body, and some lace-
radons of skin on the left shoulder, as I have
described finding on the Friday. 1 observed
nothing additional of the kind afterwards.
I Have not the slightest doubt that the fracture
! caused death.
Prisoner Williams wished witness to swear
distinctly whether the fracture was produced
by one or the other instrument he had
named.
Witness replied that he could not do so.
James Holies (Superintendent of the hulk
Success ) stated that he had known the late
Mr Juhn Price about fourteen years. Ke-
membered the morning of the 26th March,
when he landed the general gang of prisoners,
eighty-three in number, at about eight
o’clock. They were working at various


works. The Success men were assigned to a |
particular spot on shore, and not working !
with the others. There is a tramway pro-
ceeding from Williamstown towards the |
works. The Success quairy is the centre one
of the three; the other two being the Lysander
and the Sacramento. Inconsequence of certain
complaints I proceeded to town for Mr. Price,
who arrived at a quarter to three o’clock. I
first saw him about 60 yards below the Success
quarry, advancing towards it. 1 met him and
proceeded with him to the quarry. After Mr.
Price came up to the gang the first man he
met was Smith, the pii-oner now in the dock.
Mr. Price asked Smith (who came up-towards
us) what complaints he had to make, to which
Smith replied “ Yes, I have to complain of the
way in which a man named Taylor had Ins
bread taken from him this morning, and also
of the bread given to us: here is a sample”
(taking some out of a bag belonging to
another prisonei). I saw the bread, which was
stale a id mouldy—unfit to eat; it had not
been served out at all that morning. Mr.
Price Told him that he knew it was quite
right, as no prisoner was allowed to have two
rations at the same time. That was the reai-on
why the bread was taken away. Mr. Price then
said, ‘You seem to have some other com-
plaints.” To which Smith replied, “ I have
a thousand.” Mr. Price and i then passed
farther on and stopped at the upper end of
the tramway nearest to the Sacramento
quarry. (The witness here described the po-
sition of Mr. Price at this time, which was
near some slidings, one verging to the sea
side from the tramway, and the other in the
opposite direction.) The tramways are about
nine feet above the original level, the breadth
of the embankment being at that point about
thirty feet: the wooden tramway itself is ah mt
four feet wide. When Mr. Price was there the
cart party insisted upon speaking with him,
and they were followed by the quarry men.
They ad came up on the embankment and
clustered up on the upper side, forming a
semicircle round him towards the lighthouse
They rati the carts up and depo-
sited tne loads between him and
the men. He ordered the men to be sent on
board, as he would see them there and hear
their complaints. Saw Smith and Maloney
on the embankn ent at the time. Saw Smith’s
hands raised uuwards. Knew Smith was
called ‘Yellow Jack.” Heard him say “We
will not serve any longer under the officers
and Maloney said “ That is the tyrant
yonder,” and several other exclamations.
Then saw pieces of earth thrown from the
rear, which tell near Mr. Price. I did not see
Williams at that time. I then saw several
stones thrown. Mr, Price put up his hand to
his head, and then he went towards the siding
and I lost sight of him. I then went to the
sentries. Saw Mr. Price’s body afterwards
and identified it.
ByPiisoner Williams: Had not the same
chance of seeing what was done to Mr. Price
as Hyland and others had.
By Prisoner Smith: You first took the bread
out of the bag and handed it to Mr.
Price, who said, “Who served this out?
Send for the officer who issued it.” I
saw you and distinguished you because
you were in that part of the semiciicle
which faced me. I was behind Mr. Price.
The bread was not weighed to know whether,
the eight was correct, although the weights
aud scales were brought. I saw nothing more
than your hands held up, and observed your
excited manner. I did not see you strike him.
By Prisoner Maloney : You had heavy irons
on when you went out to work. I believe
you went out the day after you asked permis-
sion to do so. You also asked to be relieved
from heavy irons, which was done in a few
days. You complained to Mr. Price that you
had had 231 days’ solitary confinement out of
three years and eight months’ imprisonment
which you had done. Your sentence was for
five years. It was then you asked him, and
his remark was, “Take his name down.”
During your time on the Success you never
had any words in anger with the Inspector-
General, and I know he has granted you
many favours It is not the case that John
Jones was the first man Mr. Price spoke to.
1 did not hear you say to Jr. Price that I
and Mr. Hyland were not fit to be over people,
; that we were always trying to extort crime
ut of you. I remember weighing your
bread one morning and finding it weigh
within a very small trifle of 16 ounces: the
balance was even. It is not true that it was
2 ounces short. Ido not remember it, as I
should do if it had occurred. i recollect
on that morning, which was a windy morning,
your transposing the bread and the Ib.-weight
in the scales. 1 think the Insptctor-Geneial
! fell back from a blow which he received when
! he put up his hand as I have described.
By the Attorney-General: Maloney brought
[ up the bread on the morning he referred to,
i which was before the murder. It is true that
he transferred the bread to the weight-scale,
and the consequence was that the day being
windy the scales vibrated. I afterwards took
the scales and examined them, and found
them correct.
By his Honor; Did not give the prisoner an
opportunity of seeing that they were correct.
'By Priioner Maloney: Would not the wind
have the same effect upon the scales when the
bread was in the other side ?
Witness: I suppose so. I could not recol•
lect at this distance of time whether I got you
four days’ solitary for making the complaint.
It is eighteen months ago since it occuned.
Thomas Hyland, examined by Mr. Sewell:
Is the chief warder of the Success hulk. Re-
membeis the ‘26th of March. Was on shore
that day at Gellibrand’s Point. A message
was sent on board for scales and weights, and
witness brought then ashore to the tramway,
and from thence took them to the quarry.
Saw the Inspector General on the tramway,
close to where the prisoners used to empty the
sand, about ten yards from the two slips that
haye been described. A prisoner named Roche
was then complaining to him about the short
weight of bread. Next saw Richard Jones
complaining to him about soap. At that


time there were not more than eight or ten
prisoners about Mr. Price. Jones said the
prisoners cid not get the proper weight of
soap. Mr. Price said, *' Let me see—let me
see an allowance or soap.” Witness went to
the quarry to obtain it. Before witness came
back forty or fifty prisoners had marched up
to the spot in frie, that is “in two’s.” They
came close to where Mr. Price was standing
on ifie embankment. The three prison
ers now at the bar were there. Mr.
Price’s manner on that day was quiet. He
appeared to be inquiring into the complaints
of all. The prisoner Maloney shook his fist
at witness, at about four paces distant, and
said, “That is the b y tyrant.” Two pri
soners, of whom one was Willi im Jones, (wit-
ness could not say who was the other,) then
shouted out, “ Wt will not serve under such
officers.” Mr. Price had stepped back a lew
paces, and said the men must go on board :
he would speak with them all there. It was
upon this that the cry which witness has
just alluded to was raised, home clods were
thrown. Four persons rushed forward, Wm.
Jones, Richard Jones, Thomas Maloney, and
Daniel Donovan. Maloney threw a stone,
which struck Mr. Price on the side of the head.
Witness was then about ten paces from Ma-
loney. Thefi ur laid hold on Mr. Price by the
upper part of the body. Mr. Price rescued
himself from their grasp and turned to run
down the slip. As ne ran, witness saw a stone
strike him on the body. It was three or
four pounds weight. Witness did not
see who threw it. Mr. Price on receiving the
stone staggered on three or four paces, and
then fell headlong into a pool. He was rising
again, and had got to his hands and knees,
when witness saw one of the three prisoners
now at the bar, Thomas Williams, rush to
where he was lying, with a shovel in his
hand. He raised the shovel over his right
shoulder, and struck Mr Price on the back
of his head, and, as it appeared to
witness, with the edge of the shovel.
Witness could see the fiat of the shovel. This
blow struck Mr. Price prostrate. Witness
was then standing about thirty yards off upon
the embankment. Some of the prisoners con
tinued to stand upon the tramway. Some
rushed down the slip after Mr. Price. Wit-
ness is not able to identify the men who
rushed down the slip after him. Saw a man
stand over Mr. Price while he was lying, and
strike him with a stone. Is not able to say
positively who that man was, but believes it
to have been Maloney. Williams, who is now
at the bar, is certainly the man who struck
with the shoveb When witness s i w the man
striking Mr. Price with the stone witness
flung a stone at the man. Just then Maloney
sang out, “Layhold on that h —y Hyland.”
Knew by the voice that it was Maloney. Thirty
or forty stones came flying in ail directions.
About twenty prisoners pursued witness.
Witness could only identify one of these: it
was Ghesley. The pri-oners who went on
shore that day took most of them two suite of
clothes with them. When witness saw Wil
iiams on shore he woie the ordinary prisoners’
hat and trousers, and a rather remarkable
bluejacket. He had not the same jacket on
when 1m afterwards leturmd on board.
About half ,n hour after Williams came on
board and lad been locked up in his cell,
witness heard him say, “ The b y ty rant is
done for.” Witness did not see Williams, but
knew his voice. Witness was at the moment
standing over the cell, a separate cell in which
he was confined. The officer in charge of
the ptis mens had great trouble in managing
them for the last five months. There has
been a considerable alteration in the tr atrnent
of the prisoners within that time. The irons
had been knocked off ol several of tnem.
The alteration in the treatment has been on
the side of lenity, not of harshness.
About three months previous to the present
occurrence, after the trial of Melville, wit-
ness saw a portion of the Age newspaper in
the cell of one of the prisoners.
Mr. Justice Barry : How does this affect the
prisoners? In whose cell did you see it?
Witness: In the cell of a prisoner named
Thorpe.
Mr. Justice Barry: Then it has nothing to
do with the present case,
Mr. Sewell: We do not press that.
Examination continued: Witness has heard
the prisoner say that they expected to have
a great deal done for them. Une of the pri-
soners included in the present indictment
(Brannigan) has said it. They asked witness
did he think they would soon get tobacco,
tea, and sugar.
Mr. Justice Barry : Is that all?
Witness: That is all, Sir.
Witness, cross-examined by the prisoner
Willi ams : I did not see you talking to the
Inspector Genei ah Saw you in the crowd
close to William Jones and Maloney. I saw
you strike Mr. Price with a spade.
Who ran away first, Holies or you?—Both
about the same time.
Who ran first, Mr. Price or you?—Mr.
Price first, and then I ran in the same direc-
tion as Mr. Price.
Williams: The fact is you could not see
who threw or who struck, only you have a
few men picked out that you want to sacri-
fice, and that will be seen before you have all
of you done.
Cross examined by the prisoner Smith:
Witness ran towards the Lighthouse.
In answer to a question from the Judge : If
Mr. Price and 1 had both been allowed to
pursue our course we would have both been
making towards the lighthouse—l running
along the top of the embankment, he in the
same direction, at the bottom of it-
The prisoner Smith insisted they could not
have been running in the same direction.
Prisoner to the witness: How many fol-
io vved you?
Witness: About twenty followed me.
Prisoner; And were you brave enough to
stand and face twenty men. and throw a
stone at the men that struck Mr. Price ?
Witness; I flung one stone.
Prisoner: You would not face a lizard nor
one man, but to hang him; yet you swear


now you turned on twenty men pursuing
you
The Prisoner Williams : He ran away as
fast as his legs could carry him, and he could
see nothing, only he has his victims picked
out.
The Prisoner Smith: Did you swear at
Melville’s trial that you saw Melville strike
Owen Owens the blow that killed him?
Witness: I did swear it.
Smith ; And yet you see it is n<»w publicly
acknowledged he did not strife it.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Maloney:
When I shook my fist at you had I anything
in my hand ?
Witness: I saw nothing in your hand:
your fist was shut. You were not under nay
eye afterwards. After that I was remarking
a man named Jones more than you. Mr.
Price moved away before me. When he
ordered the men to be taken on board, and
said he would hear their complaints there,
he started a few paces to the rear. Two
clods were thrown before he was
rushed. He was struck before he was
rushed. You struck him before he was
rushed. Witness did not run away when the
clods were thrown; not until tue four men
rushed Mr. Price. Did not see prisoner (Ma-
loney) stoop. The only thing witness heard
him (Mahoney ) say was what he heard him
say to witness himself.
Prisoner: Hyland, my life depends upon
your swearing. You have sworn falsely when
you swear that 1 struck Mr. Price. You say
you saw me ?
Witness: Yes, I saw you.
Prisoner: God forgive you.
The prisoner further cross-examined the
witness as to some complaints made by the
prisoner at a time when he needed medical
assistance, and not attended to by witness;
and as to some threats which the prisoner
alleged that the witness had on that occasion
uttered against him, but nothing of conse-
quence was elicited.
Samuel Wilson being sworn, deposed : I am
senior overseer to the hulk Success. I recol
lect the 26th of March, the day of the assault
on Mr. Price. I first saw him coming up the
tramway, and he stopped close to some of the
prisoners at the beginning of the Success
works. I was sent on duty, and when I came
back Mr. Price was standing near the sli les,
and James Kelly was speaking to him. Nei-
ther of these three prisoners now in the dock
were then present. While Mr. Price was
speaking to Kelly I stood away; until I was
called by Mr. Price, who asked me what I
knew of the charge against Kelly of leaving
his working, and going under the tank.
Having explained the circumstance to Mr.
Price, he turned round and told Kelly that
he could do nothing for him —the magistrate
had decided it. Kelly shock his fist, and
called Mr. Price a “b —- big headed b’— and
as he turned away added, “ Your race is run.”
Mr. Price ordered me to send Kelly on board,
a close prisoner, at once. I called the nearest
warder, and Kelly went back towards five or
six prisoners, so that he was not then taken t n
hoard. I followed him down, and ordered him
out, so that I might give him in charge to the
warder. Kelly stooped and picked up a stone,
and said tome, “You come and t .ke me out,”
and called me a “white livered b .’’adding
that I should go and look for some honest
employment, but it was too late then. I
told the warder to never mind him, and
go away. I then went towards Mr. Price,
but as the men on the land side broke work
and went to the muster ground, 1 went to
inform Mr. Price. Kelly again spoke to me,
and said, “I may thank you for this, you
b old dog.” I said, “I can’t help it I
must do my duty if you knock my head off.”
He said, ‘ 1 won’t, knock your head off, but I
will gnaw your liver.” I replied, “ 1 have
never done you wrong;” and William
Jones then stepped forward, and said, “ You
lying old dog, you have sacrificed me too.”
1 then went towards Mr. Price ; and the men,
who had fallen in, followed me up and said,
“Let us speak to him (Mr. Price) on the tram-
way.” As they approached the top of the
side road Mr Price asked. “ Who ordered
those men up?” I said, “They came up of
their own accord; I did my best to prevent
them: they would not stop for me.” Mr.
Price replied, “ Oh, that’s it, is it ? Now look
here, men, the best thing you can do is to fall
in and go on hoard, and I will see you there
individually.” I proceeded upon order to get
the men to fall in on the muster-ground,
and told them to fall in, but no
attention was paid to my order.
I then heard them shout, and saw a shower of
stones tailing in the direction where I stood.
It was not in the direction of Mr. Price. I
could see him at that time; he was nearer the
lighthouse than I was. 1 heard several of the
men cry out, “ Let us have fresh officers, we’ll
not have these tyrants.” Mr. Hyland then
rushed by me, and I saw Mr. Price hurled
down by a mob of the convicts I recollect
several of them. Amongst them were Heniy
Smith (1,794), William Jcnes, Henry Smith
(1,222), and John Jones. And afterwards I
saw Thomas Williams, the prisoner in the
dock, who struck me on the head._ I was not
more than five yards from Mr. Price when he
was hurled down the bank. I hastened do wn
to intercept the prisoners, who were mshing
him, when I became surrounded by the pri-
soners, and was thrown down violently. I re-
ceived several blows while down, and on gain-
ing my feet was again thrown down. Henry
Smith (1.222), tirstseized me by the collar, and
when I was down Thomas Williams
came to me with a stone in his hand, and
struck me several blows on the head. I then
found myself at liberty, and ran away, when
I met Richard Bryant, who struck me on the
head with a shovel. I threw up my hand to
guard off the blow, and received a severe one
on my arm. 1 then ran in the direction of
the sea but I felt the blood run over my
face; I stumbled, and when I regained my
feet I looked round, hut could not 'listinguish
any man, because of the blood running over
my fa-e. The men were then at the foot of
the siding.


By Thomas Williams: I recollect what you
were at work at that afternoon; but do not re-
member spying >ou were an old, experienced
hand at quarrying. Ido not r- member see-
ing yon speak to Mr. Price, or any oue parti-
cularly, that afternoon- I saw the officers
who were standing on the ground, and 1 saw
Hyland rum ing towards the lighthouse; but
he stopped about fifteen or twenty yards from
me. I had not received my blows then. I did
not see you seize on Mr. Price. I was
not many minutes on the ground
Though I saw the men rushing Mr
Price, t did not see any one strike him. I
think you had plenty of time to assist those
who were assaulting Mr Price, as well as to
strike me. I did not see you strike Mr. Price
however. When you struck me 1 called out
“ Mercy, Williams, meicy.”
By Henry Smith, alias Brennan : I came up
to you that afternoon while you were showing
Mr. Price some bread. I went down to the
Point to tell the warder to bring the scales.
Previously to the quarry gang corning up
there were about thirty men with Mr. Price.
Several of them were speaking to him. Mr.
Price was rushed very so m after the
gang to which you belonged came up. Ire
collect some one saying the scales were pegged
to cheat them out of their rations.
I saw you very much excited, but
I did not see you strike Mr. _ Price
or any other officer. I have not the slightest
recollection of what you srid at that time. I
am certain as to your identity, because I
stepped into the middle of the road, to re-
monstrate with you. Theie were about thirty
others coming up with you. Mr. Price was
rushed about a minute before I was thrown
down. I do not know by whom I was
thrown.
By Thomas Maloney : I do not recollect
asking you about Edwards, a stone-cutter;
but I remember that I spoke to you of idling.
I saw you and Smith speaking to Mr. PHce.
I did not see Mr. Price struck at all, but the
attack was made just at the time that Hyland
ran away. I have known you about two
years in this country. I knew you before,
about ten years ago. I was about ten yards
from the spot where the men caught hold of
Mr. Price. I bad little time to see any of those
who struck him, so as to identify them. If I
had seen your face I think I should have recol
lectedyou: but the mob was too thick and
crowded to allow me to see any one in parti-
cular. They seemed to press very close to lay
hold of Mr. Price, but you did not lay hold
of him, that is, not to my knowledge.
Thomas Quin being sworn, deposed: I come
from the Gaol and I was a pri-
soner on board the Success hulk on the
26th March last. I remember Mr. Price
coming up to the works that afternoon,
about half past two or three o’clock. I
was at work washing the prisoners’ clothing
on the works. It was about five or six yards
from the place where Mr. Price first came. I
saw Kelly go and speak to him about his
ticket-of leave, but did not hear Mr. Price’s
reply. Mr. Hollis and Capt. Blachford were
with Mr. Price. Kelly followed Mr. Price up
the tram-road, and said, “ I have done three
years; are you going to give me my ticket of-
leave?'’ Mr. Price pushed Kelly by the shoul-
der, and Kelly then said, “ You b y white-
livered wretch, your race is run.” Mr.
Price then came back towards the quarry,
and stood nearly opposite the tent, speaking
to other prisoners. I heard Keliy then say to
Mr. Wilson, “You b y old dog, you have
been the occasion of this.” Mr. Henry then
called me and sent me to Mr. Price to see
w .at he wanted. We stood about fifteen to
twenty yards from Mr. Price then. I went
towards him, and when I got within about
two yards I saw the men standing round in
a half circle, with Mr. Price in front. One
man said, “ We will not work another hour
under the b—y tyrant.” I saw a man named
Jones hit Mr Price on his left ear with his fist.
The men then ran forward, pressing on Mr.
Price, who was striking out in sell defence,,
After Jones had hit Mr. Price, he flung a stone
and said “down with the b —y wretch.” I
retreated to a pile of rubble, where I could
see what was going on. I saw Chesley hit Mr.
Price on the head with a stone; and then a
volley of stone war thrown. I saw Bryan
Inues (pointlngto prisoner Thos. Williams)by
Mr Price then he was down, and hit him with
a sdovel twice. I saw James Kelly tak e up
a stone with his two arms, and throw it upon
Mr. Price’s head, saying “ Phereyoub—y tyrant
(or wretch), take that.” I Know a man named
Brown, and I saw him take the shovel from
Innes’s hand, and strike Mr. Price, twice with
it. I saw Maloney among the men on the
railroad when Mr. Price stood to talk to the
men. I saw Smith (the other prisoner) in the
front rank of the body of men before Mr. Price
was rushed. I did not stay after the rush,
but ran away, cried “ murder,” and sought
protection.
By Thomas Williams: I did not see you
strike Wilson. I know the nature of an oath.
I also know the Lord’s Prayer. I would not
swear falsely lor any man. I was at Pent-
ridge once, and you may call it absconding if
you like—but having no guard, Iran away.
I never absconded from Collingwood. I recol-
lect having a man named Taylor before the
Visiting Justice a few days ago for striking
me, but I was not told by the Magistrate on
that occasion that he had a good mind to
punish me for telling a falsehood. I do not
know if other men besides myself had an op-
portunity of seeing you strike Mr- Price. I
ran away, as did also the officers. I would
not have run away if I had not feared that
some one would strike me. I did not go so
far but that I could see what went on. I
did not see where the officers ran to. I ran
towards the lighthouse. I have not been
promised a free pardon for giving evidence.
No one has spoken to me about the matter.
I was present when a rush was made at Pent-
ridge, and pointed out two of the men, but I
did not get them into trouble about it. I was
asked about the matter in that case, but I
have not been asked to give evidence in this
case. 1 call you Bryan Innes, because that is


the name you go by among your fellow pri-
son erp.
By Henry Smith : My name is Quinn, alias
Thomas Fay. I saw you that afternoon near Mr.
Price, gesticulating, but I did not hear what
you said, so many were speaking at once.
I did not see yon strike Mr. Price.
By Thomas Maloney: I did not see you fake
partin striking Mr Price. I only saw you
lifting your hands up and down. The chief
warder did not rush by me. I was by a heap
of rubble on the railway. I did not see you
among the body of men when Mr. Price was
lying on the ground I did not see Mr. Price
st ruck before he was rushed: he might have
been. I was engaged cooking for the super-
intendent at Collingwood turee years and
four months ago I did not abscond from
thence I was charged with it and was sent to
the hulks for the attempt to abscond. I do not
recollect being brought into Melbourne in a
cart. I did not alscond with the superin-
tendent’s clothes. It is a long time ago, and
Ido not recollect. I was sent on board the
Success I was s a nt from Melbourne Gaol.
I was not away a fortnight before T was
taken. I did not get away at all. Iwasonly
sent to the hulks for an attempt to escape.
I have no recollection of being taken while
driving a horse and cart.
Re examined by Thomas Williams : I saw
you strike Mr Price. I was on the land side
of the tramway. The tramway is about
three or four feet wide, as near as I recollect,
and the 1 eap of rubble is six feet high, and
three or four feet wide. I would not swear
how wide the tramway is—it might be five
or six feet wide. I was at the end of the heap
of stones on the tramway. It was ten or
twelve yards from where Mr. Price was struck
down.
At this stage of the case, it being six o’clock,
the proceedings were adjourned till ten
o’clock on the following morning, his Honor
informing the jury that he ha 1 ordered suit-
able provision to be made for them, but he
could not allow them to separate.
Tuesday, Wlh April , 1857.
Criminal Sessions.
THE MURDER OE MR. PRICE.
The trial of the three prisoners, Thomas
Williams Henry Smith (alias Brennan ', and
Thomas Maloney , was continued this morning
His Honor Mr Justice Barry took his seat
shortly before ten o’clock, and the gentlemen
of the jury having answered to their names
the evidence of the Crown was proceeded
with.
Mr. James Hendry stated he was overseer
on board the Success. Recollected the occur-
rence of the disturbance on the 26th March.
Was on the S"a side of the embankment.
First saw Mr. Price on the Lysander quarrv,
and afterwards where he ultimately stopped
Came within five yards of him. The men of
the cart party, twenty five in number, struck
work, and insisted that.they would speaktoMr
Price. The rest of the men were wheeling
sand in barrows. I told them I would go and
tell Mr. Price they wanted to see him in a
body; and whilst I went up to tell him so,
the five carts followed with the men to
deposit the sand, and Mr Price was
then talking to a man named Bryant. The
twenty five men formed a half circle round
him, each five men still standing to the carts.
A prisoner named John Burns said. “The
scales are not true : a great many of the men.
here ought to be at their liberty.” I then
observed large numbers of men coming up
the slip in files, from the land side of the
embankment from the quarry : they were led
by two men named Jones and Taylor. I
ordered them to halt, but they paid no atten-
tion to the order. They joined our party,
making about seventy men. Thomas
Maloney, the prisoner in the rock, was then
talking violently, and two men were holding
him back. He pointed in the direction of
Mr. Hyland, and he said, “ That is the
tyrant: let me at him.” Henry Smith
(the prisoner in the dock) said, “ The fact
of the matter is. we will not serve
under such officers,” Then immediately
some lumps of clay or stones were thrown
from the rear; by whom I did not see : two
of the lumps struck Mr. Price ; one on the
face and the other about the hat. He im-
mediately put up both hands to his face and
retreated, turning round towards the sea. The
prisoners then began howling in a dieadful
manner, and made a rush in the direction of
Mr. Price. When the rush come towards me
I got up on a stage about two and a half feet
high on the top of the slide, and which was
about three feet from where I was stand-
ing. I could see right down the embankment
when I was standing on it. I saw a warder
named Gleeson struck with a stone, and then
the prisoner Maloney a stone, which
struck Mr. Price on the back of the head. He
was then about ten feet distant from him.
Mr. Price was about sixteen yards distant
fiom me at the lime. He was nearly half
way down the slip He fell on his knees.
There were other prisoners, I should say about
thirty, who were clostr to Mr. Price than
Maloney was, but I cannot say whether they
hit him, although they appeared to be attack-
ing him. I identified Richard Jones Francis
Brauigan, Thomas Young. John Wil-
liams, Henry Smith, No. 1,22 i. not the
prisoner now in the dock, Richard Bryant,
William Jones, William Brown, and the
prisoner in the dook Thomas Williams.
Mr. Price regained his feet partly, but
was then hustled lower down the slip, and I
then saw Thomas Williams strike Mr. Price
on the back of his head with a shovel. He
then fell upon his hands and knees, and was
dragged, hustled, and kicked further on to
the level ground, where I lost sight of him.
(The shovel was produced.) It was similar to
that. Part of the crowd came up shouting,
and I saw Captain Blachford knocked down
by three men, just alter the blow was struck
by Williams. A good many, perhaps twenty
prisoners, who had not gone down the


slip, were throwing stones from the
the top of the embankment at the place where
Mr. Price was lying. There was a party also
pursued Mr. Hyland and Gale along the
tramway about 200 yards. I then lost sight
of them,. They appeared to go down into the
quarry. I then went down the quarry, oppo-
site the stage, and went up towards where the
sentries were. They are arranged in a semi-
circularline which embraces the whole of the
quarries. I think there are about sixteen of
them, at a distance of about 800 yards Irom
the soot where the carts were placed before
Mr. Price. The sentries could not see him
when he went down the slip. 1 saw Mr. Price
being carried along the tramway by the
prisoners, but I was too far off to identify h m
The prisoners were afterwards got on board
in different paities. I took the first forty-five
who went voluntarily. I think Henry Smith
(in the dock) was amongst them. That was
between four and five o’clock in the after-
noon. I then went again on shore, and re-
turned with sixteen of the refractory men.
who were taken on board by force. Amongst
them was Thos. Williams (the prisoner in
the dock), who asked me “ How is Mr. Price?”
I said “ He is not dead.” He then replied, “I
thought he was cooked.” I understood hi mto
mean that he was killed. Picked up two pairs of
trousers nextdaywith blood on them,but they
do not belong to any of the prisoners in the
dock. The cells on the Success are some of
them solitary : the boarding between them is
about 2 inches thick. The prisoners can com-
municate through the bars in front, and also
through the ports if they Ifiten. It is not pre-
vented by the warders if they talk in a mode-
rate voice. There is another deck with
larger cells containing generally three and
sometimes four prisoners each. When the
prisoners are on shore communication is pre-
vented by the warders from the land side.
By Prisoner Thomas Williams : I saw you
strike Mr. Price. I pick you out amongst thirty.
You were about twenty five yards off. When
Mr. Price first came you were in the quarry
at work. There was a mob about Mr. Price.
You were one of the leading men. You said
to me nothing more than I have stated. I
believe somebody did say, “Oh! come in.
What are you alraid of ? No one will harm
you.” Ido not know whether it was you, I
did not reply to you, “ There is nothing the
matter with Price except what a piece of
Sticking-plaster will cure.”
By Prisoner Henry Smith: You
were not in my charge with the
cart party at the time of the
occurrence. Mr. Price was talking to John
Burns at the time. I heard you say you
would not serve under such officers, and
talking in a very excited and inciting man-
ner. I d d not see you taking any active
part in the violence, beyond the language
which jou used. I was in a position to see
what took place. Your name amongst others
was taken down to show that you went on
board voluntarily. You were out of irons at
the time ; but you were placed in irons on
the Friday afternoon.
By Prisoner Thomas Maloney: I know
that Eichard Jones and John Burns
were standing near you at the
time when you were _ apparently ad*
dressing yourself to Mr. Price, but pointing
towards Mr. Hyland- You might have been
complaining of Mr. Hyland and Mr. Holies,
but I only heard you say the‘words I have
mentioned in reference to the former, and you
struggled to gel away from the men who were
holding you, and at him. The blow I saw
you strike with the stone was not the first
blow struck: there were others throwing
stones at the same time, but I s wear positively
that the stone you threw did hit Mr. Price
on the head. You were one of the front men,
and Mr. Price was about ten feet distant from
you. I saw you leave the tramroad and rush
down the slip. You were one of the leading
men who rushed Mr. Price down. There
were Thomas Williams, John Williams,
Thomas Young. Francis Branagan, Henry
Smith (1,222), Eichard Bryant, Wm. Brown,
and William Jones also in the rush. I have
not had any conversation about you with
Mr. Hyland since the occurrence. We have
not made up the story together abmt your
hitting the blow with the stone. I could not
be certain whether Mr. Hyland looked round
when he was running. He migh* nave done
so, but he could have seen anybody strike
Mr. Price as he was running, at any rate in
the first two hundred yards. About a dozen
prisoners pursued Mr. Hyland. I did not see
you amongst the first men who came up the
embankment from the quarry; you might
have been without my noticing you. I think
the mcb was led by two men named Jones
and Taylor. There were not many stones
thrown at the time you threw one. I dare
say there were a dozen, but I happened to
have you in my eye at the time. There were
other stones which hit him also. It is a
breach of prison discipline to be seen through
the bars, but it is not so to com-
municate by talking through the
bars. The doors of the cell are six
feet high, and the bars are above the doors.
If conversation is carried on by the prisoners
in a load voice, the guard outside
would hear them; but they can com-
municate without their conversation being
heard by the guard, unless he happened to
put his ear to the door and listened.
By the Attorney General: There are ports
outside all the cehs for ventilation, which the
prisoners can open for themselves. The
ports are about tour feet apart. They are
larger in the inside than they are outside.
By the Prisoner; If any person happened
to be over the bulwarks he could hear the
conversation carried on between the pri-
soners through the port-holes, but not other-
wise.
Captain Blatchford being sworn, deposed :
My name is Henry William Blatchford, and
I am iuspec’or of penal bulks and superin-
tendent of the hulk Lysander. I knew Mr.
Price, and recollect Thursday, the 26th
March last. I was with Mr. Price that day
at a quarter to three o’clock, at the lighthouse.


1 attended him up the works until we came
to the Success quarry, where the prisoner
Fay addressed him. Then Mr. Price spoke
to a man named Russell, telling him that he
would still do what he could for him, but
the answer received from Government as to
his case was unfavourable. The man thanked
him. Then a prisoner named Kelly ad-
dressed him, about an indulgence. He asked,
“Is my application to go in?” Mr. Price
inquired how long he had been free from the
office? Kelly replied some months; but re-
cently he had got into trouble again. Mr.
Price asked him what for ? He said,
about leaving his work to assist another man
in dressing a stone. Mr, Price referred to an
overseer, Mi. Wilson, to ask if this was cor-
rect? Wilson replied it was not That Kelly
had quitted his work, gone to the tent, and
was found with pen and ink. Mr. Price
refused Kelly’s application, Kelly then
became very excited—shook his fists, his lips
quivered, and ho said, “ You b y
wretch your race is nearly run.” Mr. Price
ordeied him on board. Maloney then wanted
to know if a man saved his rations whether
he was allowed to keep them ? That was
against orders. Smith (the prisoner in the
dock) spoke at the same time on the same sub
ject. Mr. Price replied: “You know very
well it is against the regulations.” These
prisoners were on the tram, and had come
up from their work with the barrows. One
or both replied ; “ Oh very well, Sir; if that’s
the case, your word is law.” The matter
dropped at that. I should have mentioned
that Chesley had previously addressed Mr.
Price respecting his legs. His manner was
insolent and defiant. He said, “ My legs are
bad ; I am injured for life ; what are you go-
ing to do for me?” Mr Price replied that the
medical officer would attend to his case. We
proceeded farther on the tramway, and
Maloney made a complaint against the su-
perintendent, Mr Holies, stating that he had
“ faked” the scales, and they were getting
short rations Mr Price replied, “ I
will have you taken on board, and the
scales shall be test d, and if your statement is
incorrect I’ll punish you.” Malonev said he
would not go, and others said “ Don’t go ”
and he did not. The prisoners swarmed
round, and took their position on the quarry
side of the tram. They had also cut us off
from proceeding along to the Sacramento
works. I addressed the prisoners, and told
them not to speak all at once. The manner
of Mr. P ice during this time was very mild
and quiet. Jut-t after I had addressed the
men, I happened to turn round, and I heard
some one throw a stone. I turned, and saw
Mr. Price retreating backwards, and as I
turned I was struck behind the left oar, and
received a blow which neaily threw me down
the bank of the tram. I then ran and leaped
over an adjoining wall, and crossed the
quarry to the sentries, amid howls and exe-
crations. Words were used to the effect —
“ We’ll have other officers; we will have satis-
faction.” Mr. Price was then surrounded by
a party of the Success gang. 1 returned, and
obtained my hat, which had fallen when I
received the blow. I then proceeded to get
the men on board. I can identify the three
prisoners as being near Mr. Price at the time
the rush was made. I also remember others, —-
Roberts, Kelly, Chesley, and a great many
more I saw there.
By prisoner Thomas Williams; I saw you
there, and saw you gesticulating You were
also speaking; but I heard you make no
special complaint. When the stones were
thrown I did not see the other officers, nor
consequent ]y, which way they ran, When I
passed the Success quirryl saw Mr. Hyland
either shaking hL, list or flinging a stone at
the men. I did not see you take actual part
in the matter.
By prisoner Henry Smith : I was addressed
by some one about mouldy bread, and you
addressed me about back rations. The la-
bour-gang that day consisted of eigbty-one
or eighty-lhree men— of whom, perhaps,
thirty were in the cart gang. I saw a num-
ber of men coming up from the quarry ; and
perhaps there were thirl y or forty near Mr.
Price, while others were farther down the
tramway. I did not see you take any active
part in the matter, or strike Mr. Price pre-
vious to the rush. I did not set you throwing
stones.
By prisoner Thomas Maloney: The time
you spoke to Mr. Price was about a quarter
past three o’clock. It was about the
scales. The men from the quarries came up
by twos and threes, though the officers at-
tempted to prevent them. Mr. Price was at-
tended by myself, Mr. Holies, Mr. Hyland,
Mr. Gale, and Mr. Wilson. I swear you are
the man that made the complaint about the
scales, and Mr. Price ordered you on board,
to have the scales tested, Mr. Wilson was
there at the time. I think your complaint
was about the last made previously to the
rush.
Prisoner Maloney, by permission of the
Court,examined Mr. Hyland on this point,in
contra.fiction : Mr. Hyland said he did not
hear Maloney make the complaint about the
scales. When he came up with the scales,
the storekeeper came with him. He thought
Maloney was on the tram way when he passed.
Captain Blatchford, continued: I was
under the impression that it was
you (Maloney), made the complaint.
I did not hear you speak to Mr,
Price that day about your liberty, or make a
complaint against Mr. Hoiks or Mr. Hyland.
I did not see you take any active part in
throwing at Mr. Price. At the time the dirt
was thrown I was standing by him. When
you spoke about the scales you stood in front
of him.
.Re examined by prisoner Thomas Wil-
liams : When I first came I was chief warder,
and held the situation four or six months’
from March to October perhaps. Then I was
appointed superintendent, and at the end of
five or tix months more was made inspector
of the penal hulks, as well as superintendent
of the Lysander. lam not the godfather of
any of Mr. Price’s children.


James Caldwell being sworn, deposed: I
am sergeant of the shore guard. I saw Mr.
Price on the works on the 260 h March. I
saw the prisoners rush Mr. Price, but do not
identify any of them. About an hour
after the rush I was at the lighthouse
I heard Maloney and Williams use threaten-
ing language towards Mr. Hyland Maloney
said, pointing to Hyland, “ 1 should like to
do for him, as I (or we, I am not certain
which) have done for Mr. Price.” Ido not
think Smith was with those prisoners at the
lighthouse. I heard Williams speak of the
“b y tyrants and assassins,” these words
being used towards me and Mr Hyland.
Among the prisoners at the lighthouse were
Anderson, Williams, and Smith (not the
prisoner in the dock ). I found these stones —
(producing some large pieces of bluestone,
varying from about 12 or 14 inches in circum-
ference)—near where Mr. Price was knocked
down. Some are marked with blood, and to
one a hair adhered, which has been rubbed
off; and on another, part of the nap of a hat,
and that has since been rubbed off.
By prisoner Thomas Wdlhams: I know you
from seeing you at woik in the Success gang.
I knew your name from the overseer. 1 also
recognise you by the colour of your hair. I
obtain the names of all prisoners, if possible.
At the time the exclamation was made use of
by you, there were a great many persons
around, your mob. Ido not remember hear-
ing any of the prisoners say, “ There is no ne-
cessity for you to bring fire arms to us.”
By prisoner Henry Smith Ido not recollect
you at all. .
By prisoner Maloney : Captain Crawford
was talkii.g to you, remonstrating about jour
not going on board, at the time you made
use of the language against Hyland I recog-
nise you, because I have noticed you as a
lazy man, sitting down, when you ought to be
at work. The overseers were among the gang
at the time, butpei haps did not see you I did
not “ pull” you for it. You went on board
perhaps a quarter of an hour or twenty mi-
nutes after using the expression towards Mr.
Hyland that I have mentioned.
Henry Pee, being sworn, deposed : I remem
ber the 26th March last. I was one of the
Success gang at work cutting stone. I re
member Mr. Price coming, and I spoke to
him. Afterwards I went again to my work,
and then I went to him again. Mr. Price
was still standing in the place I left him, on
the muster ground. A man named Jones was
talking to Mr. Price at that time, asking how
much longer he would keep him before he
would send for his ticket-of "leave. Mr.
Price sold he could not tell him. Jones went
away and Mr. Price went along the tram
road to where some men were caiting sand,
about fifty or sixty yards from the place
where I stood. I saw Kelly speak to Mr.
Price, but I did not hear what was said.
Ihe prisoner Smith attention to
the fact that witness bad given different
evidence before the Coroner, stating that he
heard Kelly ask about bis three days’ soli-
tary confinement.
Witness repeated he did not bear what was
said by Mr. Price or by Kelly, and then pro-
ceeded : I heard Kelly tell Wilson that it was
all through him that he had not got
off his solitary confinement. Wilson said
Kelly might knock his head off if
he pleased. Kelly replied he would not,
but he would “gnaw his b y heart
out.” Wilson then walked away, and Kelly
went to his gang. The man Jones went to
Mr. Price then, and Said, “ I have written to
you a statement which you have partially
acknowledged, but the other part you have
not ansvered.” Mr Price replied that he be-
lieved he had. I then heard Smith, the
prisoner in the dock, speak to Mr. Price. He
drewup his right hand, pointing toMr. Hyland,
and said he wou‘d not work any more under
that b y tyrant. A stone was thrown, and
a man named Burns then threw another
stone, which hit Mr. Price on the side of the
head. Mr. Price put bis hand to bis head and
said, “Don’t, don’t men,” and Wdliams, the
prisoner in the dock, then tried to lay hold of
him by the throat. Mr. Price got away from
him. and Maloney struck Mr. Price on the
face with his right hand. Maloney was stand-
ing close to me. Mr. Price hit out with both
hands, and tried to get away down the em-
bankment. The body of men then rushed
after him, from twenty to thirty in number,
Williams was one, and he was holding Mr.
Price’s coat and trying to pull him back. Ma-
loney also was there, but I did not see him
strike Mr. Price again. I saw also a man
named Brown, and one called Black Bill
Jones, also a man named Richard Ryan. I
saw Chesley on the tramway, but did not
see him go down the embankment. After
they had gone down the embankment Black
Bill Jones was throwing stones, and I saw the
prisoner Williams strike Mr. Price repeatedly
with his hands. I stood on the tramway. Mr.
Price was struck with stones more than once.
He tried to keep his feet, but fell, first on one
knee and then on the other. Williams, Ryan,
and Brown were kicking him with their feet.
Jones knocked him down with a big stone,
and the men beat him for three or four
minutes- I did not see Williams use any-
thing but his fists in striking Mr. Price, but I
saw Hichard Ryan striking with a shovel. He
hit Mr. Price about the head and neck. He
then said “ Come away: he wants no more
now: he’s cooked.” He was coming away,
when I went away myself. Mr. Price was left
where he lav. I remarked the dress of Wil-
liam-i, who had on that morning white trou-
sers and a giey jacket. I saw blood on his
trousers after the assault. When Maloney
came uo the tramway, he said, ‘ Now for the
Sacramento gang ” I afterwards, in about
three minutes, went back to where Mr Price
was lying. A man named Russell helped
to carry him to the lighthouse. I then went
up to my gang again. While we were taking
Mr. Price to the lighthouse, I heard some
prisoners say—“ There’s them b y wretches
carrying him : let us cook every one of them.”
I did not recognise their voices. I noticed
among them, when they came along the


tram, Williams, Jones, Smith, and Ryan.
I heard them say, “ There’s Fee
has not got his irons broke,
and he’s a long-sentence man: let us give it
to him.” Jones was the first to approach
me, hut he did not speak to me. He said to
Smith, the prisoner in the dock, who was
then sitting down on a stone near, “You’ve
been the means of all this, and now you want
to back out of it.” Smith replied that he did
not: what did he want him to do? Jones
asked “Would you like another man?” Smith
rejoined, he “ was ready for any b— —y thing.’
Just before Mr. Price came to the quarry
Kelly said to me “The big fellow is coming
up the road.” I replied “Is he?” He said
“ Yes. I believe they are going to put him
through his facings to-day.”
By Prisoner Williams: I did not see you
speak to Mr. Price. You were standing on
his left when you attempted to seize him by
the throat. I lost sight of you in the body of
men. 1 saw you kick him; and others were
kicking him. I can’t say how many were
there. I saw you strike Mr. Price be
hind his back before he fell. I saw the
free people run away when the stones were
thrown. I saw Mr. Hyland stop within thirty
yards of me. I saw Mr- Wilson and the special
constable run down tne embankment endea-
vouring to protect Mr. Price. I did not see
you use anything besides your hands and feet.
There was some disturbance in the ward
where you were one day, and you attempted
to part two combatants. Their noses bled
and marked the floor. Blood also fell on your
trousers and flannel, and on my own too.
By Prisoner Henry Smith: I am under
sentence for twenty years. I was tried for high-
way robbery,with violence. 1 had twosentences
of ten years each. I was present while the
body of men assembled round Mr. Price with
complaints. I did not see you then take any
active part in the matter, nor strike or rush
him. I saw you hold up your right hand,
point to Mr. Hyland, and say you would not
work under that tyrant. He was in a
position to hear what you said.
Prisoner pointed out that Mr. Hyland ana
Mr. Wilson stated in their evidence that it
was some one else, and not him (Smith) who
made use of the remark. Ha contended
therefore the evidence was inadmissible.
His Honor said he must receive it and de-
cide on its value afterwards.
Examination resumed: I did not see you
taking an active part in the affray.
By Prisoner Maloney: You struck Mr.
Price before the rush took place. I saw also
a man named Burns throw a stone. It was
the first I saw that struck Mr. Price. I was
within two yards of him. He was_ struck by
another stone, but I did not see it thrown.
You struck him with your right hand. 1 did
not see you throw any stones that day, or in
possession of any weapon, either before or
after the assault. I believe you were in your
shirt sleeves. I saw you rush down the em-
bankment, but did not afterwards see you
strike him.
Re examined by the Prisoner Williams.
I do not recollect who was in the ward or cell
along with me before you came. _ 1 recollect
a man named George Price was in the cell,
but was shifted out. I heard him say that
he should like to go into Cooper’s cell, to learn
to cypher and write. We never came to terms
with Brown and Roach about cutting
through the cell to get away. He never
spoke to me on such a subject. I say nothing
but the truth. I never said about the 20th of
March, I had got a sharp knife, and would get
some teeth cut in it, for there was the port
and we could cut our way through. I did not
ask Price to get a file, nor did I ask Kenny to
get a file. I never showed you the knife;
nor did I show you a counter-sink, usually
used for hinges. You did not tell me, “I
know you of old, and you shan’t get a rise out
of me.”
John Gleeson: Is a special warder on shore.
Recollects the day of this occurrence, and
was present when Mr. Price was rushed.
When witness first saw Mr. Price that day
the prisoner Maloney was speaking to him.
Several voices were exclaiming, “We won’t
serve under these officers.” Maloney raised
his hand and shook it at Hyland, saying, “That
is the b ——y tyrant.” Some clay was thrown
in Mr. Price’s face. He attempted to get along
the tramway, but the prisoners rushed him
back. Witness was at that time a few yards
behind him, and rushed forward to assist him.
Witness was then seized. A man whom he
was not able to identify seized him by the
shoulders and dragged him to the edge of the
tramway, to fling him over. Witness strug-
gled and got away from him. At that
moment witness saw the prisoner Maloney
with a stone in his hand. Did not see the
stone go from his hand, but he was in the act
of flinging it. Is not able to identify any
other man.
Cross-examined by Maloney; You (Mal-
oney) were standing right before Mr. Price
when you shook your hand at Hyland. _ I was
four yards behind Mr. Price. I saw you with the
stone in your hand rushing down the slip
after Mr. Price, and within a few yards of
him. I was not chucked over the embank-
ment, but was thrown upon the embankment.
Getting clear and turning round, 1 saw you
with the stone in your hand, in the act of
flinging, and before it left your hand I myself
received a stone that left me senseless.
Maloney : Had I anything in my hand
when I shook it at Hyland ?
Witness : I saw nothing.
Maloney : It is odd that I did nothing to
the man that I was abusing, and that I should
fling the stone at the man that 1 made no
complaint against.
Simon Russell: Is a prisoner of the Crown
confined on board the Success. On the day in
question witness was on the tramroad. Saw
a hat lying on the ground on the sea side of
the tramway, and a little beyond it Mr,
Price’s body lying. Went over and liftt d the
head out of the puddle. Mr. Price was at
that time groaning very heavily. Sat down
beside him, and was alone with the body for
some minutes before he got any help. Seven


or eight men, prisoners, afterwards came up
and helped witness to remove the body along
the tramway to the lighthouse. Mr. Price
made several efforts to speak, but could not.
Mr. Maine produced the shovel, stained with
blood, which he had found on the tramway
about five o’clock on the day of the occur-
rence.
James Watts, acting overseer of works at
Gellibrand’s Point, produced a jacket that he
had found on the tramway next day, opposite
the blacksmith’s shop. It was stained with
blood, and bore the number 433, the number
of the prisoner Williams.
Attorney-General to Williams; Have you
any question to ask ?
Williams: No, Sir : That is my jacket.
This closed the case for the Crown.
His Honor then asked the prisoners if they
had any observations to offer to the jury.
Thomas Williams said : I am a very igno-
rant man, and therefore beg your Honor io
take my part. All I can say about
the disturbance is that on the morn-
ing of the 26th March I believe I came
ashore in the first boat, and in the
seond boat I believe there was a man
named Taylor. This man had been sentenced
to solitary confinement on the complaint of
the witness and prisoner Quinn, and when he
came out he brought with him a ration and
a-half of bread. Hyland took the bread away
from Taylor, as prisoners are not allowed to
keep over their rations from day to day, and
when I came out the men were murmuring
that Hyland was at his old tricks again,
I knew nothing of the matter, and had
nothing to say about it. I have been con-
victed four years and five months, and of
this time I have bem confined four
years and two months. {The priso-
ner then went on to complain of
the conduct of the warders and officers of the
hulk President and Success, on board both
of which he had been confined. After
having been thn-e years and five days
on board the President , I was removed to the
Success for good conduct as it was called, but
I was singled out from the rest of the priso-
ners, and was not allowed to go On shore to
work. The blood that has been shed on
boaid those hulks is now crying to
heaven for vengeance. The officers and
warders are all picked men by the late
Inspector General; picked by him because
they would suit his purposes and so long as
Mr. Blatchford, Holies, and Hyland are on
board the hulks so long will prisoners be sent
to this Court to be tried.
Henry Smith, alias Brennan, next addressed
the jury, and said : There has not one particle
of evidence beeu given which shows that I
was even ai ling or abetting in the murder of
Mr. Price. The witness Quinn is under heavy
sentences for having absconded twice from
the stockade, while under the care of Mr.
Price, and was sent down to the hulks in
heavy irons. I will put it to you, gentlemen
of the jury, if such a man as this would not
grasp at a shadow to obtain his liberty ? I
hope and trust to the Almighty God, and to
your sense of honour, not to convict me on
evidence like this. If I had assisted in the
transactions of the day in question somebody
must have seen me, but I am a
man that never imbrued my hands in any
man’s blood. My intentions on going to
speak to Mr. Price were to complain of my
rations, and not to commit murder. My life
is in your hands; but I remind you that there
is not one tittle of evidence in support of the
charge against me. I was in the middle of
seventeen men, and therefore it must be very
difficult to speak positively to any man’s
identification. I have put my trust in God
on this occasion, and He has succoured me,
and I have Him to thank for never having
imbrued my hands in any man’s blood.
Maloney said : I can neither read or write,
but I wish to bring the conduct of the officers
of the hulks, and the way in which they have
trepanned and ensnared me, under your
notice. The prisoner then entered into
a lengthy history of his life and punishments
on board the hulks , and continued: I have
been 231 days in solitary confinement out of
the two years and ten months 1 have been on
board the hulks, and during the whole while
Hyland and Holies have always been making
complaints against me. Since the disturbance
about Melville there have been, as has been al-
leged, disturbances on boaid, but the cause of
them was the bad and insufficient rations. I
have several times made complaints about the
rations, and on this account the officers have
always had a down on me. What I have
stated is the truth, as I shall have to an-
nounce before my Judge for the ragged and
dirty life I have led—for a ragged life I have
led. I have been blackened in your esti-
mation by being called a murderer, but I call
on that Saviour who suffered and died on the
cross that I am innocent of the murder, and
took no part in it, as the Almighty God is in
heaven. I shall not be long in this world in
all probability, but may the Almighty God
deny light to my soul if I ever lifted my hand
in an act of murder. I know how it hap-
pened that I have been charged with this
murder, and I trace it all to the ill-feeling of
the warders against me, and in consequence
of my having complained of the chief warder
and the superintendent that day. I was
amongst the mob, and saw the murder com-
mitted ; but, as the God before whom 1 am
going is my judge, I took neither hand, act,
or part in aiding or abetting in the murder.
Thomas Williams again addressed the jury
and said : I wish to call your attention that
on the day in question eighty three men were
collected together on the works. Stones were
thrown, and no man who swears honestly and
uprightly can possibly say who threw them,
as all the free officers ran away. Notwith-
standing this, men have come here to-day to
swear to me, and I am the principal man they
mean to finish. I hope you will see strictly
into the case.
His Honor: Do you wish to call any wit-
nesses ?
Thomas Williams: If a list of the prisoners
who were present on the works on the day ia


question were handed me I would take them
as they are entered.
'J he Attorney-General: Name any.
Thomas Williams : Kenny, he was there.
James Kenny, a prisoner of the Crown,
examined by the prisoner Williams : Was in
the same cell with Williams, (the prisoner at
the bar previous to March last. Knows the
convict Fee who has given evidence for the
Crown. Recollects that Fqe asked witness
could he get a saw sharpened for him. Wit-
ness was at that time working cutting stones,
it might be a rod away from Fee. Witness
asked Fee what he wanted with sharpening a
saw, and Fee gave him to understand, that it
was for the purpose of escape. But witness
believed that his object was roguery. Wit-
ness had before that time heard him con-
versing with the chief #arder.
Attorney General objected to the witness
saying what passed between Fee and the
warder.
Cross-examined by the Attorney-General:
You thought this was a bit of roguery?
Witness: Yes, Sir.
Attorney-General: You have a great aver-
tion to roguery?
Witness; I had to this roguery, and I had
a reason and a very good reason to believe he
meant it.
John Givney, a prisoner of the Crown,
examined by the prisoner Williams:
Was present on this occasion, but went
away the moment be saw the
affray begin. Saw the Chief Warder Hyland
run. He ran for about 150 yards before he
stopped. (Witness described the direction in
which each of the officers ran.) Witness did
not think that the officers were in a position
to di-tinguish who struck the blow.
Cross-Examined by Attorney-General :
Was carting sand in his go cart. Saw one of
the officers pick up three stones and heave
them into the mob. Saw Hyland standing on
the stage after the rush was all over.
Another prisoner of the Crown also swore
he saw the affair, and saw the officers run
away, and did not believe that from the
position they occupied they could distinguish
what occurred so as to identify persons.
They were too far off to identify features, and
all the prisoners were dressed alike.
Henry Browne, a prisoner of the Crown,
examined by Williams; Was present. Was
at work with Williams. Saw the officers run
away. Did not see Williams take any part
in what occurred.
Cross-Examined by the Attorney General:
Saw a rush, and a great rush, go down
the hill—about thirty or forty men.
Left the tramway about five minutes
after the rush took place. Did not
see Mr. Price fall. Has been about four years
with the Success men, and knows them well,
except some new men lately come among
them. Cannot swear to the faces of any of
any of the men who took part in the rush.
There was great confusion. Cannot twear to
one.
John Jones, a prisoner of the Crown, exa-
mined by the prisoner Smith: Was present.
Was speaking to the Inspector-General.
Heard Smith make his complaint to the In-
spector-General. Smith had complained
about his rations on various occasions unto
the Superintendent, to the Inspector-General,
and to the Magistrate. Did not see Smith
take any part whatever in the attack on the
Inspector General. Smith was among the
first party taken off to the ship.
William Singleton, a prisoner of the Crown,
examined by Smith: Was present. Saw
Smith present some bread to the Inspector-
General, complaining of it. The Inspector-
General handed it to Hollis, and sent on
board for scales. Before the scales came Mr.
Price had walked on about a hundred yards.
Fort}’ or fifty men came up. The Inspector-
General asked the officer why he
had permitted them to come in this
irregular manner. They made several
complaints. Mr. Price asked them what they
wanted him to do. They said to discharge
the officers, all with one voice, and holding up
their hands, said they would not work under
these officers, and cried out against Hyland
as a tyrant, and asked Mr. Price to give them
satisfaction, and dismiss him. He said he
would do nothing of the kind, the officer
had only done his duty, and he would
give them no satisfaction. Some
clay was then thrown from behind
and Smith turned round to the crowd and
said, “ drop it boys, drop it, we will get satis-
faction without that work,” The crowd cried
out “down with the tyrants!” and rushed on
Mr. Price. Smith did not join the ;rush, he
remained on the tramway, leaning on his
cart, and afterwards he walked about the
tramway with his arms folded, saying, “ this
was very bad, and that they could have got
satisfaction without this.” Saw the officers
run away, except Hendry, Hendry
stood his ground, and remained on the tram-
way until the crowd came back.
Jones, prisoner of the crown, examined
by Mallony: Witness wasj present. Was
complaining to Mr. Price that he was delayed
of his liberty, Mallony was standing beside
witness when the rush took place. He did
not take any part in it to witness’s know-
ledge, When the rush took place, witness
went away to the tool-house, without a mo-
ment’s delay. Does not know what took
place after that. Mallony often complained
about his rations- He complained to the
magistrate, and the magistrate said his com-
plaint was just.
Thomas Horan, a prisoner of the crown,
examined by Mallony: Was present. Saw
Mallony there. Did not see him take any
part in the attack.
Thomas Smith a prisoner of the crown,
examined by Mallony : Was present. Heard
Malloney complain to Mr. Price about his
returns and his rations. Cannot say exactly
what he said, as it was all touch man-go. The
officers ran away. Every one took to his
heels. Is not competent to say whether the
officers could distinguish who took partin the
attack. Witness himself could not distin-
guish


Christopher Farrell, a prisoner of the Crown,
examined by Malloney ; Witness and Mal-
loney walked up together from the boats that
morning. Malloney asked some of the pri-
soners who were on shore before them, why
the men refused to work, and a man answered
him that a prisoner’s bread had been taken
away from him, and that they would not work
until it was enquired into.
Cross-examined : Witness knew that the
men had determined not to work before they
left the hulk. He cannot say how many had
united in this determination. Heard the
voices of several who declared they would not
work, but could not distinguish who the men
were. Witness was one of the men who were
discovered hidden in the pit. Refuses to tell
who put him there. Will not commit other
men.
His Honor said that witness was bound to
answer.
Witness will not tell. Will take any pun-
ishment rather than tell. Heard the pri-
soners say that morning that they expected
Mr. Price would come that day to hear their
complaints. Some of his fellow-prisoners
knew that witness was about to escape, and
wished him not to attempt it. The pit had
been dug before that day; probably one day
before. Mr. Price had been sent for by several
of the prisoners. By as many as five; by ten.
Will not say by more than ten.
Mr. Sewell: Had not more than twenty
agreed that Mr. Price should be sent for ?
Witness: Cannot say twenty. There
might be a dozen. Cannot name the pri-
soners. Could not distinguish the voices. If
men stood in file, and several cried out to
send for the Inspector, as was the
case here, it would not be possible
to distinguish every voice. This occurred
about six o’clock in the morning. Some
wanted to send for Mr. Price; some said to
send for the magistrate. Witness cannot say
what occurred in the latter part of the day.
Witness was buried alive during that time.
It was not generally known among the priso-
ners that witness was to have been put in the
hole. It might have been known to four
persons or perhaps to six. The men were
working in the quarry, within five or six
yards of him, when witness went in, but
there were not more than six of
them. Will not tell who dug the bole,
only that the man who was found in the hole
with him helped in digging it. Went into it
about half past two o’clock in the day. Did
not go in earlier because he could not. The
overseer was standing over it up to that hour.
The overseer went for some powder at that
hour, and witness then took the opportunity.
There were about 10 lbs. of bread in the
hole, and some water. Some of the bread
witness himself had saved ; some of it the
men had been kind enough to give him.
William Mac, a prisoner of the Crown,
examined by Malloney: Witness was present,
saw Maloney. Saw him at the time the at-
tack was made upon the Inspector-General.
Was about six yards from him. Did not see
him take any part. Saw the officers run
away. Hyland ran about twelve or fourteen
yards, when he stood a bit. He stood long
enough to pick up a stone and throw it. Saw
Hendry jump up upon the stage which is
used in stonecutting, and immediately turn,
jump down, and run away. Witness is certain
that none of tbe officers could tell the men
that struck the blow, for witness himself
stood by his cart upon the embankment,
and saw the blow struck, yet could not tell
who struck it. Hendry remained on the
stage only as long as it took him to turn
round. He then jumped down, and ran
away to the blacksmith’s shop.
Cross-examined: Saw several blows struck.
Saw Mr. Price fall. When he fell there might
have been seventeen or eighteen men about
him. Witness has been eighteen months in
the Success, and know? all the Success gang.
Yet could not now name one of those who
were about Mr. Price. Witness’s irons were
taken off for him. Cannot tell who took
them off. Did not notice who took them off.
It was not Mr. Hyland, nor any of the
officers, nor any one having proper authority
to take them off.
This closed the case for the prisoners.
The Attorney-General, addressing the
Court, said, that seeing that the prisoners
were undefended, he conceived he would
best fulfil his duty by now leaving
the case in the hands of his Honor, and waiv-
ing his right to address the jury again.
His Honor, in summing up the evidence to
the jury, said the prisoners had been indicted
for having feloniously and wilfully and of
malice aforethought, killed and murdered one
John Price. He dared say it would be unne-
cessary for him to explain to them the law
with regard to the definition of murder, for
unfortunately they were too familiar, as
jurors, with the nature of that crime; but he
would say, however, that voluntarily killing
any person under the King’s peace, of malice
aforethought, either expressed or implied, was
murder. It did not appear that there were
any grounds for finding the prisoners guilty
of homicide or manslaughter, for there was no
evidence to show that the death of Mr. Price
was necessary or desirable. If they found that
Williams and Maloney were active agents
agents in the death of Mr. Price, still if
Smith was engaged with them in one common
intention (the evidence of which they must
look for in his actions) he was equally re-
sponsible in the first degree. The inten-
tion appeared from the evidence, which
pointed to the desire of a great body of the
prisoners to secure the attendance of Mr.
Price on the ground by complaining of their
rations. So long as these complaints were
peaceably and quietly made, all was proper ;
but if a riot resulted, all that were concerned
in it that could be distinguished were respon-
sible to the law for the consequences. He
said it advisedly, because they were in a po-
sition to discriminate from the evidence that
some of the men were not responsible for the
results, as a body withdrew after making
their complaints, and another party, with a
humanity which is much to be respected, as-


ted Mr. Price when he was down. He
called attention to this at the outset
of the case, because they had been
called on to consider the case of Smith as dif-
fering from that of the other two prisoners.
The prisoner Smith had relied, in his defence,
on the circumstance of his not having struck
any blow; but if the jury came to a conclu-
sion that the intention was a common one,
all concerned in the result were equally guilty,
for in cases of organised resistance against
constituted authorities, all parties concerned
in such resistance were responsible for the
consequences, even if such results followed as
were not at first contemplated or premedi-
tated. It was for them to say, however, if in
the case of Smith he was so far acting in
concert with the other two prisoners as to
render him responsible for the consequences
which followed. His Honor then went
through the evidence, and pointed out the
material portions which affected the pri-
soners; and concluded by observing that
the jury should look at the evidence as
a whole, and say whether or not
Mr. Price had been killed by the prisoners at
the bar themselves or in concert with others.
Smith’s case was different from that of the
other two, inasmuch as he had not been pro-
ved to have inflicted any blows, but with
respect to Williams and Maloney, there is
nothing in the evidence which could reduce
the charge against them to one of manslaugh-
ter.
The jury then retired at half-past six o’clock
and at seven o’clock returned with a verdict
of Guilty against all three of the prisoners.
Smith they strongly recommended to mercy
on the ground that it had not been proved
that he had struck any blows.
The prisoners were then asked if they had
anything to say why the sentence of the law
should not be passed on them.
Thomas Williams asked His Honor
to defer the sentence until after
the trial of the remainder of the
the prisoners, as he thought it likely it might
be proved before the trials were concluded
that he was not the man that struck the
blow. He said the wardens Hyland and
Hendry had contradicted each other, and
that the witnesses had contradicted each
other throughout. If they had had money to
employ counsel, the result might have been
different, but if it was the will of God that he
should die, he was content to die, for during
the past four years and a half, he had lived
a miserable life, and therefore would as »oon
die as not.
Smith said he had been found guilty of
wilful murder, but he was not guilty, as he
never lifted a hand, or rushed Mr. Price, as he
had a soul to be saved. He trusted that his
Honor would act upon the recommendation
of the jury in his case.
Maloney said that enough evidence had been
given against him to hang any man or twenty
men, but when he looked at the persecution
which the Saviour suffered, what other
could a wretch like he expect. He called on
Almighty God to witness that he had never
lifted a hand against Mr. Price or any of the
officers on the day in question. If he did
may the Almighty God never receive his soul,
but if his life would be an atonement to Al-
mighty God for the sins he had committed,
he would be satisfied, and he hoped he should
prepare for death in the best way he could
in the short time allowed him to live. He
had placed his trust in Almighty God on the
previous day and that morning before enter-
ing the Court that he might not be found
guilty of a crime which he had never com-
mitted. If his Honor would grant that his
execution might be public he would be very
glad, that the public might hear, at the last
moment, his confession.
Williams said there was a young man
named Brown in the gaol charged with
taking a spade out of his _ (Williams’s)
hand and striking Mr. Price with it.
He declared to God that Brown never did so,
and he hcped the jury would consider this
when the lad was on his trial. He had been
picked out by the officers of the hulks because
if they had not pitched upon somebody to
charge they would have lost their situations.
All of them had sworn falsely.
Maloney said that Hollis had not sworn
falsely against him but that Hendry had.
His Honor then passed sentence upon the
prisoners in the following words:-Thomas
Williams, Thomas Maloney, and Henry
Smith, you have been found guilty of the
crime of wilful murder; the offence is one
which, committed under the circumstances
detailed, is of a character most dangerous to
the society in which you live. Surrounded
as we are in a country of vast expanse, by
characters, who, unhappily like your-
selves, have not profited by the previous
punishments which you have received, such
crimes are additionally dangerous. 1 have
before me a table which shows that all three
of you have before suffered the sentence of
the law ; one of you has been three times
convicted of highway robbery, another of ag-
gravated robbery, and the third of larceny.
You could not have been left without severe
punishment, but it was not alone
in order that you should receive
that punishment that you were sent
to the places where you have been impris-
oned, but also for your security, having, as it
were, bid defiance to all the rules which are
necessary for binding society together, and
not only for your own sakes, but by example
to prevent others of the same dangerous class
from proceeding to such extremities as you
have done. Many of the inhabitants
of this country who have come
to it during the last three or four
years are totally‘unacquainted with the class
of men you represent; living in the security
of peaceful England in her rural districts and
quiet counties, they know nothing more, and
hear nothing more than of the proceedings
of their well-regulated county gaols, where
poor vagrants or other objects of pity are con-
fined who have been led into the commission
of some trifling larceny or other incouside-
I rable crime by sheer poverty. That is not


your case, nor that of hundreds like you.
Here wealth abounds on all sides; there is
no restriction to your becoming—by the
exertion of only ordinary labour —enriched
beyond the dreams of such poverty as that
which you were originally acquainted with.
Abundant oppori unities for honest labour
surround you; and persons are willing, in this
country, to overlook those secessions from the
paths of honesty and rectitude which in
England prevent those who have once sinned
from obtaining employment. Here the great
necessities of the country cause the people to
look with a lenient eye upon those who have
been convicted, and it rarely happens that they
are themselves debarred from following an ho
nestcourse of livelihood in consequenceof their
misfortune. The present case is, therefore,
not one which demands pity or sympathy ;
and with reference to the mode of defence
which you have adopted to-day, and espe-
cially two of you, it is one with which I think if
the public sjmpatby is directed aright it will
not hold much communion. You have
brought forward instances of ill treatment and
hardship, the truth or falsehood of which 1 have
no opportunity of deciding upon. Someofthe
complaints made by two of you appear to me
to be frivolous in the extreme, even were they
true. First with reference to the food, the
scale of rations is fixed by the Executive
Government here, and is in excess of that
eaten by her Majesty’s troops. Many a free
man, obliged to live by hard labour, would be
but too glad to procure such rations as you
object to. I felt some surprise at the class of
objections which were raised, and I must
observe that I receive them myself
with more distrust than I otherwise should,
inasmuch as although you appeared
to regard them as a material feature
of your defence, you omitted to ask a single
question of one of the warders or officers, or
even of your fellow prisoners, with a view to
substantiating the truth of them, hoping to
create an improper influence by them on the
minds of the jury. It is my duty to say that
Ido not believe the reports at present—if they
be true they should be inquired into and rec-
tified, and no doubt they will be, but as they
stand at present, levelled as they are at the
officers in charge, unsubstantiated by proof—
where every opportunity and every lati-
tude were afforded you—they must be
received with the utmost distrust. You
seem to me to view your case as if you were
injured, completely forgetting the aggression
which you yourselves have made upon
society. It is not my duty to dwell further
on this part of the case, and I have done so
thus far, not with the intention of reproach-
ing you, nor of recalling the painful scenes,
both of vice and of punishment which you
have gone through—far from it —but to beg
of you to use the little, space of time
which is now allotted to you, to make
all the reparation which you say you be
lieve to be necessary not only to the society
whose laws you have outraged, but to a
higher being. I must guard one of you from
what 1 conceive to be the impiety of your
language. Your life, unfortunate man, can
afford no sufficient atonement for your
crime. It is from the death of another that
you must hope: your own lile is in the hands
of your Creator, and you can gain no merit
from any offering of your own. It is nor. my
dut,y to attempt to lecture you: that duty I
will leave in the hands of abler men, —
those whose profession it is to instruct
you in the .paths in which you
ought to walk, but I again earnestly request
you to devote the time which is left you to
the spiritual advantages to which these gen-
tlemen will teach you to apply it. One of
you bas asked that you might be allowed the
privilege of being executed publicly ; lament-
able it is to me to hear such a request. I
deplore it most deeply, for notwithstanding
the expressions of simulated piety which
have been uttered by you, I cannot believe
that there is anything whatever in
the request but the miserable gra-
tification of displaying the last
feelings of exultation with which an un-
repentant man wishes to leave the world.
The Legislature of the country has deprived
me of the power of granting that request, and
in this instance I think I may say that I re-
joice in not possessing the power, for I fear
that the last hour of your life would be em-
ployed either iu an exhibition of profanity or
of attempted justification. I eatreat you to
employ it in a manner more b. fitting
your awful position, Henry Smith, I
shall forward, as I am bound to do,
to the proper quarter the recom-
mendation of the jury to mercy which ac-
companied the verdict against you. I can
imagine the merciful feelings which have
actuated the jury in their humane view of
your conduct, whilst they have so far regarded
their duty and their oaths of office in finding
you guilty. That you were a partici-
pant in the crime there can be no doubt,
although probably you possess sufficient
dexterity and cunning to excits others
whilst refraining from being an active
agent j ourself. Some further enquiry must
be made. That the recommendation to mercy
will be effective, or that the extreme penalty
of the law will be carried out in your case, it
is not for me to say; my duty consists nowin
passing sentence and making my report; for
myself I hold out to you no hope of mercy.
I cannot do so. You Thomas Williams de-
sire to have your sentence postponed until
after the conclusion of the other trials, in the
hop* that it may appear that you are not tfce
person who struck the blow; you have sought
to throw distrust on the testimony of the
other witnesses; your case has been left to a
discriminating and pains taking jury who
have found you guilty. 1 have already ex-
plained the law to them, and I now repeat to
you that if you think that even were that so,
you are in point of law not guilty, you are
under a most erroneous imprt ssion; even if it
were proved that, as you say, you did not
striae the blow; and in the face of such
full and respectable testimony, I cannot
doubt it I feel convinced that the jury have


been perfectly right in saying that you were
implicated. It remains now only for me to
admonish you once more to make the best
use of the little time that remains for you in
this world The sentence of the Court is,
that you Thomas Williams, Thomas Maloney
and Henry Smith, be each of you taken from
the place where you are, and thence removed
at such time, and to such place as his Excel-
lency the Governor with the advice of his
Executive Council may direct, and that you
be hanged by the neck until you be dead,
and may the Lord have mercy upon your
souls.
The prisoners were then removed from the
dock, Maloney saying as he left it, “I hope
the Lord will have mercy upon my soul: lam
not afraid to die.”
Ihe Court adjourned at half-past seven
o’clock to ten o’clock on Wednesday morn-
ing.
Wednesday, April \bth, 1857.
(Before his Honor Mr. Justice Barry.)
THE MURDER OF MR. PRICE.
His Honor Mr. Justice Barry took his seat
on the bench at ten o’clock.
The following prisoners were placed at the
bar -—John Williams, Henry Smith (No. 1,222),
James Kelly , Richard Jones. William Jones.
The prisoner Henry Smith said he wished to
speak to his Honor before the trial com-
menced. There were four witnesses whom he
wished for. They were confined at the hulks,
and he hoped his trial would not be allowed
to proceed without them.
Mr, Justice Barry : Name them.
Prisoner named them.
Mr. Gurner, Crown Prosecutor, explained
that the prisoner had given him a list of all
the witnesses he desired to have from the
hulks, and they were all brought up to the
gaol. Subsequently he expressed a wish for
thtse four.
Prisoner explained that the copy of the
depositions had not been furnished him until
Sunday evening, af er he had given that list.
Mr. Justice Barry: He must have these wit-
nesses.
It was then arranged that the trial should
proceed, and the witnesses be meantime sent
for to the hulks, and got to town in time for
the defence.
The prisoner James Kelly then applied to
the Court and asked his Honor to give him
counsel to defend him. Until that morning
he was under the impression that he would
have been defended A gentlemen had been
speaking to him in the gaol on Sunday, and
he had hoped that he would defend him. The
copy of the depositions had not been given
him until Sunday evening. He had pot been
before the Coroner, and he scarcely knew
what he was accused of.
Mr. Justice Barry said a similar application
had been made to him at the trial which ter-
minated yesterday. He had then said, as he
mUst say now, that he could not coerce
counsel. In saying so he but adopted the
language of the most eminent English Judges.
A different course would be not on ly unjust
to counsel, but might prove very injurious to
prisoners. He would be glad to have the as-
sistance of counsel, but he could not provide
counsel. That must rest with other powers,
either the Executive or the Legislature. If
done in one case it must be done in all. It
was different in this country from what it was
in England. In England prosecutions were
carried on partly at the expense of the several
counties in which the offence had been
committed, and in which the trial took
place, and the Judges had a right to make
an order for expenses, even the expenses of
defending prisoners. He had no such power.
He therefore felt justified, on reflection, in ad-
hering to the course that for years he had
adopted. To be assisted by counsel would
relieve him from a very great responsibility
whh h he had to assume when prisoners were
left undefended. From that responsibility
however, he would not shrink.
The Attorney-Creneral hoped that his Honor
would permit him to say that the matter of
employing counsel at the public expense was
a consideration, not for the Executive but for
the Legislature. He himself, in conducting
the recent trial, had pursued a most lenient
course; he had not pressed the prisoners with
evidence on which it would have been his duty
to lay much more stress had the prisoners
been defended, and he had admitted a course
of examination that under other cir-
cumstances he must have excluded. At the
same time, he must say that it would be a
wise, just, and humane course if the Legisla-
ture made provision for prisoners otherwise
undefended.
Mr. Justice Barry then turned to the
prisoners and informed them that they had
each arighlto challenge twenty jurors, and fur-
ther acquainted them, on a suggestion which
he said emanated from the Attorney-General,
that they had a right to dtmand that none of
the jury that had convicted the prisoners who
were arraigned with them yesterday should
be called to day until the rest of the panel
was exhausted.
Thq prisoners availed themselves of the
suggestion, and requested that none of yester-
day’s jury be called.
The Attorney-General, addressing the jury,
said it was now his duty to assume the re-
sponsible task of placing before them the
evidence affecting the prisoners at the bar in
this most distressing and unhappy case.
There was a peculiar point to which he must
draw their attention as regarded the prisoners
arraigned that day. They were not charged
with having struck any blow, but with aiding
the prosecution of the general design enter-
tained by those who actually struck the
blow. Counsel then explained at some
length the law as it affected persons
engaged in aiding and abetting or taking
part' in the general purpose of murder.
What the jury would have to find was, that
these prisoners were assisting in and pro-
moting the general design. II the jury had
any doubt as to the participation of any of


the prisoners, it was the humane state of the
law that the prisoners should have the be-
nefit of that doubt. The jury would be care-
ful to dismiss from their minds all foregone
impressions. The newspapers had necessarily
discussed this matter very much at large,
and it was not possible that they
had come to the jury box without
some knowledge of the case; but their
verdict must be founded solely on the evi
dence that would be produced to them, to the
exclusion of all other sources of knowledge.
The Attorney- General then went into the
facts of the case. The first incident of the
day was the complaint respecting the bread
of a prisoner named Taylor. Taylor had
been found to have more than his day’s
allowance. The bread was taken from him,
in accordance with a very necessary rule that
prisoners should not be permitted to save up
provisions, to be used, probably, for purposes
of escape. The taking away of the bread formed
one of the reasons for winch the prisoners
afterwards sent for Mr. Price. I’he prisoners also
Complained that some of the allowances of
bread were short, and that the full quantity
of soap had not been served out. On these
grounds they demanded that Mr. Price be
sent for, he being the person that acted as
the general redresser of grievances. Counsel
then described the ground. He narrated the
arrival of Mr. Price, the presenting of the
several complaints, some of which he was
able to attend to, others he could not satisfy,
but all cf which he had received with the
calmness of temper, combined with firmness
in the disrhorge of his duties, which were
known to have characterised him. Counsel
then detailed the commencement of the at-
tack, the subsequent rush upon Mr. Price, and
the other circumstances of his murder, as they
were detailed in evidence at the recent trial.
The first witness called on behalf of the
Crown was
James Holies, Superintendent of the hulk
Success. His direct evidence was almost
identical with that given by him upon the
trial of the first batch of prisoners. He de-
scribed Mr. Price’s arrival on the works; his
conversation with Henry Smith (convicted in
the last batch) about Taylor’s bread; his
conversation about Smith’s own bread, alleged
by Smith to have been served out that day
and to be mouldy; his conversation
in the quarry with Kelly, one of the
prisoners arraigned to-day, in which
witness stated that Kelly on being in-
formed by Mr. Price that he must serve
his full time, exclaimed to Price,'' You b—-y
tyrant, youdfface will soon be run.” He de-
scribed Mr. Price’s going upon the tramway;
his conversation there with Maloney and
other prisoners; the coming up of the cart
party; the coming up of the other gangs; the
several complaints made to Mr. Price; the
threatening language to the officers; the
order that the prisoners should be taken on
board; their refusal to go; the flinging of the
first stones, and the rush down the slip on the
seaward side of the embankment. All these
circumstances were described as in the evi
dence of the same witness on the previous
trial.
The witness was now cross-examined at
great length by the present prisoners.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Smith:
When witness ran away he ran towards the
sentries. He received no blow, but several
stones flew about his head.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Kelly.
Remembers Kelly to have been subpoenaed in
Melville’s case,
Ho _ you remember saying to me I
was going to the court on Melville’s trial, and
there was no saying how soon I might be
going there on my own account?—or any-
thing to the effect that you were disposed to
get me into difflculties ?
Witness; No.
Did I not often say that Wilson and
Hyland were combined to keep me from my
liberty?
You often said so to me.
Wilson accused me of breaking a spade. I
said I had broken it accidentally. Did I not
charge Wilson with perjury in the enquiry
that arose out of that ?
You did.
When I wanted to explain that the spade
had been broken accidentally, you would not
listen to ms, nut ordered me on board at
once ?
_ I ordered you on board because ycu were
violent and excited, and I feared you were
going to strike Wilson with the spade.
Do you not work men to the carts in heavy
irons?
No. I will not absolutely say we never
work men at the carts with heavy irons; but
we do not, except in cases of great urgency ;
and then not in the heaviest irons. We may
have worked some occasionally in 18 lb. irons;
but that would be when the men in light
irons, whom we usually work at the carts,
were invalided, and we had to put them to
the lighter work, usually assigned to men in
heavy irons. There may at this time be
about a dozen men in heavy irons at the
Success. When you complained to the Inspec-
tor- General you laid great stress on your having
had three days solitary, and, if I do not
mistake, I told the Inspector you had been
better-behaved lately.
Did not the Inspector-General say to me,
“ it is your temper keeps you here;”
and “ Kelly, I don’t mind your gas,” meaning
he did not mind what I might say?
Witness: I do not recollect that.
Will you swear that the words you say I
us ,d (“ You b y tyrant, your race will soon
be run”) were used to the Inspector General?
Whatever words I used, were they not used to
Wilson, saying to him when I was refused my
liberty, “ Tou are to be blamed for this ?”
You spoke, I think, to the Inspector-Gene
ral. Your face was towards the Inspector-
General.
Did you see me near the place where this
sad affair took place ?
I did not see you after you were speaking
with the inspector until after the affair was
over


How far was it from where I spoke to the
Inspector to the place where the affray oc-
curred ?
Seventy or eighty yards.
Did I not say to you when you were running
away, “ Mr. Holies, I hope the words I used
just now will not be taken advantage of.
Ifou see I have nothing to do with this
matter ?
When you were coming on board the boats
with the first party, you aked me to observe
that you were going voluntarily; and you
said you hoped your words would not be
taken advantage of.
(The prisoner earnestly insisted that he
had used this expression to the witness when
witness was running away upon the first
rush of the prisoners upon the officers, but
witness said if the prisoner had said so at
that time he (witness) did not h«ar him.)
Cross-examined by the prisoner Richard
Jones; Did you not hear this complaint made
to the Inspector-General that dSy—“ We wish
to know why one ounce of our bread is stopped
every day ?
Witness : I heard no such complaint.
Prisoner: Well, I wish it to be heard now
\\ hat is our ration of bread ?
Witness: 1 lb.
How much do we get ?
Witness: About fifteen ozs is weighed to
you.
To the Court: The ration is 1 lb. In divi-
ding the bread some of it crumbles, and the
weight does not stand. The weight is gene-
rally about 16£ ozs., and the crumbs we put
in the men’s soup.
Witness, in answer to the prisoner: I did,
I think, hear Bryant complain that day about
the soap, that a part of the soap was used
for washing down the decks, being withdrawn
from the men’s allowance. I did not hear a
complaint made that there were sixteen
buckets of fresh wa;er used in washing down
the decks, and the men obliged to wash
themselves in salt water.
Is it not the case ?
Witness: We wash the decks with fresh
water in order to keep yourselves dry. If we
washed them with salt water they would
not dry. The men get fresh water to wash
with on Sundays. On week days they go to
work on shore,and they wash in the freshwater
that gathers in the quarries.
His Honor to the prisoner; You will re-
member that we are not now trying the
truth of these grievances, but whether Mr,
Price was murdered, and by whom.
Prisoner: I want to show the Court that
our complaints were real.
His Honor: It is for that purpose I have
admittedjgo much.
Witness to the prisoner: The prisoners are
allowed two suics of slop clothes yearly, and
one pair of trousers extra. They are not
allowed to keep two of any garment at a time.
When the clothes need to be washed they are
taken away for that purpose, and are then in
the custody of the chief warder, until they are
served out again in exchange for other clothes
taken away. When the rush on Mr. Price
took place I ran away. Ido not know what
became of the other officers. I did not see any
one strike Mr, Price. I saw nothing but the
rush.
Cross-examined by the prisoner William
Jones: Has been six years in this colony. Be-
fore that time lived in Van Diemen’s Land.
Was a Government officer at Bridgewater.
Are you a married man ?
Yes.
Were you at Campbeltown ?
Yes.
Did your wife leave you there?
I decline to answer.
How are men searched when they come
on board?
They are stripped naked and then searched.
His Honor: Explain why they are stripped.
To prevent matters being secreted about
them, as tobacco.
Prisoner : Are men’s ears, noses, mouths,
and private parts searched ?
Yes.
Are they made to stoop ?
They are made to stoop that the officers
may see.
Prisoner : Is a man made to stoop as in
quest of nature, and then does the chief war-
den make an actual search?
I never saw it.
To his Honor: I have been in the penal
service for twenty years, and have seen thou-
sands of men searched, and I never saw the
examination pursued in that manner.
To the prisoner : You are a tradesman.
You were employed in the blacksmith’s shop,
I believe I did hear the Inspector-General say
to you. “ You would not be here if 1 had
known of it.” I believe he had known you as
a constable.
Do you remember my being brought up
befoie the magistrate for making com-
plaints?
You were often brought up for making
complaints.
Do you know James Dawson? When he
complained of the short weight of his bread,
do you remember throwing the bread upon
the ground, and saying you would see him
d—d before you got it weighed?
No.
When I had reset the coppers, what, work
was I put to ?
General labour.
On the 2nd of December, I was put on board
the hulk and placed in 50-lb. irons. I never
knew why. Tell me now?
You were placed in heavy irons for
security. *
To Mr. Sewell: It was apprehended he was
attempting to abscond.
Was I charged with absconding?
No.
And I was put in heavy irons, 50 lb. weight,
without any charge against me ?
They were not 50 lbs. weight.
Prisoner: I bsg pardon; they were 45 lbs.
weight without the rivets. I saw them
weighed myself.
Prisoner; Do you recollect my being


knocked down on the deck and brutally
abused, for asking why I was put in irons ?
No,
Do you remember my being put in No. 2
cell ?
No.
His Honor : Was he ever in that cell ?
Witness: I cannot say.
What are the dimensions of that cell ?
I'cannot say exactly. Perhaps five feet by
four.
Prisoner: Three feet six by three feet six, is
the most, your Honor.
Do you recollect my sending for the doctor
to complain of my being confined with filly
pounds weight of irons, and no tackling or
leather to keep the iron from my legs ?
I do not.
Prisoner : You do not recollect the doctor
being fetched to see me, and his ordering me
a shower bath ?
No.
I was only ordered it, but did not get it. .
Mr. Sewell asked his Honor did he not
consider this line of examination to be irrele
vant?
Prisoner: Ycur Honor we have been repre
sented as making pretended complaints, I
want to show to the Court and to the public
that these complaints were not groundless
Do you remember my complaining to the
Inspector-General of the treatment I was re
ceiving, and his opening his eye with h ; s
finger thus, (drawing bis eyelids asunder,) and
asking me, “Do you see anything green in
my eye ?”
No.
Prisoner : Is there a scratch in the books to
warrant my treatment?
Witness: What do you call your treat-
ment ?
Prisoner: Why being ironed and starved
without cause, that is what 1 call treatment,
ill-treatment, brutal treatment,
I was nine months in irons ?
You were a long time in irons.
We are allowed one pound of bread: is it
weighed out to us ?
15 ozs. are weighed out to you.
How is it that in eveiy other government
department they get the whole allowance,
but in the bulk Success we g*-t but 15 ozs. ?
It is the same in all the bulks.
It is not so at the Ga< 1. Does a 41b. loaf
lose 4 ozs. in cutting it in four parts? This is
not the story you told us. You told us that
the short weight was an allowance for the
draft ?
The loaf does not always weigh exactly
4 lbs.
When the sergeant gets my bread to weigh
it, and he comes back to say it is right, does
he tell me it weighs 1 lb., or that it weighed
15 ozs.?
He tells you 15£ ozs.
(The prisoner cross-examined the witmss
at equal length and with similar minuteness
as to the ration of soap )
When Taylor complained that morning
about his bread being taken from him, what
•answer did you give him ? Did you not twist
him by the shoulder and say, “Just you go
below; that is the best for you ”?
I put my hand upon his shoulder, and said,
“ Taylor, go below.”
The mouldy bread that was complained of
to Mr Price—you said in your direct examina-
tion that it had been issued three or four
days?
No I said it had not been issued that
morning.
What reason had you to know that it had
not been issued that morning ?
Because the bread issued that morning was
of quite a different character. It was new
and fresh. Phis was stale.
Did you see ail the bread issued that morn-
ing?
No,
Yet you swear that this bread had not been
issued, though you did not see what was
issued.
That bread had not been issued that day.
Were the sand carts that you described as
having been tilted up by the men upon the
tramway tilted up in the usual place?
Witness: They were tilted up in the place
where the sand was usually deposited, but it
was not u-ual that they should all be tilted
up at the same time. The embankment at
that point is about thirty feet wite. It is not
so wide through its whole _ length. That
width continues for about thirty or forty feet
of length. Oannot soy but there were some
stones obstructing it there. Ihe men formed
themselves in a half circle. I recollect the body
of the men coming up. Wilson endeavoured to
make them fall in. I and several other offi-
cers were standing close to Mr. Pxice at the
moment. The men were not all at the top
of the embankment. The gang extended
from the bottom of the slip to where
Mr, Price was standing. Mr. Hyland
was standing close to me. Did not
see Mr. Gale just then. He may have
been standing behind me, I was down, en-
deavouring to get the gang into line when
the throwing took place. I bad shifted down
a little lower from where Mr. Price stood, and
might be ten yards away fr.om him. Did not
see Mr. Wilson at the time. A little before
that Mr. Wilson had said that the men
would not be stopped coming up from their
work-
When the first dht was thrown did you
stand still or run away ?
I did not run at that moment.
I stopped till the rush took place,
which was not, perhaps, more than
half a minute. I ran down the road towards
the sentries. I followed the middle road. I
saw Mr, Hyland go before I did. I turned
round when I got to where the corporal,
Pierce, stood, about two hundred yards from
the tramway. The blacksmith’s shop may be
from seventy-five to one hundred yards from
the tramway. I swear that the water the
men have to wash with at the quarries is fresh
water, the drainage of the land. The so-xp is
served out twice a week, at the rate of about
2| drachms a day for each man. They are


allowed altogether about 3J ozs. per week for
washing clothing and personal purposes-
What becomes of the other two and a half
ounces ?
Disused for various purposes connected
with the prisoners, and some for the use of
the ship.
Then some of our soap is applied to the use
of the ship. Is any soap allowed by Govern-
ment for the use of the ship ? ..
No. The six ounces is supposed to answer
all requirements.
Do you recollect on the 27th the men re-
fusing their hominy ?
Yes.
And on Saturday likewise ?
Yes.
Five meals on Surday morning ?
Mr. Justice Barry, to the prisoner : You
have been allowed great latitude as to every
thing previous to the 26th, but I cannot see
how anything occurring after the 26th can be
of use to you.
Piisoner ; Will your Honor excuse me ?
but I have that in view which you
will see presently is calculated to serve us.
We have been accused of making groundless
complaints. I want to show the Court that
our complaints were not groundless.
His Honor explained the difference between
matters happening before the 26th and matters
taking place after the 26;h, adding, that he
regretted to be obliged to interrupt the pri-
soner in the course of examination be was
now pursuing, but the prisoner would him-
self see that the rule he was eniorfkig was
equally a rule of common sense as it was of
law.
The prisoner had no more questions to ask.
Dr. John Wilkins, Medical Officer at
Williamstown, was then examined for the
Crown. He described Mr. Price’s wounds as
in his evidence given at the trial of the last
prisoners.
Cross-examined by Kelly : Does not very
distinctly recollect Kelly on board the Presi-
dent. Does not recollect that on Kelly going
to him to get a tooth drawn he ordered him
on half rations until it was drawn, and left
him so for nine days. Knows the small box
in which prisoners are confined for solitary
confinement. Thinks it is three or four
feet square. Will not swear it is so much.
Does not think it is so small as twenty
inches square Does not believe he
ever told prisoner that a man in “ solitary”
had only an hour a week allowed for exercise.
When the President hulk w r as first established
the hours allowed for exercise to men con-
fined in “solitary” were fewer than now.
Did you not keep a man narmd Smith for
nineteen days on bread and water?
I had not the power to do so.
This was a man you wanted to operate on,
and he would not allow it ?
I never perform an operation on any man
against his will.
To the Court: When a man has to be
operaied on it is necessary' to put him on low
diet, to reduce the system, in order to prevent
inflammation and bad symptoms ensuing.
Cross-examined by Richard Jones.
The cross-examination by this prisoner re-
lated in the first instance to some occasion on
which he alleged that he complained to the
doctor of illness, and the doctor pur, him
upon half rations. The doctor explained,
that as the prisoner complained to him that
he was not able to eat his food, he thought he
had no occasion for it, and he directed it to
be stopped. The piisoner further examined
the doctor as to a man that he alleged had
been “ neddied” in the presencepf the doctor,
when the doctor, it was alleged, cried out, “ lay
on, lay on.” But the doctor swore it was all
false. He had been, he said, four years in at-
tendance on all the penal hulks, and he never
saw a blow struck on a prisoner all that
time.
The doctor explained to the Court that if a
man has been as long as thirty days in “soli-
tary” he is in the habit of stopping his meat
for one day after he comes out. This is
done to prevent dysentery, which is apt
to ensue if a prisoner eats meat immediately
after liberation from a long solitary confine-
roent. On one occasion a man had oeen
brought up to him to complain of his meat
having been slopped under such circum-
stances. He (the Doctor) explained to him
why it had been done. The man immediately
struck him a blow upon his left eye with such
force that he having shrunk aside to avoid it
the man feil prostrate on the deck.
He had a small cane in his hand,
and he struck the man several blows
with it. One of the officers who was present
also struck him, as he began to fight with his
Lands and feet.
Cross examined by William Jones : My at-
tendances in the hulk Svccess average two
visits in three days throughout the year,
my regular visits being every second day.
Prisoner : I am now about to take you back
to January 1856. Do you recollect being
brought to me at that time when I complained
that I could not take exercise with Gl) lbs. of
irons on my legs ? Did you not order me a
shower-bath ?
Positively I did not.
Do you remember keeping me seventeen
days on half rations ?
If 1 did you must have been sick, but I do
not remember it.
And I having only complained that I could
not take exercise with fifty pounds of irons?
Witness: I never saw heavier than thirty-
six pound irons on board the ship.
Dave there not been complaints about
meat cropped by you for several days, and
nothing aiven in lieu of it?
Ob, I know there are complaints of it, but
I am the best judge of whether it should be
done. 1 have never stopped any ratidns for
punishment, never except for medical pur-
poses.
To the Court: When a man comes out
from a long solitary confinement his stomach
cannot bear meat, and the consequence of
taking it is dysentery. 1 have had several
thousand cases of dysentery, but never a fatal
one, which I attribute to my being able to


exert a judicious control over the rations.
Even when the meat is stopped the rations
which still remain are too much for a weak
stomach after “solitary.”
f!! Captain Blatchford was then examined for
the Crown. His evidence was to the same
effect ason the last occasion. Themost material
part of his direct evidence was perhaps that
portion of it in which he described Mr. Price’s
conversation with Kelly (one of the prisoners
at the bar), and Kelly’s remarkable words,
which have been so much alluded to in the
course of this and the late trial. The witness
said Kelly applied to Mr. Price, and asked
him, “Am I to have my indulgence, my
ticket of leave?” Mr. Price inquired as to the
cause of some punishment which stood against
him. Kelly said it was because he bad
left his work to assist a stonecutter. Mr.
Price asked Wilson was it so. Wilson said
No, Kelly had left his work and gone to the
Success tent, and was found there with another
prisoner and a pen and ink in the tent, but
Wilson would not swear that he (Kelly) had
been using it. Mr. Price said, then he
could not grant him any indulgence. Kelly
doubled up his fist and said, “You b y
wretches, b y tyrants, your race is nearly
done!’’—using the plural number.
After his direct examination, which went
into great detail, Captain Blatchford was
cross-examined at considerable length by the
prisoners.
Cross examined by the prisoner Smith :
Does not remember to have seen Smith speak
to Mr. Price at all. First saw Smith on the
tramway. When the rush took place witness
was leaning on the tail of one of the go carts,
so near to Mr. Price that he could have
touched him. Did not see Mr. Price struck
at all, nor any one take hold of him. He
only saw the rush, when witness ran away.
Before he arrived at the sentries he made
a turn and saw that chief war-
der Hyland had cleared the mob on
the embankment. He had made a
pouse and was raising his hands
as in the act of throwing a stone. Witness
did not make any delay after he had reached
the sentries. Returned at once to the quarry,
and saw Mr. Price’s body being borne along
the tramway. This was not above five
minutes after the first rush. When the rush
took place there might have been fifty or
sixty men on the embankment. Does not
think all the gang were there. Thinks some
remained in the quarry.) There was no mob
collected when Kelly spoke to Mr. Price.
The men were working but were very
slack. When witness said in his direct
examination that Kelly fell back into
the body of prisoners, he meant back
among the men who were workis g.
Gross examined by Kelly : Remembers
Kelly on board the President. Has often seen
him there in solitary confinement. Ihe box
as it is called, is about the square ol this (the
witness-box, about three feet or three feet six).
A man can stand up in it. One cannot lie
down in it. It was not intended to lie down
in, or to piss the night in it. Prisoners are
kept there from the time they are
“roused” in the morning until the silence
bell is rang at night. That may be according
to the season, twelve or fourteen hours.
After the third or fourth day’s confinement a
man gets an hour a day of exercise on deck.
Do you recollect my being nine days and
nine nights in that box, when you first
came?
I do not recollect it.
Do you recollect Mr. Hyland dragging me
out and striking me ?
I cannot recollect it. I did not see it.
Do you recollect my being chained to the
ringbolt?
I recollect your being very insubordinate,
refusing every legitimate order, and you very
often deserved the ringbolt.
That is your sympathy, Sir, for your fellow-
man. Have you ever known a man brought
before the justice for having a speck of white-
wash on his clothing?
I do not recollect any such case. Men
might he punished for wantonly rubbing off
the whitewash.
Have you ever known a man brought up
for speaking about his rations, the complaint
being construed into insolence?
Not unless the complaint was frivolous and
groundless.
When I was going away from yon and Mr.
Price, how far was Mr. Wilson from rre? Did
I apply the words I used to Mr. Wilson or to
Mr. Price? Were not these the words I used :
—“ This.” meaning Wilson, “is the wretch or
the I blame for all.”
I did not hear the words you
now use at all ; but the words
you did use, and what I have
sworn to, you may have applied to Mr. Price
or to Mr. Price and all the officers, or I cannot
say that you did not use them to Wilson, as
you allege.
(Mr. Justice Barry read the words from the
direct examination. They were “You
b—ry wretches, you b y tyrants, your
race is run.” The words were in the plural
number.)
To Richard Jones: The blow received by
witness struck olf his hat; When he sprang
away he passed through two or three men.
When you jumped upon the corner of the
sand did not a man say to you “ get out of
the way as soon as you can,” and when you
came back, and got your hat from the man
who handed it to you, did you not say you
would remember him and also the man who
had bid you to get out of the way.
Witness; 1 did not then make any such
remark. I did say I wished I knew who hit
me the cowardly blow I had received and I
would remember him.
[The prisoner then cross-examined Cap-
tain Blatchford at considerable length re-
minding him of circumstances that might
might recall to his mind the words)of warning
which he alleged that he had given to him.
Captain Blatchford could not remember the
words being used to him, nor did he believe
that they had been used ; but the movements
of Captain Blatchford described by Williams


—some of them now recalled to his memory
for the first time—seemed to tally so well with
what Captain Blatchford himself remembered
as at to raise a strong presumption that Wil-
liams had been looking at all Captain Blatch-
ford’s movements, and consequently could not
have joined in the rush after Price, which
took place down the opposite side of the
embankment from that on which Cap-
tain Blatchford had escaped. These cir-
cumstances were elicited in a long
and rambling examination. The prisoner
who appeared to be a very uninstructed man,
was materially aided in putting his questions,
and letting this favourable ray in upon his
case by Mr. Justice Barry ]
Cross-examined by the prisoner William
Jones: Has known Mr. Price since 1845.
Knew him in Norfolk Island. Remembers a
a visit of the Bishop of Tasmania to Norfolk
Island. Mr- Price left Norfolk Island on leave
of absence on half-pay- Witness left Norfolk
Island at the same time. Witness lived some
months in this colony with Mr. Price. Ap
plied for the first situation as chief warden
that became vacant, and obtained it. When a
prisoner first comes to the hulks he is
searched. For that purpose he is stripped,
and all his parts looked at, his mouth, nose,
ears, and.’ other parts. He is made to stoop
down for the latter purpose. Was appointed
chief-warder of the President. Filled that
situation to June 1856. The ration of a man
on work is 1 lb, of meat, 1 lb. of bread, 1 lb. of
potatoes, 8 ozs. of meal, \ oz. of sugar.
Prisoner: Allow me to correct you, 1 oz.
Witness: Yes, 1 oz. of sugar, £ oz, of salt,
and \ oz. of soap. There is no soup given but
what the meat is boiled in. There is a pint
of that given. On board the Lysander the
weight of the bread runs generally 15J ozs. to
nearly 16 ozs. It is impossible that there
should not be some loss on a detailed issue.
Williams: Are the prisoners at the loss of
that ?
I suppose they must be, when there is no
per centage allowed. _ , .
Have you ever known a prisoner for asking
to have his rations weighed brought up as
for a groundless complaint ?
I do not remember it.
*To the Court: Ido not remember any case
of a man requiring his rations to be weighed,
and being punished when they turned out
correct.
His Honor: Is it a ground of complaint l
Witness : It is not.
Jones : How much soap does a prisoner re-
ceive to wash himself with ?
His allowance is two ounces three times a
week, but a portion of this is applied to other
purposes, as washing slops,_ washing flannels,
shaving, cleaning the ship, and other pur-
poses. . .
You admit part of the ration of soap is used
for cleaning the ship?
It is done on board the LyMnaer , and 1
have no doubt it is done on board all the
ships.
On the day of Mr. Price’s death, I came on
the works about three o’clock I went straight
up the tramway with Mr. Price. We left the
tramway while we passed into the
Success quarry, when Mr, Price began to
speak with the men. We returned to the
tram again. Ido not remember that we
passed off the tram a second time. I cannot
remember who first addressed Mr. Price when
he went to the sand heap. When Mr._ Price
first addressed t ussell he was standingin the
quarry near the stone bunkers, to the right of
the tent. Russell was a prisoner of the
Crown with Mr. Price at Norfolk Island.
Since I have had charge of the gang Russell
has been superintending the stone-dressers.
Do not know that Russell is an absentee
from Van Dieman’s Land, but have heard he is.
After talking to Russell, Mr. Price and I went
up the railroad. We passed the first slip, and
proceeded to where the sand was deposited.
The inland incline is about twenty yards from
that spot. A complaint was made about soap.
The men drawing the carts came up after Mr.
Price had got to the sand heap. They took
the carts along the tramway and tilted them
up nearly, but not exactly in a line on the
quarry side of the tram. They remained on
the quarry side of the tramway as they were
tilted up. There is not much space on each
side of the tramway. The carts passed up
and were tilted one after the other, and they
remained there. The men fell in by their
carts. Saw several lots of men dribble up from
the other gangs. Did not see the overseer
with them. Do not know whether the over-
seer was with them or not, but heard some
one say the men were coming up without
orders —that “ they would come up.” After
the men came up the officers were pretty
close together on the tramway. Cannot
say exactly how they stood. The men were
on the quarry side of the tramway,
very few on the seaward side of the tramway.
Do not recollect John Jones addressing Mr.
Price. He may have done so. You may have
spoken to him, but I do not recollect your
speaking to him. Do not recollect you or
Jones addressing him. I was within a few
yards of Mr. Pi ice, Mr. Hollis was probably
the nearest officer to Mr. Price. I stood with
my back partly turned to Mr. Price, speaking
to men on my left. When the rush took
place, I did see threats used to Mr. Price, vio-
lent language~of all sorts, “b y wretches,
b y tyrants,” the usual language
made use of on such occasions,
I remember the complaint about mouldy
bread and the bad rations. The bread did
not seem to me have been issued that morn-
ing. It seemed to be three or four days’ old,
it was so stale and dry and mouldy. I have
never known mouldy bread served out to pri-
soners. I have seen prisoners complain of it,
but never saw it proved to have been served
out.
Jones: Where did they get this mouldy
bread then ?
Witness: Saved their rations, and then
made a complaint out of the mouldy rations.
When I jumped the wall I did not sing out
to any one. _ . .
Jones; I have it hear (reading from Captain


Blachford’s'depositions.) “ I leaped the wall
at the same time, hailing Mr. Crawford,
the Inspector of Police, to get his force out”?
I hailed them when I came near them.
The first sentries were a couple of hundred
yards off the tramway.
Jones: I think if you measured it, you
would* find it two hundred yards to the back
of the quarry ?
When 1 leaped the wall I ran across
the quarry leaving the blacksmith’s shop
on my left. I came to the line of sen-
tries. took a pistol from the Serjeant, and im-
mediately turned back toward the quarry,
I did not cross the quarry again nor go nearer
to the tramway at that point than one hun-
dred yards. Some man carried me my hat
quite across the quarry. I did not at that
time notice any one on the stage. I c died
out for some one to bring me my hat, I did
not look up the line, but down the line to-
wards the man.
Jones; But you dropped your hat above,
and when you called for your hat you would
look in the direction in which you lost it ?
Attorney General to the prisoner : Do not
argue with the witness, put questions, argue
hy-and bye when you address the jury.
Witness : When I got my hat I returned to
the line of sentries and taen passed along
their line toward the lower part of the tram-
way.
Jones; Have there been any complaints of
late on board the Lysander as to provisions?
Yes. There have been complaints.
Mr. Justice Barry: Was this man, the
prisoner at the bar, on board the Ly sander?
Witness: No.
Mr. Justice Barry: I put the question be-
case if he was not, I do not see the propriety
of this line of examination.
Jones: The object of my question is this,
to shew that there have been general com-
plaints throughout the hulks about the pro-
visions.
Mr. Sewell: It shows that there has
been communication between the prisoners
in the various hulks.
Mr. Justice Barry: Just so, and may there-
fore damage the prisoners’ case.
Jones: I want to show that the complaints
made by us were not groundless. The com-
plaints were general. However, I will not
press it _
Cross examined a second time by Richard
Jones: Prisoners are not allowed to keep two
shirts or two pair of trousers at a time.
Jones : Is a man then responsible for a
shirt, a coat, or a pair of trousers that is not
in bis possession ?
Attorney General; Ido not see the bearing
of this qu< stion.
Mr. Justice Barry • I see the bearing. The
prisoners want to show that their insubordi-
nation was directed against the officers not
against the Inspector General.
Jones: lam making a remark Sir, about
the clothing. There will be clothing brought
against us here —
Mi. Justice Barry; These are observations
on the evidence. Reserve them for your ad-
dress to the jury. Do you wish to ask any
other questions?
Jones: No other.
The Court adjourned till ten o’clock on
Thursday morning, having sat until nearly
seven o’clock.
Thursday, 16 th April , 1857.
(Before his Honor Mr. Justice Barry.)
THE MURDER OF MR. PRICE.
His Honor Mr. Justice Barry took his seat
upon the Bench at ten o’clock.
The trial of the prisoners John Williams ,
Henry Smith , (No. 1.222) James Kelly, Richard
Jones, and William Jones, adjourned from yes-
terday, was resumed.
Captain Blatchford was recalled and again
cross-examined by the piisoner Kelly;—
You swore yesterday that I used the words
“b y wretches, b y tyrants.” You
swear in your deposition now before that I
said “ b y wretch, b y tyrant,” as if to
Mr. Price alone.
Mr. Justice Barry: Was it singular or
plural? His Honor then read his notes of
Captain Blatchford’s evidence, in which the
words appeared as plural, and addressed to
all the officers.
Captain Blatchford : Both might have been
used.
To Richard Jones: Saw no man on the
stage. If any man had been there, and
witness had looked in that direction, must
have seen him.
Mr. Justice Barry : Before you go I wish to
ask you a question as to the mode of exa-
mining or searching the prisoners. Is that
conducted in a manner unnecessarily to
off-nd decency?
Witness: The mode of examining the pri-
soners used at the hulks is necessary for the
security of prisoners, and is not conducted in
a manner to outrage decency. It is necessary
to see whether files or small instruments are
introduced about the privates or other parts.
In two years’ experience in Victoria I have
known no instances in which instruments
were found so concealed, but I have known
several instances in Norfolk Island of small
files or watch springs being tied about the
privates, or concealed in other parts. _ It is
not an unnecessary precaution. I believe it
is practised in the English gaols, and in prac-
tising it here there is no unnecessary offence
to decency.
Thomas Hyland, chief warder on board
the hulk Success, was then called- He de-
scribed the taking of the bread from Taylor.
Having a double allowance of bread is con-
trary to the prison regulations. W tuess
went on shore about three o’clock, in conse-
quence of a message sent on board for scales
and weights. When witness came on shore
a man named Roche was speaking to Mr,
Price. Roche said to him, “ VVhich are we
allowed, 15 or 16 ozs. of bread?” To which
Mr. Price answered, ”15 ozs.” Cannot say
what reply Roche made. A man


named Jones afterwards complained about
soap. (The witness then described the
several complaints made to the inspector, as
have already appeared in his evidence given
in the former trial). The prisoner at the bar,
William Jones, was speaking to Mr, Price.
He lifted up his hand and said, “ The fact of
is we won’t serve under these officers,” and
the cry was taken up along the line. Saw
the prisoner Richard Jones there too. Then
some clods were thrown afterwards the rush
upon Mr. Price took place In that rush witness
could distinguish four persons as having laid
hold upon Mr. Price —Thomas Maloney, con-
victed at the last trial; Daniel Donovan, not
yet tried ; and two of the prisoners now at
the bar, Richard Jones and William Jones.
Twenty or thirty men rushed at Mr.
Price and pursued him. About twenty
pursued witness along the tramway.
Mr. Price was in the act of rising when
witness saw him struck with a spade on the
back of the head, by one of the prisom-rs
convicted at the last trial. Is quite sure the
two Jones’ now at the bar joined in the rush-
His eye followed them for a few paces, and
then'they were lost in the crowd. The pri-
soner, William Jones, was in irons when he
left the ship, and witness saw him in irons on
the works that day. Remembers him coming
on board the ship, about a quarter after five
o’clock. He was not ironed when he came on
board. Neither of the prisoners Jones were
ironed when they came on board. Went on
shore again about seven o’clock in the evening.
(Witness here described the finding of John
King and Christopher Farrell, as has already
appeared in his former evidence.)
Cross-examined by John Williams: I did
not see you in the rush.
The Attorney-General: He does not swear
anything against you.
Mr. Justice Barry, to the prisoner John
Williams : The witness has said nothing to
implicate you.
Williams: Yes, but I went to clear myself.
Williams then preceded to examine the wit-
ness. *
Witness to prisoner: A jacket of yours
was shown to me with blood on it.
Williams: Was not the blood on the inside?
Did you not give a man named Murphy some
caustic to burn out a ringworm?
Witness : Yes, I remember 1 did.
The jacket was here sent for.
Prisoner: You say you remember giving
Murphy the caustic?—l do.
Prisoner, exposing his arm, which was a
good deal marked and seamed: I tried the
experiment to see whether the caustic would
take the marks out of my arm, and there it
is. It burned deeply. It drew blood, and I
wiped the blood on the inside of the jacket.
The jacket was here produced, and the
blood was seen where the prisoner indicated,
insi le on the back.
Mr. Justice Bany; Is there much blood.
Witness: Not much blood, Sir; but it was
fresh when I saw it.
Examined by the prisoner Henry Smith :
After the prisoners came up I did not see that
any were standing down the slope towards
the quany. Saw a stone thrown, which
hit Mr. Price on the back while
he was running down the slip. The
stone made him stagger toward the embank-
ment.
Prisoner : The stone was thrown, if at all,
from the tramway. If so it should have
felled him outward not inward upon the
embankment.
/ he prisoner was proceeding to argue upon
this, when his Honor bid him to reserve any
reasoning upon the matter for his obser-
vations to the j ury.
Witness ; I do not particularly recollect
seeing you in the rush. I saw a jacket and a
shirt of yours at the coroner’s inquest. I
will not be positive as to seeing a jumper.
You came on board deficient of your jacket,
shirt, and jumper.
[The clothes were here brought into Court,
and the shirt handed to the prisoner ]
Witness : I stated at the coroner’s inquest
that I saw blood on the shirt. The blood
was on the inside of the front of it.
Prisoner (having examined the shirt).
I know that shirt by a mark upon it. It is
the shirt I wore that day, but I see no blood
upon it, Mr. Hyland.
Witness directed prisoner’s attention to
what he considered a blood mark,
Prisoner: What is on the inside of the back,
if it be blood. Let the jury see it, and say if
it is blood.
Hyland: There is a piece torn off the tail
of it, and there was blood on the part that
was tom off, your Honor.
His Honor : How do you know there was
blood upon it?
I can prove it. your Honor.
His Honor: You should state what you
know, and not stste inferences.
(The jacket was now produced.)
Witness : There is a stain on the inside of
the sleeve. The mark is very indistinct, but
it has been analysed, and discovered to be
blood.
His Honor; Is the person who analysed it
in Cou 1 1 ?
Witness ; Net now, but he will be produced.
A pair of braces were next produced.
Witness (in answer to the prisoner): These
braces were found near your clothes. They
are not marked. The prisoners’ braces are
not marked.
Two of the prisoners: We can show the
braces now upon us matked.
Witness : Borne braces are marked—not all.
I cannot swear that these belong to pri-
soner.
A set of irons were next produced, but wit-
ness could not say who they belonged to.
They were found near the prisoner’s clothes.
Prisoner: Have you any reason to believe
that this unfortunate affair was premedi-
tated ?
His Honor warned the piisoner against
asking this question, as placing him in the
power of any opinion that the witness might
form.


Prisoner: Do you remember my asking you
to let me see the magistrate?
Yes.
Did I see him ?
No. I told the magistrate when he came,
but when he did come he had not time.
Did I tell you I had neither shirt, jumper,
nor jacket?
Yes.
Did’you not tell me they were lost?
No. I told you I had not got them.
Do you remember when we were brought
on deck to have our hair cut after the 26th?
Yes.
How were we brought up ?
You were handcuffed with your hands be-
hind your back. There were five men on
deck guarding. It was necessary to iron you
so lest you should seize the scissors from the
barber and stick him with it. You may have
been brought up next day without irons to
be shaved, but I do not consider a razor to
be as dangerous a weapon as a scissors, I
know I could defend myself against a man with
a razor. I could not against a man with a
scissors.
Prisoner: I mention this, your Honor, to
show the system that iscarried on of irri-
tating the minds of the prisoners.
Witness: It is necessary for your security.
I recollect your receiving ten days’ solitary
for insubordination, about four months before
Mr. Price’s murder. It was on the order of
the magistrate. I remember your requesting
to see the magistrate about the matter when
you came out; and he said in accordance
an observation that he had made at the trial
that the offence was rather disobedience of
orders than insubordination. He therefore
altered the offence inscribed on your character
board, from insubordination to disobedience
of orders. You were on the doctor’s list for
sore eyes at one time, while on the Success, but
you were not invalided- Invalided means being
put off work or sent to light work in conse-
quence of illness.
Prisoner: Oh, there is no light work on
board the Success.
Mr. Justice Barry: What kind of work do
you call light work ?
Witness: We call stonebreaking light work.
His Honour: Stonebreaking? Then what
quantity of stones will a prisoner break in
the day ? . ,
Witness: Perhaps not a quarter of a yard.
All the stonebreaking done by the prisoners
does not average half a yard a day for each
man. , . #J ,
His Honour: How does that compare with
ordinary labourers’ work.
Witness: Arailwayman will break as much
as three yards in a day.
To the prisoner Kelly : You were on board
the Success when 1 came there. You were in
solitary confinement. I know constable
Bowden. If I heard you whistling I would
certainly bring you before the visiting jus-
tices, though I do not remember that I ever
did bring you up for that. I have not brought
a man up before the magistrate for having a
bit of whitewash onhiselbow, but have brought
men up for having wilfully or carelessly
rubbed the whitewash off their cells. I have
brought prisoners up for having a needle and
thread. It is againstthe Government regula-
tions. I do not recollect bringing any man
up for having in his cell some of a former
ration of salt. I recollect going to your cell
on one occasion with Corporal Flynn, Captain
Blatchford, and Mr. Price, when I was in the
PTeszdcnt,
Did Captain Blachford say to you, “ Go
over to that fellow and see what he has to
say.” Was this said as a make-believe that
you were going to hear my complaint? And
did Coporal Flynn then drag me out ? and did
you neddyme with your life-protector?
No; I never struck a prisoner, nor saw a
prisoner struck while I was there.
Did you handcuff me to my irons ?
I may have done that, but I do not remem-
ber it.
What are the dimensions of the little-box
in which I was then confined ?
It is about the same as this witness-box.
This is probably two feet six inches square.
The solitary cell you speak of is two feet by
two feet six.
Do you recollect my being kept in that box
for nine days and nine nights without any
exercise.
I do not.
Mr. Justice Barry: Is it the case.
No, your Honor, it is not the case.
To the prisoner; I have known you _de •
prived of “the usual "privilege of walking
for half-an-hour in the passage below after
coming out of “ solitary,” but I have not
known of your being sent back for the night
to the solitary cell. At that time, when I
was on board the President, the order of the
medical officer was that prisoners undergoing
solitary confinement should have one hour’s
exercise, above deck, every fourth or fifth
day. I have not heard it ever stated by any
of the officers that a prisoner in solitary was
only entitled to an hour a week. The regu-
lations as to solitary are that a
man is not to receive more than
a month’s solitary at a time,
and that when sentenced to three months’
solitary, he must get it in periods of a month,
and with intervals of not less than a month.
I never knew a man receive more than thirty
one days at a time.
Prisoner: Mark that, gentlemen, I will
show by the books that I have done thirty-
seven days, beginning with the 27th of Feb-
ruary, 1856.
Witness: If I was afraid of a prisoner
as a man likely to _ assault me,
I would carry a life preserver
with me, but I never did strike a man on
board the President. I cannot say what you
were sent to the President for. I recollect the
Melville affair. I recollect the refractory sea-
man Turner being drowned. 1 recollect your
accusing me to the magistrate of not making
proper exertion to save him. I saw Turner
In the water, and saw a prisoner named John-
son strike him with an oar. You were sub-
poenaed on Meb illo’s trial. I recollect


after you came back observing that your hair
was long. When I see a man’s hair long I
commonly ask him how long a time he has
to You told me the sheriff had given
you liberty to have your hair, and you had
your hair ; I did not take it off. You were
expecting your indulgence on the ‘26th, that
is before you were brought before the Magis-
trate and sentenced to solitary. You were
expecting to get your indulgence on the 26th.
I cannot say that you were at that time
twelve months out of trouble nor nine
months. The books will show. Your of-
fence was being away from your appointed
place of labour. A man named James Flem-
ing was brought up on the same day for hav-
ing a sharpened piece of iron in his posses-
sion, He was admonished. He was a long-
term man.
Prisoner; Yet I for a less offence got three
days’ solitary because I was near my indul-
gence.
The Attorney-General: This was the de-
cision of Mr. Pascoe. the magistrate, not of
any officer of the ship.
The prisoner was proceeding to examine
the witness as to other men wbo he alleged
had been punished with solitary for trivial
offences at a time when the period of their
“ indulgence” was drawing near, and who
were thus deprived of their expected liberty,
when
Mr. Justice Barry interrupted him ; these
were not acts of the officers; they were the sen-
tences of the magistrates.
Prisoner: Your Honor, 1 am accused of an
expression to Mr. Price, of which I am inno-
cent, though I did use violent expressions to
the officers. lam on trial for my life for these
expressions, and I want to show what we
mean by such expressions.
Witness : I remember you coming on board
voluntarily on the evening of the murder.
These who came on board voluntarily were
not placed in irons. Those who at first re-
fused to come were. You were not placed
in irons until the day after. You
had been out of irons for three or four
months previously, I did not observe any
marks of blood on your clothes. I got your
hair cut. I had no special orders to do so. I
did not cut it before because your period of
indulgence was approaching, besides that
you told me the Sheriff allowed you your hair,
it is my duty to see that a man has his hair
for two months before his time of indulgence,
and although you got the three days solitary,
I left your hair, as you hoped to be able to
satisfy the Inspector, and get him to look
over your offence.
Cross examined by the prisoner, Richard
Jones: I observed your trousers torn as you
were on the works. Ido remember ordering
Locker (/Donnell to have your trousers
mended a few days after Mr. Price’s death,
but I cannot say whether they were mended.
A prisoner is not allowed to have any second
article of clothing. He is examined every
evening to see that he has no second article,
nothing but the clothes on him. A prisoner
is allowed nothing but “ what he stands up-
right in.” When slops are with the washer-
man they are on the ground upon the works.
It was.quite posible for you on that day to
throw off your slops if there was blood on
them and take other slops from the heap. I
knewi; you for about eighteen months,
or two years, under my charge in the hulks
I never brought you before the magistrate
during that time- You charged me before
(he magistrate on the 26th of December last,
for beating a man named O’Brien, who was
brought before the Visiting Justice for
assaulting me.
Mr. Justice Barry to the witness; Explain
that matter.
Witness: It is the duty of the warders to
go round to the several cells at a stated hour
in the evening, to knock at the door, and as-
certain by the prisoner’s answering that he is
there. I knocked at the door of O’Brien’s
cell, and he did not answer. I then opened
the door, and he flung his pouchee bag in my
face and told me to be off. I reported the
circumstance to the Chief Warder, and he
directed me as O’Brien had been sentenced
to three days’ solitary, to put him into soli-
tary at once. I went to his cell, and when I
opened the door he flung the head of his tub
at me. It did not hit me, but it deeply in-
dented an oak stancheon behind me. _ As I
was afterwards putting him into “solitary”
he endeavoured to bite my nose off, and in
self-defence I struck him with my life-pro-
tector, and the prisoners all sung out “ mur-
der,” that I was murdering the man. This
happened on board the Success.
The prisoner proceeded to cross-examine
the witness as to the opportunities of re-
ligious instruction afforded to the prisoners.
Witness, to the prisoner: You were one of a
party whom I brought to the gaol when the
President sprung a leak. I do remember that
you expressed a wish to see a clergyman. I
did not say that you could not see a clergy-
man, as there was none there paid for attend-
ing you. I said I would speak to the clergy-
man.
Did I ever see a clergyman while I was
there ?
No, you did not. I spoke about the matter
to Mr. Price, and he was afraid to biing the
prisoners into the corridor to attend prayeis.
He did not think it safe. He feared lor the
security of the prisoners.
What opportunity have we on board the
hulks for hearing the Word of God?
The clergyman visits you, and you have
religious instruction every Sunday.
Plow often does the clergyman attend?
Twice a-week.
How many can he see in one day ?
He visits one cell. A cell contains at most
four prisoners. There are eighty on board
the ship.
How long would it take to go round all in
the ship at that rate ?
Ten weeks.
What is the religious instruction ?
On every Sunday a Bible and a prayer bork
is put into each cell—two prayer books, if
there be two in the ceil of different religions


the player hooks being the prayer books of
the creed of each, also a reading book, which
is changed each week. The reading book is
from the general library of the ship. The
library contains sixty or seventy volumes in
use. There are several volumes of Chambers’
Edinburgh Journal, and several tales. A dic-
tionary and a slate are also put into the cell.
The religious instructor reads to the men each
Sunday.
Prisoner; Well, I have been some months
on board the ship, and it has never come to
my turn to hear the Word of God yet.
Prisoner then proceeded to cross-examine
witness as to the occurrences of the 26th of
March.
Witness to the prisoner: I heard only two
complaints made to Mr. Price—yours and
"Roche’s —before the cart party came up.
When you made your complaint about the soap
there were only abouttwelve men immediately
near Mr. Price. You belonged generally to the
quarry party. There were one or two carts
up when I came upon the ground. There were
several officers with the Inspector General.
I saw the rush. There was a great yell. I
distinguished you as one ot the lour men who
took hold of Mr. Price. A stone had been
thrown immediately before. Twenty or thirty
men pursued me. After I had run about twelve
yards I stood, took up a stone, and threw it
at a man who was standing over Mr. Price.
I then continued to run towards the light
house. In about eight minutes afterwards I
returned hack. It was from twenty minutes
to half an hour after the rush before I
saw the body of Mr. Price _ carried
up to the railway. I did not
see Captain Blackford until I saw him where
he met the body, somewhere near the ceme-
tery. I saw the men knocking off their irons
in the Success quarry ; about thirty-one men
altogether knocked their irons off that day.
No men returned voluntarily in the first boat
who had their irons wholly off. Cooper, who
had his irons partially off returned in it- I
do not say that the whole twenty-five men
were in pursuit of me for the first twelve
yards I ran; but after I threw the stone, they
rushed in pursuit of me. At the com-
mencement most of the men’s attention
was directed towards Mr. Price. Some of the
men who ran after me wereout of irons. Men
cannot run fast in irons—about half as fast as
ordinary men. There were thirty six men
out of irons, forty-six men in irons._ The
chain of the irons is about two feet six inches
long, and allows the man that length of a
step. (A pair of irons was produced in Court,
and witness corrected his estimate to two
feet.)
The prisoner here cross-examined at great
length to show the he (the prisoner) having
been, Jn irons, and therefore only able
to run one step for another man’s two,
it was not possible for him to be one
of the first in a general rush of men,
ironed and unironed, upon Mr. Price.
Witness explained that the Inspector-
General stood within about three yards of the
prisoner.
Prisoner: But how'far did he run from
that spot before he was seized ?
Witness: Five or six yards more.
Prisoner: That makes nine or ten yards
in all. Could an ironed man overtake him
over that distance?
Witness; He had received a stone before he
was seized. When seized, he stopped and dis-
engaged himself from the men, and ran
again.
Cross-examined by the prisoner William
Jones: I have been on board the Success, as
chief warder, since the 21st of June last. You
were then confined on board in irons, I think
they were second-class irons- 14-lb. irons.
There are no 50 lb irons on board. The
heaviest are 36 lbs. The irons I put upon
you alter you attempted to abscond were 36-lb.
irons. I know a man of the nameof MTntyre.
He got ninety days solitary for assaulting
the superintendent. MTntyre had 36-lb.
irons on him. Do not" know the
nature of the assault committed by MTntyre.
He was tried by two magistrates for it. Was
not present when the assault was made, I was
on the top deck. When I came down in the
lower deck, Mr. Holies, the superintendent,
told me MTntyre had struck him with his
quart pot on the head. He did not tell me,
shaking his neddy, that be had given it to
him well about the body, but feared to strike
him about the head least he should kill the
d— d rascal.
Mr. Justice Barry : It is not fair to Holle
not to have asked him about this when he
was in the box, that he might be able to give
his account and explanation of it.
Witness: After the affair was over, the man
began to be insubordinate in his cell: he kept
kicking the sides of it. I handcuffed him at
six o’clock, and he remained handcuffed until
eight o’clock, I then went in and said,“Come,
MTntyre, do not be foolish. Will you be
quiet, and I will take your handcuffs off.”
He gave me no answer. I took them off,
and he was quiet. He was removed some
time afterwards to the President. The
occasion of his being removed to
the President was, that I discovered a tnb-
hoop coiled up into the shape of a handled
dagger concealed in his cell. He had con-
trived to get the hoop off the tub, and to
bend and shape it into this form. It was
three or four thicknesses of the hoop-iron.
When I found it he exclaimed that I had
“sprung the plant,” and said he had intended
to stab the superintendent with it. It was
secreted in the port. The cells are searched
three times eveiy day, but it seems the ser-
geant neglected his duty on this occasion. I
brought the sergeant before the Inspector of
Hulks, Captain Blatchford for this neglect.
There was no other place than the port where
a man could have secreted this instrument,
for it was doubled up as I have said three or
four thicknesses.
How can you call that a secret place ? The
port is no more than an open window.
The Attorney-General to the prisoner: It
was there, and you must take the witness s
answer.


Witness to the prisoner; I know a man
named Henry Young, and knew how he gut
into trouble, and got ninety-four days’ soli-
tary. It was for assaulting the sergeant
and assaulting me. Though sentenced
to ninety-four days’ he could only do a week
at a time without interval. He assaulted me
because I showed his tub to the Doctor at the
Doctor’s request, and he was put upon an al-
lowance of arrowroot.
The Attorney-General here handed up to
the Court the Act of Council defining the
powers of punishment given to the Visiting
Witness to the Court: These acts are all
read to the prisoners.
Mr. Justice Barry; Is this read to the
prisoneis ? (reading a clause making it felony
for a prisoner to attempt to escape, and giv-
ing the Visiting Justices summary powers for
punishing).
Witness; It is read.'
Prisoner to the witness; How came (he
medical officer to send for the man’s tub? He
did not complain?
Witness. He did complain, and
then refused to take the diet ordered by the
medical officer. The medical officer then
required to see his tub that he might
satisfy himself whether _he was suf-
fering under the complaint he alleged.
Remembers getting John O’Brien some days’
solitary for making unnecessary noise in his
cell, shaking his irons, and again when I
knocked at his cell, and he did not answer.
[Witness here detailed the same circum-
stances as to O’Brien that he had already
stated in reply to the further prisoner who
last cross-examined him; and in reply_ to a
question from the present cross-examining
prisoner, said :]
I did not in any way aggravate the man. I
was particularly civil to him.
Prisoner; Have you or have you not ever
told Locker Green or Hugh Casey, warders, to
listen at my cell-door, and if 1 opened my
lips to have me up ?
I nevt r set any warders to spy.
Theie are sixty five bocks in use in the
hulk library, and each volume is shifted each
week. Have not the best books in the library
been selected for the use of the warders, and
kept by them?
The warders have a library of their own
and they aie not allowed to have any of the
prisoners’ library books in their possession.
Do you remember my complaining a day or
two before this occurrence that I could thrust
my fist through the soles of my shoes, and I
working in irons?
No.
Do you not remember saying to Mr. Holies
This would not have occurred if you had
issued their boots to the men ?”
No. It was not my duty to see to the issue
of the slips. I did make objection on one
occasion to the doctor seeing the sick aftei
the night muster. The night muster
is about seven o’clock, but I did, not
withstanding, allow him to see two men
who were complaining. _ There were
no men seriously ill at the time. The men
under medical treatment get whatever the
medical officer orders. If a prisoner remains
on board from his work as sick, he is placed
upon half rations until he sees the medical
officer, and when the medical officer sees
him he can place him on any class of ra-
dons he thinks fit. There have been a
good many complaints lately, both respect-
ing rations and other matters. The men
have complained lately about the weight of
their bread. You get 15| ounces now.
Previously you got 15 ounces, and the crumbs
were put upon the soup : now there are little
or no crumbs for the soup. The bread is re-
ceived by the storekeeper; he is present
when it is cut up, and all the crumbs are put
upon the soup. I am always present when
the bread is served out. I never saw any
mouldy bread served out. Ido not remember
your requesting your bread to be weighed on
the 24th of March (two days before Mr. Price’s
murder). If you bad requested it the ser-
geant would take it up to have it weighed.
You were present yourself. Do you know
of an order of the Inspector-General that the
men should be themselves permitted to see
their bread weighed ?
No, I am not aware of such an order.
There were some weighings of bread in
presence of the men, but l am not aware that
the order proceeded from any higher
authority than the superintendent.
Are you aware of the 1-lb weight being
2 ozs. short ?
No, it was not short. There are
not new weights now in the hulk.
The same weights are still there
that have always been used. The scales and
weights used at the hulks are issued by the
Colonial Government. The bread and meat
are cut up in the presence of a prisoner
selected out of the gang of the Success hulk,
and not out of any other ship. The
man Dixon, the store labourer (before
whom the food is weighed) was brought
from the Lysander , but since he has
come to the Success he is a prisoner there
like yourselves. There are three shirts a
year drawn for each of the prisoners.
When I came to the bnlk you received
four: one has been reduced since my arrival,
but you still got one more than the regulation.
Fresh water is used every day for washing the
decks— top and bottom deck. It would not do
to use salt water to wash the lower deck for
your own sakes : you would not be dry. The
prisoners get fresh water three times a week
to wash themselves: fourteen or fifteen
buckets are emptied into a trough for that
purpose. The other four mornings salt water
is given. Once a week fresh water
is given for washing the feet. I never
heard that you were without soap to wash
your feet. The inferior officers look after
these things. .
Prisoner: Yes, and the answer I received
from one of them was, “ There is plenty of
sand there and a scrubbing-brush: we want
the soap to wash the ship.
Witness: The allowance of soap is § an
ounce a day per man. It is not cut up into
hall-ounces, as no prisoners would be allowed to


keep his soap, but it is cut into larger lumps,
and as the men wash the lump of soap is passed
from man to man. I issue to the lockers out
of the “two-ounce allowance” two pounds a
week of soap for each deck, the upper and
lower: that is four pounds a week in all. The
cells require to be washed with soap, other
wise they would get filled with fleas. As re-
gards the distribution, the object is to make
the most of it for tne piisoners themselves.
The washermen get soap for washing the
duck trousers.
To the Court: Every time these men com-
plained of their rations, the complaint was
investigated by the magistrate and the medical
officer, and in no case was it ever found
justified. The water you wash in on shore is
mostly fresh water. —How comes it that it
fills up at every tide?
Mr, Justice Barry to the witness: In fact it
is brackish
It is brackish, your Honor.
Witness to the prisoner : By an order of
the Inspector-General no man is permitted to
have more than one day’s rations.
Is that order read to the men ?
No; it is not one of the regulations
founded on Acts of Council, or orders
of his Excellency which, relate to
matters of main importance. These are read
to the men. This was not a regulation of
that character. On the 26th I was accom-
panied on shore by Mr, Gale, and a prisoner
named Taylor. When I came to where Mr.
Price stood Roche was making a complaint
about the weight of the bread, and wanted to
know whether it should he 15 or 16 ozs, He
did not complain about the quality. Did not
complain'about its being mouldy. This was
at the sand heap. The next that I heard
complain was Richard Jones. This was before
the men came out of the quarry. You were
not on the ground the time. When Richard
Jones complained, there might be eight
or a dozen men present. Jones’ complaint
was backed up by a man named Bryant.
The next that came on the ground were the
quarry party, who marched up in twos, headed
by you. You were ironed with second class
irons, or 14 lb. irons. I did not see Mr. Wilson
next you when you were coming up. I know
he was not at your head, nor at your right
front when you were marching up. Mr. Price
asked who ma ched up these men here,
addressing, I think, the Supenntendent.
The men fell in themselves. John Jones was
the first man who then spoke. I did not hear
you making a complaint. What I saw was
you standing with your right hand raised up,
and exclaiming that “ the fact of the matter
was you would not serve under such officers.”
I did not hear you complain to him of me
and Mr. Hollis. You were within three yards
of Mr. Price at the time. I was within two
yards. You were rather on the right of him
as you stood in the ranks opposite me. Mai-
looy was the man nearest Mr. Price
You were the next man to Mallony.
[The prisoner here cross-examined the wit-
ness at great length, and with great minute-
ness as to the position of the several promi-
nent persons, including himself; the charac-
ter of the ground; and the relative distance
of the principal points. To fix the latter,the
map withdrawn by the Crown counsel on the
first day of the trial was now put in, and a
surveyor examined ]
In answer to the latter question of the pri-
soner’s cross-examination, witness said : I was
standing clear of the railroad to seaward of
the rails. The gang did not form round us so
as to cut off retreat. They did form a curve
on the Sacramento side. When the first
stones were thrown, they were thrown from
the back rank. The men were three or four
deep. You were in the front rank. You were
almost opposite to me, with Maloney upon
your left. You stood opposite to Mr. Price,
and about two paces to the left of him. There
was only one stone thrown, to my knowledge,
previous to your laying hold of Mr. Price.
None of the prisoners laid hold of me.
Cross Examined a second time by the
prisoner Henry Smith : I recolle'ct an occasion
in February on which the Mayor of Wil-
liamstown and Dr. Wilkins were on the works.
The men had refused to work on account of
the meat, but the Superintendent, Mr. Hollis,
is the proper person to tell anything about
that.
Mr. Hollis having been sent for, he was ex-
amined by the prisoner Smith: I remember
an occasion in the month of February last,
when the Mayor of Williamstown (Mr.
Mason) and Doctor Wilkins visited the works.
They examined the men’s rations. The men
had refused their dinner when sent to them.
The rations were not condemned. Cannot
repeat what the Mayor said. I did not hear
him say he would not give his dog such
meat.
To Mr. Sewell: The rations given to the
men are generally very good.
To the prisoner Richard Jones : There was
one mess of potatoes of which the Mayor said
that all the bad potatoes there were seemed to
bavegotinto that mess. He also said that one
mess of meat was worse than the others
that it seemed to be the neck of the beef.
Prisoner: Did I not say I could not eat it,
it was so hard: ana did not he say it was
hard.
Yes. He did say, “ well, that is hard.” He
stated that you were entitled to rations such
ns the Government had contracted for. It was
in consequence of the wish of the gang ex-
pressed that day the Inspector-General al-
lowed the men to name a delegate to look after
the rations.
To the prisoner Kelly: Prom the tent
where I parted you, to the quarries was about
thirty five yards ; to the sand heap seventy-
five or one hundred yards.
To Mr. Sewell: fl’he prison rations on board
the Success are considered much better than
in any of the other penal establishments.
Mr. Justice Barry: How is it that your
rations are better than in any other estab-
lishment ?
Witness: I really cant say your honor.
We have always had a very good cook.
At six o’clock the Court adjourned to ten
o’clock on Friday morning.


Friday, April 17th. 1867.
(Before His Honor Mr. Justice Barry.)
THE MURDER OF MR, PRICE.
Mr. Justice Barry took his seat upon the
bench at ten o’clock.
The prisoners, .Fhn Williams , Henry Smith,
James Kelly, Richard Jones, and William Jones',
were again placed in the dock and their trial
resumed.
The prisoner William Jones addressing the
Court said, there was one material witness
the Inspector of Police, Mr. Crawford, whom
it would be necessary for the prisoners to ex-
amine.
Mr. Justice Barry: Give his name to the
sheri If, he shall be sent for.
James Hendry, Overseer of the hulk Success,
was then sworn and examined on behalf of
the Crown. He said: I remember Thursday,
the 26th of March. I remember the ar-
rival of Mr. Price upon the ground,
Mr. Price stopped to speak with the men that
were wheeling the sand on the embankment.
At this time I was close by the cart party,
and 300 yards from him. The men of the
cart party became very uneasy to speak to
him. They said “Let us all go up to him,
there is no use in going to him by twos and
threes. The overseer ought to fall us all in
together that we may make our complaints
in a body.” Shortly after this all dropped
theircarfs and stopped working. There were
thirty-four men of the Success gang altogether
on that side, the seaward side of the tram-
way. All the rest were on the quarry side.
I told them to go on with the work, I would
go to Mr. Price and tell him that they wanted
to see him. Mr. Price was at that time
moving along the tramway towards the
Sacramento quarry. As I went up to see Mr.
Price the men followed with their carts to the
place where they usually drop the sand, on
the top of the embankment. Mr. Price was
then speaking to a man named Bryant.
There are two slips there, one on the land
side leading down to the quarries, the other
on the seaward side leading down to
the sea. While Mr. Price was stand-
ing speaking the carts came up
in a line, one cart after another
in front of Mr. Price. Mr Price was standing
on the seaward side of the rails. The carts
came up along the seaward slip, crossed the
rails and drew the carts to the land side
of the rails. The men did not drop the sand,
but stood to their carts. The prisoners at the
bar, John Williams, and Richard Jones, were
employed with these carts, but not at the
same cart. A prisoner named John Barnes
said to Mr. Price “Are you going to do
nothing for us ? There are lots of men here
whose time is out, and who ought to have
their liberty, and you know that well enough.
The men do not get their proper quantity
of rations. The scales are not true.” Mr.
Price answered “ Well, Barnes, I will take
you on board, we will there try the scales.
If they are not true they shall be put to
rights. If they arc true you shall be punished
for making a false statement.” While Barnes
was speaking, I observed a large namber of
men coming up on the land side of the em-
bankment. I saw the prisoner at the
bar, William Jones, in the front rank
of them. I ordered them to halt. They
came up in front of Mr. Price and
joined the cart party. Many complaints
were then made. There were three or
four persons speaking together. I observed
Malloney (lately convicted) and Henry Smith
(1791), both speaking in a very excited man-
ner. There was some prisoner in front of Mr.
Price complaining about the soap. Mr.
Price sent for an allowance of soap. He also
sent for the washerman to see whether he
was allowed soap to wash the slops
with. Shortly after this there were
some lumps of clay or stones thrown
from the rear. I saw two lumps strike
Mr. Price, one on the face, the other on the
hat. Mr. Price threw up both hands, one to
his face, and one to his hat. He turned round,
took some steps towards the slip that leads
down in the direction of the sea. There was
then a general rush, and a dreadful yell
among the prisoners. I then got upon the
stage that was used for laying cut stone upon.
This stage is about 2£ feet high. I saw
Mr. Price pursued by the prisoners, among
whom I saw John Williams, Henry Smith,
Richard Jones, and William Jones, three
of whom are now at the bar. About the
middle of the slip I saw Malloney
strike him on the back of the head
with a shovel. Mr. Price fell upon his
knees at that time. He recoveied his
feet, and was hustled down to the foot of the
slip, I then saw Thomas Williams (lately
convicted) strike him on the back of the
head with a shovel. This felled him, and he
was then kicked and dragged along the level
ground. The prisoners now at thfe bar, Wil-
liams, Smith, and Richard and William
Jones, were all in the rush. I also saw the
fifth of these prisoners—Kelly—among the
crowd; but I can’t say that I saw him strike.
I was standing on the stage all this time,
which was about thiee minutes. At the
same time I saw a party of prisoners who
had not gone down the slip throwing
stones in the direction of Mr. Price.
I saw no more of Mr. Price until I saw his
dead body. (A shovel was here produced in
Court). The shovel with which Mr. Price
was struck was such as that. Neither of the
prisoners at the bar had a shovel. After a few
minutes, a party of the prisoners who had
rushed down the slip began to come up again,
I then left the stage, jumped the wall, and
ran across the quarry on the land side. I
passed at the back of the blacksmith’s shop,
towards the sentries behind the quarry.
About twenty minutes after this 1 saw the
prisoner at the bar, John Williams, among a
body of other prisoners, in the quarry,
who were breaking their irons. I went to the
brink of the quarry, and said, “ Now, look
here, men, if you attempt to come up hero,
you are sure to be shot, every man of you.”
John Williams had then a pick-handle in his


hand, The sergeant of the guard was with
me, a little to my rear. He said. “ Now, re-
collect you have been cautioned.” Williams
replied to the sergeant, “ Someone is sure to
fall, and you stand a bad chance yourself.”
I do not recollect seeing any of the prisoners
at the bar again until I was going off to the
ship with the later boats at five o’clock
Williams went off in the boat
with me. He lifted my hat off my
head and said “you are not hurt Mr.
Hendry,” I said, “no I did not receive a
scratch.” He said “I am glad of it.” Jones
made some similar observation, and added
that I never did any man any harm. Smith
said “did you see Wilson how he ran and
sung out * mercy, mercy,’ before any one
touched him.” I had taken on board before
that, forty-five men who went on board vol-
untarily. The prisoner Kelly was among
them. The second draft was fifteen men.
The third which I was then taking on board
was sixteen men. I had no aims with
me that day. The overseers do not usually
carry arras It is considered dangerous
for overseers nrxing with the prisoners
to carry arms, as they might be rushed
by the men and the arms taken from them.
The same rule applies to all the officers.
The nearest sentries to the tramway were 200
or 300 yards distant. The sentries could not
command the spot where Mr. Price fell. The
embankment would intercept their view and
their fire. The duty of these sentries is to see
that the prisoners do not get outside the
lines, and each sentry has his own beat.
The witness was then cross-examined by the
prisoner William-:: I told Mr. Hollis that the
men wanted to speak to Mr. Price,_ but I did
not myself speak to Mr. Price- It is possible
that you may have been complaining to Mr.
Price about my taking you away from stone-
cu ting and putting you to the cart. You
had previously said that you would make
such a complaint The stones ran short, and
I put you to the cart work. It is to a certain
extent within the power of overseers to change
men. It is generally done on the instructions
of the Inspector, and in this case I had in-
structions to change to the carts all the men
except invalids and men in heavy irons.
Prisoner; I was complaining that some out
of irons were stone-cutting, and that 1, who
was in irons, was put to the carts.
When I ran down after Mr. Price, what did
Ido?
1 did not see you do anything. You seemed
inclined to get a hit at Mr. Price. You were
running about.
Might I not be endeavouring to get away
from the stones that were flying?
You were in danger of stones: but if you
w, re inclined to keep out of the way of stones
you would not have rushed down the slip.
There was no necessity for you to rush down
the slip. . . .
A man must run any way to get out
of the way cf a rush and of
stones. I could have thrown a stone
myself if I wanted to hurt Mr. Price. Hid you
see a stone in my hand ?
I saw nothing in your hand. Mr. Price
seemed to be running away from you, and
you to be in pursuit of him. I did not say
your hand was empty. I cannot say whether
it was or not, but I saw nothing in it % You
seemed desirous to get a hit at Mr. Price. I
distinguish you rather than some other men
because I know you longer and better than
them. I judged of your being anxious to hit
Mr, Price because your arms were going as if
you wanted to get at him, you being at the
time within six feet of him. You were among
a crowd of about thirty men. I knew them
all, but in the bustle had not been able to iden-
tify more than ien of them I have known you
three years. Your conduct generally has been
good, very good. For the last six mcn*hs you
have been a little disorderly in the ranks. I
never had occasion to bring you up before the
magistrate. I believe other officers had.
Was it not some of my fellow prisoners who
brought me up?
It might be.
I saw you breaking your irons in the
quarry. , ,
Was I not the first man who came up to
you when you came to the quarry to get the
first draft of men aboard?
I think Brannigan was the first. You
were with him. I said “ hold, do not come
farther.” I jumped off the railway on the
land side, but not until all was over.
Cross examined by the prisoner, Henry
Smith: I have been overseer about three
months. I remember when Mr. Mason, the
Mtyor of Williamstown, accompanied bv Dr.
Wilkins, examined the meat in February
last. The men complained of the meat and
the potatoes. The Mayor said that the meat
was rough and bad. He said that all the
worst part of it had got into one or two
messes, that it should be better for the future,
that it was not good. It was then suggested
that one man of the prisoners should be
kept on board as a delegate, to look after
the rations for them, and should come on
shoie with the cooked rations at dinner time.
The meat was not condemned by the Mayor.
The prisoners did not eat it. _ They took it
down afterwards and threw it into the sea.
The suggestion made on this occasion was
adopted, and there has been a delegate, so he
is called. The number of the man is taken
by rotation oft the roll (so we understood the
witness.) He is kept on board to look alter
the rations, and he comes on shore with them
at dinner time. The names of the men are
not on the roll, but their numbers. The men
are designated by their numbers.
Witness, in answer to the continued exami-
nation of the prisoner Smith: You were told
off to the excavation work on the ‘26th. When
I left the tramway, I had lost sight of
Captain Blatchford. I had seen hum
shortly before among a number of
men. He was knocked down. When
I jumped off the stage, or within a minute
of it, he had made his escape from the tram-
way. At the time Mr. Price sent for the
washerman all the cart parties were up.
When the men came on shore m the morn-


Ing they refused to wo*-k for a time. A man
named Brown said, “Do not go to work men,
we must send for some one who will do us
justice.” When it was proposed to send for
Mr. Price some, of the men said, ‘Do not
send for him, send for the magistrate.” Others
said “Do not send for him, he is of no use.
Send for the Mayor of Williamstown.” Ido
not remember that it was said of the magis-
trate “he will not do us justice;” but I
do remember the words “ he is of no use.”
When some sail send for the magistrate, and
some for the Mayor of Williamstown ; others
cried out we will not have either of them, we
will have the Inspector-General himself down.
Prisoner: Did you not hear Mr.Wilson,the
overseer, say there was no use in sending for
the Mayor of Williamstown, as we were living
on the water and out of his authority.
Witness: Yes, I think I did hear Wilson
say that.
Cross-examination continued ; Some of the
gang told us (the officers), that you had come
to the resolution to work until dinner-time,
and if Mr. Price or some one did not come to
see you get justice you would not go to work
after dinner. Yet you did go to work after
dinner, though Ms. Price had not arrived, and
you seemed quieter in your demeanor, and
that gave me the impression that you
had arrived at some fixed purpose.
As the men came up the tramway I
told them to halt. I saw all them.
I stood at the top of the ship and saw all the
men come up. They did not come up with
picks or pick handles- I was with three or
lour yards of Mr Price when the men were
conversing with him.
Did you here any man say to Mr. Price take
Hyland out of the ship we will not serve under
him?
1 heard some such thing.
Did you hear me call out “silence” before
the men spoke ?
I did not, but it might have been called
out.
When the man said “ take Hyland out of
the ship, we will not work under him.” Did
Mr. Price say “ That is it, is it?”
He probably did. It is very like an expres-
sion of his.
Did he then say anything about going on
board ?
He did, he said “ take them on board” or
words to that efftct.
Prisoner ; That instant ?
Witness : About that time he bid the men
be taken on board.
Prisoner : You know there was not an in-
stant of time, and that instant the rush was
made.
Prisoner; Were you not frightened when
the rush was made on Mr. Price ?
I was rather frightened. I was nearly
knocked down by the rush ol men.
Prisoner : You say you were frightened,
and yet you jumped up on the stage and
stood deliberately looking at what went on ?
I did not say deliberately.
Prisoner ; You stood there three or four
minutes. That was deliberately.
Prisoner : What was the first thing you did
after you got upon the stage ?
I saw when the Warder, Gleeson, was struck.
He was turned right around by the blow. He
was a little way down the slope when he
was struck. He then ran up the slip along
the tram and down the land side, into the
quarry.
Prisoner : You say you remember ten of
the men that were in that rush ?
Do you not usually carry a blacklead pencil
with you ?
Yes, I generally have one.
Have you not one now?
I have.
Had you one that day ?
Probably I had; yes, I remember I had.
Did you use it that day ?
I have just remembered that I did
use one that day to take down the
names of the men who fell in volun-
tarily to go on board with me. I did not take
down many names. I began to make a list
of the men who were going on board with me,
but I found I could not finish it.
Were you not confused at the time of the
rush ?
I dare say I was a little confused ; more so
than if nothing paiticular had been going on.
If I had not been confused I could disti. guish
and remember every man that was there.
Prisoner: Now be so good as to let us know
when did you take down the names of the
ten men you now identify as taking part in
the rush?
I never took them down at all.
Prisoner. You never took down the names?
The only names I took down were the
names of the fifteen prisoners included in
this indictment. I took them down after the
coroner’s inquest, and these ten are amongst
them.
What day was the coroner’s inquest?
I made the list late on Monday night.
Prisoner : And this happened on Thursday,
five days before. You have trusted your
memory very well if you meant to hang ten
men on your memory for five days. Your
memory must be very good. Can you identify
the three men you saw knock Captain Blatch-
f jrd down ?
I cannot now identify any of them.
Prisoner: Yet you pick tea out of the
middle of the thirty men tha rushed after
Mr. Price. Did you see ail th se men toge-
ther?
1 do not say I saw them all at any one
time, but I saw all of them at one moment or
another about Mr Price, as he was dragged
along. The men were, John Williams,
Thomas Williams, John Young, Richard
Jones, William Jones, Richard Bryant,
Thomas Mah.ney, William Henry Smith,
and Francis Brannigan.
Examination continued : I distinctly saw
Thomas Williams strike Mr. Price with the
shovel. The other nine were among the
crowd of men around him at that moment,
They were within ten feet of him. About
thirty in all were around him, that is chiefly


in rear of him; in fact, three sides of him,
scarcely any in front of him.
As Mr. Price ran down the slip did you see
any one lay hold of him ?
Yes, I saw two or three close by him. I
think they did lay hold of him. After Mr.
Price got clear of these men Mallony struck
him with the stone. I accompanied the sur-
veyor for some time the day he took the plan
of the works. I pointed out to him one of
the places where Mr. Price fell, the place
where I saw him fall. The irons you
wore that day were I think 14 lb. irons
I do not say that all the men that did not go
with me in the first draft refused to go. Some
of them did not give me a chance to ask
them. You were all flying about in all di-
rections. I asked all collectively, though not
each individually. I asked all collectively,
because you ought to bo all in the quarry
when I asked them.
Oh ! you asked them all there because they
ought to be ail there.
Do you remember Captain Blatchford being
on board the Sunday after the occurrence?
Ido not. Ido not remember the prisoner
MFee (now a witness for the Grown) being
brought on deck to see Captain Blackford, nor
Downey.
Prisoner : Now hold on till I jog your me-
mory again. Not on the Sunday after, but
the Sunday week after did you see a magis-
trate on board.
I saw Captain Crawford on board.
Prisoner: That is the man I mean. Did
you see M Sawley brought up to see him?
I did not. I believe Fee and Quinn, and
some other prisoners were taken ashore that
day.
Prisoner : Was there anything said to Mr
Price during the rush ?
I cannot say there was. There was a yell—
a howl like wild beasts.
Prisoner: Just so; that is the name you
have for us—“ wild beasts.” You speak of us
and treat us as wild beasts. W T e are not much
better, certainly. Did any of us strike you ?
No, nobody struck me.
Did you find any clothes on the works?
I did.
Did you find any belonging to me ?
No. , , ,
You say you saw Mr, Price s body conveyed
along the tramway. Were there any officers
with it ?
No.
N one but prisoners ?
None but prisoners. I was at that time
between the tramway and the sentries, and
about 100 yards from the ladder that crosses
the railway wall. As I saw the body from
there there was no officer with it. I remember
he had his irons off one leg. When I first
noticed you that day you were in the rush.
I will not say you had nothing in your hand,
but I did not see anything in your hand.
You were within four feet of Mr. Price when
I first saw you struggling in the crowd to get
at him.
Prisoner: You did not hear me speak ?
I did not hear you speak ; I thought yotl
were howling.
Howling! I will not ask you any more
questions; I only make it worse.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Kelly: I
did not see you at the occurrence. The blow
from Maloney felled Mr. Price to his knees.
Mr. Price was struck several times. He was
brought to the ground by the blow of the
shovel, and from Williams, and never re-
covered his feet afterward. I did not observe
you at all.
(The prisoner asked the jury to take notice
of this, as there was forthcoming evidence
against him, which he read from ths deposi-
tion of Quinn, one of the prisoners who was
to give evidence on the part of the Crown. It
described Kelly as standing over Mr. Trice’s
body, with a stone, dashing the stone in his
hand and saying, “ Take that you b y
tyrant.”
Witness, in answer to a question : I know
the prisoner Quinn, and it would be only
under certain circumstances that I would
have believed him on his oath.
To Mr. Sewell: I have no other reason for
doubting him than that he is a prisoner of the
Crown. The same reason would apply to all
of them. I never knew Quinn to be guilty of
falsehood or perjuring himself.
Prisoner: I hope your Honor will take
notice that Mr. Henry saw Mr. Price struck
with the shovel, [and that ho did not see
me there at all.
Prisoner to the Witness: Do you think it
possible that I, whose person you have known
for (hree years, could be there and you not see
me ?
You might have been there.
Prisoner: Did I not go on board volun*
tarily with you ? Did I not point out to you,
“there is my jacket and jumper on the stone
heap, Mr. Henry can Igo for it?”
Some one said that to me. Several said it
I told them all to go on board and their
clothes would be sent after tfcem.
To the Prisoner: 1 knew you on hoard the
President in Mr. Hyland’s time. You had 28-
lb. irons on. I knew you to be in solitary
confinement on board the President. I recol-
lect you being often in solitary there, but I do
not recollect you getting ten days for whist-
ling. I have never known a man get solitary
for having thread only in his possession ; he
would for a needle and thread.
Do you remember my getting fourteen days
solitary for bidding a man named Mitchell
good morning. These are tne heavy offences
that we get solitary for; and the solitary has
left me here to-day.
Witness did not remember this. Did you
see me dragged out of my cell on the Presi-
dent by Corporal Flynn, and struck hyHyland
with his truncheon?
Witness did not remember such an occur-
rence.
Prisoner: You were present. You had
your hand about my neck yourself. You
certainly did not hurt me.
Witness : I was not present if any such
thing occurred.


Prisoner: Mr. Hendry, think of it again.
Corporal Flynn dragged me out. I certainly
addressed some language to him that I ought
not to have done, I was struggling with
him. You got your arm round ray neck
yourself. I would not put such absurd ques-
tions to you if it were not true ?
Witness: I could have no objection to
explain it if I recollected it, but I do not
recollect a tittle of it. The circumstance
may have taken place, but if it did I was not
there.
To his Honor • I never saw a man struck
on board. I know there have been instances.
They were in self-defence. I myself never
saw any man struck on board, under any
circumstances.
£?o the prisoner: It is not true that I had
my hand about your neck when Hyland
struck you with a truncheon. I never saw
you struck with a truncheon by Hyland, or
by any man. The solitary box you were con-
fined in is about twenty-two inches one way,
by rather more than two feet the other way.
To his Honor; It is a place especially con-
structed for the purpose of punishment.
His Honor; I must say I can hardly see the
the importance of this examination. The
matter of it is in evidence already*
To the prisoner: When a man is punished
by he receives an hour’s exercise on
deck every five days. I do not recollect your
making complaint about being thirty-seven
days consecutively in solitary. _ Ido not re-
collect your speaking to the visiting magis-
trate about it, and his saying he would see
after it. Ido not know that when you after-
wards spoke to the officer to see the magis-
trate about it you were told to hold your
tongue, or you would be brought up if you
made any more of your bother about it.
Do you recollect my having a rash on my
skin after solitary, and complaining to the
doctor, and the doctor telling me I had
brought it on myself, and I might cure
myself?
Witness ; I do remember something of it.
To his Honor; I recollect the circumstance
of the prisoner having a rash on his skin after
‘ solitary,” but I do not recollect the doctor
using that expression.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Richard
Jones: I found a trousers belonging to you on
the works. There was a spot of blood on it.
The trousers was here called for and pro-
duced. A small piece appeared to have been
cut out of it. Witness explained that the
piece had been cut out and sent to the doctor
for analysis.
To the prisoner ; You were in the habit o
bathing every day among the stones, and
might thus have slightly scratched your skin.
This might account for that stain upon the
inside of your trousers. I remember when
the quarry men were brought to work that
morning. The overseer ordered the men to
full out of their ranks. They did not fall
out. Ido not remember that you and Kelly
fell out upon that order. There was a move
made, as if two or three were disposed to fall
out, and you may have been one of them.
After speaking to the men, and giving them
a second order, they did fall out. The course
is that, having fallen out, the men go away
and wash. They are allowed ten minutes to
wash. After they had fallen out Brown told
them not to work. They did not go to work
for an hour. They loitered about the ground.
The prisoner then proceeded to examine the
witness as to the occurrences at the said heap
what immediately preceded the rush upon
Mr. Price. Witness went for the washerman
Quinn. He expressed an unwillingness to
come up among those men as he was afraid
of them.
His Honor; Quinn’s opinion is no evidence
against the prisoners.
Witness to the prisoner: Quinn did come
up to the tramway following after me, but I
cannot say whether he spoke to Mr. Price.
As I came up the tramway on that occasion
I saw the quarrymen coming up. The two
siips are nearly opposite each other. The
stage runs quite across the embankment.
No one hit me or tried to hit me, but in the
rush they rubbed against me, and I was near
being trampled down.
The Court adjourned for ten minutes.
After a short adjournment the examination
of the witness by the prisoner Richard Jones
was resumed: The body of Mr. Price had not
been removed when I first saw Mr. Hyland.
Did not see any one take up Captain Blatch-
ford’s hat. Part of those men who rushed
after Mr. Price attacked the special warder. I
distinctly saw them, and have a pretty good
idea of who they w ire, but I cannot swear to
one of them. I will swear that sixteen men,
and not fifteen, went to the hulk under my
charge in the third draft. I think you were
in the boat, but will not swear. No one gave
me orders to tell the men that if they came
on the hill they would be fired upon, but I
thought they would when I saw them strik-
ing the irons off. I saw the body at Dr.
Wilkins on Saturday. I recollect saying that
the body seemed greatly changed, but cannot
say when I said so. When I went on board
that night I did not speak about
the Inspector-General, but I think
I heard some enquiries made by other persons
as to whether he was dead, and I heard the
prisoners making use of obscene expressions
about him being dead.
Further cross-examined by the prisoner
Kelly : I did not see Quinn come close up to
the men; he said, ‘ Do not bring me up
amqpgst these men, I am afraid of them.”
Cross-examined by William Jones: I was
never taken before the visiting Magistrate by
Mr. Hyland for neglect of duty. I recollect
M'lntyre being on board the Success, and
making an assault on Mr. Holies. I was not
present. I have been in office about'ten
months, but the assault you speak of was
before that time. I recollect a piece of iron-
hoop being found in MTntyre’s cell. You had
been about a fortnight working in the gang
at the time of the murder, your irons weigh-
ing 14-lbs. I saw Williams, (the prisoner in
the dock), present on the 26th March. He
said in reply to the caution given to them


against moving after breaking their irons,
“ Some of you stand a bad chance,” The men
went to work about half-past nine
o’clock on the morning in question. Mr.
Wilson went on board about nine o’clock.
I took eighty two or eighty three men on
that day. I will not swear which. I swore
in my depositions about eighty-one, which I
now confirm- Forty-five went voluntarily,
and sixteen in the third launch, but I did not
accompany the second launch, although I
am positive of the number sixteen that went
in ic—that made seventy-seven, including the
two men found concealed in the hole; the
other four went down with Mr. Price’s
body. Saw the fiist man ofthe Success gang
speak to Mr. Price where the barrows were on
the embankment. I saw a man speak to him
between the two heaps of rubble, but I do not
remember who it was. I vokruteered to the
men to go to speak to Mr. Price, provided
they would keep to their work, which they did.
The prisoner here examined the witness at
great length as to the relative positions of Mr.
Price, the other officers, and himself, during
the time that the complaints were being
made.
It had been usual on previous occasions
similar to those referred to, for all the priso-
ners to fall in a body, that the Inspector-
General might speak to them. On this occa-
sion they did not leave their carts, but re-
mained in bodies of five each. I
did not see Mr. Wilson with those men,
The retreat of toe officers was not cut off
by the position of the men when the first
move was made, but it was cut off imme-
diately afterwards. Ido n-ot think the men
observed where I went to. The men were
standing several men deep. The whole body
appeared to move forward, the front ranks
pressed on by the rear towards Mr.
Price. A man might have been rushed
a little way down the slope by the crowd, but
not very far. if he was not going of his own
free will, Mr. Price was about three feet from
the nearest man to him. The movement was
principally from the right and centre. The
mob went past me. Mr. Price went past me.
You know what the clothing of the pri-
soners is washed with. Is the duck clothing
washed with scan or with clay ?
The Attorney-General interfered to prevent
the line of examination now about to be
commenced, as only calculated to protract
time and keep the jury from their families.
He appealed to the Court whether had
not extended every reasonable indulgence to
the prisoners.
Mr. Justice Barry: Time is a secondary
consideration. The regularity of the proceed-
ings is the first. There has been great
latitude.
His Honor to the witness: Has Ibis man
made any complaints about the washing of
the clothing?
Prisoner; Your Honor, that is not the point
I want.
Mr. Justice Barry to the witness : Is it your
business to look after the washing of the
clothes?
Prisoner: Your Honor, my question will
take but a word —yes or no.
Mr. Justice Barry: Have you seen the
clothes washed with clay?
Witness; I have, sometimes with soap some-
times with clay.
Juror: Is it pipeclay ?
One of the prisoners: It is not pipeclay
but yellow clay from among the rocks there.
Witness to the juror: It is very much in the
nature of pipeclay.
Mr. Sewell: Are the clothes cleaned?
Witness; They are.
One of the Prisoners: They cannot be clean
washed with clay.
Witness to the Prisoner: I saw no prepara-
tions made for the assault.
Prisoner : I ass you, do you think there
was a preconcerted plan to murder Mr. Price?
Witness: Ido think there was.
His Honor to the Prisoner: You must not
be prejudiced by this answer though you have
drawn it out yourself. You should not be
prejudiced by any person’s mere opinion as
an inference from facts. The facts are the
prop-r evidence. The jury will not take this
into consideration.
Witness to Prisoner: I saw no attempt of
any prisoner to knock his irons off before the
assault. I saw no person have any hammer-
handle or pick-handle in his hand. If any
person had such, I think I would have
seen it.
Prisoner: Do you suppose that a man in
irons could have kept up with the men out of
irons that rushed Mr. Price that day ?
Yes, I think he could. They were not
getting on very fast, and I do think that a
man in irons could have kept up with them.
What were the heaviest irons in the works
that day ?
I believe there were 22-lb. irons. These
were the heaviest ?
Could a man in 22-lb. irons keep up with
them?
I think he could.
The cross-examination of the witness ended
here. The cross-examination by the last pri-
soner was very protracted, but as it went, for
the most part, over the same ground as that
already traversed by the other prisoners, we
have not thought it necessary to follow it
through at any length.
[lt was now seven o’clock.]
The Attorney-General asked bis Honor
whether he would wish to proceed further
that night.
His Honor was in the hands of the Attor-
ney-General and the jury.
The Attorney-General said they could
not hope to get through the exa-
mination and cross - examination of
another witness that night, seeing
the course of cross-examinaiion that was
being adopted by the prisoners. His learned
friend, Mr. Sewell, had called their attention
to a case in the State trials— Watson’s case—
which he now handed up to his Honor.
There was a strong opinion there expressed
by a learned Judge there that between the
examination-in-chief and the cross- exam ina-


tion of a witness there ought not to be any
interruption of time nor any comHiunication
by the witness with external parties. Under
these circumstances he thought it better to
adjourn now,
A juryman said the jury would be willing
to proceed in order to avoid any chance of
being locked up on Sunday.
The Attorney-General thought it would
not ha possible to proceed further to-
night. He said on the authority of the
same case (Watson’s) he would suggest
to His Honor one or two indulgences that
might be granted to the jury. They had
now been three days shut up, and during
that time knew nothing of what was
passing in the outside world. He would sug-
gest on the authority of Lord Ellehborough,
that the jury might be allowed to communi-
cate with any member of their family, or even
their clerks or servants, provided it were
done in the presence of a sworn officer of the
Court. Also, the jury might walk an hour
each day for exercise under due surveillance.
His Honor assented, and added
that another _ suggestion of Lord El-
len borough’s might also be adopted to sit
again at 9 o’clock to-morrow. His Honor
seemed also to contemplate a probable neces-
sity for sitting to twelve o’clock to-morrow
night.
Mr. Sewell said the Crown had five wit-
nesses still to examine, of whom three at
•least were as important as any yet produced;
and if the prisoners adopted the same course
of cross-examination, the evidence of these
witnesses might be equally protracted with
that of the witnesses already examined.
The Attorney-General; The Crown j could
close their case in two hours.
Mr. Sewell: The delay is caused by the
course adopted by the prisoners.
The prisoner Richard Jones wished to make
one remark to his Honor about that trousers.
He was confident he had not worn the
trousers since it had been washed
His Honor: My own individual opinion
was, the supposed mark of blood was so in-
significant that it ought not to have been
produced.
The Attorney General; That was also my
opinion, and the Crown did not produce
the trousers nor any of the clothes.
His Honor; No, they were called for by
prisoners themselves.
His Honor’s suggestion as to the Court sit-
ting again at nine o’clock to-day, fell to the
ground.
The Court was adjourned to ten o’clock on
Saturday.
Saturday , 18fA April, 1857.
(Before Mr. Justice Barry.)
THE MURDERERS OF MR. PRICE.
Mr. Justice Barry took his seat on the bench
at 10 o’clock. .
The prisoners John Williams, Henry Smith,
(T 222.) James Kelly, Richard Jones, and William
Jones were again put at the bar.
The Attorney General proceeded to call
further evidence for the crown.
James Wilson called and examined by the
Attorney General: I am the Overseer of the
hulk Success. On the day of this occurrence
I was sent on board for the scales. When I
came back Mr. Price had advanced to the cen-
tre of the quarry. He then spoke with Kelly,
one of the prisoners in the dock. Mr. Price
said to me, “ Was Kelly’s punishment in-
flicted for assisting another man at a stone ?”
I said, “No, there were no stones there con-
nected with his work. I suspected he was
writing, as I found a pen and ink with him.”
I found it in a barrow within the tent where
I came on Kelly absenting himself from his
work. It is against the regulations to have
writing materials. Mr. Price said to Kelly,
“Now, Kelly, you hear what the overseer
says: I can do nothing for you; go on with
your work.” Kelly then raised his hand and
shook it at Mr. Price in a threatening manner,
saying, “ Ah! you b y b r, your race is
run.” Mr. Price then said to me, “ Send him
on board a close prisoner.” I called Gleeson,
and went down towards Kelly, where he had
fallen back to his work. I said, “ Kelly,
you are ordered on board by the Inspector-
General.” He took up a stone, shook it at
me, and said, “Come and take me,youb y
old dog.” I then told Gleeson not to mind
him, and turned away, seeing that I could
not take him, in the excited state he was in,
without great risk. As I passed away he said,
“ Why don’t you go and look for some honest
employment, you old dog; we know you
from Sydney, but it is too late now.”
Prisoner: You forgot all this in your depo-
sitions.
Witness in continuation : During this time
Mr. Price had moved on to where the carts
used to deposit the sand. The carts had
moved up to the embankment The men
on the land side had ceased work, and gone
to their usual muster ground. I turned back
and “ failed ” them in in good order. Kelly
then spoke to me again, and said, “ You
old dog, I may thank you for this.” I said,
“ I have done you no wrong. I must do
my duty if you knock my head off.” Wil-
liam Jones, the prisoner now at the bar,
then said, “ You b—y old dog, you have sa-
crificed me too.” I left them, as I wanted
to speak to Mr. Price. They followed me
up. They came up in rather an irregular
manner (not regularly in twos), and in a hur-
ried excited way. I said “ Halt..’ They
pushed up without paying any attention,
and formed, facing Mr. Price.
(Here the witness, who appeared very weak
and exhausted from the effect of his wounds,
asked for a chair.)
Mr. Price turned round to me and said,
“ Who has ordered these men up ?” I said,
“ No one ; they have come of their own ac-
cord.” “ Oh, that is it, is it ?” he said ;
“ now look here, men ; the best thing you
can do is. to fall-in on the muster-ground,
and go on board ; I will there hear what you
have to say.” Then I heard many voices cry-
ing out “we will not go on board. That will


not do, we will not have such officers; we will
not have Hyland the b—y tyrant,” and some
expressions of that nature. I immediately
saw stones flying, and saw Mr. Price hurling
down the slip on the seaward side, and a mob
of men about him. I attempted to intercept
the mob, I was seized and thrown down. I
can identify Henry Smith, 1222, the man
who is already convicted, as the first man
that seized and struck me. This was off the
tramway on the slip about half-way down.
He struck me with his hand on the jaw, not
with his fist but with his hand holding a
stone in it. I got another blow on the side of
my head, I rose and was again thrown against
the bank, Thomas Williams one of the men
recently convicted stood over me with a stone in
his hand and struck me several blows saying
“ Come boys, let us settle him.” I soon after-
wards found myself at liberty, and got up
and ran. I cried out “mercy, Williams;
mercy, Williams.” I was next met by Richard
Bryant with a shovel. He struck me on the
top of the head, and the back of my hand,
which I had thrown up to guard my head. I
ran away about thirty yards towards the sea.
I stumbled over some cut stone and fell. I
put my hands up to my face and drew away
the blood. Looking back I saw a great many
prisoners in a mob together in the place I
had left, but I could not distinguish any indi-
vidual, my sight had become so dim. I iden-
tify two of the prisoners at the bar, William
Jones and Henry Smith, as having rushed
after Mr. Price.
The prisoner Williams declined to put any
questions to the witness.
Mr. Milner Stephen here informed the Court
that he had been instructed in behalf of the
prisoner, Henry Smith. He declined to put
any question to the witness.
Cross examined by the prisoner Kelly: I
do not identify more than two of the prison-
ers now at the bar. I did swear to John
Williams at the Coroner’s inquest, but I de-
cline to swear to Mm now. I was very weak
on that day. I now hesitate about him, and
will not swear to him when there is any
doubt on my mind.
The prisoner here handed in to his Honor
a pen and ink sketch of the ground, by which
he asked permission to examine the witness.
He examined him at considerable length as to
position and distances, but the whole result
of the examination was only to fix the dis-
tance from the place where Kelly had first
spoken with Mr. Price to the place where the
final rush was made as between thirty and
forty yards.
Cross examination continued When you
first began to speak to Mr. Price you were
very near him. The distance between
you differed as he was walking away. You
did not follow, but took _ perhaps a step
forward with your hand raised toward him.
Your were not dragged away. A hand might
have been laid on you, but I did not see it.
You backed to your usual place of work.
There were no persons there to my know-
ledge but the men who were at their
usual employment. There was no rush
nor crowd. I left you at the stones
where ydti were usually at work.
The day after you came out to work after
your solitary sentence, you asked me had I
any objection you should speak to me. I
said, “ What is it, Kelly ?” You said, “ N9W
this will deprive me of my liberty.” I said,
“ I cannot help it: your liberty has nothing
to do with me. I must do my duty.” You
said, could you not easily have it passed
over? The pieces of stone are there still.”
pointing to some pieces of stone near the tent.
There was no piece there a foot square.
Kenny, who had the sentence with
you, walked up and said it was all through
him you had got sentenced on the eve of your
liberty ; that, if any one was to blame, he was
to blame; that you were helping him to get
a stone from under the tent. I still continued
that I would do nothing in it, I said, if on
that day you had applied to me for a charac-
ter or recommendation, I might have spoken
for jmu, but I could not go back from
what I have said ; the thing was too plain,
as you knew very well that haying a pen and
ink in your possession was a serious offence in
itself. After you had fallen back from speak
ing to Mr. Price, I left you at your work, and
walked a little distance away. You after-
wards fell in with the rest of the men, and
went up with them to where Mr. Price stood.
I saw you go up there.
Prisoner: You did not state that in your
deposition. 1 will read from your deposition.
You say, “ Finding him in a furious state
and thinking my life was not safe, I
turned from him, and immediately afterwards
the rush took place,” It is clear from these
depositions that you then lost sight of me,
yet you say to-day that you afterwards saw
me go up to the tramway with the other
men.
Witness: The rush did take place soon af-
terwards, but before it took place I
tried to muster the men. You were among
them and went up with them.
The prisoner here called his Honor’s atten-
tion to the inconsistency between the wit-
ness’s evidence to-day and his depositions.
The deposition stated that the witness turned
away from him, the prisoner, and that imme-
diately afterwards the rush took place, but he
had stated to-day that he, the prisoner, had
abused him a second time before the rush took
place. . , ~
His Honor turned to his notes and said it
was so. but after perusing for some time the
depositions and bis notes of evidence, he ex-
plained the discrepancy, by observing that
the witness had given more particulars than
the deposition had done. He had spread out
matter that was only generally stated in the
deposition. His Honor said he mm t observe
that this was not a correct way of taking de-
positions. This deposition contained this ex-
pression : “ he held some conversation about
a magisterial sentence.” Now that was not a
proper way of taking depositions the conver-
sation should have been fully stated. He had
frequent occasion to observe that depositions
were very loosely and improperly drawn. De-


positions should carefully state particulars
and not inferences from particular.
The Attorney-General: Your Honor will
permit me to say that Wilson was very weak
on the day his deposition was taken.
His Honor : lam aware of that. I intend
my observations generally.
Prisoner to the witness : Didn’t you bring
me up for breaking a shovel about six months
ago? Did you not get me punished for break-
ing it wilfully, though it had been broken ac
cidentally ?
Witness: The facts were these: you had
been excavating stone, and I made some ob-
servations about planks lying about. There
was a shovel lying there, and in shifting the
planks, as I afterwards understood, the
shovel was broken I came round after
this had oc- curred and I saw the
broken shovel which had been dropped
from the bank into the quarry below. I asked
three prisoners who were working in the
quarry how it had been broken, and who
broke it. The said they knew nothing
about it. You came up and said “ I broke the
shovel.” “ Well,” I said. “ I must report you
to the superintendent.’ 1 I did report to the
superintendent Mr. Hollis that 1 suspected
you of breaking a shovel wilfully. He ordered
you to be reported to the magistrate. You
got very excited, you had part of the broken
shovel in your hand and you used some very
abusive language, and I thought you would
striKe the superintendent. I entered the
charge, not for wilfully breaking the shovel
but for suspicion of breaking it. You were
punished not for breaking it, but for the lan-
guage you used.
His Honor: The magistrate was content
with the explanation he gave as to the break-
ing of the shovel ?
Witness: Yes your Honor, and if he had
told me that he had thrown the planks
upon it I would have been content myself.
Cross-examination 'by Kelly continued: I
brought Henry Smith before the magistrate
about three months ago for insubordination.
He was convicted and punished. He got some
days solitary,. I charged him with insubor-
dination and refusal to work, and the magis-
trate said it was rather an act ol disobedience
of orders than insubordination. He had re-
fused to give up his tools and go on board,
which in presence of his fellow-prisoners was
a very serious act ol insubordination.
Mr. Justice Barry: Then he seems to have
been very leniently dealt with. He was dealt
with as for a minor offence instead of the
graver one.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Richard
Jones: I brought out eighty-one men from
the Success that morning. When we came on
shore Henry Hmith said he wanted to see the
magistrate or some person that would see jus-
tice done; that a man named Taylor had
been badly treated on board by the chief
warder Hyland, his bread having been taken
from him. Another of them said they should
send for the Mayor of Williamstown. Then
there was a general wish for Mr. Price. The
men refused to go to work. 1 told them to go
to their work; that I would go on board, and
do my best to have the Inspector-General
down by dinner-time. With that they went
to work, and worked on until Mr. Price came.
I said on that occasion to the men, “ Now,
will some of you come forward and tell
me what your complaint is?” Donovan step-
ped forward, and said that Taylor’s bread had
been taken ; that seemed to be the only dis-
tinct complaint, but all were exclaiming
against Mr. Hyland. I have often overheard
from the conversations of the men, that their
complaints were about long sentences; about
being put in irons ; about rations; and a good
deal about Mr. Hyland.
I remember that when the Mayor of Wil
liamstown examined the rations, he said to
the men you are entitled to such and such
rations, but you should make your complaint
through the proper channel. He spoke very
properly. The men did afterwards throw
away the food, but it had been knocked about
a good deal. I have seen you eat worse din-
ners than you had that day. The proposition
was made that day that the men should have
a delegate to look after their rations, and they
have had one ever since, There have been
numerous complaints about the provisions
within the last six months.
Mr. Justice Barry: Was there any material
difference in the quality of the rations
within the last few months ?
Witness: They were considerably better
than they had been before.
Mr. Justice Barry: Were they reasonably
good provisions ?
Witness; They were.
Mr. Justice Barry : Have you experience in
the quality of provisions ?
Witness: I have been several years in my
present situation, and I was previously 26
years in the army. I know the quality of the
rations usually supplied to soldiers, and the
rations supplied to these prisoners are better
than them; soldiers get two meals
a day ; these prisoners get three. The
contractors do sometimes need a little stirring
up, and we do look after them. The rations
supplied to those prisoners are better in
quality and greater in quantity than those
supplied to soldiers.
Gross examined by the prisoner William
Jones: I have not had any correspondence
with witnesses since the trial commenced. I
have seen newspapers, but have not read any
of the evidence. You had been out at work
some days before this sad affair occurred.
Not more than fourteen days, I believe. You
had heavier irons than the ordinary ones. I
recollect that on the 26th March the gangs
went to work at nine o’clock, and I went on
board about half past eight o’clock. When the
men requested to see some one the first name
mentioned was the magistrates name, and
then the Mayor of Williamstown. I said
they could not see the Mayor of Williams-
town, as he was only a magistrate within
tbe limits of the municipality. I recollect
you were at work in a quarry near the rail-
way. You came and asked what the
disturbance or grievance was about. I


addressed myself to Donovan, not to you.
I recollect you were confined about eighteen
months ago ; but I do not remember on the
27th December, 1855, charging you with idle-
ness after twenty-five days’ confinement. I
do recollect fetching several cart parties < be-
fore the magistrate for idleness. At the time
of the assault on Mr. Price I stood with my
back to the sea, on the left of the line of pri-
soners. The main rush appeared to be on Mr.
Price, but at first some went along the tram-
way a little distance towards Mr, Hyland.
The prisoners were in a very excited state.
When the men fell in, prior to the rush, I do
not recollect any one speaking to Mr. Price,
except Taylor. When I bad been thrown
down rather more than half way down the
slip I lost sight of Mr. Price. Thomas Wil-
liams, now under sentence of death, was the
man who struck me when I regained my feet.
When I ultimately got away my sight was so,
dim, from the flow of blood over my face I
could not distinguish anything excepting that
there were a good many men on the spot I
had left.
Thomas Quin, a prisoner of the Crown,
examined by the Attorney-General: On the
morning of the 26th March, a great body of
the men refused to go to work until they bad
seen a magistrate or the Inspector-General.
But the whole of them eventually agreed to
go to work until dinner time, when they
might see Mr. Price. The prisoners in the
dock were among those men. I saw Mr.
Price come in the afternoon between two
and three, while I was engaged in washing
the men’s slops near the tent. I saw thepriso
ner Kelly go up to Mr. Price who was standing
about five yards from me. Kelly said, “ 1 have
had three day’s solitary ; will that stop me
from having my ticket-of leave ?” I did not
hear the reply, but I saw that Kelly followed
Mr. Price up the tramway. I saw Kelly mo-
tioning with his arm, and he said, “ Here, are
you going to let me get my ticket-of-leave;
I’ve served my three years?” Mr. Price shoved
Kelly away.
To His Honor: I would not swear that Mr.
Price touched Kelly, but he put out his
hand.
Examination continued : Kelly said to Mr.
Price, “you tyrant, your race is run;” and then
fell back and said to Wilson, “ you b y old
dog, you’ve been the cause of all this ” 1 saw
some men from the quarries then come up on
the tramway. I went up towards Mr. Price,
and heard some men saying, “ We will
not work another hour under that tyrant.”
Ido not know whom they meant. They ap-
peared excited, and a body of men rushed
forward to where Mr. Price and the officers
were standing. The officers went away, and
Mr. Price was using both hands, as if de-
fending himself, and continually saying,
“ Fall back, hill back, men.” I did not see
any of the prisoners in the dock at that
time. I saw Charles Jones strike Mr. Price.
I then went away to a place of safety, but
where I could see what went on. I saw Mr.
Price with his hat off, and running, while
stones were thrown at him, and the men
followed in pursuit. Mr. Price fell first on
one knee and then on the other, until he fell
and rose no more. I saw Ohesley throw a
stone at Mr. Price from the tramway,
and then I saw Kelly strike Mr. Price
while he was down, standing over him
with a stone. He dashed it down,
and said, “ There jou b y wretch
I saw Thomas Williams strike Mr. Price
twice with a shovel while he was down;_ and
Brown dragged the shovel out of Williams’
hand, and struck Mr. Price three times with
it. I saw a man named Norton among the
mob of men, jumping up; but whether he
jumped upon Mr. Price 1 can’t say. I did
not see. . * ,
Prisoner John Williams was about to ask
questions, but was informed that witness had
not spoken of him.
Henry Smith declined to ask any ques-
tions.
By prisoner Kelly: I was transported to
Van Diemen’s Land. I was first sentenced
for six months for an assault, and am now
under sentence for seven jears, and two years
additional for absconding from Pentridge.
Mr. George Milner Stephen said to Kelly,
“ If you like I will ask a few questions for
you, as I am sure the Court and jury must
be tired, and I may probably ass the questions
in less time.
Kelly: I thank you, Sir; I should be much
obliged to you.
The cross-examination was then con-
tinued : I have served four years and two
months of my sentence. Ido not know any-
thing of being rewarded by the authorities
for giving evidence to day. I saw the stone
thrown by Ohesley strike Mr. Price. The
precise effect of that blow I did not see. 1 here
were a great number of stones thrown, as Mr.
Price was struggling along, falling first on
one knee and then on the other; and, amid
the shower of stones, was one very large one,
which hit Mr. Piice on the side of the head,
which felled him. I saw Kelly pick a stone
from the tramway and rush in among the
throng, and dash it on Mr. Price’s head, as
near as I could guess.
By a juror: The stone was, as near as I
could say, eighteen or twenty pounds weight.
Larger than those produced by the previous
witness, Caldwell.
By Mr. Stephen: I have not been punrshed
twice. I have been on board the hulks. I
received the sentence of seven years because
a man swore I robbed him of 155., which was
not the truth.
Prisoners Richard Jones and William Jones
severally declined to cross-examine this wit-
ness.
Henry Fee, prisoner of the Crown, was then
called. On his entering the witness-box the
prisoner william Jones said he wished to ask
him a question previous to his being sworn.
Jones to witness Fee : What religion do you
profess?
Witness: Protestant.
Jones: Did you never openly declare your-
self to be an Atheist?
Witness: Never.


The witness was then sworn and examined
by the Attorney-General: I saw William
Jones rush down the Hill after the Inspector-
General, also Henry Smith. The number of
men who ran down was about thirty. Bryant
and William Brown were also among the
number. I saw William Jones strike the
Inspector-General as he was going down the
slide. I also saw Henry Smith strike him,
he struck him with his fist. I saw Brown
and Bryant strike him also before they went
down the tramway. I heard the men shout
that they would not work under the b y
tyrant, pointing to Hyland, before any blows
were struck. Stones were thrown before the
Inspector General went down the embank
ment, but I cannot tell who threw them,
James Kelly said to me, “ The big fellow is
coming up the road.” He meant John Price.
This was when Mr, Price was first coming on
the ground. Kelly said, “ I believe they are
going to put him through his facings.”
By a Juror: What do you understand by
putting him through his facings?
Witness : I understood that they were going
to speak sharp words to him about some com-
plaints they were about to make.
Witness cross examined by Mr. Stephen on
behalf of Henry Smith.
The prisoner Williams deDlined to put any
questions.
I was sent to Yan Diemen’s Land for ten
years. I went to Sydney a free man, and am
now under accumulated sentence of twenty
years.
By William Jones: I was not sentenced to
transportation for life in Yan Diemen’s Land,
and am not an absentee from that colony,
I did not make an agreement with four or
five others to cut our way out of the cell in
which we were. Thomas Williams, William
Brown, and Paul Roach were in the cell with
me. I did not agree to take in instruments
to cut our way out, but I refuse to make any
confession. I have done more than five years
of my sentence. On the day of the murder,
the Inspector-General told me he would take
my irons off. I worked at the business of cut-
ler in Yorkshire, England. I was not taken
out of my cell on the Sunday, Monday, or
Tuesday following the day of the murder.
William Downey, prisoner of the Crown
examined by the Attorney General : I was
employed on the works on the day of the
murder. I saw Kelly speak to Mr. Price. I
heard Kelly call Wilson, the overseer, a b —y
old dog, and say Wilson would pay for it.
That day I saw Belly fling a stone at the
Inspector-General, and knock his hat off
Kelly was from three to four yards from me
when he threw the stone. I saw John Wil
liams throw two stones at Capt. Blatchford,
one of which hit him. John Williams ordered
me in front of him to the Sacramento gang.
He said, if I did not go, he would knock my
brains out with a stone hammer.
Cross examined by John Williams: I swear
1 did not throw any stones myself. I was
not put in irons in Pentridge. I was one of the
men who took the Inspector General to the
lighthouse. I have been convicted twice in
the colony. My first sentence will
be completed in December n«xt.
The second stone you threw hit Captain
Blatcbford on the left side. You said at the
time come over you b~y old dog.”
Cross- Examined by Mr. Stephen : I was
sent to Van Diemens Land for 10 years
before coming to the colony. I saw the
prisoner Smith whom we call Shylock strike
Mr. Price with a pick handle. I was exa-
mined at the Coroner’s inquest, and there
spoke positively that I saw Smith strike Mr.
Price with a pick handle. [Tbe deposition
was read, and the words were, “ I think I saw
Smith strike &c.]
By Kelly, James Anderson covered in
King and Farrell in the hole. I did not call
him a hound for not covering me in the hole
too. I had no hole in contemplation myself,
Anderson and Smith also struck tbe Inspector-
General with a “spalling” handle or pick
handle. They had hold of the Inspector-Ge-
neral’s coat at the time pulling him back,
I was not one of the first men who caught
hold of Mr. Price. Neither did I say when
Mr. Price came on the works on the 26th
March, that I would never work another hour
for the government. Directly Mr. Price’s
hat was knocked oft’ by the stone you
threw, the men shouted “ Down with
the tyrant.” I told the chief warder when
I came on board the hulk the same
evening, "that two men were buried on shore.
I told him because it was not fit for a dog to
see, the way in which the Inspector-General
was treated. I could not be silent.
James Caldwell sergeant of the shore guard,
examined by the Attorney General: I pro-
duce some stones picked up on the works the
morning following the murder. There is
blood on them.
Robert Maine examined by the Attorney
General: lam never in the Lysander gang.
The shovel I produce I found 40 feet from
where the pool of blood was.
Simon Russell, prisoner of the Crown,
examined by Dr. Sewell: On the 26th
inst., I was near the tramway. After
the attack I saw Mr. Price’s body on
the sea side of the tramway. I turned Mr.
Price’s head on one side and looked about for
assistance, but did not obtain any for four or
five minutes. At length Pretty, Gibney, H. Fee,
W. Downey, A. Merry, myself, and others, who
I cannot recollect, carried the body away with
me. Mr. Price was always very kind to me.
Ido not know of any change in the treat-
ment of the prisoners lately.
This closed the case for the crown.
John Williams said he was not capable of
addressing the Jury. He would depend on
what the other men would say.
Mr- Stephen then rose and addressed the
jury on behalf of the prisoner Smith. He re-
gretted that he had only been entrusted with
the defence at the eleventh hour. He did not
sympathise with any man guilty of murder,
or even charged with murder, but he did com-
passionate them, as did also, he believed, every
other gentleman at the bar; and if
any member at the bar had been


called on by the Court, or by any
refbectable attorney, none of them
would have shrunk from the responsibility,
at whatever personal inconvenience, of de-
fending even the whole of the prisoners. Di-
rectly he was instructed by a respectable at-
torney of the Court, even although he was
very late, still he did not feel that he could
refuse, although at the time lie had most
pressing business of his own calling his special
attention. The Attorney-General, in open-
ing the case against the prisoner, had said that
the jury would have to find whether or not
they had been participating in a common de-
sign. If they found that they were not so
engaged they would acquit them. The
learned counsel quoted cases to show that
even under circumstances in which parties
set out with an unlawful purpose, such as
stealing apples or shooting game, and if one
of them should commit the crime of murder,
it was held the rest of them were not
also guilty of the crime, as murder was not
the common intention with which they set
out. The men who struck the blows by which
Mr. Price was killed were guilty of a barbar-
ous murder, but they must be satisfied beyond
the possibility of doubt that murder was
the common intention before they could
find persons, who were merely pre-
sent at the time, guilty of the offence.
It did not appear that there was ever any
original intention of committing the crime
of murder, but only of making complaints ;
but things went on from bad to worse, till
one man, with passions more excited than
others, struck the_ fatal blow. The only
evidence against his client was that of Mr.
Hendry, the overseer, who swore that he was
in the general rush ; but it was very possible
indeed that as the rush was made down an
inclined place, that his client was forced down
by the vis inertias of the crowd behind him.
The existence of a common intention was
altogether unsupported by the evidence on
the part of the crown, for the witnesses stated
that some of the convicts cried out against
Mr. Hyland, some against Mr. Wilson and
others against Captain Blatchford; and
indeed the outbreak appeared to him
to have arisen altogether from one of those
sudden outbursts of passion which men,
suffering under real or supposed grievances,
can be understood sometimes to feel. The
Crown was bound to show either that his
client was a participator in a common design,
or that he struck the fatal blow. The evi-
dence of the medical man went to show that
the fatal blow was struck with the shovel, and
even if his client had struck Mr. Price with his
fist, or had even thrown a stone that did not,
by its size, evidence a murderous intent, he
contended he could not be convicted of
murder. The evidence of the prisoners of the
Crown against his client was contradictory,
for Quin swore that he struck Mr. Price wit a
his fist, whereas Downey swore that he struck
him with a pick handle. These two state-
ments were inconsistent. If he had
the pick handle, he would not have
abandoned it to strike with his fists,
especially if he had a murderous purpose.
There was no evidence to support the asser-
tion of Downey, that Smith struck with a
pick-handle ; and therefore he had a right
to say that this statement was not true.
But take it that his client struck Mr. Price
with his fist—he would take this as the most
undeniable evidence that he never contem-
plated the crime of murder, for striking
with the fist was not the act of a murderer.
If he had desired to commit murder, why
did he not take up a stone or some other
weapon to carry out his purpose ? He re-
peated that all the evidence agaiust his
client was, that he was in the rush, and it
would be hard indeed if a man should be
convicted of murder on such grounds, and
when it was the fact that another
man came up and struck the fatal blow.
It was clear from the that his_ client
could not have been a participator in the
rush on Mr. Price at all, for it had been
sworn to by Mr. Wilson that he (Smith)
pushed after him and struck him with a
stone at the time when the rush was first
made on Mr. Price. The learned counsel re-
sumed his seat by announcing that he should
not call any witnesses.
The Prisoner Kelly then addressed the jury,
and called God to witness that he had never
taken act, part, or deed, in the murder of Mr.
Price. Concerted murder bad been at-
tempted to be shown from the observation
which was imputed to him, “ You b y
tyrant your race is nearly run,” but the
fact was that about nine months ago he
charged Mr. Wilson with perjury, and after
speaking to Mr. Price about the three days’
solitary confinement which he had suffered,
he turned around on Wilson, who had been
the mean of his obtaining the solitary con-
finement, and said, “ you are a perjurer, and
your race of perjury is nearly run.” This
was in Mr. Price’s hearing, and when he was
standing near to his person. He believed he
should never have beenin that court if it had
not been for Mr. Hyland, who had always
done all in his power to injure him. When
he first came into the colony he unfortunately
committed himself, for which he had received
a sentence of five years, which was the only
sentence he had ever received. There
was only one copy of the depositions
given to the whole of the prisoners, and this
was not received by him until Saturday last.
He declared to his God that he was an in-
nocent man, and hoped the jury would be
of the same opinion when they heard his
evidence.
The prisoner Richard Jones then addressed
the jury, and complained of the conduct of
Mr. Hyland, and the severe discipline en-
forced by him on board the hulks. Not-
withstanding these strict regulations, he had
never even been brought before a magis-
trate, and, with but one exception, he was
the only man on board the Success whosff
board was marked “good.” Was it probable
then, with the prospect of liberation before
him, on account of his good conduct, that


he should do any act of violence to Mr.
Price or anybody else?
William Jones next addressed the jury in a
long, and the first part of it a discursive
speech. He called attention to some discre-
pancies in the evidence of the various wit
nesses, more particularly with reference to
their estimation of distance, time, and i um-
bers. He complained that there were no fixed
rules or rt gelations on board the hulks; but
when any charge was wanted to be preferred
against a man, he was brought up on some
imaginary -offence which he did not know
was an offence at all, and was punished for
it. The place where prisoners were examined
on board the hulks was a kind of office which
would not hold more than about four per
sons, If more than one prisoner was brought
up, the second could not get into it, and on
one occasion having been brought up with
another man he was punished by the
visiting justice without having been
within the office or asked a question
in his defence. There bad been fifteen men
committed for this unfortunate affair, and
out of that number not more than two or
three were probably guilty of the offence.
The guilty men were just as likely to be
among those who went on board voluntarily
as among those who staid out. One man who
had been convicted, and another then in
the dock went on board voluntarily.
The prisoner complained that he had not
seen the depositions until Sunday morning.
Only one copy had been given among fifteen,
prisoners one day before they were all
brought to trial, and it was among them
“now let me have them,” and “ now let me
have them.” No man eojnld have them for
more than half an hour. The prisoner went
on to say that the gang had no purpose
against Mr. Price, They only wanted to
have their complaints fairly heard. The first
proposal was to send for the magistrate.
When that was proposed, it was said “ it is no
use, he will do us no justice.” Then the call
was for the Mayor of Williamstown, but Mr.
Wilson, theoverseer, (as Mr. Wilson had him-
self stated to thejury) interfered, and told the
men it wes impossible for the men to have the
Mayor, that he had no authority to give them
any redress. Then it was said We will have
Mr. Price himself ” Prisoner asked thejury
to excuse the prisoners for the time they had
necessarily occupied in cross examining the
witnesses. I know, he said, it has been hard
upon you, and hard upon the Court, but it is
still harder upon us to lose our lives.
The prisoners then called their witnesses.
George Murphy, prisoner of the Crown,
criled and examined by the prboner Wil-
liams: I remember the 26th March last. I
saw you that aternoon. When the overseers
held up their hands for the men to knock off
work I went up to where Mr. Price was. I
cannot say that I saw you then on the rail-
way, but you might have spoken to me, I
heard some one say Mr. Price had been killed,
but I cannot say you told me, I remember
speaking to you on the railroad after hearing
that Mr. Price was killed. At this time
part of the men were down where Mr. Price
was killed. I saw Eli Cooper there algo.
You went up to the other gang and I advised
you not to do so. I cannot say that any one
in the gang called you. You said you would
do as you liked. You might have said to me
that you would be accused < i participation in
the affray on account of your irons having
been broken, but I do not remember your
doing so.
James Fleming, prisoner of the Crown,
called and examine! by Williams: I remem-
ber seeing you on the railway on the 26th
March. You were with a hand cart. I did
not see you leave your cart at all. I saw you
after the rush was over, but you never left
year cart from the time of your coming up to
the last time I saw you. When the body of
men rushed on Mr. Price I was standing in
front of the tent, forty yards from the tram-
way, and you were at your hand-cart on
the embankment. I never saw you any-
where near Mr. Price. Ryan spoke
to me when I was in front of the tent. He
told me to go and sit down.
Cross-examined by the Attorney-General:
I saw stones flying about. Williams’ cart
came up in company with another.
Eli Cooper, prisoner of the Grown, called,
and cross examined by Williams: On the26th
March I was working in a cart with you. At
the time of the rush we were standing toge-
ther in the cart. You did not leave my side.
When 1 went away in the boat you might
have said to me No doubt they will pick out
some long sentenced men for this,”
By Richard Jones : When Captain Blatch-
ford came back again to the edge of the
quarry he said “ Tell that man that struck
me to come out before me now, (he held
a revolver in his hand), and tell the
man that ordered me away, that I think
worse of him than of the one which struck me.’
Richard Jones: Your honor remembers
Captain Blatchford did not recollect that ho
had said the last words at all.
Cross-examined by the Attorney- General: I
saw the rush. I know the gang. I cannot
name anyone who joined in the rush. lam
under sentence for twenty-two years for high-
way robbery.
James Regan, prisoner of the Crown, called
and examined by Kelly: I remember the 26th
March. I recollect seeing Downey (who had
just been examined as a witness for the
Crown) in the crowd about Mr. Price. He
nrade a complaint. Downey followed Mi,
Price down the hill, and held him back by
his coat.
Cross-examined ; I was standing behind
Jones when I saw Downey. Mr. Price
was retreating down the hill, and had
got about five or six yards from wheie
I was, when Downey caught hold of
him. After Mr. Price went down the slide
Downey returned back. There might have
been seven or eight men pursuing Mr. Price,
There was not twenty. I cannot say I knew
any but Downey.
Attorney General: You won’t peach on any
more.


I have been two years in the Success gang,
was two years before that in the President , I
am under fifteen years sentence for assault
with intent to rob.
William Jones, (765) prisoner of the Crown,
examined by the prisoner James Kelly : Re-
member the 26th. Was washing the men’s
trousers. Saw Quinn, (who had just been
examined for the Crown), with scales and
weights in his hand. Witness was
two hundred yards away from Mr. Price
When the rush was made Quinn dropped the
scales and weights very quickly, and ran
away in the direction of Williamstown.
Cross examined: Quinn ran towards the
lighthouse. The place at which the scales
were dropped by Quinn was eighty or ninety
yards from the sand heap where Mr. Price had
been standing. Quinn was in the act of run-
ning away when I heard the shouting.
Thomas Smith, prisoner of the Crown,
examined hj r the prisoner Kelly: Remembers
the 16th. A few minutes before the rush I
saw you at the foot of the hill (the embank-
ment). I was on the hill, and called out to
you whether you were not going to see the
Inspector. You said you had got your
answer, and you went away towards the
carpenter’s shop. I was leaning on one of the
sand carts on the tramway.
Cross-examined: Kelly was within thirty
or forty yards of me. Cannot say how many
were in the rush. Nearly all the gang went
down. Cannot name one that went down.
I swear that I cannot tell one man that went
down.
John Ammond, prisoner of the Crown, ex-
amined by prisoner Kelly: I remember the
26th. I saw you going up the brow of the
hill, and, when the rush took place, I saw you
turn back and go to the carpenters’ bench.
James M’Ginn, prisoner of the Crown, ex-
amined by prisoner Kelly: I remember the
26th. About a minute before the rush took
place I saw you on the brow of the hill,
oing up near the carpenter’s bench. When
the rush took place I saw you return to the
carpenter’s beach. You took a part in the
rush.
John Jones, prisoner of the Crown, ex-
amined by Kelly: About a minute before
the occurrence I saw you near the tool-house
(the same as tne carpenters’ bench), you were
not on the tramway at all.
Cross-examined: He was down by the car-
penter’s bench.
Kelly: That is the brow of the hill.
Witness: T was at the sand carts. Kelly was
not there at all. Kelly never came up the hill.
William Roberts, prisoner of the Crown,
examined by Richard Jones: You were
standing three or four yards from me when
Captain Blatchford went past. As he passed
me he thought I suppose that I would strike (
him, and he called out, “Oh don’t, don’t,”
and I at once told him to be off while he had
an opportunity.
The piisoner; That witness is worth ten
others yt ur Honor. Captain Blatchford him-
self said that Robert Roberts was there. The
day Captain Blatchford was examined, I did
not wish to name Roberts, lest I should get
him into trouble ; but there is the man now
that spoke to Captain Blatchford.
The prisoner, William Jones, addressing
the Court: lour Honor, I will call no pri-
soner witnesses.
The case for the defence closed here.
The Attorney General waived his right of
addressing the jury, and said he would leave
the matter in the hands of the Court.
His Honor then summed up, explaining
what the term “ murder ” meant, and the
distinction between that and manslaughter
as consisting in malice, which, in fact, meant
murderous intmtion; he proceeded to say, the
law of the case had been presented to them
by the learned counsel who had defended one
of the prisoners; and his definition was a
correct one. After describing the nature and
operation of malice, his Honor said the jury
would draw the inference of intention from
acts and words proved to them. At the same
time he cautioned them words were often not
correctly reported or not correctly understood
by persons who had heard them, The jury
would decide, in considering the testimony
given, how far the words sworn to in this case
were correctly reported or understood. They
might ask what could be the object
which could be gained by the murder
of Mr. Price? Certainly no advantage
could be obtained unless the prisoners at the
moment made their escape; but that they had
not done. It was shown that there had been
an attack on the other officers. The jury
would consider whether there was evidence of
a common design, whether this was done in
carrying out a common purpose with those
who attacked lf those who as-
saulted the officers were in the act of carrying
out the common object, it was not necessary
they should strike a blow to make them par-
ticipators in the offence. His Honor then
reviewed the most important portions of the
evidence. He said that three of the witnesses
had proved nothing against the prisoners as
to the striking a blow, but the jury would
consider whether their evidence went
to prove combination, or went to
such an extent as to prove malice.
Going very carefully over the evidence for the
prosecution, he said that he passed over a
great mass of evidence which was not to the
point; but which he had allowed to be given
because he did not wish to put the least re-
straint upon the prisoners in conducting
their defence, so long as their questions were
reasonable. The tenor of the evidence he
alluded to showed that the prisoners imagined
they had grievances which ought to be reme-
died. His Honor also glanced at the allega-
tion made that the warders had exceeded
their duty in striking the prisoners. He said
each warder, on his oath, had denied the
allegation, so that was disposed of; but even
if they had thus exceeded their duty, that was
not the point under consideration. Nor
could the circumstances of the convicts having
been ill-used by the warders justify them
in murdering Mr. Price. In alluding to the
contradictory evidence on the questions of


times and distances, his Honor said allow-
ances must be made for the witnesses, who
being without mechanical guides for measur-
ing either time or distance, could not form in
every instance an exactly correct estimate.
At the same time, as these points were of the
utmost importance for the prisoners, espe-
cially in the cases of an attempt to establish
an alibi, the jury would give due consideration
to them. His Honor having occupied some-
thing more than an hour and a-hait in charg-
ing the jury, dismissed them to consider their
verdict.
Just previously to the jury leaving the
Court,
The prisoner Kelly said : Your Honor, will
you allow me to say one word to the jury ?
His Honor: What do you wish to say ?
Kelly : I wish to say this to the gentlemen
of the jury;—-The only thing against me in
the eviJence is the speaking of a few words,
for your Honor sees the evidence of the
prisoner Quinn ought to be scratched out
against me.
Hts Honor: If I have omitted anything
I will state it if you will point it out; but
even if it were regular that you should ad-
dress the jury a second time, you will see
(looking at the clock, then marking the hour
as hall-past eleven, and within half-an-hour
of Sunday) you will see that it is now too
late.
Kelly; That is what I want to say, your
Honor. These words! These words! I wish
to explain these words that make the case
appear so bad against me.
'The Attorney-General : His Honor has
already put the case strongly in your favour.
His Honor, to the Jury ; 1 have no desire
to hurry your deliberatiohs gentlemen,— but
I wish to inform you that I cannot receive
your verdict after twelve o’clock—(pointing
to the clock.)
The jury then retired, and returning into
court at ten minutes to twelve o’clock, de-
livered the following verdict That John
Williams, Henry Smith, James Kelly, Richard
Jones, and William Jones are Not guilty.
The jury were then discharged, and the
Court adjourned till ten o’clock on Monday
morning,
Monday, 20th April, 1857.
(Before His Honor Mr. Justice Barry.)
THE MURDER OF MR. PRICE,
His Honor Mr. Justice Barry took his seat
upon the bench at ten o’clock.
The following prisoners were then placed
at the bar, charged with the murder of Mr
Price— Francis Brannigan, William Brown, and
Richard Bryant.
The jury were then called, the prisoners
exercised their right of challenge very
sparingly, and a jury was soon sworn.
The prisoner Bryant, addressing the court:
Your Honor there is a witness in Williams
town I would wish to have here. It is Mr
Pascoe the visiting magistrate.
His Honor directed the witness to be sent,
for.
The prisoner Francis Brannigan: Your
Honor there are none of us here can read the
depositions. May we hand them over to the
jury,
Mr. Justice Barry: I will take careful notes
of all the“evidence,and you will hear them read
over to the jury.
The Attorney-General, addressing the jury,
said that the prisoners at the bar stood in-
dicted for the murder of the late Mr. Price.
The popular idea of murder, ho said, was a
correct one—that murder consists in the un-
lawful killing of another, with what the law
calls malice aforethought, that is, with some
degree of delibeiation. The law, however, did
not require that that deliberation should be
of long contiuuation, and sometimes it would
infer the deliberation from other circum-
stances, as for instance, if a man used a deadly
weapon, malice would be presumed. There
was another principle, to which he would
draw their attention, that was, that if a com-
mon purpose were shown in a number of
persons, all who were united in that purpose
were equally guilty of the murder committed
in prosecution of it with the person who might
actually strike the blow. The learned gentle-
man cited the usual cases to prove and illus-
trate these views It would be enough if the
jury could, in this case, come to the conclu-
sion that these prisoners were united in a
common unlawful purpose, which in the
prosecution of it ultimately resulted in the
murder of Mr. Price. They would then be
all equally guilty ef it, This doc-
trine had been carried out by a series
of decisions from the oldest times to the
present day. The learned Attorney-
General then explained at some length the
circumstances, already familiar to the public,
which led to the sending for Mr. Price, and
the final rush of the prisoners upon that ill-
fated gentleman. It would be the duty of
the jury to say whether the prisoners at the
bar were participators in the general design
of that tumultuous rush. If the jury I bought
they were, then the Crown would have suc-
ceeded in bringing the offence home to them;
but if the jury entertained a reasonable doubt
as to the identity of the prisoners, that would
he ground for an acquittal. The Attorney-
General then described the position of the
sentries. Mr. Price had been rushed
down the slip on the opposite side of the
embankment from the sentries. The em-
bankment was of considerable height, and
perfectly screened from the view and fire of
the sentries the perpetrators of the murder
There were good reasons to prevent the
sentries from closing in. Their duty was to
occupy an outside line of considerable
extent, which enclosed all the quarries and
all the various gangs. If they had closed in
the result would have been that the prisoners
in the other quarries would have been let
loose, and the town of Williamstown and
the whole country would have been
laid open to the depredations of
of 250 of the worst criminals in this colony.
What their depredations would have been, the
history of the last five jears made known to


them. The jury would have to say whether the
prisoners at the bar, so participated in that
general design which resulted in the death of
Mr. Price, ttiat they should be held guilty in
common with those who struck the blows.
Dr. Wilkins was the first witness called for
the crown. He described the condition of
the body, the wounds, and the cause of
death,
The prisoners did not cross-examine him.
Mr. George Milner Stephen announced to
the Court that he had been instructed to
delend tne prisoner Bryant,
Mr. Hollis, Superintendent on board the
Success, was the second witness called lor
the crown. His testimony was nearly the
same as that which he had already given on
two previous occasions. About thirty men
took part in the rush on Mr. Price, witness
could not identify any of the prisoners at
the bar as having been among these thirty.
The quality of the rations furnished to the
prisoners has been very good. There have
been complaints lately, and these complaints
have been attended to
Cross-examined by the prisoner Brannigan .
The reason that your allowance falls short of
the full pound is that in cutting up the
bread the weight will not stand, and besides
this the bread crumbles.
Prisoner : Does not the baker send an add!
tional allowance of bread to make up for
that ?
He do s latterly.
To a Juryman : There is a per centage al-
lowed of about or 3 per cent. This has
been allowed for aoout two months.
Witness described that one of the prisoners
called an inspector, is now appointed to look
alter the men’s rations ; and, in answer to a
question hour the prisoner Brown, he ex-
plained that sometimes, to make up full
weight, a separate piece of bread is added to
the prisoners’ bread ration, which is called a
“rider,” or a “jockey,” and that this occ r-
sionally falls off. The result is, that it will
occasionally happen, in the serving out of a
great number of rations, that some ration is
a trifle short, and this may have occurred at
some time with the prisoner now cross-ex-
amining.
Mr. James Hendry, overseer of th&Sticcess,
gave the same evidence that he had already
given on previous trials. He described, as
betore, his position ou the stage, overlooking
all that occurred, and detailed thecircum
stances under which Mr. Price was hurled
down the slip, hit with stones, and, finally,
struck with a shovel by Thomas Williams,
now under sentence of death. He saw the
three prisoners now in the dock rush down
after Mi. Pxica. He now produced part of a
shirt belonging to the prisoner Brown, num-
bered 7fi4.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Brannigan;
I saw you rushing down the slip after Mr.
Price.
Prisoner: What occurred while I was at the
bottom of the embankment?
Witness: Mr Price was struck by stones,
and Thomas Williams ( lately convicted )
struck him with a shovel. I did not see you
strike him, but I saw you, as I considered, en-
deavouring to strike him. I noticed you
first immediately after Malloneyhad struck
him.
Prisoner; You have said that you saw eight
or ten men coming back,and they ca ne within
sixteen yards of you. Can you identify any
of them ?
Witness: I cannot.
Prisoner : Yet you can identify men who
were fifty yards off.
Cross examined by the prisoner Browne;
Did you see me, and what was I doing ?
You were trying to get at Mr. Price. I did
not see you get at him. There were about
thirty men about him, endeavouring to get at
him. There were prisoners on the tramway
throwing stones at Mr. Price. They could do
so with great advantage, for they stood right
over him, as he was rushed down the slip and
they kept pace along the tramway, to which
it ran parallel.
Prisoner: Who complained about the
scales ?
Burns did.
Prisoner: I think it was Malloney you said
in your deposition. We cannot read. If any
gentleman would be good enough to look at
the deposition for us.
Mr. Justice Barry then read the deposition
of Hendry aloud to the prisoner. _ The sup-
posed statement was not found in it.
On further examination the statement was
found to have been made in Captain Blatch-
ford’s deposition. Captain Blatchfordsaid he
believed the prisoner was Malloney.
Cross-examined by Mr. Stephen: The de-
mand of the prisoners in the morning was to
send for some one who would do them jus-
tice. Does not distinctly remember the Ma\ or
of Williamstown being named. The refusal
to woik was a refusal to work, not only under
Hyland, but under the officers generally.
Mr. Hyland, Chief Warder of the hulk
Success, gave testimony similar to that which
he had given on the previous trials. As re-
gards the present prisoners specially, he said
he recollected seeing the prisoner Richard
Bryant on the tramway. When the complaints
were making to Mr. Price, he did not notice
’either of the other two prisoners there. Saw
Mr, Pi ice taken hold of by four men. Malloney
(now under sentence of death), Dunovan (not
tried yet) and Richard and William Jones
(two of the prisoners acquitted on Saturday).
The prisoner William Browne, now in the
dock, when he came on board after the oc-
currence, had another man’s shirt and ano-
ther man’s trousers on him, and was deficient
of a hat. Witness produces a hat win:h the
identifies as Biowne’s. It is a straw hat
patched with a piece of a duck trousers, and
the patch is stained with blood.
Cross examined by Browne: I know the hat
by the patch. There were two or three other
men bad hats similarly patched, but these
other men went on board with their hats; so
this hat must be yours. But at all events, I
know this hat to be yours.
To Brannigan: Your allowance is 1 lb. of


bread, but it only runs fifteen ounces, as the
cist of the bread and the crumbs, which are
afterwards thrown upon the soup, run away
with the other ounce.
To Browne: The Government contract is
for Ilb of bread for each prisoner. The baker
sometimes does throw in 2 or 3 lbs- to the
hundred, but this is optional with him.
Have you not put men who were waiting
for trial upon penal rations, or half rations ?
I have not.
Have you not put me on them ?
You were sick at that time, and that was
the cause why you were put upon reduced
rations,
Mr. Wilson, overseer of the Success gang,
(Mr. Wilson appeared still very weak, and he
was accommodated with a chair): When the
men expressed their discontent in the
morning at the ill-treatment, as they
called it, that Taylor had received, they first
proposed to send for Mr. Pascoe, the magis-
trate, and then proposed to send for Mr.
Mason, the Mayor of Williamstown. I ex-
plained to them that Mr. Mason had no
authority to do anything in the matter, and
then they agreed to send for Mr. Price. (Mr.
Wilson then described, as he had on previous
occasions, all that occurred up to the rush
upon Mr. Price. He stated that he attempted
to intercept the rush, but was himself pushed
some way down the slip, knocked down, and
assaulted by a number of men from whom he at
length extricated himself. He then proceeded :
I can identify five men as having taken part
in the rush. One of them is Bryant. I met
Bryant, now at the bar, just as I got clear
from the others. He was coming down the
slip in the same direction as those who
were pursuing Mr. Price. He might at
that time be four or five yards from Mr.
Price. He struck me with a shovel on the
top of the head and on the back of the hand
which I threw up to defend my head. I
escaped, scarcely knowing in what direction
I went. I was also struck by Henry Smith
and Thomas Smith (not now at the bar).
I did not see Mr. Price after he was first
rushed down but I distinctly heard him cry,
“Come here, come here,” no doubt to attract
the officers.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Brannigan :
When I first gave orders to the men to fall
out there was a movement on the part of a
few men to fall out, but they fell back again
on the rest of the men calling out not to go
to work. I cannot say who these few men
were, nor that you were one of them-
The prisoner here earnestly asserted that
he aud four others whom he named fell out,
and never went back into the ranks again
until they went to their work, but witness
could not remember that it was so.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Browne:
When witness was first struck down he was
very much confused by the blow. He was
afterwards met by Bryant, who was the last
that struck him.
Cross examined by Mr. Stephen : Henry
Smith (acquitted on Saturday) struck me on
the right jaw with a stone in his hand. I
stumbled and then felt myself seized by
several. When I was turned on my back
Williams, the second man who stiuck
me, struck me several times on the head
with a stone in his hand. The blows produced a
good deal of blood, which flowed down my neck
and my collar. ’Twas after I received the
blow from Bryant that I felt the blood flow
down my face. After the blows from Wil-
liams I unexpectedly found myself at liberty,
and it was when I got up that I was struck
by Bryant.
Henry Fee, a prisoner of the Crown, exam-
ined on behalf of the Crown ; Described his
asking Mr. Price to have his irons taken off.
Mr. Price promised to look into his case. Mr.
Price’s manner to him was civil. It never
was otherwise to a prisoner who addressed
him. “Witness was within two yards of Mr.
Price at the tramway. Saw Bryant and
Browne, two of the prisoners now at the bar,
then close to Mr. Price, making their com-
plaints. First a stone was thrown at Mr.
Price. Then Malloney struck him a blow
with his fist. John Williams next struck him
with a sione. Mr. Price called *’ Don’t, dont.”
Browne (now at the bar) struck him with his
fist, several men laid hold of him, he turned
and ran down the slip. Thirty men pursued
him. The prisoners Browne and Bryant pur-
sued him. They both struck him several
times as he was hurled down the slip. Browne
kicked him with his foot about the body.
Bryant used a shovel and kicked him also.
Bryant said, “ Come away, now he is cooked.”
Witness then described, as he had done on
previous occasions, his taking up the body
and carrying it with the assistance of some
other prisoners.) When I came back I was
near a heap of stones. A number of the men
were there. They said “ Fee is a long-sen-
tenced man. He has not his irons broken.
He has been carrying John to the light-
house.”
The prisoner Browne cross-examined the
witness much as he had been cross-examined
on previous occasions as to his former life.
Being asked whether he had ever given other
information against prisoners, witness said:
“That is my business, and none of yours if I
have. You have all been trying to lower my
character with the Government. I have
servea five years of my time, and
have never bad a scratch against
my character. These men (addressing
himself to the Bench) will say anything
against me. I have heard them making it
up among one another, and I have no doubt
they could get men to swear to it.”
Cross examined by Mr. Stephen : I am sen-
tenced to twenty years I came here from
Sydney. I was sent a prisoner from England
to Sydney. I got two sentences in the
colony, one for an assault with intent to rob,
and another for a common assault on the
police. I have not boasted to my fellow
prisoners that Ido not believe in a God. I
say my prayers—just merely the Lord’s pray r er.
Sometimes I forget it. I saw Jones and Bry-
ant suite Mr. Price. I saw no other man /
but Bryant strike Mr. Price with a shovel.


When I came back from carrying Mr. Price
I saw Bryant on the tramway with a pick
handle in his hand. I saw the prisoner Bry-
ant hit Mr, Price three times with the shovel,
one blow struck him on the back of the head,
one lower down on the back of the neck, and
one still further down on the shoulders.
Thomas Quinn, a prisoner of the Crown,
examined on behalf of the Crown; —gave the
same testimony as to the general occurrences
that lie had given on previous trials. As
specially affecting the present prisoners he
said: I saw the prisoner Brown snatch a
shovel out ofj.the hands of a man named
Bryan Eliis (an alias for Thomas Williams,
now under sentence of death) and Strike the
Inspector General with it as be lay.
Cross-examined by Brannigan ; Has r been
six years in the colony.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Brown : I
saw you strike Mr, Price with the shovel.
You snatched it out of Brpan Ellis’s hand.
Cross-examined by Mr. Stephen : I am under
sentence of nine years. I have served four
years of it. I saw Kelly strike Mr. Price. I
mean the same Kelly that 1 gave evidence
against last week
Mr. Stephen : The man that was acquitted
on Saturday ?
Witness : I do not know, Sir.
Mr. Stephen : Do you not know he was ac-
quitted ?
Witness : I have not heard it, Sir.
Mr. Stephen: I thought news travelled
faster in the gaol.
I ran down the tramway shouting “ mur-
der, murder. They are murdering the In-
spector General,” to attract the attention of
officers on the hulk. I was afterwards taken
on board the hulk for protection from the
other prisoners. lam sure of the two men
that struck with the shovel—the two prisoners
at the bar, Bryant and Brown. 1 noticed
them because the shovel was so remarkable.
As they struck him they kept hitting short
chops at him, I suppose_ lest they should
hurt the men about by raising the shovel.
John James Watts, acting overseer, of the
hulks, at Williamstown, was examined on be-
half of the Crown ; Was on the ground that
day searching for secreted prisoners. I picked
up this hat, Brown’s hat within forty feet of
the pool of blood at the bottom of the tram-
way. When I picked it up the blood came
fresh from it on my fingers.
Robert Maine produced the bloody shovel,
picked up in the tramway opposite the pool
of blood, and exactly forty feet from the tram-
way. The pool of blood was just nineten feet
from the base of the tramway.
James Caldwell, serjeant of the shore-
guard : I produce stones found near the
lace and stained with blood, and apparently
stones with which Mr. Price had been struck.
I saw the three prisoners now at the bar
going off in the last drafts of men. Heard
one of them, Bryant, then call the officers
“b y tyrants and assassins.” Mahoney
was then there, and said to me “I should like
to do for you.” 1 produce a small piece of a
shirt, 761, (Browne’s number). I found it in
one of the hand carta, A piece of it was cut
off and sent to have the stains upon it ana-
li zed.
Mr. Justice Barry to witness. Has that been
washed ?
Witness: Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Justice Barry to Mr. Hyland: Has
that been washed? It looks singularly
clean.
Oh, your Honor, it might be quite as clean
as that.
I can scarcely imagine it to look so clean
if it had been worn by a working man from
Sunday to Thursday ?
Mr. Hyland : Thought it might, but did
seem quite positive that it had not been
washed.
The case for the Crown closed here.
Thomas Brannigan being asked whether he
wished to say anything to the jury said: All
he had to say was, he was innocent of the
charge, and no one had sworn to his striking
a blow.
The prisoner, William Brown, being asked
whether he wished to address the jury said,
in the first place he would say to the jury
that the convict witness Fee never stated at
the coroner’s inquest that he had seen him,
the prisoner, do anything amiss. In the next
place, as to the blood on his clothes, he could
show by witnesses how that came. As to his
striking Mr. Price with a shovel, there was a
man, Thomas Williams, now cast for death
in the gaol, and he would not say so. It was
sworn by Fee that he the prisoner had taken
the shovel from) Williams’hand, but Williams
would swear the contrary. He was now c»st
for death, and there could be no reason why
he should tell a lie for him (the prisoner).
Mr. George M. Stephen said it was his duty
to address the jury for the prisoner Bryant.
He felt his task greatly lightened by the fact
that there was no evidence against his client
from any credible source. All the evidence
against him came from thatmost polluted of all
sources,thrice convicted convicts Far be it from
him to impute to any parties acting for the
Crown any desire to corrupt these witnesses ;
but he could not help entertaining that
frightful suspicion, that the evidence of these
convicts had been given under the belief that
by giving evidence against their fellow con-
victs, they would sooner or later derive some
benefit from it. There was no evidence save
evidence of this character to show that
his client had been concerned in giving the
death blow. Far be it from him as a lawyer
to say that to constitute the crime of murder
a party must have given that death blow,
but it was necessary that a party should
have been, at least, a participator in
a common design of perpetrating murder. It
was not even enough that the parties should
have been associated for carrying out some
other illegal purpose, and that murder should
have ensued. For this position Mr. Stephen
cited the case so often named on these trials,
the King v. Collinson, 4 Carr, and Payne , where
two parties having set out to rob an orchard,
and a watchman having suddenly appeared
from behind a tree, one of the parties struck


him and killed him; this 'was not accounted
murder in the other party, because this
was not a part of the original design.
For that end it would have been
necessary to show that the parties origi-
nally combined to oppose to the death
any person who interfered with their purpose.
If the jury believed that Bryant struck
Mr. Price on the head with a shovel, he was
uv.der those circumstances guilty of murder.
But here he especially was proved to have
been engaged in an act which was strictly
lawful. He was complaining to Mr. Price in
a proper, respectful manner, of the
shortness, of the allowance of soap, and
Mr. Price was taking the proper steps to
have that proper complaint investigated.
It was the duty of the Crown to show that
he or the other prisoners had any common
purpose with the murderer, the Crown had
not done so, but had on the contrary shown
that there was not any purpose of the kind
prevailing among the prisoners. They
imagined they had grievances, and wanted
to have them redressed. Mr. Wilson, the
overseer, had proved that the first proposition
was to send for Mr. Pascoe, the magistrate.
That was not approved of among them.
They then wished to send for the Mayor of
Williamstown, and it was only after Mr.
Wilson himself had explained to them that
that gentleman could not redress their
grievances, that they sent for Mr, Price.
It had been sworn that he had struck Mr.
Price with a shovel, but no credible witness
had sworn it, none but the convict Fee ; on
the contrary—a circumstance which would
probably put him, if acquitted now, upon his
trial for another offence, —the most credible
testimony which had been given against him,
that of Mr. Wilson, described him to have
been at that very moment attacking Mr.
Wilson, and the attack not a murderous
attack. He did not cleave him with the edge
of his shovel, but he struck him with the flat
of it, so that it did not interrupt Mr.
Wilson in pursuing his flight. He could
not then have been in two places at once.
So far for the testimony of the officers. Now
he passed to (hat of the convict witnesses.
The prisoner Fee said, “ I saw him strike Mr.
Price three blows on the back of the head
with a shovel.” Now, there was a most over-
whelming answer to this. Williams, who was
now in the prison condemned to death for
this very death-blow, Fee had sworn that he
did not see Williams about Mr. Price on
that occasion at all. There was this escape
for the veracity of this witness, that he might
possibly have mistaken the identity of the
two persons. But so it was,—that the very blow
for which Williams was now under sentence
of death, Fee had sworn was struck by Bryant
But there was another fact which must
bring conviction to the jury. Fee had sworn
to six blows inflicted on Mr. Price with a
shovel. The medical witness had sworn
that there was only one wound that could
have been inflicted by a shovel. (Mr.
Stephen then read the testimony of Dr.
Wilkins describing all the wounds found upon
the head, and only one on the hack of it, and
stating that that was the only one likely to
have been inflicted with a shovel) Now for that
one wound there was already a man under
sentence of death. The dead body was itself
the witness for his client, and he was bound
to say that what he now urged for his own.
client, had equal force in favour of the pri-
soner Browne. He might fairly assume that
this portion of the case against his client was
dissipated, and after this what was there
against him ? Mr. Stephen continued at
considerable length to press other views of the
evidence in favour of his client.
The witnesses for the defence were then
called.
James Wilson Wallis, a prisoner of the
Crown, examined by his Honor on behalf of
the prisoner Browne, prisoner having re-
quested his Honor to do so: Witness was on
that day in the Sacramento gang. He saw the
prisoner in the Sacramento gang after this
affair. He shook hands with the prisoner,
and advised him not to strike off his irons.
The prisoner would not take witness’s advice.
He said he had given his word that if Mr.
Price did not strike off his irons he would
strike them off himself. He would not take
witness’s advice and he went away.
Mr. Justice Barry to the prisoner: Do you
wish to have this testimony given for you ?
Prisoner: No, your Honor; but I wish to
know whether, when I went to his gang, he
did not see my finger cut.
Witness : He came a second time to the
Sacramento gang, and his finger was then cut
and bleeding. His first visit to the gang was
after we heard the cheering from the Success
gang.
Frederick Buckland, also a prisoner of the
Crown belonging to the Saaame.nto gang, was
called for the prisoner Browne, but he only
proved the same fact about his finger being
bleeding on his second visit (o the gang.
The prisoners called no other witnesses.
Mr. Sewell replied on behalf of the Crown,
If the prisoners had been, as the previous
witnesses, undefended by counsel, he would
not have pressed them with the weight of a
second address from the prosecution, but
having had the advantage of being defended
by counsel —
Mr. Stephen: Only one of the prisoners.
Mr. Justice Barry: Only one.
He (Mr. Sewell) considered it his bounden
duty to take care that the law was laid down
correctly, and that the facts of the case
were brought properly before their view. If
there was any doubt or merciful consideration
that ought properly to weigh with them in
favour of the prisoners, he did not desire
to deprive them of the benefit of it ; but
on the other hand there were other orders of
society entitled to their protection, and the
jury must consider what desolation would
sweep over these classes of society if the pri-
son gates were to be thrown open, and acts such
as these had been committed here were to be
left unpunished and unrestrained. The
learned counsel then proceeded to expound
what he conceived to be the true principle of


the law. He would ask was it the pur-
pose of these men to offer violence to
the warders? They had it in evi-
dence that there had been a growing
spirit of insubordination among these pri-
soners for months. The complaints which
they had made the excuse of this insubordi-
nation had been investigated here. The
rations which they complained of were
proved to have been better than those re-
ceived by the English soldier,—better far
than what the hone.t English labourer could
supply to his family. They were luxuries for
men of their station. Every instance of sup-
posed violence that these men could allege
had been investigated, and cases that had been
used to harrow up the feelings of the public—
and it had been proved on the oath of every
officer of these ships on the cross examination
of the prisoners, that no act of repression
had been ever used that was not necessary to
keep these men in a proper state of sub-
ordination. When the jury called the
fads of the case to mind he believed they
could be but under one single impression,
that the common purpose of the prisoners
had been to bring Mr. Price to the spot, not
for the purpose of having their grievances re-
dressed, but for the purpose of wreaking their
evil purposes upon him. Mr. Sewell thenalluded
to the words used by Kelly to Mr. Price, “ Your
race is nearly run.” How did Kelly know
that, if there was not a purpose it should be
so. Kelly had previously told another pri
soner that “ the big man was coming down,
and they were going to put him through his
facings.” These men had abundant opportu-
nities of communicating and entering into
concert. They were in the habit of com-
municating on board the ship. They com-
municated freely on shore where they worked.
The jury had ample evidence that the
men had formed one common purpose, and
that was to get Mr Price into their power for
the object which they afterwards carried into
effect. It had been suggested that some of
the prisoners at the bar might possibly have
rushed down to save Mr. Price. If there had
been but one friendly hand there, certainly
if there had been three or four friend'y nun
disposed to assist Mr. Price, his life would
have been saved. As regards the shovel with
which Bryant struck Mr. Price, they had cor-
roborative bvidence of the strongest character
that the prisoner had the shovel. He had
been stacking sand on the spot- Wilson met
him rushing down with that shovel in his
hand, and he struck Wilson with it- He was
afterwards seen striking Mr. Price with the
same weapon It was not necessary that wit-
nesses should be supposed to speak with accu-
racy as to the pirticular part of the head on
which blows were struck that were seen
from a distance. He believed that
the ear was towards the front of
the head, and the one fatal blow was
found not in the back of the head but on the
near ear. The medical description of the other
wounds sufficiently answered to such wounds
as might have been inflicted by the blows de-
scribed by Fee. The jury would take all the
facts of the case into their consideration, and
say was there a common unlawful purpose in
sending for Mr. Price, not necessarily to mur-
der him, but did they intend to beat and ill-
treat him. This was acommoh unlawful pur-
pose, and the question was were the blows
which brought about Mr. Price’s death struck
in prosecution of this purpose. The jury must
not be led away by the distinction that
these men must be acquitted if the jury did
not think it proved that they had actually
struck the blow. Such a doctrine would
acquit the cunning instigators who set mis-
chief a foot to convict only their less blame-
able tools; it would be opening a dooi to
crimes, and holding these persons pardoned
who were really the most gudty.
His Honor was proceeding to charge the
jury when Bryant said he had not called
his witnesses.
His Honor: Your defence has been in the
hands of learned counsel, and he would_ have
called any witnesses he thought material to
your case.
The prisoner said he washed to call Mr,
Pascoe, the magistrate, who he said was a
good and a just mao, though a strict man;
and also Captain Blatchford, the superinten
dent of hulks, and Mr. Smith of the Sacra-
mento, and others who would prove that he
was elsewhere at . the time of the oc-
currence.
Mr. Stephen said he had been made aware
of the prisoner's wish to call Mr. Pascoe, but
as it was only to enquire respecting a charge
he had once made before him against Mr.
Wilson, he Mr. Stephen had considered the
evidence immaterial, and had advised that
it was unnecessary to produce it. His brief
had been delivered to him at the very
last moment, and he had not heard
of the prisoner’s wish to call other witnesses,
as he certainly was not so ignorant of his duty
to omit calling witnesses to prove an abbi.
It appeared that the witnesses were not
within reach, nor likely to be procured on
any reasonable dMay.
Mr. Justice Barry said he was very unwill-
ing to shut ont evidence, but he must consider
this as an ordinary case in which the prisoner
had been assisted by counsel, and it must pro-
ceed.
His Honor proceeded to charge the jury.
He said the law laid down by the prisoner’s
counsel was good law as regards those cases to
which it applied. The question was, had it
been properly applied here? In allusion ter
those cases in which malice was infened from
the use of deadly weapons, his Honor said
that an inflamed and infuriated crowd was
as dangerous as arms—that fury, in fact, sup-
plied arms. This crowd, he said, were engaged
in an unlawful purpose. To prefer their com-
plaints in a temperate and moderate manner
would have been a lawful purpose; but
a riotous and insubordinate assembly
of persons whom the law had placed under
such strict restraint as it had placed these
men now refusing to obey their officers, re-
fusing to halt when ordered to do s 0.-rthis
must be considered as an assembly that con-


tetnplated ’resistance at all hazards. There
might have been but thirty or forty men bent
on this unlawful purpose. Indeed it was
proved that there were some among them
both legally and morally innocent of this in-
tention. It would be for the jury to consider
whether the prisoners at the bar were inno-
cent or not. His Honor then alluded to the
case that had been cited at the bar, of parties
who had agreed to rob an orchard. But if, he
said, the parties who had agreed to rob that
orchard were aware that it was guarded by
watchmen, who must be assaulted and per-
haps murdered before the illegal object could
be earned out, then murder by one of them
would have been murder by all. His Honor
proceeded to apply this doctrine to the case
then in hand. He said it was not necessary
that the actual death of Mr. Price should have
been originally contemplated; and he pro-
ceeded to describe the attack upon that ill-
fated gentleman as an assault inflamed by
degrees until it was aggravated and swollen
to the crime of murder. He then proceeded
to review the evidence at considerable length
and concluded by saying to the jury that he
had explained the law to them, and recapitu-
lated the evidence to which they had to apply
it,—it was their duty to say whether the pri-
soners were guilty or not gulity.
the jury having retired to the jury- room
at about a quarter to seven o’clock, they re-
turned in about a quarter of an hour with the
following verdicts, “We find the prisoner
Brannigan guilty, most strongly recom-
mending him to mercy. The other two pri-
soners guilty.”
His Honor asked the jury on what grounds
they recommended Brannigan to mercy ?
The foreman said on this ground simply,
that they understood from his Honor that
the law required them to bring him in guilty,
but they believed he had not struck a blow.
The prisoner Bryant: My Lord I consider
myself murdered. The superintendent of the
hulks, Mr. Smith of the Sacramento , and three
prisoners from the hulks would all have
proved my innocence. I had neither hand,
act, nor part in the death of Mr. Price- I call
Almighty God to witness that I was not
within thirty-five yards of Mr. Price when
he was knocked down. I saw him knocked
down, but I was not within thirty five yards
of the place. I would have been a
wretch and a vile wretch if I struck Mr.
Price, I had a long time to serve, and no
hope of my liberty, so I had nothing to ask
him for, nor he to refuse me, but he was
the gentlemen that, when I was in the Presi-
dent, two years ago, and had sore legs, took off
my irons. I am under twenty years’ sentence,
part of which I deserved, and part I did not
deserve. Ycur Honor sentenced me ten
years of it, for robbery on the gold-fields. I
certainly robbed the place, but if I did I had
no help hut do that or starve. I had no luck
on the diggings, and I did not want to beg.
I consider I have been very unjustly dealt
with.
His Honor then proceeded to sen-
tence the prisoners. He said they had
been found guilty of the murder of
Mr. Price. They could hardly have
expected the jury to pronounce any other
verdict. As regards the prisoner Bryant he
had suggested that he had not been able
to call his necessary witnesses. He had been
defended by counsel, and it was not now in
the power of the Court to do anything; but he
would call the attention of her Majesty’s Go-
vernment to the facts, and if they thought
that any further facts should be elicited to
elucidate the case, they would act in their dis-
cretion. For himself he had no doubt in the
matter. They had all been engaged in the
commission of an illegal act, and they were
amenable for all its consequences, even though
they did not originally contemplate that these
should proceed to the length that they ulti-
mately reached. Alluding to the evidence on
which they had been found guilty, his Honor
said it had been classified into two classes,
—the evidence of the free officers, and that of
their fellow-convicts. If the conviction
of any of them bad depended solely on the
evidence of any degraded or suspected mem-
bers of society, he should feel much remorse
in seeing the sentence of the law carried out;
but it did not depend upon such evidence.
The verdict was most fully justified
by the evidence of men unaffected
by any such taint. They had committed one
of the most daring crimes that the history of
this country records. What object they could
have had it was not easy to conjecture. He
did not know who might be the ruccessor of
Mr. Price, but he hoped, for the sake of the
convicts he would have under his charge,
that he would be equally considerate and
humane. Redress had always been given
them when it could be given; and when it
was refused, it was refused without harsh
severity or unkind rebuke. It was a most
unhappy time they had taken for the com-
mission of their crime. If he had been en-
gaged in any act of necessary severity, their
crime might have been imputed to what
had been called “ the wild justice of revenge.”
a principle which he hoped would never be
alluded to in this country with indulgence or
toleration ; but they had chosen a moment
when he was engaged in the kindly and tem-
perate discharge of his duties towards them.
The public time had been wasted, not on this
trial but on a preceding one, in the investiga-
tion of charges unfounded and fabricated, and
in most instances not affecting the persons
who made the complaint. He be-
lieved he had exceeded his duty in
permitting the large scope of inquiry that had
been indulged in, but he was better pleased
to have erred in giving to prisoners, circum-
stanced as they were, too great a liberty, rather
than in treating them with too strict a repres-
sion. It the misguided and unfortunate men
who were now undergoing their sentences
thought they would meet any sympathy in
taking away the lives of those who were ap-
pointed to keep guard over them, they would
find themselves grievously mistaken. If the
means of restriction already used by the Go-
vernment were not found sufficient to restrain


it would be necessary that the Government
should take, and they would take, severer
measures of repression. For some months
they had been in a state of insubordination,
the lives of the’r officers had been in danger,
and all had been crowned by this terrible
and barbarous murder. He did not intend in
harshnes to them the expession he had now
used ; but he hoped they would not abuse the
privileges or the interval now afforded to them,
but would apply them to such preparations
as it might be in their power to make for
that awful change which awaited them.
His Honour then passed the usual sentence
of death.
The prisoners were removed, and the Court
adjourned to ten o’clock on Tuesday morn-
ing.
Tuesday, 2\st Aptil, 1857.
(Before Mr. Justice Barry.)
THE MURDER OF MR. PRICE.
His Honor Mr. Justice Barry took his seat
upon the bench at ten o'clock.
The following prisoners were then placed
at the bar: — Daniel Donovan, John Chesley,
James Anderson, and John Young, alias Lowe.
They are the last of the fifteen included in
the present indictment.
Mr. George Milner Stephen appeared to
defend the prisoner James Anderson.
In the absence of the Attorney-General.,
Mr. Sewell prosecuted.
Mr. Hollis; Superintendent on board the
Success, examined byMr. Sewell: The prisoners
had facilities of communicating through the
gratings of their cells and the port-
holes in the side of the vessel, and still
greater opportunities when they worked on
shore. For some months previous to the
26th there had been a considerable spirit of
insubordination manifested among them As
instances of insubordination, they had fre-
quently refused to obey orders. Mr. Price’s
manner on the day in question had been
particularly kind. He was listening to the
complaints of all, and showing a disposition
to satisfy every reasonable request. The wit-
ness then proceeded to describe the facts that
had fallen under his observation as they have
already been so often presented to the public.
The manner in which he described the occur-
rence which immediately preceded the fatal
rush was this :—“ Mr. Price ordered them to
fall in: they replied they would not; they
would not work under their officers.”
Witness proceeded to say: I saw the prisoner
John Chesley not at the tramway but at the
quarry. He spoke to Mr. Price. I noticed
nothing particular in his demeanour : his
manner was rather civil at the_ time. I can-
not identify any of the other prisoners now at
the bar, as present on that day.
Witness was cross examined at very con-
siderable length by the prisoner Daniel Dono-
van, hue nothing material was elicited.
Cross-examined by John Chesley: You
were exempt from labour on account of your
health. For the benefit of your health you
were allowed to walk about on shore within
the boundaries. I believe you were shifted
to the Success from the President on account
of your healih. You were under medical
treatment all the time you were in the Success.
Mr. Price at your request had written to Van
Diemen’s Land, and ascertained that you had
come from that colony a free man, and were
not a bolter. I did not see you on the tram-
way at all.
Prisoner: All I have to do now, Sir, is to
ask you what was my general conduct on
board the hulk ?
Witness : Since you have been on board the
Success, Chesley, your conduct has been quiet
and orderly.
Prisoner; I thank you. Sir.
Cross-examined by Mr. Milner Stephen:
When Kelly held up his fist at Mr. Price, he
was retreating back towards his work. The
phrase he used to Mr. Price was, “You b y
tyrant, your race is nearly run.” I most de-
cidedly swear the word was “ tyrant,” in the
singular number. I cannot say whether the
prisoner James Anderson was in the quarry
party. I did not see him. Anderson’s name
had been sect in to Mr, Price, at Mr. Price’s
own suggestion, for a recommendation for
good conduct about six weeks before. This
application was with a view to his lemoval to
the stockades. It came back not approved of.
Anderson is under sentence for horse-stealing,
being his first offence. He is a native youth
from the other side (Yan Diemen’s Laud), and
I am informed of good family.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Young : You
have been at the Success since December last.
Your conduct has been good since you have
been under my charge. Mr. Price removed
you from the lower to the upper deck as an
indulgence, not thinking your case a bad one.
Did you ever know of my giving a saucy
answer to Mr. Price ?
No.
Or to any officer?
Your manner was certainly sometimes ra-
ther excited but you were never punished.
Do you remember my asking the Inspector-
General leave to write to my friends, and he
answering “ Talk of that next Lap year,”
and my saying “ Why that is four years?”
No. lam sure if you wanted to write to
your friends Mr. Price would permit you.
Prisoner said Mr. Price had always acted
as an upright man to him. He protested he
had no part in his death, and did not
even know on what grounds he was charged
with participation in it, as he had not
yet seen the depositions.
Mr. Hyland was next examined ; Daniel
Donovan, the prisoner at the bar, was one of
the four persons who seized on Mr. Price
after Malloney had thrown the stone that hit
him on the side of the head. The four men
were Donovan, Mallcuey, and Daniel, and
William Jones (the last two were acquitted
on Saturday night). After Mr. Price had been
rushed down the slip, several of the pri-
soners remained upon the tramway. As
witness ran along the tramway himself
he looked back and saw John Chesley the


foremost of the men,pursuing him and throw-
ing stones after him. After the death of Mr
Price, witness saw the convicts running about
in all directions, as if anxious to see where
they could break through the line of sentries.
Saw many creeping on their hands and feet
towards the sentries, and afterwards return
ing when they perceived they were dis-
covered.
Cross-examined by Donovan ; I was about
ten paces from Mr. Price when he broke away
from the four men who first seized him. He
was half-way down the incline. I was at the
head of it. None of the stones thrown after
me hit me. The men pursued me about 160
yards, thiowing stones after me all the time.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Chesley : I
did not observe you at all that day, until I
saw you running after me on the tramway,
I was about forty-five yards ahead of you.
Prisoner : I will prove by the medical officer
and by my fellow prisoners, that I have not
ran those two years, and that the state of my
legs does not enable me to run.
Witness: You ran fast enough that day.
Prisoner: You saw me throw stones, you
say. You do not say so in your deposi-
tions.
His Honor read the depositions, and did
not find any mention of Chesley’s throwing
stones.
Hyland; I was not asked that question at
the inquest, your Honor.
Witness in continuation: The medical
officer told you he could not do anything
for you on board the Success, that if he ope-
rated on the veins of your legs you would re-
quire a person constantly to attend you, and
he would endeavor to have you removed to
the Lysander. You had got some blue-stone
from me for the removal of proud flesh.
His Honor to the prisoner : Are you suffer-
ing from the leg now ?
Prisoner ; Yes, your Honor.
His Honor : You would perhaps wish to
sit down ?
Prisoner: I thank your Honor, after a while
I would.
Witness; I recollect the doctor saying re-
peatedly that he would have you removed
to the Lysander, but I cannot swear to the
conversation you now speak of,
Prisoner : Do you remember my having 43
lbs. irons on me ?
Witness: 36 lbs.
Prisoner insisted they were 43 lbs.
Witness : They were 36 lbs., and I recollect
what it was for. It was for taking Mr. Price’s
horse out of his stable at Pentridge and rid-
ing away with him.
Prisoner : Well I did nothing but a manly
act. It was no mean job.
Witness : It was an attempt to escape.
You rode through the sentries.
Prisoner ; Do you remember a man named
James Murphy on account of a difficulty
about a bit of tobacco being neddied ?
Witness: He was not neldied. I brought
up the man before the magistrates for having
tobacco.
Prisoner here cross-examined the witness
as to the manner in which he had searched
for the tobacco.
Witness explained that the man was sen-
tenced by the magistrates for having tobacco,
which was a breach of the regulations. Wit-
ness had searched him. Mr. Wintle was pre-
sent.
Prisoner: Do you remember a man named
Young being neddied?
Witness: He was not neddied. He made a
spring at me to bite my thumb, and he nearly
took my nail off. The sergeant struck him
with a pair of handcuffs.
Prisoner; What was my character on
board.
Witness: You were not a troublesome
man.
Prisoner : Do you recollect my ever getting
into any troubles, any scramblings, any back-
bitings ?
Witness: I remember your fighting with a
man named St. Glair.
Prisoner denied it and said if it was true
he would have been brought up for it.
Witness: Yes; you were brought up for
it, but only as disorderly conduct.
Prisoner: I never was brought up but
once, and that was for saying to another
man that the Governor was dead.
Witness: You would not be brought up for
saying the Governor was dead. 1 recollect
some men cheering because the Governor was
dead.
Prisoner: Oh, that was none of me. I heard
the sentry say that the Governor was dead,
and 1 told another man that he was dead,
and that was the only thing I ever was
brought up for; and 1 must be a very quiet
man, and have the patience of Job, to have
spent two years in the hulks and never to
have got into any trouble but that. That
was no easy thing,
Witness: Oh, it is easy enough, if a man
will only keep himself quiet; but you are a
man I never have had any trouole with. I
say that I consider you a quiet man.
The prisoner then examined the witness at
great length as to alleged grievances about
soap, fresh water, aud what prisoner consi-
dered to be Mr Hyland’s officicusness in per-
forming every function on board the hulk.
He accused him of perpetually irritating the
temper of the men, and wound up by saying,
“ Well, I tell you now, and you know it, that
you caused Mr. Price’s death, and no one
else.
Notwithstanding this compliment, Hyland
again gave the man a good character.
The prisoner Donovan asked permission to
put another question: How long have you
known me, Mr. Hyland, and what is my cha-
racter ?
I have known you for two years, and
I have always noticed you to be a very quiet
man. I never knew any complaint against
you.
Mr. Hendry, overseer of the Success gang,
was next examined. Having stated the same
general facts as to the occurrences of the day
that he had already stated on other occasions,
he proceeded to say Mr. Price had advanced


along the tramway to where Bryant was
stacking sand with a shovel. There were two
shovels there. There were two men stacking
sand. The cart party came up. The prisoner
Young, now at the bar, was in the cart party.
At the moment Malloney was threatening
Hyland, and just before the first clay was
thrown, Young, the prisoner at the bar, was
conducting himself in a very excited manner
in the front rank of the gang opposite to Mr.
Price, and when Malloney threw stones,
Young was among the men rushing at Mr.
Price. I saw him afterwards at the bottom of
the slip, and again in the crowd about Mr.
Price, when he was struck down near the
pool of water. In fact, I saw Young all the
way down. I could see from the expression
of his face that he was holloaing and
shouting, and he was struggling with an
evident effort to get at Mr, Price and
strike him. Some of the men about Mr.
Price turned back, and as I then left the posi-
tion where I had been standing, and turned
my attention to the men on the tramway, 1
saw Chesley (now at the bat) there running
about in a very excited manner. I hear i
him saying, “Any man that would give
information to the tyrants I would hang
him—l would hang him.’’ He was tumping
about with a pick handle in his hand.
The witness was cross-ex trained by the
prisoner Donovan at great length.
The prisoner Chesley asked His Honor to
look to the prisoner’s deposition and observe
that though he had sworn to-day that he, Ches-
ley, was looking about with a pick-handle in
his hand, he had mentioned nothing of it in
hi depositions. . .
His Honor looked at the depositions, and
said it was so.
The prisoner hoped His Honor would give
him the benefit of it.
Prisoner to the witness; Why did you not
mention all this at the Coroner’s Inquest ?_
Witness; I had not brought it to mind
then. , ,
Prisoner: You had not made the yarn up.
Witness: You may depend upon it if it had
occurred to me I would have mentioned it.
Prisoner: Was I not exempted from work,
and allowed to walk about on shore, on ac-
count ol my health ? .
Witness : You were, within certain limits.
Prisoner: Did you ever see anything wrong
about me ?
Witness: See anything wrong? I never had
occasion to biing you before a magistrate.
Cross examined by the prisoner Young ;
Prisoner : What was my character ?
Witness ; You have always been a very
quiet well-conducted man, as far as I know.
Prisoner : Did you ever hear of me getting
into riot ? I have never had an hour of soli-
tary ; that is the reason why Mr. Price al-
ways had so good a word lor me. Were there
not a great many complaints lately ?
Witness ; The" men have several time re-
fused to work within the last four months.
Prisoner : Was Mr. Price ever brought there
before?
Witness : I think he was once ;
Prisoner: Were the complaints always
groundless ? Did Mr. Price ever make any
alteration on account of the complaints?
Were not the complaints generally about short
rations ?
Mr. Price did direct that the _ prisoners
should have the privilege to see their own pro-
visions weighed.
Prisoner: You always saw me what they call
“ an outsider- man,” keeping by myself, making
no acquaintance, and being wholly on my own
bottom ?
Witness ; I did not particularly notice you
in that way more than any other man.
Prisoner: Did you see me leave my cart on
the day in question ?
Witness: You did leave your cart, and I
saw you about Mr. Price on the ground below,
gesticulating, as if you wanted to get at
him. I did not see anything in your hand.
[The prisoner cross examined the witness
at great length, and with great mi-
nuteness, earnestly insisting throughout
that witness must have made _ a
mistake in the prisoner’s identity.
He stated repeatedly that he did not believe
that witness had any ill will against him, but
was persisting in a mistake originally con-
ceived in the confusion and alarm of the mo-
ment at which he was looking on at the oc-
currences] , , , ,
Dr. Wilkins, medical attendant of the hulks
was called on behalt of the Crown, and de-
scribed the condition of the body.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Chesley :
You were under medical treatment, but I
have not considered you as under treatment
for the last six months. I have not seen you
much for the last six months. You have been
suffering from varicose veins in your legs; but
I considered you as nearly cured of late, and
not under treatment. 1 have seen you latterly
only at long intervals- You were in irons on
board the President. It was not necessary lor
me to apply to have these irons removed. If
I thought they were injuring your legs I
could remove them myself on my own au-
thority. Ido not consider your disease was
produced by the irons. It is a disease com-
mon outside. I talked about sending you to
the Lysander, but you have more than once
told me you were well, .
Prisoner: I told you I was better Sir? Do
you not think I could scarcely walk ?
I believe you were scheming. Some said
you were the fastest runner in the gang. Va-
ricose veins are generally produced by pres-
sure from above. Irons on the ancles are not
very likely to produce varicose veins.
Prisoner; Am 1 able to run ?
Witness: Oh. yes; you are able to run. "he
last time I saw you, you came to me from the
end or the ship last enough. It is common
for prisoners to produce these sore legs them-
selves.
William Denny a prisoner of the Grown
from the hulk Success : Saw all the prisoners
at the bar that day, saw Donovan standing
among the men on the tramway. I did not


-see him do anything. I saw Chesley on the
tramway, did not see him do anything, I
saw Anderson there. I saw him strike the
Inspector-General on the slip. He struck
him with either a pick handle orthe handle
of a spalling hammer, on the back, I went
on board in the first boat. 1 was one of the
Eersons who got water for the Inspector, and
elped to carry him towards the lighthouse.
I saw Young on the tramway that day. I
did not see him do anything.
The witness was cross-examined by the
prisoners Donovan and Chesley, but nothing
material was elicited.
In the course of a long cross-examination
by Mr. Stephen, witness said he had seen the
prisoner Anderson cover up, one of the men
who were found hid in the hole. Witness in-
formed the officers that the men were covered
up. Thought it was his duty to do so. His
sympathies “ for the time present” were not
with his fellow prisoners but with the Go-
vernment. Witness has come here from Van
Diemen’s Land. Came here free after having
served a sentence of ten years. Has been
twice convicted in this colony.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Young ; I
did not see you do anything. I always ob-
served that you were “ a man oy yourself ” on
the works. You did not associate with
others, nor take part in any mobs (groups of
five or six men, who were in the habit of
messing and otherwise associating together,
as the prisoner who put the question ex
plained it). The Inspector-General had not
time to make answers or give explanations
He had not time to say “forgive me ” till he
was rushed.
Henry Fee : prisoner of the Crown. Saw
all the prisoners at the bar that day. Saw
Donovan on the tramway. He was standing
within five or six yards of the Inspector-
General. Did not see him do anything, Saw
Chesley that day on the top of the tramway
after the rush. He was running qu along the
the tramway, and he cried, “ Come along, we
have him,” flinging a stone at the Inspector-
General. He afterwards went down to the
bottom of the tramway. Witness did not
see him come back to the tramway.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Chesley:
I saw you and a man named Horan run
along the tramway, and you flung stones at
the Inspector-General. There was no crowd
there then. I only observed you and Horan.
Prisoner : Your Honor will observe
Hyland says that at this moment a mob of
twenty-tire men were pursuing him.
His Honor in a friendly manner advised
the prisoner to make no observations, but to
proceed with his examination.
The prisoner thanked his Honor, and
hoped his Honor was noting.
Prisoner to the witness: What did you see
me do then ?
Witness: You went down the bank towards
Mr. Price.
The prisoner hoped his Honor would note
this.
His Honor: I have noted it.
How far was Mr. Price then away from
where he was first rushed ?
Witness : About fifty yards.
Prisoner appeared particularly anxious that
his Honour should noie each of these answers
evidently as conflicting with Mr. Hyland’s ac-
count that he was then in pursuit of Mr.
Hyland,
Cross-examined by the prisoner Young: I
did not see you do anything.
By Mr. Stephen : I have come here from the
gaol; I have been in a cell with Bussell,
Quinn, and Downey, the other convict wit-
nesses. 1 did not swear anything against
Anderson or his depositions.
Captain Blatffiford was produced by the
Crown, that the prisoners might question
him if they thought fit.
Mr. Stephen ; Did Kelly use the words said to
be applied to Mr. Price, in the singular or the
plural number?
Witness; To the best of my belief in the
plural, and in the singular too.
Downey, a prisoner of the crown :
Saw Chesley there that day. He ran along
the tramway, and from there flung stones at
Mr. Price below. He afterwards went down
off the tramway to where the Inspector Gene-
ral was. He then mingled with the body of
men who surrounded the Inspector-General.
Witness did not see him afterwards.
Cross examined by the prisoner Chesley: I
saw you come up the embankment from the
seaside, as I considered it, with the object to
cut off Mr. Price, and you sang out “Come on
boys, come on.”
Prisoner : You know, I hope, you all ob-
serve, that the deposition says no such thing
as that I sang out. Every one of them is
making additions to the story that he told
betore.
His Honor read the deposition and said he
found it was not mentioned.
Prisoner : thanks,your Honor. They have
been making it up since.
Witness in continuation : I did not see you
after you had been throwing the stone at the
Inspector General. 1 did not see any officers
there. The officers had ran a way. It Mr.
Hyland was there 1 did not see him.
1 homas M'Sawley, prisoner of the Crown:
Is a prisoner on board the Success. Was on
the tramway on the day in question. Saw
Young and Chesley, two of the prisoners at
the bar there. Saw Chesley strike Mr. Price
with his hand holding a stone in it. This
was in the middle of the tramway. Did not
see Young do anything, was not examined
betore the Coroner. Did not observe either of
the other prisoners that day.
Cross-examined by Chesley: 1 saw you
strike the blow as Mr. Price was being rushed
down tin tramway. I told an officer that I *
wished to give evidence in the case.
Prisoner: I have not the leeft doubt that
they could get forty more of these
hulks, P they had the least of hastening
their indulgence by it, to swear a hundred,
men’s lives away.
Prisoner : Were you ever a public informer ?


Did you ever give information to the Govern-
ment ?
Witness ; I decline to answer that question.
When did you tell the officeis that you had
evidence to give ?
On the Monday after Mr. Price died—that
is, a week after it.
John Reed, prisoner of the Crown : Saw all
the prisoners at the bar near Mr. Price at ihe
Sand reef that day, saw Chesley strike him
with a stone-hammer on the side of the head ;
saw Anderson throw stones at him: saw
Young strike him with a stone. I was not
examined before the Coroner.
Cross-examined by Chesley: Mr. Hyland
was still there when you struck Mr. Price
with a small hammer such as they break stones
with.
Chesley: Why, good God, if I did that it
would be instant death! Where did 1 strike
him?
Witness: Over the ear.
Prisoner: Did Ido anything else?
Witness: Yes, you followed him a yard or
two down the slip, threw a stone at him, and
said, “ That will do; he has got enough from
me.”
Prisoner: That would be a capital story, if
you told it in time.
Cross examined by Mr. Stephen: I was
first examined about this eight or ten days
after Mr. Price’s death, but I informed one of
the officers that I had evidence to give in two
or three days after the occurrence.
Cross-examined by the prisoner Young :
The way I came to give a statement was
this: I told Mr. Hyland that I wished for
pen and ink to write, and that I wanted to
see the Superintendent, He asked me was it
about Mr. Price. I said it was, and he said
he would send a magistrate to examine me.
I never mentioned any of the names until I
had seen Downey after he returned from the
inquest- I have been in a cell with Quinn,
Downey, M'Cauley, and the other convicts
who have sworn against the prisoners, in all
six of us. I was put into the cell on Monday
and withdrawn on Tuesday. I had no con-
versation in this affair with the other men,
except that this was a dreadful business I
came to the hulks convicted for horsestealing
I slept in the cell with M'Sewley, Quinn
Downey, Fee, and another convict who gave
evidence for the Crown. The chief conver-
sation between us was about all that had
gone by in our lifetime. About Mr. Price’s
murder we only said that it was a very sad
affair—a very brutal transaction. I do not
remember ever hearing mentioned any of the
men’s names that were engaged in it.
Prisoner; When you talked about the
death of Mr, Price, did nobody say who did
it ?
Witness: No, everybody kept their own
counsel. i
Prisoner: ifhen you were at the works did
you never hear any conversation among the
prisoners that they would hang any man for
their liberty ? No.
1 did not hear your name mentioned in
the cell, Ido not now know your name. I
saw you heave a stone at Mr. Price, and the
stone hit him on the shoulder, you were on
the top of the embankment, about six yards
from it.
John Gleeson, a warder of the Success, re-
ceived a violent blow on the head that day,
from a stone; did not see any of the prisoners
in the dock there that day.
James Caldwell, sergeant of the shore
guard : Saw Chesley and Anderson that day.
They were two of the later drafts of thirty-
one men that went on board in the evening
I heard Chesley and Anderson then using th.
words “ b y tyrants” to the officers.
Witness produced the bloody stones found
near the pool of blood.
Mr. Robert Maine produced the bloody
shovel found near the same spot.
This closed the case for the Crown.
It was now a quarter to seven o’clock, and
the Court adjourned to ten o’clock on Wed-
nesday morning.
Wednesday, 2%nd April, 1857.
(Before his Honor Mr. Justice Barry.)
MURDER OP MB. PRICE.
His Honor Mr. Justice Barry took his seat upon tha
bench at ten o’clock.
The prisoners, Daniel Donovan, John Chesley,
James Anderson, and James Young, alias Lowe, were
replaced at the bar.
His Honor asked the prisoners whether they wished
to address the jury.
The prisoner Donovan said, they had witnesses to
call.
His Honor: The usual course is to address the jury
before calling witnesses.
Mr. Sewell sugge-tedto his Honor, that in England
prisoners conducting their own defence were allowed
to reserve their addnss to the jury until they had
examir ed their witnesses.
His Honorjiwas aware of that. He only meant to
inform the prisoners of the usual course of proceed-
ing.
Mr. Milner Stephen addressed the jury in behalf of
the prisoner Anderson. He argued the law of the
case at considerable length, citing several new authori-
ties to prove the necessity of establishing a common
purpose of murder, of violent assault, or of resistance
at all hazards, before any person who took no actual
part could be held guilty of the murder. As regarded
the special case of his client, he relied particularly on
the fact that no free person had spoken to his
having struck a blow or taken any part in
the rush. The only testimony against him by
any free man was the comparatively insignificant
fact that going on boai d two hours alter the
occurrence, a number of prisoners continued to use
the expressions fowaids their officers which had been
so frequently used that day ; and that Anderson had
on that occasion used the phrase “the b y ty-
rants,” This was the only evidence borne by free men
against his client. Counsel then proceeded to review
at gieat length the evidence of the convicts ; to point
out alleged contradictions in it, and to show the
strong motives which might influence men situated as
they were to render what they might believe would
be considered as a service to the Crown.
The prisoners then proceeded to call their witnesses.
John Hammon, a prisoner of the Crown, examined
hy the prisoner Donovan; I saw you at the sand heap
that day. I saw the rush made on Mr. Price. Tou
did not take part in it. You immediately turned
round, went down the embankment on the land side,
and proceeded to the tent.


Cross-examined by Mr. Sewell: When the prisoner
came back to the tent he stood there talking to a
number of men. A man named Wight was one of
these three men ; Branningan I believe was another ;
a man named Smith was there; I believe Kelly,
recently acquitted, was there, but lam not sure,
went on board with the first batch of men. The pri-
soner did not go on board then.
John Jones, a prisoner of the Crown, examined by
the prisoner Donovan : I was present at the assault
made on Mr. Price. I did not see you on the railway,
but I turned away myself directly on the assault being
made. I saw you going before me towards the tent.
Cross-examined : On the brow of the embankment
met a man named Kelly, who has been lately tried
and acquitted here, and I walked with him to the
tent. The prisoner was before us. I came here from
New Zealand. 1 went there from Van Diemen’s Land.
I was under two sentences for robbery in Van Die-
men’s Land. I am now under sentence for horse-
stealing. I went off to the c hip in the first boat.
Robert Pasco, Visiting Justice of the Hulks, ex-
amined by the prisoner Chesley : I have known you
since you have been in the hulks. I have no remem-
brance of any misconduct of yours. My present im-
pression is that your conduct has been good. I re-
member your coming to me to complain of your legs
being bad, and the pressure of your chains upon
them. I referred you to the medical officer. As
well as I remember, you could rot be operated on in
the President, as you could not have the necessary
attendance. I was under the impression that you
were to be removed to some place where you could
be operated on. Some hospital, as you could not be
cured in your cell. I think I represented the matter
to the Government.
To Mr. Stephen; I do not remember any case of
Anderson being brought before me as a magistrate.
Examined by the prisoner Young : I remember your
speaking to me about an application made by you re-
garding thejustice of your conviction.
Prisoner; Do you remember my being brought uo
for saying to another prisoner “the Governor is dead.”
Witness : I recollect it; you were brought up for a
breach of the regulations in speaking ta another pri-
soner whde at exercise. It was your first offence, and
you were only admonished.
The prisoner here handed a letter to his Honor from
the late Chief Justice, written to a person who had
interested himself in getting an inquiry instituted into
the facts of the case on which the prisoner had been
convicted. By consent of the Crown it was read. It
went to show that the Chief Justice was willing to in-
quire into the case.
James Fleming, examined by the prisoner Chesley :
I recollect two or three days before Mr. Price’s death
seeing the witness Pee, prisoner of the Crown, bring
you a knife and a file. He wanted you to make a saw
for him. You refused to do it. When Mr. Price went
up on the railroad I was walking between the tent
and the railroad. Immediately after the occurrence
took place I saw you standing between the hand-carts
and the spot where the rush took place. I saw Fee
come to you on two or three different days about the
saw. He said he wanted to escape.
George Murphy, prisoner of the Crown, examined
by the prisoner Chesley : I was on the tramway within
about three men of Mr. Price when the rush took
place. 1 did not observe you at the moment of the
rush; but just after it had taken place I observed
you on the right of the railroad, going towards the
Sacramento gang. I did not see you move from
where you were standing until the whole was over,
when you went away in the Sacramento direction.
You remained on the railroad as long as six or seven
m mutes.
Malcolm Smith, superintendent of the Sacramento,
examined by the prisoner Chesley: Is acquainted
with the regulations as to indulgence extended to pri-
soners. There is a regulation that no absconder or
person under a second conviction can have indulgence.
except for some meritorious conduct, or under soma
special circumstances,-
Kenny, a prisoner of the Crown, examined by
the prisoner Chesley: I recollect Fee (the convict
witness) coming to you with a saw and counter-sinker.
I said to you '• you must beware of that man, he is
getting up a plot against you or some other person.”
Icannot tell what was the conversation between you
and him, only you told him he must not be coming to
you with such tales as that.
Witness, turning suddenly to the Court: Your
Honor, Fee is the greatest scoundrel in the world.
Cross-examined : Came a free emigrant from Eng-
land. Is under sentence of ten years for burglary,
of which he has seven to serve.
John Bidwell, prisoner of the Crown, examined by
the prisoner Chesley: Was on the railroad that day
when Mr. Price was attacked. You were there when
the attack took place. I cannot say whether you
stayed there after the attack took place. My atten-
tion was on Mr. Price, but I did not see you move.
Cross-examined; I went on board in the third
boat. My trousers were taken off. There was blood
on my trousers. I had fallen cn shore and cut my
knee, which occasioned the blood. (The witness here
suddenly turned to the Court, evidently thinking he
had got an opportunity of making his own com-
plaints known, and began an enunciation of griev-
ances, which his Honor however immediately checked,
and the witness was removed.)
Robert Roberts, prisoner of the Crown, examined
by the prisoner Chesley: I was near Mr. Price when
the occurrence took place. I saw you. I think you
were seven or eight yards from Mr. Price. I never
ost sight of you until I saw a body of men returning
from where Mr. Price was lying. You then went away
n the direction of the Sacramento gang.
Cross-examined : I did not keep my eye continually
on the prisoner, but I never lost sight of him, for I
turned away from the rush, I had no wish to see what
was, going on.
Cross-examined: I was tried with Melville for horse-
stealing, and got a sentence of twelve years,
William Jones, prisoner of the Crown, examined by
the prisoner Chesley: I was employed washing that
day. I saw Quin with the scales in his hand. He
was within sixteen or seventeen yards of where Mr.
Price was. When the rush took place he laid down
the scales hastily, and ran away towards the light-
house. He did not stop until he got near the burying-
ground, that is about eighty yards from where Mr.
Price was rushed.
Mr, Henry, called by Chesley; Icannot tell where
Quin was when the rush occurred. lam only able to
say that a few minutes before it happened I saw him
within about forty yards of the place.
Arthur Richards, prisoner of the Crown, examined
by the prisoner Young ; I was on the railroad on the
occasion. I was working in the same cart with you.
You were in the bibbs of the cart with me when the
rush took place, You left the bibbs, but you stood
to the cart, and did not take any part in the rush.
Cross examined : We were within six or seven yards
of Mr. Price. I had complained to Mr. Price.
James Gavan, prisoner of the Crown, examined
by the prisoner Young : I was at the cart—next cart
to yours. I remember your leaving the cart shortly
before the rush took place, and going down to the
tent. You came back just as the assault had occurred.
You did not afterwards leave your cart until the men
at the carts fell in.
This closed the evidence for the prisoners.
The prisoners then severally addressed the jury,
Donovan reviewed the evidence, witness by wit-
ness, dwelling a good deal upon certain discrepancies,
principally of time.
The prisoners Chesley and Young severally addressed
the jury, after which
Mr. Sewell replied for the Crown.
His Honor then charged the jury. He explained
the law relating to murder, and the responsibility of
persons taking part in proceedings which resulted in


murder, as he had had such frequent occasion to do
during the last ien days, and carefully reviewed the
evidence, analysing it as it affected each of the prison-
ers.
The jury retired to consider their verdict at half-
past six o’clock.
At seven o’clock his Honor called the Jury into
court and asked them had they agreed upon their
verdict.
The foreman answered that they had not.
His Honor then sa'd that he could not receive their
verdict after 12 o’clock. If they arrived at a verdict
at any time before that hour they might send for him
and he would come down and receive it.
At half-past ten o’clock the jury having agreed upon
a veid'Ct. sent for his Honor
When his Honor had taken his seat upon the bench,
the jury came into court and delivered the following
verdict:—
Daniel Donovan, not guilty,
John Chesley, guilty,
James Anderson, not guilty,
John Young, not guilty.
John Chesley being asked whit he had to say why
sentence of death should hot be passed upon him,
said : My lord, 1 return thanks to the Almighty God
that he has guided the hearts of the jury in favour of
my fellow-prisoners. Although condemned to death, I
can say that lam an innocent man. I have had as
good a character as any man of us all, and there is rot
a scratch against me in the prison these two years, ex-
cept enly that attempt *o escape. My conviction has
been brought about upon a chain of evidence no two
parts of it agreeing. Mr. Hyland described me to be
pursuing him along the railroad at the moment that the
other witnesses described me as throwing stones at
Mi. Price, jumping down the embankment, and going
in among the crowd that surrounded him. Both can-
not be true. The witness Pee has stated that
I followed the Inspector General down the
slide. If that was true I could not have escaped
the observation of all the officers. Mr. Hendry stated
that after the occurrence he saw me with a pick-handle
in my hand. He had not said so in his depositions,
but he has thought fit now to bring a heavier pressure
of evidence to bear against me in order to make t e
case look blacker than it did before. My lord, I
hope all these tilings will be weighed and brought to a
point. I have been brought in guilty of what Ido not
deserve. I say again what I said before, and Ido not
deviate from it. lam as innocent of the murder of
John Price, Inspector of Prisons, as any man breathing
upon earth. I have one request to make that if there
be anything in mj favour in regard to merer, whether
in the evidence or in respect of the cruelty I have suf-
fered from irons, that your Honor would report it in
my favour. [Here the prisoner paused for a time. He
again proceeded with greet earnestness J Does it look
accountable or reasonable, your Honor, what has been
sworn against me, that I should have a stone- hammer
in my hand and strike Mr. Price with it, and that hav
ing this stone-hammer I should then throw it down
to take a stone and fling it at him? If anything is to
be done in my bahalf, 1 trustto your Honor to do it.
His Honor then proceeded to pass sentence. He
said : It is a great relief to my mind, at the end of
these protracted sittings, that I have to pass the last
sentence of the law on only one of you four men.
That you, Donovan —that you, Anderson—that you,
Young, have escaped I sincerely congratulate you;
and I earnestly hope that this may lead to a refor-
mation in your lives. It seems that punishment
upon punishment, and indulgence given as largely as
indulgence could be afforded, have not in some in-
stances that have come before us produced the ex-
pected results. I hope that the escape that you have
had to-day will operate in your hearts, and, through
you, in the minds of the unfortunate associates among:
whom you will have to pass many miserable days.
That these trials have done good I hope. They have
revealed what was before only matter of surmise and
conjecture, and, I fear, very ill-founded belief in the
minds of many. The subject, and the very difficult
subject, of the management of you and your associates
has had much light let in upon it, and that a more
candid opinion will be formed it is to be hoped. It is
painful to be obliged to say that but one influence can
be used in the management of you, that influence
being severity accon panied with unremitting vigi-
lance. Still severity without justice would be cruel,
and to tolerate cruelty would be abhorrent to the
feelings of a British community. The subject of penal „
establishments will, I doubt not, engage the serious
attention of the Govirnment [so we understood his
Honour, who at these words was not perfectly audi-
ble], I believe in my heart, were it from your own
expressions solely, though there were no othe 1- evi-
dence, that the gentleman whose death we have been
inquiring into here was just, though severe. The ex-
pressions that have fallen from yourselves lead inevi-
tably to that conclusion. John Chesley, I believe
from evidence now before me, that you have been
twice convicted in Van Diemen’s Land.
Chesley : It is not true, my Lord.
His Honor : Such is the report before me.
His Honor proceeded to say, alluding to the at-
tempts at escape made by Chesley an 1 other of the
prisoners; That you >houid have attempted to escape
is not to be wondered at. The love of liberty is inex-
tinguishable, and it is not for me to animadvert
with severity on such attempts, but it shows that
when men in your position make these attempts
against every' precaution tnat is taken, there is no
cruelty in taking the precautions. I hope that you
who have escaped, when you return to the place from
ivhieh you came, will make known among your asso-
ciates that crime among \ ou will not pass unpunished,
and that you will not escape conviction because the-
iaw may have to complete its evidence by the testi-
mony of men looked upon with suspicion in conse-
quence of the turpitude of their lives and the infamy -~
of their characters. Even were there no evidence but
the evidence of your associates, it would be my dhty
to tell the jury that they must de?l with that evi-
dence as best they might, and that it was not beyond
the pale of their duty to convict. It is now my < uty,
John Chesley, to pass upon you the last sentence ot
the law, accompanying it with a kindly and fiiefidly
admonition to use the time allowed to y’ou as bSst
you may. The carrying out of hat sentence
rests with other persons. It rests with
her Mijesty’s Government. However much-
disposed I might be to have mercy extended
t > you I could do no more than put your case favour-
ably, but I do not feel myself justified in saying that
I am so disposed. His Honor then passed the sentence
ot death.
The prisoner James Anderson said : I beg to thank
the jury and the Judge. lam very sensible that I
have had justice done to me. I beg also to thank my
counsel, and the gentlemen who brought up my wit-
nesses.
ou ; Young: And so say I, John Young.
sfor- Donovin ; And I, Daniel Donovan.
tent The prisoners were removed, and the Court ad- .
yas journed. f
for the murder of Mr. Price, eight of whom were acquit ted, •
By, Richard Jones, William Jones, Daniel Donovan, Janes v
Fifteen prisoners were put upon their trial for
namely, John Williams, Henry Smith, James Kelly,
Anderson and John Young. The seven found guilty were Thomas Williams, Thomas Maloney, Henry Smith
{alias Brennan), Francis Brar.igan, William Brown, Richard Bryant and John Chesley.


vJsSk


