

Cfjromcle.
FOR 1814:
CONTAINING A
GENERAL AND BIOGRAPHICAL 111 STORE
*
THE ROYAL NAVY
OF THE
CUmteh ;
WITH A VARIETY OF ORIGINAL PAPERS ON
NAUTICAL SUBJECTS.
Under the guidance of several
LITERARY AND PROFESSIONAL MEN.
VOL. XXXII.
(FROM JULY TO DECEMBER.)
** O’er the glad waters of the dark blue sea.
Our thoughts as boundless, and our souls as free,
Far as the breeze can bear, the billows foam.
Survey our Empire, and behold our home 1
These are our realms, no limits to their sway.”—(BYRON.)
LONDON:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY AND FOR JOYCE GOLD, 103, fUOE-EANE ;
And sold by Messrs. Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, & Brown, Mr. Wilkie, Messrs. Sherwood,
Neeley, and Jones, and Messrs. Walker & Co. Paternoster-row; Messrs. White & Cochrane,
Fleet-street; Mr. Asperne, and Messrs. Richardsons, Cornhill ; Messrs. Black, Parry, & Co.
Leadenhall-street •, Messrs, Crosby and Co. Stationers'-hall-court; Messrs. Scatchard and
Letter man, and Mr. Law, Avemaria-lane; Mr. Lindsell, Wimp ole-street; Mr. Booth,
Dnke-strcet, Portland-]>lace; Mr. G. W. Wetton, Maidenhead; Messrs. Mottley and Co. and
Mr. Mills, Portsmouth; Mr. Woodward t Portsca; Mr. Johnson, Gosport; Messrs. Congdon,
Hoxland, and Platt, Dock; Messrs. Haydon—Curtis—Smith—Rogers—and Nettleton, Ply-
mouth; Mr. Godwin, Bath; Messrs. Norton and Son, Bristol; Mr. Robinson, Liverpool;
Mr. Wilson, Hull; Messrs. Manners and Miller, Mr. Creech, and Mr. Constable, Edin-
burgh; Mr. Turnbull and Mr. Lumsden, Glasgow ; and the principal Booksellers in the
different Seaport Totvns throughout the United Kingdom*




biographical memoir
CAPTAIN MATTHEW FLINDERS, R.N.
Or oak, or brass, with triple fold,
Around that daring mortal’s bosom roll’d.
Who first to the wild ocean’s rage.
Launch’d the frail bark, and heard the winds engage
Tempestuous, when the south descends
Precipitate, and with the north contends j
Nor fear’d the stars portending rain,
Nor the loud tyrant of the western main.
Francis: Horace; od. i, 3.
CERTAINLY it is not one of the least of our national honors,
that while we have been gaining trophies on the ocean by the
naval exploits of a Blake, a Hawick, or a Nelson, we have been
erecting imperishable monuments of nautical fame, by the adven-
turous spirit of a Drake, a Dampier, and a Cook. Possibly
future Britons may not feel more proud of that warlike display of
the trident* which has marked the eventful period of our history
comprised within the prolonged reign of George 111. than of
those pacific, yet hazardous enterprises of navigation, for extend,
ing the bounds of natural knowledge, and conferring benefits upon
mankind. Nor among the celebrated names that in the various
paths of life shed lustre upon the annals of this maniy island,
must the patriot navigator neglect a grateful tribute to that of
Flinders.
At the precise period when this hardy and persevering mariner
had just made good his title to be enrolled among those worthies
of his profession, who have merited the gratitude of all 44 they that
go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters,” +
by the final delivery of the elaborate account of his labours to the
public, has he been cut off from amongst us in the prime of
life, by maladies, originating from sufferings that consecrate his
memory as that of a martyr to the cause of his country and of
science.
• Trident:— “ J.c trident de Neptune est le sceptre du monde,” (The world-
commanding sceptre of the deep), is a verse of the composition of Lemieree
(author of Ceramis, a tragedy ;) of which verse he was so extremely proud, that
he used to call it (xar’ tZoyr.t) “ man vers.”
•|* Psalm evil, 23,
iSavutfjiron.Vol. XXXII. a a


Fortunately for the public, he did survive the completion of that
task; and fortunately for the readers of the *9abal ®bronitU, the
•writer of the present lines, in the course of his researches connected
with another branch of this publication,* of which he has the habitual
superintendance, entered into a correspondence with the deceased
Subject of this memoir, which led to his obtaining such heads of
biographical information, as, coupled with subsequent assistance
from his surviving relatives, hare enabled the writer to undertake
this sketch of his life and public services.
Matthew Flinders was the eldest son of Mr. Matthew Flinders,
a surgeon, settled at Donington, near Boston, in Lincoln.shire,
and of Susanna, his wife (whose maiden name was Ward) : a man
of education, and excellent moral habits, much esteemed for his
professional abilities, and whose father and grand-father had suc-
cessively and successfully practised the medical art in that neigh,
bourhood. Besides Matthew, his parents had another son named
Samuel Ward, now a lieutenant in the navy, and several daugh-
ters. He was born at Donington, on 16th March, 1774.
Being designed to follow the profession of his father, after passing
some years at a reputable free-school in Donington, he was at the
age of 12 years sent to a grammar-school at Horbling, in the
same county, then conducted by the Reverend John Shinglar;
where, in addition to the usual english studies, he acquired some
knowledge of the latin and greek classics. After a stay of three
years at this seminary, he returned home to prosecute his medical
education: but for this he evinced little or no inclination, and
having met with, and read, partly by stealth, that book to which
Britain is indebted for so many of her most valuable sailors, the
venerable recorder of the ship-wrecked narrative, Robinson
Crusoe, t Flinders felt inspired with all the spirit of enterprise,
• Hydrography ; from volume xviii, down to the present one.
t When Captain Flinders returned to his present biographer, the sheet of
printed biographical interrogatories, adopted in this department of the ißftbttl
Cf)tOmdc at the suggestion of a correspondent. (Plutauch : 5&. (£. xxviii, 114.)
there was found written opposite to No. 24: w Juvenile or miscellaneous anecdotes
illustrative of individual character ? Induced to go to sea against the wish cf
friends, from reading Robinson Crusoe The biographer also happening to under-
stand, that to the same cause, the navy is indebted for another of its ornaments
(Admiral Sir Sidney Smytiie), was in a great measure thereby led to give
another studious rending vo that charming story ; and theuce to adopt a plan for


and restless desire of peregrination, with which those surprising
adventures hardly ever fail to fire the youthful mind : so, resolving
upon a sea.faring life, he wrote to a cousin, John Flinders, who
had served his time under Admirals Gardner, and Aißeck, to ex-
press his wishes. His cousin in answer slated :—the little chance
there was of success in the navy without powerful interest j* that
he himself had served nearly eleven years,- and had then but slen-
der hopes of attaining to a lieutenant’s commission; f but that he
had better at all events study Euclid and Robertson’s elements ,
and make himself well acquainted with Moore’s navigation.
The ardour of our young sailor was not to be so damped;
and he attended only to the advice contained in the latter part of
this admonitory epistle. He sat himself to work, and before a
twelve-month had elapsed, he, unassisted by any master but
Hamilton. Moore, so far taught hjmself alone navigation, that his
knowledge of trigonometry surpassed that of the school-master of
his native place.
This was in the year 1790: when being 16 years of age, and
having received some encouragement from a female cousin, J at
that lime preceptress to the two daughters of Captain (afterwards
Admiral) Pasley,| he (in the month of May) ventured to present
himself as a volunteer on board the Scipio, then lying at Chatham ;
was kindly received by that officer, who commanded the ship, was
put upon her quarter-deck ; and afterwards followed him into the
Bellerophon. But the causes of the armament of which this ship
its republication, now almost at maturity, Robinson Crusoe, illustrated with
explanatory notes, and embellished by maps, and cuts of technical or scientific
subjects, edited by the Hydrograpiier of the 38. <£. will be published at the
office of this publication in the course of a few weeks ; under the designation of
the “ Naval-Chronicle edition and is hereby recommended to the early notice
of the patrons thereof, and, in general, of.all those engaged in the tuition of
youth.
* “ Inlerest ; —a baneful, but alas ! too familiar and true an expression.
Is there aio remedy ?
t It is, however, due, in justice to the memory of Admiral Affleck, to state,
that Joint Flinders, after long being his follower, was made a lieutenant into the
Cygnet, sloop-of-war; on board which ship he soon after died in the West Indies,
of that destructive epidemic, popularly termed the “ yellow fever.”
;f This lady is since married to—— Newbold, Esq. of Kingston-upon-Hnll.
( A biographical memoir, accompanied by a portrait, of Admiral Sir Thomas
Easley, is in the JB. <£. vel, iv.


was part, having ceased, and an expedition being just fitted otrt
under Captain (now Admiral) W, Bligh, for the purpose of trans-
planting the Bread-fruit tree from the Friendly-isles to those of the
West-Indies, our adventurer, who never accustomed himself to
inactivity, in 1791, with the assent of his patron, Captain Pasley,
embarked on the Providence ; and from thence may be dated that
predilection for nautical discovery, which became the ruling passion
of his life.*—(Bread-fruit is the artocarpus incisa , Linn.)
In this voyage he proved an useful auxiliary to Captain Bligh ;
for he was ever ready to assist in the construction of his charts,
and in astronomical observations: indeed, although still but a very
juvenile navigator, the latter branch of scientific service, and the
care of the time-keepers, were principally entrusted to him.
After his return home in the latter part of 1793, he again joined
his old commander, whose broad.pendant, as commodore, wa»
flying in the Belierophon ;+ and in the memorable fight of the Ist
of June, was aid-de-camp to that distinguished officer.
As it is the smaller and unobserved actions of a man’s life, that
give the greatest insight into his character, we relate the following
anecdote. When Lord Howe broke the French line on that
decisive day, the second ship from the Queen Charlotte was the
Belierophon ; her guns would bear on three of the enemy’s ships,
and some of those on the quarter-deck having been left loaded and
primed by their men while called off to trimming sails, &c. Mr.
Flinders, having at that time no other but the general orders to
fire away as fast 7 as possible, seized a lighted match, and at the
instant his ship was passing under the stern of a French three-
decker, fired in succession as many of the deserted guns as would
bear, right into her. Commodore Pasley having observed his
actions, shook the young hero violently by the collar, and
* Although the memoranda with which the biographer has been favoured by
the late Captain Flinders’ relatives do not allude to the circumstance; yet a regard
to accuracy renders it proper to mention, that Captain F. himself, in answering
the 9th biographical query : “ First and other ships he ever sailed in ? ” names the
Dictator as the third in order, between the Belierophon and Providence : but as
he neither mentions the captain, nor alludes to any other circumstance connected
therewith, it wms most probably a mere temporary turn-over, or guard-ship
rating, not to lose any time of servitude.
f The conduct of the Belierophon is particularly described in 38. <£. i> 20;
iv, So 9,


sternly said, u How dare you do this, youngster, without my
orders?” Mr. Flinders innocently replied, u he did not know,
but he thought it a fine chance to have a good shot at ’em.”
After returning to port from this battle, being still fonder of
royages of discovery than of the regular routine of service, our
navigator, in July or August, 1794, joined H. M. S. Reliance,
commanded by Captain Henry Waterhouse,* formerly fifth
lieutenant of the Bellerophon : In the Reliance, Captain, now
Admiral, John Hunter,+ was to embark as governor of the young
colony at Port. Jackson, on the coast of New S. Wales. In this
voyage he flattered himself that opportunities for following his
favourite pursuit would frequently occur; and in this he was not
disappointed; for where such opportunities did not occur of them,
selves he contrived them, pointed them out to the governor, and
faithfully realized that officer’s views. It was not, however, until
the 15 th of Februapy, 1795, that the Reliance left Plymouth, in corn*
pany with the grand fleet, under Earl Howe; and perhaps the great*
est number of merchant ships for various destinations, that ever at
once quitted the English shores. Previous to sailing, as his ab-
sence was likely to be protracted for a number of years, he paid
a visit to his friends in Lincolnshire ; when finding his brother
Samuel was inclined to follow the same career, he prevailed on his
father to let him join him in the Reliance as a volunteer.
In September, 1795, he arrived at Port. Jackson, and suffered
only a month to elapse, before he and bis friend, Mr. George Bass,
surgeon of the Reliance, being'unable 16 procure any better
equipment, began operating, in a little boat of eight feet long,
called “ Tom-Thumb;” they entered Botany Bay, and explored
George’s River twenty miles farther up than it had been carried
by Governor Hunter’s survey. But to give an account of the
different excursions, hazardous undertakings in boats and small
vessels, as well as the miraculous escapes of our daring explorer,
during the nearly five years stay of the Reliance in the service of
the colony, would exceed the limits of this species of narrative, at
well as anticipate the pleasure the reader will enjoy in perusing the
* Captain Waterhouse departed this life, 27th July, 1812. See jß.d, vol.
zxviii, 264.
+ See J®. d. vol. vi, for the memoir and portrait of this officer.


natal biography.
published account of the Voyage to Terra-Australis* itself; he i» f
therefore, referred to the Introduction of that publication; whereby
he will be satisfied that, amid difficulties insurmountable to moat
other men, no occasion was lost, nor exertion spared, to pro-
mote the geographical knowledge of this new and interesting
portion of the globe.
He passed his examination for the rank of lieutenant at the Cape
of Good Hope in 1797, and was appointed, in a vacancy, acting
lieutenant of the Reliance, by Governor Hunter, on her second
arrival at Port Jackson : an appointment he principally attributed
to the kind offices of his friend, Captain William Kent, + who well
discerned his merit; and it was afterwards confirmed by the Admi-
ralty ; which circumstance he always thought arose from some
favourable representations from his first patron, Admiral Sir Tho-
mas Pasley,
On the return of the Reliance to England in the latter part of
1800, such were the signal services he had rendered to navigation
and geography in New Holland, and such the merits of the charts
and information which he laid before that great promoter of useful
knowledge, Sir Joseph Banks, that this gentleman, after writing
to the Admiralty on the subject of a further voyage of discovery,
pointed him out the fit person to carry the plan in execution. In
consequence of which, early in 1801, Lieutenant Flinders was
appointed to the command of the Xenophon, then lying at Sheer-
ness, under orders to fit out for this particular service; her name
was changed to the Investigator, pursuant to directions from the
lords-commissioners of the Admiralty; and previously to sailing
♦Terra-australis: —the name which Captain Flinders appears to have
•affixed unto the tract of land hitherto most unscientifically called New-lloliand. n
We have long wished to see it receive a more appropriate appellation. The one in
the text is certainly more descriptive ; but we do not altogether approve of the
needless recourse to a dead-language. Why not call it more concisely Australia ?
or else, to denote its contiguity to that division of the globe, under which it is pro*
pcrly classified, why ma} r it not be called either Australasia, or Austr’asia? But
really A T eu?Holland, iVew-South-Wales, and a score or two more of such unmean-
ing new titles tacked to old countries, which being inhabited, cannot have beea
without some local name, is quite surfeiting. Hyduocraphlr 0. (£.
f This officer also has since paid the debt of nature on the Mediterranean station,
on £9lh August, 1812. The Editor has been encouraged by Admiral
to hope for a contribution of Captain Kent’s professional biography.


•n this service, Lieutenant Flinders received the rank of com-
mander.
During this sojourn in England, and in the month of April the
same year, he married Ann, step-daughter of the late Reverend
William Tyler, rector of Bratoft, in Lincoln-shire: her own
father, whose name was Chappell, died at sea, in command of a
vessel out of Hull, in the Baltic trade.
In July 1801, he sailed from England, and successfully per-
formed his voyage : in about eighteen months he circumnavigated,
and actually examined near the whole coast of li Terra-Austra -/
Its;” an island little inferior in size to the continent of Europe :
but at the close of these operations he was shipwrecked on an
unknown coral reef.
“ The Investigator was accompanied in the early part of her voyage, on
the coast of New Holland, by the Lady Nelson brig, and was condemned
as unserviceable at Port Jackson, in August 1803. Upon which the Por-
poise was fitted to carry home Captain Flinders, and some of his officers,*
in expectation of getting another ship, to renew the purposed voyage of
discovery. Which, after investigating the coast of New Holland, particu-
larly the S.W. part, would have been extended to the South Seas. The
intended track of the Porpoise homeward, lay through Forest’s Straits, be-
tween the coast of New Holland and New Guinea, into the Indian
Ocean.
“ The first notice that appeared of the shipwreck of the Porpoise and
Cato, was published at Port-Jackson, in the Sidney Gazette; of which the
following is a copy : Captain Flinders, late commander of H. M. sloop
Investigator, and Mr. Park, commander of the ship Cato, arrived at
Government-house, at half-past three in the afternoon of the Bth instant
(September, 1803), with the following disagreeable intelligence, as commu-
nicated in a letter to the Governor.-}-
* Those with a star prefixed remained at Port Jackson,
M r - Fowler, first lieutenant of the Investigator.
Samuel W. Flinders, second lieutenant, brother to the captain.
John Atkin, acting master.
Robert Pnrdie, surgeon.
♦ Mr. Brown, naturalist.
IVllHam Westall, landscape painter.
* Mr. Bauer, botanic painter.
Mr. Mart, carpenter, (who built a schooner on the reef, in a masterly
manner, although the first he had ever constructed.)
f The late Philip Gidley King, post-captain, R.N.


“ * gi*, “ ‘ Sidney, New South Wales, Sept. 9, 1803.
“ ‘ I have to inform you of my arrival here yesterday, in a six-oared
cutter, belonging to bis Majesty’s armed vessel Porpoise, commanded* by
Lieutenant Fowler; which ship, lam sorry to state to your Excellency, I
left on shore upon a coral reef, without any prospect of her being saved, in
latitude 32° 11' S. and longitude 155° 13' E.: being 196 miles N., 88° E.
from Sandy Cape, and 729 miles from this port. The ship Cato, which
was in company, is entirely lost upon the same reef, and broken to pieces,
without any thing having been saved from her ; but the crew, with the
exception of three, are, with the whole of the officers, crew, and passen-
gers of the Porpoise, upon a small sand bank, near the wrecks; with suffi-
cient provisions, and water saved from the Porpoise, to subsist the whole,
amounting to 80 men, for three months.
“ ‘ Accompanied by the commander of the Cato, Mr. John Park, and
twelve men, I left Wreck Reef in the cutter, with three weeks provisions,
on Friday, August the 26th, in the morning; and on the 28th, in the even-
ing made the land near Indian Head, from whence I kept the coast on
board to this place.
“ ‘ I cannot state the extent of Wreck Reef to the eastward, but a bank
is visible in that direction, six or seven miles from the wrecks. In a west
direction we rowed along the reef twelve miles ; but saw no other dangers
in the passage towards Sandy Cape. There are several passages through
the reef, and anchorage in from 15 to 22 fathoms, upon a sandy bottom:
the flag-staff bearing S.E. to S.S.W. distance from three quarters, to one
and a quarter mile.
“ ‘ After the above statement, it is unnecessary for me to make applica-
tion to your Excellency, to furnish me with the means of relieving the
crews of the two ships, from the precarious situation in which they are
placed; since your humanity, and former unremitting attention to the
Investigator, and Porpoise, are sureties, that the earliest and most effec-
tual means will be taken ; either to bring them back to this port, or to send
them, and myself, onward towards England.
u ‘ I enclose to your Excellency a letter from Lieutenant Fowler upon
this occasion; and as he refers to me for the particulars of the wreck, an
account thereof is also enclosed.
“ ‘ I think it proper to notice to your Excellency, that the great exer-
tions of Lieutenant Fowler, and his officers, and ship’s company, as well
as the passengers belonging to the Investigator, in saving his" Majesty’s
stores, have been very praise-worthy ; and I judge, that the precautions
that were taken, will exonerate the commander of the Porpoise from the
blame, that might Otherwise be attached to the loss of his Majesty’s armed
vessel. 1 have the honour to be, &c.
* The direction of the ship’s course remained with Captain Flinders. The
Porpoise had been originally a Spanish packet.


The following is an extract from the narrative of an officer of the
Bridgewater, giving an account of the melancholy catastrophe, and
describing the situation of the shoal.
“ The Cato was standing right on us, whilst wearing ; and luffing up
close under our bow, we called to her to put her helm a-starboard, fearing
she would be on board of us ; in which case we must both inevitably have
been onshore ; she did so, and luffed up close under our stern.
“ The ship’s head now drew off the reef; and in a few minutes, we hap-
pily cleared the surf, and perceived the ship drawing fast from a fate
so recently appearing unavoidable. The officers were assembled, and
Captain Palmer spoke to us as follows: ‘Do you think it prudent, consi-
dering circumstances; the darkness of the night, the swell, the heavy surf
(for so the reef was), with the uncertainty of our safety ; to attempt send-
ing, or giving the Porpoise any assistance f or would it not be more prudent,
to stand off and on, and be ready to give every assistance in the morning?'’*
The latter was thought most advisable, as the former could only have ter-
minated in the sacrifice of officer, boat, and crew.—We stood off and orj
during the night, which was tempestuous, with frequent and violent
squalls of rain and wind. In the morning, at day-light, we saw the Por-
poise was nearly buried in the surf, her bow and bowsprit only showing
themselves! and we had the melancholy sight of the Cato, having shared
the same fate : this was augmented by the impossibility, from the violence
of the weather, of rendering them any assistance. We lay between the
reefs till the following day ; when, lying-to, we again made the reef, and
could see little, or nothing, of the wreck of the Porpoise remaining ; and
the Cato, with her bottom exposed to a tremendous surf: not a soul out of
the two ships was it in our power to save.
“ This shoal is in extent about four or five miles, stretching N.N.W. and
S.S.E. in longitude 153° 4l' east, and south latitude 22° 20'. We passed,
after this, through Shorthand’s, and Dampier’s Straits. The Bridgewater
afterwards proceeded to Batavia for the purpose of obtaining refreshments;
and during her stay there, intelligence was received of the’renewal of hos-
tilities : in consequence, Captain Palmer took advantage of a land wind,
and slipped his cable in the night.f
This difficulty, however, Captain Flinders surmounted; pro-
cured from Governor King, and safely conducted to the fatal reef,
a vessel, sufficient to convey his officers and people to China; and
still persevering in his intention of getting himself and his valuable
♦ Why this was not more effectually done, does not appear. But, according
to our information, a young midshipman immediately stepped forward, and
begged, that Captain Palmer would allow him to collect volunteers, that ha
might go to the assistance of his countrymen.
f See JBabal <£{jtdUtde, xii, 4.30; xvii, 130, 223, 325, 405; xvii, 52, 134,
401, 485.
satj. Cfiron, Vo).XXXII.


discoveries to England with all possible expedition, crossed the!
great southern ocean in a schooner of 29 tons burthen, named the
Cumberland, when, on the 17th of December, the very day four
months on which he was wrecked, he entered Port Louis, in the
Isle of France. Here, in contempt of his commission and pass,
ports from the friendly powers of Europe, he was cruelly detained,
and lingered out an imprisonment of six years and a half. This
.conduct of the French governor showed that he was worthy of his
Corsican master, and the najne of De-Caen* will be consigned to
infamy as long as mankind shall consider it honorable to promote
science, and virtuous to practise hospitality. On his return to his
native land, in October 1810, he was promoted to the rank of
post captain ; and the then first Lord-commissioner of the Admi-
ralty (Mr, Yorke) was considerate enough to date his commission
the 7th of May, 1810; as far back as the time that minister
came into office. It would appear, that this was all that could he
done consistently with the rules of that department; although
Mr. Yorke acknowledged, that had Captain Flinders arrived in
England safely with his charts and discoveries in 1804, he would
at that time have merited the promotion he received in 1810.
Thus a loss of rank for six years was one of the evil consequences
arising from his abominable and (among civilized nations) unpre-
cedented bondage. +
About this time, that is, in the beginning of 1811, Captain
Flinders received the commands of his superiors to undertake the
publication of his voyage, in order to form the sequel to those of
Cook and Vancouver. And it was during this period of literary
seclusion, that the ®i)tBnicle being presented to his notice,
obtained no small share of his regard. Besides answering the
established biographical enquiries with the utmost candour, Cap.
tain Flinders was always accessible to reference touching any nau-
tical or scientific points upon which the Hydrographer (without
personal acquaintance) took the liberty of consulting him, and
liberal to the greatest degree in imparting his knowledge : J as the
reader will be thoroughly convinced of by a perusal of the follow-
ing unadorned epistle:—
* ©atol (Chronicle: xiv, 332.
f Ibid, xii, 450 ; xvi, ISO, 223, 325, 405; xvii, 52, 134, 401, 459.
t Ibid, xxvi, 231.


1 have had the honour to receive your printed letter of queries, as to my
life and public services; and return it with notes, as desired. My Voyage
will not, as I expect, be out of the press before 1814 ; so that the mention
snade in the newspapers was premature, and without my knowledge. At
the proper time, I shall be willing to have it announced in the Naval
Chronicle.
I am sorry it is not in my power to give much information upon the
charts of Ceylon, of Saldanha Bay, and of the Cape of Good Hope. Ido
not recollect how they lay down the Trident, or Whittle, rock. The fal-
lowing marks for it were given to me at False-Bay;—
Cape Point, by compass, S«W.J W. Noah’s Arch, distant 6or 6 j miles.
N.W.b.N. Cape Hanglip, S.E. fE. Muusenberg Houses, N. fW. It lie*
four miles from the shore to the westward ; and has 12 feet upon it at low
water. As to Mauritius, the best chart I have seen, is that published in Grant’*
history of the island ; although, like all the rest, it is defective in the inte-
rior. The latitude of Port Louis is 20 s 10'S. apd longitude, from a series
of lunarobservations, 57° 45J’ E.; but these observations having been made
in 3804 and 5, when the errors of the lunar and solar tables were con-
siderable, it is probable that the longitude is from 10' to 15' too great.
The insertion of the note upon the magnetism of ships, in the next
JB. (£.* will make more generally known a subject which is interesting to
every commander of a ship; and probably be the means of preventing some
accidents : as such, I hope it may be acceptable to the readers, and it will
he agreeable to me. I am, Sir, &c.
Hpdrographer of the jB.C.
This was shortly followed by another demonstration, both of
bis unabaling ardour for the propagation of useful knowledge,
and it is allowable to add, the estimation in which he held this
particular vehicle of the same. In the course of the Hydrogra-
pher’s frequent (but not more frequent than deserved) reference
to aa eminent hydrographic authority, a quotation therefrom
upon the specific subject of magnetism, f elicited from our navi-
gator -a critique , equally characterised by accuracy and liberality c
which received insertion under the appropriate head in this work :
but as its readers are necessarily a fluctuating body, and the subject
• ißatal Chronicle • xxviii, 252,
t Ibid* xxvuij 318.


is of importance to navigation (independently of the light thi*
correspondence throws upon individual character), the biographer
Hopes to stand excused for again laying this genuine production of
the sailor’s pen before them.
In the Naval Chronicle for the last month (page 319), under the head
Hydrography, is an extract from Horsburgh’s Directions for sailing to
andfrom the East Indies a work, in which the well-earned reputatipn
pf the author makes error proportionably pernicious, should error be there
found; That part of the extract upon which I propose to make some obser-
vation, is as follows :
“ If the magnetic north points to the eastward of the true north, the
variation of the compass is said to be westerly; and it is called easterly
variation when the magnetic north points to the westward of the true north
pole of the world. So, according to the denomination in vulgar use, if un-
derstood literally, it names the variation of the true north from the mag-
netic north, and not the angle of aberration of the magnetic meridian from
the true meridian, which is intended.”
I have not the Directions by me, but conclude that the extract is cor-
rectly made; and, after premising, that a difference of opinion is not
inconsistent with that respect which I do certainly entertain for Mr, Hors-
hurgh, as a zealous searcher and promulgator of what he believes to be true
and useful, I have to observe, that the above passage appears to me to
contain an error; not in any particular part, but throughout; and, conse-
quently, I believe, that the denominations of the variation in vulgar use arc
correct: that is, when the magnetic north points to the eastward of the
true north, the variation of the compass is said to be, not westerly, as
above, but eastward; and that this is right.
In allowing the variation upon magnetic courses or bearings, it is ad-
mitted that no error exists in the common practice; and the question,
therefore, turns wholly upon the correctness of the denomination. A north
course by compass, where there is two points west variation, is N.N.VV.
true, or by the world. The magnetic north, does it then point to the
eastward of the true north, as Mr. Horsburgh says, or does it point west-
ward, as I presume to think ?
Take two compass cards, and place them one upon the other. Consider
the lower card to show the true points, and the upper one the magnetic, or
compass points. Then, since the magnetic north, with two- points west
variation, is identical with the true N.N.W. place the north of the upper,
or magnetic card, over the N.N.W. of the under, or true card- It will
then, as I think, be evident, that the magnetic north points to the west-
ward of the true pole of the world; and that the denomination in vulgar


use, understood literally, is right. If it can be shown to be otherwise, I
shall be happy to see the proofs, and to correct my opinion.
In another part of the extract from Mr. Horsburgh’s work (N. C. p. 326),
it is mentioned, that Captain P. Hey wood, of H.M.S. Polyphemus, mads
an experiment at Spithead, to ascertain the change in the variation which
might arise from the direction of the ship’s head being altered from the
eastward to the westward ; “ but he could not perceive any aberration
of the needle.” Whoever knows Captain Heywood, will not doubt of his
accuracy; but the compass not being placed upon, or at the binnacle, it
does not solve the question of differences, even for the steering compasses
of the Polyphemus. Captain Heywood was present, in May 1812, when
the experiments instituted by order of the Admiralty, were made on board
the Devastation bomb, at Spithead ; and I believe it would not now sur-
prise him, more than it would me, if, in his first observations, the varia-
tion, instead of being greater when the head was westward, as was the casa
in the Investigator, he had found it several degrees less; since the com-
pass was placed in the fore part of the ship, near, or upon, the knight-
heads. I am, Sir, &c.
The Hydrographer of the lAidttfiem
Naval Chronicle.
P. S. If agreeable to the Editor, and it can be done, he is requested to
communicate this letter to Mr. Horsburgh; and to suppress the publication
of it, should such be the wish of Mr. H.
The P, S. to the above has furnished an additional reason for
reprinting this letter, because it not only places the goodness of
Captain Flinders’ motives in a very just light: but it also offers
occasion to render equal justice to the other estimable man of sci-
ence therein named, Mr. Horsburgh : who equally above dis-
guise, and free from the proverbial waspishness of authors,
at once admitted, and satisfactorily explained the causes of,
the error thus pointed but (which in fact was partly a clerical
and partly a typographical erratum , such as a very voluminous
work is unavoidably liable to). That this amicable controversy
was closed with reciprocal sentiments of respect between the
parties, the following and last document of the series exhibits
conclusive and gratifying evidence:—
Captain Flinders presents his compliments to the Hydrographer of the
.Naval Chronicle, and has the honour to acknowledge the receipt of his
note, relative to the extract from Mr. Horsburgh’s Sailing Directions, He
has. also, received a letter from Mr. Horsburgh, wherein Mr, H. candidly


avows the error into which be had inadvertently falleA. The object which
Captain F. had in view, in making observations upon the extract, being
solely to prevent the circulation of what appeared to him to be an error,
so much the more pernicious from being given on such authority as that of
Mr. Horsburgh, he begs of the Hydrographer to insert, in the next number
of the Naval Chronicle, such an article or note on the subject as will
answer this purpose; and Captain F, wishes this should be done in the
form and manner which shall be most agreeable to Mr. Horsburgh.
London , November 11, 1812.
We may now return to Captain Flinders’ grand occupation ;
which, after immense labour and mental exertion, coupled with
privation of needful bodily exercise, and aiso curtailment of rest
and ease, he, fortunately for science, completed. But, an
organic disease of a chronical character, engendered no doubt by
the early hardships of his professional life ; aggravated by the
pestilential tyranny of Buonaparte’s satellite; and finally rendered
fatal by the improper regimen induced by his literary avocations,
terminated his career, a few days only prior to the appearance of
his elaborate publication, that is to say, on the 19th July, 1814,
at the age of 40 years.*
In the outset of this narrative (page 178), is the well-authentic
catcd anecdote of Flinders’s juvenile study of the “ venerable
recorder of the shipwrecked narrative,” as illustrative of individual
character. The close of our hero’s life has evinced the hold that
that seductive narrative had of him, and exhibits strong and addi-
tional evidence of the truth and justice of the poet’s allusion to the
“ master-passion strong in death.” Nine days only before his
decease, he addressed the following note to the writer of the pre-
sent memoir:—
Captain Flinders’ compliments to the Hydrographer of the Naval
Chronicle, and will thank him to insert his name in the list of subscribers
to his new edition of Robinson Crusoe ; he wishes also that the volume, on
delivery, should have a neat common binding, and be lettered.
London Street, Judy 5th K 1814.
Captain Flinders has left issue one daughter, two years of age,
who with his widow is but scantily provided for by the small pro-
perty he had attained during long employment in a laborious but
• Bsbsl €|roniclc, xxxii, 88.


Unprofitable branch of his hazardous profession. It is to be
hoped and expected this will not escape the notice and consider*,
tion of those who have the administration of the national bounty s
for he died, if ever a man did, a martyr to his zeal for his country'*
service. Of the successful and persevering pursuit of his.favourite
calling, his Voyage in the Investigator will afford the best
proof, and it will remain an imperishable monument of his un-
daunted spirit, and irresistible ability. So strong was his predi-
lection for the adventurous service of discovery, that to his
friends he has frequently been heard to say, that, “ if the plan of
a Discovery-Voyage were read over his grave, he should rise up,
awakened from death.” After his shipwreck, on returning 730
miles in an open boat to Port Jackson, the governor and officers
greeted him with the name of “ Indefatigable ,” a title which it
may be expected his country, when acquainted with his merit, will
not hesitate to ratify.
His private character was as admirable as his public one was
exemplary : his integrity, uprightness of intention, and liberality
of sentiment, were not to be surpassed ; he possessed the social
virtues and affections in an eminent degree, and in conversation he
was particularly agreeable, from the extent of his general infor-
mation, and the lively acuteness of his observations.
NAUTICAL ANECDOTES AND SELECTIONS.
A SAItOR TURNED MANTUA MAKEr!
THE second mate of Mr. Turnbull’s ship (see his Voyage) was so de-
termined in his request to he permitted to take a female native of the
Sandwich Islands on board the Margaret, that it was not deemed prudent
to refuse him that privilege.
He was passionately fond of his mistress, and spared neither expense nor
pains to equip her in the most handsome style. She was in truth in a most
woeful plight when they received her from her relations, being brought to
him without cither wardrobe or jointure, but just as she stood in her native
dress. It was necessary to clothe her anew—no easy task in a ship where
there was neither mantua-maker nor linen-draper. Her husband therefore
purchased several purple-bordered muslin shawls, on which, at every leisure
moment, he worked in his best manner, until at length he produced a sort
of long robe, stitched together rather than sewed: when fitted on the lady,
it had much the air of a leopard’s skin, from the multitude of spots caused


tjy the crossing of the borders in all directions. That her finery might he
of a piece, and she appear a little a-la-mode Brittunie, it was necessary
she should wear pumps. The robe not only fitted, but delighted the poor
girl, but with the pumps she would willingly have dispensed. It was her
husband’s will, however, that she should wear them, and she reluctantly
submitted j this was no small sacrifice on her part, for when the shoes were
tied on, she moved as if she bad been iron shod. This was too painful to
be long endured; she therefore requested to be unfettered ; he consented,
and her finery was laid aside till she arrived at Otaheite. One of her hus-
band’s shirts was substituted for common wear, during the passage.
From the first moment of the ship’s arrival, she was received with un-
common attention by the ladies, who flocked round her in crowds, re-
garding her attentively from head to foot, and complimenting her very
courteously. Whether it was that her colour so nearly resembled their own,
or that the splendour of her dress so far exceeded any thing they had before
seen, they were in raptures with her : every one pressed eagerly forward to
pay their respects. After they had gazed awhile in this manner, the women
withdrew with her into the ship’s hold. The cause of this privacy was
unknown—whether they suspected it was some man dressed up to impose
on them, or that, previous to her reception amongst them, there was a
kind of masonic ceremony to be observed ; but so far is certain, that, from
what the woman said, they examined her very closely. None were more
busy on this occasion, than some of the branches of the royal family.
CEREMONY AMONGST SAILORS ON CROSSING THE LINE.
As this ceremony is of long standing amongst sailors, and though some-
what ludicrous, yet, when well acted, is sufficiently amusing, we shall
insert it here.
On this very important occasion, one of the most comic characters (the
uglier the better) amongst the ship’s company, is selected to represent Ne-
ptune. This point settled, the next is to choose a suitable retinue of
attendants to act as tritons, sea-horses, mermaids, &c. as the circumstances
of the case will admit. From amongst these a kind of committee is chosen
to arrange the embellishments and decorations suitable for the occasion ;
such as painting, perfuming, powdering, &c. Invention is at this time on
its utmost stretch who shall most excel in metamorphosing themselves into
such extravagant characters, so as not to he recognised : this arrangement
occasions a great stir and bustle—no peeping..behind the scenes—if any
one should venture, even of their own party, it is at his peril. The im-
portant moment arrived, Neptune, (as if really issuing from his watery
element) from behind a screen hanging across the fore part of the ship,
with a voice as of an infernal, demands, through a speaking trumpet,
“ What ship is this—tehat is the captain’s name ?” At this instant, down
drops the screen, and Neptune, with his attendants, is seen arrayed in
all his pomp and majesty, seated on a triumphal car (generally a gun-
carriage, with a grating run across it), holding in one hand a tremendous
whip, and in the otjier a fish-gig or pair of grains as a trident, and having


JI.M.S- York, of a sot).
Late!), in Montagu street, the lady of Vice-admiral Sir Richard
Stracban, Bart, of a daughter.
At Kxmunth, the lady of Captain Cocks, K-N. of two daughters.
At the same place, the lad) of the Hon. Captain Jones., lI.N. of a
son.
On the lath of June, at Stonchoose, the lady of Captain Schomherg,
R.N. of a son.
On the 19th of June, in Piccadilly, the lady of the Uon. Commissioner
Courtney Boyle, of the Transport Board, of a son.
MARRIAGES.
Lately, Captain Bill, II.N. to Augusta, daughter af Joseph Boekcn (j
Esq. of Falmouth.
Lately, at Halifax, Nova Scotia, Commissioner the Hon. Philip
Wodehousc, of the naval yard at that place, to Miss Cameron, second
daughter of Governor Cameron, of New Providence.


On M® 19th July, Captain Matthew Flinders,+ R.N. greatly lamented
by hisfamily and friends. This gentleman’s fate had been as hard as it
lias been'eventful. Under the direction of the Admiralty he sailed, in
I SOI, upon a voyage of discovery to Terra-Australis; where, after pro-
secuting successfully the purpose of his voyage, he had the misfortune
to run upon a coral rock, and lose his ship; out of the wreck he con-
structed a small vessel, that carried him to the Mauritius; where,
shocking to relate, instead of being received with kindness, as is the
practice of civilized nations to nautical discoverers, he was put in prison
by the governor, De-Caen, and confined for six years and a half, which
brought upon him maladies that have hastened his death. Fortunately
for mankind and his own fame, be survived a few days the finishing of
the printing the account of his voyage.
* See life of Earl How e, vot, i. and Portrait, vot. ix.
+ for farther particulars relating to Captain flinders, see N, C, xiv. 832,
ixviii. 318,321, 323, 400,401,
