



QUEENSLAND INSURANCE BUILDING
80-82 PITT STREET, SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA


BIOGRAPHY OF THE QUEENSLAND
INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED
This Company had its genesis in 1886, when James
Burns, founder of Burns, Philp & Co. Ltd., formed The
North Queensland Insurance Co. Ltd., with its Head Office
at 24 Bridge Street, Sydney. It was fostered at the com-
mencement by the parent Shipping Company, and the
career of the undertaking has been marked by extraordinary
progress. Marine underwriting was the sole activity of the
Company at its inception and business was rapidly acquired.
As the operations increased in size it was decided, in 1891,
to add Fire Insurance to the Company’s activities and the
business progressed steadily, with the result that in 1893 the
Head Office accommodation had become inadequate. The
Company then purchased a freehold property at the corner
of Pitt and Bridge Streets, Sydney, where the previous Head
Office building was subsequently erected.
In 1896 the business of Sydney Lloyds was acquired,
and in 1905 a subsidiary Company was floated and called
The North Queensland Accident Insurance Co. Ltd., to
transact Accident business only—a class of business which
the parent Company was precluded from accepting under
its Memorandum of Association, which could not be altered
under the conditions of the New South Wales Companies
Act then in existence. In 1906, due to an amendment of
this Act, the Company was enabled to alter its objects to
include Accident risks: therefore, the business of The North
Queensland Accident Insurance Co. Ltd. was absorbed by
the parent Company, and "North” was dropped from the
Company’s title, which then became the Queensland
Insurance Co. Ltd.
In 1897 the business of the Company began to expand
and Branches were opened in Melbourne, Adelaide and
Wellington, N.Z., to replace existing Agencies. A few


years later, additional Branches were established throughout
the remaining Australian capitals and also elsewhere in the
Dominion of New Zealand. A Branch was opened in
London in 1904. These Branches have since increased in
number, and there are now 31 in Australia and eight in
New Zealand. In 1922 the Company decided to further
extend its operations abroad as a result it now has
Branches in India, Canada, Fiji, Singapore, and Java. In
addition, the Company has over 100 Agencies, extending
to countries such as Holland, Belgium, Denmark, South
and East Africa, China, Egypt, Iraq, Palestine, West Indies
and many other important centres throughout the world.
The following comparative figures indicate the rapid
growth of the Company. During its first year of establish-
ment in 1886 the net premium income amounted to
£16,430, and the paid-up capital was £12,300. To-day, the
net premium income exceeds £1,000,000, paid-up capital
is £750,000, and the Company’s assets exceed £4,000,000.
From a small beginning when Marine Insurance only
was transacted at the time of its flotation, the Company
has grown to such an extent that it now underwrites every
class of insurance with the exception of Life; moreover, as
indicated, its ramifications have become world-wide, and
the overseas business continues to expand.
The acquisition of the new building which the Com-
pany now occupies became necessary owing to the in-
adequacy of the old Head Office to accommodate the
increased staff consequent upon the progress and expansion
of the Company’s activities.
The Queensland Insurance Co. Ltd. is the largest
Australian Fire, Marine and Accident Insurance Company,
and it is remarkable that from such a small beginning, as
indicated herein, the Company now occupies an important
position as one of the largest Australian institutions.


QUEENSLAND INSURANCE BUILDING.
The Queensland Insurance Building is located at 80-82
Pitt Street, Sydney, between Hunter Street and Martin
Place, and it is of interest to note that the site of the struc-
ture is reputed to be the location of an ex-Governor’s
house, which was built in the early days when New South
Wales was a Colony.
Completed in 1940 and rising to a height of 150 feet,
the new structure consists of a basement, with 14 additional
floors —the ground floor having approximately 10,000 sq.
ft. and all other floors slightly more than 6,000 sq. ft. of
letting space. The Sydney Branch of the Company also
occupies the ground floor and basement, the latter contain-
ing a Clinic for the treatment of Workers’ Compensation
cases, which is the most modern of its kind in Australia.
Two main entrances from Pitt Street are provided,
which also serve the basement direct, and the various floors
of the building are-served by four fast lifts. The walls of
these two entrance vestibules are lined with marble in
three colours, and the floors are also paved with black and
dove-grey marble.
The exterior of the building is faced with two types of
specially made bricks, and the window treatment is of the
serrated type, which give a vertical motif to the facade.
The shape of these windows primarily is to deflect the
sun’s rays and to prevent direct penetration of heat.
The building is air-conditioned throughout, and the
operating machinery is the largest single unit type of its
kind in Australia. The air, which is constantly changed,
being cooled in summer and warmed in winter.
The entire building is of fire-proof construction, is
fitted with automatic fire alarms which communicate direct
with Fire Brigade Headquarters, and, in addition to the
main stairway, contains fire escape stairs. Furthermore,
there are 96 steel-frame automatically closing fire doors to
the various passages and stairways, all constructed under
Fire Underwriters’ regulations.
This office building, in which is incorporated all
modern requirements, is one of the largest of its type in
Australia.


LOWER FACADE


FOYER
VESTIBULE


GENERAL MANAGER'S OFFICE


CLINIC—WAITING ROOM
CLINIC—DOCTOR'S EXAMINATION ROOM


AIR-CONDITIONING PLANT


VIEWS SYDNEY BRANCH OFFICE


THE ORIGINAL SITE OF THE QUEENSLAND INSURANCE BUILDING
This buildin g was erect ed, so far as can be ascertained, in 1789, ans it is rwputed that, later, ex-
Governor Bligh resided in this cottage whilst living ashore in Sydney after the arrival of
Governor Macquarie.
(Reproduced by courtesy of The Royal Australian Historical Society)


QUEENSLAND INSURANCE CO. LTD.
Head Office:
80-82 PITT STREET, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
Directors:
JAMES BURNS, Chairman
ROBERT J. NOSWORTHY G. J. A. KERRUISH
JOHN CADWALLADER S. E. WILSON
General Manager - - G. J. A. KERRUISH
Assistant General Manager - - H. W. HORN
Chief Inspector of Branches - F. G. KINGSFORD
Secretary and Public Officer - R. S. FENTON
Foreign Dept. Manager (3 Inspector A. G. POOLE
Claims Dept. Manager - T. E. CUNNINGHAM
Engineering Dept. Manager - - F. T. FRYE
\V. S. PTY. LTD.
