

si-
BIOGRAPHY
MISS ALICE SYDNEY BURYETT,
THE AUSTRALIAN PIANISTE,
AS TRANSLATED FROM
L’EURO PE ARTISTE, PARIS, APRIL 15th, 7883,
c G “9AP -
FOR some time past the preference has decidedly been given to
foreign artists. Paris seems to have praises tor them alone, as
soon as they enter openly into competition with us in the vast world
of art, to whatever branch they may belong. America has particularly
spoilt us by her numerous exotic productions, many proofs having been
given of the eminent artistic taste of the New World, so richly endowed
by nature, and who, understanding their mission, come to inspire
themselves at the true source of Art to develop their faculties and
perfect their talent.
This is the case of the young and charming Australian virtuose
who occupies us to-day.
Miss Alice Sydney Burvett, with her rare intelligence, well under-
stood that her natural gifts alone were not sufficient _ to arrive at
celebrity, and from the day she first placed her small fairy-like hands
upon the key-board, she had but one wish, one thought —to go to
Europe.
Miss Burvett, perhaps, left with regret those luxuriant forests
populated by thousands of birds of harmonious song; possibly she
wept at leaving that beautiful azure sky which has as yet not been
tarnished by our machinery of all sorts, but her future was in Europe,
and she sailed, bidding adieu to her native country and birthplace,
Wooloomooloo.
As soon as she arrived in France the young Australian began her
musical studies at St. Servan, in Brittany, under the direction of
Madame Leon Ross, an American lady, and a professor of great merit,
who, having taken the child in hand, had her work without relax, and
she made such rapid progress that she soon advised her going to Paris.
Miss Burvett left for that city immediately after the Franco-Prussian
War of 1870, at once obtaining the favour of being admitted to the Con-
servatoire (a real favour), she being the first Australian to whom it had
been accorded.


M. Henri Ravina, the eminent professor with whom she took private
lessons for five years, and under whose tuition she terminated her
musical education, interested himself so much on her behalf that ere
long the pupil equalled the master, Ravina declaring that he had no
longer anything to teach her.
Strengthened with this support, and encouraged by the applause
which she received at the Salle Herz, where she gave her first public
concert on March 18, 1874, Miss Alice Sydney Burvett went to London,
where she gave several concerts, and was heard at the Crystal Palace,
Alexandra Palace, Promenade Concerts, Covent Garden, and in several
Salons of the nobility, always with the same success.
After this first and brilliant debut Miss Burvett returned to Paris,
and continued her series of concerts.
A grand occasion for displaying her talents soon presented itself. A
large Charity Concert was being given at the Chatelet Theatre, the
largest next to the Opera House in Paris, which was-attended by 4,000
persons. Kowalski, the well-known Polish pianist, had arranged,
expressly for the occasion, his famous “ Marche Hongroise ” for two
pianos, which, written entirely in octaves, is scarcely abordable,
excepting by great talents. Miss Burvett performed with the com-
poser, who, astounded by the force and precision of her play, declared
her to be the lady unrivalled as a pianiste.
Miss Burvett was applauded by the entire house, and after a double
encore, received an avalanche of flowers. From that moment her
talent was consecrated. After these successes, Miss Burvett undertook
an artistic tour to the principal sea-side resorts in Normandy, where,
during the summer season, many of the elite of Paris take rendezvous;
also to several of the most important towns in France, among which
we may cite Lyons, Rouen, Lille, Havre, &c., where she obtained
legitimate success.
In 1877 she made her debut in Brussels, where, in a Grand Concert,
with orchestra and choirs, which she herself gave at the Palais Ducal
(Prince of Orange’s Palace), for the benefit of the Sauveteurs de
Belgique, General Renard, late Aide-de-Camp to the King, presented
her with a gold medal, accompanied with a handsome diploma.
It was at this time that she commenced at Antwerp the system of
Pianoforte Recitals (the first lady in Belgium who had done so), the
young virtuose succeeding in entrancing a most critical audience under
the charm of her wonderful execution. Thus she visited Liege, Gand,
Spa, Ostend, &c., being the object everywhere of the most flattering
demonstrations. But her greatest triumph was in Antwerp, where she
did not hesitate to play the day after, and in the same Hall where
Rubinstein had just given a Recital, performing Beethoven’s Grand
Sonata in C Major, “ which the celebrated Russian pianist had executed,”
with marvellous virtuosite. _ .
The Belgian Press were warm in their praise, and proclaimed Miss
Burvett a great artiste, even going so far as to compare her to Rubin-
stein.
It was in Brussels, after one of her seances, that Yieuxtemps, _ the late
renowned violinist took the hand of the young pianiste and said, “ My
child, you have indeed a grand future before you. In all my experience
I have never met with fingers having such a perfect execution.”
Returning again to Paris during the Exhibition year, Miss Burvett
inaugurated with great eclat the magnificent “ Grand Salle des Fetes ”
at the Hotel Continental. She was honoured with the patronage of


H.R.H. the Prince ol Wales, and had assembled a societe d’elite,
among'whom were the Princesse Mathilde, several members of the
Rothschild family, Madame Waddmgton, &e. . ■ '
The following winter Miss Burvett undertook a tour m the bouth of
France, visiting Nice, Mentone, and Cannes. Everywhere she obtained
the greatest triumphs, accompanied by numerous floral tributes,_ At
Mentone she had the honour of the attendance, at one of her Recitals,
of their Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of Bavaria, who, her
performance concluded, personally congratulated her warmly on her
great talent, expressing much satisfaction at the programme.
Miss Burvett then started for Switzerland, where, during the season,
she visited Geneva, Bern, Lausanne, Interlaken, &e. She then came
to London, and went through some of the leading English towns, Bir-
mingham, Liverpool, Leeds, Pfuddersfield, Brighton, and Hastings,
returning again to Paris, this time giving a fine Orchestral Concert at
the Salle Henri Herz. ' , „
During the last season in London she held an Evening Concert _at
St James’s Hall, before an audience numbering 1,500 persons, with
immense success. . ... 14-1
The Press of all countries are unanimous in their approval of her
talents. Up to the present Miss Burvett has given over 200 seances on
her own account, her last essay being at Bordeaux, where she fanny
took her hearers by storm. .
Young and charming, tall and fair, Miss Burvett unites the warm and
passionate nature of the South with the distinction of an English lady.
Gay and Wirituelle, she is greatly admired by all those who come in
contact with her. As an artiste she is incomparable m fingering, her
play at the same time full of precision and most versatile. She phrases
marvellously well, and shades with a wonderful lightness of touch the
most fugitive things. Notwithstanding this she has. complete mastery
over her instrument, and, when necessary, a wrist power nothing
short of that of a man’s. m , , ,
She excels in those productions dear to Thalberg’s school, but sur-
mounts with the same facility all difficulties of the various styles .01
different masters, but where she is truly chez die is m fantastic,
original pieces, coming from the brains of such as Gottschaik,
Kowalski, &c. . ,
Although Miss Burvett has already attained a .very marked place
among the virtuose of the piano, she can yet go much further, for as
yet she is quite young, and has before her a most brilliant future,
She has already been nominated a member of the Comite-Artistique cle
ITnstitut Protecteur de I’Enfance, in Paris, and other honourable
distinctions that do as much credit to the artiste as to the “ Femme clu
Monde,” of which Miss Burvett is one of the most graceful ornaments.


