

CELEBRATED
VIOLINISTS
BY
DR.T.L. PHIPSON


This book was donated by;
Mr Bo A» Crome,
253 Attunga Street,
MIRANDA, N.SoVo 2228
May, 1974


C G ITubrey
CELEBRATED VIOLINISTS.


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES
AND
ANECDOTES
OF
CELEBRATED VIOLINISTS.
BY
DR. T. L. PHIPSON.
LONDON;
RICHARD BENTLEY AND SON.
IJaiiLshtrs in ®r&hurE to (fttajesig Hu (Sawn.
1 877-
{Ail fig fils reserved .)


PREFACE
B WELL-KNOWN statesman once said
that the violin had done as mucli for
civilisation as the steam-engine; and
I am certainly not prepared to con-
tradict this assertion. It naturally follows that
a great violinist may exercise as beneficial an in-
fluence on mankind as a great engineer or a great
o o o
philosopher. Of this we shall bo better able to
judge presently.
It is perhaps well to seize upon this oppor-
tunity for a few words on the difference between
a violin and a fiddle. It is not at all an unusual
thing to hear ignorant or vulgar-minded persons
speak of both these instruments as one and the


same production. Bat the fiddle is a much older
instrument than the violin. A kind of fiddle was
used in fairs and shows by the Anglo-Saxons as
early as the tenth century. Some believe it to
have originated in England or Wales; whilst the
violin came to us from France and Italy many
hundred years later, and did not attain its full
degree of perfection till the seventeenth century.
The fiddle of olden times, which was a very coarse
kind of musical instrument, has come down to
us modified in form, and noiu externally resem-
bles the violin. It can be purchased at the price
of a few shillings; but no violin worthy of the
name can be had for less than five to ten
pounds, and for a solo instrument twenty-five
to fifty pounds is the least amount that
will procure a good instrument. For a fine
Cremona violin of one of the old masters
(Amati, Stradivarius, Guarnerius), from one
hundred to three hundred pounds is by no
means an uncommon price. It need scarcely
be added that it is the violin of the seven


teentb century which is referred to at the be-
ginning of this preface.
I feel it almost a duty to my readers to ex-
plain why the present work should differ some-
what widely in character from those which have
hitherto escaped from my pen.
I have long been a violinist; and though cir-
cumstances have caused me to adopt another pro-
fession instead of that of music, yet, from early
childhood, m3' mother’s assiduous caro and un-
tiring energy taught me to make my violin a
source of recreation which has amply repaid me
for years of toil. To her, whose efforts have been
continued by the dear partner of my joys and
sorrows, I owe my first successes in the drawing-
room and the concert-room, and the power, not
only of giving pleasure to thousands, hut of ob-
taining funds for certain charitable purposes
which my purse would be totally inadequate to
supply. Let me add to this that my father pre-
sented me with a line Stradivarius instrument,
when I was little more than twelve years old,
and gave me my first music lesson.


I shall never forget the day—nor the astonish-
ment that it caused to my worthy professor M,
Henri Standish —when my mother once inter-
rupted us in the middle of a lesson. It was a
hot summer day in Brussels, in the year 1852;
we were working away, with our coats off as
usual, when she entered the room with a roll of
music, evidently fresh from the publishers, and
proceeded to unfold it without saying a word.
Then, placing it before my master, she insisted that
he should teach me to play it without delay. It
was the seventh Concerto of De Beriot. The piece
had been recently played at the annual competi-
tion by the older pupils of the Brussels Conserva-
toire, and my excellent professor had obtained the
prize. From that moment I became a violinist.
As years rolled on I took deeper interest
in those distinguished men who have left
behind them well-known names as celebrated
performers, and I have endeavoured to give
my readers, in the present volume, a sketch
of their lives, their characters, and their works.


A violinist, however great, cannot be set up as
the most perfect type of humanity, but it will be
seen, I trust, in the following pages, that it is
chiefly men of high moral and intellectual cha-
racter that have attained celebrity in this diffi-
cult branch of the musical art. In some in-
stances natural genius may have done wonders,
but in most eases courage and perseverance have
had their share also. Corelli, Tartint, Viotti,
De Behiot, were men whose lives many of us
might envy; their performances and their works
have added to the enlightenment of mankind in
every country of tire world, have tended to refine
onr thoughts and soften our feelings, by attract-
ing us constantly towards that which is fine and
beautiful.
London , 1877.


CONTENTS.
r.\Git
Preface . v
Introduction 1
I. LULLI (1633 1687} 7
11, COKELLI (1653—1713)
Geminiani, Philidoe, Locatelli, Somis,
ETC 15
111. The BANNISTERS (16-10—1729)
Davis Mell, Baltzae, Britton,— Origin
of Concerts in England . . .30
IV r , TAETINI (1692—1770)
Vekacini, Yaccai, Linlky,
Madalena Sermen, Lolli . . ,38
V. LECT.EB, GIARDINI, PUG NANI (1697
1798)
The Concerts Spieituels.—Boccherini . 55
YI. YIOTTI (1755—1824)
Gioenowick, Bode, Madlle. Gerbini,
Mori, Kreutzee, Baillot, Lafont,
the German School, Louis Spohr , 69


VII. NTCOLO PAGANINI (1784—1840)
CATEEINA CALCAGNO, PIHNGE BACCHIOC-
chi, Guarnerius, Ciandelli, Camillo
Siyoet, Antonia Bianchi, Loud Byron lio
VIII. CHARLES AUGUSTE DE BfiRIOT
(1802—1870)
Jaootot, Eobreoiits, Maginj, Masosi,
Malibean, the Brussels Conserva-
toire, Lauteeiugh, the Sisters Mi-
laisot.t.o, Lkoxaed, HENRI VIErXTEMRS,
Prince Youssoufoff .... 100
IX. OLE BULL (1810-1875)
Norwegian Fairy Tales.—Vidocq.—
Mdme. Rossini, Thou Andunson . . 182
X. CONTEMPORARY VIOLINISTS.
Ernst, Joachim, Vieuxtemfs, ’Wieniaw-
ski, Sivoßi, St. Leon, Sainton, etc,, etc. 20E*
XI. FRAULEIN SCHMOHLING . . .237
XII
CONTENTS.


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES
AND
ANECDOTES
OF
CELEBRATED VIOLINISTS.
INTRODUCTION.
seems very evident that, in what
ISM y|f “ay be termed early days, music
was systematically cultivated in
Italy with a degree of success per-
fectly astonishing, the influence of which is
widely felt now, and extends deeply into modem
society. No one can doubt that the most
beautiful of all music lias sprung from Italy,
and that Italian music still exerts its beneficial
influence over the whole of the lyric and
dramatic world.


This is the less surprising when we consider
the enormous efforts made for so many consecu-
tive years, we might almost say centuries, in that
favoured clime, to cultivate this and other Fine
Arts in which the Italians have excelled in the
most admirable manner. Take, for instance, the
study of singing as practised in Rome as early as
16,90, when all other musical schools were yet
either unborn or in jr state of embryo; at least,
when compared with what they have since be-
come. Angelini, in his Stori.a della Musiea,
which this eminent singer published in 1(305, tells
us that, at this early period, the pupils in Roman
schools of singing went through the following daily
routine:—First, they sang for one hour difficult
music, to become accustomed to it; another hour
was given to the cadenza or shake; another hour
for difficult passages; an hour for reading and
study, devoted to literature; and another hour for
singing exercises to he performed in presence of
the professor, and before a mirror, in order to
avoid any uncouth or disagreeable attitude or bad
expression of the face. Thus were occupied the
five hours of the morning. In the afternoon half
an hour was devoted to theoretical studies; an


other half hour to the rules of thorough bass, and
copying these rules into their books; then half
an hour again to reading and literature, The
remainder of the day was devoted to exercises on
the harpsichord, to the composition of religious
music, motets, or little songs; in fact, to any species
of composition for which the pupils themselves
showed a predilection. This occurred on days
when the school was not allowed to go out. On
the days devoted to exercise in the open air, the
pupils most frequently went to sing to an echo
near the Monte Mario, out of the Angelica gate,
so that they might acquire some idea of the sound
of their own voices as heard by an audience.
They also sang in the various churches, and the
evening was generally passed in discussions on
style, etc., with the professor.
I have given the passage almost verbatim, as
it is a very curious one. What art could resist
such persevering efforts when seconded by the
natural gifts and instincts of the youthful artists
themselves ■ How could they fail to delight and
charm the whole civilised world ! And with re-
gard to instrumental music, as with singing,
painting, sculpture, and architecture, the stm
I—2


dent of the past will find in Italy a constant
source of power and beauty, spreading its joyful
and refining influence over tbe whole wmrld.
It is to Italy we must look for the greatest of
violin-players as for tbe greatest violin-makers;
and though other nations, especially France and
Germany, and even England, have successfully
followed in the footsteps of Italian art, we shall
have in the present volume ample evidence that
to Italy the world owes an enormous debt of
melody and inspiration.
It is not often that the French will admit
superiority in any other nation ; but M. Choron
tells us in his well-known work that the Italians
have been “ the instructors of all Europe in
instrumental composition.” In violin music their
compositions have served as models, and the same
may be said with regard to the harpsichord, “all
other solo pieces have been constructed on these
models,” etc.
The very first violin-player of eminence was a
certain Giovanni Battista, who lived in 1590, and
to whom various old writers allude on account of
his clever performances. We know, however,
very little of him, and his instrument was very


little cultivated in those days, though history
mentions several distinguished players on the t'ioi
{a much larger kind of instrument) both in France
and Italy.
About IG3O there were iu France some noted
violinists, Constantine, Lazarin, Boccan, Foucard,
and probably others, but no record of their lives
has come down to us.
In Italy, however, about ICioO, an ecclesiastic
known as Padre Castrovillari, of Padua, took
rank as an eminent violinist and composer. He
had a pupil named Bassaui, a Venetian, who was
afterwards the professor of the celebrated Corelli.
The latter instructed, among others, Locatelli,
whose studies did much to perfect the talent of
Paganini. But it must not be supposed that we
can make out a complete chain of violinists;
many celebrated artistes were contemporary, and
belonged to totally different schools. Thus,
Paganini and the “ classical” Spohr were both
born in 1784 ; Lolli, Kardini, and Pugmmi were
contemporaries, as were Lulli and Corelli before
them.
In 1G79 the above-named Bassaui published
several sonatas, and became distinguished by bis


excellent style of performance. -But even in 1670
we find in Germany, at the Court of Saxony, a
very ingenious violinist, Walther, who published
some remarkable works showing a great know-
ledge of the powers and resources of his instru-
ment.


I.
Lulli.
1633—1687.
SNE fine summer day in the year 1646,
the Due de Guise brought back
with him, from Florence to Paris, an
Italian lad just thirteen years of age.
The boy was called Giovanni Battista Lulli, but
more frequently answered to the abbreviated
appellation of Baptista. His dark eyes, long
flowing hair and open countenance, together with
his peculiar soft Italian accent, and, above all, his
remarkable talent as a violinist, even at that early
age, gained him more than one admirer. It ap-
pears, from various accounts, that the lad was
engaged as a page to Mademoiselle de Mout-
pensier, a niece of Louis XIV., and at first she
appears to have been very much pleased with


him. But for some reason or other she got tired
of him as a page, and he was made to fill some
subordinate place in the kitchen ! There appears
to be no doubt that Lulli was an excellent cook,
and had learned the secret of preparing some
very exquisite dishes which none of the French
cooks of the period could manage.
That he got into many scrapes in the royal
kitchen there can he little doubt, for not only was
the head-cook, or chef, jealous of the favour be-
stowed upon her protege' by Mademoiselle de
Montpensier, hut whenever the opportunity oc-
curred he neglected his duties to play some soft
Italian melody on his violin, which so enchanted
the entire force of the kitchen, that one and all
forgot where they were, or what they were doing,
and the dinner was more than once completely
spoilt. Then again, it is said, that one of his
kitchen companions purloined six bottles of wine,
which he sold to purchase Lulli a new violin,
when the old chef had taken his original instru-
ment away. Many a time, indeed, would Lulli’s
violin have been broken over his head by the in-
furiated chef, but it happened that Louis XIV.
had expressed his approval of the sorbets and aeufs
8
CELEJiJiA TED VIOLINISTS.


a La neige, which Luili alone knew how to make.
The head-cook himself passed, however, for the
inventor of those dishes. Luili knew it, and had
the good sense to allow matters to remain as they
were. It protected him from violence.
One day—Luili was then fifteen and a half
years of age —the sun was shining gloriously in
the heavens, the kitchen boys were all as gay as
larks; it is needless to add, the head-cook was
far away, and Luili, who had taken up his violin,
was treating his enraptured companions to some
of his very llnest music, when the Comte de
Nogent suddenly entered the kitchen, and,
to the surprise of all present, took away the
boy and his violin. Never again was Luili to
behold those greasy walls and pans; in iact,
that day proved the commencement of his for-
tune.
The illustrious Count had heard, from the open
windows of his apartment, the sound of Luili’s
violin; his curiosity was excited, and he longed
to know what inmate of the palace could manage
the instrument so skilfully. Having assured him-
self that the music proceeded from the kitchen,
he entered, and telling Luili not to fear, but to
9
L ULLI.


follow him and bring his violin, he took the boy
straightway to the princess, and made him play
before her the melodies that were still ringing in
the ears of the pot-boys,
Wc do not know all that passed at that inter-
view; but no doubt Mademoiselle de Montponsier
was as surprised and delighted as the worthy
Comte do Nogent, for Lulli, who had been only
taught the first elements of his art by an Italian
friar, was immediately placed by her under a pro-
per master; and, in a comparatively short time, he
became a professor in his turn. After a while he
was elevated to the rankof Court Musician,and, his
reputation as a violinist having spread, the King
himself desired to hear him. Lulli was nineteen
years of age when he played for the first time be-
fore Louis XIV., who was so enchanted with his per-
formance, and with that of some of his pupils, that
he engaged their permanent services as Les petits
Violona dih lloi. There had existed, for some time,
at the French Court a band of twenty-four violin-
players ; they were called “ The Violins of the
Chamber,” and had attracted the attention of our
Charles 11., who endeavoured to imitate this insti-
tution in England. It is said that the petits violons
10
CEL ERR A TED VIOL LVfSTV.


soon eclipsed the older band, and Lull! entered
more and more into the favour of the King.
He nbw composed the music for several plays
and ballets, in which Louis himself sometimes
took a part, as did many of the ladies and gentle-
men of the Court; and brilliant f£tcs and the-
atrical performances at Versailles were of frequent
occurrence. Lull! became at the same time both
an able composer and an excellent actor: he not
only wrote the music and ballets for several of
Moliere’s plays, but sometimes took a prominent
part in the acting of these pieces. His greatest
success lay in comic character, for which he
had a very decided disposition. When Moliere
wished to amuse his guests he was wont to ex-
claim, turning to Lulli; “ Come, Baptista, make
us laugh.”
In the year 1G72, the King made Lulli director
of the Koyal Academy of Music (the French
Opera), which, until then, had been submitted to
the Abbe Perrin, and from that moment dates the
birth of the Grand Opera in France, The glory
ot having created such a splendid institution
belongs, however, partly to Philippe Quinault, a
member of the French Academy, who wrote the


libretto for most of Lulli’s operas. The latter
are very numerous : in fifteen years ho wrote no-
less than nineteen grand operas ; and whilst he
reigned supremo at the Royal Academy, no other
composer’s works were allowed to see the light.
The sarcastic Boileausaid to him one day : “You
are not only the/trsf, but the only musician in
France !” Lulli appears also to have shown much
jealousy towards Corelli when he visited Paris,
and did not use any efforts to make his stay there
agreeable. Amide is considered one of his finest
compositions, and witlr regard to his religious
music, Madame do Sdvigne writes that “she does
not think there is finer music in heaven.” Our
national anthem has been ascribed to him, but
erroneously; having been composed in 1607 by
Dr, John Bull, organist to James 1., and the
words by Ben Jonson : it was sung in England
many years before Lulli was bom. Perse'e is
another of his best-known works.
Lulli's music is occasionally performed in Paris
and in London. As late as the year 1856 one of
the songs from his Persic was sung by Madame
Viardot-Garcia at a cheap Orchestral Concert at
St. Martin’s Hall, and was most riotously ap


plauded. It is true that the singer gave the
grand old song with due majesty of declamation
and fascination of character ; but the truth of the
«ria in itself had something to do with the
triumph,
A number of Italian pieces, which he had com-
posed in his leisure moments, were collected and
published by one of his sons in 1702, under the
title of Fragments. From the period that Lulli
took the direction of the Grand Opera, passed
his time in composing and, to the distress of his
wife Madeleine, enjoying the society of convivial
friends, ho seems to have abandoned altogether
his once-delightful violin. “ Never,” says Moreri,
“did any man carry so far the art of violin-
playing; and in his hands this instrument was
more agreeable than in any others, however
clever,” Lulli made a considerable number of
pupils, among the more remarkable of whom we
may name Lalouette, Lalande* Louis and Jean
Louis Lulli,* Colosse,* Marais, * Desmarest,*
■Gervais,* Vcrdier, Baptiste, Joubert, and Rebel.
Those with an asterisk to their names had some
of their music performed at the Opera after the
death of Lulli.


In 168 G the King fell dangerously ill, and on
his recovery Lulli was ordered to compose a Te
Deum. On leading this work he accidentally
struck his foot with the cane which he was using,
and the wound became so serious that he died of
it on the 22nd of March, IGB7, at the age of fifty-
three. He expired singing one of his own airs,
“II faut mourir pecheur.” Santeuil composed an
epitaph upon him in six Latin lines, the sense of
which is :
“ 0 Death, we knew that thoii wert blind,
But in striking Lulli thou has proved
To us that thou art deaf.'’
One of Lulli’s best pupils, Lalouette, has left a
MS. Methods, or systematic treatise, on the art of
violin-playing. In 183 G this MS. was in the
possession of the violinist J, B. Cartier; but
what has become of it we do not know.


II.
Corelli.
1653—1713.
the month of February, 1653, there
‘jwfgj t&P was k°rn at Fusignano, in the terri-
tory of Bologna, a man whose career
was destined to have a most
prodigious influence upon the art of violin -
playing, and whose compositions have come
down to us as types of purity and freshness.
This was Archangelo Corelli. His great
reputation and the number of pupils he made
connect him more or less with all the great
violinists who have followed, even down to the
present day.
In his youthful days the Church had more
hold upon music and musicians than the theatre
or the concert-room, and Corelli’s first master


was Matteo Simonelli, distinguished for his
knowledge of composition, who taught him the
first rudiments of the art. But the young artiste
soon showed a very decided preference for secular
music; so, abandoning hia former master, he
placed himself under Bassani, whom we have
already mentioned in our Introduction.
This Bassani was a man of extensive know-
ledge, and a clever violinist; he had, moreover,
composed several successful works for tiro Church,
the theatre, and the chamber. Under his tuition
the young Corelli appears to have made very
rapid progress, and, as he advanced in years,
laboured incessantly in the practice of his in-
strument. Before Corelli was twenty years of
age, he appears to have followed the natural
propensity of all artistes, and set out on his
travels. It is said that in 1G72 he was at Paris,
hut could not stay there on account of the jealousy
of Lulli. In 1679 or IGBO, when about twenty-
seven years of age, he paid a visit to Germany,
and was very well received in several quarters,
more especially by the Elector of Bavaria, who not
only admired his talent as a violinist, but retained
his services for a while. His absence from Italy


was, however, not of long duration ; he returned
homo, and afterwards proceeded to Home to con-
tinue his studies, and there, about 1683, he pub-
lished his first Sonatas.
The result of this assiduous labour was that
Corelli became a great violinist, and his fame ex-
tended throughout Europethe number of his
pupils increased year by year, and many came
from enormous distances to benefit by his instruc-
tion. As a solo-player, it is said that his style of
performance was learned and elegant, his tone
was firm and even; “occasionally,” we are told, his
playing " was impressed with feeling,” but during
his performance “ his countenance was distorted,
his eyes red as fi.ro, and his eye-hails rolled as if
ho were in agony,”
Corelli was appointed leader of the orchestra at
the Opera of Rome about the year 1690. He ap-
pears to have been the first leader who directed
that the bowing of the orchestra should be per-
fectly uniform; that is, that the hows should all
move up and down together; and at a rehearsal
before a concert at which any of his compositions
were to be performed, he would invariably stop
the orchestra if lie saw an irregular bow.
2


At Koine lie Lad a great and, powerful patron
in the person of Cardinal Ottohoni. This Cardinal
■was evidently fond of music, for he had a concert
at his residence every Monday evening, and Corelli
had the direction of it When the latter had re-
sided at Rome several 3'ears, he published some of
the music which he used to perforin himself as
solos in the various concerts at which he appeared.
It was issued as “ Senate u Viol-ini, etc.. Op. 5.”
It has been said by a distinguished writer, that
Corelli, by tins and his other publications, laid
the basis of the art of playing the violin ; hut it
is difficult to arrive at a true beginning in any-
thing. Corelli, no doubt, profited largely by those
who had gone before him, and it would be an in-
justice to his predecessors not to acknowledge it
here.
Some of our readers will remember that it was
at the house of the above-mentioned Cardinal that
the immortal Handel met Corelli. A curious
story is told about this meeting. One of Handels
compositions was to be performed on that par-
ticular Monday, and it appears that the Italian
violinist was giving to the opening movement a
style of his own, when Handel, who had formerly


studied the ■violin, lost his temper, as usual, and
so far forgot himself as to snatch the instrument
from the hand of Corelli. The latter is said to
have replied with his accustomed mildness, “ My
•dear Saxon, this music is in the French style,
which I do not understand !” This little anecdote
has heen brought forward by Schcelcher and
others to prove that Handel knew more of the
violin than the greatest virtuoso of his time —
which is palpably absurd! It merely proves that
the Italian musician did not accent his music in
the German style, and that Handel happened to
know enough of the instrument to be able to show
him the proper accent.
"When Corelli’s reputation had increased to a
high degree at Rome, and was already spreading
to other important cities, a certain curiosity was
everywhere evinced to hear his performance, and
he received no less than a royal invitation from
the Court of Naples. According to Dubourg this
must have been about the year 1708. He did not
feel much disposed to go; but, at last, was induced
to accept the invitation. However, he took with
him his second violin, Matteo, and a violoncellist,
in case he should not be well accompanied by the
2—2
19
CORELLI.


Neapolitan orchestra. Ho had no sooner arrived
than he was ashed to play some of his concertos
before the King. This he refused, as the whole of
his orchestra was not with him and there was no-
time for a rehearsal. However, ho soon found
that the Neapolitan musicians played the orches-
tral parts of his concertos as well as his own
accompanists did after some practice; for having
at length consented to play the first of his con-
certos before the Court, the accompaniment was
so s-ood that Corelli is said to have exclaimed to
Matteo: “Si nuona a Napoli!” —They do play
at Naples!” This performance being quite suc-
cessful, he was presented to the King, who after-
wards requested him to perform one of his sonatas;
hut his Majesty found the adagio “ so long and so-
dry, that he got up and left the room, (1) to the
great mortification of the eminent virtuoso.” As
the King had commanded the piece, the least he
could have done would have been to have waited
till it was finished. “If they play at Naples they
are not very polite there,” poor Corelli must have
thought! Another unfortunate mishap also oc-
curred to him there, if we are to believe the
dictum of Geminiani, one of Corelli's pupils, who


had preceded him at Naples : it would appear
that in being appointed out of compliment to lead
a composition of Scarlatti’s, on arriving at an air
in G minor, Corelli led off in C major. , “Let us
recommence,’’said the composer good-humouredly;
but the same occurred amiin. and Scarlatti
O O'
was absolutely obliged to point out what was the
matter. This, we are told, added to Corelli’s mor-
tification so much that he soon after left Naples and
returned to Rome. These stories must be taken
cum grano satis when we remember that they
are the ipse dixit of another artiste, who, though a
pupil, was, to a certain extent, a rival of Corelli’s.
That Corelli was a man who knew how to
make himself respected we can plainly see in
what occurred at Ottoboni’s residence one even-
ing, when he observed tbo worthy Cardinal and
others talking during the performance of one of
his finest solos. On this occasion, to the surprise
of ever\ r one present, Corelli quietly laid down
Ins violin and stepped off the platform to join the
company. On being asked the reason of this
singular behaviour, he replied that he was afraid
the noise of his music might perhaps interrupt
the conversation ’
21
CORELLI.


But Corelli had not been long back in Borne
before it became the fashion to patronize another
clever violinist named Yalentini, which is said to
have displeased him exceedingly, at least, such is
Geminiani’s account, who also states that a
hautboy-player created some sensation about the
same time.
In 17)2 the Concertos of Corelli were beauti-
fully engraved at Amsterdam; the celebrated
composer only survived the publication six
weeks, the dedication bearing the date Rome, 3rd
December, 1712, and his death occurring on the
ISth January, 1713. He was interred at the
Pantheon, where a beautiful statue was erected,
to his memory bearing the inscription :
Corelli princeps musicorum,”
and near to that of Raffaele.
Corelli appears to have been a man of a meek,
timid, and gentle nature, hut not devoid of
humour and pleasantry; remarkable for his
modesty and retiring habits not less than for
the habitual plainness of his dress. He accumu-
lated a considerable fortune and left a valuable
collection of pictures. With regard to bis com


positions, his Solos or Op. 5, are still looked upon
as a classical and valuable work to study; this
work cost him three years of arduous labour.
His sixth and last work (the Concertos) are still
performed occasionally in the concert-room. As
studies, the Solos of Corelli have been adopted by
the most eminent professors. Several of these
works are published by Schott & Co., and others
by K. Cocks & Co., of London,
Corelli made many excellent pupils ; one of the
most re markable of these was Francesco Geminiani,
whom we have already mentioned. He was born
at Lucca in ICBO, studied first under a violinist
named Lunati, and then under Corelli. Ho left
Homo for Naples when Corelli was at the zenith
of his fame. In 1714 he came over to England
and played before George I. Here he published a
number of works, winch show great perseverance
and incessant application ; he also arranged some
of Corelli’s works. He possessed great execution
and considerable taste, and bis performances be-
came fashionable. Some of his compositions are
very elegant, but are not generally considered
equal to those of his illustrious master. In 1750
he went to Paris, and resided there some live
23
CORELLI.


years, afterwards to Dublin, where lie died on
the 17th September, 17G2, in his eighty-third
year. He left, in the person of Matthew Dubourg,
a pupil who attained high rank as a musician,
in the time of Handel.
An entire volume would not be sufficient
to relate all the facts and adventures con-
nected with the life of Geminiani, could the
data in question now he collected. As wo have
mentioned the great Handel, it may be noted, at
the same time, that Geminiani was partly the
means of reconciling George I. to the capricious
humour and eccentricities of that celebrated com-
poser. The King, who arrived in England in
September, 1714, and was crowned at West-
minster a month later, was irritated with Handel
for having left Germany, where he held the posi-
tion of Chapel-master to George, when Elector of
Brunswick, and still more so by his having com-
posed a Te Baum on the Peace of Utrecht, which
was not favourably regarded by the Protestant
princes of Germany. Baron Kilmanseck, a Hano-
verian, and a great admirer of Handel, under-
took to bring them together again. Being
o o o o
informed that the King intended to picnic on the


Thames, he requested the composer to write
something for the occasion. Thereupon, Handel
wrote the twenty-five little concerted pieces
known under the title of Water Mtisie. They were
executed in a barge which followed the royal
boat. The orchestra consisted of four violins,
one tenor, one violoncello, one double bass, two
hautboys, two bassoons, two French horns, two
flageolets, one flute, and one trumpet. The King
soon recognised the author of the music, and his
resentment against Handel began to soften.
O O
Shortly after this, Geminiani was requested to
play some sonatas of his own composition in the
King’s private cabinet; but fearing that they
would lose much of thoir effect if they were ac-
companied in an inferior manner, he expressed
the desire that Handel should play the accom-
paniments. Baron Kilmanseck carried the request
to tlio King, and supported it strongly. The
result was that peace wars made, and an extra
pension of :£2OO per annum settled upon Handel.
Another most remarkable man with whom
Geminiani came in contact some years later, was
Philidor, the operatic composer and celebrated
chess-player. Geminiani, Philidor, and Signorina


Lanza were to give a series of concerts in
Rotterdam in 1745, but the scheme was broken
up by the unfortunate death of the lady. Andre
Danican Philidor was born at Dront, near Paris,
in 1726. His grandfather was hautboy-player
to the court of Louis XIII, (An Italian, named
Philidor, was much admired by the King for his
superior performance on that instrument, and on
his departure for Italy, Louis gave M. Danican
the sobriquet of Philidor, which was ever after
appended to the family name.) His father was
leader of the Concerts Spirituels to be referred to
in the sequel, and several of his relations were
eminent musicians in the bands of Louis XIV. and
Louis XV. At six years of age, Philidor was ad-
mitted into the choir of the Chapel Royal at
Versailles (1732), and when eleven years old he
composed a motette, which was performed in the
Chapel, and pleased Louis XV. so much that he
gave the child a present of five louis d’or, and
encouraged him to go on with his musical studies.
In the Chapel Royal at Versailles, there were
about eighty musicians daily in attendance,
violins, hautboys, violas, double basses, choristers,
etc. ; and, cards not being allowed, they had a


long table inlaid with a number of chess-boards,
with which they amused themselves during their
leisure time. When fourteen, years of age,
Philidor was the bast chess-player in the band,
and at that time also, several of his musical com-
positions were performcdatthe Concerts Spiriinels.
Four years later he played, at Paris, two games
at chess, at the same time, without seeing the
board, winning both games. In later years ho
became widely known as a composer of numerous
operas that have delighted the French public for-
mally years, and also as one of the greatest chess-
players that ever lived. He died in London in 1795,
at the age of sixty-nine, and shortly before his
death played three chess matches at once, two of
them without seeing either of the boards, and the
third whilst looking over the table. His first musi-
cal drama, Blaise le Savatier, was performed at the
Opera Coraique in 1759, and met with great suc-
cess, It was soon followed by several others.
Philidor and Ueminiani were great friends for
many years.
As early as 1699, when Corelli was first violin
in the Chapel of the Margrave of Anspach, he
had already a pupil named Pisendel, who after


wards became famous in Germany; he was at-
tached to the Court of Saxony, and opened a
violin school at Dresden, where many good pupils
were made.
Another name we cannot pass over is that of
Pietro Locatelli, bom at Bergamo in 1693 ;he
was only sixteen when Corelli died, so that he
could not have had many years’ training under
him. His compositions display boldness and
originality, and he has left ns the Arte di ruiova
modulus lone , a most curious work, which appears
to have been studied by Paganini. Locatelli
died in Holland in 1764. Little appears to be
known of his wandering life.
Lorenzo Somis, another excellent pupil of
Corelli, has become noted by the pupils he, in his
turn, has made, including such men as Leeler,*
Pugnani (the professor of Viotti), and Giardini.
Somis was Chapel-master to the King of Sar-
dinia.
Carbonelli, Vivaldi, and several others less
"■ Jean Marie Leeler, a celebrated pupil of Somis, was
born at Lyons in 1697, and assassinated (it is said from
jealousy) in the streets of Paris in 1764. lie is regarded
as the founder of the French school of violin-playing.
We shall refer to him again.


known, derived their art from the same illustri-
ous source; and among them we may, perhaps,
include Yisconti of Cremona, whoso counsels
greatly assisted Straduarius in the construction,
of his magnificent instruments.


III.
The Bannisters.
1640—1729.
Englishmen, father and. son,
I named Bannister, made themselves,
Vm at this rather remote period, a con-
siderable reputation as violin-players.
It is not difficult to account for the younger Ban-
nister being a good musician, for he was taught
with assiduous care hy his father; but how the
latter began his musical career it is rather difficult
to imagine. We only know that John Bannister
the elder was born of very humble parentage, in
the parish of St. Giles, London; but the exact
year would be difficult to say. For several gene-
rations this family must have been highly gifted
as regards music. We arc expressly told that
John Bannister received the first rudiments of


music from his father, who used to play at Christ-
mas-time as one of the ivaits in the parish above-
named—a very different place now to what it
was in those days, when it had plenty of green
fields, hedges, and hay-ricks about it. In the
course of a very short time this Bannister made
great progress on his instrument, and, marvellous
as it may appear, he actually attracted the atten-
tion of Charles 11., who sent him to If ranee, no
slight journey in those days, to improve his
musical education; and, on his return, appointed
him leader of the Royal Violins—an institution
which, as we stated before, King Charles 11. was
induced to form in imitation of Louis XIV.
The first leader of this hand of violins in Eng-
land was a German from Luhcck, named Baltzar,
who possessed considerable execution and a bril-
liant style of performance, such as had not yet
been heard in England, when the best violin-
player of the period was an amateur, a clock-
maker, named Davis Mel!, An old author, whose
remarks are sometimes very amusing, states that,
“ After Baltzar came to England and showed his
most wonderful parts on that instrument—the
violin —Mell was not so much admired; yet he
31
THE BANNISTERS.


played sweeter, was a well-bred gentleman, and
not given to excessive drinking, as Baltzar was.’'
In spite of his drinking propensities, Baltzar was
buried in Westminster Abbey in 1063: and John
Bannister the elder succeeded him as leader of
the King’s violins.
Bannister is said by his contemporaries to have
quite equalled the Italian violinists, and one day
be ventured to tell Charles 11. that the English
violinists were superior to those of France; for
which speech he lost his appointment. He then
set about giving concerts, and appears to have
been the first who established in London concerts,
in which the audience paid for seats. In one of
these, given in 1677, the advertisement states
that the musical performance will begin “ with a
parley of instruments composed by Mr. Bannister
and performed by eminent masters.” This Ban-
nister died in 1679, and was also interred in
Westminster Abbey. There was more room
there in those days than now. He left a son
named after himself, whom he had succeeded in
making a clever violinist. The younger Ban-
nister was appointed to King William’s band, and
was also first violin at Drury Lane for many


years, till succeeded by Carbone!!!. He published
some works on the violin, in conjunction with a
German musician, Godfrey Finger,* and died
about 1729.
The elder Bannister was the first Englishman,
(with the solitary exception of Davis Mell), who
distinguished himself on the violin. He is also
remarkable historically, as having first attempted
something like a public concert in 1672.
in the Memoirs of Mustek, published by Roger
North, who was Attorney'General under James
11., we are told that Bannister had " a good the-
atrical vein; and in composition had a lively
style peculiar to himself. He procured a large
room in White Fryers, near the Temple back gate,
and made a large raised box for the musicians,
whose modesty required curtains. The room
was rounded with seats and small tables—
alehouse fashion. One shilling was the price,
and call for what you pleased ; there was very
* This artiste was a Silesian, and a voluminous writer
of violin-music. In 1685 lie was appointed Chapel-master
to James 11. He afterwards returned to Germany as
chamber-musician to the Queen of Prussia in 1703, and
Chapel-master to the Court of Gotha in 1717. His style
approached that of the Italians Bassani and Torelli,
3


good music, for Bannister found means to procure
the best hands in towne, and some voices to come
and perform there ; and there wanted no variety
of humour, for Bannister himself {inter alia ) did
wonders upon flageolett to thoro’ bass, and the
severall master's had their solos. This continued
full one winter, and more I remember not"
We know, however, that these concerts con-
tinued for many years; we have already quoted
from an advertisement of one given in 1677, and
here is an extract from that which announced
the first on the 30th September, 1672:
"These are to give notice that at Mr. John
Bannister’s house (now called the Musich-school),
over against The George Tavern, in White
Fryers, this present Monday, will be musick
performed by excellent masters, beginning pre-
cisely at four o’clock in the afternoon, and every
afternoon for the future precisely at the same
hour.”*
It was Bannister’s son who played occasion-
ally at the house of that eccentric hut clever
character, Thomas Britton, an excellent account
of whom is given by Schoelcher, in his Life of
* London Gazette, SCtii Sept., 1&72.


Handel. Thomas Britton “ belonged to that
class of men whom persons of limited views
are accustomed to term the lower orders of
society, for he gained his daily bread by crying
small coal, which ho carried about the streets
in a sack upon his shoulders.” He lived near
Clerkenwell Green, a quarter of the town with
which fashionable people were scarcely ac-
quainted before he made it illustrious. How he
came to play upon the viola da gamba is not
known; but he played upon it, and he was so
much of an artiste that he grouped around him
a number of amateurs and professors who were
happy to perform concerted music under his
direction. Among the distinguished persons who
met at bis house (Hawkins tells ns) there were
John Hughes, author of The Siege of Damascus;
John Bannister, the violinist; Sir Roger I’Estrange,
gentleman; Woolaston, the painter; Robe, a justice
of the peace; Henry Needier, of the Excise office,
and another English violinist named Obadiah
Shuttleworth (who also performed on the organ
and composed some capital music), Henry Symons,
and Ahiell Wichello.
At first they admitted their friends only to
3—2


their reunions, but gradually the circle of auditors
increased, until it included some of the most
distinguished persons in the town. Britton was
the tenant of a stable, which he divided horizon-
tally by a floor. On tbe ground-floor was his
coal-shop ; the upper story formed a long and
narrow room, in which it was scarcely possible
for a tall man to stand upright, and where, when
he had escaped the dangers of the little dark
winding staircase, the visitor found no sort of
convenience. Such was tbe chamber in which
the first meetings in the nature of private con-
certs took place in England, and in which in-
strumental music was regularly performed.
Here it was that, from 1678 to September, 1714,
when the worthy Britton died, the itinerant small-
coal merchant entertained every week the intelli-
gent dilettanti of London. The musical soiries
were always free to those who received invita-
tions. One of the most remarkable persons who
patronised them was the Duchess of Queensbury,
a most celebrated Court beauty; her attendance
was very regular. All newly-arrived artistes
were eager to appear there, Dr. Pepusch and
Handel played there; so did Bannister, Shuttle


worth, and several others, well-known men of
their time. Britton acquired so much con-
sideration that ho was addressed as “ Sir ” He
had a singular 'penchant for old manuscripts, and
purchased as many as his business would allow.
Of these he left behind him a very fine collection,
duly catalogued, and the catalogue printed;
besides several musical instruments, among which
was a harpsichord and an organ. Woolaston
painted two portraits of his friend Britton, in
one of which he is represented in a coal-heaver’s
hat, a blouse, and a neckerchief knotted like a
rope.
We will now bring this section on the Bannis-
ters to a close. Some authors write the name
Banister, others with a double n; it is almost im-
possible to say which is correct. Shuttle worth
was a younger contemporary of John Bannister
pare, and afterwards the leader at the Swan
Concerts, in Gornhill, till 1733. His father was a
man of small fortune, acquired in Spitalfields,
partly by teaching music, and partly by copying
Corelli’s music for sale, before it was printed in
England.
O


IV.
Tartini.
1692—1770.
IUSEPPE TARTEST was born at
Pirano, a seaport town in Istria, in
the month of April, 1692. His father
had been made a noble, and young
Tartini had all the manners and appearance of a
gentleman of birth and education when, at the
age of twenty-two, he composed his well-known
Sonata, entitled Trillo del Diavolo. He was
originally intended for the law, and in 1710,
entered as a student at the University of Padua.
Whilst still young he showed a great predilection
for music, and also for the art of fencing, in which
he soon became so proficient that he equalled, if
he did not surpass, the master who taught him.
Tartini entered the University of Padua before


ho was twenty years of age, and had already re-
ceived some lessons on the violin from Giulio dL
Terni, a clever musician, who, strange to relate,
in after years took, some lessons from his cele-
brated pupil.
It is difficult to say what might have been the
future career of the young student had circum-
stances permitted him to continue his university
studies to the end ; but in the midst of them, we
find a love affair; in fact, a marriage without the
consent of the parents, and the young Tartini an
outcast from his family, reduced to fly and to
wander about in search of a living. After many
hardships ho found his way to a convent at Assisi,
where he was received hospitably by a monk, who
was some family connection of his (we are told
that Tartini s father received his rank of noble-
man for some benefits connected with the Cathe-
dral at Parcnza). This good-natured friar, whose
name lias not come down to us, took pity on the
youth’s misfortunes, and allowed him to remain
in the convent until something could be done for
him.
Here it was, thus isolated in the convent at
Assisi, that he set to work vigorously with his


violin, and prosecuted a course of study that was
to result in the Sonata del Diavolo, and other no
less remarkable compositions. He performed fre-
quently in the orchestra of the convent, and on a
certain occasion, when a great festival was held
there, and a high wind was blowing, the curtain
which hid the performers from view, according
to the fashion of the time, was blown aside, and
Tartini was immediately recognised by some towns-
people who had come from Padua. This created
no little sensation, but led finally to a conciliation
with his family; after which he and his wife took
up their abode at Venice. The reason why he
chose that town was the presence there of a most
remarkable performer on the violin, named Fran-
cesco Veracini, It has been said that Tartini,
when quite a boy, walked all the way from Padua
to Venice to hear this Veracini play.
Francesco Veracini was the pupil of his uncle
(usually called “Veracini the elder,” an emi-
nent artiste in his day), and a great, though very
eccentric, musician. At the time of Tartini’s visit,
he was at the head of the Venetian Academy of
Music, founded by the King of Poland. He was
nicknamed “capo pazzo,” or mad head, on account


of his very eccentric manners ; and according to
Fayolle (who is not always very accurate, how-
ever,) he really became mad some time afterwards.
Tartini, on the contrary, was a man of a most
sensitive and modest disposition; and must have
formed a marked contrast to the professor whom
ho so much admired. Dubourg, in his clever
book on the Violin, reproduces a curious story
that is told of this Veracini: —“ Being at Lucca,
at the time of the annual festival, called ‘Festa
della Croce,’ on which occasion it was customary
for the principal professors in Italy, both vocal
and instrumental, to meet, Veracini put his name
down for a violin solo. When he entered the
choir he found the principal place already occu-
pied by Laurenti, of Bologna, a well-known and
clever soloist, who asked him where he was going.
‘To the place of the first violinist,’ was the
haughty reply. Laurenti calmly explained that
he had been engaged to fill that post himself, but
that if Veracini wished to play a solo, either at
vespers or at high mass, he should have a place
assigned to him. It was evident that the last
speaker did not recognise Veracini, who, on hear-
ing the explanation, turned indignantly away and


went to the lowest place in the orchestra. When
his turn came to play his concerto, he begged that
instead of it he might play a solo where he was,
accompanied on the violoncello by Lanzetti.
This he did in so brilliant and unexpected a
manner, that the applause was loud and continued
in spite of the sacred nature of the locality, and
whenever he was about to make a close, he turned
towards Laurenti and called out: ‘ Cosi se suona
per fare il primo violino ’ —this is the way to play
first violin !”
Yeracini played upon a fine Steiner violin.
The only master he ever had was his uncle
Antonio, of Florence, alluded to above; and it
was by travelling all over Europe, and by nume-
rous performances in public, that he formed a
style of playing peculiar to himself, very similar
to what occurred to Paganini and the celebrated
De Bdriot in later years.
It does not appear certain that Tartini ever
took lessons from Yeracini ; hut hearing the latter
play in public had no doubt a very great effect
upon him, and caused him to devote many years
to the careful study of his instrument. Some
say that Yeracini’s performance awakened a vivid


■emulation in Tartini, who was already at that
time acknowledged to be a very clever musician.
However that may be, he had never heard any
great player before he went to Venice, and had
not conceived it possible that such effect and
expression could be obtained by the varied man-
agement of the bow. It has been said that a
friendship sprang up between these two eminent
artistes and another clever man named Alexandra
Marcello, and that devoted much time to
the study of the principles of violin-playing,
particularly to style, and to the varied kinds of
bowing. It appears that this friendship only
ceased when Veracini’s mind gave way; after
which Tartini withdrew to Ancona to devote
himself to uninterrupted study; and it was in
complete solitude that he applied himself to dis-
cover the fundamental principles of the how,
which principles have since served as the basis of
every violin school in the world. He held some
small appointment in the orchestra at Ancona,
.and the remainder of his time was taken up with
hard study, not only of the violin as a solo instru-
ment, but with the principles, of acoustics, and
with mathematics.


It was at this time that Tartini made a very
curious discovery, known as the phenomenon of
the third sound, which created some sensation at
the time, and has since given rise to numerous
learned discourses, but does not appear to have
led to any great practical result. Various
memoirs or treatises were written by him, and
that in which he develops the nature of the third
sound is his “ Tratto di Musica secondo la vera
seienza dell’ Armonia.” In this, and others of
his works, he appears much devoted to theory,
and endeavours to place all his practical facts
upon a thoroughly scientific basis. The effect
known as the third sound consists in the sympa-
thetic resonance of a third note when the two
upper notes of a chord are played in perfect tune..
“ If you do not hear the bass,” Tartini would say
to his pupils, “ the thirds or sixths which you are
playing are not perfect in intonation.”
We will not stay here to analyse all the
different theories that have been put forth to
account for this singular phenomenon. It has
arrested the attention more especially of Rameau,
and J. B. Cartier, as well as many others. But
this is perhaps the place to remark that Tar


thus library was full of the most learned works,
and that he appears to have devoted much of his
time to reading and arduous scientific study.
Indeed, had he been a philosopher by profession
(for in practice he certainly was), many scientific
discoveries would doubtless have resulted from
his labours, and when we reflect upon the ex-
tremely learned and so-called “ dry” books that
existed on the shelves of his study, it is wonder-
ful that he should have left anything like music
to the world.
At Ancona, nevertheless, he attained such
eminence as a performer, and as a musician, that
it led to his appointment in 1721 to the director-
ship of the orchestra in the Church of St.
Anthony, at Padua. Fctis tells us that he passed
the remaining forty-nine years of his life here,
“in peace and comfort, solely occupied with
labours connected with the art ho loved.” His
great fame as a violinist brought him repeated
offers from the greater European cities, even from
London and Paris, hut he firmly declined them
■all, and never quitted his native country. Thus
it is that those only who visited Italy in his day,
could have had an opportunity of hearing Tartini


play. Fortunately for the musical art, he esta-
blished a Violin School at Padua, in 1728, and
made many very excellent pupils who afterwards
became known throughout Europe. Of these
the most remarkable will be mentioned further
on. He established a systematic method of
study for the violin, which became so much the
vogue, that considerable numbers of young men
resorted to Padua from different countries in
order to benefit by his instruction.
Tartini’s compositions comprise several Sonatas
and Trios, and eighteen Concertos for five instru-
ments. His slow movements are remarkably
expressive, and his music shows not only a great
knowledge of the violin, but also of the laws, or
science, of harmony, in which he was a great
adept. His bowing is large, fine, and expressive;
and some of bis Sonatas, even now, are performed
in the concert-room, and rarely fail to meet with
due appreciation. Schott has published two
editions of the well-known Sonata del Diavolo.
He left, in published pieces and manuscripts,
no less than one hundred and fifty different
works.
The well-known Sonata termed the Trillo del


Diavolo, or “ Devil’s Sonata,” was composed under
peculiar circumstances, as lie tells us—or, at least,
aa M. de Lalande tells us lie had it from Tartini’s
own lips; and as Nardini, a pupil of the latter,
afterwards confirmed it to Michael Kelly.
“ One night in 1713,” he says, “ I dreamt that
I had made a compact with the devil, who pro-
mised to be at my service on all occasions. Every-
thing succeeded according to my mind, my wishes
were anticipated, and desires always surpassed
by the assistance of my new servant. At last I
thought I would offer my violin to the devil, in
order to discover what kind of a musician ho was,
when, to my great astonishment, I heard him play
a solo so singularly beautiful and with such supe-
rior taste and precision, that it surpassed all the
music I had ever heard or conceived in the whole
course of my life. I was so overcome with sur-
prise and delight that I lost my power of breath-
ing- and the violence of this sensation awoke me.
O'
Instantly I seized my violin in the hopes of re-
membering some portion of what 1 had just heard,
hut in vain! The work which this dream sug-
gested, and which I wrote at the time, is doubt-
less the best of all my compositions, and X still


call it the Sonata del Biavolo ; but it sinks so
much into insignificance compared with what I
heard, that I would have broken ray instrument
and abandoned music altogether had I possessed
any other means of subsistence.”
It might be suggested that the devil in Tartini’s
dream was simply an exaggerated reminiscence of
the eccentric Veraeini, as he knew him at Venice.
Another suggestion is that the name of the piece
was given by the young professor (for Tartini was
only twenty-two years of age when he composed
this Sonata) on account of the difficult passage of
double shakes that occurs twice in it, and which a
French performer might have termed “ diablement
difficile.”
Tartini died at Padua on the 26th February,
1770, and was universally regretted; he had re-
sided nearly fifty years in that town, and was
looked npon with pride hy every inhabitant of
the place; he was of a serious, contemplative,
scientific turn of mind, and had long enjoyed the
estimation of his fellow-townspeople as a religious
man, a philosopher, and a great musician. He
used to say himself that he studied very little till
after he was thirty years of age; hy which we must


understand that he did not appear to make much
progress with his instrument till that period; hut
for a man of his active mind and learned educa-
tion, it is impossible to believe that he ever gave
himself much rest. It is a curious fact, that at the
age of fifty-two, Tartini made a marked alteration
in his stylo of performance, and, instead of dis-
playing his abilities in difficult passages, preferred
to yield to grace and expression. His method of
executing an adagio has been represented by his
contemporaries as inimitable, and he appears to
have conferred this gift upon one of his favourite
pupils, Nardini, who was the finest adagio-player
in Italy, and probably in the whole world.
Pietro Nardini was bom at Leghorn in 1725 ;
be soon became Tavtini’s most distinguished pupil,
and in after years an old friend and companion.
In 17G3 he was attached to the chapel of the
Duke of Wurtomberg, but in the course of a few
years he returned to Leghorn, where he composed
almost all his works. In 1769 ho went to Padua,
and renewed his friendship with Tartini, whom he
attended in his last illness with filial attachment.
He afterwards entered the service of the Grand
Duke of Tuscany, and, in 1783, drew forth the
4


admiration of all who had the good fortune to
hear him. play. Michael Kelly heard him at
Florence in a concert. He says: “ I had the
gratification of hearing a Sonata on the violin,
played by the great Nardini. Though very far
advanced in years, he played divinely. He spoke
with great affection of his favourite pupil, Thomas
Linley, who, he said, possessed powerful abilities.”
Dupaty, a Frenchman, who published some letters
on Italy, and who heard him in 1783, says : “ His
violin is a voice, or possesses one.” His music,
like his character, was of a serious cast, and the
latter doubtless harmonised well with that of his
old friend and professor, Nardini died at Florence
in 1796 ; and has left a number of compositions,
solos, sonatas, trios, concertos, some trios for flute,
and some manuscripts. His style is large, his
ideas clear, and the expression natural*
* Nardini made a remarkable pupil in the person of
Francesco Vaccari, horn at Modena in 1772, who ap-
peared at Mantua when only thirteen years of age. In
1804 he held for a short time the appointment of violin-
solo to the King of Spain ; he appeared on two separate
occasions in England, and his performance was dis-
tinguished for purity of tone, good taste, ;md elegance
of expression. Thomas Linley, Nardini’s English pupil,
was born at Eath in 1756, and played in public at the
50
CELEBRATED VIOLINISTS.


Another pupil whom Tarijni held in great affec-
tion was Pasqualo Bini. He was recommended
to him, when only fifteen years old, by Cardinal
Olivieri, who afterwards took the young Bini to
Romo, where his playing created quite a sensation.
Tartini once recommended a pupil to Bini in the
following terms: “ I recommend him to a pupil of
mine who plays bettor than I do, and I am proud
of it, as ho (Bini) is an angel in religion and morals.”
Among several other very distinguished vio-
linists that have issued from the school founded
at Padua by Tartini, and who enjoyed his direct
influence, we must name Dominico Ferrari, to
whom is attributed the invention of harmonic
sounds, the French violinists Pagin and La
Houssaye, and Mademoiselle de Sirmen.
Madalena Lombardini Sirmen united high ac-
complishment as a singer with such an eminence
early age of eight years. While on the Continent he
enjoyed the friendship of Mozart, who was about his own
age. Liuley played concertos of Handel and Geminiani
most admirably. He was drowned in 1778, by the upset-
ting of a pleasure-boat. He was the eldest son of the
successful song composer. ISTardini was buried at the
Chapel of the Holy Cross, the Pantheon of Florence,
beside Michael Angelo, Machiavelli, Galileo, and Alfieri.
4—2
51
TARTINL


in violin-playing, that she not only rivalled all
the other pupils of Tartini, but acquired a
European reputation. Her musical studies com-
menced at the Conservatoire of the Mendicanti
at Venice. She afterwards became a pupil of
Tartini, and devoted herself exclusively to the
violin. About the year 1780 she visited Franco
and England, and published a considerable quan-
tity of violin music. Tartini entered into corre-
spondence with this lady, and wrote to her a
celebrated letter on the study of the violin ; this,
was translated and published at London by Dr.
Burney in 1771. It is given entire in Duhourg's.
work on the violin.
A contemporary of Tartini, who attained con-
siderable eminence as a violinist, was
Lolli, horn at Bergamo in 1728, and who from
1762 to 1773 was concert-master to the Dube of
Wurternberg, He afterwards travelled to Russia
and received a splendid violin-bow from the
Empress Catherine 11., bearing upon it the in-
scription, “ Archet fait par ordre de Catherine 11,
pour Tincomparable Lolli,” In the year 1785
Lolli came to England. A contemporary speaks
of him thus: “ The celebrated performer on the


-violin, Lolli, came to London in 178-5 ; such was
his caprice that lie was seldom heard, and so
-eccentric was his stylo and composition that by
many he was regarded as a madman. He was,
however, during his lucid intervals, a very great
and expressive performer in the serious style.”
From England he travelled to Spain, and thence
to Paris, where he performed at various concerts,
and in 1788 returned to Italy. When he entered
•on his German engagement at Stuttgardtin 17C2
ho found a superior there in the form of Nardini,
He requested the Duke to allow him a year’s
leave of absence “ to travel;” instead of which he
retired to a secluded village, where he applied
himself most assiduously to the study of his
instrument. At the end of the year he returned
from his pretended journey, and produced such
an effect by his playing that Nardini returned to
Italy. This anecdote is recorded by Gerber. As
a rule, Lolli was rarely inclined to exhibit in an
■adayio ; his performance was generally rapid and
more or less eccentric. He wrote several sets of
solos, and a Treatise on tits Violin. He also
made an eminent pupil in the person of Jarno-
wick, who reigned supreme at Paris in 1778, and


whose elegant and brilliant performances capti-
vated the public more than any other violinist
had hitherto done. From whom Lolli himself
received his instruction I have not been able to
discover; but in his day the number of eminent
musicians in Italy was very considerable. Some
say that Locatelli gave him lessons.* According
to Yalery, the author of Curiosites et Anecdotes
Italiennes, Tartini was proclaimed by the Italians
il Maestro delle Nazioni,in other terms, the finest
musician in the world.,; the French, alluding to
his studies on the management of the bow, have
termed him le Ugislateuv de I’archet —the law-
giver of the bow. In the person of Pugnani he
had, without doubt, the greatest of all his pupils 1
but Pugnani had also the advantage of having
o so
studied previously under the celebrated Somis,
and only took lessons of Tartini when already an
artiste of considerable abilities. Thus Pugnani,
who formed the immortal Viotti, united in him-
self the schools of Corelli and Tartini, We shall
refer to him again.
* Fetis says that Locatelli did not produce many pupils,
but that he had “ many imitators, especially Lolli, Fiorillo,.
and, above all, Paganini,” It seems rather probable that
Lolli really was a pupil of his.


V.
Lecler, Giardini, Pagnani.
1697 —1798.
SE know very little about tlic private or
public life of the celebrated Lorenzo
Somis, to whom we have alluded
before—one of the greatest masters of
the violin —except that he was a pupil of Corelli,
that he was Chapebmaster to the King of
Sardinia, that he published at Rome, in 1722,
various sonatas or trios, and that he made, among
many others, three most remarkable pupils,
Lecler, Giardini, and Pugnani.
Leelor (Jean Marie) was bom at Lyons in
1697, and first learnt music from his father,
who was a musician by profession. Young
Lecler was educated as a dancer, and used the
violin as a dancing-master. While a youth he


appeared as a dancer at Eouen. But having
been engaged as ballet-master at Turin, Somis,
who was pleased with Lecler’s playing, gave him
some lessons, by which he made rapid progress.
On leaving this celebrated tutor, he was already
a musician of considerable ability, and in his
travels seems to have acquired a stjde peculiar to
himself, remarkable more especially for its spirit
and energy. He then abandoned dancing, and
devoted himself entirely to the violin. The
Due de Grammont, who had some lessons from
him, allowed him a pension, and otherwise pro-
tected him until he was appointed concert-master
to Louis XV. According to Fetis he arrived
in Paris in 1729, and was first engaged in the
orchestra of the Opera, and afterwards in the
King’s hand. He may he said, by his extra-
ordinary labours, to have created a new school
of violin-playing in France; his compositions are
difficult, and some are performed occasionally by
artistes of the present day. In 1723 he composed
a collection of solos, soon followed by others, and
then by sonatas, duos, trios, and concertos. The
influence of these compositions may be traced in
the French violin music of the present period.


Lecler had a bold and dignified style of per-
formance, full of energy, and his powers were
remarkable. He appears to have been a man of
estimable character, living for the most part a
retired life. His end was tragical; he was as-
sassinated while walking in the streets of Paris,
on the evening of the 22nd of October, 1764.
It is generally supposed that lie fell a sacrifice
to envy. The violinist, Herr Joachim, played a
solo of Lecler’s in a concert in London in 1874.
The life of Felici Giardini was a very eventful
one, and this celebrated violinist was more dis-
tinguished as a performer than by his com-
positions. Bom at Turin in 1716, he studied first
at Milan under Paladini, and then at Turin
under Somis. His progress was so rapid that at
the early ago of seventeen he was enabled to
travel, visiting various towns in Italy, and finally
getting an appointment in the orchestra of the
Opera in Naples, then conducted hy the well-
known Jomelli. In this capacity he remained
only for a short time—long enough, however, to
have received a remarkable lesson, as Dr. Burney
tells ns, in Giardini’s own lananao'e;—Possessing
' o o o
considerable ability upon his instrument, he was


accustomed to embroider, or otbervvise change
certain passages of the music, much more than,
any orchestral player was over heard to do
before or since. “ One night,” says Giardini,
“ Jomelli, who had composed the opera that was
being performed, came into the orchestra and
seated himself close by me; I at once deter-
mined to give the worthy maestro a touch of
my taste and execution. In the symphony of a
song which was of a pathetic stylo the oppor-
tunity occurred, and I gave loose to my fingers
and fancy; for which I was immediately rewarded
by the composer with a violent slap in the face !
It was about the best lesson I ever received from
a great master in my life.”
It is satisfactory to be told that ever after this
Jomelli treated the young musician, who was
quite beneath his position in an orchestra, with
great kindness. Somehow or other, Giardini did
not, however, get quit of the theatre—indeed it
was destined to be the great bane of his life. He
managed, nevertheless, to appear occasionally at
concerts, and his reputation daily increased ;in
Berlin he had a very enthusiastic reception, and
arrived in London in 1749, where he produced a
58
CELEBRA TED VIOLINISTS.


great sensation. His -first public performance in
London was at tlio little theatre in the Hay-
market, where he met with much success, and
was soon looked upon as tire greatest performer
on the violin of his day. He produced quite as.
great a sensation in that concert as Paganini did
eighty years later in the larger Opera House
opposite.*
After this, Giardini became “ the fashion,” and
was heard often both in public and in private ;
his style of playing, bis tone, elegant bowing and
graceful carriage, met with universal admiration.
He soon formed an Academia, or morning concert,
at his house, at which his pupils performed. In
1754 he became first violin at the Opera. In
those days the first violin was the leader of the
orchestra, and gave the movements, etc.; there
was no other leader, with a hdton, as now, so that
none but the greatest artistes could hold such a
position. In the course of two years he joined
Signora Mingotti, the singer, in the management
* We are told that, on this occasion, “ Giardini dis-
played his power in a solo and a concerto, after which the
applause was so long and loud that the like of it had
rarely or over before been heard in that well-known
house.”


of the Opera House, and composed several of the
lyric dramas performed there. But this joint
management proved a failure, and poor Giardini
lost so much money that he was compelled to
rely, once more, upon his resources as a violinist.
He was then quite unrivalled as a solo-player
and as a leader, besides which he had several
pupils among the aristocratic and the fashion-
able. He also composed a number of solos and
concertos for the violin. But his playing was far
more remarkable than his compositions. A con-
temporary who heard him in 1774 speaks of “ the
full and prolonged tones of Giardini’s violin,”
On this occasion he played a concerto, in which
he introduced the then popular air “ Come, haste
to the wedding,” which brought the audience into
a state of ecstasy. “He was a fine-figured man,
superbly dressed in green and gold ; the breadth
of the lace upon his coat, with the three large
gold buttons on the sleeve, made a rich appear-
ance, which still glitters in my imagination.”*
Another artiste, Parke, a hautboy-player, heard
him in 1776, and states that “he displayed a
* Account by Mr. Gardiner of a concert at Leicester,
at which Giardini performed.


fund of grace and expression, liis tone uniting
sweetness and power.”
“ Giardini resided in England,” says Dubourg *
"till the year 1784, when he went to Naples
under the protection and patronage of Sir William
Hamilton, There he continued five years, and
then returned to this country; but his reception
was not what it had formerly been.” Like
Henry Phillips, the singer, when he returned in
later years from his American trip, he found his
place filled up, his fashionable friends deserted
him, his powers, when most required, were
weaker. Giardini’s health was impaired, he was
sinking under confirmed dropsy, and “ he found
himself still doomed to the prosecution of his art
when all his former excellence was lost. Instead
of leading he now played in public only the
tenor in quartets that he had recently com-
posed.” After attempting, unsuccessfully, a
burlctta opera at the little theatre in the Hay-
market, he was induced in 1793 to go to St.
Petersburg, and afterwards to Moscow, with his
burletta performers. “ The most cruel disap-
pointment, however, attended him in each of
* George Dubourg, The Violin, London, 1852.


these cities, in the latter of which lie died at the
age of eighty, in a state (as far as it could he dis-
covered) of poverty and wretchedness.”
It is some satisfaction after this to know that
by his wonderful performances he has left a name
in the annals of violin-playing, and that his influ-
ence upon the musical world of England, if
Italy, will still be felt for many 3 T ears to come.
There can be no doubt that Felici Giardini was
the greatest violinist that had, up to this period,
appeared before an English audience.
Another pupil of Somis, and afterward of Tar-
tini, was the well-known Gaetano Pugnani. He
* O
was one of the most brilliant stars that have
emanated from the Piedmontese school founded
hy Somis, and has exercised a great influence on
the art hy the grandeur of his style, the variety of
his bowing, and the improvements he introduced
into the form of the concerto. He was bom at
Turin in 1728, and after studying under the cele-
brated master of that town, soon became known
as a very accomplished violinist. He had already
achieved much success as a solo-plaver at the
Court of Sardinia before he went forth on his
travels. When he arrived at Paris he had to com


pete with some of the greatest violinists of the
period, among whom were the German virtuoso
J. Stamitz, and the French artistes Pagin and
Gavinies. Nevertheless, Pugnani met with a very
cordial reception at the Concerts Spirituals, where
he appeared several times; and afterwards visited
many European towns, with similar successful
results,*
After staying for a considerable time in Eng-
land, where he composed a great deal of violin
* The Concerts Spirituals were established in Paris in
March, 1725, as a kind of annex to the Opera, like the
“ Promenade Concerts” of the present day in London.
They were given in one of the rooms at the Palace of the
Tuileries, and under the direction of Philidor (father of
the great chess-player and composer of numerous pretty
operas). The first concert took place on the 18th March,
172 C ; the programme was as follows : first, a Series of
Airs for violins, composed by Lalande, followed by a
Caprice by the same author, and his ConfUebor. Next
came a Concerto of Corelli, entitled Nuit de Noel, and
lastly a cantata, Domino and Motet , by Lalande. It began
at six in the evening and finished at eight, amidst the
applause of all present. These concerts were continued
in the Salle des Sttisses at the Tuileries until the Revolu-
tion ; with the establishment of the Empire they were
transferred to the Opera, and continued there till the
Revolution of July. They were devoted to sacred music
principally; hence their name.


music, Pugnani returned to Italy in 1770, and
continued in Turin the direction of the Violin
School founded hy Somis. He had for pupils the
distinguished Yiotti, Bruni, Olivieri, Diana, Borra,
Molino, Traversa, Borghi, and others. His style
of execution is said to have been broad and noble,
“ characterised bj-th at commanding sweep of the
bow, which afterwards formed so grand a feature
in the performance of Viotti.” Pugnani’s com-
positions are very numerous ; they consist of solos,
trios, quartets, quintets, overtures, and operas.
Of the latter he composed seven or eight, which
were all highly successful, and performed in al-
most every theatre in Italy,
As a violinist he had at Paris a truly formid-
able rival in Gavinies, whom Viotti has termed
“the French Tartini,” and who was appointed, in
1794, Professor of the Violin in the then newly-
established Conservatoire of Paris; but both as a
composer and a performer Pugnani was held in
the greatest esteem throughout Europe until the
time of his death, which occurred at Turin in
1798.
It is said that in his younger days he had
an ardent desire to see and hear Tartini, and


therefore left Paris and proceeded to Padua.
Tartini received him kindly, and evinced some
curiosity to hear him play. Pugnani took up
his instrument and commenced a -well-known
solo, hut he had not played many bars before
Tartini suddenly seized his arm, saying “ Too
loud, my friend, too loud !” The Piedmontese
began again, but at the same passage Tartini
stopped him again, exclaiming this time, “ Too
soft, my good friend, too soft!” Pugnani there-
fore laid down the violin, and begged of Tartini
to give him some lessons. He was at once received
among his pupils, and, though already an excel-
lent artiste, began his musical education almost
entirely anew. Many anecdotes have been
foisted upon Pugnani, some evidently the crea-
tion of rivals, and not worth repeating. Others,
on the contrary, tend to enlighten us upon the
character of the man. Thus, when playing, he
was so completely absorbed in the music, that he
has been known, at a public concert, to walk
about the platform during the performance of
a favourite cadenza, imagining himself alone in
the room. Again, at the house of Madame Denis,
when requested to play before Yoltairc, who had
5


little or no music in Lis soul, Pugnani stopped
short when the latter Lad the had taste to con-
tinue his conversation, remarking at the same
time: “ M. de Voltaire is very clever in making
verses, hut as regards music he is devilishly
ignorant!” This was a curious speech in the
mouth of a pupil of Tartini'
Some have accused Pugnani of being exceed-
o o
ingly conceited. What great artiste has not in
some degree the same failing ? Is it not rather
legitimate in those who have risen to the highest
pinnacles of fame ? There is no doubt that
during his stay in Paris he excited a considerable
amount of jealousy in various quarters; if he
had been a Frenchman he would have been
lauded to the skies, and perhaps had a monu-
ment in the Xjouvre—but an Italian ! The fact
is, poor Pugnani was annoyed not a little in the
French capital; he received various nicknames,
and a young painter, who lived on the same floor,
went so far as to take advantage of the some-
what large -nose of the Italian violinist. This
feature in the face of a virtuoso is of less im-
portance, practically speaking, than a large chin,
whereby the instrument can be firmly held.


The young painter, whose name has not come
down to us, caricatured Pugnani more than once,
•and in one of his impertinent drawings he repre-
sented the Italian artiste leading his orchestra,
all the musicians of which were grouped under
his vast nasal ornjan, as under an enormous
O '
parasol.
In this section a few words should be devoted
to Luicn Boccherini, born at Lucca in 1740, and
O 3 '
distinguished more as a composer than a virtuoso.
Indeed, his favourite instrument was the violon-
cello. He gave great delight in his concerts by
playing Nardini’s duetts for violin and violon-
cello, which he executed with Manfredi, a pupil
of the latter. To Boccherini is attributed the
first successful writing of trios, quartetts, _ and
quintetts, or rather the fixing of the true cha-
racter of these compositions. Among other
curiosities he wrote quintetts for two violon-
cellos. From 1708 to 1806 he wrote no less than
nine by-three of these quintetts for the two instru-
ments, besides numerous other works. After a
while he left Italy and went to reside in Spain,
where he is said to have “ basked in the sun-
-5 2


shine of royal favour,” and composed nine works
annually for the Royal Academy of Madrid, in
which town he died in 180(1, aged sixty-six. A
very clover saying is attributed to him. The
King of Spain, Charles IV., was fond of playing
with the great composer, and was very ambitious
of shining as a great violinist; his cousin, the
Emperor of Austria, was also fond of the violin,
and played tolerably well. One day the latter
asked Boccherini in a rather straightforward
manner what difference there was between his
playing and that of his cousin Charles IV.
“ Sire,” replied Boccherini, without hesitating
for a moment, “ Charles IV. plays like a King,
and your Majesty plays like an Emperor,”
We hope his Majesty was satisfied!


VI.
1755—1824.
the person of the justly celebrated
ST we find the link which con-
nects the modem school of violin-
playing to the schools of the past.
Although he had only seven or eight pupils, it
was said shortly after his death, that this great
artiste must be looked upon as the master of all
European violinists. As time rolls on this ob-
servation, of course, loses the weight it once pos-
sessed, but Viotti’s fame is none the less for that.
He was universally regarded as the greatest
violinist of his time, and the influence he had
upon music in general, and violin music in par-
ticular, was very considerable. He was one of
those rare phenomena in. the world of art, in


whom the powers of the virtuoso were equalled
by those of the composer.
When Viotti made his appearance above the
musical horizon as a star of the first magnitude,
the dilettanti of Europe were under the magic
sway of many very clever violinists, and unless
he had been a musician of the very finest type,
it is probable that, on account of his modest and
retiring disposition, we should scarcely have be-
come acquainted with his name. At Paris, where
he first attracted public attention, a pupil of
Antonio Lolli, named Giornowick, at that time
reigned supreme. This Giornowick was a most
captivating performer on the violin, though a per-
son of a most eccentric and quarrelsome nature.
His dehut was made at the Concerts Spirituds,
before alluded to, but it was unsuccessful; the
style of music performed there did not suit him,
though it might possibly have suited the capri-
cious Lolli, his professor. But he soon overcame
this first check, and afterwards played in almost
every town in Europe with immense success.
Giornowick was horn at Palermo in 1745, and
died at St. Petersburg in 1804, after a long, and
a thoroughly artistic career. His performance?


was graceful and elegant throughout, and-
Lis tone very pure. He had a happy maimer
in treating popular airs as rondos, “ returning
ever and anon to his theme after a variety of
brilliant excursions, in a way that used to
fascinate his hearers.” His concertos are agree-
able and brilliant, hut are considered to lack
grandeur.
Michael Kelly heard him at Vienna. “He was
a man of a certain age,” he tells us, “ but in the full
vigour of talent: his tone was very powerful, his
execution most rapid, and his taste, above all,
alluring. No performer, in my remembrance,
played such pleasing music.”
Duhourg relates that on one occasion when
Giornowick had announced a concert at Lyons,
he found the people rather retentive of their
money, so he postponed the concert to the follow-
ing evening, reducing the price of the tickets to
one-half. A crowded company was the result.
But tbo bird had flown! The artiste had left
Lyons without ceremony, together with the re-
ceipts from sales of tickets.
In London, where he was frequently heard
between 1792 and 1790, he once gave a concert


that was very fully attended, but on the com-
mencement of his solo the company continued
their conversation, which was, moreover, inter-
mixed with the clattering of tea-cups, for it was
then the custom to serve tea throughout the per-
formances as well as during the intervals. Gior-
nowick turned to the orchestra and stopped it.
“These people,” he said, “know nothing about
music—anything is good enough for drinkers of
warm water—l will give them something better
suited to their taste Whereupon he struck up
a very commonplace French air, which had a
marvellous success.
When Yiotti arrived in Paris, wick set
off on his travels ; he left about 1780,*
Giovanni Battista Yiotti was bom in 1755, at
Fontaueto, a little village in Piedmont. How he
took to violin-playing nobody seems to know, but
he studied it so effectually under Pugnani at
Turin, that at twenty years of age he was ap-
pointed First Yiolin to the Chapel Royal of that
* Some years later, Viotti and Giornowiek were in the
same town (at Hamburg) when the latter gave two very
successful concerts, and reaped a rich harvest; but Yiotti,
poor as he was at the time, could not be prevailed upon
to appear, though his reputation was then European.


town, where he remained three years. He then,
travelled as a solo-player, and after meeting with
a most flattering reception at Berlin, he continued
his course to Paris, where he also made his d/but
at the Concerts Spirituels.
“The arrival of Viotti in Paris,” says Fetis,
“ produced a sensation difficult to describe. No
performer had ever been heard who had attained
so high a degree of perfection, no artiste had pos-
sessed so fine atone, such sustained elegance, such
fire, and -so varied a style. The fancy which was
developed in his concertos increased the delight
he produced upon his auditory ; his compositions
for the violin were as superior to those which had
been previously heard, as his execution surpassed
that of all his predecessors and contemporaries.”
In Giornowick the public applauded grace and
elegance ; in Viotti, beauty and grandeur.
It will be seen by the foregoing pages what a
number of eminent musicians then thronged Paris,
and how much talent and originality it required
to draw public attention to any one artiste ir»
particular. Nevertheless, Viotti had not resided
very long there before ho attracted attention in
the very highest quarters. He soon received the
73
VIOTTI.


command of Queen Mario Antoinette to play at
the Court of Versailles. On one of these occa-
sions a very curious scene occurred, very charac-
teristic of that peculiarly courageous nature of
Viotti, •which was to ho found not only in his
compositions and his playing, but in the/manner
of the man himself, in his every-day life. On the
evening referred to, a very brilliant concert had
been prepared, and a considerable number of
talented musicians enframed for the occasion.
Viotti had put himself down for a concerto of his
own composition ; and no sooner had the first few
bars of it commenced than a considerable noise
was heard, and the arrogant and conceited Count
d’Artois entered with great hustle, in spite of the
presence of royalty and a most numerous and
brilliant company. All this noise interrupted the
performance; but that was not all: no sooner had
the violinist recommenced his piece, than the said
Count got up in a fidgety manner, walked about
the room, and spoke in rather loud tones to
several ladies of his acquaintance. This was too
much. A flash of fire darted from the dark eyes
of the Italian virtuoso, as he turned an indignant
glance towards the source of this eminently rude
74
CELEBRA TED VIOLINISTS.


behaviour; then, patting his violin quietly under
his .arm and taking the music from the reading-
desk, he withdrew from the concert-room without
further ceremony, “ leaving the Concert, Her Ma-
jesty, .and His Royal Highness, to the reproaches
of the audience.” This scene, as we find it de-
scribed by various writers, some of whom may
have witnessed it, is an exact pendant to that
which occurred at the house of Cardinal Ottoboni
when Corelli showed how to compel an audience
to behave respectfully to him.
It is needless, perhaps, to say that in private
circles, both among the aristocracy and in the
artistic world, Viotti was often the great charm
of the evening: more than once he played at the
house of the Count de Balck, where his friend
Carat used to sing, and where the magnificent
C! T O
tenor voice and admirable singing of young Orfila,
a scientific chemist, attracted a very large share
of attention, and caused him to receive numerous
solicitations to abandon science for a musical
career. But this young Portuguese had come to
Paris to study medicine, and was so fascinated
with the study of chemistry, more particularly
that branch of this vast and useful science that


relates to poisons, that lie never deviated from his
scientific career except on such occasions as we
refer to here.
That Viotti must have had strong political
opinions, and perhaps meddled in politics to some
extent, appears tolerably evident from one or two
circumstances connected with his career. In the
first place, we have the anecdote just related, his
haughty and independent demeanour in presence
of royalty; in the next, his abrupt departure
from Paris at the outbreak of the revolution ; and
again, his expulsion from London for alleged
political reasons.
The scene at Versailles, above related, seems
also to have had considerable effect upon his
future career; for, ever afterwards, he evinced
the greatest dislike to appear in public as a solo-
player; once only he played for a charity; and
once again, in the year 1790, when a singular
concert was arranged to take place on the fifth
story of a house in Paris; the apartment in ques-
tion being occupied by a member of the Govern-
ment and an old friend of the violinist. “I will
play,” said he on being pressed; “ but only on one
■condition, and that is, that the ataliencc shall


come up here to us; we have long enough de-
scended to them, but times are changed, and now
we may compel them to rise to our level or
something to that effect. It took place in due
course, and was a very brilliant concert indeed.
The only ornament was a bust of Jean Jacques
Rousseau; a large number of distinguished ar-
tistes, both instrumental and vocal, wore present,
and a most aristocratic audience. A good deal
of Boccherini's music was performed that evening,
and though many of the titled personages had
mounted to the fifth floor for the first time in
their lives, so complete was the success of the
concert, that not one descended without regret,
and all were warm in their praise of the per-
formances of the distinguished violinist.
Viotti was, as we have already stated, occa-
sionally to he heard in private, and besides the
hotel of the Count de Balck, some privileged
friends had frequent opportunities of hearing
him at the house of Madame Montegerault at
Montmorency. This lady was an amiable and
talented pianiste. Sometimes she would scat
herself at her instrument and play a brilliant
improvisation in the concerto style, when Viotti


would take up his violin, and, catching the spirit
of the piece, would join in the performance, and
in a series of extemporaneous passages display
his immense powers to the delight of all present.
These performances were always exceedingly
spirited, and produced a magical effect upon the
audience. The Italians have always been noted
for their skill in improvisation. Not very long
ago I had a. wonderful example of this at my
sister’s house in the playing of Signor Tito Mattel,
the talented pianist. With his left hand upon
the piano and his right upon a small harmonium,
lie produced, for about ten minutes, some of the
most charming music I ever heard. He con-
fessed later to me that he had formerly given
concerts at Naples, in which he played duetts on
the two instruments at once.
As we have already hinted, Yiotti was for
some unknown reasons obliged to quit Paris,
rather abruptly, on the outbreak of the revolu-
tion. In 1790 he came over to London, and
appeared at Salomon’s Concerts, with the same
success that had attended his first appearances
in Paris. Every one was charmed with his origi-
nality, his fine large bowing, his boldness, and


Lis exquisite taste. After awhile he took some
share in the management of the King's Theatre,
and about 1794 —5 became leader of the orchestra
there. But, curious to relate, he suddenly re-
ceived an order from the British Government to
quit England without delay.
He then passed over to Holland and took up
his residence at Schonfeld, not far from Hamburg,
a beautiful and secluded place, where he wrote
several of his best compositions, and among
others the well-known ISix Duetts for two violins,
which have proved excellent studies in the hands
of young professors, initiating them to the secrets
of good tone and good taste.
In the course of a few years he found himself
at liberty to return to England, and in 1801 he
came over to London again, this time not as a
violinist, but to establish himself as a 'win&mer-
chant ! This undertaking did not prove success-
ful, and poor Yiotti lost a considerable sum of
money in the speculation—some persons say the
whole of his fortune. His friend Garat, one of
the most charming singers of that period, relates
how ho discovered Yiotti at London, when none
of his French friends knew what had become of


him. In the very zenith of his powers and
height of his reputation, the founder of a violin
school which remains celebrated to this day,
Viotti had quitted Paris suddenly, and since his
departure no one had received, either directly or
indirectly, any news of him. According to Garat,
some vague indications led him to believe that
the celebrated violinist had taken up his resi-
dence in London, but for a long time after his
(Garat’s) arrival in the metropolis, all his attempts
to find him were fruitless. At last, one morning
he went to. a large export house for wine. It
had a spacious courtyard, filled with numbers of
large barrels, among which it was not easy to
move towards the office, or counting-house. On
entering the latter, the first person who met his
gaze was Viotti himself. Viotti, surrounded by
a legion of employes, and so absorbed in business
that he did not notice Garat! At last he raised
his head, and, recognising his old friend, seized
him by the hand, and led him into an adjoining
room, where he gave him a hearty welcome.
Garat could not believe his senses, and stood
motionless with surprise.
“ I see you are astonished at the metamor


pliosis,” said Yiotti; “it is certainly drule—un-
expected ; but what could you expect ? At Paris
I was looked upon as a ruined man, lost to all
my friends; it was necessary to do something to
get a living, and here I am, making my for-
tune !”
"But,” interrupted Garat, “have you taken
into consideration all the drawbacks and an-
noyances of a profession to which you were not
brought up, and which must be opposed to your
tastes T ’
“ I perceive,” continued Viotti, " that you share
the error which so many indulge in. Com-
mercial enterprise is generally considered a most
prosaic undertaking, but it has, nevertheless, its
seductions, its prestige, its poetical side, I assure
you no musician, no poet, ever had an existence
more full of interesting and exciting incidents
than those which cause the heart of the merchant
to throb. His imagination, stimulated by success,
•carries him forward to new conquests; his clients
increase, his fortune augments, the finest dreams
of ambition are ever before him.”
" But art!” again interrupted his friend ; “ the
art of which you are one of the finest re-
-13
81
VIOTTI.


presentatives—you cannot Lave entirely aban-
doned it
“ Art will lose nothing,” quietly rejoined Viotti
"and you will find that I can conciliate two
things without interfering with either, though
you, doubtless, imagine them irreconcilable. We
will continue this subject another time; at
present I must leave you. I have some pressing-
busines.s to transact this afternoon; but come
and dine with me at six o’clock, and be sure
you do not disappoint me.”
Garat, who relates this conversation, goes on
to toll us that he kept the appointment moat
punctually, and, to his surprise, when he returned
to the house, he found all the barrels and waggons
that encumbered the courtyard in the morning
carefully stowed away, and in their place were
to be seen several carriages, a number of footmen
and servants. A laquais in brilliant livery con-
ducted the visitor to the drawing-room on the
first-floor. This apartment, and those adjoining,
were most elegantly furnished, and decorated with
sparkling mirrors, candelabra, gilt ornaments,
handsome furniture, and curiosities. Viotti re-
ceived him at the head of the staircase, hut he


was no longer the careful, industrious man of
business that Garat bad seen in the morning; it
was the type of a gentleman of birth and fortune
that now stood before him. His friend was
again struck dumb with astonishment; but his
surprise was increased tenfold when he heard
announced the names of the other visitors, who
soon flocked into the drawing-room; all eminent
and distinguished men. The dinner was ex.-
quisite, and after dinner they had some excellent
music. A young French lady sang some beautL
ful songs by Cimarosa, then Yiotti played one of
bis last concertos, and never was bis bow more
gifted or more sublime. The wine merchant
was still the same great artiste he had been in
Paris.
After a great deal of trouble, Garat tells us,
be induced Yiotti to quit London for a short
time, and to go over to Paris, where he again
delighted the friends of the Comte de Balck and
others with his playing. It was once half-past
four in the morning when one of these agreeable
meetings was brought to a close.
Yiotti carried on the wine trade for several
years, but, as we have said, it all ended un-
-6—2


successfully, and, when his fortune was gone,
he solicited, through his Parisian friends, some
appointment in France, and was eventually
nominated Director of the Music at the Grand
Opera. It is said that neither his age nor his
quiet character were congenial to such an under-
taking, and after a while he retired from it, but
was then granted a pension. He came again
over to England, and chose to reside in London,
where he had already made a kind of second
home, and whore he died on the 24th of March,
1824.
Whilst Viotti held the post of Director of the
Music at the Grand Opera in Paris, the following
letter was addressed to him by Possini on the
10th July, 1821; the English translation scarcely
does justice to the Italian :
“ Most esteemed Sir,
“You will be surprised at receiving a
letter from an individual who has not the honour
of your personal acquaintance, but I profit by the
liberality of feeling existing between artistes to
address these lines to you through our friend
Herold, from whom I have learnt with the


greatest satisfaction, the high, and, I fear, some-
what undeserved opinion yon have of me. The
oratorio of Movie, composed by me three years
ago, appears to our mutual friend susceptible of
dramatic adaptation to French words; and I,
who have the greatest reliance on Hdrold’s haste
and on his friendship for me, desire nothing
more than to render the entire work as perfect
as possible, by composing new airs in a more
religions style than those which it at present
contains, and by endeavouring to the best of my
power that the result shall neither disgrace the
composer of the partition, nor you, its patron and
protector. If M. Viotti, with his great celebrity,
will consent to be the Mecsenas of my name, he
may be assured of the gratitude of his devoted
servant,
(Signed) “ Gioacchino Rossini.”
" P.S. —In a month’s time I will forward yon
the alterations of the drama Mdisc, in order
that you may judge if they are conformable to
the operatic style. Should they not be so, you
will have the kindness to suggest any others
better adapted to the purpose,”


Viotti was naturally poetical; M. Eymar'says
of him, “ Never did a man attach so much value
to the simplest gifts of nature, and never did a
child enjoy them more passionately.” This love
of nature aided to establish the purity and
rectitude of his taste. A simple violet would
transport him with joy when he discovered it
hidden among the leaves; in the country every-
thing was an object of fresh interest and en-
joyment; all nature spoke to his heart, and he
yielded himself at once to its emotions. The
strictest integrity and honour regulated his
transactions as a man of business, and his feelings
were kind and benevolent. As a musician he
is said never to have been surpassed in any of
the highest qualities that belong to violin-playing,
and his compositions are models of grandeur,
spirit, and variety of expression. The Concerto,
which began to be much improved in his day,
was still further advanced by Viotti, though the
execution of those manual difficulties which the
violinist of the present day sets so much value
upon, were not then the fashion. Paganini had
not yet appeared.
Viotti lias left us a beautiful picture of a still


afternoon in. tho mountains of Switzerland. It
was there he heard, under peculiar circumstances,
and probably for the first time, the plaintive
■sound of a mountain horn, breathing forth tho
few notes of a kind of R'tnz des Vaohes.
“ The liana des Vaches which I send you,” he
says in one of his letters, “is neither that with
which our friend Jean Jacques has presented us,
nor tliat of which M. De la Bord speaks in his
work on Music. I cannot say whether it is
known or not; all I know is that I heard it in
Switzerland, and, once heard, I have never for-
gotten it. I was sauntering along, towards the
decline of day, in one of those sequestered spots
.... flowers, verdure, streamlets, all united to
form a picture of perfect harmony. There, with-
out being fatigued, I seated myself mechanically
on a fragment of rock, and fell into so profound a
reverie that I seemed to forget that I was upon
earth. While sitting thus, sounds broke on my
■ear which were sometimes of a hurried, some-
times of a prolonged and sustained character,
and were repeated in softened tones by the
■echoes around. I found they proceeded from a
mountain horn ; and their effect was heightened
87
VIOTTI.


by a plaintive female voice. Struck as if by
enchantment, I started from my dreams, listened
with breathless attention, and learned, or rather
engraved upon my memory, the Ramz ties Vaches
which I send you. In order to understand all its
beauties you ought to be transplanted to the
scene in which I heard it, and to feel all the en-
thusiasm tha.t such a moment inspired."
Wo ourselves have bad the good fortune to
pass such a moment in the hills of Waldeck, on a
tine afternoon in June, when the tinkling of the
sheep-bells came from the sides of a neighbouring
slope, and gradually approached the spot at which
wo listened eagerly to those fairy-like sounds.
Nothing we have 'yet met with in music can
realise the effect these sounds produced upon us ;
not even the Heinz des Vaches in Kossini's Guil-
laume Tell, nor the beautiful little composi-
tion of Alard, entitled Souvenir des Pyrenees,
though there is something in both of these that
approaches to the magical effect of which we
speak, and which is, no doubt, heightened by the
scenery.
Ferdinand Langle has left us the following
interesting anecdote of Viotti, and more than


once related it to Adolph Adam, the well-known
French composer. The father of the former,
Marie Langle, also an excellent professor of har-
mony, and formerly one of the instructors of
Dalayrac, was an intimate friend of the great
violinist. One fine summer evening, Marie
Langle and Yiotti were taking a walk along the
Champs Elysees, and after a while sat down on
one of the benches under the trees to enjoy the
fresh air, if possible, without the dust of the
foot-path. Night was gradually approaching,
and Viotti, who was naturally of a dreamy,
thoughtful disposition, had yielded to one of
those reveries which isolated him even in the
midst of a numerous and brilliant society, whilst
Langle sat thinking over some of the airs in his
opera Corlsandre, which he was then composing.
In a few moments they were both rather dis-
agreeably brought back to mother earth and the
locality in question, by some harsh discordant
sounds, so terribly false that they made the
musicians almost start from their seats. They
both suddenly turned their astonished features
toward each other as much as to say, “ What
on earth is that T Viotti was the first to speak:


“ It can’t be a violin,” he said, “ and yet there
is some resemblance to one,”
“ Nor a clarionet,” suggested Langld, “ though
1 DD O ' O
it is something like it.”
The easiest manner of solving the problem was
to go and see what it was. They approached the
spot whence the extraordinary tones issued, and
saw a poor blind man standing near a miserable-
looking candle and playing upon a violin—but
the latter was an instrument made of tin-plate.
“ Fancy !” exclaimed Viotti, “ it is a violin, but
a violin of tin-plate! Did you ever dream of
such a curiosity ?’ and after listening a while, he
added, “ I say, Langle, I must possess that instru-
ment ; go and ask the old blind man what he will
sell it for.”
Langle approached and asked the question, but
the old man. was disinclined to part with it.
“But we will give you enough for it to enable
you to purchase a better," he added; “ and why
is not your violin like others ?”
The aged fiddler explained, that, when he got
old and found himself still poor., not being able to
work, but still able to scrape a few airs upon a
violin, he had endeavoured to procure one, but in


vain. At last his good kind nephew Eustache,
who was apprenticed to a tinker, had made him
■one of tin-plate. “ And an excellent one too,” he
added; “ and my poor hoy Eustache brings me
here in the morning when he goes to work, and
fetches me away again in the evening as he re-
turns, and the receipts are not so had sometimes
—once, when ho was out of work, it was I who
kept the house going 1”
“’Well," said Viotti, "I will give you twenty
francs for your violin. You can huy a much bet-
ter one for that price ; but let me try it a little 1”
He took the violin into his hands. Its singular
tone amused him, and he produced some extra-
ordinary effects upon it. Indeed, so much was he
.absorbed by his playing that he did not perceive
a considerable crowd had gathered round, and
were listening with curiosity and astonishment
to this most extraordinary performance. Langle
seized upon the opportunity, and passed round
the old man’s hat. A goodly number of two-sous-
pieces, and oven some silver-bits, was the im-
mediate response ; and these were handed to the
astonished beggar, whilst Viotti prepared to give
him the twenty francs.


“ Stay a moment,” said the blind man, recover-
ing a little from his surprise ; “just now I said I
would sell the violin for twenty francs, but I did
not know it was so good, I ought to have at
least the double for it.”
Yiotti had never received a more genuine com-
pliment, and he did not hesitate to give the old
man two pieces of gold instead of one, and then im-
mediately retired from the spot, passing through
tho crowd with the tin-plate instrument under'
his arm. Ho had scarcely gone forty yards when
he felt some one pulling at his sleeve ; it was a
workman, who politely took off Ins cap and said ;
“ Sir, you have paid too dear for that violin;
and if you are an amateur, as it was I who made
it, I can supply you with as many as you like at
six francs each.”
This was Eustache; he had just come in time
to hear the conclusion of the bargain, and little
dreaming that he was so clever a violin-maker,
wished to continue a trade that had begun so-
successfully. However, Yiotti was quite satisfied
with the one sample he had bought. He never
parted with that instrument, and had it with him
when he came to reside in London,


It appears that this extraordinary instrument
was sold at London with other effects of the great
violinist, after his death, and realised a few shil-
lings only. An amateur of curiosities offered a
large price to the purchaser of it, if he, or any one
else, could inform him how such a mysterious
piece of workmanship happened to be in the pos-
session of the celebrated Yiotti,
We have stated above that Viotti had few
pupils, but they all became very superior artistes.
Rode, Robreclits, Cartier, Mademoiselle Gerbini,
Aldoy, Labarrc, Pixis, Mori, Madame Paravicini,
Yacher: such are the principal names of those
who owed their talent directly to his teaching ;
but Yiotti gave advice and encouragement to
many others, and his influence appears to have
been beneficially felt even by those who ranked
as great artistes in his own day.
Pierre Rode, probably the most eminent of
these, both as a performer and composer, was born
at Bordeaux in 1774, and showed a very marked
disposition for music when very young. At thir-
teen years of age, he ’Aas sent to Paris and placed
under Yiotti. His first appearance in public
occurred in 1790, when he was sixteen. At this
93
VIOTTI.


concert lie played one of Viotti’s concertos. He
then played second violin at the Theatre Feydeau,
and, when opportunity occurred, he performed in
concerts. In 1796 he took to professional travel-
ling in Holland and Germany, and on the way to
France from Hamburg by sea, he was shipwrecked
on the English coast. Viotti was then in London,
and Rode did not succeed before an English audi-
ence. Moreover, like Viotti, lie soon got notice
to quit from the Government, on the suspicion
merely of being a democrat! On returning to-
Paris he was successful, and got an appointment
as Professor at the Conservatoire, and in 1800,.
that of Violin-Solo to the Emperor Napoleon (then
Premier Consul).
In 1803 he obtained a similar appointment in
Russia, and remained there five years, after which
he travelled again to various European towns
till, in 1829, he was struck with paralysis, of
which lie died in the year following. His per-
formance was very elegant, like his compositions.
His well-known Air Varie, and his Concertos f
have become classical. According to Fit is, he
was “ a model of perfection in his performance,”
and his compositions lead us to believe that this


is not an. exaggerated estimate. The French
called Rode the “ Correggio of ike Violin."
Mademoiselle Clerbini appears to have had con-
siderable execution, a fair share of good taste,
but was rather devoid of feeling. She played a
great deal in Spain and Portugal, and also ap-
peared in London, The other lady, Madame
Paravicini, at one time a teacher of music to the
Bcauharnais family, and patronised by the Em-
press Josephine, was, later in life, compelled to
take to the violin as a means of livelihood. Sho
appeared with considerable success in Milan,
Bologna, Vienna, etc.
Nicholas Mori deserves also more than a pass-
ing notice. He was bom in London in 179 G,
and began tbe violin very early in life, some say
when be was three years of age. The fact is,
that at eight he was brought out as a youthful
prodigy, and performed a concerto by his teacher,
Barthelcmon. He afterwards became one of the
best pupils of Viotti, and as a lad played in
the orchestra of the Opera. When arrived at
the maturer age of twenty, he was made leader
of the ballet, so that bis career thus far fore-
shadowed somewhat that of the late Alfred


Mellon, an excellent violinist and conductor born
in Birmingham, and whose London career has
been most successful.
In 1813, when the Philharmonic Concerts
opened a new field for violinists, Mori, aided by
his distinguished professor Viotti, took rank as an
eminent performer, and this led to his being ap-
pointed Professor of the Yiolin at the Royal
Academy of Music. He was now an established
favourite with the English public, and played
with considerable success in numbers of concerts
of all kinds. His performance was remarkable
for the facility with which he executed difficult
passages, more than for taste and refinement.
He died in June, 1839, leaving a name that will
he long remembered among English lovers of the
violin. Duhourg has said of his performance ;
■“Mori’s playing was admirably suited to the ap-
prehension and desires of a fashionable audience.
It was showy, but not profound; striking, but
not moving, full of artificial neatness, with little
of natural grace Admirable as it was in
some points, it sufficiently showed why he could
not hope to distinguish himself in composition.”
He made many good pupils, among whom were


Oury, Richards, Musgrove, Patey, etc.; the former,
who afterwards took lessons of nearly all the
eminent artistes in Europe, and who married a
distinguished French pianiste, Mdllo. Belleville,
ran through a most successful artistic career,
more especially in Italy and other continental
countries. George Macfarren, Sterndale Bennett,
and Earl Falmouth were, in their younger days,
pupils of Oury.
This is also the place to allude to the two dis-
tinguished violinists Kreutzer and Baillot, who
have formed many able pupils, and were for
many years professors at the Paris Conservatoire.
Ptodolphe Kreutzer, born at "Versailles in 176(5, a
son of one of the Court musicians, had for
master a German violinist of much fame, Sta-
mitz, the founder of a violin school in his native
country; but his style and finish were chiefly
owing to the instruction he received later in life
from Gavinies, and from the effect produced upon
him by hearing the performances of Viotti. After
this Kreutzer’s method became broader, more
brilliant, and exceedingly bold.
Baillot was more remarkable for poetic feeling;
he was a pupil of Pollani (one of Nardini’s pupils),
7


and wan born near Paris, about 1770. He was a
great so?<j-playcr, but shone still more in the
quartctts of Haydn, Boccherini, Mozart, and
Beethoven. At the Opera, where lie was engaged
to play the solos for dancing, “ho was only the
shadow of himself,” says Fctis. Baillot not only
ranks as a great violinist, but stands forth as a
great composer in the midst of a galaxy of talent
and genius. He was succeeded by Habcncck,
one of his ablest pupils, to whom the French
Conservatoire owes its presentable teacher Alard,
the composer of some very brilliant modem Fan-
tasias.
Lafont was another great violinist whose
talent can be directly connected with the school
of Yiotti. No performer, perhaps, ever gave
greater pleasure or excited more enthusiasm in
the concert-room. Charles Phillipe Lafont, who
styled himself Violon solo aux Cours de Franca
et de Russia, must be looked upon as one of the
finest violinists that ever lived. Though his
cbmpositions have been surpassed by those of
Ernst and De Beriot, there is a peculiar elegance
and a freshness about them even now, that class
them among the more admirable productions for


tlit! violin. His own performance was charac-
terised. by sweetness, purity of tone, and exqui-
site finish, with a considerable amount of execu-
tion and a rapid, distinct staccato and detachd
bowing-. In fact ho was a perfect master of his
instrument, and exhibited the most exquisite
taste in ornament. Lafont began his musical
career as a singer, and in 1794 ho occasionally
sang in concerts at Paris and other towns. He
studied music in its various branches under
several distinguished professots; but when, he
took finally to the violin, he completed his
studies under Rode, to whose school he adhered
very closely, following all the great characteristics
■of that admirable master. "Whilst ho resided in
Russia he was “ First Violin to the Emperor ” at
St. Petersburg; but in 1800 he returned to Paris,
and held the appointment of leader at the King’s
chapel. His two Fantasias on Auber's Domino
JS'oir, and on La Muette , and his charming
,Romance Valse arc some of his most charac-
teristic compositions.
Germany, having had so many lino composers
of her own, has been, perhaps, somewhat less in-
-7—2


fluonced by the talent and genius of Yiotti, but
this is the only place in the present volume that
we can take a glance at some of the greatest
violinists produced on German soil.
We have already alluded to Stamitz, the son
of a Bohemian schoolmaster, as the founder of a
violin school in Germany; his name and reputa-
tion were extended by bis eldest son Charles,,
born at Manbeim in 1740, who made many able
pupils. There was also Benda, a contemporary
of the elder Stamitz, and, like the latter, born in
Bohemia, in 1700, being ten years older than the
schoolmaster’s musical son. Benda while a child
was sopranist in the choir of St, Nicholas at
Prague; whilst still a boy he took a fancy for
the violin, and after awhile ran away with a
company of itinerant musicians. A blind Jew,
named Loebel, a very clever performer on the in-
strument —some say a perfect virtuoso —gave
him his first serious instruction, and rendered
him capable of profiting by the lessons of others-
at Prague and Vienna, until he became a very
great solo-player, and made an immense r eputa-
tion.
Here, too, we must mention Leopold Mozart,


the father of the celebrated composer, an excel-
lent violinist, and author of a “ 2letkod,” or Book
of Instruction for the Violin. Ho was born in
1719, and, after filling several honourable posts,
■died at Salzburg in 1787. Much of his life was
■spent in travelling with his immortal son, and
his daughter, with whom he visited all the Courts
of Europe, and, finally, returned to Salzburg,
rich in hopes centred on his son, but poor in
purse, the long journeys having nearly ex-
hausted his pecuniary resources. It is difficult
to conceive a Mozart in such a position. But
such was the fact, rendered all the more distress-
ing from continual suffering, produced by re-
peated attacks of gout. He had, however, a
worthy patron in the Prince Bishop of Salzburg.
His “ Instruction Book for the Violin ” was con-
sidered, for more than fifty years, the best work
of its kind, and is still advertised by music-
sellers.
Then we have the well-known name of
William Cramer, a violinist of no mean order,
born at Mannheim in 1730, patronised by Prince
Maximilian, but who did not succeed in Germany,
and so came to England, where he was esteemed


the first violinist of his day. He was a had
economist, and the embarrassment he sustained
in. Ills affairs, coupled with the transference of the
leadership of the Opera orchestra to Yiotti, com-
bined to hasten his death, which occurred in
1799. His son, Francois Cramer, fully sustained
his father's reputation as a violinist; though he
never had much importance as a soZo-playor.
He made an excellent leader of the Avt-ianl
Concerts, and became remarkable by his read-
ing of Handel’s music. His brother, John
Cramer, made quite as great a name as a
pianiste.
Nor can We pass over the name of John
Peter Salomon, the originator of the celebrated
' C 3
“ Salomon’s Concerts,” in Loudon. He was born
at Bonn, on the Rhine, in 1745, and educated for
the law. His love of music and enterprising
spirit led him to London, where he organised
concerts in 1791, at which many distinguished-
artistes, including the violinist Yauiewitz and the
great Viotti, made their first appearance before
an English audience.
To Germany also the musical world owes the
two cousins Romberg, one a violinist, and the


other a violoncellist, both distinguished per-
formers and composers of merit.
Fesca, the great adon/io-player, patronised by
Jerome Bonaparte, was born at Magdeburg in
1781), where he performed a concerto in public
when only eleven years of age. He has left us
some meritorious compositions.
Kiesewctter, the son of a violinist of Auspach,
was born in 1777, and became leader of the
orchestra at the Court of Hanover, where he was
so poor that he could not support hia wife and
eight children. In 1821 he came to London, and
his performances at the Philharmonic Concerts
were much admired. He died here in September,
1827, “receiving unremitted attention at the
close of his career from his pupil, Oury,” whom
we have already alluded to.
A player much in the same style was May-
seder, who for many years stood high in the world
of music, both as a soio-playor and a composer.
His brilliant music was much appreciated at
Vienna, where he resided most of Ids life.
But the greatest celebrity among German vio-
linists of the first half of the nineteenth century,
whether considered as a composer or a performer,


is without doubt Louis Spohr, the author of the
well-known Violin School, through which so
many of our English dilettanti have been made
to toil. It is a curious circumstance that he was
bom in 1784 —the same year as the immortal
Paganini.
Spohr has written his own biography, and a
most delightful book it is, though tinged with
that peculiar melancholy which seems to be in-
herent to the ambitious German mind. He
was born at Seesen, in Brunswick, the son of a
physician in tolerable practice, who, no doubt,
was net a person calculated to foster a youthful
love for music. However, Spohr found an im-
portant patron in the Duke of Brunswick, who
was himself a performer on the violin, and who
enabled liim to take lessons from Francis Eck,
leader of the concerts at the Court of Munich.
With Eck, th 6 young Spohr made a musical tour
in Russia, but it was only after he returned to
Germany that he applied himself most assidu-
ously to the study of his instrument, in order to
overcome its immense difficulties. In the year
1805 he was offered, and accepted, the post of
Concert-master to the Duke of Saxc-Gotha, a


very moderate appointment, but delightful to
him in many respects, as the readers of his
charming Autobiography will soon perceive.
After a while, however, it seemed advisable to
give it up, and to travel through the various
cities of Europe as a concert-player. In 1817 he
thus visited Italy, and was heard in Venice by
Paganini himself, who spoke of Spohr’s finished
execution and broad style with the greatest
warmth and unfeigned admiration. Indeed, it
may safely be asserted that Spohr could do that
which Paganini could not, whilst Paganini
■could likewise perform music that Spohr could
have no idea of. In Spohr wo have an example
of strenuous hard work, based upon sound and
well-known principles, and with a moderate
.amount of natural talent. In Paganini we have
unlimited natural talent, comparatively little
work, and immense originality. For some time
Spohr held the post of leader at the theatre of
Erankfort-on-thc-Mainc, when he was succeeded
hy Guhr, a great admirer of Paganini, and the
author of a treatise on Harmonics, etc.
Spohr made several visits to England, and
played in 1820 at the Philharmonic Concerts.


Ho also led the Norwich Musical Festival in the
year 1839. He was, perhaps, even more distin-
guished as a leader and composer than as a
violinist; and his life, being one of continuous
labour, the number of works —operas, oratorios,
concertos, etc. —that have issued from his most
fertile brain is very considerable. Refined taste-
and prodigious execution characterised his per-
formance, in which he was often, much assisted
by the great talent of his wife as an accom-
panist and duettist, and for whom he wrote
several brilliant concerted pieces. Among his
operas we should mention Jessonda and Faust;
but a complete list of bis compositions would fill
several of our pages. In his performance he had
a peculiar horror of harmonic notes and pizzicato,
and, in fact, of all those little peculiarities which
characterised his great Italian rival. On the
other hand he shows great partiality for chro-
matic passages, which constitute one of the
greatest difficulties in violin performances. In
the month of October, 1821, Spohr arrived with
his family in Dresden, chiefly for the purpose of
enrraoin" the services of Miksch as a teacher of
o o o
singing for his eldest daughter. Weber, who had


declined the directorship of the Opera at Gassed,.
was at tliis time written to by Feige, the lessee,
to beg him to point out the most worth;? man for
this position. The celebrated composer at once
recommended Spohr, who to the end of his life
tilled the post with honour. For further details
of the career of this bold yet amiable character
—for such indeed was Spohr—we must refer our
readers to his Autobiography , of which there
exists an English translation ; and we will con-
clude this section of our work by quoting a por-
tion of his admirable address to young artistes,
inserted at the end of his excellent Violin
School:
“My dear Young Fellow-Artiste,
“ You have now surmounted the greatest
difficulties in your ascent up the steep path of
art. In prosecuting your journey, great and in-
creasing- enjoyments await you at every step.
Courageously press forward. Do not tarry!
Standing still will be but the precursor to going
backwards. You have chosen the most difficult
of all instruments; and one upon which it is only
possible to make progress—or, indeed, to retain


in after years what you have already acquired—•
by constant daily practice. Your instrument is,
however, the most perfect of any, as well as that
which most amply repays the labours of study;
hut not until the player has attained the full
•command of it.
“Strive at all times after that which is most
noble in Art, and disdain all kinds of char-
latanism. He who seeks only to please the mul-
titude ■will sink lower and lower. Be, then,
considerate in your choice of music, and perform
only the finest and best of every kind
Lastly, when you have attained the highest point
of perfection as a violinist and musician which
your particular talent will admit of, think kindly
on him who has endeavoured to smooth your
difficult path and facilitate your career as an
Artiste.”
The influence of Spohr, both as a composer and
teacher, has been very great, more especially in
Germany and England. A well-known English
violinist, Blagrove, was one of his favourite
pupils; and many others equally talented, among
whom we may reckon the distinguished Eerdi-
108
CEL Eli 11. VJ'KD VIOUSIXTH.


Hand David, have derived ardour and impetus
from his works, and advantage from meditating
on such lives as those to which wo have just
referred.


VII.
Nicolo Paganini.
1784— 1840.
"|S(?Sfa®T the beginning of this century the
mother of Paganini had a dream,
which she related to her young child
in these terms: “My son, you will
be a great musician. An angel, radiant with
beauty, appeared to me during the night, and
promised to accomplish any wish that I might
make. I asked that you should become the
greatest of all violinists, and the angel granted
that my desire should he fulhlled!”
Whether this little speech was imagined for
the sake of encouraging her son to work, and to
enable him to hear" the cruel treatment of his
father; cr whether it was a real dream, a sort of
instinctive foreshadowing of the hoy’s future


■career ; it is certain that the “ angel radiant with
beauty ” did keep the promise in the most perfect
manner possible.
Nieolo Paganini, the most wonderful violinist
of the nineteenth century, was born at Genoa on
the night of the 18th February, 1781. His
father, Antonio Paganini, was a ship-broker, who
was passionately fond of music and played upon
the mandoline. Wo know very little about him,
except that he soon perceived his child’s talents,
and caused him to study so early and so severely
that he not only affected his constitution, per-
haps naturally rather delicate, hut he actually
forced him to become a tolerable violin-player at
six years of age ! That the young Paganini gave
evidence of very precocious skill, and that, very
early in life, his instinct and natural genius led
him to attempt extraordinary effects upon his
instrument cannot be doubted. It is no less
true that his father’s knowledge of music was of
a very meagre kind, and not sufficient to enable
him to do more than give his son the roughest
elements of the art. For a short period the
leader of the Genoese theatre, Signor Cervetto,
undertook to instruct him; but when eight years


of age, the young Paganini was placed under
the care of Giacomo Costa, an excellent violinist,
and director of church music in that town. At
this time, also, ho was encouraged and helped
in his endeavours to master the art and science
of music by the composer Gnocco, who was most
kind to him.
It is stated by some of his biographers that,
even at this early period—between the age of
eight and nine—the youthful Paganini composed
his first piece, a kind of sonata, now lost, like
many others of his productions. Costa gave him
lessons for about six months, during which time
* O
Nicolo played in the churches, where the music
was under his professor's direction.
It was when nine years of age that he made
his first appearance in a concert given at the
theatre by two well-known singers, who after-
Wards sang for his benefit in a second concert.
On both occasions he performed some varia-
tions he had composed upon a French air, and
met with a most enthusiastic reception. It was
now considered necessary to place the boy under
some first-rate professor, and Alessandro Roll a, of
Parma, was fixed upon. Paganini was then


twelve years of age, and it is said that when he
and his father arrived at Holla's residence, the
learned professor was ill, and not at all inclined
to receive them. Being shown into a room ad-
joining the invalid’s bedroom, they saw upon the
table a violin and a piece of music in MS.,
which the father requested his son to try over
while they waited. This he performed so well,
that Holla inquired what artiste had come into
his house.; and, on learning that it was 3 r oung
Paganini who had come to solicit lessons, declared
he could teach him nothing hut what the lad
knew already. However, he appears to have
given him lessons for some months, during which
time the boy studied composition under Ghiretti,
and obtained the friendship and help of Paer, his
pupil (afterwards a celebrated composer), whilst
he stayed at Parma, Paer was exceedingly kind
to him.
In 1797, when thirteen years of age, Pa-
ganini was brought back to Genoa by bis
father, and began to write his first compositions
for the violin. He wrote his music so difficult
that it required all his energy to master it, and
he was occasionally seen to try the same passage
8


in a hundred different ways until he bad dis-
covered the best means of performing it; so that
at the end of the day he used to fall in a state of
complete exhaustion upon a couch, where he
would lie motionless for a considerable time. In
this year his father determined upon taking him
a professional tour through the principal towns
of Lombardy, which appears not only to have
proved very successful, but to have created a
notion in the young artiste's brain that he could
just as well make such a tour alone, and so escape
from his father’s tyranny. An opportunity for
realising this dream occurred very soon after-
wards ; it was at the annual festival of Lucca
that, in his fourteenth year, Paganini, not without
much difficulty, obtained the consent of his father
to appear' in tire concerts. He was to be accom-
panied there by his elder brother. At Lucca he
was received with so much enthusiasm that he
vowed he never would return to the paternal
roof, and at once set off to fulfil engagements at
concerts in Pisa and other towns. In vain did
the mortified parent endeavour to induce him to
return; in vain did he claim the moneys earned by
the performances of his young son. Nieolo sent


his father a portion of them, but retailed the re-
mainder, and continued his romantic style of life.
Unfortunately—and yet for Paganini some-
what fortunately—gambling was at this period
a very prevalent vice in Italy. The young
musician, for he was barely sixteen, fell several
times a victim to this passion, which seemed
to increase with his success; and often de-
prived him, in one short evening, of the pro-
ceeds of several concerts. In fact, so far did
he allow himself to be enslaved by this vicious
tendency that more than once he had to borrow
money upon his violin the source of his
livelihood —in order to pay his gambling
debts. However, even in these sad straits the
good angel that appeared in his mother’s dream
seems to have kept watch over him. One day
at Leghorn, having lost all Ins money and his
violin into the bargain, he made bold to request
the loan of an instrument in order to perform at
a concert for which he was engaged. In this
instance he applied to a French gentleman, M.
Livron, a merchant at Leghorn, who was a dis-
tinguished amateur performer, and possessed a
very fine Guarnerius violin. The musical world
B—2
115
XICOL 0 PA a A XTKL


of tins period of history, and in fact of all periods,
must he considered highly indebted to this noble
and kind-hearted Frenchman. After the concert
when Paganini returned the instrument to M.
Livron, the latter, who had been to hear him, ex-
claimed, “Never will I profane the strings which
yonr fingers have touched! that instrument is
yours,” The astonishment and delight of the
young artiste may bo more easily imagined than
described. It was upon this violin that Paganini
afterwards performed in all his concerts, and the
great virtuoso left it to the town of Genoa,
where it is now preserved in a glass case in the
Museum ; an excellent engraving of it, from a
photograph, was published in 1875, in George
Hart’s book on The Violin.
At this period of his life, between the ages of
seventeen and twenty, Nicolo Paganini was sur-
rounded by numerous admirers, and Jed into all
kinds of dissipation. He was a tall, slim youth,
with dark eyes, and long dark hair which, later
in life, he allowed to fall in curls upon his
shoulders; he was naturally amiable, and witty
in conversation, though he has been reproached
with selfishness. There can he no doubt that he


wa.s, at this period, constantly under the com-
bined influences of flattery and unbounded
ambition; nevertheless, in spite of all his suc-
cessful performances at concerts the style of life
he was leading kept him so poor that he fre-
quently took in hand all kinds of musical work
to supply the wants of the moment. It is a
curious coincidence that the fine violin which
was presented to him by M, Livron, as we have
just seen, was the cause of his abandoning, after
a while, most completely 7 the allurements of the
gaming-tables. Paganini tells us himself that a
certain nobleman was anxious to possess this
instrument, and had offered for it a sum equiva-
lent to about £BO English money; but the artiste
would not sell it even if £2OO had been offered
for it, although he was, at this juncture, in great
need of funds to pay off a debt of honour, and
sorely tempted to accept the proffered amount.
Just at this point Paganini received an invita-
tion to a friend’s house where gambling was the
order of the day 7 . “All my capital,” he says*
* Fdtis’ Hist, of the Violin : also Schottky and Vinola.
The three authors give precisely the same anecdote in
Paganini’s own words.


“ consisted of thirty francs, as I had disposed of my
jewels, watch, rings, etc.; I nevertheless resolved
on risking this last resource, and, if fortune proved
fickle, to sell my violin and proceed to St. Peters-
burg, without instrument or baggage, with the
view of re-establishing my affairs. My thirty
francs were soon reduced to three, and I already
fancied myself on the road to Russia, when my
luck took a sudden turn, and I won one hundred
and sixty francs. This saved my violin, and
completely set me up. From that day forward
I gradually gave up gambling, becoming more
and more convinced that a gambler is an object
of contempt to all well-regulated minds.”
But love-making was not given up, if the card-
table was abandoned. For it is at this period of
the young artiste’s life that occurs a most curious
episode extending over three whole years. All we
know respecting this gap in the career of the
violinist is that, during the interval in question,
he resided in the country with a friend who had
conceived a great admiration for his talent, a
Tuscan lady of position, who was a great per-
former on the guitar. During these three years
Paganini appears to have abandoned the violin
118
CELEIiUA TED VIOLIXISTS.


and taken to the guitar, upon which he soon
became an extraordinary player; he also com-
posed, during tins interval, twelve sonatas for
violin and guitar, some of which have been pre-
served. Our information on this period of Paga-
nini’s life is extremely meagre.
In 1804 lie returned to Genoa, and devoted
some considerable time to composition; he was
twenty years of age, and wrote here four grand
quartetts for violin, tenor, violoncello, and guitar,
and also some bravura variations for violin with
guitar accompaniment. At this period he gave
lessons to a young girl of Genoa, Catherine Cal-
ca<rno, about seven vears of ajre; eisdit vears
O 7 o O 7 O
later, when only fifteen years old, this young
lady astonished Italian audiences by the boldness
of her style; she continued her artistic career
till the year ISIG, when she had attained the
age of twenty-one, and all traces of her in the
musical world appear to be lost; doubtless, at
this period she found a husband, and retired
completely from public life.
In 1805 Paganini accepted the position of
director of music and conductor of the Opera
orchestra at Lucca, under the immediate patron


age of the Princess Elisa, sister of Napoleon 1.,
and 'wife of Prince Bacciochi. The prince took
lessons from him on the violin. Here lie was
made much of, though the emoluments were
small; and it was at the numerous concerts given
at the Court of Lucca that Paganini for the first
time essayed many of those curious effects, such
as performances on one. string, harmonic and
pizzicato passages, which, in after years, became-
so characteristic of his style of playing.
However, this fixed position was not of long
duration. In 1808 ho recommenced, and from
that time forward continued, his wandering
career, giving concerts at the various towns of
northern Italy, and amassing considerable sums
of money'. He could always obtain a theatre by
offering the manager half the receipts; and at
this time Paganini seems to have become more
economical, or less extravagant, and to have
begun to realise the value of money.
Some curious adventures belong to this period
of his artistic existence. Thus at a concert in
Leghorn, where he was not so well received as-
he had been seven years previously, he came on
to the platform limping from the effects of a


wound in his foot. This created a roar of
laughter. Then, just as he began his perform-
ance, the candles fell out of his desk, which
created another uproar. But the magic accents
of his violin soon turned the laughter into en
thusiastic applause.
At the little town of Forrarc things did not end
so smoothly. In those days the common people
of the suburbs of that town considered the resi-
dents of the town itself as a set of asses ! hence
any countryman, a resident of the suburbs, if
asked where he came from, or where ho was
going, never replied “ from Ferrare,” but put up
his head and began braying like an ass ! Now,
unluckily, Paganini could imitate the braying of
an ass upon his violin. This being stated, let ns
relate, in a few words, what happened. Arrange-
ments for the concert having been made, and
Signora Marcolini having agreed to sing, it was
found, at the last moment, that this lady was
unable or refused to do so. Thereupon Paganini
sought the assistance of Madame Palleriui, the
principal dancer of the theatre, who possessed a
most agreeable voice. After much solicitation
she acceded to his request, and duly appeared
121
XICOLO PA GAXIXI.


at the concert. Though exceedingly nervous,
she sang well enough to elicit a considerable
amount of applause ; nevertheless, just as she re-
tired, encouraged by those marks of approval, a
shrill whistle was heard (in England a dissatisfied
audience hiss and groan, hut on the continent
the whistle is usually resorted to). Paganini was
furious, and vowed he would punish the man who
had proffered this insult to his lady friend. He
waited till the end of the concert. When about
to perform his last piece, ho came forward to the
front of the platform, and amidst much laughter
he imitated the chirping of birds, the crowing of
a cock, the mewing of a cat, etc.; and, after all,
whilst making the most inimitable performance
of the braying of a donkey, he exclaimed," This is j
for the man who whistled!" —imagining, no doubt,
that it would turn the laugh against that indi-
vidual, and so punish him for his impertinent
behaviour. The effect produced was magical,
hut not at all what Paganini had anticipated : the
audience took it as an allusion to themselves , in
accordance with what wo have stated above. They
rose to a man, hooting, vociferating, and rushing
towards the platform; and would probably have


strangled the eminent violinist had he not sought
safety in a precipitous retreat. When safely
housed, he was told the cause of this fearful
tumult. Paganini never visited the town again.
Wherever Paganini appeared, the sensation
produced by his wonderful performances daily
increased; and as his fame became greater so did
jealousy and ill-feeling increase in divers quarters.
Reports more or less scandalous, and perfectly
untrue, were spread about, referring to his dissi-
pated life, asserting that he had made a compact
with the devil, and other like nonsense. Similar
stories were published in the papers, one of which
asserted that he had acquired his on the
fourth string from having been incarcerated in
O O
prison for eight years, during which time ail his
■strings had broken except the fourth, upon which
he practised during the whole time of his impri-
sonment, This is totally untrue. Paganini never
was in prison for an hour: it was Guarnerius,
the maker of his violin, who was for some time
locked up for political offences, being a man of
turbulent character, and who, while in prison,
managed to construct several excellent instru-
ments, which, on account of the roughness of their


finish, have been long known as tile “prison
Guarneri" violins, and are now becoming so rare
that they fetch large suras of nione}'.
As he approached his thirtieth year Paganini’s
delicate and highly nervous constitution began
give way ; he was troubled at intervals by attacks
of internal inflammation, which his mode of life,
and exceedingly moderate repasts, somewhat ag-
gravated, by keeping him, even whilst in health,
in a state of abnormal weakness.
His reputation, as one of the most extra-
ordinary performers on the violin that the world
over saw, had by this time begun to spread
beyond the confines of his native country.
It was at Milan in 1813, when twenty-nine
years of age, that he composed his variations
called Le Streghe (“ The Witches ”), in which he in-
troduced many of his most remarkable effects.
The air of this piece was taken from a ballet by
Sussmayer, called 11 noce de Bvnevento, the scenes
of which were arranged by Virgano. It was the
air at which the witches appeared in this piece,
as performed at the theatre of La Scala. On the
29th October, ISI3, he gave his first concert in
that theatre, and was received with unbounded


enthusiasm. This was one of his greatest suc-
cesses, and he ever afterwards had a kind of pre-
dilection for the city of Milan, where he gave
numerous concerts before ho extended his travels
■out of Italy. Hero it was, also, that occurred a
very interesting feature in his life. In March,
1816, Paganini, bein<i then at Genoa, heard that
' o ’ o ’
the celebrated French violinist, Lafont, was at
Milan, and ho left for that town at once to hear
him play. “His performance,” says Paganini,
“ pleased me exceedingly.”
A week later, the Italian virtuoso gave a con-
cert himself at La Scala, at which Lafont was
present; and the next day the latter proposed
that they should both play in the same concert.
“I excused myself,” says the Italian, “alleging
that such experiments were impolitic, as the
public invariably looked upon these matters as
duels, in which there must be a victim, and
that it would be so in this case; for, as he was
acknowledged to be the best violinist in Franco,
■so the public indulgently considered me the best
of Italian violinists. Lafont not looking at it in
this light, I was obliged to accept the challenge.
I allowed him to arrange the programme. We


each played a concerto of our own composition,
after which we played together a duo concertante
by Kreutzer. In this I did not deviate in the
least from the composer’s test whilst wo played
together, but in the solo parts I yielded freely to
my own imagination, and introduced several
novelties, which seemed to annoy my adversary.
Then followed a Russian Air, with variations,
by Lafont, and T finished the concert with my
variations called Le Streghe. Lafont probably
surpassed me in tone ; but the applause which
followed my efforts convinced mo that I did not
suffer by comparison.”
We have perused several versions of this affair,
and have come to the conclusion that Paganini’s
is the most truthful and the most modest of them
all. In other cases we have not been able to
admit so implicitly tbe assertions of the "wilj-
Italian,” a term that has been frequently applied
to him.
A few years later Paganini played with the
eminent Polish violinist, Lipinski; this was at
Placentia, in 1818; the two artistes were great
friends, and one of Lipinski’s works (Tre Ca-
■pried) is dedicated to Paganini. Mayseder, also,


dedicated a work to Paganini • and Lafont ar-
O *
ranged one of Ids Rondos that had been set for
piano by Herz. This shows that he was appre-
ciated and esteemed by the greatest of his fellow-
artistes quite as much as he was admired by
the general public.
In the year 1817 Rossini, Heyerboer, and
Paganini were at Rome during Carnival time.
It was on this occasion that Rossini produced
his clever paid song, Garnavale, Carnavale —“We
are poor beggars,” etc., well-known in England—
which the three eminent composers sang in the
streets, having disguised themselves for the pur-
pose. It was also during this Carnival that Rossini
produced his Cenerentola, and that Paganini
gave several concerts which excited the greatest
enthusiasm,
A little later, at Naples, his health gave way
again, and it got reported that he was consump-
tive. This had such an effect upon the landlord
of the house in which he was staying—as con-
sumption was considered to bo infectious —that
he actually turned poor Paganini out into the
street. Fortunately at this moment a violoncello-
player, Ciandelh, who knew Paganini well, came


to his rescue, and his anger was so great when
he saw what had happened to the great violinist
that he belaboured the barbarous landlord un-
mercifully with a stick, and conveyed the invalid
to a comfortable lodging where he was carefully
attended to.
Some time afterwards Paganini had an oppor-
tunity of repaying this kindness, for lie gave
Ciandelli some valuable instruction, which en-
abled him in the course of a few days to become
transformed from a very indifferent performer
into an artiste of considerable eminence.
At the age of thirty-six Paganini again found
himself at Milan, and there organised a society
of musical amateurs, called Gli Orfei. He con-
ducted several of their concerts. But either the
love of a roving life, or the necessity of wandering
in order to fill his exchequer, kept him con-
stantly on the move; and though, during these
travels, he is said to have met with many extra-
ordinary adventures, very little reliance can be
placed upon the accounts that have come down
to us, the more so when we consider that Paga-
nini’s mode of life was, as we shall see presently,
become by this time extremely sober. It was


no'u until lie was forty-four years of age that he
■at last quitted Italy, to make himself better
known in foreign countries; and on the 29th
March, 1828, he made his first appearance at
Vienna. The reception lie met with was de-
scribed as “ a paroxysm of enthusiasm.” He
gave a great number of concerts there, including
one for the benefit of the poor, and ho wa.s very
soon the most jjopular man of the day. The
shopkeepers called their goods after him ; there
were cravats a la Paganini, canes d la Paga-
nini, etc.; a good stroke at billiards was termed
tin coup a, la Paganini, It was at Vienna that,
after some considerable solicitation, a cabman
obtained from the illustrious violinist (who
scarcely knew what he granted) the permission
to print, in large letters, on his cab the words,
" Cabriolet de Paganini ” —it was indeed a con-
veyance that had once bean hired by the vir-
tuoso during a heavy shower. The man by this
cunning device soon made enough money to
enable him to rent a large house and start as an
hotel-keeper, in which capacity Paganini found
him on his next visit to that city.
One day, as he was walking along the streets
9
129
NICOLO PAGANINI.


of Vienna, Paganini saw a poor little Italian
boy scraping some Neapolitan songs before the
windows of a large house. A celebrated com-
poser who accompanied the artiste remarked to
him, " There is one of your compatriots.” Upon
which Paganini evinced a desire to speak to the
lad, and went across the street to him for that
purpose. After ascertaining that he was a poor
beggar-boy from the other side of the Alps, and
that he supported his sick mother, his only
relative, by his playing, the great violinist
appeared touched. He literally emptied his
pockets into the hoy’s hand, and taking the
violin and bow from him, began the most gro-
tesque and extraordinary performance possible.
A crowd soon collected, the great virtuoso was
as soon recognised by the bystanders, and when
he brought the performance to an end, amidst
the cheers and shouts of all assembled, ho
handed round the hoy’s hat, and made a con-
siderable collection of coin, in which silver
pieces were very conspicuous. He then handed
the sum to the young Italian, saying, “ Take
that to your mother,” and rejoining his
companion, walked off with him, saying, “ I


liope I’ve done a good turn to that little
animal.”
At Berlin, where he soon afterwards astonished
his crowded audiences by his miraculous playing,
the same fanatical enthusiasm ensued; and with
the exception of Palermo, Naples (where he seems
to have had many detractors), and Prague, his
visits to the various cities of Europe were one
continued triumph. People tried in vaip to
»
explain his method of playing, professors criti-
cised him, and pamphlets were published which
endeavoured to make him out a quack or a
charlatan. It was all to no purpose. Libels even,
as we have seen, were published on. him in the
papers. But nothing could arrest bis onward
course ; triumph succeeded triumph wherever he
appeared ; and, though no one could understand
him, every one admired him, and he had only to
touch his violin to enchant thousands.
A rather curious scene occurred at Berlin, at a
musical evening party to which Paganini was
invited. A young and presumptuous professor of
the violin performed there several pieces with
very little effect; he was pot aware of the pre-
sence of the Genoese giant, whom he did not
9—2


know even by sight. As many people in the room
did know him, however, it was not long before
he was requested to favour the company with a
specimen of his talent. After endeavouring for
some time to be excused, ho was compelled to
take the violin into his hand, when he played a
few variations in such a dreadfully bad style
that several persons could not control their
laughter. The young professor then came for-
ward and played another piece in the most con-
ceited manner possible,, and with an evident
sneer at the illustrious maestro, Paganini took
up tiic instrument a second time and played a
short piece with such deep feeling and astonish-
ing execution, that the audience sat as if petri-
fied, and at the concluding cadence burst forth
into such a thunder of applause that it was quite
deafening. During the tumult the young pro-
fessor escaped unnoticed, and was never again
seen in the house at which he had received so
severe a lesson.
The celebrated artiste gave his first concert
in Paris, at the Opera-house, on the 9th March,
1831; he was then forty-seven years of age, and
was described by Castil Blaze as being nearly


six feet in height, with a long pale face, large
nose, brilliant little eyes like those of an eagle,
long curling black hair which fell upon the collar
of his coat, extremely thin and cadaverous look-
ing, altogether a gaunt, wiry, but delicate being*
in some respects only the shadow of a man. But
his eyes sparkled with genius, his wrist and his
long bony fingers were so flexible that they
“ could only be compared to a handkerchief tied
to the end of a stick.” It would be impossible to
describe the enthusiasm his first concert created.
Eetis has spoken of it as an “ universal frenzy.”
His great fame had preceded him to Paris, and
artistes as well as the general public were full of
curiosity to hoar him. Here, as at other Euro-
jjean cities, he invariably performed his own
compositions (and, indeed, his reputation as a
composer, though only few of his compositions
were then known, was very considerable). When
asked the reason of this he has been known to
reply, “ that if ho played other compositions than
his own, he was obliged to arrange them to suit
1 O O
his peculiar style, and it was less trouble to write
a piece of his own,” Although he occasionally
indulged in quaHetts of Beethoven with amateurs
133
NICOLO PAGANINI.


fit Milan (and at Paris, in order to please his
French audience, once played a concerto by
Rode), he could produce little effect by sucii
manifestations of his talent.
All his concerts in Paris in 1831, and again
when he returned (after his English trip) in 1834,
were as successful as his first appearance there.
He soon established himself an universal fa-
vourite. The journals spoke of this tall, thin
artiste, so delicate, so admired, so covered with
■applause, as the least pretentious, the most
naive, and the simplest-mannered of men.
Nevertheless, he had his full share of eccen-
tricity.
One day a Court concert was announced at the
Tuilcries; Paganini was asked to play. He
consented, and wpnt to inspect the room the day
before. Finding that the curtains were too
numerous, and hung so that they would greatly
interfere with the sound, he requested the super-
intendent to see to this, and get things properly
arranged. It appears that this self-sufficient
official paid, no attention to his demands, and
Paganini was so offended by his manners that lie
resolved nob to play. The hour of the concert


arrived—but no Paganini! The Court was all
seated —murmurs arose. At last an official was
despatched to the hotel where the illustrious
virtuoso was staying—he was told that the great
violinist had not gone out, hut that hi went to
bed very early. . .
The success of Paganini at Paris surpassed the
most sanguine expectations ; and a similar fate
awaited him at London.
His first concert in London was given at the
King’s Theatre, on the 3rd June, 1831. All
kinds of rumours had heralded his appearance in
Bngland, and numerous were the stories told of
his eccentricities. The capacious area of the
Opera-house was scarcely large enough to hold
the crowd that flocked to hear him, in spite of
the fact that the prices of admission had been
raised by the parties who engaged him—a
circumstance that gave rise to much feeling of
discontent, and raised a storm of opposition, by
which, wc are informed, this attempt (erroneously
attributed to Paganini’s selfishness) was finally
frustrated.
No musical performance has ever been attended
with more enthusiasm than that which accoin


paniod this first appearance of the illustrious
Genoese in London.
The concert opened with Beethoven's Second
Symphony, admirably performed by the orchestra
of the Philharmonic Society, after which Lahlache
sang Rossini’s Largo ul factotum with much
applause, and was encored. "A breathless silence
then ensued,” says Mr. Gardner (an amateur of
Leicester, who, as ho tells ns, had, at the risk of
his ribs, placed himself at the opera doors two
and a half hours before hiiey wore opened), “ and
every eye watched the action of this extraordi-
nary violinist as he glided from the side scenes
to the front of the stage. An involuntary
cheering burst, at this moment, from every part
of the house, many persons rising from their
seats to view the spectre during the thunder
of this unprecedented cheering—his gaunt and
extraordinary appearance being more like that,
of a devotee about to suffer martyrdom than
one to delight you with his art. With the tip.
of his how he set off the orchestra in a grand
military movement, with a force and vivacity
as surprising as it was new. At the termina-
tion of this introduction he commenced with a


soft streamy note of celestial quality ; and with
three or four whips of his bow elicited points
of sound that mounted to the third heaven, and
as bright as the stars. . . . Immediately an
execution followed which was equally indescrib-
able. A scream of astonishment and delight
burst from the audience at the novelty of this
effect. . . .” etc.
This unsophisticated account may serve to gdve
some slight idea of the impression produced by
Paganini at his concerts. At this, his first ap-
pearance before an English public, he performed
four pieces: the first was a concerto of a most
florid character; the second a composition in tho
minor key; the third was a military rondo for
the fourth string, in which he introduced the air
Non piu undrai of Mozart; the last was his
Introduction and variations on Nel cor pin non
mi sento, with its curious pizzicato and rich
arpeggio passages.
“ can be more intense in feeling,” says
a contemporary critic, “ than his conception and
delivery of an adagio passage. His tone is not
perhaps so full and round as that of Baillot or
De Beriot, for example; it is delicate rather than
137
NIGOL 0 PA GA A'INI.


strong; but this delicacy was probably never
possessed equally by any other player.”
“There is no trick in his playing,” says an-
other ; “ it is all fair, scientific execution, opening
to ns a new order of sounds . . . all his passages
seem free and unpremeditated, as if conceived on
the instant One has no impression of their
having cost him either forethought or labour. .. .
The word difficulty has no place in his vocabu-
lary. . . , ” etc.
The same excitement produced by this first
display of his wonderful performance in London,
was fully sustained in subsequent concerts, both
here and in the numerous provincial towns which
he visited shortly afterwards.
The shocking stories that were circulated so
freely about Paganini during tbo time of his Eu-
ropean tour, had preceded his arrival in England,
and gave a kind of mysterious celebrity to bis
name. No doubt be considered them well calcu-
lated to ensure him a certain amount of notoriety,
and it was only when they assumed the most
libellous proportions that he condescended to
contradict them by printing a few letters in the
newspapers. Notwithstanding these contradic


tions, thousands of people must have still con-
tinued under the spell of these tales, and felt a
morbid curiosity to see the man who was accused
of murder and imprisonment, and of having sold
himself to the Evil Spirit! His marvellous per-
formance was quite on a par with the wild exag-
geration of these libellous reports, and the effects
of the latter were annihilated in the enthusiastic
admiration of the great artiste as a musician.
Paganini had gained a great deal of money by
his artistic wanderings, more especially by his
tour through England; and when, in 1834, after
an absence of six years, ho returned to his native
county, ho seems to have thought of settling
down quietly in some retired locality, and of de-
voting liis time to publishing his compositions.
He purchased several properties, and, among
others, a charming country house, called Villa
Gajoaa, near Parma, where he decided on residing.
At this period, and for some time previously,
many music-sellers attempted to purchase the
copyright of his works. But Paganini set such
a high price upon them that no one could treat
with him. It is probable that this was done
purposely; for ho once proposed that some of his


music should be set for the piano, and would not
allow it to go out of his hands as violin music,
as he had not yet decided upon giving up playing
in public. He was just as anxious to keep
his music to himself as other violinists were
anxious to see it in print; and now that some of
his pieces are printed, how few can perform
them!
After his return to Italy, Paganini gave several
most successful concerts. Among others, one for
the poor at Placentia, on the 14th November,
1834, and another at the Court of the Duchess of
Parma, in the December following. But his
health was already giving way most visibly.
Phthisis of the larynx, or consumption, which
rendered him a mere shadow of his former self,
and sometimes almost deprived him of speech,
had been gaining ground since bis return to his
native climate. In 1836, however, he was better,
and some unscrupulous Parisian speculators in-
dueed him to lend his name to a joint-stock
undertaking, a sort of gambling-room and concert
hall, which they called the Casino .Paganini.
This was duly opened in a fashionable part of
Paris in 1837; but, as the Government would not


allow the establishment to be used as a sain-
bling-housc, and the concerts did not pay the
expenses, it became a great failure, and the illus-
trious artiste actually suffered by it to the extent
of £2,000.
One of his last, if not his very last concert,
was given with the guitar-player, Signor Leg-
nani, at Turin, on the 9th June, 1837, for the
benefit of the poor. He was then on his way to
fulfil his enrmrrcments at the fatal Parisian Ca-
W O
sino, which opened with much splendour in the
November following. But Lis health had an;ain
O O
broken down, and the fatigue of the journey had
told upon him so much that he was unable to
appear at the Casino. When the enterprise was
found to bo a failure, a rascally lawsuit was
■carried on against him, and, according to Fetis,
who is very explicit on this subject, the French
judges condemned him to pay the aforesaid
£2,000, and to be deprived of his liberty until
that amount was paid—all this without hearing
his defence!
The career of the greatest of violinists was at
this critical period fast drawing to a close. His
medical advisers recommended him to return at


once to the South, fearing that the winter would
kill him in Paris. He died at Nice, on the 27th
May, 1840, at the age of fifty-six. Ho left to his
legitimised and only son Achilles, the fruit of his
liaison with the cantatrice Antonia Bianchi, of
Gomo, a considerable fortune of some £BO,OOO,
and the title of Baron, which he had acquired in
Germany, His will was dated the 27th April,
1537 ; it was read on the Ist June, 1840; by it
he also left two legacies, of about £2OOO each, to
his two sisters, and an annuity of £OO a year to
his once beloved Antonia, His beautiful violin
ho bequeathed to the town of Genoa. As lie left
no money to the Church, moreover as he died
without receiving the Sacrament, difficulties
were raised with regard to his funeral, and the
authorities at Rome had to be consulted on the
subject! His biographers have fully described
this disgraceful proceeding. After an enormous
amount of trouble, anxiety, and expense, the
young Baron Paganini had a solemn service to
the memory of his father performed at Parma
(where he had, not many years previously, re-
ceived the Order of St. George from the hands
of the Duchess herself), at the church of the


Steocatu, after which permission was obtained
from the Bishop of Parma to have the body
interred in the village churchyard near the Villa
Gajona. Thus it was that the last homage paid
to the illustrious artiste could only be effected in
May, 1845 —five years after his decease! All
this time the remains of Nicolo Paganini were
for some period at the Hospital of Nice, and
afterwards interred at a country place belonging
to the familyy at Polcevera, near Genoa., where
they were taken by sea. Reports got abroad
that piteous noises were beard there at night,
and it was to put an end to these rumours that
young Baron Paganini determined to make a
final effort for permission to have a funeral
service, and the interment at the village church
above named.
There are several excellent portraits of Paga-
nini, and the Florentine sculptor, Bartolini,
executed a bust of him in 1809, when the already
great violinist was twenty-five years of ago. The
French have manifested much jealous feeling
with regard to the illustrious virtuoso; they
were vexed that he was not a Frenchman; they
wish, even now, to have their school for the


■violin considered tiie best in the world, just as
they wish to place French opera above Italian
■opera ! It was in the French papers that Paga-
nini was obliged to contradict the libellous re-
ports published about him, and many French
writings and anecdotes connected with the illus-
trious musician are of the most flippant and un-
truthful nature. With the exception of the Ger-
man anecdotes by Harris and Professor Schottky,
of Prague, and the biographical notice by Fetis,
late chapel-master to the King of the Belgians,
it is to Italian accounts only that we can refer
with safety for details of Paganini’s wonderful
career, more particularly to the admirable work
of Signor Conestabile.
In his early years Paganini devoted himself to
the most severe study, in order to acquire the
prodigious execution that characterised his per-
formance. Later in life he studied rarely or
ever; he used to say he had worked hard enough
when young, and could afford to repose. It
must not be forgotten that he, in a great
measure, created the difficulties he performed;
and studied to vary the effects and increase the
resources of his instrument. “Having played


the music of the old masters,” says Ftstis, “par-
ticularly that of Pugnani, Viotti, and also that
of Kreutzer, he felt that he could never attain
great fame if ho followed in their path. Chance
brought under his notice the ninth work of Lo-
eatelli, entitled L’Arte di Nvjyva Modulazione,
and he at once saw a new world of ideas and
facts. This work, on its first appearance, was
unsuccessful, on account of its excessive difficulty,
and perhaps because it was in advance of the
period when “classic” forms could be departed
from.”
Moreover, the necessity for innovation was at
its zenith in Paganini’s time, and this circum-
stance was favourable to him.
“ In adopting the ideas of his predecessors,”
continues the same author, “in resuscitating for-
gotten effects, in superadding what his genius
and perseverance gave birth to, he arrived at
that distinctive character of performance which
■contributed to his ultimate greatness. The di-
versity of sounds, the different methods of tuning
his instrument, the frequent employment of har-
monics both single and double, the simultaneous
pizzicato and bow passages, the various staccato,
10


the use of double and even triple notes, a pro-
digious facility in executing wide intervals with
unerring precision, together with an extraordinary
variety of styles of bowing, such were the prin-
cipal features of Paganini's talent, rendered all
the more perfect by his great execution, his
exquisite nervous sensibility, and his deep mu-
sical feeling,”
Let us add to all this his perfect knowledge of
harmony and composition, which may be judged
of by the few of his works which have come
down to us. Nothing can surpass the breadth
and feeling of his cantahile passages, nothing has
ever superseded the elegance of his ornament nor
the boldness of his rapid passages, nothing can be
finer than the harmony of his accompaniments.
At his concerts he gave out to the members of
the orchestra the various parts of the accompani-
ment, but they rarely saw the solo part which he
performed, for, in most cases, he played from
memory. He was exceedingly particular at re-
hearsal, and was roused to anger if the slightest
detail of the accompaniment was neglected or
badly executed. When, on the contrary, the
orchestral parts were well rendered, he would


exclaim, " Bravissirni! Siete tiUti virtuosi!” —
" You are all artistes!”
After his death his MS, works were col-
lected by his son, and a list of them forwarded
to one of his biographers, but, unfortunately,
many were found to be incomplete. Some
ten or twelve pieces have, however, come down
to us, including his celebrated composition,
Le Streghe, his variations on Le Garnaval de
Venise, and some Sonatas and Concertos; among
tire latter, his Second Concerto, which contains
the famous Hondo de la Cioohette, so often per-
formed by Camillo Sivori, who is said to have
had some lessons from Paganini. This Rondo
was played by Paganini throughout Europe
with enormous success. This and the fantasia
called Le Streghe may be looked upon as the
most characteristic of his compositions, and as
perfect illustrations of his style of performance
and writing. The adagio parts are very
beautiful; the rapid passages are marvels of
dramatic feeling, and in his hands were wonder-
fully effective. Very early in life Paganini
had published Twenty-four Caprices, or studies
for the violin, which have lately been re-issued
10—2


in England,* But they had attracted . little at-
tention until his name became popular; even
then, no one, save Ole Bull, appears to have been
able to make anything of them. That the
performances of Paganini produced an enormous
influence upon the art of violin-playing cannot
be doubted for a moment. This influence is
most strikingly apparent in the performances
and compositions of artistes who have succeeded
to him when compared to those of Rode, Viotti,
and others, who immediately preceded the
Genoese genius. We have only to study the
compositions of De Beriot, Alard, Sivori, Ernst,
Ghys, etc., to at once appreciate the enormous
extent of the influence to which we allude.
Paganini, indeed, was the first to develop the
full resources of the violin as a solo instrument,
and his successors have largely profited by his
labours. It is evident that this effect has been
produced by his playing alone, on account of the
vast number of concerts which he gave, and the
thousands who heard him, and criticised his
performance. But since 1851 his music, or that
* By George Hart of Prince’s Street, Leicester Square,
the author of a work on Violins, and Violin-makers,


part of it which has been preserved complete, has
been published by Schott & Co., and our more
modern artistes, who have not had the ad-
vantage of hearing Paganini, can now form a
good idea of his admirable playing, by a care-
ful study of some of his principal compositions.
His private life may interest some readers less
than his artistic career, nevertheless we must
endeavour to complete our sketch of this most
remarkable character, and find place for one or
two more anecdotes.
Paganini has been often accused of selfishness
and miserly habits, but be knew also how to be
generous when occasion offered. He was of great
service to several fellow-artistes, and frequently
gave concerts for the poor. But when we reflect
upon his neglected education —save as regards
music—his utter ignorance of almost everything
that was not directly related to his art, and the
wretched associates of his youth, it is wonderful
that his character should have remained so nai've
and so good as it certainly was. That ho was a
man of peculiarly eccentric manners no one can
doubt; in fact, some may have fancied
him slightly crazed. His very appearance gave


strength to this notion; his entrance upon the
platform of the concert-room was more than once
greeted with an outburst of laughter, so singu-
larly eccentric was his every movement and
entire demeanour. He had also a habit of
speaking aloud to himself, when alone; and if
at such moments a stranger approached, he
greeted him with a ghastly smile that was pecu-
liar to him, and occasionally lit up his features
for a moment when lie was cheered after his
performance in public. In society he was natu-
rally taciturn, but could be high-spirited and full
of anecdotes when among intimate friends. His
natural irritability was much increased by con-
stant inflammation of the intestines, to which he
was subject, more or less, all his life, and which he
increased tenfold by having frequent recourse to
a quack medicine, then in vogue, in which he was
unfortunate enough, like many others, to place
implicit confidence. Whether the continual use
of this vile drug hastened his death by accele-
rating the consumption which was devouring his
constitution, or not, we have no proof, but there
can be little doubt of it.
He was exceedingly polite to artistes. They


visited him in considerable numbers, often with
the hope of eliciting some information as to his
wonderful performances. In this respect they
were invariably disappointed. George Harris, an
Englishman attached to the Court of Hanover,
accompanied Paganini for a whole year in the
capacity of secretary, and was with him during
his English tour. He tells us in his little German
pamphlet, published at Brunswick in 1830, that
the great artiste was never seen to practise a
single note of music in private. His marvellous
dexterity seems to have been kept up entirely
by the numerous concerts which he gave, and by
his exceedingly nervous and delicate tempera-
ment.
With regard to his knowledge of music an
anecdote is related which confirms the opinion
that, to Paganini, the most difficult music of his
day was mere child’s play. An eminent painter
at Parma, named Pas ini, also a clever violinist,
disbelieved the prodigious faculty imputed to
Paganini, of playing the most difficult music at
.first sight. This gentleman possessed a valuable
Stradivarius violin, and offered to present it to
the celebrated virtuoso if he could perform.


straight off, a manuscript concerto which he
placed before him. “This instrument shall be
yours,” he said, “if you can play, in a masterly
manner, that concerto at first sight,” The
Genoese took the violin in his hand, saying,
“In that case, my friend, you may bid adieu to
it at once,” and he immediatey threw Pasini
into ecstatic admiration by his performance of
the piece. There is little doubt that this is the
Stradivarius instrument left by Paganini to his
son, and valued at about £6OO English money.
Of Antonia Bianchi, the mother of his son
Achilles, Paganini tells us that after many years
of a most devoted life, the lady’s temper became
so violent that a separation was necessary.
“ Antonia was constantly tormented,” he says,
"by the most fearful jealousy; one day she
happened to be behind my chair when I was
writing some lines in the album of a great
pianiste, and when she read the few amiable
words I had composed in honour of the artiste
to whom the book belonged, she tore it from
my hands, demolished it on the spot, and, so
fearful was her rage, that ■ she would have
assassinated me.”


He was very fond of his little son Achilles.
A French gentleman tells ns that he called
once to take Paganini to dine with him. He
found the artiste’s room in great disorder. A
violin on the table with manuscript music,
another upon a chair, a snuffbox on the bed
along with his child’s toys; music, money, letters,
articles of dress, all file-mile; nor were the
tables and chairs in their proper places. Every-
thing was in the most conspicuous confusion.
The child was out of temper; something had
vexed him; he had been told to wash his hands ;
and, whilst the little one gave vent to the most
violent hursts of temper, the father stood as calm
and quiet as the most accomplished of nurses.
He merely turned quietly to his visitor, and
said in melancholy accents: “ The poor child is
cross, Ido not know what to do to amuse him; I
have played with him ever since morning, and
I cannot stand it any longer.”
" It was rather amusing,” says the same writer,
“ to see Paganini in his slippers doing battle with
his child, who came about up to his knees. The
little one advanced boldly with his wooden
sword, whilst the father retired, crying out.


‘ Enough! enough! I’m already wounded!’ But
it was not enough; the young Achilles was never
satisfied until his father, completely vanquished,
fell heavily upon the bed.”
Travelling, such as it was in those days, must
have been an arduous undertaking to a person
so delicate and suffering as Paganini. Never-
theless he was cheerful enough in the post-
chaise, and told numerous anecdotes as long as
his voice did not fail him. He had, according to
Harris, the habit of getting out whenever the
horses were changed, and then walked about to
stretch his legs after the long ride. In some
O O
cases he extended these promenades so far that
he did not return till long after the fresh horses
were harnessed, much to the annoyance of the
drivei 1 . On one of these occasions, when going
from London to Birmingham to fulfil an engage-
ment, the coachman vowed that, if it occurred
again, he would drive on without him. It did
occur at the very next change of horses, and,
Mr, Harris being asleep, the surly driver con-
tinued the journey, leaving Paganini behind.
This gave rise to considerable trouble, and to the
despatch of a post-chaise from the next station in


search of the violinist, who, in a towering passion,
refused to pay the expense of it. The case went
before the Birmingham magistrates, and Paganini
was compelled to pay for his eccentricity.
His luggage was of the simplest description:
a very dilapidated box, which contained his
valuable Cremona violin, and served also as a
portmanteau to pack his jewellery, his linen, and
various other small objects; to this was added a
carpet-bag and a hat-box. He carried invariably
upon his person a little red pocket-book, in which
he kept all his accounts; and in this wonderful
little book (which was found under his pillow
after his death) were seen, in a handwriting that
none but himself could decipher, the financial
results of his concerts at Vienna, Garlsruhe
Frankfort, Leipzig, Paris, Berlin, etc., together
with his washing-accounts, his investments, his
receipts and expenses and other memoranda; all
of which he could make out at a glance.
Harris also tells us that as regards his repasts,
Paganini was the essence of frugality; ho rarely
indulged at table, well knowing the internal
irritation that was sure to he produced thereby;
and this result was heightened by the constant


use of a fashionable medicine. In other respects
he was thoroughly Italian; and among many
traits peculiar to the Italian “ gentleman ”he
manifested considerable disdain for the lower
classes. When one of the latter happened to
address him, he would turn his back upon him,
and inquire of his companion, “What does this
animal want with me?” When he was con-
tented with a postillion, or a coachman, he would
say, “ That animal drives well.” Ho was per-
fectly indifferent to ordinary comforts and luxu-
ries, and was contented with anything that was
offered him at his hotels; he never complained
of his room or his bed, however plain, provided
there was no noise. Like all men of highly-
nervous constitution he slept well, and enjoyed
lengthened repose; when the atmosphere was
highly charged with electricity, or when a
thunderstorm arose, he became very excitable;
his irritability was then excessive, and he would
remain silent for hours together, whilst his eyes
rolled and his limbs twitched with nervous con-
vulsive movements.
It is, perhaps, needless, to add that a man of
Paganini’s celebrity enjoyed the personal friend


ship of many of his great contemporaries; Lord
Byron, Sir Clifford Constable, Lord Holland,
Bossini, Ugo Foscolo, Monti, the Princess Elisa,
and a number of distinguished painters and
musicians were on terms of great intimacy with
him. The name of Lord Byron, whom Paganini
most admired, is intimately connected with the
last moments of the groat violinist. Under the
blue sky of Nice, in a warm, bright atmosphere,
and surrounded hy a circle of intimate friends,
Paaanini sat at his bedroom window, whilst
O '
the sun sank towards the horizon, bathing the
■clouds, the earth, and the sea in tints of the
richest purple and gold. A soft, tepid breeze
flowed into the room, bringing with it the per-
fumes of a thousand flowers; the birds were
singing joyously in the green boughs around,
whilst a crowd of gay promenaders were enjoying
the cool evening upon the shore. After having
examined for some time these animated groups
ef pleasure-seekers, the eyes of the great artiste
suddenly turned to a portrait of Lord Byron
that hung near his bed. A flash of animation
spread over hi,s features, whilst he took up his
violin, and illustrated the career of the great
157
NICOLO PAGANINI.


poet, bis genius, bis troubles, bis success, by one
of tho most beautiful musical poems that the
illustrious virtuoso over invented. In this bril-
liant improvisation he followed the English bal'd
through all the details of his stormy career;
there were the accents of doubt, of irony, of
despair, just as they come to us from the pages of
"Manfred,” of “Lara,” of" The Giaour,” then came
the cry of liberty, exciting Greece to break
her chains, and the tumult of triumph
Paganini had scarcely finished the last phrase of
this magnificent drama when his bow remained,
as if petrified, in his icy fingers. The shock of
this moral effort had proved too great for him,
and from that moment he never quitted his
bed.
The day before his death he seemed a little
better, and requested his servant to purchase a
pigeon for him: “Giulietta," he said, “I fancy
I could eat a pigeon.” On the last night of his
existence he appeared unusually tranquil; he had
slept a iittle, and when he awoke he requested
that the curtains of his bed should be drawn
aside that he might contemplate the full moon.
But the musical effort just referred to had ex


hausted his little remaining strength, and it may
he said that he sent to heaven with the last
sounds of his enchanted violin, the last sigh of a
life which had been all melody.
159
NI COLO PAGANINI.


VIII.
De Bériot .
1802—1870.
SHE most worthy contemporary, and at
the same time successor, of the great
Genoese artiste that has yet appeared
above the musical horizon is, without
doubt, Charles Auguste De Beriot. A new school
for the violin was formed some years ago in
Brussels, with De Beriot at its head; and it
already numbers a host of heroes. It comes
down to us of the present day in the familiar
names of De Beriot, Yieuxtemps, Leonard, Artot,
M onastcrio, Ooenen, Standish, Golyns, Brume,
Beumer, etc., etc., all distinguished violinists and
able professors in their turn.
Even before the revolution of 1830, Brussels
was the city of Flanders where the best music


was heard, and no continental town has had a
more successful Conservatoire, more particularly
as regards the violin, the violoncello, and the
piano. As a school for singing it has been much
less successful; though it has given our opera-
houses Madame Lemmens-Sherrington, Mdlle.
Artot, and a few others. Who can ever forget
the fine military music performed by the band
of Les Guides (the Horse Guards of Belgium) ?
and who has not been charmed by the splendid
orchestra of the Opera under the direction of
Singelde, the clever violinist (whose daughter
enchanted us so recently at the Italian Opera in
London), now, alas! just passed away from his
brother-artistes, who respected and admired him?
This orchestra, one of the finest for stringed in-
struments in Europe, was chiefly composed of
young artistes from the Conservatoire deßruxelles.
It was the direction of the violin school of
this important institution that, in the full zenith
of his powers as a virtuoso and a composer. He
Beriot was called upon to take; and a good
fortune it has been for all those who have left
that excellent school to gain their livelihood by
musical art, in whatever form,
11


De Bdr.iot was born at Louvain in 1802; his
parents were of noble extraction, but be bad the
misfortune to be left an orphan at the early age
of nine years. It appears pretty certain that he
was left entirely without fortune, for at this
tender age he was very kindly taken in hand by
M. Tiby, a professor of music in that town, who
had observed the child’s precocious love of the
art, and who became not only a tutor but a
second father to him. Under M. Tiby’s daily
instruction he soon became tolerably skilful on
the violin. While still very young he was able
to play one of Viotti’s concertos in a manner that
elicited the unanimous applause of his hearers.
The young De Beriot was a lad of a high moral
character and contemplative mind, and his whole
life at this early period seems to have been
bent upon improving his musical education, and
striving to attain the beautiful in art. Besides
his worthy tutor and friend, he had no model to
imitate, and he scarcely knew where to look for
further instruction. At that time the Belgian
violin school had turned its attention to a text-
book, called Jacotot’s Method , as being an easy
and rapid system for acquiring proficiency on the


violin. The young Do Beriot purchased the
work, iu order to see what he could do with it;
and afterwards called upon the author to solicit
further help. From this Method and the con-
versation in question with M. Jacotot himself.
Do Beriot learnt little more than two things,
namely, that perseverance triwm/phs over all ob~
stacles, and that, in general, ive are not willing
to do all that ive are able to do. That these two
precepts guided this celebrated violinist through
life, we have ample evidence, his own violin
school, his numerous compositions, and his charm-
ing performances, are a proof of it.
In 1821, when Charles Auguste De Beriot had
attained the age of nineteen years, it was deter-
mined that he should quit his native town, where
so few facilities were afforded him, in order to
improve his musical talent. He was then a
handsome youth, with a strongly-knit frame,
slightly above the middle height, with fine dark
eyes and hair, a rather florid complexion, and
very gentlemanly appearance. After a short re-
sidence at Brussels he found his way to Paris,
with a letter of introduction to the great Viotti,
then Director of Music at the Opera, De Beriot’s
11—2


greatest ambition at this time was to be heard
by Viotti, and, after playing before him, the old
master gave him the following piece of advice,
which the young Belgian never forgot:
“ You have a fine style,” he said, “give your-
self up to the business of perfecting it; hear all
men of talent; profit by everything, but imitate
nothing,” There was at this time in Brussels a
violinist named Eobrechts, a former pupil of
Viotti, and one of the last artistes who derived
instruction directly from the celebrated Italian.
Andreas Eobrechts was born at Brussels on the
18th December, 1797, and made rapid progress as
a musician under Planken—a professor who, like
the late M. Very, who succeeded him, formed
many excellent pupils. He then entered himself
at the Conservatoire of Paris in 1814, where he
received some private lessons from Baillot, whilst
the institution itself was closed during the occu-
pation by the allied armies.
Viotti, hearing the young Eobrechts play, was
so struck with his magnificent tone and broad
style, that he undertook to give him finishing
lessons, with the approbation of Baillot. This
was soon arranged, and for many years the two


violinists wore inseparable. He even accom-
panied Yiotti in his journey to London, where
they were heard more than once in duetts. The
illustrious Italian had recognised in Robrechts
the pupil who most closely adhered to his style
of playing, and one of the few who were likely
to diffuse it in after years.
In 1820 Rob redds returned to Brussels, where
he was elected first violin solo to the King Wil-
helm I. It was shortly after this that De Berlot
took lessons from him, and he it was who gave
him the letter of introduction to Viotti. The
same excellent professor also gave instructions to
the young Artot. He died in 1860, the last
direct representative of the great Yiotti school.
It will now he seen where De Bdriot acquired
the first principles of that large, bold, and ex-
quisitely charming style, that in after-life
characterised both his performances and his
compositions.
Arriving at Paris, eager for progress, and
probably thinking that the classical style of the
master he had just left would not lead him on
quickly enough, or far enough, he sought Yiotti,
as we have seen, and then entered himself at the


Conservatoire, with the view of taking lessons
from Baillot. We have often wondered whether,
at this period of his life, 1821 to 1824, or there-
abouts, De Beriot was in any way influenced
by the enormous success of Lafont and of Paga-
nini as wandering artistes, and concert-players.
Most of our readers will admit it; for the
reputation of the great Genoese violinist had
then begun to spread beyond the boundaries of
his native country, and as for Lafont, his name
had been long popular throughout Europe, How-
ever that may be, the young Belgian artiste did
not remain more than a few months at the Paris
Conservatoire, but applied himself most assidu-
ously to the study of his instrument, relying
entirely upon his own resources, and seeking aid
from no one. Perhaps this was what Viotti
meant, when he gave him those well-remembered
words of advice. At this time De Beriot possessed
a very fine violin by Paolo Giovanni Magini, a
celebrated maker, who worked at Brescia, where
he was born in 1590, and died in IG4O, a pupil of
the celebrated Caspar di Salo. The violins of
this maker are rare and valuable. How De
Beriot got it we do not know, but that its peculiar


plaintive quality and fine tone well suited his
performance we can easily believe. Yery soon
afterwards he appeared in several concerts, and
always with a brilliant success. Like Paganini,
he appeared before the public for the first time in
compositions of his own. These were some of his
first Airs varies, consisting of an introduction, a
theme, followed by three or four variations and
a brilliant finale. They won him universal ap-
plause, by their freshness and originality as much
as by his finished execution and large style of
cantabile.
In 1826 he went direct to London from
Paris, preceding Paganini by some years, and
met with the same success that had attended his
efforts in France. His style was new, his per-
formance most exquisite, and the enthusiasm
with which ho was greeted everywhere, both in
London and the provinces, established for him a
lasting reputation.
The circumstance of De Beriot having appeared
in England about five years before Paganini, must
be looked upon as a piece of that good fortune
which frequently attends the efforts of earnest,
striving men. Had he tarried in his studies and


arrived here after the marvellous Italian., how
different the result might have heen ! Not that
l)e Beriot had not wonderful qualities of his own,
which would have enabled him to meet with
considerable success in any country, but who can
doubt that tho impression he produced here
would have been much diminished 1 Indeed, in
1834, long before the bewitching influence of
Paganini’s concerts had died away, there came
over a Florentine violinist, Masoni, whose powers
of execution were perhaps even greater than
those of De Beriot, and had he not been preceded
by the great Genoese, his playing would have
been considered most wonderful. Masoni soon
left for America and India; so Europe lost sight
of him altogether.
However, there was a peculiar charm in De
Bdriot’s performance that was perhaps never
possessed hy any violinist of this century; and
thus early in his career his playing was charac-
terised by most refined taste, a rich and charming
tone, and wonderful execution.
After travelling for several years, and meeting
everywhere with the most enthusiastic receptions,
he returned to Belgium, and had tho honour of


being presented to King Wilhelm. The latter,
though exceedingly fond of pictures, knew little
or nothing of music ; nevertheless, he was a warm
patron, of Art in any form, and he understood that
it was necessary to ensure the independence of a
young artiste who gave promise of becoming a
great ornament to his country. He therefore
bestowed upon him a pension of two thousand
florins per annum (about ,£160) and the title of
First Violin Solo to His Majesty.
He had not long enjoyed this most gratifying'
position, when the Revolution of 1830, which
separated Belgium from Holland, broke out, and
deprived him of it. It was at this critical
period that he formed the acquaintance of the-
celebrated singer, Madame Malibran, whom he
afterwards married. Their friendship arose in
Paris, in 1830, where she was singing in Italian
Opera.
The short though glorious career of this gifted
singer shines like a beautiful meteor through
the firmament of Art; her influence upon the
great violinist must have been most marked.
Maria Felicia Garcia, afterwards Madame Mali-
bran, belonged to a family of most distinguished


musicians. She wag educated hy her father, the
tenor Garcia, of world-wide reputation, and in
her earliest youth gave evidence of the most
surprising talent that was ever heard of. At the
age of thirteen she was a professed musician, and
at fifteen, when she came with her parents to
London, she obtained a complete triumph by
accidentally performing in Rossini’s II Barbiere,
to supply the place of a prinia donna who was
unable to appear.
We cannot tarry here to enter into the de-
tails of her poetic existence. Her father hav-
ing taken her to America, where she fulfilled a
number of engagements with an increasing suc-
cess, she finally espoused there a rich merchant
named Malihran, much older than herself. It
was a most ill-advised marriage; and, to make
matters worse, the merchant failed very soon
afterwards. Some go so far as to say that he
foresaw this catastrophe before he contracted his
marriage, in the hopes of regaining his fortune
hy the proceeds of the singer’s career. How-
ever that may be, a separation took place, and
Madame Malihran returned to Paris in 1827.
Her singing in Italian Opera was everywhere a


source of the most enthusiastic ovation, and as
she rose like a star of the first magnitude in the
world of song, so the young De Bdriot was fast
earning his laurels as one of the greatest violinists
of the day. Moreover, as we have seen, he was a
very handsome man. In 1830 an indissoluble
friendship united these two kindred spirits, and
in 1832 De Beriot, Lahlache, and Madame Mali-
bran set out for a tour in Italy, where the latter
had operatic engagements at Milan, Home, and
Naples, and where they all three appeared in
concerts with the most ddatant success —as may
well bo imagined.
At Bologna, in 1834, it is difficult to say
whether the cantatrice , or the violinist, or the
inestimable basso, produced the greatest sensa-
tion ; hut her bust in marble was, there and then,
placed under the peristyle of the Opera-House.
Henceforward De Beriot never quitted her,
and their affection seems to have increased as
time wore on, In the year following she ap-
peared in London, where she gave forty repre-
sentations at Drury Lane, performing in La
Sonnamhula, The Maid of Artois, etc., etc., for
which she received the sum of £3200. We fear


this is more than Dc Bdriot, with all his talent,,
would have made in one year by his violin !
Another journey to Italy, more concerts, more
operatic successes, a return to Paris, and finally,,
in 1836, the proper divorce having been obtained.
La Malibran and De Beriot were married. But,
alas ! the joys of this union were destined to be of
short duration. After only nine days’ illness, the
celebrated singer died at Manchester, where she
had gone, with her husband, to fulfil an engage-
ment. During these nine fearful days, De lid riot
only once quitted his wife’s side—and it was at
her special request—to perform at a concert for
which he was engaged. When the day arrived
she manifested, as she had always done, the
greatest anxiety for his success; and when, in
reply to her constant inquiries, her friends in-
formed her of the applause that had greeted his
performance, a soft angelic smile lit up her pale
features, which all her suffering could not re-
press.
Bellini died, at the age of twenty-eight, on the
23rd of September, 1835; Malibran followed him,
at the same age, on the 23rd of September, 1836.
Her premature death was the result of an acci


■dent while riding, an exercise of which she was
passionately fond. When all was over, De Bdriot,
usually so calm and so severe, was driven frantic.
The adorable mother of his only child was taken
suddenly away from him; all his Jlopes were
■shattered; he was inconsolable.
The news of this great misfortune spread like
wildfire through the country, and De Beriot had
to fly to Paris before his wife’s funeral took place,
in order to secure the fortune of his child—young
Charles De Beriot, afterwards so distinguished a
pianist. No one knew the motives of this sudden
disappearance, and in England he was freely ac-
cused of villainy and cruelty. It is scarcely
necessary to add that this accusation was most
unjust. De Beriot was the slave of circum-
stances—the woman he loved was dead, his entire
thoughts centred on the future of her son. The
funeral service was performed at Manchester,
on the Ist of October, 1836, and the remains
of the immortal songstress were interred at
the Collegiate Church of that town. The fol-
lowing simple inscription marked her resting-
place :
173
DE BERIOT.


Jttaria Jfelida Dc JJmot,
DIED 33rd SEP. 1835,
AT THE AGE OF 28 YEARS.
Some time afterwards De Beriot obtained per-
mission to remove the mortal remains of his
beloved wife to Laeken, near Brussels. Over her
tomb in that beautiful churchyard of Laeken
stands the magnificent marble statue by Geefs—
the greatest of Belgian sculptors—a chef d’osuvre
of art, and a fit memorial to such talent and such
beauty.
More than a year elpased before De Beriot
could recover from this fearful shock. On the
15th December, 1837, Malibran’s celebrated sister
Pauline Garcia (afterwards Madame Yiardot)
made her first public appearance in a concert at
Brussels for the benefit of the poor; and on this
occasion De Beriot made his first appearance
after the death of his wife. The King and Queen,
tlie Prince de Ligne, the members of the Corps
diplomatique, and many persons of celebrity were
present.
Miss Clayton, the talented authoress of the


Queens of Song, tells us that after tills concert,
which was most successful, the Sooiiti Pkiihar-
moniguc caused two medals to be struck for De
Bdriot and Mdlle. Garcia, the moulds of which
were immediately destroyed.
After some other performances equally brilliant,
Pauline Garcia quitted Belgium for Germany
with her mother and Be Beriot. In the summer
of 1838, they returned to Brussels, and then pro-
ceeded to Paris, where, on the 15th December—
the anniversary of the Brussels concert—the
great singer and Be Beriot appeared at the
Theatre de la, Renaissance to a crowded and
enthusiastic audience. Among other splendid
pieces performed on this occasion we note the
grand duo for voice and violin by Panseron, "Lo
Songe de Tartini.” In this she accompanied
herself on the piano with infinite grace and
skill.
On the 18th April, 1840, Pauline Garcia mar-
ried M. Viardot, the Director of the Italian Opera
at Paris, and in the following August, De Beriot
espoused Mdlle. Huber at the Church of Laeken
before mentioned. She was a young German


lady, daughter of a magistrate of Vienna, and,
being left an orphan at an early age, had been
adopted by Prince Dietrischten Preskau.
On his return to Brussels, De Beriot became
Director of the Violin School of the Conservatoire
Roy ale de Musique, and resided in a beautiful
house on the external Boulevard de VObserva-
toire, just behind that astronomical institution,
rendered celebrated by the works of Quetlet,
Houzeau, and others. He devoted his time to
composition, and to the education of his son;
in whose features were reflected those of the
immortal Malibran, and whose early talent for
music gave great promise. The writer was for
some years his schoolfellow, and observed his
constant progress upon the piano, and in com-
position, to which his afternoons were almost
solely devoted. But, as young Charles De
Beriot inherited an ample fortune, he was
never obliged to appear as an artiste, though,
whenever he did so, the applause was unani-
mous ; and his compositions for the .piano are
full of poetic grace and brilliancy. Had he
been obliged to resort to an artistic career,
ho would have done honour to his country,


and have ranked among the greatest musicians
of this century. For many years we have
lost sight of him, as he went to reside in
Paris only shortly before wo left that city for
London ; but our friends tell us that his mus-
ical evenings are frequented by the most
celebrated artistes and literary characters in
Paris, and are a great treat to all who go
there.
Though occasionally heard in private, De Beriot
ceased giving public concerts after his return to
Brussels as director of the classes at the Con-
servatoire. He made many excellent pupils,
among whom are Lauterbach, Beumer (at present
first violin solo at the Opera), Monastcrio, Stand-
ish, Mdlle. Fiery, and many others, all exquisite
■artistes.
We do not remember whether the celebrated
sisters Milanollo, two of the finest performers on
the violin the musical world ever heard, were
pupils of De Beriot or not; we rather think that
they studied under Leonard, the second professor
of the Brussels Conservatoire, and a most able
teacher.
About the year 1829 De Beriot was struck
12


with the precocious talent of young Henri
Vieuxtemps, and gave him gratuitous lessons for
some time.
By his numerous and exceedingly beautiful
compositions, De Bdriot lias left behind him
an imperishable name. In his Violin School,
now published in every language, he has truly
smoothed the difficult path of the student who
aims at the higher branches of his profession,
and cultivates taste and poetic feeling. His
numerous duetts for violin and piano, gradually
increasing in difficulty, and founded on the most
beautiful of operatic selections, are well calculated
to animate the beginner, and to cause him to
persevere until he can perform the later pro-
ductions of this talented master. For artistes,
he has written his Ecole transcendante, his
Caprices, his Etudes caracUristiques , a great
number of Airs varies, and his well-known Con-
certos, ten or eleven in number, besides a con-
siderable number of Fantasias and concert-
pieces. What can be more charming than his
well-known Air Montagnard? what 1 freshness!'
what feeling! Or where can we find music more
grandiose, or more dramatic than his seventh


Concerto? or liis Andante et Rondo Rume,
from the second Concerto % Then, again, how
original are his Trois Etudes, his Tourhillon ,
his Sylphide, etc! There is no striving after
effect; all comes naturally to the truly inspired
composer; his cadences are beautiful; his chords,
types of pure harmony; and his ornaments both
graceful and effective. In his valse movements
he is less successful, but his BoUros and Polaccas
are perfect models of lively melody.
No artiste that has not true musical feeling,
and knows not how to charm as well as to
astonish, need attempt De Beriot’s music. A
player without soul might perform his original
Tremolo , a caprice on a theme by Beethoven, or
his Fantasia on Russian Airs, perhaps, hut he
could never do justice to most of this admirable
composer’s music. Do Beriot’s aim (and his gift)
was to charm, rather than to astonish; but his
concert music requires considerable study and
can only be performed by violinists of the very
first water.
During his life at Brussels, as well as in his
numerous journeys, he enjoyed the society of
the most distinguished men of his day. To his
12—2


friend the Prince de Chiraay, a great patron of
art, he owed many opportunities of enchanting
the most select of audiences; and one of his
finest works is dedicated to the Princess. His
splendid first Concerto is dedicated to King Leo-
pold 1,, and his ninth to the Russian Princess
Youssoupoff, whose husband was De Beriot’s
particular friend and a distinguished amateur
■violinist. Late in life the eminent composer’s
eyesight began to fail him, and the malady in-
creased so much that some time before his death
he became totally blind. It was during one of
his visits to the residence of his friend Prince
Youssoupoff, at St, Petersburg, that his last ill-
ness overtook him. He died April 13, 1870,
aged sixty-eight.
Having composed so much music upon operatic
airs, and listening constantly to the divine sing-
ing of his first wife, it is not surprising that
slight reminiscences of these crop up occasionally
in some of De Beriot’s works. Thus in his first
Concerto we have a passage that reminds us for-
cibly of the march in Bellini’s Nor-ma; and again
in the ninth a few bars occur which are a repro-
duction of the burden of the exquisite tenor song


in Auber’s La Sirine. Bat such instances are
rare; and for originality no composer of late
years, save Paganini himself, can be compared
to Charles Auguste Be Beriot.
O


IX.
Ole Bull.
1810—1875.
the course of our various reading we
PfJf met, very recently, with an account
jjr?jLof a “Norwegian Musical Festival.”
This we found in young Mr. Eae’s
book of travel, entitled The Land of the North
Wind ; and, as the account is short, we give it
in his own words; he was then sailing along the
coast of Norway, and he says:
“At Bodd there came on board a minstrel—
though that word, when applied to him, is mere
foolishness. He was a collection of minstrels —a
band —a Norwegian Musical Festival. With his
mouth he played the Pandean pipes, attached
round his neck by a scarf; with his right hand
he turned a barrel organ, with his left he played


a pair of castanets ; bis left foot moved a cord,
which ran under his arm and put a drumstick in
motion—on his back was slung a drum; with
his right knee he manoeuvred a pair of cymbals
hanging from the organ ; to his hat was attached
a rod, which struck a triangle when he nodded
his head ; and somewhere about him was a tam-
bourine. When we saw him we were struck
with a great awe, and felt that this was no
ordinary being. Was this the familiar god
Pan ? Was this the Genius of Music turned
loose upon the Earth t Was this
aux Enfers 1 We looked at him, speaking
in hushed whispers, and waiting for his first
note. When he began to play, all doubt was
laid aside; he was Orphee, and we were aux
Enfers!”
The Norwegian musician we are going to write
about was a very different character, though he
has had attributed to bim the power of becoming
a “.Norwegian musical festival” with bis violin
alone, and if he could not perform a quartett on
one string, he could do so on four. Not only was
Olaus Bull, or Ole Bull, as he is generally called,
one of the most gifted performers of this century,


but his life has been one of extraordinary adven-
ture.
He was born in the old town of Bergen, on the
6th of February, 1810. His parents belonged to
the leading families of that resort of merchants,
shippers, timber-dealers, and herring-fishers. His
grandmother on his father’s side was sister to the
poet, Edward Storm, the author of the Sinclair
Lay, an epic poem on the Scottish colonel
Sinclair, who, with a thousand volunteers, made
a descent on Norway, and was killed, together
with his men, by the peasants, who hurled rocks
upon them in the fearful pass known as the
Guldbrands-dahl, a valley since become univer-
sally admired in the celebrated picture by Marcus
Larsen.
His father, John Storm Bull, was a chemist,
a pupil of the celebrated chemist. Professor Troms-
dorff. His mother came of the good old Dutch
family Gelmuyden, and she had four brothers,
two of whom were captains in the army, one a
captain in the navy, and one a merchant, who
afterwards became editor of the only newspaper
printed in Bergen. All the members of the
family were exceedingly fond of music, and the


editor had occasional quavtett parties at his
house, sometimes as often as twice a week, when,
the works of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven
came to the front. speaking, these
musical evenings coincided with a dinner-party,
and young Ole would often creep in, though it
was already time for bed, and imbibe the sweet
or discordant sounds, as the case might be, with
a more than infantine curiosity.
Having been long accustomed to listen with
intense interest to the fairy tales of his grand-
mother, to the stories about the mysterious
Huldra, and the Fosselcal, or Spirit of the Water-
fall, the child Ole used to imagine that it was
the instruments alone that sent forth all those
wonderful sounds; he could not conceive that the
music was anything else than the singing of the
violins themselves. This was a queer notion;
but Ole was a most poetic child, and a story is
told of him when he was about six years old,
standing in a field before a group of bluebells,
fancying he heard them ring, and pretending to
accompany their music with two pieces of wood,
which, in imitation of his uncle, he held as a
violin and bow. After a while the worthy uncle


gave little Ole a violin, upon which the young
lad worked his way alone so successfully that he
was soon able to take part in the quartetts at
the house of the newspaper editor.
Like all artistes who have risen to great emi-
nence. Ole Bull, at a very early age, thus gave
proofs of great natural talent: and, as is usually
the case in similar circumstances, his mother per-
ceived it at once, and determined that his love
of music should be encouraged and cultivated.
Now at this time there was at Bergen one
professor of music, and be was a violinist. His
name was Poulsen; he had originally come to the
town from Denmark, on business; but he found
there so many jovial companions—for Bergen has
long had a reputation for conviviality, and even
musicians sipped their brandy whilst they played
—that the Danish professor postponed his de-
parture, from week to week, until he was some
sixty years old.
This Poulsen was a true artiste, he was ex-
quisitely sensitive to the beauties of art, had a
good knowledge of its rules, and, we are told,
“ would show his perseverance in playing as
long as there remained a drop in the brandy


bottle set before him.” When his dress was
threadbare, his friends would give him a new
suit, and at intervals he would give a concert
that would yield him a profit of some ten
pounds.
Such was the professor to whom, in his tender
years. Ole Bull was submitted for instruction.
It appears that the latter made such rapid pro-
gress that the old professor being unable to do
more for him, and thinking, perhaps, that his
future prospects in life were now certaiidy cut off
in Bergen, left the town for ever.
The hoy now resorted to taking promiscuous
lessons, chiefly from Danish artistes who visited
Bergen to give concerts; he was nearly twelve
years old, and in spite of the progress he had
already made into the arcana of musical art, his
father seems to have' set his mind upon making
him a clergyman, and with that view engaged
for him a private tutor named Musesus —a most
appropriate name for the teacher of the young
musical genius. This tutor soon discovered where
Ole Bull's taste lay, for he was a clever man,
though somewhat cruel. He forbade him to play
upon his violin at all, and exhorted him to attend


solely to his classical studies. Thus under re-
straint, Bull's love of art became a passion, and
having muffled his violin by means of a sourdine,
or mute, he practised away at night, when all
was still, and nothing was heard at Bergen save
the dashing of the northern ocean upon the rocky
shore and the wild strains of the lad’s half-
silenced violin.
So the time wore on, Ole being occupied by
day with Ms tutor and the classical authors, and
at night with his dearest companion still, the
little violin that his uncle had given him. Being
naturally quick at learning, a boy of keen intel-
lect, and wonderful perseverance, he managed to
satisfy his father, and his tutor, that he was
making fair progress; and when he had reached
his eighteenth year, he was despatched to Chris-
tiania, to pass an examination and enter the
University.
His love for his father was so great that, ab-
sorbed as be was by bis violin studies, he listened
with true filial affection to hjs entreaties to
abandon music altogether, and went on bis way,
firmly resolved to abide by his parent’s instruc-
tions.


But circumstances were too much for him. He
had scarcely arrived at Christiania, after a long
and tedious journey, than he met some com-
panions from Bergen, also students at the "Uni-
versity, who begged him to play at a concert to
bo given that very night for the benefit of the
poor.
Ole begged to be excused: he was tired, the
journey had fatigued him ; and, moreover, his
father had forbidden him to play,
“ But it’s an act of charity,” they exclaimed.
“Well, that alters the case somewhat,” replied
Ole; “ perhaps my governor would not mind
that.”
And so he played at tho concert. He also
managed to ease his conscience 'enough to play
again at a quartett party the next evening; and
the day after he went up for his examination, and
was most decidedly rejected, or “ plucked.”
This was hi.s first real grief—how many others
had to follow before his name became familiar
throughout the world ! With ill-suppressed tears
he found himself before one of the young pro-
fessors, at whose house he had played the previous
night.


“It is the best thing that could have happened
to you,” said the latter, by way of consolation.
“ How so ?" inquired Ole.
“ My dear fellow, do you believe that you are
a fit man for a curacy in Finmarken, or a mission
among the Laps 1 Nature has made you a
musician; stick to your violin, and you will
never regret it.”
“But, my father!” the young man sobbed.
“ Your father will never regret it either,” re-
joined the professor.
In this sad plight his jovial friends did not
desert him, and the leader of the Philharmonic
Society of Christiania being then very ill, Ole
Bull was appointed to fill his place 'pro tem. He
managed this business so well that some weeks
later, when the leader died. Ole had the position
offered to him, and accepted it. As this rendered
him independent of his father’s purse, the old
gentleman, somewhat reluctantly, pardoned his
failure to enter the University.
In the summer of 1829, when nineteen years
of age, Ole Bull managed to take a holiday trip
into Germany, where he heard Spohr, then Di-
rector of the Music at the Opera of Cassel. He


afterwards heard Maurer, a German violinist,
known as an excellent teacher and to have at-
tained the most complete mastery over the
mechanical difficulties of his instrument. A little
later he heard Wiele, at Nordhausen, another
clever performer on the violin ; but Ole expected
most encouragement from the veteran Louis
Spohr.
“From this excursion,” says one of his friends,
“ Ole Bull returned completely disappointed. He
had fancied that a violin-player like Spohr must
be a man who, by his personal appearance, by
the poetic character of his performance, by the
flash of genius, would enchant and overwhelm his
hearers; instead of this, he found in Spohr a
correct teacher, exacting from the young Nor-
wegian the same cool precision which charac-
terised his own performance, and quite unable to
appreciate the wild, strange melodies he brought
from the land of the North.”
On his way home Ole fell in with some
students who were going to a concert at Minden,
and was induced to accompany them. It hap-
pened that the violinist of the evening was in-
disposed, and could not appear—it is said he had


got drunk. The young Norwegian was asked to
supply his place, and did so, being rewarded by
very enthusiastic applause. A warm reception
followed the next day in the shape of a challenge
from the violinist who had devoted himself to
*
beer the evening before, and whom Ole Bull
fought and slightly wounded ; upon which he
was advised to quit the locality as soon as pos-
sible. He went straight away back to Chris-
tiania, “feeling,” as he says in one of his letters,
“ as if the very soil of Europe repelled him,” He
was somewhat repaid by the exceedingly kind
reception that awaited him on arriving among
his old friends, who had already begun to idolise
him.
He managed to stay a year and a half, or two
years, in his native land, when the same restless
spirit which formed an inherent part of his cha-
racter, induced him again to leave Norway and
to try his fortune in the South. It was in the
year 1831 when Ole Bull was scarcely twenty-
one years of age, and when the cholera was raging
in Paris, that the Norwegian musician, full of
confidence in his own powers, first set foot in that
Capital. The diligence deposited him in the


yard of the hotel, friendless, homeless, and with
an exceedingly light purse. His only resource
was his violin; and his only hope that of an
opportunity to make himself heard. Crowded
audiences wore then attracted by Malibran and
Paganini; and Ole Bull’s first impulse was to
hear these great artistes. One night he returned
late to his lodgings, after being charmed by
Malibran a singing; he went to bed late, and on
awaking the next morning he discovered, to his
utter dismay, that his landlord had absconded
with all ins household furniture. He had taken
with Him the musician’s clothes and his violin-
all of which were contained in one moderate-
sized box ! One of his biographers says that the
poor youth wandered about for three entire days
in Paris, a. prey to want and despair, and ended
by throwing himself into the Seine, in the hope
that death would relievo him from his suffer-
ings. Another account says that, after being
robbed of his clothes and his violin, he had
still eno’ugh money to pay for one iveel's ac-
commodation in a miserable boarding-house;
and it was during the last dinner for which he
was able to pay, that he made the acquaintance
13


there of a well-known and very remarkable
character.
Ole Bull confided his miseries to this stranger,
who appeared interested in his sad story. After
a moment’s silence the latter said abruptly:
“ Well, I will do something for you, if you have
courage and five francs,”
“ I have both.”
" Then go to-night to Frascati’s, at ten o’clock;
pass through the first room, enter the second, where
they play rouge et noir , and when a new faille
begins put your five francs on rouge and leave
them there.”
Bull’s love of adventure, and the confidence in-
spired by the stranger’s manner, determined him to
do exactly what this peculiar individual told him.
At ten o’clock precisely, he stood at Frascati’s
before the table where rouge et noir was being
played. In a few minutes he threw his five
francs on red; the card was drawn; red wins—
the five francs were ten francs. Following most
scrupulously his instruction, Bull left his ten
francs on rouge —in another minute they had be-
come twenty francs —still the young Norwegian
left his money on the winning colour, and in the


course of less than half an hour a considerable
pile of gold lay on the table before him, and be-
longed to him. He had only to stretch forth his
arm and clutch it.
The only question was, had he left his money
long enough ? Was red going to pass any
longer ?
In relating this adventure to a friend, he said,
“ I was in a fever —I acted as if possessed by a
spirit not my own; no one can understand my
feelings who has not been so tried—left alone in
the world as if on the extreme verge of existence,
with the abyss yawning beneath, and at the
same time feeling something within that might
merit a saving hand at the last moment.”
Whilst he hesitated to withdraw his money, a
fair white hand stretched forward towards it, and
covered it. In a moment the iron grasp of the
young Norwegian had seized it by the wrist —the
owner uttered a piercing shriek, and cries of
“ Turn her out ” were raised; but a dark spare
figure standing near, whom Ole Bull at once re-
cognised as his friend of a few hours previously,
said in a clear calm voice, “Madame, leave this
gold aloneand turning to Bull, “ Sir, take your
13—2
195
OLE BULL.


money, if you please.” Following this advice
the musician took up a sum of about four hundred
francs—but he still stood riveted to the spot, and
saw red come up to the end of the faille, so that
had he persevered somewhat longer he would
have been a comparatively wealthy man that
very evening.
On arriving at his miserable lodging he counted
out his gains ; he could hardly believe it was not
a dream. “ What a hideous joy I felt,” he says,
in a letter to one of his friends; “what a horrible
pleasure it was to have saved one’s own soul by
tbe spoil of others !”
The strange personage who had thus befriended
Ole Bull was the detective Yidocq, already an
European celebrity. He never met him again.
The next thing to be done was, without waste
of time, to replace the lost violin. With this
object in view, he set out to purchase one; and,
in doing so, accidentally made the acquaintance
of an individual named Lahout, who imagined
he had discovered a method of imitating the old
Cremona varnish, by means of a compound of
asafeetida, which he smeared over modern-made
instruments in the hopes of improving their tone.


This eccentric inventor thought Bull a likely
person to bring out the merits of his discovery;
so he got him invited to play at a house where
the Duke and Duchess de Montebello were pre-
sent. His performance created a sensation, and
the Duke took him at once under-his patronage.
The result of this was that Ole Bull was soon
enabled to give a concert in Paris. This was
not artistically so successful as it might have
been; but who could listen at that time to any
but Paganini ? However, through the kind pa-
tronage of the Duke, a large number of tickets
were sold, and after paying all expenses, the
violinist found himself possessed of a profit of
1200 francs (about £4B English).
A curions accident occurred to him again at
this period (June, 1832); his landlord and land-
lady both died from cholera, and he was obliged
to seek for new lodgings. One of his companions
intimated that a lady, the Comtesse de Faye,
who resided near, had lately lost her son, and
would probably let his room for a time. He
applied there, and was shown into a room where
three ladies, dressed in deep mourning, were
sitting. The older one, on hearing his errand,


briefly declined to let Mm a room, when one
of her daughters exclaimed : “ Look at him,
mother!"
Bull was surprised at this. The old lady put
on her spectacles, and, as she riveted her eyes
upon him, her countenance changed suddenly.
She had found in him such a resemblance to
the son she had lost, that she at once consented
to his residing in her house. Some time after-
wards Ole Bull indeed became her son, having
married the fascinating girl who had exclaimed,
“ Look at him, mother !”
With the little money he had now earned he de-
termined to go to Italy, provided with some letters
of introduction; and gave his first Italian concert
at Milan, in 1831. Applause was not wanting,
but his performance was rather severely criti-
cised in the papers. The following paragraph
reproduced from an Italian musical periodical,
published shortly after this concert, probably
represents very truly the state of his talent at
that period:
“ M. Ole Bull plays the music of Spohr, May-
seder, Pugnani, and others, without knowing the
true character of the music he plays, and partly


spoils it by adding a colour of his own. It is
manifest that this colour of his own proceeds
from an original, poetical, and musical indi-
viduality ; hut of this originality he is himself
unconscious. He has not formed himself; in
fact, he has no style; he is an uneducated
musician. Whether he is a diamond or not is
uncertain; but certain it is that ike diamond
'is not polished.”
In a short time Ole Bull discovered that it
was necessary to cultivate, more than he had
done, his cantahile this was his weakest
point, and a most important one. In Italy he
found persons who enabled him to develop this
great quality of the violin, and from that mo-
ment his career as an artiste was established.
The next concert of any consequence that he
played in was at Bologna, under peculiar circum-
stances ; and his reputation as a great violinist
appears to date from that concert: —Be Bcriofc
and Malibran were then idolised at Bologna, and
just as Ole Bull arrived in that ancient town,
De Beriot was about to fulfil an engagement
O O
to play at a concert given by the celebrated
Philharmonic Society there. The engagement


had l;een made by the Marquis Zampievi, who
bad also managed to hurt the susceptibilities
of the great Belgian artiste, and, consequently,
when the day arrived De Beriot had a sore
finger, and, to the disappointment of all, could
not play.
Now, Bull had a small lodging off one of the
principal streets, where he intended to wait until
circumstances enabled him to find an audience.
He was practising in his room upstairs, his
window being open, and the sounds caught the
ear of Madame Rossini, first wife of the illustrious
composer, and no other than the once delicious
Isabella Colbrand, pvima donna of the San
Carlo Theatre at Naples. If any one in the
world could judge of the tone of a violin, she
could.
Madame Rossini hastened to the disappointed
Marquis, and informed him that she had dis-
covered a violinist quite capable of performing
in the place of De Beriot.
“ Who is it ?” inquired the Marquis.
“I do not know,” said the celebrated cantatrice.
"You are joking, then ?”
"Not at all; but I have assured myself that a


;genius has arrived in this town. He lodges close
here,” she added, pointing to Ole Bull’s apart-
ments; “take your net, and catch your bird before
■he has fiotvn away.”
In a few hours Ole Bull was performing before
a distinguished audience in the concert-room of
ihe Philharmonic Society. He played two
pieces; one of which was his famous Quartett for
One Violin. His success was considerable. The
applause was most enthusiastic, and he was
escorted home by a number of dilettanti in pro-
cession by torchlight.
This was Ole Bull’s first great success. He
had played in Germany, Switzerland, and at
Milan, but he had never created so much en-
thusiasm before. Malibran was, of course, rather
■annoyed, but so far was jealousy, or anything of
■the kind, from her amiable character, and from
that of De Beriot, that shortly afterwards, when
Bull was introduced to them, ho was treated
with the utmost kindness. At this concert, also,
he made the acquaintance of Prince Poniatowski
and the amiable Princess, who promised him
first-rate introductions if he went to Florence,
In 1835 he played with similar success at


Naples, at Rome, and afterwards in Paris, at the
Opera-House. During the ensuing year he gave
concerts in other towns in Prance; and from the
middle of 1836 to the first half of 1837 he played
in London and the provincial towns of England.
In England Ole Bull gave no less than two
hundred and eighty concerts in the space of six-
teen months. After this ho visited successively
almost every town of importance in Europe, and
in 1843 set out for the first time to America..
He returned again to Europe in 1846, continued
his roving artistic life in France, Spain, Holland,
etc,, until 1851, when he returned home —if it
could still be called so—to Norway, where he-
endeavoured to establish a national Norwegian
O
theatre.
Tip to that time the Danish language only
had been heard on the Norse stage. Ole Bull’s-
desire was to see the true Scandinavian language
substituted for the Danish. It was at Bergen
that Bull established the first Norwegian theatre;
and a story is told how he got an old fiddler,
Thorgeir Andunson, a celebrated player of dance
music, such as Neil Gow was in Scotland, to
come and play some real national dance music in
202
CELEBRATED VIOLINISTS.


the orchestra, and caused the worthy old man to
gain about £4OO for his pains, which, of course,
set him up for ever.
The years 1852 to 1857 were again passed in
America, whilst from 1857 to 1801 he was again
devoting himself to his Norwegian theatre. In
O O
1862 he was heard in England for the last time.
There can he no doubt that descriptive music
was that which Ole Bull endeavoured to make
his speciality. Imbued, as his poetic mind was,
with the legends and fairy tales of the North, it
was not unnatural that he should endeavour to
realise them in his performance. He has avowed
that when he played he wished to raise a curtain
for his audience, so that they might see what was
passing in his own mind. It was the Huldra,
the legends of the North, that he endeavoured to
reproduce by the wild strains of his violin; it
was a stream of fairy melody, mixed with the
harsh, discordant sounds of the surging elements.
“Opinions are not agreed,” says a critic, “as to
the extent to which Ole Bull is to be considered
an imitator of Paganini. It appears certain that
the example of the latter urged him to attempt
the more strange and remote difficulties of the in


strument ” At the outset of his career, we cer-
tainly find him doing so, at the expense of song
and fine tone, the essence of violin music. Had
ho adhered to this primitive course, he would
never have risen to the height he has, as a per-
former and a composer. With regard to his com-
positions, we know very little of them, save that
they procured him an enthusiastic reception
Wherever he played them. We have already
; alluded to his Quartett for One Violin. Another
ipiece of his was called Et Gaeterhesdg, in which
he endeavoured to tell his audience what he saw
and experienced in a visit to a cow-keeper’s
cottage on the mountain. A grander production
was his Battle of Kringelen, a musical reproduc-
tion of the epic poem, the Si'ficlair Lay, by
his great-uncle. In others of his compositions
he was remarkable for his rich arpeggios, his
double stops, and shakes, and a rapid and exact
■staccato.
As a proof of the wonderful execution of Ole
Bull we may mention that he played the whole
■of Paganini’s Twenty-four Capricci* by heart.
* Yentiqnattri Capricci per Violiflo Solo. Op. I.
(Published by Hart, in London.)


This fact we have from a friend who knew him
well.
On his last visit to England Ole Bull was a
tall, power fully-built man, with a round, ex-
pressive northern face, and thick, short hair
as white as snow. He possessed a valuable-
Guarnerius violin, which he sold, and, when in
London, purchased a Nicholas Amati of 1C79,
formerly the property of Sir W. Curtis, a well-
known collector of valuable instruments, and this
instrument was considered to be the finest Amati
in the world.
During his wanderings, Bull made many and
valuable friends, and in 1838 had the honour of
being presented to the King of Sweden, Carl
Johan (Bernadette), It is well known that
Bernadotte had a strong feeling against Norwegi-
ans, as they had obstinately refused to be united
with Sweden under his despotic rule. At the
interview in question His Majesty let fall some
expressions that wounded the pride of the great
violinist, who was an ardent patriot.
“ Sire,” said Ole Bull, drawing himself up to.
his full height, and looking the King straight in
the face, “ I have the honour to he a Norwegian!”'


The King was somewhat startled, and for a
moment returned the artiste’s fierce glance, his
eagle eyes beaming with anger. Then, suddenly
relaxing his features, he allowed a pleasant smile
to curl his lips as he replied:
“Well, well, I know you damned sturdy
fellows!” He afterwards bestowed upon Bull
the Order of Vasa.
To an able Norwegian writer who knew him
well we are indebted for a portion of Ole Bull’s
career as a politician in North America. It ap-
pears that, during his first stay in that country,
he conceived the idea that those of his country-
men who had emigrated to the United States
might thrive better if protected and provided for
by one of their own countrymen. He, therefore,
went out again in 1852, and purchased 125,000
acres of land on the banks of the Susquehannah,
to which hundreds of emigrated Norwegians
hastily flocked.
“Timber was felled, ground cleared, cottages,
churches, and schoolhouses built, and all went
on smoothly, when, one fine morning. Ole Bull
was informed that the real owner of the land
wished to see him: he had purchased the land


of a company that proved to he not the rightful
owners; and thus had transferred the bulk of
his fortune into the pockets of swindlers. More-
over, he had trespassed on the property of Mr.
George Stewardson, a worthy Quaker, who,
though both honest and forbearing, could not
consent to lose what was his. Bull brought an
action against the swindlers, but the lawsuit be-
came a vulture that fed on his life’s-blood. He
had to take up his violin and play for costs,
whilst his opponents fought him with his own
money.”
Consumed by fever and anxiety, he travelled
from town to town, from New York to San
Francisco, playing almost every night; and on
the last night of his engagement he was struck
down by yellow fever. His powerful Norwegian
frame and excellent constitution, which he owed
to his very temperate habits throughout his
chequered existence, bore him through this trial;
and, with a truly indomitable energy, he at last
recovered some thousands of dollars, and fulfilled
his responsibility towards his countrymen.
Having thus got over his difficult and tedious
scheme of colonisation, he returned to Europe


and was for many years in the habit of spending
the summer at a beautiful little estate be had
purchased in one of the islands on the western
coast of Norway; migrating in winter towards
the south, and devoting himself to art to the last.
Ho passed away from the world of music here
below at the beginning of the year 1875.


X.
Contemporary Violinists.
ST will be perceived by many of my
readers that in the foregoing pages
I have confined myself to those cele-
brated men who have not only made
themselves known to their contemporaries by
their brilliant performances, but by their com-
positions—and, in many instances, by their
exemplary lives—have exercised a considerable
influence upon the Art of Music, and upon man-
kind in general.
Several violinists who shone as great cele-
brities in their day, hut whose influence has ex-
tended less widely, have been referred to also;
hut many of the latter have, of necessity, in a
work of this kind, been passed over in silence.
It has been my endeavour to seek for the
14


greatest, but many who have been, great have
been left behind. In the French and German
schools more especially, had I been compiling a
dictionary of musicians, it would have been my
duty to have written of Leduc, Senailie, the
“accomplished but volatile” Chevalier de St.
George, Gossec, his friend Paissible—who, like
Nourrit, the singer, died by his own hand—
Panorfka, the Belgian violinist Hauman, the
Viennese Hauser; and, among our own country-
men, Bream Thom, Henry Cooper, C. F. Hall,
Dando, Loder, and some others; all fine per-
formers upon the violin and good musicians,
and some of whom might doubtless deserve
the epithet of “ celebrated ” in more than one
■sense.
Another French violinist of great notoriety ,
even in the days of Paganini’s greatest glory,
was Alexandre Boucher, who bore so great
■a resemblance to Napoleon I. that the Eussian
Emperor Alexander induced him one day to dress
himself as Napoleon, in order that his Majesty’s
mother might see what the French Emperor
looked like. The illusion, we are told, was
perfect. In 1821 Boucher performed at a concert


•with Weber, at Berlin. He was pat down to
play some variations on a Norwegian air, com-
posed by the great German maestro. But, to
the astonishment of the composer (who accom-
panied him), and the audience, the eccentric vio-
linist suddenly broke off from this piece, and,
with a series of tremolos, pizzi catos, and shakes,
followed by the trumpet notes which announce
the entrance of Zamiel, plunged into a wild olla
podrida of melodies from Dev Freischiits, in which
he finally bewildered and lost himself altogether.
Then, throwing down his violin, he sprang upon
Weber at the piano, embraced the struggling
composer before all the spectators, and, whilst
apparently choking with emotion, ho exclaimed,
"Ah! grand maitre! que je t'aime! que je
t’admire !” The Berlin public accepted this ec-
centricity with favour, and received it with a
storm of applause, mingled with cries of " Long
live Weber!”
Boucher, one of the cleverest of violinists, was
indeed a celebrated man in his day—but not ex-
actly celebrated in the sense we attach to our
title-page.
Then, who has not heard of Spagnoletti 1 The
14—2


real name of this talented artiste is said to have
been Paolo Diana. At the early age of twelve
years the young Spagnoletti was introduced at
the Conservatoire of Naples as a very promis-
ing performer on the violin. On that occasion
we are told the Director of Music placed
before the young aspirant a very difficult and
elaborate composition, which ho requested him
to play at sight, by way of putting his boasted
powers to the test. " Spagnoletti, nothing
daunted, glanced slightly over the pages, and
turning them upside down, played the piece
throughout, to the great delight and admiration
of his numerous hearers.” We next find him
performing with great idat at Milan, from which
place he was brought to London by Viganoni, the
celebrated tenor, about the period of Madame
Banti's last season at the King’s Theatre. Here he
was engaged for several years as the second violin,
and in 1817 became the leader of that orchestra
which he conducted so long witli satisfaction to
the musical world. He led the Oratorios, the
great Provincial Meetings, the Ancient and
Philharmonic Concerts, and at the Grand Musical
Festival in Westminster Abbey.


We are told by one who knew him well that
Spagnoletti perpetrated an excellent joke on the
occasion of a concert given for a charitable pur-
pose. On that occasion he was requested to play
in a difficult composition, two of the pripcipal
performers looking over the same desk. Before
the piece began he remarked that it was rather
too bad not to have shown him the music earlier,
that he might have tried it over, at the same
time turning over leaf by leaf and pointing out
sundry difficult passages. At this moment the
baton of the conductor sounded to begin, and
before the other musicians at his desk could
realise their situation “ Spagnoletti had turned
the music upside down, and was playing away
as hard as any of them, leaving his two fellow-
artistes in perfect dismay.’'
When leader at the King’s Theatre he used to
speak of his first viola-player as being “ both as
■a man and a musician, a most praiseworthy
■character; as a man, by the tenor of his conduct,
and as a musician, by the conduct of his tenor,”
Spagnoletti was a composer of some eminence
several of his concertos played in public by him-
self are considered compositions of great merit.


Ho always evinced an ardent love of his art, and
on all occasions private feeling gave way to public
interests in its exercise. His life is, indeed, dis-
tinguished by few of those amusing particulars,
which often diversify relations of this descrip-
tion ; but it presents to us a good man and a man
of undoubted genius, labouring honourably and
successfully to advance himself to the highest
post in his branch of art. Signor Spagnoletti
was for years in a very delicate state of health,
having suffered from two severe attacks of para-
lysis ; the third attack proved fatal. From the
moment he was last seized he was deprived of
speech, and also of the use of one side of his-
body. A few hours previous to his death he
appeared most anxious about something, but
could not make himself understood to those
around him. His son, however, fancying that
his anxiety might he to see his favourite violin
once more, brought it to him; it appeared to-
satisfy and delight him to have it once more in
his hand. This excellent and eminent musician
died in his sixty-first year. His remains were
placed beside those of Madame Spagnoletti, in
Brompton Churchyard.


And now, to draw the present work to a close,
I have only to add a few words on some violinists
of our own time—words of simple congratula-
tion and admiration; for, as most of these distin-
guished artistes are still living, it is not for me,
hut for posterity, to write the history of their
lives, I conclude my book, then, merely with a
few observations upon those whom I have had the
good fortune to know something of 'personally.
Among the distinguished artistes who have
lately passed from among us, I will mention in
the first place Heinrich Ernst. This truly cele-
brated violinist lias produced, during a career
prematurely ended by a nervous affliction which
undermined his health, a series of most beautiful
compositions, which will live for many years to
come. His Camaval de Venise is preferred by
many to that of Paganini; his EUgie is a model
of fine composition that has never been surpassed.
Besides these, ho has left some Nocturnes, a Fan-
tasia on II Pirata , another on Ofello, his Airs
hongroises, and some Duetts. His performance
depended in a great measure upon the state of
his delicate health ; but when in good health and


spirits, nothing could be finer. Pure tone, won-
derful execution, and most poetic feeling charac-
terised his playing.
His compatriot, Herr Joachim, who is at pre-
sent such a favourite with us, possesses the 'same
charming qualities, with the advantage, more-
over, of robust health. He was a pupil of Fer-
dinand David, and Moscbeles, the pianiste, in his
autobiography, speaks of the boy Joachim, when
eight years of age, playing with success in a
concert at Leipzig, before a most critical audience.
In trios and quartette ho is said by a person well
competent to judge to be “absolute perfection;”
and as a soloist, he performs the most difficult
music of the old masters and that of modern com-
posers with equal facility.
Henri Vieuxtemps, born at Verviers, in Bel-
gium, in 1820, made his first appearance, also,
at the age of eight, and we possess a lithographic
print of him as he then appeared, with a violin
nearly as large as himself. After taking lessons
from Ledoux and De Eeriot, he started at once
on his successful artistic career, playing in almost
every town in Europe, and taking lessons on the
violin and in composition whilst on his travels.


In 1843 he made a trip to America; before
■which he had played with great success in
Russia, and had, while there, perfected himself
considerably in the science of composition. His
most remarkable compositions are his Fan-
taisie Caprice , Airs varies, and Concertos, and
his writings for the instrument are tolerably
numerous. At the death of De Beriot, Henri
Vieuxtemps was offered the post of Director of
Violin Music at the Conservatoire of Brussels,
which he held for a short time only; he retired
to Paris, and we regret to learn has suffered from
paralysis in the arm. His playing was remark-
able for extraordinary execution, and Vieuxtemps
was always one of those players who sought to
astonish as well as to charm.
Wieniawski, the Polish violinist, has succeeded
to the post at the Brussels Conservatoire, left
vacant by the retirement of M. Vieuxtemps. This
artiste has, on several occasions, been heard in
England, and is justly ranked as one of the
greatest performers of the present day. His
compositions show to what a great extent he has
also studied the art of composition. They are
both original and effective.


Kontski and Wilhelmj, compatriots of the-
latter, the former, brother of the well-known
pianist, and the latter a beautiful player who has-
often delighted London audiences, are good ex-
amples of talent produced upon the soil of Hun-
gary and Bohemia.
Joseph Artot, bom at Brussels in 1815, and
father of the well-known pnma donna, has
given us several excellent compositions. Of his
performance we cannot speak, but it must have'
been very remarkable, since be played a concerto
by Yiotti when quite a child. Ho studied under
Professor Snel at Brussels, and afterwards at the-
Paris Conse'i'vatoire under Kreutzer.
D. Alard, at present at the head of the violin
school at Paris, is a fertile composer and an ex-
cellent professor. He has produced a great num-
ber of pupils, and his brilliant Fantasias have
proved most successful. He has edited a col-
lection of music by the old masters. C. Dan-
cla, who is attached to the same institution,
also claims notice as a careful professor and
a voluminous writer of violin music of every
kind.
H. Leonard, who retired too soon from the
218
CELEBRA TED VIOLINISTS.


Brussels school to reside in Paris, is one of the
most distinguished violinists born on Belgian
soil. His compositions are eminently scientific.
For many years he was second professor at the
Brussels Conservatoire. He is one of those
artistes whose fame has spread through Europe
as much by his writings as by his performances.
A. Bazzini, the Neapolitan violinist, has also
given us a great number of most tasteful com-
positions. He performed at London many years
ago, but does not appear to have travelled much.
His writings show a complete mastery of the
instrument, and perfect knowledge of harmony.
Some of them are very original; for instance, his
Monde des Latins, his EUgie, etc., and his
Fantasias are brilliant and effective,
Camillo Sivori, another Italian violinist, whose
name has been, and justly so, a “household
word” for many years past, made his appearance
In England for the first time, as a solo-player, in
Jullien’s concerts. It was reported that he was
a pupil of Paganini, and one of the very few
persons to whom the illustrious Genoese gave
lessons. "With regard to this, there is an anecdote
which the writer heard quite recently:
219
CO NT BMP ORA R V VIOLINISTS.


At a musical party where several eminent
artistes were assembled, and at which Sivori had
played, and produced, as usual, a great sensation,
lie was addressed by a very indifferent musician,
somewhat to the following effect;
“ Signor Sivori, you are supposed to bo a pupil
of Paganini’s; well, I claim also to have had
lessons from that great violinist.”
“Indeedl” said the other; "this is something
new.”
“It is perfectly true,”
“As I never heard of it before, perhaps you
will explain ”
“Just so; well, I was very young; it was at
Carlsruhe; my father, who played the tenor in
the orchestra there, said to me one morning,
' Jahn, my hoy, the great Paganini gives a concert
here to-morrow, and I intend that you shall hear
him. The price of the places is so high that I
can’t get any free tickets, and, therefore, you
must come into the orchestra with me; you will
play the triangle, for which you will get your
two dollars, and you will have the advantage of
hearing the great man at the same time.’
Well, at rehearsal, shortly afterwards, I felt de


termined to show the celebrated Italian that I
was as enthusiastic a musician as he was; so,
when the bell comes in the Rondo de la Clockette,
ping — ping—ping went my triangle., and echoed
again and again through the empty concert-
room,
“Paganini's eyes turned in ray direction, and
flashed fire : 1 Troppo forte ! troppo forte !' he
exclaimed,
‘“Andate ancora s empre piano!’ We
began again ; but the second time was no better:
O O J 7
the clear ping of triangle rang out so loud that
the harmonic notes cf the violin which echoed
it were nowhere. At this the illustrious Italian
paced up and down the platform, seemingly in a
paroxysm of rage, and muttering some such
words as ' Corpo di Bacco! e cattivissimo! troppo
forte!!’ then, laying down his violin, he sprang
into the orchestra, and seizing upon the triable,
he tore it from my hands, and holding it in the
air, gave it three delicate little touches, making
me distinctly understand the kind of sound he
wished elicited from it. This was my first and
only lesson from Paganini. Thus, you see, I also
am a pupil of your great compatriot!”


An article in the Quarterly Review some few
years ago did full justice to the influence exer-
cised by M. Jullien upon music in England. To
his efforts we are indebted for the introduction
to this country of many fine artistes; Madame
Jullien, who died recently in London, was mainly
instrumental in enticing here one of the greatest
singers, our incomparable prinui donna, Madlle.
Tietjens, and her husband introduced us to one
of the greatest violinists that over lived, in the
person of Camillo Sivori. In England Signor
Sivori has played a great deal at the Musical
Union, directed by the well-known Professor
Ella,; and also at the Philharmonic Concerts.
Many years ago the author heard Sivori
perform the celebrated Rondo de la Clochette of
Paganini at the Theatre de St. Hubert, at Brussels;
the effect was magical. Nothing could be finer
than his magnificent tone, the complete mastery
of the most intricate passages, and the peculiar
beautj 7 of his double notes.
At the same theatre, a short time afterwards,
we heard another violinist, of a rather different
style. This was the well-known St. Leon, the
'/native de ballet for many years at Paris and


London, and the husband of Madlle. Cerito.
Arthur St. Leon died suddenly in Paris on that
notable day, Sept. 4,1870, in the Cafi du Divan,
from apoplexy or heart disease. He was one of
the most charming violinists we ever heard. His
tone was peculiarly sweet, his cadenzas and
scales were round and perfectly even, and his
taste most refined. When I mentioned to a very
celebrated violinist the pleasure that St. Leon’s
performance had given me, he shrugged his
shoulders and exclaimed, “ Oui, mats il n’a pas
de style That accusation was unjust.
It is not probable that St. Leon would have
shone in the performance of a “ classical ” con-
certo, or in a Sonata of Beethoven; hut nothing
could be more beautiful than his playing. His
execution was considerable, and his expression
perfectly natural. He was also exceedingly
■clever in imitating the various noises of a farm-
yard, which he introduced in one of his pastoral
compositions. I shall never forget the beauty of
his playing in a ballet entitled “Le Violon du
Diable,” in which he performed a series of fan-
tasias to the dancing of Madlle, Plunkett. The
.story of the ballet is simply this: A poor village


musician, who plays only the most wretched
dance-music —which, nevertheless, delights the
peasantry of his village, with whom he is a great
favourite—by some freak of fortune meets with
his satanic majesty, who presents him with a
violin. This turns out to he a truly marvellous
instrument. When he plays it, the peasants can-
not dance to the music now, hut stand as if
petrified, looking on with astonishment, whilst a
fairy form is called into existence each time the
enchanted instrument is touched, and dances to
the delicious music that it pours forth. Nothing
could be more charming than this combination of
the exquisite playing of M, St. Leon and the no
less exquisite dancing of Madllc. Plunkett. The
music was chiefly written by St. L£on himself.
Henri Standish, of Brussels, son of an Eng-
lish Professor of Mathematics, rose rapidly as a
violinist of great power; competing successfully
as a virtuoso and a teacher with Vieuxtemps,
Leonard, Steveniers, Artot, and others. Unfor-
tunately for the musical art, shortly after taking
the first prize in De Bdriot’a class at the Con-
servatoire, Standish obtained the Gold Medal of
the Academy of Painting, and finding the latter


accomplishment a more lucrative profession, has
adhered more to it than to music.
A violinist who has been long among us, the
talented M, Prosper Sainton, was bom at Bou-
logne in 1814, he was educated for the law, and
took his B.A. degree in France; but his love of
music was so great that, while pursuing his legal
studies at Paris, he became enrolled among the
pupils of the Conservatoire, and in 1834 took the
first prize in the violin class there. This decided
him to adopt an artistic career rather than a legal
one, and he set out at once on his travels, playing
with considerable success in the various towns of
Europe. In 1844 he arrived in London, and
played at the concerts of the Philharmonic
Society, and afterwards obtained the appointment
of Professor at the Royal Academy of Music. He
was also appointed first violin to the Italian
Opera, and Violin Solo in her Majesty’s state
band. He married the well-known contralto
singer, Miss Dolby. His playing is much ad-
mired for neatness of execution and pure tone.
He has written a number of effective composi-
tions for his instrument. He was a pupil of
Habeneck whilst at the Paris Conservatoire, and
15
225
CONTEMPORARY VIOLINISTS.


has since that time made many excellent pupils
himself.
Mr, Carrodus, a native of Keighley, in York-
shire, has risen to eminence with ns as a violin-
player of very considerable abilities. He was-
a favourite pupil of the late Bernhard Molique—
one of the best violinists Germany ever produced.
The playing of Molique was solid and masterly,
hut his extremely modest and retiring disposi-
tion hindered his success with the general public,
though he was always most highly esteemed by
musicians. His solos for the violin are very well
written. It was with one of these, the Concerto-
in D minor, that Mr. Carrodus made his debut at
the Musical Society of London, after being known
for some time as an excellent orchestral player.
This realised for him a triumphant success, which
has been confirmed at every subsequent appear-
ance. His tone is pure and liquid, and his exe-
cution irreproachable, enabling him to surmount
all mechanical difficulties with perfect ease. He
has several distinguished pupils.
America, both North and South, possesses some
admirable, violinists, whose names scarcely ever
reach us on this side of the Atlantic. Of these


we recently had an isolated specimen in the
person of M. Careno Sauret, who came here with
his talented wife, a magnificent pianist, and
astonished ns for a short time by his fine per-
formances, At the Promenade Concerts at
Covent Garden, M. Careno Sauret performed
Paganini’s famous variations, called Le Streghe,
with enthusiastic success, and that alone would
stamp him as a violinist of no ordinary merit. A
little later, at Hanover Square Rooms, ho per-
formed with his wife the duo in “The Huguenots,”
by De Beriot and Thalberg, a Tarantella by
Wieniawski, and other remarkable pieces, includ-
ing Ernst’s Airs hongroises. M, Careno Sauret’s
performance is characterised by pure tone, perfect
intonation, wonderful execution, and a thorough
command of harmonic notes ; added to this, his
staccato is most perfect.
Since my younger days, when the sisters
Milanollo and the sisters Ferny delighted many
audiences in various towns of Europe, we have'
had a number of very distinguished lady violinists ■
among us. Besides Madame Norman Neruda,
who has become an established favourite here, we
have Mademoiselle Castellan, Madame Boulanger,,
15—2


Mademoiselle de Bono, and others, who show what
delicacy and power ladies can attain on this instru-
ment, which requires so much physical strength
to master it. Mademoiselle Frery, formerly a
pupil of De Bdriot, and an exceedingly hand-
some woman, disappeared from Brussels when she
obtained the first prize at the Conservatoire, and
has not been heard of since in Europe; she is
one of the fine artistes lost to us in America.
Mademoiselle Singelli, who has had so successful
a career as a vocalist, was in her more youthful
days a very clever violinist. Many years ago
the great singer Madame Mara charmed crowded
audiences by her violin-playing; and in musical
works will be found accounts of many dis-
tinguished lady violinists from the time of Queen
Elizabeth to our own.
In these days, when every orchestral player is
a true artiste, it would occupy considerably more
space than I have at my disposal, to attempt to
exhaust the list of all the eminent violinists that
are more or less known to me at the present day,
I have already passed over many eminent pro-
fessors of former days, such as Oampagnoli, of
Dresden, Fiorillo, whose charming studies are so
228
CELEBRATED VIOLINISTS.


much admired, and those excellent artistes who
charm Londoners almost every night, Viotti Col-
lins, Burnett, Blagrove, "Wiener, Politzer, Ludwig,
Bless, Strauss, Ch. Fletcher, of Lymington, and
others, whose names I am reluctantly compelled
to omit, show to what perfection the art of
violin-playing is brought at present, thanks to
the great men, sketches of whose lives form the
sections of the present work,
A charming English violinist of the “ classical”
type is Henry Holmes; one of our best artistes.
Another most distinguished performer was Be-
menyi, of whose career many extraordinary stories
have been told. Like the young Sassemo, who
once gave great promise, we have lost sight of
him of late years. Bemenyi styled himself
violin solo to her Majesty.
Alfred Mellon, himself a very clever violinist,
a native of Birmingham, and an excellent leader,
introduced not a few good artistes to our London
audiences; and among the more eccentric charac-
ters, judging from his performance, is Levey, the
brother of the well-known composer of Fanchette
and the charming song Esmeralda. This violinist
has been accused, perhaps unjustly, of playing
229
CONTEMPORARY VIOLINISTS.


tricks with Ms violin, or of singing at the same
time; but of this I am not able to judge. He
has performed at various places under the name
of Paganini redivivtts, and, according to the
newspapers, has met with more success in Italy
than in England. Unfortunately, I can only
speak of this person’s performance from hearsay,
and I am told he is very clever.
In Queen Anne’s reign there was a man whose
name was Clench, a native of Barnet, that made
his appearance in London, He performed at the
corner of Bartholomew Lane, behind the Royal
Exchange, His price for admission was one
shilling each person. His advertisement stated
that “he imitated the horses, the huntsmen, and
a pack of hounds, a sham doctor, an old
woman, a drunken man, the bells, the flute, the
double-bass, and the organ with three stops, by
his own natural voice, to the greatest perfec-
tion.”
This genius bad a rival, however, who was
called the “ whistling man.” His excellence con-
sisted in counterfeiting the notes of all kinds of
singing birds. The same performance has been
since imitated by many others; by none, perhaps.
230
celebrated violinists .


with greater success than a person who named him-
self Rossignol, and who was associated with Bres-
law, the juggler. This “Rossignol, the hird-tutor,”
appeared at Go vent Garden Theatre, many years
ago, where, in addition to his imitation of the
birds, he executed a concerto on a violin ivithout
strings; that is, he made the notes in a wonderful
manner with his voice, and represented the bow-
ing by drawing a small stick backwards and
forwards over a stringless instrument. Hia per-
formance was received with great applause, and
the success he met with produced several com-
petitors, hut none of them equalled him. It was
afterwards discovered that the sounds were pro-
duced by an instrument contrived for the purpose,
concealed in the mouth.
Having now brought my account of violinists
down to that "celebrated” individual who
played upon a violin without any strings at all,
my readers will think it is evidently time that I
should bring this volume to a close.
But I must allude, in a few words, to a most
important subject. Why do we make so wide a
distinction between the remuneration of singers
and that of instrumentalists ? Why do we pay a


prima donna or a primo tenore (often of very-
limited musical education) by hundreds of pounds
when the orchestral player—often a highly-
educated musician—is obliged to content himself
with a guinea a night. When we see artistes
like Car rod us, Yiotti Collins, Burnett, etc., step
out of the orchestra and play a fine Concerto or
Fantasia solo, we perceive at once of what first-
rate artistes such an orchestra is composed. It
is evident that these performers are as much
undervalued —judging from their emoluments-
as our soprani and tenori are overvalued.
We cannot but hope that the time is not far
distant when this most unjust state of things
will be rectified. It is true that now and then a
Paganini arises, and takes a glorious revenge; but
that is not exactly the point in question. With-
out an orchestra there can be no opera, and if we
wish to keep up our orchestra to a high pitch of
perfection, we must give our young musicians
proper encouragement, and something to look
forward to.
That the state of things to which I allude
urgently needs to be greatly reformed is the more
evident when we consider that it is not every
232
CELEBRATED VIOLINISTS.


orchestral player who can, as in those exceptional
cases above-mentioned, shine forth as a solo
player, and so derive greater benefits from his
profession. The education is different after a
certain point of perfection has been attained; and
the qualities admired in the one are different
from those we applaud in the other. The or-
chestral player is trained to sacrifice himself for
the ensemble, whilst the solo player is educated
to bring forth all his individuality or originality.
Hence two classes of musicians, that can rarely
take each other’s places. Many an excellent
artiste shirks the idea of giving lessons all day,
and playing in the orchestra all night ; few,
indeed, have strength to do this long, and thus
some capital performers are lost to our operas.
A higher scale of appointments would secure
their services, and render them to a great extent
independent of the drudgery of giving lessons
during the day.
Let us note here the impetus now given to
violin-playing in England, and to the musical art
in general, by the encouragement it receives from
so eminent a dilettante as H.R.H, the Duke of
Edinburgh, as well as by some excellent musical
233
CONTEMPORARY VIOLINISTS.


.societies such as that of the Wander ing Minstrels
and others. But, as the present work is exclu-
sively devoted to those- who have made violin-
playing their profession, we can only stay to
remark that the art of the amateur ranks much
higher in England than many persons appear to
suppose; we could mention several ladies and
gentlemen whose finished performance upon the
violin is very fascinating and invariably meets
with the appreciation that it deserves.
*****
We must not conclude this section on contem-
porary artistes without alluding to a violinist
whose name we are not at liberty to mention; we
can vouch for the truth of the anecdote. It was
some years ago—hut the story is none the worse
for that—the writer was sauntering down the
Montague de la Cour at Brussels, about ten
o’clock on a hot evening in September, when the
sounds of a violin struck his ear. Brussels was
always a great place for the violin. We stopped
to listen. There was a certain sweetness and
fulness of tone that attracted our attention, and
proved that the player, whoever he might be,
possessed the complete control of his instrument.


The sounds appeared to proceed from an Esta-
minet (a kind of Cafe) called the Pot d’Or, We
entered, and, sure enough, there was a dark-
haired, bronze-faced youth playing upon an
excellent violin, which we should have thought
to be an Amati, judging by the sweetness
of the tones he drew from it. He was sur-
rounded by a circle of Flemish admirers in
blouses, whom he had just delighted with his
performance of the popular air, An daire de la
Lune, finishing off with a brilliant finale of his
own composition. Some of these went so far as
to assert to us that Paganini himself could have
been nothing in comparison with this marvellous
instrumentalist ’ “In fact,” said one, in a curious
mixture of French and Flemish, and approaching
us confidentially, with his glass of faro in his
hand, “in fact, he can play a note that neither
Beriot, nor Singelde—no, nor even Paganini him-
self—had any notion of.”
We soon got into conversation with the violin-
ist and examined his instrument, which was a
very good one indeed to he in the hands of an
itinerant musician. He was not long, either, in
showing us, by way of return for some little
235
CONTEMPORARY VIOLINISTS.


civility, the celebrated note that none of the great
violinists, who had preceded him, knew anything
of. He executed a single scale, beginning at the
lowest note of the violin and running up to the
highest. This was played with tolerable accuracy,
and all the notes came out full and clear. “Now,
Messieurs,” said he, “that is the whole of the
violin as Paganini knew it; but I know one note
more —listen!” He now repeated the scale as
before, but, after reaching the highest note at-
tainable by orthodox means, he completed his
performance with a still higher one, which he pro-
duced, in perfect intonation, by causing his left
hand to glide rapidly along the back of the in-
strument : the note was produced by the rapid
friction of the hand over the varnish on the back
of the violin ! It could, of course, have been pro-
duced just as well upon a polished mahogany
table. We were all perfectly satisfied that Paga-
nini was not acquainted with that note!
We endeavoured to watch the career of this
clever violinist, for such indeed he was. At the
time we met him, he was a pupil of the Conserva-
toire, but so very poor that, unknown to his pro-
fessors and to his fellow-students, he played about


at night in different Estaminets, and so secured
a meal or two for the next day. After a time he
obtained a prize at the Conservatoire, and in
April, 1856, we heard him at one of the matinies
of the Prince de V, . . . where he performed in a
trio of Mozart’s, and afterwards a Fantasia by
Artot, and was very well received. Although
still very young he was already styled “ the pro-
fessor.” After this we lost sight of him altogether,
as we left the town ourselves; but we understand
that he has attained an honourable position in
his profession, which many years ago enabled
him to support his mother and to educate a
younger brother. That this violinist had the
stamp of the true artiste upon him we were
thoroughly convinced the night we met him
for the first time in the Estarninet aw Pot d’Or.
237
CONTEMPORARY VIOLINISTS.


XI.
Frăulein Schmöhling.
BS a kind of appendix to the present work
we present our readers with a short
sketch of the career of a most extraor-
dinary mnsici an. wh osc romantic exist-
ence extended from theyearl747tolß3l. Noplace
could conveniently be found for her in the chrono-
logical series of remarkable characters before
alluded to; the more so, as her enormous success
in the world of art was mainly owing to her own
efforts, being the pupil of no great master. Nor
was she all her life a violinist, but achieved
celebrity, principally, during her career as a
prima donna having abandoned her violin
shortly before she became Madame Mara.
Herr Schmohling, her father, was a poor musi


cian of Cassel. Fortune had never smiled upon
him, and his suffering appears to have reached its
climax when his charming young wife Anna
died, a few days after the birth of their first child,
the subject of this memoir.
Poor before, he was now wretchedly miserable,
and no efforts could enable him to emerge from
the obscurity by which he was surrounded in the
small town of Cassel. The little child became
the living image of the unfortunate mother, and
the sight of her roused Schmohling to fresh exer-
tion, though his life had lost all its charms, and
misery of every kind weighed heavily upon him.
His lodging on the second floor of a little house
near the entrance of the town was of the poorest
description, and now sadness and distress added
their mournful tints to the picture. Whilst
absent from home—if such a denomination can be
properly applied to such a miserable abode—the
poor child was left entirely alone, attached to an.
old arm-chair; and as Schmohling was obliged
to go out nearly every day to earn bis scanty
living by giving a few lessons, or by any other
musical work that happened to present itself, the
infant was constantly left in this precarious posi


tion. The effect of this was that the child be-
came delicate, and at three years old she could not
walk. In. the meantime she had been christened
Elizabeth Gertrude,
As the poor father was only too glad to do
any kind of work that would enable him to
supply his daily wants, he sometimes undertook
to repair the instruments of the musicians of the
Cassel orchestra, and one day his little daughter,
then four years old, was found playing with one
of these violins that lay upon a table near her,
In imitation of her father, she drew the how
across the strings, and placing her tiny fingers
upon the neck of the instrument, she produced
one or two notes, so round and distinct, that he
was lost in surprise.
It was Dr. Johnson, we believe, who said that
“ there is nothing in which the power of art is
shown so much as in playing on the violin. In
all other things,” he remarked, " we can do some-
thing at first; any man will forge a bar of iron if
you give him a hammer; not so well as a smith, but
tolerably. A man will saw a piece of wood, and
make a box, though a clumsy one; but give him
a violin and a bow, and he can do nothing.”


Doubtless Herr Schmohling knew this better
than Dr. Johnson did ; and we may easily judge
of his surprise when he heard the child play
several notes of the scale most distinctly, before
she had been told how to do it; and at the time
she was only just four years old !
A flash of light—call it instinct, or what you
will—seems to have shone through the musician’s
brain at the moment. From that day he began
systematically to teach his daughter music; and
in the course of twelve short months she could
already play some little airs upon the violin
with such marvellous skill that the precocious
child became the talk of the town.
One thing is very certain, namely, that this
drew around him a number of speculators and
curiosity-mongers, several of whom made him
propositions with the view to exhibit his child ;
for musical phenomena were rare in Cassel in
those days, and, for that matter, in many other
places also. For some time Schmohling held
firm to his own opinions, and refused to listen to
his would-be friends, preferring to wait until
his daughter’s talent should be more fully de-
veloped.
16


At last, however, he gave way, for fear of
exasperating certain notabilities of the place
upon whom his livelihood more or less entirely
depended; and on the 16th November, 1753,
a large room was hired, and the little Elizabeth,
then in her sixth year, made her first appearance
in public. It seems almost incredible; but,
fortunately, the whole affair is well known to
those who occupy themselves with musical
matters.
The day had been looked forward to with the
utmost impatience. The audience was numerous
and select. As the poor child could not walk,
being still in very delicate health, her father
carried her into the concert-room, placed her
on a chair upon the platform, and put into her
hands his best violin.
At the first sound of the instrument a profound
silence reigned throughout the room; but in a
short time it was interrupted by murmurs of
astonishment and approbation, and at the con-
clusion of her first performance the applause was
like thunder. The pretty child, as she was lifted
from the chair, was embraced over and over
again, and large tears of joy rolled down the


cheeks of Herr Schmohling, as he carried his
darling prodigy into the artistes’ room, and con-
fided her to a circle of admiring friends.
From simple curiosity the sale of tickets had
been considerable, and for the first time for many
years the poor musician felt that he had some
money in his pocket.
The French have a saying: XJn honheur riar-
rive jamais send, which we English translate
It never rains but it pours. The day after the
concert, Schmohling received an anonymous
letter; but such a letter! It is still extant, and
here it is, in its English dress:
“ Dear Hekr Schmohling,
“ I was one of those who experienced,
yesterday, the greatest satisfaction on perceiving
the precocious talent of your charming little
daughter. It would be infinitely regrettable that
so brilliant an organisation should not receive
every development of which it is susceptible. As.
a rich man and a friend of art, I am decided
upon defraying the expenses of her education. I
beg to enclose a first instalment, of two hundred
florins ; you will proceed at once to Frankfort,.
IC—2
243
FRA VLEIN SCHMOHLING.


where she will be recommended by me to the
best professors, and you will receive every month
a similar sum for the next ten years. In the
above-mentioned town I have a friend, a surgeon
' O
of great experience, who will attend to your
daughter’s ailments; and I have no doubt that
in a very short time she will be able to walk as
well as you or I.
“I should be glad if you would start to-morrow.
Do not endeavour to find out either my name or
my address; any attempt of that sort would be
quite superfluous.”
The letter was signed “An Amateur.”
However much Sehmdhling would have liked
to have wrung the hand of this magnanimous
benefactor, all efforts to discover him were fruit-
less, and he could only abide by his instructions,
which he carried out to the letter. He proceeded
at once to Frankfort-on-the-Maine, where the
medical skill alluded to in the letter was brought
to bear with considerable success upon the little
Elizabeth's affliction. The paralytic affection of
her legs disappeared in due course, and at nine
years of age she was as beautiful a blond German
244
CELEBEA TED VIOLINISTS.


girl as could have been found in. the whole king-
dom. Her talent as a violinist increased as
rapidly as her other charms, and wherever she
played she was the object of universal admira-
tion. Music had now become a serious study
with her, and her mysterious benefactor, by the
regularity of his remittances, enabled her father
to dispense with anxiety as to the future. For
five years she continued her studies and her
medical treatment at Frankfort; after which it
was decided to proceed to Vienna, with the view
of obtaining better instruction, and, if possible,
of giving some concerts.
Arrived at Vienna in her twelfth year, arrange-
ments were at once made for a series of concerts,
at which she performed with the greatest success,
and was looked upon by the dilettanti of that
sparkling town as the greatest musical pheno-
menon ever known. Her extreme youth, her
beauty, and her wonderful and elegant per-
formance produced universal enthusiasm. Among
her more ardent admirers at this period was the
English ambassador, who prevailed upon her
father to take her to England, and gave him
numerous letters of introduction. In 1760


Schmbbling and his admired daughter set out for
London, where they were received most kindly.
After performing at Court, with the greatest
success, Elizabeth Schmbbling was heard in a
number of concerts ; and every drawing-room of
any importance was graced by her presence. The
attention she received from the nobility, and the
universal admiration in which she was held, both
for her musical talent and her graceful manners
and charming appearance, especially by the gen-
tlemen, excited among the ladies something
besides admiration. A feeling akin to jealousy
was aroused in certain quarters by all these ova-
tions ; it was openly asserted that the violin was
an impi'oper instrument for a woman, and various
equally nonsensical notions got propagated so
viciously that poor Eraulein Schmbbling found
herself more than once received rather coldly,
and became plainly convinced that the dazzling
star of her fortune was not glittering so brightly
as before. Although little more than thirteen
years of age, this systematic persecution preyed
upon her mind, and suddenly decided her to
abandon the violin, and to cultivate her voice,
whicli was powerful, sweet, and flexible, and only


■wanted a little training to rival that of the first
singers of the day.
At this time there was, in London, a young
professor of singing, named Paradis!, and Herr
Schmohling determined to place his daughter
under his care. He discovered that she had a
voice of great extent and extreme flexibility,
together with exquisite feeling and marvellous
dramatic instinct. Nothing could be more cer-
tain, in his opinion, than her ultimate success as a
cantatrice, and he devoted all his energies to this
wonderfully promising pupil She, on her part,
responded most completely to his efforts, and in
the course of a comparatively short time, she was
■enabled to appear as a public singer in London
with considerable success. Indeed this success
was so great, for so young a person, that it gave
rise to much envious feeling among her fellow-
a o
artistes, and Fraulein Schmohling found herself
the object of intrigues of so invidious a nature
that all her talent and perseverance could not
conquer them.
Disgusted with everybody and everything, her
father decided upon returning to his native town,
where he hoped to obtain some permanent en


gagement for his talented daughter. But this
was a vain hope; Cassel presented no opening
for her; and she was but coldly received.
The poor father was sadly disconcerted by
these unexpected freaks of fortune, but the child
had already begun to think for herself; her per-
severance knew no bounds, and her ambition de-
termined her to vie with the very greatest in
art. She had heard that a talented musician
named Hiller had founded a musical school at
Leipzig in 1766, that had already gained some
celebrity, and he had acquired the reputation of
possessing the finest method for singing in
Germany. To this institution Fraulein Schmbh-
ling was determined to go; and she studied
hard there till the year 1771, when she was
twenty-two years of age. At this period her
voice was one of the finest ever heard, and (with
the exception of Henrietta Sontag) she was the
greatest singer Germany has ever produced. She
used to say that had she a daughter to whom
singing was to be taught, this daughter
should first study the violin; and she attri-
buted in great measure to her violin training
that wonderful facility in vocal execution


which surprised her hearers while it enchanted
them.
She made her dehut at Dresden in an opera by
Hasse, and every one present at once perceived
what a brilliant career lay before her. The success
which attended this performance was renewed at
all her appearances, and her extraordinary talent
as a singer and as a dramatist shone forth princi-
pally in the operas of Jomelli, Porpora, Sacchini,
Hasse, Piccini, and Gluck.
The news of her success—perhaps some of her
previous history—got to the ears of the Great
Frederick ; but as he had given up playing on
the flute, musical matters had less interest for
him than nsual. He had become melancholy,
and was advised by his personal friends to hear
the brilliant artiste who conferred such honour
on his country. He heard her, in an opera of
Sacchini’s, performed expressly for the occasion,
at Potsdam, and was enraptured.
From this moment Fraulein Schmbhling was
the most popular cantatrice, in Germany. We
cannot follow her here through all her triumphs.
Besides her operatic engagments she was ap-
pointed Court musician at a salary of three thou-
249
FRAULEIN SCHMOHLING.


sand florins; her poorfather was made completely
happy, and, as one of her contemporaries informs
us, at every opera in which she appeared,
bouquets, wreaths, sonnets, and compliments
of every description were showered upon the
stage.
At this period there existed at Potsdam a
musician of the name of Mara. He was a clever
professor upon the violoncello, and was engaged
as such in the Royal orchestra. This man was
by no means handsome, hia face was covered with
marks left by small-pox, besides which he was
very quarrelsome, accustomed to use strong
language, and, worse than all, addicted to strong
drink. His love of the bottle caused him
more than once to be excluded from good
society.
Such was the individual who fell desperately in
love with the fair cantatrice, and, marvellous to
relate, she returned his affection! When he
offered her marriage he was accepted. The news
of this affair caused a sort of stupefaction among
the lady’s numerous admirers, and it is said that
even Frederick himself attempted to prevent
the marriage. However, it took place in due


course; and in about a week Madame Mara
found out her mistake. After a series of scenes
a separation was agreed upon.
It is said that a reconciliation was brought
about somewhat later, by the extraordinary con-
duct of the King. His Majesty would not hear
of the songstress leaving Berlin; she was for
some time a complete prisoner, and the position
was perfectly unendurable to her. It was a long
time before the Great Frederick could be made
to see the ridiculousness of his conduct in this
respect. A fter various attempts to escape, planned
and carried out by her husband, but frustrated
by the King, Mara and his wife at last received
an authority to quit Prussia. This story is
doubtful.
It was in I7SO, after having devoted a little
time to restore her health, shattered to some
extent by the constant annoyances and troubles
that cropped up during her engagement at the
Court of Berlin, Madame Mara made her ap-
pearance at the Vienna Opera-House. Her suc-
cess there was not so great as we could have
imagined, for, at that time. Opera huffa, in which
she did not shine so brilliantly as in more serious


productions (in which all her energy and fire
could display themselves), was alone in vogue.
But it was in Vienna that she gained the good
graces of the Empress Maria Theresa, to which
she owed the patronage of Marie Antoinette, who-
invited her to sing at the palace of Versailles.
Here her pure, elegant, expressive, and dramatic
singing won the hearts of every one. At the
French Opera she had only one rival. Signora
Todi, a lady who had numerous friends and sup-
porters, and the well-known conflicts between
the “ Todistes” and the " Maratistes” lasted some
time before the palm was finally awarded to
Madame Mara.
In London, her singing in the Handel Festival
music was the talk of the day for a lengthened
period. Here she appeared at the Opera with
the celebrated Mrs. Billington and the capti-
vating Brigitta Banti, and was universally ac-
knowledged as the greatest artiste that Germany
had ever sent to our shores. After singing in
various towns in Italy, Madame Mara returned
again to London in 1790, and never quitted our
capital till the year 1801, when she gave her
farewell representation, at the age of fifty-five,


.and was received with great enthusiasm. The
receipts were over £IOOO.
In spite of her husband’s vices Madame Mara
settled a pension on him after their separation,
and she still regarded him with affection and
D
even admiration. When one of her friends ex-
pressed surprise at her generosity towards such
an unprincipled ruffian, she remarked with the
.utmost naiveU: “ But you must allow that he is
the handsomest man ever seen !”
Jean Mara died at Schiedam in Holland (of all
places in the world !) in the year 1808, having
devoted some years to the practice of smuggling.
Four years previously Madame Mara had gone
to St. Petersburg, and afterwards, in 1806, to
Moscow, where she remained till that town was
burnt, losing thus some property she had pur-
chased there. Finding herself at liberty by the
death of her husband, she married the talented
flute-player Florio.
When Moscow was destroyed she went to
Revel, where she supported herself by giving
lessons in music. She endeavoured to sing again
in London in 1820, when in her seventy-second
year; but her wonderful powers, of course, had


flown : and the year following poor Mara returned
to her native town of Cassel, where she was idol-
ised. But she appears to have had a larger con-
nection at Bevel, her last resting-place on this
earth, where she died in January 1833.
In spite of her numerous successes, which
crowned a life of untiring energy, Madame Mara
never realised a large fortune; she sang and gave
lessons as long as a spark of energy remained
in her. What with her first husband’s dissipated
habits, her own good-nature, blind confidence,
and horror of business, it may easily be supposed
that this great artiste saved little or nothing
from the honorariums of a life of toil crowned
by triumph.
On the celebration of her eighty-third birth-
day —the 23rd February, 1831 —great poet
Goethe addressed some verses to her
BILLING AKU SOUS, Pli-lUTERS, GMILEIORIJ, 6UWREV.
S.


BENTLEY’S BURLINGTON LIBRARY
Each Volume to be had separately, smith few exceptions, in crown B vo., cloth ,
price 6s.
* These books are in Roxburghe binding.
The Dead Cities of the Zuyder Zee.
* Guizot’S Life of Oliver Cromwell.
* Mignet’s Life of Mary Queen of Scots.
The Day after Death.
' Dr. McCausland’slSermons. in Stones.
* Dr. MgCausland’s Adam and the Adamite.
Dr. McCausland’s Builders; of Babel.
* Lord Calling and Bulwer’S Historical Characters.
* Timbs’s Lives of Painters.
* Timbs’s Lives of Statesmen.
’ Timbs’s Wits and Humourists. 2 mis. 12 s.
•Timbs’s Later Wits and Humourists. 2 vols. 12 s.
Timbs’s Doctors and Patients.
* The Bentley Ballads.
' Dr. Doran’s Table Traits, with Something on Them.
South Sea Bubbles, by the Earl and the Doctor.
Roots: A Plea for Tolerance. IndemySvo.
Guillemin’s The Sun.
' Earl Dundonald’s Autobiography of a Seaman.
* BESANT AND PALMER’S HISTORY OF JERUSALEM.
* Crowest’s The Great Tone Poets.
The Wit and Wisdom of Lord Chesterfield.
Bygone Days in Devon and Cornwall.


BENTLEY’S FAVOURITE NOVELS.
Each work can be had separately, price 6j., of all Booksellers in
Town or Country.
MRS-HENRY WOOD.
East Lynne. (65th thousand.)
The Channings. (29th thousand.)
Mrs. Halliburton’s Troubles.
The Master of Greyland*.
Verner’s Pride.
Within the Maze.
Lady Adelaide.
Bessy Rane.
Roland Yorke,
Lord OAksUEN’s Daughters.
Shadow of Ashlvdyat,
Oswald Cray.
Dene Hollow.
George Canterbury’s Will.
Trevlyn Hold.
Mildred Arkell.
St. Martin’s Eye.
Elster's Folly.
Anne Hereford.
A Life’s Secret.
Red Court Farm,
Orville College.
Parkwater.
MISS AUSTEN.
{The only Complete Edition.)
Sense and Sensibility:
Emma.
Pride and Prejudice.
Mansfield Park.
North anger Abbey & Persuasion.
Lady Susan and The Watsons.
MISS RHODA BROUGHTON.
Nancy,
Good-bye, Sweetheart !
Red as a Rose is She.
Cometh up as a Flower.
Not Wisely but Too Well.
MRS. ALEXANDER.
Her Dearest Foe.
The Wooing o’t.
Which shall it be?
ANTHONY TROLLOPE.
The Three Clerks.
MRS, ANNIE EDWARDES.
Leah : a Woman of Fashion.
Ought we to Visit her?
Susan Fielding.
Steven Lawrence : Yeoman.
BARONESS TAUTPHCEUS.
The Initials, I At Odds,
Quits ! I Cvrilla.
LADY G. FULLERTON.
Constance Sherwood.
Too Strange not to be True.
Mrs. Gerald’s Niece.
Ladybird.
MRS. AUGUSTUS CRAVEN.
A Sister’s Story.
MISS HELEN MATHERS.
Com in’ thro’ the Rye. - (Sixth Edition.)
BY ANONYMOUS AUTHORS.
The Last of the Cavaliers, | Johnny Ludlow.
.RICHARD BEHTLET & SOW, Hew Burlington Street.


' Ili3 -I'M
