

SLTPI -MKNT TO THE KyNETON’ GUARDIAN.
In Memoriam.
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
OF
THE LATE MR. JAMES HUTCHESON
TOGETHER WITH
MEMORIAL SERMON
Preached in the «
Independent Church, Kyneton, on Sunday, October 4, 1891,
BY THE
REV. E. C. ISAAC .
Minister of Kyneton Independent Church.
Kyneton ;
PRINTED AND PUEIiISHEDBY M. K. ARMSTRONG) MOLLISON-STREET?
1891.
PRICE SIXPENCE.


In Memoriam.
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
OF
THE LATE MR. JAMES HUTCHESON
TOGETHER WITH
MEMORIAL SERMON
Pbeaoiied in the
Independent Church, Kyneton, on Sunday, October 4, 1891,
BY THE
REV. E. C. ISAAC
Minister of Kyneton Independent Church,
Kyneton;
FEINTED AND PUBLISHED BY M. K. AEMSTEONO, MOLLISON-STEEET.
1891.


“He is not dead
Who in his record still the earth shall tread
With God’s clear aureole shining* round his head.”
“Gentlest of spirits!—Not for thee
Our tears are shed, our sighs are given.
Why mourn to know thou art a free
Partaker of the joys of Heaven ?
Finished thy work, and kept thy faith,
In Christian firmness unto death
And beautiful as sky and earth
When Autumn’s sun is downward going,
The blessed memory of thy work
Around thy place of slumber glowing.”


BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
OF THE
LATE JAMES HUTCHESON.
....
§T can be truly said no one, with receptive mind or spirit, ever
spent an hour with James Hutcheson without receiving
mental and moral stimulus. That ho possessed such a wealth
tof wisdom and power was not indicated by the outward
appearance ; on the contrary, first impressions on seeing him
were apt to be very erroneous. But let the conversation flow
in some, to him, loved channel, and the feeling would
unconsciously steal over you. “I am in the company of a
wonderful man.” This is not the opinion of a few, but from every
quarter similar testimony may be gathered, and increased acquaint-
ance with him always proved synonymous with increased confidence
in, and love to him. His departure from our midst is too recent;
his loss too painfully felt just now for us to form anything approach-
ing a fair estimate of the man, or of the influence he has exerted
upon the community of Kyneton, but he was so universally revered
and loved, a brief biographical sketch will be welcomed by all wbo
knew him, or came into either social or business relationship with him.
James Hutcheson was born on the 28th of May, 1819, in the
village of Coylton, about five miles from the town of Ayr, in
Scotland, a district rendered familiar to the readers of Kobert
Burns’ poems by the faithful and delightful pictures he has given
of its pastoral scenery. He was born of comparatively poor parents,
as the following story told by himself will indicate —“I remember
while a little boy lying awake one night, and over-hearing my father
and mother talking with a good deal of anxious forebod-
ings as to where to-morrow’s meals were to be obtained.
As I listened to their conversation, I made the resolution as
soon as I was able to work I would make it impossible for them to
talk in that way again.” To form a resolution with him was to
carry it out, and most faithfully did he perform his self-imposed
task.


At a very early age he was sent to work, and in consequence,
received but a scanty education. He has often said that he
was nineteen years old before he could fluently read the book he
loved most of all—the Now Testament. His early manhood was mostly
spent at Baillieston, near Glasgow, where he worked as a blacksmith.
On 14th June, 1847, he married his first and only love, Miss Annie
Watson, also a native of Coylton, with whom ho had gone to school.
Before his marriage he became the subject of religious impressions,
and his passage from “darkness to light” is worth repeating.
“ For many months I was in a terrible condition of spiritual
darkness and doubt, and my attempts to get light werj all in vain,
until one day, as I was walking along a quiet road, my heart was
moved to pity by the writhings of a wounded snake. Suddenly
the thought flashed into my mind, surely if I feel as I do for
that poor injured creature the Great Father and Creator of both
must regard mo with a more tender regard and pity. It was the
dawning of a new day, the stirrings of a new life to me, and from
that moment I have never doubted His Fatherhood or my sonship.”
Soon after his conversion he joined the Evangelical Union Church
at Bell’s Hill, of which the Rev. Mr. Riddle was pastor. Thither he
and his young wife walked every Sunday a distance of six miles.
While in connection with this church ho first gave signs of his
future powers as a preacher, and Mr. Riddle occasionally availed
himself of his services. He and a friend about this time, at the
earnest solicitation of their minister, began to prepare themselves
for entering college with a view to the ministry, but circumstances
prevented this in Mr. Hutcheson’s case. In 1851 he and bis wife, in
company with Mr. Alex. Ferguson, who had married a sister of Mrs.
Hutcheson, sailed from Plymouth in the ship Reliance for Adelaide,
having as shipmates Mr. Anderson, of Bullarook, and others, who
have proved valuable colonists. They worked for a time at the
Burra Burra copper mines, but early in 1852 he and Mr. Ferguson
started for the Forest Creek gold diggings, leaving their wives in
Adelaide. A short experience there, during which time they
were fairly successful, convinced them that they would be all
the bettor for the assistance of their wives. Others were in a similar
position, and as it was necessary for them to remain behind to
prevent their claims being “jumped,” Mr. Hutcheson was deputed
to go to Adelaide, from whence he returned with his wife, sister-in-
law, and the wives of three other diggers, and some children. At
that time Mr. Windridge (now well known as Col. Windridgo) was
in business near Piper-street bridge, and had purchased the farm
known as Eosehill. Being married to a sister of Mrs. Hutcheson,
he induced Mr. Hutcheson, a few months after the latter returned
from Adelaide, to settle in Clowes’ Forest, about nine miles from
Kyneton. There ho worked at timber splitting for house-building
and fencing, which he hauled with a bullock team to Mr. Windridgo’s
and to an allotment in High-street, Kyneton, upon which a little later


Mr. Hutcheson built a two-roomed cottage with smitby attached,
for by this time he had determined to return to his trade. This
humble erection stood on a portion of the site now occupied by the
workshops of Messrs. Crewther Brothers, agricultural implement
makers. Taking his brether-in-law, Mr. Alexander Ferguson, into
partnership, they commenced work in 1853. In 1856, Mr. John
Walker joined them, and having married a sister of Mrs. Hutcheson,
in 1856, entered into partnership with his brother-in-law. This
proved most successful. As manufacturers of ploughs and reaping
machines the names of Messrs. Hutcheson and Walker became house-
hold words among the farmers of the district; and as they introduced
so many improvements into their machines they were able to
successfully compete with imported agricultural machinery on many
a show ground. In the latter part of 1872, having secured a
competency, they resolved to retire from business, and disposed of
their plant and goodwill to three of their workmen, Messrs. Crewther
Brothers and Hugh Gardiner. A few years since Mr. Gardiner left
this partnership, and commenced business for himself; but the
business begun by Mr. Hutcheson is still carried on successfully by
the Messrs. Crewther, under the well-known style of “ Messrs.
Hutcheson and Walker.” The partnership, however, of the latter
was not dissolved by the sale of their manufacturing business.
About the time ofthis change they purchased the fine property belong-
ing to the late Dr. Baynton, of Darlington, at Baynton, where
Mr. Walker went to reside, and which, in the subsequent division
of the property, fell to his share, Mr. Hutcheson retaining
extensive farm property at Glenlyon, where his brother Mr. Samuel
Hutcheson resides, and at Greenhill, now occupied by his nephew.
In 1874 Mr. Hutcheson purchased “ Sandhill ” from Mr. Eobert
Harper, a property of about 140 acres of rich land. This he has
improved by fencing, tree-planting, and underground tile drainage.
It is now one of the richest and best managed properties in the
district. This has been his home since 1874. He has lived a
retired but eminently useful and practical life, respected and
revered by the whole countryside.
A sketch of Mr. Hutcheson’s life would be incomplete without
some reference to his connection with the Kyneton Independent
Church. Almost as soon as ho set foot in the then small hamlet,
with its large and increasing wayside trade of teams going backward
and forwards to the diggings, and the opening up of the country to the
south and north west of the town by farmers, ho in conjunction
with such men as the late Messrs. Ben Kenworthy,Samuel Attwood,
Joseph Eogers, and William Dobinson.with Mr. John Menzies, Mr.
H. G. Parker, and others, organised religious services. These
services were originally held in a carpenter’s shop in Yaldwin-strcet
at the rear of what is now St. Paul’s Church of England. Almost
directly a fund was started to build a permanent church, and in
May, 1853, a wooden building which had cost over 41800 was


opened for public worship. Carpenters in those days earned £2
and £2 ss. per day. The Rev. Robert Anderson was the first
pastor, and the services were attended by members of all protestant
denominations. During his pastorate of three years Mr. Hut-
cheson occasionally conducted the services, and when the pastor
died in June, 1855, he and Mr. Menzies took entire charge for
several months. In a paper prepared by the Rev. G. J. Rich-
mond, and read at the induction of the Rev. S. Bryant, the follow-
ing occurs :—“ The church now fell upon troublous times. With a
reduced church roll and sparse congregation on account of migra-
tions, and a heavy debt, the prospect was gloomy in the extreme.
It was seriously proposed to sell the property and abandon the
enterprise ; and there is no doubt this would have been done but
for the timely and generous determination of Mr. Hutcheson to
become personally responsible for the greater part of the
liability.” About six months later the Rev. G. C. Morrison
(father of Mr. G. C. Morrison, lately C.P.B. at Kyneton,
took charge of the struggling church, but his pastorate was a brief
one, Mr, Mofrison unfortunately dying in November, 1850. Again
Mr. Hutcheson willingly, gratuitously, and unostentatiously occu-
pied the pulpit, and continued to do so until 1868, when failing
health, caused by continued bard manual and mental labour led him
to resign. The church then invited the Rev. G. J. Richmond to
take the pastoral oversight fcr a year, in order that Mr. Hutcheson
might have a much-needed rest. At the expiration of that time
Mr. Richmond’s invitation was renewed for another year, and in
1870 Mr. Hutcheson again resumed the pastoral office, which he
held till 1876. The present handsome stone church was opened in
1860, and by the request of the members conveyed in very touching
terms to Mr. Hutcheson, he formally assumed the pastorate and
continued to minister with great profit to his hearers until the
date given above, when the Rev. S. Bryant, now of. the Victoria
Parade Church, Melbourne, was appointed pastor. With the
exception of occasionally supplying the pulpit between the resig-
nation of Mr. Bryant in July, 1879, and the appointment of the
Rev. Mr. Spavin in Juno, 1880, and the period, including the illness
and death of Mr. Spaven in June, 1882, and the appointment of the
Rev. W. Currie, in December, 1883, followed by the interregnum
between Mr. Currie’s resignation in February, 1889, and the
appointment of the Rev. E. C. Isaac, the present pastor, in April,
1890, Mr. Hutcheson never statedly conducted worship in the church
after the appointment of Mr. Bryant. He was, however, always
ready to help in conducting the pulpit services, on occasions when
help was needed. His last service was a few months ago, when,
during the absence of the pastor, ho presided at the week night
service, and preached with great power from the words, “ Bear ye
one another’s burdens and so fulfil the law of Christ.”


That Mr. Hutcheson performed so much pastoral duty while
actively pursuing hard, laborious, daily toil as a blacksmith —for he
wrought as hard as any of his men —is a testimony to his great
powers of labour, endurance, and application. Whatever he did he
performed with all his might. His sermons and addresses were
characterised by originality of thought and felicity of illustration and
expression, while his thorough catholicity of opinion and gentleness
of manner added charms and power to his ministrations which
were not without their influence on the lives of his hearers. His
usual mode of composition, as described by himself, was to select the
subject for his next Sunday's discourses early in the week ; and while
fashioning a plough, orbeating out some portions of a reaping machine
he pondered over his texts giving snatches of thought as they came
to him to those who wrought with him. His utterances in the
pulpit were truly “ sparks from the anvil.” Ho could, when
occasion demanded, write a lengthy and connected paper, as
members of the Kyneton Religious and Philosophic Society, (of
which he was president) will remember; hut his usual method was
to preach extempore with few or no notes. His leisure was well
employed. He read largely the best books on theolpgy and mental
and moral sciences. His knowledge of the physical sciences was
extensive and accurate. Light and heat were his favourite sub-
jects. His mind was stored with information upon almost every
conceivable subject, as those who know him intimately can
testify. For ten years he was a close student of Herbert Spencer,
and other advanced thinkers. He read into and out of Spencer’s
Philosephic System, much which we doubt not was foreign to the
author, but the fact that Mr. Hutcheson’s nature was permeated
with a warm personal love to Jesus Christ, and that to him the
religion of Jesus was the most natural religious system, will explain
that. He know his Bible from cover to cover, and with a mind
constantly active and orginal, he was able, either in conversation,
which was much valued by those with whom he was intimate, or in
his pulpit utterances, to stimulate thought. To almost his last day
he was a hard worker ; when least required to exert himself he
wrought in the laborious and disagreeable work of sub-draining
his farm, and constantly assisted the men to whom he let the
work on contract, at times taking the most irksome portions of
the labour. He was charitable and generous, yet withal careful
and without ostentation. He was often solicited to accept office in the
Shire Council or as a justice of the peace ; this he always declined,
preferring his work as preacher to all other forms of duty. For
sixteen years be conducted a fortnightly Sunday service at
Baynton, relinquishing it only about two months ago.
Many anecdotes might he told of Me. Hutcheson’s self-denial
and firm adherence to principle. His life was comprised of such.
It was a life of thought and work for others, and there are many
to-day, not only in this town and district, but in distant parts of


tho colony who mourn him as a lost friend. Of him it might be
said as a modern poet writes :
‘ ‘ Brother, there is a possibility in you of much ;
The possibility of leaving: on the eternal skies
The record of an heroic life.”
Me. Hutcheson was, much struck several years ago on read-
ing the account of the interment of the Rev. Dr. Norman M'Leod,
with the fact that his body was wrapped in his plaid. He thought
it took away from the gruesomeness of burial, and remembering this
sentiment Me. Hutcheson’s relatives wrapped him in his plaid
before placing his remains in the coffin. He leaves no children.
His widow and three brothers and sisters, with their families, are
the more immediate relatives who mourn his loss.
THE FUNERAL.
|pp3|HERE was a very large assemblage at the funeral of the
V® late Mr. Jas. Hutcheson on Thursday, Ist October. The
mortuary arrangements were in tho efficient charge of
ftflf Mr. Bromley. A service was held in the house of the
deceased, at Sandhill, by the Rev. E, C. Isaac and Rev. W.
gfeiL Currie, and shortly after ten a.m. the procession began to
move. It consisted of a hearse, two mourning coaches, a
large number of private vehicles, and mourners on horseback.
The procession crossed the railway line and came up Mollison-street
to Hutton-street, gathering additional volume by the way, until it
reached the Independent Church. Here the coffin was carried by
six bearers, viz., Messrs. Thomas Crewther, Hugh Hart, Donald
Tolmie, Henry Thomson, Edmund Brister, and T. Thorpe, and laid
on a platform, covered with a pall, in front of the choir, tho choir
rails being also draped in black. The coffin itself was covered with
wreaths of white flowers. As the coffin was carried into the church
the congregation remained standing, and Mr. I. Coutts, of Mel-
bourne, who officiated at the organ, played the “ Dead March in
Saul.” The three pews immediately in front of the pulpit were
reserved for the family connections of the deceased, and the
remainder of the church was filled by a large assemblage of mourners,
upon whom the affecting scene made a deep impression.


The Rev. G. J. Richmond conducted the service, with whom
also wore associated the Revs. W. Currie and E. C. Isaac, the
former two past ministers, and the latter the present minister of the
church. The choir was also in attendance and led the singing.
The hymn beginning “ God is love 1 His mercy brightens,” having
been sung, Mr. Richmond read passages of Scripture appropriate to
the occasion. This was followed by singing the hymn beginning
“For thy dear saint, 0 Lord 1”
The Rev. Mr. Richmond, having engaged in prayer, addressed
the congregation as follows : —Without anticipating that may bo said
subsequently, it has been thought fitting that I should say a few
words to you respecting our friend in this service. I have known
him for twenty-five years, and in that time have learned to highly
esteem and truly love him. He was, early in life, brought under
Christian influences. When the great truth, “God is love,” was
first received by him he was transformed by it. It became the
dominant thought of his life, which he was ever eager to illustrate
and enforce. His religious awakening was accompanied by a
remarkable intellectual activity. He applied himself to study, and
among other subjects acquired sufficient knowledge of Greek to reaij
the New Testament in the original. What he was as a man of
business many of you know better than I, yet I know enough to
assure mo that he controlled his business life by his religious
principles, and that in all his transactions he proved himself an
upright and consistent man. It is most suitable that in this church
—the church he loved so well—l should recall his faithful and
earnest exhibition of Christian truth, when his face was illuminated
with a radiant light as ho strove to bring others to the Saviour
whom he himself loved and served. He is gone ; but will never be
forgotten by those who have been privileged to know him. Some
day, perhaps, a monumental stone will mark his resting place, but
this church will be a better memorial of his life work, and, bettor
still, his memory enshrined in the hearts of those he served and
blessed. We are about to carry him to his last resting place, and
bid him farewell. His death interrupts for a time our intercourse,
but does not destroy our friendship. With many of us it will be,
as long as life lasts, a fondly cherished hope to renew our inter-
course with him in the clearer atmosphere and joyous service of
heaven.
After Mr. Richmond’s address, and the singing of the hymn,
“ Captain and Saviour of the host,” the coffin was removed from the
church to the hearse, the organ again pealing forth the march for the
dead
The procession then took its way to the cemetery, the coffin
being carried from the gates to the vault by the same bearers as
before mentioned, the pall-bearers being Messrs. Harper, Coutts,
Farquhar, Furphy, H. G. Parker, and Dr. Pestell. There were a
number of chief mourners related to the family, and they were


followed by a very large gathering of sympathising friends from
every part of the Kyneton district. The Rev. E. C. Isaac con-
ducted the funeral service at the grave.
The Rev. W. Currie addressed those present, and said that
their presence there that morning, on one of the busiest days, in
such numbers, testified to their sincere respect and affection for
their deceased friend. 11 is feelings were not under sufficient
control, and he could not say all he would like to have said. He
had lost a dear and true friend, and although he had only known
him for seven years he felt as if he had known him a lifetime, as
their friendship had been of the closest and kindliest nature. It
was but three weeks ago he spent a long afternoon with him, and
on overlooking that beautiful view of the slopes of Kyneton from his
residence, Mr. Hutcheson made the remark that this was a grand
old world, and that he would like to live, were it possible, into the
next century, not so much for the purpose of witnessing the improve-
ments which the advancement of the sciences might bring, as of that
reign of universal kindly feeling and brotherhood which ho so
longed for, and which he thought he could trace in the bright future.
Their deceased brother was large and liberal-hearted, and had a
longing to be akin to all humanity. Ho had a man's strength of
thought and purpose, and a woman’s tenderness and delicacy. His
religion had stood the test of time, and he carried into the work-
shop and into his dealings with his fellow-men the religion of the
gentle Christ whom he loved so well and served so faithfully. H e
had left to us a bright example of duty done, and of a beautiful and
orderly life.' He followed with all his heart the Saviour whom ho
loved—seeking to know what He would have him do in all circum-
stances, and doing it. He was ever forward in defence of truth
and honour, and his teaching, influence, and example had helped
many to begin and to walk in the divine life. This occasion of
parting with their dead friend, and committing his body to the
grave, was full of sad and sorrowing interest, and whilst it was
possible his memory might, fade, there were many present whose
hearts would cherish, whilst memory held its seat, the remembrance
of the Christian teachings and life of James Hutcheson.
The proceedings terminated by the benediction being pro-
nounced by the Rev. Mr. Isaac.


MEMORIAL SERMON.
“ And a man shall he as a hiding place from the wind , and a covert from the
tempest ; as rivers of water in a dry place: as the shadow of a great rock in
a weary land.”— lst.., 32, 2.
God’s greatest and best gift to nations and to communities is His gift of noble
men. However bountifully He may lavish His other gifts, though the
heavens rain down plenty, and the soil yields abundance—though every
breeze of heaven bear prosperity, ’till all have enough and to spare, and the
land is crowded with well filled treasure-houses, that country or community is
poor indeed which contains not among its citizens those whom we can call
noble men—not of blood or race only, but men of strong moral fibre, men of
courage and integrity, and fidelity to principle and conviction. I know lam
giving utterance to a very deep conviction in your minds when I say James
Hutcheson was a man of that character, a noble man indeed, a man* of whom
we as a community are justly proud—a man for whom we thank Almighty
God with all our hearts, for not only has he added to the material wealth of
this district, hut he has, as a man among men, added to those intellectual
and spiritual forces which hold a community together—giving it life and
strength. He has helped to make Kyneton what it is in more senses than
one, and I am certain also, whatever of greatness and influence may be in
store for us, bis energy and perseverance, and- industry, and Christian
integrity will be found to have played no insignificant part in bringing it
about; for though he is gone from our midst, though these eyes of ours will
never more .look into his, though his profound thinkings, or simple manly
utterances, will never again be heard, the moral force of his life and words
will never be lost, as long as there are living hearts and living memories in
this town. Though dead he lives, and will live. To-day we "mourn his
absence. We are poorer, this town is poorer, our life altogether is darker
because he is away. Yet our grief is mingled with gladness—we sorrow not
as those who have no hope—we sorrow because he is not with us in the flesh;
we rejoice because he is with us in the spirit, and our joy is deeper than our
sorrow because of what he has been, and for what he has done. His life and
achievements will always be a mental and moral stimulus to us. His simple,


natural and Christ-like life will help to keep our faith in the eternal love and
goodness alive. He has approached nearer to the ideal life set forth in
Isaiah’s words than any man I know, for if any part of our conduct be an
indicaiton of character, in the comparatively short time I have known Mr.
Hutcheson, I have learned this, —to many a one he has been “as a hiding
place from the wind, and a shelter from the tempest .... as the
shadow of a great rock in a weary land ”
It may not ho out of place here to intimate why I selected these words
for this memorial service. Some months ago I had the pleasure of five
hours’ continuous intercourse withhim. WedrovetoTylden. Hehappened
to be in a very happy and talkative mood. A variety of subjects were
introduced and discussed, and one related to his own life ; this led me to ask
for some particulars. I was soon familiar with the leading features of it,
and, like many others, deeply impressed by the story. As I walked down
from his house, thinking of him, and what I had heard, still under the spell
of his strong personality, this text suddenly came to my mind, and
this thought with it, —if ever it should fall to my lot to take part in any
services which may bo hold at Mr. Hutcheson’s death, I will take that
passage as the basis of my remarks. Little did I then think I should have
to perform that sad task so soon. It seems like a dream. I cannot realize
it. It seems impossible to mo that he will never enter this house again, that
he will never more occupy that seat, that we shall never again hear his
kindly greeting, nor hold sweet intercourse with him. But it is a fact.
That splendid and impressive service of last Thursday—the presence of so
many at the grave, led thither by no morbid curiosity, but to show their
respect and love for him, these emblems of our mourning, all testify to that;
and it is for us now to gather all the comfort and inspiration we can from
what we know of him.
I think I shall best serve tke highest purposes, and at the same time
meet your wishes, if, taking my text as the starting point, 1 speak of Mr.
Hutcheson, First, as a man generally; Secondly, as a Christian man; and
Lastly as a minister of Jesus Christ.
In Isaiah’s words we have one of his many pictures of the Messiah, but
he is not thinking alone of Him. When he says, “ A man,’’ ho means any
man; he means the ideal of every man. In this verse, then, he gives us
‘ ‘ The shelter and fountain force of society, not material wealth or science,
but personal influence and freshness of the human personality.”
I am only speaking your own thoughts when I say Mr. Hutcheson had
a rare, strong and unique personality. Before coming to Kynoton I had
heard of his intellectual vigour and varied accomplishments, and I own I
looked forward with curiosity and trepidation to our first meeting. Before
I had been in his company five minutes I felt I was in the company of a man
tender-hearted and loving; a man indeed. I shall not readily forget my


first impressions of him. He laid hold of me, and has held me ever since
with that undeflnahle something (shall I call it power ?) which proceeded
from him. Everyone who knew him was impressed by his naturalness.
There was no striving after effect. His dress, his face, his surrounding,
his whole mode of life, all indicated that. To me, and with me,
he was always at his ease, always had a kind cheery word, always
seemed glad to see mo, always ready for a “crack,” and then, what talk !
Though ho once told me he had a good deal of trouble with his temper, I
never saw or heard of him being other than affable and approachable.
There was nothing about his appearance to indicate his marvellous mental
power (he was the most intellectual man I ever met), or to make him inaees-
sible to his follow men. I have often heard of people’s faces “ lighting up.”
Mr. Hutcheson’s was the only one I ever saw. As you talked with him,
especially if the theme was “Jesus,” “the fashion of his countenance
changed.” Little children loved him, and he loved them ; they would play
about him.
He desired to be akin to all humanity. While he loved God with all
his heart, he loved men. A man of his calibre was able to guage men. It did
not take him long to come to something like a clear and fair estimate of
them, and while he was not blind to their faults, I never remember hearing
him pass a judgment which I considered hard, harsh or unjust. He could
denounce with the fiercest invectives anything that bordered upon the mean
or despicable, but his voice melted to tenderness when he talked of men’s
failings. He always remembered he and his brother man were made of the
same elay. He saw more of the harmonies in human nature than the dis-
cords and contradictions. To him God was not only in Christ manifesting
Himself unto the world, but in every other man in a greater or lesser
degree. He knew that there was a power in man working for righteousness,
and that made him patient and considerate of men. His relationship with
those who served him was of a piece with his whole nature. He lived and
worked with them. Only yesterday morning I had a long talk with one
who spoke of him as “ just and generous.” “While you worked for him,”
said he, “ Mr. Hutcheson would have his twelve inches to the foot, and
when pay time came he gave you your twelve inches, but very often it would be
fifteen or sixteen. ’ ’ This was a working man’s way of saying Mr. Hutcheson
was generous. Those of you who knew him more intimately than I did can
testify to his generosity. From all I have heard he loved to give quietly.
“Whenever he helped, it was always on a large scale,” said one to me tie
other afternoon, and I believe it. He had a wonderously sympathetic
nature. He literally carried men’s infirmities and troubles as his own
burdens. O, how often has he stood between some cold, biting wind of
adversity and sorrow and proved himself to be a covert from the tempest-
How many has ho saved from ruin and death. Selfishness and he were


total strangers. Envy—“ the coal that comes hissing hot from hell ” —was
to him an unknown quantity. He verily loved his neighbour as himself.
These lines admirably fit him :
“ I live for those who love me,
For those who know me true,
For the heaven that smiles above me,
And awaits my coming too.
For the wrongs that need resistance,
For the cause that needs assistance,
For the future in the distance,
Forthe good that I can do."
Throughout his whole career “he bore the white flower of a blameless
life,’’ and those who knew him most intimately are the most ready to set
their seal to this. He was a centre around which gathers the most diversified
types of human nature. The secret of this magnetic power was his readiness
and ability to see, acknowledge, and utilise the desirable in everyone. Truly
a notable man has fallen. It will be long before we look upon his like again.
He was of no ordinary type—one out of a thousand. Like a diamond of
many polished facets, his character was one of varied excellencies, productive
of admiration and esteem. Death has broken the alabaster box, but the
fragrance remains.
I must now hurriedly speak of him as a Christian, as I shall have an
opportunity of dealing with that more fully to-night. James Hutcheson
was a Christian of the true Christly sort. When talking with him he always
gave you the impression that Jesus Christ was a living power in his life ; and
though he may not have been a Christian after the orthodox type, he was a
Christian according to Jesus Christ. There was not an atom of cant in his
nature, as we know that term. Cant has been described as the repetition of
a creed after it has become a phrase, by the cooling of that white-heat
conviction which once made it both the light and warmth of the soul. All
of you know his Christianity was something more than a creed, or the
repetition of phrases which had lost the white-heat of conviction. His
Christianity was an attempt to reproduce the Christ life in his own life.
From the first moment he saw the light of the Glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, that light has been the comfort and strength of his life. It
permeated his being, it manifested itself in everything he said or did. It was
the inspiration of everything good and noble in his life. It stimulated heart
and brain, and wrought in him that kindliness of disposition which gave a
charm to his manner. What James Hutcheson was, he was by the Grace of
God. No one I ever met made eternal things more real without words. No
one I ever met gave me a clearer picture of what I believe the Saviour of
Mankind intends us all to be. Ido not mean to imply he was perfect. No
one was more conscious of his own imperfections than be. Neither do I wish
to convey the notion he never made mistakes. The man who never made a
mistake never made anything worth very much. But, what I want to say


is this— James Hutcheson was my ideal Christian man ; his clear grip of the
truth, “ God is Loye,” was a formative power in his life, and made him what
ho was. He possessed a large amount of grit, grace, and gumption, these
made his Christianity manly. His faith in Jesus Christ as Saviour from sin
was “ reasonable.” It never lost itself in mysticism, nor wasted itself in
mere feeling; it was the parent of all toil, and the ally of all righteousness;
it was never darkened by dogmatic narrowness—it shone clear and bright to
the end of his days.
I must now speak of him as a “ Minister of Jesus Christ.” He was a
bom preacher. Very soon after he came to the knowledge of the truth he
began to tell out what he knew. He told me ‘‘ I once had a notion of going
to college to prepare for the Ministry, but circumstances prevented.” He
fitted himself for that work, however, in conjunction with the Great Teacher
in such a way as no college or professor could have prepared him. Someone
has said no very large portion of eternal truth falls to the lot of any one man.
The portion which fell to the lot of Mr. Hutcheson was “God is Love.”
This was the truth to him. This he loved to talk about; and if it were
possible to gather his sermons together, I fancy that text or modifications of
it would head most of them. I once asked him how he prepared his sermons.
His reply was —“ they came prepared.” I found out afterwards they were
mostly thought out while he worked at the anvil. They were all the result
of his own deep thinking. He read much ; he was a profound thinker; and,
what is next best he felt profoundly too. He seldom consulted commen-
taries, and when he did he said “ they helped me little.” What he gathered
he assimilated, and having made it his own, he wrought it out in his own
natural and vivid style. He preached, not after the traditional order, but
all his sermons were presentations of concrete truth. He dealt little in the
abstract. Ho was a master of illustration. From all quarters I gather that;
and those of you who know and heard him in his prime will remember many
he gave. I only heard him once, and that was at Tylden at the lust
Anniversary. The way in which he treated the subject—“ The secret of a
happy life,” was a thing to bo remembered, it will never be erased from my
memory. He largely depended in all his pulpit work upon the inspiration of
the moment—not a very safe thing to do, except for men of his stamp. Ho
once told me the following story, some of you may recollect the sermon :
“ I was giving a series of addresses on Colossians, and I came to the words
‘ the word of the truth of the gospel, which is come to you as it is in all the
world.’ Well, I knew the gospel in Paul’s day was not known over all the
world, yet I felt sure Paul had made no mistake. It was the orthodox
interpretation which bothered me. I read all the available commentaries,
but could got no help All through the week I thought over it until
Saturday came and I was as far off as ever. I concluded then that
I should have to honestly tell the people I couldn’t explain it. Sunday


morning came and still no light, and we had begun the singing of the hymn
before the sermon. I intended to make a clean breast of my inability to
explain it, when suddenly the truth came to my mind. I saw that Paul was
not talking about the wide area over which the truth of the Gospel had
spread, but the manner in which it spread. It came to them as it came to
everyone else.” Then his voice fell, and his whole manner changed, when
he said, “I don’t think I or the people ever had a better time.” “Holy
men of old spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost,” and holy men in
modem times speak by the same “moving power.” Mr. Hutcheson was
inspired in the truest sense “To present Jesus Christ, personally, as tho
Friend and Helper of humanity, Christ as God impersonate, eternally and by
a necessity of his nature helpful, remedial and restorative ; the Friend of
each individual soul, and thus the Friend of all society, ’ ’ was the one all
absorbing object of his preaching. With this thought burning in his heart
all tho week, can wo expect anything else than living burning utterances on
the Lord’s day ? Can we wonder at tho power he exorcised ? People of all
creeds wended their way to this church to hoar “ tho blacksmith preacher,”
and I am free to say there never was, there never will be, a more spiritually
powerful preacher in this pulpit. I have in my note-book an extract from
some book I have read running thus—“ The sources of his pulpit power,’>
Then the following analysis:—“ (1) Vital Faith; (2) Clear intellectual
insight: (3) Keen imaginative faculties; (4) Humanity—sympathy with
men; (o) Common sense." Nothing informs me to whom this extract refers,
but I think I can now write the name “ James Hutcheson ” after it, for he
possessed all these qualities in a large degree; and they, in combination,
made him a preacher of no mean order. For nearly forty years he has gone
in and out among you, sharer of all your joys and sorrows. He has brought
light and life to many a home. He has been instrumental in the salvation of
many. He now rests from his labors. During his latter days a holy calm
and resignation possessed him. He know he was soon to go, but as the
voyager knows ho is approaching the shores of the land to which he sails by
the birds which hover about the ship, and sometimes by the fragrance of
flowers borne upon the breeze, so as our loved James Hutcheson approached
the unseen land some rays of its glory shone upon him, and ho knew the
meaning of those words, ‘ ‘ Tho peace of God which passeth all understanding
shall keep your hearts and minds.” Now—
“ Nothing need cover his high fame hut heaven ;
No pyramid set off his memories
But the eternal substance of his greatness,
TO WHICH I LEAVE HIM.”
M. K. ARMSTRONG, PRINTER, KYSF.TON.
